Contextual processing of locative prepositional phrases
Nicolas DENAND & Monique ROLBERT
Laboratoire d?Informatique Fondamentale de Marseille
163, avenue de Luminy - Case 901
F-13288 Marseille Cedex 9
France
{Nicolas.Denand,Monique.Rolbert}@lif.univ-mrs.fr
Abstract
This paper deals with contextual aspects of loca-
tive preposition processing. Firstly, accordingly to a
study on the referential behavior of the pronominal
adverb ?y? in its locative uses, we show that static
locative prepositions are functions, not only at the
conceptual level (as shown in previous studies), but
also from a contextual point of view. Such functions
introduce new objects in the discourse context, that
have to be taken into account in classical contex-
tual processing tasks, such as reference resolution or
question answering. Then, we show how these phe-
nomena can fit into contextual formalisms like DRT
and DPL.
1 Introduction
Most often, in a nominal anaphoric relation, a
personal pronoun (like ?le?(clitic)/?him?) is in-
volved in an anaphoric relationship with a nom-
inal phrase (NP), located in the same sentence
as the pronoun or a previous one. The pronoun
is therefore related to the discourse individual
referred to by the NP:
(1)Un homme est venu ce matin. Paul le
connaissait.(A man came this morning.
Paul knew him.)
In this example, the pronoun ?le?/?him? is
anaphorically linked to the NP ?un homme?/?a
man?. The pronoun refers to the discourse en-
tity introduced by the NP.
The antecedent NP can be found in different
syntactical configurations, without being neces-
sarily related to the case of the pronoun itself.
For instance, the personal pronoun ?elle?/?it?
(subject) can be in anaphoric relation to a NP,
itself embedded in a complement (here, loca-
tive):
(2)J?ai pose? mon portable sur la table parce
qu?elle e?tait propre.(I put my laptop on
the table because it was clean.)
Similarly, the clitic pronoun ?y? in its non-
locative uses is anaphorically linked to a NP.
These uses were already studied (see, for exam-
ple, (Ruwet, 1990)).
What about locative uses of the pronominal
adverb ?y?1? That is, when it is used to replace
the locative prepositional complement of a verb
(Locative Prepositional Phrase, or LPP), like
in:
(3)Cette ville est belle. J?y ai ve?cu autre-
fois.(This town is beautiful. I lived there
formerly.)
Here again, in a classical way, one can say that
?y?/?there? refers to a ?place? introduced by
a NP preceding the pronoun. We have a prob-
lem though, to rebuild the exact locative seman-
tics of the pronominal sentence (here, something
like ?in this town?). The situation gets even
more complicated when the antecedent of the
pronoun lies itself in a LPP, like in the follow-
ing:
(4)J?ai passe? mes vacances dans le Gard. J?y
ai ve?cu autrefois.(I spent my holydays in
the Gard. I lived there formerly.)
In this paper, we show that the pronominal
adverb ?y? can be anaphorically linked to a
LPP, locative preposition included. This leads
us to the fact that some LPPs introduce indi-
viduals in the discourse context. We discuss
the functional role played by locative preposi-
tions in this process. Finally, we explain how
to account for these contextual functions within
a discourse representation system such as DRT
and DPL and its integration into processing a
subset of French.
1?y? is usually considered a pronoun for its non loca-
tive uses (Ce vase est casse?. N?y touche pas.(This vase
is broken. Don?t touch it.)) and an adverb elsewhere
(Paul y va.(Paul goes there.)). (Grevisse, 1975) notes
certain uses in which the status of ?y? is unclear. It is
then called ?pronominal adverb?.
2 Locative prepositions are
contextual functions
A lot of examples show that ?y?, as a pronom-
inal adverb, may have a NP as syntactical an-
tecedent:
(5)Je vois la table. Tu y as pose? tes clefs.(I
see the table. You put your keys there.)
If we replace the pronoun with its referent, we
have:
(6)Je vois la table. Tu as pose? tes clefs sur
la table.(I see the table. You put your keys
on the table.)
But, differences appear between this last ex-
ample and a classical anaphoric relationship:
first of all, the preposition ?sur?/?on?, appear-
ing in the rebuilt LPP in (6) does not come from
either the antecedent (since this one is a NP),
or the verb (?sur?/?on? is not a mandatory
preposition for the verb ?poser?/?put?, since
this one accepts other prepositions like in ?poser
dans?/?put in? or ?poser sous?/?put under?).
Moreover, the coreference link between the pro-
noun and its antecedent (usually generated by
the anaphoric relation) is unclear: can we re-
ally assume that ?y?/?there? refers to the ob-
ject designated by the NP ?the table?? A first
answer to these problems could be that there
is a kind of metaphoric interpretation of the
object designated by the antecedent NP, which
would allow it to designate also a place, for in-
stance the location where it stands, or its inte-
rior when the name of the object clearly sug-
gests an interiority feature. This approach was
studied and approved by (Mackenzie, 2004) and
similar ideas (though in the conceptual domain)
can be found in (Flageul, 1997). Nevertheless,
we can notice that it is rare for the pronoun ?y?
to designate the place defined this way. In ex-
ample (5), one cannot say that ?y? refers to the
place occupied by the table. Moreover, such an
interpretation of the involved phenomenon does
not allow to account for the following examples:
(7)Va chercher pre`s de la table, je crois
que ton ballon s?y trouve.(Go look
near the table, I think your ball is there.)
(8)Je suis alle? derrie`re la maison. Un ve?lo s?y
trouvait.(I went behind the house. A bicy-
cle was there.)
(9)Quand j?ai pose? mon sac
a` co?te? de la tasse, ton portable s?y trou-
vait.(When I put my bag next to the cup,
your laptop was there.)
If we replace the pronoun with its antecendent,
we have:
(10)Va chercher pre`s de la table, je crois que
ton ballon se trouve pre`s de la table.(Go
look near the table, I think your ball is near
the table.)
(11)Je suis alle? derrie`re la maison. Un ve?lo se
trouvait derrie`re la maison.(I went behind
the house. A bicycle was behind the house.)
(12)Quand j?ai pose? mon sac a` co?te? de la
tasse, ton portable se trouvait a` co?te? de la
tasse.(When I put my bag next to the cup,
your laptop was next to the cup.)
The difference between these examples and
(5) resides in the fact that, here, the prepo-
sition employed in rebuilt examples (10), (11)
and (12) is necessarily the same as the prepo-
sition involved in the LPP of the previous sen-
tence. We notice that the syntactical similar-
ity between the antecedent LPP and the rebuilt
one does not come from a pure syntactic rela-
tionship between the pronominal adverb and its
antecedent. In addition, there really is a coref-
erence relationship since, in example (10) for in-
stance, both LPPs mention the same table and,
in fact, the same ?place?. Therefore, we have
to account for the coreference link between pro-
noun ?y? and a ?place?, described by the an-
tecedent LPP. We must then consider that ?y?
is anaphorically related to the LPP and, hence,
refers to an ?object? introduced by this LPP and
different from that designated by the NP.
Studying where-questions raises a valuable
analogy. For instance, let us consider a static
locative question like:
(13)Ou` se trouve mon portable ?(Where is my
laptop?)
One possible answer to this question, within a
universe described by example (9) above, is:
(14)A` co?te? de la tasse.(Next to the cup.)
If we classically consider that the semantics of
such questions (wh-questions) is the maximal
set of individuals satisfying the property corre-
sponding to the question (on this subject, see
(Van Rooy, 1999), (Groenendijk and Stokhof,
1984)), then we must admit that ?a` co?te? de la
tasse?/?next to the cup? is an individual. As
a matter of fact, the semantics of question (13)
is:
{x/se trouve(mon portable, x)}2
and one element of this set is therefore an object
that can be designated by the LPP ?a` co?te? de
la tasse?/?next to the cup? (which is clearly a
different object from the one designated by the
NP ?la tasse?/?the cup?).
Thus, we conclude that LPPs introduce indi-
viduals that can be viewed as answers to loca-
tive questions. Then it appears that these in-
dividuals are precisely those that can be des-
ignated by adverb ?y? in situations similar to
the examples given above. Other examples give
support to this point of view. The anaphoric
use of locative adverb ?la`?/?there?3 or repeti-
tions by definite description show us other cases
that require to assume the existence of LPPs-
generated individuals:
(15)Je suis en face du cine?ma. On se retrouve
la`.(I am in front of the cinema. Let?s meet
there.)
(16)Je suis a` droite de l?arbre. L?endroit est
magnifique.(I am to the right of the tree.
The place is beautiful.)
Therefore, we give the following rule:
Some4 LPPs introduce/designate two
individuals: one classical, given by the
contextual interpretation of the embed-
ded NP, the other given by the in-
terpretation of the LPP itself (that
is, by the compound [prep + NP]).
The pronominal adverb ?y? may be
anaphorically linked to a LPP (that
is, precisely, to the phrase made of
[prep+NP]), thus referring to the indi-
vidual introduced by the complete LPP.
Then, what happens when ?y? has a NP for
an antecedent? The NP is its antecedent but
it has no coreference relationship with it. On
can think here that we are facing a relationship
close to bridging anaphora (like ?la porte?/?the
door?...?la poigne?e?/?the handle?). But in-
stead of having a classical part/whole relation-
ship between the two members of the anaphora,
we have an underspecified (the preposition is
missing) relationship of type object/place. ?y?
2There is no way to introduce the preposition ?next
to? in this semantic formula from the surface form of the
question.
3See the work of (Lorentzen, 1998) on the distinct
behaviors of ?ici?/?here? and ?la`?/?there?.
4We will see later that determining what LPPs are
involved in this rule is a difficult question, unanswered
in this paper.
is therefore involved in a coreference relation-
ship with another object than the one desig-
nated by its antecedent. The semantics of this
object depends on the antecedent NP and a (yet
undetermined) preposition. We notice that even
if the antecedent NP is embedded in a LPP, the
preposition of the latter is not always referred
to by the pronoun. The following example:
(17)Max habite loin du parking mais j?y ai
(quand me?me) gare? ma voiture.(Max lives
far from the carpark, but I (nevertheless)
left my car there.)
can be paraphrased by:
(18)Max habite loin du parking mais j?ai quand
me?me laisse? ma voiture dans le park-
ing.(Max lives far from the carpark, but I
(nevertheless) left my car in the carpark.)
In these situations, the preposition ?far from?
is not part of the anaphoric relation. We will
say that the syntactic antecedent of the pronoun
is the embedded NP (and not the LPP) and
we will introduce a new locative preposition to
calculate the referent of ?y?/?there?.
We notice that this process makes the inter-
pretation of pronoun ?y? potentially ambiguous
when this one refers to a LPP: the pronoun can
indeed refer to the LPP or have the NP (embed-
ded in the LPP) as an antecedent. The following
example shows such an ambiguity:
(19)J?habite a` co?te? de Paris et j?y travaille.(I
live near Paris and I work there.)
There are two possible interpretations for this
sentence:
(20)J?habite a` co?te? de Paris et je travaille a`
co?te? de Paris.(I live near Paris and I work
near Paris.)
(21)J?habite a` co?te? de Paris et je travaille
a` Paris.(I live near Paris and I work in
Paris.)
Finally, we notice that the behavior of relative
sentences introduced by ?ou`?/?where? is similar
to the examples above, except the fact that the
antecedent is always a NP:
(22)Je vois la table ou` tu as pose? ton portable.(I
see the table where you put your laptop.)
(23)Max habite loin du parking ou` j?ai laisse?
ma voiture.(Max lives far from the carpark
where I left my car.)
The antecedent of the relative pronoun
?ou`?/?where? is the NP which is embedded in
the locative complement and its semantics must
be completed by a (implicit) locative preposi-
tion (it could be replaced in surface forms by
?on which?/?in which?).
Now that we showed that some LPPs in-
troduce/designate one discourse individual, we
must have a closer look at the underly-
ing phenomenon. Many studies dealt with
contextual effects of NPs (definite/indefinite,
generic/specific, etc. see, for instance, (Cor-
blin, 1987)). A summary of these can be found
in (Salmon-Alt, 2001). Where do LPPs fit in
there? First of all, we notice that the situation
is complicated since it depends obviously on the
nature of the NP which is embedded in the LPP
and, for example, some cases of ?generic LPPs?
can be encountered, like in:
(24)Habiter pre`s d?un cre?matorium comporte
e?galement des risques : la mortalite? natale
y est plus e?leve?e de 4%.(It is also risky to
live near a crematorium: birth mortality is
higher by 4% there.)
We will firstly focus on LPPs containing two
types of NPs: indefinite with specific interpre-
tation and definite descriptions (or any refer-
ential expression, for instance pronominal). In
both cases we get, after the interpretation of the
embedded NP, an entity, either pre-existing the
interpretation of the NP or newly created. This
entity serves as a basis to determine the new en-
tity generated by the interpretation of the LPP.
Clearly, the other tool allowing to determine
this new entity is the locative preposition in-
volved in the LPP: what is its status? Several
studies on space representation give definitions
(either qualitative or quantitative) of the part of
space designated by a spatial function applied
to an object or a place. These works usually
focus on explaining the conditions under which
one can say that a point of space (or an object)
is or not within such a part of space (see, for
example (Vieu, 1991), (Schang, 1997)). This
belonging is then most often represented by a
spatial relation (like to be on the right of) be-
tween objects, which will be either true or false.
These processes do not highlight this part of
space that we aim to raise as a discourse object,
but they show the matching between some loca-
tive prepositions and spatial functions5. Other
5Here, again, it seems difficult to state that every
locative preposition matches a spatial function. This
question will not be discussed in this paper. But, such
a study could probably rely on the classification of loca-
tive prepositions proposed in (Borillo, 1993) and (Borillo,
studies also highlight this role of locative prepo-
sitions. V. Flageul (Flageul, 1997) considers
locative prepositions as conceptual-level opera-
tors, which turn a type object into a type place.
A. Peyraube (Peyraube, 2003) describes the his-
torical evolution of Chinese localizers and notes
that ?their main function in pre-medieval Chi-
nese is to follow nouns and transform them into
place words, tending to behave like functional
words?. We take one step further and state that
locative prepositions are contextual-level oper-
ators (or ?functions?, from a logical point of
view) which produce an object from another,
the former being the part of space cited before.
The work of V. Flageul allows us to specify the
conceptual type of this object according to the
involved preposition.
Concerning LPPs that contain NPs quanti-
fied by ?every?, the situation slightly differs:
typically, such NPs imply universally quantified
variables. We will get back on this point when
examining examples in the next paragraph.
As a conclusion for the current section, we
state that in the situations described above: -
Some locative prepositions denote contextual
functions: they associate to one individual X
from the context another one, noted f(X). -
Some LPPs produce an object f(X) where f is
the function associated to the locative preposi-
tion and X, the object designated or produced
by the embedded NP.
3 Processing preposition functions
with DRT and DPL
We are now going to show how to integrate these
functions when representing discourse and ref-
erential links. First of all, we show on exam-
ples6 how this works within DRT-like formal-
ism. Then we show results obtained in a DPL
approach.
2000).
6The examples we use here are simple on purpose and
may therefore seem odd or ill-formed. Nevertheless, we
can give many others where ?y? refers to a LPP. A brief
search on the Internet alowed us to reveal examples of
various types:
(25)Nous nous sommes promene?s pre`s d?un volcan et
nous y avons trouve? des roches inte?ressantes.(We
had a walk near a volcano and we found interesting
rocks there.)
(26)Les terrains primitifs, en faisant irruption dans les
terrains primordiaux, y ont amene? un certain nom-
bre de mine?raux inte?ressants.(Primitive terrains,
when rushing into primordial terrains, brought a
certain number of interesting minerals there.)
DRT ((Kamp, 1981)) is a theory proposing a
discourse representation formalism, essentially
oriented towards (pronominal and others) ref-
erence problems. We show here with the cases
studied in the previous section how a LPP and
a referent to a LPP can be accounted for within
this formalism.
(30)Un arbre se trouve derrie`re une maison.
Il y fait de l?ombre7.(There is a tree
behind a house. It casts shadow there.)
tree x
x y z
house y
z = behind(y)
is_located(x,z)
Figure 1: DRS of example (30) (step 1)
Comments: indefinite NPs ?un arbre?/?a
tree? and ?une maison?/?a house? classically
introduce two new individuals in the Discourse
Representation Structure (DRS). The LPP in-
troduces a new individual z, being the result of
the application of function behind on reference
marker y.
Example continuation:
(27)Au moment du projet, la densite? des moules
ze?bre?es,. . . , e?tait de faible a` mode?re?e pre`s de
Burritts Rapids, mais elle y augmentait rapide-
ment.(At the time of the project, the density of ze-
bra mussels,. . . , was low to moderate near Burritts
Rapids, but it was quickly increasing there.)
(28)Durant le projet, c?est pre`s de chaque section qu?on
a observe? les plus bas niveaux de bacte?ries E. Coli
de toute la rivie`re. Le niveau d?E. Coli y e?tait assez
faible pour que la baignade y soit permise presque
tous les jours.(During the project, the lowest levels
of E. Coli bacteria in all the river were observed
near every section. The level of E. Coli was low
enough there to permit swimming on most days.)
(29)Les gens pre?fe`rent acheter loin du centre ville car
ils y trouvent des logements peu chers.(People pre-
fer buying far from downtown because they find
cheap residences there.)
casts_shadow(v,w)
x y z v w
tree x
house y
z = behind(y)
is_located(x,z)
v = x
w = z
Figure 2: DRS of example (30) (step 2)
Comments: classically, pronoun ?il?/?it? in-
troduces a new reference marker v linked to its
antecedent by the equality v = x. ?y?/?there?
also introduces a new reference marker w linked
to its antecedent by equality w = z. The fact
that the antecedent z is itself linked to a func-
tional term is without consequence.
(31)Si un arbre se trouve derrie`re une maison,
il y fait de l?ombre.(If a tree is
behind a house, it casts shadow there.)
is_located(x,z)
casts_shadow(x,v)
v = z
v
x y z
tree x
house y
z = behind(y)
Figure 3: DRS of example (31)
Comments: this example is equivalent to a don-
key sentence. Thanks to its location inside the
DRS, reference marker z is accessible from vari-
able v.
(32)Un arbre se trouve derrie`re chaque maison
et y fait de l?ombre.(A tree is
behind every house and casts shadow
there.)
casts_shadow(z,y)
x
house x
y z
y = behind(x)
tree z
is_located(z,y)
Figure 4: DRS of example (32)
Comments: we chose here the interpretation
in which the quantifier ?chaque?/?every? has
a scope beyond the indefinite subject. We no-
tice that the quantification associated to vari-
able y is existential (from its presence in the
right box of the implication) and not universal,
like it would have been the case if variable y was
present in the left box. This choice is not really
important since the result of a function is, by
definition, unique.
Through these examples, we can see that rep-
etitions of functional terms are always done
within the scope of the argument quantification:
indeed, either both terms are introduced in the
same box - at the same level - or the functional
term is introduced in the right box of an impli-
cation (it is therefore in the scope of the variable
introduced in the left box). To remain correct,
every reference to this functional term will oc-
cur in the same context.
These processes are thus classical. Functional
terms just have to be introduced in DRT no-
tation. In the ?classical? DRT definition (like
it is presented, for instance, in (van Eijck and
Kamp, 1997), p. 191), terms are either con-
stants or variables used as reference markers or
discourse referents. We added functions in the
language. We assume that a set of function let-
ters with their arities is given. Then the set of
terms is augmented by functional terms. Prac-
tically, these functional terms are obtained by
applying functions on variables.
Thus, a locative preposition corresponds to
a function from this language. One can see to
which typed lambda-expressions lexical items or
phrases must be associated to obtain the results
given above. According to notations from (van
Eijck and Kamp, 1997) p. 217, we can state
that a locative preposition is of type < e, e >
and has as lambda-expression ?v (behind v) if
behind is the function associated to the prepo-
sition. The LPP causes the new individual to
appear in the DRS. It is of type << e, T >
, T > (like a NP) and its lambda expression is
?P (ui; (NP ?v(ui = (Loc Prep v) . P (ui))))
where NP denotes the lambda-expression given
from the LPP-embedded NP, Loc Prep is the
lambda-expression of locative preposition given
above and ui the reference marker introduced
by the LPP. Finally, pronoun ?y? will be asso-
ciated to lambda-expression ?P (P ui) where ui
is its antecedent reference marker8.
8We can not detail here the lambda-expressions as-
sociated to other phrases or items required for complete
DPL (Groenendijk and Stokhof, 1984) is an-
other discourse representation system allowing
easy expression of referential links. To account
for our LPP processing, the language must be
augmented with functions and functional terms
(which raises a priori no problem). Here are
some DPL formulas corresponding to the fol-
lowing examples:
(33)Un arbre se trouve derrie`re une maison.(A
tree is behind a house.)
?x ?y [tree(x) ? house(y) ? is(x, behind(y))]
(34)Il y fait de l?ombre.(It casts shadow there.)
?x ?y [tree(x) ? house(y) ? is(x, behind(y))] ?
casts shadow(x, behind(y))
The occurrence of the variable in the functional
term is linked by its quantifier, like in case of
pronominal repetition without function. The
well-formedness of formulas is therefore guar-
anteed.
(35)Si un arbre se trouve derrie`re une maison,
il y fait de l?ombre.(If a tree is behind a
house, it casts shadow there.)
[?x tree(x)??y [house(y)?is(x, behind(y))]] ?
casts shadow(x, behind(y))
In order to build these DPL formulas,
we associate to locative prepositions the
lambda-expression ?v(behind v) of type <
e, e >, and to LPPs the lambda-expression
?P [NP ?y[P [Prep Loc y]]] of type << e, T >
, T > ([ ] are used as application operator).
These expressions are very close to those used
in DRT, apart from the fact that they do not
introduce reference markers. In the absence of
these markers, the link between pronoun ?y?
and its functional antecedent is established by
using the same variable appearing in the an-
tecedent functional term and building a new
functional term from the same function. The
lambda-expression associated to ?y? then be-
comes ?P [P [Prep Loc x]] where [Prep loc x]
is the antecedent of ?y?.
4 Conclusion
In this paper, we studied the contextual conse-
quences of the referential interpretation of loca-
tive prepositional phrases through references by
pronominal adverb ?y?. We stated that locative
prepositions are functions at a contextual level
and that LPPs introduce new individuals into
the discourse context.
processing of our examples. The approach is classical
and the reader can refer, for instance, to (van Eijck and
Kamp, 1997)
The results described here are used within
a platform (made by our team) allowing to
develop natural language understanding appli-
cations featuring a syntactical analysis phase,
a lambda-calculus-based representation of sen-
tences and a contextual processing of discourse
(proforms and definite descriptions resolution).
We use DRT to resolve references, then DPL for
a final discourse representation.
Many difficult questions remain unanswered.
First of all, it seems that only some LPPs pro-
vide such a productive ability at a contextual
level and that it depends on both the locative
preposition and the type of the embedded NP.
Classifying and characterizing these types of
NPs remain to be done. Dynamic LPPs should
also be studied. Besides we could study the be-
havior of other prepositional syntagms (tempo-
ral prepositions, for instance).
References
A. Borillo. 1993. Pre?positions de lieu et
anaphores. Langages, pages 27?46.
A. Borillo. 2000. Formes et sens des
pre?positions. In PREP-AN 2000. University
of Tel-Aviv.
D. Corblin. 1987. Inde?fini, de?fini et
de?monstratif. Droz, Gene`ve-Paris.
V. Flageul. 1997. Description se?mantico-
cognitive des pre?positions spatiales du
franc?ais. Ph.D. thesis, Universite? Paris IV ?
Sorbonne.
M. Grevisse. 1975. Le bon usage. Duculot.
J. Groenendijk and M. Stokhof. 1984. Studies
in the semantics of questions and the prag-
matics of answers. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Amsterdam.
H. Kamp. 1981. A theory of truth and semantic
representation. In J. Groenendijk, T. Jansen,
and M. Stokhof, editors, Formal methods in
the study of language, Mathematisch Cen-
trum, Amsterdam.
L. R. Lorentzen. 1998. Je serai la` ou J?y
serai ? ? voila` la question. In A. Englebert,
M. Pierrard, L. Rosier, and D. van Raem-
donck, editors, Actes du XXIIe Congre`s In-
ternational de Linguistique et de Philologie
Romanes, Bruxelles.
L. Mackenzie. 2004. Anaphoric reference to en-
tities and places in literal and metaphorical
contexts. In J. Andor and P. Pelyva?s, edi-
tors, Empirical, cognitive-based studies in the
semantics-pragmatics interface, Amsterdam.
Elsevier. to be published.
A. Peyraube. 2003. On the history of place
words and localizers in chinese: a cognitive
approach. Space in languages: linguistic sys-
tems and cognitive categories, february.
N. Ruwet. 1990. En et y : deux clitiques
pronominaux antilogophoriques. Langages,
97. Larousse.
S. Salmon-Alt. 2001. Re?fe?rence et dialogue
finalise? : de la linguistique a` un mode`le
ope?rationnel. Ph.D. thesis, LORIA, Univer-
site? Henri Poincare?, Nancy I.
D. Schang. 1997. Repre?sentation et in-
terpre?tation de connaissances spatiales dans
un syste`me de dialogue homme-machine.
Ph.D. thesis, Universite? Henri Poincare?,
Nancy I.
J. van Eijck and H. Kamp. 1997. Representing
discourse in context. In J. van Benthem and
A. ter Meulen, editors, Handbook of Logic and
Language. Elsevier.
R. Van Rooy. 1999. Questioning to resolve de-
cision problems. In P. Dekker, editor, Pro-
ceedings of the 12th Amsterdam Colloquium,
Amsterdam.
L. Vieu. 1991. Se?mantique des relations spa-
tiales et infe?rences spatio-temporelles : une
contribution a` l?e?tude des structures formelles
de l?espace en Langage Naturel. Ph.D. thesis,
IRIT, Universite? Paul Sabatier.
