Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 761?769,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Discriminative Learning with Natural Annotations:
Word Segmentation as a Case Study
Wenbin Jiang 1 Meng Sun 1 Yajuan Lu? 1 Yating Yang 2 Qun Liu 3, 1
1Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jiangwenbin, sunmeng, lvyajuan}@ict.ac.cn
2Multilingual Information Technology Research Center
The Xinjiang Technical Institute of Physics & Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences
yangyt@ms.xjb.ac.cn
3Centre for Next Generation Localisation
Faculty of Engineering and Computing, Dublin City University
qliu@computing.dcu.ie
Abstract
Structural information in web text pro-
vides natural annotations for NLP prob-
lems such as word segmentation and pars-
ing. In this paper we propose a discrim-
inative learning algorithm to take advan-
tage of the linguistic knowledge in large
amounts of natural annotations on the In-
ternet. It utilizes the Internet as an external
corpus with massive (although slight and
sparse) natural annotations, and enables a
classifier to evolve on the large-scaled and
real-time updated web text. With Chinese
word segmentation as a case study, exper-
iments show that the segmenter enhanced
with the Chinese wikipedia achieves sig-
nificant improvement on a series of testing
sets from different domains, even with a
single classifier and local features.
1 Introduction
Problems related to information retrieval, machine
translation and social computing need fast and ac-
curate text processing, for example, word segmen-
tation and parsing. Taking Chinese word seg-
mentation for example, the state-of-the-art mod-
els (Xue and Shen, 2003; Ng and Low, 2004;
Gao et al, 2005; Nakagawa and Uchimoto, 2007;
Zhao and Kit, 2008; Jiang et al, 2009; Zhang and
Clark, 2010; Sun, 2011b; Li, 2011) are usually
trained on human-annotated corpora such as the
Penn Chinese Treebank (CTB) (Xue et al, 2005),
and perform quite well on corresponding test sets.
Since the text used for corpus annotating are usu-
ally drawn from specific fields (e.g. newswire or
finance), and the annotated corpora are limited in
 think that NLP                  has already ...
n ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? n
i-1 i j j+1
(a) Natural annotation by hyperlink
n ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? n
i-1 i j j+1
n ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? n
i-1 i j j+1
(b) Knowledge for word segmentation
(c) Knowledge for dependency parsing
Figure 1: Natural annotations for word segmenta-
tion and dependency parsing.
size (e.g. tens of thousands), the performance of
word segmentation tends to degrade sharply when
applied to new domains.
Internet provides large amounts of raw text, and
statistics collected from it have been used to im-
prove parsing performance (Nakov and Hearst,
2005; Pitler et al, 2010; Bansal and Klein, 2011;
Zhou et al, 2011). The Internet alo gives mas-
sive (although slight and sparse) natural annota-
tions in the forms of structural information includ-
ing hyperlinks, fonts, colors and layouts (Sun,
2011a). These annotations usually imply valuable
knowledge for problems such as word segmen-
tation and parsing, based on the hypothesis that
the subsequences marked by structural informa-
tion are meaningful fragments in sentences. Fig-
ure 1 shows an example. The hyperlink indicates
761
a Chinese phrase (meaning NLP), and it probably
corresponds to a connected sub-graph for depen-
dency parsing. Creators of web text give valuable
annotations during editing, the whole Internet can
be treated as a wide-coveraged and real-time up-
dated corpus.
Different from the dense and accurate annota-
tions in human-annotated corpora, natural annota-
tions in web text are sparse and slight, it makes
direct training of NLP models impracticable. In
this work we take for example a most important
problem, word segmentation, and propose a novel
discriminative learning algorithm to leverage the
knowledge in massive natural annotations of web
text. Character classification models for word seg-
mentation usually factorize the whole prediction
into atomic predictions on characters (Xue and
Shen, 2003; Ng and Low, 2004). Natural anno-
tations in web text can be used to get rid of im-
plausible predication candidates for related char-
acters, knowledge in the natural annotations is
therefore introduced in the manner of searching
space pruning. Since constraint decoding in the
pruned searching space integrates the knowledge
of the baseline model and natural annotations, it
gives predictions not worse than the normal decod-
ing does. Annotation differences between the out-
puts of constraint decoding and normal decoding
are used to train the enhanced classifier. This strat-
egy makes the usage of natural annotations simple
and universal, which facilitates the utilization of
massive web text and the extension to other NLP
problems.
Although there are lots of choices, we choose
the Chinese wikipedia as the knowledge source
due to its high quality. Structural information, in-
cluding hyperlinks, fonts and colors are used to de-
termine the boundaries of meaningful fragments.
Experimental results show that, the knowledge im-
plied in the natural annotations can significantly
improve the performance of a baseline segmenter
trained on CTB 5.0, an F-measure increment of
0.93 points on CTB test set, and an average incre-
ment of 1.53 points on 7 other domains. It is an ef-
fective and inexpensive strategy to build word seg-
menters adaptive to different domains. We hope to
extend this strategy to other NLP problems such
as named entity recognition and parsing.
In the rest of the paper, we first briefly intro-
duce the problems of Chinese word segmentation
and the character classification model in section
Type Templates Instances
n-gram C?2 C?2=@
C?1 C?1=?
C0 C0=g
C1 C1=,
C2 C2=?
C?2C?1 C?2C?1=@?
C?1C0 C?1C0=?g
C0C1 C0C1=g,
C1C2 C1C2=,?
C?1C1 C?1C1=?,
function Pu(C0) Pu(C0)=false
T (C?2:2) T (C?2:2)= 44444
Table 1: Feature templates and instances for
character classification-based word segmentation
model. Suppose we are considering the i-th char-
acter ?g? in ?...@? g ,???n??...?.
2, then describe the representation of the knowl-
edge in natural annotations of web text in section
3, and finally detail the strategy of discriminative
learning on natural annotations in section 4. Af-
ter giving the experimental results and analysis in
section 5, we briefly introduce the previous related
work and then give the conclusion and the expec-
tation of future research.
2 Character Classification Model
Character classification models for word segmen-
tation factorize the whole prediction into atomic
predictions on single characters (Xue and Shen,
2003; Ng and Low, 2004). Although natural anno-
tations in web text do not directly support the dis-
criminative training of segmentation models, they
do get rid of the implausible candidates for predic-
tions of related characters.
Given a sentence as a sequence of n charac-
ters, word segmentation splits the sequence into
m(? n) subsequences, each of which indicates a
meaningful word. Word segmentation can be for-
malized as a character classification problem (Xue
and Shen, 2003), where each character in the sen-
tence is given a boundary tag representing its posi-
tion in a word. We adopt the boundary tags of Ng
and Low (2004), b, m, e and s, where b, m and
e mean the beginning, the middle and the end of a
word, and s indicates a single-character word. the
decoding procedure searches for the labeled char-
acter sequence y that maximizes the score func-
762
Algorithm 1 Perceptron training algorithm.
1: Input: Training corpus C
2: ~?? 0
3: for t? 1 .. T do ? T iterations
4: for (x, y?) ? C do
5: y ? argmaxy ?(x, y) ? ~?
6: if y 6= y? then
7: ~?? ~?+?(x, y?)? ?(x, y)
8: Output: Parameters ~?
tion:
f(x) = argmax
y
S(y|~?,?, x)
= argmax
y
?(x, y) ? ~?
= argmax
y
?
(i,t)?y
?(i, t, x, y) ? ~?
(1)
The score of the whole sequence y is accumulated
across all its character-label pairs, (i, t) ? y (s.t.
1 ? i ? n and t ? {b,m, e, s}). The feature
function ? maps a labeled sequence or a character-
label pair into a feature vector, ~? is the parame-
ter vector and ?(x, y) ? ~? is the inner product of
?(x, y) and ~?.
Analogous to other sequence labeling prob-
lems, word segmentation can be solved through a
viterbi-style decoding procedure. We omit the de-
coding algorithm in this paper due to its simplicity
and popularity.
The feature templates for the classifier is shown
in Table 1. C0 denotes the current character, while
C?k/Ck denote the kth character to the left/right
of C0. The function Pu(?) returns true for a punc-
tuation character and false for others, the function
T (?) classifies a character into four types, 1, 2, 3
and 4, representing number, date, English letter
and others, respectively.
The classifier can be trained with online learn-
ing algorithms such as perceptron, or offline learn-
ing models such as support vector machines.
We choose the perceptron algorithm (Collins,
2002) to train the classifier for the character
classification-based word segmentation model. It
learns a discriminative model mapping from the
inputs x ? X to the outputs y? ? Y , where X is the
set of sentences in the training corpus and Y is the
set of corresponding labeled results. Algorithm 1
shows the perceptron algorithm for tuning the pa-
rameter ~?. The ?averaged parameters? technology
(Collins, 2002) is used for better performance.
n ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? n
i-1 i j j+1
(a) Original searching space
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
b
m
e
s
b
m
e
s
b
m
e
s
b
m
e
s
b
m
e
s
b
m
e
s
b
m
e
s
b
m
e
s
b
m
e
s
b
m
e
s
n ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? n
i-1 i j j+1
(b) Shrinked searching space
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
b
m
e
s
e
s
b
s
b
m
e
s
b
m
e
s
b
m
e
s
b
m
e
s
e
s
b
s
b
m
e
s
Figure 2: Shrink of searching space for the charac-
ter classification-based word segmentation model.
3 Knowledge in Natural Annotations
Web text gives massive natural annotations in the
form of structural informations, including hyper-
links, fonts, colors and layouts (Sun, 2011a). Al-
though slight and sparse, these annotations imply
valuable knowledge for problems such as word
segmentation and parsing.
As shown in Figure 1, the subsequence P =
i..j of sentence S is composed of bolded charac-
ters determined by a hyperlink. Such natural anno-
tations do not clearly give each character a bound-
ary tag, or define the head-modifier relationship
between two words. However, they do help to
shrink the set of plausible predication candidates
for each character or word. For word segmenta-
tion, it implies that characters i ? 1 and j are the
rightmost characters of words, while characters i
and j + 1 are the leftmost characters of words.
For i ? 1 or j, the plausible predication set ? be-
comes {e, s}; For i and j + 1, it becomes {b, s};
For other characters c except the two at sentence
boundaries, ?(c) is still {b,m, e, s}. For depen-
dency parsing, the subsequence P tends to form
a connected dependency graph if it contains more
than one word. Here we use ? to denote the set of
plausible head of a word (modifier). There must
be a single word w ? P as the root of subse-
quence P , whose plausible heads fall out of P ,
that is, ?(w) = {x|x ? S ? P}. For the words
in P except the root, the plausible heads for each
763
Algorithm 2 Perceptron learning with natural an-
notations.
1: ~?? TRAIN(C)
2: for x ? F do
3: y ? DECODE(x, ~?)
4: y? ? CONSTRAINTDECODE(x, ~?,?)
5: if y 6= y? then
6: C? ? C? ? {y?}
7: ~?? TRAIN(C ? C?)
word w are the words in P except w itself, that is,
?(w) = {x|x ? P ? {w}}.
Creators of web text give valuable structural
annotations during editing, these annotations re-
duce the predication uncertainty for atomic char-
acters or words, although not exactly defining
which predication is. Figure 2 shows an exam-
ple for word segmentation, depicting the shrink
of searching space for the character classification-
based model. Since the decrement of uncertainty
indicates the increment of knowledge, the whole
Internet can be treated as a wide-coveraged and
real-time updated corpus. We choose the Chinese
wikipedia as the external knowledge source, and
structural information including hyperlinks, fonts
and colors are used in the current work due to their
explicitness of representation.
4 Learning with Natural Annotations
Different from the dense and accurate annotations
in human-annotated corpora, natural annotations
are sparse and slight, which makes direct training
of NLP models impracticable. Annotations im-
plied by structural information do not give an ex-
act predication to a character, however, they help
to get rid of the implausible predication candidates
for related characters, as described in the previous
section.
Previous work on constituency parsing or ma-
chine translation usually resort to some kinds of
heuristic tricks, such as punctuation restrictions,
to eliminate some implausible candidates during
decoding. Here the natural annotations also bring
knowledge in the manner of searching space prun-
ing. Conditioned on the completeness of the de-
coding algorithm, a model trained on an exist-
ing corpus probably gives better or at least not
worse predications, by constraint decoding in the
pruned searching space. The constraint decoding
procedure integrates the knowledge of the baseline
Algorithm 3 Online version of perceptron learn-
ing with natural annotations.
1: ~?? TRAIN(C)
2: for x with natural annotations do
3: y ? DECODE(x, ~?)
4: y? ? CONSTRAINTDECODE(x, ~?,?)
5: if y 6= y? then
6: ~?? ~? +?(x, y?)??(x, y)
7: output ~? at regular time
model and natural annotations, the predication dif-
ferences between the outputs of constraint decod-
ing and normal decoding can be used to train the
enhanced classifier.
Restrictions of the searching space according to
natural annotations can be easily incorporated into
the decoder. If the completeness of the searching
algorithm can be guaranteed, the constraint decod-
ing in the pruned searching space will give predi-
cations not worse than those given by the normal
decoding. If a predication of constraint decoding
differs from that of normal decoding, it indicates
that the annotation precision is higher than the lat-
ter. Furthermore, the degree of difference between
the two predications represents the amount of new
knowledge introduced by the natural annotations
over the baseline.
The baseline model ~? is trained on an exist-
ing human-annotated corpus. A set of sentences
F with natural annotations are extracted from the
Chinese wikipedia, and we reserve the ones for
which constraint decoding and normal decoding
give different predications. The predictions of re-
served sentences by constraint decoding are used
as additional training data for the enhanced classi-
fier. The overall training pipeline is analogous to
self-training (McClosky et al, 2006), Algorithm
2 shows the pseudo-codes. Considering the online
characteristic of the perceptron algorithm, if we
are able to leverage much more (than the Chinese
wikipedia) data with natural annotations, an online
version of learning procedure shown in Algorithm
3 would be a better choice. The technology of ?av-
eraged parameters? (Collins, 2002) is easily to be
adapted here for better performance.
When constraint decoding and normal decod-
ing give different predications, we only know that
the former is probably better than the latter. Al-
though there is no explicit evidence for us to mea-
sure how much difference in accuracy between the
764
Partition Sections # of word
CTB
Training 1? 270 0.47M
400 ? 931
1001 ? 1151
Developing 301 ? 325 6.66K
Testing 271 ? 300 7.82K
Table 2: Data partitioning for CTB 5.0.
two predications, we can approximate how much
new knowledge that a naturally annotated sentence
brings. For a sentence x, given the predications of
constraint decoding and normal decoding, y? and
y, the difference of their scores ? = S(y) ? S(y?)
indicates the degree to which the current model
mistakes. This indicator helps us to select more
valuable training examples.
The strategy of learning with natural annota-
tions can be adapted to other situations. For ex-
ample, if we have a list of words or phrases (espe-
cially in a specific domain such as medicine and
chemical), we can generate annotated sentences
automatically by string matching in a large amount
of raw text. It probably provides a simple and
effective domain adaptation strategy for already
trained models.
5 Experiments
We use the Penn Chinese Treebank 5.0 (CTB)
(Xue et al, 2005) as the existing annotated cor-
pus for Chinese word segmentation. For conve-
nient of comparison with other work in word seg-
mentation, the whole corpus is split into three par-
titions as follows: chapters 271-300 for testing,
chapters 301-325 for developing, and others for
training. We choose the Chinese wikipedia 1 (ver-
sion 20120812) as the external knowledge source,
because it has high quality in contents and it is
much better than usual web text. Structural infor-
mations, including hyperlinks, fonts and colors are
used to derive the annotation information.
To further evaluate the improvement brought
by the fuzzy knowledge in Chinese wikipedia, a
series of testing sets from different domains are
adopted. The four testing sets from SIGHAN
Bakeoff 2010 (Zhao and Liu, 2010) are used, they
are drawn from the domains of literature, finance,
computer science and medicine. Although the ref-
erence sets are annotated according to a different
1http://download.wikimedia.org/backup-index.html.
 95.6
 95.8
 96
 96.2
 96.4
 96.6
 96.8
 97
 97.2
 97.4
 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10
Ac
cu
ra
cy
 (F
1%
)
Training iterations
Figure 3: Learning curve of the averaged percep-
tron classifier on the CTB developing set.
word segmentation standard (Yu et al, 2001), the
quantity of accuracy improvement is still illustra-
tive since there are no vast diversities between the
two segmentation standards. We also annotated
another three testing sets 2, their texts are drawn
from the domains of chemistry, physics and ma-
chinery, and each contains 500 sentences.
5.1 Baseline Classifier for Word
Segmentation
We train the baseline perceptron classifier for
word segmentation on the training set of CTB
5.0, using the developing set to determine the
best training iterations. The performance mea-
surement for word segmentation is balanced F-
measure, F = 2PR/(P +R), a function of preci-
sion P and recall R, where P is the percentage of
words in segmentation results that are segmented
correctly, and R is the percentage of correctly seg-
mented words in the gold standard words.
Figure 3 shows the learning curve of the aver-
aged perceptron on the developing set. The sec-
ond column of Table 3 lists the performance of
the baseline classifier on eight testing sets, where
newswire denotes the testing set of the CTB it-
self. The classifier performs much worse on the
domains of chemistry, physics and machinery, it
indicates the importance of domain adaptation for
word segmentation (Gao et al, 2004; Ma and
Way, 2009; Gao et al, 2010). The accuracy on the
testing sets from SIGHAN Bakeoff 2010 is even
lower due to the difference in both domains and
word segmentation standards.
2They are available at http://nlp.ict.ac.cn/ jiangwenbin/.
765
Dataset Baseline (F%) Enhanced (F%)
Newswire 97.35 98.28 +0.93
Out-of-Domain
Chemistry 93.61 95.68 +2.07
Physics 95.10 97.24 +2.14
Machinery 96.08 97.66 +1.58
Literature 92.42 93.53 +1.11
Finance 92.50 93.16 +0.66
Computer 89.46 91.19 +1.73
Medicine 91.88 93.34 +1.46
Average 93.01 94.54 +1.53
Table 3: Performance of the baseline classifier and
the classifier enhanced with natural annotations in
Chinese wikipedia.
5.2 Classifier Enhanced with Natural
Annotations
The Chinese wikipedia contains about 0.5 million
items. From their description text, about 3.9 mil-
lions of sentences with natural annotations are ex-
tracted. With the CTB training set as the exist-
ing corpus C, about 0.8 million sentences are re-
served according to Algorithm 2, the segmenta-
tions given by constraint decoding are used as ad-
ditional training data for the enhanced classifier.
According to the previous description, the dif-
ference of the scores of constraint decoding and
normal decoding, ? = S(y) ? S(y?), indicates
the importance of a constraint segmentation to the
improvement of the baseline classifier. The con-
straint segmentations of the reserved sentences are
sorted in descending order according to the dif-
ference of the scores of constraint decoding and
normal decoding, as described previously. From
the beginning of the sorted list, different amounts
of segmented sentences are used as the additional
training data for the enhanced character classifier.
Figure 4 shows the performance curve of the en-
hanced classifiers on the developing set of CTB.
We found that the highest accuracy was achieved
when 160, 000 sentences were used, while more
additional training data did not give continuous
improvement. A recent related work about self-
training for segmentation (Liu and Zhang, 2012)
also reported a very similar trend, that only a mod-
erate amount of raw data gave the most obvious
improvements.
The performance of the enhanced classifier is
listed in the third column of Table 3. On the
CTB testing set, training data from the Chinese
 97.1
 97.2
 97.3
 97.4
 97.5
 97.6
 97.7
 97.8
Ac
cu
ra
cy
 (F
1%
)
Count of selected sentences
10000 20000 40000 80000 160000 320000 640000
using selected sentences
using all sentences
Figure 4: Performance curve of the classifier en-
hanced with selected sentences of different scales.
Model Accuracy (F%)
(Jiang et al, 2008) 97.85
(Kruengkrai et al, 2009) 97.87
(Zhang and Clark, 2010) 97.79
(Wang et al, 2011) 98.11
(Sun, 2011b) 98.17
Our Work 98.28
Table 4: Comparison with state-of-the-art work in
Chinese word segmentation.
wikipedia brings an F-measure increment of 0.93
points. On out-of-domain testing sets, the im-
provements are much larger, an average increment
of 1.53 points is achieved on seven domains. It
is probably because the distribution of the knowl-
edge in the CTB training data is concentrated in
the domain of newswire, while the contents of
the Chinese wikipedia cover a broad range of do-
mains, it provides knowledge complementary to
that of CTB.
Table 4 shows the comparison with other
work in Chinese word segmentation. Our model
achieves an accuracy higher than that of the
state-of-the-art models trained on CTB only, al-
though using a single classifier with only local
features. From the viewpoint of resource uti-
lization, the comparison between our system and
previous work without using additional training
data is unfair. However, we believe this work
shows another interesting way to improve Chi-
nese word segmentation, it focuses on the utiliza-
tion of fuzzy and sparse knowledge on the Internet
rather than making full use of a specific human-
annotated corpus. On the other hand, since only
a single classifier and local features are used in
our method, better performance could be achieved
766
resorting to complicated features, system com-
bination and other semi-supervised technologies.
What is more, since the text on Internet is wide-
coveraged and real-time updated, our strategy also
helps a word segmenter be more domain adaptive
and up to date.
6 Related Work
Li and Sun (2009) extracted character classifi-
cation instances from raw text for Chinese word
segmentation, resorting to the indication of punc-
tuation marks between characters. Sun and Xu
(Sun and Xu, 2011) utilized the features derived
from large-scaled unlabeled text to improve Chi-
nese word segmentation. Although the two work
also made use of large-scaled raw text, our method
is essentially different from theirs in the aspects
of both the source of knowledge and the learning
strategy.
Lots of efforts have been devoted to semi-
supervised methods in sequence labeling and word
segmentation (Xu et al, 2008; Suzuki and Isozaki,
2008; Haffari and Sarkar, 2008; Tomanek and
Hahn, 2009; Wang et al, 2011). A semi-
supervised method tries to find an optimal hyper-
plane of both annotated data and raw data, thus to
result in a model with better coverage and higher
accuracy. Researchers have also investigated un-
supervised methods in word segmentation (Zhao
and Kit, 2008; Johnson and Goldwater, 2009;
Mochihashi et al, 2009; Hewlett and Cohen,
2011). An unsupervised method mines the latent
distribution regularity in the raw text, and auto-
matically induces word segmentation knowledge
from it. Our method also needs large amounts of
external data, but it aims to leverage the knowl-
edge in the fuzzy and sparse annotations. It is
fundamentally different from semi-supervised and
unsupervised methods in that we aimed to exca-
vate a totally different kind of knowledge, the nat-
ural annotations implied by the structural informa-
tion in web text.
In recent years, much work has been devoted to
the improvement of word segmentation in a vari-
ety of ways. Typical approaches include the in-
troduction of global training or complicated fea-
tures (Zhang and Clark, 2007; Zhang and Clark,
2010), the investigation of word internal structures
(Zhao, 2009; Li, 2011), the adjustment or adapta-
tion of word segmentation standards (Wu, 2003;
Gao et al, 2004; Jiang et al, 2009), the integrated
solution of segmentation and related tasks such as
part-of-speech tagging and parsing (Zhou and Su,
2003; Zhang et al, 2003; Fung et al, 2004; Gold-
berg and Tsarfaty, 2008), and the strategies of hy-
brid or stacked modeling (Nakagawa and Uchi-
moto, 2007; Kruengkrai et al, 2009; Wang et al,
2010; Sun, 2011b).
In parsing, Pereira and Schabes (1992) pro-
posed an extended inside-outside algorithm that
infers the parameters of a stochastic CFG from a
partially parsed treebank. It uses partial bracket-
ing information to improve parsing performance,
but it is specific to constituency parsing, and its
computational complexity makes it impractical for
massive natural annotations in web text. There
are also work making use of word co-occurrence
statistics collected in raw text or Internet n-grams
to improve parsing performance (Nakov and
Hearst, 2005; Pitler et al, 2010; Zhou et al, 2011;
Bansal and Klein, 2011). When enriching the re-
lated work during writing, we found a work on de-
pendency parsing (Spitkovsky et al, 2010) who
utilized parsing constraints derived from hypertext
annotations to improve the unsupervised depen-
dency grammar induction. Compared with their
method, the strategy we proposed is formal and
universal, the discriminative learning strategy and
the quantitative measurement of fuzzy knowledge
enable more effective utilization of the natural an-
notation on the Internet when adapted to parsing.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
This work presents a novel discriminative learning
algorithm to utilize the knowledge in the massive
natural annotations on the Internet. Natural anno-
tations implied by structural information are used
to decrease the searching space of the classifier,
then the constraint decoding in the pruned search-
ing space gives predictions not worse than the nor-
mal decoding does. Annotation differences be-
tween the outputs of constraint decoding and nor-
mal decoding are used to train the enhanced classi-
fier, linguistic knowledge in the human-annotated
corpus and the natural annotations of web text
are thus integrated together. Experiments on Chi-
nese word segmentation show that, the enhanced
word segmenter achieves significant improvement
on testing sets of different domains, although us-
ing a single classifier with only local features.
Since the contents of web text cover a broad
range of domains, it provides knowledge comple-
767
mentary to that of human-annotated corpora with
concentrated distribution of domains. The content
on the Internet is large-scaled and real-time up-
dated, it compensates for the drawback of expen-
sive building and updating of corpora. Our strat-
egy, therefore, enables us to build a classifier more
domain adaptive and up to date. In the future, we
will compare this method with self-training to bet-
ter illustrate the importance of boundary informa-
tion, and give error analysis on what types of er-
rors are reduced by the method to make this inves-
tigation more complete. We will also investigate
more efficient algorithms to leverage more mas-
sive web text with natural annotations, and further
extend the strategy to other NLP problems such as
named entity recognition and parsing.
Acknowledgments
The authors were supported by National
Natural Science Foundation of China (Con-
tracts 61202216), 863 State Key Project (No.
2011AA01A207), and National Key Technology
R&D Program (No. 2012BAH39B03). Qun Liu?s
work was partially supported by Science Foun-
dation Ireland (Grant No.07/CE/I1142) as part
of the CNGL at Dublin City University. Sincere
thanks to the three anonymous reviewers for their
thorough reviewing and valuable suggestions!
References
Mohit Bansal and Dan Klein. 2011. Web-scale fea-
tures for full-scale parsing. In Proceedings of ACL.
Michael Collins. 2002. Discriminative training meth-
ods for hidden markov models: Theory and exper-
iments with perceptron algorithms. In Proceedings
of EMNLP, pages 1?8, Philadelphia, USA.
Pascale Fung, Grace Ngai, Yongsheng Yang, and Ben-
feng Chen. 2004. A maximum-entropy chinese
parser augmented by transformation-based learning.
In Proceedings of TALIP.
Jianfeng Gao, Andi Wu, Mu Li, Chang-Ning Huang,
Hongqiao Li, Xinsong Xia, and Haowei Qin. 2004.
Adaptive chinese word segmentation. In Proceed-
ings of ACL.
Jianfeng Gao, Mu Li, Andi Wu, and Chang-Ning
Huang. 2005. Chinese word segmentation and
named entity recognition: A pragmatic approach.
Computational Linguistics.
Wenjun Gao, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuanjing Huang. 2010.
Adaptive chinese word segmentation with online
passive-aggressive algorithm. In Proceedings of
CIPS-SIGHAN Workshop.
Yoav Goldberg and Reut Tsarfaty. 2008. A single gen-
erative model for joint morphological segmentation
and syntactic parsing. In Proceedings of ACL-HLT.
Gholamreza Haffari and Anoop Sarkar. 2008.
Homotopy-based semi-supervised hidden markov
models for sequence labeling. In Proceedings of
COLING.
Daniel Hewlett and Paul Cohen. 2011. Fully unsu-
pervised word segmentation with bve and mdl. In
Proceedings of ACL.
Wenbin Jiang, Liang Huang, Yajuan Lv, and Qun Liu.
2008. A cascaded linear model for joint chinese
word segmentation and part-of-speech tagging. In
Proceedings of ACL.
Wenbin Jiang, Liang Huang, and Qun Liu. 2009. Au-
tomatic adaptation of annotation standards: Chinese
word segmentation and pos tagging?a case study. In
Proceedings of the 47th ACL.
Mark Johnson and Sharon Goldwater. 2009. Improv-
ing nonparameteric bayesian inference: experiments
on unsupervised word segmentation with adaptor
grammars. In Proceedings of NAACL.
Canasai Kruengkrai, Kiyotaka Uchimoto, Jun.ichi
Kazama, Yiou Wang, Kentaro Torisawa, and Hitoshi
Isahara. 2009. An error-driven word-character hy-
brid model for joint chinese word segmentation and
pos tagging. In Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP.
Zhongguo Li and Maosong Sun. 2009. Punctuation as
implicit annotations for chinese word segmentation.
Computational Linguistics.
Zhongguo Li. 2011. Parsing the internal structure of
words: A new paradigm for chinese word segmenta-
tion. In Proceedings of ACL.
Yang Liu and Yue Zhang. 2012. Unsupervised domain
adaptation for joint segmentation and pos-tagging.
In Proceedings of COLING.
Yanjun Ma and Andy Way. 2009. Bilingually moti-
vated domain-adapted word segmentation for statis-
tical machine translation. In Proceedings of EACL.
David McClosky, Eugene Charniak, and Mark John-
son. 2006. Effective self-training for parsing. In
Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL.
Daichi Mochihashi, Takeshi Yamada, and Naonori
Ueda. 2009. Bayesian unsupervised word segmen-
tation with nested pitman-yor language modeling.
In Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP.
Tetsuji Nakagawa and Kiyotaka Uchimoto. 2007. A
hybrid approach to word segmentation and pos tag-
ging. In Proceedings of ACL.
Preslav Nakov and Marti Hearst. 2005. Using the
web as an implicit training set: Application to struc-
tural ambiguity resolution. In Proceedings of HLT-
EMNLP.
768
Hwee Tou Ng and Jin Kiat Low. 2004. Chinese part-
of-speech tagging: One-at-a-time or all-at-once?
word-based or character-based? In Proceedings of
EMNLP.
Fernando Pereira and Yves Schabes. 1992. Inside-
outside reestimation from partially bracketed cor-
pora. In Proceedings of ACL.
Emily Pitler, Shane Bergsma, Dekang Lin, and Ken-
neth Church. 2010. Using web-scale n-grams to
improve base np parsing performance. In Proceed-
ings of COLING.
Valentin I. Spitkovsky, Daniel Jurafsky, and Hiyan Al-
shawi. 2010. Profiting from mark-up: Hyper-text
annotations for guided parsing. In Proceedings of
ACL.
Weiwei Sun and Jia Xu. 2011. Enhancing chinese
word segmentation using unlabeled data. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP.
Maosong Sun. 2011a. Natural language processing
based on naturally annotated web resources. CHI-
NESE INFORMATION PROCESSING.
Weiwei Sun. 2011b. A stacked sub-word model for
joint chinese word segmentation and part-of-speech
tagging. In Proceedings of ACL.
Jun Suzuki and Hideki Isozaki. 2008. Semi-supervised
sequential labeling and segmentation using giga-
word scale unlabeled data. In Proceedings of ACL.
Katrin Tomanek and Udo Hahn. 2009. Semi-
supervised active learning for sequence labeling. In
Proceedings of ACL.
Kun Wang, Chengqing Zong, and Keh-Yih Su. 2010.
A character-based joint model for chinese word seg-
mentation. In Proceedings of COLING.
Yiou Wang, Jun?ichi Kazama, Yoshimasa Tsuruoka,
Wenliang Chen, Yujie Zhang, and Kentaro Tori-
sawa. 2011. Improving chinese word segmentation
and pos tagging with semi-supervised methods us-
ing large auto-analyzed data. In Proceedings of IJC-
NLP.
Andi Wu. 2003. Customizable segmentation of mor-
phologically derived words in chinese. Computa-
tional Linguistics and Chinese Language Process-
ing.
Jia Xu, Jianfeng Gao, Kristina Toutanova, and Her-
mann Ney. 2008. Bayesian semi-supervised chinese
word segmentation for statistical machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings of COLING.
Nianwen Xue and Libin Shen. 2003. Chinese word
segmentation as lmr tagging. In Proceedings of
SIGHAN Workshop.
Nianwen Xue, Fei Xia, Fu-Dong Chiou, and Martha
Palmer. 2005. The penn chinese treebank: Phrase
structure annotation of a large corpus. In Natural
Language Engineering.
Shiwen Yu, Jianming Lu, Xuefeng Zhu, Huiming
Duan, Shiyong Kang, Honglin Sun, Hui Wang,
Qiang Zhao, and Weidong Zhan. 2001. Processing
norms of modern chinese corpus. Technical report.
Yue Zhang and Stephen Clark. 2007. Chinese seg-
mentation with a word-based perceptron algorithm.
In Proceedings of ACL 2007.
Yue Zhang and Stephen Clark. 2010. A fast decoder
for joint word segmentation and pos-tagging using
a single discriminative model. In Proceedings of
EMNLP.
Huaping Zhang, Hongkui Yu, Deyi Xiong, and Qun
Liu. 2003. Hhmm-based chinese lexical analyzer
ictclas. In Proceedings of SIGHAN Workshop.
Hai Zhao and Chunyu Kit. 2008. Unsupervised
segmentation helps supervised learning of charac-
ter tagging for word segmentation and named entity
recognition. In Proceedings of SIGHAN Workshop.
Hongmei Zhao and Qun Liu. 2010. The cips-sighan
clp 2010 chinese word segmentation bakeoff. In
Proceedings of CIPS-SIGHAN Workshop.
Hai Zhao. 2009. Character-level dependencies in chi-
nese: Usefulness and learning. In Proceedings of
EACL.
Guodong Zhou and Jian Su. 2003. A chinese effi-
cient analyser integrating word segmentation, part-
ofspeech tagging, partial parsing and full parsing. In
Proceedings of SIGHAN Workshop.
Guangyou Zhou, Jun Zhao, Kang Liu, and Li Cai.
2011. Exploiting web-derived selectional prefer-
ence to improve statistical dependency parsing. In
Proceedings of ACL.
769
Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 364?369,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Stem Translation with Affix-Based Rule Selection
for Agglutinative Languages
Zhiyang Wang?, Yajuan Lu??, Meng Sun?, Qun Liu??
?Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
P.O. Box 2704, Beijing 100190, China
{wangzhiyang,lvyajuan,sunmeng,liuqun}@ict.ac.cn
?Centre for Next Generation Localisation
Faculty of Engineering and Computing, Dublin City University
qliu@computing.dcu.ie
Abstract
Current translation models are mainly de-
signed for languages with limited mor-
phology, which are not readily applicable
to agglutinative languages as the differ-
ence in the way lexical forms are gener-
ated. In this paper, we propose a nov-
el approach for translating agglutinative
languages by treating stems and affixes
differently. We employ stem as the atomic
translation unit to alleviate data spare-
ness. In addition, we associate each stem-
granularity translation rule with a distri-
bution of related affixes, and select desir-
able rules according to the similarity of
their affix distributions with given spans to
be translated. Experimental results show
that our approach significantly improves
the translation performance on tasks of
translating from three Turkic languages to
Chinese.
1 Introduction
Currently, most methods on statistical machine
translation (SMT) are developed for translation
of languages with limited morphology (e.g., En-
glish, Chinese). They assumed that word was the
atomic translation unit (ATU), always ignoring the
internal morphological structure of word. This
assumption can be traced back to the original
IBM word-based models (Brown et al, 1993) and
several significantly improved models, including
phrase-based (Och and Ney, 2004; Koehn et al,
2003), hierarchical (Chiang, 2005) and syntac-
tic (Quirk et al, 2005; Galley et al, 2006; Liu et
al., 2006) models. These improved models worked
well for translating languages like English with
large scale parallel corpora available.
Different from languages with limited morphol-
ogy, words of agglutinative languages are formed
mainly by concatenation of stems and affixes.
Generally, a stem can attach with several affixes,
thus leading to tens of hundreds of possible inflect-
ed variants of lexicons for a single stem. Modeling
each lexical form as a separate word will generate
high out-of-vocabulary rate for SMT. Theoretical-
ly, ways like morphological analysis and increas-
ing bilingual corpora could alleviate the problem
of data sparsity, but most agglutinative languages
are less-studied and suffer from the problem of
resource-scarceness. Therefore, previous research
mainly focused on the different inflected variants
of the same stem and made various transformation
of input by morphological analysis, such as (Lee,
2004; Goldwater and McClosky, 2005; Yang and
Kirchhoff, 2006; Habash and Sadat, 2006; Bisazza
and Federico, 2009; Wang et al, 2011). These
work still assume that the atomic translation unit
is word, stem or morpheme, without considering
the difference between stems and affixes.
In agglutinative languages, stem is the base
part of word not including inflectional affixes.
Affix, especially inflectional affix, indicates dif-
ferent grammatical categories such as tense, per-
son, number and case, etc., which is useful for
translation rule disambiguation. Therefore, we
employ stem as the atomic translation unit and
use affix information to guide translation rule
selection. Stem-granularity translation rules have
much larger coverage and can lower the OOV
rate. Affix based rule selection takes advantage
of auxiliary syntactic roles of affixes to make a
better rule selection. In this way, we can achieve
a balance between rule coverage and matching
accuracy, and ultimately improve the translation
performance.
364
zunyi
/STM
i
/SUF
yighin
/STM
gha
/SUF
zunyi yighin ||| ?? ??? ||| i gha
Original:zunyi yighin+i+gha
Meaning:of zunyi conference
(B)Translation rules with affix distribution
zunyi yighin ||| ????? ||| i:0 gha:0.09 zunyi yighin ||| ?????? ||| i:0 da:0.24
zunyi
/STM
i
/SUF
yighin
/STM
da
/SUF
zunyi yighin ||| ?????? ||| i da
(A) Instances of translation rule
(1) (2)
zunyi
/STM
i
/SUF
yighin
/STM
gha
/SUF
zunyi yighin ||| ?? ??? ||| i gha
(3)
Original:zunyi yighin+i+da
Meaning:on zunyi conference
Original:zunyi yighin+i+gha
Meaning:of zunyi conference
Figure 1: Translation rule extraction from Uyghur to Chinese. Here tag ?/STM? represents stem and
?/SUF? means suffix.
2 Affix Based Rule Selection Model
Figure 1 (B) shows two translation rules along
with affix distributions. Here a translation rule
contains three parts: the source part (on stem lev-
el), the target part, and the related affix distribution
(represented as a vector). We can see that, al-
though the source part of the two translation rules
are identical, their affix distributions are quite
different. Affix ?gha? in the first rule indicates
that something is affiliated to a subject, similar to
?of? in English. And ?da? in second rule implies
location information. Therefore, given a span
?zunyi/STM yighin/STM+i/SUF+da/SUF+...? to
be translated, we hope to encourage our model to
select the second translation rule. We can achieve
this by calculating similarity between the affix
distributions of the translation rule and the span.
The affix distribution can be obtained by keep-
ing the related affixes for each rule instance during
translation rule extraction ((A) in Figure 1). After
extracting and scoring stem-granularity rules in a
traditional way, we extract stem-granularity rules
again by keeping affix information and compute
the affix distribution with tf-idf (Salton and Buck-
ley, 1987). Finally, the affix distribution will be
added to the previous stem-granularity rules.
2.1 Affix Distribution Estimation
Formally, translation rule instances with the same
source part can be treated as a document collec-
tion1, so each rule instance in the collection is
1We employ concepts from text classification to illustrate
how to estimate affix distribution.
some kind of document. Our goal is to classify the
source parts into the target parts on the document
collection level with the help of affix distribu-
tion. Accordingly, we employ vector space model
(VSM) to represent affix distribution of each rule
instance. In this model, the feature weights are
represented by the classic tf-idf (Salton and Buck-
ley, 1987):
tf i,j =
ni,j?
k nk,j
idf i,j = log
|D|
|j : ai ? rj|
tfidf i,j = tf i,j ? idf i,j
(1)
where tfidf i,j is the weight of affix ai in transla-
tion rule instance rj . ni,j indicates the number of
occurrence of affix ai in rj . |D| is the number
of rule instance with the same source part, and
|j : ai ? rj| is the number of rule instance which
contains affix ai within |D|.
Let?s take the suffix ?gha? from (A1) in Figure
1 as an example. We assume that there are only
three instances of translation rules extracted from
parallel corpus ((A) in Figure 1). We can see that
?gha? only appear once in (A1) and also appear
once in whole instances. Therefore, tfgha,(A1) is
0.5 and idfgha,(A1) is log(3/2). tfidfgha,(A1) is
the product of tfgha,(A1) and idfgha,(A1) which
is 0.09.
Given a set of N translation rule instances with
the same source and target part, we define the
centroid vector dr according to the centroid-based
classification algorithm (Han and Karypis, 2000),
dr =
1
N
?
i?N
di (2)
365
Data set #Sent. #Type #Tokenword stem morph word stem morph
UY-CH-Train. 50K 69K 39K 42K 1.2M 1.2M 1.6M
UY-CH-Dev. 0.7K*4 5.9K 4.1K 4.6K 18K 18K 23.5K
UY-CH-Test. 0.7K*1 4.7K 3.3K 3.8K 14K 14K 17.8K
KA-CH-Train. 50K 62K 40K 42K 1.1M 1.1M 1.3M
KA-CH-Dev. 0.7K*4 5.3K 4.2K 4.5K 15K 15K 18K
KA-CH-Test. 0.2K*1 2.6K 2.0K 2.3K 8.6K 8.6K 10.8K
KI-CH-Train. 50K 53K 27K 31K 1.2M 1.2M 1.5M
KI-CH-Dev. 0.5K*4 4.1K 3.1K 3.5K 12K 12K 15K
KI-CH-Test. 0.2K*4 2.2K 1.8K 2.1K 4.7K 4.7K 5.8K
Table 1: Statistics of data sets. ?N means the number of reference, morph is short to morpheme. UY,
KA, KI, CH represent Uyghur, Kazakh, Kirghiz and Chinese respectively.
dr is the final affix distribution.
By comparing the similarity of affix distribu-
tions, we are able to decide whether a translation
rule is suitable for a span to be translated. In
this work, similarity is measured using the cosine
distance similarity metric, given by
sim(d1,d2) =
d1 ? d2
?d1? ? ?d2?
(3)
where di corresponds to a vector indicating affix
distribution, and ??? denotes the inner product of
the two vectors.
Therefore, for a specific span to be translated,
we first analyze it to get the corresponding stem
sequence and related affix distribution represented
as a vector. Then the stem sequence is used to
search the translation rule table. If the source part
is matched, the similarity will be calculated for
each candidate translation rule by cosine similarity
(as in equation 3). Therefore, in addition to the
traditional translation features on stem level, our
model also adds the affix similarity score as a
dynamic feature into the log-linear model (Och
and Ney, 2002).
3 Related Work
Most previous work on agglutinative language
translation mainly focus on Turkish and Finnish.
Bisazza and Federico (2009) and Mermer and
Saraclar (2011) optimized morphological analysis
as a pre-processing step to improve the translation
between Turkish and English. Yeniterzi and Oflaz-
er (2010) mapped the syntax of the English side
to the morphology of the Turkish side with the
factored model (Koehn and Hoang, 2007). Yang
and Kirchhoff (2006) backed off surface form to
stem when translating OOV words of Finnish.
Luong and Kan (2010) and Luong et al (2010)
focused on Finnish-English translation through
improving word alignment and enhancing phrase
table. These works still assumed that the atomic
translation unit is word, stem or morpheme, with-
out considering the difference between stems and
affixes.
There are also some work that employed the
context information to make a better choice of
translation rules (Carpuat and Wu, 2007; Chan et
al., 2007; He et al, 2008; Cui et al, 2010). all the
work employed rich context information, such as
POS, syntactic, etc., and experiments were mostly
done on less inflectional languages (i.e. Chinese,
English) and resourceful languages (i.e. Arabic).
4 Experiments
In this work, we conduct our experiments on
three different agglutinative languages, including
Uyghur, Kazakh and Kirghiz. All of them are
derived from Altaic language family, belonging to
Turkic languages, and mostly spoken by people in
Central Asia. There are about 24 million people
take these languages as mother tongue. All of
the tasks are derived from the evaluation of Chi-
na Workshop of Machine Translation (CWMT)2.
Table 1 shows the statistics of data sets.
For the language model, we use the SRI Lan-
guage Modeling Toolkit (Stolcke, 2002) to train
a 5-gram model with the target side of training
corpus. And phrase-based Moses3 is used as our
2http://mt.xmu.edu.cn/cwmt2011/en/index.html.
3http://www.statmt.org/moses/
366
UY-CH KA-CH KI-CH
word 31.74+0.0 28.64+0.0 35.05+0.0
stem 33.74+2.0 30.14+1.5 35.52+0.47
morph 32.69+0.95 29.21+0.57 34.97?0.08
affix 34.34+2.6 30.19+2.27 35.96+0.91
Table 2: Translation results from Turkic languages
to Chinese. word: ATU is surface form,
stem: ATU is represented stem, morph: ATU
denotes morpheme, affix: stem translation with
affix distribution similarity. BLEU scores in
bold means significantly better than the baseline
according to (Koehn, 2004) for p-value less than
0.01.
baseline SMT system. The decoding weights are
optimized with MERT (Och, 2003) to maximum
word-level BLEU scores (Papineni et al, 2002).
4.1 Using Unsupervised Morphological
Analyzer
As most agglutinative languages are resource-
poor, we employ unsupervised learning method
to obtain the morphological structure. Follow-
ing the approach in (Virpioja et al, 2007), we
employ the Morfessor4 Categories-MAP algorith-
m (Creutz and Lagus, 2005). It applies a hierar-
chical model with three categories (prefix, stem,
and suffix) in an unsupervised way. From Table 1
we can see that vocabulary sizes of the three lan-
guages are reduced obviously after unsupervised
morphological analysis.
Table 2 shows the translation results. All the
three translation tasks achieve obvious improve-
ments with the proposed model, which always per-
forms better than only employ word, stem and
morph. For the Uyghur to Chinese translation
(UY-CH) task in Table 2, performances after unsu-
pervised morphological analysis are always better
than the baseline. And we gain up to +2.6 BLEU
points improvements with affix compared to the
baseline. For the Kazakh to Chinese translation
(KA-CH) task, the improvements are also signifi-
cant. We achieve +2.27 and +0.77 improvements
compared to the baseline and stem, respectively.
As for the Kirghiz to Chinese translation (KI-CH)
task, improvements seem relative small compared
to the other two language pairs. However, it also
gains +0.91 BLEU points over the baseline.
4http://www.cis.hut.fi/projects/morpho/
UY Unsup Sup
stem #Type 39K 21K#Token 1.2M 1.2M
affix #Type 3.0K 0.3K#Token 0.4M 0.7M
Table 3: Statistics of training corpus after unsuper-
vised(Unsup) and supervised(Sup) morphological
analysis.
 31.5 32
 32.5 33
 33.5 34
 34.5 35
 35.5 36
 36.5
word morph stem affix
B
L
E
U
 
s
c
o
r
e
(
%
)
UnsupervisedSupervised
Figure 2: Uyghur to Chinese translation results
after unsupervised and supervised analysis.
4.2 Using Supervised Morphological
Analyzer
Taking it further, we also want to see the effect of
supervised analysis on our model. A generative
statistical model of morphological analysis for
Uyghur was developed according to (Mairehaba
et al, 2012). Table 3 shows the difference of
statistics of training corpus after supervised and
unsupervised analysis. Supervised method gen-
erates fewer type of stems and affixes than the
unsupervised approach. As we can see from
Figure 2, except for the morph method, stem
and affix based approaches perform better after
supervised analysis. The results show that our
approach can obtain even better translation per-
formance if better morphological analyzers are
available. Supervised morphological analysis gen-
erates more meaningful morphemes, which lead to
better disambiguation of translation rules.
5 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we propose a novel framework for
agglutinative language translation by treating stem
and affix differently. We employ the stem se-
quence as the main part for training and decod-
ing. Besides, we associate each stem-granularity
translation rule with an affix distribution, which
could be used to make better translation decisions
by calculating the affix distribution similarity be-
367
tween the rule and the instance to be translated.
We conduct our model on three different language
pairs, all of which substantially improved the
translation performance. The procedure is totally
language-independent, and we expect that other
language pairs could benefit from our approach.
Acknowledgments
The authors were supported by 863 State
Key Project (No. 2011AA01A207), and
National Key Technology R&D Program (No.
2012BAH39B03), Key Project of Knowledge
Innovation Program of Chinese Academy of
Sciences (No. KGZD-EW-501). Qun Liu?s work
is partially supported by Science Foundation
Ireland (Grant No.07/CE/I1142) as part of the
CNGL at Dublin City University. We would
like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
insightful comments and those who helped to
modify the paper.
References
Arianna Bisazza and Marcello Federico. 2009. Mor-
phological pre-processing for Turkish to English
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
IWSLT, pages 129?135.
Peter F. Brown, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Stephen
A. Della Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The
mathematics of statistical machine translation: pa-
rameter estimation. Comput. Linguist., 19(2):263?
311.
Marine Carpuat and Dekai Wu. 2007. Improving
statistical machine translation using word sense
disambiguation. In Proceedings of EMNLP-CoNLL,
pages 61?72.
Yee Seng Chan, Hwee Tou Ng, and David Chiang.
2007. Word sense disambiguation improves
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
ACL, pages 33?40.
David Chiang. 2005. A hierarchical phrase-
based model for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of ACL, pages 263?270.
Mathias Creutz and Krista Lagus. 2005. Inducing the
morphological lexicon of a natural language from
unannotated text. In Proceedings of AKRR, pages
106?113.
Lei Cui, Dongdong Zhang, Mu Li, Ming Zhou,
and Tiejun Zhao. 2010. A joint rule selection
model for hierarchical phrase-based translation. In
Proceedings of ACL, Short Papers, pages 6?11.
Michel Galley, Jonathan Graehl, Kevin Knight, Daniel
Marcu, Steve DeNeefe, Wei Wang, and Ignacio
Thayer. 2006. Scalable inference and training
of context-rich syntactic translation models. In
Proceedings of COLING/ACL, pages 961?968.
Sharon Goldwater and David McClosky. 2005.
Improving statistical MT through morphological
analysis. In Proceedings of HLT-EMNLP, pages
676?683.
Nizar Habash and Fatiha Sadat. 2006. Arabic prepro-
cessing schemes for statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings of NAACL, Short Papers, pages 49?
52.
Eui-Hong Sam Han and George Karypis. 2000.
Centroid-based document classification: analysis
experimental results. In Proceedings of PKDD,
pages 424?431.
Zhongjun He, Qun Liu, and Shouxun Lin. 2008.
Improving statistical machine translation using
lexicalized rule selection. In Proceedings of
COLING, pages 321?328.
Philipp Koehn and Hieu Hoang. 2007. Factored
translation models. In Proceedings of EMNLP-
CoNLL, pages 868?876.
Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In
Proceedings of NAACL, pages 48?54.
Philipp Koehn. 2004. Statistical significance tests for
machine translation evaluation. In Proceedings of
EMNLP, pages 388?395.
Young-Suk Lee. 2004. Morphological analysis for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
HLT-NAACL, Short Papers, pages 57?60.
Yang Liu, Qun Liu, and Shouxun Lin. 2006. Tree-
to-string alignment template for statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of COLING-ACL, pages
609?616.
Minh-Thang Luong and Min-Yen Kan. 2010.
Enhancing morphological alignment for translating
highly inflected languages. In Proceedings of
COLING, pages 743?751.
Minh-Thang Luong, Preslav Nakov, and Min-Yen Kan.
2010. A hybrid morpheme-word representation
for machine translation of morphologically rich
languages. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages 148?
157.
Aili Mairehaba, Wenbin Jiang, Zhiyang Wang, Yibu-
layin Tuergen, and Qun Liu. 2012. Directed graph
model of Uyghur morphological analysis. Journal
of Software, 23(12):3115?3129.
Coskun Mermer and Murat Saraclar. 2011. Un-
supervised Turkish morphological segmentation for
statistical machine translation. In Workshop of MT
and Morphologically-rich Languages.
368
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2002. Discrim-
inative training and maximum entropy models for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
ACL, pages 295?302.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2004. The
alignment template approach to statistical machine
translation. Comput. Linguist., pages 417?449.
Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training
in statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
ACL, pages 160?167.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings
of ACL, pages 311?318.
Chris Quirk, Arul Menezes, and Colin Cherry.
2005. Dependency treelet translation: syntactically
informed phrasal SMT. In Proceedings of ACL,
pages 271?279.
Gerard Salton and Chris Buckley. 1987. Term
weighting approaches in automatic text retrieval.
Technical report.
Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM - an extensible
language modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of
ICSLP, pages 311?318.
Sami Virpioja, Jaakko J. Va?yrynen, Mathias Creutz,
and Markus Sadeniemi. 2007. Morphology-aware
statistical machine translation based on morphs
induced in an unsupervised manner. In Proceedings
of MT SUMMIT, pages 491?498.
Zhiyang Wang, Yajuan Lu?, and Qun Liu. 2011.
Multi-granularity word alignment and decoding for
agglutinative language translation. In Proceedings
of MT SUMMIT, pages 360?367.
Mei Yang and Katrin Kirchhoff. 2006. Phrase-based
backoff models for machine translation of highly
inflected languages. In Proceedings of EACL, pages
1017?1020.
Reyyan Yeniterzi and Kemal Oflazer. 2010. Syntax-
to-morphology mapping in factored phrase-based
statistical machine translation from English to
Turkish. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 454?464.
369
