A computerized dictionary : Le Tr?sor de la langue fran?aise informatis? 
(TLFi) 
Pascale BERNARD 
ATILF (Analyse et Traitement 
Informatique de la Langue 
Fran?aise, UMR 7118-
CNRS/Universit? de Nancy2) 
44 Avenue de la Lib?ration,  
BP 30687  
F-54063-Nancy Cedex, France 
Pascale.Bernard@atilf.fr 
Jacques  DENDIEN 
ATILF (Analyse et Traitement 
Informatique de la Langue 
Fran?aise, UMR 7118-
CNRS/Universit? Nancy2) 
44 Avenue de la Lib?ration, 
BP 30687   
F-54063-Nancy Cedex, France 
Jacques.Dendien@atilf.fr 
Jean-Marie PIERREL 
ATILF (Analyse et Traitement 
Informatique de la Langue 
Fran?aise, UMR 7118-
CNRS/Universit? de Nancy2) 
44 Avenue de la Lib?ration,  
BP 30687,  
F-54063-Nancy Cedex, France 
Jean-Marie.Pierrel@atilf.fr 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents one of the main 
computerized resources of the research 
Laboratory ATILF (Analyse et traitement 
informatique de la langue fran?aise) available 
via the Web: the computerized dictionary 
TLFi (Tr?sor de la langue fran?aise 
informatis?). Its highly detailed XML 
structure (over 3,6 million tags) is powered by 
Stella: the extended capacities and 
potentialities of this software allows high level 
queries as well as hypernavigation through 
and between different databases.  
1 Introduction 
 A dictionary, in its electronic form, is a textual 
database to be used in any natural language 
processing system. The size and the contents of the 
existing dictionaries vary a lot according to the 
target of the attended public and the cost of their 
collected resources.  
In the article, we present one of our textual 
resources, the TLFi which is the most important  
computerized dictionary on French language. It is 
accessible via the web at http://www.atilf.fr/tlfi.  
2 Presentation 
Le Tr?sor de la langue fran?aise, The Treasury 
of the French language, existed first as a paper 
version. It is a dictionary of the 19th and 20th 
century vocabulary, in 16 volumes. The first 
volume was published in 1971 and the last one in 
1993. It contains about 100 000 head words with 
their etymology and history, that means 270 000 
definitions, 430 000 examples with their source, 
the majority of them are extracted from the 
Frantext database. 
 
 
 
 
The computerized version of the dictionary, the  
TLFi (Tr?sor de la langue fran?aise informatis?), 
contains the same data as the paper version, with 
its 350 million characters. With the help of very 
sophisticated automata, we have been able to insert 
in the text a very complex set of XML tags in such 
a way that every textual object is clearly identified 
and that the hierarchy containing these objects is 
clearly designed. With this tag set and thanks to its 
software Stella, it can be seen as a lexical finely 
structured database.  
2.1 Stella: the Toolbox for the TLFi 
exploitation 
     As well as all the textual resources of the 
laboratory, the textual database FRANTEXT 
(www.atilf.fr/frantext), the 8th and 9th editions of 
the dictionary of Acad?mie fran?aise and several 
others lexical database (Bernard et col, 2001 et 
2002),  the TLFi runs on its own specially  
software program STELLA, written in the 
laboratory,  
Stella allows a compact data storage (with a 
mathematically demonstrable optimality) of 
structured texts (Dendien, 1996). Above all, it 
offers, to developpers, very powerful tools for the 
access and handling of textual data including 
several XML hierarchical taggings. 
Stella offers the users:  
- An environment to make the requests. The 
interface is very friendly, with a lot of help on line. 
It offers fine-grained request possibilities, allowing 
precision in the results.  
- An optimal response time to all requests.  
- A good quality of service: Stella contains a 
linguistic ?knowledge? (flexions, categorized 
databases) which allows a user to make complex 
requests.  
- A powerful capacity of interrogation: a user can 
write parametrable grammars to be used and re-
used in different contexts.  
- A possibility of hypernavigation throughout all 
the databases interconnected under Stella. 
2.2 Specificities of the TLFi 
2.2.1 The data: 
Its originality is based, firstly, on its wordlist, 
which is rich of about 100 000 entries, present 
either in our funds or in other dictionaries. The 
TLF was a pioneer in the treatment of morphemes 
or in the treatment of structures of specific 
vocabularies. 
Secondly, it is original too, by the richness of the 
number of examples, about 430000, and syntagms, 
about 165 000, quoted throughout its 16 volumes. 
Besides, its list of metatextual objects such as 
headwords, definitions, indications of domains, 
semantic and stylistic indicators, examples with 
their sources, fixed phrases is exceptional. About 
40 different metatextual objects. 
The data are proposed in different sections: 
synchrony, etymology, history, pronunciation, 
bibliography. 
2.2.2 The structure: 
  One of the main advantages of a computerized 
dictionary is to consider it as a knowledge database 
in which one can extract any items contained in 
any textual object. In order to get the most relevant 
answers when querying the database, the XML tag 
set is divided into two subsets : the tags of the first 
subset are used as delimiters and identifiers of  the 
different kinds of textual objects used in the TLF ; 
the tags of the second subset represent the 
hierarchical organisation of the articles, in a way 
similar to the block structure of modern 
programming languages. This introduces very 
useful notions: 
The scope of an object (from a pragmatic point of 
view it is the paragraph in which the object appears 
plus all the subparagraphs of this paragraph) is the 
smallest block containing this object. 
The comparison of the scopes defines a binary 
relation between objects. Let us take the example 
of an article devoted to the headword W, 
containing the stylistic indicator ?popular? and an 
example of Zola. Does this example illustrate a 
popular sense of W? The answer is yes if the scope 
of the indicator contains the scope of the example, 
otherwise the answer is no. 
2.2.3 The different level of queries :  
  Three levels of queries are possible depending on 
the users?s need. 
2.2.3.1. First level : Simple visualization of an 
article. 
You can read an article dedicated to a specific 
headword by three means. 
Firstly, you have the possibility to write the word 
with mistakes if you do not know the right spelling 
of the word. That is very useful for the users who 
do not remember the right accents (acute, grave or 
circumflex) for instance. All kinds of mistakes 
(like bad or omitted accents, simple/double 
consonants, missing hyphens) are allowed. What is 
more, any mistake is possible as long as the right 
pronunciation is correct. For instance, if you write 
?ornitorink?, the article ?ornithorynque? will be 
found. It is also possible to enter an inflected form 
of a verb (ex. danseront) or of  an adjective or 
noun (ex. g?n?raux), or even a phonetic equivalent 
of such a form (ex. j?n?ro), even with bad accents 
(ex. jenero). 
Secondly, you can  use the possibility of seeing the 
list of the main articles contained in the TLFi, this 
allows the user to discover unknown words, just as 
if he was turning the pages of the paper version of 
the dictionary.  
Thirdly, the user can find an article thanks to 
selecting sounds and not alphabetical characters. 
At that level of consulting, you read the dictionary 
article by article, yet with easy ways of searching a 
word. 
 
2.2.3.2. Second level : aided requests. 
At that level you have the possibility of using the 
dictionary as a textual knowledge database and to 
make queries throughout the 16 volumes in one 
click of mouse. One can make requests on  graphic 
forms, on inflected forms as well, on sequences of 
words ... 
The requests can be mono-criterion or multi-
criteria. Examples of mono-criterion requests : all 
the words borrowed from Spanish language, all the 
words of a specific domain, all the onomatopoeias, 
all the metaphors and so on.  By specifying several 
criteria, one can extract from the dictionary  all the 
nouns of a specific domain, all the verbs which are 
used with a stylistic indicator (for instance 
?popular?) and which have been used by an author 
(for instance Victor Hugo). Other example : one 
can extract also all the definitions which contain a 
word (for instance instrument) and which at the 
same time do not contain the word  measure, and 
which are found in the domain of optics, and so on.  
 
2.2.3.3. Third level : complex requests. 
The user, at that level, can seek for a set of textual 
objects {O1, O2,..., On} imposing them to be 
conformant to a set of constraints combining the 
type, the contents and the relations between 
objects. 
Type and contents specifications are sometimes 
possible in other computerized dictionaries query 
systems. They allow to find articles talking about 
architecture or containing an example contained 
from Zola. Suppose now that we are looking for 
articles where an example of Zola is related to the 
domain architecture. The simple fact to combine 
the two criteria (must talk about architecture and 
contain examples of Zola), is not enough : may be 
some part of the article is not devoted to 
architecture. If the example of Zola is in such a 
part, the article is not relevant. 
In the TLFi, the problem is solved with a new kind 
of constraint, by using the scope of objects. We 
will state that the example must be hierarchically 
inferior to the domain. Thus, all the articles where 
the example is not in the scope of the domain will 
be shifted. 
This feature is nothing but the simple reflect of the 
XML tags representing the hierarchy. It gives the 
TLFi query system an incredible accuracy. 
Strangely enough, it seems to be ignored in other 
computarized dictionaries, with the consequence of 
very poor quality results. 
  
This powerful feature, plus many other ones, such 
as the possibility to make list of words in many 
ways (manually, by automatical generation of the 
inflected forms of a given lemma, or by high level 
regular expressions selection) and reuse them in 
requests, allied to the rich content of the TLFi and 
a very friendly user?s interface, with help on line, 
allow very complex querying, with pertinent 
results. 
3 Hypernavigation  
Hypernavigation throughout all the databases 
interconnected under Stella is possible. For 
example, when consulting the TLFi and by simply 
clicking on any word in an article, the user can 
navigate towards another article of the TLFi,  
towards a lexical database giving information on 
the grammatical category of the word,  towards the 
8th edition of the dictionary of the French Academy 
(1932-1935), towards the 9th  edition (started in 
1990), towards the historical database for French 
language, called DDL, giving new datations for 
words or phrases, and also towards the database 
FRANTEXT, which enables the user to discover 
other or more examples on a given word. 
Historically, the base derives from the texts 
assembled for providing examples to be used in the 
elaboration of the Tr?sor de la langue fran?aise 
(TLF). This first raison d??tre turned to a new one: 
the desire to offer the scientific community a vast 
corpus of texts linked to an efficient query tool. 
Nowadays, FRANTEXT is a textual database 
which currently includes 3737 French texts 
covering a period from 1505 to the present day, 
amounting in all to more than 217 millions of 
words. 
4 Uses of the TLFi 
At the start the TLF in its paper version was 
intended to a public of specialists in linguistics, 
erudite persons and scholars.  
The computerization of its data, the friendly 
interface with its help on line, the capacities of the 
software Stella give a new life to the TLF.  
As described above, all the possibilities of 
queries allow anyone, specialist or not, to extract 
any piece of information from that textual 
database. 
The TLFi is directed at the widest audience with 
the possibility of making queries without knowing 
the right spelling of a word. The majority of 
electronic dictionaries do not offer this possibility 
of access to words when spelling is unknown by 
the user. For instance, in the French word 
?sculpture?, the letter -p- is mute. Thanks to this 
first query of research, the user can ask the word 
by its spelling :  ?skultur?. The right answer will be 
immediately found. Besides, another friendly way 
to read the computerized TLFi consists in putting 
in evidence one or several textual objects by 
colouring them.  
Its interest for linguistic research is obvious for 
it is a powerful tool to help the user who wants to 
study grammatical classes (verbs, adjectives, 
adverbs, for instance), syntactical classes (in 
studying constructions of a verb, more precisely, 
the user can find the verbs which are followed by 
the french preposition ?de?), etymological classes 
(verbs borrowed from a language, Latin or 
English), stylistic classes (ironical or metaphorical 
uses, for instance all the adverbs used in slang), 
morphological classes (the words ending with a 
suffix, or beginning with a prefix, for instance all 
the verbs ending with the suffix ?age and which 
are an action of a verb).  It is also possible to 
exclude the content of a textual object, for instance 
if the user wants to extract all the words ending 
with the suffix ?able which are not adjectives. 
The use of the TLFi can also be foreseen for 
learning and teaching French language. Actually 
we are thinking, on one hand, about the pedagogic 
possibilities given by that computerized dictionary 
such as it is available at the moment, and on the 
other hand, about the modifications we could make 
in order to encourage its use in education  
In the use of the TLFi in teaching such as it is at 
present, we have defined a methodology whose 
aim is to allow the use of this important linguistic 
resource. In collaboration with a teacher we have 
prepared and experimented a set of pedagogical 
activities for children in the CE1 class (7 years 
old). The results show  that young children, who 
are  learning to read, are able, alone or in pairs, to 
use the TLFi to write a word in capital letters, to 
tell its grammatical category, to find a noun phrase 
or verb phrase containing this word or to say 
whether it is monosemic or polysemic. 
As regards the modifications we could 
implement in order to get the TLFi to adapt to the 
learners, we could mention different types of 
modifications according to the ages of the learners. 
Firstly, we could, in the articles, change the literary 
examples extracted from the textual database 
Frantext for examples coming from another textual 
database containing youth literature. Secondly, we 
intend to present the information in a slightly 
different way. For instance, the syntagms could be 
found at start of a new paragraph, instead of being 
at a place where it is not easy to detect them for a 
young learner. Thirdly, we intend to give specific 
helps and commentaries on line to guide the young 
learner. 
5 Conclusion 
Designed and produced first as a paper 
dictionary, the TLFi is nowadays a computerized 
dictionary in which each user, linguist or not, can 
make successfully simple or complex requests. We 
will produce a CD-Rom version in autum  2004 
but yet every one can have a free access at:  
http://www.atilf.fr/tlfi.    
References  
CNRS (1976-1993) Tr?sor de la langue fran?aise, 
dictionnaire de la langue du 19e et du 20e si?cle, 
CNRS, Gallimard, Paris. 
P. Bernard, C. Bernet, J. Dendien, J.M. Pierrel, G. 
Souvay, Z. Tucsnak. 2001. Un serveur de 
ressources informatis?es via le Web. Actes de 
TALN-2001, Tours, Juillet 2001, pages 333-338. 
P. Bernard, J. Dendien, J. Lecomte, J.M. Pierrel. 
2002. Les ressources de l?ATILF pour l?analyse 
lexicale et textuelle : TLFi, Frantext et le logiciel 
Stella. Actes des 8e Journ?es Internationales 
d?Analyse Statistique des Donn?es Textuelles 
JADT 2002, Saint-Malo 2002, pages 137-149. 
P. Bernard, J. Lecomte, J. Dendien, J.M. Pierrel. 
2002. Computerized linguistic resources of the 
research laboratory ATILF for lexical and 
textual analysis : TLFi, Frantext and the 
software Stella. Actes de LREC-2002, Las 
Palmas (Canaries). 
Dendien J., Acces to information in a textual 
database : acces function and optimal indexes,  
in Research in Humanities Computing, Papers 
from the ACH-ALLC Conference, Oxford, 
Clarendon Press, 1996 
J. Dendien et J.M. Pierrel Le tr?sor de la langue 
fran?aise informatis? : un exemple d?informati-
sation d?un dictionnaire de langue de r?f?rence 
in ? Les dictionnaires ?lectroniques ?, M. Zock 
et J. Carroll editors, Traitement Automtique des 
langues, Vol 44 ? n? 2/2003, Herm?s ? 
Lavoisier, Paris, 2003, pp. 11-37 
C. P?lissier, C. Jadelot, J.M. Pierrel. 2004. 
M?thodologie li?e ? l?Utilisation de Grandes 
Ressources Linguistiques dans le Cadre de 
l?Apprentissage : le cas du TLFi en Fran?ais 
au Cycle 3. EURALEX 2004, Lorient. 
 
