GeoName: a system for back-transliterating pinyin place names 
 
Kui Lam Kwok 
Computer Science Dept., CUNY  
Queens College, 65-30 Kissena Blvd. 
Flushing, NY, 11367 
kwok@ir.cs.qc.edu 
Qiang Deng 
Computer Science Dept., CUNY 
Queens College, 65-30 Kissena Blvd. 
Flushing, NY, 11367 
peterqc@yahoo.com 
 
Abstract  
To be unambiguous about a Chinese 
geographic name represented in English text 
as Pinyin, one needs to recover the name in 
Chinese characters. We present our approach 
to this back-transliteration problem based on 
processes such as bilingual geographic name 
lookup, name suggestion using place name 
character and pair frequencies, and 
confirmation via a collection of monolingual 
names or the WWW. Evaluation shows that 
about 48% to 72% of the correct names can 
be recovered as the top candidate, and 82% to 
86% within top ten, depending on the 
processes employed.  
1 Introduction 
Names referring to entities can be ambiguous because 
different entities may have been given the same name. 
When one encounters foreign place names within 
English texts, further complication arises because the 
English alphabet may not represent the native writing 
uniquely or adequately, and transliteration has to be 
employed. This is true for Chinese place names. In this 
information age, documents on Chinese events such as 
news stories, commentaries, reviews, analysis, can 
originate from various sources and languages other than 
Chinese. Authors may reference Chinese place names 
but not necessary accompany it with the actual Chinese 
characters. It is therefore useful to build an automatic 
algorithm to decode such a place name in English and 
map it to the original Chinese character representation. 
     Chinese language is written as a contiguous string of 
ideographs (characters) without white space. 
Geographic names of most cities, provinces, mountains, 
etc are two to four characters long.  Border regions have 
longer place names. Unlike person names, there is not a 
preferred closed set for family name characters. Any of 
the over 6K GB-encoded character is theoretically 
admissible as part of a place name. When one refers to 
them in English text, one needs to represent them using 
English alphabets ? a process of romanization. Two 
main systems exist for this process: Pinyin, official in 
Mainland China, and Wade-Giles convention, popular 
in Taiwan (see e.g. http://www.romanization.com). 
Their objective is to spell out the pronunciation of the 
Chinese characters with alphabets. Unfortunately, 
although written Chinese is by and large uniform 
(except for a few hundred characters that have 
simplified vs. traditional forms), spoken Chinese can 
vary from region to region with different dialects. The 
Pinyin system was introduced by the PRC government 
in the 1950?s. It attempts to standardize the 
representation according to the official Beijing 
Potunghua dialect (Northern China Mandarin) for the 
whole country. The Wade-Giles system is an older 
convention designed by authors of the same names in 
the late 19th and early 20th century, and is popular in 
Taiwan and some parts of South-East Asia.  
     There are also other haphazard romanization 
conventions in different regions where Chinese is used. 
For example, Hong Kong has its own British colonial 
history and Southern (GuangDong) dialect, and entity 
names are often spelt differently.  The representation 
?Hong Kong? itself is neither Pinyin nor Wade-Giles. It 
should have been ?Xiang Gang? in the former, and 
?Hsiang Kang? in the latter. This is also true for 
?Singapore?. In this investigation, we will mainly focus 
on the Pinyin convention. This is used by most of the 
Chinese (PRC) and there has been discussion in Taiwan 
to adopt it even though there are still political obstacles 
around this issue. There is evidence that this system is 
gaining popularity in the U.S. as the default choice 
(Library of Congress 2000).  
     This paper investigates methods of recovering a 
Chinese place name in GB-encoding (the character codes 
used for simplified Chinese characters) when its English 
Pinyin is given. We have previously built a system 
PYName (Kwok and Deng 2002) to back-transliterate 
Chinese person names. This paper extends it to provide 
similar functionality for place names. It is a tool to help 
reduce ambiguity in cross language geographic entity 
reference, and would be useful for cross language 
information retrieval. The organization of this paper is 
as follows: Section 2 discusses some properties of 
Pinyin place names. Section 3 discusses the use of 
frequencies to help back-transliteration. Section 4 
describes GeoName, our system to map English Pinyin 
place names to Chinese characters. Section 5 contains 
some evaluation of Geoname, and Section 6 contains 
our conclusion and future work. 
2 Pinyin Place Names 
The mapping from Chinese character to Pinyin is more 
or less unique because the majority of Chinese 
characters have only one sound (with some exceptions). 
Given a Pinyin, however, there can be many 
homophonic candidate characters depending on which 
sound it is. When one encounters such a Pinyin entity 
ambiguity can arise.  Even if the context specifies the 
place precisely, there is still uncertainty as to its original 
character representation. This is true for all entity types 
rendered into Pinyin unless they are well known. As an 
example, the capital of China, Beijing, originates from 
the characters: 
 ? ? Bei;  ? ? jing. 
However, when back-transliterating from the English, 
the following are some of the possible mappings: 
 Bei ? {????fD? ?} 
  Jing ?{?Dj.A?? ?} 
Candidates like: ?j??? ? are all possible 
place names in addition to the intended one. In fact, 
these two are highly fertile Pinyin: ?Bei? maps to 23 and 
?jing? maps to 20, leading to a total of 460 possible pairs. 
Many of the pairs of course may not be used as place 
names. 
     It is possible to diminish the above ambiguity by 
capturing also the tone of a Pinyin character as is done 
in most Chinese input systems that accept Pinyin as 
input. The simplest convention has five tones. One tone 
can be assigned to each character represented as Pinyin, 
and this can separate the mapped characters into tonal 
sets. However, most printed or electronic texts such as 
newspapers or newswires do not have tones assigned. 
Our system assumes input texts have no tonal indication, 
and so can be adapted to online text processing. 
     Chinese place names are mostly two to three 
characters long. Four-character names exist and longer 
ones are possible.  Unlike person names where the 
family name character is selected from a fairly closed 
set, character use is practically unrestricted for places. 
This means that when mapping a Pinyin representation 
into its original Chinese format, one can result in x^y 
candidates, where y is the average number of possible 
single character mappings for each of x syllables. To 
further complicate the issue, place names in Pinyin can 
be separated with white spaces or not. For example, the 
representation for ?\p, a place near Beijing, can be 
written as: 'Qin Huang Dao', ?QinHuangDao? or 
'Qinhuangdao'. The first item shows the original 
character one by one separated by a white space. The 
second item is a composite Pinyin denoting that the 
three individual Pinyin should be treated as a single 
entity. Each individual Pinyin character however is 
initialized with a capital letter.  The third item is like the 
second composite but without capital letter except for 
the first character. (For example, on 3/25/03, the New 
York Times reported a coalmine explosion at 
?Mengnanzhuang? employing this style.) All three styles 
can be found in texts. The first two indicate unique 
segmentation of the Pinyin characters. The third style 
however presents the additional problem of 
segmentation: how to recover the characters correctly. 
The string  'Qinhuangdao' may be broken up as 'Qin 
huang dao', 'Qin huang da o', ?Qin hu ang dao?, etc. 
because it so happens that the listed components -- call 
them syllables -- are all legitimate Pinyin. Thus, the 
?Qinhuangdao? composite can be either a three-, four- or 
five-character entity. One can imagine the exponential 
increase in candidates if each Pinyin syllable maps back 
to ~10 possibilities, for example. There is a fourth style 
that employs an apostrophe to indicate syllable 
separation in case of extreme ambiguity such as: Xian 
(? province) and Xi?an (T^ the city). This is very 
useful, like style one or two. Unfortunately, none of 
these is mandatory. 
3 Mapping Pinyin to Chinese Character 
Back-transliteration is a difficult problem as 
exemplified in (Knight and Graehl 1997, Chen, et.al. 
1998).  We limit ourselves to text input of a place name. 
Let E = e1 e2 e3 .. eN be a given English place name with 
Pinyin syllables ek, 1<=k<=N. It may have originated 
from a Chinese character sequence C = c1 c2 c3.. cN with  
probability: P(C|E) = P(E|C)*P(C)/P(E). P(E) can be 
ignored, and P(E|C) is reduced to a product of P(ek|ck) if 
independence of ek with ej, and ek with cj (jk) are 
assumed.  Since most Chinese characters have unique 
Pinyin, we also set P(ek|ck) to a constant, leaving the 
unknown P(C). If one has sufficient bilingual translation 
of place names, the neglected probability P(ek|ck) can be 
estimated. 
     Hence P(C|E) is roughly reduced to P(C) up to a 
constant. The most probable Chinese character sequence 
corresponding to the input Pinyin E is therefore equal to 
the one argmax P(C), or P(C) can be used to rank 
candidates C.  To estimate P(C), we initially used a 
bigram model: P(C)~P(c1)*P(c2|c1)*P(c3|c2)..*P(cN|cN-1) 
which turns out to be less effective than the following 
heuristic approach.  Instead of probability, we work 
with occurrence frequencies of the string itself, bigrams, 
and single characters. The function for ranking is 
     g(C) = a1*log [f(C)+a1] + ? a2*log [f(cicj)+a2] 
 + ?a3*log [f(ci)+a3]   (1) 
where f(.) is frequency, and the sums run over all 
consecutive bigrams and singles composing the string C, 
and ai, i=1,..3 are constants, which are larger for longer 
strings. A factor is not counted if its f(.) is zero.  When 
string C has been seen before, its effect is larger if the 
length of C is longer. If C does not exist, its component 
bigram and single character frequencies determine the 
ranking value g(C). It is generally true that for a 
character string matching some dictionary entries or 
previous use, the longer the length, the more legitimate 
it is.  
     The issues raised in Section 2 are addressed as 
follows. Many Pinyin of the third style do lead to 
unique segmentation.  For those that do not, all possible 
segmentations are captured, but they are sorted longest 
spelling sequence (and minimum syllables) first: e.g. in 
the previous example, ?Qin huang dao? is preferred over 
?Qin hu ang dao?.  The candidates (c1 c2 c3.. cN) for Eqn.1 
are limited to all possible combinations of characters 
that exist in the training data and can be mapped from 
the segmented Pinyin. Because of limitation of 
hardware, our prototype currently limits the number of 
Pinyin syllables to four in order to cut down on the 
number of candidates for certain input. 
4 GeoName 
GeoName is designed to accept a Pinyin place name and 
suggest Chinese GB-encoded candidates for it. 
Back-transliteration is an ambiguous and inaccurate 
process. Also, non-standard romanization exists 
historically for many common places names. The system 
does not yet have the capability to extract such names 
from running text, but requires that each name be entered 
on a separate line. Each Pinyin name is subjected to 
segmentation and character mapping, and a set of 
candidate GB-encoded Chinese names is produced as 
discussed in Section 2 and 3. GeoName employs a 
three-step process to effect back-transliteration: 1) table 
lookup on a bilingual place name list; 2) suggest names 
based on frequency usage of place characters and pairs; 3) 
confirmation via web retrieval or a monolingual 
geographic list.  The following sub-sections present 
details of our approach. 
4.1 Bilingual Place Name List 
Geographic entities tend not to change much over time, 
and the number of places is relatively fixed, unlike 
person name for example. Thus, it is a good strategy to 
produce a lookup table to map place names between 
Chinese and English. It will give accurate translation; it 
can handle 1:m mappings well when a Chinese name 
may be represented differently due to different systems 
of romanization, and is very efficient in real time 
computation. The disadvantages are that it is difficult to 
locate such a bi-list, it will not be complete, relatively 
fixed, and it cannot suggest possible new names that are 
not on the list.  We think such a list is an important 
component of any system that tries to do this kind of 
mappings, as there would always be many well-known 
places that have non-standard or peculiar romanization. 
From ftp://ftpserver.ciesin.columbia.edu/pub/data/China 
/CITAS/gb_code/ we located such a bi-list that contains 
about 4K unique Chinese place names. This we call 
List-A. Using the English Pinyin as key, a direct hit on 
this list will provide most probably the correct translation 
for the input. The first bit (A-bit) of a 3-bit tag would be 
set to 1, thus 100.  The tag is attached to each candidate. 
4.2 Place Name Suggestion 
The total number of GB-encoded characters is about 
6,000, but around 2,500 are the most often used.  Since 
we limit our domain to geographical names here, we can 
collect such names in monolingual Chinese text and 
estimate the probabilities for single and paired Chinese 
characters use in this context.  We employed similar 
methods in our PYName system for person names and it 
worked reasonably well.  However, unlike person names 
where many people may share the same name characters, 
geographic names tend to be relatively more unique, i.e. 
not too many places have similar characters in our 
training data. Thus, the effectiveness of using frequency 
to suggest GB-encoded place names based on a given 
Pinyin name in English is more limited. This is 
compounded by the difficulty of finding a sufficiently 
large name list. The main advantage of the probabilistic 
mapping exercise is to be able to suggest new names as 
candidates by composing with characters, and rank them 
according to how characters appear in the monolingual 
name list as discussed in Section 3. 
     The ranking formula in Eqn.(1) has to be estimated 
from some training data. We failed to find sufficient 
downloadable Chinese place names and employed 
BBN's IdentiFinder (Miller, et.al. 1999) that brackets 
location entities in running text. The collections used are 
from the TREC and NTCIR experiments. Location 
names were identified and extracted. The result is about 
80K ?approximate place names? called List-B.  The 
software is not perfect and many entries are not place 
names, or contain several names together.  But the data 
can still serve its purpose.  
4.3  Name Confirmation  
To improve the accuracy of candidate ranking obtained 
in Section 4.2, we further use a process of confirmation. 
The hypothesis is that if a GB-encoded place name 
candidate has been seen before, it has a high probability 
of being correct. Each candidate name is compared to the 
monolingual Chinese name list consisting of (List-A U 
List-B). If it exists, the second bit (B-bit) of the 3-bit tag 
is set giving 010.  
     However, as suggested before, name lists are seldom 
complete. To mitigate this problem, we also utilize the 
Word Wide Web for confirmation. The basic idea is to 
treat WWW as another name collection, but a dynamic 
one. The English Pinyin name is treated as a query and 
sent to a search engine (such as Google). By using the 
advanced search option to return GB-encoded documents, 
each candidate of the Pinyin is searched in the documents 
to confirm whether it has been used as a sub-string.  If 
true, the third C-bit of the tag is set giving 001. Another 
benefit of using the WWW is to resolve some 
dialect-based problems. As an example, both ?Hong 
Kong? and ?Xiang Gang? as Pinyin place names have 
been found on web documents with the Chinese name n
 confirmed. However, we do have to pay a price on 
performance, since web searches are relatively slow. 
Another draw back is that, web confirmation is effective 
only on popular, well-known names. Otherwise, domain 
specific name lists can be used if available. 
     Thus, all candidates are tagged and rank value 
assigned. Our current strategy is to rank candidates by 
the 3-bit tag first, followed by minimum syllable number, 
and then by g(C) of Eqn.1. If a candidate is confirmed 
somewhere, especially on our bi-list, it will be a good 
translation. Otherwise, shorter names are preferred. 
4.4 System Description  
Fig.1 below is a flowchart of GeoName showing how the 
different functions are tied together. Steps 2, 5 and 6 for 
bi-list lookup and confirmation can be enabled or 
disabled.  Although our main focus is on Pinyin input, 
GeoName does have limited support in Step 3 for other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.1. GeoName System Flowchart 
romanization systems such as Wade-Giles and Hong 
Kong Pinyin. The system allows selection if the input 
romanization convention is known. A table converts 
Wade-Giles spelling into PRC Pinyin. For Hong Kong 
style spelling, another table converts it directly into GB 
character. Example back-transliterations are shown on 
the GUI screen of GeoName in Fig.2. The 1st and 3rd 
names are correct at rank 1, the 2nd at rank 2. 
5 Evaluation of GeoName 
To evaluate the performance of GeoName, we need to 
test a set of Chinese place names in English Pinyin and 
compare the output from GeoName with the known 
Chinese characters for each name. In essence, we need 
another bi-list for testing, independent of the List-A that 
we used for training. Bilingual lists are difficult to obtain. 
Eventually a bilingual map (Map of Peoples? Republic of 
China 2001) with both Chinese and English names 
printed was located. The test set consists of 162 
non-capital city names randomly selected from the map, 
six from each of the twenty-seven provinces excluding 
Taiwan (where some names are in Wade-Giles 
convention). The rank position of the correct Chinese 
name for each Pinyin returned from GeoName was noted 
within top ten; else it is considered a failure. We tested 
four settings of the tag values, viz.: 000 (only frequency 
prediction), 001 (frequency and web confirmation), 010 
(frequency and monolingual list confirmation), and 111 
(full function).  A tabulation of the number of correct 
names found vs. rank position is shown in Table 1.  
 
Rank 
1 
 
2 
 
3 
 
4 
 
5 
 
6 
 
7 
 
8 
 
9 
 
10 
> 
10 
tag = 000 
78 22 13 3 4 4 6 1 1 1 29 
tag = 001 
95 20 7 7 2 1 2 1 0 2 25 
tag = 010 
88 24 11 1 4 2 3 0 0 1 28 
tag = 111 
116 10 2 3 3 1 2 2 0 1 22 
 
Table1:  Number of Correct Candidates in Top Ten 
 
     The result with tag=000 (using frequency only for 
candidate suggestion) shows that 78 candidates out of 
162 (48%) are correct at rank 1, and 133 (82%) correct 
within top 10. Both runs with tag=001 (add WWW 
confirmation) or tag=010 (add monolingual List-A U 
List-B confirmation) improves over tag=000 results, 
especially at rank 1, bringing this percentage to 59% and 
54% respectively. Web confirmation is expensive in 
processing time, and may be variable depending on the 
state of the Web. Monolingual list confirmation is useful, 
especially when one has a list that is more region-specific 
1. English Pinyin 
    place name 
2. Pinyin syllable 
segmentation; get al 
possible GB character 
combinations.  
3. 
Bilingual 
table 
lookup 
4. Merge candidates 
5. Monolingual 
Chinese name 
list confirmation 
6. WWW 
confirmation 
 
7. Evaluate probability; rank 
according to tag, name 
character length, probability 
to the desired input names. The best result is returned 
when all the processes are employed including checking 
on the bilingual List-A. Apparently many of our input 
names appear on this list, and it leads to simple 
table-lookup for the back-transliteration. This is probably 
not surprising because the bilingual map is not large 
(2?x3?), and it would only show the more well- known 
cities. Thus for the tag=111 run, it is seen that the correct 
candidates at rank 1 increase to 116 (71.6%), and if up to 
rank 10 candidates are included, 140 (86.4%) of the 
correct names are identified.  
Conclusion 
We have described GeoName, a system to back- 
transliterate English Pinyin geographic names to 
Chinese characters based on bilingual list lookup, 
monolingual place name character frequency, and Web 
confirmation. Evaluation using Pinyin city names shows  
that nearly 72% of the names suggested are correct at 
rank 1, and over 86% of correct names are included in 
the top ten candidates.  
     The evaluation is small involving only 162 city 
names. One needs larger scale studies with more 
obscure names or names actually in use.  The resources 
we employed are rather limited. We intend to improve 
our training data, as well as our formula for name 
suggestion. Bilingual resources are difficult to locate. 
We are exploring how to use the Web as a gigantic 
bilingual name list in order to improve our system 
further. 
Acknowledgments 
We like to thank Beth Sundheim for suggesting the 
problem and pointing out some geographic resources to 
us, and BBN for the use of their IdentiFinder software. 
This work was partially sponsored by the Space and 
Naval Warfare Systems Center San Diego, under Grant 
No. N66001-00-1-8912.   
References  
Chen, H.H., Huang, S-J., Ding, Y-W. and Tsai, S-C. 
(1998) Proper name translation in cross-language 
information retrieval. Proceedings of COLING- 
ACL98. pp.232-236. 
Knight, K. and Graehl, J. (1997) Machine transliteration. 
Proceedings of 35th Annual Meeting of Association 
for Computational Linguistics, pp. 128-135. 
Kwok, K.L. and Deng, Q. (2002) Corpus-based Pinyin 
Name Resolution. Proceedings of the First SIGHAN 
Workshop on Chinese Language Processing 
(COLING 2002). pp. 41-47. 
Library of Congress Pinyin Conversion Project (2000). 
http://www.loc.gov/catdir/pinyin/outline.html. 
Map of the Peoples' Republic of China. (2001) 
ISBN7-80544-601-6/K.573. Chengdu Cartographic 
Publishing House. (http://www.ccph-map.com) 
Miller, D., Schwartz, R., Weischedel, R. and Stone, R. 
(1999) Named Entity Extraction from Broadcast News. 
Proceedings of DARPA Broadcst News Workshop. pp. 
37-40. 
 
 
 
Fig.2: GUI of GeoName 
