A geo-coding service encompassing a geo-parsing tool and integrated digital
gazetteer service
Ian Densham
Edinburgh University Data Library
Main Library Building
George Square
Edinburgh EH8 9LJ
Scotland, UK
i.densham@ed.ac.uk
James Reid
Edinburgh University Data Library
Main Library Building
George Square
Edinburgh EH8 9LJ
Scotland, UK
james.reid@inf.ed.ac.uk
Abstract
We describe a basic Geo-coding service en-
compassing a geo-parsing tool and integrated
digital gazetteer service. The development of
a geo-parser comes from the need to explicitly
georeference large resource collections such as
the Statistical Accounts of Scotland which cur-
rently only contain implicit georeferences in
the form of placennames thus making such col-
lections inherently geographically searchable.
1 Introduction
The project is being undertaken by the Edinburgh Univer-
sity Data Library (Edina) as a part of the larger geoXwalk
(www.geoXwalk.ac.uk) project which aims to develop
a protocol based (ADL, OGC and Z39.50) UK digital
gazetteer service. The geo-parser uses the geoXwalk
server as the name authority for identified placename can-
didates.
2 The geo-coding process
In its current implementation, the service consists of
two main components, the geo-parser and the geoXwalk
gazetteer, with a generic demonstrator interface. The
term geo-parsing refers to the identification of place-
names in a document/resource, where geo-coding refers
to the tagging of the candidate and consequently the re-
source with a geographic footprint. Figure 1 shows the
basic geo-coding flowline.
A resource is submitted to the geo-parser, which iden-
tifies a series of potential placenames. Each placename
is displayed along with the number of occurrences in the
text, and the number of matching gazetteer candidates.
For each placename, a link to the gazetteer records is
displayed and a highlight option is available for identi-
fication in the original text which is displayed beneath
Figure 1: The geo-coding process
the table. Various sorting functions are also available
for records of the table. County and feature type are
the default attributes for disambiguation, although more
are available through the geoXwalk feature specification.
Currently multiple gazetteer entries can be attached to a
single placename, enabling output of different instances
of the same name in the text. Geo-coding output is avail-
able in an application specific xml schema, csv, or html,
and contains parser and editor matadata. Outputted pla-
cenames can be viewed on a map. Clearly the degree of
human interaction is high duri! ng the review stage, with
the process currently limited to individual resources. As
geo-parser development continues, user interaction at this
stage of the process will become less, although the po-
tential for ?post process? queries will rise, as the parser
is more closely integrated with the geoXwalk database.
As geo-parser development progresses the interface will
need to accommodate a more flexible approach to the
geo-coding process, as clearly interface requirements are
determined by users with associated collections of spe-
cific document types, and output requirements. A range
of functionality is required at various levels between a
fully automated batch processing mode and a more inter-
active analytical approach to individual documents. Fur-
ther investigation is required on the integration of geo-
coding output into existing document metadata.
3 The geo-parser
The current architecture of the geo-parser is conceptually
based on several passes across the text at varying levels
of abstraction. Documents are split into blocks, blocks
into tokens. Tokens are re-constituted into sentences, and
the sentences run through a place name finders to iden-
tify candidate place names. The current parser imple-
mentation uses two techniques. The first applies approxi-
mately 300 different regular expressions at the token level
based on patterns from training data (The Statistical Ac-
counts of Scotland (http://edina.ac.uk/statacc). Once all
the patterns have been run on the document then a second
pass is made to find likely placenames in conjunctions /
disjunctions with other placenames. Other patterns are
also used to attempt to remove false positives such as the
names of people, while others are based on the proximity
of placename-like words (?shire?, ?river? etc.). The sec-
ond approach uses the Brill tagger (Brill, 1994) to mark
each token with a p! art-of-speech tag, enabling rules to
be applied to the text surrounding proper nouns to select
likely placenames. Candidate placenames are then cross-
referenced with the geoXwalk gazetteer, and a marked up
version of the original document and a summary XML
version of results returned. The need for large quantities
experimental data in order to develop identification and
disambiguation further is recognised.
4 GeoXwalk
GeoXwalk is more than just a simple lookup facility
for the geo-parser as every geographic feature stored in
the gazetteer has its detailed geometry stored with it.
This clearly enables more complex searching. The abil-
ity to derive the relationships between features implic-
itly by geometric computation is significant and provides
more accurate results than can be ascertained by sim-
ple lookups based on hierarchical thesauri methods as
in traditional gazetteers. When candidates are referenced
against the gazetteer, geoXwalk provides a means to ac-
cess its ?alternate? geographies (of which there are many
in the UK) as well as a standard footprint. For example
a candidate placename ?Knowsley? could be resolved as
parish code ?BX003? as well as grid reference 340900,
392300 - 347217, 397660. The result is that more pow-
erful geographical based search strategies can be applied
e.g. ?find me all documents about Gaelic songs that do
not reference the Western Isles?.
5 Conclusions
Issues encountered during the ongoing development of a
document geo-coding tool are on the one hand concerned
with the identification and disambiguation of placenames
in the text, and on the other, the use of a sophisticated
multi-purpose gazetteer service against which candidates
are referenced. Interface flexibility is required to accom-
modate the range of possible approaches to the applica-
tion.
Acknowledgments. The authors would like to thank
all those involved with the GeoXwalk project, David
Medyckyj-Scott, Andy Corbett, James Crone , Andrew
Robson, Robert Atkey.
References
James Allen. 1995. Natural Language Understanding.
Benjamin Cummings, Redwood City, CA.
Eric Brill. 1994. Some advances in transformation-based
part of speech tagging. In National Conference on Ar-
tificial Intelligence, pages 722?727.
Claire Grover and Alex Lascarides. 2001. XML-based
data preparation for robust deep parsing. In Proc. Joint
EACL-ACL Meeting, pages 252?259, Toulouse.
Andrei Mikheev. 1999. A knowledge-free method for
capitalised word disambiguation. In Proceedings of
the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 159?166.
Nina Wacholder Yael Ravin and Misook Choi. 1997.
Disambiguation of proper names in text. In Proceed-
ings of the 17th Annual ACM-SIGIR Conference, pages
202?208.
