Abstract
Categorization of text in IR has
traditionally focused on topic. As use
of the Internet and e?mail increases,
categorization has become a key area
of research as users demand methods
of prioritizing documents. This work
investigates text classification by
format style, i.e. "genre", and
demonstrates, by complementing topic
classification, that it can significantly
improve retrieval of information. The
paper compares use of presentation
features to word features, and the
combination thereof, using Na?ve
Bayes, C4.5 and SVM classifiers.
Results show use of combined feature
sets with SVM yields 92%
classification accuracy in sorting seven
genres.   
1 Introduction
This paper firstly defines genre, explains the
rationale for automatic genre classification, and
reviews some previously published work
relevant to this problem. It describes the
features chosen to be extracted from documents
for input to a classification system. The paper
next describes data used, experiments carried
out, and the results obtained. Finally the paper
discusses the results and suggests ways for the
research to progress.
1.1 Defining Genre
The genre of a document is defined here as a
label which denotes a set of conventions in the
way in which information is presented. These
conventions cover both formatting and style of
language used. Examples of genres include
"Newswire", "Classified Advertisements", and
"Radio Broadcast News Transcript". The
format of the text and the style of language used
within a genre is usually consistent even though
the topics of different documents may vary
greatly. Note that text classifications such as
"Sport" or "Politics" are not considered as
genres here since these are broad topic areas. 
1.2 Why Genre?
Many people are experiencing the growth in the
volume of electronic text: Sources include news
services, online journals, and e?mail. Few
people have time to scan every text source of
potential interest to them and not all sources are
of equal interest to everyone.   
The continuing expansion of the Internet
makes it increasingly hard to find information
relevant to the user?s needs. Search engines go
some way to solving this problem, but often the
results are dominated by hits that do not match
the user?s requirements. Many search engines,
such as Yahoo, provide a hierarchical
classification of sites which organize web sites
by the type of information and/or services they
provide. However, the hierarchies only cover a
fraction of the Web and are largely hand built.
An automatic method of building site categories,
in conjunction with topic identification, would
speed the hierarchy construction and allow more
frequent updates. 
The authors believe that a classifier can be
trained to distinguish different document
classes, or genres, such as advertisements or
jokes from news stories, for example. It can be
trained to help identify the proportion of user?
relevant texts, which can often be very small. If
a user is searching for "stories of the god
Jupiter" then news articles and scientific papers
would less likely be of interest than classical
fiction. Note that sorting by genre differs from
"Information filtering" as the latter carries out
text selection based on content (Oard, 1994).
The belief is that for users who often find
irrelevant texts classified as relevant, and thus
The Form is the Substance: Classification of Genres in Text
Nigel Dewdney Carol VanEss?Dykema Richard MacMillan
U.S. Department of Defense U.S. Department of Defense MITRE Corp.
njdewdn@afterlife.ncsc.mil cjvanes@afterlife.ncsc.mil macmilla@mitre.org
making finding the relevant texts time
consuming, a genre filter can function with a
high degree of accuracy and lessen
misclassification of text.
The junk e?mail problem is also well known.
The variety in types of e?mail is just as large as
that found in regular mail: from personal
communications through to unsolicited junk
mail. The user must wade through the e?mail
queue or risk insufficient storage space. Users
could hand?craft rules to filter junk mail but
these require constant refinement (Sahami,
1997). "Spam" filters are becoming popular
though these just seek to separate unsolicited
and solicited mail. A genre sorter could serve as
a prioritization tool for helping the user to
organize the e?mail in his or her queue beyond
just "solicited" and "unsolicited" with a higher
degree of accuracy. 
The following example illustrates the
potential of genre identification by showing
improvement in topic based information
retrieval. Note: This is a single example, so
figures have no significance. 
Consider looking for information about
houses currently for sale. In a 9,705 document
corpus, detailed later, there are 20 such
documents. (Each document is tagged with one
of seven genres.) If one attempts to retrieve
these documents with the na?ve query "house"
one finds 693 documents, 16 of which contain
the information required. If one runs the same
query but specifies the genre "ads", then 35
documents are retrieved, 15 of which contain
relevant information. A more specific boolean
query works better than the na?ve keyword
(unsurprisingly), but adding the genre
specification still improves the result. 
Four documents offered houses for sale but
did not mention "house", one document offered
a house for sale but was not tagged "ads". 
The goal, then, is to develop a system that
can automatically categorize text into genres,
where genres are defined as classes whose
members follow certain conventions of form.
1.3 Related Work
The idea of genre classification is not new.
Kessler et. al. (?97), for example, proposed genre
"facets". They note that genre does not become
salient until faced with large hetergoneous
search spaces, but only report an experiment
using insignificant quantities of data. Stamatatos
et. al. (2000) used discriminant analysis on the
frequencies of commonly occurring words. They
also improved results by including frequencies
of eight punctuation marks. Four identified
genres from the Wall Street Journal formed the
corpus, but only 40 samples per genre were
used. Both works dispensed with the more
complex features proposed by Karlgren and
Cutting (1994) which showed promising results.
They report 27% error in distinguishing four
genres in 500 samples from the Brown corpus.
Illouz et. al. (2000) report successful use of
coarse level Part?of?Speech features in
distinguishing section types from Le Monde.
Their work also showed that fine grain Part?of?
Speech distinctions did not make for good
features in genre classification. 
Sahami et. al. (1997) report on methods for
automating the construction of e?mail filters,
sorting into two categories: "junk" and "non?
junk". Using probabilistic learning methods in
conjunction with a differential misclassification
cost to produce filters, they used selected words
as their feature set. They also augmented these
by some domain specific features, such as
number of recipients and time of posting. This
yielded improved results, but no results on use
of domain specific features alone are presented.
Pannu and Sycara (1996) describe a reusable
agent that learns a model of the user?s research
interests for filtering Conference
Announcements and Requests for Proposals
from the Web. They used Information Retrieval
(IR) and Artificial Neural Network (ANN)
techniques. The features used were a fixed
number of keywords selected from terms sorted
by TF*IDF (term frequency x inverse document
Query "house" "house" & 
("sale" | "rent")
"house" 
+ genre "ads"
G(ads) "house" & 
("sale" | "rent")
Recall 80% 53% 75% 47%
Precision 2% 19% 43% 35%
F1 Metric 4 28 55 40
 Table 1: Comparison of example queries with and without use of genre tag in a marked corpus 
frequency). They report results of 85% and 70%
accuracy in classifying a document?s relevance
using IR techniques and ANN techniques
respectively.
May (1997) describes a system that
automatically classifies e?mail messages in the
HUMANIST electronic discussion group into
one of four categories. He based the
classification of a message on string matching
using predefined phrase sets, selected manually,
for each message type. Results within
categories were mixed but overall May reports a
45.9% accuracy in tagging.
Cohen (1996) reports on two methods for
classification in sorting personal e?mail
messages. He uses a TF?IDF weighting
method, and a new method for learning sets of
"keyword?spotting rules" based on the RIPPER
rule learning algorithm. Both methods obtained
error rates of below 5%. However, only
extraction of one category from the stream is
considered.
2 Document features
This work investigates the use of two different
feature sets: a set based on words (traditional),
and a set of features that reflect the way in
which the text is presented.
2.1 Word features 
Traditionally the document features used have
been the words therein. Text classification and
clustering experiments have focussed on "bag?
of?words" techniques: the features used are
individual words usually weighted by some
scheme such as TF*IDF. Feature selection
techniques, such as thresholding term weights,
are used to reduce feature vector size. The
Information Gain algorithm is employed for this
work.
Information Gain is frequently employed in
machine learning to reduce computational
complexity. For document classification, it
measures the number of bits of information
gained, with respect to deciding the class to
which a document belongs, by each word?s
frequency of occurrence in the document
(Mitchell, 1997. Yang, 1997). Maximum?
entropy characterization of information gain [2]
is used for this paper as formulated for
document classification by Yang et. al. (1997).
Yang?s formulation is appropriate because it
treats features as objects whose values can be
measured numerically, rather than as a finite set
of predefined discrete values:
Let {gi}{i=1..m} be the set of target genres, let w
be a word, and let k be a token (i.e., an
occurrence of a word) in the document corpus.
Denote by P(w) the probability that a randomly
chosen token k is an occurrence of the word w.
Let g(k) be the genre of the document in which
k occurs, P(gi) be the probability that a randomly
chosen k has g(k) = gi, and P(gi | w) be the
conditional probability that a randomly chosen k
has g(k) = gi, given that k is an occurrence of the
word w. Denote by |S| the number of members
in any set S. An overstrike denotes the negation
of a condition. The information gain of word w
is defined to be:
IG(w)  ?i=1..m   ( P(gi) log P(gi)+P(?gi) logP(?gi))
+ P(w) P(gi | w) log P(gi | w)
+ P(?w) P(gi |?w) log P(gi |?w
+ P(w) P(?gi | w) log P(?gi | w)            
+ P(?w) P(?gi |?w) log P(?gi |?w)   eqn 1
where:
P(w) = (no. of occurrences of w in corpus) /
(total no. of all word?occurrences in corpus)
P(?w) = (no. occurrences of words other than
w in corpus) / (total no. of all word?
occurrences in corpus)
P(gi) = (|{x | g(x) = gi}|) / (total no. of all
word?occurrences in corpus)
P(?gi)=(|{x | g(x)  gi}|) / (total no. of word?
occurrences in corpus)
Note: The experiments, here, employ the
information gain algorithm just once over the
whole corpus and apply a threshold so that no
document would result in a zero vector. This
gives an "ideal" feature vector but does not
investigate the performance of the feature
selection algorithm.
2.2 Presentation features
There are many more features present in
documents than words. These vary from
linguistic features such as prevalence of
adjectives, use of tense, and sentence
complexity, to layout features such as line?
spacing, tabulation, and non alpha?numeric
characters. Space limitations preclude a
detailed description of all features used in the set
which comprises eighty nine such features, but
an outline description is given below. 
The feature extractor developed for this work
employs a ?rough and ready? Part?of?Speech
tagger based on the Porter Stemming Algorithm
(Porter, 1980). The algorithm analyzes word
morphology and decides, where possible, if the
word is a noun, verb, adjective, or adverb.
However, it does not reduce the original word to
its root. It is augmented by tables of closed?
class words which include words normally
considered stop?words. These tables allow the
identification of pronouns, conjunctions, and
articles. Simple hand?crafted rules combine the
tables and the morphological analysis to aid
verb tense identification. The program,
therefore, would not compare well with any
modern Part?of?Speech tagger, but accuracy
should not be too important provided word
tagging is consistent.
The tenses identified for verbs are restricted
to past, present and future. However, the
program also calculates the proportion of
transitions in verb tense from one identified verb
to the next. For example, if a verb was idenfied
as past tense and the next one idenfied as being
present tense, a "past?to?present" change would
be recorded.
Frequencies of different closed?class word
sets are calculated during the analysis. By word
sets, here, we mean such things as days of the
week, months of the year, signs of the zodiac
etc. Some of these sets are general, others are
specific to genre. While a term such as ?leo?
might not, by itself, be a particularly good
discriminator for a horoscope genre, the fact that
it is an astrological sign and appears with other
terms deemed astrological may well be. 
The mean and variance of sentence length,
and the mean and variance of word length are
measured. Sentence length, word length and
syllable estimates are combined to give
measures of sentence complexity. Mean word
length divided by the mean sentence length, and
the Flesch metric (Flesch, 1974) are also
calculated.
The remainder of the presentation feature set
comprise punctuation character usage, the use of
upper and lower case characters, the amount of
whitespace, and combinations of characters such
as ":?)" often referred to as "smilies". Use of
streams of punctuation marks to act as a section
break in the text are also identified. Indentation,
line?spacing, and tabulation are also measured.
All features are normalized over the
document length and scaled to lie in the range
[0,1] as this range is suitable for the SVM?light
and C4.5 classifiers. If the feature is a count
rather than a proportion the inverse of the count
(minimum value one) is taken. Feature
extraction results in a vector which is used by a
classifier either in training or in the testing of a
model.
3 Evaluation system
Both word based features and presentation
features could be calculated from samples and
their use compared in classification experiments.
Experiments used these feature values with three
different classifiers as it was thought that
different classifiers might work better with one
or other of the feature sets.
3.1 Data Set
Jaime Carbonell and Fang Liu of Carnegie
Mellon University (CMU) supplied the data
used in the experiments. The corpus is
comprised of seven genres and is summarized
in Table 2. The genres "Television News" and
"Radio News" were predominantly produced by
transcription systems and contain errors.
(Whether these two classes are truly distinct
genres is, perhaps, debatable.)
Genre No. of Samples
Advertisement 1091
Bulletin Board 998
Frequently Asked Questions 1062
Message Board 1106
Radio News 2000
Reuters Newswire 2000
Television News 1448
TOTAL 9705
Table 2: Breakdown of CMU genre corpus
3.2 The classifiers
The three different classifier types used were:
Na?ve Bayes, C4.5 decision tree, and a Support
Vector Machine. There are several methods for
employing Bayes? equation; the formulation
used here is outlined below.
Bayes formula yields the conditional
probability of a random variable X having value
x, given that another random variable Y has
value y. In adapting Bayes conditional
probability formula to document classification,
this work followed the treatment of Mitchell
(1997) pp.174?184. A document is a series of
tokens denoted K(d). G denotes a set of genres.
The probability that the genre of document d,
g(d), is gi ? G, given that d is an arbitrary token
series KS, is written: 
P(g(d)=gi|K(d)=KS) = 
P(g(d)=gi)P(K(d)=KS|g(d)=gi) /
 ?gi?G[P(g(d)=gi)P(K(d)=KS | g(d)=gi)]   (eqn.2)
Classification only requires the most likely
genre. The denominator in the above equation
is constant so only the numerator needs to be
considered. Using only those words with high
Information Gain, WS, according to eqn. 1, a
document d?s words W(d)  WS is often null,
i.e. zero probability for all cases. Following
Mitchell?s smoothing method to prevent this,
the most likely genre for a document d is the
genre gm such that m=argmaxi of eqn. 2. The
numerator value is calculated from:
P(g(d)=gi) = |D(gi)| / |C|                           (eqn.3)
P(K(d)=KS | g(d)=gi) = ?w ? W(d)(|{k ? K(gi) |
W(k)=w ? WS}| / |K(gi)|) |(w,K(d))|)                (eqn.4)
where:
C is the document corpus and D(gi) are
documents tagged as being of genre  gi.
The second classifier used was C4.5
(Quinlan 1993). This decision tree classifier
uses the Information Gain algorithm to rank
features. A tree is constructed where at each
node is a decision by which the data are split
into two groups using the feature with the most
information gain among features not yet
considered. Leaves are points at which a
classification is made. The tree is then pruned
by replacing a sub?tree with a leaf if the
expected error is reduced. This alleviates over?
fitting and reduces the complexity of the tree.
The pruned tree is the resultant classifier for use
on new data. During the classification phase for
documents under test the rules at each node are
applied to the corresponding document feature
value to select the next node rule to apply. The
document is classified when a leaf is reached.
The heuristics used in the process are tunable,
but we chose to use C4.5 with default settings.
The third classifier used was the Support
Vector Machine (SVM) (Burges, 1998.
Christianini, 2000) classifier which has received
significant interest in recent years (Osuna, 1997
Joachims, 1998). The version of SVM used was
SVM?light by Thorsten Joachims (Universitat
Dortmund) (SVM?light webpages). This
classifier has many tunable parameters and the
vector space may have a function applied to it.
Initial experiments had some trouble in getting
models using linear vector space to converge in
reasonable time. Using a radial basis function
seemed to alleviate this problem. In all other
respects experiments used SVM with default
settings. 	 SVM?light builds binary models. In
the case where multiple classes are present, as in
our experiments, a model must be produced for
each class. The classifier outputs real values
rather than binary decisions. Each item is
compared against each model and classified
according to a winner?takes?all rule. 
4 Experiments 
The experiments detailed here were run under
the ten?fold cross?validation method. This
splits the data up into training and test sets in a
90%/10% proportion. Experiments are repeated
ten times with the split being made in a round?
robin fashion. In this way all of the data is used
both in training and testing but not within the
same cycle. Recorded here are Recall, Precision
and F1 where recall is the number of correct
classifications divided by number of documents,
precision is the number of correct classifications
divided by the number of classifications made,
and F1=2 * (Precision * Recall) / (Precision +
Recall). Note that in experiments where a
classification is required (i.e. No "unknown"
class) Recall, Precision and F1 are all equal.
323 word features were selected by analysing
the Information Gain over the whole corpus. The
selected words, therefore, are in some sense an
"ideal" feature set. The length of the vector was
chosen such that no zero vector would result. 

Word counts were measured in each document.
When using Na?ve Bayes these counts were
multiplied by the log probabilities calculated.
1 Duplicate sub?vectors across class caused problems using SVM.  Doubling the sub?vector length for the optimisation
phase (using the ?q parameter in SMV?light) increased training time but avoided the problem.
2 The version of SVM light used consistently failed to converge when encountering duplicate vectors across classes.
This situation easily arises if documents containing no words present in the feature set are present.
For SVM and C4.5 logs of the counts were
taken and divided by logs of the total word
count in the corresponding document.
(Smoothing carried out by adding 1 to both
numerator and denominator prior to taking
logs.) A misclassification matrix example is
shown in Table 3. The true genre tag is
indicated by row and the classifier?s decision is
listed by column. The number of correct
classifications appear on the diagonal of the
table, and the numbers of misclassifications are
shown in the remaining column cells. 
SVM and C4.5 experimnets used
presentation feature values directly. Using the
Na?ve Bayes classifier requires that feature value
ranges be defined because Bayesian classifiers
usually work with features that are either present
or absent. However, Mitchell?s formulation
generalizes to real?valued functions: The
conditional probability that the genre of
document d is gi, given that feature f is in d,
v(f,d), is a real value V, given by:
V = v(f,d)[?d ? D(gi) v(f,d)] / |D(gi)|              (eqn.5)
where:
D(gi) is the subset of the training corpus tagged
as being of genre gi.  
Table 4 shows an example misclassification
matrix resulting from using presentation feature
vectors. 
Misclassifications made using word
frequency features were different from those
made using presentation features. The question
arises as to whether combining the two feature
sets would show improvement. To test this, each
document had its word frequency and
presentation feature vectors combined. An
Genre Ads Bulletin F.A.Q. Message Radio Reuters TV Unknown
Ads 823 47 23 6 6 5 1 179
Bulletin Board 85 715 41 1 10 1 137
F.A.Q. 13 36 756 14 4 3 234
Message Board 7 1 6 1045 2 4 1 34
Radio 4 4 3 1640 5 277 67
Reuters 4 1 1 1 5 1966 22
TV 272 1147 21
Table 4: Misclassification  Matrix using SVM with presentation features from CMU dataset
Genre Ads Bulletin F.A.Q. Message Radio Reuters TV Unknown
Ads 830 18 7 7 1 ? 1 226
Bulletin Board 49 608 8 ? 2 ? ? 323
F.A.Q. 5 3 836 7 6 ? ? 203
Message Board 2 1 3 996 4 2 ? 92
Radio ? 2 ? ? 1624 ? 219 155
Reuters 1 ? ? ? ? 1952 ? 47
TV ? ? ? ? 87 ? 1294 59
Table 5: Misclassification Matrix using SVM with presentation + word features from CMU dataset
Genre Ads Bulletin F.A.Q. Message Radio Reuters TV Unknown
Ads 911 50 13 32 6 ? 5 73
Bulletin Board 78 804 6 24 4 1 14 59
F.A.Q. 13 9 907 34 7 ? 14 76
Message Board 20 17 27 875 25 3 25 108
Radio 10 7 8 22 1543 19 205 186
Reuters ? 2 ? 3 22 1934 18 31
TV 6 10 12 23 234 10 952 193
Table 3: Misclassification Matrix for SVM using 323 word frequencies from CMU dataset
example misclassification matrix resulting from
using combined feature set vectors is shown in
Table 5.
4.1 Results
In the first set of experiments each classifier?s
"best guess" at a document?s genre was taken as
the class. The results are shown in Table 6.
Each cell shows average recall with an error
margin quoted at one standard deviation.
The C4.5 classifier is not able to be
configured to allow an unknown classification.
It is possible for Na?ve Bayes and SVM to be so
configured, since their results give a numeric
value for the most likely classification. A
document is deemed "unknown" if it scores less
than 0.5 using Na?ve Bayes, or negatively using
SVM. Recall and precision figures can be
calculated in using this scheme. The results are
shown in Table 7. (Mean value with one
standard deviation error margin.)
4.2 Discussion
Use of the presentation feature set yields a
significant advatage over use of word
frequencies except when using Na?ve Bayes.
This shows that presentations features alone,
when used with a suitable classifier, are
pertinent to classifying by genre without the
need for word features often used. The
advantage in combining feature values is seen
consistently over the three classifiers and is true
even for the Na?ve Bayes classifier which does
poorly with presentation features alone.
Applying a threshold to the classifier output
score, to allow an "unknown" class, increases
precision at some expense in recall as should be
expected. 
When the Na?ve Bayes classifier used the 89
presentation features, the results were
considerably less accurate than when it used the
323 word features. It seems likely that at least
three factors were involved. Firstly, Na?ve Bayes
assumes feature independence. While this is not
true for words, it has been the experience of the
IR community that word dependencies are small
enough for documents to be treated as "bags?
of?words". Some features in the presentation
feature set, however, are far from independent;
e.g., the proportions of parts of speech identified
are explicitly linked. Secondly, the Bayesian
formulation in Section 3.2 has an implicit
assumption of monotonicity. If word w occurs
in document d a total of n=|(w,K(d))| times, the
quantity |(w,K(d))|, being an exponent in the
formula, gives word w more weight when it
occurs more times. Let genre gj be the genre
most strongly associated with w in the training
corpus. The more times w occurs in d, the more
likely the Na?ve Bayes classifier is to classify d
as genre gj; and this effect is monotonic. But
monotonicity does not always hold, even with
words; and it fails to hold even more often in the
presentation features. For example, in our
training data, the word "said" occurs seldom in
the genres: Message?board, Bulletin?board, and
Classifier  Word frequency features Presentation features Combined features
Na?ve Bayes 77.8% +/? 1.6% 64.0% +/? 1.2% 83.1% +/? 1.5%
C4.5 Decision Tree 79.8% +/? 1.1% 85.3% +/? 1.0% 87.8% +/? 1.1%
SVM 85.4% +/? 0.9% 87.1% +/? 1.0% 92.1% +/? 0.8%
Table 6: Average recall in 10?fold cross validation genre identification experiment; forced decision
Classifier  Word frequency ftrs. Presentation ftrs. Combined ftrs.
Recall Na?ve Bayes 76.7% +/? 1.4% 33.9% +/? 1.4% 82.4% +/? 1.5%
SVM 81.8% +/? 0.6% 83.6% +/? 0.9% 84.0% +/? 2.5%
Precision Na?ve Bayes 80.4% +/? 1.3% 78.8% +/? 1.4% 84.1% +/? 1.4%
SVM 88.4% +/? 1.3% 90.1% +/? 2.4% 94.9% +/? 0.7%
F1 Metric Na?ve Bayes 78.5% +/? 1.4% 47.4% +/? 1.5% 83.2% +/? 1.4%
SVM 85.0% +/? 0.4% 86.7% +/? 0.9% 89.1% +/? 1.5%
Table 7: Mean recall in 10?fold cross validation experiment; positive identification threshold applied
FAQ. It occurs very frequently in Reuters?
newswire, and with intermediate frequency in
Radio and TV transcripts. Thirdly, the word?
feature?counts are integer?valued, while the
presentation features have continuous values.
The effect of assigning ranges of continuous
values to discrete value bins, in the use of
presentation features with Na?ve Bayes, is not
yet clear.  There has yet to be performed an error
analysis to quantify the reason(s) for the
observed accuracy decrease.
The large increase in precision with only a
small decrease in recall when allowing an
"unknown" class suggests that a more relaxed
threshold could be applied to SVM or Na?ve
Bayes output.
5 Conclusion
Experiments have demonstrated success in
creating genre models for automatic recognition
of multiple genres using a corpus of sufficient
size to draw some conclusions. These
experiments have shown that linguistic and
format features alone can be used successfully in
sorting documents into different genres, and that
performance is at least as good as use of word
based features providing a suitable classifier is
used. Rather than presentation features aiding
discimination by words it seems selected word
features assist discrimination by presentation
features as the best results are obtained using a
combination. The results suggest that automatic
genre identification could be used in
applications, such as Information Retrieval, for
better performance. For example, this technique
could improve IR performance against tasks
such as the TREC web track (TREC webpages).
Future work will investigate the effects of
having an increased number of genres and
increased corpus size.    
6 References
Biber, D. (1995) "Variation Across Speech and Writing",
Cambridge University Press, New York.
Berger, A., S.Della Pietra, V.Della Pietra, ?(1996) "A
Maximum Entropy Approach to Natural Language
Processing", Computational Linguistics, vol. 22 No.
1, pp39?71.
Burges, C. (1998) "A Tutorial on Support Vector
Machines for Pattern Recognition", Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery, No. 2.
Cherney, L.  (1999) "Conversation and Community:  Chat
in a Virtual World",  CSLI Publications, Stanford
University.
Cohen, W.W.  (1996) "Learning Rules that Classify E?
Mail", AAAI Spring  Symposium  on Machine
Learning in Information Access.  
Cristianini, N., J.Shaw?Taylor, (2000) "Introduction to
Support Vector Machines", Cambridge University
Press, .
Flesch, R. (1974) "The Art of Readable Writing", Harper
and Row, New York.
Illouz, G., B.Habert, H.Folch, S.Heiden, S.Fleury,
P.Lafon, S.Prevost (2000) "TyPTex: Genric features
for Text Profiler", Proc. RIAO 2000, Paris, France.  
Joachims, T. (1998) "Text Categorization with Support
Vector Machines: Learning with Many Relevant
Features", European Conference on Machine
Learning.
Karlgren, J., and D Cutting (1994) "Recognizing Text
Genres with Simple Metrics Using Discriminant
Analysis". In Proc. of the 15 th International conference
on Computational Linguistings (COLING?94)
Kessler, B., G Nunberg, H. Schutze (1997) "Automatic
Detection of Text Genre". In Proc. if 35 th Annual
Meeting of the ACL and 8 th Conference of ECACL.
May, A. (1997) "Automatic Classification of E?Mail
Messages by Message Type", JASIS, vol 48 No.1,
pp32?39.
Mitchell, T.M. (1997)  "Machine Learning",  McGraw?
Hill, Boston, Massachusetts.
Oard, D.W., N. De Claris, B.J.Dorr, C.Faloutsos,  (1994)
"On Automatic Filtering of Multilingual Texts",
Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on
Sytems, Man, and Cybernetics, pp1645?1650, Vsan
Antonio Texas.
Osuna, E. R.Freund, and F.Girosi, (1997) "Training
support vector machines: an application to face
recognition", IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition.
Pannu, Anandeep, Sycara.  (1996) "Learning Text
Filtering Preferences", Symposium on Machine
Learning and Information Processing, AAAI
Symposium Series, Stanford, Ca., March?96.
Porter, M.E. (1980) "An Algorithm for Suffix Stripping",
Program Vol. 14, No. 3, pp318?327, July?80.  
Quinlan, J.R. (1993) "C4.5: Programs for Machine
Learning", Morgan Kaufmann, California.
Sahami, M., S.Dumais, D.Heckerman, E.Horvitz, (1998)
"A Bayesian Approach to Filtering Junk E?Mail"
AAAI Workshop Technical Report WS?98?05. 
Stamatatos, E., N. Fakotakis, and G. Kokkinakis (2000)
"Text Genre Detection Using Common Word
Frequencies". In the Proc. of the 18 th International
Confernece on Computational Linguistics
(COLING2000)
SVM?light webpages URL:
http://ais.gmd.de/~thorsten/svm_light/
TREC webpages. URL: http://trec.nist.gov
Yang, Y., J.Pedersen, (1997) "A Comparative Study on
Feature Selection in Text Categorization",
Proceedings of the 1997 International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), pp.412?420.
