Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1438?1442,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
The VerbCorner Project: Toward an Empirically-Based Semantic
Decomposition of Verbs
Joshua K. Hartshorne
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
jkhartshorne@gmail.com
Claire Bonial, Martha Palmer
Department of Linguistics
University of Colorado at Boulder
Hellems 290, 295 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309, USA
{CBonial, MPalmer}@colorado.edu
Abstract
This research describes efforts to use crowd-
sourcing to improve the validity of the seman-
tic predicates in VerbNet, a lexicon of about
6300 English verbs. The current semantic
predicates can be thought of semantic prim-
itives, into which the concepts denoted by a
verb can be decomposed. For example, the
verb spray (of the Spray class), involves the
predicates MOTION, NOT, and LOCATION,
where the event can be decomposed into an
AGENT causing a THEME that was originally
not in a particular location to now be in that
location. Although VerbNet?s predicates are
theoretically well-motivated, systematic em-
pirical data is scarce. This paper describes a
recently-launched attempt to address this issue
with a series of human judgment tasks, posed
to subjects in the form of games.
1 Introduction
One key application of Natural Language Processing
(NLP) is meaning extraction. Of particular impor-
tance is propositional meaning: To understand ?Jes-
sica sprayed paint on the wall,? it is not enough to
know who Jessica is, what paint is, and where the
wall is, but that, by the end of the event, some quan-
tity of paint that was not previously on the wall now
is. One must extract not only meanings for individ-
ual words but also the relations between them.
One option is to learn these relations in a largely
bottom-up, data-driven fashion (Chklovski and Pan-
tel, 2004; Poon and Domingos, 2009). For instance,
Poon and Domingos (2009) first extracts depen-
dency trees, converts those into quasi-logical form,
recursively induces lambda expressions from them,
and uses clustering to derive progressively abstract
knowledge.
An alternative is to take a human-inspired ap-
proach, mapping the linguistic input onto the kinds
of representations that linguistic and psychologi-
cal research suggests are the representations em-
ployed by humans. While the exact characteriza-
tion of meaning (and by extension, thought) remains
an area of active research in the cognitive sciences
(Margolis and Laurence, 1999), decades of research
in linguistics and psychology suggests that much of
the meaning of a sentence ? as well as its syntactic
structure ? can be accounted for by invoking a small
number of highly abstract semantic features (usu-
ally represented as predicates), such as causation,
agency, basic topological relations, and directed mo-
tion (Ambridge et al, 2013; Croft, 2012; Jackend-
off, 1990; Levin and Rappaport Hovav, 2005; Peset-
sky, 1995; Pinker, 1989). For instance, a given verb
can appear in some syntactic frames (Sally broke the
vase. Sally broke the vase with the hammer. The vase
broke.) and not others (*Sally broke the vase to the
floor. *Sally broke John the vase.). When verbs are
classified according to the syntactic frames they can
appear in, most if not all the verbs in a class involve
the same set of abstract semantic features.1
Interestingly, roughly these same features (causa-
tion, etc.) have been singled out by developmental
psychologists as part of ?core knowledge? ? a set of
early-learned or perhaps innate concepts upon which
1Whether all verbs in a class share the same abstract pred-
icates or merely most is an area of active research (Levin and
Rappaport Hovav, 2005).
1438
the rest of cognition is built (Spelke and Kinzler,
2007). Thus these semantic features/predicates may
be not only crucial to describing linguistic mean-
ing but may be central organizing principles for a
human?s (reasonably successful) thinking about and
conceptualization of the world. As such, they pro-
vide a potentially rewarding target for NLP.
2 VerbNet
2.1 Overview and Structure
Perhaps the most comprehensive implementation
of this approach appears in VerbNet (Kipper et al,
2008; based on Levin, 1993). VerbNet classifies
verbs based on the syntactic frames they can appear
in, providing a semantic description of each frame
for each class. An example entry is shown below:
Syntactic Frame NP V NP PP.DESTINATION
Example Jessica sprayed the wall.
Syntax AGENT V THEME {+LOC|+DEST CONF}
DESTINATION
Semantics MOTION(DURING(E), THEME)
NOT(PREP(START(E), THEME, DESTINATION))
PREP(END(E), THEME, DESTINATION)
CAUSE(AGENT, E)
The ?Syntactic Frame? provides a flat syntactic
parse. ?Syntax? provides semantic role labels for
each of the NPs and PPs, which are invoked in ?Se-
mantics?. VerbNet decomposes the semantics of
this sentence into four separate predicates: 1) the
THEME (the paint) moves doing the event E; 2) at
the start of the event E, the THEME (the paint) is
not at the DESTINATION (on the wall), whereas 3)
at the end of the event E, the THEME (the paint) is
at the DESTINATION (on the wall), and; 4) the event
is caused by the AGENT (Sally). Note that this cap-
tures only the core aspects of semantics shared by all
verbs in the class; differences between verbs in the
same class (e.g., spray vs. splash) are omitted.
Importantly, the semantics of the sentence is de-
pendent on both the matrix verb (paint) and the syn-
tactic frame. Famously, when inserted in the slightly
different frame NP V NP.DESTINATION PP.THEME
? ?Sally sprayed the wall with paint? ? ?spray? en-
tails that destination (the wall) is now fully painted,
an entailment that does not follow in the example
above (Pinker, 1989).
2.2 Uses and Limitations
VerbNet has been used in a variety of NLP appli-
cations, such as semantic role labeling (Swier and
Stevenson, 2004), inferencing (Zaenen et al, 2008),
verb classification (Joanis et al, 2008), and informa-
tion extraction (Maynard, Funk, and Peters, 2009).
While such applications have been successful thus
far, an important constraint on how well VerbNet-
based NLP applications can be expected to perform
is the accuracy of the semantics encoded in Verb-
Net. Here, several issues arise. Leaving aside mis-
categorized verbs and other inaccuracies, as noted
above VerbNet assumes that all verbs in the same
class share the same core predicates, which may or
may not be empirically justified. Given the number
of semantic predicates (146),2 verb entries (6580),
and unique verb lemmas (6284) it is not feasible for
a single research team to check, particularly since af-
ter a certain number of verbs, intuitions become less
clear. In any case, it may not be ideal to rely solely
on the intuitions of invested researchers, whose in-
tuitions about subtle judgments may be clouded by
theoretical commitments (Gibson and Federenko,
2013); the only way to ensure this is not the case
is through independent validation. Unfortunately, of
the 280 verb classes in VerbNet, this has been done
for only a few (cf Ambridge et al, 2013).
3 VerbCorner
The VerbCorner project was designed to address
these issues by crowd-sourcing the semantic judg-
ments online (gameswithwords.org/VerbCorner/).
Several previous projects have successfully crowd-
sourced linguistic annotations, such as Phrase De-
tectives, where volunteers have contributed 2.5 mil-
lion judgments on anaphoric relations (Poesio et al,
2012). Below, we outline the VerbCorner project
and describe one specific annotation task in detail.
3.1 Developing Semantic Annotation Tasks
Collecting accurate judgments on subtle questions
from naive participants with limited metalinguistic
2Note that these vary in applicability from those specific to
a small number of verbs (CHARACTERIZE, CONSPIRE) to those
frequently invoked (BEGIN, EXIST).
1439
skills is difficult. Rare is the non-linguist who can
immediately answer the question, ?Does the verb
?throw,? when used transitively, entail a change of
location on the part of its THEME?? Thus, we began
by developing tasks that isolate semantic features in
a way accessible to untrained annotators.
We converted the metalinguistic judgments
(?Does this verb entail this abstract predicate??) into
real-world problems, which previous research sug-
gests should be easier (Cosmides and Tooby, 1992).
Each judgment tasks involved a fanciful backstory.
For instance, in ?Simon Says Freeze?, a task de-
signed to elicit judgments about movement, the
Galactic Overlord (Simon) decrees ?Galactic Stay
Where You Are Day,? during which nobody is al-
lowed to move from their current location. Partici-
pants read descriptions of events and decide whether
anyone violated the rule. In ?Explode on Contact?,
designed to elicit judgments about physical contact,
objects and people explode when they touch one an-
other. The participant reads descriptions of events
and decides whether anything has exploded.3
Each task was piloted until inter-coder reliability
was acceptably high and the modal response nearly
always corresponded with researcher intuitions. As
such, these tasks cannot be used to establish whether
researcher intuitions for the pilot stimuli are correct
(this would be circular); however, there is no guar-
antee that agreement with the researcher will gener-
alize to new items (the pilot stimuli cover a trivial
proportion of all verbs in VerbNet).
3.2 Crowd-sourcing Semantic Judgments
The pilot experiments showed that it is possible to
elicit reliable semantic judgments corresponding to
VerbNet predicates from naive participants (see sec-
tion 3.3). At the project website, volunteers choose
one of the tasks from a list and begin tagging sen-
tences. The sentences are sampled smartly, avoid-
ing sentences already tagged by that volunteer and
biased in favor of of the sentences with the fewest
3Note that each task is designed to elicit judgments about
entailments ? things that must be true rather than are merely
likely to be true. If John greeted Bill, they might have come
into contact (e.g., by shaking hands), but perhaps they did not.
Previous work suggests that it is entailments that matter, partic-
ularly for explaining the syntactic behavior of verbs (Levin and
Rappaport Hovav, 2005)
judgments so far. Rather than assessing annotator
quality through gold standard trials with known an-
swers (which wastes data ? the answers to these tri-
als are known), approximately 150 sentences were
chosen to be ?over-sampled.? As the volunteer tags
sentences, approximately one out of every five are
from this over-sampled set until that volunteer has
tagged all of them. This guarantees that any given
volunteer will have tried some sentences targeted
by many other volunteers, allowing inter-annotator
agreement to be used to assess annotator quality.
Following the example of Zooniverse (zooni-
verse.org), a popular ?Citizen Science? platform,
volunteers are encouraged but required to register
(requiring registration prior to seeing the tasks was
found to be a significant barrier to entry). Regis-
tration allows collecting linguistic and educational
background from the volunteer, and also makes it
possible to track the same volunteer across sessions.
Multiple gamification elements were incorporated
into VerbCorner in order to recruit and motivate vol-
unteers. Each task has a leaderboard, where the
volunteer can see his/her rank out of all volunteers
in terms of number of contributions made. In ad-
dition, there is a general leaderboard, which sums
across tasks. Volunteers can earn badges, displayed
on their homepage, for answering certain numbers
of questions in each task. Finally, at random inter-
vals bonus points are awarded, with the explanation
for the bonus points tailored to the task?s backstory.
VerbCorner was launched on May 21, 2013. After
six weeks, 555 volunteers had provided at least one
annotation, for a total of 39,274 annotations, demon-
strating the feasibility of collecting large numbers of
annotations through this method.
3.3 Case Study: Equilibrium
?Equilibrium? was designed to elicit judgments
about application of force, frequently argued to be
a core semantic feature in the sense discussed above
(Pinker, 1989). The backstory involves the ?Zen Di-
mension,? in which nobody is allowed to exert force
on anything else. The participant reads descriptions
of events (Sally sprayed paint onto the wall) and de-
cides whether they would be allowable in the Zen
Dimension ? and, in particular, which participants
in the event are illegally applying force.
In order to minimize unwanted effects of world
1440
knowledge, the verb?s arguments are replaced with
nonsense words or randomly chosen proper names
(Sally sprayed the dax onto the blicket). In the
context of the story, this is explained as necessary
anonymization: You are a government official de-
termining whether certain activities are allowable,
and ensuring anonymity is an important safeguard
against favoritism and corruption. An alternative
wouod be to use multiple different content words,
randomly chosen for each annotator. However, this
greatly increases the number of annotators needed
and quickly becomes infeasible.
3.3.1 Pilot Results
The task was piloted on 138 sentences, which com-
prised all possible syntactic frames for three verbs
from each of five verb classes in VerbNet. After
two rounds of piloting (between the first and second,
wording in the backstory was adjusted for clarity
based on pilot subject feedback and results), Kripp?s
alpha reached .76 for 8 annotators, which represents
a reasonably high level of inter-annotator agreement.
Importantly, the modal response matched the intu-
itions of the researchers in 137 of 138 cases.4
3.3.2 Preliminary VerbCorner Results
?Equillibrium? was one of the first tasks posted on
VerbCorner, with data currently being collected on
12 of the 280 VerbNet classes, for a total of 5,171
sentences. As of writing, 414 users have submitted
14,294 judgments. Individual annotators annotated
anywhere from 1 to 195 sentences (mean=8, me-
dian=4). While most sentences have relatively few
judgments, each of the 194 over-sampled sentences
has between 15 and 20 judgments.5
Comparing the modal response with the re-
searchers? intuitions resulted in a match for 184 of
194 sentences. In general, where the modal response
4The remaining case was ?The crose smashed sondily.? for
which four pilot subjects thought involved the crose applying
force ? matching researcher intuition ? and four thought did
not involve any application of force, perhaps interpreting the
sentence was a passive.
5These are the same 15 verbs used in the piloting. The num-
ber of sentences is larger in order to test a wider range of pos-
sible arguments. In particular, wherever appropriate, separate
sentences were constructed using animate and inanimate argu-
ments. Compare Sally sprayed the dax onto Mary and Sally
sprayed the dax onto the blicket.
did not match researcher intuitions, the modal re-
sponse was itself not popular, comprising an aver-
age of 53% of responses, compared with an aver-
age of 77% where the modal response matched re-
searcher intuitions. Thus, these appear to be cases of
disagreement, either because the correct intuition re-
quires more work to obtain or because of differences
across idiolects (at the moment, there is no obvious
pattern as to which sentences caused difficulty, but
the sample size is small). Thus, follow-up investi-
gation of sentences with little inter-coder agreement
may be warranted.
4 Conclusion and Future Work
Data-collection is ongoing. VerbNet identifies ap-
proximately 150 different semantic predicates. An-
notating every verb in each of its syntactic frames for
each semantic predicate would take many millions
of judgments. However, most of the semantic predi-
cates employed in VerbNet are very narrow in scope
and only apply to a few classes. Thus, we have be-
gun with broad predicates that are thought to apply
to many verbs and are adding progressively narrower
predicates as work progresses. At the current rate,
we should complete annotation for the half-dozen
most frequent semantic predicates in the space of a
year.
Future work will explore using an individual
annotator?s history across trials to weight that
user?s contributions, something that VerbCorner was
specifically designed to allow (see above). How to
assess annotator quality without gold standard data
is an active area of research (Passonneau and Car-
penter, 2013; Rzhetsky, Shatkay and Wilbur, 2009;
Whitehill et al, 2009). For instance, Whitehill and
colleagues (2009) provide an algorithm for jointly
estimating both annotator quality and annotation
difficulty (including the latter is important because
some annotators will have low agreement with oth-
ers due to their poor luck in being assigned difficult-
to-annotate sentences). This algorithm is shown to
outperform using the modal response.
Note that this necessarily biases against annota-
tors with few responses. In our case study above, ex-
cluding annotators who contributed small numbers
of annotations led to progressively worse match to
researcher intuition, suggesting that the loss in data
1441
caused by excluding these annotations may not be
worth the increased confidence in annotation quality.
Future research will be needed to assess this trade-
off.
The above work shows the feasibility of crowd-
sourcing VerbNet semantic entailments, as has been
shown for a handful of other linguistic judgments
(Artignan, Hascoet and Lafourcade, 2009; Poesio et
al., 2012; Venhuizen et al, 2013). There are many
domains in which gold standard human judgments
are scarce; crowd-sourcing has considerable poten-
tial at addressing this need.
References
B. Ambridge, J. M. Pine, C. F. Rowland, F. Chang, and
A. Bidgood. 2013. The retreat from overgeneral-
ization in child language acquisition: Word learning,
morphology, and verb argument structure. Wiley In-
terdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science. 4:47-62.
G. Artignan, M. Hascoet, and M. Lafourcade. 2009.
Mutliscale visual analysis of lexical networks. Pro-
ceedings of the 13th International Conference on In-
formation Visualisation. Barcelona, Spain.
T. Chklovski and P. Pantel. 2004. VerbOcean: Mining
the Web for fine-grained semantic relations. Proceed-
ings of Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP). Barcelona, Spain.
L. Cosmides and J. Tooby. 1992. Cognitive adaptations
for social exchange. in The Adapted Mind. (J. Barkow,
L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, Eds.) Oxford University
Press, Oxford, UK.
W. Croft. 2012. Verbs: Aspect and Argument Structure.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
D. R. Dowty. 1991. Thematic proto-roles and argument
selection. Language. 67:547-619.
E. Gibson and E. Fedorenko. 2013. The need for quanti-
tative methods in syntax and semantics research. Lan-
guage and Cognitive Processes. 28(1-2):88?124.
R. Jackendoff. 1990. Semantic Structures. The MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
E. Joanis, S. Stevenson, and D. James. 2008. A general
feature space for automatic verb classification. Natu-
ral Language Engineering. 14(3):337-367.
K. Kipper, A. Korhonen, N. Ryant and M. Palmer. 2008.
A large-scale classification of English verbs. Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Journal, 42:21?40
E. Margolis and S. Laurence 1999. Concepts: Core
Readings. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
B. Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alternations:
A Preliminary Investigation. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
B. Levin and M. Rappaport Hovav. 2005. Argument
Realization. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK.
D. Maynard, A. Funk, and W. Peters. 2009. Using
lexico-syntactic ontology design patterns for ontology
creation and population. Proceedings of Workshop on
Ontology Patterns (WOP 2009). Washington, DC
R. J. Passonneau and B. Carpenter 2013. The benefits
of a model of annotation. 7th Linguistic Annotation
Workshop and Interoperability with Discourse. Sofia,
Bulgaria.
D. Pesetsky. 1995. Zero Syntax: Experiencers and Cas-
cades. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
S. Pinker. 1989. Learnability and Cognition. The MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
M. Poesio, J. Camberlain, U. Kruschwitz, L. Robaldo,
and L. Ducceschi. 2012. The Phrase Detective Multi-
lingual Corpus, Release 0.1. Proceedings of the Col-
laborative Resource Development and Delivery Work-
shop. Istanbul, Turkey
H. Poon and P. Domingos. 2009. Unsupervised seman-
tic parsing. Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Singapore.
A. Rzhetsky, H. Shatkay, and W. J. Wilbur. 2009. How
to get the most out of your curation effort. PLoS Com-
putational Biology, 5(5):1?13.
E. S. Spelke and K. D. Kinzler. 2007. Core knowledge.
Developmental Science, 10(1):89?96.
R. Swier and S. Stevenson. 2004. Unsupervised seman-
tic role labeling. Proceedings of the Generative Lexi-
con Conference, GenLex-09. Pisa, Italy.
N. Venhuizen, V. Basile, K. Evang, and J. Bos. 2013.
Gamification for word sense labeling. Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference on Computational
Semantics (IWCS 2013). Potsdam, Germany
J. Whitehill, P. Ruvolo, T. F. Wu, J. Bergsma. and J.
Movellan. 2009. Whose vote should count more: Op-
timal integration of labels from labelers of unknown
expertise. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 22. Vancouver, Canada
A. Zaenen, C. Condoravdi, and D G. Bobrow. 2008. The
encoding of lexical implications in VN. Proceedings
of LREC 2008. Morocco
1442
Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 397?402,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
The VerbCorner Project: Findings from Phase 1 of Crowd-Sourcing a
Semantic Decomposition of Verbs
Joshua K. Hartshorne
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
jkhartshorne@gmail.com
Claire Bonial, Martha Palmer
Department of Linguistics
University of Colorado at Boulder
Hellems 290, 295 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309, USA
{CBonial, MPalmer}@colorado.edu
Abstract
Any given verb can appear in some syntac-
tic frames (Sally broke the vase, The vase
broke) but not others (*Sally broke at the
vase, *Sally broke the vase to John). There
is now considerable evidence that the syn-
tactic behaviors of some verbs can be pre-
dicted by their meanings, and many cur-
rent theories posit that this is true for most
if not all verbs. If true, this fact would
have striking implications for theories and
models of language acquisition, as well as
numerous applications in natural language
processing. However, empirical investiga-
tions to date have focused on a small num-
ber of verbs. We report on early results
from VerbCorner, a crowd-sourced project
extending this work to a large, representa-
tive sample of English verbs.
1 Introduction
Verbs vary in terms of which syntactic frames they
can appear in (Table 1). In principle, this could be
an unpredictable fact about the verb that must be
acquired, much like the phonological form of the
verb.
However, most theorists posit that there is a sys-
tematic relationship between the semantics of a
verb and the syntactic frames in which it can ap-
pear (Levin and Hovav, 2005). For instance, it
is argued that verbs like break, which describe a
Frame hit like break
NP V NP x x x
NP V - - x
NP that S - x -
NP V at NP x - -
Table 1: Some of the syntactic frames available for
hit, like, and break.
caused change of state, can appear in both the NP
V NP form (Sally broke the vase) and the NP
V form (The vase broke). Verbs such as hit and
like do not describe a change of state and so can-
not appear in both forms.
1
Similarly, only verbs
that describe propositional attitudes, such as like,
can take a that complement (John liked that Sally
broke the vase).
1.1 The Semantic Consistency Hypothesis
This account has a natural consequence, which we
dub the Semantic Consistency Hypothesis: There
is some set of semantic features such that verbs
that share the same syntactic behavior are identi-
cal along those semantic features.
2
Note that on
certain accounts, this is a strong tendency rather
than a strict necessity (e.g., Goldberg, 1995).
It is widely recognized that a principled re-
lationship between syntax and semantics would
have broad implications. It is frequently invoked
in theories of language acquisition. For instance,
Pinker (1984, 1989) has described how this cor-
respondence could solve long-standing puzzles
about how children learn syntax in the first place.
Conversely, Gleitman (1990) has shown such a
syntax-semantics relationship could solve signif-
icant problems in vocabulary acquisition. In fact,
both researchers argue that a principled relation-
ship between syntax and semantics is necessary
for language to be learnable at all.
In computational linguistics and natural lan-
guage processing, some form of the Semantic
Consistency Hypothesis is often included in lin-
guistic resources and utilized in applications. We
1
Note that this is a simplification in that there are non-
causal verbs that appear in both the NP V NP frame and the
NP V frame. For details, see (Levin, 1993).
2
There is a long tradition of partitioning semantics into
those aspects of meaning which are ?grammatically relevant?
and those which are not. We refer the interested reader to
Pinker (1989), Jackendoff (1990), and Levin & Rappaport
Hovav (2005).
397
describe in detail one such resource, VerbNet,
which is highly relevant to our investigation.
1.2 VerbNet
VerbNet (Kipper et al, 2008; based on Levin,
1993) lists over 6,000 verbs, categorized into 280
classes according to the syntactic frames they can
appear in. That is, all verbs in the same class ap-
pear in the same set of syntactic frames. Impor-
tantly, in addition to characterizing the syntactic
frames associated with each class, VerbNet alo
characterizes the semantics of each class.
For instance, class 9.7, which comprises a
couple dozen verbs, allows 7 different syntactic
frames. The entry for one frame is shown below:
Syntactic Frame NP V NP PP.DESTINATION
Example Jessica sprayed the wall.
Syntax AGENT V THEME {+LOC|+DEST CONF}
DESTINATION
Semantics MOTION(DURING(E), THEME)
NOT(PREP(START(E), THEME, DESTINATION))
PREP(END(E), THEME, DESTINATION)
CAUSE(AGENT, E)
Importantly, the semantics listed here is not just
for the verb spray but applies to all verbs from the
Spray Class whenever they appear in that syntac-
tic frame ? that is, VerbNet assumes the Semantic
Consistency Hypothesis.
VerbNet and its semantic features have been
used in a variety of NLP applications, such as se-
mantic role labeling (Swier and Stevenson, 2004),
inferencing (Zaenen et al, 2008), verb classifica-
tion (Joanis et al, 2008), and information extrac-
tion (Maynard et al, 2009). It has also been em-
ployed in models of language acquisition (Parisien
and Stevenson, 2011; Barak et al, 2012). In gen-
eral, there has been interest in the NLP literature
in using these syntactially-relevant semantic fea-
tures for shallow semantic parsing (e.g., Giuglea
and Moschitti, 2006).
2 Empirical Status of the Semantic
Consistency Hypothesis
Given the prominence of the Semantic Consis-
tency Hypothesis in both theory and practice, one
might expect that it was on firm empirical foot-
ing. That is, ideally there would be some database
of semantic judgments for a comprehensive set
of verbs from each syntactic class. In princi-
ple, these judgments would come from naive an-
notators, since researchers? intuitions about sub-
tle judgments may be unconsciously clouded by
theoretical commitments (Gibson and Fedorenko,
2013). The Semantic Consistency Hypothesis
would be supported if, within that database, predi-
cates with the same syntactic properties were sys-
tematically related semantically.
No such database exists, whether consisting of
the judgments of linguists or naive annotators.
Most theoretical studies report researcher judg-
ments for only a handful of examples; how many
additional examples were considered by the re-
searcher goes unreported. In any case, to our
knowledge, of the 280 syntactic verb classes listed
by VerbNet, only a handful have been studied in
any detail.
The strongest evidence comes from experimen-
tal work on several so-called alternations (the pas-
sive, causative, locative, and dative alternations).
Here, there does appear to be a systematic seman-
tic distinction between the two syntactic frames in
each alternation, at least most of the time. This
has been tested with a reasonable sample of the
relevant verbs and also in both children and adults
(Ambridge et al, 2013; Pinker, 1989). However,
the relevant verbs make up a tiny fraction of all
English verbs, and even for these verbs, the syn-
tactic frames in question represent only a fraction
of the syntactic frames available to those verbs.
This is not an accidental oversight. The limit-
ing factor is scale: with many thousands of verbs
and over a hundred commonly-discussed seman-
tic features and syntactic frames, it is not feasi-
ble for a single researcher, or even team of re-
searchers, to check which verbs appear in which
syntactic frames and carry which semantic en-
tailments. Collecting data from naive subjects is
even more laborious, particularly since the aver-
age Man on the Street is not necessarily equipped
with metalinguistic concepts like caused change of
state and propositional attitude. The VerbCorner
Project is aimed at filling that empirical gap.
3 VerbCorner
The VerbCorner Project
3
is devoted to collecting
semantic judgments for a comprehensive set of
verbs along a comprehensive set of theoretically-
relevant semantic dimension. These data can be
used to test the Semantic Consistency Hypothesis.
3
http://gameswithwords.org/VerbCorner/
398
Independent of the validity of that hypothesis, the
semantic judgments themselves should prove use-
ful for any study of linguistic meaning or related
application.
We address the issue of scale through crowd-
sourcing: Recruiting large numbers of volunteers,
each of whom may provide only a few annota-
tions. Several previous projects have success-
fully crowd-sourced linguistic annotations, such
as Phrase Detectives, where volunteers have con-
tributed 2.5 million judgments on anaphoric rela-
tions (Poesio et al, 2012).
3.1 Integration with VerbNet
One significant challenge for any such project is
first classifying verbs according to the syntactic
frames they can appear in. Thus, at least initially,
we are focusing on the 6,000+ verbs already cata-
loged in VerbNet. As such, the VerbCorner Project
is also verifying and validating the semantics cur-
rently encoded in VerbNet. VerbNet will be edited
as necessary based on the empirical results.
Integration with VerbNet has additional bene-
fits, since VerbNet itself is integrated with a vari-
ety of linguistic resources, such as PropBank and
Penn TreeBank. This amplifies the impact of any
VerbCorner-inspired changes to VerbNet.
3.2 The Tasks
We selected semantic features of interest based on
those most commonly cited in the linguistics lit-
erature, with a particular focus on those that ? ac-
cording to VerbNet ? apply to many predicates.
Previous research has shown that humans find
it easier to reason about real-world scenarios than
make abstract judgments (Cosmides and Tooby,
1992). Thus, for each feature (e.g., MOVEMENT),
we converted the metalinguistic judgment (?Does
this verb entail movement on the part of some en-
tity??) into a real-world problem.
For example, in ?Simon Says Freeze,? a task
designed to elicit judgments about movement, the
Galactic Overlord (Simon) decrees ?Galactic Stay
Where You Are Day,? during which nobody is al-
lowed to move from their current location. Par-
ticipants read descriptions of events and decide
whether anyone violated the rule.
In ?Explode on Contact,? designed to elicit
judgments about physical contact, objects and
people explode when they touch one another. The
participant reads descriptions of events and de-
cides whether anything has exploded.
Note that each task is designed to elicit judg-
ments about entailments ? things that must be true
rather than are merely likely to be true. If John
greeted Bill, they might have come into contact
(e.g., by shaking hands), but perhaps they did not.
Previous work suggests that it is the semantic en-
tailments that matter, particularly for explaining
the syntactic behavior of verbs (Levin, 1993).
3.3 The Items
The exact semantics associated with a verb may
depend on its syntactic frame. Thus Sally rolled
the ball entails that somebody applied force to the
ball (namely: Sally), whereas The ball rolled does
not. Thus, we investigate the semantics of each
verb in each syntactic frame available to it (as de-
scribed by VerbNet). Below, the term item is the
unit of annotation: a verb in a frame.
In order to minimize unwanted effects of world
knowledge, the verb?s arguments are replaced with
nonsense words or randomly chosen proper names
(Sally sprayed the dax onto the blicket). The use
of novel words is explained by the story for each
task.
3.4 The Phases
Given the sheer scale of the project, data-
collection is expected to take several years at least.
Thus, data-collection has been broken up into a se-
ries of phases. Each phase focuses on a small num-
ber of classes and/or semantic entailments. This
ensures that there are meaningful intermediate re-
sults that can be disseminated prior to the comple-
tion of the entire project. This manuscript reports
the results of Phase 1.
4 Results
The full data and annotations will be released in
the near future and may be available now by re-
quest. Below, we summarize the main findings
thus far.
4.1 Description of Phase 1
In Phase 1 of the project, we focused on 11 verb
classes (Table 3) comprising 641 verbs and seven
different semantic entailments (Table 2). While
six of these entailments were chosen from among
those features widely believed to be relevant for
syntax, one was not: A Good World, which inves-
tigated evaluation (Is the event described by the
verb positive or negative?). Although evaluation
399
Task Semantic Feature Anns. Anns./Item Mode Consistency
Entropy PHYSICAL CHANGE 23,875 7 86% 95%
Equilibrium APPLICATION OF FORCE 27,128 8 79% 95%
Explode on Contact PHYSICAL CONTACT 23,590 7 93% 95%
Fickle Folk CHANGE OF MENTAL STATE 16,466 5 81% 96%
Philosophical Zombie Hunter MENTAL STATE 24,592 7 80% 89%
Simon Says Freeze LOCATION CHANGE 24,245 7 83% 88%
A Good World EVALUATION 22,668 7 72% 74%
Table 2: Respectively: Task, semantic feature tested, number of annotations, mean number of annotations
per item, mean percentage of participants choosing the modal response, consistency within class.
of events is an important component of human
psychology, to our knowledge no researcher has
suggested that it is relevant for syntax. As such,
this task provides a lower bound for how much se-
mantic consistency one might expect within a syn-
tactic verb class.
In all, we collected 162,564 judgments from
1,983 volunteers (Table 2).
4.2 Inter-annotator Agreement
Each task had been iteratively piloted and re-
designed until inter-annotator reliability was ac-
ceptable, as described in a previous publication.
However, these pilot studies involved a small num-
ber of items which were coded by all annota-
tors. How good was the reliability in the crowd-
sourcing context?
Because we recruited large numbers of an-
notators, most of whom annotated only a few
items, typical measures of inter-annotator agree-
ment such as Cohen?s kappa are not easily calcu-
lated. Instead, for each item, we calculated the
most common (modal) response. We then con-
sidered what proportion of all annotations were
accounted for by the modal response: a mean of
100% would indicate that there was no disagree-
ment among annotators for any item.
As can be seen in Table 2, for every task, the
modal response covered the bulk responses, rang-
ing from a low of 72% for EVALUATION to a high
of 93% for PHYSICAL CONTACT. Since there
were typically 4 or more possible answers per
item, inter-annotator agreement was well above
chance. This represents good performance given
that the annotators were entirely untrained.
In many cases, annotator disagreement seems
to be driven by syntactic constructions that are
only marginally grammatical. For instance, inter-
annotator agreement was typically low for class
63. VerbNet suggests two syntactic frames for
class 63, one of which (NP V THAT S) appears to
be marginal (?I control that Mary eats). In fact,
annotators frequently flagged these items as un-
grammatical, which is a valuable result in itself for
improving VerbNet.
Class Examples PChange Force Contact MChange Mental LChange
12 yank, press - x d - - d
18.1 hit, squash d x d - - d
29.5 believe, conjecture - - - - d -
31.1 amuse, frighten - - - x d -
31.2 like, fear - - - - x -
45.1 break, crack x d d - - d
51.3.1 bounce, roll - d d - - d
51.3.2 run, slink - d - - - d
51.6 chase, follow - - - - - d
61 attempt, try - - - - - -
63 control, enforce - - - - - -
Table 3: VerbNet classes investigated in Phase 1, with presence of semantic entailments as indicated by
data. x = feature present; - = feature absent; d = depends on syntactic frame.
400
4.3 Testing the Semantic Consistency
Hypothesis
4.3.1 Calculating consistency
We next investigated whether our results support
the Semantic Consistency Hypothesis. As noted
above, the question is not whether all verbs in the
same syntactic class share the same semantic en-
tailments. Even a single verb may have different
semantic entailments when placed in different syn-
tactic frames. Thus, calculating consistency of a
class must take differing frames into account.
There are many sophisticated rubrics for calcu-
lating consistency. However, for expository pur-
poses here, we use one that is intuitive and easy
to interpret. First, we determined the annotation
for each item (i.e., each verb/frame combination)
by majority vote. We then considered how many
verbs in each class had the same annotation in any
given syntactic frame.
For example, suppose a class had 10 verbs and
2 frames. In the first frame, 8 verbs received the
same annotation and 2 received others. The con-
sistency for this class/frame combination is 80%.
In the second frame, 6 verbs received the same
annotation and 4 verbs received others. The con-
sistency for this class/frame combination is 60%.
The consistency for the class as a whole is the av-
erage across frames: 70%.
4.3.2 Results
Mean consistency averaged across classes is
shown for each task in Table 2. As expected,
consistency was lowest for EVALUATION, which
is not expected to necessarily correlate with syn-
tax. Interestingly, consistency for EVALUATION
was nonetheless well above floor. This is per-
haps not surprising: two sentences that have the
same values for PHYSICAL CHANGE, APPLICA-
TION OF FORCE, PHYSICAL CONTACT, CHANGE
OF MENTAL STATE, MENTAL STATE, and LO-
CATION CHANGE are, on average, also likely to
be both good or both bad.
Consistency was much higher for the other
tasks, and in fact was close to ceiling for most of
them. It remains to be seen whether the items that
deviate from the mode represent true differences in
semantics or reflect merely noise. One way of ad-
dressing this question is to collect additional anno-
tations for those items that deviate from the mode.
4.4 Verb semantics
For each syntactic frame in each class, we deter-
mined the most common annotation. This is sum-
marized in Table 3. The semantic annotation de-
pended on syntactic frame nearly 1/4 of the time.
4
These frequently matched VerbNet?s seman-
tics, though not always. For instance, annota-
tors judged that class 18.1 verbs in the NP V NP
PP.INSTRUMENT entailed movement on the part
of the instrument (Sally hit the ball with the stick)
? something not reflected in VerbNet.
5 Conclusion and Future Work
Results of Phase 1 provide support for the Seman-
tic Consistency Hypothesis, at least as a strong
bias. More work will be needed to determine the
strength of that bias. The findings are largely con-
sistent with VerbNet?s semantics, but changes are
indicated in some cases.
We find that inter-annotator agreement is suf-
ficiently high that annotation can be done effec-
tively using the modal response with an average
of 6-7 responses per item. We are currently in-
vestigating whether we can achieve better reliabil-
ity with fewer responses per item by taking into
account an individual annotator?s history across
items, as recent work suggests is possible (Passon-
neau and Carpenter, 2013; Rzhetsky et al, 2009;
Whitehill et al, 2009).
Thus, crowd-sourcing VerbNet semantic entail-
ments appears to be both feasible and productive.
Data-collection continues. Phase 2, which added
over 10 new verb classes, is complete. Phase 3,
which includes both new classes and new entail-
ments, has been launched.
Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the support of the
National Science Foundation Grant NSF-IIS-
1116782, DARPA Machine Reading FA8750-09-
C-0179, and funding from the Ruth L. Kirschstein
National Research Service Award. Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations ex-
pressed in this material are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Science Foundation.
4
Note that this table was calculated based on whether the
semantic feature was present or not. In many cases, the data
was significantly richer. For instance, for APPLICATION OF
FORCE, annotators determined which participant in the event
was applying the force.
401
References
Ben Ambridge, Julian Pine, Caroline Rowland,
Franklin Chang, and Amy Bidgood. 2013. The re-
treat from overgeneralization in child language ac-
quisition: word learning, morphology and verb ar-
gument structure. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Cognitive Science, 4(1):47?62.
Libby Barak, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Steven-
son. 2012. Modeling the acquisition of mental
state verbs. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on
Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics,
pages 1?10. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Leda Cosmides and John Tooby. 1992. Cognitive
adaptations for social exchange. The Adapted Mind,
pages 163?228.
Edward Gibson and Evelina Fedorenko. 2013. The
need for quantitative methods in syntax and seman-
tics research. Language and Cognitive Processes,
28(1-2):88?124.
Ana-Maria Giuglea and Alessandro Moschitti. 2006.
Shallow semantic parsing based on framenet, verb-
net and propbank. In Proceedings of the 217th
European Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
pages 563?567, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, The
Netherlands. IOS Press.
Lila Gleitman. 1990. The structural sources of verb
meanings. Language Acquisition, 1(1):3?55.
Adele E. Goldberg. 1995. Constructions: A Construc-
tion Grammar approach to argument structure. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
Eric Joanis, Suzanne Stevenson, and David James.
2008. A general feature space for automatic
verb classification. Natural Language Engineering,
14(3):337?367.
Beth Levin and Malka Rappaport Hovav. 2005. Argu-
ment Realization. Cambridge University Press.
Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alter-
nations: A preliminary Investigation. University of
Chicago press.
Diana Maynard, Adam Funk, and Wim Peters. 2009.
Using lexico-syntactic ontology design patterns for
ontology creation and population. In Proc. of the
Workshop on Ontology Patterns.
Christopher Parisien and Suzanne Stevenson. 2011.
Generalizing between form and meaning using
learned verb classes. In Proceedings of the 33rd An-
nual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. Cite-
seer.
Rebecca J Passonneau and Bob Carpenter. 2013. The
benefits of a model of annotation. In Proceedings of
the 7th Linguistic Annotation Workshop and Inter-
operability with Discourse, pages 187?195.
Steven Pinker. 1984. Language Learnability and Lan-
guage Development. Harvard University Press.
Steven Pinker. 1989. Learnability and Cognition: The
Acquisition of Argument Structure. MIT Press.
Massimo Poesio, Jon Chamberlain, Udo Kruschwitz,
Livio Robaldo, and Luca Ducceschi. 2012. The
phrase detective multilingual corpus, release 0.1. In
Collaborative Resource Development and Delivery
Workshop Programme, page 34.
Andrey Rzhetsky, Hagit Shatkay, and W John Wilbur.
2009. How to get the most out of your curation ef-
fort. PLoS Computational Biology, 5(5):1?13.
Robert S Swier and Suzanne Stevenson. 2004. Un-
supervised semantic role labeling. In Proceedings
of the Generative Lexicon Conference, volume 95,
page 102.
Jacob Whitehill, Paul Ruvolo, Tingfan Wu, Jacob
Bergsma, and Javier R Movellan. 2009. Whose vote
should count more: Optimal integration of labels
from labelers of unknown expertise. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 22,
pages 2035?2043.
Annie Zaenen, Daniel G Bobrow, and Cleo Condo-
ravdi. 2008. The encoding of lexical implications in
verbnet: Predicates of change of locations. In Lan-
guage Resources Evaluation Conference.
402
