Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1521?1532,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Hierarchical Entity-based Approach to Structuralize User Generated
Content in Social Media: A Case of Yahoo! Answers
Baichuan Li1,2?, Jing Liu3?, Chin-Yew Lin4, Irwin King1,2, and Michael R. Lyu1,2
1Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
2Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
3Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, P.R. China
4Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing 100080, P.R. China
bcli@cse.cuhk.edu.hk jliu@ir.hit.edu.cn cyl@microsoft.com
{king,lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract
Social media like forums and microblogs have
accumulated a huge amount of user generated
content (UGC) containing human knowledge.
Currently, most of UGC is listed as a whole
or in pre-defined categories. This ?list-based?
approach is simple, but hinders users from
browsing and learning knowledge of certain
topics effectively. To address this problem, we
propose a hierarchical entity-based approach
for structuralizing UGC in social media. By
using a large-scale entity repository, we design
a three-step framework to organize UGC in
a novel hierarchical structure called ?cluster
entity tree (CET)?. With Yahoo! Answers as
a test case, we conduct experiments and the
results show the effectiveness of our frame-
work in constructing CET. We further evaluate
the performance of CET on UGC organiza-
tion in both user and system aspects. From
a user aspect, our user study demonstrates
that, with CET-based structure, users perform
significantly better in knowledge learning than
using traditional list-based approach. From
a system aspect, CET substantially boosts
the performance of two information retrieval
models (i.e., vector space model and query
likelihood language model).
1 Introduction
With the development of Web 2.0, social
media websites?such as online forums, blogs,
microblogs, social networks, and community
?This work was done when the first two authors were on
internship at MSRA.
Table 1: Sample questions about Edinburgh
1. Where can i buy a hamburger in Edinburgh?
2. Where can I get a shawarma in Edinburgh?
3. How long does it take to drive between Glasgow
and Edinburgh?
4. Whats the difference between Glasgow and Edinburgh?
5. Good hotels in London and Edinburgh?
6. Looking for nice , clean cheap hotel in Edinburgh?
7. Does anyone know of a reasonably cheap hotel in
Edinburgh that is near to Niddry Street South ?
8. Who can recommend a affordable hotel in
Edinburgh City Center?
question answering (CQA) portals?have become
the mainstream of web, where users create, share,
and exchange information with each other. As a
result, more and more UGC is accumulated, with
social media websites retaining a huge amount of
human knowledge and user experience. At present,
most of UGC is organized in a list structure with
extra information (e.g., category hierarchies in
online forums), or without any other information.
This ?list-of-content? (list-based approach) is
simple and straightforward, but ineffective for
browsing and knowledge learning. Consider
the following case: a user wants to spend his
vacation in Edinburgh. He visits a CQA website
to explore which aspects are mostly asked. In this
scenario, he may browse some relevant categories
like ?Travel:United Kingdom:Edinburgh? to get
useful information. He may also issue a query like
?travel in Edinburgh? to search relevant questions.
However, both the browsing and the searching give
the user a list of relevant contents (e.g., questions
shown in Table 1), not the direct knowledge. Thus,
the user has to read these contents, understand them,
classify them into various topics, and gain valuable
1521
HGLQEXUJK
^