Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1677?1687,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Translating into Morphologically Rich Languages with Synthetic Phrases
Victor Chahuneau Eva Schlinger Noah A. Smith Chris Dyer
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
{vchahune,eschling,nasmith,cdyer}@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
Translation into morphologically rich lan-
guages is an important but recalcitrant prob-
lem in MT. We present a simple and effec-
tive approach that deals with the problem in
two phases. First, a discriminative model is
learned to predict inflections of target words
from rich source-side annotations. Then, this
model is used to create additional sentence-
specific word- and phrase-level translations
that are added to a standard translation model
as ?synthetic? phrases. Our approach re-
lies on morphological analysis of the target
language, but we show that an unsupervised
Bayesian model of morphology can success-
fully be used in place of a supervised analyzer.
We report significant improvements in transla-
tion quality when translating from English to
Russian, Hebrew and Swahili.
1 Introduction
Machine translation into morphologically rich lan-
guages is challenging, due to lexical sparsity and the
large variety of grammatical features expressed with
morphology. In this paper, we introduce a method
that uses target language morphological grammars
(either hand-crafted or learned unsupervisedly) to
address this challenge and demonstrate its effective-
ness at improving translation from English into sev-
eral morphologically rich target languages.
Our approach decomposes the process of produc-
ing a translation for a word (or phrase) into two
steps. First, a meaning-bearing stem is chosen and
then an appropriate inflection is selected using a
feature-rich discriminative model that conditions on
the source context of the word being translated.
Rather than attempting to directly produce full-
sentence translations using such an elementary pro-
cess, we use our model to generate translations of
individual words and short phrases that augment?
on a sentence-by-sentence basis?the inventory of
translation rules obtained using standard translation
rule extraction techniques (Chiang, 2007). We call
these synthetic phrases.
The major advantages of our approach are: (i)
synthesized forms are targeted to a specific transla-
tion context; (ii) multiple, alternative phrases may
be generated with the final choice among rules left
to the global translation model; (iii) virtually no
language-specific engineering is necessary; (iv) any
phrase- or syntax-based decoder can be used with-
out modification; and (v) we can generate forms that
were not attested in the bilingual training data.
The paper is structured as follows. We first
present our ?translate-and-inflect? model for pre-
dicting lexical translations into morphologically rich
languages given a source word and its context (?2).
Our approach requires a morphological grammar to
relate surface forms to underlying ?stem, inflection?
pairs; we discuss how either a standard morpholog-
ical analyzer or a simple Bayesian unsupervised an-
alyzer can be used (?3). After describing an ef-
ficient parameter estimation procedure for the in-
flection model (?4), we employ the translate-and-
inflect model in an MT system. We describe
how we use our model to synthesize translation
options (?5) and then evaluate translation quality
on English?Russian, English?Hebrew, and English?
1677
Swahili translation tasks, finding significant im-
provements in all language pairs (?6). We finally
review related work (?7) and conclude (?8).
2 Translate-and-Inflect Model
The task of the translate-and-inflect model is illus-
trated in Fig. 1 for an English?Russian sentence pair.
The input will be a sentence e in the source language
(in this paper, always English) and any available lin-
guistic analysis of e. The output f will be composed
of (i) a sequence of stems, each denoted ? and (ii)
one morphological inflection pattern for each stem,
denoted ?. When the information is available, a
stem ? is composed of a lemma and an inflectional
class. Throughout, we use ?? to denote the set
of possible morphological inflection patterns for a
given stem ?. ?? might be defined by a grammar;
our models restrict ?? to be the set of inflections
observed anywhere in our monolingual or bilingual
training data as a realization of ?.1
We assume the availability of a deterministic
function that maps a stem ? and morphological in-
flection ? to a target language surface form f . In
some cases, such as our unsupervised approach in
?3.2, this will be a concatenation operation, though
finite-state transducers are traditionally used to de-
fine such relations (?3.1). We abstractly denote this
operation by ?: f = ? ? ?.
Our approach consists in defining a probabilistic
model over target words f . The model assumes in-
dependence between each target word f conditioned
on the source sentence e and its aligned position i in
this sentence.2 This assumption is further relaxed
in ?5 when the model is integrated in the translation
system.
We decompose the probability of generating each
target word f in the following way:
p(f | e, i) =
?
???=f
p(? | ei)
? ?? ?
gen. stem
? p(? | ?, e, i)
? ?? ?
gen. inflection
Here, each stem is generated independently from a
single aligned source word ei, but in practice we
1This prevents the model from generating words that would
be difficult for the language model to reliably score.
2This is the same assumption that Brown et al (1993) make
in, for example, IBM Model 1.
use a standard phrase-based model to generate se-
quences of stems and only the inflection model op-
erates word-by-word. We turn next to the inflection
model.
2.1 Modeling Inflection
In morphologically rich languages, each stem may
be combined with one or more inflectional mor-
phemes to express many different grammatical fea-
tures (e.g., case, definiteness, mood, tense, etc.).
Since the inflectional morphology of a word gen-
erally expresses multiple grammatical features, we
would like a model that naturally incorporates rich,
possibly overlapping features in its representation of
both the input (i.e., conditioning context) and out-
put (i.e., the inflection pattern). We therefore use
the following parametric form to model inflectional
probabilities:
u(?, e, i) = exp
[
?(e, i)>W?(?)+
?(?)>V?(?)
]
,
p(? | ?, e, i) =
u(?, e, i)
?
????? u(?
?, e, i)
. (1)
Here, ? is an m-dimensional source context fea-
ture vector function, ? is an n-dimensional mor-
phology feature vector function, W ? Rm?n and
V ? Rn?n are parameter matrices. As with the
more familiar log-linear parametrization that is writ-
ten with a single feature vector, single weight vec-
tor and single bias vector, this model is linear in its
parameters (it can be understood as working with
a feature space that is the outer product of the two
feature spaces). However, using two feature vectors
allows to define overlapping features of both the in-
put and the output, which is important for modeling
morphology in which output variables are naturally
expressed as bundles of features. The second term
in the sum in u enables correlations among output
features to be modeled independently of input, and
as such can be understood as a generalization of the
bias terms in multi-class logistic regression (on the
diagonal Vii) and interaction terms between output
variables in a conditional random field (off the diag-
onalVij).
1678
??? ???????? ???????? ???? ?? ?? ?????????
she had attempted to cross the road on her bike
PRP   VBD         VBN          TO    VB       DT     NN    IN  PRP$   NN
nsubj
aux
xcomp
?:????????_V,+,?:mis2sfm2e
C50   C473        C28          C8    C275   C37   C43  C82 C94   C331
root
-1 +1
??? ??? ???? ? ? ???? ???? ?? ?? ?????????
she had attempted to cross the road on her bike
PRP   VBD         VBN         TO   VB      DT     NN  IN  PRP$   NN
nsubj
aux
xcomp
?:????????_V,+,?:mis sfm2e
C50   C473        C28         C8    C275   C37   C43  C82 C94   C331
root
-1 +1
Figure 1: The inflection model predicts a form for the target verb lemma ? =???????? (pytat?sya) based on its
source attempted and the linear and syntactic source context. The correct inflection string for the observed Russian
form in this particular training instance is ? = mis-sfm-e (equivalent to the more traditional morphological string:
+MAIN+IND+PAST+SING+FEM+MEDIAL+PERF).
?
???
???
source aligned word ei
parent word epii with its dependency pii ? i
all children ej | pij = i with their dependency i? j
source words ei?1 and ei+1
?
???
???
?
?
?
token
part-of-speech tag
word cluster
?
?
?
? are ei, epii at the root of the dependency tree?
? number of children, siblings of ei
Figure 2: Source features ?(e, i) extracted from e and its linguistic analysis. pii denotes the parent of the token in
position i in the dependency tree and pii ? i the typed dependency link.
2.2 Source Context Features: ?(e, i)
In order to select the best inflection of a target-
language word, given the source word it translates
and the context of that source word, we seek to ex-
ploit as many features of the context as are avail-
able. Consider the example shown in Fig. 1, where
most of the inflection features of the Russian word
(past tense, singular number, and feminine gender)
can be inferred from the context of the English word
it is aligned to. Indeed, many grammatical functions
expressed morphologically in Russian are expressed
syntactically in English. Fortunately, high-quality
parsers and other linguistic analyzers are available
for English.
On the source side, we apply the following pro-
cessing steps:
? Part-of-speech tagging with a CRF tagger
trained on sections 02?21 of the Penn Tree-
bank.
? Dependency parsing with TurboParser (Mar-
tins et al, 2010), a non-projective dependency
parser trained on the Penn Treebank to produce
basic Stanford dependencies.
? Assignment of tokens to one of 600 Brown
clusters, trained on 8G words of English text.3
We then extract binary features from e using this
information, by considering the aligned source word
ei, its preceding and following words, and its syn-
tactic neighbors. These are detailed in Figure 2.
3 Morphological Grammars and Features
We now describe how to obtain morphological anal-
yses and convert them into feature vectors (?) for
our target languages, Russian, Hebrew, and Swahili,
using supervised and unsupervised methods.
3.1 Supervised Morphology
The state-of-the-art in morphological analysis uses
unweighted morphological transduction rules (usu-
3The entire monolingual data available for the translation
task of the 8th ACL Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion was used.
1679
ally in the form of an FST) to produce candidate
analyses for each word in a sentence and then sta-
tistical models to disambiguate among the analy-
ses in context (Hakkani-Tu?r et al, 2000; Hajic? et
al., 2001; Smith et al, 2005; Habash and Rambow,
2005, inter alia). While this technique is capable
of producing high quality linguistic analyses, it is
expensive to develop, requiring hand-crafted rule-
based analyzers and annotated corpora to train the
disambiguation models. As a result, such analyzers
are only available for a small number of languages,
and, as a practical matter, each analyzer (which re-
sulted from different development efforts) operates
differently from the others.
We therefore focus on using supervised analysis
for a single target language, Russian. We use the
analysis tool of Sharoff et al (2008) which produces
for each word in context a lemma and a fixed-length
morphological tag encoding the grammatical fea-
tures. We process the target side of the parallel data
with this tool to obtain the information necessary
to extract ?lemma, inflection? pairs, from which we
compute ? and morphological feature vectors ?(?).
Supervised morphology features: ?(?). Since
a positional tag set is used, it is straightforward to
convert each fixed-length tag ? into a feature vector
by defining a binary feature for each key-value pair
(e.g., Tense=past) composing the tag.
3.2 Unsupervised Morphology
Since many languages into which we might want to
translate do not have supervised morphological an-
alyzers, we now turn to the question of how to gen-
erate morphological analyses and features using an
unsupervised analyzer. We hypothesize that perfect
decomposition into rich linguistic structures may not
be required for accurate generation of new inflected
forms. We will test this hypothesis by experimenting
with a simple, unsupervised model of morphology
that segments words into sequences of morphemes,
assuming a (na??ve) concatenative generation process
and a single analysis per type.
Unsupervised morphological segmentation. We
assume that each word can be decomposed into any
number of prefixes, a stem, and any number of suf-
fixes. Formally, we let M represent the set of all
possible morphemes and define a regular grammar
M?MM? (i.e., zero or more prefixes, a stem, and
zero or more suffixes). To infer the decomposition
structure for the words in the target language, we as-
sume that the vocabulary was generated by the fol-
lowing process:
1. Sample morpheme distributions from symmet-
ric Dirichlet distributions: ?p ? Dir|M |(?p)
for prefixes, ?? ? Dir|M |(??) for stems, and
?s ? Dir|M |(?s) for suffixes.
2. Sample length distribution parameters
?p ? Beta(?p, ?p) for prefix sequences
and ?s ? Beta(?s, ?s) for suffix sequences.
3. Sample a vocabulary by creating each word
type w using the following steps:
(a) Sample affix sequence lengths:
lp ? Geometric(?p);
ls ? Geometric(?s).
(b) Sample lp prefixes p1, . . . , plp indepen-
dently from ?p; ls suffixes s1, . . . , sls in-
dependently from ?s; and a stem ? ? ??.
(c) Concatenate prefixes, the stem, and suf-
fixes: w = p1+? ? ?+plp+?+s1+? ? ?+sls .
We use blocked Gibbs sampling to sample seg-
mentations for each word in the training vocabulary.
Because of our particular choice of priors, it possible
to approximately decompose the posterior over the
arcs of a compact finite-state machine. Sampling a
segmentation or obtaining the most likely segmenta-
tion a posteriori then reduces to familiar FST opera-
tions. This model is reminiscent of work on learning
morphology using adaptor grammars (Johnson et al,
2006; Johnson, 2008).
The inferred morphological grammar is very sen-
sitive to the Dirichlet hyperparameters (?p, ?s, ??)
and these are, in turn, sensitive to the number of
types in the vocabulary. Using ?p, ?s  ??  1
tended to recover useful segmentations, but we have
not yet been able to find reliable generic priors for
these values. Therefore, we selected them empiri-
cally to obtain a stem vocabulary size on the parallel
data that is one-to-one with English.4 Future work
4Our default starting point was to use ?p = ?s =
10?6, ?? = 10?4 and then to adjust all parameters by factors
of 10.
1680
Table 1: Corpus statistics.
Parallel Parallel+Monolingual
Sentences EN-tokens TRG-tokens EN-types TRG-types Sentences TRG-tokens TRG-types
Russian 150k 3.5M 3.3M 131k 254k 20M 360M 1,971k
Hebrew 134k 2.7M 2.0M 48k 120k 806k 15M 316k
Swahili 15k 0.3M 0.3M 23k 35k 596k 13M 334k
will involve a more direct method for specifying or
inferring these values.
Unsupervised morphology features: ?(?). For
the unsupervised analyzer, we do not have a map-
ping from morphemes to structured morphological
attributes; however, we can create features from the
affix sequences obtained after morphological seg-
mentation. We produce binary features correspond-
ing to the content of each potential affixation posi-
tion relative to the stem:
prefix      suffix
...-3 -2 -1 STEM +1 +2 +3...
For example, the unsupervised analysis ? =
wa+ki+wa+STEM of the Swahili word wakiwapiga
will produce the following features:
?prefix[?3][wa](?) = 1,
?prefix[?2][ki](?) = 1,
?prefix[?1][wa](?) = 1.
4 Inflection Model Parameter Estimation
To set the parametersW andV of the inflection pre-
diction model (Eq. 1), we use stochastic gradient de-
scent to maximize the conditional log-likelihood of
a training set consisting of pairs of source (English)
sentence contextual features (?) and target word in-
flectional features (?). The training instances are
extracted from the word-aligned parallel corpus with
the English side preprocessed as discussed in ?2.2
and the target side disambiguated as discussed in ?3.
When morphological category information is avail-
able, we train an independent model for each open-
class category (in Russian, nouns, verbs, adjectives,
numerals, adverbs); otherwise a single model is used
for all words (excluding words less than four char-
acters long, which are ignored).
Statistics of the parallel corpora used to train the
inflection model are summarized in Table 1. It is
important to note here that our richly parameterized
model is trained on the full parallel training cor-
pus, not just on a handful of development sentences
(which are typically used to tune MT system param-
eters). Despite this scale, training is simple: the in-
flection model is trained to discriminate among dif-
ferent inflectional paradigms, not over all possible
target language sentences (Blunsom et al, 2008) or
learning from all observable rules (Subotin, 2011).
This makes the training problem relatively tractable:
all experiments in this paper were trained on a sin-
gle processor using a Cython implementation of the
SGD optimizer. For our largest model, trained on
3.3M Russian words, n = 231K ? m = 336 fea-
tures were produced, and 10 SGD iterations were
performed in less than 16 hours.
4.1 Intrinsic Evaluation
Before considering the broader problem of integrat-
ing the inflection model in a machine translation
system, we perform an artificial evaluation to ver-
ify that the model learns sensible source sentence-
target inflection patterns. To do so, we create an
inflection test set as follows. We preprocess the
source (English) sentences exactly as during train-
ing (?2.2), and using the target language morpholog-
ical analyzer, we convert each aligned target word to
?stem, inflection? pairs. We perform word alignment
on the held-out MT development data for each lan-
guage pair (cf. Table 1), exactly as if it were going to
produce training instances, but instead we use them
for testing.
Although the resulting dataset is noisy (e.g., due
to alignment errors), this becomes our intrinsic eval-
uation test set. Using this data, we measure inflec-
tion quality using two measurements:5
5Note that we are not evaluating the stem translation model,
1681
acc. ppl. |??|
S
up
er
vi
se
d
Russian
N 64.1% 3.46 9.16
V 63.7% 3.41 20.12
A 51.5% 6.24 19.56
M 73.0% 2.81 9.14
average 63.1% 3.98 14.49
U
ns
up
. Russian all 71.2% 2.15 4.73
Hebrew all 85.5% 1.49 2.55
Swahili all 78.2% 2.09 11.46
Table 2: Intrinsic evaluation of inflection model (N:
nouns, V: verbs, A: adjectives, M: numerals).
? the accuracy of predicting the inflection given
the source, source context and target stem, and
? the inflection model perplexity on the same set
of test instances.
Additionally, we report the average number of pos-
sible inflections for each stem, an upper bound to the
perplexity that indicates the inherent difficulty of the
task. The results of this evaluation are presented in
Table 2 for the three language pairs considered. We
remark on two patterns in these results. First, per-
plexity is substantially lower than the perplexity of a
uniform model, indicating our model is overall quite
effective at predicting inflections using source con-
text only. Second, in the supervised Russian results,
we see that predicting the inflections of adjectives
is relatively more difficult than for other parts-of-
speech. Since adjectives agree with the nouns they
modify in gender and case, and gender is an idiosyn-
cratic feature of Russian nouns (and therefore not
directly predictable from the English source), this
difficulty is unsurprising.
We can also inspect the weights learned by the
model to assess the effectiveness of the features
in relating source-context structure with target-side
morphology. Such an analysis is presented in Fig. 3.
4.2 Feature Ablation
Our inflection model makes use of numerous fea-
ture types. Table 3 explores the effect of removing
different kinds of (source) features from the model,
evaluated on predicting Russian inflections using
supervised morphological grammars.6 Rows 2?3
just the inflection prediction model.
6The models used in the feature ablation experiment were
trained on fewer examples, resulting in overall lower accuracies
show the effect of removing either linear or depen-
dency context. We see that both are necessary for
good performance; however removing dependency
context substantially degrades performance of the
model (we interpret this result as evidence that Rus-
sian morphological inflection captures grammatical
relationships that would be expressed structurally in
English). The bottom four rows explore the effect
of source language word representation. The results
indicate that lexical features are important for accu-
rate prediction of inflection, and that POS tags and
Brown clusters are likewise important, but they seem
to capture similar information (removing one has lit-
tle impact, but removing both substantially degrades
performance).
Table 3: Feature ablation experiments using supervised
Russian classification experiments.
Features (?(e, i)) acc.
all 54.7%
?linear context 52.7%
?dependency context 44.4%
?POS tags 54.5%
?Brown clusters 54.5%
?POS tags, ?Brown cl. 50.9%
?lexical items 51.2%
5 Synthetic Phrases
We turn now to translation; recall that our translate-
and-inflect model is used to augment the set of rules
available to a conventional statistical machine trans-
lation decoder. We refer to the phrases it produces
as synthetic phrases.
Our baseline system is a standard hierarchical
phrase-based translation model (Chiang, 2007). Fol-
lowing Lopez (2007), the training data is compiled
into an efficient binary representation which allows
extraction of sentence-specific grammars just before
decoding. In our case, this also allows the creation
of synthetic inflected phrases that are produced con-
ditioning on the sentence to translate.
To generate these synthetic phrases with new in-
flections possibly unseen in the parallel training
than seen in Table 2, but the pattern of results is the relevant
datapoint here.
1682
Russian supervised
Verb: 1st Person
child(nsubj)=I child(nsubj)=we
Verb: Future tense
child(aux)=MD child(aux)=will
Noun: Animate
source=animals/victims/...
Noun: Feminine gender
source=obama/economy/...
Noun: Dative case
parent(iobj)
Adjective: Genitive case
grandparent(poss)
Hebrew
Suffix ?? (masculine plural)
parent=NNS after=NNS
Prefix ? (first person sing. + future)
child(nsubj)=I child(aux)='ll
Prefix ? (preposition like/as)
child(prep)=IN parent=as
Suffix ? (possesive mark)
before=my child(poss)=my
Suffix ? (feminine mark)
child(nsubj)=she before=she
Prefix ?? (when)
before=when before=WRB
Swahili
Prefix li (past)
source=VBD source=VBN
Prefix nita (1st person sing. + future)
child(aux) child(nsubj)=I
Prefix ana (3rd person sing. + present)
source=VBZ
Prefix wa (3rd person plural)
before=they child(nsubj)=NNS
Suffix tu (1st person plural)
child(nsubj)=she before=she
Prefix ha (negative tense)
source=no after=not
Figure 3: Examples of highly weighted features learned by the inflection model. We selected a few frequent morpho-
logical features and show their top corresponding source context features.
data, we first construct an additional phrase-based
translation model on the parallel corpus prepro-
cessed to replace inflected surface words with their
stems. We then extract a set of non-gappy phrases
for each sentence (e.g., X ? <attempted,
???????? V>). The target side of each such phrase
is re-inflected, conditioned on the source sentence,
using the inflection model from ?2. Each stem is
given its most likely inflection.7
The original features extracted for the stemmed
phrase are conserved, and the following features
are added to help the decoder select good synthetic
phrases:
? a binary feature indicating that the phrase is
synthetic,
? the log-probability of the inflected forms ac-
cording to our model,
? the count of words that have been inflected,
with a separate feature for each morphological
category in the supervised case.
Finally, these synthetic phrases are combined with
the original translation rules obtained for the base-
line system to produce an extended sentence-specific
grammar which is used as input to the decoder. If a
7Several reviewers asked about what happens when k-best
inflections are added. The results for k ? {2, 4, 8} range from
no effect to an improvement over k = 1 of about 0.2 BLEU
(absolute). We hypothesize that larger values of k could have a
greater impact, perhaps in a more ?global? model of the target
string; however, exploration of this question is beyond the scope
of this paper.
phrase already existing in the standard phrase table
happens to be recreated, both phrases are kept and
will compete with each other with different features
in the decoder.
For example, for the large EN?RU system, 6%
of all the rules used for translation are synthetic
phrases, with 65% of these phrases being entirely
new rules.
6 Translation Experiments
We evaluate our approach in the standard discrim-
inative MT framework. We use cdec (Dyer et al,
2010) as our decoder and perform MIRA training
to learn feature weights of the sentence translation
model (Chiang, 2012). We compare the following
configurations:
? A baseline system, using a 4-gram language
model trained on the entire monolingual and
bilingual data available.
? An enriched system with a class-based n-gram
language model8 trained on the monolingual
data mapped to 600 Brown clusters. Class-
based language modeling is a strong baseline
for scenarios with high out-of-vocabulary rates
but in which large amounts of monolingual
target-language data are available.
? The enriched system further augmented with
our inflected synthetic phrases. We expect the
class-based language model to be especially
8For Swahili and Hebrew, n = 6; for Russian, n = 7.
1683
helpful here and capture some basic agreement
patterns that can be learned more easily on
dense clusters than from plain word sequences.
Detailed corpus statistics are given in Table 1:
? The Russian data consist of the News Com-
mentary parallel corpus and additional mono-
lingual data crawled from news websites.9
? The Hebrew parallel corpus is composed of
transcribed TED talks (Cettolo et al, 2012).
Additional monolingual news data is also used.
? The Swahili parallel corpus was obtained by
crawling the Global Voices project website10
for parallel articles. Additional monolingual
data was taken from the Helsinki Corpus of
Swahili.11
We evaluate translation quality by translating and
measuring the BLEU score of a 2000?3000 sentence-
long evaluation corpus, averaging the results over 3
MIRA runs to control for optimizer instability (Clark
et al, 2011). Table 4 reports the results. For all lan-
guages, using class language models improves over
the baseline. When synthetic phrases are added, sig-
nificant additional improvements are obtained. For
the English?Russian language pair, where both su-
pervised and unsupervised analyses can be obtained,
we notice that expert-crafted morphological analyz-
ers are more efficient at improving translation qual-
ity. Globally, the amount of improvement observed
varies depending on the language; this is most likely
indicative of the quality of unsupervised morpholog-
ical segmentations produced and the kinds of gram-
matical relations expressed morphologically.
Finally, to confirm the effectiveness of our ap-
proach as corpus size increases, we use our tech-
nique on top of a state-of-the art English?Russian
system trained on data from the 8th ACL Work-
shop on Machine Translation (30M words of bilin-
gual text and 410M words of monolingual text). The
setup is identical except for the addition of sparse
9http://www.statmt.org/wmt13/
translation-task.html
10http://sw.globalvoicesonline.org
11http://www.aakkl.helsinki.fi/cameel/
corpus/intro.htm
Table 4: Translation quality (measured by BLEU) aver-
aged over 3 MIRA runs.
EN?RU EN?HE EN?SW
Baseline 14.7?0.1 15.8?0.3 18.3?0.1
+Class LM 15.7?0.1 16.8?0.4 18.7?0.2
+Synthetic
unsupervised 16.2?0.1 17.6?0.1 19.0?0.1
supervised 16.7?0.1 ? ?
rule shape indicator features and bigram cluster fea-
tures. In these large scale conditions, the BLEU score
improves from 18.8 to 19.6 with the addition of word
clusters and reaches 20.0 with synthetic phrases.
Details regarding this system are reported in Ammar
et al (2013).
7 Related Work
Translation into morphologically rich languages is
a widely studied problem and there is a tremen-
dous amount of related work. Our technique of syn-
thesizing translation options to improve generation
of inflected forms is closely related to the factored
translation approach proposed by Koehn and Hoang
(2007); however, an important difference to that
work is that we use a discriminative model that con-
ditions on source context to make ?local? decisions
about what inflections may be used before combin-
ing the phrases into a complete sentence translation.
Combination pre-/post-processing solutions are
also frequently proposed. In these, the tar-
get language is generally transformed from multi-
morphemic surface words into smaller units more
amenable to direct translation, and then a post-
processing step is applied independent of the trans-
lation model. For example, Oflazer and El-Kahlout
(2007) experiment with partial morpheme groupings
to produce novel inflected forms when translating
into Turkish; Al-Haj and Lavie (2010) compare dif-
ferent processing schemes for Arabic. A related but
different approach is to enrich the source language
items with grammatical features (e.g., a source sen-
tence like John saw Mary is preprocessed into, e.g.,
John+subj saw+msubj+fobj Mary+obj) so as
to make the source and target lexicons have simi-
lar morphological contrasts (Avramidis and Koehn,
2008; Yeniterzi and Oflazer, 2010; Chang et al,
1684
2009). In general, this work suffers from the prob-
lem that it is extremely difficult to know a priori
what the right preprocessing is for a given language
pair, data size, and domain.
Several post-processing approaches have relied
on supervised classifiers to predict the optimal com-
plete inflection for an incomplete or lemmatized
translation. Minkov et al (2007) present a method
for predicting the inflection of Russian and Arabic
sentences aligned to English sentences. They train a
sequence model to predict target morphological fea-
tures from the lemmas and the syntactic structures
of both aligned sentences and demonstrate its ability
to recover accurately inflections on reference trans-
lations. Toutanova et al (2008) apply this method
to generate inflections after translation in two differ-
ent ways: by rescoring inflected n-best outputs or by
translating lemmas and re-inflecting them a posteri-
ori. El Kholy and Habash (2012) follow a similar
method and compare different approaches for gen-
erating rich morphology in Arabic after a transla-
tion step. Fraser et al (2012) observe improvements
for translation into German with a similar method.
As in that work, we model morphological features
rather than directly inflected forms. However, that
work may be criticized for providing no mechanism
to translate surface forms directly, even when evi-
dence for a direct translation is available in the par-
allel data.
Unsupervised morphology has begun to play a
role in translation between morphologically com-
plex languages. Stallard et al (2012) show that an
unsupervised approach to Arabic segmentation per-
forms as well as a supervised segmenter for source-
side preprocessing (in terms of English translation
quality). For translation into morphological rich lan-
guages, Clifton and Sarkar (2011) use an unsuper-
vised morphological analyzer to produce morpho-
logical affixes in Finnish, injecting some linguistic
knowledge in the generation process.
Several authors have proposed using conditional
models to predict the probability of phrase transla-
tion in context (Gimpel and Smith, 2008; Chan et
al., 2007; Carpuat and Wu, 2007; Jeong et al, 2010).
Of particular note is the work of Subotin (2011),
who use a conditional model to predict morpholog-
ical features conditioned on rich linguistic features;
however, this latter work also conditions on target
context, which substantially complicates decoding.
Finally, synthetic phrases have been used for
different purposes than generating morphology.
Callison-Burch et al (2006) expanded the cov-
erage of a phrase table by adding synthesized
phrases by paraphrasing source language phrases,
Chen et al (2011) produced ?fabricated? phrases
by paraphrasing both source and target phrases, and
Habash (2009) created new rules to handle out-of-
vocabulary words. In related work, Tsvetkov et al
(2013) used synthetic phrases to improve generation
of (in)definite articles when translating into English
from Russian and Czech, two languages which do
not lexically mark definiteness.
8 Conclusion
We have presented an efficient technique that ex-
ploits morphologically analyzed corpora to produce
new inflections possibly unseen in the bilingual
training data. Our method decomposes into two
simple independent steps involving well-understood
discriminative models.
By relying on source-side context to generate ad-
ditional local translation options and by leaving the
choice of the full sentence translation to the decoder,
we sidestep the difficulty of computing features on
target translations hypotheses. However, many mor-
phological processes (most notably, agreement) are
most best modeled using target language context. To
capture target context effects, we depend on strong
target language models. Therefore, an important
extension of our work is to explore the interaction
of our approach with more sophisticated language
models that more directly model morphology, e.g.,
the models of Bilmes and Kirchhoff (2003), or, alter-
natively, ways to incorporate target language context
in the inflection model.
We also achieve language independence by
exploiting unsupervised morphological segmen-
tations in the absence of linguistically informed
morphological analyses.
Code for replicating the experiments is available from
https://github.com/eschling/morphogen;
further details are available in (Schlinger et al, 2013).
1685
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the U. S. Army Research
Laboratory and the U. S. Army Research Office under
contract/grant number W911NF-10-1-0533. We would
like to thank Kim Spasaro for curating the Swahili devel-
opment and test sets, Yulia Tsvetkov for assistance with
Russian, and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful
comments.
References
Hassan Al-Haj and Alon Lavie. 2010. The im-
pact of Arabic morphological segmentation on broad-
coverage English-to-Arabic statistical machine trans-
lation. In Proc. of AMTA.
Waleed Ammar, Victor Chahuneau, Michael Denkowski,
Greg Hanneman, Wang Ling, Austin Matthews, Ken-
ton Murray, Nicola Segall, Yulia Tsvetkov, Alon
Lavie, and Chris Dyer. 2013. The CMU machine
translation systems at WMT 2013: Syntax, synthetic
translation options, and pseudo-references. In Proc. of
WMT.
Eleftherios Avramidis and Philipp Koehn. 2008. Enrich-
ing morphologically poor languages for statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proc. of ACL.
Jeff A. Bilmes and Katrin Kirchhoff. 2003. Factored
language models and generalized parallel backoff. In
Proc. of NAACL.
Phil Blunsom, Trevor Cohn, and Miles Osborne. 2008.
A discriminative latent variable model for statistical
machine translation. In Proc. of ACL.
Peter F. Brown, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Stephen A.
Della Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The mathe-
matics of statistical machine translation: parameter es-
timation. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):263?311.
Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne, and Philipp
Koehn. 2006. Improved statistical machine transla-
tion using paraphrases. In Proc. of NAACL.
Marine Carpuat and Dekai Wu. 2007. Improving statisti-
cal machine translation using word sense disambigua-
tion. In Proc. of EMNLP.
Mauro Cettolo, Christian Girardi, and Marcello Federico.
2012. WIT3: Web inventory of transcribed and trans-
lated talks. In Proc. of EAMT.
Yee Seng Chan, Hwee Tou Ng, and David Chiang. 2007.
Word sense disambiguation improves statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proc. of ACL.
Pi-Chuan Chang, Dan Jurafsky, and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2009. Disambiguating ?DE? for Chinese?
English machine translation. In Proc. of WMT.
Boxing Chen, Roland Kuhn, and George Foster. 2011.
Semantic smoothing and fabrication of phrase pairs for
SMT. In Proc. of IWSLT.
David Chiang. 2007. Hierarchical phrase-based transla-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 33(2):201?228.
David Chiang. 2012. Hope and fear for discrimina-
tive training of statistical translation models. JMLR,
13:1159?1187.
Jonathan H. Clark, Chris Dyer, Alon Lavie, and Noah A.
Smith. 2011. Better hypothesis testing for statistical
machine translation: Controlling for optimizer insta-
bility. In Proc. of ACL.
Ann Clifton and Anoop Sarkar. 2011. Combin-
ing morpheme-based machine translation with post-
processing morpheme prediction. In Proc. of ACL.
Chris Dyer, Adam Lopez, Juri Ganitkevitch, Johnathan
Weese, Ferhan Ture, Phil Blunsom, Hendra Setiawan,
Vladimir Eidelman, and Philip Resnik. 2010. cdec: A
decoder, alignment, and learning framework for finite-
state and context-free translation models. In Proc. of
ACL.
Ahmed El Kholy and Nizar Habash. 2012. Translate,
predict or generate: Modeling rich morphology in sta-
tistical machine translation. In Proc. of EAMT.
Alexander Fraser, Marion Weller, Aoife Cahill, and Fa-
bienne Cap. 2012. Modeling inflection and word-
formation in SMT. In Proc. of EACL.
Kevin Gimpel and Noah A. Smith. 2008. Rich source-
side context for statistical machine translation. In
Proc. of WMT.
Nizar Habash and Owen Rambow. 2005. Arabic tok-
enization, part-of-speech tagging and morphological
disambiguation in one fell swoop. In Proc. of ACL.
Nizar Habash. 2009. REMOOV: A tool for online han-
dling of out-of-vocabulary words in machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Confer-
ence on Arabic Language Resources and Tools.
Jan Hajic?, Pavel Krbec, Pavel Kve?ton?, Karel Oliva, and
Vladim??r Petkevic?. 2001. Serial combination of rules
and statistics: A case study in Czech tagging. In Proc.
of ACL.
Dilek Z. Hakkani-Tu?r, Kemal Oflazer, and Go?khan Tu?r.
2000. Statistical morphological disambiguation for
agglutinative languages. In Proc. of COLING.
Minwoo Jeong, Kristina Toutanova, Hisami Suzuki, and
Chris Quirk. 2010. A discriminative lexicon model
for complex morphology. In Proc. of AMTA.
Mark Johnson, Thomas L. Griffiths, and Sharon Goldwa-
ter. 2006. Adaptor grammars: A framework for spec-
ifying compositional nonparametric Bayesian models.
NIPS, pages 641?648.
Mark Johnson. 2008. Unsupervised word segmentation
for Sesotho using adaptor grammars. In Proc. SIG-
MORPHON.
Philipp Koehn and Hieu Hoang. 2007. Factored transla-
tion models. In Proc. of EMNLP.
1686
Adam Lopez. 2007. Hierarchical phrase-based transla-
tion with suffix arrays. In Proc. of EMNLP.
Andre? F.T. Martins, Noah A. Smith, Eric P. Xing, Pe-
dro M.Q. Aguiar, and Ma?rio A.T. Figueiredo. 2010.
Turbo parsers: Dependency parsing by approximate
variational inference. In Proc. of EMNLP.
Einat Minkov, Kristina Toutanova, and Hisami Suzuki.
2007. Generating complex morphology for machine
translation. In Proc. of ACL.
Kemal Oflazer and I?lknur Durgar El-Kahlout. 2007. Ex-
ploring different representational units in English-to-
Turkish statistical machine translation. In Proc. of
WMT.
Eva Schlinger, Victor Chahuneau, and Chris Dyer. 2013.
morphogen: Translation into morphologically rich lan-
guages with synthetic phrases. Prague Bulletin of
Mathematical Linguistics, (100).
Serge Sharoff, Mikhail Kopotev, Tomaz Erjavec, Anna
Feldman, and Dagmar Divjak. 2008. Designing and
evaluating a Russian tagset. In Proc. of LREC.
Noah A. Smith, David A. Smith, and Roy W. Tromble.
2005. Context-based morphological disambiguation
with random fields. In Proc. of EMNLP.
David Stallard, Jacob Devlin, Michael Kayser,
Yoong Keok Lee, and Regina Barzilay. 2012.
Unsupervised morphology rivals supervised morphol-
ogy for Arabic MT. In Proc. of ACL.
Michael Subotin. 2011. An exponential translation
model for target language morphology. In Proc. ACL.
Kristina Toutanova, Hisami Suzuki, and Achim Ruopp.
2008. Applying morphology generation models to
machine translation. In Proc. of ACL.
Yulia Tsvetkov, Chris Dyer, Lori Levin, and Archna Bha-
tia. 2013. Generating English determiners in phrase-
based translation with synthetic translation options. In
Proc. of WMT.
Reyyan Yeniterzi and Kemal Oflazer. 2010. Syntax-to-
morphology mapping in factored phrase-based statis-
tical machine translation from English to Turkish. In
Proc. of ACL.
1687
Proceedings of the Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 142?149,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26?27, 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
The CMU Machine Translation Systems at WMT 2014
Austin Matthews Waleed Ammar Archna Bhatia Weston Feely
Greg Hanneman Eva Schlinger Swabha Swayamdipta Yulia Tsvetkov
Alon Lavie Chris Dyer
?
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
?
Corresponding author: cdyer@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
We describe the CMU systems submitted
to the 2014 WMT shared translation task.
We participated in two language pairs,
German?English and Hindi?English. Our
innovations include: a label coarsening
scheme for syntactic tree-to-tree transla-
tion, a host of new discriminative features,
several modules to create ?synthetic trans-
lation options? that can generalize beyond
what is directly observed in the training
data, and a method of combining the out-
put of multiple word aligners to uncover
extra phrase pairs and grammar rules.
1 Introduction
The MT research group at Carnegie Mellon Uni-
versity?s Language Technologies Institute partici-
pated in two language pairs for the 2014 Workshop
on Machine Translation shared translation task:
German?English and Hindi?English. Our systems
showcase our multi-phase approach to translation,
in which synthetic translation options supple-
ment the default translation rule inventory that is
extracted from word-aligned training data.
In the German?English system, we used our
compound splitter (Dyer, 2009) to reduce data
sparsity, and we allowed the translator to back
off to translating lemmas when it detected case-
inflected OOVs. We also demonstrate our group?s
syntactic system with coarsened nonterminal types
(Hanneman and Lavie, 2011) as a contrastive
German?English submission.
In both the German?English and Hindi?English
systems, we used an array of supplemental ideas to
enhance translation quality, ranging from lemma-
tization and synthesis of inflected phrase pairs to
novel reordering and rule preference features.
2 Core System Components
The decoder infrastructure we used was cdec
(Dyer et al., 2010). For our primary systems,
all data was tokenized using cdec?s tokenization
tool. Only the constrained data resources pro-
vided for the shared task were used for training
both the translation and language models. Word
alignments were generated using both FastAlign
(Dyer et al., 2013) and GIZA++ (Och and Ney,
2003). All our language models were estimated
using KenLM (Heafield, 2011). Translation model
parameters were chosen using MIRA (Eidelman,
2012) to optimize BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002)
on a held-out development set.
Our data was filtered using qe-clean
(Denkowski et al., 2012), with a cutoff of
two standard deviations from the mean. All
data was left in fully cased form, save the first
letter of each segment, which was changed to
whichever form the first token more commonly
used throughout the data. As such, words like The
were lowercased at the beginning of segments,
while words like Obama remained capitalized.
Our primary German?English and Hindi?
English systems were Hiero-based (Chiang,
2007), while our contrastive German?English sys-
tem used cdec?s tree-to-tree SCFG formalism.
Before submitting, we ran cdec?s implementa-
tion of MBR on 500-best lists from each of our
systems. For both language pairs, we used the
Nelder?Mead method to optimize the MBR pa-
rameters. In the German?English system, we ran
MBR on 500 hypotheses, combining the output of
the Hiero and tree-to-tree systems.
The remainder of the paper will focus on our
primary innovations in the two language pairs.
142
3 Common System Improvements
A number of our techniques were used for both our
German?English and Hindi?English primary sub-
missions. These techniques each fall into one of
three categories: those that create translation rules,
those involving language models, or those that add
translation features. A comparison of these tech-
niques and their performance across the two lan-
guage pairs can be found in Section 6.
3.1 Rule-Centric Enhancements
While many of our methods of enhancing the
translation model with extra rules are language-
specific, three were shared between language
pairs.
First, we added sentence-boundary tokens <s>
and </s> to the beginning and end of each line in
the data, on both the source and target sides.
Second, we aligned all of our training data us-
ing both FastAlign and GIZA++ and simply con-
catenated two copies of the training corpus, one
aligned with each aligner, and extracted rules from
the resulting double corpus.
Third, we hand-wrote a list of rules that trans-
form numbers, dates, times, and currencies into
well-formed English equivalents, handling differ-
ences such as the month and day reversal in dates
or conversion from 24-hour time to 12-hour time.
3.2 Employed Language Models
Each of our primary systems uses a total of three
language models.
The first is a traditional 4-gram model gen-
erated by interoplating LMs built from each of
the available monolingual corpora. Interpolation
weights were calculated used the SRILM toolkit
(Stolcke, 2002) and 1000 dev sentences from the
Hindi?English system.
The second is a model trained on word clus-
ters instead of surface forms. For this we mapped
the LM vocabulary into 600 clusters based on the
algorithm of Brown et al. (1992) and then con-
structed a 7-gram LM over the resulting clusters,
allowing us to capture more context than our tra-
ditional surface-form language model.
The third is a bigram model over the source side
of each language?s respective bitext. However, at
run time this LM operates on the target-side out-
put of the translator, just like the other two. The
intuition here is that if a source-side LM likes our
output, then we are probably passing through more
than we ought to.
Both source and target surface-form LM used
modified Kneser-Ney smoothing (Kneser and Ney,
1995), while the model over Brown clusters
(Brown et al., 1992) used subtract-0.5 smoothing.
3.3 New Translation Features
In addition to the standard array of features, we
added four new indicator feature templates, lead-
ing to a total of nearly 150,000 total features.
The first set consists of target-side n-gram fea-
tures. For each bigram of Brown clusters in the
output string generated by our translator, we fire
an indicator feature. For example, if we have the
sentence, Nato will ihren Einfluss im Osten st?arken
translating as NATO intends to strengthen its influ-
ence in the East, we will fire an indicator features
NGF C367 C128=1, NGF C128 C31=1, etc.
The second set is source-language n-gram fea-
tures. Similar to the previous feature set, we fire
an indicator feature for each ngram of Brown clus-
ters in the output. Here, however, we use n = 1,
and we use the map of source language words to
Brown clusters, rather than the target language?s,
despite the fact that this is examining target lan-
guage output. The intuition here is to allow this
feature to penalize passthroughs differently de-
pending on their source language Brown cluster.
For example, passing through the German word
zeitung (?newspaper?) is probably a bad idea, but
passing through the German word Obama proba-
bly should not be punished as severely.
The third type of feature is source path features.
We can imagine translation as a two-step process
in which we first permute the source words into
some order, then translate them phrase by phrase.
This set of features examines that intermediate
string in which the source words have been per-
muted. Again, we fire an indicator feature for each
bigram in this intermediate string, this time using
surface lexical forms directly instead of first map-
ping them to Brown clusters.
Lastly, we create a new type of rule shape fea-
ture. Traditionally, rule shape features have indi-
cated, for each rule, the sequence of terminal and
non-terminal items on the right-hand side. For ex-
ample, the rule [X] ? der [X] :: the [X] might
have an indicator feature Shape TN TN, where
T represents a terminal and N represents a non-
terminal. One can also imagine lexicalizing such
rules by replacing each T with its surface form.
We believe such features would be too sparse, so
instead of replacing each terminal by its surface
form, we instead replace it with its Brown cluster,
143
creating a feature like Shape C37 N C271 N.
4 Hindi?English Specific Improvements
In addition to the enhancements common to the
two primary systems, our Hindi?English system
includes improved data cleaning of development
data, a sophisticated linguistically-informed tok-
enization scheme, a transliteration module, a syn-
thetic phrase generator that improves handling of
function words, and a synthetic phrase generator
that leverages source-side paraphrases. We will
discuss each of these five in turn.
4.1 Development Data Cleaning
Due to a scarcity of clean development data, we
augmented the 520 segments provided with 480
segments randomly drawn from the training data
to form our development set, and drew another
random 1000 segments to serve as a dev test set.
After observing large discrepencies between the
types of segments in our development data and the
well-formed news domain sentences we expected
to be tested on, we made the decision to prune our
tuning set by removing any segment that did not
appear to be a full sentence on both the Hindi and
English sides. While this reduced our tuning set
from 1000 segments back down to 572 segments,
we believe it to be the single largest contributor to
our success on the Hindi?English translation task.
4.2 Nominal Normalization
Another facet of our system was normalization of
Hindi nominals. The Hindi nominal system shows
much more morphological variation than English.
There are two genders (masculine and feminine)
and at least six noun stem endings in pronuncia-
tion and 10 in writing.
The pronominal system also is much richer than
English with many variants depending on whether
pronouns appear with case markers or other post-
positions.
Before normalizing the nouns and pronouns, we
first split these case markers / postpositions from
the nouns / pronouns to result in two words in-
stead of the original combined form. If the case
marker was n (ne), the ergative case marker in
Hindi, we deleted it as it did not have any trans-
lation in English. All the other postpositions were
left intact while splitting from and normalizing the
nouns and pronouns.
These changes in stem forms contribute to the
sparsity in data; hence, to reduce this sparsity, we
construct for each input segment an input lattice
that allows the decoder to use the split or original
forms of all nouns or pronouns, as well as allowing
it to keep or delete the case marker ne.
4.3 Transliteration
We used the 12,000 Hindi?English transliteration
pairs from the ACL 2012 NEWS workshop on
transliteration to train a linear-chained CRF tag-
ger
1
that labels each character in the Hindi token
with a sequence of zero or more English characters
(Ammar et al., 2012). At decoding, unseen Hindi
tokens are fed to the transliterator, which produces
the 100 most probable transliterations. We add
a synthetic translation option for each candidate
transliteration.
In addition to this sophisticated transliteration
scheme, we also employ a rule-based translitera-
tor that specifically targets acronyms. In Hindi,
many acronyms are spelled out phonetically, such
as NSA being rendered as enese (en.es.e). We
detected such words in the input segments and
generated synthetic translation options both with
and without periods (e.g. N.S.A. and NSA).
4.4 Synthetic Handling of Function Words
In different language pairs, individual source
words may have many different possible trans-
lations, e.g., when the target language word has
many different morphological inflections or is sur-
rounded by different function words that have no
direct counterpart in the source language. There-
fore, when very large quantities of parallel data
are not available, we can expect our phrasal inven-
tory to be incomplete. Synthetic translation option
generation seeks to fill these gaps using secondary
generation processes that exploit existing phrase
pairs to produce plausible phrase translation alter-
natives that are not directly extractable from the
training data (Tsvetkov et al., 2013; Chahuneau et
al., 2013).
To generate synthetic phrases, we first remove
function words from the source and target sides
of existing non-gappy phrase pairs. We manually
constructed English and Hindi lists of common
function words, including articles, auxiliaries, pro-
nouns, and adpositions. We then employ the
SRILM hidden-ngram utility (Stolcke, 2002) to re-
store missing function words according to an n-
gram language model probability, and add the re-
sulting synthetic phrases to our phrase table.
1
https://github.com/wammar/transliterator
144
4.5 Paraphrase-Based Synthetic Phrases
We used a graph-based method to obtain transla-
tion distributions for source phrases that are not
present in the phrase table extracted from the par-
allel corpus. Monolingual data is used to construct
separate similarity graphs over phrases (word se-
quences or n-grams), using distributional features
extracted from the corpora. The source similar-
ity graph consists of phrase nodes representing se-
quences of words in the source language. In our
instance, we restricted the phrases to bigrams, and
the bigrams come from both the phrase table (the
labeled phrases) and from the evaluation set but
not present in the phrase table (unlabeled phrases).
The labels for these source phrases, namely the
target phrasal inventory, can also be represented
in a graph form, where the distributional features
can also be computed from the target monolingual
data. Translation information is then propagated
from the labeled phrases to the unlabeled phrases
in the source graph, proportional to how similar
the phrases are to each other on the source side,
as well as how similar the translation candidates
are to each other on the target side. The newly
acquired translation distributions for the unlabeled
phrases are written out to a secondary phrase table.
For more information, see Saluja et al. (2014).
5 German?English Specific
Improvements
Our German?English system also had its own
suite of tricks, including the use of ?pseudo-
references? and special handling of morphologi-
cally inflected OOVs.
5.1 Pseudo-References
The development sets provided have only a sin-
gle reference, which is known to be sub-optimal
for tuning of discriminative models. As such,
we use the output of one or more of last year?s
top performing systems as pseudo-references dur-
ing tuning. We experimented with using just one
pseudo-reference, taken from last year?s Spanish?
English winner (Durrani et al., 2013), and with
using four pseudo-references, including the out-
put of last year?s winning Czech?English, French?
English, and Russian?English systems (Pino et al.,
2013).
5.2 Morphological OOVs
Examination of the output of our baseline sys-
tems lead us to conclude that the majority of our
system?s OOVs were due to morphologically in-
flected nouns in the input data, particularly those
in genitive case. As such, for each OOV in the
input, we attempt to remove the German genitive
case marker -s or -es. We then run the resulting
form f through our baseline translator to obtain a
translation e of the lemma. Finally, we add two
translation rules to our translation table: f ? e,
and f ? e?s.
6 Results
As we added each feature to our systems, we
first ran a one-off experiment comparing our base-
line system with and without each individual fea-
ture. The results of that set of experiments are
shown in Table 1 for Hindi?English and Table 2
for German?English. Features marked with a *
were not included in our final system submission.
The most surprising result is the strength of
our Hindi?English baseline system. With no extra
bells or whistles, it is already half a BLEU point
ahead of the second best system submitted to this
shared task. We believe this is due to our filter-
ing of the tuning set, which allowed our system to
generate translations more similar in length to the
final test set.
Another interesting result is that only one fea-
ture set, namely our rule shape features based on
Brown clusters, helped on the test set in both lan-
guage pairs. No feature hurt the BLEU score on
the test set in both language pairs, meaning the
majority of features helped in one language and
hurt in the other.
If we compare results on the tuning sets, how-
ever, some clearer patterns arise. Brown cluster
language models, n-gram features, and our new
rule shape features all helped.
Furthermore, there were a few features, such as
the Brown cluster language model and tuning to
Meteor (Denkowski and Lavie, 2011), that helped
substantially in one language pair while just barely
hurting the other. In particular, the fact that tuning
to Meteor instead of BLEU can actually help both
BLEU and Meteor scores was rather unexpected.
7 German?English Syntax System
In addition to our primary German?English sys-
tem, we also submitted a contrastive German?
English system showcasing our group?s tree-to-
tree syntax-based translation formalism.
145
Test (2014) Dev Test (2012)
System BLEU Met TER BLEU Met TER
Baseline 15.7 25.3 68.0 11.4 22.9 70.3
*Meteor Tuning 15.2 25.8 71.3 12.8 23.7 71.3
Sentence Boundaries 15.2 25.4 69.1 12.1 23.4 70.0
Double Aligners 16.1 25.5 66.6 11.9 23.1 69.2
Manual Number Rules 15.7 25.4 68.5 11.6 23.0 70.3
Brown Cluster LM 15.6 25.1 67.3 11.5 22.7 69.8
*Source LM 14.2 25.1 72.1 11.3 23.0 72.3
N-Gram Features 15.6 25.2 67.9 12.2 23.2 69.2
Src N-Gram Features 15.3 25.2 68.9 12.0 23.4 69.5
Src Path Features 15.8 25.6 68.8 11.9 23.3 70.4
Brown Rule Shape 15.9 25.4 67.2 11.8 22.9 69.6
Lattice Input 15.2 25.8 71.3 11.4 22.9 70.3
CRF Transliterator 15.7 25.7 69.4 12.1 23.5 70.1
Acronym Translit. 15.8 25.8 68.8 12.4 23.4 70.2
Synth. Func. Words 15.7 25.3 67.8 11.4 22.8 70.4
Source Paraphrases 15.6 25.2 67.7 11.5 22.7 69.9
Final Submission 16.7
Table 1: BLEU, Meteor, and TER results for one-off experiments conducted on the primary Hiero Hindi?
English system. Each line is the baseline plus that one feature, non-cumulatively. Lines marked with a *
were not included in our final WMT submission.
Test (2014) Dev Test (2012)
System BLEU Met TER BLEU Met TER
Baseline 25.3 30.4 52.6 26.2 31.3 53.6
*Meteor Tuning 26.2 31.3 53.1 26.9 32.2 54.4
Sentence Boundaries 25.4 30.5 52.2 26.1 31.4 53.3
Double Aligners 25.2 30.4 52.5 26.0 31.3 53.6
Manual Number Rules 25.3 30.3 52.5 26.1 31.4 53.4
Brown Cluster LM 26.4 31.0 51.9 27.0 31.8 53.2
*Source LM 25.8 30.6 52.4 26.4 31.5 53.4
N-Gram Features 25.4 30.4 52.6 26.7 31.6 53.0
Src N-Gram Features 25.3 30.5 52.5 26.2 31.5 53.4
Src Path Features 25.0 30.1 52.6 26.0 31.2 53.3
Brown Rule Shape 25.5 30.5 52.4 26.3 31.5 53.2
One Pseudo Ref 25.5 30.4 52.6 34.4 32.7 49.3
*Four Psuedo Refs 22.6 29.2 52.6 49.8 35.0 46.1
OOV Morphology 25.5 30.5 52.4 26.3 31.5 53.3
Final Submission 27.1
Table 2: BLEU, Meteor, and TER results for one-off experiments conducted on the primary Hiero
German?English system. Each line is the baseline plus that one feature, non-cumulatively.
Dev (2013) Dev Test (2012)
System BLEU Met TER BLEU Met TER
Baseline 20.98 29.81 58.47 18.65 28.72 61.80
+ Label coarsening 23.07 30.71 56.46 20.43 29.34 60.16
+ Meteor tuning 23.48 30.90 56.18 20.96 29.60 59.87
+ Brown LM + Lattice + Synthetic 24.46 31.41 56.66 21.50 30.28 60.51
+ Span limit 15 24.20 31.25 55.48 21.75 29.97 59.18
+ Pseudo-references 24.55 31.30 56.22 22.10 30.12 59.73
Table 3: BLEU, Meteor, and TER results for experiments conducted in the tree-to-tree German?English
system. The system in the bottom line was submitted to WMT as a contrastive entry.
7.1 Basic System Construction
Since all training data for the tree-to-tree system
must be parsed in addition to being word-aligned,
we prepared separate copies of the training, tun-
ing, and testing data that are more suitable for in-
put into constituency parsing. Importantly, we left
the data in its original mixed-case format. We used
the Stanford tokenizer to replicate Penn Treebank
tokenization on the English side. On the German
side, we developed new in-house normalization
and tokenization script.
We filtered tokenized training sentences by sen-
146
tence length, token length, and sentence length ra-
tio. The final corpus for parsing and word align-
ment contained 3,897,805 lines, or approximately
86 percent of the total training resources released
under the WMT constrained track. Word align-
ment was carried out using FastAlign (Dyer et
al., 2013), while for parsing we used the Berke-
ley parser (Petrov et al., 2006).
Given the parsed and aligned corpus, we ex-
tracted synchronous context-free grammar rules
using the method of Hanneman et al. (2011).
In addition to aligning subtrees that natively ex-
ist in the input trees, our grammar extractor also
introduces ?virtual nodes.? These are new and
possibly overlapping constituents that subdivide
regions of flat structure by combining two adja-
cent sibling nodes into a single nonterminal for
the purposes of rule extraction. Virtual nodes
are similar in spirit to the ?A+B? extended cate-
gories of SAMT (Zollmann and Venugopal, 2006),
and their nonterminal labels are constructed in the
same way, but with the added restriction that they
do not violate any existing syntactic structure in
the parse tree.
7.2 Improvements
Nonterminals in our tree-to-tree grammar are
made up of pairs of symbols: one from the source
side and one from the target side. With virtual
nodes included, this led to an initial German?
English grammar containing 153,219 distinct non-
terminals ? a far larger set than is used in SAMT,
tree-to-string, string-to-tree, or Hiero systems. To
combat the sparsity introduce by this large nonter-
minal set, we coarsened the label set with an ag-
glomerative label-clustering technique(Hanneman
and Lavie, 2011; Hanneman and Lavie, 2013).
The stopping point was somewhat arbitrarily cho-
sen to be a grammar of 916 labels.
Table 3 shows a significant improvement in
translation quality due to coarsening the label set:
approximately +1.8 BLEU, +0.6 Meteor, and ?1.6
TER on our dev test set, newtest2012.
2
In the MERT runs, however, we noticed that the
length of the MT output can be highly variable,
ranging on the tuning set from a low of 92.8% of
the reference length to a high of 99.1% in another.
We were able to limit this instability by tuning to
Meteor instead of BLEU. Aside from a modest
2
We follow the advice of Clark et al. (2011) and eval-
uate our tree-to-tree experiments over multiple independent
MERT runs. All scores in Table 3 are averages of two or
three runs, depending on the row.
score improvement, we note that the variability in
length ratio is reduced from 6.3% to 2.8%.
Specific difficulties of the German?English lan-
guage pair led to three additional system compo-
nents to try to combat them.
First, we introduced a second language model
trained on Brown clusters instead of surface forms.
Next we attempted to overcome the sparsity
of German input by making use of cdec?s lattice
input functionality introduce compound-split ver-
sions of dev and test sentences.
Finally, we attempted to improve our grammar?s
coverage of new German words by introducing
synthetic rules for otherwise out-of-vocabulary
items. Each token in a test sentence that the gram-
mar cannot translate generates a synthetic rule al-
lowing the token to be translated as itself. The left-
hand-side label is decided heuristically: a (coars-
ened) ?noun? label if the German OOV starts with
a capital letter, a ?number? label if the OOV con-
tains only digits and select punctuation characters,
an ?adjective? label if the OOV otherwise starts
with a lowercase letter or a number, or a ?symbol?
label for anything left over.
The effect of all three of these improvements
combined is shown in the fourth row of Table 3.
By default our previous experiments were per-
formed with a span limit of 12 tokens. Increasing
this limit to 15 has a mixed effect on metric scores,
as shown in the fifth row of Table 3. Since two out
of three metrics report improvement, we left the
longer span limit in effect in our final system.
Our final improvement was to augment our tun-
ing set with the same set of pseudo-references
as our Hiero systems. We found that using one
pseudo-reference versus four pseudo-references
had negligible effect on the (single-reference) tun-
ing scores, but four produced a better improve-
ment on the test set.
The best MERT run of this final system (bottom
line of Table 3) was submitted to the WMT 2014
evaluation as a contrastive entry.
Acknowledgments
We sincerely thank the organizers of the work-
shop for their hard work, year after year, and the
reviewers for their careful reading of the submit-
ted draft of this paper. This research work was
supported in part by the U. S. Army Research
Laboratory and the U. S. Army Research Office
under contract/grant number W911NF-10-1-0533,
by the National Science Foundation under grant
147
IIS-0915327, by a NPRP grant (NPRP 09-1140-
1-177) from the Qatar National Research Fund (a
member of the Qatar Foundation), and by com-
puting resources provided by the NSF-sponsored
XSEDE program under grant TG-CCR110017.
The statements made herein are solely the respon-
sibility of the authors.
References
Waleed Ammar, Chris Dyer, and Noah A. Smith. 2012.
Transliteration by sequence labeling with lattice en-
codings and reranking. In NEWS workshop at ACL.
Peter F Brown, Peter V Desouza, Robert L Mercer,
Vincent J Della Pietra, and Jenifer C Lai. 1992.
Class-based n-gram models of natural language.
Computational linguistics, 18(4):467?479.
Victor Chahuneau, Eva Schlinger, Noah A. Smith, and
Chris Dyer. 2013. Translating into morphologically
rich languages with synthetic phrases. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP.
David Chiang. 2007. Hierarchical phrase-based trans-
lation. Computational Linguistics, 33(2):201?228.
Jonathan H. Clark, Chris Dyer, Alon Lavie, and
Noah A. Smith. 2011. Better hypothesis testing
for statistical machine translation: Crontrolling for
optimizer instability. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Short Papers, pages 176?181, Portland,
Oregon, USA, June.
Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2011. Meteor
1.3: Automatic metric for reliable optimization and
evaluation of machine translation systems. In Pro-
ceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 85?91, Edinburgh, Scot-
land, UK, July.
Michael Denkowski, Greg Hanneman, and Alon Lavie.
2012. The cmu-avenue french-english translation
system. In Proceedings of the NAACL 2012 Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation.
Nadir Durrani, Barry Haddow, Kenneth Heafield, and
Philipp Koehn. 2013. Edinburgh?s machine transla-
tion systems for european language pairs.
Chris Dyer, Adam Lopez, Juri Ganitkevitch, Johnathan
Weese, Ferhan Ture, Phil Blunsom, Hendra Seti-
awan, Vladimir Eidelman, and Philip Resnik. 2010.
cdec: A decoder, alignment, and learning framework
for finite-state and context-free translation models.
In Proc. of ACL.
Chris Dyer, Victor Chahuneau, and Noah A. Smith.
2013. A simple, fast, and effective reparameteriza-
tion of IBM Model 2. In Proc. of NAACL.
Chris Dyer. 2009. Using a maximum entropy model
to build segmentation lattices for mt. In Proceed-
ings of Human Language Technologies: The 2009
Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 406?414. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Vladimir Eidelman. 2012. Optimization strategies for
online large-margin learning in machine translation.
In Proceedings of the Seventh Workshop on Statisti-
cal Machine Translation.
Greg Hanneman and Alon Lavie. 2011. Automatic
category label coarsening for syntax-based machine
translation. In Proceedings of SSST-5: Fifth Work-
shop on Syntax, Semantics, and Structure in Statis-
tical Translation, pages 98?106, Portland, Oregon,
USA, June.
Greg Hanneman and Alon Lavie. 2013. Improving
syntax-augmented machine translation by coarsen-
ing the label set. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT
2013, pages 288?297, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, June.
Greg Hanneman, Michelle Burroughs, and Alon Lavie.
2011. A general-purpose rule extractor for SCFG-
based machine translation. In Proceedings of SSST-
5: Fifth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics, and Struc-
ture in Statistical Translation, pages 135?144, Port-
land, Oregon, USA, June.
Kenneth Heafield. 2011. KenLM: Faster and smaller
language model queries. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, Edin-
burgh, Scotland, UK, July.
R. Kneser and H. Ney. 1995. Improved backing-off
for m-gram language modeling. In Proceedings of
IEEE Internation Conference on Acoustics, Speech,
and Signal Processing, pages 181?184.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Computational linguistics, 29(1):19?51.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: A method for automatic
evalution of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 311?318, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA, July.
Slav Petrov, Leon Barrett, Romain Thibaux, and Dan
Klein. 2006. Learning accurate, compact, and
interpretable tree annotation. In Proceedings of
the 21st International Conference on Computational
Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 433?
440. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Juan Pino, Aurelien Waite, Tong Xiao, Adri`a de Gis-
pert, Federico Flego, and William Byrne. 2013.
The university of cambridge russian-english system
at wmt13.
148
Avneesh Saluja, Hany Hassan, Kristina Toutanova, and
Chris Quirk. 2014. Graph-based semi-supervised
learning of translation models from monolingual
data. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL), Baltimore, Maryland, June.
Andreas Stolcke. 2002. Srilm-an extensible language
modeling toolkit. In INTERSPEECH.
Yulia Tsvetkov, Chris Dyer, Lori Levin, and Archna
Batia. 2013. Generating English determiners in
phrase-based translation with synthetic translation
options. In Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation.
Andreas Zollmann and Ashish Venugopal. 2006. Syn-
tax augmented machine translation via chart parsing.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 138?141, New York, New
York, USA, June.
149
