Building a training corpus for word sense disambiguation
in English-to-Vietnamese Machine Translation
Dien Dinh
Faculty of IT, VNU-HCMC, Vietnam
 ddien@saigonnet.vn
Abstract
The most difficult task in machine translation is the elimination of  ambiguity in human
languages. A certain word in English as well as Vietnamese often has different  meanings
which depend on their syntactical position in the sentence and the actual context. In order to
solve this ambiguation, formerly, people used to resort to many hand-coded rules.
Nevertheless, manually building these rules  is a time-consuming and exhausting task. So,
we suggest an automatic method to solve the above-mentioned problem by using
semantically tagged corpus. In this paper, we mainly present building a semantically tagged
bilingual corpus to word sense disambiguation (WSD) in English texts. To assign semantic
tags, we have taken advantage of  bilingual texts via word alignments with semantic class
names of LLOCE (Longman Lexicon of Contemporary English). So far, we have built
5,000,000-word bilingual corpus in which 1,000,000 words have been semantically
annotated with the accuracy of 70%. We have evaluated our result of semantic tagging by
comparing with SEMCOR on SUSANNE part of our corpus. This semantically annotated
corpus will be used to extract disambiguation rules automatically by TBL (Transformation-
based Learning) method. These rules will be manually revised  before being applied to the
WSD module in the English-to-Vietnamese Translation (EVT) system.
1 Introduction
Nowadays more and more people are interested
in word sense disambiguation (WSD). Bilingual
corpora have been exploited in order to train
such WSD system, finding out the rules that can
be applied in Machine Translation (Zinovjeva,
2000). The statistical method based on bilingual
corpus is used to find and link words in bitexts
for English-French, English-Chinese, English-
Japanese, etc. (Isahara, Melamed, 2000).
Regarding the English-Vietnamese bilingual
corpus, however, so far, we haven't seen any
works yet. In this paper, we present building an
English-Vietnamese bilingual corpus with
semantic tags. This semantically-annotated
coprus will be used to train the WSD module for
our EVT in the future. In this paper, we don't
concentrate on word alignment or WSD, but we
concentrate on assigning semantic tags to
English and Vietnamese words via their class-
based word-alignments (Dien Dinh, 2002).
Thanks to aligned word-pairs along with their
corresponding semantic classes in LLOCE, we
can find the correct sense of a word and assign it
to an appropriate semantic tag. That is, we take
advantage of manually correct translation of
English and Vietnamese words to disambiguate
word senses in semantic tagging. The rest of this
paper consists of 4 following sections:
- Section 2: Collecting English-Vietnamese
bilingual texts.
- Section 3:  Normalizing English-
Vietnamese bilingual corpus.
- Section 4:  Annotating bilingual corpus:
assigning semantic tags to word-pairs in
corpus and applying this semantically-
annotated corpus to train the WSD module.
- Section 5: Conclusion and future
improvements.
2 Collecting  English-Vietnamese
bilingual texts
When chosing this bilingual approach, we have
met many difficulties. Firstly, due to no official
English-Vietnamese bilingual corpus available
up to now, we have had to build them by
ourselves by collecting English-Vietnamese
bilingual texts from selected sources. Secondly,
as most of these sources are not electronic
forms, we must convert them into electronic
form. During the process of electronic
conversion, we have met another drawback.
That is: there is no effective OCR (Optical
Character Recognition) software available for
Vietnamese characters. Compared with English
OCR softwares, Vietnamese OCR one is lower
just because Vietnamese characters have  tone
marks (acute, breve, question, tilde, dot below)
and diacritics (hook, caret,..). So, we must
manually input most of Vietnamese texts (low-
quality hardcopies). Only OCR of high-quality
hardcopies has been used and manually revised.
During collecting English-Vietnamese bilingual
texts (figure 1), we choose only following
materials:
- Science or techniques materials.
- Conventional examples in dictionaries.
- Bilingual texts that their translations are
exact (translated by human translator and
published by reputable publishers) and not
too diversified (no "one-to-one"
translation).
So far, we have collected  a 5,000,000-word
corpus containing 400,000 sentences (most of
them are texts in science and conventional
fields).
Table 1. Collection of bilingual texts
No Sources Number of
English
words
Number of
Vietnamese
?words? (2)
1 English-VN
Dictionaries
600,344 1018,657
2 VN-English
Dictionaries
427,397 691,096
5 LLOCE 305,975 402,086
4 SUSANNE(1) 128,000 181,781
6 Technical
TextBooks
226,953 297,920
7 Children?s
Encyclopedia
52,836 72,294
8 Other books 267,920 341,170
Total 2,009,425 3,005,004
Legend:
(1) SUSANNE (Surface and Underlying Structural
ANalyses of Naturalistic English) is constructed
by Geoffrey Sampson (1995) at Sussex
University, UK. Vietnamese translation is
performed by English teacher of VNU-HCMC.
(2) Vietnamese "word" is a special linguistic unit in
Vietnamese language only, which is often called
"tie?ng". This lexical unit is lower than traditional
words but higher than traditional morphemes.
Fig. 1. An example collected from English-
Vietnamese dictionary
3 Normalizing  English-
Vietnamese bilingual corpus
However, after the collection, we must convert
them into unified forms (normalization) by
aligning sentences as follows.
3.1 Sentence-alignment of bilingual
corpus
During inputting this bilingual corpus, we have
aligned sentences manually under the following
format:
*D02:01323: The announcement of the royal
birth was broadcast to the nation.
+D02:01323: L??i loan ba?o s?? ra ???i cu?a ???a
con hoa?ng to?c ?a? ????c truye?n thanh tre?n toa?n
quo?c.
*D02:01324: Announcements of births,
marriages and deaths appear in some
newspapers.
+D02:01324: Nh??ng tho?ng ba?o ve? s?? ra ???i,
c???i ho?i, tang che? xua?t hie?n tre?n mo?t va?i t??
ba?o.
In which, first characters are reference numbers
indicating its sources and the position of
sentence in texts.
Because most of our bilingual corpus are
manually typed, we haven't used automatic
sentential alignment. Automatic sentential
alignment (Gale and Church, 1991) will be
necessary if we have already had online
bilingual texts.
3.2 Spelling Checker of bilingual corpus
After aligning sentences, we check the spell of
English words and Vietnamese words
automatically. Here, we have met another
drawback in processing the Vietnamese word
segmentation because Vietnamese words
(similar to Chinese words) are not delimited by
spaces (Dien Dinh, 2001). However, our
spelling checker is able to detect non-existent
words in English or Vietnamese only. So, we
must review this corpus manually. In fact,
Vietnamese ?word? here is only ?tie?ng?, which
is equivalent to Vietnamese ?spelling word? or
?morpheme? (due to features of isolated
language typology).
4 Annotating bilingual corpus
The main section in this paper is to annotate the
semantic labels. To carry out this task, we have
taken advantage of classification of semantic
classes in LLOCE. We considered these class
names as semantic tags and assign them to
English words in source sentences. In this
section, we concentrate on annotating  semantic
tags via class-based word alignment in English-
Vietnamese bilingual corpus.
There are many approaches to word
alignment in biligual corpora such as: statistics-
based (Brown, 1993), patern-based mapping
(Melamed I.D. 2000), class-based (Sue Ker J.
and Jason Chang S. 1997), etc.  Because our
main focus is semantical tagging, we have
chosen the class-based approach to word
alignment. This approach was firstly suggested
by Sue J.Ker and Jason S. Chang (1997) in word
alignment of English-Chinese bilingual corpus.
However, instead of using LDOCE (Longman
Dictionary Of Contemporary English) for
English and CILIN for Chinese, we use LLOCE
enhanced by Synsets of WordNet for both
English and Vietnamese. Thank to this enhanced
LLOCE (40,000 entries), our class dictionary
enjoys more coverage than the original LLOCE
(only 16,000 entries).
4.1 Classes in LLOCE
According to a report of EAGLES (1998),
LLOCE is a small size learner style dictionary
largely derived from LDOCE and organized
along semantic principles. A quantitative profile
of the information provided is given in table 2
below.
Table 2. Classes in LLOCE
Number of entries 16,000
Number of senses 25,000
Major codes 14
Group codes 127
Semantic fields
Set codes 2441
Grammar codes same as LDOCE
Selectional
restrictions
same as LDOCE
Domain & register
Labels
same as LDOCE
Semantic classification in LLOCE is articulated
in 3 tiers of increasingly specific concepts
represented as major, group and set codes, e.g.
<MAJOR: A> Life and living things
<GROUP: A50-61> Animals/Mammals
<SET: A53> The cat and similar animals: cat,
leopard, lion, tiger,...
Each entry is associated with a set code, e.g.
<SET: A53> nouns The cat and similar animals
Relations of semantic similarity between codes
not expressed hierarchically are cross-
referenced.
There are 14 major codes, 127 group codes and
2441 set codes. The list of major codes below
provides a general idea of the semantic areas
covered:
1. <A> Life and living things
2. <B> The body, its functions and welfare
3. <C> People and the family
4. <D> Buildings, houses, the home, clothes,
belongings, and personal care
5. <E> Food, drink, and farming
6. <F> Feelings, emotions, attitudes, and
sensations
7. <G> Thought and communication, language
and grammar
8. <H> Substances, materials, objects, and
equipment
9. <I> Arts and crafts, sciences and
technology, industry and education
10. <J> Numbers, measurement, money, and
commerce
11. <K> Entertainment, sports, and games
12. <L> Space and time
13. <M> Movement, location, travel, and
transport
14. <N> General and abstract terms.
4.2 Class-based word-alignment
We can see clearly that computers cannot
understand human dictionary, it only can
recognize machine dictionary (called MRD),
leading to a limitation in vocabulary as well as
ambiguity in semantics when we align words
relying on dictionary. So class-based alignment
is a solution supplementing the in-context
translations concept.
In order to get a good result when using
class-based algorithm, words in both English
and Vietnamese have to be classified based on
their senses (Resnik, 1999). And the ways we
use to classify them should be as identical as
possible. So we have chosen words in its classes
corresponding to those in LLOCE. Vietnamese
word-classes are named after the available
names of English ones. These seed lexicons
must have large coverages. So after building
these lexicons, we use some more reliable
thesauri to enrich them.
4.2.1 Vietnamese word-class lexicon
construction
For the sake of convenience, we call Vietnamese
word-class lexicon ?CVDic?. Words in this
lexicon are classified into many groups. Each
group has a unique name called class-code. If
knowing one class-code, we can easily know the
number of words of that word-class and even
what these words are.
Step 1:, translations of one English word in
LLOCE are sequentially inserted in turn to the
corresponding class of CVDic.
Consider ew = English word
vw = Vietnamese word
EC = English class-code
VC = Vietnamese class-code
When looking ew up in LLOCE, we obtain its
synonymous translations : vw1, vw2, vw3, ?
Then vw1, vw2, vw3 ? are added to CVDic as :
VC vw1, vw2, vw3 ?
As a result, each word class of CVDic includes
at least one translation word. Normally, the
number of synonyms in Vietnamese are very
large because the richness in the way of
translation is one of the characteristics of
Vietnamese.
Step 2 :, we increase the coverage of the CVDic
by using the English Vietnamese lexicon. Senses
of one word of this English-Vietnamese lexicon
are organised in synonym groups. For each word
in the right hand side, we find if it appears in
some word-classes of the CVDic, then adding
the whole group of VEDic to that class of
CVDic.
We consider VG as a Vietnamese synonym
group of EVDic :
VGi = { a1,a2, ..., an } (i>0, n>0)
In the Vietnamese-class lexicon, we have :
word-class Cj  includes word set   VCj = { b1, b2,
..., bm } (j>0,m>0).
Then if (?bk ? VCj, 1?k?m ? bk ? al ? VGi,
1?l?n) the class Cj ? VCDic will contain the
words of VGi ? VCj.
4.2.2 Using WordNet to add synonyms to
English word-class lexicon
As you can see, Wordnet (Miller, 1996) is an
on-line lexical reference system whose design is
inspired by current psycholinguistic theories of
human lexical memory. English nouns, verbs,
and adjectives are organized into synonym sets.
We take advantages of this valuable resource to
add more words to word classes in the English
word-class lexicon, CEDic.
In WordNet,  English words are grouped in
Synsets (SN1,SN2,?), this classification model
is much more detailed than the one in LLOCE.
Therefore, if any two Synsets in these Synsets
contain two words which belong to the same
word-class, we add the words of the intersection
of these two Synsets to that word-class. That
means:
ECewSNSNew
ECewECewSNewSNew ji
?????
?????
),(
,|,
21
2121
4.3 Word alignment algorithm
Before describing this algorithm briefly, we
have following conventions:
S stands for English sentence and T stands for
Vietnamese one. We have sentence pair
translated by each other is (S,T), s is the word in
S, t is the word in T which is translated by s in S
in context. DTs is the set of dictionary meanings
for s entry, each meaning is represented by d.
WS = { s  }, set of English real words and idioms
presented in S.
WT = { t | t ?T ? t ? VD }, set of Vietnamese
possible words presented in T.
where :  VD is the Vietnamese Dictionary
containing Vietnamese possible words and
phrases.
The problem is how computers can recognise
which t in T will be aligned with which s in S.
Relying on WT, we can solve the case resulting
in the wrong definitions of words in Vietnamese
sentences when we only carry out word segment
relying on VD. Our algorithm is in conformity
with the following steps.
4.3.1 Dictionary-based word alignment
We mainly calculate the similarity on morpheme
between each word d in DTs with all t in WT
based on formula calculating Dice coefficient
(Dice, 1945) as follows:
where: | d | and | t | : the number of morphemes
in d and in t.
| d ? t | : the number of morphemes in
the intersection of d and t.
Next, for each word pair (s, t) obtained from
Descartes product (WS x WT), we calculate the
value of DTSim(s, t) presenting the likelihood of
a connection as follows :
Examining a sample on following sentence pair:
S =  ?The old man goes very fast?
T =  ?O?ng cu? ?i qua? nhanh?
We will have:
WS = { the, old, man, go, very, fast }
WT = { o?ng, o?ng cu?, cu?, ?i, nhanh, qua? }
Suppose that we are examining on ?man?,
DT(man) = { ng???i, ?a?n o?ng, nam nhi }
So, we have:
DTSim(man, o?ng) = max{ Sim(ng???i, o?ng),
Sim (?a?n o?ng, o?ng), Sim(nam nhi, o?ng) }=
max{(2x0)/(1+1),(2x1)/(2+1),(2x0)/(2+1)}
= 0.67
DTSim(man, o?ng cu?) = max{ Sim(ng???i,o?ng
cu?), Sim(?a?n o?ng,o?ng cu?), Sim(nam nhi, o?ng
cu?)}=max{(2x0)/(1+2),(2x1)/(2+2),(2x0)/(2+2)}
=0.5
Then, we choose candidate translation pairs of
greatest likelihood of connection.
4.3.2 Calculating the correlation between
two classes of two languages
The correlation ratio of class X and class Y can
be measured using the Dice coefficient as
follows:
Where |X|= the total number of the words in X,
         |Y|= the total number of the words in Y,
From(a,Y) =1,if  ,),)(( ALLCONNyaYy ???
                = 0, otherwise
To(X,b)= 1,   if  ,),)(( ALLCONNbxXx ???
= 0, otherwise,
ALLCONN : a list of initial connections
obtained by running above dictionary-based
word alignment over the bilingual corpus.
4.3.3 Estimating the  likelihood of candidate
translation pairs
A coefficient, presented by Brown (1993)
establishing each connection is a probabilistic
value Pr(s,t), showing translated probability of
each pair  (s,t) in (S,T), calculated by product of
dictionary translated probability, t(s | t), and
dislocated probability of words in sentences, d (i
| j, l, m). However Sue J. Ker and Jason S.
Chang did not agree with it completely. In their
opinion, it is very difficult to estimate t(s, t) and
d(i, j) exactly for all values of s, t, i, j in the
formula:
We have the same opinion with them. We can
create functions based on dictionary, word
concept and position of words in sentences to
limit cases to be examined and computed.
The similar concept of word pair (s, t)  function:
Then, combining with DTSim(s, t), we have
four value of t(s, t). We have to combine with
DTSim(s, t) because we are partially basing on
dictionary. Besides, we can solve the case that
there are many words belonging to the same
class in sentences.
DTSim(s, t) = max Sim(d, t)
||||
),(),(
),(
YX
bXToYaFrom
YXClassSim Xa Yb+
+
=
? ?
? ?
Pr(s, t) = t(s, t) x d(i, j)
ConceptSim(s,t) = maxClassSim(X,Y)
    s?X,t?Y
(2)
(4)
(5)
(3)
2 x | d ? t |
Sim(d, t) =    
  | d | + | t |
(1)
Table 3. Constants in word alignment
DTSim(s, t) ConceptSim(s, t)
a) t1 ? h1 ? h2
b) t2 ? h1 < h2
c) t3 < h1 ? h2
d) t4 < h1 < h2
Where h1 and h2 are thresholds chosen via
experimental results.
4.4 Result of sense tagging for corpus
Table 6. Result of sense tagged corpus
Jet planes fly about nine miles high.   
Ca?c phi c? pha?n l??c bay cao ch??ng ch?n da?m.  
i 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
S Jet planes fly about nine miles high
T
pha?n
l??c
ca?c phi
c? bay ch??ng ch?n da?m cao
j 2 1 3 4 5 6 4
M181 M180 M28 J4 J68 N305
Because we have made use class-based word
alignment as described above, after aligning
words in bilingual corpus, we determine the
semantic class of each word. For example:
according to classification of LLOCE, the
word ?letter? has 2 meanings, one is
?message? (if it belongs to class G155) and
one is ?alphabet? (if it belongs to class G148).
Table 4. Result of sense tagging for ?letter?
i 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
S I write a letter to my friend
T To?i vie?t mo?t b??c
th?
cho cu?a
to?i
ba?n
j 0 1 2 3 5 7 6
G
280
G
190
G
155
G
281
C
40
Similarly, the word ?bank? has 3
meanings, one is ?money? (if it belongs to
class J104), one is ?river? (if it belongs to class
L99) and one is ?line? (if it belongs to J41
class). After aligning words, we have semantic
tags  as follows:
Table 5. Result of word alignment for ?bank?
i 0 1 2 3
S I enter the bank
T To?i ?i va?o nha? ba?ng
j 0 1 2 3
Class G280 M5 J104
In this case, ?bank? belongs to J104 class,
that is the meaning of  ?bank?  is ?money?.
4.5 Evaluation of sense tagging for
corpus
To evaluate the accuracy of our sense
tagging in our corpus, we compare our result
with SEMCOR (Shari Landes et. al., 1999) on
SUSANNE (Geoffrey Sampson, 1995) part
only. We have done manual comparison
because there are differences between semantic
tags of LLOCE and SEMCOR. The result is:
70% of annotated words are assigned correct
sense tags.
4.6 Applying sense tagged corpus for
WSD
After annotating the bilingual corpus (mainly
English texts), we will apply TBL method of
Eric Brill (1993) to extract disambiguation
rules based on POS, syntactic and semantics
information around the polysemous
(ambiguous) words.
Firstly, we proceed the initially tagging for
all words (except stopwords) with ?naive?
labels (most probable labels of this word).
Secondly, the learner will generate rules that
match the templates showing the format of the
rules.
All possible rules that match the templates
and replace the wrong tags with the correct
ones are generated  by the learner. In order to
know whether this tag is correct or not, we
must base on the training corpus (annotated
corpus from section 4). TBL method has rules
under following templates as follows:
If we call semantic label (classification of
LLOCE) X and Y,.., the template will have
following format: ?Change X into Y if the Z
condition is met?. The Z condition may be a
word form, or a Part-Of-Speech (POS), or a
syntactic label, or a semantic label. Thus, we
must assign each English word to an
appropriate  POS tag by an available POS-
tagger (such as POS-tagger of Eric Brill) and
syntactic label by an available parser (such as :
APP, PCPATR, ...). After annotating
morphological, syntactical  and semantic
labels, we will apply the above templates in
which Z condition has one of following
formats:
? The ith -word to the left/right of the
ambiguous word is a certain ?word form
W? or a certain symbol.
? The ith -word to the left/right of the
ambiguous word is a certain POS k
(lexical tag).
? The ith -word to the left/right of the
ambiguous word is  a syntactical function
(e.g. Subject or Object) of the ambiguous
word (syntactic tags).
? The ith -word to the left/right of the
ambiguous word is  a certain semantic
label L.
After using the above templates to extract
transformation rules through training stages,
we must manually revise them. We will
consider these true and reasonable
transformation rules as disambiguation ones
which can be applied in  the WSD module of
English-to-Vietnamese MT system.
5 Conclusion
In this paper , we have presented the building
of semantically annotated bilingual corpus
(based on semantic classes of LLOCE). So far,
we have built an English-Vietnamese bilingual
corpus with 5,000,000 words from selected
sources (in science-techniques and
conventional fields).  We have also taken
advantage of corresponding features of
bilingual corpus to semantically annotate for
English (and Vietnamese) words via class-
based word alignment. This class-based
approach has been experimented in our
English-Vietnamese bilingual corpus and
given encouraging results (nearly 70% of
ambiguous words are assigned to correct
semantic labels).
In the next stages, we will use this
annotated corpus as training corpus for WSD
in our EVT with the machine learning method
of Eric Brill (TBL).
References
Arthur. 1997. Longman Lexicon Of
Contemporary English (Vietnamese version by
Tran Tat Thang), VN Education Publisher.
Brown et al 1993.  The mathematics of
statistical machine translation: Parameter
estimation, Computational Linguistics, 19(2):
263-311.
Brill Eric. 1993. A corpus-based approach
to language learning, phi thesis, Pennsylvania
Uni., USA.
Gale W.A and Church K.W. 1991, A
program for aligning sentences in bilingual
corpora. Proceedings of ACL-1991, ACL.
Dice, 1945. Measures of the amount of
ecologic association between species. Journal
of Ecology, 26 pp. 297-302.
Dien Dinh, Kiem Hoang, Toan Nguyen
Van, "Vietnamese Word Segmentation",
Proceedings of NLPRS'01, Tokyo, Japan,
10/2001, pp. 749-756.
Dien Dinh, et al, "Word-alignment in
English-Vietnamese bilingual corpus",
Proceedings of EALPIIT'02, HaNoi, Vietnam,
1/2002, pp. 3-11.
EAGLES. 1998. An Extensible Architecture
for General Linguistic Engineering.
Preliminary Recommendations on Semantic
Encoding Interim Report.
Geoffrey Sampson, 1995, English for the
Computer. Clarendon Press-Oxford.
Isahara. and Haruno. 2000. Japanese-
English aligned bilingual corpora, Parallel
Text Processing (edited by Jean Veronis),
Kluwer Academic Press, 2000, pp. 313 ? 334.
Melamed I.D. 2000.  Pattern recognition
for mapping bitext correspondence, Parallel
Text Processing (edited by Jean Veronis),
Kluwer Academic,  pp. 25 ? 48.
Miller G.A. 1996. Introduction to WordNet.
5papers.ps: online lexical database at
http://www.cogsci.princeton.edu/~wn/.
Princeton.
Resnik P. 1999. WordNet and Class-based
Probabilities, WORDNET: An Electronic
Lexical Database (edited by Christiane
Fellbaum), MIT Press,  pp. 239 ? 263.
Shari Landes, Claudia Leacock, and
Randee I.Tengi. 1999. Building semantic
concordances. WordNet : an electronic lexical
database.
Sue Ker J. and Jason Chang S. 1997.  A
Class-based Approach to Word Alignment,
Computational Linguistics, 23(2):313-343.
Zinovjeva. 2000. Learning sense
disambiguation rules for Machine Translation,
MSc-thesis, Uppsala Uni.
POS-Tagger for English-Vietnamese Bilingual Corpus 
 
Dinh Dien 
Information Technology Faculty of  
Vietnam National University of HCMC, 
20/C2 Hoang Hoa Tham, Ward 12, 
Tan Binh Dist., HCM City, Vietnam 
ddien@saigonnet.vn 
Hoang Kiem 
Center of Information Technology 
Development of 
Vietnam National University of HCMC,  
227 Nguyen Van Cu, District 5, HCM City, 
hkiem@citd.edu.vn 
 
 
Abstract 
Corpus-based Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
tasks for such popular languages as English, French, 
etc. have been well studied with satisfactory 
achievements. In contrast, corpus-based NLP tasks for 
unpopular languages (e.g. Vietnamese) are at a 
deadlock due to absence of annotated training data for 
these languages. Furthermore, hand-annotation of even 
reasonably well-determined features such as part-of-
speech (POS) tags has proved to be labor intensive and 
costly. In this paper, we suggest a solution to partially 
overcome the annotated resource shortage in 
Vietnamese by building a POS-tagger for an 
automatically word-aligned English-Vietnamese 
parallel Corpus (named EVC). This POS-tagger made 
use of the Transformation-Based Learning (or TBL) 
method to bootstrap the POS-annotation results of the 
English POS-tagger by exploiting the POS-information 
of the corresponding Vietnamese words via their word-
alignments in EVC. Then, we directly project POS-
annotations from English side to Vietnamese via 
available word alignments. This POS-annotated 
Vietnamese corpus will be manually corrected to 
become an annotated training data for Vietnamese NLP 
tasks such as POS-tagger, Phrase-Chunker, Parser, 
Word-Sense Disambiguator, etc. 
1 Introduction 
POS-tagging is assigning to each word of a text the 
proper POS tag in its context of appearance. Although, 
each word can be classified into various POS-tags, in a 
defined context,  it can only be attributed with a definite 
POS. As an example, in this sentence: ?I can can a 
can?, the POS-tagger must be able to perform the 
following: ?IPRO canAUX canV aDET canN?. 
In order to proceed with POS-tagging, such various 
methods as  Hidden Markov Models (HMM); Memory-
based models (Daelemans, 1996); Transformation-
based Learning (TBL) (Brill, 1995); Maximum 
Entropy; decision trees (Schmid, 1994a);  Neural 
network (Schmid, 1994b); and so on can be used. In 
which, the methods based on machine learning in 
general and TBL in particular prove effective with 
much popularity at present.  
To achieve good results, the abovementioned 
methods must be equipped with exactly annotated 
training corpora. Such training corpora for popular 
languages (e.g. English, French, etc.) are available (e.g. 
Penn Tree Bank, SUSANNE, etc.). Unfortunately, so 
far, there has been no such annotated training data 
available for Vietnamese POS-taggers. Furthermore, 
building manually annotated training data is very 
expensive (for example, Penn Tree Bank was invested 
over 1 million dollars and many person-years). To 
overcome this drawback, this paper will present a 
solution to indirectly build such an annotated training 
corpus for Vietnamese by taking advantages of 
available English-Vietnamese bilingual corpus named 
EVC (Dinh Dien, 2001b). This EVC has been 
automatically word-aligned (Dinh Dien et al, 2002a). 
Our approach in this work is to use a bootstrapped 
POS tagger for English  to annotate the English side of 
a word-aligned parallel corpus, then directly project the 
tag annotations to the second language (Vietnamese) 
via existing word-alignments (Yarowsky and Ngai, 
2001). In this work, we made use of the TBL method 
and SUSANNE training corpus to train our English 
POS-tagger. The remains of this paper is as follows: 
? POS-Tagging by TBL method:  introducing to 
original TBL, improved fTBL, traditional English 
POS-Tagger by TBL.  
? English-Vietnamese bilingual Corpus (EVC): 
resources of EVC, word-alignment of EVC. 
? Bootstrapping English-POS-Tagger: bootstrapping 
English POS-Tagger by the POS-tag of 
corresponding Vietnamese words. Its evaluation 
? Projecting English POS-tag annotations to 
Vietnamese side. Its evaluation. 
? Conclusion:  conclusions, limitations and future 
developments. 
2 POS-Tagging by TBL method 
The Transformation-Based Learning (or TBL)  was 
proposed by Eric Brill in 1993 in his doctoral 
dissertation (Brill, 1993) on the foundation of structural 
linguistics of Z.S.Harris. TBL has been applied with 
success in various natural language processing (mainly 
the tasks of classification). In 2001, Radu Florian and 
Grace Ngai proposed the fast Transformation-Based 
Learning (or fTBL) (Florian and Ngai, 2001a) to 
improve the learning speed of TBL without affecting 
the accuracy of the original algorithm.  
The central idea of TBL is to start with some 
simple (or sophisticated) solution to the problem (called 
baseline tagging), and step-by-step apply optimal 
transformation rules (which are extracted from a 
annotated training corpus at each step) to improve 
(change from incorrect tags into correct ones) the 
problem. The algorithm stops when no more optimal 
transformation rule is selected or data is exhausted. The 
optimal transformation rule is the one which results in 
the largest benefit (repairs incorrect tags into correct 
tags as much as possible). 
A striking particularity of TBL in comparison with 
other learning methods is perceptive and symbolic: the 
linguists are able to observe, intervene in all the 
learning, implementing processes as well as the 
intermediary and final results. Besides, TBL allows the 
inheritance of the tagging results of another system 
(considered as the baseline or initial tagging) with the 
correction on that result based on the transformation 
rules learned through the training period. 
TBL is active in conformity with the 
transformational rules in order to change wrong tags 
into right ones. All these rules obey the templates 
specified by human. In these templates, we need to 
regulate the factors affecting the tagging. In order to 
evaluate the optimal transformation rules, TBL needs 
the annotated training corpus (the corpus to which the 
correct tag has been attached, usually referred to as the 
golden corpus) to compare the result of current tagging 
to the correct tag in the training corpus. In the executing 
period, these optimal rules will be used for tagging new 
corpora (in conformity with the sorting order) and these 
new corpora must also be assigned with the baseline 
tags similar to that of the training period. These 
linguistic annotation tags can be morphological ones 
(sentence boundary, word boundary), POS tags, 
syntactical tags (phrase chunker), sense tags, 
grammatical relation tags, etc. 
POS-tagging was the first application of TBL and 
the most popular and extended to various languages 
(e.g. Korean, Spanish, German, etc.) (Curran, 1999). 
The approach of TBL POS-tagger is simple but 
effective and it reaches the accuracy competitive with 
other powerful POS-taggers. The TBL algorithm for 
POS-tagger can be briefly described under two periods 
as follows: 
* The training period: 
? Starting with the annotated training corpus (or 
called golden corpus, which has been assigned 
with correct POS tag annotations), TBL copies this 
golden corpus into a new unannotated corpus 
(called current corpus, which is removed POS tag 
annotations). 
? TBL assigns an inital POS-tag to each word in 
corpus. This initial tag is the most likely tag for a 
word if the word is known and is guessed based 
upon properties of the word if the word is not 
known.  
? TBL applies each instance of each candidate rule 
(following the format of templates designed by 
human beings) in the current corpus. These rules 
change the POS tags of words based upon the 
contexts they appear in. TBL evaluates the result of 
applying that candidate rule by comparing the 
current result of POS-tag annotations with that of 
the golden corpus in order to choose the best one 
which has highest mark. These best rules are 
repeatedly extracted until there is no more optimal 
rule (its mark isn?t higher than a preset threshold). 
These optimal rules create an ordered sequence. 
* The executing period: 
? Starting with the new unannotated text, TBL 
assigns an inital POS-tag to each word in text in a 
way similar to that of the training period. 
? The sequence of optimal rules (extracted from 
training period) are applied, which change the POS 
tag annotations based upon the contexts they 
appear in. These rules are applied deterministically 
in the order they appear in the sequence. 
In addition to the above-mentioned TBL algorithm 
that is applied in the supervised POS-tagger, Brill 
(1997) also presented an unsupervised POS-tagger that 
is trained on unannotated corpora. The accuracy of 
unsupervised POS-tagger was reported lower than that 
of supervised POS-tagger. 
Because the goal of our work is to build a POS-tag 
annotated training data for Vietnamese, we need an 
annotated corpus with as high as possible accuracy. So, 
we will concentrate on the supervised POS-tagger only. 
For full details of TBL and FTBL, please refer to 
Eric Brill (1993, 1995) and Radu Florian and Grace 
Ngai (2001a). 
 
3 English ? Vietnamese Bilingual Corpus 
The bilingual corpus that needs POS-tagging in this 
paper is named EVC (English ? Vietnamese Corpus). 
This corpus is collected from many different resources 
of bilingual texts (such as books, dictionaries, corpora, 
etc.) in selected fields such as Science, Technology, 
daily conversation (see table 1). After collecting 
bilingual texts from different resources, this parallel 
corpus has been normalized their form (text-only), tone 
marks (diacritics), character code of Vietnam (TCVN-
3), character font (VN-Times), etc. Next, this corpus 
has been sentence aligned and checked spell semi-
automatically. An example of unannotated EVC as the 
following: 
*D02:01323: Jet planes fly about nine miles high. 
+D02:01323: C?c phi c? ph?n l?c bay cao kho?ng 
ch?n d?m. 
Where, the codes at the beginning of each line refer 
to the corresponding sentence in the EVC corpus. For 
full details of building this EVC corpus (e.g. collecting, 
normalizing, sentence alignment, spelling checker, 
etc.), please refer to Dinh Dien (2001b). 
Next, this bilingual corpus has been automatically 
word aligned by a hybrid model combining the 
semantic class-based model with the GIZA++ model. 
An example of the word-alignment result is as in figure 
1 below. The accuracy of word-alignment of this 
parallel corpus has been reported approximately 87% in 
(Dinh Dien et al, 2002b). For full details of word 
alignment of this EVC corpus (precision, recall, 
coverage, etc.), please refer to (Dinh Dien et al, 
2002a). 
The result of this word-aligned parallel corpus has 
been used in various Vietnamese NLP tasks, such as in 
training the Vietnamese word segmenter (Dinh Dien et 
al., 2001a), word sense disambiguation (Dinh Dien, 
2002b), etc. 
Remarkably, this EVC includes the  SUSANNE 
corpus (Sampson, 1995) ? a  golden corpus has been 
manually annotated such necessary English linguistic  
annotations as lemma, POS tags, chunking tags, 
syntactic trees, etc.  This English corpus has been 
translated into Vietnamese by English teachers of 
Foreign Language Department of Vietnam University 
of HCM City. In this paper, we will make use of this 
valuable annotated corpus as the training corpus for our 
bootstrapped English POS-tagger. 
 
No. Resources The number 
of pairs of 
sentences  
Number of 
English 
words 
Number of  
Vietnamese 
morpho-words 
Length 
(English 
words) 
Percent 
(words/
EVC) 
1. Computer books 9,475 165,042 239,984 17.42 7.67
2. LLOCE dictionary 33,078 312,655 410,760 9.45 14.53
3. EV bilingual dictionaries 174,906 1,110,003 1,460,010 6.35 51.58
4. SUSANNE corpus 6,269 131,500 181,781 20.98 6.11
5. Electronics books 12,120 226,953 297,920      18.73 10.55
6. Children?s Encyclopedia 4,953 79,927 101,023 16.14 3.71
7. Other books 9,210 126,060 160,585 13.69 5.86
 Total 250,011 2,152,140 2,852,063 8.59 100%
Table 1. Resources of EVC corpus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. An example of a word-aligned pair of sentences in EVC corpus
Jet planes fly about nine miles high 
Ca?c phi c? pha?n l??c bay cao khoa?ng ch?n da?m
4 Our Bootstrapped English POS-Tagger 
So far, existing POS-taggers for  (mono-lingual) 
English have been well developed with satisfactory 
achievements and it is very difficult (it is nearly 
impossible for us) to improve their results. Actually, 
those existing advanced POS-taggers have exhaustively 
exploited all linguistic information in English texts and 
there is no way for us to improve English POS-tagger in 
case of such a monolingual English texts. By contrast, 
in the bilingual texts, we are able to make use of the 
second language?s linguistic information in order to 
improve the POS-tag annotations of the first language. 
Our solution is motivated by I.Dagan, I.Alon and 
S.Ulrike (1991); W.Gale, K.Church and D.Yarowsky 
(1992). They proposed the use of bilingual corpora to 
avoid hand-tagging of training data. Their premise is 
that ?different senses of a given word often translate 
differently in another language (for example, pen in 
English is stylo in French for its writing implement 
sense, and enclos for its enclosure sense). By using a 
parallel aligned corpus, the translation of each 
occurrence of a word such as pen can be used to 
automatically determine its sense?. This remark is not 
only true for word sense but also for POS-tag and it is 
more exact in such typologically different languages as 
English vs. Vietnamese.  
In fact, POS-tag annotations of English words as 
well as Vietnamese words are often ambiguous but they 
are not often exactly the same (table 4). For example, 
?can? in English may be ?Aux? for ability sense, ?V? 
for to make a container sense, and ?N? for a container 
sense and there is hardly existing POS-tagger which can 
tag POS for that word ?can? exactly in all different 
contexts. Nevertheless, if that ?can? in English is 
already word-aligned with a corresponding Vietnamese 
word, it will be POS-disambiguated easily by 
Vietnamese word? s POS-tags. For example, if ?can? is 
aligned with ?c? th??, it must be Auxiliary ; if it is 
aligned with ???ng h?p? then it must be a Verb, and if 
it is aligned with ?c?i h?p? then it must be a Noun.  
However, not that all Vietnamese POS-tag 
information is useful and deterministic. The big 
question here is when and how we make use of the 
Vietnamese POS-tag information? Our answer is to 
have this English POS-tagger trained by TBL method 
(section 2) with the SUSANNE training corpus (section 
3). After training, we will extract an ordered sequence 
of optimal transformation rules. We will use these rules 
to improve an existing English POS-tagger (as baseline 
tagger)  for tagging words of the English side in the 
word-aligned EVC corpus. This English POS-tagging 
result will be projected to Vietnamese side via word-
alignments in order to form a new Vietnamese training 
corpus annotated with POS-tags. 
4.1 The English POS-Tagger by TBL method 
To make the presentation clearer, we re-use notations in 
the introduction to fnTBL-toolkit of Radu Florian and 
Grace Ngai (2001b) as follows:  
? ? : denotes the space of samples: the set of words 
which need POS-tagging. In English, it is simple to 
recognize the word boundary, but in Vietnamese 
(an isolate language), it is rather complicated. 
Therefore, it has been presented in another work 
(Dinh Dien, 2001a). 
? C : set of possible POS-classifications c (or tagset). 
For example: noun (N), verb (V), adjective (A), ... 
For English, we made use of the Penn TreeBank 
tagset and for Vietnamese tagset, we use the POS-
tagset mapping table (see appendix A). 
? S = ?xC: the space of states: the cross-product 
between the sample space (word) and the 
classification space (tagset), where each point is a 
couple (word, tag). 
? ? : predicate defined on S+ space, which is on a 
sequence of states. Predicate ? follows the 
specified templates of transformation rules. In the 
POS-tagger for English, this predicate only 
consists of English factors which affect the POS-
tagging process, for example U
],[ nmi
iWord
+???
  or  
U
],[ nmi
iTag
+???
 or U
],[ nmi
ji TagWord
+???
? .   
Where, Wordi  is the morphology of the ith word from 
the current word. Positive values of i mean 
preceding (its left side), and negative ones mean 
following (its right side). i ranges within the 
window from ?m to +n. In this English-
Vietnamese bilingual POS-tagger, we add new 
elements including 0VTag  and 0VTag? to those 
predicates. VTag0 is the Vietnamese POS-tag 
corresponding to the current English word via its 
word-alignment. These Vietnamese POS-tags are 
determined by the most frequent tag according to 
the Vietnamese dictionary. 
? A rule r defined as a couple (?, c) which consists 
of predicate ? and tag c. Rule r is written in the 
form ? ? c. This means that the rule r = (?, c) will 
be applied on the sample x if the predicate ? is 
satisfied on it, whereat, x will be changed into a 
new tag c. 
? Giving a state s = (x,c) and rule r = (?, c), then the 
result state r(s), which is gained by applying rule r 
on s, is defined as:   
  
    s if ?(s)=False 
(x, c?) if ?(s)=True r(s) = 
? T : set of training samples, which were assigned 
correct tag. Here we made use of the SUSANNE 
golden corpus (Sampson, 1995) whose POS-tagset 
was converted into the PTB tagset. 
? The score associated with a rule r = (?, c) is usually 
the difference in performance (on the training data) 
that results from applying the rule, as follows: 
? ?
? ?
?=
Ts Ts
sscoresrscorerScore )())(()(  
 
4.2 The TBL algorithm for POS-Tagging 
The TBL algorithm for POS-tagging can be briefly 
described as follows (see the flowchart in figure 2): 
Step 1: Baseline tagging: To initiatize for each sample x 
in SUSANNE training data with its most likely POS-tag 
c. For English, we made use of the available English 
tagger (and parser) of Eugene Charniak (1997) at 
Brown University (version 2001). For Vietnamese, it is 
the set of possible parts-of-speech tags (follow the 
appearance probability order of that part-of-speech in 
dictionary). We call the starting training data as T0. 
Step 2: Considering all the transformations (rules) r to 
the training data Tk in time kth, choose the one with the 
highest Score(r)  and applying  it to the training data to 
obtain new corpus Tk+1. We have: Tk+1 = r(Tk) = { r(s) | 
s?Tk}. If there are no more possible transformation 
rules which satisfies: Score(r) > ?, the algorithm is 
stopped. ? is the threshold, which is preset and adjusted 
according to reality situations. 
Step 3: k = k+1. 
Step 4: Repeat from step 2. 
Step 5: Applying every rule r which is drawn in order 
for new corpus EVC after this corpus has been POS-
tagged with baseline tags similar to those of the training 
period. 
 
* Convergence ability of the algorithm: call ek the 
number of error (the difference between the tagging 
result in conformity with rule r and the correct tag in 
the golden corpus in time kth), we have: ek+1 = ek ? 
Score(r), since Score(r) > 0, so ek+1 < ek with all k, and 
ek?N, so the algorithm will be converged after limited 
steps. 
* Complexity of the algorithm: O(n*t*c) where n: size 
of training set (number of words); t: size of possible 
transformation rule set (number of candidate rules); c: 
size of corpus satisfied rule applying condition (number 
of order satisfied predicate ?). 
4.3 Experiment and Results of Bootstrapped 
English POS-Tagger 
After the training period, this system will extract an 
ordered sequence of optimal transformation rules under 
following format, for examples: 
VBtagNNtagTOtag ??=?=? 001 ))()((
MDtagVBtagMDVTagcanWord ??=?=?= 0000 ))()()""((
VBtagVPBtagMDTagi i ??=?=???? 00 ))()|]1,3[((  
These are intuitive rules and easy to understand by 
human beings. For examples: the 2nd rule will be 
understood as follows: ?if the POS-tag of current word 
is VB (Verb) and  its word-form  is ?can? and its 
corresponding Vietnamese word-tag is MD (Modal), 
then the POS-tag of current word will be changed into 
MD?. 
We have experimented this method on EVC corps 
with the training SUSANNE corpus. To evaluate this 
method, we held-back 6,000-word part of the training 
corpus (which have not been used in the training 
period) and we achieved the POS-tagging results as 
follows: 
Step Correct 
tags 
Incorrect 
Tags 
Precision
Baseline tagging 
(Brown POS-tagger) 
5724 276 95.4% 
TBL-POS-tagger 
(bootstrapping by 
corresponding 
Vietnamese POS-tag) 
5850 150 97.5% 
Table 2. The result of Bootstrapped POS-
tagger for English side in EVC. 
It is thanks to exploiting the information of the 
corresponding Vietnamese POS that the English POS-
tagging results are improved. If we use only available 
English information, it is very difficult for us to 
improve the output of Brown POS-tagger. Despite the 
POS-tagging improvement, the results can hardly said 
to be fully satisfactory due to the following reasons: 
* The result of automatic word-alignment is only 
87% (Dinh Dien et al, 2002a). 
* It is not always true that the use of Vietnamese 
POS-information is effective enough to disambiguate 
the POS of English words (please refer to table 3). 
Through the statistical table 3 below, the 
information of Vietnamese POS-tags can be seen as 
follows:   
- Case 1,2,3,4: no need for any disambiguation of 
English POS-tags. 
- Case 5, 7: Full disambiguation of English POS-tags 
(majority). 
- Case 6, 8, 9: Partial disambiguation of English 
POS-tags by TBL-method. 
 
    1 if c = True(x) 
    0 if c ? True(x) score((x,c)) =  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Flowchart of TBL-algorithm in POS-tagger for EVC corpus 
 
No. English POS-tags  Vietnamese POS-tags Contrast English vs. Vietnamese 
POS-tags 
Percent % 
1. One POS-tag only  One POS-tag only  Two POS-tags are identical 25.2 
2. One POS-tag only One POS-tag only  Two POS-tags are different 1.2 
3. One POS-tag only More than 1 POS-tag One common POS-tag only 5.3 
4. One POS-tag only More than 1 POS-tag No common POS-tag 3.5 
5. More than 1 POS-tag One POS-tag only  One common POS-tag only 50.5 
6. More than 1 POS-tag One POS-tag only  No common POS-tag 2.8 
7. More than 1 POS-tag More than 1 POS-tag One common POS-tag only 6.1 
8. More than 1 POS-tag More than 1 POS-tag More than 1 common POS-tag 4.1 
9. More than 1 POS-tag More than 1 POS-tag No common POS-tag 1.3 
Table 3. Contrast POS-tag of English and Vietnamese in the word-aligned EVC 
word-aligned bilingual 
SUSANNE corpus 
remove POS-tags 
Unannotated corpus 
Brown POS-tagger 
(baseline tagger) 
current annotated  
corpus 
Templates 
candidate  
transformation rules 
Corpus annotated by 
candidate rules 
Compare 
& EvaluateOptimal Rules mark 
>? 
End 
Y
N
Sequence of 
optimal rules
Vietnamese 
corresponding POS-tags
5 Projecting English POS-Tags to 
Vietnamese 
After having English-POS-tag annotations with high 
precision, we proceed to directly project those POS-
tag annotations from English side into Vietnamese 
side. Our solution is motivated by a similar work of 
David Yarowsky and Grace Ngai (2001). This 
projection is based on available word-alignments in 
the automatically word-aligned English-Vietnamese 
parallel corpus.  
Nevertheless, due to typological difference 
between English (an inflected typology) vs. 
Vietnamese (an isolated typology),  direct projection 
is not a simple 1-1 map but it may be a complex m-n 
map:   
? Regarding grammatical meanings, English  
usually makes use of inflectional facilities, such 
as suffixes to express grammatical meanings. For 
example: -s ?plural, -ed ?past, -
ing?continuous, ?s ? possesive case, etc. 
Whilst Vietnamese  often makes use of function 
words, word order facilities. For example: 
?ca?c?? ?nh??ng? ? plural, ??a?? ? past, ??ang? 
? continuous, ?cu?a? ? possessive cases, etc. 
? Regarding lexicalization, some words in English 
must be represented by a phrase in Vietnamese 
and vice-versa. For example: ?cow? and ?ox? in 
English will be rephrased into two words ?bo? 
ca?i? (female one) and ?bo? ???c? (male one) in 
Vietnamese; or ?nghe?? in Vietnamese will be 
rephrased into two words ?buffalo calf? in 
English. 
The result of projecting is as table 4 below. 
In addition, tagsets of two languages are 
different. Due characteristics of each language, we 
must use two different tagset for POS-tagging. 
Regarding English, we made use of available POS-
tagset of PennTreeBank. While in Vietnamese, we 
made use of POS-tagset in the standard Vietnamese 
dictionary of Hoang Phe (1998) and other new tags. 
So, we must have an English-Vietnamese consensus 
tagset map (please refer to Appendix A). 
Eng-
lish 
Jet planes fly about nine miles high
E-tag NN NNS VBP IN CD NNS RB 
VN-
ese 
pha?n 
l??c 
(ca?c) 
phi c? 
bay khoa?ng ch?n da?m cao 
V-tag N N V IN CD N R 
Table 4. An example of English POS-
tagging in parallel corpus EVC 
Regarding evaluation of POS-tag projections, 
because so far, there has been no POS-annotated 
corpus available for Vietnamese, we had to manually 
build a small golden corpus for Vietnamese POS-
tagging with approximately 1000 words for 
evaluating.  The results of Vietnamese POS-tagging 
is as table 5 below: 
Method Correct 
tags 
Incorrect 
Tags 
Precision
Baseline tagging 
(use information 
of POS-tag  in 
dictionary) 
823 177 82.3% 
Projecting from 
English side in 
EVC 
946 54 94.6% 
Table 5. The result of projecting POS-tags 
from English side to Vietnamese in EVC. 
6 Conclusion 
We have just presented the POS-tagging for an 
automatically word-aligned English-Vietnamese 
parallel corpus by POS-tagging English words first 
and then projecting them to Vietnamese side later. 
The English POS-tagging is done in 2 steps: The 
basic tagging step is achieved through the available 
POS-tagger (Brown) and the correction step is 
achieved through the TBL learning method in which 
the information on the corresponding Vietnamese is 
used through available word-alignment in the EVC. 
The result of POS-tagging of Vietnamese in the 
English-Vietnamese bilingual corpus plays a 
meaningful role in the building of the automatic 
training corpus for the Vietnamese processors in need 
of parts of speech (such as Vietnamese POS-taggers, 
Vietnamese parser, etc.). By making use of the 
language typology? s differences and the word-
alignments in bilingual corpus for the mutual 
disambiguation, we are still able to improve the result 
of the English POS-tagging of the currently powerful 
English POS-taggers. 
Currently, we are improving the speed of 
training period by using Fast TBL algorithm instead 
of TBL one.  
In the future, we will improve this serial POS-
tagging to the parallel POS-tagging for both English 
and Vietnamese simultaneously after we obtain the 
exact Vietnamese POS-tags in the parallel corpus of 
SUSANNE. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Prof. Eduard Hovy 
(ISI/USC, USA) for his guidance as external advisor 
on this research. 
References 
E. Brill. 1993. A Corpus-based approach to Language 
Learning, PhD-thesis, Pennsylvania Uni., USA. 
E. Brill. 1995. Transformation-Based Error-Driven 
Learning and Natural Language Processing: A Case 
Study in Part of Speech Tagging. Computational 
Linguistics, 21(4), pp. 543-565. 
E. Brill. 1997. Unsupervised Learning of Disambiguation 
Rules for Part of Speech Tagging. In Natural 
Language Processing Using Very Large Corpora. 
Kluwer Academic Press. 
J. Curran. 1999. Transformation-Based Learning in 
Shallow Natural Language Processing, Honours 
Thesis, Basser Department of Computer Science, 
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. 
E. Charniak. 1997. Statistical parsing with a context-free 
grammar and word statistics, in Proceedings of the 
Fourteenth National Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, AAAI Press/MIT Press, Menlo Park.  
I. Dagan, I.Alon, and S.Ulrike. 1991. Two languages are 
more informative than one. In Proceedings of the 29th 
Annual ACL, Berkeley, CA, pp.130-137. 
W. Daelemans, J. Zavrel,  P. Berck, S. Gillis. 1996. MTB: 
A Memory-Based Part-of-Speech Tagger Generator. 
In Proceedings of 4th Workshop on Very Large 
Corpora, Copenhagen. 
D. Dien, H. Kiem, and N.V. Toan. 2001a. Vietnamese 
Word Segmentation, Proceedings of NLPRS?01 (The 
6th Natural Language Processing  Pacific  Rim 
Symposium), Tokyo, Japan, 11/2001, pp. 749-756. 
D. Dien. 2001b. Building an English-Vietnamese bilingual 
corpus, Master thesis in Comparative Linguistics, 
University of Social Sciences and Humanity of HCM 
City, Vietnam. 
D. Dien, H.Kiem, T.Ngan, X.Quang, Q.Hung, P.Hoi, 
V.Toan.  2002a. Word alignment in English ? 
Vietnamese bilingual corpus, Proceedings of 
EALPIIT?02, Hanoi, Vietnam, 1/2002, pp. 3-11. 
D.Dien, H.Kiem. 2002b. Building a training corpus for 
word sense disambiguation in the English-to-
Vietnamese Machine Translation, Proceedings of 
Workshop on Machine Translation in Asia, COLING-
02, Taiwan, 9/2002, pp. 26-32. 
R. Florian, and G. Ngai. 2001a. Transformation-Based 
Learning in the fast lane, Proceedings of North 
America ACL-2001. 
R. Florian, and G. Ngai. 2001b. Fast Transformation-Based 
Learning Toolkit. Technical Report. 
W. Gale, K.W.Church, and D. Yarowsky. 1992. Using 
bilingual materials to develop word sense 
disambiguation methods. In Proceedings of the Int. 
Conf. on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in 
MT, pp.101-112. 
H. Phe. 1998. T?? ?ie?n tie?ng Vie?t (Vietnamese Dictionary). 
Center of Lexicography.  Da Nang Publisher. 
G. Sampson. 1995.  English for the Computer: The 
SUSANNE Corpus and Analytic Scheme, Clarendon 
Press (Oxford University Press). 
H. Schmid. 1994a. Probabilistic POS Tagging using 
Decision Trees, Proceedings of International 
Conference on New methods in Language Processing, 
Manchester, UK. 
H. Schmid. 1994b. POS Tagging with Neural Networks, 
Proceedings of International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics, Kyoto, Japan, pp.172-176. 
D. Yarowsky and G. Ngai. 2001. Induce, Multilingual POS 
Tagger and NP bracketer via projection on aligned 
corpora, Proceedings of NAACL-01. 
Appendix A. English-Vietnamese consensus 
POS-tagset mapping table 
English POS  Vietnamese 
POS  
CC (Coordinating conjunction) CC 
CD (Cardinal number) CD 
DT (Determiner) DT 
EX (Existential) V 
FW (Foreign word) FW 
IN (Preposition) IN 
JJ (Adjective) A 
JJR (Adjective, comparative) A 
JJS (Adjective, superlative) A 
LS (List item marker) LS 
MD (Modal) MD 
NN (Noun, singular or mass) N 
NNS (Noun, plural) N 
NP (Proper noun, singular) N 
NPS (Proper noun, plural) N 
PDT (Predeterminer) DT 
POS (Possessive ending) ?cu?a? 
PP (Personal pronoun) P 
PP$ (Possessive pronoun) ?cu?a? P 
RB (Adverb) R 
RBR (Adverb, comparative) R 
RBS (Adverb, superlative) R 
RP (Particle) RP 
SYM (Symbol) SYM 
TO (''to'') - 
UH (Interjection) UH 
VB (Verb, base form) V 
VBD (Verb, past tense) V 
VBG (Verb, gerund or present 
participle) 
V 
VBN (Verb, past participle) V 
VBP (Verb, non-3rd person 
singular present) 
V 
VBZ (Verb, 3rd person singular 
present) 
V 
WDT (Whdeterminer) P 
WP (Wh-pronoun) P 
WP$ (Possessive wh-pronoun) ?cu?a? P 
WRB (Wh-adverb) R 
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 215?222,
Beijing, August 2010
An ontology-driven system for detecting global health events
Nigel Collier
National Inst. Informatics
collier@nii.ac.jp
Reiko Matsuda Goodwin
Fordham University
reikogoodwin@gmail.com
John McCrae
Bielefeld University
johnmccrae@gmail.com
Son Doan
Vanderbilt University
son.doan@vanderbilt.edu
Ai Kawazoe
Tsuda College
zoeai@tsuda.ac.jp
Mike Conway
University of Pittsburgh
conwaym@pitt.edu
Asanee Kawtrakul
Kasetart University
ak@ku.ac.th
Koichi Takeuchi
Okayama University
koichi@cs.okayama-u.ac.jp
Dinh Dien
VietNam National University
ddien66@yahoo.com
Abstract
Text mining for global health surveillance
is an emerging technology that is gaining
increased attention from public health or-
ganisations and governments. The lack
of multilingual resources such as Word-
Nets specifically targeted at this task have
so far been a major bottleneck. This pa-
per reports on a major upgrade to the
BioCaster Web monitoring system and
its freely available multilingual ontology;
improving its original design and extend-
ing its coverage of diseases from 70 to 336
in 12 languages.
1 Introduction
The number of countries who can sustain teams
of experts for global monitoring of human/animal
health is limited by scarce national budgets.
Whilst some countries have advanced sensor net-
works, the world remains at risk from the health
impacts of infectious diseases and environmen-
tal accidents. As seen by the recent A(H5N1),
A(H1N1) and SARS outbreaks, a problem in one
part of the world can be rapidly exported, leading
to global hardship.
The World Health Organization (WHO) esti-
mates that in the future, between 2 to 7.4 mil-
lion people could be at risk worldwide from a
highly contageous avian flu virus that spreads
rapidly through the international air travel net-
work (WHO, 2005). Pandemics of novel
pathogens have the capacity to overwhelm health-
care systems, leading to widespread morbidity,
mortality and socio-economic disruption (Cox
et al, 2003). Furthermore, outbreaks of live-
stock diseases, such as foot-and-mouth disease or
equine influenza can have a devastating impact on
industry, commerce and human health (Blake et
al., 2003). The challenge is to enhance vigilance
and control the emergence of outbreaks. Whilst
human analysis remains essential to spot complex
relationships, automated analysis has a key role
to play in filtering the vast volume of data in real
time and highlighting unusual trends using reli-
able predictor indicators.
BioCaster (http://born.nii.ac.jp) (Collier et al,
2008) is a Web 2.0 monitoring station for the early
detection of infectious disease events. The sys-
tem exploits a high-throughput semantic process-
ing pipeline, converting unstructured news texts
to structured records, alerting events based on
time-series analysis and then sharing this informa-
tion with users via geolocating maps (Fig. 1(a)),
graphs (Fig. 1(b)) and alerts. Underlying the sys-
tem is a publicly available multilingual applica-
tion ontology. Launched in 2006 (Collier et al,
2006) the BioCaster Ontology (BCO) has been
downloaded by over 70 academic and industrial
groups worldwide. This paper reports on a ma-
jor upgrade to the system and the ontology - ex-
panding the number of languages from 6 to 12,
redefining key relations and extending coverage in
the number of diseases from 70 to 336, including
many veterinary diseases.
215
(a) Bio-geographic map (b) Trend graph analyser
(c) BioCaster processes
Figure 1: (a)BioCaster?s bio-geographic map for a suspected foot-and-mouth outbreak on 22nd March,
2010 with links to the multilingual ontology, NCBI, HighWire, GoPubMed and Google Scholar; (b)
The trends analyser showing aggregated document counts for health events in China between 13nd
March and 12th April, 2010; (c) The system?s pipeline of processes with example semantic markup.
216
2 Background
As the world becomes more interconnected and
urbanized and animal production becomes in-
creasingly intensive, the speed with which epi-
demics spread becomes faster, adding to pressure
on biomedical experts and governments to make
quick decisions. Traditional validation methods
such as field investigations or laboratory analysis
are the mainstay of public health but can require
days or weeks to issue reports. The World Wide
Web with its economical and real time delivery of
information represents a new modality in health
surveillance (Wagner and Johnson, 2006) and has
been shown to be an effective source by the World
Health Organization (WHO) when Public Health
Canada?s GPHIN system detected the SARS out-
break in southern China from news reports dur-
ing November 2002. The recent A(H1N1) ?swine
flu? pandemic highlighted the trend towards agen-
cies using unvalidated sources. The technologi-
cal basis for such systems can be found in sta-
tistical classification approaches and light weight
ontological reasoning. For example, Google Flu
Trends (Ginsberg et al, 2009) is a system that de-
pends almost entirely on automatic statistical clas-
sification of user queries; MedISys-PULS (Yan-
garber et al, 2008), HealthMap (Freifeld et al,
2008) and BioCaster use a mixture of statisti-
cal and ontological classification; and GPHIN
(Mawudeku and Blench, 2006) and Argus (Wil-
son, 2007) rely on a mixture of ontological classi-
fication and manual analysis.
Compared to other similar systems BioCaster
is characterized by its richly featured and pub-
licly downloadable ontology and emphasizes crit-
ical evaluation of its text mining modules. Em-
pirical results have included: topic classification,
named entity recognition, formal concept anal-
ysis and event recognition. In the absence of
a community gold standard, task performance
was assessed on the best available ?silver? stan-
dard - the ProMED-mail network (Madoff and
Woodall, 2005), achieving F-score of 0.63 on 14
disease-country pairs over a 365-day period (Col-
lier, 2010).
Despite initial skepticism within the public
health community, health surveillance systems
based on NLP-supported human analysis of me-
dia reports are becoming firmly established in
Europe, North America and Japan as sources of
health information available to governments and
the public (Hartley et al, 2010). Whilst there is no
substitute for trained human analysts, automated
filtering has helped experts save time by allow-
ing them to sift quickly through massive volumes
of media data. It has also enabled them to sup-
plement traditional sources with a broader base of
information.
In comparison with other areas of biomedical
NLP such as the clinical and genetics? domains, a
relative lack of building block resources may have
hindered the wider participation of NLP groups
in public health applications. It is hoped that the
provision of common resources like the BCO can
help encourage further development and bench-
marking.
3 Method
BioCaster performs analysis of over 9000 news ar-
ticles per day using the NPACI Rocks cluster mid-
dleware (http://www.rockcsclusters.org) on a plat-
form of 48 3.0GHz Xeon cores. Data is ingested
24/7 into a semantic processing pipeline in a short
1 hour cycle from over 1700 public domain RSS
feeds such as Google news, the European Media
Monitor and ProMED-mail. Since 2009, news has
also being gathered under contract from a com-
mercial news aggregation company, providing ac-
cess to over 80,000 sources across the world?s lan-
guages.
The new 2010 version of BioCaster uses ma-
chine translation into English (eleven languages)
to source news stories related to currently oc-
curring infectious and environmental disease out-
breaks in humans, animals and plants.
Access to the site is freely available but lo-
gin registration applies to some functions such as
email alerts. Processing is totally automatic, but
we have the potential within the login system to
enable human moderated alerts which broadcast
to Twitter and RSS.
Below we describe in detail two key aspects of
the system that have been significantly upgraded:
the BCO and the event detection system.
217
3.1 Ontology
3.1.1 Aim
The BioCaster Ontology aims:
? To describe the terms and relations necessary
to detect and risk assess public health events
in the grey literature;
? To bridge the gap between (multilingual)
grey literature and existing standards in
biomedicine;
? To mediate integration of content across lan-
guages;
? To be freely available.
The central knowledge source for BioCaster
is the multilingual ontology containing domain
terms such as diseases, agents, symptoms, syn-
dromes and species as well as domain sensitive
relations such as a disease causing symptoms or
an agent affecting particular host species. This al-
lows the text mining system to have a basic un-
derstanding of the key concepts and relationships
within the domain to fill in gaps not mentioned
explicitly in the news reports. To the best of our
knowledge the BCO is unique as an application
ontology, providing freely available multilingual
support to system developers interested in out-
break surveillance in the language of the open me-
dia.
The BCO however has little to say outside of
its application domain, e.g. in disease-gene in-
teraction or for supporting automatic diagnosis.
As discussed in Grey Cowell and Smith (2010),
there are many other resources available that have
the potential to support applications for infec-
tious disease analysis including controlled vocab-
ularies and ontologies such as the the Unified
Medical Language System (UMLS) (Lindberg et
al., 1993), International Classification of Diseases
(ICD-10) (WHO, 2004), SNOMED CT (Stearns
et al, 2001), Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
(Lipscomb, 2000) and the Infectious Disease On-
tology (IDO) (Grey Cowell and Smith, 2010). In
(Collier et al, 2006) we discussed how BCO com-
pared to such ontologies so we will focus from
now on the implication of the extensions.
3.1.2 Scope
The new version of the BCO now covers 12 lan-
guages including all the United Nation?s official
languages: Arabic (968 terms), English (4113),
French (1281), Indonesian (1081), Japanese
(2077), Korean (1176), Malaysian (1001), Rus-
sian (1187), Spanish (1171), Thai (1485), Viet-
namese (1297) and Chinese (1142). The multi-
lingual ontology can be used as a direct knowl-
edge source in language-specific text mining mod-
ules, as an indexing resource for searching across
concepts in various languages and as a dictionary
for future translation modules. Currently news in
all 12 languages is available via the Web portal
but news in additional languages such as German,
Italian and Dutch are being added using machine
translation.
3.1.3 Design
Like EuroWordNet (Vossen, 1998), on which
it is loosely based, the BCO adopts a thesaurus-
like structure with synonym sets linking to-
gether terms across languages with similar mean-
ing. Synonym sets are referred to using root
terms. Root terms themselves are fully defined in-
stances that provide bridges to external classifica-
tion schemes and nomenclatures such as ICD10,
MeSH, SNOMED CT and Wikipedia. The central
backbone taxonomy is deliberately shallow and
taken from the ISO?s Suggested Upper Merged
Ontology (Niles and Pease, 2001). To maintain
consistency and computability we kept a single
inheritance structure throughout. 18 core domain
concepts corresponding to named entities in the
text mining system such as DISEASE and SYMP-
TOM were the results of analysis using a formal
theory (Guarino and Welty, 2000).
We have endeavoured to construct definitions
for root terms along Aristotelean principles by
specifying the difference to the parent. For ex-
ample in the case of Eastern encephalitis virus:
Eastern equine encephalitis virus is a
species of virus that belongs to the
genus Alphavirus of the family Togaviri-
dae (order unassigned) of the group
IV ((+)ssRNA) that possesses a positive
single stranded RNA genome. It is the
218
etiological agent of the eastern equine
encephalitis.
We are conscious though that terms used in
the definitions still require more rigorous control
to be considered useful for machine reasoning.
To aid both human and machine analysis root
terms are linked by a rich relational structure
reflecting domain sensitive relations such as
causes(virus,disease), has symptom(disease,
symptom), has associated syndrome(disease,
syndrome), has reservoir(virus, organism).
In such a large undertaking, the order of work
was critical. We proceeded by collecting a list of
notifiable diseases from national health agencies
and then grouped the diseases according to per-
ceived relevance to the International Health Reg-
ulations 2005 (Lawrence and Gostin, 2004). In
this way we covered approximately 200 diseases,
and then explored freely available resources and
the biomedical literature to find academic and lay-
man?s terminology to describe their agents, af-
fected hosts, vector species, symptoms, etc. We
then expanded the coverage to less well known
human diseases, zoonotic diseases, animal dis-
eases and diseases caused by toxic substances
such as sarin, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide and
ethylene. At regular stages we checked and val-
idated terms against those appearing in the news
media.
As we expanded the number of conditions to in-
clude veterinary diseases we found a major struc-
tural reorganization was needed to support animal
symptoms. For example, a high temperature in
humans would not be the same as one in bovids.
This prompted us in the new version to group dis-
eases and symptoms around major animal familes
and related groups, e.g. high temperature (human)
and high temperature (bovine).
A second issue that we encountered was the
need to restructure the hierarchy under Organi-
cObject which was divided between MicroOrgan-
ism and Animal. The structure of the previous
version meant that the former were doing dou-
ble duty as infecting agents and the later were af-
fected hosts. The MicroOrganism class contained
bacterium, helminth, protozoan, fungus and virus,
which then became the domain in a relation ?x
causes y?. Expansion forced us to accomodate the
fact that some animals such as worms and mites
(e.g. scabies) also infect humans as well as ani-
mals. The result was a restructuring of the organic
classes using the Linnean taxonomy as a guide-
line, although this is probably not free from errors
(e.g. virus is typically not considered to be an or-
ganism).
3.2 Event alerting system
Figure 1(c) shows a schematic of the modular de-
sign used by the BioCaster text mining system.
Following on from machine translation and topic
classification is named entity recognition and tem-
plate recognition which we describe in more detail
below. The final structured event frames include
slot values normalized to ontology root terms for
disease, pathogen (virus or bacterium), country
and province. Additionally we also identify 15 as-
pects of public health events critical to risk assess-
ment such as: spread across international borders,
hospital worker infection, accidental or deliberate
release, food contamination and vaccine contami-
nation.
Latitude and longitude of events down to the
province level are found in two ways: using the
Google API up to a limit of 15000 lookups per
day, and then using lookup on the BCO taxonomy
of 5000 country and province names derived from
open sources such as Wikipedia.
Each hour events are automatically alerted to
a Web portal page by comparing daily aggre-
gated event counts against historical norms (Col-
lier, 2010). Login users can also sign up to receive
emails on specific topics. A topic would normally
specify a disease or syndrome, a country or region
and a specific risk condition.
In order to extract knowledge from docu-
ments, BioCaster maintains a collection of rule
patterns in a regular expression language that
converts surface expressions into structured in-
formation. For example the surface phrase
?man exposes airline passengers to measles?
would be converted into the three templates
?species(human); disease(measles); interna-
tional travel(true)?. Writing patterns to produce
such templates can be very time consuming and
so the BioCaster project has developed its own
219
D3: :- name(disease){ list(@undiagnosed) words(,1) list(@disease) }
S2: :- name(symptom) { list(@severity) list(@symptom)}
CF1: contaminated food(?true?) :- ?caused? ?by? list(@contaminate verbs past)
list(@injested material)
SP4: species(?animal?) :- name(animal,A) words(,3) list(@cull verbs past)
Table 1: Examples of SRL rules for named entity and template recognition. Template rules contain
a label, a head and a body, where the head specifies the template pattern to be output if the body
expression matches. The body can contain word lists, literals, and wild cards. Various conditions can
be placed on each of these such as orthographic matching.
light weight rule language - called the Simple
Rule Language (SRL) and a pattern building inter-
face for maintaining the rule base (McCrae et al,
2009). Both are freely available to the research
community under an open source license. Cur-
rently BioCaster uses approximately 130 rules for
entity recognition, 1000 word lists and 3200 tem-
plate rules (of which half are for location recogni-
tion) to identify events of interest in English. Us-
ing SRL allows us to quickly adapt the system to
newly emerging terminology such as the 11+ des-
ignations given to A(H1N1) during the first stages
of the 2009 pandemic.
The SRL rulebook for BioCaster can recognize
a range of entities related to the task of disease
surveillance such as bacteria, chemicals, diseases,
countries, provinces, cities and major airports.
Many of these classes are recognized using terms
imported from the BCO. The rule book also con-
tains specialised thesauri to recognize subclasses
of entities such as locations of habitation, eater-
ies and medical service centres. Verb lists are
maintained for lexical classes such as detection,
mutation, investigation, causation, contamination,
culling, blaming, and spreading.
Some examples of SRL rules for named entity
recognition are shown in Table 1 and described
below:
Rule D3 in the rulebook tags phrases like ?mys-
tery illness? or ?unknown killer bug? by matching
on strings contained within two wordlists, @un-
diagnosed and @disease, separated by up to one
word.
Rule S2 allows severity indicators such as ?se-
vere? or ?acute? to modify a list of known symp-
toms in order to identify symptom entities.
Rule CF1 is an example of a template rule. If
the body of the rule matches by picking out ex-
pressions such as ?was caused by tainted juice?,
this triggers the head to output an alert for con-
taminated food.
Rule SP4 identifies the victim species as ?ani-
mal? in contexts like ?250 geese were destroyed?.
The rulebook also supports more complex in-
ferences such as the home country of national
public health organizations.
Since BioCaster does not employ systematic
manual checking of its reports, it uses a number of
heuristic filters to increase specificity (the propor-
tion of correctly identified negatives) for reports
that appear on the public Web portal pages. For
example, reports with no identified disease and
country are rejected. Since these heuristics may
reduce sensitivity they are not applied to news that
appears on the user login portal pages.
4 Results and Discussion
Version 3 of the ontology represents a significant
expansion in the coverage of diseases, symptoms
and pathogens on version 2. Table 2 summarizes
the number of root terms for diseases classified by
animal familes.
The thesaurus like structure of the BCO is com-
patible in many respects to the Simple Knowledge
Organization System (SKOS) (Miles et al, 2005).
In order to extend exchange and re-use we have
produced a SKOS version of the BCO which is
available from the BCO site. We have also con-
verted the BCO terms into 12 SRL rule books (1
for each language) for entity tagging. These too
are freely available from the BCO site.
As the ontology expands we will consider
adopting a more detailed typing of diseases such
as hasInfectingPart to indicate the organ affected
220
Species N Example
Avian 22 Fowl pox
Bee 6 Chalk brood
disease
Bovine 24 Bluetongue
Canine 4 Blastomycosis
(Canine)
Caprine 14 Contagious
agalactia
Cervine 2 Chronic wasting
disease
Equine 17 Strangles
Feline 4 Feline AIDS
Fish 2 Viral hemorr
hagic septicemia
Human 216 Scarlet fever
Lagomorph 2 Myxomatosis
Non-human 16 Sylvan
primate yellow fever
Other 2 Crayfish plague
Rodent 8 Colorado tick
fever (Rodent)
Swine 12 Swine erysipelas
Table 2: Major disease groups organized by af-
fected animal family. N represents the number of
root terms.
or hasProtectionMethod to indicate broad classes
of methods used to prevent or treat a condition.
The typology of diseases could also be extended
in a more fine grained manner to logically group
conditions, e.g. West Nile virus encephalitis,
Powassan encephalitis and the Japanese B en-
cephalitis could be connected through a hasType
relation on encephalitis.
5 Conclusion
Multilingual resources specifically targeted at the
task of global health surveillance have so far been
very rare. We hope that the release of version 3
can be used to support a range of applications such
as text classification, cross language search, ma-
chine translation, query expansion and so on.
The BCO has been constructed to provide core
vocabulary and knowledge support to the Bio-
Caster project but it has also been influential
in the construction of other public health ori-
ented application ontologies such as the Syn-
dromic Surveillance Ontology (Okhamatovskaia
et al, 2009). The BCO is freely available from
http://code.google.com/p/biocaster-ontology/ un-
der a Creative Commons license.
Acknowledgements
The authors greatly acknowledge the many co-
workers who have provided comments and feed-
back on BioCaster. Funding support was pro-
vided in part by the Japan Science and Technology
Agency under the PRESTO programme.
References
Blake, A., M. T. Sinclair, and G. Sugiyarto. 2003.
Quantifying the impact of foot and mouth disease on
tourism and the UK economy. Tourism Economics,
9(4):449?465.
Collier, N., A. Kawazoe, L. Jin, M. Shigematsu,
D. Dien, R. Barrero, K. Takeuchi, and A. Kaw-
trakul. 2006. A multilingual ontology for infectious
disease surveillance: rationale, design and chal-
lenges. Language Resources and Evaluation, 40(3?
4). DOI: 10.1007/s10579-007-9019-7.
Collier, N., S. Doan, A. Kawazoe, R. Matsuda Good-
win, M. Conway, Y. Tateno, Q. Ngo, D. Dien,
A. Kawtrakul, K. Takeuchi, M. Shigematsu, and
K. Taniguchi. 2008. BioCaster:detecting public
health rumors with a web-based text mining sys-
tem. Bioinformatics, 24(24):2940?1, December.
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn534.
Collier, N. 2010. What?s unusual in online dis-
ease outbreak news? Biomedical Semantics, 1(1),
March. doi:10.1186/2041-1480-1-2.
Cox, N., S. Temblyn, and T. Tam. 2003. Influenza
pandemic planning. Vaccine, 21(16):1801?1803.
Freifeld, C., K. Mandl, B. Reis, and J. Brownstein.
2008. Healthmap: global infectious disease mon-
itoring through automated classification and visual-
ization of internet media reports. J. American Med-
ical Informatics Association, 15:150?157.
Ginsberg, J., M. Mohebbi, R. Patel, L. Brammer,
M. Smolinski, and L. Brilliant. 2009. Detecting
influenza epidemics using search engine query data.
Nature, 457:1012?1014.
Grey Cowell, L. and B. Smith. 2010. Infectious dis-
ease informatics. In Sintchenko, V., editor, Infec-
tious Disease Informatics, pages 373?395. Springer
New York.
221
Guarino, N. and C. Welty. 2000. A formal ontology
of properties. In Dieng, R. and O. Corby, editors,
EKAW-2000: Proc. 12th Int. Conf. on Knowledge
Engineering and Knowledge Management, pages
97?112.
Hartley, D., N. Nelson, R. Walters, R. Arthur, R. Yan-
garber, L. Madoff, J. Linge, A. Mawudeku, N. Col-
lier, J. Brownstein, G. Thinus, and N. Lightfoot.
2010. The landscape of international biosurveil-
lance. Emerging Health Threats J., 3(e3), January.
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn534.
Lawrence, O. and J. Gostin. 2004. International
infectious disease law - revision of the World
Health Organization?s international health regula-
tions. J. American Medical Informatics Associa-
tion, 291(21):2623?2627.
Lindberg, Donald A.B., L. Humphreys, Betsy, and
T. McCray, Alexa. 1993. The unified medical lan-
guage system. Methods of Information in Medicine,
32:281?291.
Lipscomb, C. 2000. Medical subject headings
(MeSH). Bulletin of the Medical Library Assoca-
tion, 88:256?266.
Madoff, Lawrence C. and John P. Woodall. 2005. The
internet and the global monitoring of emerging dis-
eases: Lessons from the first 10 years of promed-
mail. Archives of Medical Research, 36(6):724 ?
730. Infectious Diseases: Revisiting Past Problems
and Addressing Future Challenges.
Mawudeku, A. and M. Blench. 2006. Global pub-
lic health intelligence network (gphin). In Proc. 7th
Int. Conf. of the Association for Machine Transla-
tion in the Americas, Cambridge, MA, USA, August
8?12.
McCrae, J., M. Conway, and N. Collier. 2009. Simple
rule language editor. Google code project, Septem-
ber. Available from: http://code.google.com/p/srl-
editor/.
Miles, A., B. Matthews, and M. Wilson. 2005. SKOS
Core: Simple knowledge organization for the web.
In Proc. Int. Conf. on Dublin Core and Metadata
Applications, Madrid, Spain, 12?15 September.
Niles, I. and A. Pease. 2001. Towards a standard up-
per ontology. In Welty, C. and B. Smith, editors,
2nd Int. Conf. on Formal Ontology in Information
Systems FOIS-2001, Maine, USA, October 17?19.
Okhamatovskaia, A., W. Chapman, N. Collier, J. Es-
pino, and D. Buckeridge. 2009. SSO: The syn-
dromic surveillance ontology. In Proc. Int. Soc. for
Disease Surveillance, Miami, USA, December 3?4.
Stearns, M. Q., C. Price, K. A. Spackman, and A. Y.
Wang. 2001. SNOMED clinical terms: overview of
the development process and project status. In Proc.
American Medical Informatics Association (AMIA)
Symposium, pages 662?666.
Vossen, P. 1998. Introduction to EuroWordNet. Com-
puters and the Humanities, 32:73?89.
Wagner, M. and H. Johnson. 2006. The internet as
sentinel. In Wagner, M. et al, editor, The Hand-
book of Biosurveillance, pages 375?385. Academic
Press.
WHO. 2004. ICD-10, International Statistical Classi-
fication of Diseases and Related Health Problems,
Tenth Revision. World Health Organization, De-
cember.
WHO. 2005. Avian influenza: assessing the pandemic
threat. Technical Report WHO/CDS/2005.29,
World Health Organization, Geneva, January.
Wilson, J. 2007. Argus: a global detection and track-
ing system for biological events. Advances in Dis-
ease Surveillance, 4.
Yangarber, R., P. von Etter, and R. Steinberger. 2008.
Content collection and analysis in the domain of
epidemiology. In Proc. Int. Workshop on Describ-
ingMedical Web Resources (DRMED 2008), Goten-
burg, Sweden, May 27th.
222
Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on South and Southeast Asian NLP, 25th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 85?93,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23-29 2014.
Building English-Vietnamese Named Entity Corpus
with Aligned Bilingual News Articles
Quoc Hung Ngo
University of Information Technology
Vietnam National Universiry - HCM City
Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
hungnq@uit.edu.vn
Dinh Dien
University of Sciences
Vietnam National Universiry - HCM City
Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
ddien@fit.hcmus.edu.vn
Werner Winiwarter
University of Vienna
Research Group Data Analytics and Computing
W?ahringer Stra?e 29, 1090 Wien, Austria
werner.winiwarter@univie.ac.at
Abstract
Named entity recognition aims to classify words in a document into pre-defined target entity
classes. It is now considered to be fundamental for many natural language processing tasks such
as information retrieval, machine translation, information extraction and question answering.
This paper presents a workflow to build an English-Vietnamese named entity corpus from an
aligned bilingual corpus. The workflow is based on a state of the art named entity recognition
tool to identify English named entities and map them into Vietnamese text. The paper also
presents a detailed discussion about several mapping errors and differences between English and
Vietnamese sentences that affect this task.
1 Introduction
Named entity recognition (NER) is a basic task in natural language processing and one of the most
important subtasks in Information Extraction. It is really essential to identify objects and extract relations
between them. Moreover, recognizing proper names from news articles or newswires is also useful in
detecting events and monitoring them. The NER task aims to identify and classify certain proper nouns
into some pre-defined target entity classes such as person (PER), organization (ORG), location (LOC),
temporal expressions (TIME), monetary values (MON), and percentage (PCT).
Several previous works in NER have been done on languages such as English (J. Sun et al., 2002;
C.W. Shih et al., 2004), Japanese (R. Sasano and S. Kurohashi, 2008), Chinese (J. Sun et al., 2002;
C.W. Shih et al., 2004), and Vietnamese (N.C. Tu et al., 2005; T.X. T. Pham et al., 2007; Q.T. Tran et
al., 2007); and NER systems have been developed using supervised learning methods such as Decision
Tree, Maximum Entropy model (D. Nadeau and S. Sekine, 2007), and Support Vector Machine (Q.T.
Tran et al., 2007), which achieved high performance. Moreover, there are several studies for bilingual
named entity recognition (C.J. Lee et al., 2006; D. Feng et al., 2004; F. Huang and S. Vogel, 2002).
However, for the English-Vietnamese pair, this task still presents a significant challenge in a number of
important respects (R. Sasano and S. Kurohashi, 2008). Firstly, words in Vietnamese are not always
separated by spaces, so word segmentation is necessary and segmentation errors will affect the level
of NER performance. Secondly, some proper names of foreign persons and locations are loanwords or
represented by phonetic symbols, so we can expect wide variations in some Vietnamese terms. Thirdly,
there are considerably fewer available existing resources such as lexicons, parsers, word nets, etc. for
Vietnamese that have been used in previous studies.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence. Page numbers and proceedings footer
are added by the organisers. Licence details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
85
In this study, we suggest a process to build a bilingual named entity corpus from aligned news express
articles. In fact, this process is applied to build an English-Vietnamese Named Entity Corpus by using
available English named entity recognition to tag entities in the English text, and then map them into
Vietnamese text based on word alignments. The mapping results are also corrected manually by using a
visualization tool.
The remainder of this paper describes the details of our work. Firstly we address the data source for
building the corpus in Section 2. Next, we present a procedure to build an English-Vietnamese Named
Entity Corpus by using a bilingual corpus and mapping English entities into Vietnamese entity tags in
Section 3. Experimental results and conclusion appear in Sections 4 and 5, respectively.
2 Tagset and Data Source
2.1 Tagset for Named Entities
There are many tagsets for the NER task, such as the hierarchical named entity tagset with 150 types (S.
Sekine et al., 2002), the biological named entity tagset (Y. Tateisi et al., 2000; J-D Kim et al., 2003), or
common named entity tagsets with 3 types and 7 tags (N. Chinchor and P. Robinson, 1998). According
to the definition of the MUC-7 conference (N. Chinchor and P. Robinson, 1998), we will identify six
types of named entities:
? PERSON (PER): Person entities are limited to humans identified by name, nickname or alias.
? ORGANIZATION (ORG): Organization entities are limited to corporations, institutions, govern-
ment agencies and other groups of people defined by an established organizational structure.
? LOCATION (LOC): Location entities include names of politically or geographically defined
places (cities, provinces, countries, international regions, bodies of water, mountains, etc.). Lo-
cations also include man-made structures like airports, highways, streets, factories and monuments.
? TIME (TIM): Date/Time entities are complete or partial expressions of time of day, or date expres-
sions.
? PERCENTAGE (PCT): Percentage entities are percentage expressions, including percentage range
expressions.
? MONEY (MON): Money entities include monetary expressions.
We have developed a guide for bilingual named entity tagging and published it as EnVnNEguide at
http://code.google.com/p/evbcorpus/downloads/list.
2.2 Data Source
The data source for building the English-Vietnamese named entity corpus is a part of the EVBCorpus
1
,
which consists of both original English text and its Vietnamese translations. It contains 1,000 news
articles defined as the EVBNews part of the EVBCorpus (as shown in Table 1) (Q.H. Ngo et al., 2013).
This corpus is also aligned semi-automatically at the word level.
In particular, each article was translated one to one at the whole article level, so we align sentence to
sentence. Then, sentences are aligned semi-automatically at the word level, including automatic align-
ment by class-based method (D. Dien et al., 2002) and use of the BiCAT tool (Q.H. Ngo and W. Wini-
warter, 2012) to correct the alignments manually. The details of the corpus are listed in Table 1.
Parallel documents are also chosen and classified into categories, such as economy, entertainment
(art and music), health, science, social, politics, and technology (percentage of each category is shown
in Table 2 and Figure 1). The wide range of categories ensures that named entities in the corpus are
diversified enough for other following tasks.
86
Figure 1: The distribution of articles and sentences in each topic in EVBNews
Table 1: Characteristics of EVBNews part
English Vietnamese
Files 1,000 1,000
Paragraphs 25,015 25,015
Sentences 45,531 45,531
Words 740,534 832,441
Words in Alignments 654,060 768,031
3 Building Named Entity Corpus
3.1 Model of Building EVNECorpus from EVBCorpus
Figure 2 shows the main modules of bilingual named entity corpus building, including three main mod-
ules: pre-processing, named entity recognition, bilingual entity mapping, and bilingual entity correction.
According to this workflow, the bilingual corpus will be tagged with named entities on the English text,
then, named entities are mapped from English to Vietnamese text. Finally, annotators will correct both
English and Vietnamese named entities by using the BiCAT tool (Q.H. Ngo and W. Winiwarter, 2012).
At the first stage, a Named Entity Recognition system is used to tag English entities in the English
sentence. Several Named Entity Recognition systems for English text are available online. For traditional
NER, the most popular publicly available systems are: OpenNLP NameFinder
2
, Illinois NER
3
system
by Lev Ratinov (L. Ratinov and D. Roth, 2009), Stanford NER
4
system by Jenny Rose Finkel (J.R.
Finkel et al., 3005), and Lingpipe NER
5
system by Baldwin, B. and B. Carpenter (B. Carpenter, 2006).
The Stanford NER reports 86.86 F1 on the CoNLL03 NER shared task data. We chose the Stanford NER
to provide for the ability of our corpus for tagging with multi-type, such as 3 classes, 4 classes, and 7
classes.
The following example is the result of the Stanford NER for the English sentence ?Prime Minister
Gordon Brown resigned as Britain ?s top politician on Tuesday evening, making way for Conservative
1
http://code.google.com/p/evbcorpus/
2
http://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/opennlp/
3
http://cogcomp.cs.illinois.edu/page/software view/4
4
http://nlp.stanford.edu/ner/index.shtml
5
http://alias-i.com/lingpipe/index.html
87
Table 2: Number of files and sentences for each topic
Topic File Sentence
Economy 125 4,326
Entertainment 11 365
Health 336 21,107
Politics 141 4,253
Science 34 1,692
Social 110 3,699
Sport 22 838
Technology 104 2,609
Misc 117 117
Total 1,000 45,531
Figure 2: Architecture of building EVNECorpus from EVBCorpus
leader David Cameron.? :
Prime Minister [Gordon Brown]
PER
resigned as [Britain]
LOC
?s top politician on [Tuesday]
TIM
evening, making way for [Conservative]
ORG
leader [David Cameron]
PER
.
and its mapped named entities in the Vietnamese sentence:
Th? t??ng [Gordon Brown]
PER
?? t? gi? ch?c v? cao nh?t tr?n ch?nh tr??ng [Anh]
LOC
v?o t?i
[th? ba]
TIM
, nh??ng ch? cho [David Cameron]
PER
nh? l?nh ??o [??ng B?o th?]
ORG
.
3.2 Mapping English to Vietnamese Named Entities
At the next stage, every alignment will be mapped from English into Vietnamese tokens. Every named
entity tag on linked English words is mapped to Vietnamese tokens on the target sentence. Left and right
boundaries are also detected to re-build named entity chunks on the Vietnamese sentence (as shown in
Figure 3):
? Remove all alignments which are not related to English named entity tokens
? Map English named entity tokens to Vietnamese text by using alignments
88
? Identify the boundaries of named entities and rebuild named entity script text.
Figure 3: Mapping named entities
However, there is a difference between the number of tagged English named entities and mapped
Vietnamese named entities (as shown in Table 3). Several English entities in the English sentences are
not translated into the Vietnamese text, therefore, these entities are not mapped.
Table 3: Number of entities at the first stage
Tag Name Tagged English Entity Mapped Vietnamese Entity Unmapped Entity
LOC Location 10,418 10,354 64
ORG Organization 8,197 8,120 77
PER Person 7,217 7,153 64
TIM Time 4,474 4,437 37
MON Money 1,003 992 11
PCT Percent 1,201 1,193 8
Total 32,510 32,249 261
There are several common errors of the mapping stage. The most frequent error is caused by the
separation of entities from English text in Vietnamese. It means that there are several cases of one tagged
English named entity being separated into two distinct Vietnamese named entities in the Vietnamese
text. On the other hand, for example, the phrase ?President [Bill Clinton]
PER
between [1994]
TIM
and
[1997]
TIM
? has one PER entity and two TIM entities whereas the Vietnamese translated text ?T?ng
th?ng [Bill Clinton]
PER
trong giai ?o?n [1994-1997]
TIM
? has one PER entity and only one TIM entity.
Three common reasons which lead to mapping errors (these cases are discussed in the next section by
analysing unmatched cases) are:
? The differences between English and Vietnamese characteristics.
? The splitting of an English named entity to two Vietnamese entities.
? The entities are replaced by pronouns and possessive pronouns in the target sentences or the other
way around.
89
3.3 Correcting Named Entities
As shown in Figure 4, we use the BiCAT tool (Q.H. Ngo and W. Winiwarter, 2012) for correcting named
entities in both English and Vietnamese sentences. The BiCAT tool is a visualization tool based on drag,
drop, and edit label operations (actions) to correct the sentence pairs. It is designed for annotators to
review whole phrase structures of English and Vietnamese sentences. They can compare the English
named entity result with the Vietnamese named entity result and correct them in both sentences. The
comparison is also used to detect incorrect named entities in both English and Vietnamese text.
Figure 4: Screenshot of BiCAT with the named entity map
Moreover, several additional information, such as POS tagger, chunker, is also shown for building
further linguistic tags. Several features are implemented on the entity matrix at the right panel of the
BiCAT tool:
? Show the sentence where named entities occur.
? Highlight the pairs which have imbalance in number of entities between source sentence and target
sentence.
? Quick jump to the sentence pair on which the user clicks.
4 Experiment and Results
Named entities include six tags: Location (LOC), Person (PER), Organization (ORG), Time including
date tags (TIM), Money (MON), and Percentage (PCT). English text is tagged with English NER tags by
Stanford NER and then mapped to Vietnamese text. Next, Vietnamese entity tags are corrected manually.
In total, the English-Vietnamese Named Entity Corpus (EVNECorpus) has 32,454 English named
entities and 33,338 Vietnamese named entities in the EVBNews corpus (see Table 4 for details and its
comparison in Figure 5).
90
Table 4: Number of entities in the EVNECorpus
Tag Name English Entity Vietnamese Entity Unmatched Entity
LOC Location 10,406 11,343 998
ORG Organization 8,177 8,218 189
PER Person 7,201 7,205 199
TIM Time 4,408 4,417 136
MON Money 1,003 993 32
PCT Percent 1,194 1,170 27
Total 32,454 33,338 1,581
There are several common unmatched named entities in English-Vietnamese named entity corpus: the
English-Vietnamese Named Entity Corpus (EVNECorpus) has 32,454 English named entities and 33,338
Vietnamese named entities in the EVBNews corpus (see Table 5). Moreover, to classify the unmatched
named entities, we also tag part-of-speech for English sentences by the POS Tagger
6
of the Stanford
Natural Language Processing Group (K. Toutanova and C. D. Manning, 2000).
As shown in Table 5, a large number of English adjectives (tagged JJ tag) are not tagged as named en-
tities while their translations are tagged as locations. Most of them are coming from country names, such
as French, English, and Vietnamese, and they refer to people or languages. In the English text ?Cuban
missile crisis?, the word Cuban is not tagged as a location because Cuban is an adjective (?Cuban/JJ
missile/NN crisis/NN?), while, in its Vietnamese translation, ?Kh?ng kho?ng t?n l?a [Cu Ba]
LOC
?, ?Cu
Ba? is tagged as a location. Moreover, there are several English named entities that are split into two
entities in the Vietnamese sentences. For example, ?[Thailand]
LOC
?s [Ministry of Public Health]
ORG
?
has two entities while its translation is [B? Y t? Th?i Lan]
ORG
. Finally, there are several named entities
that are replaced by pronouns and possessive pronouns (30 cases for PRP and 11 cases for PRP$) in the
translated sentences and the inverse direction (38 cases).
Figure 5: English entities and Vietnamese entities in the EVNECorpus
6
http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/tagger.shtml
91
Table 5: Common Unmatched Named Entities
Description/Examples POS Count
1 English named entities without alignments to Vietnamese words 190
2 Vietnamese named entities without alignments to English source words 106
3
English named entities with alignments to Vietnamese words rather than
NNP 38
Vietnamese entities
4
Vietnamese named entities with alignments to English words rather than
English entities
- Eurobond, NN 10
- Democrats, Eurobonds, Socialists NNS 45
- Kenyan, French, NNP 229
- Russians, Danish, Philippines NNPS 107
- They, he, she, it PRP 36
- Him, His, her, them PRP$ 11
- French, English, and Fuji-based JJ 797
- other cases Others 12
Total 1,581
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we have shown a workflow of building an English-Vietnamese named entity corpus. This
workflow is based on an aligned bilingual corpus. In addition, we built a Vietnamese word segmen-
tation corpus for training and evaluating the system. As result, the corpus is built semi-automatically
with over 45,000 sentences, and totally 32,454 English named entities and 33,338 Vietnamese named
entities. Moreover, we also pointed out several differences in named entity tagging between English and
Vietnamese text. These differences can be used to map named entity tags, linguistic information, and in
machine translation systems.
However, adding to the six common named entity types additional names (such as product, disease,
and event names) is also necessary, and we need further research for identifying them in bilingual corpora
because they affect the named entity recognition process as well as the corpus.
References
Bob Carpenter 2006. Character Language Models for Chinese Word Segmentation and Named Entity Recognition,
In Proceedings of the Fifth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, pp. 169-172.
Chun-Jen Lee, Jason S. Chang, and Jyh-Shing R. Jang. 2006. Alignment of Bilingual Named Entities in Parallel
Corpora Using Statistical Models and Multiple Knowledge sources, ACM Transactions on Asian Language
Information Processing (TALIP) 5, no. 2 (2006): 121-145.
Cheng-Wei Shih, Tzong-Han Tsai, Shih-Hung Wu, Chiu-Chen Hsieh, and Wen-Lian Hsu. 2004. The Construction
of a Chinese Named Entity Tagged Corpus: CNEC1.0., In Proceedings of Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics and Speech Processing (ROCLING). Association for Computational Linguistics and Chinese Language
Processing (ACLCLP).
92
Dinh Dien, Hoang Kiem, Thuy Ngan, Xuan Quang, Nguyen V. Toan, Hung Ngo, and Phu Hoi. 2002. Word Align-
ment in English ? Vietnamese Bilingual Corpus, In Proceedings of the 2nd East Asian Language Processing
and Internet Information Technology (EALPIIT?02), pp. 3-11.
Donghui Feng, Yajuan L?u, and Ming Zhou. 2004. A New Approach for English-Chinese Named Entity Align-
ment, In Proceedings of Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EMNLP), vol. 2004, pp. 372-379. Association for Computational Linguistics.
David Nadeau, and Satoshi Sekine. 2007. A Survey of Named Entity Recognition and Classification, Lingvisticae
Investigationes 30, no. 1 (2007): 3-26.
Fei Huang, and Stephan Vogel. 2002. Improved Named Entity Translation and Bilingual Named Entity Extraction,
In Proceedings of the Fourth IEEE International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces, pp. 253-258. IEEE.
J-D Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Yuka Tateisi, and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2003. GENIA Corpus - a Semantically Annotated
Corpus for Bio-Textmining, Bioinformatics 19 (suppl. 1), pp. 80-82. Oxford University Press.
Jenny R. Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher Manning. 2005. Incorporating Non-local Information into
Information Extraction Systems by Gibbs Sampling, In Proceedings of the 43nd Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2005), pp. 363-370. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jian Sun, Jianfeng Gao, Lei Zhang, Ming Zhou, and Changning Huang. 2002. Chinese Named Entity Identification
Using Class-based Language Model, In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics - Volume 1, pp. 1-7. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kristina Toutanova, and Christopher D. Manning, 2000. Enriching the Knowledge Sources Used in a Maximum
Entropy Part-of-Speech Tagger, In Proceedings of the Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing and Very Large Corpora (EMNLP/VLC-2000), pp. 63-70. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Lev Ratinov, and Dan Roth. 2009. Design Challenges and Misconceptions in Named Entity Recognition, In
Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL ?09), pp.
147-155. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Nguyen C. Tu, Tran T. Oanh, Phan X. Hieu, and Ho Q. Thuy. 2005. Named Entity Recognition in Vietnamese Free-
Text and Web Documents Using Conditional Random Fields, The 8th Conference on Some Selection Problems
of Information Technology and Telecommunication. Hai Phong, Vietnam.
Nancy Chinchor, and Patricia Robinson. 1997. MUC-7 named entity task definition, In Proceedings of the 7th
Conference on Message Understanding.
Quoc Hung Ngo, and Werner Winiwarter. 2012. A Visualizing Annotation Tool for Semi-Automatically Building a
Bilingual Corpus, In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora, LREC2012
Workshop, pp. 67-74. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Quoc Hung Ngo, Werner Winiwarter, and Bartholom?aus Wloka. 2013. EVBCorpus - A Multi-Layer English-
Vietnamese Bilingual Corpus for Studying Tasks in Comparative Linguistics, In Proceedings of the 11th Work-
shop on Asian Language Resources (11th ALR within the IJCNLP2013), pp. 1-9. Asian Federation of Natural
Language Processing Associations.
Quoc Tri Tran, TX. Thao Pham, Quoc Hung Ngo, Dien Dinh, and Nigel Collier. 2007. Named Entity Recognition
in Vietnamese Documents, Progress in Informatics, No.4, March 2007, pp. 5-13.
Ryohei Sasano, and Sadao Kurohashi. 2008. Japanese Named Entity Recognition Using Structural Natural Lan-
guage Processing, In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (IJC-
NLP), pp. 607-612. Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing Associations.
Satoshi Sekine, Kiyoshi Sudo, and Chikashi Nobata. 2002. Extended Named Entity Hierarchy, In Proceedings of
the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, pp. 1818-1824. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
TX. Thao Pham, Quoc Tri Tran, Dinh Dien, and Nigel Collier. 2007. Named Entity Recognition in Vietnamese Us-
ing Classifier Voting, ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing (TALIP) 6, no. 4 (2007):
3.
Yuka Tateisi, Tomoko Ohta, Nigel Collier, Chikashi Nobata, and Jun-ichi Tsujii. 2000. Building an Annotated
Corpus in the Molecular-Biology Domain. In Proceedings of the COLING-2000 Workshop on Semantic Anno-
tation and Intelligent Content, pp. 28-36. Association for Computational Linguistics.
93
