Proceedings of Ninth Meeting of the ACL Special Interest Group in Computational Morphology and Phonology, pages 134?141,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Creating a Comparative Dictionary of Totonac-Tepehua
Grzegorz Kondrak
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
kondrak@cs.ualberta.ca
David Beck
Department of Linguistics
University of Alberta
dbeck@ualberta.ca
Philip Dilts
Department of Linguistics
University of Alberta
pdilts@ualberta.ca
Abstract
We apply algorithms for the identification
of cognates and recurrent sound correspon-
dences proposed by Kondrak (2002) to the
Totonac-Tepehua family of indigenous lan-
guages in Mexico. We show that by combin-
ing expert linguistic knowledge with com-
putational analysis, it is possible to quickly
identify a large number of cognate sets
within the family. Our objective is to pro-
vide tools for rapid construction of com-
parative dictionaries for relatively unfamiliar
language families.
1 Introduction
Identification of cognates and recurrent sound cor-
respondences is a component of two principal tasks
of historical linguistics: demonstrating the related-
ness of languages, and reconstructing the histories
of language families. Manually compiling the list of
cognates is an error-prone and time-consuming task.
Several methods for constructing comparative dic-
tionaries have been proposed and applied to specific
language families: Algonquian (Hewson, 1974), Yu-
man (Johnson, 1985), Tamang (Lowe and Maza-
udon, 1994), and Malayo-Javanic (Oakes, 2000).
Most of those methods crucially depend on pre-
viously determined regular sound correspondences;
each of them was both developed and tested on a
single language family.
Kondrak (2002) proposes a number of algorithms
for automatically detecting and quantifying three
characteristics of cognates: recurrent sound corre-
spondences, phonetic similarity, and semantic affin-
ity. The algorithms were tested on two well-studied
language families: Indo-European and Algonquian.
In this paper, we apply them instead to a set of lan-
guages whose mutual relationship is still being in-
vestigated. This is consistent with the original re-
search goal of providing tools for the analysis of
relatively unfamiliar languages represented by word
lists. We show that by combining expert linguistic
knowledge with computational analysis, it is possi-
ble to quickly identify a large number of cognate sets
within a relatively little-studied language family.
The experiments reported in this paper were per-
formed in the context of the Upper Necaxa Totonac
Project (Beck, 2005), of which one of the authors is
the principal investigator. Upper Necaxa is a seri-
ously endangered language spoken by around 3,400
indigenous people in Puebla State, Mexico. The pri-
mary goal of the project is to document the language
through the compilation of an extensive dictionary
and other resources, which may aid revitalization
efforts. One aim of the project is the investigation
of the relationship between Upper Necaxa Totonac
and the other languages of the Totonac-Tepehua lan-
guage family, whose family tree is not yet well-
understood.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we provide background on the Totonac-Tepehua
family. Section 3 describes our data sets. In Sec-
tion 4, we outline our algorithms. In Section 5,
we report on a pilot study involving only two lan-
guages. In Section 6, we present the details of our
system that generates a comparative dictionary in-
volving five languages. Section 7 discusses the prac-
tical significance of our project.
134
2 Totonac-Tepehua Language Family
The Totonac-Tepehua language family is an isolate
group of languages spoken by around 200,000 peo-
ple in the northern part of Puebla State and the
adjacent areas of Veracruz and Hidalgo in East-
Central Mexico (Figure 1). Although individual lan-
guages have begun to receive some attention from
linguists, relatively little is known about the fam-
ily as whole: recent estimates put the number of
languages in the group between 14 and 20, but
the phylo-genetic relations between languages re-
mains a subject of some controversy. The family
has traditionally been divided into two coordinate
branches: Tepehua, consisting of three languages
(Pisa Flores, Tlachichilco, and Huehuetla), and To-
tonacan. The Totonacan branch has in turn been di-
vided into four sub-branches: Misantla, Lowlands or
Papantla, Sierra, and Northern (Ichon, 1973; Reid,
1991), largely on the impressions of missionaries
working in the area. Some dialectological work has
cast doubt on the division between Northern and
Sierra (Arana, 1953; Rojas, 1978), and groups them
together into a rather heterogeneous Highland To-
tonac, suggesting that this split may be more recent
than the others. However, the experience of linguists
working in Totonacan communities, including one
of the authors, indicates that ? judged by the crite-
rion of mutual intelligibility ? there are likely to be
more, rather than fewer, divisions needed within the
Totonacan branch of the family.
Although Totonac-Tepehua shows a good deal
of internal diversity, the languages that make it up
are easily recognizable as a family. Speakers of
Totonacan languages are aware of having a com-
mon historical and linguistic background, and there
are large numbers of easily recognizable cognates
and grammatical similarities. A typical Totonacan
consonantal inventory, that of the Papantla vari-
ant (Levy, 1987), is given in Table 1. Most lan-
guages of the family share this inventory, though one
of the languages used for this study, Upper Necaxa,
has undergone a number of phonological shifts that
have affected its consonantal system, most notably
the collapse of the voiceless lateral affricate with the
voiceless lateral fricative (both are now fricatives)
and the lenition of the uvular stop to a glottal stop,
a process that has also affected at least some of the
Figure 1: Totonac-Tepehua language area indicating
traditional taxonomic divisions.
Tepehua languages. In Upper Necaxa, this lenition
has also resulted in the creation of ejective frica-
tives from historical stop-uvular stop clusters (Beck,
2006). Languages also differ as to whether the
back-fricative consonant is /h/ or /x/, and some lan-
guages have evolved voiceless /w/ and/or voiceless
/y/ phonemes in word-final position. The phonemic
status of the glottal stop is an open question in sev-
eral of the languages.
Plosive p t k q
Affricate ? t? ?
Fricative s ? S h
Approximant w l j
Nasal m n ?
Table 1: Illustrative Totonac-Tepehua consonantal
inventory.
In terms of vocalic inventory, it was previously
thought that all Totonacan languages had three-
vowel systems (/a/, /i/, /u/), and that they also made
distinctions for each vowel quality in vowel length
and laryngealization. It has since come to light
that at least some languages in the Sierra group
do not make length distinctions (in at least one of
these, Olintla, it appears that short vowels have de-
veloped into a phonemic schwa), and that others
do not distinguish laryngealized vowels. A number
of languages, including Upper Necaxa and some of
the languages adjacent to it, have developed a five-
135
vowel system; the sounds /e/ and /o/ are recognized
in the orthographies of several languages of the fam-
ily even where their phonemic status is in doubt.
3 Data
There are five languages included in this study:
Tlachichilco (abbreviated T), Upper Necaxa (U),
Papantla (P), Coyutla (C), and Zapotitla?n (S).
Tlachichilco belongs to the Tepehua branch; the
other four are from the Totonacan branch. Zapotitla?n
is traditionally considered to belong to the Sierra
group of Totonacan, whereas the status of Coyutla
is uncertain. The location of each language is indi-
cated by grey lozenges on Figure 1.
The data comes from several diverse sources. The
Tlachichilco Tepehua data are drawn from an elec-
tronic lexical database provided to the authors by
James Watters of the Summer Institute of Linguis-
tics. The data on Upper Necaxa was collected by
Beck in the communities of Patla and Chicontla ?
located in the so-called Northern Totonac area ?
and data from the Papantla area was provided by
Paulette Levy of the National Autonomous Univer-
sity of Mexico based on her field work in the vicin-
ity of the city of Papantla. Data on the remain-
ing two languages were provided by Herman As-
chmann. The material from Coyutla was drawn from
a word list compiled for Bible translation and the
Zapotitla?n material has been published in dictionary
form (Aschmann, 1983). The glosses of Totonac
forms for all the languages are in Spanish.
The dictionaries differ significantly in format and
character encoding. The Tepehua and Coyutla dic-
tionaries are in a file format and character encoding
used by the Shoebox program. The Upper Necaxa
and the Zapotitla?n dictionaries are in their own for-
mats and character encodings. The Papantla dictio-
nary is in the RTF format. The dictionaries also dif-
fer in orthographies used. For example, while most
dictionaries use k to represent a voiceless velar stop,
the Coyutla dictionary uses c.
4 Methods
In this section, we briefly outline the algorithms em-
ployed for computing three similarity scores: pho-
netic, semantic and correspondence-based. Our cog-
nate identification program integrates the three types
of evidence using a linear combination of scores.
The algorithms are described in detail in (Kondrak,
2002).
The phonetic similarity of lexemes is computed
using the ALINE algorithm, which assigns a similar-
ity score to pairs of phonetically-transcribed words
on the basis of the decomposition of phonemes into
elementary phonetic features. The principal compo-
nent of ALINE is a function that calculates the sim-
ilarity of two phonemes that are expressed in terms
of about a dozen multi-valued phonetic features. For
example, the phoneme n, which is usually described
as a voiced alveolar nasal stop, has the following
feature values: Place = 0.85, Manner = 0.6, Voice =
1, and Nasal = 1, with the remaining features set to
0. The numerical feature values reflect the distances
between vocal organs during speech production, and
are based on experimental measurements. The pho-
netic features are assigned salience weights that ex-
press their relative importance. The default salience
values were tuned manually on a development set
of phoneme-aligned cognate pairs from various re-
lated languages. The overall similarity score is the
sum of individual similarity scores between pairs of
phonemes in an optimal alignment of two words.
The similarity value is normalized by the length of
the longer word.1
For the determination of recurrent sound corre-
spondences we employ the method of inducing a
translation model between phonemes in two word
lists. The idea is to relate recurrent sound correspon-
dences in word lists to translational equivalences in
bitexts. The translation model is induced by com-
bining the maximum similarity alignment with the
competitive linking algorithm of Melamed (2000).
Melamed?s approach is based on the one-to-one as-
sumption, which implies that every word in the bi-
text is aligned with at most one word on the other
side of the bitext. In the context of the bilingual
word lists, the correspondences determined under
the one-to-one assumption are restricted to link sin-
gle phonemes to single phonemes. Nevertheless, the
method is powerful enough to determine valid cor-
respondences in word lists in which the fraction of
cognate pairs is well below 50%.
1Another possibility is normalization by the length of the
longest alignment (Heeringa et al, 2006).
136
Because of the lack of a Totonac gold standard,
the approach to computing semantic similarity of
glosses was much simpler than in (Kondrak, 2002).
The keyword selection heuristic was simply to pick
the first word of the gloss, which in Spanish glosses
is often a noun followed by modifiers. A complete
gloss match was given double the weight of a key-
word match. More complex semantic relations were
not considered. In the future, we plan to utilize a
Spanish part-of-speech tagger, and the Spanish por-
tion of the EuroWordNet in order to improve the ac-
curacy of the semantic module.
5 Pairwise Comparison
The first experiment was designed to test the effec-
tiveness of our approach in identifying recurrent cor-
respondences and cognates across a single pair of
related languages. The data for the experiment was
limited to two noun lists representing Upper Necaxa
(2110 lexemes) and Zapotitla?n (763 lexemes), which
were extracted from the corresponding dictionaries.
Both correspondences and cognates were evaluated
by one of the authors (Beck), who is an expert on the
Totonac-Tepehua language family.
5.1 Identification of correspondences
In the first experiment, our correspondence identi-
fication program was applied to Upper Necaxa and
Zapotitla?n. Simple correspondences were targeted,
as complex correspondences do not seem to be very
frequent among the Totonac languages. The input
for the program was created by extracting all pairs
of noun lexemes with identical glosses from the two
dictionaries. The resulting list of 865 word pairs was
likely to contain more unrelated word pairs than ac-
tual cognates.2
The results of the experiment were very encour-
aging. Of the 24 correspondences posited by the
program, 22 were judged as completely correct,
while the remaining two (?:? and t?:?). were
judged as ?plausible but surprising?. Since the pro-
gram explicitly list the word pairs from which it
extracts correspondences, they were available for
a more detailed analysis. Of the five pairs con-
taining ?:?, one was judged as possibly cognate:
2Some lexemes have multiple glosses, and therefore may
participate in several word pairs.
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700
Cutoff
"cumulative precision"
"subset precision"
Figure 2: Cognate identification precision on the To-
tonac test set.
Upper Necaxa [?astun] and Zapotitla?n [aPa?astun]
?rinco?n, esquina?. Both word pairs containing t?:?
were judged as possibly cognate: [lit?an]/[li?eX]
?favor?, and [t?aqt?a]/[?a?a] ?elote?. Both unex-
pected correspondences were deemed to merit fur-
ther linguistic investigation.
5.2 Identification of cognates
In the second experiment, our cognate identification
program was run on the vocabulary lists containing
the Upper Necaxa and Zapotitla?n nouns. A large list
of the candidate word pairs with their glosses was
sorted by the total similarity score and evaluated by
Beck. The cognation judgments were performed in
order, starting from the top of the list, until the pro-
portion of false positives became too high to justify
further effort. At any point of the list, we can com-
pute precision, which is the ratio of true positives (in
this case, cognates) to the sum of true positives and
false positives (all word pairs up to that point).
The cognate decisions were based on the follow-
ing principles. The pairs could be judged as true
positives only if the word roots were cognate; shar-
ing an affix was not deemed sufficient. Compound
words were counted as cognates if any of the mul-
tiple roots were related; for example, both snow-
storm/storm and snowstorm/snow would be accept-
able. The rationale is that a person compiling an
etymological dictionary would still want to know
about such pairs whether or not they are eventually
included as entries in the dictionary.
In total, 711 pairs were evaluated, of which 350
137
were classified as cognate, 351 as unrelated, and
10 as doubtful. 18 of the positive judgments were
marked as loans from Spanish. In Figure 2, the
boxes correspond to the precision values for the
seven sets of 100 candidate pairs each, sorted by
score; the curve represents the cumulative precision.
For example, the percentage of actual cognates was
86.9% among the first 300 word pairs, and 72.4%
among the word pairs numbered 201?300. As can
be seen, almost all the pairs in the beginning of the
file were cognates, but then the number of false pos-
itives increases steadily. In terms of semantic sim-
ilarity, 30% of the evaluated pairs had at least one
gloss in common, and further 7% shared a keyword.
Among the pairs judged as cognate, the respective
percentages were 49% and 11%.
6 Multiwise comparison
When data from several related languages is avail-
able, the challenge is to identify cognate sets across
all languages. Our goal was to take a set of diversely
formatted dictionaries as input, and generate from
them, as automatically as possible, a basic compara-
tive dictionary.
Our system is presented graphically in Figure 3.
This system is a suite of Perl scripts and C++ pro-
grams. With the exception of the input dictionary
converters, the system is language-family indepen-
dent. With little change, it could be used to deter-
mine cognate sets from another language family. In
this section, we describe the four stages of the pro-
cess: preprocessing, identification of cognate pairs,
extraction of cognate sets, and postprocessing.
6.1 Preprocessing
The first step is to convert each input dictionary from
its original form into a word list in a standardized
format. Because of the differences between dictio-
naries, separate conversion scripts are required for
each language. The conversion scripts call on a
number of utilities that are maintained in a shared
library of functions, which allows for the relatively
easy development of new conversion scripts should
additional dictionaries become available.
Each line in the resulting language files contains
the phonetic form of the lexeme expressed in a uni-
form encoding, followed a gloss representing the
Figure 3: Flowchart illustrating conversion system
138
meaning of the lexeme. Long glosses are truncated
to thirty characters, with sub-glosses separated by
semicolons. For the present study, the conversion
scripts also removed all dictionary entries that were
known not to be nouns.
For the purpose of uniform encoding of phonetic
symbols, we adopted the ALINE scheme (Kondrak,
2002), in which every phonetic symbol is repre-
sented by a single lowercase letter followed by zero
or more uppercase letters. The initial lowercase let-
ter is the base letter most similar to the sound rep-
resented by the phonetic symbol. The remaining
uppercase letters stand for the phonetic features in
which the represented sound differs from the sound
defined by the base letter. For example, the phoneme
[S], which occurs at the beginning of the word shy,
is represented by ?sV?, where V stands for palato-
alveolar.
6.2 Identification of cognate pairs
The main C++ program computes the similarity of
each pair of words across the two languages using
the methods described in Section 4. A batch script
runs the comparison program on each pair of the dic-
tionary lists. With n input dictionaries, this entails
(n
2
)
pairwise comparisons each resulting in a sepa-
rate list of possible cognate pairs. These lists are
then sorted and trimmed to include only those pairs
that exceeded a certain similarity threshold.
The batch script has an option of selecting a sub-
set of dictionary pairs to process, which was found
useful in several cases. For example, when we dis-
cover a newer version of a dictionary, or update
an individual dictionary conversion script, only 4,
rather than all 10 lists need to be re-generated.
6.3 Extraction of cognate sets
The output from processing individual pairs of word
lists must be combined in order to extract cognate
sets across all languages. The combination script
generates an undirected weighted graph in which
each vertex represents a single lexeme. The source
language of each lexeme is also stored in each ver-
tex. Links between vertices correspond to possi-
ble cognate relationships identified in the previous
stage, with the link weights set according to the sim-
ilarity scores computed by the comparison program.
The algorithm for extracting cognate sets from
Figure 4: A sample judgment screen.
the graph is the following. First, we find the con-
nected components within the graph by applying the
breadth-first search algorithm. The components are
added to a queue. For each component in the queue,
we exhaustively generate a list of connected sub-
graphs in which each vertex corresponds to a dif-
ferent source language. (In the present study, the
minimum size of a subgraph was set to three, and
the maximum size was five, the total number of lan-
guages.) If no such subgraphs exist, we discard the
component, and process the next component from
the queue. Otherwise, the subgraph with the max-
imum cumulative weight is selected as the most
likely cognate set. We remove from the component
the vertices corresponding to that cognate set, to-
gether with their incident edges, which may cause
the component to lose its connectivity. We identify
the resulting connected component(s) by breadth-
first search, and place them at the end of the queue.
We repeat the process until the queue is empty.
6.4 Postprocessing
The candidate cognate sets extracted in the previ-
ous stage are rendered into an HTML page designed
to allow an expert linguist to verify their correct-
ness (Figure 4). After the verification, a dictionary
composed of the confirmed cognate sets is automat-
ically generated in HTML format, with the glosses
restored to their original, untruncated form. Addi-
tional cognate sets can be incorporated seamlessly
into the existing list. A sample entry in the gener-
139
C li:qama:n el juguete; hace burla
de el
T laaqamaan el juguete
317 S li:qama:n el juego; el juguete; lo
maltrata; le hace burla
U le:ha:ma:n juguete
P li:qama:n el juguete
Table 2: A sample entry in the generated dictionary.
ated dictionary is shown in Table 2.3
6.5 Results
In our initial attempt to extract cognate sets from the
graph, we extracted from the graph only those con-
nected components that were complete cliques (i.e.,
fully connected subgraphs). Of the resulting 120
candidate cognate sets, all but one were confirmed
by Beck. The only false positive involved two words
that were true cognates, and one word that was mor-
phologically related to the other two. However, al-
though this method was characterized by a very high
precision, the overly restrictive clique condition ex-
cluded a large number of interesting cognate sets.
In order to improve recall, the method described
in Section 6.3 was adopted. 430 possible cognate
sets of 3, 4, or 5 words were discovered in this man-
ner. 384 (89%) of these sets were judged to be true
cognate sets. Of the remaining 46 sets, 45 contained
partial cognate sets. The set that contained no cog-
nate words was composed of three words that share
a cognate root, but have different prefixes.
7 Discussion
From a practical standpoint, the procedures used
in these experiments provide a powerful tool for
the identification of cognate sets and sound cor-
respondences. The identification of these corre-
spondences by traditional means is cumbersome and
time-consuming, given the large amounts of data
that require processing. The Upper Necaxa dic-
tionary, for instance, contains nearly 9,000 entries,
fromwhich a list of about 2,000 nouns would have to
be extracted by hand, and then compared pairwise to
lists drawn from dictionaries of potentially compa-
3The entire dictionary in its current state can be viewed at
http://www.cs.ualberta.ca/?pdilts.
rable length of each of the other languages, each of
which would also have to be compared to the other.
Lists of potential correspondences from each pair-
wise comparison would then have to be compared,
and so on. The algorithms described here accom-
plish in mere minutes what would take man-hours
(perhaps years) of expert labour to accomplish man-
ually, outputting the results in a format that is eas-
ily accessed and shared with other researchers as
an HTML-format list of cognates that can be made
available on the World Wide Web.
The results obtained from a study of this type
have important implications for linguists, as well
as anthropologists and archeologists interested in
the history and migratory patterns of peoples speak-
ing Totonacan languages. Presented with extensive
and robust cognate sets and lists of sound changes,
linguists gain insight into the patterns of histori-
cal phonological change and can verify or discon-
firm models of phonological and typological devel-
opment. These data can also give rough indica-
tions of the time-depth of the linguistic family and,
potentially, suggest geographical origins of popula-
tions. At present, Totonac-Tepehua has not been
demonstrably linked to any other language family
in Mesoamerica. Careful reconstruction of a proto-
language might reveal such links and, possibly, shed
some light on the early movements and origins of
Mesoamerican peoples.
These experiments have also allowed us to create
the beginnings of an etymological dictionary which
will, in turn, allow us to reconstruct a more accu-
rate Totonac-Tepehua family tree. By comparing the
relative numbers of shared cognates amongst lan-
guages and the number of regular sound changes
shared by individual subsets of languages in each
cognate set, we hope to be able to determine relative
proximity of languages and the order in which the
family divided itself into branches, sub-branches,
and individual languages. This will shed light on the
problem of Totonac-Tepehua origins and migratory
patterns, and may help to answer questions about po-
tential links of Totonacan peoples to archeological
sites in East-Central Mexico, including the pyramids
of Teotihuaca?n. Accurate determination of distance
between variants of Totonacan will also help inform
social policy decisions about bilingual education and
government funding for language revitalization pro-
140
grams, as well as debates about orthographies and
language standardization.
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Paulette Levy, James Watters, and Her-
man Aschmann for sharing their dictionary data.
The fieldwork of David Beck was funded by the So-
cial Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
Canada and the Wenner-Gren Foundation. Philip
Dilts was supported by a scholarship provided by the
Government of the Province of Alberta. Grzegorz
Kondrak was supported by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada.
References
Evangelina Arana. 1953. Reconstruccio?n del proto-
tonaco. Huastecos, totonacos y sus vecinos. Revista
mexicana de estudios antropolo?gicos, 23:123?130.
Herman P. Aschmann. 1983. Vocabulario totonaco de la
Sierra. Summer Institute of Linguistics, Mexico.
David Beck. 2005. The Upper Necaxa field
project II: the structure and acquisition of
an endangered language. Available from
http://www.arts.ualberta.ca/?totonaco.
David Beck. 2006. The emergence of ejective fricatives
in Upper Necaxa Totonac. In Robert Kirchner, editor,
University of Alberta Working Papers in Linguistics 1.
Wilbert Heeringa, Peter Kleiwig, Charlotte Gooskens,
and John Nerbonne. 2006. Evaluation of string dis-
tance algorithms for dialectology. In Proceedings of
the COLING-ACL Workshop on Linguistic Distances,
pages 51?62.
John Hewson. 1974. Comparative reconstruction on
the computer. In Proceedings of the 1st International
Conference on Historical Linguistics, pages 191?197.
Alain Ichon. 1973. La religio?n de los totonacos de la
Sierra. Instituto Nacional Indigenista, Mexico City.
Mark Johnson. 1985. Computer aids for comparative
dictionaries. Linguistics, 23(2):285?302.
Grzegorz Kondrak. 2002. Algorithms for Language Re-
construction. Ph.D. thesis, University of Toronto.
Paulette Levy. 1987. Fonolog??a del totonaco de Pa-
pantla. Universidad Nacional Auto?noma de Me?xico,
Veracruz, Mexico.
John B. Lowe and Martine Mazaudon. 1994. The re-
construction engine: a computer implementation of
the comparative method. Computational Linguistics,
20:381?417.
I. Dan Melamed. 2000. Models of translational equiv-
alence among words. Computational Linguistics,
26(2):221?249.
Michael P. Oakes. 2000. Computer estimation of vocab-
ulary in protolanguage from word lists in four daugh-
ter languages. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics,
7(3):233?243.
Aileen A. Reid. 1991. Grama?tica totonaca de Xicotepec
de Jua?rez, Puebla. Summer Institute of Linguistics,
Mexico City.
Garc??a Rojas. 1978. Dialectolog??a de la zona totonaco-
tepehua. Ph.D. thesis, National School of Anthropol-
ogy and History, Mexico. Honours thesis.
141
