 English-Chinese CLIR using a Simplified PIRCS System 
 
K.L. Kwok, N. Dinstl and P. Deng 
Computer Science Department, Queens College, CUNY  
65-30 Kissena Blvd. 
Flushing, N.Y. 11367 
 
kwok@ir.cs.qc.edu 
 
 
ABSTRACT                                                           
A GUI is presented with our PIRCS retrieval system for 
supporting English-Chinese cross language information retrieval. 
The query translation approach is employed using the LDC 
bilingual wordlist.   Given an English query, different translation 
methods and their retrieval results can be demonstrated. 
 
1.    INTRODUCTION 
The purpose of cross language information retrieval (CLIR) is to 
allow a user to search, retrieve, and gain some content 
understanding of documents written in a language different from 
the one that the user is familiar with.  This is to be accomplished 
automatically without expert linguist assistance.  CLIR is of 
growing importance because it can literally open up a whole 
world of information for the user, especially with the ease and 
convenience of access and delivery of foreign documents 
provided by Internet logistics nowadays.  Searching and retrieving 
Chinese documents via English is a major sub-problem within 
CLIR because many people in the world use these two languages.  
For example, one would expect trade between China and the U.S. 
(and other countries) to grow significantly in the near future 
because of the impending WTO membership for China.  
Monitoring trends and status information from Chinese sources 
may be an essential operation for organizations interested in these 
affairs.  Chinese is a language completely different from English, 
and it is conceived to be difficult for foreigners to learn.  This 
paper describes some of the methods that we employ to deal with 
this problem, and presents a demonstrable system to illustrate the 
workings of cross language document retrieval.  In Section 2, 
techniques for the query translation approach to CLIR are 
discussed.  Section 3 contains a description of our simplified 
PIRCS retrieval system that is the basis for monolingual retrieval.  
Section 4 describes the GUI supporting interactive query input, 
document output and other implementation issues, and Section 5 
contains our conclusion and future work. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  STRATEGY FOR CROSS LANGUAGE 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 
When faced with the situation of a language mismatch between 
the target documents and the query (information need statement) 
of a user, one could reduce them to a common representation 
language for retrieval purposes by automatically translating the 
query to the document language, by translating the documents to 
the query language, or by converting both to a third representation 
language [1].  By far the simplest and most common approach 
seems to be the first method, and probably as effective as the 
others, and we have also taken this route.  The question is what 
tools to use for query translation. 
   
It is well known that machine translation is generally fuzzy and 
inaccurate [6].  This is particularly true when translation output 
are judged by humans, who tend to be unforgiving.  However, 
translation for machine consumption (such as for information 
retrieval (IR)) may not be so bad because IR can operate with a 
bag of content terms without grammar, coherence or readability.  
What IR needs is that important content terms are correctly 
covered, even at the expense of noise translations.  For this 
purpose, we have combined two different methods of query 
translation to hedge for errors and improve coverage, viz. 
dictionary translation and MT software. 
 
2.1  Translation Using LDC Bilingual Wordlist 
One method we employ is dictionary translation using the LDC 
Chinese-English bilingual wordlist (www.morph.ldc.edu/Projects/ 
Chinese) which we label as ldc2ce.  It has about 120K entries.  
Each entry maps a Chinese character sequence (character, word or 
phrase) into one or more English explanation strings delimited 
with slashes.  Sample entries are shown below: 
 
1) ?? /gather/assembly/meeting/convocation/  
2) ?? /parts/components/assembly/.. 
3) ? /assembly hall/auditorium/..   
4) ?7 /legislative assembly/   
5) ?? /legislative council/.. 
 
 When an English word from a query is looked up in the ldc2ce 
wordlist, it will usually be mapped into many Chinese terms and 
reduction of the output is necessary.  For this disambiguation 
purpose, we employ several methods in succession as tabulated 
below: 
 
? Dictionary structure-based: ldc2ce format is employed 
to select the more correct mappings among word 
translations.  For example, when the word to translate is 
?assembly?, we would pick line 1) and 2) only, rather 
than the additional 3) or 4) because in the latter two, 
?assembly? appears in context with other words.  
? Phrase-based: ld2ce can also be regarded as a phrase 
dictionary by matching query strings with English 
explanations of Chinese terms, giving much more 
accurate phrase translations.  For example, if ?legislative 
assembly? appears in a query, it would match line 4) 
exactly and correctly, and would supersede all other 
single word translations such as those from lines 1), 2), 
3) and 5). 
? Corpus frequency-based: for single word translations 
with many candidates, those with higher occurrence 
frequency usually have higher probability of being 
correct.  
? Weight-based: a Chinese term set translated for one 
English word can be considered as a synonym set, so 
that each individual Chinese term is weighted with the 
inverse of the sum of the collection frequencies, and 
generally gives more effective retrieval.   
 
These dictionary disambiguation techniques have been 
implemented and tested with TREC collections.  In general, they 
accumulatively lead to successively more accurate retrievals [4].  
Their output can be demonstrated in our system.  
 
2.2  Translation Using MT Software  
COTS MT software for English to Chinese (or vice versa) are 
now quite readily available on the market.  They cost from scores 
to about a thousand dollars for a single license.  These software 
mostly operate on the PC Windows platform.  Their codes are 
proprietary and usually do not come with an API.  Interfacing 
them with a UNIX and C platform thus becomes quite difficult 
and perhaps impossible.  However, if one runs retrieval from a 
Windows environment, one can ?cut and paste? from their 
translation results.  We investigated several and found that one 
from Mainland China called HuaJian (www.atlan.com) performs 
quite well.  A number of other such packages can also be 
demonstrated within our system. 
 
Once an English query has been translated into Chinese, we can 
perform monolingual Chinese IR using our PIRCS system 
described in the next section.  The two translation outcomes, from 
dictionary and MT software, can be combined for retrieval and the 
final result is usually more effective than single translation 
method alone [3].   
 
3. A SIMPLIFIED PIRCS RETRIEVAL 
SYSTEM 
PIRCS (Probabilistic Indexing and Retrieval ? Components ? 
System) is our in-house developed document retrieval system that 
has participated in all previous TREC large-scale blind retrieval 
experiments with consistently good results.  It supports both 
English and Chinese languages.  PIRCS retrieval approach is 
based on the probabilistic indexing and retrieval methods, but 
extended with the ability to account for the influence of term 
frequencies and item length of documents or queries.  PIRCS can 
best be viewed as activation spreading in a three- layer network,  
 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
di
DQ
T
qa
tk
wak
wka wki
wik
DTQQTD
doc-focused qry-focused
RSVd= k wik*wkaRSVq= k wak*wki
RSV = a*RSVq + (1-a)*RSVd
 
Figure 1. 3-Layer PIRCS Network 
 
 
Figure 1, that also supports learning from user-judged or pseudo-
relevant documents.  The details of our model are given in [4, 5]. 
As shown in Figure 1, PIRCS treats queries and documents as 
objects of the same kind.  They form a Q and a D layer of nodes 
connecting to the middle layer of term nodes.  Retrieval means 
spreading activation from a query node via common term nodes to 
a document node and summed into a retrieval status value RSVd 
for ranking.  This operation is gated by intervening edges with 
weights that are set according to the PIRCS model.  An analogous 
operation is to spread activation from document to query nodes, 
resulting in another RSVq that has been shown to have similarity 
to a simple language model [2, 4].  The final retrieval status value 
RSV is a linear combination of the two. 
 
Documents are pre-processed to create a direct file, an inverted 
file and a master dictionary that contains all the content terms and 
their usage statistics extracted from the collection.  After 
appropriate processing, the master dictionary helps construct the 
middle layer T nodes of Figure 1.  The direct file facilitates 
obtaining the terms and statistics contained in a given document, 
and helps construct the D node and D-to-T edges with weights.  
The inverted file facilitates obtaining the posting information of a 
given term, and helps construct the T-to-D edges with weights.  
At query time, a Q layer of one node is formed and the query 
terms are located on the T layer and linked in to define the Q-to-T 
and T-to-Q edges with weights. 
 
Once the 3-layer network is defined, ranking of documents for the 
query is achieved by activation spreading Q-T-D realizing the 
document-focused retrieval status value RSVd, and vice versa for 
the query-focused RSVq.  They are then linearly combined.  This 
crosslingual PIRCS demonstration runs either on a SUN Solaris or 
Linux platform.  The current implementation is a simplification of 
our batch PIRCS system and does not support automatic two-
stage retrieval for pseudo-relevance feedback.  However, users 
can interactively modify their queries to perform manual 
feedback. 
 
4.   GUI FOR INTERACTIVE CLIR 
A simplified PIRCS system with first stage retrieval will be used 
for demonstrating English-Chinese CLIR.  This system is based 
on an applet-servlet model that runs on a UNIX operating system 
(such as Solaris or Linux).  User?s interaction with PIRCS is 
supported via a GUI based on the Netscape browser (Internet 
Explorer is a better browser for this GUI, but UNIX has Netscape 
only).  The applet or HTML forms in the browser communicate 
with the servlet on the Apache server.  The servlet works as a 
bridge between the front-end program (in HTML and applet) and 
the background programs that do the translation or retrieval.  
Based on the input from the user, it can dispatch calls to the 
retrieval system and then format the output and send results back 
to the applet or directly into user?s browser through a customized 
applet-servlet channel via HTTP protocol. 
   
A GUI software that is modeled on that of ZPRISE 
(www.itl.nist.gov/iaui/894.02/works/papers/zp2/zp2.html) but 
enhanced for CLIR will be demonstrated.  The GUI supports five 
windows: one for English query input and editing, a translation 
window for displaying the Chinese terms mapped from the 
English query via the ldc2ce wordlist, a search-result window for 
displaying the fifty top-ranked document identities after retrieval, 
a document box for displaying the content of the current selected 
document in Chinese, and another index box showing the index 
terms used for retrieval together with their frequency statistics.  
This allows a user to do CLIR interactively. 
If run in a Windows environment, the translation box also allows 
input and editing for those users who know some Chinese.  In this 
test system, all Chinese are GB-encoded.  A query of a few words 
currently takes a few seconds for translation and about 20 seconds 
or more for retrieval depending on the number of unique terms.  
This response time can be improved in the future.   
 
A typical screen of the GUI is shown in Figure 2. A user starts by 
typing in an English query in free text.  When the ?Convert to 
Chinese GB? button is clicked, translation via the LDC dictionary 
look-up based on a default (best) option will be displayed.  Other 
options for translation such as using dictionary-structure only, add 
phrase matching, or include target collection frequency 
disambiguation, etc. (Section 2.1) can be chosen.  If the user finds 
too many English words left un-translated, s/he can re-phrase the 
English query wordings and repeat the process.  Otherwise, the 
retrieval button can be clicked and the top 50 document ID?s will 
be displayed in the search-result box (below the translation) sorted 
by the retrieval status value shown next to each ID.  Content of 
the top document is also displayed automatically in the large 
window with index terms high-lighted.  Additional documents 
following the one displayed can also be brought in for browsing 
purposes. 
 
 
.!JN 65537 . !TI  pd9311.150201 THE
!AB
	1?;?c?????Z?mVvs
?#?;?????
x???VHy8?????Y?u6?	1???
?;?c?
??????Z?m???vs?{|??V???m?u???"
	1?????z???)?b?z*??????|Wq?c?u???
m?Tc
H?	?|????!?:T?Y???q"
???_c?Y!}????%K?*a??|??????$???"
	1?y|c?? lT?????]?Y???Z|??
c?Y??
??Y???|??c?Y??!??8?9`?q?u`p"
	1??|HTc??]?Y???Z|?4?????*??|?
??#Y?
*Vr5Z?Ye"
	1?=|WqcH?????Z?m??F?|?u6???
?j"
xay
U.S. to separate the most-favored-nation 
status from human rights issue in China
^1.00 c? ^^1.00 ?  ^^1.00
???
^^1.00 
Z
^^1.00 
?
^^0.20 ?? 0.20 Z? 0.20 ?!
0.20 
V?
0.20 
V?
^^1.00 
#
^
Z?
7737
?
16548
Z
15765
?
5811 
c?
19471
pd9202-446300  1.5795    
pd9202-446200  1.4633    
pd9311-150201  1.4494    
pd9304-241800  1.4196    
C02bKBBW09Q<m  1.3629    
pd9207-484400  1.3556    
pd9304-248000  1.2974         
Clear Convert into Chinese GB
Keywords used to search are:
64 1
RetrieveClear
Show documents in new window
Top 50 documents
 
 
Figure 2. GUI for Cross Language Information Retrieval 
 
 
If the user knows some Chinese, s/he can have more options for 
interaction.  For example, the user can ?cut and paste? terms that 
s/he likes during perusal of the retrieved documents to do 
relevance feedback manually.  In addition, the query index terms 
(in Chinese) and their document frequencies are also displayed 
at the right hand bottom of the screen.  They can provide useful 
information about the query and can help the user make changes 
to it. 
   
As discussed before, we also make use of COTS MT software 
for query translation.  These can also be demonstrated 
separately.  However, these packages are proprietary, run under 
Windows platform, and are not interfaced with our retrieval 
system that is Linux based.  Another set-up that we can 
demonstrate is to use a Windows platform to run Internet 
Explorer that is also compatible with our GUI.  Internet 
connection will have to be made to our home computers at 
Queens College.  In this case, an MT software can be running in 
the background for query translation.  The translation result can 
then be ?cut and paste? to the translation window of our GUI.  
Users can compare retrieval results based on our dictionary 
approach and the MT software.  Alternatively, both translations 
can be combined to improve retrieval. 
 
5.   CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
English-Chinese CLIR is an important topic in Human 
Language Technology and has great utility.  This project 
demonstration combines simple translation with IR to provide a 
workable solution to CLIR.  It is an ongoing project and 
eventually can help non-Chinese speaking users access Chinese 
text in a reasonable fashion.  Our next step is to add capability to 
show gistings of a retrieved Chinese document in English to 
assist the user in understanding the document content.  Faster 
machines and upgrading of the programs would also provide 
speedier response time. 
 
6.   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was partially supported by the Space and Naval 
Warfare Systems Center San Diego, under grant No. N66001-1-
8912. 
 
7.     REFERENCES 
[1] Grefenstette, G. Cross Language Information Retrieval.  
Kluwer, 1998. 
[2] Hiemstra, D & Kraaj, W. Twenty-One at TREC-7:ad-hoc 
and cross language track. In: Information Technology: The 
Seventh Text Retrieval Conference (TREC-7). E.M.Voorhees 
& D.K. Harman, (eds.), NIST Special Publication 500-242, 
GPO: Washington, D.C, 227-238, 1999. 
[3] Kwok, K.L, Grunfeld, L., Dinstl, N & Chan, M. TREC-9 
cross-lingual, web and question-answering track 
experiments using PIRCS (Draft). Preliminary paper at 
TREC-9 Conference, Gaithersburg, MD, Nov, 2000. 
[4] Kwok, K.L. Improving English and Chinese ad-hoc retrieval: 
a Tipster Text Phase 3 project report.  Information Retrieval, 
3(4):313-338, 2000. 
[5] Kwok, K.L. A network approach to probabilistic information 
retrieval. ACM Transactions on Office Information System, 
13:324-353, July 1995. 
[6] Nirenburg, S, Carbonell, J, Tomita, M & Goodman, K. 
(Eds.) MT: A Knowledge-Based Approach.  Morgan 
Kaufmann, 1994.
 
