Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 93?98,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automatic Detection of Multilingual Dictionaries on the Web
Gintar
?
e Grigonyt
?
e
?
Timothy Baldwin
?
? Department of Linguistics, Stockholm University
? Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
gintare@ling.su.se tb@ldwin.net
Abstract
This paper presents an approach to query
construction to detect multilingual dictio-
naries for predetermined language combi-
nations on the web, based on the identifi-
cation of terms which are likely to occur
in bilingual dictionaries but not in general
web documents. We use eight target lan-
guages for our case study, and train our
method on pre-identified multilingual dic-
tionaries and the Wikipedia dump for each
of our languages.
1 Motivation
Translation dictionaries and other multilingual
lexical resources are valuable in a myriad of
contexts, from language preservation (Thieberger
and Berez, 2012) to language learning (Laufer
and Hadar, 1997), cross-language information
retrieval (Nie, 2010) and machine translation
(Munteanu and Marcu, 2005; Soderland et al,
2009). While there are syndicated efforts
to produce multilingual dictionaries for differ-
ent pairings of the world?s languages such as
freedict.org, more commonly, multilingual
dictionaries are developed in isolation for a spe-
cific set of languages, with ad hoc formatting,
great variability in lexical coverage, and no cen-
tral indexing of the content or existence of that
dictionary (Baldwin et al, 2010). Projects such
as panlex.org aspire to aggregate these dic-
tionaries into a single lexical database, but are
hampered by the need to identify individual multi-
lingual dictionaries, especially for language pairs
where there is a sparsity of data from existing dic-
tionaries (Baldwin et al, 2010; Kamholz and Pool,
to appear). This paper is an attempt to automate
the detection of multilingual dictionaries on the
web, through query construction for an arbitrary
language pair. Note that for the method to work,
we require that the dictionary occurs in ?list form?,
that is it takes the form of a single document (or
at least, a significant number of dictionary entries
on a single page), and is not split across multiple
small-scale sub-documents.
2 Related Work
This research seeks to identify documents of a
particular type on the web, namely multilingual
dictionaries. Related work broadly falls into
four categories: (1) mining of parallel corpora;
(2) automatic construction of bilingual dictionar-
ies/thesauri; (3) automatic detection of multilin-
gual documents; and (4) classification of docu-
ment genre.
Parallel corpus construction is the task of au-
tomatically detecting document sets that contain
the same content in different languages, com-
monly based on a combination of site-structural
and content-based features (Chen and Nie, 2000;
Resnik and Smith, 2003). Such methods could
potentially identify parallel word lists from which
to construct a bilingual dictionary, although more
realistically, bilingual dictionaries exist as single
documents and are not well suited to this style of
analysis.
Methods have also been proposed to automat-
ically construct bilingual dictionaries or thesauri,
e.g. based on crosslingual glossing in predictable
patterns such as a technical term being immedi-
ately proceeded by that term in a lingua franca
source language such as English (Nagata et al,
2001; Yu and Tsujii, 2009). Alternatively, com-
parable or parallel corpora can be used to extract
bilingual dictionaries based on crosslingual distri-
butional similarity (Melamed, 1996; Fung, 1998).
While the precision of these methods is generally
relatively high, the recall is often very low, as there
is a strong bias towards novel technical terms be-
ing glossed but more conventional terms not.
Also relevant to this work is research on lan-
93
guage identification, and specifically the detection
of multilingual documents (Prager, 1999; Yam-
aguchi and Tanaka-Ishii, 2012; Lui et al, 2014).
Here, multi-label document classification meth-
ods have been adapted to identify what mix of
languages is present in a given document, which
could be used as a pre-filter to locate documents
containing a given mixture of languages, although
there is, of course, no guarantee that a multilingual
document is a dictionary.
Finally, document genre classification is rele-
vant in that it is theoretically possible to develop
a document categorisation method which classi-
fies documents as multilingual dictionaries or not,
with the obvious downside that it would need to be
applied exhaustively to all documents on the web.
The general assumption in genre classification is
that the type of a document should be judged not
by its content but rather by its form. A variety
of document genre methods have been proposed,
generally based on a mixture of structural and
content-based features (Matsuda and Fukushima,
1999; Finn et al, 2002; zu Eissen and Stein, 2005).
While all of these lines of research are relevant
to this work, as far as we are aware, there has not
been work which has proposed a direct method
for identifying pre-existing multilingual dictionar-
ies in document collections.
3 Methodology
Our method is based on a query formulation ap-
proach, and querying against a pre-existing index
of a document collection (e.g. the web) via an in-
formation retrieval system.
The first intuition underlying our approach is
that certain words are a priori more ?language-
discriminating? than others, and should be pre-
ferred in query construction (e.g. sushi occurs as
a [transliterated] word in a wide variety of lan-
guages, whereas anti-discriminatory is found pre-
dominantly in English documents). As such, we
prefer search terms w
i
with a higher value for
max
l
P (l|w
i
), where l is the language of interest.
The second intuition is that the lexical cover-
age of dictionaries varies considerably, especially
with multilingual lexicons, which are often com-
piled by a single developer or small community
of developers, with little systematicity in what is
including or not included in the dictionary. As
such, if we are to follow a query construction ap-
proach to lexicon discovery, we need to be able
to predict the likelihood of a given word w
i
be-
ing included in an arbitrarily-selected dictionary
D
l
incorporating language l (i.e. P (w
i
|D
l
)). Fac-
tors which impact on this include the lexical prior
of the word in the language (e.g. P (paper|en) >
P (papyrus|en)), whether they are lemmas or not
(noting that multilingual dictionaries tend not to
contain inflected word forms), and their word class
(e.g. multilingual dictionaries tend to contain more
nouns and verbs than function words).
The third intuition is that certain word combi-
nations are more selective of multilingual dictio-
naries than others, i.e. if certain words are found
together (e.g. cruiser, gospel and noodle), the con-
taining document is highly likely to be a dictionary
of some description rather than a ?conventional?
document.
Below, we describe our methodology for query
construction based on these elements in greater de-
tail. The only assumption on the method is that
we have access to a selection of dictionaries D
(mono- or multilingual) and a corpus of conven-
tional (non-dictionary) documents C, and knowl-
edge of the language(s) contained in each dictio-
nary and document.
Given a set of dictionaries D
l
for a language l
and the complement set D
l
= D\D
l
, we first con-
struct the lexicon L
l
for that language as follows:
L
l
=
{
w
i
|w
i
? D
l
? w
i
/? D
l
}
(1)
This creates a language-discriminating lexicon for
each language, satisfying the first criterion.
Lexical resources differ in size, scope and cov-
erage. For instance, a well-developed, mature
multilingual dictionary may contain over 100,000
multilingual lexical records, while a specialised 5-
way multilingual domain dictionary may contain
as few as 100 multilingual lexical records. In line
with our second criterion, we want to select words
which have a higher likelihood of occurrence in
a multilingual dictionary involving that language.
To this end, we calculate the weight sdict(w
i,l
) for
each word w
i,l
? L
l
:
sdict(w
i,l
) =
?
d?D
l
{
|L
l
|?|d|
|L
l
|
if w
i,l
? d
?
|d|
|L
l
|
otherwise
(2)
where |d| is the size of dictionary d in terms of the
number of lexemes it contains.
The final step is to weight words by their typ-
icality in a given language, as calculated by their
94
likelihood of occurrence in a random document in
that language. This is estimated by the proportion
of Wikipedia documents in that language which
contain the word in question:
Score(w
i,l
) =
df(w
i,l
)
N
l
sdict(w
i,l
) (3)
where df(w
i,l
) is the count of Wikipedia docu-
ments of language l which contain w
i
, and N
l
is
the total number of Wikipedia documents in lan-
guage l.
In all experiments in this paper, we assume that
we have access to at least one multilingual dictio-
nary containing each of our target languages, but
in absence of such a dictionary, sdict(w
i,l
) could
be set to 1 for all words w
i,l
in the language.
The result of this term weighing is a ranked list
of words for each language. The next step is to
identify combinations of words that are likely to
be found in multilingual dictionaries and not stan-
dard documents for a given language, in accor-
dance with our third criterion.
3.1 Apriori-based query generation
We perform query construction for each language
based on frequent item set mining, using the Apri-
ori algorithm (Agrawal et al, 1993). For a given
combination of languages (e.g. English and Swa-
heli), queries are then formed simply by combin-
ing monolingual queries for the component lan-
guages.
The basic approach is to use a modified support
formulation within the Apriori algorithm to prefer
word combinations that do not cooccur in regular
documents. Based on the assumption that query-
ing a (pre-indexed) document collection is rela-
tively simple, we generate a range of queries of de-
creasing length and increasing likelihood of term
co-occurrence in standard documents, and query
until a non-empty set of results is returned.
The modified support formulation is as follows:
cscore(w
1
, ..., w
n
) =
{
0 if ?d,w
i
, w
j
: co
d
(w
i
, w
j
)
?
i
Score(w
i
) otherwise
where co
d
(w
i
, w
j
) is a Boolean function which
evaluates to true iff w
i
and w
j
co-occur in doc-
ument d. That is, we reject any combinations of
words which are found to co-occur in Wikipedia
documents for that language. Note that the actual
calculation of this co-occurrence can be performed
Figure 1: Examples of learned queries for different
languages
efficiently, as: (a) for a given iteration of Apri-
ori, it only needs to be performed between the new
word that we are adding to the query (?item set? in
the terminology of Apriori) and each of the other
words in a non-zero support itemset from the pre-
vious iteration of the algorithm (which are guaran-
teed to not co-occur with each other); and (b) the
determination of whether two terms collocate can
be performed efficiently using an inverted index of
Wikipedia for that language.
In our experiments, we apply the Apriori al-
gorithm exhaustively for a given language with a
support threshold of 0.5, and return the resultant
item sets in ranked order of combined score for
the component words.
A random selection of queries learned for each
of the 8 languages targeted in this research is pre-
sented in Figure 1.
4 Experimental methodology
We evaluate our proposed methodology in two
ways:
1. against a synthetic dataset, whereby we in-
jected bilingual dictionaries into a collection
of web documents, and evaluated the ability
of the method to return multilingual dictio-
naries for individual languages; in this, we
naively assume that all web documents in the
background collection are not multilingual
dictionaries, and as such, the results are po-
tentially an underestimate of the true retrieval
effectiveness.
2. against the open web via the Google search
API for a given combination of languages,
and hand evaluation of the returned docu-
ments
95
Lang Wikipedia articles (M) Dictionaries Queries learned Avg. query length
en 3.1 26 2546 3.2
zh 0.3 0 5034 3.6
es 0.5 2 356 2.9
ja 0.6 0 1532 3.3
de 1.0 13 634 2.7
fr 0.9 5 4126 3.0
it 0.6 4 1955 3.0
ar 0.1 2 9004 3.2
Table 1: Details of the training data and queries learned for each language
Note that the first evaluation with the synthetic
dataset is based on monolingual dictionary re-
trieval effectiveness because we have very few
(and often no) multilingual dictionaries for a given
pairing of our target languages. For a given lan-
guage, we are thus evaluating the ability of our
method to retrieve multilingual dictionaries con-
taining that language (and other indeterminate lan-
guages).
For both the synthetic dataset and open web ex-
periments, we evaluate our method based on mean
average precision (MAP), that is the mean of the
average precision scores for each query which re-
turns a non-empty result set.
To train our method, we use 52 bilingual Free-
dict (Freedict, 2011) dictionaries and Wikipedia
1
documents for each of our target languages. As
there are no bilingual dictionaries in Freedict for
Chinese and Japanese, the training of Score values
is based on the Wikipedia documents only. Mor-
phological segmentation for these two languages
was carried out using MeCab (MeCab, 2011) and
the Stanford Word Segmenter (Tseng et al, 2005),
respectively. See Table 1 for details of the num-
ber of Wikipedia articles and dictionaries for each
language.
Below, we detail the construction of the syn-
thetic dataset.
4.1 Synthetic dataset
The synthetic dataset was constructed using a sub-
set of ClueWeb09 (ClueWeb09, 2009) as the back-
ground web document collection. The original
ClueWeb09 dataset consists of around 1 billion
web pages in ten languages that were collected in
January and February 2009. The relative propor-
tions of documents in the different languages in
the original dataset are as detailed in Table 2.
We randomly downsampled ClueWeb09 to 10
1
Based on 2009 dumps.
Language Proportion
en (English) 48.41%
zh (Chinese) 17.05%
es (Spanish) 7.62%
ja (Japanese) 6.47%
de (German) 4.89%
fr (French) 4.79%
ko (Korean) 3.61%
it (Italian) 2.8%
pt (Portuguese) 2.62%
ar (Arabic) 1.74%
Table 2: Language proportions in ClueWeb09.
million documents for the 8 languages targeted
in this research (the original 10 ClueWeb09 lan-
guages minus Korean and Portuguese). We then
sourced a random set of 246 multilingual dic-
tionaries that were used in the construction of
panlex.org, and injected them into the docu-
ment collection. Each of these dictionaries con-
tains at least one of our 8 target languages, with
the second language potentially being outside the
8. A total of 49 languages are contained in the
dictionaries.
We indexed the synthetic dataset using Indri (In-
dri, 2009).
5 Results
First, we present results over the synthetic dataset
in Table 3. As our baseline, we simply query for
the language name and the term dictionary in the
local language (e.g. English dictionary, for En-
glish) in the given language.
For languages that had bilingual dictionaries for
training, the best results were obtained for Span-
ish, German, Italian and Arabic. Encouragingly,
the results for languages with only Wikipedia doc-
uments (and no dictionaries) were largely com-
parable to those for languages with dictionaries,
with Japanese achieving a MAP score compara-
ble to the best results for languages with dictio-
nary training data. The comparably low result for
96
Lang Dicts MAP Baseline
en 92 0.77 0.00
zh 7 0.75 0.00
es 34 0.98 0.04
ja 5 0.94 0.00
de 75 0.97 0.08
fr 34 0.84 0.03
it 8 0.95 0.01
ar 3 0.92 0.00
AVERAGE: 32.2 0.88 0.04
Table 3: Dictionary retrieval results over the syn-
thetic dataset (?Dicts? = the number of dictionaries
in the document collection for that language.
English is potentially affected by its prevalence
both in the bilingual dictionaries in training (re-
stricting the effective vocabulary size due to our
L
l
filtering), and in the document collection. Re-
call also that our MAP scores are an underestimate
of the true results, and some of the ClueWeb09
documents returned for our queries are potentially
relevant documents (i.e. multilingual dictionaries
including the language of interest). For all lan-
guages, the baseline results were below 0.1, and
substantially lower than the results for our method.
Looking next to the open web, we present in Ta-
ble 4 results based on querying the Google search
API with the 1000 longest queries for English
paired with each of the other 7 target languages.
Most queries returned no results; indeed, for the
en-ar language pair, only 49/1000 queries returned
documents. The results in Table 4 are based on
manual evaluation of all documents returned for
the first 50 queries, and determination of whether
they were multilingual dictionaries containing the
indicated languages.
The baseline results are substantially higher
than those for the synthetic dataset, almost cer-
tainly a direct result of the greater sophistication
and optimisation of the Google search engine (in-
cluding query log analysis, and link and anchor
text analysis). Despite this, the results for our
method are lower than those over the synthetic
dataset, we suspect largely as a result of the style
of queries we issue being so far removed from
standard Google query patterns. Having said this,
MAP scores of 0.32?0.92 suggest that the method
is highly usable (i.e. at any given cutoff in the doc-
ument ranking, an average of at least one in three
documents is a genuine multilingual dictionary),
and any non-dictionary documents returned by the
method could easily be pruned by a lexicographer.
Lang Dicts MAP Baseline
zh 16 0.55 0.19
es 17 0.92 0.13
ja 13 0.32 0.04
de 34 0.77 0.09
fr 36 0.77 0.08
it 23 0.69 0.11
ar 8 0.39 0.17
AVERAGE: 21.0 0.63 0.12
Table 4: Dictionary retrieval results over the open
web for dictionaries containing English and each
of the indicated languages (?Dicts? = the number
of unique multilingual dictionaries retrieved for
that language).
Among the 7 language pairs, en-es, en-de, en-fr
and en-it achieved the highest MAP scores. In
terms of unique lexical resources found with 50
queries, the most successful language pairs were
en-fr, en-de and en-it.
6 Conclusions
We have described initial results for a method de-
signed to automatically detect multilingual dictio-
naries on the web, and attained highly credible re-
sults over both a synthetic dataset and an exper-
iment over the open web using a web search en-
gine.
In future work, we hope to explore the ability
of the method to detect domain-specific dictionar-
ies (e.g. training over domain-specific dictionar-
ies from other language pairs), and low-density
languages where there are few dictionaries and
Wikipedia articles to train the method on.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for
their valuable comments, and the Panlex devel-
opers for assistance with the dictionaries and ex-
perimental design. This research was supported
by funding from the Group of Eight and the Aus-
tralian Research Council.
References
Rakesh Agrawal, Tomasz Imieli?nski, and Arun Swami.
1993. Mining association rules between sets of
items in large databases. ACM SIGMOD Record,
22(2):207?216.
Timothy Baldwin, Jonathan Pool, and Susan M.
Colowick. 2010. PanLex and LEXTRACT: Trans-
lating all words of all languages of the world. In
97
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING 2010), Demo
Volume, pages 37?40, Beijing, China.
Jiang Chen and Jian-Yun Nie. 2000. Parallel web text
mining for cross-language IR. In Proceedings of
Recherche d?Informations Assistee par Ordinateur
2000 (RIAO?2000), pages 62?77, College de France,
France.
ClueWeb09. 2009. The ClueWeb09 dataset. http:
//lemurproject.org/clueweb09/.
Aidan Finn, Nicholas Kushmerick, and Barry Smyth.
2002. Genre classification and domain transfer for
information filtering. In Proceedings of the 24th Eu-
ropean Conference on Information Retrieval (ECIR
2002), pages 353?362, Glasgow, UK.
Freedict. 2011. Freedict dictionaries. http://www.
freedict.com.
Pascale Fung. 1998. A statistical view on bilin-
gual lexicon extraction: From parallel corpora to
non-parallel corpora. In Proceedings of Associa-
tion for Machine Translation in the Americas (AMTA
1998): Machine Translation and the Information
Soup, pages 1?17, Langhorne, USA.
Indri. 2009. Indri search engine. http://www.
lemurproject.org/indri/.
David Kamholz and Jonathan Pool. to appear. PanLex:
Building a resource for panlingual lexical transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the 9th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2014), Reykjavik, Iceland.
Batia Laufer and Linor Hadar. 1997. Assessing the
effectiveness of monolingual, bilingual, and ?bilin-
gualised? dictionaries in the comprehension and pro-
duction of new words. The Modern Language Jour-
nal, 81(2):189?196.
Marco Lui, Jey Han Lau, and Timothy Baldwin. 2014.
Automatic detection and language identification of
multilingual documents. Transactions of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, 2(Feb):27?40.
Katsushi Matsuda and Toshikazu Fukushima. 1999.
Task-oriented world wide web retrieval by document
type classification. In Proceedings of the 1999 ACM
Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement (CIKM 1999), pages 109?113, Kansas City,
USA.
MeCab. 2011. http://mecab.googlecode.
com.
I. Dan Melamed. 1996. Automatic construction of
clean broad-coverage translation lexicons. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd Conference of the Association
for Machine Translation in the Americas (AMTA
1996), Montreal, Canada.
Dragos Stefan Munteanu and Daniel Marcu. 2005. Im-
proving machine translation performance by exploit-
ing non-parallel corpora. Computational Linguis-
tics, 31(4):477?504.
Masaaki Nagata, Teruka Saito, and Kenji Suzuki.
2001. Using the web as a bilingual dictionary. In
Proceedings of the ACL 2001 Workshop on Data-
driven Methods in Machine Translation, pages 1?8,
Toulouse, France.
Jian-Yun Nie. 2010. Cross-language information
retrieval. Morgan and Claypool Publishers, San
Rafael, USA.
John M. Prager. 1999. Linguini: language identifi-
cation for multilingual documents. In Proceedings
the 32nd Annual Hawaii International Conference
on Systems Sciences (HICSS-32), Maui, USA.
Philip Resnik and Noah A. Smith. 2003. The web
as a parallel corpus. Computational Linguistics,
29(3):349?380.
Stephen Soderland, Christopher Lim, Mausam,
Bo Qin, Oren Etzioni, and Jonathan Pool. 2009.
Lemmatic machine translation. In Proceedings
of the Twelfth Machine Translation Summit (MT
Summit XII), Ottawa, Canada.
Nicholas Thieberger and Andrea L. Berez. 2012. Lin-
guistic data management. In Nicholas Thieberger,
editor, The Oxford Handbook of Linguistic Field-
work. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Huihsin Tseng, Pichuan Chang, Galen Andrew, Daniel
Jurafsky, and Christopher Manning. 2005. A condi-
tional random field word segmenter for sighan bake-
off 2005. In Proceedings of the Fourth SIGHAN
Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, volume
171.
Hiroshi Yamaguchi and Kumiko Tanaka-Ishii. 2012.
Text segmentation by language using minimum de-
scription length. In Proceedings the 50th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 969?978,
Jeju Island, Korea.
Kun Yu and Junichi Tsujii. 2009. Bilingual dictio-
nary extraction from Wikipedia. In Proceedings of
the Twelfth Machine Translation Summit (MT Sum-
mit XII), pages 379?386, Ottawa, Canada.
Sven Meyer zu Eissen and Benno Stein. 2005. Genre
classification of web pages. In Proceedings of the
27th Annual German Conference in AI (KI 2005),
pages 256?269, Ulm, Germany.
98
Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Predicting and Improving Text Readability for Target Reader Populations (PITR) @ EACL 2014, pages 74?83,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Improving Readability of Swedish Electronic Health Records
through Lexical Simplification: First Results
Gintar
?
e Grigonyt
?
e
a
, Maria Kvist
bc
, Sumithra Velupillai
b
, Mats Wir
?
en
a
a
Department of Linguistics, Stockholm University, Sweden
b
Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, Sweden
c
Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden
gintare@ling.su.se, maria.kvist@karolinska.se,
sumithra@dsv.su.se, mats.wiren@ling.su.se
Abstract
This paper describes part of an ongo-
ing effort to improve the readability of
Swedish electronic health records (EHRs).
An EHR contains systematic documenta-
tion of a single patient?s medical history
across time, entered by healthcare pro-
fessionals with the purpose of enabling
safe and informed care. Linguistically,
medical records exemplify a highly spe-
cialised domain, which can be superfi-
cially characterised as having telegraphic
sentences involving displaced or missing
words, abundant abbreviations, spelling
variations including misspellings, and ter-
minology. We report results on lexical
simplification of Swedish EHRs, by which
we mean detecting the unknown, out-of-
dictionary words and trying to resolve
them either as compounded known words,
abbreviations or misspellings.
1 Introduction
An electronic health record (EHR; Swedish: pa-
tientjournal) contains systematic documentation
of a single patient?s medical history across time,
entered by healthcare professionals with the pur-
pose of enabling safe and informed care. The
value of EHRs is further increased by the fact that
they provide a source of information for statis-
tics and research, and a documentation for the pa-
tient through the Swedish Patient Data Act. EHRs
collect information from a range of sources, such
as administration of drugs and therapies, test re-
sults, preoperative notes, operative notes, progress
notes, discharge notes, etc.
EHRs contain both structured parts (such as
details about the patient, lab results, diagnostic
codes, etc.) and unstructured parts (in the form of
free text). The free-text part of EHRs is referred
to as clinical text, as opposed to the kind of gen-
eral medical text found in medical journals, books
or web pages containing information about health
care. Clinical texts have many subdomains de-
pending on the medical speciality of the writer and
the intended reader. There are more formal kinds
of EHRs, such as discharge summaries and radiol-
ogy reports, directed to other physicians, and more
informal kinds such as daily notes, produced by
nurses and physicians (as memory notes for them-
selves or for the team). In spite of the Patient Data
Act, the patient is seldom seen as a receiver or
reader of the document.
Linguistically, health records exemplify a
highly specialised domain, which can be super-
ficially characterised as having telegraphic sen-
tences involving displaced or missing words,
abundant abbreviations, undisputed misspellings,
spelling variation which may or may not amount to
misspellings depending on the degree of prescrip-
tivism, and terminology. While this specialised
style has evolved as an efficient means of com-
munication between healthcare professionals, it
presents formidable challenges for laymen trying
to decode it.
In spite of this, there has been no previous work
on the problem of automatically improving the
readability of Swedish EHRs. As an initial at-
tempt in this direction, we provide an automatic
approach to the problem of lexical simplification,
by which we mean detecting the unknown, out of
dictionary words and trying to resolve them either
as compounds generated from known words, as
abbreviations or as misspellings. As an additional
result, we obtain a distribution of how prevalent
these problems are in the clinical domain.
2 Lexical challenges to readability of
EHRs
A major reason for the obstacles to readability of
EHRs for laymen stems from the fact that they
74
are written under time pressure by professionals,
for professionals (Kvist et al., 2011). This re-
sults in a telegraphic style, with omissions, ab-
breviations and misspellings, as reported for sev-
eral languages including Swedish, Finnish, En-
glish, French, Hungarian and German (Laippala
et al., 2009; Friedman et al., 2002; Hag`ege et
al., 2011; Surj?an and H?eja, 2003; Bretschneider et
al., 2013). The omitted words are often subjects,
verbs, prepositions and articles (Friedman et al.,
2002; Bretschneider et al., 2013).
Unsurprisingly, medical terminology abounds
in EHRs. What makes this problem an even
greater obstacle to readability is that many medical
terms (and their inflections) originate from Latin
or Greek. Different languages have adapted these
terms differently (Bretschneider et al., 2013). The
Swedish medical terminology went through a
change during the 1990s due to a swedification
of diagnostic expressions performed in the 1987
update of the Swedish version of ICD, the Inter-
national Classification of Diseases
1
. For this ver-
sion, the Swedish National Board of Health and
Welfare decided to partly change the terminology
of traditional Latin- and Greek-rooted words to a
spelling compatible to Swedish spelling rules, as
well as abandoning the original rules for inflec-
tion (Smedby, 1991). In this spelling reform, c
and ch pronounced as k was changed to k, ph was
changed to f, th to t, and oe was changed to e.
For example, the technical term for cholecsystitis
(inflammation of the gall bladder) is spelled kole-
cystit in contemporary Swedish, thus following the
convention of changing ch to k and removing the
Latin ending of -is. The results
2
of exact match-
ing to kolecystit (English: cholecystitis) and some
presumed spelling variants clearly demonstrate the
slow progress (Table 1).
As medical literature is predominantly written
in English nowadays, physicians increasingly get
exposed to the English spelling of Latin and Greek
words rather than the Swedish one. This has re-
sulted in a multitude of alternate spellings of sev-
eral medical terms. For example, tachycardia
(rapid heart) is correctly spelled takykardi, but is
1
http://www.who.int/classifications/
icd/en/
2
Based on a subset of the Stockholm Electronic Pa-
tient Record Corpus (Dalianis et al., 2012) of 100,000 daily
notes (DAY) written by physicians of varying disciplines (4
mill. tokens) and 435,000 radiology reports (X-RAY) writ-
ten by radiologists (20 mill. tokens). KORP: http://
spraakbanken.gu.se/korp/
Term KORP DAY X-RAY
kolecystit 51 48 84
colecystit 0 1 8
cholecystit 4 88 1613
Table 1: Alternate spellings of the Swedish
medical term kolecystit (eng. cholecystitis) in
the Swedish corpus collection Korp, daily notes
(DAY) and radiology reports (X-RAY), respec-
tively. Correct spelling in bold.
also frequently found as tachycardi, tachykardi,
and takycardi (Kvist et al., 2011). A similar
French study found this kind of spelling variation
to be abundant as well (Ruch et al., 2003).
EHRs also contain neologisms. These are often
verbs, typically describing events relating to the
patient in active form, such as ?the patient is in-
farcting? (Swedish: patienten infarcerar) instead
of the unintentional ?the patient is having a my-
ocardial infarction?. Similar phenomena are de-
scribed by Josefsson (1999).
Abbreviations and acronyms in EHRs can fol-
low standardised writing rules or be ad hoc (Liu
et al., 2001). They are often domain-specific
and may be found in medical dictionaries such
as MeSH
3
and Snomed CT
4
. For instance, 18 of
the 100 most common words in Swedish radiol-
ogy reports were abbreviations, and 10 of them
were domain-specific (Kvist and Velupillai, 2013).
Because many medical terms are multiword ex-
pressions that are repeated frequently in a pa-
tient?s EHR, the use of acronyms is very common.
Skeppstedt et al. (2012) showed that 14% of di-
agnostic expressions were abbreviated in Swedish
clinical text.
Abbreviations are often ambiguous. As an
example, 33% of the short abbreviations in the
UMLS terminology are ambiguous (Liu et al.,
2001). Pakhomov et al. (2005) found that the ab-
breviation RA had more than 20 expansions in the
UMLS terminology alone. Furthermore, a certain
word or expression can be shortened in several dif-
ferent ways. For instance, in a Swedish intensive
care unit, the drug Noradrenalin was creatively
written in 60 different ways by the nurses (Allvin
et al., 2011).
It should be noted that speech recognition, al-
though common in many hospitals around the
3
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
4
http://www.ihtsdo.org/
75
world, has not been introduced in Sweden, and
many physicians and all nurses type the notes
themselves. This is one explanation to the vari-
ation with respect to abbreviations.
User studies have shown that the greatest bar-
riers for patients lie mainly in the frequent use
of abbreviations, jargon and technical terminol-
ogy (Pyper et al., 2004; Keselman et al., 2007;
Adnan et al., 2010). The most common com-
prehension errors made by laymen concern clini-
cal concepts, medical terminology and medication
names. Furthermore, there are great challenges for
higher-level processing like syntax and semantics
(Meystre et al., 2008; Wu et al., 2013). The re-
search presented in this paper focuses on lexical
simplification of clinical text.
3 Related research
We are aware of several efforts to construct au-
tomated text simplification tools for clinical text
in English (Kandula et al., 2010; Patrick et al.,
2010). For Swedish, there are few studies on med-
ical language from a readability perspective. Borin
et al. (2009) present a thorough investigation on
Swedish (and English) medical language, but EHR
texts are explicitly not included. This section sum-
marizes research on Swedish (clinical) text with
respect to lexical simplification by handling of ab-
breviations, terminology and spelling correction.
3.1 Abbreviation detection
Abbreviation identification in English biomedical
and clinical texts has been studied extensively (e.g.
Xu et al. (2007), Liu et al. (2001)). For detec-
tion of Swedish medical abbreviations, there are
fewer studies. Dann?ells (2006) reports detection
of acronyms in medical journal text with 98% re-
call and 94% precision by using part of speech
information and heuristic rules. Clinical Swedish
presents greater problems than medical texts, be-
cause of ad hoc abbreviations and noisier text. By
using lexicons and a few heuristic rules, Isenius et
al. (2012) report the best F-score of 79% for ab-
breviation detection in clinical Swedish.
3.2 Compound splitting
Good compound analysis is critical especially for
languages whose orthographies concatenate com-
pound components. Swedish is among those lan-
guages, in which every such concatenation thus
corresponds to a word. The most common ap-
proach to compound splitting is to base it on a lex-
icon providing restrictions on how different word
forms can be used for generating compounds. For
example, Sj?obergh and Kann (2006) used a lex-
icon derived from SAOL (the Swedish Academy
word list), and
?
Ostling and Wir?en (2013) used the
SALDO lexicon of Swedish morphology (Borin
and Forsberg, 2009). With this kind of approach,
compound splitting is usually very reliable for
genres like newspaper text, with typical accuracies
for Swedish around 97%, but performs poorer in
domain specific genres.
3.3 Terminology detection
The detection of English medical terminology is
a widely researched area. An example of term
detection in English clinical texts is Wang and
Patrick (2009) work based on rule-based and ma-
chine learning methods, reporting 84% precision.
For Swedish clinical text, Kokkinakis and
Thurin (2007) have employed domain terminol-
ogy matching and reached 98% precision and 87%
recall in detecting terms of disorders. Using sim-
ilar approaches, Skeppstedt et al. (2012), reached
75% precision and 55% recall in detecting terms
of disorders. With a machine learning based ap-
proach, improved results were obtained: 80%
precision, 82% recall (Skeppstedt et al., 2014).
Skeppstedt et al. (2012) have also demonstrated
the negative influence of abbreviations and mul-
tiword expressions in their findings.
3.4 Spelling correction
A system for general spelling correction of
Swedish is described by Kann et al. (1998), but
we are not aware of any previous work related to
spelling correction of Swedish clinical text. An
example of spelling correction of clinical text for
other languages is Tolentino et al. (2007), who use
several algorithms for word similarity detection,
including phonological homonym lookup and n-
grams for contextual disambiguation. They report
a precision of 64% on English medical texts. An-
other example is Patrick et al. (2010) and Patrick
and Nguyen (2011), who combine a mixture of
generation of spelling candidates based on ortho-
graphic and phonological edit distance, and a 2-
word window of contextual information for rank-
ing the spelling candidates resulting in an accuracy
of 84% on English patient records. Sikl?oski et al.
(2013) use a statistical machine translation model
76
Figure 1: Distribution of 100 PR dataset sentences by length (number of sentences on the y-axis and
number of tokens on the x-axis).
(with 3-grams) for spelling correction, achieving
88% accuracy on Hungarian medical texts.
4 Experimental data
This study uses clinical notes
5
from the Stockholm
Electronic Patient Record corpus containing more
than 600,000 patients of all ages from more than
500 health units during 2006?2013 (Dalianis et al.,
2012).
A randomly selected subset of 100 daily notes
from different EHRs written by physicians be-
tween 2009?2010 was used as a gold standard
dataset for evaluating abbreviation detection, com-
pound splitting and spelling corrections. This 100
daily notes dataset contains 433 sentences and
3,888 tokens, as determined by Stagger (
?
Ostling,
2013), a Swedish tokenizer and POS tagger. The
majority of sentences contain between 4?11 to-
kens (see Figure 1.)
The text snippet in Figure 2 provides an illus-
trative example of the characteristics of a health
record. What is immediately striking is the num-
ber of misspellings, abbreviations, compounds and
words of foreign origin. But also the syntax is
peculiar, alternating between telegraphic clauses
with implicit arguments, and long sentences with
complex embeddings.
5
Approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board in
Stockholm (Etikpr?ovningsn?amnden i Stockholm), permis-
sion number 2012/2028-31/5
5 Lexical normalization of EHRs
Normalization of lexis in clinical text relies heav-
ily on the lookup in available lexicons, corpora and
domain terminologies. Although these resources
usually cover the majority of words (i.e. tokens)
in texts, however due to the ever evolving lan-
guage and knowledge inside the domain, medi-
cal texts, when analysed with the NLP tools, also
contain unknown
6
words. These remaining words
that are not covered by any lexicon, or corpora re-
source, can be misspellings, abbreviations, com-
pounds (new word formations), words in foreign
languages (Latin, Greek, English), or new terms.
Our approach to dealing with unknown words
combines a rule-based abbreviation detection and
Swedish statistical language model-based com-
pound analysis and misspelling resolution.
The following sections describe three methods
that are applied in a pipeline manner. That is, first,
all known abbreviations are detected and marked;
second the unknown words are checked whether
they are compounds; finally, for the remaining un-
known words, context dependent word corrections
are made.
5.1 Detecting abbreviations
This section describes the heuristics and lexi-
con lookup-based abbreviation detection method.
The Swedish Clinical Abbreviation and Medi-
cal Terminology Matcher (SCATM) is based on
6
By unknown words we mean words that cannot be
looked up in available lexical resources or linguistically ana-
lyzed by POS tokenizer.
77
Figure 2: Characteristics of a health record: misspellings (underline), abbreviations (bold), compounds
(italic) and words of foreign origin (red).
SCAN (Isenius et al., 2012). The SCATM method
uses domain-adapted Stagger (
?
Ostling, 2013)
for the tokenization and POS-tagging of text.
The adapted version of Stagger handles clinical-
specific
7
abbreviations from three domains, i.e. ra-
diology, emergency, and dietology. SCATM also
uses several lexicons to determine whether a word
is a common word (in total 122,847 in the lexi-
con), an abbreviation (in total 7,455 in the lexi-
con), a medical term (in total 17,380 in the lexi-
con), or a name (both first and last names, in total
404,899 in the lexicon). All words that are at most
6 characters long, or contains the characters ?-?
and/or ?.? are checked against these lexicons in a
specific order in order to determine whether it is
an abbreviation or not.
The SCATM method uses various lexicons
8
of
Swedish medical terms, Swedish abbreviations,
7
Abbreviations that do not follow conventional orthogra-
phy styles, e.g. a typical abbreviation p.g.a. (en. due to) can
have the following variants p g a, pga, p. G. A., p. gr. a.
8
the sources of lexicons are: anatomin.se,
neuro.ki.se smittskyddsinstitutet.se,
medicinskordbok.se, runeberg.org, g3.
spraakdata.gu.se/saob, sv.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Lista_ver_frkortningar, karolinska.
se/Karolinska-Universitetslaboratoriet/
Sidor-om-PTA/Analysindex-alla-enheter/
Forkortningar/ and the list of Swedish names (Carlsson
and Dalianis, 2010).
Swedish words and Swedish names (first and last).
5.2 Compound splitting
For compound splitting, we use a collection of lex-
ical resources, the core of which is a full-form
dictionary produced by Nordisk spr?akteknologi
holding AS (NST), comprising 927,000 en-
tries
9
. In addition, various resources from the
medical domain have been mined for vocab-
ulary: Swedish SNOMED
10
terminology, the
L?akartidningen medical journal
11
corpus, and
Swedish Web health-care guides/manuals
12
.
A refinement of the basic lexicon-driven tech-
nique described in the related research section is
that our compound splitting makes use of contex-
tual disambiguation. As the example of hj?arteko
illustrates, this compound can be hypothetically
split into
13
:
hj?art+eko (en. cardiac+echo)
9
Available at: www.nb.no/Tilbud/Forske/
Spraakbanken/Tilgjengelege-ressursar/
Leksikalske-ressursar
10
www.socialstyrelsen.se/
nationellehalsa/nationelltfacksprak/
11
http://spraakbanken.gu.se/eng/
research/infrastructure/korp
12
www.1177.se and www.vardguiden.se
13
Korp (http://spraakbanken.gu.se/korp) is a collection of
Swedish corpora, comprising 1,784,019,272 tokens, as of
January 2014.
78
KORP freq.: 642 + 5,669
hj?arte+ko (en. beloved+cow)
KORP freq.: 8 + 8,597
For choosing the most likely composition in the
given context, we use the Stockholm Language
Model with Entropy (SLME) (
?
Ostling, 2012)
which is a simple n-gram language model.
The max probability defines the correct word
formation constituents:
hj?art+eko 2.3e-04
hj?arte+ko 5.1e-07
The SMLE is described in the following section.
5.3 Misspelling detection
The unknown words that are not abbreviations or
compounds can very likely be misspellings. Mis-
spellings can be a result of typing errors or the lack
of knowledge of the correct spelling.
Our approach to clinical Swedish misspellings
is based on the best practices of spell checkers
for Indo-European languages, namely the phonetic
similarity key method combined with a method
to measure proximity between the strings. In
our spelling correction method, the Edit distance
(Levenshtein, 1966) algorithm is used to measure
the proximity of orthographically possible can-
didates. The Soundex algorithm (Knuth, 1973)
shortlists the spelling candidates which are phono-
logically closest to the misspelled word. Further,
the spelling correction candidates are analyzed in
a context by using the SLME n-gram model.
The SLME employs the Google Web 1T 5-
gram, 10 European Languages, Version 1, dataset
for Swedish, which is the largest publically avail-
able Swedish data resource. The SLME is a sim-
ple n-gram language model, based on the Stupid
Backoff Model (Brants et al., 2007). The n-gram
language model calculates the probability of a
word in a given context:
P (w
L
1
) =
L
?
i=1
P (w
i
|w
i?1
1
) ?
L
?
i=1
?
P (w
i
|w
i?1
i?n+1
)
(1)
The maximum-likelihood probability estimates
for the n-grams are calculated by their relative fre-
quencies:
r(w
i
|w
i?1
i?n+1
) =
f(w
i
i?n+1
)
f(w
i?1
i?n+1
)
(2)
The smoothing is used when the complete n-
gram is not found. If r(w
i?1
i?n+1
) is not found,
then the model looks for r(w
i?1
i?n+2
) , r(w
i?1
i?n+3
),
and so on. The Stupid backoff (Brants et al.,
2007) smoothing method uses relative frequencies
instead of normalized probabilities and context-
dependent discounting. Equation (3) shows how
score S is calculated:
S(w
i
|w
i?1
i?k+1
) =
=
?
?
?
?
?
f(w
i
i?k+1
)
f(w
i?1
i?k+1
)
iff(w
i
i?k+1
)) > 0
?S(w
i
|w
i?1
i?k+2
) otherwise
(3)
The backoff parameter ? is set to 0.4, which was
heuristically determined by (Brants et al., 2007).
The recursion stops when the score for the last
context word is calculated. N is the size of the
corpus.
S(w
i
) =
f(w
i
)
N
(4)
The SLME n-gram model calculates the
probability of a word in a given context:
p(word|context). The following example
14
shows the case of spelling correction:
Original:
Vpl p?a onsdag. UK tortdag.
(en. Vpl on wednesday. UK thsday.)
torgdag (en. marketday): 4.2e-10
torsdag (en. Thursday): 1.1e-06
Corrected:
Vpl p?a onsdag. UK torsdag.
6 Experiments and results
Our approach to lexical normalization was
tested against a gold standard, namely, the 100
EHR daily notes dataset. The dataset was anno-
tated for abbreviations, compounds including ab-
breviations and misspellings by a physician.
We carried out the following experiments (see
Table 2):
1. SCATM to mark abbreviations and terms;
14
Vpl stands for V?ardplanering (en. planning for care), UK
stands for utskrivningsklar (en. ready for discharge).
79
Method Lexical normalization task Gold-
standard,
occurences
Precision, % Recall, %
SCATM 1 Abbreviation detection 550 91.1 81.0
SCATM 1a Abbreviations included in
compounds only
78 89.74 46.15
NoCM 1 Out-of-dictionary compound
splitting
97 83.5 -
NoCM 1a Out-of-dictionary com-
pounds which include
abbreviations
44 59.1 -
NoCM 2 Spelling correction 41 54.8 63.12
SCATM+NoCM Spelling correction 41 83.87 76.2
Table 2: Results of lexical normalization.
2. NoCM (lexical normalization of compounds
and misspellings as described in sections
5.2 and 5.3) to resolve compounds and mis-
spellings;
3. The combined experiment SCATM+NoCM
to resolve misspellings.
The last experimental setting was designed as a
solution to deal with compounds that include ab-
breviations. Marking abbreviations prior to the
spelling correction can help to reduce the number
of false positives.
The 433 sentences contained a total of 550 ab-
breviations (78 of these were constituents of com-
pound words), and 41 misspellings of which 13
were misspelled words containing abbreviations.
Due to the tokenization errors, a few sentence
boundaries were detected incorrectly, e.g. inter-
rupted dates and abbreviations. Because of this
some abbreviations were separated into different
sentences and thus added to false negatives and
false positives.
The first experiment (SCATM 1 and 1a) of de-
tecting abbreviations achieved both high precision
and recall. As a special case of demonstrating the
source of errors (see SCATM 1a) is the evaluation
of detecting abbreviations which are part of com-
pounds only. The low recall is due to the design of
the SCATM which does not handle words longer
than 6 characters, thus resulting in compounded
abbreviations like k?arlkir or ?overvak to go unde-
tected.
The evaluation of the second experiment
(NoCM 1, 1a and 2) showed that the majority
of out-of-dictionary compounds was resolved cor-
rectly (NoCM 1) and reached 83.5% precision.
Errors mainly occurred due to spelling candi-
date ranking, e.g. even+tull instead of eventuell
and compounds containing abbreviations and mis-
spelled words. As a special case of demonstrating
the source of errors of the latter (see NoCM 1a) is
the evaluation of those compounds
15
only which
contain abbreviations. The task of spelling correc-
tion (NoCM 2) performed poorly, reaching only
54.8% precision. This can be explained by failing
to resolve misspellings in compounds where ab-
breviations are compounded together with a mis-
spelled words, e.g. aciklocvirkonc (aciklovir kon-
centrate).
The third experiment (SCATM+NoCM) com-
bined abbreviation detection followed by the out-
of-dictionary word normalization (spelling cor-
rection and compound splitting). This setting
helped to resolve the earlier source of errors, i.e.
words that contain both misspelling(s) and abbre-
viation(s). The overall precision of spelling cor-
rection is 83.87%.
7 Conclusions
Our attempt to address the problem of lexical sim-
plification, and, in the long run, improve readabil-
ity of Swedish EHRs, by automatically detecting
and resolving out of dictionary words, achieves
91.1% (abbreviations), 83.5% (compound split-
ting) and 83.87% (spelling correction) precision,
respectively. These results are comparable to those
15
This number of compounds is derived from the number
of abbreviations included in compounds (from SCATM 1a)
by selecting only those out-of -dictionary words which do not
contain punctuation.
80
reported in similar studies on English and Hungar-
ian patient records (Patrick et al., 2010; Sikl?osi et
al., 2013).
Furthermore, the analysis of the gold standard
data revealed that around 14% of all words in
Swedish EHRs are abbreviations. More specifi-
cally, 2% of all the words are compounds includ-
ing abbreviations. In contrast, and somewhat un-
expectedly, only 1% are misspellings. This dis-
tribution result is an important finding for future
studies in lexical simplification and readability
studies of EHRs, as it might be useful for inform-
ing automatic processing approaches.
We draw two conclusions from this study. First,
to advance research into the field of readability
of EHRs, and thus to develop suitable readability
measures it is necessary to begin by taking these
findings into account and by relating abbrevia-
tions, spelling variation, misspellings, compounds
and terminology to reading comprehension.
Second, as a future guideline for the overall
pipeline for detecting and resolving unknown, out-
of-dictionary words, we suggest handling abbrevi-
ations in a first step, and then taking care of mis-
spellings and potential compounds. The most ur-
gent area for future improvement of the method is
to handle compound words containing both abbre-
viations and misspellings.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank the anonymous review-
ers for valuable feedback. Maria Kvist and Sum-
ithra Velupillai were in part funded by the V?ardal
Foundation, Sumithra also by the Swedish Re-
search Council and the Swedish Fulbright com-
mission. We thank Robert
?
Ostling who pro-
vided the POS tagger and the Stockholm Lan-
guage Model with Entropy.
References
M. Adnan, J. Warren, and M. Orr. 2010. Assess-
ing text characteristics of electronic discharge sum-
maries and their implications for patient readabil-
ity. In Proceedings of the Fourth Australasian Work-
shop on Health Informatics and Knowledge Man-
agement - Volume 108, HIKM ?10, pages 77?84,
Darlinghurst, Australia, Australia. Australian Com-
puter Society, Inc.
H. Allvin, E. Carlsson, H. Dalianis, R. Danielsson-
Ojala, V. Daudaravicius, M. Hassel, D. Kokki-
nakis, H. Lundgren-Laine, G.H. Nilsson, ?. Nytr?,
S. Salanter?a, M. Skeppstedt, H. Suominen, and
S. Velupillai. 2011. Characteristics of Finnish and
Swedish intensive care nursing narratives: a com-
parative analysis to support the development of clin-
ical language technologies. Journal of Biomedical
Semantics, 2(Suppl 3):S1, doi:10.1186/2041-1480-
2-S3-S1, July.
L. Borin and M. Forsberg. 2009. All in the family: A
comparison of SALDO and WordNet. In Proceed-
ings of the Nodalida 2009 Workshop on WordNets
and other Lexical Semantic Resources, pages 7?12.
NEALT.
L. Borin, N. Grabar, M. Gronostaj, C. Hallett, D. Hard-
castle, D. Kokkinakis, S. Williams, and A. Willis.
2009. Semantic Mining Deliverable D27.2: Em-
powering the patient with language technology.
Technical report, Semantic Mining (NOE 507505).
T. Brants, A. C. Popat, P. Xu, F. J. Och, and J. Dean.
2007. Large language models in machine transla-
tion. In In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference
EMNLP-CoNLL, pages 858?867.
C. Bretschneider, S. Zillner, and M. Hammon. 2013.
Identifying pathological findings in German radiol-
ogy reports using a syntacto-semantic parsing ap-
proach. In Proceedings of the 2013 Workshop on
Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP
2013). ACL.
E. Carlsson and H. Dalianis. 2010. Influence of Mod-
ule Order on Rule-Based De-identification of Per-
sonal Names in Electronic Patient Records Writ-
ten in Swedish. In Proceedings of the Seventh In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, LREC 2010, pages 3071?3075, Valletta,
Malta, May 19?21.
H. Dalianis, M. Hassel, A. Henriksson, and M. Skepp-
stedt. 2012. Stockholm EPR Corpus: A Clinical
Database Used to Improve Health Care. In Pierre
Nugues, editor, Proc. 4th SLTC, 2012, pages 17?18,
Lund, October 25-26.
D. Dann?ells. 2006. Automatic acronym recognition.
In Proceedings of the 11th conference on European
chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (EACL).
C. Friedman, P. Kra, and A. Rzhetsky. 2002. Two
biomedical sublanguages: a description based on the
theories of Zellig Harris. Journal of Biomedical In-
formatics, 35(4):222?235.
C. Hag`ege, P. Marchal, Q. Gicquel, S. Darmoni,
S. Pereira, and M. Metzger. 2011. Linguistic
and temporal processing for discovering hospital ac-
quired infection from patient records. In Proceed-
ings of the ECAI 2010 Conference on Knowledge
Representation for Health-care, KR4HC?10, pages
70?84, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.
N. Isenius, S. Velupillai, and M. Kvist. 2012. Initial
results in the development of scan: a swedish clini-
cal abbreviation normalizer. In Proceedings of the
81
CLEF 2012 Workshop on Cross-Language Evalu-
ation of Methods, Applications, and Resources for
eHealth Document Analysis - CLEFeHealth2012,
Rome, Italy, September. CLEF.
G. Josefsson. 1999. F?a feber eller tempa? N?agra
tankar om agentivitet i medicinskt fackspr?ak.
S. Kandula, D. Curtis, and Q. Zeng-Treitler. 2010. A
Semantic and Syntactic Text Simplification Tool for
Health Content. In Proc AMIA 2010, pages 366?
370.
V. Kann, R. Domeij, J. Hollman, and M. Tillenius.
1998. Implementation Aspects and Applications of
a Spelling Correction Algorithm. . Technical Report
TRITA-NA-9813, NADA, KTH.
A. Keselman, L. Slaughter, CA. Smith, H. Kim, G. Di-
vita, A. Browne, and et al. 2007. Towards
consumer-friendly PHRs: patients experience with
reviewing their health records. In AMIA Annu Symp
Proc 2007, pages 399?403.
D. E. Knuth, 1973. The Art of Computer Program-
ming: Volume 3, Sorting and Searching, pages 391?
392. Addison-Wesley.
D. Kokkinakis and A. Thurin. 2007. Identifica-
tion of Entity References in Hospital Discharge Let-
ters. In Proceedings of the 16th Nordic Conference
of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA) 2007,
pages 329?332, Tartu, Estonia.
M. Kvist and S. Velupillai. 2013. Professional
Language in Swedish Radiology Reports ? Char-
acterization for Patient-Adapted Text Simplifica-
tion. In Proceedings of the Scandinavian Con-
ference on Health Informatics 2013, Copenhagen,
Denmark, August. Link?oping University Electronic
Press, Link?opings universitet.
M. Kvist, M. Skeppstedt, S. Velupillai, and H. Dalianis.
2011. Modeling human comprehension of swedish
medical records for intelligent access and summa-
rization systems, a physician?s perspective. In Proc.
9th Scandinavian Conference on Health Informat-
ics, SHI, Oslo, August.
V. Laippala, F. Ginter, S. Pyysalo, and T. Salakoski.
2009. Towards automated processing of clinical
Finnish: Sublanguage analysis and a rule-based
parser. Int journal of medical informatics, 78:e7?
e12.
VI Levenshtein. 1966. Binary Codes Capable of Cor-
recting Deletions, Insertions and Reversals. Soviet
Physics Doklady, 10:707?710.
H. Liu, Y. A. Lussier, and C. Friedman. 2001. Disam-
biguating Ambiguous Biomedical Terms in Biomed-
ical Narrative Text: An Unsupervised Method.
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 34:249?261.
S. M. Meystre, G. K. Savova, K. C. Kipper-Schuler,
and John E. Hurdle. 2008. Extracting informa-
tion from textual documents in the electronic health
record: a review of recent research. IMIA Yearbook
of Medical Informatics 2008. 47 Suppl 1:138-154.
R.
?
Ostling and M. Wir?en, 2013. Compounding in
a Swedish Blog Corpus, pages 45?63. Stockholm
Studies in Modern Philology. New series 16. Stock-
holm university.
R.
?
Ostling. 2012.
http://www.ling.su.se/english/nlp/tools/slme/stockholm-
language-model-with-entropy-slme-1.101098 .
R.
?
Ostling. 2013. Stagger: an Open-Source Part of
Speech Tagger for Swedish. Northern European
Journal of Language Technology, 3:1?18.
S. Pakhomov, T. Pedersen, and C. G. Chute. 2005. Ab-
breviation and Acronym Disambiguation in Clinical
Discourse. In Proc AMIA 2005, pages 589?593.
J. Patrick and D. Nguyen. 2011. Automated Proof
Reading of Clinical Notes. In Helena Hong Gao
and Minghui Dong, editors, PACLIC, pages 303?
312. Digital Enhancement of Cognitive Develop-
ment, Waseda University.
J. Patrick, M. Sabbagh, S. Jain, and H. Zheng. 2010.
Spelling correction in Clinical Notes with Emphasis
on First Suggestion Accuracy. In 2nd Workshop on
Building and Evaluating Resources for Biomedical
Text Mining, pages 2?8.
C. Pyper, J. Amery, M. Watson, and C. Crook. 2004.
Patients experiences when accessing their on-line
electronic patient records in primary care. The
British Journal of General Practice, 54:38?43.
P. Ruch, R. Baud, and A. Geissb?uhler. 2003. Using
lexical disambiguation and named-entity recogni-
tion to improve spelling correction in the electronic
patient record. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine,
29(1-2):169?184.
B. Sikl?osi, A. Nov?ak, and G. Pr?osz?eky, 2013. Context-
Aware Correction of Spelling Errors in Hungar-
ian Medical Documents, pages 248?259. Number
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 7978. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg.
J. Sj?obergh and V. Kann. 2006. Vad kan statistik
avsl?oja om svenska sammans?attningar? Spr?ak och
stil, 1:199?214.
M. Skeppstedt, M. Kvist, and H Dalianis. 2012.
Rule-based Entity Recognition and Coverage of
SNOMED CT in Swedish Clinical Text. In Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC 2012,
pages 1250?1257, Istanbul, Turkey, May 23?25.
M. Skeppstedt, M. Kvist, G. H. Nilsson, and H. Dalia-
nis. 2014. Automatic recognition of disorders,
findings, pharmaceuticals and body structures from
82
clinical text: An annotation and machine learn-
ing study. Journal of Biomedical Informatics,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2014.01.012.
B. Smedby. 1991. Medicinens Spr?ak: spr?aket
i sjukdomsklassifikationen ? mer konsekvent
f?orsvenskning efterstr?avas [Language of Medicine:
the language of diagnose classification - more
consequent Swedification sought]. L?akartidningen,
pages 1519?1520.
G. Surj?an and G. H?eja. 2003. About the language of
Hungarian discharge reports. Stud Health Technol
Inform, 95:869?873.
H. D. Tolentino, M. D. Matters, W. Walop, B. Law,
W. Tong, F. Liu, P. A. Fontelo, K. Kohl, and D. C.
Payne. 2007. A UMLS-based spell checker for nat-
ural language processing in vaccine safety. BMC
Med. Inf. & Decision Making, 7.
Y. Wang and J. Patrick. 2009. Cascading classifiers for
named entity recognition in clinical notes. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Biomedical Informa-
tion Extraction, WBIE ?09, pages 42?49, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
D. T. Y. Wu, D. A. Hanauer, Q. Mei, P. M. Clark,
L. C. An, J. Lei, J. Proulx, Q. Zeng-Treitler, and
K. Zheng. 2013. Applying Multiple Methods to As-
sess the Readability of a Large Corpus of Medical
Documents. Stud Health Technol Inform, 192:647?
651.
H. Xu, P. D. Stetson, and C. Friedman. 2007. A Study
of Abbreviations in Clinical Notes. In Proc AMIA
2007, pages 821?825.
83
