Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1511?1521,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Sensicon: An Automatically Constructed Sensorial Lexicon
Serra Sinem Tekiro?lu
University of Trento
Fondazione Bruno Kessler
Trento, Italy
tekiroglu@fbk.eu
G?zde ?zbal
Trento RISE
Trento, Italy
gozbalde@gmail.com
Carlo Strapparava
Fondazione Bruno Kessler
Trento, Italy
strappa@fbk.eu
Abstract
Connecting words with senses, namely,
sight, hearing, taste, smell and touch, to
comprehend the sensorial information in
language is a straightforward task for hu-
mans by using commonsense knowledge.
With this in mind, a lexicon associating
words with senses would be crucial for the
computational tasks aiming at interpreta-
tion of language. However, to the best of
our knowledge, there is no systematic at-
tempt in the literature to build such a re-
source. In this paper, we present a senso-
rial lexicon that associates English words
with senses. To obtain this resource, we
apply a computational method based on
bootstrapping and corpus statistics. The
quality of the resulting lexicon is evaluated
with a gold standard created via crowd-
sourcing. The results show that a sim-
ple classifier relying on the lexicon out-
performs two baselines on a sensory clas-
sification task, both at word and sentence
level, and confirm the soundness of the
proposed approach for the construction of
the lexicon and the usefulness of the re-
source for computational applications.
1 Introduction
Sensorial information interpenetrates languages
with various semantic roles in different levels since
the main interaction instrument of humans with the
outside world is the sensory organs. The trans-
formation of the raw sensations that we receive
through the sensory organs into our understand-
ing of the world has been an important philo-
sophical topic for centuries. According to a clas-
sification that dates back to Aristotle (Johansen,
1997), senses can be categorized into five modali-
ties, namely, sight, hearing, taste, smell and touch.
With the help of perception, we can process the
data coming from our sensory receptors and be-
come aware of our environment. While interpret-
ing sensory data, we unconsciously use our exist-
ing knowledge and experience about the world to
create a private experience (Bernstein, 2010).
Language has a significant role as our main
communication device to convert our private ex-
periences to shared representations of the environ-
ment that we perceive (Majid and Levinson, 2011).
As a basic example, onomatopoeic words, such as
knock or woof, are acquired by direct imitation of
the sounds allowing us to share the experience of
what we hear. As another example, where an im-
itation is not possible, is that giving a name to a
color, such as blue, provides a tool to describe a
visual feature of an object. In addition to the words
that describe the direct sensorial features of ob-
jects, languages include many other lexical items
that are connected to sensory modalities in various
semantic roles. For instance, while some words
can be used to describe a perception activity (e.g.,
to sniff, to watch, to feel), others can simply be
physical phenomena that can be perceived by sen-
sory receptors (e.g., light, song, salt, smoke).
Common usage of language, either written or
spoken, can be very dense in terms of sensorial
words. As an example, the sentence ?I felt the cold
breeze.? contains three sensorial words: to feel as
a perception activity, cold as a perceived sensorial
feature and breeze as a physical phenomenon. The
connection to the sense modalities of the words
might not be mutually exclusive, that is to say a
word can be associated with more than one senses.
For instance, the adjective sweet could be associ-
ated with both the senses of taste and smell. While
we, as humans, have the ability to connect words
with senses intuitively by using our commonsense
knowledge, it is not straightforward for machines
to interpret sensorial information.
Making use of a lexicon containing sensorial
words could be beneficial for many computa-
tional scenarios. Rodriguez-Esteban and Rzhetsky
1511
(2008) report that using words related to senses
in a text could clarify the meaning of an abstract
concept by facilitating a more concrete imagina-
tion. To this respect, an existing text could be au-
tomatically modified with sensory words for vari-
ous purposes such as attracting attention or biasing
the audience towards a specific concept. Addition-
ally, sensory words can be utilized to affect private
psychology by inducing a positive or negative sen-
timent (Majid and Levinson, 2011). For instance,
de Araujo et al. (2005) show that the pleasantness
level of the same odor can be altered by labeling it
as body odor or cheddar cheese. As another moti-
vation, the readability and understandability of text
could also be enhanced by using sensory words
(Rodriguez-Esteban and Rzhetsky, 2008). A com-
pelling use case of a sensorial lexicon is that auto-
matic text modification to change the density of a
specific sense could help people with sensory dis-
abilities. For instance, while teaching a concept to
a congenitally blind child, an application that elim-
inates color-related descriptions would be benefi-
cial. A sensorial lexicon could also be exploited by
search engines to personalize the results according
to user needs.
Advertising is another broad area which would
benefit from such a resource especially by using
synaesthesia1, as it strengthens creative thinking
and it is commonly exploited as an imagination
boosting tool in advertisement slogans (Pricken,
2008). As an example, we can consider the slogans
?The taste of a paradise? where the sense of sight
is combined with the sense of taste or ?Hear the
big picture? where sight and hearing are merged.
Various studies have been conducted both
in computational linguistics and cognitive sci-
ence that build resources associating words with
several cognitive features such as abstractness-
concreteness (Coltheart, 1981; Turney et al.,
2011), emotions (Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004;
Mohammad and Turney, 2010), colors (?zbal et
al., 2011; Mohammad, 2011) and imageability
(Coltheart, 1981). However, to the best of our
knowledge, there is no attempt in the literature to
build a resource that associates words with senses.
In this paper, we propose a computational method
to automatically generate a sensorial lexicon that
associates words in English with senses. Our
method consists of two main steps. First, we gen-
1American Heritage Dictionary (http://
ahdictionary.com/) defines synaesthesia in linguis-
tics as the description of one kind of sense impression by
using words that normally describe another.
erate a set of seed words for each sense category
with the help of a bootstrapping approach. In the
second step, we exploit a corpus based probabilis-
tic technique to create the final lexicon. We eval-
uate this lexicon with the help of a gold standard
that we obtain by using the crowdsourcing service
of CrowdFlower2.
The sensorial lexicon, which we named Sen-
sicon, embodies 22,684 English lemmas together
with their part-of-speech (POS) information that
have been linked to one or more of the five senses.
Each entry in this lexicon consists of a lemma-POS
pair and a score for each sensory modality that in-
dicates the degree of association. For instance, the
verb stink has the highest score for smell as ex-
pected while the scores for the other four senses
are very low. The noun tree, which is a concrete
object and might be perceived by multiple senses,
has high scores for sight, touch and smell.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
We first review previous work relevant to this task
in Section 2. Then in Section 3, we describe the
proposed approach in detail. In Section 4, we ex-
plain the annotation process that we conducted and
the evaluation strategy that we employed. Finally,
in Section 5, we draw our conclusions and outline
possible future directions.
2 Related Work
Since to the best of our knowledge there is no at-
tempt in the literature to automatically associate
words with human senses, in this section we will
summarize the most relevant studies that focused
on linking words with various other cognitive fea-
tures.
There are several studies focusing on word-
emotion associations. WordNet Affect Lexicon
(Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004) maps WordNet
(Fellbaum, 1998) synsets to various cognitive fea-
tures (e.g., emotion, mood, behaviour). This re-
source is created by using a small set of synsets
as seeds and expanding them with the help of se-
mantic and lexical relations among these synsets.
Yang et al. (2007) propose a collocation model
with emoticons instead of seed words while creat-
ing an emotion lexicon from a corpus. Perrie et al.
(2013) build a word-emotion association lexicon
by using subsets of a human-annotated lexicon as
seed sets. The authors use frequencies, counts, or
unique seed words extracted from an n-gram cor-
pus to create lexicons in different sizes. They pro-
2http://www.crowdflower.com/
1512
pose that larger lexicons with less accurate genera-
tion method perform better than the smaller human
annotated lexicons. While a major drawback of
manually generated lexicons is that they require a
great deal of human labor, crowdsourcing services
provide an easier procedure for manual annota-
tions. Mohammad and Turney (2010) generate an
emotion lexicon by using the crowdsourcing ser-
vice provided by Amazon Mechanical Turk3 and
it covers 14,200 term-emotion associations.
Regarding the sentiment orientations and sub-
jectivity levels of words, Sentiwordnet (Esuli and
Sebastiani, 2006) is constructed as an extension
to WordNet and it provides sentiments in synset
level. Positive, negative and neutral values are as-
signed to synsets by using ternary classifiers and
synset glosses. Another study that has been inspi-
rational for the design of our approach is Banea
et al. (2008). The authors generate a subjectivity
lexicon starting with a set of seed words and then
using a similarity measure among the seeds and the
candidate words.
Another cognitive feature relevant to sensorial
load of the words is the association between col-
ors and words. Mohammad (2011) builds a color-
word association lexicon by organizing a crowd-
sourcing task on Amazon Mechanical Turk. In-
stead, ?zbal et al. (2011) aim to automate this
process and propose three computational methods
based on image analysis, language models and la-
tent semantic analysis (LSA) (Landauer and Du-
mais, 1997). The authors compare these meth-
ods against a gold standard obtained by the crowd-
sourcing service of Amazon Mechanical Turk.
The best performance is obtained by using image
features while LSA performs slightly better than
the baseline.
Finally, there have been efforts in the liter-
ature about the association of words with their
abstractness-concreteness and imageability levels.
MRC Psycholinguistic Database (Coltheart, 1981)
includes abstractness-concreteness and imageabil-
ity ratings of a small set of words determined
according to psycholinguistic experiments. Tur-
ney et al. (2011) propose to use LSA similarities
of words with a set of seed words to automati-
cally calculate the abstractness and concreteness
degrees of words.
3http://www.mturk.com/mturk
3 Automatic Association of Senses with
Words
We adopt a two phased computational approach to
construct a large sensorial lexicon. First, we em-
ploy a bootstrapping strategy to generate a suffi-
cient number of sensory seed words from a small
set of manually selected seed words. In the sec-
ond phase, we perform a corpus based probabilistic
method to estimate the association scores to build
a larger lexicon.
3.1 Selecting Seed Words
The first phase of the lexicon construction pro-
cess aims to collect sensorial seed words, which
are directly related to senses (e.g., sound, tasty
and sightedness). To achieve that, we utilized
a lexical database called FrameNet (Baker et al.,
1998), which is built upon semantic frames of con-
cepts in English and lexical units (i.e., words) that
evoke these frames. The basic idea behind this
resource is that meanings of words can be under-
stood on the basis of a semantic frame. A semantic
frame consists of semantic roles called frame ele-
ments, which are manually annotated in more than
170,000 sentences. We have considered FrameNet
to be especially suitable for the collection of sen-
sorial seed words since it includes semantic roles
and syntactic features of sensational and percep-
tional concepts.
In order to determine the seed lemma-POS pairs
in FrameNet, we first manually determined 31
frames that we found to be highly connected to
senses such as Hear, Color, Temperature and Per-
ception_experience. Then, we conducted an an-
notation task and asked 3 annotators to determine
which senses the lemma-POS pairs evoking the
collected frames are associated with. At the end of
this task, we collected all the pairs (i.e. 277) with
100% agreement to constitute our initial seed set.
This set contains 277 lemma-POS pairs associated
with a specific sense such as the verb click with
hearing, the noun glitter with sight and aromatic
with smell.
3.2 Seed Expansion via Bootstrapping
In this step, we aim to extend the seed list that we
obtained from FrameNet with the help of a boot-
strapping approach. To achieve that, we adopt a
similar approach to Dias et al. (2014), who pro-
pose a repetitive semantic expansion model to au-
tomatically build temporal associations of synsets
in WordNet. Figure 1 provides an overview of
the bootstrapping process. At each iteration, we
1513
WordNet
MapNet
SVM Cross-
validation
Synset Set
Expansion
Sense
Seed
Synsets
FrameNet
Break-Point
Detection
Figure 1: Bootstrapping procedure to expand the
seed list.
first expand the seed list by using semantic rela-
tions provided by WordNet. We then evaluate the
accuracy of the new seed list for sense classifica-
tion by means of cross-validation against WordNet
glosses. For each sense, we continue iterating un-
til the cross-validation accuracy becomes stable or
starts to decrease. The following sections explain
the whole process in detail.
3.2.1 Extending the Seed List with WordNet
While the initial sensory seed list obtained from
FrameNet contains only 277 lemma-POS pairs,
we extend this list by utilizing the semantic re-
lations provided by WordNet. To achieve that,
we first map each lemma-POS pair in the seed
list to WordNet synsets with the help of Map-
Net (Tonelli and Pighin, 2009), which is a re-
source providing direct mapping between Word-
Net synsets and FrameNet lexical units. Then, we
add to the list the synsets that have WordNet re-
lations direct antonymy, similarity, derived-from,
derivationally-related, pertains-to, attribute and
also-see with the already existing seeds. For in-
stance, we add the synset containing the verb laugh
for the synset of the verb cry with the relation di-
rect antonymy, or the synset containing the ad-
jective chilly for the synset of the adjective cold
with the relation similarity. We prefer to use these
relations as they might allow us to preserve the
semantic information as much as possible during
the extension process. It is worth mentioning that
these relations were also found to be appropriate
for preserving the affective connotation by Vali-
tutti et al. (2004). Additionally, we use the rela-
tions hyponym and hyponym-instance to enrich the
seed set with semantically more specific synsets.
For instance, for the noun seed smell, we expand
the list with the hyponyms of its synset such as the
nouns bouquet, fragrance, fragrancy, redolence
and sweetness.
3.2.2 Cross-validation of Sensorial Model
After obtaining new synsets with the help ofWord-
Net relations in each bootstrapping cycle, we build
a five-class sense classifier over the seed synsets
defined by their glosses provided in WordNet.
Similarly to Dias et al. (2014), we assume that
the sense information of sensorial synsets is pre-
served in their definitions. Accordingly, we em-
ploy a support vector machine (SVM) (Boser et
al., 1992; Vapnik, 1998) model with second de-
gree polynomial kernel by representing the gloss
of each synset as a vector of lemmas weighted by
their counts. For each synset, its gloss is lemma-
tized by using Stanford Core NLP4 and cleaned
from the stop words. After each iteration cycle, we
perform a 10-fold cross-validation in the updated
seed list to detect the accuracy of the new sensorial
model. For each sense class, we continue iterating
and thereby expanding the seed list until the clas-
sifier accuracy steadily drops.
Table 1 lists the precision (P), recall (R) and
F1 values obtained for each sense after each it-
eration until the bootstrapping mechanism stops.
While the iteration number is provided in the first
column, the values under the last column group
present the micro-average of the resulting multi-
class classifier. The change in the performance
values of each class in each iteration reveals that
the number of iterations required to obtain the seed
lists varies for each sense. For instance, the F1
value of touch continues to increase until the fourth
cycle whereas hearing records a sharp decrease af-
ter the first iteration.
After the bootstrapping process, we create the
final lexicon by repeating the expansion for each
class until the optimal number of iterations is
reached. The last row of Table 1, labeled as Final,
demonstrates the accuracy of the classifier trained
and tested on the final lexicon, i.e., using the seeds
selected after iteration 2 for Sight, iteration 1 for
Hearing, iteration 3 for Taste and Smell and it-
eration 4 for Touch. According to F1 measure-
ments of each iteration, while hearing and taste
have a lower value for the final model, sight, smell
and touch have higher results. It should also be
noted that the micro-average of the F1 values of
the final model shows an increase when compared
to the third iteration, which has the highest av-
erage F1 value among the iterations. At the end
4http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/corenlp.
shtml
1514
of this step we have a seed synset list consisting
of 2572 synsets yielding the highest performance
when used to learn a sensorial model.
3.3 Sensorial Lexicon Construction Using
Corpus Statistics
After generating the seed lists consisting of synsets
for each sense category with the help of a set of
WordNet relations and a bootstrapping process, we
use corpus statistics to create our final sensorial
lexicon. More specifically, we exploit a proba-
bilistic approach based on the co-occurrence of
the seeds and the candidate lexical entries. Since
working on the synset level would raise the data
sparsity problem in synset tagged corpora such as
SemCor (Miller et al., 1993) and we need a cor-
pus that provides sufficient statistical information,
we migrate from synset level to lexical level. Ac-
cordingly, we treat each POS role of the same lem-
mas as a distinct seed and extract 4287 lemma-POS
pairs from 2572 synsets. In this section, we explain
the steps to construct our final sensorial lexicon in
detail.
3.3.1 Corpus and Candidate Words
As a corpus, we use a subset of English Giga-
Word 5th Edition released by Linguistic Data Con-
sortium (LDC)5. This resource is a collection of
almost 10 million English newswire documents
collected in recent years, whose content sums up
to nearly 5 billion words. The richly annotated
GigaWord data comprises automatic parses ob-
tained with the Stanford parser (Klein and Man-
ning, 2003) so that we easily have access to the
lemma and POS information of each word in the
resource. For the scope of this study, we work
on a randomly chosen subset that contains 79800
sentences and we define a co-occurrence event as
the co-existence of a candidate word and a seed
word within a window of 9 words(the candidate
word, 4 words to its left and 4 words to its right).
In this manner, we analyze the co-occurrence of
each unique lemma-POS pair in the corpuswith the
sense seeds. We eliminate the candidates which
have less than 5 co-occurrences with the sense cat-
egories.
3.3.2 Normalized Pointwise Mutual
Information
For the co-occurrence analysis of the candidate
words and seeds, we use pointwise mutual in-
formation (PMI), which is simply a measure of
5http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/
catalogEntry.jsp?catalogId=LDC2011T07
association between the probability of the co-
occurrence of two events and their individual prob-
abilities when they are assumed to be independent
(Church and Hanks, 1990). PMI can be exploited
as a semantic similarity measure (Han et al., 2013)
and it is calculated as:
PMI(x, y) = log
[
p(x, y)
p(x)p(y)
]
(1)
To calculate the PMI value of a candidate word
and a specific sense, we consider p(x) as the proba-
bility of the candidate word to occur in the corpus.
Therefore, p(x) is calculated as p(x) = c(x)/N ,
where c(x) is the total count of the occurrences of
the candidate word x in the corpus and N is the to-
tal co-occurrence count of all words in the corpus.
Similarly, we calculate p(y) as the total occurrence
count of all the seeds for the sense considered (y).
p(y) can thus be formulated as c(y)/N . p(x,y) is
the probability of the co-occurrence of a candidate
word x with a sense event y.
Amajor shortcoming of PMI is its sensitivity for
low frequency data (Bouma, 2009). As one pos-
sible solution, the author introduces Normalized
PointwiseMutual Information (NPMI), which nor-
malizes the PMI values to the range (-1, +1) with
the following formula:
NPMI(x, y) =
PMI(x, y)
? log p(x, y) (2)
We adopt the proposed solution and calculate
NPMI values for each candidate word and five
sense events in the corpus. Sensicon covers 22,684
lemma-POS pairs and a score for each sense class
that denotes their association degrees.
4 Evaluation
To evaluate the performance of the sensorial clas-
sification and the quality of Sensicon, we first cre-
ated a gold standard with the help of a crowdsourc-
ing task. Then, we compared the decisions com-
ing from Sensicon against the gold standard. In
this section, we explain the annotation process that
we conducted and the evaluation technique that we
adopted in detail. We also provide a brief discus-
sion about the obtained results.
4.1 Crowdsourcing to Build a Gold Standard
The evaluation phase of Sensicon requires a gold
standard data to be able to conduct a meaningful
assessment. Since to our best knowledge there is
no resource with sensory associations of words or
1515
Sight Hearing Taste Smell Touch Micro-average
It# P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
1 .873 .506 .640 .893 .607 .723 .716 .983 .828 .900 .273 .419 .759 .320 .451 .780 .754 .729
2 .666 .890 .762 .829 .414 .552 .869 .929 .898 .746 .473 .579 .714 .439 .543 .791 .787 .772
3 .643 .878 .742 .863 .390 .538 .891 .909 .900 .667 .525 .588 .720 .482 .578 .796 .786 .776
4 .641 .869 .738 .832 .400 .540 .866 .888 .877 .704 .500 .585 .736 .477 .579 .784 .774 .765
5 .640 .869 .737 .832 .400 .540 .866 .888 .877 .704 .500 .585 .738 .474 .578 .784 .774 .764
Final .805 .827 .816 .840 .408 .549 .814 .942 .873 .685 .534 .600 .760 .582 .659 .800 .802 .790
Table 1: Bootstrapping cycles with validation results.
majority class 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
word 0 0.98 3.84 9.96 11.63 16.66 34.41 12.42
sentence 0.58 2.35 7.07 10.91 13.27 15.63 21.23 16.51
Table 2: Percentage of words and sentences in each majority class.
sentences, we designed our own annotation task
using the crowdsourcing service of CrowdFlower.
For the annotation task, we first compiled a col-
lection of sentences to be annotated. Then, we de-
signed two questions that the annotators were ex-
pected to answer for a given sentence. While the
first question is related to the sense association of a
whole sentence, the second asks the annotators to
collect a fine-grained gold standard for word-sense
associations.
We collected a dataset of 340 sentences consist-
ing of 300 advertisement slogans from 11 adver-
tisement categories (e.g., fashion, food, electron-
ics) and 40 story sentences from a story corpus. We
collected the slogans from various online resources
such as http://slogans.wikia.com/wiki and
http://www.adslogans.co.uk/. The story
corpus is generated as part of a dissertation re-
search (Alm, 2008) and it provides stories as a col-
lection of sentences.
In both resources, we first determined the can-
didate sentences that had at least five tokens and
contained at least one adjective, verb or noun. In
addition, we replaced the brand names in the ad-
vertisement slogans with X to prevent any bias.
For instance, the name of a well-known restaurant
in a slogan might cause a bias towards taste. Fi-
nally, the slogans used in the annotation task were
chosen randomly among the candidate sentences
by considering a balanced number of slogans from
each category. Similarly, 40 story sentences were
selected randomly among the candidate story sen-
tences. To give a more concrete idea, for our
dataset we obtained an advertisement slogan such
as ?X?s Sugar Frosted Flakes They?re Great!? or a
story sentence such as ?The ground is frozen, and
besides the snow has covered everything.?
In the crowdsourcing task we designed, the an-
notators were required to answer 2 questions for
a given sentence. In the first question, they were
asked to detect the human senses conveyed or di-
rectly described by a given sentence. To exemplify
these cases, we provided two examples such as ?I
saw the cat? that directly mentions the action of
seeing and ?The sun was shining on the blue wa-
ter.? that conveys the sense of sight by using vi-
sual descriptions or elements like ?blue? or ?shine?
which are notable for their visual properties. The
annotators were able to select more than one sense
for each sentence and together with the five senses
we provided another option as None which should
be selected when an annotator could not associate
a sentence with any sense. The second question
was devoted do determining word-sense associa-
tions. Here, the annotators were expected to asso-
ciate the words in each sentence with at least one
sense. Again, annotators could choose None for
every word that they could not confidently asso-
ciate with a sense.
The reliability of the annotators was evaluated
on the basis of 20 control sentences which were
highly associated with a specific sense and which
included at least one sensorial word. For instance,
for the control sentence ?The skin you love to
touch?, we only considered as reliable the anno-
tators who associated the sentence with touch and
the word touch with the sense touch6. Similarly,
for the slogan ?The most colourful name in cos-
metics.?, an annotator was expected to associate
the sentence with at least the sense sight and the
word colorful to at least the sense sight. The raters
who scored at least 70% accuracy on average on
6If the annotators gave additional answers to the expected
ones, we considered their answers as correct.
1516
the control questions for the two tasks were con-
sidered to be reliable. Each unit was annotated by
at least 10 reliable raters.
Similarly to Mohammad (2011) and ?zbal et al.
(2011), we calculated the majority class of each
annotated item to measure the agreement among
the annotators. Table 2 demonstrates the observed
agreement at both word and sentence level. Since
10 annotators participated in the task, the annota-
tions with a majority class greater than 5 can be
considered as reliable (?zbal et al., 2011). In-
deed, for 85.10% of the word annotations the ab-
solute majority agreed on the same decision, while
77.58% of the annotations in the sentence level
have majority class greater than 5. The high agree-
ment observed among the annotators in both cases
confirms the quality of the resulting gold standard
data.
In Table 3, we present the results of the anno-
tation task by providing the association percent-
age of each category with each sense, namely sight
(Si), hear (He), taste (Ta), smell (Sm) and touch
(To). As demonstrated in the table, while the sense
of sight can be observed in almost every advertise-
ment category and in story, smell and taste are very
rare. We observe that the story sentences invoke all
sensory modalities except taste, although the per-
centage of sentences annotated with smell is rela-
tively low. Similarly, personal care category has
an association with four of the senses while the
other categories have either very low or no asso-
ciation with some of the sense classes. Indeed, the
perceived sensorial effects in the sentences vary
according to the category such that the slogans in
the travel category are highly associated with sight
whereas the communication category is highly as-
sociated with hearing. While the connection of the
food and beverages categories with taste is very
high as expected, they have no association with the
sense of smell. This kind of analysis could be use-
ful for copywriters to decide which sensorymodal-
ities to invoke while creating a slogan for a specific
product category.
4.2 Evaluation Measures
Based on the annotation results of our crowdsourc-
ing task, we propose an evaluation technique con-
sidering that a lemma-POS or a sentence might be
associated with more than one sensory modalities.
Similar to the evaluation framework defined by
?zbal et al. (2011), we adapt the evaluation mea-
sures of SemEval-2007 English Lexical Substitu-
tion Task (McCarthy and Navigli, 2007), where
Category Si He Ta Sm To
personal care 49.36 10.75 0.00 13.29 26.58
travel 58.18 0.00 29.09 0.00 12.72
fashion 43.47 0.00 0.00 26.08 30.43
beauty 84.56 0.00 0.00 0.00 15.43
computing 32.25 59.13 0.00 0.00 8.60
food 0.00 5.46 94.53 0.00 0.00
beverages 22.68 0.00 59.79 0.00 17.52
communications 25.00 67.50 0.00 0.00 0.075
electronics 45.94 54.05 0.00 0.00 0.00
education 28.57 42.85 0.00 0.00 28.57
transport 61.81 38.18 0.00 0.00 0.00
story 58.37 20.81 0.00 7.23 13.57
Table 3: The categories of the annotated data and
their sense association percentages.
a system generates one or more possible substitu-
tions for a target word in a sentence preserving its
meaning.
For a given lemma-POS or a sentence, which
we will name as item in the rest of the section, we
allow our system to provide as many sensorial as-
sociations as it determines by using a specific lex-
icon. While evaluating a sense-item association of
a method, a best and an oot score are calculated by
considering the number of the annotators who as-
sociate that sense with the given item, the number
of the annotators who associate any sense with the
given item and the number of the senses the sys-
tem gives as an answer for that item. More specif-
ically, best scoring provides a credit for the best
answer for a given item by dividing it to the num-
ber of the answers of the system. oot scoring, on
the other hand, considers only a certain number of
system answers for a given item and does not di-
vide the credit to the total number of the answers.
Unlike the lexical substitution task, a limited set
of labels (i.e., 5 sense labels and none) are allowed
for the sensorial annotation of sentences or lemma-
POS pairs. For this reason, we reformulate out-of-
ten (oot) scoring used by McCarthy and Navigli
(2007) as out-of-two.
In Equation 3, best score for a given item i from
the set of items I, which consists of the items an-
notated with a specific sense by a majority of 5
annotators, is formulated where H
i
is the multiset
of gold standard sense associations for item i and
S
i
is the set of sense associations provided by the
system. oot scoring, as formulated in Equation 4,
accepts up to 2 sense associations s from the an-
swers of system S
i
for a given item i and the credit
is not divided by the number of the answers of the
1517
system.
best (i) =
?
s?S
i
freq (s ? H
i
)
|H
i
| ? |S
i
|
(3)
oot (i) =
?
s?S
i
freq (s ? H
i
)
|H
i
|
(4)
As formulated in Equation 5, to calculate the
precision of an item-sense association task with a
specific method, the sum of the scores (i.e., best
or oot) for each item is divided by the number of
items A, for which the method can provide an an-
swer. In recall, the denominator is the number of
the items in the gold standard for which an answer
is given by the annotators.
P =
?
i?A
score
i
|A|
R =
?
i?I
score
i
|I|
(5)
4.3 Evaluation Method
For the evaluation, we compare the accuracy of
a simple classifier based on Sensicon against two
baselines on a sense classification task both at
word and sentence level. To achieve that, we use
the gold standard that we obtain from the crowd-
sourcing task and the evaluation measures best and
oot. The lexicon-based classifier simply assigns
to each word in a sentence the sense values found
in the lexicon. The first baseline assigns the most
frequently annotated sensory modality, which is
sight, via crowdsourcing task with a float value of
1.0 to each lemma-POS pair in the sensorial lexi-
con. The second baseline instead builds the associ-
ations by using a Latent Semantic Analysis space
generated from the same subset of LDC that we ex-
ploit for constructing Sensicon. More specifically,
this baseline calculates the LSA similarities be-
tween each candidate lemma-POS pair and sense
class by taking the cosine similarity between the
vector of the target lemma-POS pair and the aver-
age of the vectors of the related sensory word (i.e.,
see, hear, touch, taste, and smell) for each possi-
ble POS tag. For instance, to get the association
score of a lemma-POS pair with the sense sight,
we first average the vectors of see (noun) and see
(verb) before calculating its cosine similarity with
the target lemma-POS pair.
For the first experiment, i.e., word-sense as-
sociation, we automatically associate the lemma-
POS pairs obtained from the annotated dataset with
senses by using i) Sensicon, ii) the most-frequent-
sense baseline (MFS), iii) the LSA baseline. To
achieve that, we lemmatize and POS tag each sen-
tence in the dataset by using Stanford Core NLP.
In the end, for each method and target word, we
obtain a list of senses sorted according to their
sensorial association values in decreasing order.
It is worth noting that we only consider the non-
negative sensorial associations for Sensicon and
both baselines. For instance, Sensicon associates
the noun wine with [smell, taste, sight]. In this
experiment, best scoring considers the associated
senses as the best answer, smell, taste, sight ac-
cording to the previous example, and calculates a
score with respect to the best answer in the gold
standard and the number of the senses in this an-
swer. Instead, oot scoring takes the first two an-
swers, smell and taste according to the previous
example, and assigns the score accordingly.
To determine the senses associated with a sen-
tence for the second experiment, we use a method
similar to the one proposed by Turney (2002). For
each sense, we simply calculate the average score
of the lemma-POS pairs in a sentence. We set a
threshold value of 0 to decide whether a sentence
is associated with a given sense. In this manner,
we obtain a sorted list of average sensory scores
for each sentence according to the three methods.
For instance, the classifier based on Sensicon as-
sociates the sentence Smash it to pieces, love it to
bits. with [touch, taste]. For the best score, only
touch would be considered, whereas oot would
consider both touch and taste.
4.4 Evaluation Results
In Table 4, we list the F1 values that we obtained
with the classifier using Sensicon and the two base-
lines (MFS and LSA) according to both best and
oot measures. In addition, we provide the perfor-
mance of Sensicon in two preliminary steps, before
bootstrapping (BB) and after bootstrapping (AB)
to observe the incremental progress of the lexicon
construction method. As can be observed from the
table, the best performance for both experiments is
achieved by Sensicon when compared against the
baselines.
While in the first experiment the lexicon gen-
erated after the bootstrapping step (AB) provides
a very similar performance to the final lexicon
according to the best measure, it can only build
sense associations for 69 lemmas out of 153 ap-
pearing in the gold standard. Instead, the final lex-
icon attempts to resolve 129 lemma-sense associa-
tions and results in a better recall value. Addition-
ally, AB yields a very high precision as expected,
1518
since it is created by a controlled semantical ex-
pansion from manually annotated sensorial words.
BB lexicon includes only 573 lemmas which are
collected from 277 synsets and we can not ob-
tain 2 sense association scores for oot in this lexi-
con since each lemma is associated with only one
sense with a value of 1. The LSA baseline yields
a very low performance in the best measure due to
its tendency to derive positive values for all sen-
sorial associations of a given lemma-POS tuple.
Another observed shortcoming of LSA is its fail-
ure to correlate the names of the colors with sight
while this association is explicit for the annotators.
On the other hand, LSA baseline significantly im-
proves the MFS baseline with a p-value of 0.0009
in oot measures. This result points out that even
though LSA provides very similar positive asso-
ciation values for almost all the sensory modali-
ties for a given item, the first two sensorial asso-
ciations with the highest values yield a better per-
formance on guessing the sensorial characteristics
of a lemma-POS. Nevertheless, Sensicon signifi-
cantly outperforms the LSA baseline in both best
and oot measures with the p-values of 0.0009 and
0.0189 respectively. The statistical significance
tests are conducted using one-sided bootstrap re-
sampling (Efron and Tibshirani, 1994).
Concerning the sentence classification experi-
ment, the classifier using Sensicon yields the high-
est performance in both measures. The very high
F1 value obtained with the oot scoring indicates
that the right answer for a sentence is included
in the first two decisions in many cases. Sensi-
con significantly outperforms the LSA baseline on
the best measure (p-value = 0.0069). On the other
hand, when systems are allowed to provide two an-
swers (oot), the performance of LSA comes close
to Sensicon in terms of F1 measure.
After the manual analysis of Sensicon and gold
standard data, we observe that the sensorial clas-
sification task could be nontrivial. For instance, a
story sentence ?He went to sleep again and snored
until the windows shook.? has been most fre-
quently annotated as hearing. While the sensorial-
lexicon classifier associates this sentence with
touch as the best answer, it can provide the cor-
rect association hearing as the second best answer.
To find out the best sensorial association for a sen-
tence, a classification method which exploits var-
ious aspects of sensorial elements in a sentence,
such as the number of sensorial words or their de-
pendencies, could be a better approach than using
only the average sensorial values.
Lemma Sentence
Model best oot best oot
Most-Frequent-Sense 33.33 33.33 38.90 38.90
LSA 18.80 70.38 53.44 76.51
Lexicon-BB 45.22 45.22 49.60 51.12
Lexicon-AB 55.85 55.85 59.89 63.21
Sensicon 55.86 80.13 69.76 80.73
Table 4: Evaluation results.
Based on our observations of the error cases,
we believe that synaesthesia, which is one of the
most common metaphoric transfers in language
(Williams, 1976), should be further explored for
sense classification. As an example observation,
the advertisement slogan ?100% pure squeezed
sunshine? is associated with touch as the best an-
swer by Sensicon and taste by LSA baseline while
it is most frequently annotated as sight in the
gold standard. This slogan is an example usage
of synaesthesia and metaphors in advertising lan-
guage. To clarify, a product from the category of
beverages, which might be assumed to have a taste
association, is described by a metaphorical substi-
tution of a taste-related noun, most probably the
name of a fruit, with a sight-related noun; sun-
shine. This metaphorical substitution, then used
as the object of a touch-related verb, to squeeze,
produces a synaesthetic expression with touch and
sight.
5 Conclusion
In this paper we have presented the construction
of Sensicon, a sensorial lexicon, which associates
words with sensory modalities. This novel aspect
of word semantics is captured by employing a two-
step strategy. First, we collected seed words by
using a bootstrapping approach based on a set of
WordNet relations. Then, we performed a cor-
pus based statistical analysis to produce the final
lexicon. Sensicon consists of 22,684 lemma-POS
pairs and their association degrees with five sen-
sory modalities. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first systematic attempt to build a sen-
sorial lexicon and we believe that our contribution
constitutes a valid starting point for the commu-
nity to consider sensorial information conveyed by
text as a feature for various tasks and applications.
The results that we obtain by comparing our lexi-
con against the gold standard and two baselines are
promising even though not conclusive. The results
confirm the soundness of the proposed approach
for the construction of the lexicon and the useful-
1519
ness of the resource for text classification and pos-
sibly other computational applications.
Sensicon is publicly available upon request to
the authors so that the community can benefit from
it for relevant tasks. From a resource point of
view, we would like to explore the effect of us-
ing different kinds of WordNet relations during
the bootstrapping phase. It would also be interest-
ing to experiment with relations provided by other
resources such as ConceptNet (Liu and Singh,
2004), which is a semantic network containing
common sense, cultural and scientific knowledge.
We would also like to use the sensorial lexicon for
various applicative scenarios such as slanting ex-
isting text towards a specific sense with text modi-
fication. We believe that our resource could be ex-
tremely useful for automatic content personaliza-
tion according to user profiles. As an example, one
can imagine a system that automatically replaces
hearing based expressions with sight based ones in
pieces of texts for a hearing-impaired person. Au-
tomating the task of building sensorial associations
could also be beneficial for various tasks that need
linguistic creativity. For instance, copywriters can
take advantage of a system detecting the sensorial
load of a piece of text to generate more appropri-
ate advertisement slogans for specific product cat-
egories. Finally, we plan to investigate the impact
of using sensory information for metaphor detec-
tion and interpretation based on our observations
during the evaluation. For instance, the synaes-
thetic metaphor bittersweet symphony could be de-
tected by determining the sensorial characteriza-
tions of its components.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Daniele Pighin for his in-
sightful comments and valuable suggestions.
This work was partially supported by the PerTe
project (Trento RISE).
References
Ebba Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm. 2008. Affect in Text
and Speech. Ph.D. thesis, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign.
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The berkeley framenet project. pages 86?90.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Carmen Banea, Rada Mihalcea, and Janyce Wiebe.
2008. A bootstrapping method for building subjec-
tivity lexicons for languages with scarce resources.
In LREC.
Douglas A. Bernstein. 2010. Essentials of Psychol-
ogy. PSY 113 General Psychology Series. Cengage
Learning.
Bernhard E. Boser, Isabelle Guyon, and Vladimir Vap-
nik. 1992. A Training Algorithm for Optimal Mar-
gin Classifiers. In Proceedings of the 5th Annual
Workshop on Computational learning theory.
Gerlof Bouma. 2009. Normalized (pointwise) mutual
information in collocation extraction. Proceedings
of GSCL, pages 31?40.
Kenneth Ward Church and Patrick Hanks. 1990. Word
association norms, mutual information, and lexicog-
raphy. Comput. Linguist., 16(1):22?29, March.
Max Coltheart. 1981. The mrc psycholinguistic
database. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 33(4):497?505.
Ivan E. de Araujo, Edmund T. Rolls, Maria In?s Ve-
lazco, Christian Margot, and Isabelle Cayeux. 2005.
Cognitive modulation of olfactory processing. Neu-
ron, 46(4):671?679.
Ga?l Harry Dias, Mohammed Hasanuzzaman,
St?phane Ferrari, and Yann Mathet. 2014.
Tempowordnet for sentence time tagging. In
Proceedings of the Companion Publication of the
23rd International Conference on World Wide Web
Companion, WWW Companion ?14, pages 833?
838, Republic and Canton of Geneva, Switzerland.
InternationalWorldWideWeb Conferences Steering
Committee.
Bradley Efron and Robert J. Tibshirani. 1994. An in-
troduction to the bootstrap, volume 57. CRC press.
Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. Senti-
wordnet: A publicly available lexical resource for
opinion mining. In Proceedings of LREC, volume 6,
pages 417?422.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA ; London.
Lushan Han, Tim Finin, Paul McNamee, Anupam
Joshi, and Yelena Yesha. 2013. Improving word
similarity by augmenting pmi with estimates of word
polysemy. Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE
Transactions on, 25(6):1307?1322.
Thomas Kjeller Johansen. 1997. Aristotle on the
Sense-organs. Cambridge University Press.
Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Ac-
curate unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics - Volume 1, ACL ?03, pages 423?
430, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
1520
Thomas K. Landauer and Susan T. Dumais. 1997.
A solution to plato?s problem: The latent semantic
analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and rep-
resentation of knowledge. Psychological review,
104(2):211.
Hugo Liu and Push Singh. 2004. Conceptnet - a practi-
cal commonsense reasoning tool-kit. BT Technology
Journal, 22(4):211?226, October.
Asifa Majid and Stephen C. Levinson. 2011. The
senses in language and culture. The Senses and So-
ciety, 6(1):5?18.
Diana McCarthy and Roberto Navigli. 2007. Semeval-
2007 task 10: English lexical substitution task. In
Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluations, pages 48?53. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
George A. Miller, Claudia Leacock, Randee Tengi, and
Ross T. Bunker. 1993. A semantic concordance. In
Proceedings of the workshop on Human Language
Technology, HLT ?93, pages 303?308, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Saif M. Mohammad and Peter D. Turney. 2010. Emo-
tions evoked by common words and phrases: Using
mechanical turk to create an emotion lexicon. In
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on
Computational Approaches to Analysis and Gener-
ation of Emotion in Text, pages 26?34. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Saif M. Mohammad. 2011. Colourful language: Mea-
suring word-colour associations. In Proceedings of
the 2nd Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 97?106. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
G?zde ?zbal, Carlo Strapparava, Rada Mihalcea, and
Daniele Pighin. 2011. A comparison of unsuper-
vised methods to associate colors with words. In Af-
fective Computing and Intelligent Interaction, pages
42?51. Springer.
Jessica Perrie, Aminul Islam, Evangelos Milios, and
Vlado Keselj. 2013. Using google n-grams to ex-
pand word-emotion association lexicon. In Compu-
tational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing,
pages 137?148. Springer.
Mario Pricken. 2008. Creative Advertising Ideas
and Techniques from the World?s Best Campaigns.
Thames & Hudson, 2nd edition.
Raul Rodriguez-Esteban and Andrey Rzhetsky. 2008.
Six senses in the literature. The bleak sensory land-
scape of biomedical texts. EMBO reports, 9(3):212?
215, March.
Carlo Strapparava and Alessandro Valitutti. 2004.
WordNet-Affect: an affective extension ofWordNet.
In Proceedings of LREC, volume 4, pages 1083?
1086.
Sara Tonelli and Daniele Pighin. 2009. New features
for framenet - wordnet mapping. In Proceedings of
the Thirteenth Conference on Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning (CoNLL?09), Boulder, CO,
USA.
Peter D. Turney, Yair Neuman, Dan Assaf, and Yohai
Cohen. 2011. Literal and metaphorical sense iden-
tification through concrete and abstract context. In
Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on the Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
680?690.
Peter D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down?:
semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classi-
fication of reviews. In Proceedings of the 40th an-
nual meeting on association for computational lin-
guistics, pages 417?424. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Alessandro Valitutti, Carlo Strapparava, and Oliviero
Stock. 2004. Developing affective lexical resources.
PsychNology Journal, 2(1):61?83.
Vladimir N. Vapnik. 1998. Statistical Learning The-
ory. Wiley-Interscience.
Joseph M. Williams. 1976. Synaesthetic adjectives: A
possible law of semantic change. Language, pages
461?478.
Changhua Yang, Kevin Hsin-Yih Lin, and Hsin-Hsi
Chen. 2007. Building emotion lexicon from weblog
corpora. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting
of the ACL on Interactive Poster and Demonstration
Sessions, pages 133?136. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
1521
Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 352?357,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automation and Evaluation of the Keyword Method
for Second Language Learning
G
?
ozde
?
Ozbal
Trento RISE
Trento, Italy
gozbalde@gmail.com
Daniele Pighin
Google
Z?urich, Switzerland
biondo@google.com
Carlo Strapparava
FBK-irst
Trento, Italy
strappa@fbk.eu
Abstract
In this paper, we combine existing
NLP techniques with minimal supervi-
sion to build memory tips according to
the keyword method, a well established
mnemonic device for second language
learning. We present what we believe to be
the first extrinsic evaluation of a creative
sentence generator on a vocabulary learn-
ing task. The results demonstrate that NLP
techniques can effectively support the de-
velopment of resources for second lan-
guage learning.
1 Introduction
The keyword method is a mnemonic device (Co-
hen, 1987; Thompson, 1987) that is especially
suitable for vocabulary acquisition in second lan-
guage learning (Mizumoto and Kansai, 2009;
Hummel, 2010; Shen, 2010; Tavakoli and Gerami,
2013). In this method, a target word in a foreign
language L2 can be learned by a native speaker of
another language L1 in two main steps: 1) one or
more L1 words, possibly referring to a concrete
entity, are chosen based on orthographic or pho-
netic similarity with the target word; 2) an L1 sen-
tence is constructed in which an association be-
tween the translation of the target word and the
keyword(s) is established, so that the learner, when
seeing or hearing the word, immediately recalls
the keyword(s). To illustrate, for teaching the Ital-
ian word cuore which means heart in English, the
learner might be asked to imagine ?a lonely heart
with a hard core?.
The keyword method has already been proven
to be a valuable teaching device. However, the
preparation of the memorization tips for each new
word is an activity that requires considerable time,
linguistic competence and creativity. To the best
of our knowledge, there is only one study which
attempts to automate the mechanism of the key-
word method. In (
?
Ozbal and Strapparava, 2011),
we proposed to automate the keyword method by
retrieving sentences from the Web. However, we
did not provide any evaluation to demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach in a real life sce-
nario. In addition, we observed that retrieval poses
severe limitations in terms of recall and sentence
quality, and it might incur copyright violations.
In this paper, we overcome these limitations by
introducing a semi-automatic system implement-
ing the keyword method that builds upon the key-
word selection mechanism of
?
Ozbal and Strappar-
ava (2011) and combines it with a state-of-the-art
creative sentence generation framework (
?
Ozbal et
al., 2013). We set up an experiment to simulate
the situation in which a teacher needs to prepare
material for a vocabulary teaching resource. Ac-
cording to our scenario, the teacher relies on au-
tomatic techniques to generate relatively few, high
quality mnemonics in English to teach Italian vo-
cabulary. She only applies a very light supervi-
sion in the last step of the process, in which the
most suitable among the generated sentences are
selected before being presented to the learners. In
this stage, the teacher may want to consider factors
which are not yet in reach of automatic linguistic
processors, such as the evocativeness or the mem-
orability of a sentence. We show that the automat-
ically generated sentences help learners to estab-
lish memorable connections which augment their
ability to assimilate new vocabulary. To the best of
our knowledge, this work is the first documented
extrinsic evaluation of a creative sentence genera-
tor on a real-world application.
2 Related work
The effectiveness of the keyword method (KM)
is a well-established fact (Sar?c?oban and Bas??bek,
2012). Sommer and Gruneberg (2002) found that
using KM to teach French made learning easier
and faster than conventional methods. Sagarra
and Alba (2006) compared the effectiveness of
352
three learning methods including the semantic
mapping, rote memorization (i.e., memorization
by pure repetition, with no mnemonic aid) and
keyword on beginner learners of a second lan-
guage. Their results show that using KM leads
to better learning of second language vocabulary
for beginners. Similar results have been reported
by Sar?c?oban and Bas??bek (2012) and Tavakoli
and Gerami (2013). Besides all the experimental
results demonstrating the effectiveness of KM, it
is worthwhile to mention about the computational
efforts to automate the mechanism. In (
?
Ozbal and
Strapparava, 2011) we proposed an automatic vo-
cabulary teaching system which combines NLP
and IR techniques to automatically generate mem-
ory tips for vocabulary acquisition. The system
exploits orthographic and phonetic similarity met-
rics to find the best L2 keywords for each target L1
word. Sentences containing the keywords and the
translation of the target word are retrieved from
the Web, but we did not carry out an evaluation
of the quality or the coverage of the retrieved sen-
tences. In
?
Ozbal et al (2013) we proposed an ex-
tensible framework for the generation of creative
sentences in which users are able to force sev-
eral words to appear in the sentences. While we
had discussed the potentiality of creative sentence
generation as a useful teaching device, we had not
validated our claim experimentally yet. As a previ-
ous attempt at using NLP for education, Manurung
et al (2008) employ a riddle generator to create
a language playground for children with complex
communication needs.
3 Memory tip generation
Preparing memory tips based on KM includes two
main ingredients: one or more keywords which are
orthographically or phonetically similar to the L2
word to be learned; and a sentence in which the
keywords and the translation of the target L2 word
are combined in a meaningful way. In this section,
we detail the process that we employed to generate
such memory tips semi-automatically.
3.1 Target word selection and keyword
generation
We started by compiling a collection of Ital-
ian nouns consisting of three syllables from var-
ious resources for vocabulary teaching includ-
ing http://didattica.org/italiano.
htm and http://ielanguages.com, and
produced a list of 185 target L2 words. To gen-
erate the L1 keywords for each target word, we
adopted a similar strategy to
?
Ozbal and Strappa-
rava (2011). For each L2 target word t, the key-
word selection module generates a list of possi-
ble keyword pairs, K. A keyword pair k ? K
can either consist of two non-empty strings, i.e.,
k = [w
0
, w
1
], or of one non-empty and one empty
string, i.e., w
1
= . Each keyword pair has the
property that the concatenation of its elements is
either orthographically or phonetically similar to
the target word t. Orthographic and phonetic sim-
ilarity are evaluated by means of the Levenshtein
distance (Levenshtein, 1966). For orthographic
similarity, the distance is calculated over the char-
acters in the words, while for phonetic similarity
it is calculated over the phonetic representations
of t and w
0
+ w
1
. We use the CMU pronuncia-
tion dictionary
1
to retrieve the phonetic represen-
tation of English words. For Italian words, instead,
their phonetic representation is obtained from an
unpublished phonetic lexicon developed at FBK-
irst.
3.2 Keyword filtering and ranking
Unlike in (
?
Ozbal and Strapparava, 2011), where
we did not enforce any constraints for selecting
the keywords, in this case we applied a more so-
phisticated filtering and ranking strategy. We re-
quire at least one keyword in each pair to be a
content word; then, we require that at least one
keyword has length ? 3; finally, we discard pairs
containing at least one proper noun. We allowed
the keyword generation module to consider all the
entries in the CMU dictionary, and rank the key-
word pairs based on the following criteria in de-
creasing order of precedence: 1) Keywords with
a smaller orthographic/phonetic distance are pre-
ferred; 2) Keywords consisting of a single word
are preferred over two words (e.g., for the target
word lavagna, which means blackboard, lasagna
takes precedence over love and onion); 3) Key-
words that do not contain stop words are preferred
(e.g., for the target word pettine, which means
comb, the keyword pair pet and inn is ranked
higher than pet and in, since in is a stop word); 4)
Keyword pairs obtained with orthographic similar-
ity are preferred over those obtained with phonetic
similarity, as learners might be unfamiliar with the
phonetic rules of the target language. For example,
for the target word forbice, which means scissors,
1
http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/cgi-bin/
cmudict
353
Group Target Sentence
A1 campagna a company runs the country
A1 isola an island of remote isolated communities
A1 fabbrica a fabric worker in a factory
A1 bagnino lifeguards carry no bag
A1 inverno the inferno started, winter left
A1 cielo the sky has no ceiling
A1 marrone blood and marrow in a brown water
A1 cuore the lonely heart has hard core
A1 coperta a piece of copper in the corner of a blanket
A1 locanda an inn oak door with lock and key
A2 piazza a square building serves a free pizza
A2 calzino big bloke with sock in the casino
A2 scatola a cardboard box sat in a scuttle of a house
A2 ragazzo boys also have rag dolls
A2 angolo a corner kick came at an angle
A2 cestino a teen movie uses basket to play the chess
A2 carbone the coal is the form of carbon
A2 cassetto a blank cassette tape is in a drawer
A2 farfalla the butterflies are far in the fall
A2 tovaglia a damp cloth towel
B1 duomo the old cathedral has a dome
B1 aceto a vinegar sauce contains the acid
B1 nuvola the sophisticated novel depicts the cloud
B1 chiesa the Catholic church has Swiss cheese
B1 bacino the explosion in the back broke the pelvis
B1 maiale a pork meat comes in the mail
B1 minestra Chinese ministries have soup
B1 estate this estate is for summer
B1 bozzolo a buzz comes wrapped in the cocoon
B1 arnese harness a technology to develop a tool
B2 asino an Asian elephant is riding a donkey
B2 miele do not make honey to walk a mile
B2 polmone crowded pullmans stop the lungs
B2 fagiolo a topical facial bean cream
B2 fiore a fire in a flower market
B2 compressa the clay tablet is in the compressed form
B2 cavallo horse running fast in cavalry
B2 fiume the muddy river has smoke and fumes
B2 pittore a famous painter has precious pictures
B2 manico manic people have broken necks
Table 1: Sentences used in the vocabulary acqui-
sition experiment.
the keyword pair for and bid is preferred to for and
beach.
We selected up to three of the highest ranked
keyword pairs for each target word, obtaining 407
keyword combinations for the initial 185 Italian
words, which we used as the input for the sentence
generator.
3.3 Sentence generation
In this step, our goal was to generate, for each Ital-
ian word, sentences containing its L1 translation
and the set of orthographically (or phonetically)
similar keywords that we previously selected. For
each keyword combination, starting from the top-
ranked ones, we generated up to 10 sentences by
allowing any known part-of-speech for the key-
words. The sentences were produced by the state
of the art sentence generator of
?
Ozbal et al (2013).
The system relies on two corpora of automatic
parses as a repository of sentence templates and
lexical statistics. As for the former, we combined
two resources: a corpus of 16,000 proverbs (Mi-
halcea and Strapparava, 2006) and a collection of
5,000 image captions
2
collected by Rashtchian et
al. (2010). We chose these two collections since
they offer a combination of catchy or simple sen-
tences that we expect to be especially suitable
for second language learning. As for the sec-
ond corpus, we used LDC?s English GigaWord 5th
Edition
3
. Of the 12 feature functions described
in (
?
Ozbal et al, 2013), we only implemented the
following scorers: Variety (to prevent duplicate
words from appearing in the sentences); Seman-
tic Cohesion (to enforce the generation of sentence
as lexically related to the target words as possi-
ble); Alliteration, Rhyme and Plosive (to intro-
duce hooks to echoic memory in the output); De-
pendency Operator andN -gram (to enforce output
grammaticality).
We observed that the sentence generation mod-
ule was not able to generate a sentence for 24%
of the input configurations. For comparison, when
we attempted to retrieve sentences from the Web
as suggested in
?
Ozbal and Strapparava (2011), we
could collect an output for less than 10% of the in-
put configurations. Besides, many of the retrieved
sentences were exceedingly long and complex to
be used in a second language learning experiment.
3.4 Sentence selection
For each L1 keyword pair obtained for each L2
target word, we allowed the system to output up to
10 sentences. We manually assessed the quality of
the generated sentences in terms of meaningful-
ness, evocativeness and grammaticality to select
the most appropriate sentences to be used for the
task. In addition, for keyword pairs not containing
the empty string, we prioritized the sentences in
which the keywords were closer to each other. For
example, let us assume that we have the keywords
call and in for the target word collina. Among
the sentences ?The girl received a call in the bath-
room? and ?Call the blond girl in case you need?,
the first one is preferred, since the keywords are
closer to each other. Furthermore, we gave pri-
ority to the sentences that included the keywords
2
http://vision.cs.uiuc.edu/
pascal-sentences/
3
http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/
catalogEntry.jsp?catalogId=LDC2011T07
354
in the right order. To illustrate, for the same key-
words and the target words, we would prefer the
sentence ?I called him in the morning yesterday?
over ?You talk a lot in a call?.
Accordingly, for each target word in random or-
der, we sequentially scanned the outputs generated
for each keyword pair. As soon as a sentence of
adequate quality was found, we added it to our
evaluation data and moved on to the next keyword.
We continued this process until we selected a sen-
tence for 40 distinct target words, which we set
as the target size of the experiment. We had to
inspect the outputs generated for 48 target words
before we were able to select 40 good examples,
meaning that for 17% of the target words the sen-
tence generator could not produce a sentence of
acceptable quality.
4 Experiment setup
For our experiment, we drew inspiration from
Sagarra and Alba (2006). We compared the re-
tention error rate of learners who tried to memo-
rize new words with or without the aid of the auto-
matically generated sentences. Through academic
channels, we recruited 20 native English speakers
with no prior knowledge of Italian.
4
After obtaining the sentences as explained in
Section 3, we shuffled and then divided the whole
set including 40 target words together with their
translation, the generated keywords and sentences
into 2 batches (A, B) and further divided each
batch into 2 groups consisting of 10 elements (A1,
A2, B1 and B2). The set of sentences assigned
to each group is listed in Table 1: Column ?Tar-
get? reports the Italian target word being taught;
Column ?Sentence? shows the automatically gen-
erated sentence, where the translation of the tar-
get word is shown in bold and the keyword(s) in
italic. For the experiments, we randomly assigned
each subject to one of the batches (A or B). Then,
each subject was asked to memorize all the word
pairs in a batch, but they would see the memory
tips only for one of the two groups, which was
again randomly assigned. This approach resulted
in 4 different memorization exercises, namely 1)
A1 with tips and A2 without, 2) A2 with tips and
A1 without, 3) B1 with tips and B2 without, 4) B2
with tips and B1 without.
4
We preferred to select the experiment subjects in person
as opposed to crowdsourcing the evaluation to be able to ver-
ify the proficiency of the subjects in the two languages and to
ensure the reliability of the outcome of the evaluation.
Error rate (%) Reduction
Group Rote KW ?
e
%
e
A1 4.08 3.39 0.69 16.95
A2 12.07 10.42 1.65 13.69
B1 12.77 10.00 2.77 21.67
B2 22.50 12.50 10.00 44.44
Macro-average 12.85 9.08 3.78 29.39
Micro-average 11.27 8.25 3.02 26.76
Table 2: Per-group and overall retention error rate
when using rote or keyword-aided (KW) memo-
rization.
When memorizing the translations without the
aid of memory tips, the subjects were instructed
to focus only on the Italian word and its English
translation and to repeat them over and over in
their mind. Conversely, when relying on the au-
tomatic memory tips the subjects were shown the
word, its translation and the generated sentence in-
cluding the keywords. In this case, the subjects
were instructed to read the sentence over and over
trying to visualize it.
After going through each set of slides, we dis-
tracted the subjects with a short video in order to
reset their short term memory. After that, their re-
tention was tested. For each Italian word in the ex-
ercise, they were asked to select the English trans-
lation among 5 alternatives, including the correct
translation and 4 other words randomly selected
from the same group. In this way, the subjects
would always have to choose among the words
that they encountered during the exercise.
5
We
also added an extra option ?I already knew this
word? that the subjects were instructed to select
in case they already knew the Italian word prior to
taking part in the experiment.
5 Experiment results
Table 2 summarizes the outcome of the experi-
ment. The contribution of the automatically gen-
erated sentences to the learning task is assessed
in terms of error rate-reduction, which we mea-
sure both within each group (rows 1-4) and on the
whole evaluation set (rows 5-6). Due to the pres-
ence of the ?I already knew this word? option in
the learning-assessment questionnaire, the number
of the actual answers provided by each subject can
be slightly different, hence the difference between
macro- and micro-average.
5
Otherwise, they could easily filter out the wrong answers
just because they were not exposed to them recently.
355
The error rate for each memorization technique
t (where t = R for ?Rote memorization? and
t = K for ?keyword-aided memorization?) is cal-
culated as: e
t
=
i
t
c
t
+i
t
, where c
t
and i
t
are the
number of correct and incorrect answers provided
by the subjects, respectively. The absolute error
rate reduction ?e is calculated as the absolute dif-
ference in error rate between rote and keyword-
aided memorization, i.e.: ?
e
= e
R
? e
K
. Finally,
the relative error rate reduction %
e
is calculated as
the the ratio between the absolute error rate reduc-
tion ?e and the error rate of rote memorization e
R
,
i.e.,: %
e
=
?
e
e
R
=
e
R
?e
K
e
R
.
The overall results (rows 5 and 6 in Table 2)
show that vocabulary learning noticeably im-
proves when supported by the generated sen-
tences, with error rates dropping by almost 30%
in terms of macro-average (almost 27% for micro-
average). The breakdown of the error rate across
the 4 groups shows a clear pattern. The results
clearly indicate that one group (A1) by chance
contained easier words to memorize as shown by
the low error rate (between 3% and 4%) obtained
with both methods. Similarly, groups A2 and B1
are of average difficulty, whereas group B2 ap-
pears to be the most difficult, with an error rate
higher than 22% when using only rote memoriza-
tion. Interestingly, there is a strong correlation
(Pearson?s r = 0.85) between the difficulty of
the words in each group (measured as the error
rate on rote memorization) and the positive contri-
bution of the generated sentences to the learning
process. In fact, we can see how the relative er-
ror rate reduction %
e
increases from?17% (group
A1) to almost 45% (group B2). Based on the re-
sults obtained by Sagarra and Alba (2006), who
showed that the keyword method results in bet-
ter long-term word retention than rote memoriza-
tion, we would expect the error rate reduction to be
even higher in a delayed post-test. All in all, these
findings clearly support the claim that a state-of-
the-art sentence generator can be successfully em-
ployed to support keyword-based second language
learning. After completing their exercise, the sub-
jects were asked to provide feedback about their
experience as learners. We set up a 4-items Lik-
ert scale (Likert, 1932) where each item consisted
of a statement and a 5-point scale of values rang-
ing from (1) [I strongly disagree] to (5) [I strongly
agree]. The distribution of the answers to the ques-
tions is shown in Table 3. 60% of the subjects ac-
knowledged that the memory tips helped them in
Rating (%)
Question 1 2 3 4 5
Sentences helped 5 20 15 35 25
Sentences are grammatical - 25 30 35 10
Sentences are catchy - 25 10 50 15
Sentences are witty - 25 25 50 -
Table 3: Evaluation of the generated sentences on
a 5-point Likert scale.
the memorization process; 45% found that the sen-
tences were overall correct; 65% confirmed that
the sentences were catchy and easy to remember;
and 50% found the sentences to be overall witty
although the sentence generator does not include a
mechanism to generate humor. Finally, it is worth
mentioning that none of the subjects noticed that
the sentences were machine generated, which we
regard as a very positive assessment of the qual-
ity of the sentence generation framework. From
their comments, it emerges that the subjects ac-
tually believed that they were just comparing two
memorization techniques.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we have presented a semi-automatic
system for the automation of the keyword method
and used it to teach 40 Italian words to 20 En-
glish native speakers. We let the system select
appropriate keywords and generate sentences au-
tomatically. For each Italian word, we selected the
most suitable among the 10 highest ranked sug-
gestions and used it for the evaluation. The sig-
nificant reduction in retention error rate (between
17% and 45% on different word groups) for the
words learned with the aid of the automatically
generated sentences shows that they are a viable
low-effort alternative to human-constructed exam-
ples for vocabulary teaching.
As future work, it would be interesting to in-
volve learners in an interactive evaluation to un-
derstand the extent to which learners can bene-
fit from ad-hoc personalization. Furthermore, it
should be possible to use frameworks similar to
the one that we presented to automate other teach-
ing devices based on sentences conforming to spe-
cific requirements (Dehn, 2011), such as verbal
chaining and acrostic.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the PerTe
project (Trento RISE).
356
References
Andrew D. Cohen. 1987. The use of verbal and
imagery mnemonics in second-language vocabulary
learning. Studies in Second Language Acquisition,
9:43?61, 2.
M.J. Dehn. 2011. Working Memory and Academic
Learning: Assessment and Intervention. Wiley.
K. M. Hummel. 2010. Translation and short-term L2
vocabulary retention: Hindrance or help? Language
Teaching Research, 14(1):61?74.
V. Levenshtein. 1966. Binary codes capable of cor-
recting deletions, insertions, and reversals. Soviet
Physics Doklady, 10:707?710.
R. Likert. 1932. A technique for the measurement of
attitudes. Archives of Psychology, 22(140):1?55.
Ruli Manurung, Graeme Ritchie, Helen Pain, Annalu
Waller, Dave O?Mara, and Rolf Black. 2008. The
Construction of a Pun Generator for Language Skill
Development. Appl. Artif. Intell., 22(9):841?869,
October.
R. Mihalcea and C. Strapparava. 2006. Learning to
laugh (automatically): Computational models for
humor recognition. Journal of Computational In-
telligence, 22(2):126?142, May.
A. Mizumoto and O. T. Kansai. 2009. Examining
the effectiveness of explicit instruction of vocabu-
lary learning strategies with Japanese EFL university
students. Language Teaching Research 13, 4.
G?ozde
?
Ozbal and Carlo Strapparava. 2011. MEANS:
Moving Effective Assonances for Novice Students.
In Proceedings of the 16th International Confer-
ence on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI 2011), pages
449?450, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
G?ozde
?
Ozbal, Daniele Pighin, and Carlo Strapparava.
2013. BRAINSUP: Brainstorming Support for Cre-
ative Sentence Generation. In Proceedings of the
51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL 2013), pages 1446?1455,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Cyrus Rashtchian, Peter Young, Micah Hodosh, and
Julia Hockenmaier. 2010. Collecting image annota-
tions using amazon?s mechanical turk. In Proceed-
ings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating
Speech and Language Data with Amazon?s Mechan-
ical Turk, CSLDAMT ?10, pages 139?147, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
N. Sagarra and M. Alba. 2006. The key is in the
keyword: L2 vocabulary learning methods with be-
ginning learners of spanish. The Modern Language
Journal, 90(2):228?243.
A. Sar?c?oban and N. Bas??bek. 2012. Mnemonics tech-
nique versus context method in teaching vocabulary
at upper-intermediate level. Journal of Education
and Science, 37(164):251?266.
Helen H. Shen. 2010. Imagery and verbal coding ap-
proaches in Chinese vocabulary instruction. Lan-
guage Teaching Research, 14(4):485?499.
Steffen Sommer and Michael Gruneberg. 2002. The
use of linkword language computer courses in a
classroom situation: a case study at rugby school.
?Language Learning Journal, 26(1):48?53.
M. Tavakoli and E. Gerami. 2013. The effect of key-
word and pictorial methods on EFL learners? vocab-
ulary learning and retention. PORTA LINGUARUM,
19:299?316.
G. Thompson. 1987. Using bilingual dictionar-
ies. ELT Journal, 41(4):282?286. cited By (since
1996)6.
357
Zock/Rapp/Huang (eds.): Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon, pages 114?125,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23, 2014.
A Computational Approach to Generate a Sensorial Lexicon
Serra Sinem Tekiro?lu
FBK-Irst
Via Sommarive 18
Povo, I-38100 Trento
tekiroglu@fbk.eu
G?zde ?zbal
Trento RISE
Via Sommarive 18
Povo, I-38100 Trento
gozbalde@gmail.com
Carlo Strapparava
FBK-Irst
Via Sommarive 18
Povo, I-38100 Trento
strappa@fbk.eu
Abstract
While humans are capable of building connections between words and sensorial modalities by
using commonsense knowledge, it is not straightforward for machines to interpret sensorial in-
formation. To this end, a lexicon associating words with human senses, namely sight, hearing,
taste, smell and touch, would be crucial. Nonetheless, to the best of our knowledge, there is no
systematic attempt in the literature to build such a resource. In this paper, we propose a compu-
tational method based on bootstrapping and corpus statistics to automatically associate English
words with senses. To evaluate the quality of the resulting lexicon, we create a gold standard via
crowdsourcing and show that a simple classifier relying on the lexicon outperforms two base-
lines on a sensory classification task, both at word and sentence level. The results confirm the
soundness of the proposed approach for the construction of the lexicon and the usefulness of the
resource for computational applications.
1 Introduction
The connection between our senses and the way we perceive the world has been an important philosophi-
cal topic for centuries. According to a classification that dates back to Aristotle (Johansen, 1997), senses
can be categorized as sight, hearing, taste, smell and touch. With the help of perception, we can process
the data coming from our sensory receptors and become aware of our environment. While interpreting
sensory data, we unconsciously use our existing knowledge, experience and understanding of the world
to create a private experience (Bernstein, 2010).
Language has a significant role as our main communication device to convert our private experiences
to shared representations of the environment that we perceive (Majid and Levinson, 2011). As a basic
example, giving a name to a color, such as red, provides a tool to describe a visual feature of an object.
In addition to the words which describe the direct sensorial features of objects, languages include many
other lexical items that are connected to sense modalities in various semantic roles. For instance, while
some words can be used to describe a perception activity (e.g., to smell, to gaze, to listen), others can
simply be physical phenomenons that can be perceived by sensory receptors (e.g., flower, fire, sugar).
Common usage of language can be very dense in terms of sensorial words. As an example, the sentence
?I tasted a delicious soup.? contains three sensorial words: to taste as a perception activity, delicious as
a perceived sensorial feature and soup as a physical phenomenon. While we, as humans, have the ability
to connect words with senses intuitively by using our commonsense knowledge, it is not straightforward
for machines to interpret sensorial information.
From a computational point of view, a sensorial lexicon could be useful for many scenarios. Rodriguez-
Esteban and Rzhetsky (2008) report that using words related to human senses in a piece of text could
clarify the meaning of an abstract concept by facilitating a more concrete imagination. Based on this
result, an existing text could be automatically modified with sensory words for various purposes such
as attracting attention or biasing the audience towards a specific concept. In addition, sensory words
can be utilized to affect private psychology by inducing a positive or negative sentiment (Majid and
This work is licenced under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Page numbers and proceedings
footer are added by the organizers. License details: http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
114
Levinson, 2011). As an example, de Araujo et al. (2005) show that the pleasantness level of the same
odor can be altered by labeling it as body odor or cheddar cheese. As another motivation, the readability
and understandability of text could also be enhanced by using sensory words (Rodriguez-Esteban and
Rzhetsky, 2008).
Yet another area which would benefit from such a resource is advertisement especially by using synaes-
thesia1, as it reinforces creative thinking and it is commonly exploited as an imagination boosting tool in
advertisement slogans (Pricken, 2008). As an example, we can consider the slogans ?Taste the rainbow?
where the sense of sight is combined with the sense of taste or ?Hear the big picture? where sight and
hearing are merged.
There are various studies both in computational linguistics and cognitive science that build resources
associating words with several cognitive features such as abstractness-concreteness (Coltheart, 1981;
Turney et al., 2011), emotions (Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004; Mohammad and Turney, 2010), colors
(?zbal et al., 2011; Mohammad, 2011) and imageability (Coltheart, 1981). However, to the best of our
knowledge, there is no attempt in the literature to build a resource that associates words with senses.
In this paper, we propose a computational method to automatically generate a sensorial lexicon2 that
associates words in English with senses. Our method consists of two main steps. First, we generate the
initial seed words for each sense category with the help of a bootstrapping approach. Then, we exploit a
corpus based probabilistic technique to create the final lexicon. We evaluate this resource with the help
of a gold standard that we obtain by using the crowdsourcing service provided by CrowdFlower3.
The sensorial lexicon embodies 22,684 English lemmas together with their part-of-speech (POS) in-
formation that have been linked to one or more of the five senses. Each entry in this lexicon consists of a
lemma-POS pair and a score for each sense that indicates the degree of association. For instance, the verb
stink has the highest score for smell as expected while the scores for the other four senses are very low.
The noun tree, which is a concrete object and might be perceived by multiple senses, has high scores for
sight, touch and smell.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We first review previous work relevant to this task in
Section 2. Then in Section 3, we describe the proposed approach in detail. In Section 4, we explain the
annotation process that we conducted and the evaluation strategy that we adopted. Finally, in Section 4,
we draw our conclusions and outline possible future directions.
2 Related Work
Since to the best of our knowledge there is no attempt in the literature to automatically associate words
with human senses, in this section we will summarize the most relevant studies that focused on linking
words with various other cognitive features.
There are several studies dealing with word-emotion associations. WordNet Affect Lexicon (Strap-
parava and Valitutti, 2004) maps WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) synsets to various cognitive features (e.g.,
emotion, mood, behaviour). This resource is created by using a small set of synsets as seeds and expand-
ing them with the help of semantic and lexical relations among these synsets. Yang et al. (2007) propose
a collocation model with emoticons instead of seed words while creating an emotion lexicon from a cor-
pus. Perrie et al. (2013) build a word-emotion association lexicon by using subsets of a human-annotated
lexicon as seed sets. The authors use frequencies, counts, or unique seed words extracted from an n-
gram corpus to create lexicons in different sizes. They propose that larger lexicons with less accurate
generation method perform better than the smaller human annotated lexicons. While a major drawback
of manually generated lexicons is that they require a great deal of human labor, crowdsourcing services
provide an easier procedure for manual annotations. Mohammad and Turney (2010) generate an emotion
lexicon by using the crowdsourcing service provided by Amazon Mechanical Turk4 and it covers 14,200
term-emotion associations.
1American Heritage Dictionary (http://ahdictionary.com/) defines synaesthesia in linguistics as the description of one
kind of sense impression by using words that normally describe another.
2The sensorial lexicon is publicly available, upon request to the authors.
3http://www.crowdflower.com/
4http://www.mturk.com/mturk
115
Regarding the sentiment orientations and subjectivity levels of words, Sentiwordnet (Esuli and Sebas-
tiani, 2006) is constructed as an extension toWordNet and it provides sentiments in synset level. Positive,
negative and neutral values are assigned to synsets by using ternary classifiers and synset glosses. An-
other study that has been inspirational for the design of our approach is Banea et al. (2008). The authors
generate a subjectivity lexicon starting with a set of seed words and then using a similarity measure among
the seeds and the candidate words.
Concerning the association between colors and words, Mohammad (2011) builds a color-word asso-
ciation lexicon by organizing a crowdsourcing task on Amazon Mechanical Turk. Instead, ?zbal et al.
(2011) aim to automate this process and propose three computational methods based on image analysis,
language models and latent semantic analysis (LSA) (Landauer and Dumais, 1997). The authors com-
pare these methods against a gold standard obtained by the crowdsourcing service of AmazonMechanical
Turk. The best performance is obtained by using image features while LSA performs slightly better than
the baseline.
Finally, there have been efforts in the literature about the association of words with their abstractness-
concreteness and imageability levels. MRC Psycholinguistic Database (Coltheart, 1981) includes
abstractness-concreteness and imageability ratings of a small set of words determined according to psy-
cholinguistic experiments. Turney et al. (2011) propose to use LSA similarities of words with a set of
seed words to automatically calculate the abstractness and concreteness degrees of words.
3 Automatically Associating Senses with Words
We adopt a two phased computational approach to construct a large sensorial lexicon. First, we employ a
bootstrapping strategy to generate a sufficient number of sensory seed words from a small set of manually
selected seed words. In the second phase, we perform a corpus based probabilistic method to estimate
the association scores to build a larger lexicon.
3.1 Selecting Seed Words
The first phase of the lexicon construction process aims to collect sensorial seed words, which are directly
related to senses (e.g., sound, tasty and sightedness). To achieve that, we utilized a lexical database called
FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998), which is built upon semantic frames of concepts in English and lexical
units (i.e., words) that evoke these frames. The basic idea behind this resource is that meanings of words
can be understood on the basis of a semantic frame. A semantic frame consists of semantic roles called
frame elements, which are manually annotated in more than 170,000 sentences. We have considered
FrameNet to be especially suitable for the collection of sensorial seed words since it includes semantic
roles and syntactic features of sensational and perceptional concepts.
In order to determine the seed lemma-POS pairs in FrameNet, we first manually determined 31
frames that we found to be highly connected to senses such as Hear, Color, Temperature and Percep-
tion_experience. Then, we conducted an annotation task and asked 3 annotators to determine which
senses the lemma-POS pairs evoking the collected frames are associated with. At the end of this task, we
collected all the pairs (i.e., 277) with 100% agreement to constitute our initial seed set. This set contains
277 lemma-POS pairs associated with a specific sense such as the verb click with hearing, the noun glitter
with sight and aromatic with smell.
3.2 Seed Expansion via Bootstrapping
In this step, we aim to extend the seed list that we obtained from FrameNet with the help of a bootstrapping
approach. To achieve that, we adopt a similar approach to Dias et al. (2014), who propose a repetitive
semantic expansion model to automatically build temporal associations of synsets in WordNet. Figure 1
provides an overview of the bootstrapping process. At each iteration, we first expand the seed list by
using semantic relations provided by WordNet. We then evaluate the accuracy of the new seed list for
sense classification by means of cross-validation against WordNet glosses. For each sense, we continue
iterating until the cross-validation accuracy becomes stable or starts to decrease. The following sections
explain the whole process in detail.
116
WordNet
MapNet
SVM Cross-validation
Synset SetExpansion
SenseSeedSynsetsFrameNet
Break-PointDetection
Figure 1: Bootstrapping procedure to expand the seed list.
Extending the Seed List with WordNet
While the initial sensory seed list obtained fromFrameNet contains only 277 lemma-POS pairs, we extend
this list by utilizing the semantic relations provided by WordNet. To achieve that, we first map each
lemma-POS pair in the seed list to WordNet synsets with the help of MapNet (Tonelli and Pighin, 2009),
which is a resource providing directmapping betweenWordNet synsets and FrameNet lexical units. Then,
we add to the list the synsets that are in WordNet relations direct antonymy, similarity, derived-from,
derivationally-related, pertains-to, attribute and also-see with the already existing seeds. For instance,
we add the synset containing the verb laugh for the synset of the verb crywith the relation direct antonymy,
or the synset containing the adjective chilly for the synset of the adjective cold with the relation similarity.
We prefer to use these relations as they might allow us to preserve the semantic information as much as
possible during the extension process. It is worth mentioning that these relations were also found to be
appropriate for preserving the affective connotation by Valitutti et al. (2004). Additionally, we use the
relations hyponym and hyponym-instance to enrich the seed set with semantically more specific synsets.
For instance, for the noun seed smell, we expand the list with the hyponyms of its synset such as the
nouns bouquet, fragrance, fragrancy, redolence and sweetness.
Cross-validation for Sensorial Model
After obtaining new synsets with the help of WordNet relations in each bootstrapping cycle, we build a
five-class sense classifier over the seed synsets defined by their glosses provided in WordNet. Similarly
to Dias et al. (2014), we assume that the sense information of sensorial synsets is preserved in their
definitions. Accordingly, we employ a support vector machine (SVM) (Boser et al., 1992; Vapnik, 1998)
model with second degree polynomial kernel by representing the gloss of each synset as a vector of
lemmas weighted by their counts. For each synset, its gloss is lemmatized by using Stanford Core NLP5
and cleaned from the stop words. After each iteration cycle, we perform a 10-fold cross-validation in the
updated seed list to detect the accuracy of the new sensorial model. For each sense class, we continue
iterating and thereby expanding the seed list until the classifier accuracy steadily drops.
Table 1 lists the precision (P), recall (R) and F1 values obtained for each sense after each iteration until
the bootstrapping mechanism stops. While the iteration number is provided in the first column, the values
under the last column group present the micro-average of the resulting multi-class classifier. The change
in the performance values of each class in each iteration reveal that the number of iterations required to
obtain the seed lists varies for each sense. For instance, the F1 value of touch continues to increase until
the fourth cycle whereas hearing records a sharp decrease after the first iteration.
After the bootstrapping process, we create the final lexicon by repeating the expansion for each class
until the optimal number of iterations is reached. The last row of Table 1, labeled as Final, demonstrates
the accuracy of the classifier trained and tested on the final lexicon, i.e., using the seeds selected after
iteration 2 for Sight, iteration 1 for Hearing, iteration 3 for Taste and Smell and iteration 4 for Touch.
5http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/corenlp.shtml
117
Sight Hearing Taste Smell Touch Micro-average
It# P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
1 .873 .506 .640 .893 .607 .723 .716 .983 .828 .900 .273 .419 .759 .320 .451 .780 .754 .729
2 .666 .890 .762 .829 .414 .552 .869 .929 .898 .746 .473 .579 .714 .439 .543 .791 .787 .772
3 .643 .878 .742 .863 .390 .538 .891 .909 .900 .667 .525 .588 .720 .482 .578 .796 .786 .776
4 .641 .869 .738 .832 .400 .540 .866 .888 .877 .704 .500 .585 .736 .477 .579 .784 .774 .765
5 .640 .869 .737 .832 .400 .540 .866 .888 .877 .704 .500 .585 .738 .474 .578 .784 .774 .764
Final .805 .827 .816 .840 .408 .549 .814 .942 .873 .685 .534 .600 .760 .582 .659 .800 .802 .790
Table 1: Bootstrapping cycles with validation results.
According to F1 measurements of each iteration, while hearing and taste have a lower value for the final
model, sight, smell and touch have higher results. It should also be noted that the micro-average of the F1
values of the final model shows an increase when compared to the third iteration which has the highest
avarage F1 value among the iterations. At the end of this step we have a seed synset list consisting of
2572 synsets yielding the highest performance when used to learn a sensorial model.
3.3 Sensorial Lexicon Construction Using Corpus Statistics
After generating the seed lists consisting of synsets for each sense category with the help of a set of
WordNet relations and a bootstrapping process, we use corpus statistics to create our final sensorial lex-
icon. More specifically, we exploit a probabilistic approach based on the co-occurence of the seeds and
the candidate lexical entries. Since working on the synset level would raise the data sparsity problem in
synset tagged corpora such as SemCor (Miller et al., 1993) and we need a corpus that provides sufficient
statistical information, we migrate from synset level to lexical level. Accordingly, we treat each POS
role of the same lemmas as a distinct seed and extract 4287 lemma-POS pairs from 2572 synsets. In this
section, we explain the steps to construct our final sensorial lexicon in detail.
Corpus and Candidate Words
As a corpus, we use a subset of English GigaWord 5th Edition released by Linguistic Data Consortium
(LDC)6. This resource is a collection of almost 10million English newswire documents collected in recent
years, whose content sums up to nearly 5 billion words. The richly annotated GigaWord data comprises
automatic parses obtained with the Stanford parser (Klein and Manning, 2003) so that we easily have
access to the lemma and POS information of each word in the resource. For the scope of this study, we
work on a randomly chosen subset that contains 79800 sentences and we define a co-occurrence event as
the co-existence of a candidate word and a seed word within a window of 9 words (the candidate word,
4 words to its left and 4 words to its right). In this manner, we analyze the cooccurrence of each unique
lemma-POS pair in the corpus with the sense seeds. We eliminate the candidates which have less than 5
cooccurences with the sense categories.
Normalized Pointwise Mutual Information
For the cooccurrence analysis of the candidate words and seeds, we use pointwise mutual information
(PMI), which is simply a measure of association between the probability of the co-occurence of two
events and their individual probabilities when they are assumed to be independent (Church and Hanks,
1990) and it is calculated as:
PMI(x, y) = log
[
p(x, y)
p(x)p(y)
]
(1)
To calculate the PMI value of a candidate word and a specific sense, we consider p(x) as the probability
of the candidate word to occur in the corpus. Therefore, p(x) is calculated as p(x) = c(x)/N , where c(x)
is the total count of the occurences of the candidate word x in the corpus and N is the total cooccurrence
count of all words in the corpus. Similarly, we calculate p(y) as the total occurrence count of all the
6http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/catalogEntry.jsp?catalogId=LDC2011T07
118
majority class 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
word 0 0.98 3.84 9.96 11.63 16.66 34.41 12.42
sentence 0.58 2.35 7.07 10.91 13.27 15.63 21.23 16.51
Table 2: Percentage of words and sentences in each majority class.
seeds for the sense considered (y). p(y) can thus be formulated as c(y)/N . p(x,y) is the probability of the
cooccurence of a candidate word x with a sense event y.
A major shortcoming of PMI is its sensitivity for low frequency data (Bouma, 2009). As one possible
solution, the author introduces Normalized Pointwise Mutual Information (NPMI), which normalizes the
PMI values to the range (-1, +1) with the following formula:
NPMI(x, y) =
PMI(x, y)
? log p(x, y) (2)
We calculated NPMI values for each candidate word and five sense events in the corpus. The sensorial
lexicon covers 22,684 lemma-POS pairs and a score for each sense class that denotes their association
degrees.
4 Evaluation
To evaluate the performance of the sensorial classification and the quality of the lexicon, we first created
a gold standard with the help of a crowdsourcing task. Then, we compared the decisions coming from the
lexicon against the gold standard. In this section, we explain the annotation process that we conducted
and the evaluation technique that we adopted in detail. We also provide a brief discussion about the
obtained results.
4.1 Crowdsourcing to Build a Gold Standard
The evaluation phase of the sensorial lexicon requires a gold standard data to be able to conduct a mean-
ingful assessment. Since to our best knowledge there is no resource with sensory associations of words
or sentences, we designed our own annotation task using the crowdsourcing service CrowdFlower. For
the annotation task, we first compiled a collection of sentences to be annotated. Then, we designed two
questions that the annotators were expected to answer for a given sentence. While the first question is
related to the sense association of a whole sentence, the second asks the annotators the sense associations
of the words in the same sentence to collect a fine-grained gold standard.
We collected a dataset of 340 sentences consisting of 300 advertisement slogans from 11 advertisement
categories (e.g., fashion, food, electronics) and 40 story sentences from a story corpus. We collected the
slogans from various online resources such as http://slogans.wikia.com/wiki and http://www.
adslogans.co.uk/. The story corpus is generated as part of a dissertation research (Alm, 2008) and it
provides stories as a collection of sentences.
In both resources, we first determined the candidate sentences which had at least five tokens and con-
tained at least one adjective, verb or noun. In addition, we replaced the brand names in the advertisement
slogans with X to prevent any bias. For instance, the name of a well-known restaurant in a slogan might
cause a bias towards taste. Finally, the slogans used in the annotation task were chosen randomly among
the candidate sentences by considering a balanced number of slogans from each category. Similarly, 40
story sentences were selected randomly among the candidate story sentences. To give a more concrete
idea, for our dataset we obtained an advertisement slogan such as ?X's Sugar Frosted Flakes They're
Great!? or a story sentence such as ?The ground is frozen, and besides the snow has covered everything.?
In the crowdsourcing task we designed, the annotators were required to answer 2 questions for a given
sentence. In the first question, they were asked to detect the human senses conveyed or directly described
by a given sentence. To exemplify these cases, we provided two examples such as ?I saw the cat? that
directly mentions the action of seeing and ?The sun was shining on the blue water.? that conveys the sense
of sight by using visual descriptions or elements like ?blue? or ?shine? which are notable for their visual
119
Category Si He Ta Sm To
personal care 49.36 10.75 0.00 13.29 26.58
travel 58.18 0.00 29.09 0.00 12.72
fashion 43.47 0.00 0.00 26.08 30.43
beauty 84.56 0.00 0.00 0.00 15.43
computing 32.25 59.13 0.00 0.00 8.60
food 0.00 5.46 94.53 0.00 0.00
beverages 22.68 0.00 59.79 0.00 17.52
communications 25.00 67.50 0.00 0.00 0.075
electronics 45.94 54.05 0.00 0.00 0.00
education 28.57 42.85 0.00 0.00 28.57
transport 61.81 38.18 0.00 0.00 0.00
story 58.37 20.81 0.00 7.23 13.57
Table 3: The categories of the annotated data and their sense association percentages.
properties. The annotators were able to select more than one sense for each sentence and together with
the five senses we provided another option as None which should be selected when an annotator could
not associate a sentence with any sense. The second question was devoted do determining word-sense
associations. Here, the annotators were expected to associate the words in each sentence with at least
one sense. Again, annotators could choose None for every word that they could not confidently associate
with a sense.
The reliability of the annotators was evaluated on the basis of 20 control sentences which were highly
associated with a specific sense and which included at least one sensorial word. For instance, for the con-
trol sentence ?The skin you love to touch?, we only considered as reliable the annotators who associated
the sentence with touch and the word touch with the sense touch7. Similarly, for the slogan ?The most
colourful name in cosmetics.?, an annotator was expected to associate the sentence with at least the sense
sight and the word colorful to at least the sense sight. The raters who scored at least 70% accuracy on
average on the control questions for the two tasks were considered to be reliable. Each unit was annotated
by at least 10 reliable raters.
Similarly to Mohammad (2011) and ?zbal et al. (2011), we calculated the majority class of each anno-
tated item to measure the agreement among the annotators. Table 2 demonstrates the observed agreement
at both word and sentence level. Since 10 annotators participated in the task, the annotations with a ma-
jority class greater than 5 can be considered as reliable (?zbal et al., 2011). Indeed, for 85.10% of the
word annotations the absolute majority agreed on the same decision, while 77.58% of the annotations in
the sentence level have majority class greater than 5. The high agreement observed among the annotators
in both cases confirms the quality of the resulting gold standard data.
In Table 3, we present the results of the annotation task by providing the association percentage of each
category with each sense, namely sight (Si), hear (He), taste (Ta), smell (Sm) and touch (To). As demon-
strated in the table, while the sense of sight can be observed in almost every advertisement category and
in story, smell and taste are very rare. We observe that the story sentences invoke all sensorial modali-
ties except taste, although the percentage of sentences annotated with smell is relatively low. Similarly,
personal care category has an association with four of the senses while the other categories have either
very low or no association with some of the sense classes. Indeed, the perceived sensorial effects in the
sentences vary according to the category such that the slogans in the travel category are highly associated
with sight whereas the communication category is highly associated with hearing. While the connection
of the food and beverages categories with taste is very high as expected, they have no association with the
sense of smell. This kind of analysis could be useful for copywriters to decide which sensory modalities
to invoke while creating a slogan for a specific product category.
7If the annotators gave additional answers to the expected ones, we considered their answers as correct.
120
4.2 Evaluation Measures
Based on the annotation results of our crowdsourcing task, we propose an evaluation technique consider-
ing that a lemma-POS or a sentencemight be associated withmore than one sensorymodalities. Similar to
the evaluation framework defined by ?zbal et al. (2011), we adapt the evaluation measures of SemEval-
2007 English Lexical Substitution Task (McCarthy and Navigli, 2007), where a system generates one or
more possible substitutions for a target word in a sentence preserving its meaning.
For a given lemma-POS or a sentence, which we will name as item in the rest of the section, we allow
our system to provide as many sensorial associations as it determines using a specific lexicon. While
evaluating a sense-item association of a method, a best and an oot score are calculated by considering
the number of the annotators who associate that sense with the given item, the number of the annotators
who associate any sense with the given item and the number of the senses the system gives as an answer
for that item. More specifically, best scoring provides a credit for the best answer for a given item by
dividing it to the number of the answers of the system. oot scoring, on the other hand, considers only a
certain number of system answers for a given item and does not divide the credit to the total number of
the answers. Unlike the lexical substitution task, a limited set of labels (i.e., 5 sense labels and none) are
allowed for the sensorial annotation of sentences or lemma-POS pairs. For this reason, we reformulate
out-of-ten (oot) scoring used by McCarthy and Navigli (2007) as out-of-two.
In Equation 3, best score for a given item i from the set of items I, which consists of the items annotated
with a specific sense by a majority of 5 annotators, is formulated whereH
i
is the multiset of gold standard
sense associations for item i and S
i
is the set of sense associations provided by the system. oot scoring,
as formulated in Equation 4, accepts up to 2 sense associations s from the answers of system S
i
for a
given item i and the credit is not divided by the number of the answers of the system.
best (i) =
?
s?S
i
freq (s ? H
i
)
|H
i
| ? |S
i
|
(3)
oot (i) =
?
s?S
i
freq (s ? H
i
)
|H
i
|
(4)
As formulated in Equation 5, to calculate the precision of an item-sense association task with a specific
method, the sum of the scores (i.e., best or oot) for each item is divided by the number of items A, for
which the method can provide an answer. In recall, the denominator is the number of the items in the
gold standard for which an answer is given by the annotators.
P =
?
i?A
score
i
|A|
R =
?
i?I
score
i
|I|
(5)
4.3 Evaluation Method
For the evaluation, we compare the accuracy of a simple classifier based on the sensorial lexicon against
two baselines on a sense classification task, both at word and sentence level. To achieve that, we use
the gold standard that we obtain from the crowdsourcing task and the evaluation measures best and oot.
The lexicon-based classifier simply assigns to each word in a sentence the sense values found in the
lexicon. The first baseline simply assigns a random float value, which is in the range of (-1,1), to each
sense association of each lemma-POS pair in the sensorial lexicon. The second baseline instead builds
the associations by using a Latent Semantic Analysis space generated from the British National Corpus8
(BNC), which is a very large (over 100 million words) corpus of modern English. More specifically,
this baseline calculates the LSA similarities between each candidate lemma-POS pair and sense class
by taking the cosine similarity between the vector of the target lemma-POS pair and the average of the
vectors of the related sensory word (i.e., see, hear, touch, taste, and smell) for each possible POS tag.
For instance, to get the association score of a lemma-POS pair with the sense sight, we first average the
vectors of see (noun) and see (verb) before calculating its cosine similarity with the target lemma-POS
pair.
8http://www.hcu.ox.ac.uk/bnc/
121
For the first experiment, i.e., word-sense association, we automatically associate the lemma-POS pairs
obtained from the annotated dataset with senses by using i) the sensorial lexicon, ii) the random baseline,
iii) the LSA baseline. To achieve that, we lemmatize and POS tag each sentence in the dataset by using
Stanford CoreNLP. In the end, for eachmethod and target word, we obtain a list of senses sorted according
to their sensorial association values in decreasing order. It is worth noting that we only consider the non-
negative sensorial associations for the sensorial lexicon and the random baseline, and the associations
above the value of 0.4 which we empirically set as the threshold for the LSA baseline. For instance,
the sensorial lexicon associates the noun wine with [smell, taste, sight]. In this experiment, best scoring
considers the associated senses as the best answer, smell, taste, sight according to the previous example,
and calculates a score with respect to the best answer in the gold standard and the number of the senses
in this answer. Instead, oot scoring takes the first two answers, smell and taste according to the previous
example, and assigns the score accordingly.
To determine the senses associated with a sentence for the second experiment, we use a method similar
to the one proposed by Turney (2002). For each sense, we simply calculate the average score of the
lemma-POS pairs in a sentence. We set a threshold value of 0 to decide whether a sentence is associated
with a given sense. In this manner, we obtain a sorted list of average sensory scores for each sentence
according to the three methods. For instance, the classifier based on the sensorial lexicon associates the
sentence Smash it to pieces, love it to bits. with [touch, taste]. For the best score, only touch would be
considered, whereas oot would consider both touch and taste.
4.4 Evaluation Results
In Table 4, we list the F1 values that we obtained with the classifier using the sensorial lexicon and the
two baselines (Random and LSA) according to both best and oot measures. In addition, we provide
the performance of the sensorial lexicon in two preliminary steps, before bootstrapping (BB) and after
bootstrapping (AB) to observe the incremental progress of the lexicon construction method. As can be
observed from the table, the best performance for both experiments is achieved by the sensorial lexicon
when compared against the baselines.
While in the first experiment the lexicon generated after the bootstrapping step (AB) provides a very
similar performance to the final lexicon according to the bestmeasure, it can only build sense associations
for 69 lemmas out of 153 appearing in the gold standard. Instead, the final lexicon attempts to resolve
129 lemma-sense associations and results in a better recall value. Additionally, AB yields a very high
precision as expected, since it is created by a controlled semantical expansion from manually annotated
sensorial words. The LSA baseline slightly improves the random baseline according to both best and oot
measures and it also outperforms BB for oot. BB lexicon includes only 573 lemmas which are collected
from 277 synsets and we can not obtain 2 sense association scores for oot in this lexicon since each lemma
is associated with only one sense with a value of 1.
Concerning the sentence classification experiment, the classifier using the sensorial lexicon yields the
highest performance in bothmeasures. The very high F1 value obtained with the oot scoring indicates that
the right answer for a sentence is included in the first two decisions in many cases. The low performance
of the LSA baseline might be arising due to its tendency to link the sentences with the sense of touch (i.e.,
215 sentences out of 320 gold standard data). It would be interesting to see the impact of using another
corpus to build the LSA space and constituting the sense vectors differently.
After the manual analysis of the sensorial lexicon and gold standard data, we observe that the sensorial
classification task could be nontrivial. For instance, a story sentence ?He went to sleep again and snored
until the windows shook.? has been most frequently annotated as hearing. While the sensorial lexicon
classifier associates this sentence with touch as the best answer, it can provide the correct association
hearing as the second best answer. To find out the best sensorial association for a sentence, a classification
method which exploits various aspects of sensorial elements in a sentence, such as the number of sensorial
words or their dependencies, could be a better approach than using only the average sensorial values.
Based on our observations in the error cases, the advertisement slogan ?100% pure squeezed sunshine?
is associated with touch as the best answer by both the sensorial lexicon and LSA baseline while it is most
frequently annotated as sight in the gold standard. This slogan is an example usage of synaesthesia and
122
Lemma Sentence
Model best oot best oot
Random 21.10 37.59 21.10 37.59
LSA 26.35 37.60 31.01 37.63
Lexicon-BB 45.22 45.22 49.60 51.12
Lexicon-AB 55.85 55.85 59.89 63.21
Sensorial Lexicon 55.86 80.13 69.76 80.73
Table 4: Evaluation results.
metaphors in advertising language. To clarify, a product from the category of beverages, which might be
assumed to have a taste association, is described by a metaphorical substitution of a taste-related noun,
most probably the name of a fruit, with a sight-related noun; sunshine. This metaphorical substitution,
then used as the object of a touch-related verb, to squeeze, produces a synaesthetic expression with touch
and sight.
5 Conclusion
In this paper we have presented a computational method to build a lexicon that associates words with
senses by employing a two-step strategy. First, we collected seed words by using a bootstrapping ap-
proach based on a set of WordNet relations. Then, we performed a corpus based statistical analysis to
produce the final lexicon. The resulting sensorial lexicon consists of 22,684 lemma-POS pairs and their
association degrees with five sensory modalities. To our best knowledge, this is the first systematic at-
tempt to build a sensorial lexicon and we believe that our contribution constitutes a valid starting point
for the community to consider sensorial information conveyed by text as a feature for various tasks and
applications. The results that we obtain by comparing our lexicon against the gold standard are promis-
ing even though not conclusive. The results confirm the soundness of the proposed approach for the
construction of the lexicon and the usefulness of the resource for text classification and possibly other
computational applications.
As future work, we would like to explore the effect of using different kinds of WordNet relations dur-
ing the bootstrapping phase. It would also be interesting to experiment with relations provided by other
resources such as ConceptNet (Liu and Singh, 2004), which is a semantic network containing common
sense, cultural and scientific knowledge. We would also like to use the sensorial lexicon for various
applicative scenarios such as slanting existing text towards a specific sense with text modification. We
believe that our resource could be extremely useful for automatic content personalization according to
user profiles. As an example, one can imagine a system that automatically replaces hearing based ex-
pressions with sight based ones in pieces of texts for a hearing-impaired person. Finally, we plan to
investigate the impact of using sensory information for metaphor detection and interpretation based on
our observations during the evaluation.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Daniele Pighin for his insightful comments and valuable suggestions.
This work was partially supported by the PerTe project (Trento RISE).
References
Ebba Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm. 2008. Affect in Text and Speech. Ph.D. thesis, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign.
Collin F Baker, Charles J Fillmore, and John B Lowe. 1998. The berkeley framenet project. pages 86--90.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
123
Carmen Banea, Rada Mihalcea, and Janyce Wiebe. 2008. A bootstrapping method for building subjectivity lexi-
cons for languages with scarce resources. In LREC.
D. Bernstein. 2010. Essentials of Psychology. PSY 113 General Psychology Series. Cengage Learning.
Bernhard E. Boser, Isabelle Guyon, and Vladimir Vapnik. 1992. A Training Algorithm for Optimal Margin Clas-
sifiers. In Proceedings of the 5th Annual Workshop on Computational learning theory.
Gerlof Bouma. 2009. Normalized (pointwise) mutual information in collocation extraction. Proceedings of GSCL,
pages 31--40.
Kenneth Ward Church and Patrick Hanks. 1990. Word association norms, mutual information, and lexicography.
Comput. Linguist., 16(1):22--29, March.
Max Coltheart. 1981. The mrc psycholinguistic database. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
33(4):497--505.
Ivan E de Araujo, Edmund T Rolls, Maria In?s Velazco, Christian Margot, and Isabelle Cayeux. 2005. Cognitive
modulation of olfactory processing. Neuron, 46(4):671--679.
Ga?l Harry Dias, Mohammed Hasanuzzaman, St?phane Ferrari, and Yann Mathet. 2014. Tempowordnet for
sentence time tagging. In Proceedings of the Companion Publication of the 23rd International Conference
on World Wide Web Companion, WWW Companion '14, pages 833--838, Republic and Canton of Geneva,
Switzerland. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.
Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. Sentiwordnet: A publicly available lexical resource for opinion
mining. In Proceedings of LREC, volume 6, pages 417--422.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet An Electronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA ;
London.
Thomas Kjeller Johansen. 1997. Aristotle on the Sense-organs. Cambridge University Press.
Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Accurate unlexicalized parsing. In IN PROCEEDINGS OF THE
41ST ANNUAL MEETING OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS, pages 423--430.
Thomas K Landauer and Susan T Dumais. 1997. A solution to plato's problem: The latent semantic analysis theory
of acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge. Psychological review, 104(2):211.
H. Liu and P. Singh. 2004. Conceptnet - a practical commonsense reasoning tool-kit. BT Technology Journal,
22(4):211--226, October.
Asifa Majid and Stephen C Levinson. 2011. The senses in language and culture. The Senses and Society, 6(1):5--
18.
Diana McCarthy and Roberto Navigli. 2007. Semeval-2007 task 10: English lexical substitution task. In Proceed-
ings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations, pages 48--53. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
George A. Miller, Claudia Leacock, Randee Tengi, and Ross T. Bunker. 1993. A semantic concordance. In
Proceedings of the workshop on Human Language Technology, HLT '93, pages 303--308, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Saif M Mohammad and Peter D Turney. 2010. Emotions evoked by common words and phrases: Using mechan-
ical turk to create an emotion lexicon. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational
Approaches to Analysis and Generation of Emotion in Text, pages 26--34. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Saif Mohammad. 2011. Colourful language: Measuring word-colour associations. In Proceedings of the 2nd
Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics, pages 97--106. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
G?zde ?zbal, Carlo Strapparava, Rada Mihalcea, and Daniele Pighin. 2011. A comparison of unsupervised meth-
ods to associate colors with words. In Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction, pages 42--51. Springer.
Jessica Perrie, Aminul Islam, Evangelos Milios, and Vlado Keselj. 2013. Using google n-grams to expand word-
emotion association lexicon. In Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, pages 137--148.
Springer.
124
Mario Pricken. 2008. Creative Advertising Ideas and Techniques from the World's Best Campaigns. Thames &
Hudson, 2nd edition.
R. Rodriguez-Esteban and A. Rzhetsky. 2008. Six senses in the literature. The bleak sensory landscape of biomed-
ical texts. EMBO reports, 9(3):212--215, March.
C. Strapparava and A. Valitutti. 2004. WordNet-Affect: an affective extension of WordNet. In Proceedings of
LREC, volume 4, pages 1083--1086.
Sara Tonelli and Daniele Pighin. 2009. New features for framenet - wordnet mapping. In Proceedings of the
Thirteenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL'09), Boulder, CO, USA.
Peter D Turney, Yair Neuman, Dan Assaf, and Yohai Cohen. 2011. Literal and metaphorical sense identification
through concrete and abstract context. In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on the Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 680--690.
Peter D Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down?: semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classification
of reviews. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting on association for computational linguistics, pages 417-
-424. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alessandro Valitutti, Carlo Strapparava, and Oliviero Stock. 2004. Developing affective lexical resources. Psych-
Nology Journal, 2(1):61--83.
Vladimir N. Vapnik. 1998. Statistical Learning Theory. Wiley-Interscience.
Changhua Yang, Kevin Hsin-Yih Lin, and Hsin-Hsi Chen. 2007. Building emotion lexicon from weblog corpora.
In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL on Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions, pages
133--136. Association for Computational Linguistics.
125
