   
 
S-MINDS 2-Way Speech-to-Speech Translation System 
 
Farzad Ehsani, Jim Kimzey, Demitrios Master,  
Karen Sudre, David Domingo 
Hunil Park 
Engineering Department  
Sehda, Inc. Independent Consultant 
Mountain View, CA 94043 Seoul, Korea 
{farzad, jkimzey, dlm, karen, ddomingo}@sehda.com phunil@hotmail.com 
 
  
 
Abstract 
 
Sehda?s 2-way speech translation 
system, S-MINDS, interprets between 
provider and patient in routine medical 
interactions with very high accuracy. 
Optimizing the system for new tasks 
or languages requires very little data. 
New developments include a hybrid 
translation approach that allows 
participants to say complex or out-of-
domain utterances, the expansion of 
hands-free functionality, and the 
ability to deliver the most urgent 
expressions instantaneously. 
1 Introduction 
Speech translation technology has the potential 
to give nurses and other clinicians immediate 
access to consistent, easy-to-use, and accurate 
medical interpretation for routine patient 
encounters. This could improve safety and 
quality of care for patients who speak a different 
language from that of the healthcare provider. 
The most common hospital interactions are 
interview-style dialogs where the provider?s and 
patient?s utterances are simple and relatively 
predictable. Sehda?s speech translation system, 
S-MINDS, focuses on translating in such 
situations with extremely high accuracy. 
One key difference between S-MINDS and other 
speech translation systems is the amount of data 
required in development. Most other systems 
depend on a moderate amount of domain-
specific data being available. If the data is not 
already available, it is extremely time- and 
labor-intensive for a developer to collect enough 
realistic data to effectively model a pure SMT 
system ? even if the developer has direct access 
to a group of actual users for whom its system is 
being optimized. 
For this and other reasons, Sehda focuses on 
rapid building and deployment of speech 
translation systems for tasks or languages where 
little or no data is available.  
 2 System Description 
This section describes the speech recognition, 
translation, speech generation, interface and 
hardware components that make up S-MINDS. 
2.1 Speech Recognition 
S-MINDS uses a number of voice-independent 
automated speech recognition (ASR) engines, 
with the usage dependent on the languages and 
the particular domain. These engines include 
Nuance 8.5i, SRI EduSpeak 2.0ii, and Entropic?s 
HTK-based engine.iii  
Sehda?s (internal) dialog/translation creation 
tools allow developers to compile and run new 
dialogs with any ASR engine so they do not 
have to be encumbered by the nuances of any 
particular engine. 
2.2 Translation 
S-MINDS processes ASR output using a 
combination of grammars and language models 
that is selected based on the task and the 
availability of training data.  
S-MINDS first employs a semantic parser to 
extract the essential words and phrases from the 
ASR output. This information is then fed into 
   
 
Sehda?s proprietary interpretation engine, which 
matches the information against a finite set of 
concepts in the specified domain. The resulting 
translation is extremely accurate ? often more 
accurate than the ASR output itself. However, as 
the name suggests, this engine does not directly 
translate users? utterances but interprets what 
they say and paraphrases their statements.  
2.3 Speech Generation 
S-MINDS uses its own voice generation system, 
which splices human recordings, to output most 
translations. If recordings do not exist for a word 
or phrase, S-MINDS generates the speech using 
a text-to-speech (TTS) engine. 
S-MINDS includes a set of tools by which users 
can modify and augment the existing system 
with additional words and phrases in the field in 
a matter of a few minutes. 
2.4 Interface 
A variety of interface features make S-MINDS 
particularly easy to use in a hospital 
environment. 
Most S-MINDS functions can be performed 
hands-free and eyes-free via a voice user 
interface (VUI) so the provider can focus on the 
patient and the operation of hospital equipment.  
A picture viewer allows digital images to be 
displayed to aid communication with the patient 
and add clarity to the log. 
Verbal or on-screen verification can be 
employed (with adjustable upper and lower 
thresholds) to put an additional check on 
recognition accuracy. 
2.5 Hardware 
A complete S-MINDS system contains three 
main hardware components: a Windows XP 
computer with S-MINDS software installed; 
a headset microphone, which the healthcare 
provider uses to control S-MINDS and 
communicate with the patient; and a 
telephone handset, which the patient uses to 
communicate with the provider. 
3 Current Developments  
Under a contract with DARPA, Sehda has 
developed a more interactive system using a 
combination of SMT and interpretation 
engines.  This allows the users to speak 
more freely. If an utterance is too complex or 
too far ?out of domain? to be handled by the 
interpretation engine, S-MINDS falls back to the 
SMT engine, which returns a fairly reliable 
word-for-word translation of the ASR output.  
The VUI in S-MINDS is being enhanced to 
include nearly all system control functions, 
reducing the need to change settings 
manually. In addition, users will be able to 
deliver some urgent expressions (such as 
?Hold still? or ?You can breathe?) 
instantaneously without saying a ?hotword? 
first.  
 
                                                 
i   http://www.nuance.com/nuancerecognition/ 
ii   http://www.speechatsri.com/products/eduspeak.shtml 
iii   http://htk.eng.cam.ac.uk/ 
