Text-mining Needs and Solutions for the Biomolecular Interaction Network 
Database (BIND) 
 
Ian Donaldson 
Blueprint Initiative, Mount Sinai Hospital 
Toronto, Ontario 
Canada 
ian.donaldson@mshri.on.ca 
 
 
Proteomics represents a collection of experimental approaches that may be used to 
investigate biological systems.  Such approaches commonly produce vast amounts of data that 
relate to physical interactions between biomolecules.  One challenge in extracting useful 
information from these data is determining how they relate to current knowledge. 
The goal of the BIND database (Biomolecular Interaction Network Database) is to curate 
and archive these interaction data from the literature using a standard data representation so that 
they may be effectively used for knowledge discovery (http://bind.ca) (Bader et al, 2001; Bader 
and Hogue, 2000).  This database facilitates placing experimental data into context. 
 
   For instance, a biologist may be presented with evidence suggesting that several different 
proteins may interact with their protein of interest.  One of the first obvious questions is; ?Is there 
any evidence to support any of these potential interactions??  These questions may be answered 
using a number of approaches. For each of the potential interactions: 
 
1) Are there any matching interaction records in BIND or some other interaction database? 
2) Are there any interaction records that involve proteins with similar sequences? 
3) Are there any interaction records that involve proteins with similar conserved domain profiles? 
4) Is the potential interaction likely given the Gene Ontology annotation associated with the two 
interacting proteins? 
5) What are the synonyms for the two potential interactors and do these synonyms ever co-occur 
in the literature. 
 
 Answering each of these questions requires addressing a number of technical issues, 
which, in principal, are trivial.  However, in practice, it is non-trivial to solve all of these 
problems to completion and to solve them consistently.  Failing to do so means that knowledge 
that may support a potential interaction will be lost.  This is unacceptable since much of 
proteomics is about filtering meaningful data away from noise. 
 Interestingly, solving these questions is also of interest to text-miners.  Mentions of any 
two proteins in text may be viewed as a potential interaction.  A set of potential interactions may 
be sorted according to the answers to the above questions. 
I will describe here, the ongoing efforts to incorporate the functionality of a text-mining 
tool called PreBIND (Donaldson et al, 2003) into a larger bioinformatics application 
programming platform called SeqHound.  This platform already incorporates the NCBI?s 
GenBank sequence database, Molecular Modelling Database, LocusLink and Conserved Domain 
database as well as functional annotation from the Gene Ontology consortium and (in the near 
future) interaction data from BIND (the Biomolecular Interaction Network Database).  SeqHound 
is freely available via a web-interface and an application programming interface in C, C++, PERL 
and Java (http://seqhound.blueprint.org)(Michalickova et al, 2002).  I envision that this system 
will be used by biologists to examine interaction data from high-throughput proteomics studies.  
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                   Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases, pp. 50-51.
                                                HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Biolink 2004,
In addition, it may also be used by text-miners to help generate and submit preliminary BIND 
records to the BIND database. 
 
 
References 
Bader, G. D., Donaldson, I., Wolting, C., Ouellette, B. F., Pawson, T., and Hogue, C. W. (2001). 
BIND--The Biomolecular Interaction Network Database. Nucleic Acids Res 29, 242-245. 
Bader, G. D., and Hogue, C. W. (2000). BIND--a data specification for storing and describing 
biomolecular interactions, molecular complexes and pathways. Bioinformatics 16, 465-477. 
Donaldson, I., Martin, J., De Bruijn, B., Wolting, C., Lay, V., Tuekam, B., Zhang, S., Baskin, B., 
Bader, G. D., Michalickova, K., et al (2003). PreBIND and Textomy - mining the biomedical 
literature for protein-protein interactions using a support vector machine. BMC Bioinformatics 4, 
11. 
Michalickova, K., Bader, G. D., Dumontier, M., Lieu, H. C., Betel, D., Isserlin, R., and Hogue, C. 
W. (2002). SeqHound: biological sequence and structure database as a platform for 
bioinformatics research. BMC Bioinformatics 3, 32. 
 
