Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Tutorials, page 6,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, 22 June 2014. c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semantics for Large-Scale Multimedia: New Challenges for NLP
Florian Metze
Carnegie Mellon University
fmetze@cs.cmu.edu
Koichi Shinoda
Tokyo Institute of Technology
shinoda@cs.titech.ac.jp
1 Description
Thousands of videos are constantly being up-
loaded to the web, creating a vast resource, and an
ever-growing demand for methods to make them
easier to retrieve, search, and index. As it becomes
feasible to extract both low-level as well as high-
level (symbolic) audio, speech, and video features
from this data, these need to be processed further,
in order to learn and extract meaningful relations
between these. The language processing commu-
nity has made huge process in analyzing the vast
amounts of very noisy text data that is available
on the Internet. While it is very difficult to create
semantic units of low-level image descriptors or
non-speech sounds by themselves, it is compara-
tively easy to ground semantics in the word output
of a speech recognizer, or text data that is loosely
associated with a video. This creates an opportu-
nity for NLP researchers to use their unique skills,
and make significant contributions to solve tasks
on data that is even noisier than web text, but (we
argue) even more interesting and challenging.
This tutorial aims to present to the NLP com-
munity the state of the art in audio and video
processing, by discussing the most relevant tasks
at NIST?s TREC Video Retrieval Evaluation
(TRECVID) workshop series. We liken ?Seman-
tic Indexing? (SIN) task, in which a system must
identify occurrences of concepts such as ?desk?,
or ?dancing? in a video to the word spotting ap-
proach. We then proceed to explain more recent,
and challenging tasks, ?Multimedia Event Detec-
tion? (MED) and ?Multimedia Event Recounting?
(MER), which can be compared to transcription
and summarization tasks. Finally, we will present
an easy way to get started in multi-media analysis
using Virtual Machines from the ?Speech Recog-
nition Virtual Kitchen?, which will enable tutorial
participants to perform hands-on experiments dur-
ing the tutorial, and at home.
2 Outline
1. Introduction
? Content based video retrieval
? What is the ?Semantic Gap??
? The TRECVid workshop and its tasks
2. Semantic Indexing
? State-of-the art frameworks
? Extension of Bag-of-Word model
? Multi-modality
3. Multimedia Event Detection & Recounting
? State-of-the art frameworks
? Multimodal fusion
? Semi-supervised and active learning
? Video Summarization
4. Challenges for NLP
? How to design visual concepts?
? Intermediate representations?
? Are there any grammars in video?
5. Practice session
? Virtual Machines in the Speech
Recognition Virtual Kitchen
(http://speechkitchen.org/)
3 Instructors
Florian Metze received his PhD from Universitat
Karlsruhe (TH) in 2005. He worked as a Senior
Research Scientist at Deutsche Telekom Labora-
tories (T-Labs) and joined Carnegie Mellon Uni-
versity?s faculty in 2009. His interests includes
speech and audio processing, and user interfaces.
Koichi Shinoda received his D. Eng. from Tokyo
Institute of Technology in 2001. In 1989, he joined
NEC Corporation. From 1997 to 1998, he was a
visiting scholar with Bell Labs, Lucent Technolo-
gies. He is currently a Professor at the Tokyo In-
stitute of Technology. His research interests in-
clude speech recognition, video information re-
trieval, and human interfaces.6
