Limited-Domain Speech-to-Speech Translation
between English and Pashto
Kristin Precoda, Horacio Franco, Ascander Dost, Michael Frandsen, John Fry,
Andreas Kathol, Colleen Richey, Susanne Riehemann, Dimitra Vergyri, Jing Zheng
SRI International
333 Ravenswood Ave.
Menlo Park, CA 94025
Christopher Culy
FX Palo Alto Laboratory, Inc.
3400 Hillview Ave., Building 4
Palo Alto, CA 94304
Abstract
This paper describes a prototype system for
near-real-time spontaneous, bidirectional
translation between spoken English and
Pashto, a language presenting many
technological challenges because of its lack of
resources, including both data and expert
knowledge. Development of the prototype is
ongoing, and we propose to demonstrate a
fully functional version which shows the basic
capabilities, though not yet their final depth
and breadth.
1 Introduction
This demonstration will present a prototype system for
bidirectional speech-to-speech translation within a
limited semantic domain, that of first encounters
between a patient and a medical professional. A major
goal of the work is to explore techniques that are
appropriate for languages that are not of great
commercial interest and that consequently are lacking in
data and resources of many kinds. The system has been
developed for American English and Pashto, one of the
major languages of Afghanistan, which presents a
variety of challenges for both data-intensive and
knowledge-based approaches.
It should be noted that the system must be viewed as
one component in a real-time transaction between two
cooperating humans. The ultimate goal of those humans
is to exchange information by whatever means is
effective: not, necessarily, to rely exclusively on the
system?s output, but to use it in combination with other,
non-speech modalities of conveying meaning and with
ordinary world knowledge.
The final system is intended to run on a handheld
device, such as a PDA, with its attendant memory and
speed limitations and restriction to integer-only
computation. Most components of the demonstration
system run in a PocketPC emulation environment on a
Windows laptop, with a few in the full Windows
environment. All aspects of the prototype system are
undergoing active development.
2 Overall Architecture
A simple description of the architecture is as follows.
The system is controlled by the English speaker, who is
expected to have greater technological familiarity and
who has the benefit of visual feedback on the system
performance. Spoken input, in either English or Pashto,
is recognized by SRI?s small-footprint DynaSpeak?
recognizer, and an ordered list of hypotheses is
produced. The most likely hypothesis is input to SRI's
Gemini natural language parser/generator (Dowding et
al. 1993), which attempts to parse the speech
recognition output. Handling of possible errors or
failures will be discussed in Section 3.
When a successful parse is obtained, Gemini creates
a quasi-logical form representing the meaning of the
sentence. In general, multiple quasi-logical forms may
be created, reflecting differing interpretations of the
input sentence. These forms, which are domain
independent and serve here as an interlingua, can be
ordered by heuristically assigning preferences or
dispreferences to the parsing rules applied to create
them. Gemini uses a grammar for the target language to
generate a translation from the most-preferred
interpretation possible, and outputs a textual
representation of the translation.
Theta, a small-footprint concatenative synthesizer
from Cepstral LLC (Cepstral LLC 2004), then produces
synthetic spoken output in the target language from the
textual representation generated by Gemini. The Pashto
voice was created specifically for this project.
An English and a Pashto version of each component
are called by a single application which includes a
graphical user interface. A screen shot of the interface
is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Screen shot of prototype system
interface.
3 Redundancy and Handling Infelicities
As in any complex system, performance can differ from
the ideal in a number of ways, and it is important for the
system to provide alternative ways to support successful
communication. Some kinds of subideal performance
and recovery approaches are described here.
The most likely hypothesis output by the speech
recognizer may not be exactly what was spoken. When
the input speech is English, the English speaker can see
whether the most likely hypothesis (shown in the
"Input" box in Figure 1) is correct or approximately
correct. If the English speaker judges the hypothesis to
not be close enough to the intended text, s/he may either
repeat the utterance or click on the "Guesses?" button
to see an ordered list of the best hypotheses. A sample
list is shown in Figure 2. If the correct text is on this list,
the user may select it to submit for translation. When
the input speech is in Pashto, this functionality is less
useful, as the Pashto speaker is not assumed to be able
to read, even if the hypotheses were displayed in Pashto
script.
Figure 2. Sample ordered list of recognizer
hypotheses.
Once a recognition hypothesis has been submitted
for translation, several possible problems can arise.
Pashto is a moderately inflected, split-ergative Indo-
European language, and for Pashto in particular,
recognition errors may lead to apparent lack of syntactic
agreement between elements of the sentence which
should (and did in fact) agree. As Gemini tries to
generate a full parse of the input, it has the option of
using parse rules that relax agreement requirements.
These rules are dispreferred and a parse built upon them
may be kept only if a full, grammatically correct parse
cannot be completed. Another possible problem is that
unknown words, some grammatical constructions, and
input errors may render any full parse unachievable. In
this case, fallback strategies can be applied to translate
partial parses, fragments, or any known words. Other
strategies are currently in development.
Another class of approaches for assisting
communication allows the English speaker to quickly
perform certain actions or play high-frequency phrases
to the Pashto speaker. If there is background noise or
distractions or the TTS quality is not high enough for
easy comprehension, pressing the "Replay" button will
immediately play back the last translation result. "Ask
for Rep" plays a prerecorded sentence asking the Pashto
speaker to repeat what s/he said. Several other useful
phrases are available by clicking on the "Phrases?"
button and then selecting from the screen shown in
Figure 3.
Figure 3. Prerecorded Pashto phrases which can
be played back with a single click.
4 Sample Interaction
The table below shows an excerpt of a dialog between
an English and a Pashto speaker, both new to this
system, whose interaction was part of an informal trial
run by the MITRE Corporation in February 2004 for the
DARPA CAST program. The English speaker, a doctor,
had just received eighteen minutes of training in how to
use the system and had had no other exposure to it. The
Pashto speaker, playing the role of an injured patient,
had received training in complaints consistent with a
particular injury scenario and had seen others use the
system, but had not interacted with the system himself.
Except as noted, the translations are understandable.
Spoken input System result
I am a doctor, can I help
you?
[failure to translate
because two sentences]
I am a doctor z@ ddAkttar y@m
Can I help you? AyA z@ d@ tA sara
komak kaw@lay S@m
ho, mehrabAni w@krra yes make [partial
translation; full translation
should have been "yes
please do"]
Where are you hurt? [rerecorded after one
misrecognition] t@ cherta
khugx ye
ghwagx aw ugxa [misrecognized
repeatedly; unable to give
meaningful translation;
should have been "ear and
shoulder"]
Can you breathe? AyA t@ sA akhIst@lay
Se
na, mUSkel lar@m no I have the problem
Do you have pain? AyA t@ dard lare
zAyt of much [minor
misrecognition; translation
should have been "much"]
Do you take medications? AyA t@ dawAuna akhle
[incorrect plural form of
dawA, but understood by
Pashto speaker anyway]
na no
Do you want pain
medication?
AyA t@ d@ dard dawA
ghwArre
ho yes
Do you have allergies? AyA t@ hasAsiyatuna lare
ho yes
What are your allergies? stA hasAsiyat ts@ day
antibyutik [misrecognized but
correctly understood by
doctor as "antibiotics"]
5 Challenges
Three main challenges face this project. First,
commercially nonviable languages, such as Pashto,
often offer very few linguistic resources (such as
linguistic descriptions, acoustic data, texts, language
processing tools). The lack of resources makes
development more difficult, and severely constrains the
approaches that are viable: approaches that rely on large
corpora cannot be used. In addition, there is a shortage
of literate speakers who are available to act as
consultants, and a scarcity of basic knowledge about the
language. This impedes progress and renders difficult
approaches that rely on a large body of hand-crafted
translation rules. The challenge of having no single
person who has a deep understanding of both the
language and the technology and who can serve as a
bridge between them is substantial, and causes more
iterative development than is ordinarily the case when
bilingual technologists are available, as newly
discovered phenomena or new understanding cause
revisions of previous work.
A second major challenge is due to the nature of the
domain and the underlying concept of operations. Real
speech occurs in noisy environments, has disfluencies,
and is highly variable (e.g., phrasings, dialect
differences). In addition, the output of a speech
recognizer contains more and qualitatively different
errors than typical text input to automatic translation
systems. While the problems of real speech are not
unique to this project, they are magnified by the fact
that the non-English speakers will largely be
unsophisticated users of technology, who will often be
using the system for the first and only time. The system
must work well from the very first utterance ? there
cannot be much of a learning curve. This applies to the
translation quality and to other aspects of the system,
such as the synthetic speech, as speakers are not familiar
with synthesized Pashto speech. These speakers are also
not expected to be literate, and their understanding will
not be bolstered by the extra redundancy and
capabilities that the display offers to the English
speaker.
A third major challenge is posed by the handheld
device platform with its computational and storage
limitations, and the near-real-time requirement of the
envisioned usage. The restriction to integer-only
computation is most serious for the speech recognition,
as nearly all medium- or large-vocabulary speech
recognizers perform extensive floating-point
computations, and the conversion of a speech recognizer
to use only integer computation required considerable
effort. The severe memory limitations perhaps impact
most the parsing/generation components of the system.
6 Summary
We have described a prototype of a spoken language
translation system for use by English-speaking medical
personnel treating Pashto-speaking patients.  The
system, which is targeted to a handheld device, is being
developed with extremely little Pashto-language data of
any kind.  It builds on medium-vocabulary speaker-
independent HMM-based speech recognition, rule-
based translation and supporting methods, and
concatenative synthesis. While the system is certainly
still under development, it has provided a reasonable
proof of concept in informal trials.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported under SPAWAR contract N66001-
99-D-8504 with funding from DARPA. Many thanks are due
to Mohammad Shahabuddin Khan, David Kale, Robert J.
Podesva, Valerie Wagner, and many Pashto speakers who
worked with us in various capacities.
References
Cepstral, LLC. 2004. Theta: Small footprint text-to-
speech synthesizer, Pittsburgh, PA, http://
www.cepstral.com
J. Dowding, J. M. Gawron, D. E. Appelt, J. Bear, L.
Cherny, R. Moore, and D. B. Moran. 1993. Gemini:
A natural language system for spoken language
understanding.  Proceedings of the Thirty-First
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 54-61.
Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Grammar Engineering Across Frameworks, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 63?70,
Suntec, Singapore, 6 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Using Large-scale Parser Output to Guide Grammar Development
Ascander Dost
Powerset, a Microsoft company
adost@microsoft.com
Tracy Holloway King
Powerset, a Microsoft company
Tracy.King@microsoft.com
Abstract
This paper reports on guiding parser de-
velopment by extracting information from
output of a large-scale parser applied to
Wikipedia documents. Data-driven parser
improvement is especially important for
applications where the corpus may differ
from that originally used to develop the
core grammar and where efficiency con-
cerns affect whether a new construction
should be added, or existing analyses mod-
ified. The large size of the corpus in ques-
tion also brings scalability concerns to the
foreground.
1 Introduction
Initial development of rule-based parsers1 is often
guided by the grammar writer?s knowledge of the
language and test suites that cover the ?core? lin-
guistic phenomena of the language (Nerbonne et
al., 1988; Cooper et al, 1996; Lehmann et al,
1996). Once the basic grammar is implemented,
including an appropriate lexicon, the direction of
grammar development becomes less clear. Inte-
gration of a grammar in a particular application
and the use of a particular corpus can guide gram-
mar development: the corpus and application will
require the implementation of specific construc-
tions and lexical items, as well as the reevalua-
tion of existing analyses. To streamline this sort
of output-driven development, tools to examine
parser output over large corpora are necessary, and
as corpus size increases, the efficiency and scal-
ability of those tools become crucial concerns.
Some immediate relevant questions for the gram-
mar writer include:
1The techniques discussed here may also be relevant to
purely machine-learned parsers and are certainly applicable
to hybrid parsers.
? What constructions and lexical items need to
be added for the application and corpus in
question?
? For any potential new construction or lexical
item, is it worth adding, or would it be better
to fall back to robust techniques?
? For existing analyses, are they applying cor-
rectly, or do they need to be restricted, or even
removed?
In the remainder of this section, we briefly dis-
cuss some existing techniques for guiding large-
scale grammar development and then introduce
the grammar being developed and the tool we use
in examining the grammar?s output. The remain-
der of the paper discusses development of lexical
resources and grammar rules, how overall progress
is tracked, and how analysis of the grammar output
can help development in other natural language
components.
1.1 Current Techniques
There are several techniques currently being used
by grammar engineers to guide large-scale gram-
mar development, including error mining to de-
tect gaps in grammar coverage, querying tools for
gold standard treebanks to determine frequency
of linguistic phenomena, and tools for querying
parser output to determine how linguistic phenom-
ena were analyzed in practice.
An error mining technique presented by van
Noord (2004) (henceforth: the van Noord Tool)
can reveal gaps in grammar coverage by compar-
ing the frequency of arbitrary n-grams of words
in unsuccessfully parsed sentences with the same
n-grams in unproblematic sentences, for large
unannotated corpora.2 A parser can be run over
new text, and a comparison of the in-domain and
2The suffix array error mining software is available at:
http://www.let.rug.nl/?vannoord/SuffixArrays.tgz
63
out-of-domain sentences can determine, for in-
stance, that the grammar cannot parse adjective-
noun hyphenation correctly (e.g. an electrical-
switch cover). A different technique for error
mining that uses discriminative treebanking is de-
scribed in (Baldwin et al, 2005). This tech-
nique aims at determining issues with lexical cov-
erage, grammatical (rule) coverage, ungrammati-
cality within the corpus (e.g. misspelled words),
and extragrammaticality within the corpus (e.g.
bulleted lists).
A second approach involves querying gold-
standard treebanks such as the Penn Treebank
(Marcus et al, 1994) and Tiger Treebank (Brants
et al, 2004) to determine the frequency of cer-
tain phenomena. For example, Tiger Search (Lez-
ius, 2002) can be used to list and frequency-
sort stacked prepositions (e.g. up to the door) or
temporal noun/adverbs after prepositions (e.g. by
now). The search tools over these treebanks al-
low for complex searches involving specification
of lexical items, parts of speech, and tree config-
urations (see (M??rovsky?, 2008) for discussion of
query requirements for searching tree and depen-
dency banks).
The third approach we discuss here differs from
querying gold-standard treebanks in that corpora
of actual parser output are queried to examine
how constructions are analyzed by the grammar.
For example, Bouma and Kloosterman (2002) use
XQuery (an XML query language) to mine parse
results stored as XML data.3 It is this sort of ex-
amination of parser output that is the focus of the
present paper, and specific examples of our expe-
riences follow in Section 2.2.
Use of such tools has proven vital to the devel-
opment of large-scale grammars. Based on our
experiences with them, we began extensively us-
ing a tool called Oceanography (Waterman, 2009)
to search parser output for very large (approxi-
mately 125 million sentence) parse runs stored on
a distributed file system. Oceanography queries
the parser output and returns counts of specific
constructions or properties, as well as the exam-
ple sentences they were extracted from. In the
subsequent sections we discuss how this tool (in
conjunction with existing ones like the van No-
ord Tool and Tiger Search) has enhanced grammar
development for an English-language Lexical-
3See also (Bouma and Kloosterman, 2007) for further dis-
cussion of this technique.
Functional Grammar used for a semantic search
application over Wikipedia.
1.2 The Grammar and its Role
The grammar being developed is a Lexical-
Functional Grammar (LFG (Dalrymple, 2001))
that is part of the ParGram parallel grammar
project (Butt et al, 1999; Butt et al, 2002). It runs
on the XLE system (Crouch et al, 2009) and pro-
duces c(onstituent)-structures which are trees and
f(unctional)-structures which are attribute value
matrices recording grammatical functions and
other syntactic features such as tense and number,
as well as debugging features such as the source
of lexical items (e.g. from a named entity finder,
the morphology, or the guesser). There is a base
grammar which covers the constructions found in
standard written English, as well as three overlay
grammars: one for parsing Wikipedia sentences,
one for parsing Wikipedia headers, and one for
parsing queries (sentential, phrasal, and keyword).
The grammar is being used by Powerset (a Mi-
crosoft company) in a semantic consumer-search
reference vertical which allows people to search
Wikipedia using natural language queries as well
as traditional keyword queries. The system uses a
pipeline architecture which includes: text extrac-
tion, sentence breaking, named entity detection,
parsing (tokenization, morphological analysis, c-
structure, f-structure, ranking), semantic analysis,
and indexing of selected semantic facts (see Fig-
ure 1). A similar pipeline is used on the query
side except that the resulting semantic analysis is
turned into a query execution language which is
used to query the index.
text extraction script
sentence breaker finite state
named entity detection MaxEnt model
LFG grammars
tokenizer finite state
morphology finite state
grammar XLE: parser
ranking MaxEnt model
semantics XLE: XFR
Figure 1: NL Pipeline Components
The core idea behind using a deep parser in the
pipeline in conjunction with the semantic rules is
to localize role information as to who did what to
whom (i.e. undo long-distance dependencies and
64
locate heads of arguments), to abstract away from
choice of particular lexical items (i.e. lemmatiza-
tion and detection of synonyms), and generally
provide a more normalized representation of the
natural language string to improve both precision
and recall.
1.3 Oceanography
As a byproduct of the indexing pipeline, all of
the syntactic and semantic structures are stored
for later inspection as part of failure analysis.4
The files containing these structures are distributed
over several machines since ?125 million sen-
tences are parsed for the analysis of Wikipedia.
For any given syntactic or semantic structure,
the XLE ordered rewrite system (XFR; (Crouch et
al., 2009)) can be used to extract information that
is of interest to the grammar engineer, by way of
?rules? or statements in the XFR language. As the
XFR ordered rewrite system is also used for the
semantics rules that turn f-structures into seman-
tic representations, the notation is familiar to the
grammar writers and is already designed for ma-
nipulating the syntactic f-structures.
However, the mechanics of accessing each file
on each machine and then assembling the results is
prohibitively complicated without a tool that pro-
vides a simple interface to the system. Oceanogra-
phy was designed to take a single specification file
stating:
? which data to examine (which corpus ver-
sion; full Wikipedia build or fixed 10,000
document set);
? the XFR rules to be applied;
? what extracted data to count and report back.
Many concrete examples of Oceanography runs
will be discussed below. The basic idea is to
use the XFR rules to specify searches over lexi-
cal items, features, and constructions in a way that
is similar to that of Tiger Search and other facili-
ties. The Oceanography machinery enables these
searches over massive data and helps in compil-
ing the results for the grammar engineer to inspect.
We believe that similar approaches would be fea-
sible to implement in other grammar development
environments and, in fact, for some grammar out-
puts and applications, existing tools such as Tiger
4The index is self-contained and does not need to refer-
ence the semantic, much less the earlier syntactic, structures
as part of the search application.
Search would be sufficient. By providing exam-
ples where such searches have aided our grammar
development, we hope to encourage other gram-
mar engineers to similarly extend their efforts to
use easy access to massive data to drive their work.
2 Grammar Development
The ParGram English LFG grammar has been de-
veloped over many years. However, the focus of
development was on newspaper text and technical
manuals, although some adaptation was done for
new domains (King and Maxwell, 2007). When
moving to the Wikipedia domain, many new con-
structions and lexical items were encountered (see
(Baldwin et al, 2005) for a similar experience
with the BNC) and, at the same time, the require-
ments on parsing efficiency increased.
2.1 Lexical Development
When first parsing a new corpus, the grammar en-
counters new words that were previously unknown
to the morphology. The morphology falls back to a
guesser that uses regular expressions to guess the
part of speech and other features associated with
an unknown form. For example, a novel word end-
ing in s might be a plural noun. The grammar
records a feature LEX-SOURCE with the value
guesser for all guessed words. Oceanography was
used to extract all guessed forms and their parts
of speech. In many cases, the guesser had cor-
rectly identified the word?s part of speech. How-
ever, words that occurred frequently were added to
the morphology to avoid the possibility that they
would be incorrectly guessed as a different part of
speech. The fact that Oceanography was able to
identify not just the word, but its posited part of
speech and frequency in the corpus greatly sped
lexical development.
Incorrect guessing of verbs was of particular
concern to the grammar writers, as misidentifica-
tion of verbs was almost always accompanied by
a bad parse. In addition, subcategorization frames
for guessed verbs were guessed as either transi-
tive or intransitive, which often proved to be in-
correct. As such, the guessed verbs extracted us-
ing Oceanography were hand curated: true verbs
were added to the morphology and their subcate-
gorization frames to the lexicon. Due to the high
rate of error with guessed verbs, once the correctly
guessed verbs were added to the morphology, this
65
option was removed from the guesser.5
Overall, ?4200 new stems were added to the
already substantial morphology, with correct in-
flection. Approximately ?1300 of these were
verbs. The decision to eliminate verbs as possi-
ble guessed parts of speech was directly motivated
by data extracted using Oceanography.
Since the guesser works with regular expres-
sions (e.g. lowercase letters + s form plural
nouns), it is possible to encounter forms in
the corpus that neither the morphology nor the
guesser recognize. The grammar will fragment on
these sentences, creating well-formed f-structure
chunks but no single spanning parse, and the un-
recognized forms will be recorded as TOKENs
(Riezler et al, 2002). An Oceanography run ex-
tracting all TOKENs resulted in the addition of sev-
eral new patterns to the guesser as well as the addi-
tion of some of the frequent forms to the morphol-
ogy. For example, sequences of all upper case let-
ters followed by a hyphen and then by a sequence
of digits were added for forms like AK-47, F-22,
and V-1.
The guesser and TOKENs Oceanography runs
look for general problems with the morphology
and lexicon, and can be run for every new cor-
pus. More specific jobs are run when evaluating
whether to implement a new analysis, or when
evaluating whether a current analysis is function-
ing properly. For example, use of the van No-
ord tool indicated that the grammar had problems
with certain less common multiword prepositions
(e.g. pursuant to, in contrast with). Once these
multiword prepositions were added, the question
then arose as to whether more common preposi-
tions should be multiwords when stacked (e.g. up
to, along with). An Oceanography run was per-
formed to extract all occurrences of stacked prepo-
sitions from the corpus. Their frequency was tal-
lied in both the stacked formations and when used
as simple prepositions. With this information, we
determined which stacked configurations to add to
the lexicon as multiword prepositions, while main-
taining preposition stacking for less common com-
binations.
2.2 Grammar Rule Development
In addition to using Oceanography to help develop
the morphology and lexicon, it has also proven ex-
5It is simple to turn the guessed verbs back on in order to
run the same Oceanography experiment with a new corpus.
tremely useful in grammar rule development. In
general, the issue is not in finding constructions
which the grammar does not cover correctly: a
quick investigation of sentences which fragment
can provide these and issues are identified and re-
ported by the semantics which uses the syntax out-
put as its input. Furthermore, the van Noord tool
can be used to effectively identify gaps in gram-
mar rule coverage.
Rather, the more pressing issues include
whether it is worthwhile adding a construction,
which possible solution to pick (when it is worth-
while), and whether an existing solution is ap-
plying correctly and efficiently. Being able to
look at the occurrence of a construction over large
amounts of data can help with all of these issues,
especially when combined with searching over
gold standard treebanks such as the Penn Tree-
bank.
Determining which constructions to examine
using Oceanography is often the result of failure
analysis findings on components outside the gram-
mar itself, but that build on the grammar?s output
later in the natural language processing pipeline.
The point we wish to emphasize here is that the
grammar engineer?s effectiveness can greatly ben-
efit from being able to take a set of problematic
data gathered from massive parser output and de-
termine from it that a particular construction mer-
its closer scrutiny.
2.2.1 When relative/subordinate clauses
An observation that subordinate clauses contain-
ing when (e.g. Mary laughed when Ed tripped.)
were sometimes misanalyzed as relative clauses
attaching to a noun (e.g. the time when Ed tripped)
prompted a more directed analysis of whether
when relative clauses should be allowed to at-
tach to nouns that were not time-related expres-
sions (e.g. time, year, day). An Oceanography run
was performed to extract all when relative clauses,
the modified nominal head, and the sentence con-
taining the construction. A frequency-sorted list
of nouns taking when relative clause modifiers
helped to direct hand-examination ofwhen relative
clauses for accuracy of the analysis. This yielded
some correct analyses:
(1) There are times [when a Bigfoot sighting or
footprint is a hoax].
More importantly, however, the search revealed
many incorrect analyses of when subordinate
66
clauses as relative clauses:
(2) He gets the last laugh [when he tows away
his boss? car as well as everyone else?s].
By extracting all when relative clauses, and their
head nouns, it was determined that the construc-
tion was generally only correct for a small class of
time expression nominals. Comparatively, when
relative clause modification of other nominals was
rarely correct. The grammar was modified to dis-
prefer relative clause analyses of when clauses un-
less the head noun was an expression of time. As
a result, the overall quality of parses for all sen-
tences containing when subordinate clauses was
improved.
2.2.2 Relative clauses modifying gerunds
Another example of an issue with the accuracy of a
grammatical analysis concerns gerund nouns mod-
ified by relative clauses without an overt relative
pronoun (e.g. the singing we liked). It was ob-
served that many strings were incorrectly analyzed
as a gerund and reduced relative clause modifier:
(3) She lost all of her powers, including [her
sonic screams].
Again, a frequency sorted list of gerunds modi-
fied by reduced relative clauses helped to guide
hand inspection of the instances of this construc-
tion. By extracting all of the gerunds with re-
duced relative clause modifiers, it was possible
to see which gerunds were appearing in this con-
struction (e.g. including occurred alarmingly fre-
quently) and how rarely the overall analysis was
correct. As a result of the data analysis, such rel-
ative clause modifiers are now dispreferred in the
grammar and certain verbs (e.g. include) are addi-
tionally dispreferred as gerunds in general. Note
that this type of failure analysis is not possible
with a tool (such as the van Noord tool) that only
points out gaps in grammar coverage.
2.2.3 Noun-noun compounds
As part of the semantic search application,
argument-relation triples are extracted from the
corpus and presented to the user as a form of sum-
mary over what Wikipedia knows about a partic-
ular entity. These are referred to as Factz. For
example, a search on Noam Chomsky will find
Factz triples as in Figure 2. Such an application
highlights parse problems, since the predicate-
argument relations displayed are ultimately ex-
tracted from the syntactic parses themselves.
One class of problem arises when forms which
are ambiguous between nominal and verbal analy-
ses are erroneously analyzed as verbs and hence
show up as Factz relations. This is particularly
troublesome when the putative verb is part of a
noun-noun compound (e.g. ice cream, hot dog)
and the verb form is comparatively rare. A list
of potentially problematic noun-noun compounds
was extracted by using an independent part of
speech tagger over the sentences that generated the
Factz triples. If the relation in the triple was tagged
as a noun and was not a deverbal noun (e.g. de-
struction, writing), then the first argument of the
triple and the relation were tagged as potentially
problematic noun-noun compounds. Oceanogra-
phy was then used to determine the relative fre-
quency of whether the word pairs were analyzed as
noun-noun compounds, verb-argument relations,
or independent nouns and verbs.
This distributional information, in conjunction
with information about known noun-noun com-
pounds in WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998), is being
used to extract a set of ?100,000 noun-noun com-
pounds whose analysis is extremely strongly pre-
ferred by the grammar. Currently, these are con-
strained via c-structure optimality marks6 but they
may eventually be allowed only as noun-noun
compounds if the list proves reliable enough.
3 Tracking Grammar Progress
The grammar is used as part of a larger applica-
tion which is actively being developed and which
is regularly updated. As such, new versions of
the grammar are regularly released. Each release
includes a detailed list of improvements and bug
fixes, as well as requirements on other compo-
nents of the system (e.g. the grammar may require
a specific version of the XLE parser or of the mor-
phology). It is extremely important to be able to
confirm that the changes to the grammar are in
place and are functioning as expected when used
in the pipeline. Some changes can be confirmed
by browsing documents, finding a sentence likely
to contain the relevant lexical item or construction,
and then inspecting the syntactic structures for that
6See (Frank et al, 2001) and (Crouch et al, 2009) on the
use of Optimality Theory marks within XLE. C-structure op-
timality marks apply preferences to the context free backbone
before any constraints supplied by the f-structure annotations
are applied. This means that the noun-noun compounds will
be the only analysis possible if any tree can be constructed
with them.
67
Figure 2: Example Factz
document.
3.1 Confirming Grammar Changes
However, some changes are more complicated to
confirm either because it is hard to determine from
a sentence whether the grammar change would ap-
ply or because the change is more frequency re-
lated. For these types of changes, Oceanogra-
phy runs can detect whether a rare change oc-
curred at all, alleviating the need to search through
documents by hand. For example, to determine
whether the currency symbols are being correctly
treated by the grammar, especially the ones that
are not standard ASCII (e.g. the euro and yen sym-
bols), two simple XFR rules can be written: one
that looks for the relevant c-structure leaf node and
counts up which symbols occur under this node
and one that looks for the known list of currency
symbols in the f-structure and counts up what part-
of-speech they were analyzed as.
To detect whether frequency related changes
to the grammar are behaving as expected, two
Oceanography runs can be compared, one with
the older grammar and one with the newer one.
For example, to determine whether relative clauses
headed by when were dispreferred relative to
subordinate clauses, the number of such relative
clauses and such subordinate clauses were counted
in two successive runs; the relative occurrence of
the types confirmed that the preference mecha-
nism was working correctly. In addition, a quick
examination of sentences containing each type
showed that the change was not over-applying
(e.g. incorrectly analyzing when relative clauses as
subordinate clauses).
3.2 General Grammar Checking
In addition to Oceanography runs done to check
on specific changes to the grammar, a core set of
XFR rules extracts all of the features from the f-
structure and counts them. The resulting statistics
of features and counts are computed for each ma-
jor release and compared to that of the previous
release. This provides a list of new features which
subsequent components must be alerted to (e.g. a
feature added to indicate what type of punctua-
tion surrounded a parenthetical). It also provides a
quick check of whether some feature is no longer
occurring with the same frequency. In some cases
this is expected; once many guessed forms were
added to the lexicon, the feature indicating that
the guesser had applied dropped sharply. How-
ever, unexpected steep variations from previous
runs can be investigated to make sure that rules
were not inadvertently removed from the gram-
mar, and that rules added to the grammar are func-
tioning correctly.
4 Using Grammar Output to Develop
Other Components
In addition to being used in development of the
grammar itself, examination of the grammar out-
put can be useful for engineering efforts on other
components. In addition to the examples cited
above concerning the development of the mor-
phology used by the grammar, we discuss one sim-
ple example here. The sentence breaker used in
the pipeline is designed for high precision; it only
breaks sentences when it is sure that there is a sen-
tence break. To make up for breaks that may have
been missed, the grammar contains a rule that al-
lows multiple sentences to be parsed as a single
string. The resulting f-structure has the final sen-
tence?s f-structure as the value of a feature, LAST,
and the remainder as the value of a feature, REST.
The grammar iteratively parses multiple sentences
into these LAST-REST structures. Because the fea-
ture LAST is only instantiated when parsing mul-
tiple sentences, input strings whose parses con-
tained a LAST component could be extracted to
determine whether the sentence breaker?s behavior
should be changed. An example of two sentences
which were not broken is:
68
(4) The current air staff includes former CNN
Headline News gal Holly Firfer in the morn-
ings with co-host Orff. Mid-days is Mara
Davis, who does a theme lunch hour.
The relatively short unknown wordOrff before the
period makes it unclear whether this is an abbrevi-
ation or not. Based on the Oceanography analysis,
the number of unbroken sentences which received
analyses was roughly halved and one bug concern-
ing footnote markers was discovered and fixed.
5 Conclusion
Large-scale grammars are increasingly being used
in applications. In order to maximize their effec-
tiveness in terms of coverage, accuracy, and effi-
ciency for a given application, it is increasingly
important to examine the behavior of the grammar
on the relevant corpus and in the relevant applica-
tion.
Having good tools makes the grammar engi-
neer?s task of massive data driven grammar de-
velopment significantly easier. In this paper we
have discussed how such a tool, which can ap-
ply search patterns over the syntactic (and seman-
tic) representations of Wikipedia, is being used in
a semantic search research vertical. When used
in conjunction with existing tools for detecting
gaps in parser coverage (e.g. the van Noord tool),
Oceanography greatly aids in the evaluation of ex-
isting linguistic analyses from the parser. In ad-
dition, oceanography provides vital information to
determining whether or not to implement coverage
for a particular construction, based on efficiency
requirements. Thus, the grammar writer has a
suite of tools available to address the questions
raised in the introduction of this paper: what gaps
exist in parser coverage, how to best address those
gaps, and whether existing analyses are function-
ing appropriately. We hope that our experiences
encourage other grammar engineers to use similar
techniques in their grammar development efforts.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Scott Waterman for creat-
ing Oceanography and adapting it to our needs.
References
Timothy Baldwin, John Beavers, Emily M. Bender,
Dan Flickinger, Ara Kim, and Stephan Oepen.
2005. Beauty and the beast: What running a
broad-coverage precision grammar over thee bnc
taught us about the grammar ? and the corpus.
In Stephan Kepser and Marga Reis, editors, Lin-
guistic Evidence: Empirical, Theoretical, and Com-
putational Perspectives, pages 49?70. Mouton de
Gruyter, Berlin.
Gosse Bouma and Geert Kloosterman. 2002. Query-
ing dependency treebanks in XML. In Proceedings
of the Third international conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC), Gran Canaria.
Gosse Bouma and Geert Kloosterman. 2007. Mining
syntactically annotated corpora using XQuery. In
Proceedings of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop,
Prague, June. ACL.
Sabine Brants, Stefanie Dipper, Peter Eisenberg, Sil-
via Hansen, Esther Ko?nig, Wolfgang Lezius, Chris-
tian Rohrer, George Smith, and Hans Uszkoreit.
2004. TIGER: Linguistic interpretation of a German
corpus. Research on Language and Computation,
2:597?620.
Miriam Butt, Tracy Holloway King, Mar??a-Eugenia
Nin?o, and Fre?de?rique Segond. 1999. A Grammar
Writer?s Cookbook. CSLI Publications.
Miram Butt, Helge Dyvik, Tracy Holloway King, Hi-
roshi Masuichi, and Christian Rohrer. 2002. The
Parallel Grammar Project. In COLING2002 Work-
shop on Grammar Engineering and Evaluation,
pages 1?7.
Robin Cooper, Dick Crouch, Jan van Eijck, Chris
Fox, Josef van Genabith, Jan Jaspars, Hans Kamp,
David Milward, Manfred Pinkal, Massimo Poesio,
and Steve Pulman. 1996. Using the framework.
FraCas: A Framework for Computational Semantics
(LRE 62-051).
Dick Crouch, Mary Dalrymple, Ronald Kaplan,
Tracy Holloway King, John T. Maxwell III, and
Paula Newman. 2009. XLE Documentation. On-
line.
Mary Dalrymple. 2001. Lexical Functional Grammar.
Syntax and Semantics. Academic Press.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press.
Anette Frank, Tracy Holloway King, Jonas Kuhn, and
John T. Maxwell III. 2001. Optimality theory style
constraint ranking in large-scale LFG grammars. In
Peter Sells, editor, Formal and Empirical Issues in
Optimality Theoretic Syntax, pages 367?397. CSLI
Publications.
Tracy Holloway King and John T. Maxwell, III. 2007.
Overlay mechanisms for multi-level deep processing
applications. In Proceedings of the Grammar En-
gineering Across Frameworks (GEAF07) Workshop.
CSLI Publications.
69
Sabine Lehmann, Stephan Oepen, Sylvie Regnier-
Prost, Klaus Netter, Veronika Lux, Judith Klein,
Kirsten Falkedal, Frederik Fouvry, Dominique Esti-
val, Eva Dauphin, Herve? Compagnion, Judith Baur,
Lorna Balkan, and Doug Arnold. 1996. TSNLP
? Test Suites for Natural Language Processing. In
Proceedings of COLING 1996.
Wolfgang Lezius. 2002. Ein Suchwerkzeug fu?r syn-
taktisch annotierte Textkorpora (in German). Ph.D.
thesis, IMS, University of Stuttgart Arbeitspapiere
des Instituts fu?r Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung
(AIMS). volume 8, number 4.
Mitchell Marcus, Grace Kim, Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz, Robert MacIntyre, Ann Bies,
Mark Ferguson, Karen Katz, and Britta Schas-
berger. 1994. The Penn treebank: Annotating
predicate argument structure. In ARPA Human
Language Technology Workshop.
Jir??? M??rovsky?. 2008. PDT 2.0 requirements on a query
language. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages
37?45. Association for Computational Linguistics.
John Nerbonne, Dan Flickinger, and Tom Wasow.
1988. The HP Labs natural language evaluation
tool. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Evaluation
of Natural Language Processing Systems.
Stefan Riezler, Tracy Holloway King, Ronald Kaplan,
Dick Crouch, John T. Maxwell III, and Mark John-
son. 2002. Parsing the Wall Street Journal using a
lexical-functional grammar and discriminative esti-
mation techniques. In Proceedings of the ACL.
Gertjan van Noord. 2004. Error mining for wide-
coverage grammar engineering. In Proceedings of
ACL.
Scott A. Waterman. 2009. Distributed parse mining.
In Proceedings of the NAACL Workshop on Soft-
ware Engineering, Testing, and Quality Assurance
for Natural Language Processing.
70
