41
On the Acquisition of Phonological Representations
B. Elan DRESHERDepartment of LinguisticsUniversity of TorontoToronto, OntarioCanada M5S 3H1dresher@chass.utoronto.ca
AbstractLanguage learners must acquire the grammar(rules, constraints, principles) of their lan-guage as well as representations at variouslevels. I will argue that representations arepart of the grammar and must be acquiredtogether with other aspects of grammar; thus,grammar acquisition may not presupposeknowledge of representations. Further, I willargue that the goal of a learning modelshould not be to try to match or approximatetarget forms directly, because strategies to doso are defeated by the disconnect betweenprinciples of grammar and the effects theyproduce. Rather, learners should use targetforms as evidence bearing on the selection ofthe correct grammar. I will draw on twoareas of phonology to illustrate these argu-ments. The first is the grammar of stress, ormetrical phonology, which has receivedmuch attention in the learning model litera-ture. The second concerns the acquisition ofphonological features and contrasts. Thisaspect of acquisition turns out, contrary tofirst appearances, to pose challenging prob-lems for learning models.
1 IntroductionI will discuss the extent to which representa-tions are intertwined with the grammar, andconsequences of this fact for acquisitionmodels. I will focus on phonological rep-resentations, but the argument extends toother components of the grammar.One might suppose that phonological rep-resentations can be acquired directly from theacoustic signal. If, for example, children are
equipped with innate phonetic feature detect-ors, one might suppose that they can usethese to extract phonetic features from thesignal. These extracted phonetic featureswould then constitute phonological repre-sentations (surface, or phonetic, representa-tions). Once these are acquired, they canserve as a basis from which learners can ac-quire the rest of the grammar, namely, thephonological rules (and/or constraints) andthe lexical, or underlying, representations.This idea of acquisition by stages, with re-presentations preceding rules, has enduringappeal, though details vary with the prevail-ing theory of grammar; versions of this the-ory can be found in (Bloch, 1941) and(Pinker, 1994:264?5). The idea could not beimplemented in American Structuralist pho-nology, however (Chomsky, 1964), and Iwill argue that it remains untenable today. Iwill discuss two areas of phonology in whichrepresentations must be acquired togetherwith the grammar, rather than prior to it. Thefirst concerns the grammar of stress, ormetrical phonology. The second concerns theacquisition of phonological features. Thesepose different sorts of problems for learningmodels. The first has been the subject of con-siderable discussion. The second, to myknowledge, has not been discussed in thecontext of formal learning models. Though ithas often been assumed, as mentioned above,that acquisition of features might be the moststraightforward aspect of phonological acqui-sition, I will argue that it presents challeng-ing problems for learning models.
42
2 Representations of stressPhonetic representations are not simply bun-dles of features. Consider stress, for example.Depending on the language, stress may beindicated phonetically by pitch, duration,loudness, or by some combination of thesedimensions. So even language learners giftedwith phonetic feature detectors will have tosort out what the specific correlates of stressare in their language. For purposes of the en-suing discussion, I will assume that thismuch can be acquired prior to furtheracquisition of the phonology.But simply deciding which syllables havestress does not yield a surface representationof the stress contour of a word. According tometrical theory (Liberman and Prince 1977,Halle and Idsardi 1995, Hayes 1995), stressresults from grouping syllables into feet; thestrongest foot is assigned the main stress, theother feet are associated with secondarystress. Moreover, some syllables at the edgesof the stress domain may be designated asextrametrical, and not included in feet.For example, I assume that learners whohave sorted out which acoustic cues signalstress can at some point assign the stresscontours depicted in (1) to English words.The height of the column over each syllable,S, indicates how much relative stress it has.However, these are not the surface represen-tations. They indicate levels of stress, but nometrical organization.
(1) Representations of stress contours beforesetting metrical parametersa. Am?rica b. M?nit?ba
  x          x Line 2
  x       x   x  Line 1
x x x x  x x x  x Line 0
S S S S  S S S  S
America Manito:ba
According to conventional accounts ofEnglish stress, the metrical structures as-signed to these words are as in (2).
(2) Acquired representationsa. Am?rica b. M?nit?ba
  x          x Line 2
 (x)   (x    x) Line 1
x(x x)<x> (x x)(x)<x> Line 0
L L L  L  L L  H  L
Ameri ca Mani to:ba
Looking at the word America, these repre-sentations indicate that the first syllable A isunfooted, that the next two syllables mericonstitute a trochaic foot, and that the finalsyllable ca is extrametrical. Manitoba hastwo feet, hence two stresses, of which thesecond is stronger than the first. The Ls andHs under the first line of the metrical griddesignate light and heavy syllables, respec-tively. The distinction is important in Eng-lish: The syllable to: in Manitoba is heavy,hence capable of making up a foot by itself,and it receives the stress. If it were light, thenManitoba would have stress on theantepenultimate syllable, as in America.How does a learner know to assign thesesurface structures? Not just from the acousticsignal, or from the schematic stress contoursin (1). Observe that an unstressed syllablecan have several metrical representations: itcan be footed, like the first syllable inAmerica; it can be the weak position of afoot, like the second syllable of Manitoba; orit can be extrametrical, like the final syllablesin both words. One cannot tell from thesound which of these representations to as-sign. The only way to know this is to acquirethe grammar of stress, based on evidencedrawn from the observed contours in (1).Similar remarks hold for determining syl-lable quantity. English divides syllables intolight and heavy: a light syllable ends in ashort vowel, and a heavy syllable containseither a long vowel or is closed by a con-sonant. In many other languages, though, aclosed syllable containing a short vowel isconsidered to be light, contrary to the Englishcategorization. Learners must decide how to
43
classify such syllables, and the decision can-not be made on phonetic grounds alone.
3 Acquisition of metrical structureHow, then, are these aspects of phonologicalstructure acquired? Following Chomsky(1981), I will suppose that metrical structuresare governed by a finite number of para-meters, whose value is to be set on the basisof experience. The possible values of aparameter are limited and given in advance.1Parameter setting models must overcome abasic problem: the relation between a para-meter and what it does is indirect, due to thefact that there are many parameters, and theyinteract in complex ways (Dresher and Kaye,1990). For example, in English main stress istied to the right edge of the word. But thatdoes not mean that stress is always on thelast syllable: it could be on the penultimatesyllable, as in Manitoba, or on the antepen-ultimate, as in America. What is consistent inthese examples is that main stress devolvesonto the strong syllable of the rightmost foot.Where this syllable and foot is in any givenword depends on how a variety of parametersare set. Some surprising consequences followfrom the nontransparent relationship betweena parameter and its effects.The first one is that a learner who hassome incorrectly set parameters might knowthat something is wrong, but might not knowwhich parameter is the source of the prob-lem. This is known as the Credit Problem(cf. Clark 1989, 1992, who calls this theSelection Problem): a learner cannot reliablyassign credit or blame to individualparameters when something is wrong.There is a second way in which parameterscan pose problems to a learner. Some para-meters are stated in terms of abstract entitiesand theory-internal concepts that the learnermay not initially be able to identify. For ex-ample, the theory of stress is couched in                                                      1For some other approaches to the acquisition ofstress see (Daelemans Gillis and Durieux, 1994),(Gupta and Touretzky, 1994), (Tesar, 1998, 2004), and(Tesar and Smolensky, 1998).
terms of concepts such as heavy syllables,heads, feet, and so on. In syntax, variousparameters have been posited that refer spe-cifically to anaphors, or to functional projec-tions of various types. These entities do notcome labelled as such in the input, but mustthemselves be constructed by the learner. So,to echo the title character in Plato?s dialogueThe Meno, how can learners determine ifmain stress falls on the first or last foot ifthey do not know what a foot is, or how toidentify one? This can be called the Episte-mological Problem: in this case we knowabout something in the abstract, but we donot recognize that thing when it is front of us.Because of the Credit Problem and theEpistemological Problem, parameter settingis not like learning to hit a target, where onecan correct one?s aim by observing whereprevious shots land. The relation betweennumber of parameters correct and apparentcloseness to the target is not smooth (Turkel,1996): one parameter wrong may result informs that appear to be way off the target,whereas many parameters wrong mayproduce results that appear to be better(Dresher, 1999). This discrepancy betweengrammar and outputs defeats learning modelsthat blindly try to match output forms(Gibson and Wexler, 1994), or that are basedon a notion of goodness-of-fit (Clark andRoberts, 1993). In terms of Fodor (1998),there are no unambiguous triggers: thus,learning models that seek them in individualtarget forms are unlikely to be successful.I have argued (Dresher, 1999) that Plato?ssolution ? a series of questions posed in aspecified order ? is the best approach wehave. One version of this approach is thecue-based learner of (Dresher and Kaye,1990). In this model, not only are the prin-ciples and parameters of Universal Grammarinnate, but learners must be born with somekind of a road map that guides them insetting the parameters. Some ingredients ofthis road map are the following:First, Universal Grammar associates everyparameter with a cue, something in the data
44
that signals the learner how that parameter isto be set. The cue might be a pattern that thelearner must look for, or simply the presenceof some element in a particular context.Second, parameter setting proceeds in a(partial) order set by Universal Grammar:this ordering specifies a learning path (Light-foot 1989). The setting of a parameter lateron the learning path depends on the results ofearlier ones.Hence, cues can become increasingly ab-stract and grammar-internal the further alongthe learning path they are. As learners ac-quire more of the system, their representa-tions become more sophisticated, and theyare able to build on what they have alreadylearned to set more parameters.2If this approach is correct, there is noparameter-independent learning algorithm.This is because the learning path is depend-ent on the particular parameters. Also, thecues must be discovered for each parameter.Thus, a learning algorithm for one part of thegrammar cannot be applied to another part ofthe grammar in an automatic way.3
4. Segmental representationsUp to now we have been looking at an aspectof phonological representation above thelevel of the segment. I have argued that ac-quisition of this aspect of surface phono-logical representation cannot simply be basedon attending to the acoustic signal, butrequires a more elaborate learning model.But what about acquisition of the phonemicinventory of a language? One might supposethat this be achieved prior to the acquisitionof the phonology itself.Since the pioneering work of Trubetzkoyand Jakobson, phonological theory has pos-ited that phonemes are characterized in termsof a limited set of distinctive features. There-
                                                      2For details of parameter ordering, defaults, andcues in the acquisition of stress, see (Dresher and Kaye,1990) and (Dresher, 1999).3 For further discussion and critiques of cue-basedmodels see (Nyberg, 1991), (Gillis Durieux and Daele-mans, 1995), (Bertolo et al 1997), and (Tesar, 2004).
fore, to identify a phoneme one must be ableto assign to it a representation in terms offeature specifications. What are these repre-sentations? Since Saussure, it has been acentral assumption of much linguistic theorythat a unit is defined not only in terms of itssubstance, but also in negative terms, withrespect to the units it contrasts with. On thisway of thinking, an /i/ that is part of a three-vowel system /i a u/ is not necessarily thesame thing as an /i/ that is part of a seven-vowel system /i  e a o  u/. In a three-vowelsystem, no more than two features are re-quired to distinguish each vowel from all theothers; in a seven-vowel system, at least onemore feature is required.Jakobson and Halle (1956) suggested thatdistinctive features are necessarily binary be-cause of how they are acquired, through aseries of ?binary fissions?. They propose thatthe order of these contrastive splits, whichform what I will call a contrastive hierarchy(Dresher 2003a, b) is partially fixed, therebyallowing for certain developmental sequen-ces and ruling out others. This idea has beenfruitfully applied in acquisition studies,where it is a natural way of describing devel-oping phonological inventories (Pye Ingramand List, 1987), (Ingram, 1989), (Levelt,1989), (Dinnsen et al, 1990), (Dinnsen,1992), and (Rice and Avery, 1995).Consider, for example, the development ofsegment types in onset position in Dutch(Fikkert, 1994):
 (3) Development of Dutch onset consonants(Fikkert 1994)consonant             u                     m
           obstruent                    sonorant    urum     urumplosive   fricative    nasal  liquid/glide           g    g        g           g         /P/            /F/      /N/       /L/J/
At first there are no contrasts. The value ofthe consonant defaults to the least marked (u)onset, namely an obstruent plosive, desig-
45
nated here as /P/. The first contrast is be-tween obstruent and sonorant. The former re-mains the unmarked (u), or default, option;the marked (m) sonorant defaults to nasal,/N/. At this point children differ. Some ex-pand the obstruent branch first, bringing inmarked fricatives, /F/, in contrast withplosives. Others expand the sonorant branch,introducing marked sonorants, which may beeither liquids, /L/, or glides, /J/. Continuingin this way we will eventually have a treethat gives all and only the contrasting fea-tures in the language.
5. Acquiring segmental representationsLet us consider how such representationsmight be acquired. To illustrate, we will lookat the vowel system of Classical Manchu(Zhang, 1996), which nicely illustrates thetypes of problems a learning model will haveto overcome. Zhang (1996) proposes the con-trastive hierarchy in (4) for Classical Man-chu, where the order of the features is [low]>[coronal]>[labial]>[ATR].
 (4) Classical Manchu vowel system (Zhang1996)4 [low]            ?     +              [coronal]                       [labial]  +ru?      ?ru+/i/        [ATR]     [ATR]         //
          +ty? +ty?                 /u/       //  //       /a/
Part of the evidence for these specifica-tions comes from the following observations:
(5) Evidence for the specifications in (4)a. /u/ and // trigger ATR harmony, but /i/does not, though /i/ is phonetically[+ATR ], suggesting that /i/ lacks aphonological specification for [ATR].
                                                      4Zhang (1996) assumes privative features: [F] vs.the absence of [F], rather than [+F] vs. [?F]. Thedistinction between privative and binary features is notcrucial to the matters under discussion here.
b. // triggers labial harmony, but /u/ and/ / do not. Though phonetically[+labial], there is no evidence that /u/and // are specified for this feature.
Acquiring phonological specifications isnot the same as identifying phonetic features.Surface phonetics do not determine the pho-nological specifications of a segment. Man-chu /i/ is phonetically [+ATR], but does notbear the feature phonologically; /u/ and //are phonetically [+labial], but are not specif-ied for that feature. How does a learner de-duce phonological (contrastive) specifica-tions from surface phonetics?5It must be the case that phoneme acqui-sition requires learners to take into accountphonological processes, and not just the localphonetics of individual segments (Dresherand van der Hulst, 1995). Thus, the phonolo-gical status of Manchu vowels is demonstrat-ed most clearly by attending to the effects ofthe vowel on neighbouring segments.This conclusion is strengthened when weconsider that the distinction between /u/ and/U/ in Classical Manchu is phonetically evi-dent only after back consonants; elsewhere,they merge to [u]. To determine the under-lying identity of a surface [u], therefore, alanguage learner must observe its patterningwith other vowels: if it co-occurs with[+ATR] vowels, it is /u/; otherwise, it is /U/.The nonlocal and diverse character of theevidence bearing on the feature specifica-tions of segments poses a challenge tolearning models.Finally, let us consider the acquisition ofthe hierarchy of contrastive features in eachlanguage. Examples such as the acquisitionof Dutch onsets given above appear to accordwell with the notion of a learning path,whereby learners proceed to master individ-ual feature contrasts in order. If this orderwere the same for all languages, then this                                                      5Phonological contrasts that play a role in phono-logical representations are thus different from theirphonetic manifestations, the subject of studies such as(Flemming, 1995).
46
much would not have to be acquired. How-ever, it appears that the feature hierarchiesvary somewhat across languages (Dresher,2003a, b). The existence of variation raisesthe question of how learners determine theorder for their language. The problem isdifficult, because establishing the correctordering, as shown by the active contrasts ina language, appears to involve different kindsof potentially conflicting evidence. In thecase of metrical parameters, the relevant evi-dence could be reduced to particular cues, orso it appears. Whether the setting of featurehierarchies can be parameterized in a similarway remains to be demonstrated.
6 ConclusionI will conclude by raising one furtherproblem for learning models that is suggestedby the Manchu vowel system. We have ob-served that in Classical Manchu, // is the[+ATR] counterpart of /a/. Both vowels are[+low]. Since [low] is ordered first amongthe vowel features in the Manchu hierarchy,we might suppose that learners determinewhich vowels are [+low] and which are notat an early stage in the process, before as-signing the other features. However, a vowelthat is phonetically [] is ambiguous as to itsfeatural classification. In many languages,including descendants of Classical Manchu(Zhang, 1996, Dresher & Zhang, 2003) suchvowels are classified as [?low]. What helpsto place // as a [+low] vowel in ClassicalManchu is the knowledge that it is the[+ATR] counterpart of /a/. That is, in order toassign the feature [+low] to //, it helps toknow that it is [+ATR]. But, by hypothesis,[low] is assigned before [ATR]. Similarly, thedetermination that /i/ is contrastively[+coronal] is tied in with its not being con-trastively [?labial]; but [coronal] is assignedprior to [labial].It appears, then, that whatever order wechoose to assign features, it is necessary tohave some advance knowledge about classi-fication with respect to features ordered later.
Perhaps this paradox is only apparent. How-ever it is resolved, the issue raises an inter-esting problem for models of acquisition.
7 AcknowledgementsThis research was supported in part by grant410-2003-0913 from the Social Sciences andHumanities Research Council of Canada. Iwould like to thank the members of the pro-ject on Contrast in Phonology at theUniversity of Toronto (http://www.chass.utoronto.ca/~contrast/) for discussion.
ReferencesStefano Bertolo Kevin Broihir EdwardGibson and Kenneth Wexler. 1997. Char-acterizing learnability conditions for cue-based learners in parametric language sys-tems. In Tilman Becker and Hans-UlrichKrieger, editors, Proceedings of the FifthMeeting on the Mathematics of Language.http://www.dfki.de/events/ mol/.Bernard Bloch. 1941. Phonemic overlapping.American Speech 16:278?284. Reprintedin Martin Joos, editor, Readings in Lingui-stics I, Second edition, 93?96. New York:American Council of Learned Societies,1958.Noam Chomsky. 1964. Current issues in lin-guistic theory. In Jerry A. Fodor andJerrold J. Katz, editors, The Structure ofLanguage, 50?118. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:Prentice-Hall.Noam Chomsky. 1981. Principles and para-meters in syntactic theory. In NorbertHornstein and David Lightfoot, editors,Explanation In Linguistics: The LogicalProblem of Language Acquisition, 32?75.London: Longman.Robin Clark. 1989. On the relationship bet-ween the input data and parameter setting.In Proceedings of NELS 19, 48?62.GLSA, University of Massachusetts,Amherst.Robin Clark. 1992. The selection of syntacticknowledge. Language Acquisition 2:83?149.
47
Robin Clark and Ian Roberts. 1993. A com-putational model of language learnabilityand language change. Linguistic Inquiry24:299?345.Walter Daelemans Steven Gillis and GertDurieux. 1994. The acquisition of stress: Adata-oriented approach. ComputationalLinguistics 20:421?451.Daniel A. Dinnsen. 1992. Variation in devel-oping and fully developed phonetic inven-tories. In Charles Ferguson Lise Menn andCarol Stoel-Gammon, editors, Phonologi-cal Development: Models, Research, Im-plications, 191?210. Timonium, MD:York Press,.Daniel A. Dinnsen Steven B. Chin MaryElbert and Thomas W. Powell. 1990.Some constraints on functionally disorder-ed phonologies: Phonetic inventories andphonotactics. Journal of Speech andHearing Research 33:28?37.B. Elan Dresher. 1999. Charting the learningpath: Cues to parameter setting. LinguisticInquiry 30:27?67.B. Elan Dresher. 2003a. Contrast and asym-metries in inventories. In Anna-Maria diSciullo, editor, Asymmetry in Grammar,Volume 2: Morphology, Phonology,Acquisition, 239?257. Amsterdam: JohnBenjamins.B. Elan Dresher. 2003b. The contrastivehierarchy in phonology. In Daniel CurrieHall, editor, Toronto Working Papers inLinguistics (Special Issue on Contrast inPhonology) 20, 47?62. Toronto: Depart-ment of Linguistics, University ofToronto.B. Elan Dresher and Harry van der Hulst.1995. Global determinacy and learnabilityin phonology. In John Archibald, editor,Phonological Acquisition and Phonologi-cal Theory, 1?21. Hillsdale, NJ: LawrenceErlbaum.B. Elan Dresher and Jonathan Kaye. 1990. Acomputational learning model for metricalphonology. Cognition 34:137?195.B. Elan Dresher and Xi Zhang. 2003. Phono-logical contrast and phonetics in Manchu
vowel systems. Paper presented at theTwenty-Ninth Annual Meeting of theBerkeley Linguistics Society, February2003. To appear in the Proceedings.Paula Fikkert. 1994. On the Acquisition ofProsodic Structure (HIL Dissertations 6).Dordrecht: ICG Printing.Edward Flemming. 1995. Auditory represen-tations in phonology. Doctoral disserta-tion, UCLA.Janet Dean Fodor. 1998. Unambiguous trig-gers. Linguistic Inquiry 29:1?36.Edward Gibson and Kenneth Wexler. 1994.Triggers. Linguistic Inquiry 25:407?454.Steven Gillis Gert Durieux and WalterDaelemans. 1996. A computational modelof P&P: Dresher & Kaye (1990) revisited.In Frank Wijnen and Maaike Verrips, edit-ors, Approaches to Parameter Setting,135?173. Vakgroep Algemene Taalweten-schap, Universiteit van Amsterdam.Prahlad Gupta and David Touretzky. 1994.Connectionist models and linguistictheory: Investigations of stress systems inlanguage. Cognitive Science 18:1?50.Morris Halle and William J. Idsardi. 1995.General properties of stress and metricalstructure. In John Goldsmith, editor, TheHandbook of Phonological Theory, 403?443. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.Bruce Hayes. 1995. Metrical Stress Theory:Principles and Case Studies. Chicago:University of Chicago Press.David Ingram. 1989. First Language Acquis-ition: Method, Description and Explana-tion. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress.Roman Jakobson and Morris Halle. 1956.Fundamentals of Language. The Hague:Mouton.Clara C. Levelt. 1989. An essay on childphonology. M.A. thesis, Leiden Uni-versity.Mark Liberman and Alan Prince. 1977. Onstress and linguistic rhythm. LinguisticInquiry 8:249?336.David Lightfoot. 1989. The child?s triggerexperience: Degree-0 learnability (with
48
commentaries). Behavioral and Brain Sci-ences 12:321?375.Eric H. Nyberg 3rd. 1991. A non-determin-istic, success-driven model of parametricsetting in language acquisition. Doctoraldissertation, Carnegie Mellon University,Pittsburgh, PA.Steven Pinker. 1994. The Language Instinct.New York: William Morrow.Plato. Meno. Various editions.Clifton Pye David Ingram and Helen List.1987. A comparison of initial consonantacquisition in English and Quich?. InKeith E. Nelson and Ann Van Kleeck,editors, Children's Language (Vol. 6),175?190. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Keren Rice and Peter Avery. 1995. Variabil-ity in a deterministic model of languageacquisition: A theory of segmental elabo-ration. In John Archibald editor, Phonolo-gical Acquisition and PhonologicalTheory, 23?42. Hillsdale, NJ: LawrenceErlbaum.Bruce Tesar. 1998. An iterative strategy forlanguage learning. Lingua 104:131?145.Bruce Tesar. 2004. Using inconsistency de-tection to overcome structural ambiguity.Linguistic Inquiry 35:219?253.Bruce Tesar and Paul Smolensky. 1998.Learnability in Optimality Theory. Lin-guistic Inquiry 29:229?268.William J. Turkel. 1996. Smoothness in aparametric subspace. Ms., University ofBritish Columbia, Vancouver.Xi Zhang. 1996. Vowel systems of theManchu-Tungus languages of China. Doc-toral dissertation, University of Toronto.
