Integrating Information Extraction and Automatic Hyperlinking 
 
Stephan Busemann, Witold'UR G \ VNL Hans-Ulrich Krieger,  
Jakub Piskorski, Ulrich Sch?fer, Hans Uszkoreit, Feiyu Xu 
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI GmbH) 
Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3, D-66123 Saarbr?cken, Germany 
sprout@dfki.de 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a novel information sys-
tem integrating advanced information extrac-
tion technology and automatic hyper-linking. 
Extracted entities are mapped into a domain 
ontology that relates concepts to a selection of 
hyperlinks. For information extraction, we use 
SProUT, a generic platform for the develop-
ment and use of multilingual text processing 
components. By combining finite-state and 
unification-based formalisms, the grammar 
formalism used in SProUT offers both pro-
cessing efficiency and a high degree of decal-
rativeness. The ExtraLink demo system show-
cases the extraction of relevant concepts from 
German texts in the tourism domain, offering 
the direct connection to associated web docu-
ments on demand.   
1 Introduction 
The utilization of language technology for the 
creation of hyperlinks has a long history (e.g., 
Allen et al, 1993). Information extraction (IE) is a 
technology that can be applied to identifying both 
sources and targets of new hyperlinks. IE systems 
are becoming commercially viable in supporting 
diverse information discovery and management 
tasks. Similarly, automatic hyperlinking is a matu-
ring technology designed to interrelate pieces of 
information, using ontologies to define the rela-
tionships. With ExtraLink, we present a novel 
information system that integrates both technolo-
gies in order to reach at an improved level of 
informativeness and comfort. Extraction and link 
generation occur completely in the background. 
Entities identified by the IE system are mapped 
into a domain ontology that relates concepts to a 
structured selection of predefined hyperlinks, 
which can be directly visualized on demand using 
a standard web browser. This way, the user can, 
while reading a text, immediately link up textual 
information to the Internet or to any other docu-
ment base without accessing a search engine.  
The quality of the link targets is much higher 
than with standard search engines since, first of all, 
only domain-specific interpretations are sought, 
and second, the ontology provides additional 
structure, including related information. 
ExtraLink uses as its IE system SProUT, a gene-
ric multilingual shallow analysis platform, which 
currently provides linguistic processing resources 
for English, German, Italian, French, Spanish, 
Czech, Polish, Japanese, and Chinese (Becker et 
al., 2002). SProUT is used for tokenization, mor-
phological analysis, and named entity recognition 
in free texts. In Section 2 to 4, we describe innova-
tive features of SProUT. Section 5 gives details 
about the ExtraLink demonstrator. 
2 Integrating Typed Feature Structures 
and Finite State Machines 
The main motivation for developing SProUT 
comes from the need to have a system that (i) 
allows a flexible integration of different processing 
modules and (ii) to find a good trade-off between 
processing efficiency and linguistic expressive-
ness. On the one hand, very efficient finite state 
devices have been successfully applied to real-
world applications. On the other hand, unification-
based grammars (UBGs) are designed to capture 
fine-grained syntactic and semantic constraints, 
resulting in better descriptions of natural language 
phenomena. In contrast to finite state devices, 
unification-based grammars are also assumed to be 
more transparent and more easily modifiable. 
SProUT?s mission is to take the best from these 
two worlds, having a finite state machine that 
operates on typed feature structures (TFSs). I.e., 
transduction rules in SProUT do not rely on simple 
atomic symbols, but instead on TFSs, where the 
left-hand side of a rule is a regular expression over 
TFSs, representing the recognition pattern, and the 
right-hand side is a sequence of TFSs, specifying 
the output structure. Consequently, equality of 
atomic symbols is replaced by unifiability of TFSs 
and the output is constructed using TFS unification 
w.r.t. a type hierarchy. Such rules not only recog-
nize and classify patterns, but also extract frag-
ments embedded in the patterns and fill output 
templates with them. 
Standard finite state techniques such as minimi-
zation and determinization are no longer applicable 
here, due to the fact that edges in our automata are 
annotated by TFSs, instead of atomic symbols. 
However, not every outgoing edge in such an 
automaton must be analyzed, since TFS annota-
tions can be arranged under subsumption, and the 
failure of a general edge automatically causes the 
failure of several, more specialized edges, without 
applying the unifiability test. Such information can 
in fact be precompiled. This and other optimization 
techniques are described in (Krieger and Piskorski, 
2003). 
When compared to symbol-based finite state 
approaches, our method leads to smaller grammars 
and automata, which usually better approximate a 
given language.  
3 XTDL ? The Formalism in SProUT 
XTDL combines two well-known frameworks, 
viz., typed feature structures and regular ex-
pressions. XTDL is defined on top of TDL, a defi-
nition language for TFSs (Krieger and Sch?fer, 
1994) that is used as a descriptive device in several 
grammar systems (LKB, PAGE, PET).  
Apart from the integration into the rule 
definitions, we also employ TDL in SProUT for 
the establishment of a type hierarchy of linguistic 
entities. In the example definition below, the 
morph type inherits from sign and introduces three 
more morphologically motivated attributes with 
the corresponding typed values: 
morph := sign & [ POS  atom, STEM atom, INFL infl ]. 
A rule in XTDL is straightforwardly defined as 
a recognition pattern on the left-hand side, written 
as a regular expression, and an output description 
on the right-hand side. A named label serves as a 
handle to the rule. Regular expressions over TFSs 
describe sequential successions of linguistic signs. 
We provide a couple of standard operators. Con-
catenation is expressed by consecutive items. Dis-
junction, Kleene star, Kleene plus, and optionality 
are represented by the operators |, *, +, and ?, resp. 
{n} after an expression denotes an n-fold repetition. 
{m,n} repeats at least m times and at most n times. 
The XTDL grammar rule below may illustrate 
the syntax. It describes a sequence of morphologi-
cally analyzed tokens (of type morph). The first 
TFS matches one or zero items (?) with part-of-
speech Determiner. Then, zero or more Adjective 
items are matched (*). Finally, one or two Noun 
items ({1,2}) are consumed. The use of a variable 
(e.g., #1) in different places establishes a 
coreference between features. This example enfor-
ces agreement in case, number, and gender for the 
matched items. Eventually, the description on the 
RHS creates a feature structure of type phrase, 
where the category is coreferent with the category 
Noun of the right-most token(s), and the agreement 
features corefer to features of the morph tokens. 
 np :> 
   (morph & [ POS  Determiner, 
 INFL  [CASE #1, NUM #2, GEN #3 ]] )?  
   (morph & [ POS  Adjective, 
 INFL  [CASE #1, NUM #2, GEN #3 ]] )*  
   (morph & [ POS  Noun & #4, 
 INFL  [CASE #1, NUM #2, GEN #3 ]] ){1,2} 
 -> phrase & [CAT #4, 
 AGR agr & [CASE #1, NUM #2, GEN #3 ]]. 
 
The choice of TDL has a couple of advantages. 
TFSs as such provide a rich descriptive language 
over linguistic structures and allow for a fine-
grained inspection of input items. They represent a 
generalization over pure atomic symbols. Unifia-
bility as a test criterion in a transition is a generali-
zation over symbol equality. Coreferences in 
feature structures express structural identity. Their 
properties are exploited in two ways. They provide 
a stronger expressiveness, since they create 
dynamic value assignments on the automaton 
transitions and thus exceed the strict locality of 
constraints in an atomic symbol approach. Further-
more, coreferences serve as a means of information 
transport into the output description on the RHS of 
the rule. Finally, the choice of feature structures as 
primary citizens of the information domain makes 
composition of modules very simple, since input 
and output are all of the same abstract data type.  
Functional (in contrast to regular) operators are 
a door to the outside world of SProUT.  They 
either serve as predicates, helping to locate 
complex tests that might cancel a rule application, 
or they construct new material, involving pieces of 
information from the LHS of a rule.  The sketch of 
a rule below transfers numerals into their 
corresponding digits using the functional operator 
normalize() that is defined externally. For instance, 
"one" is mapped onto "1", "two" onto "2", etc. 
 
  ?  numeral & [ SURFACE #surf, ... ] .?  -> 
  digit & [ ID #id, ... ],  where #id = normalize(#surf). 
4 The SProUT System  
The core of SProUT comprises of the following 
components: (i) a finite-state machine toolkit for 
building, combining, and optimizing finite-state 
devices; (ii) a flexible XML-based regular com-
piler for converting regular patterns into their cor-
responding compressed finite-state representation 
(Piskorski et al, 2002); (iii) a JTFS package which 
provides standard operations for constructing and 
manipulating TFSs; and (iv) an XTDL grammar 
interpreter. 
Currently, SProUT offers three online compo-
nents: a tokenizer, a gazetteer, and a morphological 
analyzer. The tokenizer maps character sequences 
to tokens and performs fine-grained token classifi-
cation. The gazetteer recognizes named entities 
based on static named entity lexica.  
The morphology unit provides lexical resources 
for English, German (equipped with online shallow 
compound recognition), French, Italian, and 
Spanish, which were compiled from the full form 
lexica of MMorph (Petitpierre and Russell, 1995). 
Considering Slavic languages, a component for 
Czech presented in (Haji?, 2001), and Morfeusz 
(Przepi?rkowski and Wolinski, 2003) for Polish. 
For Asian languages, we integrated Chasen 
(Asahara and Matsumoto, 2000) for Japanese and 
Shanxi (Liu, 2000) for Chinese.  
The XTDL-based grammar engineering plat-
form has been used to define grammars for 
English, German, French, Spanish, Chinese and 
Japanese allowing for named entity recognition 
and extraction. To guarantee a comparable 
coverage, and to ease evaluation, an extension of 
the MUC-7 standard for entities has been adopted.   
 
ne-person := enamex & [ TITLE list-of-strings, 
                          GIVEN_NAME list-of-strings, 
                          SURNAME list-of-strings, 
                                  P-POSITION list-of-strings, 
                          NAME-SUFFIX string, 
                                    DESCRIPTOR string ]. 
 
Given the expressiveness of XTDL expressions, 
MUC-7/MET-2 named entity types can be 
enhanced with more complex internal structures. 
For instance, a person name ne-person is defined 
as a subtype of enamex with the above structure. 
The named entity grammars can handle types 
such as person, location, organization, time point, 
time span (instead of date and time defined by 
MUC), percentage, and currency.  
The core system together with the grammars 
forms a basis for developing applications. SProUT 
is being used by several sites in both research and 
industrial contexts. 
A component for resolving coreferent named 
entities disambiguates and classifies incomplete 
named entities via dynamic lexicon search, e.g., 
Microsoft is coreferent with Microsoft corporation 
and is thus correctly classified as an organization. 
5 ExtraLink: Integrating Information 
Extraction and Automatic Hyperlinking  
A methodology for automatically enriching web 
documents with typed hyperlinks has been develo-
ped and applied to several domains, among them 
the domain of tourism information. A core compo-
nent is a domain ontology describing tourist sites 
in terms of sights, accommodations, restaurants, 
cultural events, etc. The ontology was specialized 
for major European tourism sites and regions (see 
Figure 1). It is associated with a large selection of  
 
 
 
Figure 1: Link Target Page (excerpt). The instance the 
web document is associated to (Isle of Capri) is shown 
on the left, together with neighboring concepts in the 
ontology, which the user can navigate through. 
 
link targets gathered, intellectually selected and 
continuously verified. Although language techno-
logy could also be employed to prime target 
selection, for most applications quality require-
ments demand the expertise of a domain specialist. 
In the case of the tourism domain, the selection 
was performed by a travel business professional. 
The system is equipped with an XML interface and 
accessible as a server. 
The ExtraLink GUI marks the relevant entities 
(usually locations) identified by SProUT (see 
second window on the left in Figure 2). Clicking 
on a marked expression causes a query related to 
the entity being shipped to the server. Coreferent 
concepts are handled as expanded queries. The 
server returns a set of links structured according to 
the ontology, which is presented in the ExtraLink 
GUI (Figure 2). The user can choose to visualize 
any link target in a new browser window that also 
shows the respective subsection of the ontology in 
an indented tree notation (see Figure 1).  
 
 
 
Figure 2: ExtraLink GUI. The links in the right-hand 
window are generated after clicking on the marked 
named entity for Lisbon (marked in dark). The bottom 
left window shows the SProUT result for ?Lissabon?. 
 
The ExtraLink demonstrator has been imple-
mented in Java and C++, and runs under both MS 
Windows and Linux. It is operational for German, 
but it can easily be extended to other languages 
covered by SProUT. This involves the adaptation 
of the mapping into the ontology and a multi-
lingual presentation of the ontology in the link 
target page. 
Acknowledgements 
Work on ExtraLink has been partially funded 
through grants by the German Ministry for 
Education, Science, Research and Technology 
(BMBF) to the project Whiteboard (contract 01 IW 
002), by the EC to the project Airforce (contract 
IST-12179), and by the state of the Saarland to the 
project SATOURN. We are indebted to Tim vor 
der Br?ck, Thierry Declerck, Adrian Raschip, and 
Christian Woldsen for their contributions to 
developing ExtraLink. 
References 
J. Allen, J. Davis, D. Krafft, D. Rus, and D. Subrama-
nian. Information agents for building hyperlinks. J. 
Mayfield and C. Nicholas: Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Intelligent Hypertext, 1993. 
M. Asahara and Y. Matsumoto. Extended models and 
tools for high-performance part-of-speech tagger. 
Proceedings of  COLING, 21-27, 2000. 
0 %HFNHU : 'UR G \ VNL +-U. Krieger, J. 
Piskorski, U. Sch?fer, F. Xu. SProUT?Shallow Pro-
cessing with Typed Feature Structures and Unifica-
tion. In Proceedings of  ICON, 2002. 
J. +DML? Disambiguation of rich inflection?compu-
tational morphology of Czech. Prague Karolinum, 
Charles University Press, 2001. 
H.-U. Krieger and U. Sch?fer. TDL?A Type Description 
Language for Constraint-Based Grammars. Procee-
dings of COLING, 893-899, 1994. 
H.-U. Krieger and J. Piskorski. Speed-up methods for 
complex annotated finite state grammars. DFKI 
Report, 2003. 
K. Liu. Research of automatic Chinese word segmen-
tation. Proceedings of ILT&CIP, 2001. 
D. Petitpierre and G. Russell. MMORPH?the Multext 
morphology program. Multext deliverable report 
2.3.1. ISSCO, University of Geneva, 1995. 
J. PiskRUVNL:'UR G \ VNL );X DQG2 6FKHUIA 
flexible XML-based regular compiler for creation 
and converting linguistic resources. Proceedings of 
LREC 2002, Las Palmas, Spain, 2002. 
A. Przepi?rkowski and M. Wolinski. The Unbearable 
Lightness of Tagging: A Case Study in Morphosyn-
tactic Tagging of Polish. Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Linguistically Interpreted Corpora, 2003. 
 
