Proceedings of Human Language Technology Conference and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (HLT/EMNLP), pages 604?611, Vancouver, October 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
  
The Use of Metadata, Web-derived Answer Patterns and Passage 
Context to Improve Reading Comprehension Performance
Yongping Du 
Media Computing and Web 
Intelligence Laboratory 
Fudan University 
Shanghai, China 
ypdu@fudan.edu.cn 
 
 
Helen Meng 
Human-Computer 
Communication Laboratory 
The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong 
 HongKong. SAR. China 
hmmeng@se.cuhk.edu.hk 
 
Xuanjing Huang 
Media Computing and Web 
Intelligence Laboratory 
Fudan University 
Shanghai, China 
xjhuang@fudan.edu.cn 
 
 
Lide Wu 
Media Computing and Web 
Intelligence Laboratory 
Fudan University 
Shanghai, China 
ldwu@fudan.edu.cn 
Abstract 
A reading comprehension (RC) system 
attempts to understand a document and returns 
an answer sentence when posed with a 
question.  RC resembles the ad hoc question 
answering (QA) task that aims to extract an 
answer from a collection of documents when 
posed with a question.  However, since RC 
focuses only on a single document, the system 
needs to draw upon external knowledge 
sources to achieve deep analysis of passage 
sentences for answer sentence extraction.  
This paper proposes an approach towards RC 
that attempts to utilize external knowledge to 
improve performance beyond the baseline set 
by the bag-of-words (BOW) approach.  Our 
approach emphasizes matching of metadata 
(i.e. verbs, named entities and base noun 
phrases) in passage context utilization and 
answer sentence extraction. We have also 
devised an automatic acquisition process for 
Web-derived answer patterns (AP) which 
utilizes question-answer pairs from TREC QA, 
the Google search engine and the Web.  This 
approach gave improved RC performances for 
both the Remedia and ChungHwa corpora, 
attaining HumSent accuracies of 42% and 
69% respectively.  In particular, performance 
analysis based on Remedia shows that relative 
performances of 20.7% is due to metadata 
matching and a further 10.9% is due to the 
application of Web-derived answer patterns. 
1. Introduction 
A reading comprehension (RC) system attempts to 
understand a document and returns an answer 
sentence when posed with a question.  The RC 
task was first proposed by the MITRE 
Corporation which developed the Deep Read 
reading comprehension system (Hirschman et al, 
1999).  Deep Read was evaluated on the Remedia 
Corpus that contains a set of stories, each with an 
average of 20 sentences and five questions (of 
types who, where, when, what and why). The 
MITRE group also defined the HumSent scoring 
metric, i.e. the percentage of test questions for 
which the system has chosen a correct sentence as 
the answer.  HumSent answers were compiled by a 
human annotator, who examined the stories and 
chose the sentence(s) that best answered the 
questions.  It was judged that for 11% of the 
Remedia test questions, there is no single sentence 
in the story that is judged to be an appropriate 
answer sentence.  Hence the upper bound for RC 
on Remedia should by 89% HumSent accuracy.  
(Hirschman et al 1999) reported a HumSent 
accuracy of 36.6% on the Remedia test set.  
Subsequently, (Ng et al, 2000) used a machine 
learning approach of decision tree and achieved 
the accuracy of 39.3%.   Then (Riloff and Thelen, 
2000) and (Charniak et al, 2000) reported 
improvements to 39.7% and 41%, respectively.  
They made use of handcrafted heuristics such as 
the WHEN rule: 
if contain(S, TIME), then Score(S)+=4 
i.e. WHEN questions reward candidate answer 
sentences with four extra points if they contain a 
name entity TIME.  
RC resembles the ad hoc question answering 
(QA) task in TREC.1  The QA task finds answers 
to a set of questions from a collection of 
documents, while RC focuses on a single 
                                                                 
1 http://www.nist.gov. 
604
  
document.  (Light et al 1998) conducted a 
detailed compared between the two tasks.  They 
found that the answers of most questions in the 
TREC QA task appear more than once within the 
document collection.  However, over 80% of the 
questions in the Remedia corpus correspond to 
answer sentences that have a single occurrence 
only.  Therefore an RC system often has only one 
shot at finding the answer. The system is in dire 
need of extensive knowledge sources to help with 
deep text analysis in order to find the correct 
answer sentence.   
Recently, many QA systems have exploited 
the Web as a gigantic data repository in order to 
help question answering (Clarke et al, 2001; 
Kwok et al, 2001; Radev et al, 2002).  Our 
current work attempts to incorporate a similar idea 
in exploiting Web-derived knowledge to aid RC.  
In particular, we have devised an automatic 
acquisition process for Web-derived answer 
patterns. Additionally we propose to emphasize 
the importance of metadata matching in our 
approach to RC.  By metadata, we are referring to 
automatically labeled verbs, named entities as well 
as base noun phrases in the passage.  It is 
important to achieve a metadata match between 
the question and a candidate answer sentence 
before the candidate is selected as the final answer.  
The candidate answer sentence may be one with a 
high degree of word overlap with the posed 
question, or it may come from other sentences in 
the neighboring context. We apply these different 
techniques step by step and obtain better results 
than have ever previously been reported. 
Especially, we give experiment analysis for 
understanding the results. 
    In the rest of this paper, we will first describe 
three main aspects of our approach towards RC ? 
(i) metadata matching, (ii)automatic acquisition of 
Web-derived answer patterns and (iii) the use of 
passage context.  This will be followed by a 
description of our experiments, analysis of results 
and conclusions. 
2. Metadata Matching 
A popular approach in reading comprehension is 
to represent the information content of each 
question or passage sentence as a bag of words 
(BOW).  This approach incorporates stopword 
removal and stemming.  Thereafter, two words are 
considered a match if they share the same 
morphological root.  Given a question, the BOW 
approach selects the passage sentence with the 
maximum number of matching words as the 
answer.  However, the BOW approach does not 
capture the fact that the informativeness of a word 
about a passage sentence varies from one word to 
another.  For example, it has been pointed out by 
(Charniak et al 2000) that the verb seems to be 
especially important for recognizing that a passage 
sentence is related to a specific question.  In view 
of this, we propose a representation for questions 
and answer sentences that emphasizes three types 
of metadata:  
(i) Main Verbs (MVerb), identified by the link 
parser (Sleator and Temperley 1993);  
(ii) Named Entities (NE), including names of 
locations (LCN), persons (PRN) and organizations 
(ORG), identified by a home-grown named entity 
identification tool; and  
(iii) Base Noun Phrases (BNP), identified by a 
home-grown base noun phrase parser respectively. 
We attempt to quantify the relative importance 
of such metadata through corpus statistics 
obtained only from the training set of the Remedia 
corpus, which has 55 stories. The Remedia test set, 
which contains 60 stories, is set aside for 
evaluation. On average, each training story has 20 
sentences and five questions. There are 274 
questions in all in the entire training set.  Each 
question corresponds to a marked answer sentence 
within the story text.  We analyzed all the 
questions and divided them into three question 
sets (Q_SETS) based on the occurrences of 
MVerb, NE and BNP identified with the tools 
mentioned above.  The following are illustrative 
examples of the Q_SETS as well as their sizes: 
Q_SETMverb  
(Count:169) 
Who helped the Pilgrims? 
Q_SETNE    
 (Count:62) 
When was the first merry-go-
round built in the United States? 
Q_SETBNP   
(Count:232) 
Where are the northern lights? 
Table 1.  Examples and sizes of question sets (Q_SETS) 
with different metadata ? main  verb (MVerb), named 
entity (NE) and base noun phrase (BNP). 
   It may also occur that a question belongs to 
multiple Q_SETS.  For example:  
605
  
Q_SETMVerb 
 
When was the first merry-go-round built 
in the United States? 
Q_SETNE 
 
When was the first merry-go-round built 
in the United States? 
Q_SETBNP 
 
When was the first merry-go-round built 
in the United States? 
Table 2.  An example sentence that belongs to multiple 
Q_SETS. 
As mentioned earlier, each question 
corresponds to an answer sentence, which is 
annotated in the story text by MITRE.  Hence we 
can follow the Q_SETS to divide the answer 
sentences into three answer sets (A_SETS).  
Examples of A_SETS that correspond to Table 1 
include: 
A_SETMVerb 
 
An Indian named Squanto came 
to help them. 
A_SETNE 
 
The first merry-go-round in the 
United States was built in 1799.
A_SETBNP 
 
Then these specks reach the air 
high above the earth. 
Table 3.  Examples of the answer sets (A_SETS) 
corresponding to the different metadata categories, 
namely, main verb (MVerb), named entity (NE) and 
base noun phrase) (BNP). 
    In order to quantify the relative importance of 
matching the three kinds of metadata between 
Q_SET and A_SET for reading comprehension, 
we compute the following relative weights based 
on corpus statistics: 
|_|
||
Metadata
Metadata
Metadata SETA
SWeight =  ?..Eqn (1) 
where SMetadata is the set of answer sentences in 
|A_SETMetadata| that contain the metadata of its 
corresponding question.  For example, referring to 
Tables 2 and 3, the question in Q_SETNE ?When 
was the first merry-go-round built in the United 
Sates?? contains the named entity (underlined) 
which is also found in the associated answer 
sentence from A_SETNE, ?The first merry-go-
round in the United States was built in 1799.?  
Hence this answer sentence belongs to the set SNE.   
Contrarily, the question in Q_SETBNP ?Where are 
the northern lights?? contains the base noun 
phrase (underlined) but it is not found in the 
associated answer sentence from A_SETBNP, 
?Then these specks reach the air high above the 
earth.?  Hence this answer sentence does not 
belong to the set SBNP.  Based on the three sets, we 
obtain the metadata weights: 
WeightMVerb=0.64, WeightNE=0.38, WeightBNP=0.21 
To illustrate how these metadata weights are 
utilized in the RC task, consider again the 
question, ?Who helped the Pilgrims?? together 
with three candidate answers that are ?equally 
good? with a single word match when the BOW 
approach is applied.  We further search for 
matching metadata among these candidate 
answers and use the metadata weights for scoring.   
Question Who helped the Pilgrims? 
MVerb identified: ?help? 
BNP identified: ?the Pilgrams? 
Candidate 
Sentence 1 
 
An Indian named Squanto came to help. 
Matched MVerb (underlined) 
Score= WeightMVerb=0.64 
Candidate 
Sentence 2 
 
By fall, the Pilgrims had enough food for 
the winter. 
Matched BNP (underlined) 
Score= WeightBNP=0.21 
Candidate 
Sentence 3 
 
Then the Pilgrims and the Indians ate and 
played games. 
Matched BNP (underlined) 
Score= WeightBNP=0.21 
Table 4.  The use of metadata matching to extend the 
bag-of-words approach in reading comprehension.  
3. Web-derived Answer Patterns 
In addition to using metadata for RC, the proposed 
approach also leverages knowledge sources that 
are external to the core RC resources ? primarily 
the Web and other available corpora.  This section 
describes our approach that attempts to 
automatically derive answer patterns from the 
Web as well as score useful answer patterns to aid 
RC.  We utilize the open domain question-answer 
pairs (2393 in all) from the Question Answering 
track of TREC (TREC8-TREC12) as a basis for 
automatic answer pattern acquisition.   
3.1 Deriving Question Patterns 
We define a set of question tags (Q_TAGS) that 
extend the metadata above in order to represent 
question patterns.  The tags include one for main 
verbs (Q_MVerb), three for named entities 
(Q_LCN, Q_PRN and Q_ORG) and one for base 
noun phrases (Q_BNP). We are also careful to 
ensure that noun phrases tagged as named entities 
are not further tagged as base noun phrases. 
606
  
    A question pattern is expressed in terms of 
Q_TAGS.  A question pattern can be used to 
represent multiple questions in the TREC QA 
resource.  An example is shown in Table 5.  
Tagging the TREC QA resource provides us with 
a set of question patterns {QPi} and for each 
pattern, up to mi example questions. 
Question Pattern (QPi): 
When do Q_PRN Q_MVerb Q_BNP? 
Represented questions: 
Q1: When did Alexander Graham Bell invent the 
telephone? 
Q2: When did Maytag make Magic Chef 
refrigerators? 
Q3: When did Amumdsen reach the South Pole? 
(mi example questions in all) 
Table 5.  A question pattern and some example 
questions that it represents. 
3.2  Deriving Answer Patterns 
For each question pattern, we aim to derive 
answer patterns for it automatically from the Web. 
The set of answer patterns capture possible ways 
of embedding a specific answer in an answer 
sentence.  We will describe the algorithm for 
deriving answer patterns as following and 
illustrate with the following question answer pair 
from TREC QA:  
Q: When did Alexander Graham Bell invent the 
telephone? 
A: 1876 
1. Formulate the Web Query 
The question is tagged and the Web query is 
formulated as ?Q_TAG?+ ?ANSWER?, i.e. 
Question: ?When did Alexander Graham Bell 
invent the telephone?? 
QP:            When do Q_PRN Q_MVerb Q_BNP ? 
where Q_PRN= ?Alexander Graham Bell?, 
Q_MVerb= ?invent?, and  Q_BNP=  ?the 
telephone? 
hence Web query:  ?Alexander Graham Bell?+ 
?invent? + ?the telephone? + ?1876? 
2. Web Search and Snippet Selection 
The Web query is submitted to the search 
engine Google using the GoogleAPI and the top 
100 snippets are downloaded.  From each 
snippet, we select up to ten contiguous words to 
the left as well as to the right of the ?ANSWER? 
for answer pattern extraction.  The selected 
words must be continuous and do not cross the 
snippet boundary that Google denotes with ???. 
3. Answer Pattern Selection 
We label the terms in each selected snippet with 
the Q_TAGs from the question as well as the 
answer tag <A>.  The shortest string containing 
all these tags (underlined below) is extracted as 
the answer pattern (AP).  For example:  
Snippet 1: 1876, Alexander Graham Bell 
invented the telephone in the United States? 
AP 1:   <A>, Q_PRN Q_MVerb Q_BNP. 
(N.B.  The answer tag <A> denotes ?1876? in this 
example). 
Snippet 2: ?which has been invented by 
Alexander Graham Bell in 1876? 
AP 2:    Q_MVerb by Q_PRN in <A>. 
    As may be seen in above, the acquisition 
algorithm for Web-derived answer questions calls 
for specific answers, such as a factoid in a word or 
phrase.  Hence the question-answer pairs from 
TREC QA are suitable for use.  On the other hand, 
Remedia is less suitable here because it contains 
labelled answer sentences instead of factoids.  
Inclusion of whole answer sentences in Web 
query formulation generally does not return the 
answer pattern that we seek in this work. 
3.3 Scoring the Acquired Answer Patterns 
The answer pattern acquisition algorithm returns 
multiple answer patterns for every question-
answer pair submitted to the Web.   In this 
subsection we present an algorithm for deriving 
scores for these answer patterns.  The 
methodology is motivated by the concept of 
confidence level, similar to that used in data 
mining.  The algorithm is as follows: 
1. Formulate the Web Query 
For each question pattern QPi (see Table 5) 
obtained previously, randomly select an example 
question among the mi options that belongs to this 
pattern.  The question is tagged and the Web 
query is formulated in terms of the Q_TAGs only.  
(Please note that the corresponding answer is 
excluded from Web query formulation here, 
which differs from the answer pattern acquisition 
algorithm).  E.g., 
Question: ?When did Alexander Graham Bell 
invent the telephone? 
Q_TAGs: Q_PRN Q_MVerb Q_BNP 
Web query:  ?Alexander Graham Bell?+ 
?invent? + ?the telephone? 
2.   Web Search and Snippet Selection 
The Web query is submitted to the search engine 
607
  
Google and the top 100 snippets are downloaded. 
3.   Scoring each Answer Pattern APij relating to 
QPi 
Based on the question, its pattern QPi, the answer 
and the retrieved snippets, totally the following 
counts for each answer pattern APij relating to 
QPi . 
cij ? # snippets matching APij and for which the 
tag <A> matches the correct answer. 
nij ? #  snippets matching APij and for which the 
tag <A> matches any term 
Compute the ratio rij= cij / nij..........Eqn(2) 
Repeat steps 1-3 above for another example 
question randomly selected from the pool of mi 
example under QPi.  We arbitrarily set the 
maximum number of iterations to be ki = ??
???
?
im3
2  
in order to achieve decent coverage of the 
available examples.  The confidence for APij.is 
computed as          
k
r
APConfidence
k
i
ij
ij
?
== 1)( ??Eqn(3) 
Equation (3) tries to assign high confidence 
values to answer patterns APij that choose the 
correct answers, while other answer patterns are 
assigned low confidence values.  E.g.: 
<A>, Q_PRN Q_MVerb Q_BNP     (Confidence=0.8) 
Q_MVerb by Q_PRN in <A>.         (Confidence=0.76) 
3.4 Answer Pattern Matching in RC 
The Web-derived answer patterns are used in the 
RC task.  Based on the question and its QP, we 
select the related AP to match among the answer 
sentence candidates.  The candidate that matches 
the highest-scoring AP will be selected.  We find 
that this technique is very effective for RC as it 
can discriminate among candidate answer 
sentences that are rated ?equally good? by the 
BOW or metadata matching approaches, e.g.: 
Q:   When is the Chinese New Year? 
QP: When is the Q_BNP? 
where Q_BNP=Chinese New Year 
Related AP:  Q_BNP is <A> (Confidence=0.82) 
Candidate answer sentences 1: you must wait a few more 
weeks for the Chinese New Year. 
Candidate answer sentences 2: Chinese New Year is most 
often between January 20 and February 20. 
Both candidate answer sentences have the same 
number of matching terms ? ?Chinese?, ?New? 
and ?Year? and the same metadata, i.e. 
Q_BNP=Chinese New Year. The term ?is? is 
excluded by stopword removal. However the 
Web-derived answer pattern is able to select the 
second candidate as the correct answer sentence. 
Hence our system gives high priority to the 
Web-derived AP ? if a candidate answer sentence 
can match an answer pattern with confidence > 
0.6, the candidate is taken as the final answer.  No 
further knowledge constraints will be enforced. 
4. Context Assistance 
During RC, the initial application of the BOW 
approach focuses the system?s attention on a small 
set of answer sentence candidates.  However, it 
may occur the true answer sentence is not 
contained in this set.  As was observed by (Riloff 
and Thelen, 2000) and (Charniak et al, 2000), the 
correct answer sentence often precedes/follows the 
sentence with the highest number of matching 
words.  Hence both the preceding and following 
context sentences are searched in their work to 
find the answer sentence especially for why 
questions. 
Our proposed approach references this idea in 
leveraging contextual knowledge for RC.  
Incorporation of contextual knowledge is very 
effective when used in conjunction with named 
entity (NE) identification.  For instance, who 
questions should be answered with words tagged 
with Q_PRN (for persons).  If the candidate 
sentence with the highest number of matching 
words does not contain the appropriate NE, it will 
not be selected as the answer sentence.  Instead, 
our system searches among the two preceding and 
two following context sentences for the 
appropriate NE.  Table 6 offers an illustration. 
Data analysis Remedia training set shows that the 
context window size selected is appropriate for 
when, who and where questions.   
Football Catches On Fast 
(LATROBE, PA., September 4, 1895) - The new 
game of football is catching on fast, and each month new 
teams are being formed. 
Last night was the first time that a football player was 
paid.  The man's name is John Brallier, and he was paid 
$10 to take the place of someone who was hurt.? 
Question: Who was the first football player to be paid? 
Sentence with maximum # matching words: Last night 
was the first time that a football player was paid. 
Correct answer sentence: The man's name is John 
Brallier, and he was paid $10 to take the place of 
someone who was hurt. 
Table 6.  An example illustrating the use of contextual 
knowledge in RC. 
608
  
As for why questions, a candidate answer 
sentence is selected from the context window if its 
first word is one of ?this?, ?that?, ?these?, 
?those?, ?so? or ?because?.  We did not utilize 
contextual constraints for what questions. 
5. Experiments 
RC experiments are run on the Remedia corpus as 
well as the ChungHwa corpus.  The Remedia 
training set has 55 stories, each with about five 
questions.  The Remedia test set has 60 stories and 
5 questions per story.  The ChungHwa corpus is 
derived from the book, ?English Reading 
Comprehension in 100 days,? published by 
Chung Hwa Book Co., (H.K.) Ltd.  The 
ChungHwa training set includes 100 English 
stories and each has four questions on average.  
The ChungHwa testing set includes 50 stories and 
their questions.  We use HumSent as the prime 
evaluation metric for reading comprehension.   
The three kinds of knowledge sources are used 
incrementally in our experimental setup and 
results are labeled as follows: 
Result Technique 
Result_1 BOW 
Result_2 BOW+MD 
Result_3 BOW+MD+AP 
Result_4 BOW+MD+AP+Context 
Table 7.  Experimental setup in RC evaluations.  
Abbrievations are: bag-of-words (BOW), metadata 
(MD), Web-derived answer patterns (AP), contextual 
knowledge (Context). 
5.1 Results on Remedia 
Table 8 shows the RC results for various question 
types in the Remedia test set.  
 When Who What Where Why 
Result_1 32.0% 30.0% 31.8% 29.6% 18.6%
Result_2 40.0% 28.0% 39.0% 38.0% 20.0%
Result_3 52.6% 42.8% 40.6% 38.4% 21.0%
Result_4 55.0% 48.0% 40.6% 36.4% 27.6%
 Table 8.  HumSent accuracies for the Remedia test set. 
We observe that the HumSent accuracies vary 
substantially across different interrogatives. The 
system performs best for when questions and 
worst for why questions. The use of Web-derived 
answer patterns brought improvements to all the 
different interrogatives.  The other knowledge 
sources, namely, meta data and context, bring 
improvements for some question types but 
degraded others.  
Figure 1 shows the overall RC results of our 
system.  The relative incremental gains due to the 
use of metadata, Web-derived answer patterns and 
context are 20.7%, 10.9% and 8.2% respectively.  
We also ran pairwise t-tests to test the statistical 
significance of these improvements and results are 
shown in Table 9.  The improvements due to 
metadata matching and Web-derived answer 
patterns are statistically significant (p<0.05) but 
the improvement due to context is not. 
29%
35%
38.80% 42%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
Result_1 Result_2 Result_3 Result_4
H
um
Se
nt
 P
re
ci
sio
n
 
Figure 1.  HumSent accuracies for Remedia. 
Pairwise 
Comparison 
Result_1 & 
Result_2 
Result_2 & 
Result_3 
Result_3 & 
Result_4 
t-test Results t(4)=2.207, 
p=0.046 
t(4)=2.168, 
p=0.048 
t(4)=1.5, 
p=0.104 
Table 9.  Tests of statistical significance in the 
incremental improvements over BOW among the use 
of metadata, Web-derived answer patterns and context.   
We also compared our results across various 
interrogatives with those previously reported in 
(Riloff and Thelen, 2000).  Their system is based 
on handcrafted rules with deterministic algorithms.  
The comparison (see Table 10) shows that our 
approach which is based on data-driven patterns 
and statistics can achieve comparable performance. 
Question Type Riloff &Thelen 2000 Result_4 
When 55% 55.0% 
Who 41% 48.0% 
What 28% 40.6% 
Where 47% 36.4% 
Why 28% 27.6% 
Overall 40% 42.0% 
Table 10.  Comparison of HumSent results with a 
heuristic based RC system (Riloff & Thelen 00).  
5.2 Results on ChungHwa 
Experimental results for the ChungHwa corpus are 
presented in Figure 2.  The HumSent accuracies 
obtained are generally higher than those with 
609
  
Remedia.  We observe similar trends as before, i.e. 
our approach in the use of metadata, Web-derived 
answer patterns and context bring incremental 
gains to RC performance.  However, the actual 
gain levels are much reduced. 
65%
66%
68%
69%
63%
64%
65%
66%
67%
68%
69%
70%
Result_1 Result_2 Result_3 Result_4
H
um
Se
nt
 P
re
ci
sio
n
 
Figure 2.  HumSent accuracies for ChungHwa. 
5.3. Analyses of Results 
In order to understand the underlying reason for 
reduced performance gains as we migrated from 
Remedia to Chunghwa, we analyzed the question 
lengths as well as the degree of word match 
between questions and answers among the two 
corpora.  Figure 3 shows that the average length 
of questions in Chunghwa are longer than 
Remedia.  Longer questions contain more 
information which is beneficial to the BOW 
approach in finding the correct answer. 
32.6
7.5
32.5
60
13.3
54.1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
?4 5,6,7 ?8
Question Length
Pe
rc
en
t o
f Q
ue
st
io
ns
 (%
)
Remedia ChungHwa
 
Figure 3.  Distribution of question lengths among the 
Remedia and ChungHwa corpora. 
The degree of word match between questions 
and answers among the two corpora is depicted in 
Figure 4.  We observe that ChungHwa has a larger 
proportion of questions that have a match- size (i.e. 
number of matching words between a question 
and its answer) larger than 2.  This presents an 
advantage for the BOW approach in RC.  It is also 
observed that approximately 10% of the Remedia 
questions have no correct answers (i.e. match-
size=-1) and about 25% have no matching words 
with the correct answer sentence.  This explains 
the overall discrepancies in HumSent accuracies 
between Remedia and ChungHwa. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
-1 0 1 2 3 4 5 ?6
Match Size
Pe
rc
en
t o
f Q
ue
st
io
ns
 (%
)
Remedia ChungHwa
 
Figure 4.  Distribution of match-sizes (i.e. the number 
of matching words between questions and their 
answers) in the two corpora. 
While our approach has leveraged a variety of 
knowledge sources in RC, we still observe that 
our system is unable to correctly answer 58% of 
the questions in Remedia. An example of such 
elusive questions is:  
Question: When do the French celebrate their 
freedom? 
Answer Sentence: To the French, July 14 has the 
same meaning as July 4th does to the United 
States.  
6. Conclusions 
A reading comprehension (RC) system aims to 
understand a single document (i.e. story or passage) 
in order to be able to automatically answer questions 
about it.   The task presents an information retrieval 
paradigm that differs significantly from that found in 
Web search engines.  RC resembles the question 
answering (QA) task in TREC which returns an 
answer for a given question from a collection of 
documents.  However, while a QA system can 
utilize the knowledge and information in a collection 
of documents, RC systems focuses only on a single 
document only.  Consequently there is a dire need to 
draw upon a variety of knowledge sources to aid 
deep analysis of the document for answer generation.  
This paper presents our initial effort in designing an 
approach for RC that leverages a variety of 
knowledge sources beyond the context of the 
passage, in an attempt to improve RC performance 
beyond the baseline set by the bag-of-words (BOW) 
approach.  The knowledge sources include the use of 
metadata (i.e. verbs, named entities and base noun 
phrases).  Metadata matching is applied in our 
approach in answer sentence extraction as well as 
use of contextual sentences.  We also devised an 
610
  
automatic acquisition algorithm for Web-derived 
answer patterns.  The acquisition process utilizes 
question-answer pairs from TREC QA, the Google 
search engine and the Web.  These answer patterns 
capture important structures for answer sentence 
extraction in RC.  The use of metadata matching and 
Web-derived answer patterns improved reading 
comprehension performances for the both Remedia 
and ChungHwa corpora. We obtain improvements 
over previously reported results for Remedia, with 
an overall HumSet accuracy of 42%.  In particular, a 
relative gain of 20.7% is due to metadata matching 
and a further 10.9% is due to application of Web-
derived answer patterns. 
Acknowledgement 
This work is partially supported by the Direct 
Grant from The Chinese University of Hong Kong 
(CUHK) and conducted while the first author was 
visiting CUHK. This work is supported by Natural 
Science Foundation of China under Grant 
No.60435020. 
References 
Charles L.A. Clarke, Gordon V. Cormack, Thomas R. 
Lynam. 2001. Exploiting Redundancy in Question 
Answering. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM 
Conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval (SIGIR-2001, New Orleans, 
LA). ACM Press. New York, 358?365. 
Cody C. T. Kwok, Oren Etzioni, Daniel S. Weld. 2001. 
Scaling Question Answering to the Web. In 
Proceedings of the 10th World Wide Web 
Conference (WWW?2001). 150-161. 
Daniel Sleator and Davy Temperley. 1993. Parsing 
English with a Link Grammar. Third International 
Workshop on Parsing Technologies. 
Deepak Ravichandran and Eduard Hovy. 2002. 
Learning Surface Text Patterns for a Question 
Answering System. In Proceedings of the 40th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL-2002). 41-47.  
Dell Zhang, Wee Sun Lee. 2002. Web Based Pattern 
Mining and Matching Approach to Question 
Answering. In Proceedings of the TREC-11 
Conference. 2002. NIST, Gaithersburg, MD, 505- 
512. 
Dragomir Radev, Weiguo Fan, Hong Qi, Harris Wu, 
Amardeep Grewal. 2002. Probabilistic Question 
Answering on the Web. In Proceedings of the 11th 
World Wide Web Conference (WWW?2002). 
Ellen Riloff and Michael Thelen. 2000. A Rule-based 
Question Answering System for Reading 
Comprehension Test. ANLP/NAACL-2000 
Workshop on Reading Comprehension Tests as 
Evaluation for Computer-Based Language 
Understanding Systems. 
Eugene Charniak, Yasemin Altun, Rodrigo de Salvo 
Braz, Benjamin Garrett, Margaret Kosmala, Tomer 
Moscovich, Lixin Pang, Changhee Pyo, Ye Sun, 
Wei Wy, Zhongfa Yang, Shawn Zeller, and Lisa 
Zorn. 2000. Reading Comprehension Programs in a 
Statistical-Language-Processing Class. ANLP-
NAACL 2000 Workshop: Reading Comprehension 
Tests as Evaluation for Computer-Based Language 
Understanding Systems. 
Hwee Tou Ng, Leong Hwee Teo, Jennifer Lai Pheng 
Kwan. 2000. A Machine Learning Approach to 
Answering Questions for Reading Comprehension 
Tests.  Proceedings of the 2000 Joint SIGDAT 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing and Very Large Corpora 2000. 
Lynette Hirschman, Marc Light, Eric Breck, and John 
Burger. 1999. Deep Read: A Reading 
Comprehension System. Proceedings of the 37th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
Marc Light, Gideon S. Mann, Ellen Riloff and Eric 
Break. 1998. Analyses for Elucidating Current 
Question Answering Technology.  Natural 
Language Engineering. Vol. 7, No. 4.  
Martin M. Soubbotin, Sergei M. Soubbotin. 2002. Use 
of Patterns for Detection of Likely Answer Strings: 
A Systematic Approach. In Proceedings of the 
TREC-11 Conference. 2002. NIST, Gaithersburg, 
MD, 134-143. 
611
