Proceedings of the Third Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM 2014), pages 81?86,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23-24 2014.
Semantic Roles in Grammar Engineering
Wojciech Jaworski Adam Przepi?rkowski
Institute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sciences
ul. Jana Kazimierza 5, 02-668 Warszawa
wjaworski@mimuw.edu.pl adamp@ipipan.waw.pl
Abstract
The aim of this paper is to discuss difficul-
ties involved in adopting an existing sys-
tem of semantic roles in a grammar engi-
neering task. Two typical repertoires of se-
mantic roles are considered, namely, Verb-
Net and Sowa?s system. We report on ex-
periments showing the low inter-annotator
agreement when using such systems and
suggest that, at least in case of languages
with rich morphosyntax, an approximation
of semantic roles derived from syntactic
(grammatical functions) and morphosyn-
tactic (grammatical cases) features of ar-
guments may actually be beneficial for ap-
plications such as textual entailment.
1 Introduction
The modern notion of semantic ? or thematic ?
roles stems from the lexical semantic work of
Gruber 1965 (his thematic relations) and Fillmore
1968 (so-called deep cases), and was popularised
by Jackendoff 1972, but traces of this concept may
already be found in the notion of k?araka in the
writings of the Sanskrit grammarian P?an
.
ini (4th
century BC); see, e.g., Dowty 1991 for a histori-
cal introduction. Fillmore?s deep cases are Agen-
tive, Dative, Instrumental, Factive, Locative, Ob-
jective, as well as Benefactive, Time and Comi-
tative, but many other sets of semantic roles may
be found in the literature; for example, Dalrym-
ple 2001, p. 206, cites ? after Bresnan and Kan-
erva 1989 ? the following ranked list of thematic
roles: Agent, Benefactive, Recipient/Experiencer,
Instrument, Theme/Patient, Locative.
In Natural Language Processing (NLP),
one of the most popular repertoires of se-
mantic roles is that of VerbNet (Kipper et al.
2000; http://verbs.colorado.edu/
~mpalmer/projects/verbnet.html),
a valence lexicon of English based on Levin?s
(1993) classification of verbs according to the
diathesis phenomena they exhibit. The VerbNet
webpage states that it contains 3769 lemmata
divided into 5257 senses. There are 30 semantic
roles used in VerbNet 3.2,
1
including such stan-
dard roles as Agent, Beneficiary and Instrument,
but also more specialised roles such as Asset (for
quantities), Material (for stuff things are made
of) or Pivot (a theme more central to an event
than the theme expressed by another argument).
This resource is widely used in NLP, and it was
one of the main lexical resources behind the
Unified Lexicon of English (Crouch and King,
2005), a part of an LFG-based semantic parser
(Crouch and King, 2006) employed in tasks such
as question answering (Bobrow et al., 2007a) and
textual entailment (Bobrow et al., 2007b).
Another system of semantic roles considered
here is that developed by Sowa (2000; http:
//www.jfsowa.com/krbook/) for the pur-
pose of knowledge representation in artificial in-
telligence. There are 18 thematic roles proposed in
Sowa 2000, p. 508, including standard roles such
as Agent, Recipient and Instrument, but also 4
temporal and 4 spatial roles. Unlike in case of
VerbNet, there is no corpus or dictionary showing
numerous examples of the acutal use of such roles
? just a few examples are given (on pp. 506?510).
On the other hand, principles of assigning the-
matic roles to arguments may be formulated as a
decision tree, which should make the process of
semantic role labelling more efficient.
But why should we care about semantic roles at
all? From the NLP perspective, the main reason is
that they are useful in tasks approximating reason-
ing, such as textual entailment. Take the follow-
1
Table 2 on the VerbNet webpage lists 21 roles, of which
Actor is not actually used; the 10 roles which are used but not
listed there are Goal, Initial_Location (apart from Location),
Pivot, Reflexive, Result, Trajectory and Value, as well as Co-
Agent, Co-Patient and Co-Theme.
81
ing two Polish sentences, with their na?ve meaning
representations in (1a)?(2a):
(1) Anonim
anonymous
napisa?
wrote
artyku?
paper
na
for
*SEM.
*SEM
?An anonymous person wrote a paper for
*SEM.?
a. ?a?p article(a) ? person(p) ?
anonymous(p) ? write(p, a, starsem)
b. ?e?a?p article(a) ? person(p) ?
anonymous(p) ? write(e) ?
agent(e, p) ? patient(e, a) ?
destination(e, starsem)
(2) Anonim
anonymous
napisa?
wrote
artyku?.
paper
?An anonymous person wrote a paper.?
a. ?a?p article(a) ? person(p) ?
anonymous(p) ? write(p, a)
b. ?e?a?p article(a) ? person(p) ?
anonymous(p) ? write(e) ?
agent(e, p) ? patient(e, a)
While it is clear that (2) follows from (1), this
inference is not obvious in (1a)?(2a); making such
an inference would require an additional mean-
ing postulate relating the two write predicates of
different arities. In contrast, when dependents
of the predicate are represented via separate se-
mantic roles, as in the neo-Davidsonian (1b)?(2b)
(cf. Parsons 1990), the inference from (1b) to (2b)
is straightforward and follows from general in-
ference rules of first-order logic; nothing special
needs to be said about the writing events.
Also, building on examples from Bobrow
et al. 2007b, p. 20, once we know that flies is a
possible hyponym of travels, we may infer Ed
travels to Boston from Ed flies to Boston. Given
representations employing semantic roles, e.g.,
?efly(e)?agent(e, ed)?destination(e, boston)
and ?e travel(e) ? agent(e, ed) ?
destination(e, boston), all that is needed to
make this inference is a general inference schema
saying that, if P is a hypernym of Q, then
?eQ(e) ? P (e). A more complicated set of
inference schemata would be necessary if the
neo-Davidsonian approach involving semantic
roles were not adopted.
2 Problems with standard repertoires of
semantic roles
As noted by Bobrow et al. 2007b, p. 20, standard
VerbNet semantic roles may in some cases make
inference more difficult. For example, in Ed trav-
els to Boston, VerbNet identifies Ed as a Theme,
while in Ed flies to Boston ? as an Agent. The so-
lution adopted there was to use ?a backoff strategy
where fewer role names are used (by projecting
down role names to the smaller set)?.
In order to verify the usefulness of well-known
repertoires of semantic roles, we performed a us-
ability study of the two sets of semantic roles de-
scribed above. The aim of this study was to es-
timate how difficult it would be to create a cor-
pus of sentences with verbs? arguments annotated
with such semantic roles. For this purpose, 37
verbs were selected more or less at random and
843 instances of arguments of these verbs (in 393
sentences, but only one verb was considered in
each sentence) were identified in a corpus. In two
experiments, the same 7 human annotators were
asked to label these arguments with VerbNet and
with Sowa?s semantic roles.
In both cases interannotator agreement (IAA)
was below our expectations, given the fact that
VerbNet comes with short descriptions of seman-
tic roles and a corpus of illustrative examples, and
that Sowa?s classification could be (and was for
this experiment) formalised as a decision tree. For
VerbNet roles, Fleiss?s ? (called Fleiss?s Multi-
pi in Artstein and Poesio 2008, as it is actually
a generalisation of Scott?s pi rather than Cohen?s
?) is equal to 0.617, and for Sowa?s system it
is a little higher, 0.648. According to the com-
mon wisdom (reflected in Wikipedia?s entry for
?Fleiss? kappa?), values between 0.41 and 0.60 re-
flect moderate agreement and between 0.61 and
0.80 ? substantial agreement. Hence, the current
results could be interpreted as moderately sub-
stantial agreement. However, Artstein and Poesio
2008, p. 591, question this received wisdom and
state that ?only values above 0.8 ensured an anno-
tation of reasonable quality?.
This opinion is confirmed by the more detailed
analysis of the distribution of (dis)agreement pro-
vided in Tab. 1. The top table gives the number
of arguments for which the most commonly as-
signed Sowa?s role was assigned by n annotators
(n ranges from 2 to 7; not from 1, as there were no
arguments that would be assigned 7 different roles
by the 7 annotators) and the most commonly as-
signed VerbNet role was assigned bym annotators
(m also ranges from 2 to 7). For example, the cell
in the row labelled 7 and in the column labelled
82
Ve r bN e t
2 3 4 5 6 7
2 6 8 3 0 0 0 17
S 3 8 39 39 17 25 3 131
o 4 2 26 49 37 20 5 139
w 5 4 11 48 45 11 15 134
a 6 1 9 18 16 35 20 99
7 0 3 11 47 52 210 323
21 96 168 162 143 253 843
Ve r bN e t
2 3 4 5 6 7
2 0.71% 0.95% 0.36% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 2.02%
S 3 0.95% 4.63% 4.63% 2.02% 2.97% 0.36% 15.54%
o 4 0.24% 3.08% 5.81% 4.39% 2.37% 0.59% 16.49%
w 5 0.47% 1.30% 5.69% 5.34% 1.30% 1.78% 15.90%
a 6 0.12% 1.07% 2.14% 1.90% 4.15% 2.37% 11.74%
7 0.00% 0.36% 1.30% 5.58% 6.17% 24.91% 38.32%
2.49% 11.39% 19.93% 19.22% 16.96% 30.01% 100.00%
Table 1: Interannotator agreement rate for VerbNet and Sowa role systems; the top table gives numbers
of arguments, the bottom table gives normalised percentages
6 contains the information that 52 arguments were
such that all annotators agreed on Sowa?s role and
6 agreed on a VerbNet role. The final row and
the final column contain the usual marginals; e.g.,
out of 843 arguments, in case of Sowa?s system
253 arguments were annotated unanimously, and
in case of VerbNet roles ? 323 arguments. The
lower table gives the same information normalised
to percentages. Note that for a significant percent
of examples (almost 18% in case of Sowa?s sys-
tem and almost 14% in case of VerbNet) there is
no majority decision and that the concentration of
examples around the diagonal means that the lack
of consensus is largely independent of the choice
of the role system.
Some of the most difficult cases were discussed
with annotators and the conclusion reached was
that there are two main reasons for the low IAA:
numerous cases where more than one role seems
to be suitable for a given argument and cases
where there is no suitable role at all. (In fact, as
in case of LECZY
?
C ?treat, cure? discussed below, it
is sometimes difficult to distinguish these two rea-
sons: more than one role seems suitable because
none is clearly right.)
The first situation is caused by the fact that a
distinction between the roles is often highly sub-
jective; for example, when a doctor is treating a
girl, is (s)he causing a structural change? The an-
swer to this question determines the distinction be-
tween Patient and Theme in Sowa?s system. It
could be ?no? when the doctor only prescribes
some medicines, but it could be ?yes? when (s)he
operates her. Furthermore, some emphasis is put
on volitionality in Sowa?s system: the initiatior of
an action can be either Agent or Effector, depend-
ing on whether (s)he causes the action voluntarily
or not ? something that is often difficult to decide
even when a context of a sentence is given.
On the other hand, the Agent role is extended
in VerbNet to ?internally controlled subjects such
as forces and machines?, but it is easy to confuse
this role with Theme. For example, in The horse
jumped over the fence, the horse is ? somewhat
counterintuitively ? marked as Theme, as it must
bear the same role as in Tom jumped the horse over
the fence, where the Agent role is already taken by
Tom. Other commonly confused pairs are Stim-
ulus and Theme, Topic and Theme, and Patient
and Theme. Moreover, there are cases where more
than one role genuinely (not as a result of con-
fusion) matches a given argument. For example,
in the Polish sentence Ona ?aduje sie? w foremke?,
kt?ra? kto?s jej podsuna?? ?She squeezes/loads her-
self into a/the mould that somebody offered her?,
the argument w foremke? ?into mould? can be rea-
83
sonably marked as both: a spatial Destination and
a functional Result.
The other common reason for interannotator
disagreement is the lack of a suitable role. For ex-
ample, returning to the sentence A doctor is treat-
ing a girl, it seems that neither of the two systems
has an obvious role for the person being cured
(hence the impression of potential suitability of a
number of roles). In Polish sentences involving the
verb LECZY
?
C ?treat, cure?, the object of treatment
was variously marked as Agent, Beneficiary, Pa-
tient or Source when using VerbNet roles, and as
Agent, Beneficiary, Experiencer, Patient, Recipi-
ent or Result when using Sowa?s system. Thus,
in Zwierze? jest leczone z tych chor?b ?An animal
is treated for these diseases?, in the VerbNet ex-
periment the animal was marked as Beneficiary
(by 3 annotators), as Patient (?3) and as Source
(?1), and in the Sowa experiment ? as Benefi-
ciary (?2), as Patient (?2), as Recipient (?2) and
as Result (?1). Similarly, for Ma?
?
z leczy? sie? na
serce, lit. ?Husband treated himself for his heart?,
the husband was annotated as Agent (?2), Benefi-
ciary (?2), Patient (?2) and Source (?1) when us-
ing VerbNet roles and as Agent (?1), Beneficiary
(?2), Experiencer (?1), Patient (?2) and Recipi-
ent (?1) when using Sowa?s roles.
Another major problem with the attempt to use
these sets of semantic roles was a high percentage
of verb occurrences with multiple arguments as-
signed the same semantic role. In case of Sowa?s
system 4.36% of sentences had this problem on
the average (the raw numbers for the 7 annotators
are: 2, 5, 8, 9, 17, 31, 34 out of 347 sentences with
no coordination of unlikes in argument positions;
2
note the surprisingly large deviation) and in case
of VerbNet ? 2.47% sentences were so affected (7,
7, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12).
On the basis of these experiments, as well as
various remarks in the literature (see, e.g., the ref-
erence to Bobrow et al. 2007b at the beginning
of this section), we conclude that semantic role
systems such as VerbNet or Sowa?s are perhaps
not really well-suited for the grammar engineer-
ing task ? and certainly not worth the time, effort
2
In case of arguments realised as a coordination of un-
likes, e.g., a nominal phrase and a sentential clause, anno-
tators routinely assigned distinct semantic roles to different
conjuncts, so that one argument received a number of differ-
ent roles (from the same annotator) and, consequently, there
were many more duplicates in the remaining 393?347 = 46
sentences than in the 347 sentences free from coordination of
unlikes considered here.
and money needed to construct reasonably-sized
corpora annotated with them ? and that other ap-
proaches must be explored.
3 Syntactic approximation of semantic
roles
In Jaworski and Przepi?rkowski 2014 we propose
to define ?semantic roles? on the basis of mor-
phosyntactic information, including morpholog-
ical cases, following the Slavic linguistic tradi-
tion stemming from the work of Roman Jakob-
son (see, e.g., Jakobson 1971a,b). In particular,
since the broader context of the work reported here
is the development of a syntactico-semantic LFG
(Lexical-Functional Grammar; Bresnan 2001;
Dalrymple 2001) parser for Polish, we build on
the usual LFG approach of obtaining semantic
representations on the basis of f-structures, i.e.,
non-tree-configurational syntactic representations
(as opposed to more surfacy tree-configurational
c-structures) containing information about predi-
cates, grammatical functions and morphosyntac-
tic features; this so-called description-by-analysis
(DBA) approach has been adopted for German
(Frank and Erk, 2004; Frank and Semeck?, 2004;
Frank, 2004), English (Crouch and King, 2006)
and Japanese (Umemoto, 2006).
In the usual DBA approach, semantic roles are
added to the resulting representations on the ba-
sis of semantic dictionaries external to LFG gram-
mars (Frank and Semeck?, 2004; Frank, 2004;
Crouch and King, 2005, 2006). When such
FrameNet- or VerbNet-like dictionaries are not
available, grammatical function names (subject,
object, etc.) are used instead of semantic roles
(Umemoto, 2006). Unfortunately, this latter ap-
proach is detrimental for tasks such as textual en-
tailment, as LFG grammatical functions represent
the surface relations, so, e.g., a passivised (deep)
object bears the grammatical function of (surface)
subject. Other diathesis phenomena also result in
different grammatical functions assigned to argu-
ments standing in the same semantic relation to the
verb, e.g., the recipient of the verb GIVE will nor-
mally be assigned a different grammatical function
depending on whether it is realised as an NP (as in
John gave Mary a book) or as a PP (John gave a
book to Mary).
Although currently no reasonably-sized dictio-
naries of Polish containing semantic role informa-
tion are available, we do not resort to grammatical
84
functions as names of semantic roles, but rather
guess approximations of semantic roles on the ba-
sis of grammatical functions and morphosyntac-
tic features. For example, subjects of active verbs
are marked as R0 (the ?semantic role? approxi-
mating the Agent), but subjects of passsive verbs,
as well as objects of active verbs, are marked as
R1 (roughly, the Undergoer, i.e., Patient, Theme
or Product).
3
Apart from grammatical functions
and the voice value of the verb, also morphosyn-
tactic features of arguments are taken into ac-
count, especially, for PP arguments, the preposi-
tion lemma and the grammatical case it governs.
So, for example, both the OBJ-TH (dative NP) ar-
guments and certain OBL (PP) arguments, e.g.,
those headed by the preposition DLA ?for?, are
translated into the R2 ?semantic role?, which ap-
proximates the Beneficiary and Recipient seman-
tic roles. This results in the same semantic repre-
sentations of Papkin upolowa? dla Klary krokodyla
?Papkin.NOM hunted a crocodile.ACC for Klara?,
lit. ?Papkin hunted for Klara crocodile?, and Pap-
kin upolowa? Klarze krokodyla, lit. ?Papkin.NOM
hunted Klara.DAT crocodile.ACC?.
The advantage of this morphosyntax-based ap-
proach is that it is fully deterministic (only one
?semantic role? may be assigned to a given argu-
ment) and that it ensures high uniqueness of any
?semantic role? in the set of arguments of any verb
(only 6 of the 347 sentences considered above, i.e.,
1.73%, have the same ?semantic role? asigned to a
couple of arguments, compared with 2.47% and
4.36% in the experiments described in this paper;
see Jaworski and Przepi?rkowski 2014 for addi-
tional data). The disadvantage is that sometimes
wrong decisions are made; for example, OBL ar-
guments of type Z[inst] ?with? may have one of
at least three meanings: Perlative (R7), Thematic
(R1) and Co-agentive (R0); in fact, the sentence
Zr?b z nim porza?dek, lit. ?do with him order?, is
ambiguous between the last two and may mean ei-
ther ?Deal with him? (R1) or ?Clean up with him?
(R0). However, the procedure will always assign
only one of these ?roles? to such Z[inst] arguments
(currently R7).
3
We use symbols such as R0 or R1 instead of more mean-
ingful names in order to constantly remind ourselves that we
are dealing with approximations of true semantic roles; this
also explains scare quotes in the term ?semantic role? when
used in this approximative sense.
4 Conclusions
When developing a semantic parser, it makes
sense to aim at neo-Davidsonian representations
with semantic roles relating arguments to events,
as such representations facilitate textual entail-
ment and similar tasks. In this paper we reported
on experiments which show that the practical us-
ability of two popular repertoires of semantic roles
in grammar engineering is limited: as the IAA
is low, systems trained on corpora annotated with
such semantic roles are bound to be inconsistent,
limiting the usefulness of resulting semantic rep-
resentations in such tasks. In case of a language
that does not have a resouce such as VerbNet, the
question arises then whether it makes sense to in-
vest considerable time and effort into creating it.
In this and the accompanying paper Jaworski
and Przepi?rkowski 2014 we suggest an answer in
the negative and propose to approximate seman-
tic roles on the basis of syntactic and morphosyn-
tactic information. Admittedly, this proposal is
currently rather programmatic, as it is supported
only with anectodal evidence. It seems plausible
that the usefulness of resulting representations for
textual entailment should be comparable to ? or
maybe even better than ? that of semantic rep-
resentations produced by semantic role labellers
trained on rather inconsistently annotated data, but
this should be quantified by further experiments.
4
If this hypothesis turns out to be true, however,
the method we propose has the clear advantage of
being overwhelmingly cheaper: instead of many
person-years of building a resource such as Verb-
Net (and then training a role labeller, etc.), a cou-
ple of days of a skilled researcher are required to
define and test reasonable translations from (mor-
pho)syntax to ?semantic roles?.
References
Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-
Coder Agreement for Computational Linguis-
tics. Computational Linguistics 34(4), 555?596.
Daniel G. Bobrow, Bob Cheslow, Cleo Condo-
ravdi, Lauri Karttunen, Tracy Holloway King,
4
To the best of our knowledge, no testing data for such
tasks are available for Polish and Polish has never been in-
cluded in evaluation initiatives of this kind. The approach de-
scribed here is currently employed in a large-scale grammar
development effort carried out at the Institute of Computer
Science, Polish Academy of Sciences, in connection with the
CLARIN-PL Research Infrastructure, and we hope to further
report on its usefulness in the future.
85
Rowan Nairn, Valeria de Paiva, Charlotte Price,
and Annie Zaenen. 2007a. PARC?s Bridge and
Question Answering System. In Proceedings of
the GEAF07 Workshop, pages 26?45.
Daniel G. Bobrow, Cleo Condoravdi, Richard
Crouch, Valeria de Paiva, Lauri Karttunen,
Tracy Holloway King, Rowan Nairn, Charlotte
Price, and Annie Zaenen. 2007b. Precision-
focused textual inference. In Proceedings of the
ACL?PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment
and Paraphrasing at ACL 2007, pages 16?21.
Joan Bresnan. 2001. Lexical-Functional Syntax.
Blackwell Textbooks in Linguistics, Malden,
MA: Blackwell.
Joan Bresnan and Jonni M. Kanerva. 1989. Loca-
tive inversion in Chiche ?wa: A case study of fac-
torization in grammar. Linguistic Inquiry 20(1),
1?50.
Dick Crouch and Tracy Holloway King. 2005.
Unifying Lexical Resources. In Proceedings of
the Interdisciplinary Workshop on the Identifi-
cation and Representation of Verb Features and
Verb Classes.
Dick Crouch and Tracy Holloway King. 2006.
Semantics via f-structure rewriting. In Miriam
Butt and Tracy Holloway King (eds.), The Pro-
ceedings of the LFG?06 Conference, Universit?t
Konstanz, Germany: CSLI Publications.
Mary Dalrymple. 2001. Lexical Functional Gram-
mar. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
David Dowty. 1991. Thematic Proto-roles and Ar-
gument Selection. Language 67(3), 547?619.
Charles J. Fillmore. 1968. The Case for Case. In
Emmon Bach and Robert T. Harms (eds.), Uni-
versals in Linguistic Theory, pages 1?88, New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Anette Frank. 2004. Generalisations over Corpus-
induced Frame Assignment Rules. In Charles
Fillmore, Manfred Pinkal, Collin Baker and Ka-
trin Erk (eds.), Proceedings of the LREC 2004
Workshop on Building Lexical Resources from
Semantically Annotated Corpora, pages 31?38,
ELRA, Lisbon.
Anette Frank and Katrin Erk. 2004. Towards
an LFG Syntax-Semantics Interface for Frame
Semantics Annotation. In Alexander Gelbukh
(ed.), Computational Linguistics and Intelligent
Text Processing (CICLing 2004), volume 2945
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 1?
12, Heidelberg: Springer.
Anette Frank and Ji
?
r? Semeck?. 2004. Corpus-
based Induction of an LFG Syntax-Semantics
Interface for Frame Semantic Processing. In Sil-
via Hansen-Schirra, Stefan Oepen and Hans
Uszkoreit (eds.), Proceedings of the 5th In-
ternational Workshop on Linguistically Inter-
preted Corpora at COLING 2004, Geneva.
Jeffrey Gruber. 1965. Studies in Lexical Relations.
Ph. D.thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology.
Ray Jackendoff. 1972. Semantic Interpretation in
Generative Grammar. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.
Roman O. Jakobson. 1971a. Beitrag zur allge-
meinen Kasuslehre. Gesamtbedeutungen der
russischen Kasus. In Selected Writings II, pages
23?71, The Hague: Mouton.
Roman O. Jakobson. 1971b. Morfologi
?
ceskie
nabljudenija nad slavjanskim skloneniem. In
Selected Writings II, pages 154?183, The
Hague: Mouton.
Wojciech Jaworski and Adam Przepi?rkowski.
2014. Syntactic Approximation of Semantic
Roles. In Adam Przepi?rkowski and Maciej
Ogrodniczuk (eds.), Advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing: Proceedings of the 9th In-
ternational Conference on NLP, PolTAL 2014,
Warsaw, Poland, September 17?19, 2014, vol-
ume 8686 of Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelli-
gence, Heidelberg: Springer.
Karin Kipper, Hoa Trang Dang, William Schuler,
and Martha Palmer. 2000. Building a class-
based verb lexicon using TAGs. In Proceedings
of TAG+5 Fifth International Workshop on Tree
Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms.
Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alter-
nations: A Preliminary Investigation. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Terence Parsons. 1990. Events in the Semantics of
English: A Study in Subatomic Semantics. Cam-
bridge, MA: The MIT Press.
John F. Sowa. 2000. Knowledge Representa-
tion: Logical, Philosophical, and Computa-
tional Foundations. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks
Cole Publishing Co.
Hiroshi Umemoto. 2006. Implementing a
Japanese Semantic Parser Based on Glue
Approach. In Proceedings of the 20th Pacific
Asia Conference on Language, Information
and Computation, pages 418?425, Huazhong
Normal University, Wuhan, China: Tsinghua
University Press.
86
Proceedings of the Workshop on Lexical and Grammatical Resources for Language Processing, pages 83?91,
Coling 2014, Dublin, Ireland, August 24 2014.
Extended phraseological information in a valence dictionary
for NLP applications
Adam Przepi?rkowski, El?bieta Hajnicz, Agnieszka Patejuk, Marcin Woli?ski
Institute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sciences
ul. Jana Kazimierza 5, 01-248 Warszawa
{adamp,hajnicz,aep,wolinski}@ipipan.waw.pl
Abstract
The aim of this paper is to propose a far-reaching extension of the phraseological component of
a valence dictionary for Polish. The dictionary is the basis of two different parsers of Polish; its
format has been designed so as to maximise the readability of the information it contains and its
re-applicability. We believe that the extension proposed here follows this approach and, hence,
may be an inspiration in the design of valence dictionaries for other languages.
1 Introduction
The starting point of the work reported here is Walenty, a valence dictionary for Polish described in
Przepi?rkowski et al. 2014 and available fromhttp://zil.ipipan.waw.pl/Walenty (see ?1.1).
Walenty contains some valence schemata for verbal idioms; e.g., one of the schemata for ku? ?forge? says
that it combines with a nominal subject, a nominal object and a prepositional phrase consisting of the
preposition na ?on? and the accusative singular form of the noun pami?? ?memory? ? this represents the
idiom kto? kuje co? na pami?? ?somebody rote learns something?, lit. ?somebody forges something onto
memory?. The current formalism handles various kinds of verbal phraseological constructions (cf. ?1.2),
but also has clear limitations. For example, in Polish one may welcome somebody ?with arms wide
open?, and the current formalism makes it possible to express the ?welcome with arms + modifier? part,
but not the specifics of the allowed modifier, namely, that it is the adjective meaning ?open?, possibly
itself modified by an intensifying adverb (cf. ?1.3 for details).
The aim of this paper is to propose a new subformalism of Walenty for describing phraseological
valence schemata (see ?2). To the best of our knowledge, Walenty is already rather unique among valence
dictionaries for various languages in paying so much attention to phraseological constructions (among its
other rare or unique features), and at the same time it is practically employed in parsing by two different
parsers of Polish (cf. ?1.1). We believe that these traits make the current proposal to further extend the
underlying formalism potentially interesting to the wider audience.
1.1 Walenty
Walenty is a valence dictionary which is meant to be both human- and machine-readable; in particular,
it is being employed by two parsers of Polish, ?wigra (an implementation of a Definite Clause Grammar
description of fragments of Polish syntax; Woli?ski 2004) and POLFIE (an implementation of a Lexical
Functional Grammar description of fragments of Polish; Patejuk and Przepi?rkowski 2012). As these
parsers are based on two rather different linguistic approaches, the valence dictionary must be sufficiently
expressive to accommodate for the needs of both ? and perhaps other to come.
Each verb is assigned a number of valence schemata
1
and each schema is a set of argument specifica-
tions. Walenty is explicit about what counts as an argument: if two morphosyntactically different phrases
may occur coordinated in an argument position, they are taken to be different realisations of the same
argument. This is exemplified in the following schema for t?umaczy? ?explain?, as in Musia?em im t?u-
maczy? najprostsze zasady i dlaczego trzeba je stosowa? ?I had to explain them the most basic principles
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence. Page numbers and proceedings
footer are added by the organisers. Licence details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
1
As long as the dictionary contains mostly morphosyntactic information, we avoid using the term valence frame.
83
and why they should be adhered to? involving a coordinated phrase in the object position consisting of
an NP (najprostsze zasady ?the most basic principles?) and an interrogative clause (dlaczego trzeba je
stosowa? ?why they should be adhered to?; marked here as cp(int)).
subj{np(str)} + obj{np(str); cp(int)} + {np(dat)}
There are three argument positions (separated by +) given in this schema: a subject, an object and an
additional argument whose grammatical function is not specified but whose morphosyntactic realisation
is described as a dative nominal phrase (np(dat)). The subject is also described as a nominal phrase
(NP), but its case is specified as structural, i.e., potentially depending on the syntactic context. In Polish,
such subjects are normally nominative, but ? according to some approaches ? they bear the accusative
case when they are realised as numeral phrases of certain type. Similarly, the nominal realisation of the
object is specified as structural, as it normally occurs in the accusative, unless it is in the scope of verbal
negation, in which case it bears the genitive. Crucially, though, the object is specified here not just as an
NP, but also alternatively as an interrogative (int) clausal argument (cp, for complementiser phrase). A
parser may take this information into account and properly analyse a sentence with unlike coordination
like the one involving t?umaczy? ?explain?, given in the previous paragraph.
Other features of the formalism of Walenty worth mentioning here, and described in more detail in
Przepi?rkowski et al. 2014, are: the representation of control and raising (cf. Landau 2013 and references
therein), specification of semantically defined arguments (e.g., locative, temporal and manner), with their
possible morphosyntactic realisations defined externally (once for the whole dictionary), handling of
various kinds of pronominal arguments, and other types of non-morphological case specifications (apart
from the structural case). While there is no explicit semantic information in the dictionary at the moment
(apart from such semantically defined arguments and control information), i.e., no subdivision of verbal
lemmata into senses and no semantic role information, Walenty is currently being extended to include
such a semantic layer.
1.2 Phraseology in Walenty
Two features of the Walenty formalism deal with multi-word expresssions. The simpler one is concerned
with complex prepositions such as w kwestii ?in (some) matter?, na temat ?on (some) topic?, z powodu
?because of? (lit. ?of reason?), etc. Unlike in case of usual prepositional phrases, parameterised with the
preposition lemma and the grammatical case it governs (e.g., prepnp(z,inst) for a prepositional
phrase headed by z ?with? and taking an instrumental NP), such complex prepositions seem to uniformly
govern the genitive case, so explicit case information is not needed here. The following schema, for
rozpacza? (z powodu czego?) ?lament (because of something)?, illustrates this type of arguments:
subj{np(str)} + {comprepnp(z powodu)}
Other, more clearly idiomatic arguments are currently specified as fixed, lexnp and preplexnp.
Phrases of type fixed again have just one parameter: the exact orthographic realisation of the phrase;
see the following schema for zbi? ?beat? (as in He beat them to a pulp), with na kwa?ne jab?ko meaning
literally ?into sour apple?:
subj{np(str)} + obj{np(str)} + {fixed(?na kwa?ne jab?ko?)}
A more interesting type is lexnp with four parameters indicating the case of the NP, its grammatical
number, the lemma of the head, and the modifiability pattern. The following schema for p?yn?? ?flow?
(as in Hot blood flows in his veins), where the subject is a structurally-cased NP, as usual, but necessarily
headed by krew ?blood? in the singular, and the NP may contain modifiers (cf. atr), illustrates this:
subj{lexnp(str,sg,?krew?,atr)} + {preplexnp(w,loc,pl,??y?a?,ratr)}
The final lexical argument type is preplexnp, which contains an additional (initial) parameter,
namely the preposition. In the above schema, the second argument is a PP headed by the preposition
w ?in? combining with a locative NP in the plural. The NP must be headed by ?y?a ?vein? and must
contain a possessive modifier (ratr stands for ?required attribute?). So this schema covers examples
84
such as Gor?ca krew p?ynie w jego ?y?ach ?Hot blood flows in his veins?, but ? correctly ? not the non-
phraseological Gor?ca krew p?ynie w ?y?ach (no modifier of ?veins?) or Gor?ca krew p?ynie w jego ?yle
(singular ?vein?).
The third possible value of the modifiability parameter is natr, for lexicalised arguments that cannot
involve modification. The following schema for zmarzn?? ?get cold, freeze? handles the idiom zmarzn??
na ko?? ?freeze to the marrow? (lit. ?freeze to (the) bone?); note that ko?? ?bone? cannot be modified here,
as illustrated by the infelicitous Zmarz? na go??/tward? ko?? ?(He) froze to (the) naked/hard bone?:
subj{np(str)} + {preplexnp(na,acc,sg,?ko???,natr)}
Finally, batr (?bound attribute?), indicates that the NP must involve a possessive modifier meaning
?self? or ?(one?s) own?, i.e., a form of either sw?j or w?asny. For example, zobaczy? ?see? is involved in
an idiom meaning ?to see with one?s own eyes?, as in Na w?asne oczy zobaczy?em jej u?miech i to, ?e nie
by?a wcale taka stara ?With my own eyes I saw her smile and that she wasn?t so old at all?:
2
subj{np(str)} + {np(str); ncp(str,?e)} +
{preplexnp(na,acc,pl,?oko?,batr)}
Wewill see below that a more expressive ? and more general ? scheme for the representation of phrase-
ological valence is needed.
1.3 Limitations
A number of problems were identified with the formalism of Walenty as it was described in
Przepi?rkowski et al. 2014 and summarised above. To start with the simplest cases, it is a simplification to
say that complex prepositions (comprepnp above) are internally unanalysable and always combine with
genitive NPs. For example, while z powodu ?because of? cannot occur without any additional dependents,
it is sufficient for the nominal form powodu ?reason? to be modified by an appropriate adjectival form for
the whole expression to be complete, e.g., z tego powodu ?because of this?, lit. ?of this reason?, z wa?nego
powodu lit. ?of important reason?, etc. This is not a general feature of such complex prepositions, though.
For example, w trakcie ?during?, lit. ?in (the) course?, must combine with a genitive NP and the nominal
form trakcie ?course? cannot be modified by an adjective (*w tym trakcie lit. ?in this course?).
Second, it is useful for parsers to have more grammatical information about lexically fixed arguments;
for example, fixed(?na kwa?ne jab?ko?) clearly has the internal structure of a prepositional
phrase.
Third, the current formalism allows for only two types of phraseological phrases to be specified in
more detail: nominal (lexnp) and prepositional (preplexnp). While not so frequent, other kinds
of idiomatic arguments also occur, including adjectival, adverbial and infinitival. For example, one of
the idiomatic uses of mie? ?have? is mie? przechlapane ?be in the doghouse, be in deep shit?, lit. ?have
(it) screwed?, with an appropriate form of the adjective przechlapany ?screwed?. Similarly, the verb
dysze? ?pant? may be argued to optionally require the adverb ledwo ?barely?, as in ledwo dysze? ?hardly
breathe?. Also, k?a?? si? ?lie down? typically occurs with the infinitival form of spa? ?sleep?. The current
formalism may describe such requirements only using the rather inflexible fixed notation.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, modification possibilities within phraseological ar-
guments are far richer than the four symbols atr, natr, ratr and batr could repre-
sent. One case in point is the idiom already mentioned in ?1, namely, wita? kogo? z ot-
wartymi ramionami ?welcome somebody with open arms?. The best representation of the id-
iomatic argument realisation z otwartymi ramionami ?with open arms? is either fixed(?z
otwartymi ramionami?) or preplexnp(z,inst,pl,?rami??,atr) or perhaps
preplexnp(z,inst,pl,?rami??,ratr). The first of these does not allow for any modi-
fication, so it does not cover z szeroko otwartymi ramionami ?with wide open arms?, etc. The second
mentions the possibility of modifiers of ramionami (which is the instrumental plural form of the noun
rami? ?arm?), but does not constrain this possibility to (a class of) agreeing adjectives, so it would also
cover the non-phraseological z otwartymi ramionami Tomka ?with Tomek?s open arms?, lit. ?with open
2
The schema is split into two lines solely for typographic reasons.
85
arms Tomek.gen?. Also, it makes such modification optional, while wita? kogo? z ramionami ?welcome
somebody with arms? is at best non-phraseological. Finally, the third possibility makes modification
obligatory, but the current meaning of ratr is (for good reasons) constrained to possessive modifiers,
so it again does not cover the case at hand, where adjectival modification is present.
2 Extended phraseological valence
One more objection against the current subformalism for phraseological arguments, apart from those
adduced in the preceding subsection, is that it contains some ad hoc notation, whose meaning is not
transparent. The best examples of this are ratr (a possessive modifier, not just any modifier) and batr
(the modifier is a form of sw?j ?self?s? or w?asny ?own?). In contrast, we propose a formalism which is
not only more expressive, so as to deal with the limitations mentioned in ?1.3, but also more transparent.
As we will see below, the price to pay for this more expressive and principled formalism is that some
argument specifications become more complex.
2.1 Categories of phraseological arguments
The first proposed generalisation is to replace category-specific symbols lexnp and preplexnp
with the single lex, whose first parameter indicates the category of the phraseological argu-
ment. For example, the lexnp(str,sg,?krew?,atr) specification given above could be re-
placed by lex(np(str),sg,?krew?,atr), and preplexnp(w,loc,pl,??y?a?,ratr) ?
by lex(prepnp(w,loc),pl,??y?a?,ratr). Note that the first parameter of lex expresses
more than just the grammatical category of the argument ? it is the same specification of the morphosyn-
tactic realisation ? here, np(str) and prepnp(w,loc) ? as used for non-phraseological arguments.
Any (non-lexical, i.e., not lex, etc.) morphosyntactic specification used in Walenty could be used here,
including also adjectival, adverbial and infinitival.
For example, for mie? przechlapane ?be in the doghouse, be in deep shit? mentioned above, where
the adjective przechlapany must occur in the singular neuter accusative and may be modified by an
intensifying adverb (mie? kompletnie przechlapane lit. ?have (it) completely screwed?), the appropriate
argument realisation could be described as: lex(adjp(acc),n,sg,?przechlapany?,atr).
Similarly, the adverb ledwo ?barely? combining with forms of dysze? ?pant? could be described
as lex(advp(misc),?ledwo?,natr) (recycling the existing morphosyntactic specification
advp(misc) for true adverbial phrases), and the infinitival form of spa? ?sleep? co-occurring with
k?a?? si? ?lie down? ? as lex(infp(imperf),?spa??,natr) (again, reusing the standard nota-
tion for imperfective infinitival phrases, infp(imperf)).
2.2 Modification patterns
The most profound generalisation concerns, however, the specification of modification patterns within
idiomatic arguments. We propose to retain three basic indicators, namely, natr (no modification possi-
ble), atr (modification possible) and ratr (modification required), but ? in the case of the last two ?
additional information must be given specifying the kind of modification that is allowed or required. Ad-
ditionally, atr1 and ratr1 are envisaged as variants of atr and ratr with the additional constraint
that at most one such modifier may be present.
3
For example, instead of preplexnp(z,inst,pl,?rami??,ratr) for z otwartymi ramionami
?with open arms?, the following argument specification could be given, explicitly mentioning that the only
possible modifier of ramionami ?arms? is an adjectival phrase (and not, say, a genitive modifier):
4
{lex(prepnp(z,inst),pl,?rami??,ratr({adjp(agr)}))}
Note that morphosyntactic specifications of possible or required modifiers are enclosed in curly brack-
ets, just as in case of direct arguments of verbs, and for the same reason: sometimes multiple morphosyn-
tactic realisations are possible and may be coordinated, which indicates that they occupy the same syntac-
tic position. An example of this is the expression komu? cierpnie sk?ra na my?l o czym? ?something makes
3
In case of ratr, the obligatoriness of modifier together with this constraint mean that exactly one modifier must occur.
4
The symbol agr indicates agreeing case here.
86
somebody?s flesh creep?, lit. ?somebody.dat creeps skin.nom on (the) thought.acc about something.loc?.
The argument na my?l o czym? ?on (the) thought of something? may be realised in at least three ways: as a
prepositional phrase as here (prepnp(o,loc)), as a finite clause introduced by the complementiser ?e
?that? (cp(?e); e.g., komu? cierpnie sk?ra na my?l, ?e (to si? sta?o) lit. ?somebody.dat creeps skin.nom
on (the) thought.acc that (this happened.refl)?), or as a so-called correlative phrase which shares features
of the first two realisations, e.g., na my?l o tym, ?e (to si? sta?o) lit. ?on (the) thought about this.loc that
(this happened.refl)? (prepncp(o,loc,?e)). Such a disjunctively specified modification possibility
may be expressed as follows (with the line broken for typographic reasons and indented for readability):
{lex(prepnp(na,acc),sg,?my?l?,
ratr({prepnp(o,loc);cp(?e);prepncp(o,loc,?e)}))}
This specification is still incomplete: the noun my?l may also be modified by an adjectival form, e.g.,
the adjectival pronoun t?, as in sk?ra mi cierpnie na t? my?l ?this thought makes my flesh creep?, lit.
?skin.nom me.dat creeps on this.acc thought.acc?. This means that adjp(agr) must be added as a
possible modifier type. But the status of this modifier type is different than the three modifier types
given above: no two of these three phrases can co-occur unless they are coordinated, but any of them
can co-occur (and cannot be coordinated) with adjp(agr), e.g., sk?ra mi cierpnie na sam? my?l o tym
?the sheer thought makes my flesh creep?, lit. ?skin.nom me.dat creeps on sheer.acc thought.acc about
this.loc?. Hence, the two kinds of modification possibilities are analogous to two different arguments
(here, actually, dependents) of a predicate occupying different syntactic positions, and the same notation
could be used to specify them, with the + symbol:
{lex(prepnp(na,acc),sg,?my?l?,
ratr({prepnp(o,loc);cp(?e);prepncp(o,loc,?e)} + {adjp(agr)}))}
Such argument specifications involving lexmay get even more complex due to the fact that lexmay
occur inside modification specifications of another lex, as in the following description of arguments
such as z otwartymi ramionami ?with open arms?, more accurate than the one given at the beginning of
this subsection:
{lex(prepnp(z,inst),pl,?rami??,
ratr({lex(adjp(agr),agr,agr,?otwarty?,natr)}))}
Note that lex(adjp(agr),agr,agr,?otwarty?,natr) replaces adjp(agr) within ratr
and it specifies that not just any agreeing adjective phrase may modify the nominal form r?kami ?arms?,
but only the simple adjective phrase consisting of an agreeing form of otwarty ?open? does.
5
As discussed above, this is still not a complete description of the range of possibilities here, as the
adjective otwartymi ?open? may itself be modified (contrary to the natr specification above), namely, by
the adverb szeroko ?wide?. A closer approximation is given below:
6
{lex(prepnp(z,inst),pl,?rami??,
ratr({lex(adjp(agr),agr,agr,?otwarty?,
atr({lex(advp(misc),?szeroko?,natr)}))}))}
Note that this extension, with the possibility of lex recursion (of the centre-embedding type; Chomsky
1959), makes the language of schema specifications properly context-free.
2.3 Complex prepositions and fixed arguments
As noted in ?1.3 above, the notation comprep(...) (e.g., comprepnp(z powodu)) is not suffi-
cient to model various combinatory properties of complex prepositions: some of them (e.g., z powodu
?because of?) may combine with a genitive NP or an agreeing adjective phrase, others (e.g., w trakcie
?during?) may only co-occur with an NP, etc. We propose to reuse the lex notation to describe com-
plex prepositions in a more satisfactory manner. For example, one of valence schemata of umartwia?
5
Recall that if adjp(...) is the first parameter of lex, the next two indicate gender and number, hence the two agrs
after adjp(agr).
6
Sporadic examples of z bardzo szeroko otwartymi ramionami ?with arms very wide open? (note the additional bardzo ?very?)
may be found on the internet, but we draw the line here and do not model such occurrences.
87
si? ?mortify oneself?, which specifies such a comprepnp(z powodu) argument, could specify it the
following way instead (with ?_? indicating any number here):
{lex(prepnp(z,gen),_,?pow?d?,ratr({np(gen);ncp(gen,?e)}+{adjp(agr)}))}
In contrast, the requirement of w trakcie (where the noun must be in the singular and adjectival modifi-
cation is not possible) could be spelled out this way:
{lex(prepnp(w,inst),sg,?trakt?,ratr({np(gen);ncp(gen,?e)}))}
As far as we can see, all complex prepositions could be described this way. On the other hand, there
are cases of fixed arguments which could not be so described simply because they contain forms
which cannot be specified with a reference to a lemma and morphosyntactic categories such as case
or number. One example is the argument of the form fixed(?d?ba?), with the form d?ba ?oak.gen?
of the noun d?b ?oak?, which co-occurs with forms stan?? ?stand? in the idiomatic expression stan??
d?ba ?rear? (of a horse), lit. ?stand oak?. However, since the form d?ba is not used in contemporary
Polish (the contemporary genitive of d?b is d?bu), this idiomatic argument cannot be expressed as
lex(np(gen),sg,?d?b?,natr), as then parsers would try to analyse the non-phraseological (at
best) sequence stan?? d?bu as idiomatic. Instead, we propose to extend the fixed notation and add a pa-
rameter describing the general morphosyntax of such an argument, e.g., fixed(np(gen),?d?ba?).
However, such fixed arguments with forms not attested in contemporary Polish are extremely rare
and we envisage that almost all other specifications currently involving fixed can be translated into
perhaps more precise specifications involving lex. For example, fixed(?na kwa?ne jab?ko?),
used in zbi? na kwa?ne jab?ko ?beat into a pulp?, literally meaning ?into sour apple?, may be specified as
follows:
{lex(prepnp(na,acc),sg,?jab?ko?,
ratr({lex(adjp(agr),agr,agr,?kwa?ny?,natr)}))}
2.4 Syntactic sugar
There are two types of syntactic sugar that we would like to propose together with the above extensions.
First of all, while it seems that the comprepnp notation for complex prepositions should be replaced
by lex, we propose to leave such comprepnp specifications in the dictionary proper and define them
in terms of lex specifications separately. The reason for this is that once a complex preposition occurs
in the specification of a valence schema, it has the tendency to occur in many schemata; for example,
comprepnp(z powodu) occurs in 126 schemata in the March 2014 version of Walenty. Replacing
all these occurrences with the considerably more complex lex specification given above would diminish
the readability of the dictionary. Instead, comprepnp(?z powodu?) (perhaps with inverted commas,
to increase notational consistency) should be left in particular schemata and it should be defined in terms
of lex once for the whole dictionary.7
The other kind of abbreviatory notation is best illustrated with idiomatic arguments which have so far
required the batr modification indicator. Recall that batr means that a given noun may be modified
by forms of either of the two adjectives meaning ?self?s, own?, i.e., forms of sw?j and w?asny. One
example is the verb spr?bowa? ?try?, which may combine with the expression swoich/w?asnych si? ?one?s
power? rendering spr?bowa? swoich/w?asnych si? w czym? ?try one?s hand at sth?, lit. ?try one?s powers in
something?. Given the notation introduced so far, this argument would have to be specified as follows:
{lex(np(gen),pl,?si?a?,ratr({lex(adjp(agr),agr,agr,?w?asny?,natr)} +
{lex(adjp(agr),agr,agr,?sw?j?,natr)}))}
This is not only hardly readable, but also misses the generalisation that the two possible modifiers are
just the same kinds of adjectival phrases differing only in the lexical realisation of the adjective meaning
?self?s, own?. We propose abbreviating such specifications as follows, with the use of OR:
{lex(np(gen),pl,?si?a?,
ratr({lex(adjp(agr),agr,agr,OR(?w?asny?,?sw?j?),natr)}))}
7
This move would be analogous to specifying externally morphosyntactic realisations of semantically defined arguments
such as xp(locat) or xp(temp) (see Przepi?rkowski et al. 2014 for details).
88
While we could have reintroduced the batr notation to make this even more readable, this symbol is not
used inWalenty uniformly, so it would make sense to replace it with more explicit notation involving lex.
In particular, some argument specifications mentioning batr actually allow only for forms of w?asny,
not sw?j. This is, e.g., the case with dor?czy? ?hand (over)?, as in dor?czy? do r?k w?asnych (but not
dor?czy? do r?k swoich) ?deliver as hand delivery?, lit. ?hand to own hands?, where the specification of the
relevant argument in terms of lex explicitly mentions only one of these two adjectives:
{lex(prepnp(do,gen),pl,?r?ka?,
ratr({lex(adjp(agr),agr,agr,?w?asny?,natr)}))}
Note finally that this shorthand notation is useful not just in cases involving batr in the old formalism.
One case in point is the expression co? strzeli?o komu? do g?owy ?something came over somebody?, lit.
?something.nom shot sombody.dat to head.gen?, where the form of g?owa ?head? may be replaced by
analogous forms of other nouns with the samemeaning, including ?eb and ?epetyna, as specified below:
8
{lex(prepnp(do,gen),sg,XOR(?g?owa?,??eb?,??epetyna?),atr({adjp(agr)}))}
3 Case study
In the current (as of the end of April 2014) version of Walenty, there are 7 complex prepositions used
691 times (in the schemata of 367 different verbs), 17 fixed phrases used 82 times (36 verbs), 177
lexnp phrases used 686 times (393 verbs) and 238 preplexnp phrases used 1133 times (496 verbs).
The last two contain 1182 natr parameters, 217 ratr parameters, 40 batr parameters and 406 atr
parameters. Summing up, there are 439 different lexicalisations used in 2567 schemata of 659 verbs.
This means that the representation of idiomatic schemata is already non-negligible, and it is bound to
increase, as more emphasis is put on such schemata in the current development of Walenty. Hence, the
proposed changes ? if adopted ? will involve substantial interference into an existing resource, and may
have a potentially adverse impact on the development of the lexicon, if the formalism proves to be too
difficult for lexicographers. This section describes an experiment investigating this issue.
We selected 84 schemata of 36 verbs and asked two main lexicographers involved in the development
of Walenty to rewrite these schemata using the proposed formalism. The schemata include 38 fixed
arguments, 10 comprepnp arguments, 17 lexnp arguments and 28 preplexnp arguments. The last
two contain 22 natr parameters, 6 ratr parameters, 4 batr parameters and 8 atr parameters. The
schemata were selected manually, taking into account their frequency, diversity of types of lexicalisations
and their parameters, as well as the expected difficulty of rewriting them. This is the reason for the over-
representation of fixed phrases, which need to be completely reanalysed. We chose multiple schemata
for the same verb, to give lexicographers the possibility to join them into a single schemata, given the
more expressive new formalism. In particular, all 12 lexicalised schemata for the verb sta? ?stand? were
selected for the experiment.
The two lexicographers worked on the textual format of the dictionary (cf. http://zil.ipipan.
waw.pl/Walenty) without any support from a tool verifying the syntax of the schemata, etc. Cor-
respondingly, when comparing their results, we ignored purely syntactic errors, including differences in
bracketing etc., as such errors can be prevented by such a dedicated tool.
After ignoring such trivial differences, 34 of 84 schemata were found to be encoded differently by the
two lexicographers. The differences included 3 cases of a wrong lemma, 5 cases of different values of
grammatical categories of case, number, etc., and 7 differences concerning the introduction of new non-
lexicalised arguments or merging schemata on the basis of the coordination criterion mentioned in ?1.1.
These differences are not directly connected with the proposed changes of the formalism for lexicalisa-
tions. Moreover, 9 differences concerned using (r)atr instead of (r)atr1 (cf. ?2.2) where a single
realisation of a modifier is possible, as in the following (correct) argument specification for przemarzn??
?freeze? surfacing in przemarzn?? do szpiku ko?ci ?freeze to the bone?, lit. ?freeze to (the) marrow (of)
bone(s)?:
8
This argument specification uses XOR instead of OR as only one of the lexemes meaning ?head? may be used at a time,
unlike in the previous case, where forms of both sw?j and w?asny could be used simultaneously: spr?bowa? swoich w?asnych
si? w czym? lit. ?try one?s own forces in something?.
89
{lex(prepnp(do,gen),sg,?szpik?,ratr1({lex(np(gen),pl,?ko???,natr)}))}
Since ko?cimust appear exactly once, ratr1 instead of ratr should be used here. Obviously, guidelines
for lexicographers should emphasise this point.
Finally, 17 differences concerned core aspects of the new formalism, such as different modification
patters (5), the lack of the morphosyntactic type for fixed (3) and an incorrect specification of the mor-
phosyntactic type of lex, e.g., lack of aspect of infp (2). We judged 6 of them as considerably difficult
cases of fixed lexicalisations, rewriting of which was not at all obvious. One such difficulty concerned
an idiomatic use of wyj?? ?exit? as in kto? wyszed? za kogo? za m?? ?somebody married somebody else?
(of a woman marrying a man, not the other way round), lit. ?somebody.nom exited prep
9
somebody.acc
prep husband?. The problem lies in the za m?? ?prep husband? part, where m?? could be analysed as
the regular nominative, but then it would be unexpected that the preposition za occurs with a nominative
noun (it normally combines with the accusative and the instrumental), or as an idiosyncratic accusative
form only occurring in this idiom, similarly to d?ba mentioned above occurring in stan?? d?ba ?rear? ?
in this case the exceptional use of fixed would be justified, even though the use of fixed was ex-
plicitly discouraged in this experiment. The two specifications of the argument za m?? given by the two
lexicographers are cited below
10
.
{fixed(prepnp(za,acc),?za m???)}
{lex(prepnp(za,nom),sg,?m???,natr)}
In summary, we feel that the experiment showed that the new formalism is relatively clear and can be
learnt by lexicographers, given some training. Support provided by a dedicated lexicographic tool should
reduce the number of errors, especially syntactic inconsistencies. On the other hand, the experiment
confirmed that some of the most difficult lexicalisations are those currently marked as fixed, and they
clearly require special attention.
4 Discussion and conclusion
Many valence dictionaries mark some valence schemata as idiomatic ? this is true, e.g., of the VALBU
valence dictionary for German developed at the Institut f?r Deutsche Sprache (Schumacher et al. 2004;
http://hypermedia.ids-mannheim.de/evalbu/), of the VALLEX dictionary of Czech de-
veloped at the Charles University in Prague (Lopatkov? et al. 2006; http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/
vallex/), as well as some previous valence dictionaries of Polish, including Pola?ski 1980?1992 and
the dictionary that was used to bootstrap the first version of Walenty, i.e., ?widzi?ski 1998. However,
we are not aware of another valence dictionary that would explicitly describe lexicalised arguments at
the same level of detail as the version of Walenty presented in Przepi?rkowski et al. 2014. Regardless of
this level of detail, though, the formalism employed in that version suffers from a number of problems
discussed in ?1.3, limiting its ability to describe phraseological constructions precisely.
In this paper, we propose a far-reaching extension of the formalism of Walenty, making it possible to
describe the syntactic structure of a lexicalised argument to any necessary depth. As noted in ?2.2, the
proposed extension makes the description language properly context-free, but this does not seem to be a
problem for parsers employing the valence dictionary. On the contrary, as the parsers of Polish become
more sophisticated and are developed with full semantic parsing in view, they need precise description of
valence schemata that makes it possible to reliably distinguish idiomatic arguments from non-idiomatic
compositional constructions.
The need for such deeper description of phraseological arguments in valence dictionaries has occa-
sionally been expressed in the literature, e.g., by ?abokrtsk? (2005, 65?66, fn. 20), who notes that ?[i]n
case of multiword parts of phrasemes, the tree (and not only the sequence of forms) representing this part
should be ideally captured in the lexicon. . . ?. This makes us hope that the current proposal will prove
interesting also for the developers of valence lexica for languages other than Polish.
9
The preposition za has a number of different uses and may be translated as ?behind?, ?for?, ?per?, ?by?, ?as?, etc.
10
Intuitively, the first representation seems appropriate to us, but we see no strong arguments supporting this intuition.
90
References
Noam Chomsky. 1959. On certain formal properties of grammars. Information and Control 2, 137?167.
Idan Landau. 2013. Control in Generative Grammar: A Research Companion. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Mark?ta Lopatkov?, Zden?k ?abokrtsk?, and Karol?na Skwarska. 2006. Valency Lexicon of Czech Verbs:
Alternation-Based Model. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, LREC2006, pages 1728?1733, ELRA, Genoa.
Agnieszka Patejuk and Adam Przepi?rkowski. 2012. Towards an LFG parser for Polish: An exercise in
parasitic grammar development. In Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, LREC 2012, pages 3849?3852, ELRA, Istanbul, Turkey.
Kazimierz Pola?ski (ed.). 1980?1992. S?ownik syntaktyczno-generatywny czasownik?w polskich.
Wroc?aw / Cracow: Zak?ad Narodowy im. Ossoli?skich / Instytut J?zyka Polskiego PAN.
Adam Przepi?rkowski, El?bieta Hajnicz, Agnieszka Patejuk, MarcinWoli?ski, Filip Skwarski, andMarek
?widzi?ski. 2014. Walenty: Towards a comprehensive valence dictionary of Polish. In Nicoletta Cal-
zolari, Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Hrafn Loftsson, Bente Maegaard, JosephMariani, Asuncion
Moreno, Jan Odijk and Stelios Piperidis (eds.), Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC 2014, pages 2785?2792, ELRA, Reykjav?k, Iceland.
Helmut Schumacher, Jacqueline Kubczak, Renate Schmidt, and Vera de Ruiter. 2004. VALBU ? Valen-
zw?rterbuch deutscher Verben, volume 31 of Studien zur deutschen Sprache. Forschungen des Instituts
f?r Deutsche Sprache. T?bingen: Narr.
Marek ?widzi?ski. 1998. Syntactic Dictionary of Polish Verbs. Version 3a, unpublished manuscript, Uni-
versity of Warsaw.
Marcin Woli?ski. 2004. Komputerowa weryfikacja gramatyki ?widzi?skiego. Ph.D. dissertation, Institute
of Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw.
Zden?k ?abokrtsk?. 2005. Valency Lexicon of Czech Verbs. Ph. D. dissertation, Charles University,
Prague.
91
