QCS: A Tool for Querying, Clustering, and Summarizing Documents
Daniel M. Dunlavy
University of Maryland
ddunlavy@cs.umd.edu
John Conroy
IDA/CCS
conroy@super.org
Dianne P. O?Leary
University of Maryland
oleary@cs.umd.edu
Abstract
The QCS information retrieval (IR) system is
presented as a tool for querying, clustering, and
summarizing document sets. QCS has been de-
veloped as a modular development framework,
and thus facilitates the inclusion of new tech-
nologies targeting these three IR tasks. Details
of the system architecture, the QCS interface,
and preliminary results are presented.
1 Introduction
QCS is a software tool and development framework for
efficient, organized, and streamlined IR from generic
document sets. The system is designed to match a query
to relevant documents, cluster the resulting subset of doc-
uments by topic, and produce a single summary for each
topic. Using QCS for IR, the amount of redundant infor-
mation presented to a user is reduced and the results are
categorized by content.
A survey of previous work using a combination of clus-
tering and summarization to improve IR can be found in
Radev et al (2001b). Of existing IR systems employ-
ing this combination, QCS most resembles the NewsIn-
Essence system (Radev et al, 2001a) in that both sys-
tems can produce multi-document summaries from doc-
ument sets clustered by topic. However, NewsInEssence
is designed for IR from HTML-linked document sets and
QCS has been designed for IR from generic document
sets. Furthermore, one of the most important aspects of
QCS is its modularity, with the ability to plug in alterna-
tive implementations of query-based retrieval, document
clustering, and summarization algorithms.
2 Querying, Clustering, Summarizing
QCS employs a vector space model (Salton et al, 1975)
to represent a set of documents. Choices for the term
weighting currently include the following:
? Local: term frequency, log, binary
? Global: none, normal, idf, idf2, entropy
? Normalization: none, normalized
Detailed descriptions of each of these weighting factors
as well as strategies for using each of these are presented
by Dumais (1991) and Kolda and O?Leary (1998).
The current computational methods used for retrieving
a set of documents that best match a query, clustering a
set of documents by topic, and creating a summary of
multiple documents are as follows:
? Querying: Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI)
? Clustering: spherical k-means
? Summarization: a hidden Markov model (HMM)
and pivoted QR
Detailed descriptions of these methods presented in Deer-
wester et al (1990), Dhillon and Modha (2001), and
Schlesinger et al (2002), respectively.
The interface to QCS (see Figure 1) consists of a col-
lection of JavaTM 1 servlets which format input to and
output from QCS via dynamic HTML documents. This
approach allows all of the computation and formatting to
take place on a JavaTM server, with the only requirement
on the users? systems being that of an HTML-enabled
browser application (e.g., Netscape R? 7.0 ).
3 Results
QCS was tested using data from the 2002 Document Un-
derstanding Conference (http://duc.nist.gov/),
a conference focusing on summarization and the evalu-
ation of summarization systems. The data consisted of
567 news articles categorized into four types, with one
type consisting of articles covering a single natural disas-
ter event reported within a seven day window.
Results of one test producing 100-word extract sum-
maries can be seen in Figure 1, where the query consisted
of the words, ?hurricane? and ?earthquake?. The top
three scoring clusters contained a total 55 articles (32, 11,
and 12, respectively), producing the summaries shown
in the figure. The topics of these three summaries were
a hurricane near Jamaica, catastrophe insurance, and an
earthquake in California, respectively. Despite the lim-
itations of automatic summarization, this example illus-
1 JavaTM is a trademark of Sun Microsystems, Inc.
                                                               Edmonton, May-June 2003
                                                            Demonstrations , pp. 11-12
                                                         Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003
Figure 1: The interface to the QCS system includes 1) an input section for the query and choice of document set,
2) a navigation section with links to clustered documents (Q: top documents retrieved for the query and their scores,
C: documents from which summary sentences were drawn and the sentence indices, S: links to multiple or single
document summaries), and 3) an output viewing section, which here contains the default output of multiple document
summaries for the topic clusters.
trates the utility of summarizing by cluster rather than
producing a single summary of the retrieved documents.
Further results are planned for the demonstration, in-
cluding results of using QCS against the data from the
2003 Document Understanding Conference.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank C. David Levermore and
William D. Dorland of the University of Maryland for
their helpful remarks concerning the QCS system.
References
Scott C. Deerwester, Susan T. Dumais, Thomas K. Lan-
dauer, George W. Furnas, and Richard A. Harshman.
1990. Indexing by latent semantic analysis. JASIS,
41(6):391?407.
Inderjit S. Dhillon and Dharmendra S. Modha. 2001.
Concept decompositions for large sparse text data us-
ing clustering. Machine Learning, 42(1):143?175.
Susan T. Dumais. 1991. Improving the retrieval of infor-
mation from external sources. Behav. Res. Meth. Instr.,
23(6):229?326.
Tamara G. Kolda and Dianne P. O?Leary. 1998. A
semidiscrete matrix decomposition for latent seman-
tic indexing in information retrieval. ACM Trans. Inf.
Sys., 16(4):322?346.
Dragomir R. Radev, Sasha Blair-Goldensohn, Zhu
Zhang, and Revathi Sundara Raghavan. 2001a.
Newsinessence: A system for domain-independent,
real-time news clustering and multi-document summa-
rization. In Human Language Technology Conference,
San Diego, CA.
Dragomir R. Radev, Weiguo Fan, and Zhu Zhang.
2001b. Webinessence: A personalized web-based
multi-document summarization and recommendation
system. In NAACL Workshop on Automatic Summa-
rization, Pittsburgh, PA.
Gerard Salton, A. Wong, and C.S. Yang. 1975. A vec-
tor space model for information retrieval. Communi-
cations of the ACM, 18(11):613?620.
Judith D. Schlesinger, Mary Ellen Okurowski, John M.
Conroy, Dianne P. O?Leary, Anthony Taylor, Jean
Hobbs, and Wilson Harold T. Wilson. 2002. Under-
standing machine performance in the context of hu-
man performance for multi-document summarization.
In Proc. of the Workshop on Automatic Summarization.
