Concordances of Snippets 
El?bieta DURA 
Lexware Labs  
G?teborg 
Sweden 
elzbieta@lexwarelabs.com 
 
Abstract 
Excellent concordances can be produced by 
tools mounted on regular web search engines 
but these tools are not suitable for quick 
lookups on the web because it takes time to 
collect ad-hoc corpora with occurrences of a 
queried word or phrase. It is possible to get a 
web concordance in an instant if the amount of 
transferred data can be limited. One way to do 
it is to use snippets from a search engine as a 
basis for concordance lines, which is a 
solution adopted in Lexware Culler - a web 
concordance tool mounted on Google. It takes 
the same time to look up words and phrases in 
Lexware Culler as it takes for Google to 
deliver results for a search. The question is 
whether concordances based on snippets can 
be satisfactory for linguists or language 
learners. Our tests show that they actually can. 
With proper filtering concordances based on 
snippets can provide a good survey of current 
language use, which is particularly important 
as a complement to online dictionaries. 
1 Introduction 
The access to the web is ubiquitous, it is a self-
renewing language resource and its size and 
variety exceeds all previous corpora. The 
counterpart of the public web was estimated up to 
28 million books already in 2002, which can be 
compared with the largest number of volumes held 
by Harvard University - about 15 million (O'Neill, 
Lavoie, Bennett, 2003). Excellent concordances 
are produced by tools mounted on regular web 
search engines but these tools are not suitable for 
quick lookups on the web because it takes time to 
collect ad-hoc corpora with occurrences of a 
queried word or phrase. Is it possible to get a web 
concordance in an instant? 
2 Web search engines in linguistic service 
As the implementation of a special purpose 
linguistic search engine lingers on,1 web search 
                                                                                                                                        
1There is actually one being currently developed and 
engines are used to produce web concordances. 
Search engines improve constantly. For instance it 
is no longer true that ?Some search engines, 
including Google, FAST and Lycos, do not support 
wildcards at all? (Kehoe and Renouf, 2002). In 
Google wildcards are available for words and in 
AltaVista wildcards were available for both words 
and characters until its unfortunate recent death (1st 
April 2004). Google covers 4.28 billion web-
pages, it has snap-shots of majority of them in its 
cache and its result lists include snippets - short 
text excerpts from matching web-pages showing a 
search term in its closest context. Google is not 
immaculate. A search term cannot be longer than 
10 words and it is not always included in a snippet. 
It does not support case sensitive search or 
wildcards for characters. 
2.1 Tools for concordancing the web 
Concordance tools mounted on web search 
engines enable a user to compile own corpora from 
web-pages for a chosen search term and produce a 
concordance of the gathered text material.  
2.1.1 Concordances collected in batch mode   
KWiCFinder seems to have been the first one to 
provide linguists with KWIC concordances from 
the web. KWiCFinder is intended to be used in 
batch mode. It assists the user to formulate a query, 
the query is submitted to AltaVista, documents are 
retrieved and a KWIC concordance of 5-15 online 
documents per minute is produced. KWiCFinder is 
used in its own client application which needs to 
be downloaded. 
2.1.2 Concordances from selected web-sites 
WebConc is mounted on Google. It takes a 
search term from the user, accesses each web-page 
obtained from Google, collects all contexts of the 
search term and presents them as a concordance. It 
is perspicuous and easy to use. The maximal 
number of web-pages is limited to 50 in order to 
keep the retrieval time down but even with the 
minimum of 10 web-pages it is too slow for 
interactive use. It is possible to limit retrieval to 
tested for English (http://lse.umiacs.umd.edu:8080/). 
some chosen URL in WebConc, which probably is 
the best way to use the tool. 
2.1.3 Concordances by e-mail 
WebCorp (Kehoe and Renouf, 2002) makes 
access to each of web-pages retrieved by a chosen 
search engine, fortunately one does not have to 
wait for the results to appear on the screen because 
it is possible to order a concordance to be sent by 
e-mail. Various types of reports are made 
available, e.g. collocates of the search term can be 
presented summarized in a table. A frequency or 
alphabetically ordered list of all the words on any 
source page is available upon clicking on a URL 
link. Regular expressions can be used to express 
form alterations. WebCorp is an excellent example 
of how useful search engines can be made for 
linguists when their power is enhanced with 
natural language processing.  
3 Instant web concordances 
The web is not a true corpus: it is not 
representative of anything and it is not balanced. 
Nonetheless there is no better place to look up 
examples of current language use than the web, 
which possibly is also the most suitable type of use 
of this language resource. But interactive use, 
expected of concordances in general, requires short 
retrieval times. 
3.1 Why web concordances are slow 
WebCorp is said to be slow because ?the current 
version of WebCorp is for demonstration purposes 
and the speed at which results are returned will 
increase as the tool is developed further?. Is the 
speed really in the hands of the developers of the 
system? The decisive factor here is the time it 
takes to access each web-page, which depends on 
the capacity of the data transmission channel and 
the actual server a web-page is on, and this is not 
even predictable. It is possible to make sure that a 
connection is always made to a quick server by 
using Google cache instead of original URLs but 
the time taken by data transmission still remains a 
problem. One possible solution is to rely on 
snippets for concordance lines. This saves the time 
needed to collect and transfer ad-hoc web corpora.   
3.2 Web concordances and online dictionaries  
The possibility to access current language use on 
the web in an instance is crucial as a complement 
to online dictionaries. The problem confronting 
dictionaries is how to handle two incompatible 
tasks simultaneously. One is to supply correct 
definitions and thereby preserve the usefulness of 
words. The other is to report on current trends in 
language usage, even when it means effacing 
meaningful differences between words. The role of 
an online dictionary complemented with 
concordances from the web would be to consider 
whether some popular usage may be based on 
confusion.  
3.3 Lexware Culler 
Lexware Culler builds concordances of Google 
snippets and it takes the same time to look up 
words and phrases in Lexware Culler as it takes for 
Google to deliver results. Language processing is 
applied not only to search terms but also to 
snippets from Google.2 Besides Google wildcards 
which can be used for any word in general (*), it is 
possible to select words of a particular part of 
speech, in which case part of speech variables are 
used. Function word variables trigger expansion of 
search terms into alternative queries while 
variables of open parts of speech are used to filter 
away non-matching snippets obtained for a search 
term. This postfiltering is available for English and 
Swedish and it is being developed for Polish. 
A table with a summary of results is always 
supplied in Culler along with concordance lines, 
which proves often handy, e.g. in investigation of 
collocations. It is possible to test the tool at 
http://82.182.103.45/lexware/concord/culler.html 
3.4 Examples of use 
Examples provided below are representative of 
the uses of Lexware Culler tested so far.  
3.4.1 Context-based look-ups 
It is not obvious how to find a word or a phrase 
in a dictionary if all one can go after is its context, 
it may be difficult even in a corpus unless very 
large. In order to find the word for a stick used in 
conducting an orchestra we made some futile 
checks in online dictionaries3. A simple query for 
?conductor?s *? in Culler yields baton directly 
with several examples like ?not the first soloist to 
feel the lure of the conductor?s baton? .  
A new adverbial use of the word fett (fat) has 
become very popular in the language of young 
Swedes ? it has the role of a general magnifier. 
This use cannot be found in Swedish dictionaries 
or in the corpus of the Bank of Swedish. A typical 
context entered in Culler as a search term: ?det ?r 
fett *? (it is fat *) gives 188 hits of which very few 
are examples of the basic uses of the word, 
                                                     
2 Full-fledged language processing is available for 
Swedish. It is based on a language engine for Swedish ? 
Lexware (Dura and Drejak, 2002). 
3 We tried WordNet, AskOxford.com, Merriam-
Webster?s Collegiate Dictionary, Dictionary.com, and 
finally we found an example with baton in Cambridge 
Dictionaries Online. 
majority of excerpts exemplify the new adverbial 
use.  
A search term can be formulated as a typical 
defining context, for instance: ?Moomin is a *? 
and ?Moomins are *?. If the search is not limited 
to a specific country excerpts thus obtained are 
hard to find elsewhere side by side: Many people 
in Japan think that Moomin is a hippopotamus, 
however, it is actually a forest fairy or Moomin is a 
Finnish cartoon/storybook character likened to 
Finland's version of Mickey Mouse, Moomins are 
WHITE, dammit!. 
3.4.2 Tracing mistakes, language changes 
Do the French have the word entrepreneur? Yes, 
233 000 French web-pages have ?entrepreneur? or 
?entrepreneurs?. Has the correct spelling of Polish 
adverb z powrotem (back) lost to a new one word 
spelling spowrotem yet? Not, yet: it is used on 
22 400 web-pages, while the correct one is used on 
83 500 web-pages. Besides such simple checks 
Culler can be used to ferret out popular 
misinterpretations, such as those of the Swedish 
idiom med ber?tt mod (in cold blood). Table 1 is a 
result summary for the search term: ?med ber?tt *? 
and ?-mod? (any phrase beginning with med ber?tt 
excluding those with mod).4 The incorrect 
alternative versions thus extracted are: mord 
(murder), lugn (calm), v?ld (violence). The number 
of web-pages returned by Google is shown in the 
right column, the left one contains the number of 
concordance lines. 
4 med ber?tt mot 
3 med ber?tt mord 
1 med ber?tt lugn 
1 med ber?tt v?ld 
9 
Table 1: Summary table for the search term 
?med ber?tt *? ??mod? 
3.4.3 Extracting unrestrained language use 
One can learn from a dictionary what creatures 
typically produce grunting sounds. A further check 
in a large corpus yields yet more examples. The 
range of grunting creatures which appears in 
snippets for the search term ?grunting like a *? and 
?-pig? is truly amazing: from more or less 
predictable ones, like a walrus, a deranged gorilla, 
a wrestler, a lumberjack, to rather unexpected 
ones, like a constipated weasel, a freakin caveman, 
a eunuch impersonating Billy Idol, plus many fresh 
associations like an orc, the beasts back on 
Mordor, etc. 
                                                     
                                                     4 Word filter in Google is applied to the whole web-
page. 
In order to check whether and how expressions 
for becoming of age are dependent on the age itself 
the following queries were entered: ?going on 
NUM? ?gonna be NUM? ?become NUM? ?turn 
NUM?, ?push NUM?, ?reach NUM? ?make it to 
NUM? ?hit NUM?, where NUM stands for 
numerals. Enormous material was obtained for all 
ages, some of which involved surprises. For 
instance, ?make it to NUM? had most hits in lower 
ages, where the lowest numbers referred mostly to 
the age of relations, while middle numbers referred 
to young people sick in some incurable illness; 
hitting 50 and more proved to be rare, probably 
because of its low news value. 
4 Snippets as concordance lines 
Whether snippets are sufficient as concordance 
lines is a question which can be settled empirically 
only. Culler has been used extensively for the past 
three months in uses for which the examples 
provided above are representative.  
4.1 Google selections 
An average snippet is about 20 words long, which 
in most cases is sufficient as disambiguating 
context. For each query Google retrieves max. 100 
URLs and there may be up to 300 queries 
generated by Culler for a search term (when 
expanded with inflectional forms and/or function 
words).  
Google selects web-pages according to a 
complex ranking, the main ingredient of which is 
the popularity of a web-page, measured among 
others in the number of links from other web-
pages. Snippets are thus representative of prevalent 
language use. So are the numbers of matches 
reported by search engines because they report the 
number of web-pages with at least one match. The 
fact that each snippet is from a different web-page 
contributes to the diversity of excerpts. 
The quality of excerpts can differ tremendously 
dependent on a search term. Generally the longer 
the search term the higher the chance for better 
excerpts. Some terms get snippets with proper 
name readings only, in which case it is better to 
limit the source of snippets to some large 
newspaper web-site5. 
4.2 Culler selections 
Post-filtering of snippets is triggered either by 
variables of open parts of speech in a search term 
or by noise in excerpts. Three types of noisy 
excerpts are filtered away: repetitive, non-textual 
and non-phrasal. Each of the filters can be turned 
off. An average percentage of noise in snippets is 
5 The URL is entered in Culler?s slot for word filters. 
about 20%.The three types of noises amount to an 
average of 21.7 % snippets discarded in the 
examples cited above (T is the number of snippets 
obtained from Google, D is the number of 
discarded snippets). 
 
Search term T D % 
 ?Moomin is a *?  
?Moomins are *? 
120 18 15.0 
?grunting like DET *? 
 ?-pig? 
236 28 11.9 
?conductor?s? 93 35 37.6 
 ?z powrotem? 87 13 14.9 
?spowrotem? 99 17 17.1 
?entrepreneur? 183 49 26.7 
?med ber?tt *? 
 ?-mod? 
9 0 0.0 
?det ?r fett * * ? 188 95 50.5 
Table 2: Discarded snippets 
4.2.1 World wide repetitions 
Google does not return web-pages which are 
exact copies but it does return snippets which are 
the same or almost the same. Famous lyrics, 
dramas, stories, sermons, speeches, important news 
appear in enormous number of copies. For instance 
a search term ?children at your feet? has about 
50% repetitions, all of which involve web-pages 
with lyrics of the song ?Lady Madonna?. The 
average level of repetitive snippets is about 5% in 
the cited examples. Repetitive snippets discarded 
by Lexware Culler are the ones which differ only 
in: 
? case of characters, 
? date, time, link, and similar meta-
information, 
? word internal separators, like hyphens, 
? language specific characters. 
4.2.2 Non-textual snippets 
Several types of more or less formulaic elements 
which are common on the web appear in snippets. 
None of these are usually desirable as concordance 
lines: boilerplate information, mathematical 
formulae, navigation tips, hyperlinks, e-mail 
addresses, post addresses, data on updates, headers, 
footers, copy right statements, logs, fragments of 
lists of items. 7% of snippets are discarded on 
average by this type of filtering in the cited 
examples. 
4.2.3 Non-phrasal 
Punctuation is ignored by Google while Culler 
departs from an assumption that phrasal context is 
normally requested, hence only snippets without 
interrupting punctuation within a search term are 
selected. Adding marginal wildcards to a search 
term is interpreted in Culler as a request for an 
unbroken phrasal context including words matched 
by wildcards. Snippets with search terms 
interrupted by commas, full-stops, colons, 
semicolons, question and exclamation marks are 
discarded by this filtering. The impact of this 
filtering differs very much from case to case: from 
half of the excerpts to none at all.  
5 Conclusion 
Instead of collecting ad-hoc corpora from each 
web-page retrieved by Google Lexware Culler 
builds concordances of snippets. Thanks to this 
limitation it is possible to look up words and 
phrases on the web in an instant. The quality of 
concordances built of snippets varies from 
excellent to poor dependent mainly on a search 
term but the goal of getting a quick glimpse of 
language use on the web is clearly attainable with 
snippets. Snippets are sufficiently long to provide 
disambiguating contexts. The ranking system of 
web search engines gives preference to the most 
popular web-pages, hence the prevalent language 
use can be expected in majority of excerpts. At the 
same time it is also true that extensive filtering is 
required in order to make accceptable concordance 
lines of snippets. 
References  
E. Dura and Marek Drejak. 2002. Information 
Retrieval With Language Knowledge. In: Cross 
Language Evaluation Forum Berlin Heidelberg 
New York: Springer-Verlag. 
A. Kehoe & A. Renouf. 2002. WebCorp: Applying 
the Web to Linguistics and Linguistics to the 
Web. In: WWW2002 Conference, Honolulu, 
Hawaii. 
KWiCFinder 
http://www.kwicfinder.com/KWiCFinder.html 
E. T. O'Neill, B. F. Lavoie, R. Bennett. 2003. 
Trends in the Evolution of the Public Web 1998 
? 2002. In: D-Lib Magazine, Vol. 9 Nr 4. 
WebConc http://www.niederlandistik.fu-
berlin.de/cgi-bin/web-
conc.cgi?sprache=en&art=google 
WebCorp http://www.webcorp.org.uk/ 
