Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 116?125,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Modelling the Lexicon in
Unsupervised Part of Speech Induction
Greg Dubbin
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
United Kingdom
Gregory.Dubbin@wolfson.ox.ac.uk
Phil Blunsom
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
United Kingdom
Phil.Blunsom@cs.ox.ac.uk
Abstract
Automatically inducing the syntactic part-
of-speech categories for words in text
is a fundamental task in Computational
Linguistics. While the performance of
unsupervised tagging models has been
slowly improving, current state-of-the-art
systems make the obviously incorrect as-
sumption that all tokens of a given word
type must share a single part-of-speech
tag. This one-tag-per-type heuristic coun-
ters the tendency of Hidden Markov
Model based taggers to over generate tags
for a given word type. However, it is
clearly incompatible with basic syntactic
theory. In this paper we extend a state-of-
the-art Pitman-Yor Hidden Markov Model
tagger with an explicit model of the lexi-
con. In doing so we are able to incorpo-
rate a soft bias towards inducing few tags
per type. We develop a particle filter for
drawing samples from the posterior of our
model and present empirical results that
show that our model is competitive with
and faster than the state-of-the-art without
making any unrealistic restrictions.
1 Introduction
Research on the unsupervised induction of part-
of-speech (PoS) tags has the potential to im-
prove both our understanding of the plausibil-
ity of theories of first language acquisition, and
Natural Language Processing applications such
as Speech Recognition and Machine Transla-
tion. While there has been much prior work
on this task (Brown et al., 1992; Clark, 2003;
Christodoulopoulos et al., 2010; Toutanova and
Johnson, 2008; Goldwater and Griffiths, 2007;
Blunsom and Cohn, 2011), a common thread in
many of these works is that models based on a
Hidden Markov Model (HMM) graphical struc-
ture suffer from a tendency to assign too many
different tags to the tokens of a given word type.
Models which restrict word types to only occur
with a single tag show a significant increase in
performance, even though this restriction is clearly
at odds with the gold standard labeling (Brown et
al., 1992; Clark, 2003; Blunsom and Cohn, 2011).
While the empirically observed expectation for the
number of tags per word type is close to one, there
are many exceptions, e.g. words that occur as both
nouns and verbs (opening, increase, related etc.).
In this paper we extend the Pitman-Yor HMM
tagger (Blunsom and Cohn, 2011) to explicitly in-
clude a model of the lexicon that encodes from
which tags a word type may be generated. For
each word type we draw an ambiguity class which
is the set of tags that it may occur with, captur-
ing the fact that words are often ambiguous be-
tween certain tags (e.g. Noun and Verb), while
rarely between others (e.g. Determiner and Verb).
We extend the type based Sequential Monte Carlo
(SMC) inference algorithm of Dubbin and Blun-
som (2012) to incorporate our model of the lexi-
con, removing the need for the heuristic inference
technique of Blunsom and Cohn (2011).
We start in Section 3 by introducing the origi-
nal PYP-HMM model and our extended model of
the lexicon. Section 4 introduces a Particle Gibbs
sampler for this model, a basic SMC method that
generates samples from the model?s posterior. We
evaluate these algorithms in Section 5, analyzing
their behavior in comparisons to previously pro-
posed state-of-the-art approaches.
116
2 Background
From the early work in the 1990?s, much of the
focus on unsupervised PoS induction has been
on hidden Markov Models (HMM) (Brown et al.,
1992; Kupiec, 1992; Merialdo, 1993). The HMM
has proven to be a powerful model of PoS tag as-
signment. Successful approaches generally build
upon the HMM model by expanding its context
and smoothing the sparse data. Constraints such
as tag dictionaries simplify inference by restricting
the number of tags to explore for each word (Gold-
water and Griffiths, 2007). Ganchev et al. (2010)
used posterior regularization to ensure that word
types have a sparse posterior distribution over tags.
A similar approach constrains inference to only
explore tag assignments such that all tokens of the
same word type are assigned the same tag. These
constraints reduce tag assignment ambiguity while
also providing a bias towards the natural spar-
sity of tag distributions in language (Clark, 2003).
However they do not provide a model based solu-
tion to tag ambiguity.
Recent work encodes similar sparsity infor-
mation with non-parametric priors, relying on
Bayesian inference to achieve strong results with-
out any tag dictionaries or constraints (Goldwater
and Griffiths, 2007; Johnson, 2007; Gao and John-
son, 2008). Liang et al. (2010) propose a type-
based approach to this Bayesian inference similar
to Brown et al. (1992), suggesting that there are
strong dependencies between tokens of the same
word-type. Lee et al. (2010) demonstrate strong
results with a similar model and the introduction
of a one-tag-per-type constraint on inference.
Blunsom and Cohn (2011) extend the Bayesian
inference approach with a hierarchical non-
parametric prior that expands the HMM con-
text to trigrams. However, the hierarchical non-
parametric model adds too many long-range de-
pendencies for the type-based inference proposed
earlier. The model produces state-of-the art re-
sults with a one-tag-per-type constraint, but even
with this constraint the tag assignments must be
roughly inferred from an approximation of the ex-
pectations.
Ambiguity classes representing the set of tags
each word-type can take aid inference by mak-
ing the sparsity between tags and words explicit.
Toutanova and Johnson (2008) showed that mod-
elling ambiguity classes can lead to positive re-
sults with a small tag-dictionary extracted from the
data. By including ambiguity classes in the model,
this approach is able to infer ambiguity classes of
unknown words.
Many improvements in part-of-speech induc-
tion over the last few years have come from the
use of semi-supervised approaches in the form of
projecting PoS constraints across languages with
parallel corpora (Das and Petrov, 2011) or extract-
ing them from the wiktionary (Li et al., 2012).
These semi-supervised methods ultimately rely on
a strong unsupervised model of PoS as their base.
Thus, further improvements in unsupervised mod-
els, especially in modelling tag constrains, should
lead to improvements in semi-supervised part-of-
speech induction.
We find that modelling the lexicon in part-of-
speech inference can lead to more efficient algo-
rithms that match the state-of-the-art unsupervised
performance. We also note that the lexicon model
relies heavily on morphological information, and
suffers without it on languages with flexible word
ordering. These results promise further improve-
ments with more advanced lexicon models.
3 The Pitman-Yor Lexicon Hidden
Markov Model
This article proposes enhancing the standard Hid-
den Markov Model (HMM) by explicitly incorpo-
rating a model of the lexicon that consists of word
types and their associated tag ambiguity classes.
The ambiguity class of a word type is the set of
possible lexical categories to which tokens of that
type can be assigned. In this work we aim to
learn the ambiguity classes unsupervised rather
than have them specified in a tag dictionary.
The Lexicon HMM (Lex-HMM) extends the
Pitman-Yor HMM (PYP-HMM) described by
Blunsom and Cohn (2011). When the ambiguity
class of all of the word types in the lexicon is the
complete tagset, the two models are the same.
3.1 PYP-HMM
The base of the model applies a hierarchical
Pitman-Yor process (PYP) prior to a trigram hid-
den Markov model to jointly model the distribu-
tion of a sequence of latent word tags, t, and
word tokens, w. The joint probability defined
by the transition, P
?
(t
l
|t
n?1
, t
n?2
), and emission,
P
?
(w
n
|t
n
), distributions of a trigram HMM is
P
?
(t,w) =
N+1
?
n=1
P
?
(t
l
|t
n?1
, t
n?2
)P
?
(w
n
|t
n
)
117
where N = |t| = |w| and the special tag $
is added to denote the sentence boundaries. The
model defines a generative process in which the
tags are selected from a transition distribution,
t
l
|t
l?1
, t
l?2
, T , determined by the two previous
tags in their history, and the word tokens are se-
lected from the emission distribution, w
l
|t
l
, E, of
the latest tag.
t
n
|t
n?1
, t
n?2
, T ? T
t
n?1
,t
n?2
w
n
|t
n
, E ? E
t
n
The PYP-HMM draws the above multinomial dis-
tributions from a hierarchical Pitman-Yor Process
prior. The Pitman-Yor prior defines a smooth back
off probability from more complex to less com-
plex transition and emission distributions. In the
PYP-HMM trigram model, the transition distri-
butions form a hierarchy with trigram transition
distributions drawn from a PYP with the bigram
transitions as their base distribution, and the bi-
gram transitions similarly backing off to the uni-
gram transitions. The hierarchical prior can be in-
tuitively understood to smooth the trigram transi-
tion distributions with bigram and unigram distri-
butions in a similar manner to an ngram language
model (Teh, 2006). This back-off structure greatly
reduces sparsity in the trigram distributions and is
achieved by chaining together the PYPs through
their base distributions:
T
ij
|a
T
, b
T
, B
i
? PYP(a
T
, b
T
, B
i
)
B
i
|a
B
, b
B
, U ? PYP(a
B
, b
B
, U)
U |a
U
, b
U
? PYP(a
U
, b
U
,Uniform).
E
i
|a
E
, b
E
, C ? PYP(a
E
, b
E
, C
i
),
where T
ij
, B
i
, and U are trigram, bigram, and un-
igram transition distributions respectively, and C
i
is either a uniform distribution (PYP-HMM) or a
bigram character language model distribution to
model word morphology (PYP-HMM+LM).
Sampling from the posterior of the hierarchi-
cal PYP is calculated with a variant of the Chi-
nese Restaurant Process (CRP) called the Chinese
Restaurant Franchise (CRF) (Teh, 2006; Goldwa-
ter et al., 2006). In the CRP analogy, each latent
variable (tag) in a sequence is represented by a
customer entering a restaurant and sitting at one of
an infinite number of tables. A customer chooses
to sit at a table in a restaurant according to the
probability
P (z
n
= k|z
1:n?1
) =
{
c
?
k
?a
n?1+b
1 ? k ? K
?
K
?
a+b
n?1+b
k = K
?
+ 1
(1)
where z
n
is the index of the table chosen by the
nth customer to the restaurant, z
1:n?1
is the seat-
ing arrangement of the previous n ? 1 customers
to enter, c
?
k
is the count of the customers at table
k, and K
?
is the total number of tables chosen by
the previous n ? 1 customers. All customers at a
table share the same dish, representing the value
assigned to the latent variables. When customers
sit at an empty table, a new dish is assigned to that
table according to the base distribution of the PYP.
To expand the CRP analogy to the CRF for hierar-
chical PYPs, when a customer sits at a new table,
a new customer enters the restaurant of the PYP of
the base distribution.
Blunsom and Cohn (2011) explored two Gibbs
sampling methods for inference with the PYP-
HMM model. The first individually samples tag
assignments for each token. The second employs
a tactic shown to be effective by earlier works by
constraining inference to only one tag per word
type (PYP-1HMM). However marginalizing over
all possible table assignments for more than a sin-
gle tag is intractable. Blunsom and Cohn (2011)
approximates the PYP-1HMM tag posteriors for a
particular sample according to heuristic fractional
table counts. This approximation is shown to be
particularly inaccurate for values of a close to one.
3.2 The Lexicon HMM
We define the lexicon to be the set of all word
types (W ) and a function (L) which maps each
word type (W
i
? W ) to an element in the power
set of possible tags T ,
L : W ? P(T ).
The Lexicon HMM (Lex-HMM) generates the
lexicon with all of the word types and their ambi-
guity classes before generating the standard HMM
parameters. The set of tags associated with each
word type is referred to as its ambiguity class
s
i
? T . The ambiguity classes are generated from
a multinomial distribution with a sparse, Pitman-
Yor Process prior,
s
i
|S ? S
S|a
S
, b
S
? PY P (a
S
, b
S
, G)
118
UB
j
T
ij
E
j
w
1
t
1
w
2
t
2
w
3
t
3
...
W
i
s
i
S
Figure 1: Lex-HMM Structure: The graphical
structure of the Lex-HMM model. In addition to
the trigram transition (T
ij
) and emission (E
j
), the
model includes an ambiguity class (s
i
) for each
word type (W
i
) drawn from a distribution S with
a PYP prior.
where S is the multinomial distribution over all
possible ambiguity classes. The base distribution
of the PYP, G, chooses the size of the ambiguity
class according to a geometric distribution (nor-
malized so that the size of the class is at most the
number of tags |T |). G assigns uniform probabil-
ity to all classes of the same size. A plate diagram
for this model is shown in Figure 1.
This model represents the observation that there
are relatively few distinct ambiguity classes over
all of the word types in a corpus. For example, the
full Penn-Treebank Wall Street Journal (WSJ) cor-
pus with 45 possible tags and 49,206 word types
has only 343 ambiguity classes. Figure 2 shows
that ambiguity classes in the WSJ have a power-
law distribution. Furthermore, these classes are
generally small; the average ambiguity class in the
WSJ corpus has 2.94 tags. The PYP prior favors
power-law distributions and the modified geomet-
ric base distribution favors smaller class sizes.
Once the lexicon is generated, the standard
HMM parameters can be generated as described
in section 3.1. The base emission probabilities C
are constrained to fit the generated lexicon. The
standard Lex-HMM model emission probabilities
for tag t
i
are uniform over all word types with t
i
in their ambiguity class. The character language
model presents a challenge because it is non-trivial
to renormalise over words with t
i
in their ambigu-
ity class. In this case word types without t
i
in their
100 101 102 103Rank
100
101
102
103
104
105
Freq
uen
cy
Gold LexiconPredicted Lexicon
Log-Log Ambiguity Class Frequency vs. Rank
Figure 2: Ambiguity Class Distribution: Log-
log plot of ambiguity class frequency over rank
for the Penn-Treebank WSJ Gold Standard lexicon
highlighting a Zipfian distribution and the ambigu-
ity of classes extracted from the predicted tags.
ambiguity class are assigned an emission probabil-
ity of 0 and the model is left deficient.
Neither of the samplers proposed by Blunsom
and Cohn (2011) and briefly described in section
3.1 are well suited to inference with the lexicon.
Local Gibbs sampling of individual token-tag as-
signments would be very unlikely to explore a
range of confusion classes, while the type based
approximate sample relies on a one-tag-per-type
restriction. Thus in the next section we extend the
Particle Filtering solution presented in Dubbin and
Blunsom (2012) to the problem of simultaneous
resampling the ambiguity class as well as the tags
for all tokens of a given type. This sampler pro-
vides both a more attractive inference algorithm
for the original PYP-HMM and one adaptable to
our Lex-HMM.
4 Inference
To perform inference with both the lexicon and
the tag assignments, we block sample the ambi-
guity class assignment as well as all tag assign-
ments for tokens of the same word type. It would
be intractable to exactly calculate the probabili-
ties to sample these blocks. Particle filters are an
example of a Sequential Monte Carlo technique
which generates unbiased samples from a distribu-
tion without summing over the intractable number
of possibilities.
The particle filter samples multiple independent
sequences of ambiguity classes and tag assign-
ments. Each sequence of samples, called a parti-
119
cle, is generated incrementally. For each particle,
the particle filter first samples an ambiguity class,
and then samples each tag assignment in sequence
based only on the previous samples in the parti-
cle. The value of the next variable in a sequence
is sampled from a proposal distribution based only
on the earlier values in the sequence. Each particle
is assigned an importance weight such that a par-
ticle sampled proportional to its weight represents
an unbiased sample of the true distribution.
Each particle represents a specific sampling of
an ambiguity class, tag sequence, t
W,p
1:n
, and the
count deltas, z
W,p
1:n
. The term t
W,p
1:n
denotes the se-
quence of n tags generated for word-type W and
stored as part of particle p ? [1, P ]. The count
deltas store the differences in the seating arrange-
ment neccessary to calculate the posterior proba-
bilities according to the Chinese restaurant fran-
chise described in section 3.1. The table counts
from each particle are the only data necessary to
calculate the probabilities described in equation
(1).
The ambiguity class for a particle is proposed
by uniformly sampling one tag from the tagset to
add to or remove from the previous iteration?s am-
biguity class with the additional possibility of us-
ing the same ambiguity class. The particle weights
are then set to
P (s
W,p
|S
?W
)
?
t?s
W,p
(e
t
+ 1)
#(E
t
)
?
t?T?s
W,p
(e
t
)
#(E
t
)
where P (s
W,p
|S
?W
) is the probability of the am-
biguity class proposed for particle p for word type
W given the ambiguity classes for the rest of the
vocabulary, e
t
is the number of word types with t
in their ambiguity class, and #(E
t
) is the number
of tables in the CRP for the emission distribution
of tag t. The last two terms of the equation cor-
rect for the difference in the base probabilities of
the words that have already been sampled with a
different lexicon.
At each token occurrence n, the next tag assign-
ment, t
W,p
n
for each particle p ? [1, P ] is deter-
mined by the seating decisions z
W,p
n
, which are
made according the proposal distribution:
q
W,p
n
(z
W,p
n
|z
W,p
1:n?1
, z
?W
) ?
P (z
W,p
n
|c
?2
, c
?1
, z
W,p
1:n?1
, z
?W
)
?P (c
+1
n
|c
?1
n
, z
W,p
n
, z
W,p
1:n?1
, z
?W
)
?P (c
+2
n
|z
W,p
n
, c
+1
n
, z
W,p
1:n?1
, z
?W
)
?P (w
W
n
|z
W,p
n
, z
W,p
1:n?1
, z
?W
).
In this case, c
?k
n
represents a tag in the context of
site t
W
n
offset by k, while z
W,p
1:n?1
and z
?W
rep-
resent the table counts from the seating decisions
previously chosen by particle p and the values at
all of the sites where a word token of type W
does not appear, respectively. This proposal dis-
tribution ignores changes to the seating arrange-
ment between the three transitions involving the
site n. The specific tag assignement, t
W
, p
n
, is
completely determined by the seating decisions
sampled according to this proposal distribution.
Once all of the particles have been sampled, one
of them is sampled with probability proportional
to its weight. This final sample is a sample from
the target distribution.
As the Particle Filter is embedded in a Gibbs
sampler which cycles over all word types this al-
gorithm is an instance of Particle Gibbs. Andrieu
et al. (2010) shows that to ensure the samples gen-
erated by SMC for a Gibbs sampler have the tar-
get distribution as the invariant density, the par-
ticle filter must be modified to perform a condi-
tional SMC update. This means that the particle
filter guarantees that one of the final particles is as-
signed the same values as the previous Gibbs iter-
ation. Therefore, a special 0
th
particle is automati-
cally assigned the value from the prior iteration of
the Gibbs sampler at each site n, though the pro-
posal probability q
W
n
(t
W,0
n
|t
W,p
1:n?1
, z
W,p
1:n?1
) still has
to be calculated to update the weight ?
W,p
n
prop-
erly. This ensures that the sampler has a chance of
reverting to the prior iteration?s sequence.
5 Experiments and Results
We provide an empirical evaluation of our pro-
posed Lex-HMM in terms of the accuracy of
the taggings learned according to the most pop-
ular metric, and the distributions over ambiguity
classes. Our experimental evaluation considers the
impact of our improved Particle Gibbs inference
algorithm both for the original PYP-HMM and
when used for inference in our extended model.
We intend to learn whether the lexicon model
can match or exceed the performance of the other
models despite focusing on only a subset of the
possible tags each iteration. We hypothesize that
an accurate lexicon model and the sparsity it in-
duces over the number of tags per word-type will
improve the performance over the standard PYP-
HMM model while also decreasing training time.
Furthermore, our lexicon model is novel, and its
120
Sampler M-1 Accuracy Time (h)
Meta-Model (CGS10) 76.1 ?
MEMM (BBDK10) 75.5
?
40*
Lex-HMM 71.1 7.9
Type PYP-HMM 70.1 401.2
Local PYP-HMM 70.2 8.6
PYP-1HMM 75.6 20.6
Lex-HMM+LM 77.5 16.9
Type PYP-HMM+LM 73.5 446.0
PYP-1HMM+LM 77.5 34.9
Table 1: M-1 Accuracy on the WSJ Corpus:
Comparison of the accuracy of each of the sam-
plers with and without the language model emis-
sion prior on the English WSJ Corpus. The second
column reports run time in hours where available*.
Note the Lex-HMM+LM model matches the PYP-
1HMM+LM approximation despite finishing in
half the time. The abbreviations in parentheses
indicate that the results were reported in CGS10
(Christodoulopoulos et al., 2010) and BBDK10
(Berg-Kirkpatrick et al., 2010) *CGS10 reports
that the MEMM model takes approximately 40
hours on 16 cores.
accuracy in representing ambiguity classes is an
important aspect of its performance. The model
focuses inference on the most likely tag choices,
represented by ambiguity classes.
5.1 Unsupervised Part-of-Speech Tagging
The most popular evaluation for unsupervised
part-of-speech taggers is to induce a tagging for
a corpus and compare the induced tags to those
annotated by a linguist. As the induced tags are
simply integer labels, we must employ a map-
ping between these and the more meaningful syn-
tactic categories of the gold standard. We re-
port results using the many-to-one (M-1) met-
ric considered most intuitive by the evaluation of
Christodoulopoulos et al. (2010). M-1 measures
the accuracy of the model after mapping each pre-
dicted class to its most frequent corresponding tag.
While Christodoulopoulos et al. (2010) found V-
measure to be more stable over the number of
parts-of-speech, this effect doesn?t appear when
the number of tags is constant, as in our case. For
experiments on English, we report results on the
entire Penn. Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993). For
other languages we use the corpora made avail-
able for the CoNLL-X Shared Task (Buchholz and
Marsi, 2006). All Lex-HMM results are reported
with 10 particles as no significant improvement
was found with 50 particles.
Table 1 compares the M-1 accuracies of both
the PYP-HMM and the Lex-HMM models on the
Penn. Treebank Wall Street Journal corpus. Blun-
som and Cohn (2011) found that the Local PYP-
HMM+LM sampler is unable to mix, achieving
accuracy below 50%, therefore it has been left
out of this analysis. The Lex-HMM+LM model
achieves the same accuracy as the state-of-the-
art PYP-1HMM+LM approximation. The Lex-
HMM+LM?s focus on only the most likely tags for
each word type allows it to finish training in half
the time as the PYP-1HMM+LM approximation
without any artificial restrictions on the number of
tags per type. This contrasts with other approaches
that eliminate the constraint at a much greater cost,
e.g. the Type PYP-HMM, the MEMM, and the
Meta-Model
1
The left side of table 2 compares the M-1 accu-
racies of the Lex-HMM model to the PYP-HMM
model. These models both ignore word morphol-
ogy and rely on word order. The 1HMM approxi-
mation achieves the highest average accuracy. The
Lex-HMM model matches or surpasses the type-
based PYP-HMM approach in six languages while
running much faster due to the particle filter con-
sidering a smaller set of parts-of-speech for each
particle. However, in the absence of morpho-
logical information, the Lex-HMM model has a
similar average accuracy to the local and type-
based PYP-HMM samplers. The especially low
performance on Hungarian, a language with free
word ordering and strong morphology, suggests
that the Lex-HMM model struggles to find ambi-
guity classes without morphology. The Lex-HMM
model has a higher average accuracy than the type-
based or local PYP-HMM samplers when Hungar-
ian is ignored.
The right side of table 2 compares the M-1 ac-
curacies of the Lex-HMM+LM model to the PYP-
HMM+LM. The language model leads to consis-
tently improved performance for each of the sam-
plers excepting the token sampler, which is un-
able to mix properly with the additional complex-
ity. The accuracies achieved by the 1HMM+LM
1
While were unable to get an estimate on the runtime of
the Meta-Model, it uses a system similar to the feature-based
system of the MEMM with an additional feature derived from
the proposed class from the brown model. Therefore, it is
likely that this model has a similar runtime.
121
Language Lex-HMM PYP-HMM Local 1HMM Lex-HMM+LM PYP-HMM+LM 1HMM+LM
WSJ 71.1 70.1 70.2 75.6 77.5 73.5 77.5
Arabic 57.2 57.6 56.2 61.9 62.1 62.7 62.0
Bulgarian 67.2 67.8 67.6 71.4 72.7 72.1 76.2
Czech 61.3 61.6 64.5 65.4 68.2 67.4 67.9
Danish 68.6 70.3 69.1 70.6 74.7 73.1 74.6
Dutch 70.3 71.6 64.1 73.2 71.7 71.8 72.9
Hungarian 57.9 61.8 64.8 69.6 64.4 69.9 73.2
Portuguese 69.5 71.1 68.1 72.0 76.3 73.9 77.1
Spanish 73.2 69.1 68.5 74.7 80.0 75.2 78.8
Swedish 66.3 63.5 67.6 67.2 70.4 67.6 68.6
Average 66.3 (67.2) 66.5 (67.0) 66.1 (66.2) 70.2 (70.3) 71.8 (72.6) 70.7 (70.8) 72.9 (72.9)
Table 2: M-1 Accuracy of Lex-HMM and PYP-HMM models: Comparison of M-1 accuracy for the
lexicon based model (Lex-HMM) and the PYP-HMM model on several languages. The Lex-HMM and
PYP-HMM columns indicate the results of word type based particle filtering with 10 and 100 particles,
respectively, while the Local and 1HMM columns use the token based sampler and the 1HMM approxi-
mation described by Blunsom and Cohn (2011). The token based sampler was run for 500 iterations and
the other samplers for 200. The percentages in brakets represent the average accuracy over all languages
except for Hungarian.
sampler represent the previous state-of-the-art.
These results show that the Lex-HMM+LM model
achieves state-of-the-art M-1 accuracies on sev-
eral datasets, including the English WSJ. The Lex-
HMM+LM model performs nearly as well as, and
often better than, the 1HMM+LM sampler without
any restrictions on tag assignments.
The drastic improvement in the performance
of the Lex-HMM model reinforces our hypothe-
sis that morphology is critical to the inference of
ambiguity classes. Without the language model
representing word morphology, the distinction be-
tween ambiguity classes is too ambiguous. This
leads the sampler to infer an excess of poor am-
biguity classes. For example, the tag assignments
from the Lex-PYP model on the WSJ dataset con-
sist of 660 distinct ambiguity classes, while the
Lex-PYP+LM tag assignments only have 182 dis-
tinct ambiguity classes.
Note that while the Lex-HMM and Lex-
HMM+LM samplers do not have any restrictions
on inference, they do not sacrifice time. The ad-
ditional samples generated by the particle filter
are mitigated by limiting the number of tags each
particle must consider. In practice, this results in
the Lex-HMM samplers with 10 particles running
in half time as the 1HMM samplers. The Lex-
HMM+LM sampler with 10 particles took 16.9
hours, while the 1HMM+LM sampler required
34.9 hours. Furthermore, the run time evaluation
does not take advantage of the inherent distributed
nature of particle filters. Each of the particles can
be sampled completely independentally from the
others, making it trivial to run each on a seperate
core.
5.2 Lexicon Analysis
While section 5.1 demonstrates that the Lex-
HMM+LM sampler performs similarly to the
more restricted 1HMM+LM, we also seek to eval-
uate the accuracy of the lexicon model itself. We
compare the ambiguity classes extracted from the
gold standard and predicted tag assignments of the
WSJ corpus. We also explore the relationship be-
tween the actual and sampled ambiguity classes.
The solid curve in figure 2 shows the distribu-
tion of the number of word types assigned to each
ambiguity set extracted from the gold standard tag
assignments from the Penn Treebank Wall Street
Journal corpus. The straight line strongly indi-
cates that ambiguity classes follow a Zipfian dis-
tribution. Figure 2 also graphs the distribution of
the ambiguity classes extracted from the best tag-
assignment prediction from the model. The pre-
dicted graph has a similar shape to the gold stan-
dard but represents half as many distinct ambigu-
ity classes - 182 versus 343.
For a qualitative analysis of the generated lex-
icon, table 3 lists frequent ambiguity classes and
the most common words assigned to them. The 14
most frequent ambiguity classes contain only one
tag each, the top half of table 3 shows the 5 most
frequent. One third of the word-types in the first
five rows of the table are exactly matched with the
ambiguity classes from the gold standard. Most of
the remaining words in those rows are assigned to
122
Rank Gold Rank Tags Top Word Types
1 1 NNP Mr., Corp. (1), Inc. (.99), Co. (1), Exchange (.99)
2 2 NN % (1), company, stock (.99), -RRB- (0), years (0)
3 3 JJ new, other, first (.9), most (0), major (1)
4 5 NNS companies, prices (1), quarter (0), week (0), investors
5 4 CD $ (0), million (1), billion, 31, # (0)
15 303 NN, CD yen (.47, 0), dollar (1, 0), 150 (0, 1), 29 (0, 1), 33 (0, 1)
16 17 VB, NN plan (.03, .9), offer (.2, .74), issues (0, 0), increase (.34, .66), end (.18, .81)
17 115 DT, NNP As (0, 0), One (0, .01), First (0, .82), Big (0, .91), On (0, .01)
18 11 NN, JJ market (.99, 0), U.S. (0, 0), bank (1, 0), cash (.98, 0), high (.06, .9)
20 22 VBN, JJ estimated (.58, .15), lost (.43, .03), failed (.35, .04), related (.74, .23), re-
duced (.57, .12)
Table 3: Selection of Predicted Ambiguity Classes: Common ambiguity classes from the predicted
part-of-speech assignments from the WSJ data set, and the five most common word types associated
with each ambiguity class. The sets are ranked according to the number of word types associated to
them. Words in bold are matched to exactly the same ambiguity set in the gold standard. The lower
five ambiguity classes are the most common with more than one part-of-speech. Numbers in parentheses
represent the proportion of tokens of that type assigned to each tag in the gold standard for that ambiguity
class.
a class representing almost all of the words? occur-
rences in the gold standard, e.g., ?Corp.? is an NNP
in 1514 out of 1521 occurrences. Some words are
assigned to classes with similar parts of speech,
e.g. {NNS} rather than {NN} for week.
The lower half of table 3 shows the most fre-
quent ambiguity classes with more than a sin-
gle tag. The words assigned to the {NN,CD},
{DT,NNP}, and {NN,JJ} classes are not them-
selves ambiguous. Rather words that are unam-
biguously one of the two tags are often assigned
to an ambiguity class with both. The most com-
mon types in the {NN, CD} set are unambiguously
either NN or CD. In many cases the words are
merged into broader ambiguity classes because the
Lex-HMM+LM uses the language model to model
the morphology of words over individual parts-
of-speech, rather than entire ambiguity classes.
Therefore, a word-type is likely to be assigned
a given ambiguity class as long as at least one
part-of-speech in that ambiguity class is associ-
ated with morphologically similar words. These
results suggest modifying the Lex-HMM+LM to
model word morphology over ambiguity classes
rather than parts-of-speech.
The {VB,NN} and {VBN,JJ} are representative
of true ambiguity classes. Occurrences of words in
these classes are likely to be either of the possible
parts-of-speech. These results show that the Lex-
HMM is modelling ambiguity classes as intended.
6 Conclusion
This paper described an extension to the PYP-
HMM part-of-speech model that incorporates a
sparse prior on the lexicon and an SMC based in-
ference algorithm. These contributions provide a
more plausible model of part-of-speech induction
which models the true ambiguity of tag to type as-
signments without the loss of performance of ear-
lier HMM models. Our empirical evaluation indi-
cates that this model is able to meet or exceed the
performance of the previous state-of-the-art across
a range of language families.
In addition to the promising empirical results,
our analysis indicates that the model learns ambi-
guity classes that are often quite similar to those
in the gold standard. We believe that further im-
provements in both the structure of the lexicon
prior and the inference algorithm will lead to addi-
tional performance gains. For example, the model
could be improved by better modelling the rela-
tionship between a word?s morphology and its am-
biguity class. We intend to apply our model to
recent semi-supervised approaches which induce
partial tag dictionaries from parallel language data
(Das and Petrov, 2011) or the Wiktionary (Li et
al., 2012). We hypothesize that the additional data
should improve the modelled lexicon and conse-
quently improve tag assignments.
The Lex-HMM models ambiguity classes to fo-
cus the sampler on the most likely parts-of-speech
for a given word-type. In doing so, it matches or
improves on the accuracy of other models while
running much faster.
123
References
Christophe Andrieu, Arnaud Doucet, and Roman
Holenstein. 2010. Particle markov chain monte
carlo methods. Journal Of The Royal Statistical So-
ciety Series B, 72(3):269?342.
Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, Alexandre Bouchard-C?ot?e,
John DeNero, and Dan Klein. 2010. Painless un-
supervised learning with features. In Human Lan-
guage Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 582?590, Los
Angeles, California, June. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Phil Blunsom and Trevor Cohn. 2011. A hierarchi-
cal Pitman-Yor process hmm for unsupervised part
of speech induction. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages
865?874, Portland, Oregon, USA, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Peter F. Brown, Peter V. deSouza, Robert L. Mer-
cer, Vincent J. Della Pietra, and Jenifer C. Lai.
1992. Class-based n-gram models of natural lan-
guage. Comput. Linguist., 18:467?479, December.
Sabine Buchholz and Erwin Marsi. 2006. Conll-x
shared task on multilingual dependency parsing. In
Proceedings of the Tenth Conference on Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning, CoNLL-X ?06,
pages 149?164, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Christos Christodoulopoulos, Sharon Goldwater, and
Mark Steedman. 2010. Two decades of unsu-
pervised POS induction: How far have we come?
In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
575?584, Cambridge, MA, October. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Alexander Clark. 2003. Combining distributional and
morphological information for part of speech induc-
tion. In Proceedings of the tenth Annual Meeting
of the European Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (EACL), pages 59?66.
Dipanjan Das and Slav Petrov. 2011. Unsupervised
part-of-speech tagging with bilingual graph-based
projections. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies - Volume
1, HLT ?11, pages 600?609, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Gregory Dubbin and Phil Blunsom. 2012. Unsuper-
vised bayesian part of speech inference with particle
gibbs. In Peter A. Flach, Tijl De Bie, and Nello Cris-
tianini, editors, ECML/PKDD (1), volume 7523 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 760?773.
Springer.
Kuzman Ganchev, Jo?ao Grac?a, Jennifer Gillenwater,
and Ben Taskar. 2010. Posterior regularization for
structured latent variable models. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research, 99:2001?2049, August.
Jianfeng Gao and Mark Johnson. 2008. A compar-
ison of bayesian estimators for unsupervised hid-
den markov model pos taggers. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, EMNLP ?08, pages 344?352,
Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Sharon Goldwater and Tom Griffiths. 2007. A fully
bayesian approach to unsupervised part-of-speech
tagging. In Proc. of the 45th Annual Meeting of
the ACL (ACL-2007), pages 744?751, Prague, Czech
Republic, June.
Sharon Goldwater, Tom Griffiths, and Mark John-
son. 2006. Interpolating between types and tokens
by estimating power-law generators. In Y. Weiss,
B. Sch?olkopf, and J. Platt, editors, Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 18, pages 459?
466. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Mark Johnson. 2007. Why doesnt EM find good
HMM POS-taggers? In Proc. of the 2007 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-2007), pages 296?305, Prague,
Czech Republic.
Julian Kupiec. 1992. Robust part-of-speech tagging
using a hidden Markov model. Computer Speech
and Language, 6:225?242.
Yoong Keok Lee, Aria Haghighi, and Regina Barzilay.
2010. Simple type-level unsupervised pos tagging.
In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP
?10, pages 853?861, Morristown, NJ, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Shen Li, Jo?ao V. Grac?a, and Ben Taskar. 2012. Wiki-ly
supervised part-of-speech tagging. In Proceedings
of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning, EMNLP-CoNLL ?12,
pages 1389?1398, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
P. Liang, M. I. Jordan, and D. Klein. 2010. Type-
based MCMC. In North American Association for
Computational Linguistics (NAACL).
Mitchell P. Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and
Beatrice Santorini. 1993. Building a large anno-
tated corpus of English: the Penn treebank. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 19(2):313?330.
Bernard Merialdo. 1993. Tagging english text with
a probabilistic model. Computational Linguistics,
20:155?171.
124
Yee Whye Teh. 2006. A hierarchical bayesian lan-
guage model based on Pitman-Yor processes. In
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference
on Computational Linguistics and the 44th annual
meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, ACL-44, pages 985?992, Morristown, NJ,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kristina Toutanova and Mark Johnson. 2008. A
Bayesian LDA-based model for semi-supervised
part-of-speech tagging. In J.C. Platt, D. Koller,
Y. Singer, and S. Roweis, editors, Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 20, pages 1521?
1528. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
125
NAACL-HLT Workshop on the Induction of Linguistic Structure, pages 47?54,
Montre?al, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Unsupervised Part of Speech Inference with Particle Filters
Gregory Dubbin and Phil Blunsom
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Wolfson Building, Parks Road
Oxford, OX1 3QD, United Kingdom
Gregory.Dubbin@wolfson.ox.ac.uk Phil.Blunsom@cs.ox.ac.uk
Abstract
As linguistic models incorporate more subtle
nuances of language and its structure, stan-
dard inference techniques can fall behind. Of-
ten, such models are tightly coupled such that
they defy clever dynamic programming tricks.
However, Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) ap-
proaches, i.e. particle filters, are well suited
to approximating such models, resolving their
multi-modal nature at the cost of generating
additional samples. We implement two par-
ticle filters, which jointly sample either sen-
tences or word types, and incorporate them
into a Gibbs sampler for part-of-speech (PoS)
inference. We analyze the behavior of the par-
ticle filters, and compare them to a block sen-
tence sampler, a local token sampler, and a
heuristic sampler, which constrains inference
to a single PoS per word type. Our findings
show that particle filters can closely approx-
imate a difficult or even intractable sampler
quickly. However, we found that high poste-
rior likelihood do not necessarily correspond
to better Many-to-One accuracy. The results
suggest that the approach has potential and
more advanced particle filters are likely to lead
to stronger performance.
1 Introduction
Modern research is steadily revealing more of the
subtle structure of natural language to create in-
creasingly intricate models. Many modern problems
in computational linguistics require or benefit from
modeling the long range correlations between latent
variables, e.g. part of speech (PoS) induction (Liang
et al, 2010), dependency parsing (Smith and Eis-
ner, 2008), and coreference resolution (Denis and
Baldridge, 2007). These correlations make infer-
ence difficult because they reflect the complicated
effect variables have on each other in such tightly
coupled models.
Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) methods, like par-
ticle filters, are particularly well suited to estimating
tightly coupled distributions (Andrieu et al, 2010).
Particle filters sample sequences of latent variable
assignments by concurrently generating several rep-
resentative sequences consistent with a model?s con-
ditional dependencies. The sequential nature of the
sampling simplifies inference by ignoring ambigu-
ous correlations with unsampled variables at the
cost of sampling the sequence multiple times. The
few applications of particle filters in computational
linguistics generally focus on the online nature of
SMC (Canini et al, 2009; Borschinger and John-
son, 2011). However, batch applications still benefit
from the power of SMC to generate samples from
tightly coupled distributions that would otherwise
need to be approximated. Furthermore, the time cost
of the additional samples generated by SMC can be
mitigated by generating them in parallel.
This report presents an initial approach to the inte-
gration of SMC and block sampling, sometimes ref-
fered to as Particle Gibbs (PG) sampling (Andrieu
et al, 2010). Unsupervised PoS induction serves
as a motivating example for future extensions to
other problems. Section 3 reviews the PYP-HMM
model used for PoS inference. Section 4 explains the
Sequential Importance Sampling (SIS) algorithm, a
basic SMC method that generates samples for the
47
block sampler. This approach yields two implemen-
tations: a simple sentence-based block sampler (4.1)
and a more complicated type-based sampler (4.2).
Finally, section 5 evaluates both implementations on
a variety of unsupervised PoS inference tasks, ana-
lyzing the behavior of the SMC inference and com-
paring them to state-of-the-art approaches.
2 Background
SMC was introduced in 1993 as a Bayesian esti-
mator for signal processing problems with strong
non-linear conditional dependencies (Gordon et al,
1993). Since then, SMC methods have been adopted
by many fields, including statistics, biology, eco-
nomics, etc. (Jasra et al, 2008; Beaumont, 2003;
Fernandez-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramirez, 2007).
The SMC approach is the probabilisitic analogue of
the beam search heuristic, where the beam width can
be compared to the number of particles and pruning
is analogous to resampling.
The basic SMC approach serves as the basis for
several variants. Many SMC implementations re-
sample the population of particles to create a new
population that minimizes the effect of increasing
sample variance with increasing sequence length
(Kitagawa, 1996). Particle smoothing variants of
SMC reduce the relative variance of marginals early
in the sequence, as well improving the diversity
of the final sample (Fearnhead et al, 2008). Par-
ticle Markov chain Monte Carlo (PMCMC) for-
mally augments classic Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) approaches, like Gibbs sampling, with
samples generated by particle filters (Andrieu et al,
2010).
3 The PYP-HMM
The PYP-HMM model of PoS generation demon-
strates the tightly coupled correlations that com-
plicate many standard inference methods (Blunsom
and Cohn, 2011). The model applies a hierarchical
Pitman-Yor process (PYP) prior to a trigram hidden
Markov model (HMM) to jointly model the distri-
bution of a sequence of latent word classes, t, and
word tokens, w. This model performs well on cor-
pora in multiple languages, but the lack of a closed
form solution for the sample probabilities makes it a
strong canditate for PG sampling. The joint proba-
bility defined by a trigram HMM is
P?(t,w) =
N+1?
n=1
P?(tl|tn?1, tn?2)P?(wn|tn)
where N = |t| = |w| and the special tag $ is added
to the boundaries on the sentence. The model de-
fines transition and emission distributions,
tn|tn?1, tn?2, T ? Ttn?1,tn?2
wn|tn, E ? Etn
The PYP-HMM smoothes these distributions by ap-
plying hierarchical PYP priors to them. The hierar-
chical PYP describes a back-off path of simpler PYP
priors,
Tij |a
T , bT , Bi ? PYP(a
T , bT , Bi)
Bi|a
B, bB, U ? PYP(aB, bb, U)
U |aU , bU ? PYP(aU , bU ,Uniform).
Ei|a
E , bE , C ? PYP(aE , bE , Ci),
where Tij , Bi, and U are trigram, bigram, and un-
igram transition distributions respectively and Ci is
either a uniform distribution (PYP-HMM) or a bi-
gram character language model emission distribu-
tion (PYP-HMM+LM, intended to model basic mor-
phology).
Draws from the posterior of the hierarchical
PYP can be calculated with a variant of the Chi-
nese Restaraunt Process (CRP) called the Chinese
Restaurant Franchise (CRF) (Teh, 2006; Goldwater
et al, 2006). In the CRP analogy, each latent vari-
able in a sequence is represented by a customer en-
tering a restaurant and sitting at one of an infinite
number of tables. A customer chooses to sit at a ta-
ble in a restaurant according to the probability
P (zn = k|z1:n?1) =
{
c?k ?a
n?1+b 1 ? k ? K
?
K?a+b
n?1+b k = K
? + 1
(1)
where zn is the index of the table chosen by the nth
customer to the restaurant, z1:n?1 is the seating ar-
rangement of the previous n? 1 customers to enter,
c?k is the count of the customers at table k, and K
?
is the total number of tables chosen by the previ-
ous n? 1 customers. All customers at a table share
the same dish, representing the value assigned to the
48
latent variables. When customers sit at an empty ta-
ble, a new dish is assigned to that table according to
the base distribution of the PYP. To expand the CRP
analogy to the CRF for hierarchical PYPs, when a
customer sits at a new table, a new customer enters
the restaurant representing the PYP of the base dis-
tribution.
4 Sequential Monte Carlo
While MCMC approximates a distribution as the av-
erage of a sequence of samples taken from the poste-
rior of the distribution, SMC approximates a distri-
bution as the importance weighted sum of several se-
quentially generated samples, called particles. This
article describes two SMC samplers that jointly sam-
ple multiple tag assignments: a sentence based block
sampler (sent) and a word type based block sam-
pler (type). The basics of particle filtering are out-
lined below, while the implementation specifics of
the sent and type particle filters are described in
secions 4.1 and 4.2, respectively.
SMC is essentially the probabilistic analogue of
the beam search heuristic. SMC stores P sequences,
analogous to beam width, and extends each incre-
mentally according to a proposal distribution qn,
similar to the heuristic cost function in beam search.
Many particle filtering implementations also include
a resampling step which acts like pruning by reduc-
ing the number of unlikely sequences.
We implemented Sequential Importance
Sampling (SIS), detailed by Doucet and Jo-
hansen (2009), to approximate joint samples
from the sentence and word type distributions.
This approach approximates a target distribution,
pin(x1:n) =
?n(x1:n)
Zn
, of the sequence, x1:n, of n
random variables, that is ?n(x1:n) calculates the
unnormalized density of x1:n.
SIS initilizes each particle p ? [1, P ] by sampling
from the initial proposal distribution q1(x
p
1), where
xpn is the value assigned to the n-th latent variable for
particle p. The algorithm then sequentially extends
each particle according to the conditional proposal
distribution qn(x
p
n|x
p
1:n), where x
p
1:n is the sequence
of values assigned to the first n latent variables in
particle p. After extending a particle p, SIS updates
the importance weight ?pn = ?
p
n?1 ? ?n(x
p
1:n). The
weight update, defined as
?n(x1:n) =
?n(x1:n)
?n?1(x1:n?1)qn(xn|x1:n?1)
, (2)
accounts for the discrepancy between the proposal
distribution, qn, and the target distribution, pin,
without normalizing over x1:n, which becomes in-
tractable for longer sequences even in discrete
domains. The normalizing constant of the tar-
get distribution is approximately Zn ?
?P
p=1 ?
p
n
and the unnormalized density is ?n(x1:n) ??P
p=1 ?
p
nifx
p
1:n = x1:n. The particles can also be
used to generate an unbiased sample from pin by
choosing a particle p proportional to its weight ?pn.
Andrieu et al (2010) shows that to ensure the
samples generated by SMC for a Gibbs sampler has
the target distribution as the invariant density, the
particle filter must be modified to perform a con-
ditional SMC update. This means that the particle
filter guarantees that one of the final particles is as-
signed the same values as the previous Gibbs iter-
ation. Our implementation of the conditional SMC
update reserves one special particle, 0, for which the
proposal distribution always chooses the previous it-
eration?s value at that site.
4.1 Sentence Sampling
The sent particle filter samples blocks of tag as-
signments tS1:n for a sentence, S, composed of to-
kens, wS1:n. Sampling an entire sentence minimizes
the risk of assigning a tag with a high probabil-
ity given its local context but minimal probability
given the entire sentence. Sentences can be sampled
by ignoring table counts while sampling a proposal
sentence, incorporating them after the fact with a
Metropolis-Hastings acceptance test (Gao and John-
son, 2008). The Metropolis-Hastings step simplifies
the sentence block particle filter further by not re-
quiring the conditional SMC update.
While there is already a tractable dynamic pro-
gramming approach to sampling an entire sentence
based on the Forward-Backward algorithm, parti-
cle filtering the sentences PYP-HMM model should
prove beneficial. For the trigram HMM defined
by the model, the forward-backward sampling ap-
proach has time complexity in O(NT 3) for a sen-
tence of length N with T possible tag assignments
at each site. Particle filters with P particles can ap-
proximate these samples in O(NTP ) time, which
49
becomes much faster as the number of tags, T , in-
creases.
Sampling of sentence S begins by removing all
of the transitions and emitions in S from the table
counts, z, resulting in the table counts z?S of tag as-
signments t?S the values assigned to the variables
outside of S. For each site index n ? [1, N ] in the
sentence, the particle filter chooses the new tag as-
signment, tS,pn , for each particle p ? [1, P ] from the
sentence proposal distribution,
qSn (t
S,p
n |t
S,p
1:n?1) ? P (t
S,p
n |t
S,p
n?2, t
S,p
n?1, t
?S , z?S)
? P (wS,pn |t
S,p
n , t
?S , z?S ,w?S).
After each new tag is assigned, the particle?s weight
is updated according to equation (2). The simplic-
ity of the proposal density hints at the advantage of
particle filtering over forward-backward sampling:
it tracks only P histories and their weights rather
than tracking the probability of over all possible his-
tories. Once each particle has assigned a value to
each site in the sentence, one tag sequence is chosen
proportional to its particle weight, ?S,pN .
4.2 Type Sampling
The type sampling case for the PYP-HMM is more
complicated than the sent sampler. The long-range
couplings defined by the hierarchical PYP priors
strongly influence the joint distribution of tags as-
signed to tokens of the same word type (Liang et
al., 2010). Therefore, the affects of the seating de-
cisions of new customers cannot be postponed dur-
ing filtering as in sentence sampling. To account
for this, the type particle filter samples sequences
of seating arrangements and tag assignments jointly,
xW1:n = (t
W
1:n, z
W
1:n), for the word-type, W . The fi-
nal table counts are resampled once a tag assignment
has been chosen from the particles.
Tracking the seating arrangement history for each
particle adds an additional complication to the type
particle filter. The exchangeability of seating deci-
sions means that only counts of customers are nec-
essary to represent the history. Each particle repre-
sents both a tag sequence, tW,p1:n , and the count deltas,
zW,p1:n . The count deltas of each particle are stored in a
hash table that maps a dish in one of the CRF restau-
rants to the number of tables serving that dish and
the total number of customers seated at those tables.
The count delta hash table ensures that it has suffi-
cient data to calculate the correct probabilities (per
equation (1)) by storing any counts that are different
from the base counts, z?W , and defering to the base
counts for any counts it does not have stored.
At each token occurence n, the next tag assign-
ment, tW,pn for each particle p ? [1, P ] is chosen first
according to the word type proposal distribution
qWn (t
W,p
n |t
W,p
1:n?1, z
W,p
1:n?1) ?
P (tW,pn |c
?2
n , c
?1
n , t
?W,p
1:n?1, z
?W,p
1:n?1)
? P (c+1n |c
?1
n , t
W,p
n , t
?W,p
1:n?1, z
?W,p
1:n?1)
? P (c+2n |t
W,p
n , c
+1
n , t
?W,p
1:n?1, z
?W,p
1:n?1)
? P (wWn |t
W,p
n , t
?W,p
1:n?1, z
?W,p
1:n?1,w
?W,p
1:n?1).
In this case, c?kn represents a tag in the context
of site tWn offset by k, while t
?W,p
1:n?1, z
W,p
1:n?1, and
w?W,p1:n?1 represent the tag assignments, table counts,
and word token values chosen by particle p as well
as the values at all of the sites where a word token
of type W does not appear. This proposal distribu-
tion ignores changes to the seating arrangement be-
tween the three transitions involving the site n. The
specific seating arrangement of a particle is chosen
after the tag choice, at which point the weights are
updated by the result of equation (2). As with the
sent sampler, once all of the particles have been
sampled, one of them is sampled with probability
proportional to its weight. This final sample is a
sample from the true target probability.
As mentioned earlier, the sequence of particle ap-
proximations do not have the target distribution as
invariant unless they use the conditional SMC up-
date. Therefore, a the special 0 particle is automat-
ically assigned the value from the prior iteration of
the Gibbs sampler at each site n, though the proposal
probability qWn (t
W,0
n |t
W,p
1:n?1, z
W,p
1:n?1) still has to be
calculated to update the weight ?W,pn properly. This
ensures that the type sampler has a non-zero prob-
ability of reverting to the prior iteration?s sequence.
5 Experiments and Results
We take two approaches to evaluating the SMC
based samplers. The first approach is an analysis of
the samplers as inference algorithms. The samplers
should tend to maximize the posterior likelihood of
the model over iterations, eventually converging to
50
the mode. Section 5.1 analyzes the particle filter
based samplers with various numbers of particles in
an effort to understand how they behave.
Then, section 5.2 evaluates each of the proposed
approaches on PoS inference tasks from several lan-
guages. These results allow a practical comparison
with other PoS inference approaches.
5.1 SMC Analysis
Before comparing the performance of the SMC
block samplers to other inference methods, we wish
to learn more about the approaches themselves. It
is not clear how well the benefits of block sampling
transfer to SMC based approaches. Both the sent
and type samplers are novel approaches to com-
putational linguistics, and many of their properties
are unclear. For example, the samples generated
from the particle filter should have a higher vari-
ance than the target distribution. If the variance is
too high, the sampler will be slower to converge.
While additional particles lower the relative vari-
ance, they also increase the run time linearly. It is
possible that there is a threshold of particles nec-
essary to ensure that some are high likelihood se-
quences, beyond which inference gains are minimal
the additional computational expense is wasted. All
of the experiments in this section were run on the
Arabic corpus from the CoNLL-X shared language
task, which is small enough to quickly experiment
with these issues (Buchholz and Marsi, 2006).
The sentence based sampler, sent, samples from
a distribution that can be exactly computed, facilitat-
ing comparisons between the exact sampler and the
SMC approach. Figure 5.1 compares the posterior
log-likelihoods of the sent sampler and the exact
sentence sampler over 200 iterations. As expected,
the likelihoods of the particle filters approach that of
the exact sentence sampler as the number of particles
increases from 25 to 100, which completely overlaps
the performance of the exact sampler by the 50th it-
eration. This is impressive, because even with 99
additional sequences sampled (one for each particle)
each iteration the SMC approach is still faster than
the exact sampler. Furthermore, the Arabic tagset
has only 20 distinct tags, while other data sets, e.g.
the WSJ and Bulgarian, use tagsets more than twice
as large. The particle filter, which is linear in the
number of tags, should take twice as long per token
0 50 100 150 200Iteration
6.6
6.4
6.2
6.0
5.8
5.6
5.4
5.2
5.0
4.8
Log
-Lik
elih
ood
1e5
Sent: ExactSent: 25 ParticlesSent: 50 ParticlesSent: 100 Particles
Log-Likelihood of Sentence Samplers over 200 Iterations
Figure 1: Posterior Log-Likelihood of PYP-HMM infer-
ence with exact as well as SMC sentence sampler with
various numbers of particles. Error bars represent on
standard deviation over three runs.
sampled on those data, relative to the arabic data.
On the other hand, the forward-backward per token
sample time, which is cubic in tagset size, should
increase at least eightfold. So the time savings im-
prove dramatically as the size of the tagset increases.
Figure 2 compares the table configuration log-
likelihood of the 1HMM approximation imple-
mented by Blunsom and Cohn (2011) with the type
particle filter based sampler as well as the local,
token-based sampler and the exact block sentence
sampler. Unlike the sentence based block sampler,
type sampler cannot be exactly calculated, even
with the 1HMM approach of constraining inference
to only consider sequences that assign the same tag
to every token of the same word type. The 1HMM
sampler approximates these probabilities using ex-
pected table counts. Theoretically, the type sam-
pler should be a better approximation, being guar-
anteed to approach the true distribution as the num-
ber of particles increases. However, the type sam-
pler does not constrain inference as the 1HMM does,
slowing convergence by wasting particles on less
likely tag sequences. As expected, the type sam-
pler converges with the 1HMM sampler with suffi-
ciently many particles in a few iterations. The exact
block sentence sampler surpases approaches by iter-
ation 75 and does not seem to have converged by the
end of 200 iterations.
The local sampler samples a single site at a time
with a standard, token-based Gibbs sampler. The
51
0 50 100 150 200Iteration
6.6
6.4
6.2
6.0
5.8
5.6
5.4
5.2
5.0
4.8
Log
-Lik
elih
ood
1e5
1HMMLocalSent: ExactType: 100 Particles
Log-Likelihood Comparison of Samplers over 200 Iterations
Figure 2: Posterior Log-Likelihood of PYP-HMM infer-
ence with particle filters, 1HMM approximation, and lo-
cal samplers. Error bars represent one standard deviation
over three runs.
local sampler performs surprisingly well, averaging
a slightly higher likelihood than both the 1HMM
and the type samplers. This may be an indication
that the PYP-HMM model is not too tightly coupled
for the local sampler to eventually migrate toward
more likely modes. Note that both the type and
1HMM samplers initially take much larger steps,
before eventually hitting a plateau. This suggests
that some sort of mixed sampler may outperform
its component samplers by only occasionally taking
large steps.
5.2 Unsupervised Part-of-Speech Tagging
The samplers evaluated in section 5.1 induce syn-
tactic categories analogous to PoS tags. However,
to induce PoS tags, each syntactic category must be
assigned to a PoS tag in the tagset. Each site in a
corpus is assigned the most commonly visited syn-
tactic category at that site over all iterations. The
many-to-one (M-1) assignment for a category is the
most common gold standard PoS tag of the tokens
assigned to that category. While this assignment
theoretically allows a perfect accuracy if each token
is assigned to its own category, these experiments
limit the number of induced categories to the size of
the tagset. Table 1 compares the M-1 accuracy of
the sent and type particle filter samplers, from
sections 4.1 and 4.2, with 100 particles each. The
particle filter based samplers rarely score a higher
accuracy than even the local sampler, which com-
pletes 500 iterations before the particle filters com-
plete 200.
While figure 2 shows that the sentence based
block sampler eventually surpasses the 1HMM sam-
pler in likelihood, the accuracies of the 1HMM and
1HMM-LM approximations remain well above the
other approaches. The 1HMM sampler and the 100
particle type sampler have approximately the same
likelihood, yet the M-1 accuracy of the 1HMM sam-
pler is much higher. This suggests that there are
high-likelihood assignments that produce lower ac-
curacy results, presumably related to the fact that the
type sampler is not restricted to assignments with
exactly one tag for each word type. If the model
assigns equal likelihood to these assignments, infer-
ence will not be able to distinguish between them.
Perhaps a model that assigned higher likelihoods to
tag sequences with fewer tags per word type would
have a stronger correlation between likelihood and
accuracy.
6 Future Work
While the results leave much room for improvement,
the approach presented here is the most basic of par-
ticle methods. There has been considerable research
in improvements to particle methods since their in-
troduction in 1993 (Gordon et al, 1993). Two com-
mon approaches to improving particle filters are re-
sampling and particle smoothing (Doucet and Jo-
hansen, 2009; Godsill and Clapp, 2001; Pitt, 2002).
Resampling ensures that particles aren?t wasted on
unlikely sequences. Particle smoothing reduces the
variability of the marginal distributions by combin-
ing the final particles.
7 Conclusion
This paper presented a preliminary approach to in-
corporating particle methods into computational lin-
guistic inference applications. Such approaches
show great potential for inference even in highly de-
pendent distributions, but at a serious computational
cost. However, the type particle filter itself can be
largely run in parallel, only bottlenecking when the
particle weights need to be normalized. Further ex-
pansion of the basic ideas presented will enable scal-
able inference in otherwise intractable models.
52
Language Sent-100 Type-100 Local 1HMM 1HMM-LM Tokens Tag types
WSJ 69.8% 70.1% 70.2% 75.6% 77.5% 1,173,766 45
Arabic 53.5% 57.6% 56.2% 61.9% 62.0% 54,379 20
Bulgarian 64.8% 67.8% 67.6% 71.4% 76.2% 190,217 54
Czech 59.8% 61.6% 64.5% 65.4% 67.9% 1,249,408 12c
Danish 65.0% 70.3% 69.1% 70.6% 74.6% 94,386 25
Dutch 61.6% 71.6% 64.1% 73.2% 72.9% 195,069 13c
Hungarian 61.8% 61.8% 64.8% 69.6% 73.2% 131,799 43
Portuguese 59.4% 71.1% 68.1% 72.0% 77.1% 206,678 22
Table 1: Many-to-1 accuracies on CoNLL and Penn-Treebank Wall Street Journal corpora for sentence- (Sent) and
type- (Type) based filtering. The table lists the average M-1 accuracy measured according to the maximum marginal
tag assignments over 3 seperate runs after 200 iterations for the sent, type, 1HMM and 1HMM-LM samplers,
and 500 iterations for the HMM local sampler. The 1HMM-LM model has been shown to achieve state-of-the-art
unsupervised M-1 accuracies on these datasets. and thus represents the limit of unsupervised M-1 accuracy.
References
Christophe Andrieu, Arnaud Doucet, and Roman Holen-
stein. 2010. Particle markov chain monte carlo meth-
ods. Journal Of The Royal Statistical Society Series B,
72(3):269?342.
Mark A. Beaumont. 2003. Estimation of Population
Growth or Decline in Genetically Monitored Popula-
tions. Genetics, 164(3):1139?1160, July.
Phil Blunsom and Trevor Cohn. 2011. A hierarchi-
cal pitman-yor process hmm for unsupervised part of
speech induction. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Human Language Technologies, pages 865?874,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Benjamin Borschinger and Mark Johnson. 2011. A parti-
cle filter algorithm for bayesian wordsegmentation. In
Proceedings of the Australasian Language Technology
Association Workshop 2011, pages 10?18, Canberra,
Australia, December.
Sabine Buchholz and Erwin Marsi. 2006. Conll-x shared
task on multilingual dependency parsing. In Proceed-
ings of the Tenth Conference on Computational Nat-
ural Language Learning, CoNLL-X ?06, pages 149?
164, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Kevin R. Canini, Lei Shi, and Thomas L. Griffiths. 2009.
Online inference of topics with latent Dirichlet aloca-
tion. In David van Dyk and Max Welling, editors, Pro-
ceeings of the 12th International Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS*09), pages
65?72.
Pascal Denis and Jason Baldridge. 2007. Joint determi-
nation of anaphoricity and coreference resolution us-
ing integer programming. In Human Language Tech-
nologies 2007: The Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics; Proceedings of the Main Conference, pages
236?243, Rochester, New York, April. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Arnaud Doucet and Adam M. Johansen, 2009. A Tuto-
rial on Particle Filtering and Smoothing: Fifteen Years
Later. Oxford University Press.
Paul Fearnhead, David Wyncoll, and Jonathan Tawn.
2008. A sequential smoothing algorithm with linear
computational cost. Technical report, Department of
Mathematics and Statistics, Lancaster University.
Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde and Juan F. Rubio-Ramirez.
2007. Estimating macroeconomic models: A like-
lihood approach. Review of Economic Studies,
74(4):1059?1087, October.
Jianfeng Gao and Mark Johnson. 2008. A comparison of
bayesian estimators for unsupervised hidden markov
model pos taggers. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, EMNLP ?08, pages 344?352, Morristown, NJ,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Simon Godsill and Tim Clapp. 2001. Improvement
strategies for monte carlo particle filters. In A. Doucet,
J. F. G. de Freitas, and N.J. Gordon, editors, SE-
QUENTIAL MONTE CARLO METHODS IN PRAC-
TICE, pages 139?158. Springer-Verlag.
Sharon Goldwater, Tom Griffiths, and Mark John-
son. 2006. Interpolating between types and tokens
by estimating power-law generators. In Y. Weiss,
B. Scho?lkopf, and J. Platt, editors, Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 18, pages 459?466.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
N. J. Gordon, D. J. Salmond, and A. F. M. Smith. 1993.
Novel approach to nonlinear/non-Gaussian Bayesian
state estimation. Radar and Signal Processing, IEE
Proceedings F, 140(2):107?113, April.
A. Jasra, A. Doucet, D. Stephens, and C. Holmes. 2008.
Interacting sequential Monte Carlo samplers for trans-
dimensional simulation. Computational Statistics &
Data Analysis, 52(4):1765?1791, January.
53
G Kitagawa. 1996. Monte carlo filter and smoother for
non-gaussian nonlinear state space models. Journal Of
Computational And Graphical Statistics, 5(1):1?25.
P. Liang, M. I. Jordan, and D. Klein. 2010. Type-based
MCMC. In North American Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (NAACL).
Michael K Pitt. 2002. Smooth particle filters for likeli-
hood evaluation and maximisation. The Warwick Eco-
nomics Research Paper Series (TWERPS) 651, Uni-
versity of Warwick, Department of Economics, July.
David A. Smith and Jason Eisner. 2008. Depen-
dency parsing by belief propagation. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, EMNLP ?08, pages 145?156,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Yee Whye Teh. 2006. A hierarchical bayesian language
model based on pitman-yor processes. In Proceedings
of the 21st International Conference on Computational
Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, ACL-44, pages
985?992, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
54
