Proceedings of the Demonstrations at the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 9?12,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
XLike Project Language Analysis Services
Xavier Carreras
?
, Llu??s Padr
?
o
?
, Lei Zhang
?
, Achim Rettinger
?
, Zhixing Li
1
,
Esteban Garc??a-Cuesta

,
?
Zeljko Agi
?
c
?
, Bo?zo Bekavac
/
, Blaz Fortuna
?
, Tadej
?
Stajner
?
? Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain.  iSOCO S.A. Madrid, Spain.
/ University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. ? University of Potsdam, Germany.
? Jo?zef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia. 1 Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
? Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany.
Abstract
This paper presents the linguistic analysis
infrastructure developed within the XLike
project. The main goal of the imple-
mented tools is to provide a set of func-
tionalities supporting the XLike main ob-
jectives: Enabling cross-lingual services
for publishers, media monitoring or de-
veloping new business intelligence appli-
cations. The services cover seven major
and minor languages: English, German,
Spanish, Chinese, Catalan, Slovenian, and
Croatian. These analyzers are provided
as web services following a lightweigth
SOA architecture approach, and they are
publically accessible and shared through
META-SHARE.
1
1 Introduction
Project XLike
2
goal is to develop technology able
to gather documents in a variety of languages and
genres (news, blogs, tweets, etc.) and to extract
language-independent knowledge from them, in
order to provide new and better services to pub-
lishers, media monitoring, and business intelli-
gence. Thus, project use cases are provided by
STA (Slovenian Press Agency) and Bloomberg, as
well as New York Times as an associated partner.
Research partners in the project are Jo?zef Ste-
fan Institute (JSI), Karlsruhe Institute of Technol-
ogy (KIT), Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya
(UPC), University of Zagreb (UZG), and Tsinghua
University (THU). The Spanish company iSOCO
is in charge of integration of all components de-
veloped in the project.
This paper deals with the language technology
developed within the project XLike to convert in-
1
accessible and shared here means that the services are
publicly callable, not that the code is open-source.
http://www.meta-share.eu
2
http://www.xlike.org
put documents into a language-independent rep-
resentation that afterwards enables knowledge ag-
gregation.
To achieve this goal, a bench of linguistic pro-
cessing pipelines is devised as the first step in the
document processing flow. Then, a cross-lingual
semantic annotation method, based on Wikipedia
and Linked Open Data (LOD), is applied. The
semantic annotation stage enriches the linguistic
anaylsis with links to knowledge bases for differ-
ent languages, or links to language independent
representations.
2 Linguistic Analyzers
Apart from basic state-of-the-art tokenizers, lem-
matizers, PoS/MSD taggers, and NE recogniz-
ers, each pipeline requires deeper processors able
to build the target language-independent seman-
tic representantion. For that, we rely on three
steps: dependency parsing, semantic role label-
ing and word sense disambiguation. These three
processes, combined with multilingual ontologi-
cal resouces such as different WordNets and Pred-
icateMatrix (L?opez de la Calle et al., 2014), a
lexical semantics resource combining WordNet,
FrameNet, and VerbNet, are the key to the con-
struction of our semantic representation.
2.1 Dependency Parsing
We use graph-based methods for dependency
parsing, namely, MSTParser
3
(McDonald et al.,
2005) is used for Chinese and Croatian, and
Treeler
4
is used for the other languages. Treeler is
a library developed by the UPC team that imple-
ments several statistical methods for tagging and
parsing.
We use these tools in order to train dependency
parsers for all XLike languages using standard
available treebanks.
3
http://sourceforge.net/projects/mstparser
4
http://treeler.lsi.upc.edu
9
2.2 Semantic Role Labeling
As with syntactic parsing, we are developing SRL
methods with the Treeler library. In order to train
models, we will use the treebanks made available
by the CoNLL-2009 shared task, which provided
data annotated with predicate-argument relations
for English, Spanish, Catalan, German and Chi-
nese. No treebank annotated with semantic roles
exists for Slovene or Croatian. A prototype of
SRL has been integrated in all pipelines (except
the Slovene and Croatian pipelines). The method
implemented follows a pipeline architecture de-
scribed in (Llu??s et al., 2013).
2.3 Word Sense Disambiguation
Word sense disambiguation is performed for all
languages with a publicly available WordNet. This
includes all languages in the project except Chi-
nese. The goal of WSD is to map specific lan-
guages to a common semantic space, in this case,
WN synsets. Thanks to existing connections be-
tween WN and other resources, SUMO and Open-
CYC sense codes are also output when available.
Thanks to PredicateMatrix, the obtained con-
cepts can be projected to FrameNet, achieving a
normalization of the semantic roles produced by
the SRL (which are treebank-dependent, and thus,
not the same for all languages). The used WSD
engine is the UKB (Agirre and Soroa, 2009) im-
plementation provided by FreeLing (Padr?o and
Stanilovsky, 2012).
2.4 Frame Extraction
The final step is to convert all the gathered linguis-
tic information into a semantic representation. Our
method is based on the notion of frame: a seman-
tic frame is a schematic representation of a situ-
ation involving various participants. In a frame,
each participant plays a role. There is a direct cor-
respondence between roles in a frame and seman-
tic roles; namely, frames correspond to predicates,
and participants correspond to the arguments of
the predicate. We distinguish three types of par-
ticipants: entities, words, and frames.
Entities are nodes in the graph connected to
real-world entities as described in Section 3.
Words are common words or concepts, linked to
general ontologies such as WordNet. Frames cor-
respond to events or predicates described in the
document. Figure 1 shows an example sentence,
the extracted frames and their arguments.
It is important to note that frames are a more
general representation than SVO-triples. While
SVO-triples represent a binary relation between
two participants, frames can represent n-ary rela-
tions (e.g. predicates with more than two argu-
ments, or with adjuncts). Frames also allow repre-
senting the sentences where one of the arguments
is in turn a frame (as is the case with plan to make
in the example).
Finally, although frames are extracted at sen-
tence level, the resulting graphs are aggregated
in a single semantic graph representing the whole
document via a very simple coreference resolution
based on detecting named entity aliases and repe-
titions of common nouns. Future improvements
include using an state-of-the-art coreference reso-
lution module for languages where it is available.
3 Cross-lingual Semantic Annotation
This step adds further semantic annotations on top
of the results obtained by linguistic processing.
All XLike languages are covered. The goal is
to map word phrases in different languages into
the same semantic interlingua, which consists of
resources specified in knowledge bases such as
Wikipedia and Linked Open Data (LOD) sources.
Cross-lingual semantic annotation is performed in
two stages: (1) first, candidate concepts in the
knowledge base are linked to the linguistic re-
sources based on a newly developed cross-lingual
linked data lexica, called xLiD-Lexica, (2) next
the candidate concepts get disambiguated based
on the personalized PageRank algorithm by utiliz-
ing the structure of information contained in the
knowledge base.
The xLiD-Lexica is stored in RDF format and
contains about 300 million triples of cross-lingual
groundings. It is extracted from Wikipedia dumps
of July 2013 in English, German, Spanish, Cata-
lan, Slovenian and Chinese, and based on the
canonicalized datasets of DBpedia 3.8 contain-
ing triples extracted from the respective Wikipedia
whose subject and object resource have an equiv-
alent English article.
4 Web Service Architecture Approach
The different language functionalities are imple-
mented following the service oriented architec-
ture (SOA) approach defined in the project XLike.
Therefore all the pipelines (one for each language)
have been implemented as web services and may
10
Figure 1: Graphical representation of frames in the sentence Acme, based in New York, now plans to
make computer and electronic products.
be requested to produce different levels of analy-
sis (e.g. tokenization, lemmatization, NERC, pars-
ing, relation extraction). This approach is very ap-
pealing due to the fact that it allows to treat ev-
ery language independently and execute the whole
language analysis process at different threads or
computers allowing an easier parallelization (e.g.
using external high perfomance platforms such as
Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud EC2
5
) as needed.
Furthermore it also provides independent develop-
ment lifecycles for each language which is crucial
in this type of research projects. Recall that these
web services can be deployed locally or remotely,
maintaining the option of using them in a stand-
alone configuration.
The main structure for each one of the pipelines
is described below:
? Spanish, English, and Catalan: all mod-
ules are based on FreeLing (Padr?o and
Stanilovsky, 2012) and Treeler.
? German: German shallow processing is
based on OpenNLP
6
, Stanford POS tagger
and NE extractor (Toutanova et al., 2003;
Finkel et al., 2005). Dependency parsing,
semantic role labeling, word sense disam-
biguation, and SRL-based frame extraction
are based on FreeLing and Treeler.
? Slovene: Slovene shallow processing is pro-
vided by JSI Enrycher
7
(
?
Stajner et al., 2010),
which consists of the Obeliks morphosyntac-
tic analysis library (Gr?car et al., 2012), the
LemmaGen lemmatizer (Jur?si?c et al., 2010)
and a CRF-based entity extractor (
?
Stajner et
al., 2012). Dependency parsing, word sense
5
http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/
6
http://opennlp.apache.org
7
http://enrycher.ijs.si
disambiguation are based on FreeLing and
Treeler. Frame extraction is rule-based since
no SRL corpus is available for Slovene.
? Croatian: Croatian shallow processing is
based on proprietary tokenizer, POS/MSD-
tagging and lemmatisaton system (Agi?c et
al., 2008), NERC system (Bekavac and
Tadi?c, 2007) and dependency parser (Agi?c,
2012). Word sense disambiguation is based
on FreeLing. Frame extraction is rule-based
since no SRL corpus is available for Croatian.
? Chinese: Chinese shallow and deep process-
ing is based on a word segmentation compo-
nent ICTCLAS
8
and a semantic dependency
parser trained on CSDN corpus. Then, rule-
based frame extraction is performed (no SRL
corpus nor WordNet are available for Chi-
nese).
Each language analysis service is able to pro-
cess thousands of words per second when per-
forming shallow analysis (up to NE recognition),
and hundreds of words per second when produc-
ing the semantic representation based on full anal-
ysis. Moreover, the web service architecture en-
ables the same server to run a different thread for
each client, thus taking advantage of multiproces-
sor capabilities.
The components of the cross-lingual semantic
annotation stage are:
? xLiD-Lexica: The cross-lingual groundings
in xLiD-Lexica are translated into RDF data
and are accessible through a SPARQL end-
point, based on OpenLink Virtuoso
9
as the
back-end database engine.
8
http://ictclas.org/
9
http://virtuoso.openlinksw.com/
11
? Semantic Annotation: The cross-lingual se-
mantic annotation service is based on the
xLiD-Lexica for entity mention recognition
and the JUNG Framework
10
for graph-based
disambiguation.
5 Conclusion
We presented the web service based architecture
used in XLike FP7 project to linguistically ana-
lyze large amounts of documents in seven differ-
ent languages. The analysis pipelines perform ba-
sic processing as tokenization, PoS-tagging, and
named entity extraction, as well as deeper analy-
sis such as dependency parsing, word sense disam-
biguation, and semantic role labelling. The result
of these linguistic analyzers is a semantic graph
capturing the main events described in the docu-
ment and their core participants.
On top of that, the cross-lingual semantic an-
notation component links the resulting linguistic
resources in one language to resources in a knowl-
edge bases in any other language or to language
independent representations. This semantic repre-
sentation is later used in XLike for document min-
ing purposes such as enabling cross-lingual ser-
vices for publishers, media monitoring or devel-
oping new business intelligence applications.
The described analysis services are currently
available via META-SHARE as callable RESTful
services.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the European Union
through project XLike (FP7-ICT-2011-288342).
References
?
Zeljko Agi?c, Marko Tadi?c, and Zdravko Dovedan.
2008. Improving part-of-speech tagging accuracy
for Croatian by morphological analysis. Informat-
ica, 32(4):445?451.
?
Zeljko Agi?c. 2012. K-best spanning tree dependency
parsing with verb valency lexicon reranking. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING 2012: Posters, pages 1?12,
Mumbai, India, December. The COLING 2012 Or-
ganizing Committee.
Eneko Agirre and Aitor Soroa. 2009. Personalizing
pagerank for word sense disambiguation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th conference of the European
chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (EACL-2009), Athens, Greece.
10
Java Universal Network/Graph Framework
http://jung.sourceforge.net/
Bo?zo Bekavac and Marko Tadi?c. 2007. Implementa-
tion of Croatian NERC system. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Balto-Slavonic Natural Language
Processing (BSNLP2007), Special Theme: Informa-
tion Extraction and Enabling Technologies, pages
11?18. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher
Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local informa-
tion into information extraction systems by gibbs
sampling. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meet-
ing on Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL?05), pages 363?370.
Miha Gr?car, Simon Krek, and Kaja Dobrovoljc. 2012.
Obeliks: statisti?cni oblikoskladenjski ozna?cevalnik
in lematizator za slovenski jezik. In Zbornik Osme
konference Jezikovne tehnologije, Ljubljana, Slove-
nia.
Matjaz Jur?si?c, Igor Mozeti?c, Tomaz Erjavec, and Nada
Lavra?c. 2010. Lemmagen: Multilingual lemmati-
sation with induced ripple-down rules. Journal of
Universal Computer Science, 16(9):1190?1214.
Xavier Llu??s, Xavier Carreras, and Llu??s M`arquez.
2013. Joint arc-factored parsing of syntactic and se-
mantic dependencies. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 1:219?230.
Maddalen L?opez de la Calle, Egoitz Laparra, and Ger-
man Rigau. 2014. First steps towards a predicate
matrix. In Proceedings of the Global WordNet Con-
ference (GWC 2014), Tartu, Estonia, January. GWA.
Ryan McDonald, Koby Crammer, and Fernando
Pereira. 2005. Online large-margin training of
dependency parsers. In Proceedings of the 43rd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL?05), pages 91?98, Ann Ar-
bor, Michigan, June.
Llu??s Padr?o and Evgeny Stanilovsky. 2012. Freeling
3.0: Towards wider multilinguality. In Proceedings
of the Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence (LREC 2012), Istanbul, Turkey, May. ELRA.
Tadej
?
Stajner, Delia Rusu, Lorand Dali, Bla?z Fortuna,
Dunja Mladeni?c, and Marko Grobelnik. 2010. A
service oriented framework for natural language text
enrichment. Informatica, 34(3):307?313.
Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher D. Man-
ning, and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-
speech tagging with a cyclic dependency network.
In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Lin- guistics on Human Language Technology
(NAACL?03).
Tadej
?
Stajner, Toma?z Erjavec, and Simon Krek.
2012. Razpoznavanje imenskih entitet v slovenskem
besedilu. In In Proceedings of 15th Internation
Multiconference on Information Society - Jezikovne
Tehnologije, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
12
Proceedings of the Demonstrations at the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 13?16,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014.
c
?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semantic Annotation, Analysis and Comparison:
A Multilingual and Cross-lingual Text Analytics Toolkit
Lei Zhang
Institute AIFB
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
l.zhang@kit.edu
Achim Rettinger
Institute AIFB
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
rettinger@kit.edu
Abstract
Within the context of globalization,
multilinguality and cross-linguality for
information access have emerged as issues
of major interest. In order to achieve
the goal that users from all countries
have access to the same information,
there is an impending need for systems
that can help in overcoming language
barriers by facilitating multilingual and
cross-lingual access to data. In this
paper, we demonstrate such a toolkit,
which supports both service-oriented and
user-oriented interfaces for semantically
annotating, analyzing and comparing
multilingual texts across the boundaries
of languages. We conducted an extensive
user study that shows that our toolkit
allows users to solve cross-lingual entity
tracking and article matching tasks more
efficiently and with higher accuracy
compared to the baseline approach.
1 Introduction
Automatic text understanding has been an
unsolved research problem for many years. This
partially results from the dynamic and diverging
nature of human languages, which results in many
different varieties of natural language. These
variations range from the individual level, to
regional and social dialects, and up to seemingly
separate languages and language families.
In recent years there have been considerable
achievements in approaches to computational
linguistics exploiting the information across
languages. This progress in multilingual and
cross-lingual text analytics is largely due
to the increased availability of multilingual
knowledge bases such as Wikipedia, which helps
at scaling the traditionally monolingual tasks
to multilingual and cross-lingual applications.
From the application side, there is a clear need
for multilingual and cross-lingual text analytics
technologies and services.
Text analytics in this work is defined as
three tasks: (i) semantic annotation by linking
entity mentions in the documents to their
corresponding representations in the knowledge
base; (ii) semantic analysis by linking the
documents by topics to the relevant resources in
the knowledge base; (iii) semantic comparison
by measuring semantic relatedness between
documents. While multilingual text analytics
addresses these tasks for multiple languages,
cross-lingual text analytics goes one step beyond,
as it faces these tasks across the boundaries of
languages, i.e., the text to be processed and the
resources in the knowledge base, or the documents
to be compared, are in different languages.
Due to the ever growing richness of its
content, Wikipedia has been increasingly gaining
attention as a precious knowledge base that
contains an enormous number of entities and
topics in diverse domains. In addition, Wikipedia
pages that provide information about the same
concept in different languages are connected
through cross-language links. Therefore, we use
Wikipedia as the central knowledge base.
With the goal of overcoming language barriers,
we would like to demonstrate our multilingual
and cross-lingual text analytics toolkit, which
supports both service-oriented and user-oriented
interfaces for semantically annotating, analyzing
and comparing multilingual texts across the
boundaries of languages.
2 Techniques
In this section, we first present the techniques
behind our toolkit w.r.t. its three components:
semantic annotation (Sec. 2.1), semantic analysis
and semantic comparison (Sec. 2.2).
13
2.1 Wikipedia-based Annotation
The process of augmenting phrases in text with
links to their corresponding Wikipedia articles
(in the sense of Wikipedia-based annotation) is
known as wikification. There is a large body
of work that links phrases in unstructured text
to relevant Wikipedia articles. While Mihalcea
and Csomai (Mihalcea and Csomai, 2007) met
the challenge of wikification by using link
probabilities obtained from Wikipedia?s articles
and by a comparison of features extracted from the
context of the phrases, Milne and Witten (Milne
and Witten, 2008) could improve the wikification
service significantly by viewing wikification even
more as a supervised machine learning task:
Wikipedia is used here not only as a source of
information to point to, but also as training data
to find always the appropriate link.
For multilingual semantic annotation, we
adopted the wikification system in (Milne and
Witten, 2008) and trained it for each language
using the corresponding Wikipedia version. To
perform cross-lingual semantic annotation, we
extended the wikification system by making use of
the cross-language links in Wikipedia to find the
corresponding Wikipedia articles in the different
target languages. More details can be found in our
previous work (Zhang et al., 2013).
2.2 Explicit Semantic Analysis
Explicit Semantic Analysis (ESA) has been
proposed as an approach for semantic modeling
of natural language text (Gabrilovich and
Markovitch, 2006). Based on a given set of
concepts with textual descriptions, ESA defines
the concept-based representation of documents.
Various sources for concept definitions have
been used, such as Wikipedia and Reuters Corpus.
Using the concept-based document representation,
ESA has been successfully applied to compute
semantic relatedness between texts (Gabrilovich
and Markovitch, 2007). In the context of the
cross-language information retrieval (CLIR) task,
ESA has been extended to a cross-lingual setting
(CL-ESA) by mapping the semantic document
representation from a concept space of one
language to an interlingual concept space (Sorg
and Cimiano, 2008).
The semantic analysis and semantic comparison
components of our toolkit are based on CL-ESA
in (Sorg and Cimiano, 2008). The semantic
Figure 2: Architecture of our Toolkit.
analysis component takes as input a document in a
source language and maps it to a high-dimensional
vector in the interlingual concept space, such
that each dimension corresponds to an Wikipedia
article in any target language acting as a
concept. For semantic comparison, the documents
in different languages are first translated into
vectors in the interlingual concept space and then
the cross-lingual semantic relatedness between
the documents in different languages can be
calculated using the standard similarity measure
between the resulting vectors.
3 Implementation
Our multilingual and cross-lingual toolkit is
implemented using a client-server architecture
with communication over HTTP using a XML
schema defined in XLike project
1
. The server
is a RESTful web service and the client user
interface is implemented using Adobe Flex as
both Desktop and Web Applications. The
toolkit can easily be extended or adapted to
switch out the server or client. In this way, it
supports both service-oriented and user-oriented
interfaces for semantically annotating, analyzing
and comparing multilingual texts across the
boundaries of languages. The architecture of our
toolkit is shown in Figure 2.
For all three components, namely semantic
annotation, analysis and comparison, we use
Wikipedia as the central knowledge base. Table 1
shows the statistics of the Wikipedia articles in
English, German, Spanish and French as well as
the cross-language links between the them in these
languages extracted from Wikipedia snapshots of
May 2012
2
, which are used to build our toolkit.
We now describe the user interfaces of these
1
http://www.xlike.org/
2
http://dumps.wikimedia.org/
14
Figure 1: Screenshot of the Semantic Annotation Component of our Toolkit.
English (EN) German (DE) Spanish (ES) French (FR)
#Articles 4,014,643 1,438,325 896,691 1,234,567
(a) Number of articles.
EN-DE EN-ES EN-FR DE-ES DE-FR ES-FR
#Links (?) 721,878 568,210 779,363 295,415 455,829 378,052
#Links (?) 718,401 581,978 777,798 302,502 457,306 370,552
#Links (merged) 722,069 593,571 795,340 307,130 464,628 383,851
(b) Number of cross-language links.
Table 1: Statistics about Wikipedia.
components. Due to the lack of space, we only
show the screenshot of the semantic annotation
component in Figure 1. The semantic annotation
component allows the users to find the entities
in Wikipedia mentioned in the input document.
Given the input document in one language, the
users can select the output language, namely
the language of Wikipedia articles describing
the mentioned entities. In the left pie chart,
the users can see the percentage of Wikipedia
articles in different languages as annotations of the
input document. According to their weights, the
Wikipedia articles in each language are organized
in 3 relevance categories: high, medium and low.
In the middle bar chart, the number of Wikipedia
articles in each language and in each category
is illustrated. The right data grid provides the
Wikipedia article titles with their weights in the
output language and the mentions in the input
document. Clicking an individual title opens
the corresponding Wikipedia article in the output
language. The semantic analysis component
has the similar user interface as the semantic
annotation component. The difference is that the
Wikipedia articles listed in the right data grid are
topically relevant to the input documents instead
of being mentioned as entities. Regarding the user
interface of semantic comparison component, the
main inputs are two documents that might be in
different languages and the output is the semantic
relatedness between them.
4 User Study
We conducted a task-based user study and the
goal is to assess the effectiveness and usability of
our multilingual and cross-lingual text analytics
toolkit. We design two tasks reflecting the real-life
information needs, namely entity tracking and
article matching, to assess the functionality of
our toolkit from different perspectives. The entity
tracking task is to detect mentions of the given
entities in the articles, where the descriptions
of the entities and the articles are in different
languages. Given articles in one language as
context, the article matching task is to find the
most similar articles in another language.
The participants of our user study are 16
volunteers and each of them got both tasks, which
they had to solve in two ways: (1) using a major
online machine translation service as baseline
and (2) using our multilingual and cross-lingual
text analytics toolkit with all the functionality.
For each task, we randomly selected 10 parallel
articles in English, French and Spanish from the
JRC-Acquis parallel corpus
3
. After a survey,
3
http://langtech.jrc.it/JRC-Acquis.
html
15
(a) Avg. successrate per task / method
(b) Avg. time spent per task / method
Figure 3: Evaluation Results of the User Study.
we decided to provide the entity descriptions for
entity tracking task and the context documents
for article matching task in English, which all
participants can speak. Regarding the articles to
be processed, we set up the tasks using Spanish
articles for the participants who do not know
Spanish, and tasks with French articles for the
participants who cannot speak French.
To measure the overall effectiveness of our
toolkit, we have analysed the ratio of tasks that
were completed successfully and correctly and the
time the participants required for the tasks. The
average success rate and time spent per task and
per method are illustrated in Figure 3. For entity
tracking task, we observe that a success rate of
80% was achieved using our toolkit in comparison
with the success rate of 70% yielded by using the
baseline. In addition, there is a significant gap
between the time spent using different methods.
While it took 21.5 minutes on average to solve
the task using the baseline, only 6.75 minutes
were needed when using our toolkit. Regarding
the article matching task, both methods performed
very well. Using our toolkit obtained a slightly
higher success rate of 99% than 94% using the
baseline. The time spent using both methods is not
so different. The participants spent 15.75 minutes
on average using the baseline while 2 minutes less
were needed using our toolkit.
In terms of the user study, our toolkit is
more effective than the baseline for both entity
tracking and article matching tasks. Therefore,
we conclude that our toolkit provides useful
functionality to make searching entities, analyzing
and comparing articles more easily and accurately
in the multilingual and cross-lingual scenarios.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the European
Community?s Seventh Framework Programme
FP7-ICT-2011-7 (XLike, Grant 288342).
References
[Gabrilovich and Markovitch2006] Evgeniy
Gabrilovich and Shaul Markovitch. 2006.
Overcoming the Brittleness Bottleneck using
Wikipedia: Enhancing Text Categorization with
Encyclopedic Knowledge. In AAAI, pages
1301?1306.
[Gabrilovich and Markovitch2007] Evgeniy
Gabrilovich and Shaul Markovitch. 2007.
Computing semantic relatedness using
wikipedia-based explicit semantic analysis. In
Proceedings of the 20th international joint
conference on artificial intelligence, volume 6,
page 12.
[Mihalcea and Csomai2007] Rada Mihalcea and
Andras Csomai. 2007. Wikify!: linking documents
to encyclopedic knowledge. In In CIKM ?07:
Proceedings of the sixteenth ACM conference
on Conference on information and knowledge
management, pages 233?242. ACM.
[Milne and Witten2008] David Milne and Ian H.
Witten. 2008. Learning to link with wikipedia.
In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on
Information and knowledge management, CIKM
?08, pages 509?518, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
[Sorg and Cimiano2008] P. Sorg and P. Cimiano. 2008.
Cross-lingual Information Retrieval with Explicit
Semantic Analysis. In Working Notes of the Annual
CLEF Meeting.
[Zhang et al.2013] Lei Zhang, Achim Rettinger,
Michael Frber, and Marko Tadic. 2013. A
comparative evaluation of cross-lingual text
annotation techniques. In CLEF, pages 124?135.
16
