Proceedings of the Student Research Workshop at the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 106?115,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014.
c
?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automatic Creation of Arabic Named Entity Annotated Corpus Using
Wikipedia
Maha Althobaiti, Udo Kruschwitz, and Massimo Poesio
School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering
University of Essex
Colchester, UK
{mjaltha, udo, poesio}@essex.ac.uk
Abstract
In this paper we propose a new methodology to ex-
ploit Wikipedia features and structure to automati-
cally develop an Arabic NE annotated corpus. Each
Wikipedia link is transformed into an NE type of
the target article in order to produce the NE an-
notation. Other Wikipedia features - namely redi-
rects, anchor texts, and inter-language links - are
used to tag additional NEs, which appear without
links in Wikipedia texts. Furthermore, we have de-
veloped a filtering algorithm to eliminate ambiguity
when tagging candidate NEs. Herein we also in-
troduce a mechanism based on the high coverage of
Wikipedia in order to address two challenges partic-
ular to tagging NEs in Arabic text: rich morphology
and the absence of capitalisation. The corpus cre-
ated with our new method (WDC) has been used to
train an NE tagger which has been tested on differ-
ent domains. Judging by the results, an NE tagger
trained on WDC can compete with those trained on
manually annotated corpora.
1 Introduction
Supervised learning techniques are well known
for their effectiveness to develop Named Entity
Recognition (NER) taggers (Bikel et al., 1997;
Sekine and others, 1998; McCallum and Li, 2003;
Benajiba et al., 2008). The main disadvantage of
supervised learning is that it requires a large an-
notated corpus. Although a substantial amount
of annotated data is available for some languages,
for other languages, including Arabic, more work
is needed to enrich their linguistic resources. In
fact, changing the domain or just expanding the
set of classes always requires domain-specific ex-
perts and new annotated data, both of which cost
time and effort. Therefore, current research fo-
cuses on approaches that require minimal human
intervention to facilitate the process of moving the
NE classifiers to new domains and to expand NE
classes.
Semi-supervised and unsupervised learning ap-
proaches, along with the automatic creation of
tagged corpora, are alternatives that avoid manu-
ally annotated data (Richman and Schone, 2008;
Althobaiti et al., 2013). The high coverage and
rich informational structure of online encyclope-
dias can be exploited for the automatic creation of
datasets. For example, many researchers have in-
vestigated the use of Wikipedia?s structure to clas-
sify Wikipedia articles and to transform links into
NE annotations according to the link target type
(Nothman et al., 2008; Ringland et al., 2009).
In this paper we present our approach to au-
tomatically derive a large NE annotated corpora
from Arabic Wikipedia. The key to our method
lies in the exploitation of Wikipedia?s concepts,
specifically anchor texts
1
and redirects, to handle
the rich morphology in Arabic, and thereby elim-
inate the need to perform any deep morphologi-
cal analysis. In addition, a capitalisation probabil-
ity measure has been introduced and incorporated
into the approach in order to replace the capitalisa-
tion feature that does not exist in the Arabic script.
This capitalisation measure has been utilised in or-
der to filter ambiguous Arabic NE phrases during
annotation process.
The remainder of this paper is structured as fol-
lows: Section 2 illustrates structural information
about Wikipedia. Section 3 includes background
information on NER, including recent work. Sec-
tion 4 summarises the proposed methodology.
Sections 5, 6, and 7 describe the proposed algo-
rithm in detail. The experimental setup and the
evaluation results are reported and discussed in
Section 8. Finally, the conclusion features com-
ments regarding our future work.
1
The terms ?anchor texts? and ?link labels? are used inter-
changeably in this paper.
106
2 The Structure of Wikipedia
Wikipedia is a free online encyclopedia project
written collaboratively by thousands of volunteers,
using MediaWiki
2
. Each article in Wikipedia is
uniquely identified by its title. The title is usually
the most common name for the entity explained
in the article.
2.1 Types of Wikipedia Pages
2.1.1 Content Pages
Content pages (aka Wikipedia articles) contain the
majority of Wikipedia?s informative content. Each
content page describes a single topic and has a
unique title. In addition to the text describing the
topic of the article, content pages may contain ta-
bles, images, links and templates.
2.1.2 Redirect Pages
A redirect page is used if there are two or more
alternative names that can refer to one entity
in Wikipedia. Thus, each alternative name is
changed into a title whose article contains a redi-
rect link to the actual article for that entity. For ex-
ample, ?UK? is an alternative name for the ?United
Kingdom?, and consequently, the article with the
title ?UK? is just a pointer to the article with the
title ?United Kingdom?.
2.1.3 List of Pages
Wikipedia offers several ways to group articles.
One method is to group articles by lists. The items
on these lists include links to articles in a particu-
lar subject area, and may include additional infor-
mation about the listed items. For example, ?list
of scientists? contains links to articles of scientists
and also links to more specific lists of scientists.
2.2 The Structure of Wikipedia Articles
2.2.1 Categories
Every article in the Wikipedia collection should
have at least one category. Categories should be
on vital topics that are useful to the reader. For
example, the Wikipedia article about the United
Kingdom in Wikipedia is associated with a set of
categories that includes ?Countries bordering the
Atlantic Ocean?, and ?Countries in Europe?.
2
An open source wiki package written in PHP
2.2.2 Infobox
An infobox is a fixed-format table added to the
top right-hand or left-hand corner of articles to
provide a summary of some unifying parameters
shared by the articles. For instance, every scientist
has a name, date of birth, birthplace, nationality,
and field of study.
2.3 Links
A link is a method used by Wikipedia to link pages
within wiki environments. Links are enclosed in
doubled square brackets. A vertical bar, the ?pipe?
symbol, is used to create a link while labelling it
with a different name on the current page. Look at
the following two examples,
1 - [[a]] is labelled ?a? on the current page and
links to taget page ?a?.
2 - [[a|b]] is labelled ?b? on the current page, but
links to target page ?a?.
In the second example, the anchor text (aka link
label) is ?a?, while ?b?, a link target, refers to the
title of the target article. In the first example, the
anchor text shown on the page and the title of the
target article are the same.
3 Related Work
Current NE research seeks out adequate alter-
natives to traditional techniques such that they
require minimal human intervention and solve
deficiencies of traditional methods. Specific
deficiencies include the limited number of NE
classes resulting from the high cost of setting up
corpora, and the difficulty of adapting the system
to new domains.
One of these trends is distant learning, which
depends on the recruitment of external knowledge
to increase the performance of the classifier, or
to automatically create new resources used in the
learning stage.
Kazama and Torisawa (2007) exploited
Wikipedia-based features to improve their NE
machine learning recogniser?s F-score by three
percent. Their method retrieved the corresponding
Wikipedia entry for each candidate word sequence
in the CoNLL 2003 dataset and extracted a cate-
gory label from the first sentence of the entry.
The automatic creation of training data has
also been investigated using external knowledge.
An et al. (2003) extracted sentences containing
listed entities from the web, and produced a
1.8 million Korean word dataset. Their corpus
107
performed as well as manually annotated training
data. Nothman et al. (2008) exploited Wikipedia
to create a massive corpus of named entity
annotated text. They transformed Wikipedia?s
links into named entity annotations by classifying
the target articles into standard entity types
3
.
Compared to MUC, CoNLL, and BBN corpora,
their Wikipedia-derived corpora tend to perform
better than other cross-corpus train/test pairs.
Nothman et al. (2013) automatically created
massive, multilingual training annotations for
named entity recognition by exploiting the text
and internal structure of Wikipedia. They first
categorised each Wikipedia article into named
entity types, training and evaluating on 7,200
manually-labelled Wikipedia articles across nine
languages: English, German, French, Italian,
Polish, Spanish, Dutch, Portuguese, and Russian.
Their cross-lingual approach achieved up to 95%
accuracy. They transformed Wikipedia?s links
into named entity annotations by classifying the
target articles into standard entity types. This
technique produced reasonable annotations, but
was not immediately able to compete with exist-
ing gold-standard data. They better aligned their
automatic annotations to the gold standard corpus
by deducing additional links and heuristically
tweaking the Wikipedia corpora. Following this
approach, millions of words in nine languages
were annotated. Wikipedia-trained models were
evaluated against CONLL shared task data and
other gold-standard corpora. Their method out-
performed Richman and Schone (2008) and Mika
et al. (2008), and achieved scores 10% higher
than models trained on newswire when tested on
manually annotated Wikipedia text.
Alotaibi and Lee (2013) automatically de-
veloped two NE-annotated sets from Arabic
Wikipedia. The corpora were built using the
mechanism that transforms links into NE an-
notations, by classifying the target articles into
named entity types. They used POS-tagging,
morphological analysis, and linked NE phrases to
detect other mentions of NEs that appear without
links in text. By contrast, our method does not
require POS-tagging or morphological analysis
and just identifies unlinked NEs by matching
phrases from an automatically constructed and
filtered alternative names with identical terms in
3
The terms ?type?, ?class? and ?category? are used inter-
changeably in this paper.
the articles texts, see Section 6. The first dataset
created by Alotaibi and Lee (2013) is called
WikiFANE(whole) and contains all sentences
retrieved from the articles. The second set, which
is called WikiFANE(selective), is constructed by
selecting only the sentences that have at least one
named entity phrase.
4 Summary of the Approach
All of our experiments were conducted on the
26 March 2013 Arabic version of the Wikipedia
dump
4
. A parser was created to handle the medi-
awiki markup and to extract structural information
from the Wikipedia dump such as a list of redirect
pages along with their target articles, a list of pairs
containing link labels and their target articles in
the form ?anchor text, target article?, and essential
information for each article (e.g., title, body text,
categories, and templates).
Many of Wikipedia?s concepts such as links, an-
chor texts, redirects, and inter-language links have
been exploited to transform Wikipedia into a NE
annotated corpus. More details can be found in
the next sections. Generally, the following steps
are necessary to develop the dataset:
1. Classify Wikipedia articles into a specific set
of NE types.
2. Identify matching text in the title and the first
sentence of each article and label the match-
ing phrases according to the article type.
3. Label linked phrases in the text according to
the NE type of the target article.
4. Compile a list of alternative titles for articles
and filter out ambiguous ones.
5. Identify matching phrases in the list and the
Wikipedia text.
6. Filter sentences to prevent noisy sentences
being included in the corpus.
We explain each step in turn in the following sec-
tions.
5 Classifying Wikipedia Articles into NE
Categories
Categorising Wikipedia articles is the initial step
in producing NE training data. Therefore, all
Wikipedia articles need to be classified into a
specific set of named entity types.
4
http://dumps.wikimedia.org/arwiki/
108
5.1 The Dataset and Annotation
In order to develop a Wikipedia document clas-
sifier, we used a set of 4,000 manually classi-
fied Wikipedia articles that are available free on-
line
5
. The set was manually classified using the
ACE (2008) taxonomy and a new class (Product).
Therefore, there were eight coarse-grained cate-
gories in total: Facility, Geo-Political, Location,
Organisation, Person, Vehicle, Weapon, and Prod-
uct. As our work adheres to the CoNLL definition,
we mapped these classified Wikipedia articles into
CoNLL NE types ? namely person, location, or-
ganisation, miscellaneous, or other ? based on the
CoNLL 2003 annotation guidelines (Chinchor et
al., 1999).
5.2 The Classification of Wikipedia Articles
Many researchers have already addressed the task
of classifying Wikipedia articles into named entity
types (Dakka and Cucerzan, 2008; Tardif et al.,
2009). Alotaibi and Lee (2012) is the only study
that has experimented with classifying the Arabic
version of Wikipedia into NE classes. They have
explored the use of Naive Bayes, Multinomial
Naive Bayes, and SVM for classifying Wikipedia
articles, and achieved a F-score ranging from 78%
and 90% using different language-dependent and
independent features.
We conducted three experiments that used a
simple bag-of-words features extracted from dif-
ferent portions of the Wikipedia document and
metadata. We summarise the portions of the doc-
ument included in each experiment below:
Exp1: Experiment 1 involved tokens from the
article title and the entire article body.
Exp2: Rich metadata in Wikipedia proved ef-
fective for the classification of articles (Tardif et
al., 2009; Alotaibi and Lee, 2012). Therefore, in
Experiment 2 we included tokens from categories,
templates ? specifically ?Infobox? ? as well as to-
kens from the article title and first sentence of the
document.
Exp3: Experiment 3 involved the same set of
tokens as experiment 2 except that categories and
infobox features were marked with suffixes to dif-
ferentiate them from tokens extracted from the ar-
ticle body text. This step of distinguishing tokens
based on their location in the document improved
the accuracy of document?s classification (Tardif
et al., 2009; Alotaibi and Lee, 2012).
5
www.cs.bham.ac.uk/?fsa081/
In order to optimise features, we implemented a
filtered version of the bag-of-words article repre-
sentation (e.g., removing punctuation marks and
symbols) to classify the Arabic Wikipedia doc-
uments instead of using a raw dataset (Alotaibi
and Lee, 2012). In addition, the same study
shows the high impact of applying tokenisation
6
as opposed to the neutral effect of using stem-
ming. We used the filtered features proposed in
the study of Alotaibi and Lee (2012), which in-
cluded removing punctuation marks, symbols, fil-
tering stop words, and normalising digits. We ex-
tended the features, however, by utilising the to-
kenisation scheme that involves separating con-
junctions, prepositions, and pronouns from each
word.
The feature set has been represented using Term
Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF ?
IDF ). This representation method is a numeri-
cal statistic that reflects how important a token is
to a document.
5.3 The Results of Classifying the Wikipedia
Articles
As for the learning process, our Wikipedia doc-
uments classifier was trained using Liblinear
7
.
80% of the 4,000 hand-classified Wikipedia
articles were dedicated to the training stage, while
20% were specified to test the classifier. Table
1 is a comparison of the precision, recall, and
F-measure of the classifiers that resulted from the
three experiments. The Exp3 classifier performed
better than the other classifiers. Therefore, it was
selected to classify all of the Wikipedia articles.
At the end of this stage, we obtained a list of
pairs containing each Wikipedia article and its
NE Type. We stored this list in a database in
preparation for the next stage: developing the
NE-tagged training corpus.
Table 1: The results of the three Wikipedia docu-
ment classifiers.
6
It is also called decliticization or segmentation.
7
www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/?cjlin/liblinear/
109
6 The Annotation Process
6.1 Utilising the Titles of Articles and Link
Targets
Identifying corresponding words in the article ti-
tle and the entire body of text and then tagging the
matching phrases with the NE-type can be a risky
process, especially for terms with more than one
meaning. For example, the title of the article de-
scribing the city (
	
?A?, ?Cannes?)
8
can also, in Ara-
bic, refer to the past verb (
	
?A?, ?was?). The portion
of the Wikipedia article unlikely to produce errors
during the matching process is the first sentence,
which usually contains the definition of the term
the Wikipedia article is written about (Zesch et al.,
2007).
When identifying matching terms in the arti-
cle title and the first sentence, we found that ar-
ticle titles often contain abbreviations, while the
first sentence spells out entire words. This pat-
tern makes it difficult to identify matching terms
in the title and first sentence, and frequently ap-
pears in biographical Wikipedia articles. For ex-
ample, one article is entitled (?


	
P@Q? @ Q?K
.
?K
.
@, ?Abu
Bakr Al-Razi?), but the first sentence states the full
name of the person: (?


	
P@Q? @ AK


Q?
	
P
	
?K
.
??


m
