Felix Bildhauer & Roland Sch?fer (eds.), Proceedings of the 9th Web as Corpus Workshop (WaC-9) @ EACL 2014, pages 36?43,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
The PAIS
`
A Corpus of Italian Web Texts
Verena Lyding
?
verena.lyding@eurac.edu
Egon Stemle
?
egon.stemle@eurac.edu
Claudia Borghetti
?
claudia.borghetti@unibo.it
Marco Brunello
?
marcobrunello84@gmail.com
Sara Castagnoli
?
s.castagnoli@unibo.it
Felice Dell?Orletta
?
felice.dellorletta@ilc.cnr.it
Henrik Dittmann
?
henrik.dittmann@bordet.be
Alessandro Lenci
?
alessandro.lenci@ling.unipi.it
Vito Pirrelli
?
vito.pirrelli@ilc.cnr.it
Abstract
PAIS
`
A is a Creative Commons licensed,
large web corpus of contemporary Italian.
We describe the design, harvesting, and
processing steps involved in its creation.
1 Introduction
This paper provides an overview of the PAIS
`
A cor-
pus of Italian web texts and an introductory de-
scription of the motivation, procedures and facili-
ties for its creation and delivery.
Developed within the PAIS
`
A project, the cor-
pus is intended to meet the objective to help over-
come the technological barriers that still prevent
web users from making use of large quantities of
contemporary Italian texts for language and cul-
tural education, by creating a comprehensive and
easily accessible corpus resource of Italian.
The initial motivation of the initiative stemmed
from the awareness that any static repertoire of
digital data, however carefully designed and de-
veloped, is doomed to fast obsolescence, if con-
tents are not freely available for public usage, con-
tinuously updated and checked for quality, incre-
mentally augmented with new texts and annota-
tion metadata for intelligent indexing and brows-
ing. These requirements brought us to design a
resource that was (1) freely available and freely
re-publishable, (2) comprehensively covering con-
temporary common language and cultural content
and (3) enhanced with a rich set of automatically-
annotated linguistic information to enable ad-
vanced querying and retrieving of data. On top
?
EURAC Research Bolzano/Bozen, IT
?
University of Bologna, IT
?
University of Leeds, UK
?
Institute of Computational Linguistics ?Antonio Zam-
polli? - CNR, IT
?
Institut Jules Bordet, BE
?
University of Pisa, IT
of that, we set out to develop (4) a dedicated in-
terface with a low entry barrier for different target
groups. The end result of this original plan repre-
sents an unprecedented digital language resource
in the Italian scenario.
The main novelty of the PAIS
`
A web corpus is
that it exclusively draws on Creative Commons li-
censed data, provides advanced linguistic annota-
tions with respect to corpora of comparable size
and corpora of web data, and invests in a carefully
designed query interface, targeted at different user
groups. In particular, the integration of richly an-
notated language content with an easily accessible,
user-oriented interface makes PAIS
`
A a unique and
flexible resource for language teaching.
2 Related Work
The world wide web, with its inexhaustible
amount of natural language data, has become an
established source for efficiently building large
corpora (Kilgarriff and Grefenstette, 2003). Tools
are available that make it convenient to bootstrap
corpora from the web based on mere seed term
lists, such as the BootCaT toolkit (Baroni and
Bernardini, 2004). The huge corpora created by
the WaCky project (Baroni et al., 2009) are an ex-
ample of such an approach.
A large number of papers have recently been
published on the harvesting, cleaning and pro-
cessing of web corpora.
1
However, freely avail-
able, large, contemporary, linguistically anno-
tated, easily accessible web corpora are still miss-
ing for many languages; but cf. e.g. (G?en?ereux
et al., 2012) and the Common Crawl Foundations
(CCF) web crawl
2
.
1
cf. the Special Interest Group of the Association for
Computational Linguistics on Web as Corpus (SIGWAC)
http://sigwac.org.uk/
2
CCF produces and maintains a repository of web crawl
data that is openly accessible: http://commoncrawl.
org/
36
3 Corpus Composition
3.1 Corpus design
PAIS
`
A aimed at creating a comprehensive corpus
resource of Italian web texts which adheres to the
criteria laid out in section 1. For these criteria to
be fully met, we had to address a wide variety of
issues covering the entire life-cycle of a digital text
resource, ranging from robust algorithms for web
navigation and harvesting, to adaptive annotation
tools for advanced text indexing and querying and
user-friendly accessing and rendering online inter-
faces customisable for different target groups.
Initially, we targeted a size of 100M tokens, and
planned to automatically annotate the data with
lemma, part-of-speech, structural dependency, and
advanced linguistic information, using and adapt-
ing standard annotation tools (cf. section 4). In-
tegration into a querying environment and a dedi-
cated online interface were planned.
3.2 Licenses
A crucial point when planning to compile a cor-
pus that is free to redistribute without encounter-
ing legal copyright issues is to collect texts that are
in the public domain or at least, have been made
available in a copyleft regime. This is the case
when the author of a certain document decided to
share some rights (copy and/or distribute, adapt
etc.) on her work with the public, in a way that
end users do not need to ask permission to the cre-
ator/owner of the original work. This is possible
by employing licenses other than the traditional
?all right reserved? copyright, i.e. GNU, Creative
Commons etc., which found a wide use especially
on the web. Exploratory studies (Brunello, 2009)
have shown that Creative Commons licenses are
widely employed throughout the web (at least on
the Italian webspace), enough to consider the pos-
sibility to build a large corpus from the web ex-
clusively made of documents released under such
licenses.
In particular, Creative Commons provides five
basic ?baseline rights?: Attribution (BY), Share
Alike (SA), Non Commercial (NC), No Deriva-
tive Works (ND). The licenses themselves are
composed of at least Attribution (which can be
used even alone) plus the other elements, al-
lowing six different combinations:
3
(1) Attribu-
tion (CC BY), (2) Attribution-NonCommercial
3
For detailed descriptions of each license see http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/
(CC BY-NC), (3) Attribution-ShareAlike (CC BY-
SA), (4) Attribution-NoDerivs (CC BY-ND), (5)
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike (CC BY-
NC-SA), and (6) Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivs (CC BY-NC-ND).
Some combinations are not possible because
certain elements are not compatible, e.g. Share
Alike and No Derivative Works. For our purposes
we decided to discard documents released with the
two licenses containing the No Derivative Works
option, because our corpus is in fact a derivative
work of collected documents.
3.3 The final corpus
The corpus contains approximately 388,000 docu-
ments from 1,067 different websites, for a total of
about 250M tokens. All documents contained in
the PAIS
`
A corpus date back to Sept./Oct. 2010.
The documents come from several web sources
which, at the time of corpus collection, provided
their content under Creative Commons license
(see section 3.2 for details). About 269,000 texts
are from Wikimedia Foundation projects, with
approximately 263,300 pages from Wikipedia,
2380 pages from Wikibooks, 1680 pages from
Wikinews, 740 pages from Wikiversity, 410 pages
from Wikisource, and 390 Wikivoyage pages.
The remaining 119,000 documents come
from guide.supereva.it (ca. 19,000),
italy.indymedia.org (ca. 10,000) and
several blog services from more than another
1,000 different sites (e.g. www.tvblog.it
(9,088 pages), www.motoblog.it (3,300),
www.ecowebnews.it (3,220), and
www.webmasterpoint.org (3,138).
Texts included in PAIS
`
A have an average length
of 683 words, with the longest text
4
counting
66,380 running tokens. A non exhaustive list of
average text lengths by source type is provided in
table 1 by way of illustration.
The corpus has been annotated for lemma, part-
of-speech and dependency information (see sec-
tion 4.2 for details). At the document level, the
corpus contains information on the URL of origin
and a set of descriptive statistics of the text, includ-
ing text length, rate of advanced vocabulary, read-
ability parameters, etc. (see section 4.3). Also,
each document is marked with a unique identifier.
4
The European Constitution from wikisource.org:
http://it.wikisource.org/wiki/Trattato_
che_adotta_una_Costituzione_per_l?Europa
37
Document source Avg text length
PAIS
`
A total 683 words
Wikipedia 693 words
Wikibooks 1844 words
guide.supereva.it 378 words
italy.indymedia.it 1147 words
tvblog.it 1472 words
motoblog.it 421 words
ecowebnews.it 347 words
webmasterpoint.org 332 words
Table 1: Average text length by source
The annotated corpus adheres to the stan-
dard CoNLL column-based format (Buchholz and
Marsi, 2006), is encoded in UTF-8.
4 Corpus Creation
4.1 Collecting and cleaning web data
The web pages for PAIS
`
A were selected in two
ways: part of the corpus collection was made
through CC-focused web crawling, and another
part through a targeted collection of documents
from specific websites.
4.1.1 Seed-term based harvesting
At the time of corpus collection (2010), we used
the BootCaT toolkit mainly because collecting
URLs could be based on the public Yahoo! search
API
5
, including the option to restrict search to CC-
licensed pages (including the possibility to specify
even the particular licenses). Unfortunately, Ya-
hoo! discontinued the free availability of this API,
and BootCaT?s remaining search engines do not
provide this feature.
An earlier version of the corpus was collected
using the tuple list originally employed to build
itWaC
6
. As we noticed that the use of this list, in
combination with the restriction to CC, biased the
final results (i.e. specific websites occurred very
often as top results) , we provided as input 50,000
medium frequent seed terms from a basic Italian
vocabulary list
7
, in order to get a wider distribu-
tion of search queries, and, ultimately, of texts.
As introduced in section 3.2, we restricted the
selection not just to Creative Commons-licensed
5
http://developer.yahoo.com/boss/
6
http://wacky.sslmit.unibo.it/doku.
php?id=seed_words_and_tuples
7
http://ppbm.paravia.it/dib_lemmario.
php
texts, but specifically to those licenses allowing
redistribution: namely, CC BY, CC BY-SA, CC
BY-NC-SA, and CC BY-NC.
Results were downloaded and automatically
cleaned with the KrdWrd system, an environment
for the unified processing of web content (Steger
and Stemle, 2009).
Wrongly CC-tagged pages were eliminated us-
ing a black-list that had been manually populated
following inspection of earlier corpus versions.
4.1.2 Targeted
In September 2009, the Wikimedia Foundation de-
cided to release the content of their wikis under
CC BY-SA
8
, so we decided to download the large
and varied amount of texts made available through
the Italian versions of these websites. This was
done using the Wikipedia Extractor
9
on official
dumps
10
of Wikipedia, Wikinews, Wikisource,
Wikibooks, Wikiversity and Wikivoyage.
4.2 Linguistic annotation and tools
adaptation
The corpus was automatically annotated with
lemma, part-of-speech and dependency infor-
mation, using state-of-the-art annotation tools
for Italian. Part-of-speech tagging was per-
formed with the Part-Of-Speech tagger described
in Dell?Orletta (2009) and dependency-parsed by
the DeSR parser (Attardi et al., 2009), using Mul-
tilayer Perceptron as the learning algorithm. The
systems used the ISST-TANL part-of-speech
11
and dependency tagsets
12
. In particular, the pos-
tagger achieves a performance of 96.34% and
DeSR, trained on the ISST-TANL treebank con-
sisting of articles from newspapers and period-
icals, achieves a performance of 83.38% and
87.71% in terms of LAS (labelled attachment
score) and UAS (unlabelled attachment score) re-
spectively, when tested on texts of the same type.
However, since Gildea (2001), it is widely ac-
knowledged that statistical NLP tools have a drop
of accuracy when tested against corpora differing
from the typology of texts on which they were
trained. This also holds true for PAIS
`
A: it contains
8
Previously under GNU Free Documentation License.
9
http://medialab.di.unipi.it/wiki/
Wikipedia_Extractor
10
http://dumps.wikimedia.org/
11
http://www.italianlp.it/docs/
ISST-TANL-POStagset.pdf
12
http://www.italianlp.it/docs/
ISST-TANL-DEPtagset.pdf
38
lexical and syntactic structures of non-canonical
languages such as the language of social media,
blogs, forum posts, consumer reviews, etc. As re-
ported in Petrov and McDonald (2012), there are
multiple reasons why parsing the web texts is dif-
ficult: punctuation and capitalization are often in-
consistent, there is a lexical shift due to increased
use of slang and technical jargon, some syntactic
constructions are more frequent in web text than
in newswire, etc.
In order to overcome this problem, two main ty-
pologies of methods and techniques have been de-
veloped: Self-training (McClosky et al., 2006) and
Active Learning (Thompson et al., 1999).
For the specific purpose of the NLP tools adap-
tation to the Italian web texts, we adopted two dif-
ferent strategies for the pos-tagger and the parser.
For what concerns pos-tagging, we used an active
learning approach: given a subset of automatically
pos-tagged sentences of PAIS
`
A, we selected the
ones with the lowest likelihood, where the sen-
tence likelihood was computed as the product of
the probabilities of the assignments of the pos-
tagger for all the tokens. These sentences were
manually revised and added to the training corpus
in order to build a new pos-tagger model incor-
porating some new knowledge from the target do-
main.
For what concerns parsing, we used a self-
training approach to domain adaptation described
in Dell?Orletta et al. (2013), based on ULISSE
(Dell?Orletta et al., 2011). ULISSE is an unsu-
pervised linguistically-driven algorithm to select
reliable parses from a collection of dependency
annotated texts. It assigns to each dependency
tree a score quantifying its reliability based on a
wide range of linguistic features. After collect-
ing statistics about selected features from a cor-
pus of automatically parsed sentences, for each
newly parsed sentence ULISSE computes a reli-
ability score using the previously extracted feature
statistics. From the top of the parses (ranked ac-
cording to their reliability score) different pools of
parses were selected to be used for training. The
new training contains the original training set as
well as the new selected parses which include lex-
ical and syntactic characteristics specific of the tar-
get domain (Italian web texts). The parser trained
on this new training set improves its performance
when tested on the target domain.
We used this domain adaptation approach for
the following three main reasons: a) it is unsuper-
vised (i.e. no need for manually annotated training
data); b) unlike the Active Learning approach used
for pos-tagging, it does not need manual revision
of the automatically parsed samples to be used for
training; c) it was previously tested on Italian texts
with good results (Dell?Orletta et al., 2013).
4.3 Readability analysis of corpus documents
For each corpus document, we calculated several
text statistics indicative of the linguistic complex-
ity, or ?readability? of a text.
The applied measures include, (1) text length in
tokens, that is the number of tokens per text, (2)
sentences per text, that is a sentence count, and (3)
type-token ratio indicated as a percentage value.
In addition, we calculated (4) the advanced vo-
cabulary per text, that is a word count of the text
vocabulary which is not part of the the basic Ital-
ian vocabulary (?vocabolario di base?) for written
texts, as defined by De Mauro (1991)
13
, and (5)
the Gulpease Index (?Indice Gulpease?) (Lucisano
and Piemontese, 1988), which is a measure for the
readability of text that is based on frequency rela-
tions between the number of sentences, words and
letters of a text.
All values are encoded as metadata for the cor-
pus. Via the PAIS
`
A online interface, they can
be employed for filtering documents and building
subcorpora. This facility was implemented with
the principal target group of PAIS
`
A users in mind,
as the selection of language examples according
to their readability level is particularly relevant for
language learning and teaching.
4.4 Attempts at text classification for genre,
topic, and function
Lack of information about the composition of cor-
pora collected from the web using unsupervised
methods is probably one of the major limitations
of current web corpora vis-`a-vis more traditional,
carefully constructed corpora, most notably when
applications to language teaching and learning are
envisaged. This also holds true for PAIS
`
A, es-
13
The advanced vocabulary was calculated on the ba-
sis of a word list consisting of De Mauro?s ?vocabolario
fondamentale? (http://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Vocabolario_fondamentale) and ?vocabolario
di alto uso? (http://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Vocabolario_di_alto_uso), together with high
frequent function words not contained in those two lists.
39
pecially for the harvested
14
subcorpus that was
downloaded as described in section 4.1. We there-
fore carried out some experiments with the ulti-
mate aim to enrich the corpus with metadata about
text genre, topic and function, using automated
techniques.
In order to gain some insights into the com-
position of PAIS
`
A, we first conducted some man-
ual investigations. Drawing on existing literature
on web genres (e.g. (Santini, 2005; Rehm et al.,
2008; Santini et al., 2010)) and text classification
according to text function and topic (e.g. (Sharoff,
2006)), we developed a tentative three-fold taxon-
omy to be used for text classification. Following
four cycles of sample manual annotation by three
annotators, categories were adjusted in order to
better reflect the nature of PAIS
`
A?s web documents
(cf. (Sharoff, 2010) about differences between do-
mains covered in the BNC and in the web-derived
ukWaC). Details about the taxonomy are provided
in Borghetti et al. (2011). Then, we started to
cross-check whether the devised taxonomy was
indeed appropriate to describe PAIS
`
A?s composi-
tion by comparing its categories with data result-
ing from the application of unsupervised methods
for text classification.
Interesting insights have emerged so far re-
garding the topic category. Following Sharoff
(2010), we used topic modelling based on La-
tent Dirichlet Allocation for the detection of top-
ics: 20 clusters/topics were identified on the ba-
sis of keywords (the number of clusters to re-
trieve is a user-defined parameter) and projected
onto the manually defined taxonomy. This re-
vealed that most of the 20 automatically iden-
tified topics could be reasonably matched to
one of the 8 categories included in the tax-
onomy; exceptions were represented by clus-
ters characterised by proper nouns and gen-
eral language words such bambino/uomo/famiglia
(?child?/?man?/?family?) or credere/sentire/sperare
(?to believe?/?feel?/?hope?), which may in fact be
indicative of genres such as diary or personal com-
ment (e.g. personal blog). Only one of the cate-
gories originally included in the taxonomy ? natu-
ral sciences ? was not represented in the clusters,
which may indicate that there are few texts within
PAIS
`
A belonging to this domain. One of the ma-
14
In fact, even the nature of the targeted texts is not pre-
cisely defined: for instance, Wikipedia articles can actually
encompass a variety of text types such as biographies, intro-
ductions to academic theories etc. (Santini et al., 2010, p. 15)
jor advantages of topic models is that each corpus
document can be associated ? to varying degrees ?
to several topics/clusters: if encoded as metadata,
this information makes it possible not only to fil-
ter texts according to their prevailing domain, but
also to represent the heterogeneous nature of many
web documents.
5 Corpus Access and Usage
5.1 Corpus distribution
The PAIS
`
A corpus is distributed in two ways: it is
made available for download and it can be queried
via its online interface. For both cases, no restric-
tions on its usage apply other than those defined
by the Creative Commons BY-NC-SA license. For
corpus download, both the raw text version and the
annotated corpus in CoNLL format are provided.
The PAIS
`
A corpus together with all project-
related information is accessible via the project
web site at http://www.corpusitaliano.it
5.2 Corpus interface
The creation of a dedicated open online interface
for the PAIS
`
A corpus has been a declared primary
objective of the project.
The interface is aimed at providing a power-
ful, effective and easy-to-employ tool for mak-
ing full use of the resource, without having to go
through downloading, installation or registration
procedures. It is targeted at different user groups,
particularly language learners, teachers, and lin-
guists. As users of PAIS
`
A are expected to show
varying levels of proficiency in terms of language
competence, linguistic knowledge, and concern-
ing the use of online search tools, the interface
has been designed to provide four separate search
components, implementing different query modes.
Initially, the user is directed to a basic keyword
search that adopts a ?Google-style? search box.
Single search terms, as well as multi-word combi-
nations or sequences can be searched by inserting
them in a simple text box.
The second component is an advanced graph-
ical search form. It provides elaborated search
options for querying linguistic annotation layers
and allows for defining distances between search
terms as well as repetitions or optionally occurring
terms. Furthermore, the advanced search supports
regular expressions.
The third component emulates a command-line
search via the powerful CQP query language of
40
the Open Corpus Workbench (Evert and Hardie,
2011). It allows for complex search queries in
CQP syntax that rely on linguistic annotation lay-
ers as well as on metadata information.
Finally, a filter interface is presented in a fourth
component. It serves the purpose of retriev-
ing full-text corpus documents based on keyword
searches as well as text statistics (see section 4.3).
Like the CQP interface, the filter interface is also
supporting the building of temporary subcorpora
for subsequent querying.
By default, search results are displayed as
KWIC (KeyWord In Context) lines, centred
around the search expression. Each search hit can
be expanded to its full sentence view. In addition,
the originating full text document can be accessed
and its source URL is provided.
Based on an interactive visualisation for depen-
dency graphs (Culy et al., 2011) for each search
result a graphical representations of dependency
relations together with the sentence and associated
lemma and part-of-speech information can be gen-
erated (see Figure 1).
Figure 1: Dependency diagram
Targeted at novice language learners of Italian,
a filter for automatically restricting search results
to sentences of limited complexity has been in-
tegrated into each search component. When ac-
tivated, search results are automatically filtered
based on a combination of the complexity mea-
sures introduced in section 4.3.
5.3 Technical details
The PAIS
`
A online interface has been developed in
several layers: in essence, it provides a front-end
to the corpus as indexed in Open Corpus Work-
bench (Evert and Hardie, 2011). This corpus
query engine provides the fundamental search ca-
pabilities through the CQP language. Based on
the CWB/Perl API that is part of the Open Corpus
Workbench package, a web service has been de-
veloped at EURAC which exposes a large part of
the CQP language
15
through a RESTful API.
16
The four types of searches provided by the on-
line interface are developed on top of this web ser-
vice. The user queries are translated into CQP
queries and passed to the web service. In many
cases, such as the free word order queries in the
simple and advanced search forms, more than one
CQP query is necessary to produce the desired
result. Other functionalities implemented in this
layer are the management of subcorpora and the
filtering by complexity. The results returned by
the web service are then formatted and presented
to the user.
The user interface as well as the mechanisms
for translation of queries from the web forms into
CQP have been developed server-side in PHP.
The visualizations are implemented client-side in
JavaScript and jQuery, the dependency graphs
based on the xLDD framework (Culy et al., 2011).
5.4 Extraction of lexico-syntactic information
PAIS
`
A is currently used in the CombiNet project
?Word Combinations in Italian ? Theoretical and
descriptive analysis, computational models, lexi-
cographic layout and creation of a dictionary?.
17
The project goal is to study the combinatory prop-
erties of Italian words by developing advanced
computational linguistics methods for extracting
distributional information from PAIS
`
A.
In particular, CombiNet uses a pattern-based
approach to extract a wide range of multiword
expressions, such as phrasal lexemes, colloca-
tions, and usual combinations. POS n-grams
are automatically extracted from PAIS
`
A, and then
ranked according to different types of associa-
tion measures (e.g., pointwise mutual informa-
tion, log-likelihood ratios, etc.). Extending the
LexIt methodology (Lenci et al., 2012), CombiNet
also extracts distributional profiles from the parsed
layer of PAIS
`
A, including the following types of
information:
1. syntactic slots (subject, complements, modi-
15
To safeguard the system against malicious attacks, secu-
rity measures had to be taken at several of the layers, which
unfortunately also make some of the more advanced CQP fea-
tures inaccessible to the user.
16
Web services based on REST (Representational State
Transfer) principles employ standard concepts such as a URI
and standard HTTP methods to provide an interface to func-
tionalities on a remote host.
17
3-year PRIN(2010/2011)-project, coordination by Raf-
faele Simone ? University of Rome Tre
41
fiers, etc.) and subcategorization frames;
2. lexical sets filling syntactic slots (e.g. proto-
typical subjects of a target verb);
3. semantic classes describing selectional pref-
erences of syntactic slots (e.g. the direct obj.
of mangiare/?to eat? typically selects nouns
referring to food, while its subject selects an-
imate nouns); semantic roles of predicates.
The saliency and typicality of combinatory pat-
terns are weighted by means of different statisti-
cal indexes and the resulting profiles will be used
to define a distributional semantic classification of
Italian verbs, comparable to the one elaborated in
the VerbNet project (Kipper et al., 2008).
6 Evaluation
We performed post-crawl evaluations on the data.
For licensing, we analysed 200,534 pages that
were originally collected for the PAIS
`
A corpus,
and only 1,060 were identified as containing no
CC license link (99.95% with CC mark-up). Then,
from 10,000 randomly selected non-CC-licensed
Italian pages 15 were wrongly identified as CC li-
censed containing CC mark-up (0.15% error). For
language identification we checked the harvested
corpus part with the CLD2 toolkit
18
, and > 99%
of the data was identified as Italian.
The pos-tagger has been adapted to peculiari-
ties of the PAIS
`
A web texts, by manually correct-
ing sample annotation output and re-training the
tagger accordingly. Following the active learning
approach as described in section 4.2 we built a new
pos-tagger model based on 40.000 manually re-
vised tokens. With the new model, we obtained
an improvement in accuracy of 1% on a test-set
of 5000 tokens extracted from PAIS
`
A. Final tag-
ger accuracy reached 96.03%.
7 Conclusion / Future Work
In this paper we showed how a contemporary and
free language resource of Italian with linguistic
annotations can be designed, implemented and de-
veloped from the web and made available for dif-
ferent types of language users.
Future work will focus on enriching the cor-
pus with metadata by means of automatic clas-
sification techniques, so as to make a better as-
sessment of corpus composition. A multi-faceted
18
Compact Language Detection 2, http://code.
google.com/p/cld2/
approach combining linguistic features extracted
from texts (content/function words ratio, sentence
length, word frequency, etc.) and information
extracted from document URLs (e.g., tags like
?wiki?, ?blog?) might be particularly suitable for
genre and function annotation.
Metadata annotation will enable more advanced
applications of the corpus for language teaching
and learning purposes. In this respect, existing
exemplifications of the use of the PAIS
`
A inter-
face for language learning and teaching (Lyding et
al., 2013) could be followed by further pedagogi-
cal proposals as well as empowered by dedicated
teaching guidelines for the exploitation of the cor-
pus and its web interface in the class of Italian as
a second language.
In a more general perspective, we envisage
a tighter integration between acquisition of new
texts, automated text annotation and development
of lexical and language learning resources allow-
ing even non-specialised users to carve out and
develop their own language data. This ambitious
goal points in the direction of a fully-automatised
control of the entire life-cycle of open-access Ital-
ian language resources with a view to address an
increasingly wider range of potential demands.
Acknowledgements
The three years PAIS
`
A project
19
, concluded in
January 2013, received funding from the Italian
Ministry of Education, Universities and Research
(MIUR)
20
, by the FIRB program (Fondo per gli
Investimenti della Ricerca di Base)
21
.
References
G. Attardi, F. Dell?Orletta, M. Simi, and J. Turian.
2009. Accurate dependency parsing with a stacked
multilayer perceptron. In Proc. of Evalita?09, Eval-
uation of NLP and Speech Tools for Italian, Reggio
Emilia.
M. Baroni and S. Bernardini. 2004. Bootcat: Boot-
strapping corpora and terms from the web. In Proc.
of LREC 2004, pages 1313?1316. ELDA.
M. Baroni, S. Bernardini, A. Ferraresi, and
E. Zanchetta. 2009. The wacky wide web: A
collection of very large linguistically processed
19
An effort of four Italian research units: University of
Bologna, CNR Pisa, University of Trento and European
Academy of Bolzano/Bozen.
20
http://www.istruzione.it/
21
http://hubmiur.pubblica.istruzione.
it/web/ricerca/firb
42
web-crawled corpora. Journal of LRE, 43(3):209?
226.
C. Borghetti, S. Castagnoli, and M. Brunello. 2011. I
testi del web: una proposta di classificazione sulla
base del corpus pais`a. In M. Cerruti, E. Corino,
and C. Onesti, editors, Formale e informale. La vari-
azione di registro nella comunicazione elettronica.,
pages 147?170. Carocci, Roma.
M. Brunello. 2009. The creation of free linguistic cor-
pora from the web. In I. Alegria, I. Leturia, and
S. Sharoff, editors, Proc. of the Fifth Web as Corpus
Workshop (WAC5), pages 9?16. Elhuyar Fundazioa.
S. Buchholz and E. Marsi. 2006. CoNLL-X Shared
Task on Multilingual Dependency Parsing. In Proc.
Tenth Conf. Comput. Nat. Lang. Learn., number
June in CoNLL-X ?06, pages 149?164. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
C. Culy, V. Lyding, and H. Dittmann. 2011. xldd:
Extended linguistic dependency diagrams. In Proc.
of the 15th International Conference on Information
Visualisation IV2011, pages 164?169, London, UK.
T. De Mauro. 1991. Guida all?uso delle parole. Edi-
tori Riuniti, Roma.
F. Dell?Orletta, G. Venturi, and S. Montemagni. 2011.
Ulisse: an unsupervised algorithm for detecting re-
liable dependency parses. In Proc. of CoNLL 2011,
Conferences on Natural Language Learning, Port-
land, Oregon.
F. Dell?Orletta, G. Venturi, and S. Montemagni. 2013.
Unsupervised linguistically-driven reliable depen-
dency parses detection and self-training for adapta-
tion to the biomedical domain. In Proc. of BioNLP
2013, Workshop on Biomedical NLP, Sofia.
F. Dell?Orletta. 2009. Ensemble system for part-of-
speech tagging. In Proceedings of Evalita?09, Eval-
uation of NLP and Speech Tools for Italian, Reggio
Emilia.
S. Evert and A. Hardie. 2011. Twenty-first century
corpus workbench: Updating a query architecture
for the new millennium. In Proc. of the Corpus Lin-
guistics 2011, Birmingham, UK.
M. G?en?ereux, I. Hendrickx, and A. Mendes. 2012.
A large portuguese corpus on-line: Cleaning and
preprocessing. In PROPOR, volume 7243 of Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science, pages 113?120.
Springer.
A. Kilgarriff and G. Grefenstette. 2003. Introduction
to the special issue on the web as corpus. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 29(3):333?347.
K. Kipper, A. Korhonen, N. Ryant, and M. Palmer.
2008. A large-scale classification of english verbs.
Journal of LRE, 42:21?40.
A. Lenci, G. Lapesa, and G. Bonansinga. 2012. Lexit:
A computational resource on italian argument struc-
ture. In N. Calzolari, K. Choukri, T. Declerck,
M. U?gur Do?gan, B. Maegaard, J. Mariani, J. Odijk,
and S. Piperidis, editors, Proc. of LREC 2012, pages
3712?3718, Istanbul, Turkey, May. ELRA.
P. Lucisano and M. E. Piemontese. 1988. Gulpease:
una formula per la predizione della difficolt dei testi
in lingua italiana. Scuola e citt`a, 39(3):110?124.
V. Lyding, C. Borghetti, H. Dittmann, L. Nicolas, and
E. Stemle. 2013. Open corpus interface for italian
language learning. In Proc. of the ICT for Language
Learning Conference, 6th Edition, Florence, Italy.
D. McClosky, E. Charniak, and M. Johnson. 2006.
Reranking and self-training for parser adaptation. In
Proc. of ACL 2006, ACL, Sydney.
S. Petrov and R. McDonald. 2012. Overview of the
2012 shared task on parsing the web. In Proc. of
SANCL 2012, First Workshop on Syntactic Analysis
of Non-Canonical Language, Montreal.
G. Rehm, M. Santini, A. Mehler, P. Braslavski,
R. Gleim, A. Stubbe, S. Symonenko, M. Tavosanis,
and V. Vidulin. 2008. Towards a reference corpus of
web genres for the evaluation of genre identification
systems. In Proc. of LREC 2008, pages 351?358,
Marrakech, Morocco.
M. Santini, A. Mehler, and S. Sharoff. 2010. Riding
the Rough Waves of Genre on the Web. Concepts
and Research Questions. In A. Mehler, S. Sharoff,
and M. Santini, editors, Genres on the Web: Compu-
tational Models and Empirical Studies., pages 3?33.
Springer, Dordrecht.
M. Santini. 2005. Genres in formation? an ex-
ploratory study of web pages using cluster analysis.
In Proc. of the 8th Annual Colloquium for the UK
Special Interest Group for Computational Linguis-
tics (CLUK05), Manchester, UK.
S. Sharoff. 2006. Creating General-Purpose Corpora
Using Automated Search Engine Queries. In M. Ba-
roni and S. Bernardini, editors, Wacky! Working
Papers on the Web as Corpus, pages 63?98. Gedit,
Bologna.
S. Sharoff. 2010. Analysing similarities and differ-
ences between corpora. In 7th Language Technolo-
gies Conference, Ljubljana.
J. M. Steger and E. W. Stemle. 2009. KrdWrd ? The
Architecture for Unified Processing of Web Content.
In Proc. Fifth Web as Corpus Work., Donostia-San
Sebastian, Basque Country.
C. A. Thompson, M. E. Califf, and R. J. Mooney. 1999.
Active learning for natural language parsing and in-
formation extraction. In Proc. of ICML99, the Six-
teenth International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, San Francisco, CA.
43
Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2014), pages 57?61,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 26-27 April 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Extracting MWEs from Italian corpora:
A case study for refining the POS-pattern methodology
Malvina Nissim
FICLIT
University of Bologna
malvina.nissim@unibo.it
Sara Castagnoli
LILEC
University of Bologna
s.castagnoli@unibo.it
Francesca Masini
LILEC
University of Bologna
francesca.masini@unibo.it
Abstract
An established method for MWE extrac-
tion is the combined use of previously iden-
tified POS-patterns and association mea-
sures. However, the selection of such POS-
patterns is rarely debated. Focusing on Ital-
ian MWEs containing at least one adjec-
tive, we set out to explore how candidate
POS-patterns listed in relevant literature
and lexicographic sources compare with
POS sequences exhibited by statistically
significant n-grams including an adjective
position extracted from a large corpus of
Italian. All literature-derived patterns are
found?and new meaningful candidate pat-
terns emerge?among the top-ranking tri-
grams for three association measures. We
conclude that a final solid set to be used for
MWE extraction will have to be further re-
fined through a combination of association
measures as well as manual inspection.
1 Introduction
The CombiNet project
1
has the goal of building
an online resource for Word Combinations in Ital-
ian, including MWEs of various degrees of fixed-
ness (such as phrasal lexemes, collocations and
usual combinations) as well as distributional pro-
files of Italian lexemes. Within this project, the
present paper aims at investigating ways to refine
a well-known methodology for MWE-extraction,
namely the combined use of previously identified
POS-patterns and association measures (Evert and
Krenn, 2005). While POS-patterns are widely used
to extract MWEs from corpora in order to constrain
the array of possible outputs (Krenn and Evert,
2001; Wermter and Hahn, 2006, e.g.), the way in
which POS-patterns are created in the first place is
much less addressed. This step is however crucial,
1
https://sites.google.com/site/enwcin/home
especially considering that the list of patterns is
necessarily language-specific. The goal of this pa-
per is to propose a method to optimize ? in terms of
both recall and precision ? the list of POS patterns
to be used for the subsequent extraction of potential
MWEs. In order to do this, we compare predeter-
mined patterns, which would be normally used as
a first-pass sieve for potential MWEs, with pat-
terns exhibited by statistically significant n-grams
extracted from data.
2 Methodology
In this pilot study, we focus on MWEs containing
at least one adjective, and we limit the extraction
to trigrams (Section 2.1). We make use of the
following sets of data: (a) a list of frequently used
Italian adjectives; (b) a list of previously identified
POS-patterns containing at least one adjective.
2
The adjectival lemmas were taken from the
Senso Comune dictionary,
3
which contains 2,010
fundamental lemmas of the Italian lexicon, 211 of
which are adjectives (e.g. bello ?beautiful?, brutto
?ugly?, ricco ?rich?). These adjectives are used to
constrain the extraction procedure, and we refer to
this set as {SC}.
The list of predetermined POS-patterns for
MWEs involving one adjective was obtained by
merging the following information: (a) patterns
of word combinations included in existing com-
binatory dictionaries for Italian (Piunno et al.,
2013), see Table 1a; (b) additional combinatory
types mentioned in the relevant theoretical litera-
ture (Voghera, 2004; Masini, 2012), summarised
in Table 1b; and (c) a few more patterns based on
our own intuition, i.e. identified by elaborating on
the previous two lists (Table 2). This joint collec-
tion contains a total of 19 patterns, most of which
are bigrams (11), and fewer are trigrams (8). Note
2
For information on POS tags see Appendix.
3
http://www.sensocomune.it/
57
that trigrams (put together in Table 2) come for the
most part from our intuition, indicating that these
patterns are rather neglected in the literature and
in combinatory dictionaries of Italian, which tend
to focus on bigrams. For this reason, and because
longer sequences are intrinsically more idiosyn-
cratic, we concentrate on trigrams for this pilot
experiment, although in the discussion we take into
account bigrams, too (Section 3).
Table 1: Italian POS-patterns with ADJ(s)
POS-pattern Example Translation
(a) from lexicographic sources
ADJ ADJ stanco morto dead tired
ADJCONADJ vivo e vegeto live and kicking
ADJ NOUN prima classe first class
ADJ PRE pronto a ready to
ADV ADJ molto malato very ill
NOUN ADJ casa editrice publishing house
VER ADJ uscire pazzo to go crazy
(b) from relevant literature
ADJ PRO qual esso which/who
ADJ
i
ADJ
i
papale papale bluntly
ARTPRE ADJ alla francese French-style
PRE ADJ a caldo on the spot
PRE ADJNOUN di bassa lega vulgar/coarse
PRE NOUNADJ a senso unico one-way
PRO ADJ tal altro some other
2.1 Extracting the trigrams
From the corpus La Repubblica (Baroni et al.,
2004), which consists of 300M words of newswire
contemporary Italian, we extracted all trigrams fea-
turing at least one adjective, deriving this informa-
tion from the pre-existing POS tags in the corpus.
All trigrams were extracted as sequences of lem-
mas. We created three separate lists according to
the adjective?s position in the trigram (first, second,
or third). All instances containing any punctuation
item were discarded.
For each of the three sets, we kept only trigrams
occurring more than five times in the whole cor-
pus. As a further step, we selected those instances
featuring one of the 211 adjectives in {SC}, yield-
ing a total of 89,217 different trigrams featuring
an adjective as first member (191 adjectives from
{SC} occur in this position), 100,861 as second
(192 adjectives), and 114,672 as third (193).
2.2 Ranking the trigrams
We used the Text-NSP package (Banerjee and Ped-
ersen, 2003) to rank the trigrams in each of the
three sets according to three association measures
(AMs), namely the Poisson-Stirling measure (PS),
the log-likelihood ratio (LL) and pointwise mu-
tual information (PMI). However, on the basis of
preliminary inspection and observations in the liter-
ature on ranking Italian MWEs extracted from cor-
pora (Nissim and Zaninello, 2013), we discarded
PMI as not too accurate for this task. We also
considered raw frequencies, as they have proved
good indicators for collocations, on a par with AMs
(Krenn and Evert, 2001; Bannard, 2007).
The idea is to check which POS sequences are
exhibited by the highest instances in the rank, un-
der the rationale that such patterns might be good
representations of Italian MWEs containing adjec-
tives, and can be used for further extraction and
characterisation of the phenomenon (in dictionar-
ies and resources). Thus, we selected the top 10%
instances in each rank, extracted their POS patterns,
and ranked such patterns according to the number
of times they appeared. Tables 3?5 report the ten
most frequent patterns according to each measure,
when an adjective is found in first, second, and
third position, respectively.
3 Analysis and discussion
By comparing the ranked patterns in Tables 3?5
with the predetermined POS-patterns for trigrams
in Table 2, we draw the following observations.
We first consider patterns that are ranked high
for all measures. Some find a correspondence to
those in Table 2, implying that these are likely to
be solid, characteristic POS sequences to be used
in extraction (ADJ CONJ ADJ (for ADJ in first
position), ADJ PRE VER, PRE ADJ NOUN, and
VER PRE ADJ). Other found patterns, instead, are
not among the pre-identified ones, but are definitely
typical sequences, as the analysis of some of the
extracted trigrams shows. Among these: ADJ PRE
NOUN (ospite d?onore ?special guest?), VER ART
ADJ (essere il solo ?to be the only one?), NOUN
PRE ADJ (agente in borghese ?plain-clothes po-
liceman?), ARTPRE ADJ NOUN (all?ultimo mo-
mento ?at the last moment?). Envisaging an ex-
traction procedure based on POS sequences, such
structures should be included to improve recall.
Conversely, the PRE ART ADJ pattern exhibits
an incomplete sequence, and is therefore unsuitable
for MWE extraction. Since the inclusion of such
patterns would possibly affect precision, they need
to be filtered out on the grounds of grammatical
58
Table 2: Trigram POS-patterns containing ADJ(s)
POS-pattern Example Translation
from literature and resources
ADJ CON ADJ pura e semplice pure and simple
PRE ADJ NOUN a breve termine short-run
PRE NOUN ADJ in tempo reale (in) real-time
from our own intuition
ADJ PRE VER duro a morire die-hard
NOUN ADJ ADJ prodotto interno lordo gross national product
NOUN NOUN ADJ dipartimento affari sociali social affairs division
PRE ADJ VER per quieto vivere for the sake of quiet and peace
VER PRE ADJ dare per scontato to take for granted
Table 3: Top 10 POS patterns featuring an adjective as word1, extracted from the top 10% trigrams ranked
according to LL, PS, and raw frequency.
LL PS raw frequency
ADJ PRE VER ADJ NOUN PRE ADJ NOUN PRE
ADJ PRE ART ADJ NOUN ARTPRE ADJ NOUN ARTPRE
ADJ NOUN PRE ADJ NOUN ADJ ADJ ARTPRE NOUN
ADJ PRE NOUN ADJ ARTPRE NOUN ADJ PRE ART
ADJ NOUN ARTPRE ADJ PRE VER ADJ PRE VER
ADJ ARTPRE NOUN ADJ PRE NOUN ADJ NOUN ADJ
ADJ PRE DET ADJ CON ADJ ADJ PRE NOUN
ADJ CON ADJ ADJ NPR NPR ADJ CON ADJ
ADJ CHE CLI ADJ NOUN CON ADJ NOUN CON
ADJ DET NOUN ADJ PRE ART ADJ CON ART
constraints, or, ultimately, manual inspection.
Additionally, there are patterns that contain or
are portions of more relevant patterns for MWE-
hood. Some capture what are in fact bigrams (Ta-
ble 6), while others are portions of 4-grams or
possibly larger sequences, namely NOUN ADJ
PRE (NOUN), (NOUN) ADJ ARTPRE NOUN,
and NOUN ARTPRE ADJ (NOUN), where the
?missing? POS is given in brackets. Examples are:
concorso esterno in (omicidio) ?external partici-
pation in (murder)?, (banca) nazionale del lavoro
?National (Bank) of Labour?, and paese del terzo
(mondo) ?third world (country)?, respectively. Run-
ning a full-scale extraction procedure that accounts
for all n-grams should naturally take care of this.
Some of patterns from Table 2 are ranked high
only by some measures: PRE NOUN ADJ only
according to PS and raw frequency (Table 5), and
NOUN ADJ ADJ both for second and third po-
sition, but only by PS. Overall, with respect to
their ability to extract previously identified POS-
patterns, AMs perform similarly when the adjective
is the first member (Table 3), whereas PS seems
to be more indicative when the adjective is second
and third (Tables 4-5), together with raw frequency,
while LL seems to be generally performing the
worst. This point calls for a combination of AMs
(Pecina, 2008), but will require further work.
As for predetermined patterns that are not found
among the top ones, we observe that NOUN NOUN
ADJ is basically an adjective modifying a noun-
noun compound, and should be best treated as a
?complex bigram?. Similarly, the PRE ADJ VER
pattern can be seen as an extension of the ADJ VER
bigram, which is usually not considered (Table 1).
Investigating the combination of bigrams, trigrams
and n-grams with n>3 is left for future work.
4 Conclusion
In summary, basically all of the literature/intuition-
based patterns are retrieved from highly ranked
plain trigrams. However, top-ranking trigrams also
exhibit other POS sequences which should be in-
cluded in a set of patterns used for MWE extrac-
59
Table 4: Top 10 POS patterns featuring an adjective as word2, extracted from the top 10% trigrams ranked
according to LL, PS, and raw frequency.
LL PS raw frequency
ART ADJ NOUN ART ADJ NOUN ART ADJ NOUN
NOUN ADJ PRE ARTPRE ADJ NOUN ARTPRE ADJ NOUN
PRE ADJ NOUN PRE ADJ NOUN PRE ADJ NOUN
ARTPRE ADJ NOUN NOUN ADJ ARTPRE NOUN ADJ PRE
DET ADJ NOUN NOUN ADJ PRE NOUN ADJ ARTPRE
ART ADJ NPR NOUN ADJ CON NOUN ADJ CON
ART ADJ CON DET ADJ NOUN ADV ADJ PRE
ADV ADJ PRE VER ADJ NOUN DET ADJ NOUN
DET ADJ VER NOUN ADJ ADJ ADV ADJ ARTPRE
VER ADJ PRE ADV ADJ PRE ADV ADJ CON
Table 5: Top 10 POS patterns featuring an adjective as word3, extracted from the top 10% trigrams ranked
according to LL, PS, and raw frequency.
LL PS raw frequency
VER ART ADJ ART NOUN ADJ ART NOUN ADJ
PRE ART ADJ ARTPRE NOUN ADJ ARTPRE NOUN ADJ
NOUN PRE ADJ PRE NOUN ADJ VER ART ADJ
NOUN ARTPRE ADJ NOUN ARTPRE ADJ PRE ART ADJ
VER ARTPRE ADJ VER ART ADJ PRE NOUN ADJ
VER PRE ADJ NOUN PRE ADJ NOUN ARTPRE ADJ
NOUN ART ADJ PRE ART ADJ NOUN PRE ADJ
ADV ART ADJ NOUN ADV ADJ VER PRE ADJ
ADV ADV ADJ VER PRE ADJ NOUN ADV ADJ
ART DET ADJ NOUN ADJ ADJ VER ARTPRE ADJ
Table 6: Extracted trigram patterns that subsume a bigram pattern (boldfaced).
Pattern Example Translation
ADJ PRE ART degno di un worthy of a
ADJ NOUN PRE utile netto di net profit of
ADJ NOUN ARTPRE alto funzionario del senrior official of
ART ADJ NOUN il pubblico ministero the public prosecutor
NOUN ADJ PRE centro storico di historical centre of
ARTPRE ADJ NOUN della pubblica amministrazione of the public administration
DET ADJ NOUN altro duro colpo another hard blow
ADV ADJ PRE sempre pronto a always ready to
tion to improve recall. At the same time, several
patterns extracted with this technique are to be dis-
carded. Some are just irrelevant (e.g. ADJ CHE
CLI, nero che le ?black that them?): in this respect,
combining various AMs or setting grammatical
constraints could help refine precision, but human
intervention also seems unavoidable. Others are
not meaningful trigrams as such, but may be mean-
ingful as parts of larger MWEs or because they
contain meaningful bigrams. Here, it would be in-
teresting to explore how to combine n-grams with
different n-values.
This pilot experiment shows that trigram ranking
is useful to extract new patterns that are not consid-
ered in the initial set. The latter can be therefore
expanded by following the proposed methodology,
as a preliminary step towards the actual extraction
of candidate MWEs from corpora. Clearly, the va-
lidity of the expanded POS-pattern set can only be
evaluated after the extraction step is completed.
60
Acknowledgments
This research was carried out within the PRIN
project 2010-2011 (n. 20105B3HE8 003) Word
Combinations in Italian: theoretical and descrip-
tive analysis, computational models, lexicographic
layout and creation of a dictionary, coordinated by
Raffaele Simone (Roma Tre University) and funded
by the Italian Ministry of Education, University and
Research (MIUR). We are grateful to the anony-
mous reviewers for their useful comments.
References
Satanjeev Banerjee and Ted Pedersen. 2003. The de-
sign, implementation, and use of the ngram statistics
package. In A. F. Gelbukh, editor, volume 2588 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 370?381.
Colin Bannard. 2007. A measure of syntactic flex-
ibility for automatically identifying multiword ex-
pressions in corpora. In Proc. of the Workshop on
A Broader Perspective on Multiword Expressions,
pages 1?8, Prague, ACL.
Marco Baroni, Silvia Bernardini, Federica Comastri,
Lorenzo Piccioni, Alessandra Volpi, Guy Aston, and
Marco Mazzoleni. 2004. Introducing the La Re-
pubblica Corpus: A Large, Annotated, TEI(XML)-
Compliant Corpus of Newspaper Italian. In Proc. of
LREC 2004, pages 1771?1774.
Stefan Evert and Brigitte Krenn. 2005. Using small
random samples for the manual evaluation of statis-
tical association measures. Computer Speech & Lan-
guage, 19(4):450?466. Special issue on Multiword
Expression.
Brigitte Krenn and Stefan Evert. 2001. Can we do bet-
ter than frequency? A case study on extracting PP-
verb collocations. In Proc. of the ACL-EACL Work-
shop on Collocations, pages 39?46, Toulouse.
Francesca Masini. 2012. Parole sintagmatiche in ita-
liano. Caissa, Roma.
Malvina Nissim and Andrea Zaninello. 2013. Mod-
eling the internal variability of multiword expres-
sions through a pattern-based method. ACM Trans.
Speech Lang. Process., 10(2):7:1?7:26.
Pavel Pecina. 2008. A Machine Learning Approach
to Multiword Expression Extraction. In Proceed-
ings of the LREC 2008 Workshop Towards a Shared
Task for Multiword Expressions, pages 54?57, Mar-
rakech, Morocco. European Language Resources
Association.
Valentina Piunno, Francesca Masini and Sara Castag-
noli. 2013. Studio comparativo dei dizionari com-
binatori dell?italiano e di altre lingue europee. Com-
biNet Technical Report. Roma Tre University and
University of Bologna.
Miriam Voghera. 2004. Polirematiche. In Grossmann,
Maria & Franz Rainer, editors, La formazione delle
parole in italiano, T?ubingen, Max Niemeyer Verlag,
56-69.
Joachim Wermter and Udo Hahn. 2006. You can?t
beat frequency (unless you use linguistic knowl-
edge): A qualitative evaluation of association mea-
sures for collocation and term extraction. In Proc.
of COLING-ACL ?06, pages 785?792, USA.
Appendix
The tagset for all patterns extracted from
the corpus ?La Repubblica? is accessible at
http://sslmit.unibo.it/?baroni/
collocazioni/itwac.tagset.txt. In
the context of this experiment we collapsed all
fine-grained tags into the corresponding coarse-
grained tag (e.g. all verbal tags such as VER:fin or
VER:ppast were collapsed into VER). The POS
tags used in this paper are to be interpreted as in
the Table below.
Table 7: POS tags used in this paper.
abbreviation part of speech
ADJ adjective
ADV adverb
ART article
ARTPRE prepositional article
CHE any function of the word ?che?
(adjective, conjunction, pronoun)
CLI clitic
DET determiner
NOUN noun
PRE preposition
VER verb
61
