Verb Subcategorization Frequency Differences between Business- 
News and Balanced Corpora: The Role of Verb Sense 
IDouglas Roland, ~"Danid Jurafsky, "3Lise Menn,'Susanne Gahl, IElizabeth Elder and IChris 
Riddoch 
~Department of Linguistics, 2Department of
Computer Science, 3Institute of Cognitive 
Science 
University of Colorado 
Boulder, CO 80309-0295 
{ douglas.roland, jurafslQ1, lise.menn, 
elizabeth.elder, 
christopher.b.riddoch } @colorado.edu 
'Department ofLinguistics 
Harvard University 
Cambridge MA 02138 
sgahl @ fas.harvard.edu 
Abstract 
We explore the differences in verb 
subeategorization frequencies across several 
corpora in an effort to obtain stable cross 
corpus subcategonzation probabilities for 
use in norming psychological experiments. 
For the 64 single sense verbs we looked at, 
subeategorizatlon preferences were 
remarkably stable between British and 
American corpora, and between balanced 
corpora and financial news corpora. Of the 
verbs that did show differences, these 
differences were generally found between 
the balanced corpora nd the financial news 
data. We show that all or nearly all of 
these shifts in subcategorization arerealised 
via (often subtle) word sense differences. 
This is an interesting observation i  itself, 
and also suggests that stable cross corpus 
subcategorization frequencies may be found 
when verb sense is adequately controlled. 
Introduction 
Verb subcategorizafion probabilities play an 
important role in both computational linguistic 
applications (e.g. Carroll, Minnen, and Briscoe 
1998, Charniak 1997, Collins 1996/1997, Joshi 
and Srinivas 1994, Kim, Srinivas, and Tmeswell 
1997, Stolcke et al 1997) and psycholinguisfic 
models of language processing (e.g. Boland 
1997, Clifton et al 1984, Ferreira & McClure 
1997, Fodor 1978, Garnsey et al 1997, Jurafsky 
1996, MacDonald 1994, Mitchell & Holmes 
1985, Tanenhaus et al 1990, Trueswell et al 
1993). 
Previous research, however, has shown that 
subcategorization probabilities vary widely in 
different corpora. Studies such as Merlo 
(1994), Gibson et al (1996), and Roland & 
Jurafsky (1997) have found subcategorization 
frequency differences between traditional corpus 
data and data from psychological experiments. 
Biber (1993) and Biber et al (1998) have shown 
that that word frequency, word sense (as defined 
by collocates), the distribution of synonymous 
words and the use of syntactic structures varies 
with corpus genre. Roland & Jurafsky (1998, 
2000 in press) showed that there were 
subcategorization frequency differences between 
various written and spoken corpora, and 
furthermore showed that that these 
subcategorization frequency differences are 
caused by variation in word sense as well as 
genre and discourse type differences among the 
corpora. 
While the subcategorization probabilities in a 
computational l nguage model can be adjusted 
to match a particular corpus, cross corpus 
differences in such probabilities pose an 
important problem when using corpora for 
norming psychological experiments. If each 
corpus generates a separate set of probabilities, 
which probabilities are the correct ones to use as 
a model of human language processing? 
In an attempt to use corpora to provide norming 
data for 64 verbs for experimental purposes, we 
investigate in detail how verb frequencies and 
verb subcategorization frequencies differ among 
three corpora: the British National Corpus 
28 
(BNC), the Wall Street Journal corpus (WSJ), 
and the Brown Corpus (Brown). For the 64 
verbs, we randomly selected a set of sentences 
from each corpus and hand-coded them for 
transitivity, passive versus active voice, and 
whether the selected usage was an instance of 
the most common sense of the verb. 
We then ask two questions: Do these verbs 
have the same subcategorizafion probabilities 
across corpora, and, when there are differences, 
what is the cause. If a set of factors causing the 
differences can be identified and controlled for, 
then a stable set of cross-corpus probabilities 
suitable for norming psychological experiments 
can be generated. 
While previous work has shown that differences 
between corpora do exist, and that word sense 
differences play a large role in realising these 
differences, much less is known about he effect 
of other factors on subcategorizafion variation 
across corpora. For example, are there gross 
subcategorization differences between British 
and American English? To what extent does the 
business-genre nature of the Wall Street Journal 
corpus affect subcategorization probabilities? 
Finally, while Roland and Jurafsky (2000 in 
press) suggested that sense differences played a 
major ole in subcategorization biases, they were 
only able to test their hypothesis on a small 
number of verbs. 
Our eventual goal is an understanding of many 
levels of verb differences across corpora, 
including verb frequency, frequency of transitive 
versus intransitive uses, frequency of other 
subcategonzafion frames, and frequency of 
active versus passive use. This paper reports 
our preliminary results on the first two of these 
issues. Verb usage was surprisingly unaffected 
by differences between British and American 
English. Those differences that did occur seem 
mostly to be caused by differences in the 
distribution of verb senses across corpora. The 
business-genre nature of the Wall Street Journal 
corpus caused certain verbs to appear more often 
in particular senses that had a strong effect on its 
subcategorization frequencies. Even after 
controlfing for the broad sense of the verb, we 
found subcategorization differences caused by 
the "micro-differences" in sense, including quite 
specific arguments othe verb. 
1 Data 
Data for 64 verbs (shown in Table 1) was 
collected from three corpora; The British 
National Corpus (BNC) 
(http'J/info.ox.ac.uk/bnc/index.html), he Penn 
Treehank parsed version of the Brown Corpus 
(Brown), and the Penn Treebank Wall Street 
Journal corpas (WSJ) (Marcus et al 1993). 
The 64 verbs were chosen on the basis of the 
requirements of separate psychological 
experiments including having a single dominant 
sense, being easily imagable" and participating 
in one of several subcategorization alternations. 
A random sample of 100 examples of each verb 
was selected from each of the three corpora. 
When the corpus contained less than 100 tokens 
of the verb, as was frequently the case in the 
Brown and WSJ corpora, the entire available 
data was used. This data was coded for several 
properties: Transitive/Intransitive" 
Active/Passive" and whether the example 
involved the major sense of the verb or not. 
The BNC data was ceded entirely by hand, 
while the Brown and WSJ was hand coded after 
a first pass of subcategorization labelling via a 
tgrep search siring algorithm. The same coder 
labelled the data for all three corpora for any 
given verb, in order to reduce any problems in 
intercoder rehability. 
adjust, advance, appoint, arrest, break, burst, 
carve, crack, crumble, dance, design, 
dissolve, distract, disturb, drop, elect, 
encourage, entertain, excite, fight., float, 
flood, fly, frighten, glide, grow, hang, harden, 
heat, hurry, impress, jump, kick, knit, lean, 
leap, lecture,, locate, march, melt, merge, 
mutate, offend, play, pour, race, relax, rise, 
rotate, rush, sail shut, soften, spill, stand, 
study, surrender, tempt, terrify, type, walk, 
wandex, wash, watch 
Table 1- 64 verbs chosen for analysis 
2 Verb Frequency 
Because word frequency is known to vary with 
corpus genre, we used the frequency differences 
for our target verbs as a measure of corpus 
difference. We would expect factors such as 
corpus genre (Business for WSJ vs. mixed for 
BNC and Brown), American vs. British English, 
and the era the corpus sample was taken in to 
influence word frequency. 
We calculated the frequencies tbr each verb, and 
used Chi Square to test whether the difference in 
frequency was significant for each corpus 
pairing. We then counted the number of verbs 
that showed a significant difference using p = 
0.05 as a cut-off poim: This result is shown in 
Table 2. Although there were verbs that had a 
significant difference in distribution between the 
two mixed genre corpora (BNC, Brown), there 
were more differences in word frequency 
between the general corpora and the business 
corpus. The difference between the 
BNC/Brown comparison and the BNC and 
Brown vs. WSJ comparison is significant (Chi 
Square, p < .01). 
BNC vs Brown BNC vs WSJ  Brown vs WSJ  
30/64 46/64 46/64 
Table 2 - Number of verbs showing a significant 
difference in frequency between corpora. 
Table 3 shows the list of words that were 
significantly more frequent in both of the 
general corpora than they were in the business 
oriented corpus. Notice that most of the verbs 
describe leisure activities. 
amuse, boil, burst, dance, dL~turb, entertain, 
frighten, bang, harden, hurry', impress, knit, 
lean, paint, play, race, sail, stand, tempt, 
walk, wander, wash, watch 
Table 3 - Verbs which BNC and Brown both 
have more of than WSJ: 
Alternatively, when one looks at the words that 
had a significantly higher frequency in the WSJ 
corpus than in either of the other corpora (Table 
4), one finds predominately verbs that can 
describe stock price changes and business 
transactions. 
adjust, advance, crumble, drop, elect, fall, 
grow, jump, merge, quote, rise, shrink, shut, 
slip,,, 
Table 4 - Verbs which WSJ has more of than 
both Brown and WSJ: 
We are currently examining the nature of the 
differences between the British and American 
corpora. 
3 Subcategorization Frequency 
3.1 Methodology: 
For the second experiment, we coded the 
examples of the 64 verbs from each of the three 
corpora for transitivity. We counted any use 
with a direct object as transitive, and any other 
use, such as with a prepositional phrase, as 
intransitive. Passive uses were also included in 
the transitive category. Examples ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) 
illustrate intransitive uses, example ( 3 ) 
illustrates transitive (and active) while examples 
( 4 ) and ( 5 ) illustrate transitive (and passive) 
uses of the verb 'race'. 
( 1 ) Pretax profits 6r_o.p.Imd by 37 million. 
( 2 ) Something dropped to the floor. 
( 3 ) Lift them from the elbows, and then 
drop them down to the floor. 
( 4 ) Plans for an OSF binary interface have 
been dropped. 
( 5 ) It was ... the tinsel paper dropped by 
bombers. 
Roland and Jurafsky (2000 in press) showed that 
verb sense can affect verb subcategofization. 
We therefore controlled for verb sense by only 
including sentences from the majority sense of 
the verb in our counts. For example, we did 
not include instances of drop which were phrasal 
verbs with distinct senses like "drop in" or "drop 
off". We did however, include metaphorical 
extensions of the main sense, such as a company 
"dropping a product line". We thus used a 
broadly defined notion of sense rather than the 
more narrowly defined word senses used in 
some on-line word sense resources such as 
Wordnet. This was partly for logistic reasons, 
since such fine-grained senses are very hard to 
code, and partially because we suspected that 
very narrowly defined senses frequently have 
only one possible subcategorization. Coding 
for such senses would have thus biased our 
experiment s rongly toward finding a strong link 
between sense and subeategorization-bias. 
30 
We calculated transitivity biases for each of the 
64 verbs in each of the three corpora. We 
classed the verbs as high transitivity if more than 
2/3 of the tokens of the major sense were 
transitive, low transitivity if more than 2/3 of the 
tokens of the major sense were intransitive, and 
as mixed otherwise. We removed from 
consideration any token of the verb which was 
not used in its major sense. If  
subcategorization biases are related to verb 
sense, we would expect he transitivity biases to 
be stable across corpora once secondary senses 
are removed from consideration. 
3.2 Results:  
Nine of the 64 verbs, shown in Table 5, had a 
significant shift in transitivity bias. These 
verbs had a different high/mixed/low transitivity 
bias in at least one of the three corpora. 
Verb 
i 
advance 
crack 
BNC 
transitivity 
mixed 
(48%) 
Brown 
transitivity 
mixed 
(55%) 
WSJ 
transitivity 
low 
(19%) 
mixed mixed high 
(58%) (58%) (86%) 
fight low mixed high 
(29%) (49%) (64%) 
float low low mixed 
(22 %) (11%) (44%) 
flood mixed 
(52%) 
relax low 
(27%) 
soften 
high 
(100%) 
high 
(\]00%) 
low mixed 
(30%) (65%) 
high 
(71%) 
high 
(70%) 
mixed 
(43%) 
study high mixed high 
(84%) (39%) (92%) 
surrender 
Table 5 - 
mixed 
(48%) 
mixed 
(39%) 
high 
(73%) 
Transitivity bias in each corpus 
3.3 Discussion: 
In general, these shifts in transitivity were a 
result of the verbs having differences in sense 
between the corpora such that the senses had 
different subcategorizations, but were still 
within our broadly defined 'main sense' for that 
verb. 
For seven out of the nine verbs, the shifts in 
transitivity are a result of differences between 
the WSJ data and the other data, which are a 
result of the WSJ being biased towards 
business-specifie uses of these verbs. For 
example, in the BNC and Brown data, 'advance' 
is a mixture of transitive and intransitive uses, 
shown in ( 6 ) and ( 7 ), while intransitive share 
price changes ( 8 ) dominated in the WSJ data. 
( 6 ) BNC intransitive: In films, they 
advance in droves of armour across open 
fields ... 
( 7 ) BNC transitive: We have advanced 
~'moral careers" as another useful concept ._ 
( 8 ) WSJ intransitive: Of the 4,345 stocks 
that T changed hands, 1,174 declined and 
1,040 advanced. 
'Crack' is used to mean 'make a sound' ( 9 ) or 
'break' ( 10 ) in the Brown and BNC data (both 
of which have transitive and intransitive uses), 
while it is more likely to be used to mean 'enter 
or dominate a group/market' ( transitive use) in 
the WSJ data; ( 11 ) and ( 12 ). 
( 9 ) Brown intransitive: A carbine cracked 
more loudly ,.. 
( 10 ) Brown intransitive: Use well-wedged 
clay, free of air bubbles and pliable enough to 
bend without cracking. 
( 11 ) WSJ transitive: But the outsiders 
haven't yet been able to crack Saatchi's clubby 
inner circle, or to have significant influence on 
company strategy. 
( 12 ) WSJ transitive: ... big investments in
"domestic" industries uch as beer will make 
it even tougher for foreign competitors to 
crack the Japanese market. 
'Float' is generally used as an intransitive verb 
( 13 ), but nmst be used transitively when used 
in a financial sense ( 14 ). 
( 13 ) Brown i~:ransitive: The ball floated 
downstream. 
( 14 ) WSJ transitive: B.A.T aims to ... float 
its big paper and British retailing businesses 
via share issues to existing holders. 
=11 
'Relax' is generally used intransitively ( 15 ), 
but is used transitively in the WSJ data when 
discussing the relaxation of rules and credit 
(16).  
( 15 ) BNC intransitive: The moment Joseph 
stepped out onto the terrace the worried faces 
of Tran Van Hien and his wife relaxed with 
relief. 
( 16 ) WSJ transitive: Ford is willing to bid 
for 100% of Jaguar's hares if both the 
government and Jaguar shareholders agree to 
relax the anti-takeover barrier prematurely. 
'Soften" is generally used transitively ( 17 ), but 
is used intransitively in the WSJ data when 
discussing the softening of prices ( 18 ) and 
(19).  
( 17 ) Brown transitive: Hardy would not 
allow sentiment to soften his sense of the 
irredeemable pastness of the past, and the 
eternal deadness of the dead. 
( 18 ) WSJ intransitive: A spokesman for 
Scott says that assuming the price of pulp 
continues to soften, "We should do well." 
( 19 ) WSJ intransitive: The stock has since 
softened, trading around $25 a share last week 
and closing yesterday at$2.3.00 in national 
over-the-counter trading. 
'Surrender' is used both transitively ( 20 ) and 
intransitively ( 21 ), but must be used 
transitively when discussing the surrender of 
particular items uch as 'stocks' ( 22 ) and ( 23 ). 
( 20 ) BNC transitive: In 1475 Stanley 
surrendered his share to the crown... 
( 21 ) Brown intransitive: ... the defenders, 
to save bloodshed, surrendered under the 
promise that they would be treated as 
neighbors 
( 22 ) WSJ transitive: Holders can... 
surrender their shares at the per-share price of 
$1,000, plus accumulated dividends of $6.71 a 
share. 
( 23 ) WSJ transitive: ... Nelson Peltz and 
Peter W. May surrendered warrants and 
preferred stock in exchange for a larger stake 
in Avery's common shares. 
The verb 'fight" is the only verb that has a 
different ransitivity bias in each of the three 
corpora; with all other verbs, at least two 
corpora share the same bias. In the WSJ, fight 
tends to be used transitivdy, describing action 
against a specific entity or concept ( 24 ). In 
the other two corpora, there are more 
descriptions of actions for or against more 
abstract concepts ( 25 ) and ( 26 ). In addition, 
the WSJ differences may further be influenced 
by a journalistic style practice of dropping the 
preposition 'against' in the phrase 'fight 
against'. 
( 24 ) WSJ lrarlsifive: Los Angeles County 
Supervisor Kenneth Hahn yesterday vowed to 
fight the introduction of double-decking in the 
area. 
( 25 ) BNC intransitive: He fought against 
the United Nations troops in the attempted 
Katangese secession of nineteen sixty to sixty- 
two. 
( 26 ) Brown intransitive: But he would fight 
for his own liberty rather than for any abstract 
principle connected with it -- such as "cause". 
The verb 'study' is generally transitive ( 27 ), 
except in the Brown data, where study is 
frequently used with a prepositional phrase 
( 28 ) or to generically describe the act of 
studying ( 29 ). We are currently investigating 
what might be causing this difference; possible 
candidates include language change (since 
Brown is much older than BNC and WSJ), 
British-American differences, or micro-sense 
differences. 
( 27 ) BNC transitive: A much more useful 
and realistic approach is to study recordings of 
different speakers' natural, spontaneous ...
( 28 ) Brown intransitive: Inaddition, Dr. 
Clark has studied at Rhode Island State 
College and Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 
( 29 ) Brown intransitive: She discussed in 
her letters to Winslow some of the questions 
that came to her as she studied alone. 
The verb 'flood" is used intransitively more 
often in the BNC than in the other corpora. 
The Brown and WSJ uses tend to be transitive 
non-weather uses of the verb flood ( 30 ) and 
32 
( 31 ), while the BNC uses include more weather 
uses, which are more likely to be intransitive 
( 32 ). We are investigating whether this is a 
result of the BNC discussing weather more often, 
or a result of which particular grammatical 
structures are used to describe the weather 
floods in British and American English. 
( 30 ) WSJ transitive: Lawsuits over the 
harm caused by DES have flooded federal and 
state courts in the past decade. 
( 31 ) Brown transitive: The terrible vision 
of the ghetto streets flooded his mind. 
( 32 ) BNC intransitive: ,.. should the river 
flood, as he'd observed it did after heavy rain, 
the house was safe upon its hill. 
Conclusion 
The goal of the work performed in this paper 
was to find a stable set of transitivity biases for 
64 verbs to provide norming data for 
psychological experiments. 
The first result is that 55 out of 64 single sense 
verbs analyzed id not change in transitivity bias 
across corpora. This suggests that for our goal 
of providing transitivity biases for single sense 
verbs, the influence of American vs. British 
English and broad based vs. narrow corpora may 
not be large. We would, however, expect 
larger cross corpus differences for verbs that are 
more polysemous than our particular set of 
verbs. 
The second result is that for the 9 out of 64 verbs 
that did change in transitivity bias, the shift in 
transitivity bias was largely a result of subtle 
shifts in verb sense between the genres present 
in each corpus. These two results suggest that 
when verb sense is adequately controlled for, 
verbs have stable suboategorization probabilities 
across corpora. 
One possible future application of our work is 
that it might be possible to use verb frequencies 
and subeategodzafion probabilities of multi- 
sense verbs can be used to measure the degree of 
difference between corpora. 
Acknowledgements 
This project was partially supported by NSF 
BCS-9818827 and IRI-9618838. Many thanks 
to the three anonymous reviewers. 
References 
Biber, D. (1988) Variation across speech and 
writing. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Biber, D. (1993) Using Register-DiversO$ed 
Corpora for General Language Studies. 
Computational Linguistics, 19(2), 219-241. 
Biber, D, Conrad, S., & Reppen, R. (1998) 
Corpus Linguistics. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge. 
Boland, J. (1997). Resolving syntactic category 
ambiguities in discourse context: probabilistic and 
discourse constraints. Journal of Memory and 
Language 36, 588-615. 
Carrol, J., Minnen, G., & Briscoc, T. (1998). Can 
subcategorizafion probabilities help a statistical 
parser? In Proceedings of the 6 ~ ACL/SIGDAT 
Workshop on Very Large Corpora, Montreal, 
Canada. 
Charniak, E. (1997). Statistical parsing with a 
context-free grammar and word statistics. In 
AAAI-97, Menlo Park. AAAI Press. 
Clifton, C., Prazier, L., & Connine, C. (1984) 
Lexical expectations in sentence comprehension. 
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 
23, 696-708. 
Collins, M. J. (1996) A new statistical parser based 
on bigram lexical dependencies. In Proceedings of 
ACL-96, 184---191, Santa Cruz, CA. 
Collins, M. J. (1997) Three generative, iexicalised 
models for statistical parsing. In Proceedings of 
ACL-97. 
Ferreira, F., and McClure, K.K. (1997). Parsing 
of Garden-path Sentences with Reciprocal Verbs. 
Language and Cognitive Processes 12, 273-306. 
Fodor, J. (1978). Parsing strategies and 
constraints on traraformations. Linguistic 
Inquiry, 9, 427-473. 
Garnsey, S. M., Pearlmutter, N. J., Myers, E. & 
Lotocky, M. A. (1997). The contributions of 
verb bias and p!a_u~ibility o the comprehension f
temporarily ambiguous sentences. Journal of 
Memory and Language 37, 58-93. 
Gibson, E., Sehatze, C., & Salmon, A. (1996). 
The relationship between the frequency and the 
processing complexity of linguistic structure. 
Journal of Psycholinguistic Rese,~ch 25(1), 59-92. 
Joshi, A. & B. Sfinivas. (1994) Disambiguation of 
super parts of speech (or supertags): almost 
parsing. Proceedings of COLING '94. 
RR 
Jurafsky, D. (1996) A probabilistic model of 
lexical and syntactic access cmd disambiguazion. 
Cognitive Science, 20, 137-194. 
Kim A, Srinivas B and T~aeswell J (1997). 
Incremental Processing Using Lexicalized Tree- 
Adjoining Grammar: Symbolic' and Connectionist 
Approaches, Conference (m Computational 
Psycholinguistics, Berkeley, California, August 
1997. 
MacDonald, M. C. (1994) Probabilistic 
constraints and syntactic ambiguity resolution. 
Language and Cognitive Processes 9, 157-201. 
Marcus, M.P., Santorini, B. & Marcinkiewicz, M.A.. 
(1993) Building a Large Atmotated Corpus of 
English: The Penn Treebank. Computational 
Linguistics 19.2:313-330. 
Merlo, P. (1994). A Corpus-Based Analysis of Verb 
Continuation Frequencies for $~ntactic Processing. 
Journal of Pyscholinguistic Research 23.6:435- 
457. 
Mitchcll, D. C. and V. M. Holmes. (1985) 
The role of specific information about the verb in 
parsing sentences with local structural ambiguity. 
Journal of Memory and Language 24, 542-559. 
Roland, Douglas and Daniel Jurafsky. (2000 in press). 
Verb sense and verb subcategofization probabilities. 
In Paola Merlo and Suzarme Stevenson (Eds.) John 
Bcnjamins. 
Roland, Douglas and Daniel Jmafskky. (1998). How 
verb subcatcgorization frequencies are affected by 
corpus choice. Proceedings of COLING-ACL 1998. 
p 1117-1121. 
Roland, D. and Jurafsky, D. (1997) Computing 
verbal valence frequencies: corpora versus 
norm/ng studies. Poster session presented at the 
CUNY sentence processing conference, Santa 
Monica, CA. 
Stolcke, A., C. Chelba, D. Engle, V. Jimenez, L. 
Mangu, H. Printz, E. Ristad, R. Rosenfeld, D. Wu, 
F. Jelinck and S. Khudanpur. (1997) Dependency 
Language Modeling. Cen~r for Language and 
Speech Processing Research Note No. 24. Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore. 
Tanenhans, M. K., Garnsey, S. M., & Boland, J. 
(1990). Combinatory lexical information and 
language comprehension. In Altmann, Gerry T. 
M. (Ed); et al Cognitive models of speech 
processing: Psycholinguistic and computational 
perspectives. Cambridge, MA, USA: Mit Press. 
Trueswell, J., M. Tanenhaus and C. Kello. (1993) 
Verb.Specific Constraint~ in Sentence Processing: 
Separating Effects of Lexical Preference from 
Garden-Paths. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 
19.3, 528-553 
34 
