Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex 2010), pages 66?74,
Beijing, August 2010
In search of the ?right? word 
Stella  Markantonatou Institute for Lan-guage and Speech Processing / R.C. ?Athena? marks@ilsp.gr 
Aggeliki Fotopoulou  Institute for Lan-guage and Speech Processing / R.C. ?Athena? afotop@ilsp.gr  
Maria  Alexopoulou Institute for Lan-guage and Speech Processing / R.C. ?Athena? maralex@ilsp.gr  
Marianna  Mini Institute for Lan-guage and Speech Processing / R.C. ?Athena? minimar@ilsp.gr  
 
Abstract 
We report on a user needs investigation carried out in the framework of the pro-ject EKFRASIS1 that developed a plat-form for supporting authoring work in Modern Greek. The platform had as a backbone a conceptually organised dic-tionary enhanced with rich lexicographic and morphosyntactic information. Or-ganisation of information and encoding drew on Semantic Web technologies (on-tologies). Users were all professional au-thors (of literature, editors, translators, journalists) working for well-established firms. They were all familiar with printed conceptually organized dictionar-ies while most of them used a computer. They were asked to specify how the plat-form would be helpful to them when they searched for a word for which they had only vague or few clues, a situation that was familiar to all of them. Users preferred to have, in a first step, easy ac-cess to limited but to-the-point lexical in-formation while access to rich semantic information should be provided at a sec-ond step. They were interested in rich lexical material although they were not really able to identify the relations that would help them retrieve it.  They strongly preferred an organization of ma-terial by concept and PoS and appreci-                                                 1 EKFRASIS  http://www.ilsp.gr/ekfrasi_eng.html was funded by the General Secretariat of Research and Technology / Greece. 
ated easy access to normative informa-tion. 
1 Introduction 
We present an investigation of user needs that was conducted in the process of developing a platform for supporting authoring work in Mod-ern Greek. One main component of this platform is the dictionary ?EKFRASIS? (literally ?expres-sion?). EKFRASIS exploits technology and ideas developed for the Semantic Web (Guarino and Welty, 2002) to encode a conceptually organized dictionary enriched with translations as well as a wealth of lexicographic and morphosyntactic information. The overall organisation of the dic-tionary and, partially of the platform, aims at helping the user who needs a word but has few clues or just guesses about it and about its way of use.   The interviewed users were all professionals: journalists, translators, editors and authors of literature.  In this survey, we aimed to map user expecta-tions concerning interaction with the dictionary rather than to look for appropriate ways for populating it. Of course, some of the conclusions reached here may be useful for collecting lin-guistic material as well.  
2 The ?recollection problem? 
Authors (of any type of text) often find them-selves in the uncomfortable position whereby they remember or feel that the ?right? word ex-ists but they can not recall it.  Here, we will call this situation the ?recollection problem?. Alpha-betically organised dictionaries are of little help 
66
in such situations. Of course, the recollection problem is a well known one (for a discussion, see Zock and Bilac, 2004; Zock and Schwab, 2008).  Works with an international reputation have tried to face it and, of course, Roget?s The-saurus, a printed dictionary, and WordNet and EuroWordNet, both digital ones, spring easily to mind. An interesting difference between the two dictionaries is exactly about the interaction with the user: while in Roget?s lexical relations are left implicit and material is explicit, in WordNet one has to go via lexical relations such as ?hy-ponymy? and ?sister term? to find the material. In short, in Roget?s one is given the material di-rectly and no previous familiarity with taxono-mies is required while in WordNet one has to guess what taxonomic labels can offer in each case. Furthermore, just finding a word is often not enough to guarantee confidence in its usage, so information provided by an assortment of rele-vant sources is indispensable.  Of course, printed dictionaries would expand to unmanageable vol-ume if they accommodated all necessary infor-mation, but digital dictionaries are not subject to such limitations. For instance, Roget?s does not provide syntactic information but WordNet does. Digital lexica that have been compiled for NLP purposes such as Acquilex (Briscoe et al, 1993) and Simple have tried to accommodate semantic, syntactic, morphological and pragmatic informa-tion structured in a principled way and make it available to machines. In the Semantic Web era, efforts to better axiomatise the established re-sources have been made (Gangemi et al, 200; Old, 2004) as well as to combine detailed lin-guistic with ontological information for the pur-poses of Machine Translation (Nirenburg and Raskin, 2004). Such efforts were oriented to NLP mainly.  As regards human users, Roget?s success suggests that while wealth of material and good organisation of it matters, it is not necessary to present explicitly the relations among words in a ?concept?2 in order to provide a good solution to the recollection problem. On the other hand, humans do instinctively look for words on the 
                                                 2 We use the term concept to define a set of words that are conceptually related. Such sets are defined in Roget?s Thesaurus and the ?Onomasticon?. 
basis of domain relations several of which can be argued to mirror (aspects of) human cognition (Gaume et al, 2003; Kremer et al, 2008). Fur-thermore, the data we will present here indicate that searching for a word is also a matter of habit and training, having a lot to do with one?s pro-fession and familiarity with certain types of dic-tionary.  As already said, we report on a user require-ment survey that was conducted in the frame-work of the project EKFRASIS. Our aim was primarily to see how the lexicographic material should be presented to the user; however, we were also interested in fine-tuning our ideas about the nature of the material required. We start with a brief presentation of the main ideas behind the dictionary EKFRASIS. Next, we talk about how we organized the survey. For each group of questions addressed to the users, we present and comment their responses. Finally, we present our conclusions and decisions as re-gards the architecture of the dictionary EKFRA-SIS. 
3 About EKFRASIS 
A few words about the dictionary EKFRASIS are in order to set the context of the survey dis-cussed in this paper. EKFRASIS is a digital lexicon of Modern Greek (MG). 3  MG market makes available mainly alphabetically ordered printed dictionar-ies and, more recently, dictionaries of synonyms and antonyms. There is no dictionary of MG that combines lexicographic with semantic and mor-phosyntactic information.  There is one excellent thesaurus of Modern Greek, the ?Onomasticon? by Theofilos Vostantzoglou, published back in 1962. ?Ono-masticon? enjoys great reputation among Greek intellectuals. T. Vostantzoglou drew a lot on Ro-get?s Thesaurus. His material is organized in concepts and each concept is further structured into smaller groups of words. Notably, he intro-duced certain innovations of his own: contrastive presentation of concepts, eg ?Joking? and ?Speaking seriously? are presented contrastively on the same page using a special format, short definition of groups of words that form a con-cept and information on style. In addition, spe-
                                                 3 It comprises 6000 entries at the moment. 
67
cial attention is given to expressions and prov-erbs.  Links between concepts exist at lexical level introducing, in this way, relations among words in different concepts. There is no actual typology of these relations which remain im-plicit to the user. Very much like Roget?s, all the words in the conceptually organized part of the Onomasticon are also listed in alphabetical order in the second half of the book. Each word is in-dexed for the set of concepts it belongs.  In EKFRASIS we understand ?conceptual? organization as the result of the interplay of a set of domain relations. In addition, EKFRASIS is planned to help with the usage of words by pro-viding definition of concepts, glosses and trans-lation of words, usage examples and full mor-phosyntactic information. In our survey, we ex-posed the users to large amounts of information organized in more than one ways and asked them whether such a tool would be useful to them in their professional lives. Throughout the present discussion, we ask the reader to keep in mind that we aim at developing a resource that would be of use to a wide audience. 
4 The Survey 
Although the project EKFRASIS is addressed to anyone who writes in Modern Greek, we thought that professionals would have a clearer view of the authoring procedure and its needs.        Table 1. Composition of the user group  Table 1 shows the composition of the user group. Each group of professionals works under different conditions and has different require-ments. In general, journalists and translators work under time pressure while authors of litera-ture and editors are more concerned with linguis-tic and aesthetic quality. In the user group, au-thors, literature translators and editors are well known intellectuals of the country publishing with the publishing house ?Kastaniotis? (http://www. kastaniotis.com/), industrial translators work for a medium size firm ( http://www.orco.gr/ loc/frameset-gr.html? 
navbar-gr.html&0) and journalists work for the prestigious daily newspaper ?I Kathimerini? (http://www.kathimerini.gr/). Users were interviewed by teams of research-ers and 
? each of the literature authors and editors were interviewed personally  
? industrial translators and journalists were interviewed in groups according to their own requirement. 
To each person or group a presentation of the aims of the project was given and then, a spe-cially developed mock-up of a couple of usage cases of the authoring tool was presented. We used a different mock-up (.ppt file) for each au-thor and editor and for each of the journalist and translator groups because EKFRASIS is a novel application by Modern Greek standards and, since no user had some relevant experience, ver-bal description would not help at all. The presen-tations were followed by discussion and an in-terview that was taped and, finally, the users were asked to fill a questionnaire. Each user (au-thor, editor, translator, journalist) filled in a separate questionnaire.  For the first part of the mock-up, pieces of text produced by each one of the authors, a piece of Greek translation from the site of Nokia and a piece from ?I Kathimerini? were selected to de-velop the presentation that relied on the follow-ing scenario: hypothetically, when they devel-oped the particular text, the authors experienced the recollection problem and used EKFRASIS to find a couple of words. They started their search with an input word of somehow related meaning to the intended one but not necessarily of the same PoS. We present as an example extracts from the mock-up developed for one of the au-thors of literature.  In Figure 1 the author uses the noun mania as an input word.  EKFRASIS returns the names and definitions of all the concepts where the in-put word occurs (gray area on the left). The con-cepts are not necessarily related to each other. Here, the first one corresponds to ?proclivity, propensity?, the second to ?urge?, the third to ?mania? as a disorder, the fourth to ?mania, pas-sion?, the fifth to ?fury?, the sixth to ?wrath? and the seventh to ?love?. On the right, for each con-cept a set of semantically relevant words are 
Authors of literature 5 Editors 2 Translators  8 Journalists 6 Total 21 
68
given, all of the same PoS with the input one (here, a noun). For instance, concept 6 is labeled ???? ?wrath? and the words given are ???? ?wrath?, ????? ?anger?, ????? ?nerves?, ?????????? (being indignant), ????? ?mania?.   
????, ???????, ?????, ????, ????, ?????, ?????
????, ????, ?????, ?????
1. ???? [?? ?? ?????? ?????? ???????? ???? ????]
2. ???? [????? ? ?????? ??????]
3. ??????????? ???????????, ?????, ????????, ?????
???? ? ???? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????, ???????. 
4. ???????? ????????, ???????, ?????, ?????, ?????, ?????
5. ???????? [?? ?? ????????????????? ??? ????? ???????] ????????, ?????? ????, ?????, ?????, ?????
6. ???? [??????? ????????????????] ????, ?????, ?????, ??????????, ?????
7. ????? [?????? ?????????] ?????, ?????????, ?????? ????????, ???????, ?????  Figure1. Unrelated numbered concepts indi-cated with the labels on the left   In this hypothetical scenario, the user selects the 6th option (wrath). The screen shown in Fig-ure 2 pops up (on the upper left corner the label is ???? ?wrath?).   
????
??????????
????
???????
????????
1. ????
2. ???????? ???????? ?????
3. ?????? ????
????????? 4. ??????? ?????5. ?,?? ???????? ??? ????
6. ?? ?? ????????? ?????? ??????
7. ???? ??? ??????
???? ? ???? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????, ???????. 
 Figure 2.  The right hand column consists of the set of related concepts within  a PoS (noun here)  In this screen, the concepts are related to each other as they all are about wrath. The concepts in successive order are ?wrath?, ?sudden expres-sion of wrath?, ?strong wrath?, ?luck of wrath?, ?what causes wrath?, ?to become furious easily?, ?extreme wrath? and are listed on the right hand column. The list of PoS (noun, verb, adjective, adverb, expressions) is on the left hand column. In Figure 2, the activated PoS is ?noun?, how-ever, the user could activate any other PoS, an option he picks in Figure 4, where he activates the PoS ?verb?. In our hypothetical scenario, the 
user selects the 7th concept (extreme wrath) and receives the set of synonyms and antonyms, en-closed in the boxes in Figure 3. Antonyms are given in the box at the bottom of the screen. The user stores these findings and carries on with the PoS ?verb? (Figure 4).   
????
??????????
????
???????
????????
1. ????
2. ???????? ???????? ?????
3. ?????? ????
????????? 4. ??????? ?????5. ?,?? ???????? ??? ????
6. ?? ?? ????????? ????????????
7. ???? ??? ??????
???? ? ???? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????, ???????. 
??????????, ?????????, ?????????, ?????, ?????????
???????? ???????????, ????????  Figure 3. Synonyms and antonyms in a con-cept and PoS (?extreme wrath? and ?noun?). Words are organized in related numbered con-cepts indicated with the labels on the right  
????
??????????
????
???????
????????
?????????
???? ? ???? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????, ???????. 
??????? ??? ????, ??????, ????????, ??????, ??????, ??????, ?????????????? ??? ????, ?????????? ??? ????, ???????????, ???????? ???????????
 Figure 4. The PoS ?verb? for the concept  ?extreme wrath?  This PoS comprises only one concept, so the system shows the box with the lexical material. There is plenty of lexical material so the indica-tion ?more? guides the user who would require access to more information.  Two series of user responses were elicited -- one with the questionnaire and one with the in-terviews. The results of the interviews were not directly measurable but they greatly helped to clarify the picture. In what follows we will pre-sent the measurable results but in the conclu-sions, we will draw on the interviews as well. The questionnaire included different types of question (multiple choice questions, questions with graded answers, open questions). In this report we are interested in the parts of the ques-
69
tionnaire on (i) the contribution of dictionaries and spelling checkers to authoring work (ii) how authors experience the recollection problem and (iii) efficient searching for words. 
5 Questioning the users 
5.1 Contribution of technology and dic-tionaries to authoring work 
We first asked if professionals used computers and authoring aids.  Nearly 100% of users worked on a computer. All users with the exception of journalists used general language dictionaries or specialized ones including dictionaries of synonyms (Table 2). Journalists, on the other hand, seemed to pay attention mainly in word spelling.     Au-thors Edi-tors  Translators  Jour-nalists  To-tal Diction-aries (printed, digital) 
5 2 6 1 14 
Special diction-aries 
5 2 4 0 11 
Spelling checkers 0 0 2 4 6 
Table 2. Usage of authoring aids  Why do users use dictionaries and spelling checkers? We asked the users to give a yes/no answer to two contradictory statements. So, to the statement ?I can find easily what I look for in dictionaries and spelling checkers? all other us-ers and 2 journalists answered ?yes?. However, to the opposite statement ?I can not find easily what I look for in dictionaries and spelling checkers? no journalists replied while one editor and 3 authors replied ?yes?. So, the picture is somehow messed up but in the overall it shows that people have formed expectations about dic-tionaries and look for certain types of informa-tion that they more or less find. In addition, 1 editor, 4 translators, 3 authors and 4 journalists stated that dictionaries and spelling checkers speed up their work.  So, there is some kind of information in the dictionaries and the spelling checkers that helps and speeds up authoring work. Certainly, these resources provide little help with the recollection problem. So, in the next parts of the question-
naire we set out to make clear what kind of in-formation users considered useful in the diction-aries and  what else they would like to find and how. Mock-up presentations were of crucial help in this task. 
5.2 Experiencing the recollection problem 
We asked how often and in which way users ex-perienced the recollection problem. Users turned out to be quite familiar with experiences such as the following: (i) looking for a synonym (ii) en-tertaining the belief that a word exists but not being able to identify it (iii) having a general notion in mind but not being able to find words that ground it properly (Table 3).   
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total 
Synonym 1 2 6 5 14 
Heard in the past 0 2 6 5 13 General notion  4 1 6 5 16 
Other 0 0 0 3 3 
Table 3. The recollection problem  It is clear that professional demands influence authoring behavior at work: authors of literature, editors and translators are more into searching for the appropriate word than journalists. Ac-cording to the users, two are the main motives for searching words: (i) precision (ii) aesthetics (the example put forward by the users was the repetition of a word). It is also interesting that the answers already point to some important lexical relations, namely synonymy and hypernymy / hyponymy,   which can be used for both constructing and navigating a resource (and have been used in many diction-aries, for instance in WordNet).   
5.3 Searching for lexical information 
Despite the fact that answers such as ?heard in the past? and ?general notion? (Table 3) indicate that a variety of semantic relations can be used for searching for a word, it was not easy for the users to imagine which those relations would be. This became obvious because 
? users were able to fill in the part of the questionnaire on searching only after they 
70
had seen the mock-up that presented them with searching strategies other than al-phabetical listing 
? although they had twice in the question-naire the opportunity to describe some way of searching for words other than the ones suggested in the mock-up (see be-low) they did not do it ?despite the fact that interviews lasted for about 2.00 hours each on the average. 
Although they did not identify alternative searching strategies, they in the overall wel-comed the possibility of using morphologically (Table 4) and pragmatically (Table 5) related words for dealing with the recollection problem.  The example given to the users for illustrating morphologically related words was the triple adopt->adoption->adopted. The users were asked whether they would like the dictionary to ensure that such sequences would be automati-cally offered.  
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total YES 2 2 8 2 14 NO 4 0 0 2 6 Table 4. Morphological relations    A similar question was asked about domain relations with the following example: ?if you type in sell or seller or offer would you like to be given automatic access to buyer, client, con-sumer.?   
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total YES 5 2 6 4 17 NO 1 0 0 0 1 Table 5. Domain relations  Of the relations named explicitly in the ques-tionnaire, synonymy turned out to be the most likely one to be used for helping with the recol-lection problem (Table 6).  Hypernymy/hyponymy (Table 7) and an-tonymy (Table 8) were in the overall considered less useful for the recollection problem than synonymy, but still a high percentage voted for them.    
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 2 2 8 3 15 Occa-sionally 4 0 0 2 6 Rarely 0 0 0 0 0 Never 0 0 0 0 0 Table 6. Synonymy  
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 1 2 4 3 10 Occa-sionally 4 0 4 1 9 Rarely 1 0 0 1 2 Never 0 0 0 0 0 Table 7. Hypernymy/Hyponymy  
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 1 2 4 1 8 Occa-sionally 1 0 2 2 5 Rarely 3 0 2 2 7 Never 1 0 0 0 1 Table 8. Antonymy  Next, users were asked how they would like to see information presented (Table 9). They were offered mock-ups of the following four choices:  
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total ? 4 0 0 1 5 ? 0 1 2 1 4 C 2 1 4 1 8 D 0 0 2  2 4 Table 9. Presentation of information (a)   
? A. All linguistic material pops up in strict alphabetical order only (no PoS or seman-tic classification) 
? B. Only the linguistic material in the same PoS as the input word pops up in alpha-betical order 
71
? C. All linguistic material pops up in the form of a semantic tree4 together with PoS information?the tree reflects the concep-tual organization of the dictionary 
? D. Only the part of the tree that belongs to the PoS of the input word pops up 
In fact, options A and C are opposed to op-tions B and D in that the first pair offers imme-diate access to the whole lot of the related lexical material while the second pair only to the se-mantically related words in the same PoS with the input word---practically, its synonyms. In Table 9.a. we sum the answers according to this division. While the A&C option was preferred by 62% of the users, the fact that a good 38% has chosen the B&D option had to be taken into account.    
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total ?&C 6 1 4 2 13 ?&D 0 1 4 3 8 Table 9.a. Presentation of information (b)  A compromising solution to this split of re-quirements is to present first the minimal neces-sary information, practically the synonyms of the input word, and then allow users navigate through the whole lot of it.   Organisation of information in the form of a ?semantic tree? seems more popular than simple alphabetical presentation of material. Still, some users prefer information to be pre-sented as it always had, in alphabetical order, without any other complication. 
5.4 More information of interest 
 
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 1 2 2 4 9 Occ/ly 1 0 4 0 5 Rarely 4 0 2 1 7 Never 0 0 0 0 0 Table 10. Expressions   
                                                 4 ?Semantic tree? is a description of the situation in Figure 2 where words are organized in concepts indi-cated with the labels on the left hand column). 
The recollection problem concerns both one word units and expressions or collocates as is clearly indicated in Table 10 and Table 11. The question asked here was ?How often do you look for an expression / a collocate??.  We must note here that, ahead of its time, Onomasticon puts special emphasis on both types of information. Usage examples (Table 12) were requested mainly by translators and authors while glosses (Table 13) turned out to be of me-dium interest.  
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 1 1 6 3 11 Occ/ly 5 1 0 0 6 Rarely 0 0 2 2 4 Never 0 0 0 0 0 Table 11. Collocates  
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 0 1 4 2 7 Occa-sionally 1 0 4 1 6 Rarely 1 1 0 2 4 Never 4 0 0 0 4 Table 12. Usage examples  
 Jour-nalists  Edi3tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 0 1 2 1 4 Occa-sionally 3 0 4 2 9 Rarely 2 1 2 2 7 Never 1 0 0 0 1 Table 13. Glosses  On the other hand, users were interested in in-flection (Table 14) and spelling (Table 15) in-formation, as well as ?the right context of usage? (Table 16) of words or expressions.   
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 4 1 4 4 13 Occ/ly 0 0 2 1 3 Rarely 2 1 2 0 5 Never 0 0 0 0 0 Table 14. Inflection  
72
This comes as no surprise because Modern Greek reflects the long history of the language in several, often confusing ways: 
? by providing more than one spellings for a word, eg ?????? / ????? (mixture) 
? by being heavily inflected with many types for the same set of PoS and gram-matical features, eg  
???????, ??????, ??????? eat ? 3rd, plural, past continuous  Furthermore, the different forms are related with different styles, for instance in the example above the first form is considered the standard and the last the colloquial one.   
 Jour-nalists 
Edi-tors % 
Trans-lators  Au-thors  
Total 
Often 3 0 6 1 10 Occ/ly 1 0 0 1 2 Rarely 1 2 2 2 7 Never 0 0 0 0 0 Table 15. Spelling  
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 4 0 6 3 13 Occ/ly 0 0 2 1 3 Rarely 1 1 0 1 3 Never 1 1 0 0 2 Table 16. Right context of usage  Naturally, editors need the particular facilities less than the other groups given their specialty. 
6 Conclusions and decisions 
The professional occupation of the users seemed to determine the kind of available au-thoring aids they preferred. This may be due to the fact that they work under serious time pres-sure. However, they too experienced the recol-lection problem and would take advantage of domain relations to solve it. Editors require the least normative and usage information. Authors and translators seem to appreciate all types of information. Translators also stressed that effi-cient presentation of information is important, probably because they use translation aids regu-larly. 
On the basis of the questionnaire and the inter-views, we conclude that the features of the dic-tionary that would be attractive to the majority of users are: 
? Easy access to limited but to-the-point lexical information: the most usable synonyms and the most useful derivatives   
? Access to rich semantic information must be provided to those interested, al-though at a second step. Users are more interested in the lexical material than the labeling of semantic relations 
? Categorisation of lexical material by PoS. The PoS of the input word pops up first but all the other PoS in the same con-cept are available 
? Easy access to normative information given the particularities of Modern Greek in morphology and syntax  
On the basis of the above general conclusions, EKFRASIS interface design would satisfy the following minimum requirements: 
? All concepts to which an input word be-longs are shown at the first step of the search,  together with the synonyms of the word in each concept 
? Once a concept is selected, all existing sub-concepts are presented  
? If no sub-concepts exist, all PoS in a con-cept are made available to the user who sees the concept definition and the set of synonyms for each PoS (if they exist) 
? Once a word is selected all material about it pops up: gloss, example of usage, lexi-cal relations, inflection, syntactic proper-ties, collocations, translation  
Figure 5 is an extract from a mock-up where the hypothetical user has retrieved the multiword expression ????? ??? ??? ?bring to light?. In-formation given includes: gloss, synonyms (?present?, ?give away?, ?make something visi-ble?, ?make something obvious?),  inflection in-formation (concerning tense formation) and hints on its the usage. Users agreed that for each word an exhaustive summary of its properties should be provided. 
73
?????????? ???? ??? ???? ????? ? ?????????????????
??????????????????????
??????
?????????????? ????? ??? ???, ????????, ????????, ??????????, ??????? ??????, ??????? ???????
???????? ???????
??????
?????. ????? ??? ???
???. ?? ????? ??? ??? | ?? ???? ??? ???
???. ????? ??? ???
????.-?????. ??? ????? ??? ??? | ???? ????? ??? ???
????? ??? ???
??????? ?????????? ??????? ??????????????? ??? ?? ???????????. ?????? ?? ???? ??? ???? ??? ????????????? ???? ??????? ?????? ??? ?????.  
Figure 5. Presenting words 
 
References 
ACQUILEX   http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/research/nl/acquilex/ 
Briscoe, Ted, Ann Copestake and Valeria de Paiva. 1993. (eds). Inheritance, Defaults and the Lexicon. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.  
Fellbaum, Christiane. 1998. WordNet: An electronic Lexical Database, MIT Press, Cambridge. 
Gangemi, Aldo, Roberto Navigli and  Paola Velardi. 2003. The OntoWordNet Project: Extension and Axiomatization of Conceptual Relations in Word-Net. In R. Meersman et al (eds): CoopIS/DOA/ODBASE 2003, LNCS 2888, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg: 820-838. 
Gaume, Bruno, Karine Duvignau, Laurent Prevot and Yann Desalle. 2008. Toward a cognitive organisa-tion for electronic dictionaries, the case for se-mantic proxemy. In COLING 2008: Proceedings of the Workshop on cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (COGALEX 2008):86-93. 
Guarino, Nicola and Chris Welty. 2002. Evaluating Ontological Decisions with OntoClean. Communications of the ACM. 45(2):61-65. New York:ACM Press  
Kremer, Gerhard, Andrea Abel and Marco Baroni. 2008. Cognitively Salient Relations for Multilin-gual Lexicography. In COLING 2008: Proceed-ings of the Workshop on cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (COGALEX 2008): 94-101. 
Nirenburg, Sergei and Victor Raskin. 2004.  Onto-logical Semantics. The MIT Press. 
 Roget?s II: The New Thesaurus, Third Edition. 1995. (URL: http://www.bartleby. com/62/11.html) 
Old, L. John. 2003. The Semantic Structure of Ro-get?s: A whole language thesaurus. (URL: http://www.dcs.napier.ac.uk/~cs171/LJOld/papers/Dissertation.pdf) 
Old, L. John. 2004. Roget's Thesaurus of English Words and Phrases, by Roget ed. 1911 (URL: http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/10681). 
SIMPLE http://www.ub.es/gilcub/SIMPLE/simple.html 
Vossen, Piek. 1999. (ed.) EuroWordNet, General Document, (URL: http://www.illc.uva.nl/Euro WordNet  /docs.html) 
Zock, Michael and Bilac, Slaven. 2004. Word lookup on the basis of associations: from an idea to a roadmap. In COLING 2004: Proceedings of the Workshop on enhancing and using electronic dic-tionaries: 29-35. 
Zock, Michael and Didier Schwab. 2008. Lexical Access Based on Underspecified Input. In COL-ING 2008: Proceedings of the Workshop on cogni-tive Aspects of the Lexicon (COGALEX 2008): 9-18. 
?????????????,  ????????. 1962. ??????????? ? ??????????? ??? ????????????. ????, ?????.  
  
 
74
Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2014), pages 43?47,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 26-27 April 2014. c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Encoding MWEs in a conceptual lexicon
Aggeliki Fotopoulou, Stella Markantonatou, Voula Giouli
Institute for Language and Speech Processing, R.C. ?Athena? 
{afotop;marks;voula}@ilsp.athena-innovation.gr
Abstract
The proposed  paper  reports  on  work  in  progress 
aimed at the development of a conceptual lexicon 
of  Modern  Greek  (MG)  and  the  encoding  of 
MWEs  in  it.  Morphosyntactic  and  semantic 
properties  of  these  expressions  were  specified 
formally and encoded in the lexicon. The resulting 
resource will be applicable for a number of NLP 
applications.
1 Introduction
 Substantial research  in  linguistics  has  been 
devoted  to  the  analysis  and  classification  of 
MWEs from different perspectives (Fraser, 1970; 
Chomsky,  1980;  M. Gross 1982,  1988;  Ruwet, 
1983;  der  Linden,  1992;  Nunberg et  al.,  1994; 
Howarth, 1996; Jackendoff, 1997; Moon, 1998; 
Fellbaum,  2007).  Moreover,  cognitive  and 
psycholinguistic  approaches  to  MWEs  (Lakoff, 
1993;  Gibbs,  1998;  Glucksberg,  1993; 
Diakogiorgi&Fotopoulou, 2012) have accounted 
for  their  interpretation.  Within  the  NLP 
community,  there  is  a  growing  interest  in  the 
identification  of  MWEs  and  their  robust 
treatment,  as  this  seems  to  improve  parsing 
accuracy  (Nivre  and  Nilsson,  2004;  Arun  and 
Keller, 2005). In this respect, the development of 
large-scale,  robust  language resources that  may 
be integrated in parsing systems is of paramount 
importance. Representation, however, of MWEs 
in lexica poses a number of challenges. 
2 Basic Notions
Typically,  fixed  MWEs  are  identified  and 
classified on the basis of  semantic,  lexical  and 
morphosyntactic criteria. (M. Gross, 1982, 1987; 
Lamiroy, 2003), namely:
? non-compositionality:  i.e.,  the meaning of 
the  expression  cannot  be  computed  from 
the  meanings of  its  constituents  and  the 
rules used to combine them. Nevertheless, 
according  to  (Nunberg  et  al,  1994), 
compositionality refers to the fact that the 
constituents  of  some  idioms  ?carry 
identifiable  parts  of  the  idiomatic 
meaning?.  Variability has  been  further 
emphasised in (Hamblin and Gibbs 1999) 
and  (Nunberg  et  al.  1994):  fixed 
expressions  appear  in  a  continuum  of 
compositionality,  which  ranges  from 
expressions  that  are  very  analysable  to 
others  that  are  partially  analysable  or 
ultimately non-analysable.
? non-substitutability:  at  least  one  of  the 
expression  constituents  does  not  enter  in 
alternations at the paradigmatic axis 
? non-modifiability: MWEs are syntactically 
rigid structures, in that there are constraints 
concerning  modification,  transformations, 
etc. 
These  criteria,  however,  do  not  apply  in  all 
cases in a uniform way. The  variability attested 
brings about the notion ?degree of fixedness? (G. 
Gross 1996). The kind and degree of fixedness 
result in the classification of these expressions as 
fixed,  semi-fixed,  syntactically flexible or 
collocations (Sag et al, 2002). It is crucial for a 
satisfactory  MWEs  representation  in  a 
computational lexicon to provide an accurate and 
functional  formal  modelling  of  fixedness, 
variability and compositionality. 
In this paper, we will discuss the classification 
and encoding of compounds and fixed MWEs in 
a conceptually organised lexicon of MG. 
3 The conceptual lexicon 
The conceptually organised lexicon that is under 
development  (Markantonatou  &  Fotopoulou, 
2007)  capitalises  on two basic  notions:  (a)  the 
notion  of  lexical  fields,  along  with  (b)  the 
Saussurian notion of sign and its two inseparable 
facets,  namely,  the  SIGNIFIER and  the 
SIGNIFIED as the building blocks (main classes) 
of the underlying ontology.
43
In this sense, the intended language resource is 
a  linguistic  ontology  in  which  words  are 
instances in the  SIGNIFIER class. At this level, 
morphological,  syntactic  and  functional 
information about lemmas is encoded. Similarly, 
word meanings are instances in the  SIGNIFIED 
class.  Each instance in the  SIGNIFIER class is 
mapped onto a concept, the latter represented as 
an instance in the SIGNIFIED class.
The  Instances  of  the  class  SIGNIFIER are 
specified  for  (a)  features  pertaining  to  lexical 
semantic  relations  (i.e,  synonymy,  antonymy); 
(b)  lexical  relations  such  as  word  families, 
allomorphs,  syntactic  variants  etc.;  and  (c) 
morphosyntactic  properties  (PoS,  gender, 
declension,  argument  structure,  word  specific 
information  etc.).  Values  for  these features  are 
assigned to both single- and multi-word entries 
in the lexicon. MWEs are further coupled with 
rich  linguistic  information  pertaining  to  the 
lexical, syntactic and semantic levels.
4 Encoding MWEs in the lexicon
MWEs  are  encoded  as  instances  in  the 
SIGNIFIER class  of our ontology and are also 
mapped onto the corresponding concepts or word 
meanings (instances in the SIGNIFIED class).
In the remaining, we focus on the encoding of 
MWEs as instances in the SIGNIFIER class. We 
cater  for  sub-classes  corresponding  to 
grammatical  categories  (verb,  noun,  adjective, 
adverb,  preposition,  etc)  under  the  class 
SIGNIFIER in our schema. The class MWEs (as 
opposed to the class Simple Lexical Units) has 
been  defined  further  under  the  verb,  noun, 
adjective and adverb sub-classes.
Syntactic  configurations  pertaining  to  each 
class are also represented as distinct sub-classes 
hierarchically  organised  under  the  verb,  noun, 
adjective  and  adverb  classes.  Morphosyntactic 
properties, selectional preferences, and semantic 
interpretation  patterns  are  provided  for  each 
MWE depending on the grammatical category it 
pertains  to;  encoding  is  based  on  a  set  of 
parameters represented as feature-value pairs.
More  precisely,  a  typology  of  Greek  verbal 
MWEs has been defined in (Fotopoulou,  1993, 
Mini, 2009) (NP V NP1 NP2?) and of nominal 
MWEs in (Anastasiadis,  1986) (Adj  N,  NN?) 
on  the  basis  of  the  lexical  and  syntactic 
configurations involved. This typology has been 
mapped onto a hierarchy under classes  verb and 
noun).
In our approach, the main distinction between 
collocations and  fixed  MWEs is  made  explicit. 
The  degree  and  type  of  fixedness  are  then 
encoded  as  features.  Further  morphosyntactic 
information  is  also  encoded  depending  on  the 
grammatical  category  of  the  MWE  (i.e., 
declension  of  one  or  more  constituents, 
only_singular or  only_plural for nouns, etc.). In 
this way, information that may be useful for the 
automatic identification and interpretation of the 
MWEs may be retained. Moreover, the standard 
set  of  features  inherited  from  the  class 
SIGNIFIER  is  also  retained  (PoS,  Gender, 
Number, Tense, synonyms, antonyms, etc.).
4.1.The encoding schema
We have so far implemented an encoding schema 
for  nominal  and  verbal  MWEs.  We  aimed  at 
encoding rich linguistic knowledge in a formal 
way  that  would  be  exploitable  in  computer 
applications.  The  two  types  of  fixedness 
(collocations and fixed) are encoded as features: 
(a) Lexical_variance, and (b) Is_actually.
The feature  Lexical_variance1 has as possible 
values (yes or no). Collocations (assigned a yes 
value)  are  further  specified  with  respect  to 
alternative lemmas; these lemmas are encoded in 
the appropriate feature Variants. For instance, in 
example  (1)  the  two  alternative  lemmas  are 
??????????? and ???????????:
 
(1) ????????   (???????????  /  ???????????) 
(=emergency (situations / circumstances))
The feature  Is_actually (with possible values 
yes  or  no)  encodes  information  about  the 
interpretation  pattern:  a  value  yes signifies  a 
compositional  or  partially  compositional 
meaning; on the contrary,  a value  no denotes a 
non-compositional  interpretation  (fixed 
meaning).
Collocations  are  by  default  assigned feature 
values  corresponding  to  a  compositional 
meaning.  In  these  cases,  the  feature 
maintains_meaning further  specifies  the 
constituent(s)  that  contribute  to  the  non-fixed 
interpretation of the expression. For example, the 
meaning of the compound in (2) is retained from 
the  meaning  of  the  first  noun  ?????? (=trip), 
which,  in  turn,  is  the  value  assigned  to  the 
maintains_meaning feature:
1In  our  MWE  classification  scheme,  a  lexical  unit  is 
considered ?fixed? at the lemma level. This is because MG 
is a heavily inflected language.
44
(2) ??????  ??????? (trip  -  lightning  (=very 
sudden and short trip)
<maintains_meaning =  ?????? />
Finally,  the  feature  has_meta_meaning 
signifies  further  the  constituent(s)  ?  if  any  ? 
bearing a figurative meaning.  For example,  the 
compound  ??????  ??????? in  (2)  assumes  the 
figurative meaning of the second noun  ??????? 
(=very sudden and short-term).
On  the  contrary,  verbal  and  nominal 
expressions  with  a  non-compositional  meaning 
are  assigned  a  negative  value (no) for  the 
Is_actually feature since their constituents do not 
contribute to a compositional meaning; therefore, 
the  features maintains_meaning  and 
has_meta_meaning  are  left  empty  as  non-
applicable. This is exemplified in (3) below; the 
constituents ??????? (=kids?) and ???? (=joy) of 
the  expression  ??????? ???? (=playground)  do 
not contribute to the overall interpretation:
(3) ??????? ???? (=playground)
<maintains_meaning/>
<has_meta_meaning/>
This schema that applies to both nominal and 
verbal MWES, is presented in Table 1 below.
Slot Values
mwe_type Fixed;   collocation
Lexical_variance  Boolean (yes, no)
        Variants string 
?s_actually Boolean (yes, no)
  maintains_meaning String
 has_meta_meaning String
Table 1 The encoding schema for nouns & verbs
4.2.Nominal MWEs
Furthermore,  nominal  MWEs are also assigned 
values  for  features  that  are  specific  to  the 
nominal  MWEs.  Information  on  inflected 
constituents  -  if  any  ?  is  provided  in  the 
declension feature; values for  only_singular and 
only_plural provide further morphological/usage 
information;  when  used  in  combination  with 
other  features  (i.e,  is_actually)  this  type  of 
information is  evidence  of  fixedness. Frequent 
co-occurrence patterns with verbs are provided in 
the  verb_combined feature;  finally,  alternative 
nominalised  forms  are  listed  as  values  of  the 
feature  nominalization. The schema is presented 
in the table below:
only singular Boolean (yes, no)
only plural: Boolean (yes, no)
N_declension ?1, ?2, ?1_?2, Adj_N 
verb_combined string 
Nominalization string 
Table 2 The encoding schema for nouns
4.3.Verbal MWEs 
In the typology adopted for the verbal idiomatic 
expressions,  fixedness can  be  limited  to  only 
certain  constituents  of  the  sentence; a 
combination of fixed and non-fixed constituents 
in  Subject or  Object position  is  permitted.  For 
example,  in  sentences  (4)  and  (5)  below, 
fixedness relies on the relation among the verbs 
and the nouns that function as Objects (direct and 
indirect) and as Subject respectively:
(4) ???? ????NP-acc, Obj ???? ????PP 
to  give  way to  anger  (=to swallow one?s 
pride/anger) 
(5) ??????? ?? ???????? ???NP-nom, Subj
my lights are  switched on  (=to  become 
very angry)
Moreover,  the  typology  allows  for  a  restricted 
alternation of fixed elements of the expression. 
For  example,  in  the  MWE  in  (6),  the  two 
alternative lemmas are ???? and ?????????:
(6) ???? / ?????????   ??? ?????? ?? ?? ?????
to  undertake    to    offer   /  promise   the sky with 
the stars
This information is encoded in verbal MWEs, 
namely:  (a) the syntactic properties of the verb 
that occurs in the expression (valency); and (b) 
45
fixed and non-fixed arguments either in  Subject 
or  Object position.  Moreover,  selectional 
restrictions applied to the arguments (such as +/-
human) are also added.
The  encoding  schema  that  applies  to  verbal 
MWEs  specifically  is  presented  in  Table  3.  In 
this  schema,  N signifies  a  non-fixed  noun, 
whereas C denotes a fixed one; number 0 (in N0 
and C0) is used to represent a noun (either fixed 
or non-fixed in Subject position), and 1, 2, 3, etc. 
denote  complements  in  Object position  (or 
complements  of  prepositional  phrases).  Other 
features  provide  rich  linguistic  information 
regarding facets of the expression in terms of: (a) 
selectional restrictions (i.e., the features N0_type,  
N1_type,  etc., accept  as  values  the  semantic 
category in which a noun in  Subject  or  Object  
position respectively,  belongs  to),  (b)  syntactic 
alternations  (i.e.,  Poss_Ppv  encodes  the 
alternation  among  possessive and  personal 
pronoun),  grammatical  information  (i.e., 
Ppv_case  encodes  the  case  of  the  personal 
pronoun), etc.
Slot Value
N0_type hum, -hum, npc 
C0_variants string 
Poss=Ppv Boolean (yes or no)
Ppv_case gen, acc 
N1_type hum, -hum, npc (Nom de 
partie du corps/noun of 
the part of  body) 
N2_type hum, -hum, npc
N3_type hum, -hum, npc
C1_variants string 
C2_variants string 
C3_variants string 
Table 3. The encoding schema for verbs
Alternative  nouns  (in  Subject  or  Object 
position)  that  oftern  co-occur  with  the  verbal 
expression  are  also  provided  for  (C0_variant, 
C1_variant, etc).
5. Discussion
As it has been shown above, in our lexicon we 
have  opted  for  an  approach  to  MWE 
representation  that  builds  on  rich  linguistic 
knowledge. The linguistic classifications adopted 
deal  with  morphology,  syntax,  and  semantics 
interface  aspects.  Thus,  a  lexicon  ?  grammar 
representation of MWEs has been constructed by 
encoding  key  morphosyntactic  and  semantic 
information.The  typology  of  verbal  MWEs 
shares  common  characteristics  with  similar 
efforts  for  other  languages  (i.e,  DuELME, 
Gregoire,  2010 Morphosyntactic  properties  and 
selectional  preferences  account  better  for  a 
number  of  phenomena,  inherent  in  the  Greek 
language,  as  for  example  word order  and gaps 
attested in running text.
More specifically, Greek is a language with a 
relatively  free  word  order,  and  idiomatic 
expressions  often  occur  in  texts  in  various 
configurations. The encoding of fixed and non-
fixed  constituents  provides,  therefore,  extra 
information for the identification of expressions 
in texts.  Moreover, the identification of MWEs 
as  collocations  entails  a  relatively  loose 
fixedness,  allowing,  thus,  for  gaps  and 
discontinuities as shown in (7):
(7) ?? ????? ???? ?????? ?????????-?????
The  political  party  has  a  number of 
candidates record (=many candidates)
6. Conclusions and Future work
We have  given  an  overview of  the  conceptual 
lexicon  currently  under  development  and  the 
treatment of MWEs in it. We have so far treated 
nominal  and  verbal  MWEs  (~1000  entries). 
Future  work  involves  the  population  of  the 
lexicon with new expressions also pertaining to 
the grammatical categories adjective and adverb 
and the definition of a fine-grained typology for 
the  latter.  Moreover,  a  more  granular 
representation  of  fixedness  will  be  attempted. 
Compatibility  of  the  resource  with  diverse 
syntactic  approaches  will  also  be  investigated. 
The  evaluation  of  the  final  resource  will  be 
performed  by  integrating  it  in  a  tool  that 
automatically recognizes MWEs in texts.
References
???????????-????????? ?. (1986).  ? ???????? ????  
?????  ???????????.  ???????????:  ???????????? 
????????????  ????????????  (???????????? 
????????? ??????????? ??????).
46
Arun,  A.  and  F.  Keller.  2005.  Lexicalisation  in 
crosslinguistic  probablisitic  parsing:  The  case  of 
french. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting  
of  the Association for Computational  Linguistics, 
pp 306?313. Ann Arbor, MI
Chomsky, N. 1980.  Rules and Representations. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Diakogiorgi,  K.  &  Fotopoulou,  A.  2012. 
Interpretation of Idiomatic Expressions by Greek 
Speaking Children: implications for the Linguistic 
and  Psycholinguistic  Research.  An 
interdisciplinary  approach.  Lingvisticae  
Investigationes, Volume  35:1.  1-27, John 
Benjamins, Paris, France
Fellbaum,  C.  2007.  Introduction.  Fellbaum, C.  (ed). 
Idioms and Collocations: Corpus-based Linguistic  
and Lexicographic Studies. London: Continuum, 1-
Fotopoulou, A. 1993. Une Classification des Phrases  
? Compl?ments Fig?s en Grec Moderne.  Doctoral 
Thesis, Universite Paris VIII.
Fraser,  B.  1970.  Idioms  within  a  Transformational 
Grammar. Foundations of language, 1, 22-42.
Fritzinger,  F.,  Weller,  M.,  and  Heid.  U.  2010.  A 
survey  of  idiomatic  preposition-noun-verb  tiples  on 
token level. In Proceedings of LREC-10.
Gr?goire,  N.  2010.  DuELME:  a  Dutch  electronic 
lexicon  of  multiword  expressions;  Lang 
Resources & Evaluation (2010) 44:23?39
Gibbs  R.W.  1998.  The  Fight  over  Metaphor  in 
Thought and Language. In A.N. Katz, C. Cacciari, 
R.W.  Gibbs  &  M.  Turner  (eds.),  Figurative 
Language and Thought. OUP, 88-118.
Glucksberg, S. 1993. Idiom meanings and allusional 
context.  In  Idioms:  Processing,  structure,  and  
intepretation.  C.  Cacciari  and  P.  Tabossi  (eds.). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 201-225. 
Gross,  G.  1996.  Les  expressions fig?es  en fran?ais. 
Noms  compos?s  et  autres  locutions.  Paris/Gap: 
Ophrys.
Gross, M. 1982. Une classification des phrases fig?es 
du fran?ais. Revue Qu?b?coise de Linguistique 11 
(2), 151-185.
Gross,  M.  1988a.  Les  limites  de  la  phrase  fig?e. 
Langage 90: 7-23
 Gross,  Maurice.  1988b.  Sur  les  phrases  fig?es 
complexes du fran?ais. Langue fran?aise 77: 4770.
Hamblin, J., and Gibbs, W. R. 1999. Why You Can?t 
Kick  the  Bucket  as  You  Slowly  Die:  Verbs  in 
Idiom Comprehension. Journal of Psycholinguistic  
Research. 28 (1): 25-39.
Howarth P.A. 1996. Phraseology in English academic 
writing. Lexicographica Series 75.  T?bingen: Max 
Niemeyer. Jackendoff R. 1997. The Architecture of  
the Language Faculty. MIT Press.
Lakoff  G.  1993.  The  Contemporary  Theory  of 
Metaphor.  In  A.  Ortony  (ed.), Metaphor  and 
Thought, 2nd  edition  Cambridge  University  Press, 
202-251.
Lamiroy,  B.  2003.  Les  notions  linguistiques  de 
figement  et  de  contrainte.  Lingvisticae 
Investigationes 26:1,  53-66, 
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
van der Linden E-J. 1992. Incremental processing and 
the  hierarchical  lexicon.  Computational  
Linguistics, 18, 219-238
Markantonatou,  Stella  and  Fotopoulou,  Aggeliki. 
2007. The tool ?Ekfrasi". In Proceedings of the 8th  
International  Conference  on  Greek  Linguistics,  
The Lexicography Workshop. Ioannina, Greece.
Markantonatou,  S.,  Fotopoulou,  ?.,  Mini,  M.  & 
Alexopoulou, M. 2010. In search of the right word. 
In Proceedings of Cogalex-2: Cognitive Aspects of  
the  Lexicon,  2nd  SIGLEX  endorsed  Workshop. 
Beijing.
Mini, M. 2009. Linguistic and Psycholinguistic Study  
of Fixed Verbal Expressions with Fixed Subject in  
Modern  Greek:  A  Morphosyntactic  Analysis,  
Lexicosemantic  Gradation  and  Processing  by  
Elementary School Children. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation. University of Patras.
Moon,  R.  1998.  Fixed  Expressions  and  Idioms  in  
English: A Corpus-Based Approach. Oxford: OUP.
Nivre,  J.  and  Nilsson,  J.  2004.  Multiword  units  in 
syntactic parsing. Workshop on Methodologies and  
Evaluation  of  Multiword  Units  in  Real-World  
Applications.
Nunberg  ,G.,  Sag  I.,  Wasow,  T.  1994.  Idioms. 
Language 70, 491-538.
Ruwet,  N.  1983.  Du  Bon  Usage  des  Expressions 
Idiomatiques  dans  l'Argumentation  en  Syntaxe 
G?n?rative.  Revue Qu?becoise de Linguistique  13 
(1): 9-145.
Sag,  I.A.,  Bond,  F.,  Copestake  A.,  Flickinger,  D. 
2001.  Multiword  Expressions.  LinGO  Working 
PaperNo.2001-01. 
Sag,  Ivan  A.,  T.Baldwin,  F.Bond,  A. Copestake and 
Dan Flickinger.2001.Multiword  Expressions:  A 
Pain in the Neck for  NLP. LinGO Working Paper 
No.  2001-03.  In  Alexander  Gelbukh,  ed.,  (2002) 
Proceedings of COLING-2002.
 
47
Proceedings of the Workshop on Lexical and Grammatical Resources for Language Processing, pages 39?45,
Coling 2014, Dublin, Ireland, August 24 2014.
 Linguistically motivated Language Resources for Sentiment Analysis 
 
 
Voula Giouli 
 
Aggeliki Fotopoulou 
Institute for Language and Speech Processing, Athena RIC 
{voula;afotop}@ilsp.athena-innovation.gr 
 
  
 
Abstract 
Computational approaches to sentiment analysis focus on the identification, extraction, summarization 
and visualization of emotion and opinion expressed in texts. These tasks require large-scale language re-
sources (LRs) developed either manually or semi-automatically. Building them from scratch, however, 
is a laborious and costly task, and re-using and repurposing already existing ones is a solution to this 
bottleneck. We hereby present work aimed at the extension and enrichment of existing general-purpose 
LRs, namely a set of computational lexica, and their integration in a new emotion lexicon that would be 
applicable for a number of Natural Language Processing applications beyond mere syntactic parsing. 
1 Introduction 
The abundance of user-generated content over the web has brought about the shift of interest to the 
opinion and emotion expressed by people or groups of people with respect to a specific target entity, 
product, subject matter, etc. The task of sentiment analysis involves determining the so-called private 
states (beliefs, feelings, and speculations) expressed in a particular text or text segment as opposed to 
factual information. More precisely, it is focused on the following: (a) identification of sentiment ex-
pressions in textual data and their classification as appropriate, and (b) recognition of participants in 
the private state, as for example, the entities identified as the Source and Target of the emotion. More 
recently, aspect-based sentiment analysis has also been in the focus of research (Wilson, 2008). 
Traditionally, classification of sentiment expressions is usually attempted in terms of the general 
notion of polarity defined as positive, negative and neutral. Traditional approaches to text classifica-
tion based on stochastic methods are quite effective when applied for sentiment analysis yielding quite 
satisfactory results. However, certain applications require for more fine-grained classifications of sen-
timent i.e. the identification of emotional states such as anger, sadness, surprise, satisfaction, etc. in 
place of mere recognition of the polarity. Such applications might be the identification of certain emo-
tions expressed by customers (i.e., satisfaction, or dissatisfaction) with respect to some product or ser-
vice, or the analysis of emotions and feelings described by users in blogs, wikis, fora and social media 
(Klenner at al., 2009). In this respect, stochastic approaches fail to recognize multiple or even conflict-
ing emotions expressed in a document or text segment. In these cases, linguistic (syntactic and seman-
tic knowledge) is necessary in order to assess the overall polarity of a clause and or the feeling ex-
pressed in it. 
The paper is organised as follows: In section 2 we present the aims and scope of the specific work; 
section 3 gives an overview of related work on affective LRs, whereas section 4 gives an account of 
the LRs developed within the framework of Lexicon ? Grammar. Our efforts towards enriching the 
existing resources with semantic information and re-purposing them are presented in sections 5 and 6 
respectively, while section 7 outlines our conclusions and prospects for future research. 
2 Aims and scope 
We present work aimed at extending, enriching and re-purposing existing LRs, the ultimate goal being 
This work is licenced under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Page numbers and proceedings footer 
are added by the organizers. License details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
39
their integration in a tool for sentiment analysis. In specific, a suite of computational lexica developed 
within the framework of Lexicon ? Grammar (LG) and treating verbal and nominal predicates denot-
ing emotion were used. These resources were initially constructed manually as a means to describe 
general language, and they bear rich linguistic information that would be otherwise difficult to encode 
in an automatic way, namely (a) subcategorisation information, (b) semantic and distributional proper-
ties, and (c) syntactic transformations of the predicates. Within the current work, semantic information 
that is meaningful for sentiment analysis was also added to lexicon entries. The final resource was 
then used to bootstrap a grammar of emotions. This grammar is a rule-based approach to sentiment 
analysis aimed at capturing and modeling linguistic knowledge that is necessary for the task at hand.  
The work presented here was based on a previous study (Giouli et al., 2013), making further exten-
sive use of the Hellenic National Corpus (HNC), a large reference corpus for the Greek language 
(Hatzigeorgiou et al, 2000).  Additionally, a suite of specialized corpora that were developed to guide 
sentiment studies in multimodal (Mouka et al., 2012) and in textual (Giouli and Fotopoulou, 2013) 
data was used. Thus, the resulting Greek Sentiment Corpus, that amounts to c. ~250K tokens, com-
prises audiovisual material (movies dialogues), and texts selected manually from various sources over 
the web. More particularly, the online edition of two newspapers along with a news portal were 
searched on a daily basis for the identification and selection of commentaries dealing with a set of 
predefined topics; Greek blogs and fora were also used as sources for text collection. The afore-
mentioned corpus was annotated at the sentence and phrase level for opinion and emotion, and was 
subsequently used to populate the sentiment lexicon under construction. Moreover, initial steps were 
made towards creating a rule-based system for the identification of sentiment expressions in texts and 
computing the overall phrase polarity in context on the basis of corpus evidence. 
3 Related work 
A number of large-scale lexica appropriate for sentiment analysis have been developed either manual-
ly or semi-automatically. These range from mere word lists to more elaborate resources. General In-
quirer (Stone et al. 1966), the Subjectivity lexicon integrated in OpinionFinder (Wiebe et al., 2005), 
and SentiWordNet (Esuli and Sebastiani 2006) are examples of such affective lexica. On the other 
hand, WordNet-Affect (Strapparava and Valitutti 2004), an extension of WordNet Domains, is linguis-
tically oriented as it comprises a subset of synsets that are suitable to represent affective concepts in 
correlation with affective words. A set of A-labels is used to mark concepts representing emotions or 
emotional states, moods, eliciting emotions situations, and emotional responses. Finally, EmotiNet 
(Balahur et al, 2011) is a knowledge base (KB) for representing and storing affective reaction to real-
life contexts and action chains described in text. 
From a purely linguistic perspective ? yet with a view to Natural Language Processing - substantial 
work has been devoted to the semantic classification of verbal predicates denoting emotion in 
(Mathieu, 1999). In this work, verbs denoting emotional states and evaluative stances should also be 
classified according to the so-called semantic field?. Verbs were, thus, categorized into homogenous 
semantic classes which share common syntactic properties; this classification is claimed to facilitate 
semantic interpretation.  
Statistical approaches to sentiment analysis feature a ?bag-of-word? representation (Hu and Liu, 
2004). Rule-based systems, on the other hand, exploit linguistic knowledge in the form of syntac-
tic/lexical patterns for computing polarity in context. In most cases, negative particles and modality 
are reported as the most obvious shifters that affect sentiment polarity (Polanyi and Zaenen 2006, Jia 
et al. 2009, Wiegand et al. 2010, Benamara et al., 2012).  Finally, compositionality features have been 
explored for the computation of multiple or conflicted sentiments on the basis of deep linguistic analy-
sis (Moilanen and Pulman, 2007), (Neviarouskaya et al., 2009), (Klenner et al., 2009). 
4 Lexicon ? Grammar tables 
4.1 Lexicon ? Grammar framework 
The Lexical Resources hereby exploited were initially constructed in accordance with the Lexicon-
Grammar (LG) methodological framework (Gross 1975), (Gross 1981). Being a model of syntax lim-
ited to the elementary sentences of the form Subject ? Verb ? Object, the theory argues that the unit of 
40
meaning is located at the sentence rather than the word level. To this end, linguistic analysis consists 
in converting each elementary sentence to its predicate-argument structure. Additionally, main com-
plements (subject, object) are separated from other complements (adjuncts) on the basis of formal cri-
teria; adverbial complements (i.e., prepositional phrases) are considered as crucial arguments only in 
the case that they characterize certain verb frames: 
 
(1)  John removed the cups from the table. 
 
To cater for a more fine-grained classification, and the creation of homogenous word classes, this 
formal syntactic definition is further coupled with distributional properties associated with words, i.e., 
types of prepositions, features attached to nouns in subject and complement positions, etc. A set of 
transformation rules, construed as equivalence relations between sentences, further generate equivalent 
structures. It becomes evident, therefore, that the resulting resources are rich in linguistic information 
(syntactic structure, distributional properties and permitted transformational rules), which is encoded 
formally in the so-called LG tables. 
4.2 The Lexicon ? Grammar of verb and noun predicates denoting emotion 
Within the LG framework, 130 noun predicates denoting emotions (Nsent) in Modern Greek were se-
lected and classified into 3 classes, according to their syntactic and distributional properties 
(Fotopoulou & al., 2008). The 1st class comprises nouns of interpersonal relations with an obligatory 
prepositional complement and a conversed construction, as for example ????????? (= admiration). 
The 2nd class are indicative of an external cause including a non obligatory prepositional complement, 
as for example ????? (= fear). The 3rd class without complements have a static character, as for ex-
ample ??????? (= happiness). Identification of the specific light verbs (or support verbs, Vsup) they 
select for was also performed. Furthermore, their distributional properties and their co-occurrence with 
specific verbs expressing diverse modalities (aspect, intensity, control, manifestation or verbal expres-
sion) have also been encoded in a formal way. These properties reveal the restrictions nouns impose 
on the lexical choice of verbs. 
Furthermore, 339 Greek verbal predicates denoting emotion (Vsent) have been selected from vari-
ous sources (i.e. existing reference lexicographic works and corpora) and were subsequently classified 
in five LG tables. Classification was performed on the basis of the following axes: (i) syntactic infor-
mation (i.e, subcategorisation information); (ii) selectional restrictions (+Hum/ -Hum) imposed over 
their Subject and Object complements; and (iii) transformation rules. More precisely, as far as syntac-
tic structure is concerned, the predicates under consideration were identified to appear in both transi-
tive and intransitive constructions being represented as ?0 V N1 and ?0 V respectively. Certain verbs 
also allow for a prepositional phrase complement represented as ?0 V Prep N11 configurations. A 
close inspection over the data revealed the relationship between the N0 or N1 complements that de-
note the Experiencer of the emotion (i.e., the entity feeling the emotion). In two of the resulting clas-
ses the Experiencer is projected as the structural Subject of the verb, whereas the Theme or Stimulus is 
projected as their structural object. Similarly, the remaining 3 classes realize the Theme/Stimulus as the 
subject and the Experiencer as their object, their distinguishing property being their participation in 
unaccusative and middle constructions, the latter being linked to the implicit presence of an Agent 
(middle) and the absence of an Agent (unaccusative). These properties have been checked for the 
whole range of lexical data based on both linguistic introspection and corpus evidence. 
A number of Harrisian constructions and transformations (Harris, 1951; 1964; 1968) have been ex-
tensively utilized within the LG formalism to define syntactically related and semantically equivalent 
structures. Apart from passivisation and middle alternation constructions - also relevant to emotion 
predicates - the restructuring transformation has been accounted for (Guillet and Lecl?re, 1981): 
 
(2) ? ??????? ???????? ?? ????? ??? ?? ?????? ???. 
The John admires  the Maria for the courage-her. 
John admires Maria for her courage. 
                                                 
1 Adopting the LG notation, ?0 denotes a Noun in Subject position of a given verb V, whereas, N1 denotes its 
Object. 
41
 
(3) ? ??????? ???????? ?? ?????? ??? ??????. 
The John  admires the courage the Maria-of 
John admires Maria?s courage. 
 
Moreover, each verbal predicate was also coupled with morphologically-related adjectives and 
nouns, and the alignment of semantically equivalent nominal, verbal and adjectival structures was per-
formed thereof. A number of semantically equivalent paraphrases of the verbs with the morphologi-
cally related nouns and adjectives were also encoded in the tables. 
Finally, following the same methodology, a set of 2,500 verbal multi-word expressions denoting 
emotions were identified from corpora and classified in 13 categories according to their syntactic 
structure. The final resource comprises a total of ~3000 entries, organized in 21 LG tables with lem-
mas inter-connected via the tables relative to verbs. 
5 Semantic classification of emotion predicates 
Semantic classification of the verbal predicates has also been performed on the basis of their underly-
ing semantics. In this way, the syntactic and distributional properties encoded in the LG tables have 
been coupled with semantic information that defines an affective taxonomy. These properties were 
added as columns in the tables that describe the verb predicates. Our goal was to group together predi-
cates that are synonyms or near synonyms and to create an affective taxonomy hierarchical organized. 
To this end, certain abstractions and generalizations were performed where necessary for defining 
classes of emotion types.  
Initially, 59 classes of emotion-related-senses were identified. At the next stage, a number of itera-
tions followed aimed at grouping together senses that are semantically related. This procedure resulted 
in the identification of a set of senses that may be used as taxonomy of emotions. Following practices 
adopted in similar endeavours (i.e., Mathieu, 1999), each class was further assigned a tag that uniquely 
identifies the respective class. The following classes (19 classes) were identified: anger, fear, sadness, 
disgust, surprise, anticipation, acceptance, joy, love, hate, disappointment, indifference, shame, envy, 
jealousy, relaxedness, respect, resentment, and remorse. 
Next, each entry was further specified as regards the specific relation that holds between the entry 
and the emotion type it belongs to. A set of properties were then defined for which each entry was then 
examined, namely: FeelEmotion, EmotionManifestation, Behaviour, and EntailsEmotion.  
At a more abstract level, entries were further assigned a value for the semantic property polarity. 
Following previous works (Mathieu and Fellbaum, 2010), the encoding caters for the apriori polarity 
of the emotion denoted which subsumes one of the following values: (a) positive, i.e. predicates which 
express a pleasant feeling; (b) negative, i.e., predicates which express an unpleasant feeling; (c) neu-
tral, and (d) ambiguous, i.e., predicates expressing a feeling the polarity of which is context-dependent 
(e.g., surprise). 
Moreover, to better account for the semantic distinction between near synonyms that occur within a 
class such as ??????? (= I am scared), ?????????????? (=panic), etc., entries are further coupled with 
the feature intensity with possible values: low, medium, high, uncertain. Intensity was attributed to the 
lexical items on the basis of linguistic introspection and the definitions of lexical entries. 
6 Transforming Lexicon-Grammar tables to a grammar of emotions 
Being initially developed to serve as a means of linguistic description, this framework has, never-the-
less, been proved to be applicable for the construction of robust computational lexica. And although it 
has been claimed (Mathieu, 2008) that the information is not directly exploitable for NLP applications 
due to the fact that certain pieces of information are not formally encoded or are implicit, a number of 
works (Hathout and Namer 1998, Danlos and Sagot 2009) have successfully managed to reformat LG 
tables in efficient large-scale NLP lexica.  
To this end, we have tried to exploit information available in the tables and make the mappings that 
are necessary for the task of sentiment recognition. On the one hand, subcategorisation information 
with respect to selectional restrictions imposed over the Subject and Object of the verbal predicates 
was exploited. Once a verbal predicate has been identified, the constituent either in Subject or Object 
42
position that is also assigned a (+Hum) property corresponds unambiguously to the Experiencer of the 
emotion depending on the class it belongs to (i.e., SubjectExperiencer or Object Experiencer). Simi-
larly, the NP in Object position of verbs that pertain to the 2nd class ????? (=love) corresponds to the 
Target of the emotion. All other constituents correspond to the Trigger or Cause. 
On these grounds, initial steps towards building a rule-based component that identifies emotion ver-
bal and nominal predicates in texts along with the participating entities, namely the Experiencer and 
Target of the emotion expressed have been performed. To this end, a library of local grammars (Con-
stant, 2003) for emotion predicates has been constructed modeling structures in the annotated corpus. 
Local grammars (also referred to in the literature as graphs) are algebraic grammars formulated as 
combinations of sequences of grammatical symbols in the form of regular expressions that describe 
natural language. In this sense, they are a powerful tool to represent the majority of linguistic phenom-
ena in an intuitive manner. Moreover, they are compiled into finite state transducers that transform 
input text by inserting or removing special markers. Rules are sequentially applied to the text using 
longest match. We made use of the UNITEX platform (Paumier, 2013) for creating the graphs and 
then compiling them into finite state transducers. UNITEX consists of three modules, namely, corpus 
handling, lexicon development and grammar development that are integrated into a single intuitive 
graphical user interface. Based on the Lexicon-Grammar tables developed for the verbal predicates 
(c.f. section 2 above), we initially created five parameterized graphs manually; these graphs depict the 
syntactic and semantic properties of the predicates. At the next stage, a set of graphs was constructed 
automatically using UNITEX, each one representing the syntactic and semantic properties of a given 
predicate.  
It should be noted, however, that LG tables provide descriptions at an abstract level. To remedy this 
shortcoming, a number of graphs and sub-graphs describing a wide range of syntactic phenomena 
(noun phrase, coordination, modifiers, negation, and valency shifters) were constructed manually. The 
set of graphs comprises a grammar applied to the text as a cascade for the identification of the emotive 
predicate, being either verbal or nominal, its polarity and the participants of the emotion event that can 
be identified from the underlying structure ? namely the Experiencer and the Theme and the Cause. 
7 Conclusions and future work 
We have described work aimed at enriching, re-purposing and re-using already available LRs for a 
new task, namely identification of emotion expressions in texts. The existing lexica carry rich linguis-
tic information which has been mapped onto categories that are meaningful for the task. Our efforts 
have been oriented towards developing a rule-based system that efficiently will eventually recognise 
emotion expressions in texts and the participants in the emotion event. 
Future work has been planned already, consisting of the exploitation of other properties that are en-
coded in the LG tables, as for example the restructuring property as a facet of the aspect-based senti-
ment analysis and the conversion of the enriched LG tables to a standardised lexical format. Finally, 
the validation of the final resource is due against the manually annotated corpus. 
  
Acknowledgments 
The research within the project LangTERRA: Enhancing the Research Potential of ILSP/?Athena? 
R.C. in Language Technology in the European Research ERA leading to these results has received 
funding from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013). 
References 
Alexandra Balahur and Jes?s M. Hermida and Andr?s Montoyo and Rafael Mu?oz. 2011. EmotiNet: A 
Knowledge Base for Emotion Detection in Text Built on the Appraisal Theories. In R. Mu?oz et al. (Eds.): 
Natural Language Processing and Information Systems, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Volume 6716, 
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011,  pp 27-39. 
Farah Benamara, Baptiste Chardon, Yannick Mathieu, Vladimir Popescu, and Nicholas Asher. 2012. How do 
Negation and Modality Impact on Opinions? In Proceedings of the Workshop on Extra-Propositional Aspects 
of Meaning in Computational Linguistics, ExProM ?12, Jeju, Republic of Korea, 2012, pp 10?18. 
43
Matthieu Constant. 2003. Grammaires locales pour l?analyse automatique de textes : m?thodes de construction 
et outils de gestion. Th?se de doctorat, Universit? de Marne-la-Vall?e. 
Laurence Danlos and Beno?t Sagot. 2009. Constructions pronominales dans Dicovalence et le lexique-
grammaire: Integration dans le Lefff. Actes du 27e Colloque international sur le lexique et la grammaire. 
Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. SENTIWORDNET: A Publicly Available Lexical Resource for 
Opinion Mining, in Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2006), 
Genova, Italy, pp 417-422. 
Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Aggeliki Fotopoulou, Marianna Mini, Mavina Pantazara and Argiro Moustaki. 2008. La combinatoire lexicale 
des noms de sentiments en grec modern. In Iva Novacova & Agnes Tutin (eds), Le lexique des ?motions. 
ELLUG, Grenoble. 
Voula Giouli and Aggeliki Fotopoulou. 2012. Emotion verbs in Greek. From Lexicon-Grammar tables to multi-
purpose syntactic and semantic lexica. In Proceedings of the XV Euralex International Congress (EURALEX 
2012). Oslo, Norway. 
Voula Giouli and Aggeliki Fotopoulou. 2013. Developing Language Resources for Sentiment Analysis in Greek. 
In Proceedings of the Workshop ?The semantic domain of emotions: cross-domain and cross-lingual  consid-
erations. From words to phrases/text and beyond?. Workshop organized within the framework of the Interna-
tional Conference in Greek Linguistics.  ICGL, Rhodes. 
Voula Giouli, Aggeliki Fotopoulou, Effie Mouka, and Ioannis E. Saridakis. 2013. Annotating Sentiment Expres-
sions for Lexical Resourcres. In Blumenthal, Peter, Novakova, Iva, Siepmann, Dirk (eds.), Les ?motions dans 
le discours. Emotions in discourse. Frankfurt, Main et al.: Peter Lang. 
Maurice Gross. 1975. M?thodes en syntaxe. R?gime des constructions compl?tives. Hermann, Paris. 
Maurice Gross. 1981. Les bases empiriques de la notion de pr?dicat s?mantique. Langages 15, 7-52. 
Allain Guillet and Christian Lecl?re. 1981. La restructuration du sujet. Langages 65. Paris, France. 
Zelling S. Harris. 1951. Methods in Structural Linguistics. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Zelling S. Harris. 1964. The Elementary Transformations. In T.D.A.P. University of Pennsylvania 54, Pennsyl-
vania. 
Zelling S. Harris. 1968. Mathematical Structures of Language. Wiley, New York. 
Nabil Hathout and Fiammetta Namer. 1998. Automatic Construction and Validation of French Large Lexical 
Resources: Reuse of Verb Theoretical Linguistic Descriptions. In Proceedings of the Language Resources 
and Evaluation Conference, Grenada, Spain. 
Nick Hatzigeorgiu, Maria Gavrilidou, Stelios Piperidis, George Carayannis, Anna Papakostopoulou, Anna 
Spiliotopoulou, Anna Vacalopoulou, Penny Labropoulou, Elena Mantzari, Harris Papageorgiou, and Iason 
Demiros. 2000. Design and Implementation of the Online ILSP Greek Corpus. In Proceedings of the 2nd 
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference ( LREC, 2000), Athens, Greece. 
Lifeng Jia, Clement Yu and Weiyi Meng. 2009. The effect of Negation on Sentiment Analysis and Retrieval 
Effectiveness. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on Information and knowledge management, Hong 
Kong, pp. 1827-1830. 
Manfred Klenner, Stefanos Petrakis and Angela Fahrni. 2009. Robust Compositional Polarity Classification. In 
Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing (RANLP), Borovets, Bulgaria 
Yvette Yannick Mathieu. 1999. Un classement s?mantique des verbes psychologiques. Cahiers du C.I.EL: 
pp.115-134 
Yvette Yannick Mathieu. 2008. Navigation dans un texte ? la recherche des sentiments. Linguisticae Investiga-
tiones. 31:2, pp. 313-322. 
Yvette Yannick Mathieu and Christiane Fellbaum, 2010. Verbs of Emotion in French and English. Emotion, vol. 
70, 2010. 
Karo Moilanen and Stephen Pulman. 2007. Sentiment Composition. In Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natu-
ral Language Processing (RANLP), Borovets, Bulgaria, 2007, pp 378?382. 
44
Effie Mouka, Voula Giouli, Aggeliki Fotopoulou, and Ioannis E. Saridakis. 2012. Opinion and emotion in mov-
ies: a modular perspective to annotation. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Corpora for 
Research on Emotion, Sentiment & Social Signals (ES? 2012). Istanbul, Turkey. 
Alena Neviarouskaya, Helmut Prendinger, and Mitsuru Ishizuka. 2009. Compositionality Principle in Recogni-
tion of Fine-Grained Emotions from Text. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Weblogs and 
Social Media, AAAI, San Jose, USA, May 2009, pp. 278?281. 
S?bastien Paumier. 2003. UNITEX User Manual. 
Livia Polanyi and Annie Zaenen. 2006. Contextual Valence Shifters. In Shanahan, J., Qu, Y., and Wiebe, J. 
Computing Attitude and Affect in Text: Theory and Applications. Berlin: Springer, pp. 1-10. 
Philip J. Stone and Earl B. Hunt. 1963. A computer approach to content analysis: studies using the General In-
quirer system. In Proceedings of the May 21-23, 1963, Spring Joint Computer Conference. Detroit, Michigan, 
pp. 241-256. 
 Carlo Strapparava and Alessandro Valitutti. 2004. WordNet-Affect: an affective extension of WordNet. In Pro-
ceedings of Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC 2004), pp. 1083-1086. 
Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann. 2005. Recognizing Contextual Polarity in Phrase-Level 
Sentiment Analysis. In Proceedings  of HLT-EMNLP-2005. 
Teresa Wilson. 2008. Fine-grained Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis: Recognizing the Intensity, Polarity, and 
Attitudes of Private States. University of Pittsburgh. Available at: 
http://mpqa.cs.pitt.edu/data/TAWilsonDissertationCh7Attitudes.pdf. [Accessed November 2011] 
Michael Wiegand, Alexandra Balahur, Benjamin Roth, Dietrich Klakow and Andres Montoyo. 2010. A survey 
on the Role of Negation in Sentiment Analysis. In: Proceedings of NeSp-NLP ?10, pp. 60-68. 
45
