Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2014), pages 38?42,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 26-27 April 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Evaluation of a Substitution Method for Idiom Transformation in
Statistical Machine Translation
Giancarlo D. Salton and Robert J. Ross and John D. Kelleher
Applied Intelligence Research Centre
School of Computing
Dublin Institute of Technology
Ireland
giancarlo.salton@mydit.ie {robert.ross,john.d.kelleher}@dit.ie
Abstract
We evaluate a substitution based technique
for improving Statistical Machine Transla-
tion performance on idiomatic multiword
expressions. The method operates by per-
forming substitution on the original idiom
with its literal meaning before translation,
with a second substitution step replac-
ing literal meanings with idioms follow-
ing translation. We detail our approach,
outline our implementation and provide
an evaluation of the method for the lan-
guage pair English/Brazilian-Portuguese.
Our results show improvements in trans-
lation accuracy on sentences containing
either morphosyntactically constrained or
unconstrained idioms. We discuss the con-
sequences of our results and outline poten-
tial extensions to this process.
1 Introduction
Idioms are a form of figurative multiword expres-
sions (MWE) that are ubiquitous in speech and
written text across a range of discourse types.
Idioms are often characterized in terms of their
having non-literal and non-compositional mean-
ing whilst occasionally sharing surface realiza-
tions with literal language uses (Garrao and Dias,
2001). For example the multiword expression s/he
took the biscuit can have both a figurative mean-
ing of being (pejoratively) remarkable, and a lit-
eral meaning of removing the cookie.
It is notable that idioms are a compact form
of language use which allow large fragments of
meaning with relatively complex social nuances
to be conveyed in a small number of words, i.e.,
idioms can be seen as a form of compacted regu-
larized language use. This is one reason why id-
iom use is challenging to second language learners
(see, e.g., Cieslicka(2006)).
Another difficulty for second language learners
in handling idioms is that idioms can vary in terms
of their morphosyntactic constraints or fixedness
(Fazly et al., 2008). On one hand some idiomatic
expressions such as popped the question are highly
fixed with syntactic and lexical variations consid-
ered unacceptable usage. On the other hand id-
ioms such as hold fire are less fixed with variations
such as hold one?s fire and held fire considered to
be acceptable instances of the idiom type.
For reasons such as those outlined above id-
ioms can be challenging to human speakers; but
they also pose a great challenge to a range of
Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications
(Sag et al., 2002). While idiomatic expressions,
and more generally multiword expressions, have
been widely studied in a number of NLP domains
(Acosta et al., 2011; Moreno-Ortiz et al., 2013),
their investigation in the context of machine trans-
lation has been more limited (Bouamor et al.,
2011; Salton et al., 2014).
The broad goal of our work is to advance ma-
chine translation by improving the processing of
idiomatic expressions. To that end, in this paper
we introduce and evaluate our initial approach to
the problem. We begin in the next section by giv-
ing a brief review of the problem of idiom pro-
cessing in a Statistical Machine Translation (SMT)
context. Following that we outline our substitu-
tion based solution to idiom processing in SMT.
We then outline a study that we have conducted to
evaluate our initial method. This is followed with
results and a brief discussion before we draw con-
clusions and outline future work.
2 Translation & Idiomatic Expressions
The current state-of-the-art in machine transla-
tion is phrase-based SMT (Collins et al., 2005).
Phrase-based SMT systems extend basic word-by-
word SMT by splitting the translation process into
3 steps: the input source sentence is segmented
38
into ?phrases? or multiword units; these phrases
are then translated into the target language; and fi-
nally the translated phrases are reordered if needed
(Koehn, 2010). Although the term phrase-based
translation might imply the system works at the
semantic or grammatical phrasal level, it is worth
noting that the concept of a phrase in SMT is
simply a frequently occurring sequence of words.
Hence, standard SMT systems do not model id-
ioms explicitly (Bouamor et al., 2011).
Given the above, the question arises as to how
SMT systems can best be enhanced to account for
idiom usage and other similar multiword expres-
sions. One direct way is to use a translation dic-
tionary to insert the idiomatic MWE along with its
appropriate translation into the SMT model phrase
table along with an estimated probability. While
this approach is conceptually simple, a notable
drawback with such a method is that while the
MWEs may be translated correctly the word or-
der in the resulting translation is often incorrect
(Okuma et al., 2008).
An alternative approach to extending SMT to
handle idiomatic and other MWEs is to leave the
underlying SMT model alone and instead perform
intelligent pre- and post-processing of the transla-
tion material. Okuma et al. (2008) is an example
of this approach applied to a class of multi- and
single word expressions. Specifically, Okuma et
al. (2008) proposed a substitution based pre and
post processing approach that uses a dictionary of
surrogate words from the same word class to re-
place low frequency (or unseen) words in the sen-
tences before the translation with high frequency
words from the same word class. Then, follow-
ing the translation step, the surrogate words are
replaced with the original terms. Okuma et al.?s
direct focus was not on idioms but rather on place
names and personal names. For example, given
an English sentence containing the relatively in-
frequent place name Cardiff , Okuma et al.?s ap-
proach would: (1) replace this low frequency place
name with a high frequency surrogate place name,
e.g. New York; (2) translate the updated sentence;
and (3) replace the surrogate words with the cor-
rect translation of the original term.
The advantage of this approach is that the word
order of the resulting translation has a much higher
probability of being correct. While this method
was developed for replacing just one word (or a
highly fixed name) at a time and those words must
be of the same open-class category, we see the ba-
sic premise of pre- and post- substitution as also
applicable to idiom substitution.
3 Methodology
The hypothesis we base our approach on is that
the work-flow that a human translator would have
in translating an idiom can be reproduced in an al-
gorithmic fashion. Specifically, we are assuming a
work-flow whereby a human translator first iden-
tifies an idiomatic expression within a source sen-
tence, then ?mentally? replaces that idiom with its
literal meaning. Only after this step would a trans-
lator produce the target sentence deciding whether
or not to use an idiom on the result. For simplicity
we assumed that the human translator should use
an idiom in the target language if available. While
this work-flow is merely a proposed method, we
see it as plausible and have developed a compu-
tational method based on this work-flow and the
substitution technique employed by (Okuma et al.,
2008).
Our idiom translation method can be explained
briefly in terms of a reference architecture as de-
picted in Figure 1. Our method makes use of 3
dictionaries and 2 pieces of software. The first
dictionary contains entries for the source language
idioms and their literal meaning, and is called the
?Source Language Idioms Dictionary?. The sec-
ond dictionary meanwhile contains entries for the
target language idioms and their literal meaning,
and is called the ?Target Language Idioms Dictio-
nary?. The third dictionary is a bilingual dictio-
nary containing entries for the idioms in the source
language pointing to their translated literal mean-
ing in the target language. This is the ?Bilingual
Idiom Dictionary?.
The two pieces of software are used in the pre-
and post-processing steps. The first piece of soft-
ware analyzes the source sentences, consulting the
?Source Language Idioms Dictionary?, to iden-
tify and replace the source idioms with their lit-
eral meaning in the source language. During this
first step the partially rewritten source sentences
are marked with replacements. Following the sub-
sequent translation step the second piece of soft-
ware is applied for the post-processing step. The
software first looks into the marked sentences to
obtain the original idioms. Then, consulting the
?Bilingual Idiom Dictionary?, the software tries to
match a substring with the literal translated mean-
39
Figure 1: Reference Architecture for Substitution Based Idiom Translation Technique.
ing in the target translation. If the literal mean-
ing is identified, it then checks the ?Target Lan-
guage Idioms Dictionary? for a corresponding id-
iom for the literal use in the target language. If
found, the literal wording in the target translation
is then replaced with an idiomatic phrase from the
target language. However if in the post-processing
step the original idiom substitution is not found, or
if there are no corresponding idioms in the target
language, then the post-processing software does
nothing.
4 Study Design
We have developed an initial implementa-
tion of our substitution approach to SMT
based idiom translation for the language pair
English/Brazillian-Portugese. To evaluate our
method we created test corpora where each sen-
tence contained an idiom, and compared the
BLEU scores (Papineni et al., 2002) of a baseline
SMT system when run on these test corpora with
the BLEU scores for the same SMT system when
we applied our pre and post processing steps. No
sentences with literal uses of the selected idiom
form were used in this experiment.
Consequently, three corpora were required for
this experiment in addition to the three idiomatic
resources introduced in the last section. The
first corpus was an initial large sentence-aligned
bilingual corpus that was used to build a SMT
model for the language pair English/Brazilian-
Portuguese. The second corpus was the first of two
test corpora. This corpus contained sentences with
?highly fixed? idioms and will be referred to as the
?High Fixed Corpus?. Finally a second test corpus
containing sentences with ?low fixed? idioms, the
?Low Fixed Corpus?, was also constructed. In or-
der to make results comparable across test corpora
the length of sentences in each of the two test cor-
pora were kept between fifteen and twenty words.
To create the initial large corpus a series of
small corpora available on the internet were com-
piled into one larger corpus which was used to
train a SMT system. The resources used in this
step were Fapesp-v2 (Aziz and Specia, 2011), the
OpenSubtitles2013
1
corpus, the PHP Manual Cor-
pus
2
and the KDE4 localizaton files (v.2)
3
. No
special tool was used to clean these corpora and
the files were compiled as is.
To create the ?High Fixed Corpus? and ?Low
Fixed Corpus? we built upon the previous work of
Fazly et al. (2008) who identified a dataset of 17
?highly fixed? English verb+noun idioms, and 11
?low fixed? English verb+noun idioms. Based on
these lists our two test corpora were built by ex-
tracting English sentences from the internet which
contained instances of each of the high and low
fixed idiom types. Each collected sentence was
manually translated into Brazilian-Portuguese, be-
fore each translations was manually checked and
corrected by a second translator. Ten sentences
were collected for each idiom type. This resulted
in a High Fixed corpus consisting of 170 sentences
1
http://opus.lingfil.uu.se/OpenSubtitles2013.php
2
http://opus.lingfil.uu.se/PHP.php
3
http://opus.lingfil.uu.se/KDE4.php
40
containing idiomatic usages of those idioms, and
a Low-Fixed corpus consisting of 110 sentences
containing instances of low-fixed idioms.
As indicated three idiomatic resources were
also required for the study. These were: a dic-
tionary of English idioms and their literal mean-
ings; a dictionary of Brazilian-Portuguese idioms
and their literal meanings; and a bilingual dictio-
nary from English to Brazilian-Portuguese. The
English idioms dictionary contained entries for the
idioms pointing to their literal English meanings,
along with some morphological variations of those
idioms. The Brazilian-Portuguese idioms dictio-
nary similarly contained entries for the idioms
pointing to their literal meanings with some mor-
phological variations of those idioms. Finally, the
bilingual dictionary contained entries for the same
idioms along with morphological variations of the
English idioms dictionary but pointing to their lit-
eral translated meaning. The Oxford Dictionary of
English idioms and the Cambridge Idioms Dictio-
nary were used to collect the literal meanings of
the English idioms. Literal meanings were manu-
ally translated to Brazilian-Portuguese.
Following resource collection and construction
a SMT model for English/Brazilian-Portuguese
was trained using the Moses toolkit (Koehn et al.,
2007) using its baseline settings. The corpus used
for this training consisted of 17,288,109 pairs of
sentences (approximately 50% of the initial col-
lected corpus), with another 34,576 pairs of sen-
tences used for the ?tuning? process. Following
this training and tuning process the baseline trans-
lation accuracy, or BLEU scores, were calculated
for the two test corpora, i.e., for the ?High Fixed
Corpus?, and the ?Low Fixed Corpus?.
Having calculated the baseline BLEU scores,
the substitution method was then applied to re-
translate each of the two test corpora. Specifi-
cally both the ?High Fixed Corpus? and the ?Low
Fixed Corpus? were passed through our extended
pipeline with new substitution based translations
constructed for each of the test corpora. BLEU
scores were then calculated for these two out-
put corpora that were built using the substitution
method.
5 Results and Discussion
Table 1 presents the results of the evaluation.
The BLEU scores presented in the table compare
the baseline SMT system against our proposed
method for handling English idiomatic MWE of
the verb+noun type.
Corpus Baseline Substitution
High Idiomatic 23.12 31.72
Low Idiomatic 24.55 26.07
Table 1: Experiment?s results.
Overall the results are positive. For both the
high and low idiomatic corpora we find that apply-
ing the pre- and post-processing substitution ap-
proach improves the BLEU score of the SMT sys-
tem. However, it is notable that the High-Fixed
idiomatic corpus showed a considerably larger in-
crease in BLEU score than was the case for the
Low-Fixedness idiomatic cases, i.e., a positive in-
crease of 8.6 versus 1.52. To investigate further
we applied a paired t-test to test for significance
in mean difference between baseline and substitu-
tion methods for both the high-fixed and low-fixed
test corpora. While the results for the ?High Id-
iomatic Corpus? demonstrated a statistically sig-
nificant difference in BLEU scores (p  0.05),
the difference between the baseline and substitu-
tion method was not statistically significant for the
case of the ?Low Idiomatic Corpus? (p ? 0.7).
We believe the lack of improvement in the case
of low fixed idioms may be caused by a higher
morphosyntactic variation in the translations of the
low fixed idioms. This higher variation makes the
post-processing step of our approach (which re-
quires matching a substring in the translated sen-
tence) more difficult for low fixed idioms with the
result that our approach is less effective for these
idioms.
It is worth noting that the same SMT system
(without the substitution extension) achieved a
BLEU score of 62.28 on a corpus of sentences
from general language; and, achieved an average
BLEU score of 46.48 over a set of 5 corpora of
sentences that did not contain idioms and were
of simlar length to the idiomatic corpora used in
this study (15 to 20 words). Both these BLEU
scores are higher than the scores we report in Ta-
ble 1 for our substitution method. This indicates
that although our substitution approach does im-
prove BLEU scores when translating idioms there
is still a lot of work to be done to solve the prob-
lems posed by idioms to SMT.
41
6 Conclusion
Our results indicate that this substitution approach
does improve the performance of the system.
However, we are aware that this method is not the
entire solution for the MWE problem in SMT. The
effectiveness of the approach is dependent on the
fixedness of the idiom being translated.
This approach relies on several language re-
sources, including: idiomatic dictionaries in the
source and target languages and a bilingual dic-
tionary containing entries for the idioms in the
source language aligned with their translated lit-
eral meaning in the target language. In future
work we investigate techniques that we can use to
(semi)automatically address dictionary construc-
tion. We will also work on enabling the system
to distinguish between idiomatic vs. literal usages
of idioms.
Acknowledgments
Giancarlo D. Salton would like to thank CAPES
(?Coordenac??ao de Aperfeic?oamento de Pessoal de
N??vel Superior?) for his Science Without Borders
scholarship, proc n. 9050-13-2. We would like
to thank Acassia Thabata de Souza Salton for her
corrections on the Brazilian-Portuguese transla-
tion of sentences containing idioms.
References
Otavio Costa Acosta, Aline Villavicencio, and Vi-
viane P. Moreira. 2011. Identification and Treat-
ment of Multiword Expressions applied to Informa-
tion Retrieval. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Multiword Expressions: from Parsing and Genera-
tion to the Real World (MWE 2011), pages 101?109.
Wilker Aziz and Lucia Specia. 2011. Fully automatic
compilation of a portuguese-english and portuguese-
spanish parallel corpus for statistical machine trans-
lation. In STIL 2011.
Dhouha Bouamor, Nasredine Semmar, and Pierre
Zweigenbaum. 2011. Improved Statistical Machine
Translation Using MultiWord Expressions. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Workshop on Using
Linguistic Information for Hybrid Machine Trans-
lation), pages 15?20.
Anna Cie?slicka. 2006. Literal salience in on-line pro-
cessing of idiomatic expressions by second language
learners. 22(2):115?144.
Michael Collins, Philipp Koehn, and Ivona Ku?cerov?a.
2005. Clause Restructuring for Statistical Machine
Translation. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual
Meeting of the ACL, pages 531?540.
Afsanesh Fazly, Paul Cook, and Suzanne Stevenson.
2008. Unsupervised Type and Token Identification
of Idiomatic Expressions. In Computational Lin-
guistics, volume 35, pages 61?103.
Milena U. Garrao and Maria C. P. Dias. 2001. Um
Estudo de Express?oes Cristalizadas do Tipo V+Sn e
sua Inclus?ao em um Tradutor Autom?atico Bil??ng?ue
(Portugu?es/Ingl?es). In Cadernos de Traduc??ao, vol-
ume 2, pages 165?182.
Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation.
In 45th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Philipp Koehn. 2010. Statistical Machine Translation.
Cambridge University Press, New York. 2 Ed.
Antonio Moreno-Ortiz, Chantal P?erez-Hern?andez, and
M.
?
Angeles Del-Olmo. 2013. Managing Multiword
Expressions in a Lexicon-Based Sentiment Analysis
System for Spanish. In Proceedings of the 9th Work-
shop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages
1?10.
Hideo Okuma, Hirofumi Yamamoto, and Eiichiro
Sumita. 2008. Introducing Translation Dictionary
Into Phrase-based SMT. In IEICE - Transactions
on Information and Systems, number 7, pages 2051?
2057.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 311?318.
Ivan A. Sag, Thimothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword
Expressions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. In
Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Pro-
cessing: Third International Conference: CICLing-
2002, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume
2276, pages 1?15.
Giancarlo D. Salton, Robert J. Ross, and John D.
Kelleher. 2014. An Empirical Study of the Im-
pact of Idioms on Phrase Based Statistical Machine
Translation of English to Brazilian-Portuguese. In
Third Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Transla-
tion (HyTra) at 14th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
42
Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation (HyTra) @ EACL 2014, pages 36?41,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 27, 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
An Empirical Study of the Impact of Idioms on Phrase Based Statistical
Machine Translation of English to Brazilian-Portuguese
Giancarlo D. Salton and Robert J. Ross and John D. Kelleher
Applied Intelligence Research Centre
School of Computing
Dublin Institute of Technology
Ireland
giancarlo.salton@mydit.ie {robert.ross,john.d.kelleher}@dit.ie
Abstract
This paper describes an experiment to
evaluate the impact of idioms on Statis-
tical Machine Translation (SMT) process
using the language pair English/Brazilian-
Portuguese. Our results show that on sen-
tences containing idioms a standard SMT
system achieves about half the BLEU
score of the same system when applied to
sentences that do not contain idioms. We
also provide a short error analysis and out-
line our planned work to overcome this
limitation.
1 Introduction and Motivation
An idiom is an expression whose meaning is not
compositional (Xatara, 2001). In other words
the meaning of an idiom is not simply the joint
meaning of the individual words (Garrao and Dias,
2001). For example, the expression kick the bucket
has an idiomatic meaning (to die) that has nothing
to do with the meaning of kick or bucket.
Idioms are a type of multi-word expressions
(MWEs) often used in a large variety of texts and
by human speakers and thus appear in all lan-
guages (Fazly et al., 2008). Consequently, they
pose problems to most Natural Language Process-
ing (NLP) applications (Sag et al., 2002). Nev-
ertheless, they often have been overlooked by re-
searchers in NLP (Fazly et al., 2008).
As a class, idioms exhibit a number of prop-
erties that make them difficult to handle for NLP
applications. For example, idiomatic expressions
vary with respect to how morphosyntatically fixed
they are. An idiomatic expression is highly fixed
if the replacement of any of its constituents by a,
syntactically or semantically, similar word causes
the idiomatic meaning of the expression to be lost
(Fazly et al., 2008). An example of a highly fixed
idiom in English is the expression by and large.
Idioms that are highly fixed can be represented as
words-with-spaces by an NLP system (Sag et al.,
2002). If, however, an idiomatic meaning persists
across morphosyntactic variations of an expres-
sion, the idiom can be described as a low fixed id-
iom, for example, hold fire and its variations hold
one?s fire and held fire. The words-with-spaces ap-
proach does not work for these ?more flexible? ex-
ample of idioms (Fazly et al., 2008). Another fea-
ture of idioms that make them difficult for NLP
system to process is that idiomatic expressions
have both idiomatic and literal (non-idiomatic) us-
ages. Consequently, NLP systems need to distin-
guish between these types of usages (Fazly et al.,
2008).
One of the most important NLP applications
that is negatively affected by idioms is Statistical
Machine Translation (SMT) systems. The current
state-of-the-art in SMT are phrase-based systems
(Collins et al., 2005). Phrase-based SMT systems
extend the basic SMT word-by-word approach by
splitting the translation process into 3 steps: the in-
put source sentence is segmented into ?phrases? or
multi-word units; these phrases are translated into
the target language; and the translated phrases are
reordered if needed (Koehn, 2010).
It is worth highlighting that although the term
phrase-based translation seems to imply the sys-
tem works at a phrasal level, the concept of a
phrase to these systems is simply a frequently
occurring sequence of words and not necessarily
a semantic or grammatical phrase. These sys-
tems thus limit themselves to a direct translation
of phrases without any syntactic or semantic con-
text. Hence, standard phrase-based SMT systems
do not model idioms explicitly (Bouamor et al.,
2011). Unfortunately modelling idioms in order
to improve SMT is not well studied (Ren et al.,
2009) and examples of the difficulties in translat-
ing these expressions can be seen in the quality of
the resultant output of most Machine Translation
36
systems (Vieira and Lima, 2001).
Our long-term research goal is to investigate
how the translation of idiomatic expressions may
be improved. We will initially focus on the case
of English/Brazillian-Portugese but we intend our
work to be generalizable to other language pairs.
As a first step on this research program we wished
to scope the impact of idioms on an SMT system.
In order to test this we ran an experiment that com-
pared the BLEU scores of an SMT system when it
was tested on three distinct sentence aligned cor-
pora. Two of these test corpora consisted of sen-
tences containing idiomatic (rather than literal) us-
ages of idiomatic expressions and the other cor-
pus consisted of sentences that did not contain any
idioms. By comparing the BLEU score of a ma-
chine translation system on each of these corpora
we hoped to gauge the size of the research prob-
lem we are addressing.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 de-
scribes the design and creation of the corpora used
in the experiments; Section 3 presents the experi-
ment?s methodology; Section 4 reports the results
found; and Section 5 both discusses the results and
describes an approach to the problem that we will
implement in future work.
2 Related work
The work of Fazly et al. (2008) has provided an
inspirational basis for our work. Fazly?s work fo-
cused on the study of idioms and in particular their
identification and analysis in terms of the syntactic
and semantic fixedness. Fazly study did not how-
ever explore the impact of idioms on SMT.
Some related work in translating idioms can
be found in: Garrao and Dias (2001) where the
verb+noun combinations and their inclusion in an
online automatic translator is explored; Ren et al.
(2009) which makes use of a domain constrained
bilingual multi-word dictionary to improve the
MT results; Bouamor et al. (2011) which ex-
plores a hybrid approach for extracting MWEs and
their translation in a French-English corpus; and
Bungum et al. (2013) which also uses dictionaries
to capture MWEs.
None of these works compares the BLEU score
of sentences containing and not containing idioms.
And also, none of these works address the idioms
problem for the English/Brazilian-Portuguese lan-
guage pair using SMT phrase-based systems.
3 Corpora Design and Collection
The experiment we describe in this paper had two
direct targets: (a) we wished to quantify the ef-
fect of idioms on the performance of an SMT
system; and (b) we wanted to better understand
the differences (if any) between high and low
fixed idioms with respect to their impact on SMT
systems. Consequently, in order to run the ex-
periments four corpora were needed: one ini-
tial large sentence-aligned bilingual corpus was
needed to build an SMT model for the language
pair English/Brazilian-Portuguese; a test corpus
containing sentences with ?highly fixed? idioms
called the ?High Idiomatic Corpus?; another test
corpus containing sentences with ?low fixed? id-
ioms called the ?Low Idiomatic Corpus?; and a
last corpus with sentences not containing idioms
called the ?Clean Corpus?. In order to make the
results comparable the length of each sentence in
the three test corpora was kept between 15 to 20
words. All of these corpora were constructed by
hand and in the cases of the ?High Idiomatic Cor-
pus? and ?Low Idiomatic Corpus? care was taken
to ensure that all the sentences in these corpora
contained idiomatic usages of the relevant idioms.
To create the initial large corpus a series of
small corpora available on the internet were com-
piled into one larger corpus which was used to
train a SMT system. The resources used in this
step were the Fapesp-v2 (Aziz and Specia, 2011),
the OpenSubtitles2013
1
corpus, the PHP Manual
Corpus
2
and the KDE4 localizaton files (v.2)
3
. No
special tool was used to clean these corpora and
the files were compiled as is.
Idioms are a heterogeneous class; consequently,
in order to better control the experiment we de-
cided to focus on a particular type of idiom -
specifically the idiomatic expressions formed from
the combination of a verb and a noun as its di-
rect object (verb+noun combinations), for exam-
ple hit+road and lose+head. Verb+noun combi-
nations are a subclass of MWE which are notable
for their cross-lingual occurrence and high vari-
ability, both lexical and semantic (Baldwin and
Kim, 2010). Also, it is worth noting that it is possi-
ble for a particular verb+noun combination to have
both idiomatic and literal usages and these usages
must be distinguished if an NLP system is to pro-
1
http://opus.lingfil.uu.se/OpenSubtitles2013.php
2
http://opus.lingfil.uu.se/PHP.php
3
http://opus.lingfil.uu.se/KDE4.php
37
cess a sentence appropriately.
Fazly et al. (2008) named a dataset of 17
?highly fixed? English verb+noun idioms, for ex-
ample cut+figure, and that list was used to build
our ?Highly Idiomatic Corpus?. This corpus con-
sisted of 170 sentences containing idiomatic us-
ages of these idioms, 10 sentences per idiom in
the list. These English sentences were collected
from the internet and manually translated into
Brazilian-Portuguese. After that these translations
were then manually checked and corrected by a
second translator.
Fazly et al. (2008) also named a dataset of
11 ?low fixed? English verb+noun idioms, for ex-
ample get+wind, and that list was used to build
our ?Low Idiomatic Corpus?. This corpus con-
sisted of 110 sentences containing idiomatic us-
ages of these idioms, 10 sentences per idiom in
the list. These English sentences were also col-
lected from the internet and manually translated
into Brazilian-Portuguese. After this step these
translations were also manually checked and cor-
rected by a second translator. Table 1 presents
the English verb+noun combinations used in this
experiment and their Brazilian-Portuguese trans-
lations.
In order to have a valid comparison between the
translation results of sentences containing and not
containing idioms the ?Clean Corpus? was built. It
consisted of 850 sentences with their translations
and was created by sampling sentences of the ap-
propriate length (15-20 words) that did not contain
idioms from the large bilingual corpus (that we de-
scribed earlier) which we created to train the SMT
system. These sentences were then removed from
that corpus. Because the initial corpus was cre-
ated from the union of corpora from different do-
mains the ?Clean Corpus? was randomly split into
5 datasets containing 170 sentences each in or-
der to ensure no specific influence of any of those
domains on the BLEU score. We called these
?Clean1? to ?Clean5?. Special care was taken to
not have any idioms in any of the sentences in
these corpora.
As we wanted to collect 10 sentences for each
verb+noun idiomatic combination and due to the
limitations of sentence length (15 to 20 words) we
were not able to collect the ?High Idiomatic Cor-
pus? and the ?Low Idiomatic Corpus? from the
training corpus. Thus, the samples were collected
from the Internet.
4 Methodology
As a first step for this experiment, a SMT
model for the English/Brazilian-Portuguese lan-
guage pair was trained using the Moses toolkit
(Koehn et al., 2007) following its ?baseline? set-
tings (Koehn et al., 2008). The corpus used for this
training consisted of 17,288,109 pairs of sentences
(approximately 50% of the initial collected cor-
pus), with another 34,576 pairs of sentences used
for the ?tuning? process.
English Brazilian-Portuguese
blow+top perder+paci?encia
blow+trumpet ?gabar-se?
cut+figure causar+impress?ao
find+foot ?adaptar-se?
get+nod ?obter permiss?ao?
give+sack ?ser demitido?, ?demitir?
have+word ter+conversa
hit+road ?cair na estrada?
hit+roof ?ficar zangado?
kick+heel ?deixar esperando?
lose+thread ?perder o fio da meada?
make+face* fazer+careta
make+mark deixar+marca
pull+plug ?cancelar algo?
pull+punch ?esconder algo?
pull+weight ?fazer sua parte?
take+heart ?ficar confiante?
blow+whistle ?botar a boca no trombone??
get+wind ouvir+murm?urios
hit+wall ?dar de cara num muro?
hold+fire ?conter-se?
lose+head* perder+cabec?a
make+hay dar+grac?as
make+hit fazer+sucesso
make+pile fazer+grana
make+scene* fazer+cena
pull+leg pegar+p?e
see+star* ver+estrela
Table 1: The English verb+noun combinations
used in this experiment and their Brazilian-
Portuguese Translations. The idioms marked with
an * have direct translations of its constituents re-
sulting in a MWE with the same idiomatic mean-
ing in Brazilian-Portuguese. Also, note that not all
translations results in a verb+noun idiom in the tar-
get language. Those are presented between double
quotes and italics.
38
In the second step the BLEU scores for the
?High Idiomatic Corpus?, the ?Low Idiomatic
Corpus? and the five clean corpora were com-
puted. Then, the average of each evaluation for
the clean corpora was calculated.
5 Results and Analysis
Table 2 lists the SMT system BLEU scores for the
?High Idiomatic Corpus?, ?Low Idiomatic Cor-
pus?, and the average BLEU score for the clean
corpora (i.e, ?Clean1? to ?Clean5?). The differ-
ential between the BLEU scores for the clean cor-
pus and the idiomatic corpora (high and low) in-
dicates that English idiomatic expressions of the
verb+noun type pose a significant challenge to
standard phrase based SMT.
Corpus BLEU scores
High Idiomatic 23.12
Low Idiomatic 24.55
Clean (average) 46.28
Table 2: BLEU scores.
The corpora containing idioms achieved only
half of the average Clean Corpus score. As noted
earlier, some idioms have a direct translation from
English to Brazilian-Portuguese and could result
in straight forward translations that the basic SMT
system (without substitution) can handle correctly.
Given this, the BLEU scores for this subset of id-
ioms could be expected to be similar to the clean
corpus results. However, it is worth noting that
even for idioms that have direct translations, see
Table 1, the BLEU score for the sentences contain-
ing these idioms is still lower than average BLEU
score for the clean corpus. Using the Student?s t-
test, we found a statistical difference between the
?Low Idiomatic Corpus? and the ?Clean Corpus?
(p  0), and between the ?High Idiomatic Cor-
pus? and the ?Clean Corpus? (p 0).
The second question that we examined in the
experiment was whether there was a difference in
performance between the high and low fixed id-
ioms. Table 3 lists the BLEU scores for each of
the ?highly fixed? verb+noun combinations used
in the ?High Idiomatic Corpus? and Table 4 lists
the BLEU scores for each of the ?low fixed?
verb+noun combinations from the ?Low Idiomatic
Corpus?. Also, it is important to note that the
?High Idiomatic Corpus? and the ?Low Idiomatic
Corpus? have almost no difference in their BLEU
scores. We also found that there are almost no sta-
tistical difference (p = 0.85) between the ?High
Idiomatic Corpus? and ?Low Idiomatic Corpus?
which we believe indicates that both kinds of
verb+noun idiomatic combinations pose the same
problem to SMT.
?high fixed? verb+noun BLEU score
blow+top 22.08
blow+trumpet 19.38
cut+figure 20.15
find+foot 24.36
get+nod 22.06
give+sack 23.03
have+word 20.91
hit+road 24.53
hit+roof 21.34
kick+heel 18.85
lose+thread 21.81
make+face 28.62
make+mark 29.46
pull+plug 19.71
pull+punch 28.34
pull+weight 19.94
take+heart 23.41
Table 3: BLEU scores for individual ?high fixed?
verb+noun idiomatic combinations.
?low fixed? verb+noun BLEU score
blow+whistle 17.75
get+wind 19.06
hit+wall 16.52
hold+fire 23.26
lose+head 37.40
make+hay 15.87
make+hit 25.48
make+pile 25.31
make+scene 36.93
pull+leg 15.90
see+star 37.86
Table 4: BLEU scores for individual ?low fixed?
verb+noun idiomatic combinations.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
Certainly, these results are not surprising. BLEU
scores are generally dependent on the training and
test corpora; that said, it it worthwhile having a
quantification of the potential issues that idioms
pose for SMT. Due to the fact that BLEU scores
39
are dependent on the training and test corpora used
our results are corpus specific. However, these
results are our starting point to develop a hybrid
methodology.
As noted earlier, idioms are widely used in ev-
ery literary genre and new expressions come into
existence frequently. Thus, they must be properly
handled and translated by a Machine Translation
system. Given the results of our experiments it
is evident that the problem in translating idioms
has not been solved using a standard SMT system.
Such evidences and the relatively small amount
of current related work on idiomatic expression
translation, when compared with the amount of
work on other MT aspects, indicates that there is
likely not a trivial solution.
To start addressing these problems, we propose
a hybrid method inspired by the work developed
by Okuma et al. (2008) for translating unseen
words using bilingual dictionaries.
Our method, introduced in Salton et al. (2014),
work as a pre and post-processing step. We first
identify idioms in source sentences using an id-
iom dictionary. Then, we substitute the idiom in
the source sentence with its literal meaning, taken
from the dictionary and record the fact that this
sentence contained a substituted idiom. For all
sentences that are recorded as containing a substi-
tution, after the translation we check if the orig-
inal idiom that occurred in the source sentence
has a corresponding idiom in the target language
by consulting a separate bilingual dictionary. If
there is a corresponding idiom in the target lan-
guage then the translation of the literal meaning of
the source language idiom is replaced with the tar-
get language idiom. If there are no related idioms
on the target language, this post-processing step is
avoided and the translation is done.
This approach relies on a number of dictionar-
ies being available. Developing these resources
is non-trivial and in order to scale our approach
to broad coverage a large part of our future work
will focus on automating (as much as possible)
the development of these language resources. An-
other problem that we will address in future work
is ensuring that we apply substitution appropri-
ately. There are at least two situations where care
must be taken. First, a given expression may be
used both as an idiom and literally. Consequently,
we need to develop mechanisms that will enable
our preprocessing step to distinguish between id-
iomatic and non-idiomatic usages. Second, some
idiomatic expressions have direct translations. For
these expressions we expect that the substitution
method may under-perform the standard SMT sys-
tem. Ideally, we would like to be able to control
the substitution method so that these particular ex-
pressions are allowed through the preprocessing
and are handled by the standard SMT pipeline.
However, for now, considering the proportion of
expressions with direct translations in comparison
with the overall number of expressions is very low;
we hope that this problem will not have too ad-
verse an impact on our approach. Beyond these
issues, while we anticipate that our substitution
based approached will work reasonably well for
?high fixed? idioms, we are aware that the varia-
tion in ?low fixed? idioms may require us to extend
the system in order to handle this variation.
Acknowledgments
Giancarlo D. Salton would like to thank CAPES
(?Coordenac??ao de Aperfeic?oamento de Pessoal de
N??vel Superior?) for his Science Without Borders
scholarship, proc n. 9050-13-2. We would like
to thank Acassia Thabata de Souza Salton for her
corrections on the Brazilian-Portuguese transla-
tion of sentences containing idioms.
References
Wilker Aziz and Lucia Specia. 2011. Fully automatic
compilation of a portuguese-english and portuguese-
spanish parallel corpus for statistical machine trans-
lation. In STIL 2011.
Timothy Baldwin and Su Nam Kim. 2010. Multi-
word Expressions. In Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J.
Damerau, editors, Handbook of Natural Language
Processing, Second Edition. CRC Press, Taylor and
Francis Group.
Dhouha Bouamor, Nasredine Semmar, and Pierre
Zweigenbaum. 2011. Improved Statistical Machine
Translation Using MultiWord Expressions. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Workshop on Using
Linguistic Information for Hybrid Machine Trans-
lation), pages 15?20.
Lars Bungum, Bj?orn Gamb?ack, Andr?e Lynum, and Er-
win Marsi. 2013. Improving Word Translation Dis-
ambiguation by Capturing Multiword Expressions
with Dictionaries. In Proceedings of the 9th Work-
shop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages
21?30.
Michael Collins, Philipp Koehn, and Ivona Ku?cerov?a.
2005. Clause Restructuring for Statistical Machine
40
Translation. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual
Meeting of the ACL, pages 531?540.
Afsanesh Fazly, Paul Cook, and Suzanne Stevenson.
2008. Unsupervised Type and Token Identification
of Idiomatic Expressions. In Computational Lin-
guistics, volume 35, pages 61?103.
Milena U. Garrao and Maria C. P. Dias. 2001. Um
Estudo de Express?oes Cristalizadas do Tipo V+Sn e
sua Inclus?ao em um Tradutor Autom?atico Bil??ng?ue
(Portugu?es/Ingl?es). In Cadernos de Traduc??ao, vol-
ume 2, pages 165?182.
Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation.
In 45th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Philipp Koehn, Abhishek Arun, and Hieu Hoang.
2008. Towards better machine translation quality for
the German-English language pairs. In Proceedings
of the Third Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation, pages 139?142.
Philipp Koehn. 2010. Statistical Machine Translation.
Cambridge University Press, New York. 2 Ed.
Hideo Okuma, Hirofumi Yamamoto, and Eiichiro
Sumita. 2008. Introducing Translation Dictionary
Into Phrase-based SMT. In IEICE - Transactions
on Information and Systems, number 7, pages 2051?
2057.
Zhixiang Ren, Yajuan Lu, Jie Cao, Qun Liu, and
Yun Huang. 2009. Improving statistical machine
translation using domain bilingual multiword ex-
pressions. In Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on
Multiword Expressions, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages
47?54.
Ivan A. Sag, Thimothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword
Expressions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. In
Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Pro-
cessing: Third International Conference: CICLing-
2002, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume
2276, pages 1?15.
Giancarlo D. Salton, Robert J. Ross, and John D. Kelle-
her. 2014. Evaluation of a Substitution Method for
Idiom Transformation in Statistical Machine Trans-
lation. In The 10th Workshop on Multiword Expres-
sions (MWE 2014) at 14th Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Renata Vieira and Vera Lcia S. Lima. 2001.
Lingu??stica Computacional: Princ??pios e aplicac??oes.
In Ana Teresa Martins & D??bio Leandro Borges
(eds.), As Tecnologias da informac??ao e a quest?ao so-
cial: anais.
Cl?audia M. Xatara. 2001. O Ensino do L?exico: As Ex-
press?oes Idiom?aticas. In Trabalhos em Lingu??stica
Aplicada, volume 37, pages 49?59.
41
