Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2007 Doctoral Consortium, pages 1?4,
Rochester, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Query Expansion Using Domain Information in Compounds
Karin Friberg
Department of Swedish Language
Go?teborg University
Go?teborg, Sweden
karin.friberg@svenska.gu.se
Abstract
This paper describes a query expansion
strategy for domain specific information
retrieval. Components of compounds are
used selectively. Only parts belonging to
the same domain as the compound itself
will be used in expanded queries.
1 Introduction
Compounds are semantic units containing at least
two content-bearing morphemes. They function as
one word, and are, in many languages, written as one
word. In Swedish newspapers around 10% of the
words have been found to be compounds (Hedlund,
2002). Since a compound has at least two content-
bearing morphemes, a great part of the information
is contained in the compounds, information which
can be essential in retrieving relevant documents.
I will study medical compounds, examining pos-
sible ways to expand queries in information retrieval
using domain information. This information will
guide the decision of when to include compound
parts in search queries. The hypothesis is that com-
ponents from the same domain as the compound it-
self, in this case the medical domain, will increase
the effectiveness of the search, while components
from other domains or standard language will not.
2 Information Retrieval
Information retrieval is about storing and orga-
nizing documents so that they can be found and
retrieved when relevant to an information need
(Baeza-Yates, and Ribiero-Neto, 1999). The words
of the documents are stored in indexes. The user
poses a query to the system containing words de-
scribing the information need. Words in the queries
are matched against the indexed words. A ranking
function finally ranks the documents in order of cal-
culated relevance. The better the match, the higher a
document is ranked.
The goal of information retrieval is to retrieve as
many documents relevant to an information need as
possible, high recall, and to have as low proportion
of irrelevant documents in the output as possible,
high precision.
2.1 Query expansion
Query expansion is modification of a query to im-
prove retrieval effectiveness. This can be done by
changing or increasing the term content of a query.
In my work the strategy of expanding queries con-
taining compounds, with selected compound com-
ponents, is discussed. The strategy should result in
higher recall, since more documents are likely to be
retrieved. There is, however, a risk of lower preci-
sion, since irrelevant documents with certainty also
will be retrieved. To minimize the decrease of pre-
cision, only components from the same domain as
the compound itself will be used. Here, dealing with
medical compounds, the objective is to decide if the
components are from the medical domain.
3 Compounds
A compound is, as mentioned above, a semantic unit
with more than one content-bearing morpheme. In
Swedish, compounding is a very productive mor-
1
phological process. There is an infinite number of
possible compounds, so it is impossible to list them
all. They are also written as one word without the
boundary between the parts marked in any way.
3.1 Compositional/non-compositional
compounds
Occasional compounds, not lexicalized but con-
structed when needed, usually have a transparent
meaning, where the meaning can be derived from
the meaning of the parts. These are called composi-
tional compounds. Other compounds, with a mean-
ing that has strayed from the combined meaning
of the components, are called non-compositional
compounds (Hedlund, 2002). Non-compositional
compounds are often lexicalized with a fixed mean-
ing. An example of a lexicalized non-compositional
compound is tra?dga?rd ?tree yard?, Swedish for ?gar-
den?, not necessarily a garden containing trees.
In information retrieval, compositional and non-
compositional compounds are best treated in differ-
ent ways. Non-compositional compounds are often
found in dictionaries and can be processed as they
are. Using the components in queries would not ben-
efit the result. If a query contains a compositional
compound, the compound components might very
well be used to expand the query, since they build
up the meaning of the whole.
3.2 Decomposition not always beneficial
When expanding queries with compound compo-
nents, to increase recall, it is important to be aware
that this could result in lower precision. This might
be the case if the compound is non-compositional
or if the parts are too general or used in other do-
mains. In Ahlgren (2004) the author gives exam-
ples of when decomposition of compounds is use-
ful and when it is not. For a compound such as
fotboll ?foot ball? (soccer), expanding a query with
fot and boll would probably result in lower preci-
sion. On the other hand, expanding a query contain-
ing the compound narkotikapolitik ?drug politics?,
with narkotika and politik would probably be more
useful. Documents containing phrases like politik
mot narkotika ?politics against drugs? could be re-
trieved. Documents containing narkotika or politik
alone would also be found. Here one can speculate
that documents containing narkotika have a good
chance of being relevant, while the concept politik
is broader and could cause retrieval of many irrele-
vant documents.
My idea is to expand queries containing medi-
cal compounds by selecting components that also
belong to the medical domain. Take the com-
pound korsband ?cross band/tape? (cruciate liga-
ment). Both parts belong to standard language.
Including them would do more harm than good.
In the case of a?derbra?cksstrumpa ?varicose-veins
stocking? the component a?derbra?ck seems to be a
good candidate for query expansion, unlike strumpa,
which belongs to standard language.
4 The MeSH thesaurus
One way to determine which compound parts be-
long to the medical domain is to use a medical
thesaurus, a controlled vocabulary with words or-
ganized according to conceptual relations. I have
used the Swedish MeSH (Medical Subject Head-
ings) (Svensk MeSH, www), which is based on a
translation of the original American MeSH (MeSH,
www).
4.1 The MeSH tagger
A Swedish MeSH tagger (Kokkinakis, 2006) is be-
ing developed at Spra?kdata, Department of Swedish
Language, Go?teborg University. The tagger tags
maximal length strings from six subdomains of the
Swedish MeSH: A: Anatomy, B: Organisms, C: Dis-
eases, D: Chemicals and Drugs, E: Analytical, Diag-
nostic, and Therapeutic Techniques and Equipment,
and F: Psychiatry and Psychology. If a string is
tagged, the tagger will not mark a substring of this
string unless it is from another subdomain. The tag-
ger does not tag any substrings shorter than five let-
ters.
In the Swedish MeSH the compound kransarta?r
?wreath artery? (coronary artery) is not listed, thus it
is not tagged. On the other hand arta?r is found and
tagged accordingly. The word krans is not a medical
term. It is not included in MeSH and consequently
not tagged:
krans<mesh:A07>arta?r</mesh>
4.2 Expansion using MeSH
As mentioned above, one expansion strategy for
queries containing medical compounds is to add do-
2
main specific parts of the compounds to the query.
This should work with compositional compounds.
An example is patellaluxation ?patella dislocation?
(dislocation of the knee cap). Chances are that doc-
uments containing any or both of the simplex words
patella and luxation will be relevant to the needs of
a user including patellaluxation in a query.
Baseline query:
#sum(...patellaluxation...)
Expanded query:
#sum (...#syn(patellaluxation
patella luxation)...)
Expanding queries with components not from the
domain, especially those common in standard lan-
guage, will probably result in lower precision. In the
example kransarta?r the strategy would be to keep
the original compound, add arta?r which is found by
the MeSH tagger, but not krans which is not tagged.
Baseline query:
#sum(...kransarta?r...)
Expanded query:
#sum(...#syn(kransarta?r arta?r)...)
5 Experiments
To test the MeSH tagger, a run was made with
5205 compounds extracted from the on-line med-
ical lexicon Medlex (Kokkinakis, 2004), created
at Spra?kdata, Department of Swedish Language,
Go?teborg University. Medlex was created by adding
medical vocabulary to a learner?s dictionary, thus a
great part of the compounds in Medlex are from the
medical domain.
895 of the 5205 compounds were tagged. Among
compounds not tagged, around 10% were medical.
This figure should improve with a more comprehen-
sive tagger.
233 compounds which were not tagged as a
whole, had one or two components correctly tagged.
This is where the strategy described should be most
beneficial, suggesting that an expanded query con-
tain the compound itself and the tagged substring(s).
Examples of tagging which may improve effec-
tiveness in query expansion, are shown below:
<mesh:D22/D27>cellgift</mesh>sbehandling
?cell-poison treatment? (chemotherapy
treatment)
dotter<mesh:C04>tumo?r</mesh>
?daughter tumor?
fot<mesh:C17/C04/C02>va?rta</mesh>
?foot wart?
<mesh:D06/D12>insulin</mesh>chock
?insulin chock?
63 compounds had tagged components not used
in medical senses. Those strings were homonymic,
polysemic, or had several facets. Homonymy is
when a string represents different words that by
chance are alike. Polysemy is when one word has
several meanings. For example, the ?leg? of a person
and the ?leg? of a table. Facets are different aspects
of one concept. A ?person? has a body aspect as well
as a personality aspect (Croft and Cruse, 2004).
It is tagging of words that are homonymic, poly-
semic, or with medical and non-medical facets that
I predict will cause difficulties. An example is
ha?stansikte ?horse face?. Although ansikte is a med-
ical term, it is not used in a medical sense here. If
you say that a person has a ha?stansikte it is a com-
ment about looks, not health. The word ansikte has a
medical facet, but also a personal appearance facet.
Other examples of compounds with problematic
components are listed below:
do?d<mesh:A02>skalle</mesh>
?death skull? (skull referred to in a pirate
or scary sense)
femdygns<mesh:E01>prognos</mesh>
?five-days prognosis? (weather domain)
<mesh:A01>finger</mesh>borg
?finger castle? (thimble)
Only four compounds had spurious substrings
tagged. An example is ro?ntgen+apparat ?x-ray de-
vice?, tagged as below, nappar meaning ?pacifiers?:
ro?ntge<mesh:E07>nappar</mesh>at
5.1 A pre-decomposed run
As mentioned above, the MeSH tagger tags only
maximal length (sub)strings from each subdomain
of MeSH. The tagger also does not tag short strings
unless they are separate words. This entails that
3
short components will not be tagged unless decom-
position of the compound is done first.
In order to see how these features affect the out-
come of the tagger, I ran the Medlex list through the
tagger after decomposing the compounds.
This time, 1095 compounds had one or both com-
ponents tagged. 819 of these were used in the med-
ical sense. This is a number which should be com-
pared with 233 in the previous run.
276 compounds had components that were tagged
although not used in a medical sense. Only one com-
pound had a spurious substring tagged.
5.2 Standard language versus medical
language
One problem in decomposing compounds and using
the medically tagged components to expand queries,
is that many words that are medical in some meaning
or facet are common in standard language. Even if
we know that such a component is used in the med-
ical sense in a query, expanding the query with that
component would bring on irrelevant documents.
Examples of words with such properties are hand
?hand? and hja?rta ?heart?. Even though these words
are used in medical senses they are also common in
standard language, for example in lexicalized com-
pounds or in phrases.
In the tagger run with the decomposed list, most
of the 276 words that were tagged as medical,
though not used in the medical sense, had as a com-
ponent one of only 16 basic words. Below are a few
such compounds that have as a component a word
from that list, hand:
<mesh:A01>hand</mesh> bok
?hand book?
<mesh:A01>hand</mesh> broms
?hand brake?
<mesh:A01>hand</mesh> duk
?hand cloth? (towel)
6 Future work
I have presented a strategy of how to use domain
information to decide when parts of a compound
should be used in query expansion. Unfortunately
I have not been able to test the effectiveness of this
strategy. To get a true evaluation of the strategy,
a Swedish medical test collection is needed. At
present there is no such collection. However, my
research at the moment is concentrated on creating
a Swedish medical test collection, by the name of
MedEval.
The first step in my research is thus to create a
Swedish medical test collection, the second to test
query expansion strategies based on domain infor-
mation, such as the one described here. The strat-
egy described could be carried through not only in
queries, but also in indexes. That is, if a document
from the medical domain contains a medical com-
pound, the index could contain not only the com-
pound, but also its medical components. Still, a big
challenge will be to work out how to deal with poly-
semic and homonymic words and words with medi-
cal and non-medical facets.
References
Ahlgren, Per. 2004. The effects of indexing strategy-
query term combination on retrieval effectiveness in a
Swedish full text database. Publications from Valfrid,
nr 28. University College of Bora?s/Go?teborg Univer-
sity.
Baeza-Yates Ricardo and Berthier Ribeiro-Neto. 1999.
Modern information retrieval. ACM-press, New York,
NY.
Croft, William and D. Alan Cruse. 2004. Cognitive Lin-
gustics. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.
Hedlund, Turid. 2002. Compounds in dictionary-based
cross-language information retrieval. Information Re-
search, volume 7 No.2. 2002. Department of Informa-
tion Studies. University of Tampere, Finland.
Kokkinakis, Dimitrios. 2004. MEDLEX: Tech-
nical Report. Department of Swedish Lan-
guage, Spra?kdata, Go?teborg University. [www].
<http://demo.spraakdata.gu.se/svedk/pbl/MEDLEX
work2004.pdf> Retrieved January 9, 2007.
Kokkinakis, Dimitrios. 2006. Developing Resources for
Swedish Bio-Medical Text Mining. Proceedings of the
2nd International Symposium on Semantic Mining in
Biomedicine (SMBM). Jena, Germany.
MeSH. Medical Subject Headings. U.S. National
Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD. [www].
<http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/>. Retrieved January
9, 2007.
Svensk MeSH. MeSH-resurser vid KIB. Karolinska
Institutet Universitetsbiblioteket, Stockholm. [www].
<http://mesh.kib.ki.se/>. Retrieved January 9, 2007.
4
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Second Louhi Workshop on Text and Data Mining of Health Documents, pages 1?7,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
MedEval ? A Swedish Medical Test Collection
with Doctors and Patients User Groups
Karin Friberg Heppin
Department of Swedish
University of Gothenburg
Gothenburg, Sweden
karin.friberg@svenska.gu.se
Abstract
MedEval is a Swedish medical test collection
where assessments have been made, not only
for topical relevance, but also for target reader
group: Doctors or Patients. The user of the
test collection can choose if s/he wishes to
search in the Doctors or the Patients scenar-
ios where the topical relevance assessments
have been adjusted with consideration to user
group, or to search in a scenario which regards
only topical relevance. MedEval makes it pos-
sible to compare the effectiveness of search
terms when it comes to retrieving documents
aimed at the different user groups. MedEval is
also the first medical Swedish test collection.
1 A New Test Collection
When the decision was made to build a new test col-
lection, the Department of Swedish at the Univer-
sity of Gothenburg was involved in projects of re-
search in medical language processing. There was
also a growing interest of research in information re-
trieval. There existed no Swedish medical test col-
lection. Creating one seemed to be a good invest-
ment in knowledge and resources, even though this
involved a team of people during many months. As
building a test collection is a major undertaking not
many exist. OHSUMED is a medical test collection,
albeit in English. It is built on nearly 350 000 refer-
ences from MEDLINE. The OHSUMED documents
are assessed on a three graded scale: definitely, pos-
sibly and not relevant. OHSUMED contains 106
topics generated by physicians from authentic situa-
tions. The topics consist of both information about
the patient and the request. (OHSUMED, 2007)
With a new collection such as MedEval, the
Swedish department could take control over the ar-
chitecture and make decisions such as using a four
graded scale of relevance, making it possible to em-
ploy a variety of evaluation tools. However, the
most important decision was to assess documents,
not only for relevance to topics, but also for intended
groups of readers, ?Doctors: medical professionals?
or ?Patients: lay persons?, and to allow the user to
choose user scenario: None, Doctors or Patients.
2 Documents
The MedEval test collection is built on docu-
ments from the MedLex medical corpus (Kokki-
nakis, 2004). MedLex consists of scientific arti-
cles from medical journals, teaching material, guide-
lines, patient FAQs, health care information, etc.
The set of documents used in MedEval is a snapshot
of MedLex in October 2007, approximately 42 200
documents or 15 million tokens (see table 1). The
documents are stored in the trectext format.
3 Indexes
The MedEval test collection has two indexes. One
where the documents are converted to lower case,
tokenized and lemmatized, and one where the com-
pounds also are decomposed. In the second index,
the compound terms are indexed as a whole together
with the compound constituents. For instance: the
compound saltkoncentration ?salt concentration? is
indexed as saltkoncentration, salt, and koncentra-
tion.
1
Type of source Number of Percent of Number Percent
documents documents of tokens of tokens
Journals and periodicals 8 453 20.0 5.3 million 34.6
Specialized sites 14 631 34.6 2.9 million 19.1
Pharmaceutical companies 9 200 21.8 2.3 million 14.8
Government, faculties, institutes, and hospitals 2 955 7.0 2.0 million 13.3
Health-care communication companies 4 036 9.6 1.7 million 11.3
Media (TV, daily newspapers) 2 980 7.1 1.0 million 6.9
Total 42 255 100.1 15.2 million 100
Table 1: The genres of the MedEval document sources. The document collection is a snapshot of the MedLex corpus
in October 2007. (D. Kokkinakis, p.c.)
4 Topics
Two medical students in their fourth year of studies
were hired to create the topics. Their instructions
were to create information needs that could be re-
quested in real medical situations. 100 topics were
created in the first stage. 62 of these were used in
the collection.
A topic consists of a title, a description and a nar-
rative. The title is a short phrase summarizing the in-
formation need. The description is concise informa-
tion about the topic, usually in the form of a question
or a request. The narrative is a few sentences long
and it stipulates what makes a document relevant to
the topic. The narrative contains the guidelines for
the assessors when judging the relevance of the doc-
uments in the next stage. An example of a topic is
given below. The English equivalent of the descrip-
tion of topic 51 is: Why can a patient with cancer
contract anemia?
<TOP>
<TOPNO>51</TOPNO>
<TITLE> Anemi och cancer </TITLE>
<DESC> Varfo?r kan en patient med cancer
drabbas av anemi? </DESC>
<NARR> Relevanta dokument ska inneha?lla
information om vad anemi /blodbrist a?r, sym-
tom, behandling och orsaker. Information om
cancerrelaterad anemi dels utlo?st av cancern
och dels utlo?st av cancerbehandlingen a?r
relevant. </NARR>
</TOP>
5 Selecting Documents to Assess
In the ideal test collection every document would be
assessed for relevance with respect to every topic.
But with over 42 000 documents and 62 topics, tak-
ing 8 minutes to assess each document, it would take
four persons more than 40 years working 40 hours
per week to finish the assessments.
Instead, only the documents that were considered
most likely to be relevant to each topic were as-
sessed. The documents were filtered out by use of
four queries, one specific and one exhaustive for
each index. The documents selected for each topic
were sorted by document ID and duplicates were re-
moved. This was done so that the assessors would
not know how high a document had been ranked,
or in how many searches it had been retrieved. For
each topic and each of the four queries the 100 high-
est ranked documents were selected, if, in fact, there
were that many.
6 Relevance Judgments
For the relevance judgments four new medical stu-
dents were consulted. For each of 62 topics, an as-
sessor read through the documents to be assessed
and decided, for each document, the intended group
of readers and the degree of relevance to the topic.
The documents for each individual need were as-
sessed by one and the same assessor for reasons of
consistency.
The MedEval relevance assessments were made
on a four graded scale, 0-3, where 0 is ?Not at all
relevant? and 3 is ?Highly relevant?. The scale is
easily turned into a binary scale by stating that the
documents with the lower grades are to be consid-
2
ered non-relevant and the ones with higher grades
relevant. Where the division is made between rel-
evant and non-relevant depends on the needs of the
user in each case.
The relevance considered by the assessors was
topical relevance, how well a document corresponds
to a topic. The assessors were instructed not to in-
volve user relevance in this score. Each document
was judged on its own merits. The novelty of the
contents of a document should not be considered.
7 Target Groups
In addition to topical relevance the assessors judged
each document for reader target group, that is which
group of readers was the intended: Patients, if a doc-
ument was written for lay persons, or Doctors, if it
was written for medical professionals.
For a classification of documents according to
intended reader group to be useful, there must be
a measureable difference between the document
classes. Table 2 shows a number of type/token fre-
quencies in different subsets of the collection. In
each set duplicates were removed in the case that
a document had been assessed for more than one
topic. The subsets considered are described below.
Full form types are the original terms of the doc-
uments before lemmatization and lemma types are
the same terms after lemmatization.
Entire collection All documents of the MedEval
collection.
Assessed documents All documents that have been
assessed for any topic.
Doctors assessed All documents that for at least
one topic have been assessed to have target
group Doctors.
Patients assessed All documents that for at least
one topic have been assessed to have target
group Patients.
Common files All documents that for at least one
topic have been assessed to have target group
Doctors and for another to have target group
Patients.
Doctors relevant All documents that for at least
one topic have been assessed to have at least
relevance grade 1 and to have target group Doc-
tors.
Patients relevant All documents that for at least
one topic have been assessed to have at least
relevance grade 1 and to have target group Pa-
tients.
Before counting frequencies, the files were
cleaned from tags, IDs, dates (in the date tag, not
in the actual text), web information and punctua-
tion marks. Some observations are readily made by
studying table 2.
The number of tokens per document is signifi-
cantly smaller for the entire collection, than for any
subset. This means that there is a large number
of short documents that were not retrieved by any
query when the documents to be assessed were se-
lected. Maybe not surprising, since short documents
contain few terms which can match the queries.
The documents in the set ?Patients assessed? had
only 57% the number of tokens per document, com-
pared to the documents in ?Doctors assessed?. Even
though there were over 1 000 more documents in
?Patients assessed? than in ?Doctors assessed?, there
were over 50 000 more lemma types in the doctor
documents and almost 30 000 more lemma com-
pound types. The average word length in ?Doctors
assessed? was 6.29 compared to 5.73 for ?Patients
assessed?. The ratio of compound tokens was also
higher in the doctor documents, 0.128 compared to
0.098.
Table 3 illustrates the fact that the doctor docu-
ments contain more and longer terms and more com-
pounds than patient documents. This table shows
frequencies of all full form types of strings be-
ginning with fo?rmak ?atria? in ?Patients assessed?
and ?Doctors assessed? respectively. The patient
documents have 18 full form types beginning with
fo?rmak while doctor documents have 75. That is
more than four times more types for the doctor doc-
uments.
A closer look at the frequencies of fo?rmak? in the
professional and lay person texts reveals that not all
frequencies are higher for professionals. The fre-
quencies of nouns in the definite form in the lay per-
son texts are close to, equal or higher than the same
forms in the professional texts.
3
Entire Assessed Doctors Patients Common Doctors Patients
collection documents assessed assessed files relevant relevant
Number of documents 42 250 7 044 3 272 4 334 562 1 233 1 654
Tokens 12 991 157 5 034 323 3 232 772 2 431 160 629 609 1 361 700 988 236
Tokens/document 307 715 988 561 1 120 1 104 596
Average word length 5.75 6.04 6.29 5.73 6.16 6.33 5.63
Full form types 334 559 181 354 154 901 92 803 50 961 87 814 43 825
Lemma types 267 892 146 631 126 217 73 121 40 857 71 974 34 263
Compound tokens 1 273 874 573 625 412 475 237 267 76 117 179 580 92 420
Full form compound types 187 904 99 614 83 846 47 387 24 083 45 257 20 157
Lemma compound types 144 159 78 508 66 907 37 151 19 685 36 867 16 006
Ratio of compounds 0.098 0.114 0.128 0.098 0.120 0.132 0.094
Table 2: Type and token frequencies of the terms in different subsets of the MedEval test collection.
Looking at all instances of strings beginning with
fo?rmak? in the two sets of documents there is a sig-
nificant difference. In the patient documents 66 to-
kens of 372, or 17.7%, are nouns in the definite
form, while the corresponding numbers for the doc-
tor documents is 89 of 932 tokens, or 9.6%. At this
stage one can only speculate why this is so. A hy-
pothesis is that doctors/medical professionals often
discuss matters in a generic point of view, while pa-
tients/lay persons discuss specific cases.
Term Doctors Patients
fo?rmaken 21 21
fo?rmakens 1 2
fo?rmaket 11 14
fo?rmaksflimret 16 28
fo?rmaksmyocyterna 2 1
Table 4: Frequencies of terms beginning with fo?rmak
?atria?, which are in the definite form in the set ?Patients
assessed?. The frequencies of these word forms in the
documents written for the two target groups are com-
pared.
8 User Groups
The MedEval test collection allows the user to state
user group: None (no specified group), Doctors or
Patients. This choice directs the user to one of three
scenarios. The None scenario contains the topical
relevance grades as made by the assessors. The Doc-
tors scenario contains the same grades with the ex-
ception that the grades of the documents marked for
Patients target group are downgraded by one. In
the same way the Patients scenario has the docu-
ments marked for Doctors target group downgraded
by one. This means that for a doctor user patient
documents originally given relevance 3, are graded
with 2, documents given relevance 2 are graded 1
and documents given relevance 1 are graded 0. The
same is done in the Patients scenario with the doc-
tor documents. The idea is that a document that is
written for a reader from one target group but re-
trieved for a user from the other group will not be
non-relevant, but less useful than a document from
the correct target group. Put differently, a docu-
ment intended for patients would contain informa-
tion that doctors (hopefully) already know. On the
other hand, documents intended for doctors, even
though they might be topically relevant for a pa-
tient?s need, run a great risk of being written in such
a way that a patient will have problems grasping the
whole content.
Adjusting relevance in the manner described af-
fects the scenario recall bases. Since relevance
grades are downgraded for documents of the oppos-
ing target group there will be fewer relevant docu-
ments in the Doctors and Patients scenarios than in
the None scenario. This is demonstrated in figure 1
where the ideal cumulated gain for the three scenar-
ios of topics 28, 36 and 92 are shown. The ideal cu-
mulated gain is the maximum score of retrieved in-
formation possible at each position in a ranked list of
documents (Ja?rvelin, Keka?la?inen, 2002). The score
for each position is the sum of all relevance scores
so far in the ranked list.
The three topics of figure 1 show different char-
acteristics with reference to the number of relevant
4
Lay fo?rmak 73 fo?rmaksflimmer 219
person fo?rmaken 21 fo?rmaksflimmerattacker 1
audience fo?rmakens 2 fo?rmaksflimmerpatienter 1
fo?rmaket 14 fo?rmaksflimret 28
fo?rmaks 1 fo?rmakslimmer 1
fo?rmaksarytmier 2 fo?rmaksmyocyterna 1
fo?rmakseffekt 1 fo?rmakstakykardi 1
fo?rmaksfladder 2 fo?rmaksutlo?sta 2
fo?rmaksflimer 1 fo?rmakso?ra 1
Professional fo?rmak 93 fo?rmaksmuskelns 1
audience fo?rmaken 21 fo?rmaksmuskulaturen 2
fo?rmakens 1 fo?rmaksmyocyterna 2
fo?rmaket 11 fo?rmaksmyokard 3
fo?rmakets 1 fo?rmaksmyokardiet 1
fo?rmaks 21 fo?rmaksmyxom 2
fo?rmaksaktivering 1 fo?rmaksniva? 2
fo?rmaksaktivitet 1 fo?rmaksna?ra 1
fo?rmaksaktiviteten 2 fo?rmaksoch 1
fo?rmaksanatomi 1 fo?rmakspacing 7
fo?rmaksarytmi 2 fo?rmakspeptider 1
fo?rmaksarytmier 9 fo?rmaksrytmer 1
fo?rmaksbidraget 1 fo?rmaksseptostomi 1
fo?rmaksbradyarytmi 1 fo?rmaksseptum 2
fo?rmaksdefibrillator 2 fo?rmaksseptumaneurysm 10
fo?rmakseffekt 2 fo?rmaksseptumdefekt 5
fo?rmaksfladder 57 fo?rmaksseptumdefekten 1
fo?rmaksfladdret 2 fo?rmaksseptumdefekter 1
fo?rmaksflimmer 544 fo?rmaksseptums 1
fo?rmaksflimmerablationer 2 fo?rmaksstimulerat 1
fo?rmaksflimmerattacker 1 fo?rmaksstimulerin 5
fo?rmaksflimmerduration 2 fo?rmaksstorlek 2
fo?rmaksflimmerepisoder 4 fo?rmaksstorleken 1
fo?rmaksflimmerfladder 2 fo?rmakssynkron 1
fo?rmaksflimmerpatienter 4 fo?rmakssystole 1
fo?rmaksflimmerrecidiv 1 fo?rmakstaket 1
fo?rmaksflimmertendensen 1 fo?rmakstakykardi 11
fo?rmaksflimmerunderha?llande 1 fo?rmakstakykardie 8
fo?rmaksflimret 16 fo?rmakstromb 2
fo?rmaksflimrets 4 fo?rmakstryck 1
fo?rmaksfrekvenser 1 fo?rmakstrycket 1
fo?rmaksfunktion 1 fo?rmaksvolym 2
fo?rmaksfo?rstoring 1 fo?rmaksva?gg 1
fo?rmaksimpuls 1 fo?rmaksva?ggarna 2
fo?rmaksinhiberad 1 fo?rmaksva?ggen 6
fo?rmakskontraktion 4 fo?rmaksva?vnaden 2
fo?rmakskontraktionen 6 fo?rmakso?ra 9
fo?rmakskontraktionens 1 fo?rmakso?ronen 2
fo?rmaksmuskeln 1
Table 3: This is a randomly chosen example of the difference in the number of types and of tokens in the documents
written for a lay person audience, in the set ?Patients assessed? and the ones written for a professional audience, in the
set ?Doctors assessed?. The table shows all types of strings beginning with fo?rmak ?atria? in documents written for the
two target groups. The number of tokens for each type is also shown.
5
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
 0  20  40  60  80  100  120
Id
ea
l c
um
ul
at
ed
 g
ai
n
Number of documents
Topic 28. Vilka indikationer f?religger vid behandling
med benzodiazepiner? N?r ska preparatet anv?ndas?
What indications exist for treatment with
 benzodiazepines? When should the drug be used?
None
Doctors
Patients
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
 180
 200
 220
 0  20  40  60  80  100  120  140  160
Id
ea
l c
um
ul
at
ed
 g
ai
n
Number of documents
Topic 36. Vilka effekter och interaktioner med andra l?kemedel
 kan man f?rv?nta sig vid anv?ndning av waran?
What effects and interactions with other medicines
can be expected with the use of waran?
None
Doctors
Patients
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80
Id
ea
l c
um
ul
at
ed
 g
ai
n
Number of documents
Topic 92. Hud: Hur g?r man tillv?ga vid behandling
 av eksem med steroider?
Skin: How does one perform treatment of eczema with steroids?
None
Doctors
Patients
Figure 1: The recall bases of topic 28, 36 and 92 rep-
resented in ideal cumulated gain for the three scenarios:
None, Doctors and Patients. For topic 28 most of the
highly relevant and fairly relevant documents were as-
sessed to have target group Doctors. Topic 36 had the rel-
evant documents spread fairly evenly between the Doc-
tors and Patients target groups. Topic 92 showed no doc-
uments of any relevance grade for documents marked for
target group Doctors. Thus the None and the Patients
ideal gain vector coincide fully, while the cumulated gain
for the Doctors scenario is very low.
doctor and patient documents. Topic 36 has fairly
similar cumulated gain curves for the Doctors and
Patients scenarios. Topic 28 has a majority of doc-
tor documents, while topic 92 had no documents of
any relevance grade for documents marked for tar-
get group Doctors. Thus the None and the Patients
ideal gain vector coincide fully, while the cumulated
gain for the Doctors scenario is very low, originating
from downgraded patient documents.
9 Example Runs
To demonstrate the effectiveness of search terms
from the different styles of language of the two tar-
get groups, the synonyms anemi ?anemia? and blod-
brist ?blood lack? were run as search keys for topic
51 in the Doctors and Patients scenarios. anemi is a
neoclassical term, belonging to the professional lan-
guage and blodbrist is the corresponding lay person
term.
In the Doctors scenario the difference between
the results of the two search keys was striking: full
recall for the neoclassical term quite early in the
ranked list of documents and no recall at all for the
lay person term. The Patients scenario did not show
as big difference between the search keys. Note that
the resulting ranked lists of documents is the same
for both scenarios for the same search key. It is the
relevance grades of the retrieved documents that dif-
fer.
Scenario Recall anemi blodbrist
Doctors @10 50% (4/8) 0% (0/8)
@20 100% (8/8) 0% (0/8)
@100 100% (8/8) 0% (0/8)
Patients @10 22% (4/18) 33% (6/18)
@20 39% (7/18) 39% (7/18)
@100 66% (12/18) 56% (10/18)
Table 5: Running the synonyms anemi ?anemia? and
blodbrist ?blood lack? as search keys for topic 51 in the
Doctors scenario gave full recall early in the ranking list
for the neoclassical term anemi, but no recall at all for
the lay person term blodbrist. In the Patients scenario the
difference in effectiveness for these search keys was not
as striking.
6
10 Final Words
This paper shows a few aspects of medical informa-
tion retrieval which can be studied with the use of
the MedEval test collection. The main novelty of the
collection is the marking of document target groups,
Doctors and Patients, together with with the possi-
bility to choose user group. This opens up new areas
of research in Swedish information retrieval such as
how one can retrieve documents suited for different
groups of users.
The Department of Swedish at the University of
Gothenburg is in the process of making the MedEval
test collection available to academic researchers.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank the FIRE (Finnish
Information Retrieval Experts) research group at the
University of Tampere, Finland, for their invaluable
help in building the MedEval test collection.
References
OSHUMED. 2007. The OHSUMED test collection.
[www] <http://ir.ohsu.edu/ohsumed/ohsumed.html>.
Kalervo Ja?rvelin and Jaana Keka?la?inen. 2002. Cumu-
lated gain-based evaluation of IR techniques. ACM
Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 20, No.4,
pages 422-446.
Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2004. Medlex: Tech-
nical report. Department of Swedish, Uni-
versity of Gothenburg, Sweden. [www]
<http://demo.spraakdata.gu.se/svedk/pbl/MEDLEX
work2004.pdf>.
7
Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2014), pages 67?71,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 26-27 April 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Encoding of Compounds in Swedish FrameNet
Karin Friberg Heppin
Spr?akbanken
University of Gothenburg
karin.heppin@svenska.gu.se
Miriam R L Petruck
International Computer Science Institute
Berkeley, CA
miriamp@icsi.berkeley.edu
Abstract
Constructing a lexical resource for
Swedish, where compounding is highly
productive, requires a well-structured
policy of encoding. This paper presents
the treatment and encoding of a certain
class of compounds in Swedish FrameNet,
and proposes a new approach for the au-
tomatic analysis of Swedish compounds,
i.e. one that leverages existing FrameNet
(Ruppenhofer et al., 2010) and Swedish
FrameNet (Borin et al. 2010), as well as
proven techniques for automatic semantic
role labeling (Johansson et al., 2012).
1 Introduction
Like other Germanic languages (e.g. Dutch, Ger-
man), compounding is a very productive word for-
mation process in Swedish. Swedish FrameNet,
1
which is part of the larger Swedish FrameNet++
effort to create Swedish resources for language
technology purposes, analyzes Swedish composi-
tional compounds in a way that reflects the lan-
guage?s grammatical structure, records informa-
tion about the internal structure of these com-
pounds in Frame Semantic terms, and proposes us-
ing that information to automate the analysis.
2 Swedish FrameNet
Swedish FrameNet (SweFN), which began in
2011, is part of Swedish FrameNet++ (Borin et al.,
2010), a larger project whose main goal is build-
ing a panchronic lexical macro-resource for use
in Swedish language technology. Basing its work
on the original FrameNet developed in Berkeley
(BFN) (Fonetenelle, 2003), SweFN is creating a
lexical resource of at least 50,000 lexical units
1
SweFN, <http://spraakbanken.gu.se/eng/swefn>, a free
resource (CC-BY-SA 3.0, LGPL 3.0) funded by Veten-
skapsr?adet under contract 2010-6013.
(LUs) with the express goal of automating as much
of the process as possible.
Swedish FrameNet bases its contents on three
resources: (1) BFN?s frames, frame definitions
and frame-to-frame relations, for efficiency and
compatibility with other FrameNet-like resources;
(2) lexical entries from the SALDO lexicon; and
(3) example sentences from the KORP corpus col-
lection (Ahlberg et al., 2013).
Building SweFN frames includes several steps.
The SweFN researcher chooses a BFN frame with
a Swedish analogue, and populates that frame with
appropriate LUs. LU selection involves deter-
mining which of the BFN LUs have equivalents
in Swedish, or searching SALDO for LUs of the
frame. Using the KORP corpora, the researcher
finds example sentences that illustrate the LU?s
meaning and annotates each sentence with the
frame?s FEs. SweFN draws all examples from cor-
pus data; this paper also provides the larger con-
text in which compounds occur.
SweFN LUs, be they single words or multiword
expressions (MWEs), evoke frames, i.e. cognitive
structuring constituting the basic building blocks
of any framenet knowledge base. LUs are pairings
of lemmas and frames, the latter schematic repre-
sentations of events, objects, situations or states of
affairs. Frame elements (FEs) identify the seman-
tic roles of the participants of the scenario char-
acterized in a frame, e.g. AGENT, THEME, or
TIME. For each frame, example sentences illus-
trate the linguistic realization of LUs together with
the frame?s FEs for the Frame Semantic annotation
of the sentence?s constituents (Borin et al., 2013a;
Borin et al., 2013b).
3 Multiword expressions in SALDO
As mentioned above, the SALDO lexicon serves
as the primary resource for LUs in SweFN++ and
consequently also for LUs in SweFN. SALDO
contains almost 6,000 MWEs of three types, dis-
67
tinguished as follows (Borin et al., 2013a):
? Continuous MWEs corresponding to fixed
and semi-fixed expressions
2
, which may have
internal inflection, but no intervening words,
e.g. enarmad bandit (one-armed bandit) -
?slot machine?.
? Discontinuous MWEs corresponding to
syntactically flexible expressions
2
, which
may have intervening words, such as parti-
cle or phrasal verbs, e.g. ge ut (give out) -
?publish?.
? Constructions partially schematic construc-
tions or syntactic templates with one or more
slots filled with items of specific types, those
described in construction grammars, e.g. ju
X desto Y - ?The Xer the Yer? (Fillmore et al.,
1988).
SALDO treats solid compounds, i.e. single
orthographic words, just as it treats single-word
items, and does not normally define their for-
mal structure explicitly. In most cases, Swedish
compounds are written without space between
its constituents, as in korvgubbe (sausage+man)
- ?hot dog seller?. However, different possible
forms yield different meanings. The adjective +
noun NP varm korv literally means ?hot sausage?
(in the temperature sense); the continuous MWE
varm korv means ?hot dog?; and the solid com-
pound varmkorv refers to not necessarily prepared
sausage for making hot dogs. As LUs in a SweFN
frame, the solid compounds, when compositional
or partially transparent, have constituents which
manifest FEs or other LUs in the same frame. The
next section discusses these compounds and their
annotation in SweFN.
4 MWEs and compounds as LUs
SALDO?s continuous MWEs, discontinuous
MWEs, and solid compounds are candidates
for SweFN LUs, much like simplex words.
Solid endocentric compounds, which identify a
more specific instance of the compound?s head,
constitute a large group of words in Swedish.
SweFN provides an analysis for these, even
though BFN does not (Friberg Heppin and
Toporowska Gronostaj, 2012). In frames where
solid endocentric compounds are LUs, SweFN
2
As described by Sag et al. (2001)
records the pattern FE+LU, where the com-
pound?s modifier is a FE of the given frame and
the head is another LU in the same frame. Thus,
among others, Observable body parts
has ATTACHMENT, and DESCRIPTOR, and
POSSESSOR FEs. SweFN records the analysis
shown below with segmentation points between
compound parts marked with ?|?.
? ATTACHMENT+LU stort?a|nagel
(big+toe+nail) - ?big toe nail?,
pekfinger|nagel (point+finger+nail) - ?index
finger nail?
? DESCRIPTOR+LU ring|finger - ?ring finger?,
pek|finger (point+finger) - ?index finger?,
stor|t?a ?big toe?
? POSSESSOR+LU h?ast|hov ?horse hoof?
Generally, compounds with more than two con-
stituents consist of one or more constituents that
are themselves compounds. SweFN treats such
compounds in the same way as it treats other com-
pounds. For example, stort?a|nagel (big+toe+nail)
- ?big toe nail? instantiates ATTACHMENT+LU ,
where stort?a (big+toe) - ?big toe? itself is analyzed
as DESCRIPTOR+LU.
SweFN analyzes example sentences that in-
clude compounds of different types with FE and
LU annotation tags. The next section describes
this encoding.
5 Encoding of compounds
Ruppenhofer et al. (2010) describes two ways that
BFN treats noun compounds. Conventionalized
two-part words are treated as single LUs with no
internal analysis, e.g., firing squad, sugar daddy,
andwine bottle. When a frame-evoking compound
has a modifier that happens to be a noun or re-
lational adjective e.g., restoration costs, military
supremacy, the compound?s head is annotated as a
LU of the frame in question and the modifier in-
stantiates a FE of the same frame. Ruppenhofer et
al. (2010) point out that the division between the
two groups is not always clear.
SweFN relies on degree of compositionality to
determine the extent to which compound analysis
is encoded in a frame?s example sentences, not the
compound?s degree of lexicalization. Thus far, the
analysis has been produced manually. Section 6
presents a proposal for the automatic Frame Se-
mantic analysis of compounds.
68
5.1 Non-compositional compounds
Typically, non-compositional compounds are lex-
icalized. Otherwise, understanding them is not
possible, since the sense of the compound is
not apparent from its parts. SALDO lists lexi-
calized non-compositional compounds as individ-
ual entries, like simplex words. Taking its lead
from SALDO, and because constituents of non-
compositional compounds do not instantiate FEs,
SweFN does not analyze such compounds further,
as in (1), where h?asthov (horse+hoof) - ?coltsfoot?
(Plants) is annotated only as a whole.
(1) och
and
[h?asthovarna]
LU
coltsfeet+DEF
lyser
shine
som
like
solar
suns
...and the coltsfeet are shining like suns.
5.2 Compositional compounds
SALDO also treats solid compositional com-
pounds as simplex words. In contrast, SweFN
treats compositional compounds as LUs, analyz-
ing them as FE+LU, as described above in section
4. Furthermore, SweFN annotates compositional
compounds in example sentences both as wholes
and with respect to their constituent parts, as in
(2).
(2) ...klappret
...clatter+DEF
fr?an
from
[snabba]
Descriptor
fast
[[h?ast]
Possessor
[hovar]
LU
]
LU
horse+hooves
...the clatter from fast horse hooves.
Rather than serving as a modifier, the first ele-
ment of some compounds is the semantic head of
that compound. In such cases, the syntactic head
can be semantically transparent, as in bakteri-
etyp (bacteria+type) - ?type of bacteria? and kaffe-
sort (coffee+kind) - ?kind of coffee?, or show the
speaker?s attitude toward the entity identified in
the semantic head of the compound as in gubbslem
(old man+mucus) - ?dirty old man? or h?astkrake
(horse+wretch) - ?wretched horse?. For this type of
compound the modifier and the whole compound
are annotated as LUs in the given frame, as illus-
trated in (3); the syntactic head of the compound
does not realize any frame element in the frame.
(3) Han
He
fick
got
syn
sight
p?a
of
en
an
[gammal]
Age
old
[vit]
Persistent characteristics
white
[[h?ast]
LU
krake]
LU
horse+wretch
He caught sight of an old wretched white
horse.
5.3 Partially transparent compounds
For some non-compositional compounds, one
constituent clearly instantiates a FE or LU of the
frame that the compound evokes, but the other is
opaque, as in ryggskott (back+shot) - ?lumbago?
from Medical disorders. The modifier rygg
- ?back? is the body part location of the disorder;
the head skott - ?shot? is interpreted as something
that appears suddenly, as a gunshot, but its mean-
ing is not transparent. Example (4) shows that
SweFN treats the compound as a LU, and the mod-
ifier as instantiating the FE BODY PART; SweFN
does not treat the head separately.
(4) [Han]
Patient
He
fick
got
[[rygg]
Body Part
skott]
LU
back+shot
[under
during
uppv?armningen]
Time
up+warming+DEF
och
and
tvingades
forced+PASS
vila
rest+INF
He got lumbago during the warm-up and
had to rest.
Naming different types or species of a class
of entities often results in groups of compounds
whose heads are the name of the class, e.g. bl?ab?ar
(blue+berry) - ?blueberry?, where the compound
names a type of berry. In these compounds, the
modifier may not have an independent meaning,
e.g. k?orsb?ar (?+berry) - ?cherry?, where k?ors is a
cran morph, i.e. it has no meaning outside of its
use as a modifier in the compound. SweFN an-
notates the modifiers of these compounds with the
FE TYPE, as in (5), since they have no meaning
except to discern one type (cherry) of the LU in
question (berry) from other types.
(5) Ska
Shall
vi
we
plocka
pick
[[k?ors]
Type
[b?ar]
LU
]
LU
cherries
Do you want to pick cherries?
5.4 Modifier as lexical unit
SweFN also chooses to analyze sentences (that
illustrate the use of a LU) where a compound?s
modifier evokes the frame under consideration.
For example, the compound gasdetektor - ?gas de-
tector? is analyzed with respect to the Devices
frame, given the head detektor - ?detector?. How-
ever, the modifier gas - ?gas? is analyzed with re-
spect to Substances. Typically, SweFN does
not choose sentences for annotation where only
the modifier of a compound evokes the frame in
question. Still, doing so is possible, as in (6).
69
(6) En
A
v?atesensor
hydrogen+sensor
?ar
is
en
a
[gas]
LU
detektor
gas+detector
som
which
visar
shows
n?arvaron
presence+DEF
av
of
v?ate
hydrogen
A hydrogen sensor is a gas detector show-
ing the presence of hydrogen.
If analyzing a sentence where the LU under
consideration is a modifier of a compound, SweFN
does not annotate the compound?s head. This
practice reflects that of BFN (Ruppenhofer et al.,
2010, 42).
[W]e never annotate the head noun
as a frame element of a frame that may
be evoked by the non-head...While the
non-head must figure in some frame
evoked by the head, the reverse is not
true in the same way. . . .
6 Future Research
With a well-designed encoding for compounds,
SweFN is positioned to develop ways to automate
its heretofore manual annotation of compounds.
Here, we sketch out plans to pursue the automatic
Frame Semantic annotation of modifiers of com-
pounds.
Johansson and Nugues (2006) demonstrated
the effective use of FN annotation for automatic
semantic role labeling (ASRL) of Swedish text
to produce annotation (comparable to Pad?o and
Lapata (2005)). More recently, Johansson et
al. (2012) investigated the feasibility of using
Swedish FrameNet annotation as a resource in
constructing an automatic semantic role analyzer
for Swedish. We suggest the possibility of using
comparable techniques for the analysis of Swedish
compound forms, also including FN data for de-
veloping and testing the efficacy of the algorithms.
This proposal involves the following: (1) man-
ually add solid compounds from SALDO to ap-
propriate frames based on the head of the com-
pound; (2) use Kokkinakis?s (2001) compound
analysis technique to identify the component parts
of the compound, by finding n-grams of charac-
ters which do not occur in simplex words; (3) ex-
ploit existing SweFN annotation for adjacent non-
compounded words to develop an ASRL system
to annotate modifiers of Swedish compounds and
test the system; (4) exploit existing SweFN anno-
tation of full sentences to determine if a system
trained on that data would improve ASRL of mod-
ifiers in compounds; (5) using the same basic tech-
niques for developing training data, determine if
BFN data would benefit ASRL of modifiers, as
Johansson and Nugues (2006) demonstrated for
Swedish text in general.
Initially, the proposed plan for ASRL of mod-
ifiers of compounds addresses compounds with
(only) two elements. In principle, the same ap-
proach can be expanded to annotate multiple mod-
ifiers of head nouns, i.e. compounds with more
than two elements. These compounds consist at
least one constituent that is itself a compound, i.e.
the compounding process has occurred more than
once as described in section 4.
As more language technology and NLP re-
searchers develop FrameNet knowledge bases for
languages other than English, the need for auto-
matic processes to produce annotation that suits
the grammatical requirements of the particular
language will increase, as will the importance of
using existing resources efficiently and effectively.
The research proposed here offers the possibility
of providing an automatic process that would be
useful for the Frame Semantic analysis of Swedish
in particular and for other compounding languages
(e.g. Dutch, German). Additionally, the technique
may prove useful for the processing of compounds
more generally.
7 Conclusion
Given the highly productive nature of Swedish
compounding, lexical resources such as Swedish
FrameNet must attend to the representation and
analysis of compounds. This paper has presented
a new feature in SweFN, the explicit recording of
the FE+LU pattern for the analysis of composi-
tional compounds, and suggests a research plan to
analyze Swedish compounds automatically.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for
their helpful comments. The Swedish Re-
search Council (grant agreement 2010-6013) and
the University of Gothenburg via its support
of the Centre for Language Technology and
Spr?akbanken have supported this work.
70
References
Malin Ahlberg, Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, Martin
Hammarstedt, Leif J?oran Olsson, Olof Olsson, Jo-
han Roxendal, and Jonatan Uppstr?om. 2013. Korp
and Karp ? a bestiary of language resources: the re-
search infrastructure of Spr?akbanken. In Proceed-
ings of the 19
th
Nordic Conference of Computa-
tional Linguistics, NODALIDA.
Lars Borin, Dana Dann?ells, Markus Forsberg,
Maria Toporowska Gronostaj, and Dimitrios Kokki-
nakis. 2010. The past meets the present in Swedish
Framenet++. In Proceedings of the 14
th
EURALEX
International Congress.
Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Lennart L?onngren.
2013a. SALDO: a touch of yin to WordNet?s yang.
Language Resources and Evaluation, 47(4).
Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Benjamin Lyngfelt.
2013b. Close encounters of the fifth kind: Some
linguistic and computational aspects of the Swedish
FrameNet++ project. Veredas: Frame Semantics
and Its Technological Applications, 17(1).
Charles J. Fillmore, Paul Kay, and Mary Catherine
O?Connor. 1988. Regularity and idiomaticity in
grammatical constructions: The case of let alone.
Language, 64.
Thierry Fonetenelle, editor. 2003. FrameNet and
frame semantics. Number 16.3: 231?385 in Inter-
national Journal of Lexicography. Oxford University
Press.
Karin Friberg Heppin and Maria Toporowska Gronos-
taj. 2012. The rocky road towards a Swedish
FrameNet. In Proceedings of the 8
th
Conference on
International Language Resources and Evaluation,
Istanbul.
Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2006. A
FrameNet-based semantic role labeler for Swedish.
Sydney.
Richard Johansson, Karin Friberg Heppin, and Dim-
itrios Kokkinakis. 2012. Semantic role label-
ing with the swedish framenet,. In Proceedings
of the 8
th
Conference on International Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2012);, Istanbul,
Turkey.
Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2001. A framework for the
aquisition of lexical knowledge; Description and ap-
plications. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Swedish,
University of Gothenburg.
Sebastian Pad?o and Mirella Lapata. 2005. Cross-
lingual bootstrapping of semantic lexicons: The case
of framenet. In Proceedings of the American Asso-
ciation of Artificial Intelligence Conference.
Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Miriam R.L.
Petruck, Christopher R. Johnson, and Jan Schef-
fczyk. 2010. FrameNet II: Extended theory
and practice. <https://framenet2.icsi. berkeley.edu/
ocs/r1.5/book.pdf>.
Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2001. Multiword
expressions: A pain in the neck for NLP. In Pro-
ceedings of the 3
rd
International Conference on
Intelligent Text Processingand Computational Lin-
guistics (CICLing-2002. Berlin: Springer.
71
Proceedings of the Workshop on Lexical and Grammatical Resources for Language Processing, pages 8?17,
Coling 2014, Dublin, Ireland, August 24 2014.
Using language technology resources and tools
to construct Swedish FrameNet
Dana Dann
?
ells Karin Friberg Heppin
Department of Swedish
University of Gothenburg
firstname.lastname@svenska.gu.se
Anna Ehrlemark
Abstract
Having access to large lexical and grammatical resources when creating a new language resource
is essential for its enhancement and enrichment. This paper describes the interplay and interac-
tive utilization of different language technology tools and resources, in particular the Swedish
lexicon SALDO and Swedish Constructicon, in the creation of Swedish FrameNet. We show
how integrating resources in a larger infrastructure is much more than the sum of the parts.
1 Introduction
This paper describes how Swedish language technology resources are exploited to construct Swedish
FrameNet (SweFN),
1
a lexical-semantic resource that has been expanded from and constructed in line
with Berkeley FrameNet (BFN). The resource has been developed within the framework of the theory
of Frame Semantics (Fillmore, 1985). According to this theory, semantic frames including their partic-
ipants represent cognitive scenarios as schematic representations of events, objects, situations, or states
of affairs. The participants are called frame elements (FEs) and are described in terms of semantic roles
such as AGENT, LOCATION, or MANNER. Frames are evoked by lexical units (LUs) which are pairings
of lemmas and meanings.
To get a visualization of the notion of semantic frames consider the frame Vehicle landing. It
has the following definition in BFN: ?A flying VEHICLE comes to the ground at a GOAL in a controlled
fashion, typically (but not necessarily) operated by an operator.? VEHICLE and GOAL are the core
elements that together with the description uniquely characterize the frame. Their semantic types are
Physical object and Location. The non-core elements of the frame are: CIRCUMSTANCES, COTHEME,
DEGREE, DEPICTIVE, EVENT DESCRIPTION, FREQUENCY, GOAL CONDITIONS, MANNER, MEANS,
MODE OF TRANSPORTATION, PATH, PERIOD OF ITERATIONS, PLACE, PURPOSE, RE ENCODING,
SOURCE, and TIME. The lexical units evoking the frame are: land.v, set down.v, and touch down.v. In
addition, the frame contains a number of example sentences which are annotated in terms of LUs and
FEs. These sentences carry valence information about different syntactic realizations of the FEs and
about their semantic characteristics.
Currently SweFN contains around 1,150 frames with over 29,000 lexical units of which 5,000 are
verbs, and also 8,300 semantically and syntactically annotated sentences, selected from a corpus.
SweFN has mainly been created manually, but as a response to an ever increasing complexity, volume,
and specialization of textual evidence, the creation of SweFN is enhanced with automated Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) techniques. In contrast to the construction of English resources, as well as the
construction of framenets for other languages, the resources used to construct SweFN are all linked in a
unique infrastructure of language resources.
2 The development of framenets in other languages
FrameNet-like resources have been developed in several languages and have been exploited in a range
of NLP applications such as semantic parsing (Das et al., 2014), information extraction (Moschitti et
This work is licenced under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Page numbers and proceedings footer
are added by the organizers. License details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
1
http://spraakbanken.gu.se/eng/resource/swefn
8
al., 2003), natural language generation (Roth and Frank, 2009), and semi-automatic disambiguation of
polysemous words (Alonso et al., 2013).
Currently the most active framenet research teams are working on Swedish FrameNet (SweFN) (Borin
et al., 2010; Heppin and Gronostaj, 2014), Japanese FrameNet (JFN) covering 565 frames, 8,500 LUs,
and 60,000 annotated example sentences (Ohara, 2013) and FrameNet Brazil (Br-FN) for Brazilian Por-
tuguese (Torrent, 2013) covering 179 frames, 196 LUs, and 12,100 annotated sentences.
2
Even though the point of departure for all FrameNet-like resources is BFN, they differ in a number of
important aspects. SweFN has focused on transferring frames and populating them with LUs. For each
frame there are annotated example sentences extracted from corpora. Sentences illustrate the instanti-
ation of a number of LUs and FEs with regard to the frame, but many LUs do not yet have associated
example sentences. BFN and Spanish FrameNet (Subirats, 2009) also use isolated corpus sentences for
annotation while the SALSA project for German (Burchardt et al., 2009) has the aim of creating full-text
annotation of a German corpus. JFN, Spanish FrameNet, and FN-Br all use BFN software to construct
frames, while SweFN uses its own software and tools. Even though JFN uses BFN software and an-
notations tools for as much compatibility with BFN as possible, the Japanese writing system differs
considerably from that of English, and several modifications have been necessary to handle the different
character systems and word boundary issues.
Most framenets have the intention of covering general language. However, there are domain spe-
cific resources such as, the Copa 2014 FrameNet Brasil, a multilingual resource for the language of
soccer and tourism (Torrent et al., 2014) covering Portuguese, English and Spanish. Bertoldi and de
Oliveira Chishman (2011) describe work buiding a FrameNet-like ontology for the language of criminal
justice contrasting the differences between English and Portuguese languages and legal cultures.
3 Lexical and grammatical resources and tools for Swedish
Swedish FrameNet is part of SweFN++, a larger project with the goal to create a multifaceted panchronic
lexical macro-structure for Swedish to be used as an infrastructure component for Swedish language
technology and development of NLP applications and annotated corpora. One goal of SweFN++ is to
re-use and enhance existing in-house and external lexical resources and harmonize them into a single
macro-structure for processing both modern and historic Swedish text (Borin et al., 2010). Another goal
is to release all SweFN++ resources under an open content license.
3.1 SALDO ? association lexicon
SALDO (Borin et al., 2013a)
3
is a Swedish association lexicon which contains morphological and
lexical-semantic information for more than 131,000 entries, of which around 10% are verbs. SALDO en-
tries are arranged in a hierarchical structure capturing semantic closeness between lexemes. Each lexical
entry of SALDO has a unique identifier. Each lexical entry, except 41 top nodes, also has a main descrip-
tor, which may be complemented with a second determinative descriptor. These descriptors are other,
more central, entries from SALDO. The SALDO entry for the noun flaska ?bottle?, with its descriptors,
is shown in figure 1.
SALDO is the pivot of all the Swedish lexical language technology resources maintained at
Spr?akbanken. Having one pivot resource makes it possible for all Spr?akbanken resources to be com-
patible with each other (Borin and Forsberg, 2014).
3.2 Swedish Constructicon
The Swedish Constructicon (SweCcn)
4
is an electronic database of Swedish constructions (Lyngfelt
et al., 2012; Sk?oldberg et al., 2013). Just as it is precursor the Berkeley Constructicon,
5
it builds on
experiences from Construction Grammar and is historically, methodologically and theoretically closely
related to Frame Semantics and FrameNet (Fillmore et al., 2012). While framenets map single lexical
2
http://www.framenetbr.ufjf.br
3
http://spraakbanken.gu.se/saldo
4
http://spraakbanken.gu.se/swe/swecxn
5
http://www1.icsi.berkeley.edu/
?
hsato/cxn00/21colorTag/index.html
9
Figure 1: A search for the noun flaska ?bottle? in SALDO shows that it only has one sense. We are also
shown the lemma, the part of speech, the primary descriptor f?orvara ?store.v?, the secondary descriptor
h?alla ?pour.v?, and finally primary and secondary children, that is entries which have flaska as primary
or secondary descriptor.
units to the frames they evoke, a constructicon deals with the pairing of form and meaning in more
complex linguistic units, typically (partially) schematic multiword units that cannot easily be referred to
by either grammatical or lexicographic descriptions alone.
In SweCcn each construction is described individually in a construction entry, defined by its spe-
cific characteristics in form, meaning, function, and distribution. Each entry includes a free text def-
inition, schematic structural description, definitions of construction elements (CEs) and annotated ex-
ample sentences. Since the constructicon must account for both form and meaning, the construc-
tion elements can be both semantic roles and syntactic constituents. For example, the construction
reflexiv resultativ, instantiated in ?ata sig m?att ?eat oneself full?, is defined as a verb phrase
where somebody (ACTOR) or something (THEME) performs an action (ACTIVITY) that leads to a result
which affects the ACTOR/THEME, expressed with a reflexive particle. The construction roughly means
?achieve something by V-ing?, and can be applied to both transitive and intransitive verbs, altering the
verbs? inherent valence restrictions. The syntactic structure of the construction is [V refl AP], and the
construction elements are defined as the semantic roles ACTOR, THEME, ACTIVITY and RESULT, as
well as the reflexive particle. Example sentences like dricka sig full ?drink oneself drunk? and springa
sig varm ?run oneself warm? are added to the entry, while an example like k?anna sig tr?ott ?feel tired?
does not fit since one doesn?t get tired by feeling.
Swedish Constructicon is developed as an extension of Swedish FrameNet and forms a part of the
SweFN++ infrastructure. Swedish Constructicon currently consists of about 300 construction entries,
ranging from general linguistic patterns to partially fixed expressions, of which a significant part are con-
structions in the borderland between grammar and lexicon, commonly neglected from both perspectives.
3.3 Karp ? open lexical infrastructure
Karp is an open lexical infrastructure with three main functions: (1) support the creation, cura-
tion, and mutual integration of the lexical resources of SweFN++; (2) publish all lexical resources at
Spr?akbanken, making them searchable and downloadable in various formats such as Lexical Markup
Framework (LMF) (Francopoulo et al., 2006), and Resource Description Framework (RDF) (Lassila
and Swick, 1999); (3) offer advanced editing functionalities with support for exploitation of corpora
resources (Borin et al., 2013b).
There are 21 resources with over 700,000 lexical entries available in Karp. Since all resources uti-
lize the lexical entries of SALDO, a large amount of information becomes accessible when performing
simple searches. For example when we look up the SALDO entry flaska..1 ?bottle?, we find information
about the synset from Swesaurus,
6
a WordNet-like Swedish resource, as well as synset and sense from
Princeton WordNet,
7
syntactic valence from PAROLE,
8
identifier from Loan Typology Wordlist (LWT),
9
6
http://spraakbanken.gu.se/eng/resource/swesaurus
7
http://wordnet.princeton.edu/
8
http://spraakdata.gu.se/parole/lexikon/swedish.parole.lexikon.html
9
http://lingweb.eva.mpg.de/cgi-bin/ids/ids.pl?com=simple_browse&lg_id=187
10
the lexical ID from Lexin,
10
etc. Each of these resources is in turn linked to mono- and multi-lingual
information that can be exploited by any other resource or application.
3.4 Korp ? Swedish corpora
Korp is a Swedish corpus search interface developed at Spr?akbanken. It provides access to over 1.6
billion tokens from both modern and historic Swedish texts (Borin et al., 2012; Ahlberg et al., 2013).
The interface allows advanced searches and comparisons between different corpora, all automatically
annotated with dependency structure using MaltParser (Nivre et al., 2007).
One functionality provided by Korp is Related Words. This shows a list of words fetched from SALDO
which are semantically related to the search term. Only words that actually occur in the corpora are
retrieved by this function. By clicking on one of these, a new corpus search is done with this word as
search term (Borin et al., 2012). Another functionality in Korp is Word Picture which uses statistical
data to select typical examples illustrating collocational semantic relations for chosen expressions. This
query system extracts frequent collocations of the word in question along with an analysis of the parts-
of-speech of the collocating words.
4 The development of SweFN
As described by the BFN research team, manual construction of a framenet resource involves several
steps, including defining frames and frame elements, collecting appropriate lexical units for the frames,
comparing the findings with printed dictionaries, extracting syntactic and collocational contexts to illus-
trate the frame, and analyzing sentences to explore the use of LUs (Fillmore et al., 2003).
The work procedure of SweFN is based on transfer of information from BFN. To a large extent we
follow the BFN development process, but the development of SweFN differs in three crucial aspects:
(1) when we transfer frames from BFN to Swedish, there is usually no need to re-define them. How-
ever, the frames are checked for compatibility with Swedish language and culture; (2) our inventory of
LUs is derived from the SALDO lexicon; (3) we utilize in-house resources, all linked in the Swedish
infrastructure for language technology, SweFN++.
Taking BFN as a starting point saves time and effort in developing frames. Most of the effort goes
to figure out what SALDO entries evoke which frames and to find suitable example sentences. In order
to find appropriate LUs evoking a particular frame we consult: (1) the lexical resources in Karp (see
section 4.3); (2) printed dictionaries; (3) the corpus infrastructure Korp for concordance search in order to
investigate additional uses of the words. This process occasionally results in new frames or modification
of the frames of BFN (see section 4.4).
4.1 SALDO
The manual process of constructing a SweFN frame begins with choosing a frame from BFN or word of
interest. When we create a frame equivalent to one which already exists in BFN, we transfer the frame
features which are more or less language independent from the BFN frame to the SweFN frame. These
features include frame description, frame-to-frame relations, and FEs. We then search for appropriate
SALDO entries evoking the frame as well as example sentences for annotation. If suitable entries exist
in SALDO they are chosen for use as LUs. Otherwise we suggest entries to be added to SALDO (Borin
et al., 2013a). Each SALDO sense is allowed to populate only one SweFN frame except in a few cases
where some inflectional forms evoke one frame and other forms another frame.
When we instead use a word or expression as a starting point we look up all senses in SALDO and
systematically add each sense to the frame it evokes. The selection of LUs from SALDO to populate
the frames of SweFN is done in different ways. One method is to determine which of the English LUs
of BFN frames have suitable equivalents in Swedish. Thereafter different types of searches are made
in SALDO. For example, working on the frame Containers, having introduced the noun LU flaska
?bottle? one can search for entries ending with flaska, thus finding a number of compounds such as cham-
pagneflaska ?champagne bottle?, droppflaska ?dropper bottle (med.)?, eng?angsflaska (one+time+bottle)
10
http://lexin2.nada.kth.se/lexin/
11
?non-returnable bottle?, glasflaska ?glass bottle?, halvflaska (half+bottle) ?375ml bottle?, miniatyrflaska
?miniature bottle?, nappflaska (pacifier+bottle) ?baby bottle?, sprayflaska (spray+bottle) ?spray can?, tom-
flaska ?empty bottle?, vattenflaska ?water bottle?, v?armeflaska (heat+bottle) ?warm water bottle?, to name
a few. Another method is searching for entries having the LU in question as one of the determiners. For
example, working on the Animal frame, a search may be done on the determiner djur ?animal? resulting
in a long list of lexical entries for different species of animals, which may be entered into the frame.
The possibility of doing searches in SALDO as described above, in combination with compounding
being very productive in Swedish, is one reason for the relatively large number of LUs in SweFN.
4.2 Swedish Constructicon
Constructions are more complex linguistic units than words, they are common in use and difficult to ig-
nore when working with authentic text. One way to enrich SweFN with more representative examples of
how to express meaning in language is to include constructions as frame-evoking units in the database.
Currently work is being done on systematically linking constructions in SweCcn with frames in SweFN
(Ehrlemark, 2014), but the task is not as straight-forward as identifying which frame is evoked by a
certain LU. First, not all constructions evoke frames, carrying little meaning from a semantic point of
view. This includes such general patterns as constructions for modification, predication, passive voice
or filler-gap constructions. Second, constructions that potentially correspond with frames do not always
fit the distribution pattern of frame elements described in the target frame. This group includes fig-
urative constructions or constructions that are more, or less, general than the target frame in SweFN.
Constructions which do correspond with frames may be called frame-bearing constructions (Fillmore
et al., 2012). A frame-bearing construction evokes a target frame in the same manner as an LU, with
matching construction elements and frame elements.
The linking of constructions with frames is carried out through manual analysis of constructions and
their semantic valence patterns. The work includes paraphrasing the meaning of a construction to identify
which frame or frames it may evoke, and thereafter comparing the construction elements with the FEs of
the target frame. For example, SweCcn includes three constructions for comparisons: j?amf?orelse
?comparison?, which has the two subordinate constructions j?amf?orelse.likhet ?compari-
son.similarity? and j?amf?orelse.olikhet ?comparison.difference? ? all three are Swedish equiva-
lents of corresponding constructions in the Berkeley Constructicon (B?ackstr?om et al., 2014). In all three
cases the CEs in the construction entries correspond to the FEs in the Evaluative comparison
frame which has the following definition: a PROFILED ITEM is compared to a STANDARD ITEM with re-
spect to some ATTRIBUTE. By establishing a link between, in this case the comparison constructions
and the Evaluative comparison frame, we may enrich the frame with typical example sentences
such as Hennes cykel ?ar b?attre ?an min ?Her bicycle is better than mine? and Popband ?ar lika arga som
rockband ?Popbands are as angry as rockbands?.
Another example is the pair of constructions proportion i om and proportion per, which
distinguish different syntactic patterns for expressing proportion in Swedish. In both cases,
the construction combines two entities, a numerator and a denominator, joined by a preposi-
tion. However, they differ regarding domain of use, preposition used, and definiteness of the
second noun phrase. The construction proportion i om describes time, and therefore cor-
responds to frames that express proportion in relation to time units, such as Frequency and
Speed description. The construction proportion per is a more general construction
that expresses Frequency and Speed description as well as other ratio relations as de-
scribed in the frames Relational quantity, Rate quantification, Proportion, and
Price per unit. Thus, a link between SweFN and SweCcn may refer the user to correct Swedish
constructions for ratio relations from the frames they evoke.
At the time of writing, about half of the entries in SweCcn are linked to frames in SweFN. The
continuing work with comparing and linking the two resources does not aim to link all constructions
with frames, but rather to distinguish frame-bearing from non-frame-bearing constructions. The linking
allows the user to easily go between a construction and the frame or frames it evokes and correspondingly
12
from a frame to constructions evoking the frame. In this way, both SweCcn and SweFN become more
representative of the language they set out to describe and better incorporated for future pedagogical and
language technological uses.
4.3 Karp
As well as being the editing tool used to build SweFN and other resources, Karp is an important tool
for accessing information. Searching on any expression, word form or lemma results in a display of
every occurrence in all SweFN++ resources, except instances in the corpus. This gives, for example, an
overview of different senses of polysemous words, in which resources they have been entered and how.
Thus, we can see which SweFN frames are evoked by different senses of a word, we can see synonymous
words in Swesaurus (Borin and Forsberg, 2014), the morphology of the word as well as multiword units
containing this word in SALDO, samples of sentences from Korp where the chosen word occurs, and
constructions in Swedish Constructicon which use this word (Lyngfelt et al., 2012).
SweFN developers use Karp to find SALDO entries that evoke a particular frame, SweCcn developers
use Karp to find frames evoked by constructions, or constructions that evoke frames. Figure 2 shows an
example of a view in Karp. In this particular view SweFN and SweCcn resources were selected, but other
choices are also possible. The combination of searches shown here are in turn for a certain construction
or frame (two first boxes), for constructions that match a certain frame (third box). This particular search
is for constructions that match Similarity, which here resulted in 14 different constructions, each
of which contained potential patterns which in turn could be used to perform new searches in Korp.
Finally, in the fourth box the search is for a particular SALDO sense, and in the fifth box for a certain
LU. Searches for other types of units such as frame elements, etc. are also possible.
Figure 2: The Karp editing tool provides various functionalities to extract information from a number
of different lexical resources. The combination of searches above is selected to illustrate the variety of
possibilities in Karp.
13
4.4 Korp
The Korp corpora and search interface serve several purposes in the creation of SweFN. The coverage
of lexical variation found in corpora is much larger than the variation we find in a lexicon and this helps
in defining senses of polysemous words. From the corpora, example sentences are extracted to illustrate
valence structures of LUs evoking frames. Korp extended search allows searches that combine SweFN
LUs and syntactic structures of SweCcn constructions. The Related Words function provides a method of
easily expanding the set of LUs populating a frame and giving easy access to example sentences where
lexical variations are observed. Word Picture offers guidance in disambiguation as of LUs well as in
analyzing semantic and syntactic structures.
Korp is a useful tool to check for compatibility with Swedish language and culture. Extended searches
help us modify BFN frames and create new frames. There are two situations when BFN frames have
been modified for SweFN (Heppin and Gronostaj, 2014): (1) the BFN frames are not suitable because
of linguistic or cultural differences. For example the BFN frame Jury deliberation has been re-
defined to Deliberation in SweFN. In Deliberation the FE corresponding to the FE JURY in
BFN is changed to DELIBERATION GROUP seeing that there is no jury in the Swedish legal process
and a more general frame is appropriate as it covers deliberations in different kinds of legal systems;
(2) the BFN frames are too general for our purposes, for example Sound makers in BFN corresponds
to two more specific frames in SweFN: Noise makers and Musical instruments. Completely
new frames have also been created when there is a need for a frame not yet created for BFN. SweFN, for
example, has a greater emphasis on nominal LUs than framenets for other languages. Therefore, frames
such as Animals, Countries, and Plants have been created.
After determining the appropriate pairing of SALDO units and SweFN frames, searches are made for
example sentences manifesting these LUs in the Korp corpora. The sentences we aim to find should have
a variation of valence structure to give a broad overall picture of the LU patterns.
Figure 3: Word picture from Korp of the verb bygga ?build? in present tense, e.g. bygger. The columns
display from left to right subjects, objects, and adverbials. The number to the right in each column is the
frequency of the collocation in Korp.
Word Picture is useful when taking a starting point in individual, polysemous words, to determine
which frames are evoked by the different senses. In figure 3 items, which are listed in subject and object
14
positions respectively, highlight two different senses of the verb bygga ?build?, one abstract and one
concrete sense. The nouns found in subject position, such as film ?film?, system ?system?, unders?okning
?examination?, metod ?method?, rapport ?report?, etc., occur with the sense of bygga ?build? which is
typically found in an abstract intransitive construction with the preposition p?a ?on? as in ?founded on?,
?built on?, or ?based on?. This sense evokes the Use as a starting point frame. The nouns in the
object position, such as hus ?house? and bro ?bridge?, collocate with the agentive verb bygga ?build? in
the concrete sense of ?construct? or ?erect?, which evokes the Building frame (Heppin and Gronostaj,
2014).
5 Consistency checks and automatic extension of the data
There is no gold standard to evaluate the quality of SweFN against as there is no other comparable
resource. FrameNet-like resources for other languages are constructed with different foci and under
different conditions. However, there is a constant assessment of the correctness of the resources built
into the workflow and ongoing consistency checks to avoid inconsistency between resources. The Karp
tool gives error messages, for example when SALDO entries are listed in more than one frame. Other
types of checks are run with certain intervals, for example to see if there are annotation tags which do not
follow the standard format. Confronted with different types of error messages the developers go back to
the frames in question to revise the contents of the frame, such as which LUs are said to evoke the frame,
or the choice of and annotation of example sentences.
One part of the work is directed towards developing computational methods to facilitate the man-
ual construction of SweFN. We have so far focused on three tasks: (1) semantic role labeling (SRL)
(Johansson et al., 2012); (2) automatic sentence extraction, i.e. finding example sentences with varied
syntactic and semantic complexities (Pil?an et al., 2013); (3) automatic expansion of the SweFN lexicon
to determine which frame is evoked by a given word by combining statistical and rule-based methods
based on SALDO descriptors and extracted information from Korp (Johansson, 2014).
6 Conclusions
The building of one big macro-resource for Swedish language technology, where the individual resources
interact with and enhance each other, provides a unique overview of the Swedish language. One search
on a lexical expression results in a list of descriptions from all of the separate resources. The information
derived is not only useful for the end user, but also for the continuing work on all parts of the linguistic
macro-structure.
We have here focused on how two language technology resources, SALDO and SweCcn, are exploited
in the development of SweFN, but also on how these resources enhance each other and other resources.
We mainly address the manual perspectives of the workflow, illustrating what data may derive from the
different resources, how this data may be used to facilitate work, and how the contents of one resource
may reappear in the contents of another. We have given a sketch of the language technology tools with
the aim to reveal their potential importance in the development of SweFN.
The construction of SweFN, and even more so the construction of a macro-resource such as SweFN++,
will continue to develop in the foreseeable future. New insights as well as new problems will continue
to give rise to changes.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the Department of Swedish at the University of Gothenburg and the
three anonymous reviewers. The research presented here was supported by the Swedish Research
Council (grant agreement 2010-6013), the Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation (grant agreement
P120076:1), and by the University of Gothenburg through its support of the Centre for Language Tech-
nology and of Spr?akbanken.
15
References
Malin Ahlberg, Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, Martin Hammarstedt, Leif-J?oran Olsson, Olof Olsson, Johan Roxen-
dal, and Jonatan Uppstr?om. 2013. Korp and Karp a bestiary of language resources: the research infrastructure
of Spr?akbanken. In Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA
2013), Oslo University, Norway. NEALT Proceedings Series 16, number 16, pages 429?433.
H?ector Mart??nez Alonso, Bolette Sandford Pedersen, and N?uria Bel. 2013. Annotation of regular polysemy and
underspecification. In ACL (2), pages 725?730. The Association for Computer Linguistics.
Linn?ea B?ackstr?om, Benjamin Lyngfelt, and Emma Sk?oldberg. 2014. Towards interlingual constructicography. on
correspondence between constructicon resources for English and Swedish. Constructions and Frames, 6(1):9?
32. John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Anderson Bertoldi and Rove Luiza de Oliveira Chishman. 2011. The limits of using FrameNet frames to build a
legal ontology. In CEUR Workshop Proceedings, volume 776, pages 207?212.
Lars Borin and Markus Forsberg. 2014. Swesaurus; or, The Frankenstein approach to Wordnet construction. In
Proceedings of the Seventh Global WordNet Conference (GWC 2014).
Lars Borin, Dana Dann?ells, Markus Forsberg, Maria Toporowska Gronostaj, and Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2010. The
past meets the present in Swedish FrameNet++. In Proceedings of the 14th EURALEX International Congress,
pages 269?281.
Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Johan Roxendal. 2012. Korp the corpus infrastructure of Spr?akbanken. In
Proceedings of LREC 2012. Istanbul: ELRA.
Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Lennart L?onngren. 2013a. SALDO: a touch of yin to WordNet?s yang. Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation, 47(4):1191?1211.
Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, Leif-J?oran Olsson, Olof Olsson, and Jonatan Uppstr?om. 2013b. The lexical editing
system of Karp. In Proceedings of the eLex 2013 conference, pages 503?516, Tallin.
Aljoscha Burchardt, Katrin Erk, Anette Frank, Andrea Kowalski, Sebastian Pad?o, and Manfred Pinkal, 2009.
Multilingual FrameNets in computational lexicography, chapter Using FrameNet for the semantic analysis of
German annotation, representation, and annotation. Berlin: Mouton de Gryter.
Dipanjan Das, Desai Chen, Andr?e F. T. Martins, Nathan Schneider, and Noah A. Smith. 2014. Frame semantic
parsing. Computational Linguistics, 40(1):9?56.
Anna Ehrlemark. 2014. Ramar och konstruktioner ? en k?arlekshistoria [Frames and constructions ? a love story].
Department of Swedish, University of Gothenburg. GU-ISS 2014-01.
Charles J. Fillmore, Miriam R.L. Petruck, Josef Ruppenhofer, and Abby Wright. 2003. FrameNet in Action: The
Case of Attaching. IJL, 16(3):297?332, September.
Charles J. Fillmore, Russell Lee-Goldman, and Russell Rhomieux, 2012. Sign-based construction grammar,
chapter The FrameNet constructicon. Stanford: CSLI.
Charles J. Fillmore. 1985. Frames and the semantics of understanding. Quaderni di Semantica, 6(2):222?254.
Gil Francopoulo, Monte George, Nicoletta Calzolari, Monica Monachini, Nuria Bel, Mandy Pet, and Claudia
Soria. 2006. LMF for Multilingual, Specialized Lexicons. In Proceedings of the 5
th
International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), pages 233?236.
Karin Friberg Heppin and Maria Toporowska Gronostaj. 2014. Exploiting FrameNet for Swedish: Mismatch?
Constructions and Frames, 6(1):51?71. John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Richard Johansson, Karin Friberg Heppin, and Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2012. Semantic role labeling with the
Swedish FrameNet. In Proceedings of the 8
th
Conference on International Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), pages 3697?3700, Istanbul, Turkey.
Richard Johansson. 2014. Automatic expansion of the Swedish FrameNet lexicon ? Comparing and combining
lexicon-based and corpus-based methods. Constructions and Frames, 6(1):91?112. John Benjamins Publishing
Company.
Ora Lassila and Ralph Swick. 1999. Resource Description Framework (RDF). Model and Syntax Specification.
Technical report, W3C. http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-rdf-syntax.
16
Benjamin Lyngfelt, Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, Julia Prentice, Rudolf Rydstedt, Emma Sk?oldberg, and Sofia
Tingsell. 2012. Adding a Constructicon to the Swedish resource network of Spr?akbanken. In Proceedings of
KONVENS 2012, Vienna. LexSem workshop.
Alessandro Moschitti, Paul Morarescu, and Sanda M. Harabagiu. 2003. Open domain information extraction via
automatic semantic labeling. In Proceedings of the 16th International FLAIRS Conference, pages 397?401.
Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Jens Nilsson, Atanas Chanev, Glsen Eryigit, Sandra Kbler, Svetoslav Marinov, and
Erwin Marsi. 2007. MaltParser: A language-independent system for data-driven dependency parsing. Natural
Language Engineering, 13(2):95?135.
Kyoko Hirose Ohara. 2013. Toward constructicon building for Japanese in Japanese FrameNet. Veredas: Frame
Semantics and Its Technological Applications, 17(1):11?28.
Ildik?o Pil?an, Elena Volodina, and Richard Johansson. 2013. Automatic selection of suitable sentences for language
learning exercises. In 20 Years of EUROCALL: Learning from the Past, Looking to the Future. 2013 EUROCALL
Conference, 11th to 14th September 2013 Evora, Portugal, Proceedings., pages 218?225.
Michael Roth and Anette Frank. 2009. A NLG-based application for walking directions. In Proceedings of the
47th ACL and the 4th IJCNLP Conference (Software Demonstrations), pages 37?40.
Emma Sk?oldberg, Linn?ea B?ackstr?om, Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, Benjamin Lyngfelt, Leif-J?oran Olsson, Julia
Prentice, Rudolf Rydstedt, Sofia Tingsell, and Jonatan Uppstr?om. 2013. Between grammars and dictionaries: a
Swedish Constructicon. In Proceedings of the eLex 2013 conference, pages 310?327, Tallin.
Carlos Subirats, 2009. Multilingual FrameNets in Computational Lexicography, chapter Spanish FrameNet: a
frame-semantic analysis of the Spanish lexicon. Berlin: Mouton de Gryter.
Tiago Timponi Torrent, Maria Margarida Martins Salom?ao, Ely Edison da SilvaMatos, Maucha Andrade Ganomal,
J?ulia Gonc?alves, Bruno Pereira de Souza, Daniela Sim?oes, and Simone Rodrigues Peron-Corr?ea. 2014. Mul-
tilingual lexicographic annotation for domain-specific electronic dictionaries: the Copa 2014 FrameNet Brasil
project. Constructions and Frames, 6(1):72?90. John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Tiago Timpioni Torrent. 2013. Behind the labels: Criteria for defining analytical categories in FrameNet Brasil.
Veredas: Frame Semantics and Its Technological Applications, 17(1):44?65.
17
