 An analysis of Wikipedia digital writing 
 
dott. Antonella Elia 
Dipartimento di Scienze Statistiche - Sezione Linguistica 
Facolt? di Scienze Politiche - Universit? degli Studi di Napoli Federico II 
Napoli, Italy 
aelia@unina.it 
 
 Abstract 
 
This paper is a presentation of a 
doctoral research in progress focused 
on a new genre: online 
encyclopaedias. The  introduction to 
Wikipedia and Encyclopaedia 
Britannica Online will be followed by 
a presentation of wiki as a new textual 
genre. Wikipedia analysis will focus 
firstly on the investigation of the 
?WikiLanguage?, the language used in 
official encyclopaedic articles. 
Secondly, the ?WikiSpeak?, the 
spoken-written language used by  
Wikipedians in their backstage and 
informal community, will be taken 
into account. The initial findings of 
this research seem to suggest that, the 
language of the Wikipedia?s co-
authored articles is formal and 
standardized in a way similar to that 
found in Encyclopaedia Britannica 
Online. By contrast, the WikiSpeak, as 
a new variety of NetSpeak Jargon, can 
be considered as a creative domain, an 
independent and individual expression 
of linguistic freedom of self-
representation, characterizing the wiki 
Computer Mediated Discourse 
Community. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The encyclopaedia's structure, either hierarchical 
or alphabetically ordered, with its evolving 
nature is particularly adaptable to a disk-based 
or online format. All major printed 
encyclopaedias have moved to this method of 
delivery. Online E-ncyclopedias can include 
multimedia (such as video, sound clips and 
animated illustrations) unavailable in the printed 
format. They can make use of hypertext cross-
references between conceptually related items 
and, furthermore, they offer the additional 
advantage of being dynamic: new and frequently 
updated information can be presented almost 
immediately, rather than waiting for the next 
release of a static format (as with a paper or disk 
publication).  
This research is based particularly on a 
contrastive linguistic analysis of Wikipedia and 
Encyclopaedia Britannica Online. The latter is 
considered one of the greatest examples of 
general encyclopaedias in the English speaking 
world. It contains 120,000 articles which are 
commonly considered accurate, reliable and 
well-written. Brief article summaries can be 
viewed for free on the net, while the full text is 
available only for individuals with monthly or 
yearly subscription. 
On the other hand, Wikipedia is a 
collaborative authoring project on the web, a 
repository of encyclopaedic knowledge, an 
example of a collaborative hypermedium 
focused on a common project. It is one of the 
most popular reference websites receiving 
around 50 million hits per day. It is a social e-
democracy environment, designed with the goal 
of creating a free encyclopedia containing 
information on all subjects written 
collaboratively by volunteers. At the time of 
writing this paper the project has produced over 
two and half million articles and has been 
officially recognized as the largest international 
online community. It consists of 200 
independent language editions and the English 
version is the biggest one with more than 
962,995 articles (up to January 2006).  
2. Wiki as new textual genre  
 
With reference to the extensive empirical 
studies of Susan Herring on CMC, wikis and 
blogs considered as spaces belonging to the 
second web generation, can be regarded as 
adding new peculiarities to the existing  
synchronous and asynchronous tools of the 
first CMC generation (such as e-mail, mailing 
list, forum and chat). It is well known in media 
studies that ?the medium is the message? as 
McLuhan (1964) pointed out in the sixties, and 
in fact the  medium adds unique properties to 
16
 the web genre in terms of production, function, 
and reception which cannot be ignored. Wikis 
are co-authoring tools which allow collective 
collaboration. They can be, simultaneously, a 
repository of information and an asynchronous 
tool of communication and discussion across 
the web (see Wikipedia). All wikis have 
integrated search engines for locating content 
and  are open to anyone since they are 
considered a public space, even though they 
can be protected against unauthentic users.  
Their main aim is to create documents. 
Wikis, unlike traditionally designed web sites, 
encourage ?topical writing? by using wiki links 
and creating a wide network of interconnected 
pages.  The interlinking process becomes 
simpler to type by just putting the word(s) in 
square brackets. It simultaneously creates a 
new topic title (a WikiWord), a new writing 
space for that topic and a  link to that space. 
Once created, a topic will be available 
anywhere on the wiki as whenever the 
WikiWord is typed, it will link to the writing 
space of that topic  (Morgan, 2006).  
The writer, the supreme authority in print, is 
considered the one who transmits content 
through paper pages, to passive readers, whose 
role is merely to decode and interpret their 
message. The electronic writing space, being 
hypertextual and extremely flexible, changes 
the landscape. Writers can create multiple 
structures from the same topics (hierarchy, 
web, spiral, etc.) and readers can enter, browse 
and leave text at many points. In the hypertext, 
the author creates different paths for the reader, 
although there is neither a  canonical path nor a 
defined page order to follow. The new active 
readers making their choices, become co-
authors of the hypertext (Bolter, 1991). This 
idea is  more  pronounced on a wiki than 
elsewhere, because in an open wiki   the reader 
can (if allowed) really interrupt the process, re-
writing, changing, erasing and modifying the 
original text or creating new topics. 
Traditional writing creates a gap between 
writer and reader. Wiki technology mediates  
the gap because the two actors assume  
interchangeable roles  in this new open e-
environment. To conclude, wiki text is never 
static as it is considered revisable, a-temporal 
as nodes continually change through the 
collaborative writing process, creating a never 
ending evolving network of topics. Thus, 
knowledge becomes webbed, contextualized 
though it remains temporary as it can always 
be changed or vandalized. Luckily, the original 
version can always, and easily, be recovered 
by SysOps1,  through page histories2 (Morgan, 
2006). 
Wikis offer two different writing modes. The 
first one is known as ?document mode?. When 
it is used, contributors create documents 
collaboratively and can leave their additions to 
articles. Multiple authors can edit and update 
the content of documents which gradually 
become representations of contributors? shared 
knowledge (Leuf and Cunningham, 2001). 
Wikis have two states, ?Read? and ?Edit?. 
?Read state? is by default. In this case, wiki 
pages look just like normal webpages. When 
the user wants to edit a page, he/she must only 
access the ?edit state?. 
 ?Document mode? is expository, extensive, 
monological, formal, refined and less creative 
than ?thread mode?. It is in third person and 
unsigned. ?Document mode? demonstrates that 
knowledge is collective and that the ideas, not 
the writers, are the main focus. Writers 
contribute to ?document mode? refactoring, 
reorganizing, incorporating and synthesizing 
?thread mode? comments in encyclopaedic 
articles and changing the first to third person 
(Morgan, 2006).  
The second wiki writing mode is ?thread 
mode?. Contributors carry out discussions by 
posting signed messages in the discussion page 
connected to the main article. Others reply to 
the original message and so a group of 
threaded messages evolves (Morgan, 2006). 
?Thread mode? is dialogical, open, 
collective, dynamic and informal. It develops 
organically, without a predictive structure. It 
expresses public thinking, presents multiple 
positions and is exploratory. Entries are 
phrased in first person and are signed. Rather 
then replying to a discussion entry, the writer 
can refactor the page to incorporate 
suggestions made, then delete the comment. 
?Thread mode? demonstrates that knowledge 
is the result of  constructivist collaboration and 
not a lonely production. 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 SysOp is the abbreviation for "systems operator", and is 
a commonly used term for the administrator of a special-
interest area of an online service. 
2 The page history of all versions of previous pages is 
available on Wikipedia. It consists of  text, date , time 
and  editing authors. 
17
 3. Research objectives and methodolology 
 
3.1. Wikipedia vs Britannica 
 
The first objective of this research has been 
directed towards the investigation of Wikipidia 
articles and on what has been defined, in this 
paper as ?WikiLanguage?, the formal, neutral 
and impersonal language used in the official 
encyclopedic articles. In this phase, an analysis 
of  randomly selected sample articles has been 
carried out. The data for this research in 
progress has been based on two corpora. Up to 
now, they include a collection of txt files made 
up of one hundred articles representing topics 
taken from the Wiki Folksonomy?s 3 eight 
categories (culture, geography, history, life, 
mathematics, science, society, technology) and 
on a contrastive analysis of the same articles 
found in Encyclopaedia Britannica Online.  
The purpose of the quantitative research has 
been the empirical measurement of some  
linguistic features in order to define the degree 
of formality in the WikiLanguage. The sample 
articles have been analyzed through the 
ConcApp Concordancer Program. Different  
factors have been taken into consideration in 
order to define the formality of Britannica vs 
Wikipedia. The first aspect has been  articles? 
length (total words) as conciseness was found 
to be a feature of formal written discourse 
(Chafe, 1982). The second, average word 
length (in letters) as short words have been 
considered a characteristic of informal genres 
(Biber, 1988). A high level of lexical density 
(Halliday, 1985) has been found in formal 
academic writing. It has been considered the 
main stylistic difference between speech and 
writing (Biber, 1988). 
Subsequently, the number of unique lexical 
items in the two corpora has been measured. 
With reference to the findings of Heylighen 
and Dewaele (1999), frequency of word 
suffixes typical in formal genres (such as -age, 
-ment, -ance/ence, -ion, -ity, -ism) and 
impersonal pronouns (it/they) have been 
calculated. A contrastive frequency of 
meaningful keywords has also been 
                                                 
3 Folksonomy is a neologism which indicates a practice 
of collaborative categorization which makes use of freely 
chosen keywords. Taxonomy derives from Greek ?taxis? 
and ?nomos?. ?Taxis? means classification, ?nomos? (or 
nomia) management and ?folk? people; so folksonomy 
means people?s classification management.  
 
investigated. The informality of the language 
has been measured through the frequency of  
abbreviations, acronyms, contractions (I'm, 
don't, he's, etc.) and personal pronouns (I, we, 
you, he/she, they) which have been found to be 
typical of informal genres, such as face-to-face 
and phone conversations (Biber, 1988). As 
shown in Appendix A (Fig.1), the first results 
of this research conducted on one hundred 
articles have highlighted a number of 
differences and similarities between Wikipedia 
and Britannica. 
Articles in Britannica have proven to be 
shorter than those in Wikipedia  (average 
length: 1728 vs 3510 words) and they have 
shown a  higher lexical density (44.9% vs 
31.4%). Although the level of total formality is 
clearly higher in Britannica (50.2% vs 36.6%), 
the frequency of formal nouns and impersonal 
pronouns typical of the formal discourse (5.3 
vs 5.2) and the average word length  (in letters 
5.4 vs 5.2) has proven to be very similar. The 
divergent value is related to lexical density, but 
if text length varies widely (as happens in the 
two e-ncyclopedias) the  different lexical items 
will appear to be much higher in the shortest 
text  as their relationship is not linear. Each 
additional one hundred words of text adds 
fewer and fewer additional unique words 
(Biber, 1988). Thus, an interpretation of the 
collected data seems to suggest that thanks to 
the collective editorial control, the 
WikiLanguage of the co-authored articles 
shows a formal and standardized style similar 
to that found in Britannica. A table 
representing a part of the collected data, and 
their graphical representation, has been 
provided in  Appendix A (Fig. 2,3,4).   
 
3.2 Web analysis 
 
Particular attention has been devoted to 
Wikipedia digital style due to the importance of 
the interplay between genre and medium when 
dealing with web-mediated texts. The layout of 
sample articles has been investigated (table of 
content, sections and sub-sections extension) as 
well as multimodality (tables, graphs, images, 
audio recordings and videos) and 
hypertextuality [explicative (internal 
bookmarks), associative (wikilinks) and 
explorative links (external weblinks)]. At 
present Wikipedia does not  seem to fully 
exploit the potential offered by multimodality 
(and Britannica even less), showing few audio 
18
 recordings and videos. This is probably due to 
the feature of Open Source software, keeping 
with hackers? simple and essential style (i.e. 
Slashdot and Everything2), to the contributors? 
average technical skills and to the philosophical 
choice which grants a privilege to information 
and content over appearance.  One of the 
prominent properties of Wikipedia is its highly 
dense hypertextuality when compared to 
Britannica. The analysis of the articles clearly 
reveal  the  abundance  of Wikipedia?s nodes 
interlinking and dynamism, made possible by 
wiki software and, by contrast, the isolation, 
linearity (page structure) and static nature of 
corresponding Britannica articles. In this case 
using Finnemann?s  (1999) concept of ?modal 
shifts? with reference ?to reading mode? and 
?navigating mode?, it is evident that Wikipedia 
articles actively stimulates the latter allowing 
the reader to construct his/her own personal 
pathway, browsing inside and outside the 
website. 
 
4. WikiSpeak  
 
The second phase of this research will focus on 
Wikipedia as ?Computer Mediated Discourse 
Community? and on the language, defined in 
this paper as ?WikiSpeak?, the language 
spoken-written by Wikipedians in their 
informal backstage community. The medium 
has developed its own wired style and specific 
glossary, which resembles in some aspects the 
hackers? Jargon File. The main WikiSpeak 
distinctiveness lies in the lexicon used. 
WikiSpeak is an unofficial and high-context 
language which can be considered as a new 
variety of the Netspeak, one of the most 
creative domains of contemporary English. Its 
peculiarity is immediately evident in the 
?wikilogisms? found in the Community Portal 
homepage (i.e. stub, NPV, wikify, backlogs, 
FAQ, village pump, etc.) which can be 
considered, for its lexical density, a supreme 
synthesis of WikiSpeak, as well as a political 
manifesto as the wiki philosophical essence 
and its informal community style are clearly 
disclosed here4. 
The present investigation has started from its 
analysis in order to measure the impact of the 
                                                 
4 In the Community Portal homepage, of 1604 words 
used, 809 are unique words. The lexical density is very 
high 50.4%. The keywords are: help (19), you (16), 
article (16), collaboration (8), free (7). 
community front door (content, form, 
functionality) on the reader, and it will go on 
analysing the WikiSpeak used in discussion 
pages connected to the selected articles. 
A large number of new words have emerged. 
WikiSpeak is an informal and colloquial 
language rich, for example, in acronyms [i.e. 
NPOV (Neutral Point Of View), COTW 
(Collaboration Of The Week), IFD (Image For 
Deletion), etc]. Plenty of abbreviations are also 
found. They are individual words reduced to 
two or three letters, [i.e. pls (please), bb ppls 
(bye bye peoples), etc]. Some abbreviations are 
like rebuses, as the sound value of the letter, or 
numeral, acts as a syllable of a word [i.e. B4N 
(bye for now), CYL (see you later), etc]. Wiki 
acronyms used in wiki CMC (discussion 
pages, mailing lists, IRC channels, instant 
messaging and personal user pages) are not 
restricted to words or short phrases, but can be 
sentence-length [i.e. WDYS (what did you 
say?), CIO (check it out), etc]. 
Many word processes take place in 
WikiSpeak, including several ludic 
innovations. A popular method of creating 
wikilogisms is to combine two separate words 
to make new compound words. Some elements 
turn up repeatedly, i.e. Wiki (WikiPage, 
WikiBooks, WikiLink, WikiStress, etc.)5. In 
addition, WikiSpeak makes large use of blends 
(namespace, infobox, quickpoll, etc.) and 
semantic shifts [i.e. orphan, mirror, stub, etc] 
shown in the wiki glossary available for the 
newbies. 
Distinctive graphology is also an important 
feature of WikiSpeak. All orthographic 
features have been affected. For example, the 
status of capitalization varies greatly. There is 
a strong tendency to use lowercase everywhere 
on the net. The lower-case default mentality 
means that any use of capitalization is a 
marked form of communication. Messages 
wholly in capitals are considered to be 
shouting and usually avoided. A distinctive 
feature of Wiki graphology is the way two 
capitals are used: one initial, one medial.  
This phenomenon is called BiCapitalization 
(BiCaps or CamelCase6) and is widespread in 
                                                 
5 In Wikipedia veterans avoid their use as it is considered 
clich?. However it is tolerated when  it refers to technical 
terms (i.e. wikilinks). 
6 CamelCase is the practice of writing  compound words 
or phrases where the words are joined without spaces, 
and each word is capitalized within the compound. The 
19
 Wiki community (i.e. MediaWiki, WikiProject, 
etc.). It is a very interesting example of how a 
programming language influences the wired 
style, as BiCaps were used in hackers? 
communities as a word joiner alternative to the 
underscore based style and, in the original wiki 
convention to create links before the invention 
of [[ _ ]] square brackets. Now it has become 
fashionable in marketing for names of products 
and companies. Outside these contexts, 
however, BiCaps are rarely used in formal 
written English, and most style guides 
recommend against it. 
Spelling practice is also a WikiSpeak 
distinctive character. New spelling conventions 
have emerged, such as the replacement of 
plural ?s by ?z. Emotional expressions make 
use of a varying number of vowels and 
consonants (yayyyyyyy) and repeated 
punctuation (WHAT????), but punctuation 
sometimes tends to be minimalist or 
completely absent, a great deal depends on the 
user?s personality: some Wikipedians are 
scrupulous about maintaining a traditional 
punctuation while some do not use it at all. On 
the other hand, there is an increased use of 
symbols not normally part of the traditional 
punctuation system, such as # , or repeated 
dots (?), hyphens (---), repeated use of 
commas (,,,) or asterisks (***).  WikiSpeak, as 
a new variety of the NetSpeak Jargon, can be 
considered as a creative domain, an 
independent and individual expression of the 
linguistic freedom of self-representation in the 
wiki community of practice.  
This research will make use of textual 
linguistics and corpus linguistics for the 
investigation of the interactions expressed in 
the unofficial and informal Wiki CMC. 
 
5. Conclusions 
 
In conclusion, this research project has two 
main focuses: defining the Wikipedia language 
variations within a dual context of use: official 
encyclopaedic entries (WikiLanguage) vs 
backstage community Speak (WikiSpeak).  
Wikipedia, as a new expression for the 
encyclopedic genre, appears very similar to 
traditional printed encyclopedias due to its 
stylistic homogeneity, expressed Neutral Point 
                                                                       
name comes from the uppercase "bumps" in the middle of 
the compound word, suggesting the humps of a camel. 
of View7 and formal style. The first findings of 
this research in progress seem to demonstrate 
how Wikipedia succeeds   in reproducing an 
extant traditional genre even if applied to a 
collaborative and constructivist scenario. 
According to Shephered and Watters (1998), 
extant subgenres are based on already existing 
genres in other media forms which have been 
converted into  digital form (i.e. newspaper 
into electronic news); on the contrary, novel 
subgenres are entirely dependent on the new 
medium (i.e. homepages, search engines, 
webgames, etc.). They stated that when an 
extant genre migrates to a digital environment, 
it will initially be faithfully replicated: content 
and form will be preserved and the capabilities 
of the new medium will not be fully exploited 
(see Britannica). At a later stage in the 
evolution, variant genres are created. This 
process is driven by the technical capabilities 
of the new medium. It is the point of view of 
this study that Wikipedia  can be taken as an 
example of the evolution of an extant 
traditional genre (encyclopedias) which has 
been officially  preserved in the articles? 
superficial form, but not in the writing and 
reading processes (social editing, 
intertextuality, high informativeness and  
browsing mechanisms). The articles? textual 
form seems to suggest that when collaborative 
users have to respect stylistic established 
norms (see Wiki Manual of Style8) and shared 
social working ethics (see Wikiquette9), 
diversity and controversy are erased and the 
official requested style is respected within the 
open editing system. Nevertheless, 
technological advantages offered by 
collaborative software, reinforce the variety, 
the quick updating and interconnection of the 
information provided by the contributors? 
multitude. Their voices, even if individually, 
originally and democratically expressed in the 
CMC wiki community, are merged and  
homogenized in the articles? neutrality and 
formality. 
                                                 
7 A Neutral Point Of View (NPOV) is writing free from 
bias. It is generally considered desirable for journalistic 
and encyclopedic writings. According to the Wikipedia?s 
founder, Jimbo Wales, NPOV is an "absolute and non-
negotiable" principle in Wiki Manual of Style. 
8 Manual of Style is a style guide for Wikipedia?s 
contributors. It has the purpose of making the editing 
easier by following a consistent format.  
9 Principles of Wikiquette are the guidelines on how to 
work with others on Wikipedia. 
20
 Linguistic analysis cannot be separated from 
the investigation of the main philosophical and 
political goals of Wikipedia whose main aim is 
to pursue freedom of content and information 
expressed through the Wikipedian ?Collective? 
(L?vy, 1994) and ?Connective? Intelligence 
(de Kerckove, 1997) in this new acentric 
rhizomatic environment10 (Deleuze-Guattari, 
1980). Encyclopaedia Britannica is a 
knowledge compendium without any political 
meaning hosted by a commercial website 
(.com). In the 18th century, the original French 
?Encyclop?die? from Diderot and D?Alambert 
was mainly a political project designed to 
propagate the ideas of Enlightenment and to 
establish the reign of reason in Europe 
(Soufron, 2004). Similarly, Wikipedia in the 
current I.C.T. age, can be considered as a post-
modern Encyclopaedia, a copyleft reference 
work with a non-profit cultural goal (.org) 
affording a political project rather than merely 
a scientific one. It is aimed at changing the 
society of the 21st century by giving control 
over content to everyone and thus enhancing 
freedom of expression and recovering the 
original aim of the World Wide Web inventor: 
Sir Tim Berners Lee wanted the web to be a 
boundless library of Babel and not a global 
supermarket as it has become in the dot.com 
era. 
 
References 
 
Biber Douglas. 1988. Variation across speech and 
writing. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge, UK. 
 
Bolter Jay David. 1991, Writing Space: Computers, 
Hypertext, and the Remediation of Print, Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, N.Y., USA 
 
Chafe Wallace L. 1982. ?Integration and involvement in 
speaking, writing, and oral literature? in D. Tannen (Ed.), 
Spoken and Written Language: Exploring Orality and 
Literacy (pp. 35-53). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
 
Crystal David. 2001. Language and the Internet, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
 
Crystal  David 2004. The Cambridge Encyclopedia of 
English Language, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK. 
                                                 
10 In A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia, Deleuze and Guattari state that a rhizome 
is any structure in which each point is necessarily 
connected to each other point, where no location may 
become a beginning or an end, so the whole is 
heterogeneous. Deleuze labels the rhizome as a 
?multiplicity? resistant to structures of domination.  
 
De Kerkhove Derrick. 1997. Connected Intelligence, the 
Arrival of the Web Society, Somerville House Toronto, 
Canada. 
 
Deleuze Gilles and Guattari Felix. 1980. tr. Eng., 1987, A 
Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia, 
University of Minnesota Press Minneapolis, USA. 
 
Emigh William, Herring Susan. 2005. Collaborative 
Authoring on the Web: A Genre Analysis of Online 
Encyclopedias. Proceedings of the Thirty-Eighth 
Hawai'i., International Conference on System Sciences 
(HICSS-38), IEEE Press, Los Alamitos, USA.  
 
Encyclopaedia Britannica Online 
http://www.britannica.com    
 
Finnemann Niels Ole. 1999 Hypertext and 
theRepresentational Capacities of the Binary Alphabet 
http://www.hum.au.dk/ckulturf/pages/publications/nof/hy
pertext.htm 
 
Herring Susan. 1996. Computer Mediated 
Communication, linguistic, social and cross-cultural 
perspectives, John Benjamins Publishing Company. 
Amsterdam, Philadelphia. 
 
Heylighen Francis and Dewaele JM. 1999. Formality of 
language: Definition, measurement and behavioral 
determinants. Internal Report, Center "Leo Apostel", Free 
University of Brussels, Belgium . 
 
Leuf Bo and Cunningham Ward. 2001. The Wiki Way: 
Quick Collaboration on the Web, Addison-Wesley, New 
York, USA.  
 
L?vy Pierre. 1994. L'intelligence Collective. Pour une 
antropologie du cyberspace, La D?couverte, Paris, 
France. 
 
McLuhan Marshall. 1964. "The Medium is the Message" 
in Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man, Signet, 
New York, USA. 
 
Morgan M.C.  BlogsandWikis 
http://biro.bemidjistate.edu/~morgan/wiki/wiki.ph 
 
Shepherd Michael, Watters Carolyn. 1998. The evolution 
of cybergenres in International Conference on System 
Sciences (HICSS-31). Hawai?i, vol. II, p. 97-109 cit. in 
?Literature Genre & Cybergenre?. 
 
Soufron Jean Baptiste. 2004. The political importance of 
the Wikipedia project: Wikipedia toward a new electronic 
enlightment era? http://soufron.free.fr 
 
Swales John M. 1990. Genre Analysis. English in 
Academic and Research Setting, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, UK. 
 
Wikipedia  
http://www.wikipedia.org 
 
 
21
  
APPENDIX A 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Linguistic formality: Britannica vs Wikipedia 
 
22
  
 
Figure 2.  Lexical density 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Total formality in percentage 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Articles? length in words 
23
