Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis (Louhi) @ EACL 2014, pages 90?95,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Reducing VSM data sparseness by generalizing contexts:
application to health text mining
Amandine P
?
erinet
INSERM, U1142, LIMICS, Paris, France
Sorbonne Universit?es, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Paris, France
Universit?e Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cit?e, Villetaneuse, France
amandine.perinet@edu.univ-paris13.fr
Thierry Hamon
LIMSI-CNRS, Orsay, France
Universit?e Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cit?e
Villetaneuse, France
hamon@limsi.fr
Abstract
Vector Space Models are limited with low
frequency words due to few available con-
texts and data sparseness. To tackle this
problem, we generalize contexts by inte-
grating semantic relations acquired with
linguistic approaches. We use three meth-
ods that acquire hypernymy relations on a
EHR corpus. Context Generalization ob-
tains the best results when performed with
hypernyms, the quality of the relations be-
ing more important than the quantity.
1 Introduction
Distributional Analysis (DA) (Harris, 1954; Firth,
1957) computes a similarity between target words
from the contexts shared by those two words.
This hypothesis is applied with geometric meth-
ods, such as the Vector Space Model (VSM) (Tur-
ney and Pantel, 2010). The advantage of the VSM
is that the similarity of word meaning can be easily
quantified by measuring their distance in the vec-
tor space, or the cosine of the angle between them
(Mitchell and Lapata, 2010). On the other hand,
a major inconvenience is data sparseness within
the matrix that represents the vector space (Tur-
ney and Pantel, 2010). The data sparseness prob-
lem is the consequence of the word distribution in
a corpus (Baroni et al., 2009): in any corpus, most
of the words have a very low frequency and ap-
pear only a few times. Thus, those words have a
limited set of contexts and similarity is difficult to
catch. Thus, methods based on DA perform better
when more information is available (Weeds and
Weir, 2005; van der Plas, 2008) and are efficient
with large corpora of general language. But with
specialized texts, as EHR texts that are usually of
smaller size, reducing data sparseness is a major
issue and methods need to be adapted.
Semantic grouping of contexts should decrease
their diversity, and thus increase the frequency of
the remaining generalized contexts. We assume
that generalizing contexts may influence the distri-
butional context frequencies. Information for gen-
eralization can be issued from existing resources
or can be computed by linguistic approaches. In
this paper, we propose to use semantic relations
acquired by relation acquisition methods to group
words in contexts. We define a method that
switches words in DA contexts for their hierar-
chical parent or morphosyntactic variant that have
been computed on the corpus with linguistic ap-
proaches before applying the VSM method.
In the following, we first present the related
work, then our method and we finally describe the
different experiments we led. The results obtained
on the EHR corpus are then evaluated in terms of
precision and MAP, and analyzed.
2 Related work
Our approach relates with works that influence
distributional contexts to improve the performance
of VSMs. Some of them intend to change the
way to consider contexts; Broda et al. (2009) do
not use the raw context frequency in DA, but they
first rank contexts according to their frequency,
and take the rank into account. Other models
use statistical language models to determine the
most likely substitutes to represent the contexts
(Baskaya et al., 2013). They assign probabilities to
arbitrary sequences of words that are then used to
create word pairs to feed a co-occurrence model,
before performing a clustered algorithm (Yuret,
2012). The limit of such methods is that their per-
formance is proportional to vocabulary size and re-
quires the availability of training data.
Influence on contexts may also be performed by
embedding additional semantic information. The
semantic relations may be issued from an exist-
ing resource or automatically computed. With
a method based on bootstrapping, Zhitomirsky-
Geffet and Dagan (2009) modify the weights of
90
the elements in contexts relying on the seman-
tic neighbors found with a distributional similar-
ity measure. Based on this work, Ferret (2013)
uses a set of examples selected from an origi-
nal distributional thesaurus to train a supervised
classifier. This classifier is then applied for
reranking the neighbors of the thesaurus selec-
tion. Within Vector Space Model, Tsatsaronis and
Panagiotopoulou (2009) use a word thesaurus to
interpret the orthogonality of terms and measure
semantic relatedness.
With the same purpose of solving the problem of
data sparseness, other methods are based on di-
mensionality reduction, such as Latent Semantic
Analysis (LSA) in (Pad?o and Lapata, 2007) or
Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) (Zheng
et al., 2011). Matrix decomposition techniques are
usually applied to reduce the dimensionality of the
original matrix, thereby rendering it more infor-
mative (Mitchell and Lapata, 2010).
Our approach differs from the aforementioned
ones in that we add semantic information in con-
texts to reduce the number of contexts and to in-
crease their frequency. Contrary to these latter ap-
proaches, we do not reduce the contexts by remov-
ing information but by generalyzing information
and integrating extra semantic knowledge.
3 VSM and context generalization
The contexts in which occurs a target word have
associated frequencies which may be used to form
probability estimates. The goal of our method is
to influence the distributional context frequencies
by generalizing contexts.
Step 1: target and context definition During
this step, we define targets and contexts, with dif-
ferent constraints for their extraction. To adapt
our method to specialized texts, we identify terms
(specific terminological entities that denote an
event) with a term extractor (Y
A
T
E
A (Aubin and
Hamon, 2006)). Target words are both nouns
and terms (T). Their distributional contexts corre-
spond to a graphical window of n number of words
around the targets (Wilks et al., 1990; Sch?utze,
1998; Lund and Burgess, 1996). We consider two
different window sizes defined in section 4.
Linguistic approaches During the generaliza-
tion process, we use three existing linguistic ap-
proaches: two that acquire hypernymy relations
and one to get morphosyntactic variants. Lexico-
syntactic Patterns (LSP) acquire hypernymy re-
lations. We use the patterns defined by (Hearst,
1992). Lexical Inclusion (LI) acquires hypernymy
relations and uses the syntactic analysis of the
terms. Based on the hypothesis that if a term is
lexically included in another, generally there is a
hypernymy relation between the two terms (kid-
ney transplant - cadaveric kidney transplant) (Bo-
denreider et al., 2001). Terminological Variation
(TV) acquires both hypernyms and synonyms. TV
uses rules that define a morpho-syntactic transfor-
mation, mainly the insertion (blood transfusion -
blood cell transfusion (Jacquemin, 1996).
Step 2: context generalization Once targets
and contexts are defined, we generalize contexts
with the relations acquired by the three linguis-
tic approaches we mentioned. To integrate the
relations in contexts, we replace words in con-
text by their hypernym or morphosyntactic variant.
We define two rules: (1) if the context matches
with one hypernym, context is replaced by this
hypernym. (2) if the context matches with sev-
eral hypernyms or variants, we take the hypernym
or variant frequency into account, and choose the
most frequent hypernym/variant. The generaliza-
tion step is individually or sequentially performed
when several relation sets are available.
Step 3: computation of semantic similarity
After the generalization step, similarity between
target words is computed. As we previously de-
crease diversity in contexts, we choose a mea-
sure that favors words appearing in similar con-
texts. We use the Jaccard Index (Grefenstette,
1994) which normalizes the number of contexts
shared by two words by the total number of con-
texts of those two words.
Parameter: thresholds The huge number of re-
lations we obtain after computing similarity be-
tween targets leads us to remove the supposed
wrong relations with three thresholds: (i) number
of shared lemmatized contexts (2 for a large win-
dow, 1 for a small window) ; (ii) number of the
lemmatized contexts (2 for a large window, 1 for
a small window) ; (iii) number of the lemmatized
targets (3 for both window sizes). For each pa-
rameter, the threshold is automatically computed,
according to the corpus, as the mean of the values
of parameters on the corpus. And we experiment
two thresholds on similarity score we empirically
defined : sim > 0.001 and sim > 0.0005.
91
4 Experiments
In this section, we present the material we use for
the experiments and evaluation, and the distribu-
tional parameter values of the VSM automatically
determined from the data. We then describe the
generalization sets we experiment and the evalua-
tion measures we used for evaluation.
4.1 Corpus
We use the collection of anonymous clinical En-
glish texts provided by the 2012 i2b2/VA chal-
lenge (Sun et al., 2013).
The corpus is pre-processed within the Ogmios
platform (Hamon et al., 2007). We perform mor-
phosyntactic tagging and lemmatization with Tree
Tagger (Schmid, 1994), and term extraction with
Y
A
T
E
A (Aubin and Hamon, 2006).
4.2 Distributional parameters
We consider two window sizes: a large window
of 21 words (? 10 words, centered on the tar-
get, henceforth W21) and a narrow one of 5 words
(? 2 words, centered on the target, W5).
The window size influences on the type, the
volume and the quality of the acquired relations.
Generally, the smaller windows allow to acquire
more relevant contexts for a target, but increase
the data sparseness problem (Rapp, 2003). They
give better results for classical types of relations
(eg. synonymy), whereas larger windows are more
appropriate for domain relations (eg. colloca-
tions)(Sahlgren, 2006; Peirsman et al., 2008).
4.3 Generalizing distributional contexts
We define several sets of context generalization.
We experiment in step 2 different ways of gener-
alizing contexts. We use as a baseline the VSM
without any generalization in the contexts (VS-
Monly), and compare the generalization sets to it.
Regarding context generalization, we first ex-
ploit the relations acquired from only one linguis-
tic approach. We apply the method described
at the section 3 (step 2) by separately using the
three different sets of relations automatically ac-
quired. Distributional contexts are replaced by
their hypernym acquired with lexico-syntactic pat-
terns (VSM/LSP) and lexical inclusion (VSM/LI),
and by their morphosyntactic variants acquired
with terminological variation (VSM/TV). Then,
we replace contexts with relations acquired by two
approaches (TV then LI, LSP then TV, etc.). This
generalization is done sequentially: we generalize
all the contexts with the relations acquired by one
method (e.g. LI), and then with the relations ac-
quired by another method (e.g. TV). And finally,
similarly to what we perform with two methods,
we experiment the generalization of contexts by
relations acquired with the three different linguis-
tic approaches (e.g. LSP then LI then TV). We
experiment all the possible combinations. With
both the single and multiple generalization, we
aim at evaluating the contribution of each method
but also the impact of the order of the methods.
4.4 Evaluation
In order to evaluate the quality of the acquired re-
lations, we compare our relations to the 53,203
UMLS relations between terms occurring in our
EHR corpus. We perform the evaluation with
the Mean Average Precision (MAP) (Buckley and
Voorhees, 2005) and the macro-precision com-
puted for each target word: semantic neighbors
found in the resource by the total semantic neigh-
bors acquired by our method. We consider three
sets of neighbors: precision after examining 1
(P@1), 5 (P@5) and 10 (P@10) neighbors.
5 Results and discussion
Best results are obtained with a large window of
21 words, with a precision P@1 of 0.243 against
0.032 for a 5 word window, both for VSMonly,
with a threshold of 0.001. Thus, a high thresh-
old on the similarity score is not always relevant.
We observe on this corpus that the generalization
with the several linguistic approaches does not im-
prove the results. For instance, VSM/LI obtains
0.250 of P@1 with a > 0.001 threshold, and this
precision is the same with VSM/LI+TV and with
VSM/LI+LSP. This is an interesting behavior, dif-
ferent from what have been observed so far on
more general French corpora that contains cook-
ing recipes (P?erinet and Hamon, 2013).
We discuss here the results we obtain for terms,
for the two thresholds on the similarity score: a
low and a higher thresholds, with relations with a
similarity above 0.0005 and above 0.001. We ob-
serve that with a higher threshold, the precision is
higher, with a P@1 of 0.243 against 0.187 for the
lower threshold (when considering VSMonly). As
for the number of relations acquired, with a lower
threshold we obtain more relations (3,936 rela-
tions acquired for the baseline) than with a higher
92
threshold (326 relations for the baseline).
We evaluate precison after examining three
groups of neighbors. The best results are ob-
tained with P@1, and in most cases, precision de-
creases when we consider more neighbors: the
more neighbors we consider, the lower precision
is. For a 0.001 threshold, the generalized experi-
ment sets obtain a higher precision than VSMonly,
in any case. While for a 0005 threshold, the use of
LI to generalize contexts decreases the precision.
We also observe that when considering generali-
sation with TV or LSP only, or their combination,
the P@10 is slightly better than P@5.
The MAP values are higher when the thresold
on the similarity measure is low, with 0.446 for
VSM/LI against 0.089 with the > 0.001 thresh-
old. It means that some correct relations are not
well ranked with the similarity score, but are still
present. We observe that the MAP values are
always higher with the generalization sets than
with the baseline with both thresholds: 0.089 for
VSM/LI, 0.446 for VSM/LI+LSP, etc.
Comparison of the experimental sets When
considering the relations found in the UMLS, we
observe that the generalization with LSP brings
the same relations that the baseline VSMonly plus
22 relations, the generalization with TV brings 16
more relations that VSMonly, and finally that the
generalization with LI decreases the number of re-
lations acquired. When the generalization of the
contexts is performed with LI, only with LI or with
LI combined to another method, it decreases the
number of relations acquired as well as the num-
ber of relations found in the resource. On the con-
trary, generalizing contexts with LSP increases the
number of relations acquired as well as the num-
ber of relations found in the UMLS resource. We
obtain the highest number of relations when gener-
alizing contexts with LSP, with 454 relations, and
the highest precision with 0.273 for P@1.
Comparing those results with the relations ac-
quired with the linguistic approaches on the EHR
corpus shows a correlation between the quality of
the relations acquired with the generalized sets and
the relations used for generalization. Indeed, LI
gives the highest number of relations with 14,437
relations, then TV gives 631 relations, and fi-
nally LSP acquires only three relations: pancre-
atic complication - necrosis, pancreatic complica-
tion - abscess, gentle laxative - milk of magnesia.
With these relations, if the second term (eg.
necrosis) is found in the context, it is replaced by
the first term (eg. pancreatic complication). These
three relations used for generalization give better
results in terms of precision that the many relations
given by the two other approaches. We could de-
duce that the number of relations may not be as im-
portant as their quality when they are used for gen-
eralization. But when the LSP are used after TV or
LI, they do not improve the results. From this ob-
servation, we make the hypothesis that these sec-
ond terms may have already been replaced during
the generalization with LI or TV. To confirm or re-
ject this hypothesis, we look closer to the relations
acquired with TV and LI. In TV, we find no rela-
tion including any of these second terms. On the
contrary, with LI, we found the relation milk - milk
of magnesia that inhibits one of the three relations
acquired with the LSP.
We deduce that even if the quality of the re-
lations used for generalization is more important
than their number, the number of relations still
matters. If generalization is first performed with
a great number of relations, then a small number
of relations used for generalization is not enough
and does not improve the results.
6 Conclusion and perspectives
In this work, we face the problem of data sparese-
ness of distributional methods. This problem espe-
cially arises from specialized corpora which have
a smaller size and in which words and terms have
lower frequencies.
To achieve this goal, we propose to generalize
distributional contexts with hypernyms and vari-
ants acquired by three existing approaches. We fo-
cus on the acquistion of relations between terms.
We experimented several generalization sets, us-
ing one, two or the three methods sequentially
to replace words in context by their hypernym or
variant. Evaluation of the method has been per-
formed on an EHR English text collection. Gen-
eralization obtains the best results when realized
with hypernyms. The quality of the relations mat-
ters much more than their number: few but good
relations used to generalize contexts give better re-
sults than many relations of poorer quality. For
future work, we plan to use for generalization re-
lations issued from different distributional and ter-
minological resources. Finally, we will intend to
combine the methods before normalization.
93
References
Sophie Aubin and Thierry Hamon. 2006. Improving
term extraction with terminological resources. In
Advances in Natural Language Processing, number
4139 in LNAI, pages 380?387. Springer.
Marco Baroni, Silvia Bernardini, Adriano Ferraresi,
and Eros Zanchetta. 2009. The wacky wide web:
a collection of very large linguistically processed
web-crawled corpora. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 43(3):209?226.
Osman Baskaya, Enis Sert, Volkan Cirik, and Deniz
Yuret. 2013. Ai-ku: Using substitute vectors and
co-occurrence modeling for word sense induction
and disambiguation. In Proceedings of SemEval -
2013, pages 300?306, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Olivier Bodenreider, Anita Burgun, and Thomas Rind-
flesch. 2001. Lexically-suggested hyponymic rela-
tions among medical terms and their representation
in the umls. In TIA 2001, pages 11?21.
Bartosz Broda, Maciej Piasecki, and Stan Szpakowicz.
2009. Rank-based transformation in measuring se-
mantic relatedness. In Yong Gao and Nathalie Jap-
kowicz, editors, Canadian Conference on AI, vol-
ume 5549, pages 187?190. Springer.
Chris Buckley and Ellen Voorhees. 2005. Retrieval
system evaluation. In Ellen Voorhees and Donna
Harman, editors, TREC: Experiment and Evaluation
in Information Retrieval, chapter 3. MIT Press.
Olivier Ferret. 2013. S?election non supervis?ee de
relations s?emantiques pour am?eliorer un th?esaurus
distributionnel. In TALN 2013, pages 48?61, Les
Sables d?Olonne, France.
J.R. Firth. 1957. A synopsis of linguistic theory 1930-
1955. Studies in linguistic analysis, pages 1?32.
Gregory Grefenstette. 1994. Corpus-derived first, sec-
ond and third-order word affinities. In Sixth Euralex
International Congress, pages 279?290.
T. Hamon, A. Nazarenko, T. Poibeau, S. Aubin, and
J. Derivi`ere. 2007. A robust linguistic platform for
efficient and domain specific web content analysis.
In RIAO 2007, Pittsburgh, USA.
Zellig Harris. 1954. Distributional structure. Word,
10(23):146?162.
Marti A. Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hy-
ponyms from large text corpora. In International
Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages
539?545, Nantes, France.
Christian Jacquemin. 1996. A symbolic and surgi-
cal acquisition of terms through variation. In CoRR,
pages 425?438.
K. Lund and C. Burgess. 1996. Producing
high-dimensional semantic spaces from lexical co-
occurrence. Behavior Research Methods, Instru-
mentation, and Computers, 28:203?208.
Jeff Mitchell and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Composition
in distributional models of semantics. Cognitive Sci-
ence, 34(8):1388?1429.
Sebastian Pad?o and Mirella Lapata. 2007.
Dependency-based construction of semantic
space models. Comput. Linguist., 33(2):161?199.
Yves Peirsman, Heylen Kris, and Geeraerts Dirk.
2008. Size matters. tight and loose context def-
initions in english word space models. In ESS-
LLI Workshop on Distributional Lexical Semantics,
Hamburg, Germany.
Amandine P?erinet and Thierry Hamon. 2013. Hybrid
acquisition of semantic relations based on context
normalization in distributional analysis. In Proceed-
ings of TIA 2013, pages 113?120, Paris, France.
Reinhard Rapp. 2003. Word sense discovery based on
sense descriptor dissimilarity. In MT Summit?2003,
pages 315?322.
Magnus Sahlgren. 2006. The Word-Space Model:
Using Distributional Analysis to Represent Syntag-
matic and Paradigmatic Relations between Words
in High-Dimensional Vector Spaces. Ph.D. thesis,
Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
H. Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech tagging
using decision trees. In New Methods in Language
Processing, pages 44?49, Manchester, UK.
Hinrich Sch?utze. 1998. Automatic word sense dis-
crimination. Comput. Linguist., 24(1):97?123.
Weiyi Sun, Anna Rumshisky, and
?
Ozlem Uzuner.
2013. Evaluating temporal relations in clinical text:
2012 i2b2 challenge. JAMIA, 20(5):806?813.
George Tsatsaronis and Vicky Panagiotopoulou. 2009.
A generalized vector space model for text retrieval
based on semantic relatedness. In EACL 2009,
pages 70?78, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Peter D. Turney and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From fre-
quency to meaning: Vector space models of seman-
tics. JAIR, 37:141?188.
Lonneke van der Plas. 2008. Automatic lexico-
semantic acquisition for question answering. Th`ese
de doctorat, University of Groningen, Groningen.
Julie Weeds and David Weir. 2005. Co-occurrence
retrieval: A flexible framework for lexical distribu-
tional similarity. Comput. Linguist., 31(4):439?475.
Yorick A. Wilks, Dan, James E. Mcdonald, Tony
Plate, and Brian M. Slator. 1990. Providing ma-
chine tractable dictionary tools. Journal of Machine
Translation, 2.
94
Deniz Yuret. 2012. Fastsubs: An efficient and exact
procedure for finding the most likely lexical substi-
tutes based on an n-gram language model. IEEE
Signal Process. Lett., 19(11):725?728.
Wenbin Zheng, Yuntao Qian, and Hong Tang. 2011.
Dimensionality reduction with category information
fusion and non-negative matrix factorization for text
categorization. In Hepu Deng, Duoqian Miao, Jing-
sheng Lei, and Fu Lee Wang, editors, AICI, volume
7004 of LNCS, pages 505?512.
Maayan Zhitomirsky-Geffet and Ido Dagan. 2009.
Bootstrapping distributional feature vector quality.
Comput. Linguist., 35(3):435?461.
95
Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Computational Terminology, pages 1?10,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23 2014.
Generalising and normalising distributional contexts
to reduce data sparsity: application to medical corpora
Amandine P
?
erinet
Universit?e Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cit?e
Villetaneuse, France
amandine.perinet@edu.univ-paris13.fr
Thierry Hamon
LIMSI-CNRS, Orsay, France
Universit?e Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cit?e
Villetaneuse, France
hamon@limsi.fr
Abstract
Vector space models implement the distributional hypothesis. They are based on the repetition
of information occurring in the contexts of words to associate. However, these models suffer
from a high number of dimensions and data sparsity in the matrix of contextual vectors. This
is a major issue with specialised corpora that are of much smaller size and with much lower
context frequencies. We tackle the problem of data sparsity on specialised texts and we propose
a method that allows to make the matrix denser, by generalising and normalising distributional
contexts. Generalisation gives better results with the Jaccard index, narrow sliding windows and
relations of lexical inclusion. On the other hand, normalisation has no positive effect on the
relation extraction, with any combination of distributional parameters.
1 Introduction
Distributional Analysis (DA) assumes that words occurring in a similar context tend to be semantically
close (Harris, 1954; Firth, 1957). This hypothesis is usually applied through vector space models (VSM)
where vectors represent the contextual information and distributional statistical data (Sahlgren, 2006).
Each target word in a text is represented as a point defined according to its distributional properties in
the text (Turney and Pantel, 2010; Lund and Burgess, 1996). Thus, the semantic similarity between
two words is defined as a closeness in an n-dimension space, where each dimension corresponds to
some potential shared contexts. The VSMs easily quantify the semantic similarity between two words
by measuring the distance between the two corresponding vectors within this space, or the cosine of
their angle. On the other hand, besides the high number of dimensions required (for example, Sahlgren
(2006) uses VSMs with up to several millions of dimensions), VSMs also suffer from data sparseness
within the matrix representing the vector space (Chatterjee and Mohan, 2008): many elements are equal
to zero because only few contexts are associated to a target word. This disadvantage is partly due to word
distribution in corpora: whatever the corpus size, most words have low frequencies and a very limited set
of contexts compared to the number of words in the corpora. These last two elements make the similarity
between two words hard to compute. Hence, methods based on the distributional hypothesis show better
results when much information is available and especially with general corpora, usually of great size
(Weeds and Weir, 2005; van der Plas, 2008). But the reduction of data sparseness is still an important
aspect with general corpora. It is as well a major issue when working with specialised corpora. Indeed,
these corpora are characterised by smaller sizes, and with frequencies and a number of different contexts
especially lower. We focus here on this last point. We propose a rule-based method that aims at reducing
context diversity by generalising contexts. The frequency of the obtained distributional contexts is then
increased and, consequently, data sparseness and the dimensions of the vector space model are reduced.
We present here a generalisation of the distributional contexts thanks to semantic relations acquired on
corpora. The parameters of the distributional method are tuned to specialised corpora, especially in
integrating those generalised contexts.
We first present a state of the art on data sparsity reduction within distributional methods. Then
we describe the proposed context generalisation and normalisation method as well as the experiments
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence. Page numbers and proceedings footer
are added by the organisers. Licence details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
1
we performed to evaluate its impact on specialised corpora. Results are evaluated and analysed with
precision, R-precision and MAP.
2 Related work
Reducing data sparsity is a main issue in distributional analysis. The existing methods aim at influencing
the selection of useful contexts or at integrating semantic information to modify context distribution.
Thus, contrary to the common usage, Broda et al. (2009) propose to weight contexts by first ranking
contexts according to their frequency, and then take the rank into account to weight contexts. Other ap-
proaches rely on statistical language models to determine the most likely substitutes to represent contexts
(Baskaya et al., 2013). These models assign probabilities to arbitrary sequences of words based on their
co-occurrence frequencies in a training corpora (Yuret, 2012). These substitutes and their probabilities
are then used to create word pairs to feed a co-occurrence model and to cluster the word list. The limit of
such methods is their performance which depends on vocabulary size and requires an increasing amount
of training data. Influence on contexts may also be done by incorporating additional semantic infor-
mation: it has been shown that such information used to modify the standard distributional method can
improve its performance (Tsatsaronis and Panagiotopoulou, 2009). This semantic information, in partic-
ular semantic relations, may be automatically computed or issued from an existing resource. Thus, with
a bootstrap method, Zhitomirsky-Geffet and Dagan (2009) modify the context weights with the seman-
tic neighbours proposed by a distributional similarity measure. Based on this latter work, Ferret (2013)
addresses the problem of low frequency words. To better consider this information, a set of positive and
negative examples are selected with an unsupervised classifier. A supervised classifier is then applied for
re-ranking the semantic neighbours. The method allows to improve the quality of the similarity relation
between nouns with low or mid frequency.
The sparseness problem may also be tackled from the algorithmic point of view by limiting the di-
mensions of the context matrix, especially by smoothing it in order to reduce the number of vector
compounds (Turney and Pantel, 2010). Thus, Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) (Landauer and Dumais,
1997; Pad?o and Lapata, 2007) implements a factorization method of matrices by Singular Value Decom-
position (SVD). The original data in the context matrix is abstracted in independant linear components,
that allow to reduce noise and to highlight the main elements. Besides reducing the computational cost,
dimension reduction significantly improves precision in LSA applications. For instance, the use of the
SVD to compute word similarity allows to obtain scores equivalent to human scores in a TOEFL test
with multiple choice questions of synonymy (Landauer and Dumais, 1997). As for low frequency, the
SVD is a way to counterbalance the lack of data (Vozalis and Margaritis, 2003). Also, some methods, as
the non-negative matrix factorization (Lee and Seung, 1999), allow to better model word frequency. But,
when it comes to the acquisition of semantic relations, performances do not seem better than the ones
obtained with the LSA (Turney and Pantel, 2010; Utsumi, 2010). Furthermore, the dimension reduction
makes easier to treat context vectors, but it does not solve the initial issue of building a huge co-occurence
matrix. Random Indexing (RI) (Kanerva et al., 2000) may be considered as a solution to this problem,
as it incrementally builds the context matrix according to an index vector of the target word randomly
generated, as well as reducing the matrix dimension. RI and LSA have similar performance when iden-
tifying synonyms in a similar way than the TOEFL test (Karlgren and Sahlgren, 2001). Recently, the
selection of the best contexts combined with a normalisation of their weights allows to improve the qual-
ity of a SVD reduced matrix (Polajnar and Clark, 2014). In the context of definition retrieval and phrase
similarity computation, their impact depends on the compositional semantics operators used.
As above work, we aim at incorporating semantic information within distributional contexts, but by
reducing the number of contexts and increasing their frequency. Contrary to SVD based methods that
limit the contexts by removing information, here we both generalise and normalise contexts through the
integration of additional semantic knowledge computed from our corpora.
2
3 Material
In this section, we present the corpus we use. We also describe the approaches used to acquire the
semantic relations integrated in our method for context generalisation/normalisation.
Corpora To evaluate our approach, we use the Menelas corpus (Zweigenbaum, 1994). It consists in a
medical text collection, in French, on the topic of coronary diseases. The corpus contains 84,839 words.
It has been analysed through the Ogmios platform (Hamon et al., 2007). The linguistic analysis includes
a morphosyntactic tagging and a lemmatisation of the corpus, with TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994), and a
term extraction with Y
A
T
E
A (Aubin and Hamon, 2006). This last step allows to identify terminological
entities (both single word units, for eg. artery, and complex terms (i.e. multi-word expressions), for eg.
coronary disease, that denote the domain concepts).
Semantic relations acquisition Our generalisation and normalisation method of distributional con-
texts is based on semantic relations acquired from the entire corpus. We use several classical approches
that allow to acquire semantic relations between terms. For context generalisation, we use lexico-
syntactic patterns, lexical inclusion and terminological variation rules. Context normalisation is based
on a rule-based synonymy acquisition.
? Lexico-syntactic patterns (LSP) We use the patterns defined by (Morin and Jacquemin, 2004) to
detect 98 hypernymy relations between simple or complex terms, for instance: {some |several
etc.} SN: LIST or {other}? SN such as LIST. The relations acquired with such pat-
terns are usually relevant but the pattern coverage remains low.
? Lexical Inclusion (LI) This approach is based on the hypothesis that the lexical inclusion of a term
(ex: infarctus in another (infarctus du myocarde (myocardial infarction) convey a hypernymy rela-
tion between those terms (Grabar and Zweigenbaum, 2003). We constrain the method by exploiting
the term syntactic analysis provided by Y
A
T
E
A. We obtain 7,187 relations between the complex term
and its head. This approach is known to acquire relations with high precision.
? Terminological variation (TV) Terminological variant acquisition method proposed by
(Jacquemin, 2001) exploits morphosyntactic transformation rules, as the insertion or the permu-
tation, (chirurgie coronarienne (coronary surgery) / chirurgie de revascularisation coronarienne
(Coronary revascularisation surgery)) to identify semantic relations between terms.
The terminological variation rules, essentially the insertion on our French corpus, allow to acquire
171 hypernymy relations.
? Semantic compositionality (Syn) For context normalisation, we use 168 synonymy relations
acquired with the method defined in (Hamon et al., 1998). Based on the semantic compositionality
principle, a synonymy relation is inferred between complex terms, if at least one of their component
are synonyms (infection de blessure (wound infection) and septicit de blessure (wound sepsis)).
4 Distributional context generalisation and normalisation
A solution to the problem of data sparsity on specialised corpora or smaller size corpora consists in in-
creasing the density of the context matrix by disregarding superficial variations of contexts that are not
strongly statistically significant or that result from the noise of the distributional method. Thus, we gen-
eralise (conceptual abstraction) and normalise (abstraction of minor lexical variations) contexts using the
semantic information extracted from our corpus. In that respect, we use semantic relations automatically
acquired with standard methods on specialised corpora. After a brief description of the distributional
analysis we performed on specialised corpora, we present the distributional context generalisation and
normalisation.
3
4.1 Distributional method
We focus on the extraction of relations between nouns, tokens tagged as nouns by TreeTagger, and
terms, specific terminological entities extracted during the linguistic analysis of the corpus by Y
A
T
E
A(see
section 3). These semantic relations are crucial in specialised language. Nouns and terms are our targets.
The distributional contexts of these targets correspond to adjectives, nouns, verbs and terms co-occurring
with the target within a sliding window. A context is for us one element (a word or MWE), and it
corresponds to one dimension in the vector space. For both targets and contexts, we consider the lemmas.
Pre?processing
Corpus
Target & contextdefinition
Relations
Lexical inclusion (LI)
Terminological variation (TV)
Lexico?syntactic patterns (LSP)
Semantic
compositionality(SC)
on the target word and on the similarityThresholds on the shared contexts,
Jaccard index and cosine measure
Computation of
semantic similarity
Nouns + TermsGraphical windows   (21 & 5 words)
step 1 step 2
Vector Space Model
Linguistic approaches 
step 3
 
Term extractionPOS tagging & Lemmatisation
a. for generalisation b. for normalisation
Context
and normalisationgeneralisation
Figure 1: Process of distributional analysis
The overview of the distributional method is given in figure 1. The context generalisation and nor-
malisation step takes place after the distributional context definition (see section 4.2). After extracting,
generalising or normalising contexts, we compute a similarity score between each pair of target words,
considering their shared contexts. We use the Jaccard index, recognised as suitable to specialised corpora
(Grefenstette, 1994). The Jaccard index normalises the number of contexts shared by two words, w
m
and w
n
, by the total number of contexts of those two words, ctxt(w). We also use the cosine of the
context vector. In order to grant more or less importance to the information in contexts, we use these
two measures combined with a weight function. With Jaccard, we use the relative frequency, that allows
to consider the importance of a target, compared to the total number of contexts for the target. And
with cosine we use Mutual Information (MI) (Fano, 1963). While these scores quantify the similarity
between target words, it is necessary to apply thresholds to limit the proposed number of distributional
relations and discard potentially noisy relations. We also intend to make the context matrix denser by
applying thresholds on three distributional parameters: the number of shared contexts, the frequency of
shared contexts and the frequency of target words. For each parameter, a threshold is automatically com-
puted as the mean of the values taken by each parameter on the whole corpus. During the experiments
(section 5), we test the impact of these thresholds on the results.
4.2 Rules of generalisation and normalisation of distributional contexts
Context generalisation and normalisation comes after the context definition step. It aims at reducing
context sparsity and increasing the number of context occurrences. Generalisation and normalisation
rules are separately applied and exploit additional semantic relations acquired on the corpus.
Rules of generalisation We generalise contexts with semantic relations automatically acquired from
the corpus with hypernymy relations proposed by lexico-syntactic patterns and lexical inclusion (see
section 3). While terminological variation approach does not propose semantically typed relations, the
insertion rule is the only one used to acquire variants and it can be considered that the obtained rela-
tions are hypernymy relations. The hypernym and the hyponym are identified from the number of words
present in each term: the shortest term then corresponds to the hypernym (l?esion significative (signifi-
cant lesion)), and the longest term is the hyponym (l?esion coronaire significative (significant coronary
lesion)).
4
We have then for each word ctxt
i
(w) in the context of the target word w three sets of hypernymy
relations H
s
(ctxt
i
(w)) = {H
1
, . . . ,H
n
} : H
PLS
, H
IL
and H
V T
, with a hypernym set that may be
empty. We define two substitution rules that allow to generalise contexts. Thus, for each word ctxt
i
(w)
in the context of a target word w, we apply one of the following rules:
1. if |H
S
(ctxt
i
(w))| = 1, then ctxt
i
(w) := H
1
, i.e. if the word in context corresponds to only one
hypernym (H
1
), acquired by one or several methods S, the word is replaced by this hypernym.
For example, if lexical inclusion provides the relations restriction / restriction du d?ebit coronaire
(restriction of coronary output), restriction du d?ebit coronaire is replaced by restriction.
2. if |H
S
(ctxt
i
(w))| > 1, ctxt
i
(w) = argmax
|H
i
|
(H
S
(ctxt
i
(w))), i.e. if context corresponds to
several hypernyms acquired by one or several methods S, we take into consideration the hypernym
frequency |H
1
|, . . . , |H
n
| in the corpus, and we select the hypernym with the highest frequency. For
example, for the word art`ere coronaire (coronary artery) in context, the lexico-syntactic patterns
provide the following hypernyms: veine (vein), art`ere (artery), and vaisseau (vessel), the one that
is the most frequent is chosen and replaces art`ere coronaire in context.
4.2.1 Rules of normalisation
The normalisation rule aims at reducing semantic variation with automatically acquired synonymy rela-
tions. These relations are first organised in clusters of synonyms and a cluster representative is chosen:
given the relations proposed by the acquisition method (section 3), the cluster representative corresponds
to the most frequent word in the cluster. We have then for each target word ctxt
i
(w) in the context of the
word w, a synonym cluster S
s
(R) = {S
1
, . . . , S
n
, R}, with its representative R. We define one context
normalisation rule applied for each word ctxt
i
(w) in the context of a word w to substitute the context
word by the representative of the cluster it belongs: if ?R|ctxt
i
(w) ? S
S
(R), then ctxt
i
(w) := R
5 Experiments and evaluation
5.1 Experiments
We performed several series of experiments on the Menelas corpus to evaluate the impact of both gen-
eralisation and normalisation rules on the quality of the acquired relations. Our baseline is the VSM
without context substitution (VSMonly). First, we automatically compute the thresholds on the distribu-
tional parameters from the baseline (see section 4.1). The values of the thresholds are listed in table 1.
We experiment two sliding window sizes ; a small window allows to detect classical types of relations
(synonymy, meronymy, hypernymy, etc.) but increases the data sparseness problem. On the other hand,
a large window provides more general relations, a contextual proximity.
Parameters 21 word window 5 word window
Similarity score
Jaccard: sim > 0, 000999 Jaccard: sim > 0, 000999
Cosine: sim > 0.9699 Cosine: sim > 0.9699
Number of contexts 2 1
Context frequency 3 2
Target frequency 3 3
Table 1: Definition of the threshold values on distributional parameters and on the similarity score ac-
cording to the window width (21 and 5 words) and similarity measures (Jaccard index and Cosine)
We perform separately the experiments regarding generalisation and normalisation rules. With gen-
eralisation rules, in order to grasp the contribution of each linguistic method (see section 3), we define
a set of experiments where context generalisation is performed using the hypernymy relations proposed
individually by each method. The context generalisation rules ctxt
i
(w) are then applied separately us-
ing the sets H
LSP
(ctxt
i
(w)) (VSM/LSP), H
LI
(ctxt
i
(w)) (VSM/LI) and H
TV
(ctxt
i
(w)) (VSM/TV).
Then, sequentially, we apply generalisation rules by using the sets of hypernymy relations proposed
by two linguistic approaches (H
LSP
(ctxt
i
(w)) then H
LI
(ctxt
i
(w)) ? VSM/LSP+LI, H
TV
(ctxt
i
(w))
5
then H
LSP
(ctxt
i
(w)) ? VSM/TV+LSP, etc.). All contexts are generalised following the relations pro-
posed by one of the sets.Likewise, we combine the three sets of relations (for instance, H
LSP
(ctxt
i
(w))
then H
LI
(ctxt
i
(w)) then H
TV
(ctxt
i
(w)) ? VSM/LSP+LI+TV). By combining the hypernymy relation
sources in several ways, we evaluate the complementarity of the approaches used for context general-
isation. We also study the impact of the order of these methods in the generalisation sequence. All
the hypernymy relations independently of the method used for their acquisition. We consider the set
H(ctxt
i
(w)) = H
LSP
(ctxt
i
(w)) ?H
LI
(ctxt
i
(w)) ?H
TV
(ctxt
i
(w)) ? VSM/ALL3. With context nor-
malisation, we consider only one set of experiment, with normalisation of contexts (VSM/Syn).
All the experiments have been performed on both window sizes: 5 words (? 2 words, centered on the
target) and 21 words (? 10 words, centered on the target). Indeed the window size influences the number
and quality, but also the type of the relations acquired with distributional analysis. In general, a small
window size (5 words) allows to have a highest number of relevant contexts for a given target word, but
leads to more data sparsity than with a larger window (Rapp, 2003). Furthermore, the results obtained
with small size windows are of greatest quality, especially for classical relations (synonymy, antonymy,
hypernymy, meronymy, etc.), whereas larger windows are more adapted to the identification of domain
specific relations (Sahlgren, 2006; Peirsman et al., 2008).
5.2 Evaluation
As usual to evaluate distributional methods, the obtained relations are considered as semantic neighbour
sets associated to target words, and the quality of the neighbour sets is measured by comparing them to
semantic relations issued from existing resources (Curran, 2004; Ferret, 2010). Thus, we compare the
semantic relations acquired by our approach with the 1,735,419 relations in the French part of the UMLS
metathesaurus
1
. The resource contains hypernyms, synonyms, co-hyponyms, meronyms and domain
relations.
We used classical measures to evaluate the quality of our results: macro-precision (Sebastiani, 2002),
the mean of the average precisions (MAP) (Buckley and Voorhees, 2005) and R-precision.
Macro-precision equally considers all target words whatever the number of semantic neighbours and
provides a comprehensive quality of the results by computing the mean of the precision of each neighbour
set. We consider one size of neighbour set for each target word: precision after examining 1 (P@1)
semantic neighbour, the neighbour ranked first by its similarity score. Alternatively, we use R-precision
that individually defines the size of the neighbour sets to examine as the number of correct neighbours
expected for the corresponding target word (Buckley and Voorhees, 2005). To compute R-precision, we
compare our results not to all the relations from the French part of UMLS, but to reference sets built
from this resource, for each experiment. Thus, we have as many references as experiments. The mean
of average precisions (MAP) is obtained taking in consideration the not interpolated precision of the
semantic neighbours given their rank. It reflects the ranking quality and evaluates the relevance of the
similarity measure used. Thus, the MAP favours the similarity measure that ranks all the correct semantic
neighbours on top of the list. Reciprocally, adding noisy semantic neighbours at the end of the list does
not discriminate against the method.
6 Results and discussion
In this section, we present and discuss the results we obtain, first with the 21 word window and then with
the 5 word window. For both sizes, we present the number of relations acquired (Acq. Rel), the number
of relations found in the UMLS resource (Rel. UMLS), and the results in terms of MAP, R-precision and
precision to 1 (P@1). Before discussing our results, we briefly present some results of similar work.
Results in existing similar work In order to understand better our results, we first provide some results
obtained in similar work. Keep in mind that these results are not obtained with the same corpus. Indeed, a
major problem is that the comparisons with reference resources are often given for large copora and very
frequent words (Curran and Moens, 2002), or for different tasks than our task. An effective comparison
1
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/
6
is then difficult. We first present results obtained on a similar task, but with general copora, and then
results obtained on similar documents (i.e. specialised medical texts) but in a different tasks. Despite
this limit, we can still quote for comparison the values obtained by Ferret (2011) for the evaluation of
semantic neighbours extraction on English general copora (of 380 million words). The parameters of his
VSM are a small sliding window of 3 words (? 1 word centered on the target), the cosine measure and
mutual information. In his work, Ferret (2011) considers three sets of target words according to their
frequency. As in the Menelas corpus, the highest frequency of a target word is 270 and that only a few
frequencies are above 100, we may consider the set of low frequency words, that occur less than 100
times. The highest values he obtains for those target words are a MAP of 0.03, a P@1 of 0.026 and an
R-precision of 0.02. For more frequent words, occurring between 100 and 1,000 times, the values are
higher: a MAP of 0.125, a P@1 of 0.209 and an R-precision of 0.104.
For a comparison with specialised texts, we can look at Moen et al. (2014)?s work on document
similarity between care episodes in a retrieval system. The matrix is then a term-document matrix, and
not a term-context one, and the task is different. We do not know exactly how the comparison is effective,
but they obtain for their best system a MAP of 0.326 and a precision at 10 neighbours of 0.515.
Acquired Rel. Rel. in UMLS MAP R-precision P@1
JACC COS JACC COS JACC COS JACC COS JACC COS
VSMonly
(baseline)
406 9,154 4 46 0.406 0.105 0.250 0.000 0.250 0.000
VSM/TV 472 5,322 8 24 0.280 0.149 0.143 0.053 0.143 0.053
VSM/LI 324 2,844 4 18 0.454 0.232 0.250 0.167 0.250 0.200
VSM/LSP 398 4,684 6 18 0.219 0.154 0.000 0.071 0.000 0.071
VSM/TV+LI 324 2,844 4 18 0.454 0.232 0.250 0.167 0.250 0.200
VSM/TV+LSP 398 4,678 6 18 0.219 0.149 0.000 0.071 0.000 0.071
VSM/LSP+LI 336 2,748 4 14 0.454 0.263 0.250 0.208 0.250 0.250
VSM/ALL3 336 2,982 4 16 0.414 0.259 0.250 0.192 0.250 0.231
VSM/Syn 474 5,282 8 24 0.280 0.157 0.143 0.053 0.143 0.053
Table 2: Results obtained with the Jaccard index and Cosine measure for a 21 word window
Large window For the large window, we present the results obtained with Jaccard and Cosine. We do
not present all the generalisation sets because adding more relations (more methods) in the generalisation
process does not change the results: once we generalise with two methods, the results get stable. We first
observe a different behaviour according to the similarity measure in terms of relations acquired: Cosine
allow to acquire many more relations than Jaccard, and as well more relations acquired with Cosine
are found in the UMLS. However results are in general much better with Jaccard. Quite similar results
are observed between both similarity measures when generalisation is perfomed with all three linguistic
methods at a time (VSM/ALL3). Using the three methods at the same time for generalisation does not
provide better results. Indeed, it even decreases the number of relations found in the UMLS. As for
generalisation/normalisation, it allows to decrease the number of relations acquired by two when Cosine
is used, that is good because the number of relations acquired with Cosine is extremely high, but it also
divides the number of relations found in the UMLS by two.
When terminological variation is individually used, it always improves the quality of the results in
terms of MAP, precision and R-precision for Cosine, whereas it always decreases the quality with Jac-
card. The normalisation with synonyms with both similarity measures behaves similarly to generalisation
with terminological variation: they both get the best recall.
With Jaccard, generalisation with lexical inclusion improves the MAP results, that means that the
relations are better ranked. Lexical inclusion improves the results when used individually or within a
combination. Lexico syntactic patterns with a large window have little (with Cosine) or negative impact
on the results. Lexical inclusion allows to increase the MAP, R-precision and precision values when used
after the lexico syntactic patterns with Cosine.
Finally, we can conclude that with a large window, the use of Jaccard and generalisation with lexical
inclusion improves the quality of the relations acquired. But the recall is also really low. With Cosine,
the recall is higher and generalisation with LI is also the best choice.
7
Acquired Rel. Rel. in UMLS MAP R-precision P@1
JACC COS JACC COS JACC COS JACC COS JACC COS
VSMonly
(baseline)
1,882 16,178 6 60 0.502 0.118 0.333 0.054 0.333 0.048
VSM/TV 2,258 13,804 16 56 0.276 0.110 0.143 0.051 0.143 0.051
VSM/LI 976 6,172 2 38 0.536 0.132 0.500 0.067 0.500 0.067
VSM/LSP 2,112 12,656 16 50 0.187 0.106 0.071 0.057 0.071 0.057
VSM/TV+LI 976 6,172 2 38 0.536 0.132 0.500 0.067 0.500 0.067
VSM/TV+LSP 2,066 12,338 16 50 0.191 0.106 0.071 0.057 0.071 0.057
VSM/LSP+LI 934 5,996 4 38 0.378 0.135 0.250 0.067 0.250 0.067
VSM/ALL3 1,002 6,540 4 38 0.379 0.131 0.250 0.067 0.250 0.067
VSM/Syn 2,292 14,022 16 56 0.273 0.110 0.143 0.051 0.143 0.051
Table 3: Results obtained for a 5 word window? with thresholds on the distributional parameters
Narrow window With the 5 word window, the observations and results also differ according to the
similarity measure used. The best results are also obtained with the Jaccard Index and the behaviour of
both similarity measures is similar to the one observed with a large window: generalisation with lexical
inclusion reduces by two the number of relations acquired but also the number of relations found in
the UMLS. In order to better understand the behaviour of generalisation with lexical inclusion, and to
improve the results in terms of recall without decreasing precision, manual evaluation is required. The
results obtained with Cosine are lower than with a large window.
The choice of the similarity measure is a difficult choice and is linked to the other distributional
parameters of the VSM. We can deduce that Jaccard with small corpora allows to get a better precision
than Cosine, and obtains better results with a narrow window. Generalisation with lexical inclusion
appears to be the best generalisation for both measures, and normalisation with synonymy relations does
not improve the results.
But when LI is combined with relations acquired with lexico-syntactic patterns, its contribution de-
creases the results with the Jaccard index, and on the contrary improves the results with the Cosine.
The order of the methods also matters and differs according to the similarity measure: with Jaccard, the
generalisation with relations acquired with lexical inclusion before lexico-syntactic patterns has a lower
precision than the inverse combination (i.e. VSM/LSP+LI).
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we address the reduction of data sparsity in matrices of context vectors used to imple-
ment the distributional analysis. We proposed to generalise and normalise the distributional contexts
with synonymy and hypernymy relations acquired from our corpus. Words in contexts are considered as
hyponyms and are replaced by hypernyms identified on the corpus, or are considered as members of a
synonym set, and normalised with the cluster representative of this set. We performed some experiments
on a French medical corpus combining several parameters. Even if the evaluation of distributional meth-
ods is difficult, we compare the results to the semantic relations proposed by the French UMLS. Several
evaluation measures have been used to evaluate the impact of context generalisation and normalisation
on distributional analysis. The analysis of the results show that when the size of the window that allow
to produce distributional contexts is small and when the Jaccard index is used, it is better to generalise
contexts with relations acquired with lexical inclusion. However, when the window is large, generalisa-
tion with lexical inclusion with the use of Jaccard index also improves the results. Normalisation seems
to have no positive effect on relation extraction, with any combination of distributional parameters.
Beside a manual analysis of the relations and of the impact of the process of generalisation and normal-
isation on manipulated data, these results open several perspectives. The hypernymy relations we used
have been separately exploited. But these relations could be considered as a sketch towards a taxonomy
and we plan to adapt the context generalisation method in order to consider this network of relations
acquired from corpora. Furthemore, all the relations acquired from corpora may be noisy. We plan to use
other sources of relations as the ones contained in terminologies. It could then be possible to evaluate the
impact of generalisation and of the relations when their terminological type is known. Finally, we plan to
8
compare our method with two other dimension reduction methods, such as Random Indexing and LSA.
References
S. Aubin and T. Hamon. 2006. Improving term extraction with terminological resources. In Advances in Natural
Language Processing, number 4139 in LNAI, pages 380?387. Springer.
O. Baskaya, E. Sert, V. Cirik, and D. Yuret. 2013. Ai-ku: Using substitute vectors and co-occurrence modeling
for word sense induction and disambiguation. In Proc. of SemEval - 2013, pages 300?306, Atlanta, USA. ACL.
B. Broda, M. Piasecki, and S. Szpakowicz. 2009. Rank-based transformation in measuring semantic relatedness.
In Yong Gao and Nathalie Japkowicz, editors, Canadian Conference on AI, volume 5549, pages 187?190.
Springer.
C. Buckley and E. Voorhees. 2005. Retrieval system evaluation. In Ellen Voorhees and Donna Harman, editors,
TREC: Experiment and Evaluation in Information Retrieval, chapter 3. MIT Press.
N. Chatterjee and S. Mohan. 2008. Discovering word senses from text using random indexing. In Proc. of the
9th International Conference on Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, CICLing?08, pages
299?310, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.
J.R. Curran and M. Moens. 2002. Improvements in automatic thesaurus extraction. In Workshop on Unsupervised
lexical acquisition, volume 9, pages 59?66, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
J. R. Curran. 2004. From distributional to semantic similarity. Ph.D. thesis, Institute for Communicating and
Collaborative Systems School of Informatics University of Edinburgh.
R. Fano. 1963. Transmission of Information: A Statistical Theory of Communications. The MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA.
O. Ferret. 2010. Similarit smantique et extraction de synonymes partir de corpus. In TALN 2010, Montral.
O. Ferret. 2011. Utiliser l?amorage pour am?eliorer une mesure de similarit?e s?emantique. In Mathieu Lafourcade
and Violaine Prince, editors, TALN 2011, volume 1, pages 155?160, Montpellier, France, juillet.
Olivier Ferret. 2013. S?election non supervis?ee de relations s?emantiques pour am?eliorer un th?esaurus distribution-
nel. In TALN 2013, pages 48?61, Les Sables d?Olonne, France.
J.R. Firth. 1957. A synopsis of linguistic theory 1930-1955. Studies in linguistic analysis, pages 1?32.
N. Grabar and P. Zweigenbaum. 2003. Lexically-based terminology structuring. In Terminology, volume 10,
pages 23?54.
G. Grefenstette. 1994. Corpus-derived first, second and third-order word affinities. In Sixth Euralex International
Congress, pages 279?290.
T. Hamon, A. Nazarenko, and C. Gros. 1998. A step towards the detection of semantic variants of terms in
technical documents. In International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING-ACL?98), pages
498?504, Universit?e de Montr?eal, Quebec, Canada.
T. Hamon, A. Nazarenko, T. Poibeau, S. Aubin, and J. Derivi`ere. 2007. A robust linguistic platform for efficient
and domain specific web content analysis. In RIAO 2007, Pittsburgh, USA.
Z. Harris. 1954. Distributional structure. Word, 10(23):146?162.
C. Jacquemin. 2001. Spotting and discovering terms through natural language processing. The MIT Press.
P. Kanerva, J. Kristofersson, and A. Holst. 2000. Random indexing of text samples for latent semantic analysis.
In L.R. Gleitman and A.K. Josh, editors, Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, volume 1036, Erlbaum, New Jersey.
J. Karlgren and M. Sahlgren. 2001. From words to understanding. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 294?308. Foundations of Real-World Intelligence.
T.K. Landauer and S.T. Dumais. 1997. A solution to plato?s problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of acqui-
sition, induction, and representation of knowledge. Psychological Review; Psychological Review, 104(2):211.
9
D.D. Lee and H.S. Seung. 1999. Learning the parts of objects by nonnegative matrix factorization. Nature,
401:788?791.
K. Lund and C. Burgess. 1996. Producing high-dimensional semantic spaces from lexical co-occurrence. Behav-
ior Research Methods, Instrumentation, and Computers, 28:203?208.
H. Moen, E. Marsi, F. Ginter, L.-M. Murtola, T. Salakoski, and S. Salanter?a. 2014. Care episode retrieval. In
Proc. of the 5th International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis (Louhi), pages 116?
124, Gothenburg, Sweden. ACL.
E. Morin and C. Jacquemin. 2004. Automatic Acquisition and Expansion of Hypernym Links. Computers and
the Humanities, 38(4):363?396.
S. Pad?o and M. Lapata. 2007. Dependency-based construction of semantic space models. Comput. Linguist.,
33(2):161?199.
Y. Peirsman, H. Kris, and G. Dirk. 2008. Size matters. tight and loose context definitions in english word space
models. In ESSLLI Workshop on Distributional Lexical Semantics, Hamburg, Germany.
T. Polajnar and S. Clark. 2014. Improving distributional semantic vectors through context selection and normali-
sation. In Proceedings of EACL 2014. To appear.
R. Rapp. 2003. Word sense discovery based on sense descriptor dissimilarity. In MT Summit?2003, pages 315?
322.
M. Sahlgren. 2006. The Word-Space Model: Using Distributional Analysis to Represent Syntagmatic and Paradig-
matic Relations between Words in High-Dimensional Vector Spaces. Ph.D. thesis, Stockholm Univ., Sweden.
H. Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech tagging using decision trees. In New Methods in Language Pro-
cessing, pages 44?49, Manchester, UK.
F. Sebastiani. 2002. Machine learning in automated text categorization. ACM Comput. Surv., 34(1):1?47.
G. Tsatsaronis and V. Panagiotopoulou. 2009. A generalized vector space model for text retrieval based on
semantic relatedness. In EACL 2009, pages 70?78, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
P.D. Turney and P. Pantel. 2010. From frequency to meaning: Vector space models of semantics. Journal of
artificial intelligence research, 37:141?188.
A. Utsumi. 2010. Evaluating the performance of nonnegative matrix factorization for constructing semantic
spaces: Comparison to latent semantic analysis. In Proceedings of SMC, pages 2893?2900. IEEE.
L. van der Plas. 2008. Automatic lexico-semantic acquisition for question answering. Th`ese de doctorat, Univer-
sity of Groningen, Groningen.
E. Vozalis and K. G. Margaritis. 2003. Analysis of recommender systems? algorithms. In The 6th Hellenic
European Conference on Computer Mathematics & its Applications (HERCMA), Athens, Greece.
J. Weeds and D. Weir. 2005. Co-occurrence retrieval: A flexible framework for lexical distributional similarity.
Comput. Linguist., 31(4):439?475.
D. Yuret. 2012. Fastsubs: An efficient and exact procedure for finding the most likely lexical substitutes based on
an n-gram language model. IEEE Signal Process. Lett., 19(11):725?728.
M. Zhitomirsky-Geffet and I. Dagan. 2009. Bootstrapping distributional feature vector quality. Comput. Linguist.,
35(3):435?461.
P. Zweigenbaum. 1994. Menelas: an access system for medical records using natural language. Computer
Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 45.
10
