Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on the Use of Computational Methods in the Study of Endangered Languages, pages 1?5,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, 26 June 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Aikuma: A Mobile App for Collaborative Language Documentation
Steven Bird
1,2
, Florian R. Hanke
1
, Oliver Adams
1
, and Haejoong Lee
2
1
Dept of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne
2
Linguistic Data Consortium, University of Pennsylvania
Abstract
Proliferating smartphones and mobile
software offer linguists a scalable, net-
worked recording device. This paper de-
scribes Aikuma, a mobile app that is de-
signed to put the key language documen-
tation tasks of recording, respeaking, and
translating in the hands of a speech com-
munity. After motivating the approach we
describe the system and briefly report on
its use in field tests.
1 Introduction
The core of a language documentation consists
of primary recordings along with transcriptions
and translations (Himmelmann, 1998; Woodbury,
2003). Many members of a linguistic community
may contribute to a language documentation, play-
ing roles that depend upon their linguistic com-
petencies. For instance, the best person to pro-
vide a text could be a monolingual elder, while the
best person to translate it could be a younger bilin-
gual speaker. Someone else again may be the best
choice for performing transcription work. What-
ever the workflow and degree of collaboration,
there is always the need to manage files and cre-
ate secondary materials, a data management prob-
Figure 1: Phrase-aligned bilingual audio
lem. The problem is amplified by the usual prob-
lems that attend linguistic fieldwork: limited hu-
man resources, limited communication, and lim-
ited bandwidth.
The problem is not to collect large quantities of
primary audio in the field using mobile devices (de
Vries et al., 2014). Rather, the problem is to en-
sure the long-term interpretability of the collected
recordings. At the most fundamental level, we
want to know what words were spoken, and what
they meant. Recordings made in the wild suf-
fer from the expected range of problems: far-field
recording, significant ambient noise, audience par-
ticipation, and so forth. We address these prob-
lems via the ?respeaking? task (Woodbury, 2003).
Recordings made in an endangered language may
not be interpretable once the language falls out of
use. We address this problem via the ?oral trans-
lation? task. The result is relatively clean source
audio recordings with phrase-aligned translations
(see Figure 1). NLP methods are applicable to
such data (Dredze et al., 2010), and we can hope
that ultimately, researchers working on archived
bilingual audio sources will be able to automati-
cally extract word-glossed interlinear text.
We describe Aikuma, an open source Android
app that supports recording along with respeaking
Figure 2: Adding a time-aligned translation
1
and oral translation, while capturing basic meta-
data. Aikuma supports local networking so that
a set of mobile phones can be synchronized, and
anyone can listen to and annotate the recordings
made by others. Key functionality is provided
via a text-less interface (Figure 2). Aikuma in-
troduces social media and networked collabora-
tion to village-based fieldwork, all on low-cost de-
vices, and this is a boon for scaling up the quan-
tity of documentary material that can be collected
and processed. Field trials in Papua New Guinea,
Brazil, and Nepal have demonstrated the effective-
ness of the approach (Bird et al., 2014).
2 Thought Experiment: The Future
Philologist
A typical language documentation project is
resource-bound. So much documentation could be
collected, yet the required human resources to pro-
cess it all adequately are often not available. For
instance, some have argued that it is not effective
to collect large quantities of primary recordings
because there is not the time to transcribe it.
1
Estimates differ about the pace of language loss.
Yet it is uncontroversial that ? for hundreds of lan-
guages ? only the oldest living speakers are well-
versed in traditional folklore. While a given lan-
guage may survive for several more decades, the
opportunity to document significant genres may
pass much sooner. Ideally, a large quantity of these
nearly-extinct genres would be recorded and given
sufficient further treatment in the form of respeak-
ings and oral translations, in order to have archival
value. Accordingly, we would like to determine
what documentary materials would be of greatest
practical value to the linguist working in the fu-
ture, possibly ten to a hundred or more years in
future. Given the interest of classical philology in
ancient languages, we think of this researcher as
the ?future philologist.?
Our starting point is texts, as the least processed
item of the so-called ?Boasian trilogy.? A substan-
tial text corpus can serve as the basis for the prepa-
ration of grammars and dictionaries even once a
language is extinct, as we know from the cases of
the extinct languages of the Ancient Near East.
1
E.g. Paul Newman?s 2013 seminar The Law of Un-
intended Consequences: How the Endangered Languages
Movement Undermines Field Linguistics as a Scientific
Enterprise, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
xziE08ozQok
Our primary resource is the native speaker com-
munity, both those living in the ancestral home-
land and the members of the diaspora. How
can we engage these communities in the tasks
of recording, respeaking, and oral interpretation,
in order to generate the substantial quantity of
archival documentation?
Respeaking involves listening to an original
recording and repeating what was heard carefully
and slowly, in a quiet recording environment It
gives archival value to recordings that were made
?in the wild? on low-quality devices, with back-
ground noise, and by people having no training in
linguistics. It provides much clearer audio content,
facilitating transcription. Bettinson (2013) has
shown that human transcribers, without knowl-
edge of the language under study, can generally
produce phonetic transcriptions from such record-
ings that are close enough to enable someone who
knows the language to understand what was said,
and which can be used as the basis for phonetic
analysis. This means we can postpone the tran-
scription task ? by years or even decades ? un-
til such time as the required linguistic expertise is
available to work with archived recordings.
By interpretation, we mean listening to a
recording and producing a spoken translation of
what was heard. Translation into another language
obviates the need for the usual resource-intensive
approaches to linguistic analysis that require syn-
tactic treebanks along with semantic annotations,
at the cost of a future decipherment effort (Xia and
Lewis, 2007; Abney and Bird, 2010).
3 Design Principles
Several considerations informed the design of
Aikuma. First, to facilitate use by monolingual
speakers, the primary recording functions need to
be text free.
Second, to facilitate collaboration and guard
against loss of phones, it needs to be possible
to continuously synchronise files between phones.
Once any information has been captured on a
phone, it is synchronized to the other phones on
the local network. All content from any phone is
available from any phone, and thus only a single
phone needs to make it back from village-based
work. After a recording is made, it needs to be
possible to listen to it on the other phones on the
local network. This makes it easy for people to
annotate each other?s recordings. This also en-
2
ables users to experience the dissemination of their
recordings, and to understand that a private activ-
ity of recording a narrative is tantamount to public
speaking. This is useful for establishing informed
consent in communities who have no previous ex-
perience of the Internet or digital archiving.
Third, to facilitate trouble-shooting and future
digital archaeology, the file format of phones
needs to be transparent. We have devised an
easily-interpretable directory hierarchy for record-
ings and users, which permits direct manipulation
of recordings. For instance, all the metadata and
recordings that involve a particular speaker could
be extracted from the hierarchy with a single file-
name pattern.
4 Aikuma
Thanks to proliferating smartphones, it is now rel-
atively easy and cheap for untrained people to col-
lect and share many sorts of recordings, for their
own benefit and also for the benefit of language
preservation efforts. These include oral histories,
oral literature, public speaking, and discussion of
popular culture. With inexpensive equipment and
minimal training, a few dozen motivated people
can create a hundred hours of recorded speech (ap-
prox 1M words) in a few weeks. However, adding
transcription and translation by a trained linguist
introduces a bottleneck: most languages will be
gone before linguists will get to them.
Aikuma puts this work in the hands of language
speakers. It collects recordings, respeakings, and
interpretations, and organizes them for later syn-
chronization with the cloud and archival storage.
People with limited formal education and no prior
experience using smartphones can readily use the
app to record their stories, or listen to other peo-
ple?s stories to respeak or interpret them. Literate
users can supply written transcriptions and trans-
lations. Items can be rated by the linguist and
language workers and highly rated items are dis-
played more prominently, and this may be used to
influence the documentary workflow. Recordings
are stored alongside a wealth of metadata, includ-
ing language, GPS coordinates, speaker, and off-
sets on time-aligned translations and comments.
4.1 Listing and saving recordings
When the app is first started, it shows a list of
available recordings, indicating whether they are
respeakings or translations (Figure 3(a)). These
recordings could have been made on this phone, or
synced to this phone from another, or downloaded
from an archive. The recording functionality is
accessed by pressing the red circle, and when the
user is finished, s/he is prompted to add metadata
to identify the person or people who were recorded
(Figure 3(b)) and the language(s) of the recording
(Figure 3(c)).
(a) Main list (b) Adding speaker metadata (c) Adding language metadata
Figure 3: Screens for listing and saving recordings
3
4.2 Playback and commentary
When a recording is selected, the user sees a dis-
play for the individual recording, with its name,
date, duration, and images of the participants,
cf. Figure 4.
Figure 4: Recording playback screen
The availability of commentaries is indicated by
user images beneath the timeline. Once an orig-
inal recording has commentaries, their locations
are displayed within the playback slider. Playback
interleaves the original recording with the spoken
commentary, cf Figure 5.
Figure 5: Commentary playback screen
4.3 Gesture vs voice activation
Aikuma provides two ways to control any record-
ing activity, using gesture or voice activation. In
the gesture-activated mode, playback is started,
paused, or stopped using on-screen buttons. For
commentary, the user presses and holds the play
button to listen to the source, and presses and holds
the record button to supply a commentary, cf Fig-
ure 2. Activity is suspended when neither button
is being pressed.
In the voice-activated mode, the user puts the
phone to his or her ear and playback begins au-
tomatically. Playback is paused when the user
lifts the phone away from the ear. When the user
speaks, playback stops and the speech is recorded
and aligned with the source recording.
4.4 File storage
The app supports importing of external audio files,
so that existing recordings can be put through the
respeaking and oral translation processes. Stor-
age uses a hierarchical file structure and plain text
metadata formats which can be easily accessed di-
rectly using command-line tools. Files are shared
using FTP. Transcripts are stored using the plain
text NIST HUB-4 transcription format and can be
exported in Elan format.
4.5 Transcription
Aikuma incorporates a webserver and clients can
connect using the phone?s WiFi, Bluetooth, or
USB interfaces. The app provides a browser-based
transcription tool that displays the waveform for
a recording along with the spoken annotations.
Users listen to the source recording along with any
available respeakings and oral translations, and
then segment the audio and enter his or her own
written transcription and translation. These are
saved to the phone?s storage and displayed on the
phone during audio playback.
5 Deployment
We have tested Aikuma in Papua New Guinea,
Brazil, and Nepal (Bird et al., 2014). We taught
members of remote indigenous communities to
record narratives and orally interpret them into a
language of wider communication. We collected
approximately 10 hours of audio, equivalent to
100k words. We found that the networking capa-
bility facilitated the contribution of multiple mem-
bers of the community who have a variety of lin-
guistic aptitudes. We demonstrated that the plat-
form is an effective way to engage remote indige-
nous speech communities in the task of building
phrase-aligned bilingual speech corpora. To sup-
port large scale deployment, we are adding sup-
port for workflow management, plus interfaces to
the Internet Archive and to SoundCloud for long
term preservation and social interaction.
Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge support from the Aus-
tralian Research Council, the National Science
Foundation, and the Swiss National Science Foun-
dation. We are also grateful to Isaac McAlister,
Katie Gelbart, and Lauren Gawne for field-testing
work. Aikuma development is hosted on GitHub.
4
References
Steven Abney and Steven Bird. 2010. The Human
Language Project: building a universal corpus of the
world?s languages. In Proceedings of the 48th Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 88?97. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Mat Bettinson. 2013. The effect of respeaking on tran-
scription accuracy. Honours Thesis, Dept of Lin-
guistics, University of Melbourne.
Steven Bird, Isaac McAlister, Katie Gelbart, and Lau-
ren Gawne. 2014. Collecting bilingual audio in re-
mote indigenous villages. under review.
Nic de Vries, Marelie Davel, Jaco Badenhorst, Willem
Basson, Febe de Wet, Etienne Barnard, and Alta
de Waal. 2014. A smartphone-based ASR data col-
lection tool for under-resourced languages. Speech
Communication, 56:119?131.
Mark Dredze, Aren Jansen, Glen Coppersmith, and
Ken Church. 2010. NLP on spoken documents
without ASR. In Proceedings of the 2010 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 460?470. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Florian R. Hanke and Steven Bird. 2013. Large-
scale text collection for unwritten languages. In Pro-
ceedings of the 6th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing, pages 1134?1138.
Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing.
Nikolaus P. Himmelmann. 1998. Documentary and
descriptive linguistics. Linguistics, 36:161?195.
Anthony C. Woodbury. 2003. Defining documentary
linguistics. In Peter Austin, editor, Language Docu-
mentation and Description, volume 1, pages 35?51.
London: SOAS.
Fei Xia and William D. Lewis. 2007. Multilingual
structural projection across interlinearized text. In
Proceedings of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
452?459. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
5
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Applying NLP Tools to Similar Languages, Varieties and Dialects, pages 129?138,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23 2014.
Exploring Methods and Resources for Discriminating Similar Languages
Marco Lui
??
, Ned Letcher
?
, Oliver Adams
?
,
Long Duong
??
, Paul Cook
?
and Timothy Baldwin
??
?
Department of Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne
?
NICTA Victoria
mhlui@unimelb.edu.au, ned@nedletcher.net, oadams@student.unimelb.edu.au,
lduong@student.unimelb.edu.au, paulcook@unimelb.edu.au, tb@ldwin.net
Abstract
The Discriminating between Similar Languages (DSL) shared task at VarDial challenged partici-
pants to build an automatic language identification system to discriminate between 13 languages
in 6 groups of highly-similar languages (or national varieties of the same language). In this
paper, we describe the submissions made by team UniMelb-NLP, which took part in both the
closed and open categories. We present the text representations and modeling techniques used,
including cross-lingual POS tagging as well as fine-grained tags extracted from a deep grammar
of English, and discuss additional data we collected for the open submissions, utilizing custom-
built web corpora based on top-level domains as well as existing corpora.
1 Introduction
Language identification (LangID) is the problem of determining what natural language a document is
written in. Studies in the area often report high accuracy (Cavnar and Trenkle, 1994; Dunning, 1994;
Grefenstette, 1995; Prager, 1999; Teahan, 2000). However, recent work has shown that high accu-
racy is only achieved under ideal conditions (Baldwin and Lui, 2010), and one area that needs further
work is accurate discrimination between closely-related languages (Ljube?si?c et al., 2007; Tiedemann
and Ljube?si?c, 2012). The problem has been explored for specific groups of confusable languages, such
as Malay/Indonesian (Ranaivo-Malancon, 2006), South-Eastern European languages (Tiedemann and
Ljube?si?c, 2012), as well as varieties of English (Lui and Cook, 2013), Portuguese (Zampieri and Gebre,
2012), and Spanish (Zampieri et al., 2013). The Discriminating Similar Language (DSL) shared task
(Zampieri et al., 2014) was hosted at the VarDial workshop at COLING 2014, and brings together the
work on these various language groups by proposing a task on a single dataset containing text from 13
languages in 6 groups, drawn from a variety of news text datasets (Tan et al., 2014).
In this paper, we describe the entries made by team UniMelb NLP to the DSL shared task. We took
part in both the closed and the open categories, submitting to the main component (Groups A-E) as well
as the separate English component (Group F). For our closed submissions, we focused on comparing a
conventional LangID methodology based on individual words and language-indicative letter sequences
(Section 2.1) to a methodology that uses a de-lexicalized representation of language (Section 2.3). For
Groups A-E we use cross-lingual POS-tagger adaptation (Section 2.3.1) to convert the raw text to a
POS stream using a per-group tagger, and use n-grams of POS tags as our de-lexicalized representation.
For English, we also use a de-lexicalized representation based on lexical types extracted from a deep
grammar (Section 2.3.2), which can be thought of as a very fine-grained tagset. For the open submissions,
we constructed new web-based corpora using a standard methodology, targeting per-language top-level
domains (Section 2.4.2). We also compiled additional training data from existing corpora (Section 2.4.1).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence. Page numbers and proceedings footer are
added by the organisers. Licence details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
129
2 Overview
Our main focus was to explore novel methods and sources of training data for discriminating similar
languages. In this section, we describe techniques and text representations that we tested, as well as the
external data sources that we used to build language identifiers for this task.
2.1 Language-Indicative Byte Sequences
Lui and Baldwin (2011) introduced the LD feature set, a document representation for LangID that is
robust to variation in languages across different sources of text. The LD feature set can be thought of as
language-indicative byte sequences, i.e. sequences of 1 to 4 bytes that have been selected to be strongly
characteristic of a particular language or set of languages regardless of the text source. Lui and Baldwin
(2012) present langid.py,
1
an off-the-shelf LangID system that utilizes the LD feature set. In this
work, we re-train langid.py using the training data provided by the shared task organizers, and use
this as a baseline result representative of the state-of-the-art in LangID.
2.2 Hierarchical LangID
In LangID research to date, systems generally do not take into account any form of structure in the
class space. In this shared task, languages are explicitly grouped into 6 disjoint groups. We make use
of this structure by introducing a two-level LangID model. The first level implements a single group-
level classifier, which takes an input sentence and identifies the language group (A?F) that the sentence
is from. The output of this group-level classifier is used to select a corresponding per-group classifier,
that is trained only on data for languages in the group. This per-group classifier is applied to the input
sentence and the output thereof is the final label for the sentence.
2.3 De-Lexicalized Text Representation for DSL
One of the challenges in a machine learning approach to discriminating similar languages is to learn
differences between languages that are truly representative of the distinction between varieties, rather
than differences that are merely representative of peculiarities of the training data (Kilgarriff, 2001). One
possible confounding factor is the topicality of the training data ? if the data for each variety is drawn
from different datasets, it is possible that a classifier will simply learn the topical differences between
datasets. Diwersy et al. (2014) carried out a study of colligations in French varieties, where the variation
in the grammatical function of noun lemmas was studied across French-language newspapers from six
countries. In their initial analysis the found that the characteristic features of each country included the
name of the country and other country-specific proper nouns, which resulted in near 100% classification
accuracy but do not provide any insight into national varieties from a linguistic perspective.
One strategy that has been proposed to mitigate the effect of such topical differences is the use of
a de-lexicalized text representation (Lui and Cook, 2013). The de-lexicalization is achieved through
the use of a Part-Of-Speech tagger, which labels each word in a sentence according to its word class
(such as Noun, Verb, Adjective etc). De-lexicalized text representations through POS tagging were first
considered for native language identification (NLI), where they were used as a proxy for syntax in order
to capture certain types of grammatical errors (Wong and Dras, 2009). Syntactic structure is known to
vary across national dialects (Trudgill and Hannah, 2008), so Lui and Cook (2013) investigated POS plus
function word n-grams as a proxy for syntactic structure, and used this representation to build classifiers
to discriminate between Canadian, British and American English. They found that classifiers using such a
representation achieved above-baseline results, indicating some systematic differences between varieties
could be captured through the use of such a de-lexicalized representation. In this work, we explore this
idea further ? in particular, we examine (1) the applicability of de-lexicalized text representations to
other languages using automatically-induced crosslingual POS taggers, and (2) the difference in accuracy
for discriminating English varieties between representations based on a coarse-grained universal tagset
(Section 2.3.1) as compared to a very fine-grained tagset used in deep parsing (Section 2.3.2).
1
http://github.com/saffsd/langid.py
130
Sandy quit on Tuesday Sandy quit Tuesday
UT NOUN VERB ADP NOUN NOUN VERB NOUN
LTT n - pn v np
*
p np i-tmp n - c-dow n - pn v np
*
n - c-dow
British English American English
Table 1: Example of tags assigned with coarse-grained Universal Tagset (UT) and fine-grained lexical
type tagset (LTT).
2.3.1 Crosslingual POS Tagging
A key issue in generating de-lexicalized text representations based on POS tags is the lack of availability
of POS taggers for many languages. While some languages have some tools available for POS tagging
(e.g. Treaties (Schmid, 1994) has parameter files for Spanish and Portuguese), the availability of POS
taggers is far from universal. To address this problem for the purposes of discriminating similar lan-
guages, we draw on previous work in unsupervised cross-lingual POS tagging (Duong et al., 2013) to
build a POS tagger for each group of languages, a method which we will refer to hereafter as ?UMPOS?.
UMPOS employs a 12-tag Universal Tagset introduced by Petrov et al. (2012), which consists of the
tags NOUN, VERB, ADJ (adjective), ADV (adverb), PRON (pronoun), DET (determiner or article), ADP
(preposition or postposition), NUM (numeral), CONJ (conjunction), PRT (particle), PUNCT (punctua-
tion), and X (all other categories, e.g., foreign words or abbreviations). These twelve basic tags constitute
a ?universal? tagset in that they can be used to describe the morphosyntax of any language at a coarse
level.
UMPOS generates POS taggers for new languages in an unsupervised fashion, by making use of
parallel data and an existing POS tagger. The input for UMPOS is: (1) parallel data between the source
and target languages; and (2) a supervised POS tagger for the source language. The output will be the
tagger for the target language. The parallel data acts as a bridge to transfer POS annotation information
from the source language to the target language.
The steps used in UMPOS are as follow. First, we collect parallel data which has English as the source
language, drawing from Europarl (Koehn, 2005) and EUbookshop (Skadin??s et al., 2014). UMPOS word-
aligns the parallel data using the Giza++ alignment tool (Och and Ney, 2003). The English side is POS-
tagged using the Stanford POS tagger (Toutanova et al., 2003), and the POS tags are then projected from
English to the target language based solely on one-to-one mappings. Using the sentence alignment score,
UMPOS ranks the ?goodness? of projected sentences and builds a seed model for the target language on
a subset of the parallel data. To further improve accuracy, UMPOS builds the final model by applying
self-training with revision to the rest of the data as follows: (1) the parallel corpus data is divided into
different blocks; (2) the first block is tagged using the seed model; (3) the block is revised based on
alignment confidence; (4) a new tagger is trained on the first block and then used to tag the second block.
This process continues until all blocks are tagged. In experiments on a set of 8 languages, Duong et al.
(2013) report accuracy of 83.4%, which is state-of-the-art for unsupervised POS tagging.
2.3.2 English Tagging Using ERG Lexical Types
Focusing specifically on language Group F ? British English and American English ? we leveraged
linguistic information from the analyses produced by the English Resource Grammar (ERG: Flickinger
(2002)), a broad-coverage, handcrafted grammar of English in the HPSG framework (Pollard and Sag,
1994) and developed within the DELPH-IN
2
research initiative. In particular, we extracted the lexical
types assigned to tokens by the parser for the best analysis of each input string. In accordance with
the heavily lexicalized nature of HPSG, lexical types are the primary means of distinguishing between
different morphosyntactic contexts in which a given lexical entry can occur. They can be thought of as
fine-grained POS tags, containing subcategorisation information in addition to part of speech informa-
tion, and semantic information in cases that it directly impacts on morphosyntax. The version of the
ERG we used (the ?1212? release) has almost 1000 lexical types.
Table 1 illustrates an example of the type of syntactic variation that can be captured with the finer-
2
http://www.delph-in.net
131
Group Language Code
Web Corpora Existing Corpora
TLD # words # datasets # words
A Bosnian bs .ba 817383 4 715602
A Croatian hr .hr 43307311 5 1536623
A Serbian sr .rs 1374787 4 1204684
B Indonesian id .id 23812382 3 564824
B Malaysian my .my 2596378 3 535221
C Czech cz .cz 17103140 8 2181486
C Slovakian sk .sk 17253001 8 2308083
D Brazilian Portuguese pt-BR .br 27369673 4 860065
D European Portuguese pt-PT .pt 22620401 8 2860321
E Argentine Spanish es-AR .ar 45913651 2 619500
E Peninsular Spanish es-ES .es 30965338 9 3458462
F British English en-GB .uk 20375047 1 523653
F American English en-US .us 21298230 1 527915
Table 2: Word count of training data used for open submissions.
grained lexical types, that would be missed with the coarse-grained universal tagset. In American En-
glish, both Sandy resigned on Tuesday and Sandy resigned on Tuesday are acceptable whereas British
English does not permit the omission of the preposition before dates. In the coarse-grained tagset, the
American English form results in a sequence VERB : NOUN, which is not particularly interesting as we
expect this to occur in both English varieties, whereas the fine-grained lexical types allow us to capture
the sequence v np
*
ntr : n - c-dow (verb followed by count noun [day of week]), which we expect
to see in American English but not in British English.
Since the ERG models a sharp notion of grammaticality, not all inputs receive an analysis ? whether
due to gaps in the coverage of the grammar or genuinely ungrammatical input. The ERG achieved
a coverage of 86% over the training data across both British English and American English. Sentences
which failed to parse were excluded from use as input into the classifier. However the inability to classify
any sentence which we cannot parse is unsatisfactory. We solved this problem by generating lexical type
features for sentences which failed to parse using the ERG-trained ?ubertagger of Dridan (2013), which
performs both tokenisation and supertagging of lexical types and improves parser efficiency by reducing
ambiguity in the input lattice to the parser.
2.4 External Corpora
The DSL shared task invited two categories of participation: (1) Closed, using only training data provided
by the organizers (Tan et al., 2014); and (2) Open, using any training data available to participants. To
participate in the latter category, we sourced additional training data through: (1) collection of data
relevant to this task from existing text corpora; and (2) automatic construction of web corpora. The
information about the additional training data is shown in Table 2.
2.4.1 Existing Corpora
We collected training data from a number of existing corpora, as shown in Table 3. Many of the cor-
pora that we used are part of OPUS (Tiedemann, 2012), which is a collection of sentence-aligned text
corpora commonly used for research in machine translation. The exceptions are: (1) debian, which
was constructed using translations of message strings from the Debian operating system,
3
; (2) BNC ?
the British National Corpus (Burnard, 2000); (3) OANC ? the open component of the Second Release
of the American National Corpus (Ide and Macleod, 2001), and (4) Reuters Corpus Volume 2 (RCV2);
4
a corpus of news stories by local reporters in 13 languages. We sampled approximately 19000 sentences
from each of the BNC and OANC, which we used as training data to generate ERG lextype features (Sec-
tion 2.3.2) for British English (en-GB) and American English (en-US), respectively. From RCV2 we
3
http://www.debian.org
4
http://trec.nist.gov/data/reuters/reuters.html
132
bs hr sr pt-PT pt-BR id my cz sk es-ES es-AR en-US en-GB
BNC X
debian X X X X X X X X X X X
ECB X X X X
EMEA X X X X
EUconst X X X X
Europarl X X X X
hrenWaC X
KDE4 X X X X X X X X X
KDEdoc X X X X
OANC X
OpenSubtitles X X X X X X X X X X
RCV2 X X
SETIMES2 X X X
Tatoeba X X
Table 3: Training data compiled from existing corpora.
used the Latin American Spanish news stories as a proxy for Argentine Spanish (es-AR). Note that, for
a given text source, we didn?t necessarily use data for all available languages. For example, debian
contains British English and American English translations, which we did not use.
2.4.2 Web Corpus Construction
Each existing corpus we describe in Section 2.4.1 provides incomplete coverage over the set of languages
in the shared task dataset. In order to have a resource that covers all the languages in the shared task
drawn from a single source, we constructed web corpora for each language. Our approach was strongly
inspired by the approach used to create ukWaC (Ferraresi et al., 2008), and the creation of each sub-
language?s corpus involved crawling the top level domains of the primary countries associated with
those sub-languages. Based on the findings of Cook and Hirst (2012), the assumption underlying this
approach is that text found in the top-level domains (TLDs) of those countries will primarily be of
the sub-language dominant in that country. For instance, we assume that Portuguese text found when
crawling the .pt TLD will primarily be European Portuguese, while the Portuguese found in .br will
be primarily Brazilian Portuguese.
The process of creating a corpus for each sub-language involved translating a sample of 200 of the
original ukWaC queries into each language using Panlex (Baldwin et al., 2010).
5
These queries were then
submitted to the Bing Search API using the BootCaT tools (Baroni and Bernardini, 2004), constraining
results to the relevant TLD. For each query, we took the first 10 URLs yielded by Bing and appended
them to a list of seed URLs for that language. After deduplication, the seed URLs were then fed to a
Heritrix 3.1.1
6
instance with default settings other than constraining the crawled content to the relevant
TLD.
Corpora were then created from the data gathered by Heritrix. Following the ukWaC approach,
only documents with a MIME type of HTML and size between 5k and 200k bytes were used. Jus-
text (Pomik?alek, 2011) was used to extract text from the selected documents. langid.py (Lui and
Baldwin, 2012) was then used to discard documents whose text was not in the relevant language or lan-
guage group. The corpus was then refined through deduplication. First, near-deduplication was done at
the paragraph level using Onion (Pomik?alek, 2011) with its default settings. Then, exact-match sentence-
level deduplication, ignoring whitespace and case, was applied.
3 Results and Discussion
Table 4 summarizes the runs submitted by team UniMelb NLP to the VarDial DSL shared task. We
submitted the maximum number of runs allowed, i.e. 3 closed runs and 3 open runs, to both the ?general?
Groups A?E subtask as well as the English-specific Group F subtask. We applied different methods to
Group F, as some of the tools (the ERG) and resources (BNC/OANC) were specific to English. For clarity
in discussion, we have labeled each of our runs according to a 3-letter code: the first letter indicates the
5
A sample of the queries was used because of time and resource limitations.
6
https://webarchive.jira.com/wiki/display/Heritrix
133
Run Description
Macro-avg F-Score
dev tst
Grp A-E closed
AC1 langid.py 13-way 0.822 0.817
AC2 langid.py per-group 0.923 0.918
AC3 POS features 0.683 0.671
Grp F closed
FC1 Lextype features 0.559 0.415
FC2 langid.py per-group 0.548 0.403
FC3 POS features 0.545 0.435
Grp A-E open
AO1 Ext Corpora (word-level model) 0.705 0.703
AO2 Web Corpora (word-level model) 0.771 0.767
AO3 5-way voting 0.881 0.878
Grp F open
FO1 Lextype features using BNC/OANC training data 0.491 0.572
FO2 Web Corpora (word-level model) 0.490 0.581
FO3 5-way voting 0.574 0.442
Table 4: Summary of the official runs submitted by UniMelbNLP. ?dev? indicates scores from our
internal testing on the development partition of the dataset.
subtask (A for Groups A?E, F for Group F), the second indicates Closed (?C?) or Open (?O?), and the
final digit indicates the run number.
AC1 represents a benchmark result based on the LangID system (Lui and Baldwin, 2012). We used
the training tools provided with langid.py to generate a new model using the training data provided
by the shared task organizers, noting that as only data from a single source is used, we are not able to
fully exploit the cross-domain feature selection (Lui and Baldwin, 2011) implemented by langid.py.
The macro-averaged F-score across groups is substantially lower than that on standard LangID datasets
(Lui and Baldwin, 2012).
AC2 and FC2 are a straightforward implementation of hierarchical LangID (Section 2.2), using
mostly-default settings of langid.py. A 6-way group-level classifier is trained, and well as 6 different
per-group classifiers. We increase the number of features selected per class (i.e. group or language) to
500 from the default of 300, to compensate for the smaller number of classes (langid.py off-the-
shelf supports 97 languages). In our internal testing on the provided development data, the group-level
classifier achieved 100% accuracy in classifying sentences at the group level, essentially reducing the
problem to within-group disambiguation. Despite being one of the simplest approaches, overall this
was our best-performing submission for Groups A?E. It also represents a substantial improvement on
AC1, further emphasizing the need to implement hierarchical LangID in order to attain high accuracy in
discriminating similar languages.
AC3 and FC3 are based solely on POS-tag sequences generated by UMPOS, and implement a hierar-
chical LangID approach similar to AC2/FC2. Each sentence in the training data is mapped to a POS-tag
sequence in the 12-tag universal tagset, using the per-group POS tagger for the language group. Each tag
was represented using a single character, allowing us to make use of langid.py to train 6 per-group
classifiers based on n-grams of POS-tags. We used n-grams of order 1?6, and selected 5000 top-ranked
sequences per-language. To classify test data, the same group-level classifier used in AC2 was used to
map sentences to language groups, and then the per-group POS tagger was applied to derive the corre-
sponding stream of POS tags for each sentence. The corresponding per-group classifier trained on POS
tag sequences was then applied to produce the final label for the sentence. For Groups A?E, we find that
134
bs hr sr id my cz sk
T 53.0 23.2 60.0 VHN 0.9 1.3 .1.1 1.0 1.2
TV 32.4 13.2 43.3 DHN 0.1 0.1 1.1. 2.0 2.2
NT 31.5 13.9 43.2 N.1. 12.1 3.1 1.1 4.0 4.4
TVN 24.8 9.8 34.3 N.N 63.3 48.0 .N.1 0.5 0.7
VT 19.4 6.1 27.1 .DNV 1.8 1.1 .C 39.0 33.5
TN 29.1 10.9 29.6 DH 1.7 2.1 .1.. 0.7 1.0
NTV 18.6 8.4 29.4 N.DN 3.2 2.0 .P 51.2 41.8
TVNN 16.8 6.9 23.7 VH 11.3 14.9 1. 14.0 13.9
NVT 11.2 2.9 15.5 PNV1 0.5 0.4 1.. 1.2 1.6
VTV 11.0 3.2 17.0 .1. 13.2 3.8 .R 44.0 30.0
pt-BR pt-PT es-AR es-ES en-GB en-US
X 3.4 2.8 .. 22.6 43.3 NNN 48.2 43.2
N.NN 22.2 15.3 N.. 16.4 31.7 HV 41.5 46.4
.NN 29.9 22.9 .P 52.2 68.3 NN 86.3 83.0
XN 0.4 0.4 P. 6.6 16.8 H 61.8 65.9
NNNN 6.2 3.2 D. 4.4 12.6 R 61.5 65.5
D 99.2 99.5 ..$ 0.0 0.0 RR 7.2 9.4
NNN 28.3 18.6 J.. 5.0 12.6 NNNN 21.7 18.5
.NNN 6.7 4.0 ..VV 0.9 5.2 .C 15.8 18.8
N.D 58.6 47.8 DN.. 4.2 11.0 ... 0.8 0.3
NX 0.8 0.5 .PD 24.5 36.3 N.C 11.3 13.6
Table 5: Top 10 POS features per-group by Information Gain, along with percentage of sentences in each
language in which the feature appears. The notation used is as follows: . = punctuation, J = adjective,
P = pronoun, R = adverb, C = conjunction, D = determiner/article, N = noun, 1 = numeral, H = pronoun,
T = particle, V = verb, and X = others
the POS-tag sequence features are not as effective as the character n-grams used in AC2. Nonetheless,
the results attained are above baseline, indicating that there are systematic differences between languages
in each group that can be captured by an unsupervised approach to POS-tagging using a coarse-grained
tagset. This extends the similar observation made by Lui and Cook (2013) on varieties of English, show-
ing that the same is true for the other language groups in this shared task. Also of interest is the higher
accuracy attained by the POS-tag features on Groups A?E (i.e. AC3) than on English (Group F, FC3).
The top-10 sequences per-group are presented in Table 5, where it can be seen that the sequences are
often slightly more common in one language in the group than the other language(s). One limitation of
the Information Gain based feature selection used in langid.py is that each feature is scored inde-
pendently, and each language receives a binarized score. This can be seen in the features selected for
Group A, where all the top-10 features selected involve particles (labelled T). Overall, this indicates that
Croatian (hr) appears to use particles much less frequently than Serbian (sr) or Bosnian (bs), which is
an intriguing finding. However, most of the top-10 features are redundant in that they all convey very
similar information.
Similar to FC3, a hierarchical LangID approach is used in FC1, in conjunction with per-group classi-
fiers based on a sequence of tags derived from the original sentence. The difference between the taggers
used for FC3 and FC1 is that the FC3 tagger utilizes the 12-tag universal tagset, whereas the FC1 tagger
uses the English-specific lexical types from the ERG (Section 2.3.2), a set of approximately 1000 tags.
There is hence a trade-off to be made between the degree of distinction between tags, and the relative
sparsity of the data ? having a larger tagset means that any given sequence of tags is proportionally less
likely to occur. On the basis of the results of FC1 and FC3 on the dev data, the lexical type features
marginally outperform the coarse-grained universal tagset. However, this result is made harder to inter-
pret by the mismatch between the dev and tst partitions of the shared task dataset. We will discuss
this issue in more detail below, in the context of examining the results on Group F for the open category.
In the open category, we focused primarily on the effect of using different sources of training data.
AO1 and AO2 both implement a hierarchical LangID approach, again using the group-level classifier
from AC2. For the per-group classifiers, runs AO1 and AO2 use a naive Bayes model on a word-level
representation, with feature selection by Information Gain. The difference between the two is that A01
uses samples from existing text corpora (Section 2.4.1), whereas A02 uses web corpora that we prepared
specifically for this shared task (Section 2.4.2). In terms of accuracy, both types of corpora perform
135
substantially better than baseline, indicating that at the word level, there are differences between the
language varieties that are consistent across the different corpus types. This result is complementary to
Cook and Hirst (2012), who found that web corpora from specific top-level domains were representative
of national varieties of English. AO2 (web corpora) outperforms AO1 (existing corpora), further high-
lighting the relevance of web corpora as a source of training data for discriminating similar languages.
However, our models trained on external data were not able to outperform the models trained on the
official training data for Groups A?E. A03 consists of a 5-way majority vote between results AC1, AC2,
AC3, AO1 and AO2. Including the predictions from the closed submissions substantially improves the
result with respect to AO1/AO2, but overall our best result for Groups A?E was obtained by run AC2.
For Group F, FO1 utilizes ERG lexical type features in the same manner as FC1, the difference being
that FC1 uses the shared task trn partition, whereas FO1 uses sentences sampled from existing corpora,
specifically BNC for en-GB and OANC for en-US. FO2 implements the same concept as AO2, namely a
word-level naive Bayes model trained using web corpora. For the Group F (i.e. English) subtask, this was
our best-performing submission overall. FO3 is a 5-way vote between FC1, FC2, FC3, FO1 and FO2,
similar to AO3. Notably, our Group F submissions based on the supplied training data all performed
substantially better on the dev partition of the shared task dataset than on the tst partition. The inverse
is true for our submissions based on external corpora, where all our entries performed substantially better
on the tst partition than on the dev partition. Furthermore, the differences are fairly large, particularly
since Group F is a binary classification task with a 50% baseline. This implies that, at least under our
models, the en-GB portion of the trn partition is a better model of the en-US portion of the tst partition
than the en-GB portion thereof. This is likely due to the manual intervention that was only carried out
on the test portion of the dataset (Zampieri et al., 2014).
Our Group F results appear to be inferior to previous work on discriminating English varieties (Lui
and Cook, 2013). However, there are a number of differences that make it difficult to compare the
results: Lui and Cook (2013) studied differences between Australian, British and Canadian English,
whereas the shared task focused on differences between British and American English. Lui and Cook
(2013) also draw on training data from a variety of domains (national corpora, web corpora and Twitter
messages), whereas the shared task used a dataset collected from newspaper texts (Tan et al., 2014).
Consistent with Cook and Hirst (2012) and Lui and Cook (2013), we found that web corpora appear to be
representative of national varieties, and consistent with Lui and Cook (2013) we found that de-lexicalized
representations of text are able to provide better than baseline discrimination between national varieties.
Overall, these results highlight the need for further research into discriminating between varieties of
English.
4 Conclusion
Discriminating between similar languages is an interesting sub-problem in language identification, and
the DSL shared task at VarDial has given us an opportunity to examine possible solutions in greater
detail. Our most successful methods implement straightforward hierarchical LangID, firstly identifying
the language group that a sentence belongs to, before identifying the specific language. We examined a
number of text representations for the per-group language identifiers, including a standard representation
for language identification based on language-indicative byte sequences, as well as with de-lexicalized
text representations. We found that the performance of de-lexicalized representations was above baseline,
however we were not able to fully investigate approaches to integrating predictions from lexicalized
and de-lexicalized text representations due to time constraints. We also found that when using external
corpora, web corpora constructed by scraping per-country top-level domains performed as well as (if
not better than) data collected from existing text corpora, supporting the hypothesis that web corpora
are representative of national varieties of respective languages. Overall, our best result was obtained by
applying two-level hierarchical LangID, firstly identifying the language group that a sentence belongs
to, and then disambiguating within each group. Our best result was achieved by applying an existing
LangID method (Lui and Baldwin, 2012) to both the group-level and the per-group classification tasks.
136
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Li Wang, Rebecca Dridan and Bahar Salehi for their kind assistance with
this research. NICTA is funded by the Australian Government as represented by the Department of
Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy and the Australian Research Council through the
ICT Centre of Excellence program.
References
Timothy Baldwin and Marco Lui. 2010. Language identification: The long and the short of the matter. In
Proceedings of Human Language Technologies: The 11th Annual Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL HLT 2010), pages 229?237, Los Angeles, USA.
Timothy Baldwin, Jonathan Pool, and Susan M Colowick. 2010. Panlex and lextract: Translating all words of
all languages of the world. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics:
Demonstrations, pages 37?40, Beijing, China.
Marco Baroni and Silvia Bernardini. 2004. BootCaT: Bootstrapping corpora and terms from the Web. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2004).
Lou Burnard. 2000. User Reference Guide for the British National Corpus. Technical report, Oxford University
Computing Services.
William B. Cavnar and John M. Trenkle. 1994. N-gram-based text categorization. In Proceedings of the Third
Symposium on Document Analysis and Information Retrieval, pages 161?175, Las Vegas, USA.
Paul Cook and Graeme Hirst. 2012. Do Web corpora from top-level domains represent national varieties of
English? In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Textual Data Statistical Analysis, pages
281?293, Li`ege, Belgium.
Sascha Diwersy, Stefan Evert, and Stella Neumann. 2014. A weakly supervised multivariate approach to the study
of language variation. In Benedikt Szmrecsanyi and Bernhard W?alchli, editors, Aggregating Dialectology,
Typology, and Register Analysis. Linguistic Variation in Text and Speech. De Gruyter, Berlin.
Rebecca Dridan. 2013. Ubertagging. Joint segmentation and supertagging for English. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1201?1212, Seattle, USA.
Ted Dunning. 1994. Statistical identification of language. Technical Report MCCS 940-273, Computing Research
Laboratory, New Mexico State University.
Long Duong, Paul Cook, Steven Bird, and Pavel Pecina. 2013. Simpler unsupervised POS tagging with bilin-
gual projections. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 634?639.
Adriano Ferraresi, Eros Zanchetta, Marco Baroni, and Silvia Bernardini. 2008. Introducing and evaluating
ukWaC, a very large web-derived corpus of English. In Proceedings of the 4th Web as Corpus Workshop:
Can we beat Google, pages 47?54, Marrakech, Morocco.
Dan Flickinger. 2002. On building a more efficient grammar by exploiting types. In Stephan Oepen, Dan
Flickinger, Jun?ichi Tsujii, and Hans Uszkoreit, editors, Collaborative Language Engineering. CSLI Publi-
cations, Stanford, USA.
Gregory Grefenstette. 1995. Comparing two language identification schemes. In Proceedings of Analisi Statistica
dei Dati Testuali (JADT), pages 263?268, Rome, Italy.
Nancy Ide and Catherine Macleod. 2001. The American National Corpus: A standardized resource of American
English. In Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics 2001, pages 274?280, Lancaster, UK.
Adam Kilgarriff. 2001. Comparing corpora. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 6(1):97?133.
Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the Tenth
Machine Translation Summit (MT Summit X), pages 79?86, Phuket, Thailand.
Nikola Ljube?si?c, Nives Mikeli?c, and Damir Boras. 2007. Language identification : how to distinguish similar
languages ? In 29th International Conference on Information Technology Interfaces, pages 541?546.
Marco Lui and Timothy Baldwin. 2011. Cross-domain feature selection for language identification. In Proceed-
ings of the 5th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP 2011), pages 553?561,
Chiang Mai, Thailand.
137
Marco Lui and Timothy Baldwin. 2012. langid.py: An off-the-shelf language identification tool. In Proceedings
of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2012) Demo Session, pages
25?30, Jeju, Republic of Korea.
Marco Lui and Paul Cook. 2013. Classifying English documents by national dialect. In Proceedings of the
Australasian Language Technology Association Workshop 2013, pages 5?15, Brisbane, Australia.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A systematic comparison of various statistical alignment models.
Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19?51.
Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 2012. A universal part-of-speech tagset. In Proceedings of
the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012), Istanbul, Turkey, may.
European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
Carl Pollard and Ivan A. Sag. 1994. Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, USA.
Jan Pomik?alek. 2011. Removing Boilerplate and Duplicate Content from Web Corpora. Ph.D. thesis, Masaryk
University.
John M. Prager. 1999. Linguini: language identification for multilingual documents. In Proceedings of the 32nd
Annual Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences (HICSS-32), Maui, Hawaii.
Bali Ranaivo-Malancon. 2006. Automatic Identification of Close Languages - Case study : Malay and Indonesian.
ECTI Transaction on Computer and Information Technology, 2(2):126?134.
Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech tagging using decision trees. In Proceedings of the Conference
on New Methods in Natural Language Processing, Manchester, 1994.
Raivis Skadin??s, J?org Tiedemann, Roberts Rozis, and Daiga Deksne. 2014. Billions of parallel words for free:
Building and using the EU Bookshop corpus. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2014), Reykjavik, Iceland.
Liling Tan, Marcos Zampieri, Nikola Ljube?si?c, and J?org Tiedemann. 2014. Merging comparable data sources for
the discrimination of similar languages: The DSL corpus collection. In Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on
Building and Using Comparable Corpora (BUCC), Reykjavik, Iceland.
W. J. Teahan. 2000. Text Classification and Segmentation Using Minimum Cross-Entropy. In Proceedings the 6th
International Conference ?Recherche dInformation Assistee par Ordinateur? (RIAO00), pages 943?961, Paris,
France.
J?org Tiedemann and Nikola Ljube?si?c. 2012. Efficient discrimination between closely related languages. In
Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2012), pages 2619?
2634, Mumbai, India.
J?org Tiedemann. 2012. Parallel data, tools and interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012), pages 2214?2218, Istanbul, Turkey.
Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher D. Manning, and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-speech
tagging with a cyclic dependency network. In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics on Human Language Technology - Volume 1 (NAACL
?03), pages 173?180, Edmonton, Canada.
Peter Trudgill and Jean Hannah. 2008. International English: A guide to varieties of Standard English. Hodder
Education, London, UK, 5th edition.
Sze-Meng Jojo Wong and Mark Dras. 2009. Contrastive analysis and native language identification. In Proceed-
ings of the Australasian Language Technology Workshop 2009 (ALTW 2009), pages 53?61, Sydney, Australia.
Marcos Zampieri and Binyam Gebrekidan Gebre. 2012. Automatic identification of language varieties: The case
of Portuguese. In Proceedings of KONVENS 2012, pages 233?237, Vienna, Austria.
Marcos Zampieri, Binyam Gebrekidan Gebre, and Sascha Diwersy. 2013. N-gram language models and POS
distribution for the identification of Spanish varieties. In Proceedings of TALN 2013, pages 580?587, Sable
d?Olonne, France.
Marcos Zampieri, Liling Tan, Nikola Ljube?si?c, and J?org Tiedemann. 2014. A report on the DSL shared task
2014. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Applying NLP Tools to Similar Languages, Varieties and Dialects
(VarDial), Dublin, Ireland.
138
