Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2007, Companion Volume, pages 77?80,
Rochester, NY, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
ILR-Based MT Comprehension Test with Multi-Level Questions 
 
Douglas Jones, Martha Herzog, Hussny Ibrahim, Arvind Jairam, Wade Shen,  
Edward Gibson and Michael Emonts 
 MIT Lincoln Laboratory 
Lexington, MA 02420 
{DAJ,Arvind,SWade}@LL.MIT.EDU 
MHerzog2005@comcast.net 
DLI Foreign Language Center
Monterey, CA 93944 
{Hussny.Ibrahim,Michael.Emonts}
@monterey.army.mil  
MIT Brain and Cognitive 
Sciences Department 
Cambridge MA, 02139 
EGibson@MIT.EDU 
Abstract 
We present results from a new Interagency 
Language Roundtable (ILR) based compre-
hension test. This new test design presents 
questions at multiple ILR difficulty levels 
within each document. We incorporated 
Arabic machine translation (MT) output 
from three independent research sites, arbi-
trarily merging these materials into one MT 
condition.  We contrast the MT condition, 
for both text and audio data types, with high 
quality human reference Gold Standard 
(GS) translations.  Overall, subjects 
achieved 95% comprehension for GS and 
74% for MT, across 4 genres and 3 diffi-
culty levels. Surprisingly, comprehension 
rates do not correlate highly with translation 
error rates, suggesting that we are measur-
ing an additional dimension of MT quality.   
We observed that it takes 15% more time 
overall to read MT than GS.  
1 Introduction 
The official Defense Language Proficiency Test 
(DLPT) is constructed according to rigorous and 
well-established principles that have been devel-
oped to measure the foreign language proficiency 
of human language learners in U.S. Department of 
Defense settings.  In 2004, a variant of that test 
type was constructed, following the general DLPT 
design principles, but modified to measure the 
quality of machine translation.  This test, known as 
the DLPTstar (Jones et al 2005),  was based on 
authentic Arabic materials at ILR  text difficulty 
levels 1, 2, and 3, accompanied by constructed-
response questions at matching levels.  The ILR 
level descriptors, used throughout the U.S. gov-
ernment, can be found at the website cited in the 
list of references. The text documents were pre-
sented in two conditions in English translation: (1) 
professionally translated into English, and (2) ma-
chine translated with state-of-the art MT systems, 
often quite garbled.  Results showed that native 
readers of English could generally pass the Levels 
1 and 2 questions on the test, but not those at Level 
3.  Also, Level 1 comprehension was less than ex-
pected, given the low level of the original material.  
It was not known whether the weak Level 1 per-
formance was due to systematic deficits in MT 
performance at Level 1, or whether the materials 
were simply mismatched to the MT capabilities. 
In this paper, we present a new variant of the 
test, using materials specifically created to test the 
capabilities of the MT systems.  To guarantee that 
the MT systems were up to the task of processing 
the documents, we used the DARPA GALE 2006 
evaluation data sets, against which several research 
sites were testing MT algorithms.  We arbitrarily 
merged the MT output from three sites. The ILR 
difficulty of the documents ranged from Level 2 to 
Level 3, but the test did not contain any true Level 
1 documents.  To compensate for this lack, we 
constructed questions about Level 1 elements (e.g., 
personal and place names) in Level 2 and 3 docu-
ments.  A standard DLPT would have more varia-
tion at Level 1.  
2 Related and Previous Work 
Earlier work in MT evaluation incorporated an in-
formativeness measure, based on comprehension 
test answers, in addition to fluency, a measure of 
output readability without reference to a gold stan-
dard, and adequacy, a measure of accuracy with 
reference to a gold standard translation (White and 
O'Connell, 1994).  Later MT evaluation found flu-
ency and adequacy to correlate well enough with 
automatic measures (BLEU), and since compre-
hension tests are relatively more expensive to cre-
ate, the informativeness test was not used in later 
77
MT evaluations, such as the ones performed by 
NIST from 2001-2006.  In other work, task-based 
evaluation has been used for MT evaluation (Voss 
and Tate, 2006), which measures human perform-
ance on exhaustively extracting ?who?, ?when?, and 
?where? type elements in MT output. The DLPT-
star also uses this type of factual question, particu-
larly for Level 2 documents, but not exhaustively.  
Instead, the test focuses on text elements most 
characteristic of the levels as defined in the ILR 
scale.  At Level 3, for example, questions may 
concern abstract concepts or hypotheses found in 
the documents.  Applying the ILR construct pro-
vides Defense Department decision makers with 
test scores that are readily interpretable. 
3 Test Construction and Administration 
In this paper, we present a new test, based entirely 
on the DARPA GALE 2006 evaluation data, se-
lecting approximately half of the material for our 
test. We selected twenty-four test documents, with 
balanced coverage across four genres: newswire, 
newsgroups, broadcast news and talk radio.  Our 
target was to have at least 2500 words for each 
genre, which we exceeded slightly with approxi-
mately 12,200 words in total for the test.  We be-
gan with a random selection of documents and 
adjusted it for better topic coverage.  We con-
structed an exhaustive set of questions for each 
document, approximately 200 questions in total.  
The questions ranged in ILR difficulty, from "0+, 
1,1+, 2, 2+ and 3, with Levels 0+, 1 and 1+ com-
bined to a pseudo-level we called L1~, providing 
four levels of difficulty to be measured.  We di-
vided the questions into two sets, and each indi-
vidual subject answered questions for one of the 
sets. The test itself was constructed by a DLPT 
testing expert and a senior native-speaking Arabic 
language instructor, using only the original Arabic 
documents and the Gold Standard translations.  
They had no access to any machine translation 
output during the test construction or scoring. 
In August 2006, we administered the test at MIT 
to 49 test subjects who responded to announce-
ments for paid experimental subjects.  The subjects 
read the documents in a Latin square design, mean-
ing that each subject saw each document, but only 
in one of the two conditions, randomly assigned.  
Subjects were allowed 5 hours to complete the test.  
Since the questions were divided into two sets for 
each document, the actual set of 49 subjects 
yielded approximately 25 ?virtual subjects? read-
ing the full list of 228 questions.  The mean time 
spent on testing, not counting breaks or subject 
orientation, was 2.5 hours; fastest was 1.1 hours, 
slowest was 3.4 hours. 
The subject responses were hand-graded by the 
two testing experts, following the pre-established 
answers in the test protocol.  There was no pre-
assessment of whether information was preserved 
or garbled in the MT when designing questions or 
responses in the test protocol.  The testing experts 
were provided the reference translations and the 
original Arabic documents, but not the MT during 
scoring.  Moreover, test conditions were masked in 
order to provide a blind assessment.  The two test-
ing experts provided both preliminary and final 
scores; multiple passes provided an opportunity to 
clarify the correct answers and to normalize scor-
ing.  The scoring agreement rate was 96% for the 
final scores. 
4 Overall Results 
The overall result for comprehension accuracy was 
95% for subjects reading the Gold Standard trans-
lation and 74% for reading Machine Translation, 
across each of the genres and difficulty levels. The 
comprehension accuracy for each genre is shown 
in Figure 1. The two text genres score better than 
the audio genres, which is to be expected because 
the audio MT condition has more opportunities for 
error.  Within each modality, the more standard, 
more structured genre fares better: newswire re-
sults are better than newsgroup results, and the 
more structured genre of broadcast news scores 
better than the less constrained, less structured 
conversations present in the talk radio shows. 
 
 
Figure 1. Comprehension Accuracy per Genre  
97% 93% 94% 94%
80% 77% 
72% 66%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Newswire Broadcast News Talk Radio 
GS
MT
Newsgroups 
Overall Comprehension Accuracy 
78
The break-down by ILR level of difficulty for each 
question is shown in Figure 2.  The general trend is 
consistent with what has been observed previously 
(Jones et al 2005).  The best results are at Level 2; 
Level 1 does well but not as well as expected.  
Thus the test has provided a key finding, which is 
that MT systems perform more poorly on Level 1, 
even when the data is matched to their capabilities. 
Level 3 is very challenging for the MT condition, 
and also more difficult in the GS condition.  Using 
a standard 70 percent passing threshold, responses 
to questions on all MT documents, except for 
Level 3, received a passing grade. 
 
Figure 2. Comprehension Accuracy per Level. 
To provide a snapshot of the ILR levels: L1 in-
dicates sentence-level comprehensibility, and may 
include factual local announcements, etc.; L2 indi-
cates paragraph-level comprehensibility; factual/ 
concrete, covering a wide spectrum of topics (poli-
tics, economy, society, culture, security, science); 
L3 involves extended discourse comprehensibility; 
the ability to understand hypotheses, supported 
opinion, implications, and abstract linguistic for-
mulations, etc. 
It was not possible to balance Level 3 documents 
across genres within the GALE evaluation data; 
except for those taken from Talk Radio, most 
documents did not reach that level of complexity.  
Hence, genre and difficulty level were not com-
pletely independent in this test. 
5 Comprehension and Translation Error 
We expect to see a relationship between compre-
hension rates and translation error.  In an idealized 
case, we may expect a precise inverse correlation.  
We then compared comprehension rates with Hu-
man Translation Error Rate (HTER), an error 
measure for machine translation that counts the 
number of human edits required to change system 
MT output so that it contains all and only the in-
formation present in a Gold Standard reference 
(NIST, 2006).  The linear regression line in Figure 
3 shows the kind of inverse correlation we might 
expect.  Subjects lose about 12% in comprehension 
for every 10% of translation error. The R2 value is 
33%.  The low correlation suggests that the com-
prehension results are measuring a somewhat inde-
pendent aspect of MT quality, which we feel is 
important.  HTER does not directly address the 
facts that not all MT errors are equally important 
and that the texts contain inherent redundancy that 
the readers use to answer the questions.  For ex-
ploratory purposes, we divide the graph of Figure 3 
into four quadrants.  Quadrant I and IV contain 
expected behavior: 122 data points of good transla-
tions and good comprehension results versus 43 
points of bad translations and poor comprehension.  
Q-II has 24 robust points: the translations have 
high error, but somehow managed to contain 
enough well-translated words that people can an-
swer the questions.  Q-III has 28 fragile points: the 
few translation errors impaired comprehension. 
 
Figure 3. Comprehension vs. Translation Error. 
We point out that there is a 1-to-1 mapping be-
tween comprehension questions and individual 
sub-passages of the documents in the data.  Each 
point in Figure 3 plots the HTER of a single seg-
ment versus the average comprehension score on 
the corresponding question. The good and bad 
items are essentially a sanity-check on the experi-
mental design.  We expect to see good comprehen-
sion when translations are good, and we expect to 
see poor comprehension when translations are bad.  
Next we will examine the two other types: fragile 
and robust translations. 
Overall Comprehension Accuracy 
97% 96% 91% 88%
77% 82% 76% 
51%
0% 
20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 
100% 
L1~ L2 L2+ L3
GS
MT
  Q-I (Good)                        Q-II (Robust) 
122 points (57%)               24 points (10%)                          
(All Levels and Genres)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
x = Translation Error (HTER) 
y = Comprehension (DLPT*)
Q-III (Fragile)                      Q-IV (Bad) 
28 points (13%)                 43 points (20%)                          
79
A fragile translation is one that has a good 
HTER score but a bad comprehension score.  A 
sample fragile translation is one from a broadcast 
news which asks for a particular name:  the HTER 
was a respectable 24%, but the MT comprehension 
accuracy was a flat 0%, since the name was miss-
ing.  Everyone reading GS answered correctly. 
A robust translation is one that has a bad HTER 
score but still manages to get a good comprehen-
sion score.  A sample robust translation is one 
drawn from a posting providing instructions for 
foot massage.  The text was quite garbled, with an 
HTER score of 48%, but the MT comprehension 
accuracy was a perfect 100%. Everyone reading 
the GS condition also answered the question cor-
rectly, which was that one should start a foot mas-
sage with oil. We note in passing that the highest 
error rate for a question with 100% comprehension 
is about 50%, shown with the up-arrow in Figure 
3.  We should be surprised to see any items with 
100% comprehension for HTER rates above 50%, 
considering Shannon?s estimate that written Eng-
lish is about 50% redundant. We expect that MT 
readers are making use of their general world 
knowledge to interpret the garbled MT output.  A 
challenge is to identify robust translations, which 
are useful despite their high translation error rate. 
6 Detailed Discussion 
In this section we will discuss several aspects of 
the test in more detail: the scoring methodology, 
including a discussion of partial credit and inter-
rater agreement; timing information; questions 
about personal names. 
Each correct answer was assigned a score of 1, 
and each incorrect answer was assigned a score of 
0.  Partial credit was assigned on an ad-hoc basis, 
but normalized for scoring by assigning all non-
integer scores to 0.5.  This method yielded scores 
that were generally at the midpoint between binary 
scoring, in which non-integer scored were uni-
formly mapped either harshly to 0 or leniently to 1, 
the average difference between harsh and lenient 
scoring being approximately 11%.  Inter-rater 
agreement was 96%. 
The testing infrastructure we used recorded the 
amount of time spent on each document.  The gen-
eral trend is that people spend longer on MT than 
on GS.  The mean percentage of time spent on MT 
compared with GS is 115% per item, meaning that 
it takes 15% more time to read MT than GS. The 
standard error was 4%.  The median is 111%; 
minimum is 89% and maximum is 159%.  In future 
analysis and experimentation we will conduct more 
fine-grained temporal estimates.    
As we have seen in previous experiments, the 
performance for personal names is lower than for 
non-names.  We observed that the name questions 
have 71% comprehension accuracy, compared with 
the 83% for questions about things other than per-
sonal names.  
7 Conclusions and Future Work 
We have long felt that Level 2 is the natural and 
successful level for machine translation.  The abil-
ity to present concrete factual information that can 
be retrieved by the reader, without requirements 
for understanding the style, tone, or organizational 
pattern used by the writer seemed to be present in 
the previous work. It is worth pointing out that 
though we have many Level 1 questions, we are 
still not really testing Level 1 because the test does 
not contain true Level 1 documents. In future tests 
we wish to include Level 1 documents and ques-
tions.  
Continuing along these lines, we are currently 
creating two new tests. We are constructing a new 
Arabic DLPT-star test, tailoring the document se-
lection more specifically for comprehension testing 
and ensuring texts and tasks are at the intended 
ILR levels. We are also constructing a Mandarin 
Chinese test with similar design specifications.  
We intend for both of these tests to be available for 
a public machine translation evaluation to be con-
ducted in 2007. 
References 
Doddington, G. 2002. Automatic Evaluation of Machine 
Translation Quality Using N-gram Co-Occurrence 
Statistics. Proceedings of HLT 2002. 
NIST 2006. GALE Go/No-Go Eval Plan; www.nist.gov/ 
speech/tests/gale/2006/doc/GALE06_evalplan.v2.pdf 
Jones, D. A., W. Shen, et al 2005a. Measuring Transla-
tion Quality by Testing English Speakers with a New 
DLPT for Arabic. Int?l Conf. on Intel. Analysis. 
Interagency Language Roundtable Website. 2005. ILR 
Skill Level Descriptions: http://www.govtilr.org 
Voss, Clare and Calandra Tate. 2006. Task-based 
Evaluation of MT Engines. European Association for 
Machine Translation conference. 
White, JS and TA O'Connell. 1994. Evaluation in the 
ARPA machine translation program: 1993 method-
ology. Proceedings of the HLT workshop. 
80
