Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1481?1486,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Staying on Topic:
An Indicator of Power in Political Debates
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran
Dept. of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY, USA
vinod@cs.columbia.edu
Ashima Arora
Dept. of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY, USA
aa3470@columbia.edu
Owen Rambow
CCLS
Columbia University
New York, NY, USA
rambow@ccls.columbia.edu
Abstract
We study the topic dynamics of interac-
tions in political debates using the 2012
Republican presidential primary debates
as data. We show that the tendency of
candidates to shift topics changes over the
course of the election campaign, and that it
is correlated with their relative power. We
also show that our topic shift features help
predict candidates? relative rankings.
1 Introduction
The field of computational social sciences has cre-
ated many interesting applications for natural lan-
guage processing in recent years. One of the areas
where NLP techniques have shown great promise
is in the analysis of political speech. For example,
researchers have applied NLP techniques to polit-
ical texts for a variety of tasks such as predicting
voting patterns (Thomas et al., 2006), identifying
markers of persuasion (Guerini et al., 2008), cap-
turing cues that signal charisma (Rosenberg and
Hirschberg, 2009), and detecting ideological po-
sitions (Sim et al., 2013). Our work also analyzes
political speech, more specifically, presidential de-
bates. The contribution of this paper is to show
that the topic shifting tendency of a presidential
candidate changes over the course of the election
campaign, and that it is correlated with his or her
relative power. We also show that this insight can
help computational systems that predict the candi-
dates? relative rankings based on their interactions
in the debates.
2 Motivation
The motivation for this paper stems from prior
work done by the first author in collaboration
with other researchers (Prabhakaran et al., 2013a;
Prabhakaran et al., 2013b). Prabhakaran et al.
(2013a) introduced the notion of power in the do-
main of presidential debates, and Prabhakaran et
al. (2013b) followed it up with an automatic power
ranker system based on interactions within the de-
bates. The power that a candidate had at a cer-
tain point in the election campaign was modeled
based on his or her recent poll standings: in elec-
tions, popularity is power. Those studies analyzed
the 2012 Republican presidential primary debates
and found that a candidate?s power at the time of
a debate correlates with the structure of interac-
tions within the debate (e.g., turn frequency and
interruption patterns). Another finding was that
the candidates? power correlates with the distribu-
tion of topics they speak about in the debates: can-
didates with more power spoke significantly more
about certain topics (e.g., economy) and less about
certain other topics (e.g., energy). However, these
findings relate to the specific election cycle that
was analyzed and will not carry over to political
debates in general.
A further dimension with relevance beyond a
specific election campaign is how topics evolve
during the course of an interaction (e.g., who at-
tempts to shift topics). In (Prabhakaran et al.,
2014), we explored this dimension and found that
candidates with higher power introduce signifi-
cantly more topics in the debates, but attempt to
shift topics significantly less often while respond-
ing to a moderator. We used the basic LDA topic
modeling method (with a filter for substantivity of
turns) to assign topics to turns, which were then
used to detect shifts in topics. However, segment-
ing interactions into coherent topic segments is an
active area of research and a variety of topic mod-
eling approaches have been proposed for that pur-
pose. In this paper, we explore the utility of one
such topic modeling approach to tackle this prob-
lem.
While most of the early approaches for topic
segmenting in interactions have focused on the
1481
content of the contribution, Nguyen et al. (2012)
introduced a system called Speaker Identity for
Topic Segmentation (SITS) which also takes into
account the topic shifting tendencies of the partic-
ipants of the conversation. In later work, Nguyen
et al. (2013) demonstrated the SITS system?s util-
ity in detecting influencers in Crossfire debates
and Wikipedia discussions. They also applied the
SITS system to the domain of political debates.
However they were able to perform only a qual-
itative analysis of its utility in the debates domain
since the debates data did not have influence an-
notations. In this paper, we use the SITS system
to assign topics to turns and perform a quantita-
tive analysis of how the topic shift features calcu-
lated using the SITS system relate to the notion of
power as captured by (Prabhakaran et al., 2013a).
The SITS system associates each debate partic-
ipant with a constant scalar value that captures his
or her tendency to shift topics. However, since
we want to investigate how each candidate?s topic
shifting tendency relates to his or her changing
power over the course of the campaign, we intro-
duce a variation of the SITS analysis in which we
represent a different ?persona? for each candidate
in each debate. Once equipped with this notion
of ?persona?, we find that the topic shifting ten-
dency of a candidate does indeed show a great deal
of fluctuation during the election campaign period.
We also find that this fluctuation in topic shifting
tendencies is significantly correlated with the can-
didates? power.
As an additional contribution of this paper, we
demonstrate the utility of our topic shift features
extracted using both types of SITS-based anal-
yses in improving the performance of the auto-
matic power ranker system presented in (Prab-
hakaran et al., 2013b). We also investigated the
utility of topic shifting features described in (Prab-
hakaran et al., 2014) extracted using LDA based
topic modeling. However, they did not improve
the performance of the ranker, and hence we do
not discuss them in detail in this paper.
3 Data
We use the presidential debates corpus released by
Prabhakaran et al. (2013a), which contains manual
transcripts of 20 debates held between May 2011
and February 2012 as part of the 2012 Republican
presidential primaries. The corpus also captures
each candidate?s power at the time of each debate,
computed based on their relative standing in re-
cent public polls. The poll numbers capture how
successful candidates are in convincing the elec-
torate of their candidature, which in turn affects
their confidence within the debates. These debates
serve as a rich domain to explore manifestations
of power since they are a medium through which
candidates pursue and maintain power over other
candidates. Prabhakaran et al. (2013b) offers a de-
tailed description of how the relative standings in
national and state-level polls from various sources
are aggregated to obtain candidates? power.
The transcripts are originally obtained from The
American Presidency Project, where each turn of
the conversation is manually demarcated and their
speakers identified. The turns in the corpus are
preprocessed using the Stanford CoreNLP pack-
age to perform basic NLP steps such as tokeniza-
tion, sentence segmentation, parts-of-speech tag-
ging and lemmatization.
4 Modeling Topic Shifts
Topic segmentation, the task of segmenting inter-
actions into coherent topic segments, is an impor-
tant step in analyzing interactions. In addition
to its primary purpose, topic segmentation also
identifies the speaker turn where the conversation
changed from one topic to another, i.e., where the
topic shifted, which may shed light on the char-
acteristics of the speaker who changed the topic.
We use the SITS approach proposed by (Nguyen
et al., 2012) to detect topic shifts. We also propose
a different way of using SITS to obtain an analysis
of our corpus, which we call SITS
var
. We discuss
both in turn, and then provide a discussion.
4.1 Segmentation using SITS
Most computational approaches towards auto-
matic topic segmentation have focused mainly on
the content of the contribution without taking into
account the social aspects or speaker character-
istics. Different discourse participants may have
different tendencies to introduce or shift topics in
interactions. In order to address this shortcom-
ing, Nguyen et al. (2012) proposed a new topic
segmentation model called Speaker Identity for
Topic Segmentation (SITS), in which they explic-
itly model the individual?s tendency to introduce
new topics.
Like traditional topic modeling approaches, the
SITS system also considers each turn to be a
1482
0	 ?
0.1	 ?
0.2	 ?
0.3	 ?
0.4	 ?
0.5	 ?
0.6	 ?
6/13
/11	 ?
8/11
/11	 ? 9/5/
11	 ?
9/7/
11	 ?
9/12
/11	 ?
9/22
/11	 ?
10/1
1/11
	 ?
10/1
8/11
	 ?
11/9
/11	 ?
11/1
2/11
	 ?
11/2
2/11
	 ?
12/1
0/11
	 ?
12/1
5/11
	 ?
1/7/
12	 ?
1/8/
12	 ?
1/16
/12	 ?
1/19
/12	 ?
1/23
/12	 ?
1/26
/12	 ?
2/22
/12	 ?
To
pic
	 ?Sh
i?	 ?
Ten
de
ncy
,	 ?P
I(x
_d
)	 ?
Date	 ?of	 ?Debate	 ?
BACHMANN	 ?
CAIN	 ?
GINGRICH	 ?
HUNTSMAN	 ?
PAUL	 ?
PERRY	 ?
ROMNEY	 ?
SANTORUM	 ?
Figure 1: SITS
var
Topic shift tendency values across debates
bag of words generated from a mixture of top-
ics. These topics themselves are multinomial dis-
tributions over terms. In order to account for the
topic shifts that happen during the course of an in-
teraction, they introduce a binary latent variable
l
d;t
called the topic shift to indicate whether the
speaker changed the topic or not in conversation
d at turn t. To capture the individual speaker?s
topic shifting tendency, they introduced another
latent variable called topic shift tendency (pi
x
) of
speaker x. The pi
x
value represents the propensity
of speaker x to perform a topic shift.
4.2 Segmentation using SITS
var
Within the SITS formulation, the topic shifting
tendency of an individual (pi
x
) is considered a con-
stant across conversations. While an individual
may have an inherent propensity to shift topics or
not, we argue that the topic shifting tendency he
or she displays can vary based on the social set-
tings in which he or she interacts and his or her
status within those settings. In other words, the
same discourse participant may behave differently
in different social situations and at different points
in time. This is especially relevant in the context
of our dataset, where the debates happen over a
period of 10 months, and the power and status
of each candidate in the election campaign vary
greatly within that time period.
We propose a variant of SITS which takes this
issue into account. We consider each candi-
date to have a different ?persona? in each debate.
To accomplish this, we create new identities for
each candidate x for each debate d, denoted by
x d. For example, ?ROMNEY 08-11-2011? de-
notes the persona of the candidate ROMNEY in
the debate held on 08-11-2011. Running the SITS
system using this formulation, we obtain different
pi
x d
values for candidate x for different debates,
capturing different topic shift tendencies of x.
4.3 Execution
We perform both the SITS and SITS
var
analyses
on the 20 debates in our corpus. We used the non-
parametric version of SITS for both runs, since it
systemically estimates the number of topics in the
data. We set the maximum number of iterations
at 5000, sample lag at 100 and initial number of
topics at 25. We refer the reader to (Nguyen et al.,
2013) for details on these parameters.
For each candidate, we calculate the mean and
standard deviation of the topic shift tendency
(pi
x d
) of his or her personas across all debates
he or she participated in. We then average these
means and standard deviations, and obtain an av-
erage mean of 0.14 and an average standard devia-
tion of 0.09. This shows that the topic shift tenden-
cies of candidates vary by a considerable amount
across debates. Figure 1 shows the pi
x d
value fluc-
tuating across different debates.
5 Analysis of Topic Shift Features
Nguyen et al. (2013) used the SITS analysis as a
means to model influence in multi party conver-
sations. They propose two features to detect in-
fluencers: Total Topic Shifts (TTS) and Weighted
Topic Shifts (WTS). TTS(x, d) captures the ex-
pected number of topic shifts the individual x
makes in conversation d. This expectation is cal-
culated through the empirical average of samples
1483
Feature Set Feature Correlation
TopSh
Total Topic Shifts (TTS) 0.12
Weighted Topic Shifts (WTS) 0.16
TopSh
var
Total Topic Shifts (TTS
var
) 0.12
Weighted Topic Shifts (WTS
var
) 0.15
Topic Shift Tendency (PI
var
) -0.27
Table 1: Pearson Correlations for Topical Features
boldface denotes statistical significance (p < 0.05)
from the Gibbs sampler, after a burn-in period. We
refer the reader to (Nguyen et al., 2013) for more
details on how this value is computed. WTS(x, d)
is the value of TTS(x, d) weighted by 1? pi
x
. The
intuition here is that a topic shift by a speaker with
low topic shift tendency must be weighted higher
than that by a speaker with a high topic shift ten-
dency. We use these two features as well, and de-
note the set of these two features as TopSh.
We also extract the TTS and WTS features us-
ing our SITS
var
variation of topic segmentation
analysis and denote them as TTS
var
and WTS
var
respectively. In addition, we also use a feature
PI
var
(x, d) which is the pi
x d
value obtained by the
SITS
var
for candidate x in debate d. It captures the
topic shifting tendency of candidate x in debate d.
(We do not include the SITS pi
x
value in our corre-
lation analysis since it is constant across debates.)
We denote the set of these three features obtained
from the SITS
var
run as TopSh
var
.
Table 1 shows the Pearson?s product correla-
tion between each topical feature and candidate?s
power. We obtain a highly significant (p = 0.002)
negative correlation between topic shift tendency
of a candidate (PI) and his/her power. In other
words, the variation in the topic shifting tenden-
cies is significantly correlated with the candidates?
recent poll standings. Candidates who are higher
up in the polls tend to stay on topic while the
candidates with less power attempt to shift top-
ics more often. This is in line with our previous
findings from (Prabhakaran et al., 2014) that can-
didates with higher power attempt to shift topics
less often than others when responding to moder-
ators. It is also in line with the findings by Prab-
hakaran et al. (2013a) that candidates with higher
power tend not to interrupt others. On the other
hand, we did not obtain any significant correlation
for the features proposed by Nguyen et al. (2013).
6 Topic Shift Features in Power Ranker
In this section, we investigate the utility of the
SITS and SITS
var
based topic shift features de-
scribed above in the problem of automatically
ranking the participants of debates based on their
power. Prabhakaran et al. (2013b) define the prob-
lem as follows: given a debate d with a set of par-
ticipants C
d
= {x
1
, x
2
, ...x
n
} and corresponding
power indices P (x
i
) for 1 < i < n, find a ranking
function r : C
d
? {1...n} such that for all 1 <
i, j < n, r(x
i
) > r(x
j
) ?? P (x
i
) > P (x
j
).
For our experiments, we use the SVM
rank
based
supervised learned power ranker presented in that
work to estimate this ranking function.
As we do in (Prabhakaran et al., 2013b), we
here report Kendall?s Tau and Normalized Dis-
counted Cumulative Gain values (NDCG and
NDCG@3) on 5-fold cross validation (at the de-
bate level). All three metrics are based on the
number of rank inversions between original and
predicted ranking. While Tau treats all rank in-
versions equal, NDCG and NDCG@3 penalize
the inversions happening in the top of the ranked
list more than those happening in the bottom.
NDCG@3 focuses only on the top 3 positions in
the ranked list.
We use the best performing feature set of (Prab-
hakaran et al., 2013b) as the baseline (BL), which
contains three features: Words Deviation (WD),
Question Deviation (QD) and Mention Percent-
age (MP). WD and QD capture the deviation of
percentage of words spoken by the candidate and
questions addressed to the candidate from the ex-
pected fair share of those measures in the particu-
lar debate. The fair share for debate d is 1/|C
d
|?
the percentage each candidate would have gotten
for each feature if it was equally distributed. This
deviation measure is used instead of the raw per-
1484
Kendall?s Tau NDCG NDCG@3
BL 0.55 0.962 0.932
TopSh 0.36 0.907 0.830
TopSh
var
0.39 0.919 0.847
BL + TopSh 0.59 0.967 0.929
BL + TopSh
var
0.60 0.970 0.937
BL + TopSh + TopSh
var
0.59 0.968 0.934
Table 2: Power Ranker results using topic shift features on 5-fold cross validation
BL: Baseline system (Prabhakaran et al., 2013b)
NDCG: Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain
centage in order to handle the fact that the percent-
age values are dependent on the number of partic-
ipants in a debate, which varied from 9 to 4. MP
captures the percentage of mentions of the candi-
date within a debate.
Table 2 shows the results obtained using the
baseline features (BL) as well as combinations of
TopSh and TopSh
var
features. The baseline sys-
tem obtained a Kendall Tau of 0.55, NDCG of
0.962 and NDCG@3 of 0.932. The topic shift
features by themselves performed much worse,
with TopSh
var
posting marginally better results
than TopSh. Combining the topic shift and base-
line features increases performance considerably.
TopSh
var
obtained better performance than TopSh
across the board. BL + TopSh
var
posted the over-
all best system obtaining a Tau of 0.60, NDCG
of 0.970, and NDCG@3 of 0.937. These results
demonstrates the utility of topic shift features in
the power ranking problem, especially using the
SITS
var
formulation. We also experimented with
all subsets of TopSh and TopSh
var
; the best results
were obtained using all features in each set.
7 Related Work
Studies in sociolinguistics (e.g., (Ng et al., 1993;
Ng et al., 1995; Reid and Ng, 2000)) have long
established that dialog structure in interactions re-
lates to power and influence. Researchers in the
NLP community have studied power and influence
in various genres of interactions, such as organiza-
tional email threads (Bramsen et al., 2011; Gilbert,
2012; Prabhakaran and Rambow, 2013; Prab-
hakaran and Rambow, 2014), online discussion fo-
rums (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2012; Bi-
ran et al., 2012) and online chat dialogs (Strza-
lkowski et al., 2012). The correlates analyzed in
these studies range from word and phrase patterns,
to derivatives of such patterns such as linguistic
coordination, to deeper dialogic features such as
argumentation and dialog acts. Our work differs
from these studies in that we study the correlates
of power in topic dynamics. Furthermore, we an-
alyze spoken interactions.
8 Conclusion
In this paper, we studied how topic shift patterns
in the 2012 Republican presidential debates corre-
late with the power of candidates. We proposed an
alternate formulation of the SITS topic segmenta-
tion system that captures fluctuations in each can-
didate?s topic shifting tendencies, which we found
to be correlated with their power. We also showed
that features based on topic shift improve the pre-
diction of the relative rankings of candidates. In
future work, we will explore a model that cap-
tures individuals? inherent topic shift propensities,
while also capturing their fluctuations due to so-
cial factors.
Acknowledgments
This paper is based upon work supported by the
DARPA DEFT Program. The views expressed are
those of the authors and do not reflect the official
policy or position of the Department of Defense or
the U.S. Government. We also thank the anony-
mous reviewers for their constructive feedback.
1485
References
Or Biran, Sara Rosenthal, Jacob Andreas, Kathleen
McKeown, and Owen Rambow. 2012. Detecting
influencers in written online conversations. In Pro-
ceedings of the Second Workshop on Language in
Social Media, pages 37?45, Montr?eal, Canada, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Philip Bramsen, Martha Escobar-Molano, Ami Patel,
and Rafael Alonso. 2011. Extracting social power
relationships from natural language. In Proceedings
of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 773?782, Portland, Oregon, USA,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lillian Lee,
Bo Pang, and Jon Kleinberg. 2012. Echoes of
power: language effects and power differences in
social interaction. In Proceedings of the 21st in-
ternational conference on World Wide Web, WWW
?12, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Eric Gilbert. 2012. Phrases that signal workplace hier-
archy. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, CSCW
?12, pages 1037?1046, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Marco Guerini, Carlo Strapparava, and Oliviero Stock.
2008. Corps: A corpus of tagged political speeches
for persuasive communication processing. Journal
of Information Technology & Politics, 5(1):19?32.
Sik Hung Ng, Dean Bell, and Mark Brooke. 1993.
Gaining turns and achieving high in influence rank-
ing in small conversational groups. British Journal
of Social Psychology, pages 32, 265?275.
Sik Hung Ng, Mark Brooke, and Michael Dunne.
1995. Interruption and in influence in discussion
groups. Journal of Language and Social Psychol-
ogy, pages 14(4),369?381.
Viet-An Nguyen, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Philip
Resnik. 2012. Sits: A hierarchical nonparametric
model using speaker identity for topic segmentation
in multiparty conversations. In Proceedings of the
50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 78?87, Jeju Island, Korea, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Viet-An Nguyen, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Philip Resnik,
Deborah A. Cai, Jennifer E. Midberry, and Yuanxin
Wang. 2013. Modeling topic control to detect in-
fluence in conversations using nonparametric topic
models. Machine Learning, pages 1?41.
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran and Owen Rambow. 2013.
Written dialog and social power: Manifestations of
different types of power in dialog behavior. In Pro-
ceedings of the IJCNLP, pages 216?224, Nagoya,
Japan, October. Asian Federation of Natural Lan-
guage Processing.
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran and Owen Rambow. 2014.
Predicting power relations between participants in
written dialog from a single thread. In Proceed-
ings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Pa-
pers), pages 339?344, Baltimore, Maryland, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Ajita John, and Dor?ee D.
Seligmann. 2013a. Power dynamics in spoken in-
teractions: a case study on 2012 republican primary
debates. In Proceedings of the 22nd international
conference on World Wide Web companion, pages
99?100. International World Wide Web Conferences
Steering Committee.
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Ajita John, and Dor?ee D.
Seligmann. 2013b. Who had the upper hand? rank-
ing participants of interactions based on their rela-
tive power. In Proceedings of the IJCNLP, pages
365?373, Nagoya, Japan, October. Asian Federation
of Natural Language Processing.
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Ashima Arora, and Owen
Rambow. 2014. Power of confidence: How poll
scores impact topic dynamics in political debates.
In Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on Lan-
guage Technologies and Computational Social Sci-
ence, page 49, Baltimore, MD, USA, June. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Scott A. Reid and Sik Hung Ng. 2000. Conversation as
a resource for in influence: evidence for prototypical
arguments and social identification processes. Euro-
pean Journal of Social Psych., pages 30, 83?100.
Andrew Rosenberg and Julia Hirschberg. 2009.
Charisma perception from text and speech. Speech
Communication, 51(7):640?655.
Yanchuan Sim, Brice D. L. Acree, Justin H. Gross, and
Noah A. Smith. 2013. Measuring ideological pro-
portions in political speeches. In Proceedings of the
2013 Conference on EMNLP, pages 91?101, Seattle,
Washington, USA, October. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Tomek Strzalkowski, Samira Shaikh, Ting Liu,
George Aaron Broadwell, Jenny Stromer-Galley,
Sarah Taylor, Umit Boz, Veena Ravishankar, and
Xiaoai Ren. 2012. Modeling leadership and influ-
ence in multi-party online discourse. In Proceedings
of COLING, pages 2535?2552, Mumbai, India, De-
cember. The COLING 2012 Organizing Committee.
Matt Thomas, Bo Pang, and Lillian Lee. 2006. Get out
the vote: Determining support or opposition from
congressional floor-debate transcripts. In Proceed-
ings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 327?335,
Sydney, Australia, July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
1486
Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on Language Technologies and Computational Social Science, page 49,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 26, 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Power of Confidence:
How Poll Scores Impact Topic Dynamics in Political Debates
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran
Dept. of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY
vinod@cs.columbia.edu
Ashima Arora
Dept. of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY
aa3470@columbia.edu
Owen Rambow
CCLS
Columbia University
New York, NY
rambow@ccls.columbia.edu
Abstract
In this paper, we investigate how topic dy-
namics during the course of an interaction
correlate with the power differences be-
tween its participants. We perform this
study on the US presidential debates and
show that a candidate?s power, modeled
after their poll scores, affects how often
he/she attempts to shift topics and whether
he/she succeeds. We ensure the validity
of topic shifts by confirming, through a
simple but effective method, that the turns
that shift topics provide substantive topi-
cal content to the interaction. A paper de-
scribing this work is published in the ACL
2014 Joint Workshop on Social Dynamics
and Personal Attributes in Social Media.
49
Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Social Dynamics and Personal Attributes in Social Media, pages 77?82,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, 27 June 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Power of Confidence:
How Poll Scores Impact Topic Dynamics in Political Debates
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran
Dept. of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY
vinod@cs.columbia.edu
Ashima Arora
Dept. of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY
aa3470@columbia.edu
Owen Rambow
CCLS
Columbia University
New York, NY
rambow@ccls.columbia.edu
Abstract
In this paper, we investigate how topic dy-
namics during the course of an interaction
correlate with the power differences be-
tween its participants. We perform this
study on the US presidential debates and
show that a candidate?s power, modeled
after their poll scores, affects how often
he/she attempts to shift topics and whether
he/she succeeds. We ensure the validity
of topic shifts by confirming, through a
simple but effective method, that the turns
that shift topics provide substantive topical
content to the interaction.
1 Introduction
Analyzing political speech has gathered great in-
terest within the NLP community. Researchers
have analyzed political text to identify markers of
persuasion (Guerini et al., 2008), predict voting
patterns (Thomas et al., 2006; Gerrish and Blei,
2011), and detect ideological positions (Sim et al.,
2013). Studies have also looked into how per-
sonal attributes of political personalities such as
charisma, confidence and power affect how they
interact (Rosenberg and Hirschberg, 2009; Prab-
hakaran et al., 2013b). Our work belongs to this
genre of studies. We analyze how a presidential
candidate?s power, modeled after his/her relative
poll standings, affect the dynamics of topic shifts
during the course of a presidential debate.
2 Motivation
In early work on correlating personal attributes
to political speech, Rosenberg and Hirschberg
(2009) analyzed speech transcripts in the con-
text of 2004 Democratic presidential primary elec-
tions, to identify prosodic and lexico-syntactic
cues that signal charisma of political personalities.
More recently, Prabhakaran et al. (2013a) intro-
duced the notion of power an election candidate
has at a certain point in the election campaign,
modeled after the confidence that stems from their
recent poll standings. They analyzed the 2012 Re-
publican presidential primary debates and found
that the candidate?s power at the time of a de-
bate impacts the structure of interactions (e.g., fre-
quency of turns and interruption patterns). They
followed up their study with an automatic ranker
to identify leading candidates based on the inter-
action within a debate (Prabhakaran et al., 2013b).
One of the interesting findings by Prabhakaran
et al. (2013a) was that candidates? power corre-
lates with the distribution of topics they speak
about in the debates. They found that when can-
didates have more power, they speak significantly
more about certain topics (e.g., economy) and less
about certain other topics (e.g., energy). However,
these findings relate to the specific election cycle
they analyzed and will not carry over to all polit-
ical debates in general. A topical dimension with
broader relevance is how topics change during the
course of an interaction (e.g., who introduces more
topics, who attempts to shift topics etc.). For in-
stance, Nguyen et al. (2013) found that topic shifts
within an interaction are correlated with the role
a participant plays in it (e.g., being a moderator).
They also analyzed US presidential debates, but
with the objective of validating a topic segmenta-
tion method they proposed earlier (Nguyen et al.,
2012). They do not study the topic shifting ten-
dencies among the candidates in relation to their
power differences.
In this paper, we bring these two ideas together.
We analyze the 2012 Republican presidential de-
bates, modeling the power of a candidate based
on poll scores as proposed by Prabhakaran et al.
(2013a) and investigate various features that cap-
ture the topical dynamics in the debates. We show
that the power affects how often candidates at-
77
Turn # Speaker Turn Text Substantive?
223 PAWLENTY (C) I support a constitutional amendment to define marriage between a man and
woman. I was the co-author of the state ? a law in Minnesota to define it
and now we have courts jumping over this.
[S]
224 KING (M) OK. Let?s just go through this. [NS]
225 PAUL (C) The federal government shouldn?t be involved. I wouldn?t support an
amendment. [...] I don?t think government should give us a license to
get married. It should be in the church.
[S]
226 KING (M) Governor Romney, constitutional amendment or state decision? [NS]
227 ROMNEY (C) Constitutional. [NS]
228 KING (M) Mr. Speaker? [NS]
229 GINGRICH (C) Well, I helped author the Defense of Marriage Act which the Obama ad-
ministration should be frankly protecting in court. [...]
[S]
[...]
235 CAIN (C) If I had my druthers, I never would have overturned ?don?t ask/don?t tell?
in the first place. [...] Our men and women have too many other things to
be concerned about rather than have to deal with that as a distraction.
[S]
[...]
240 KING (M) Leave it in place, [...] or overturn it? [S]
241 ROMNEY (C) Well, one, we ought to be talking about the economy and jobs. But given
the fact you?re insistent, the ? the answer is, I believe that ?don?t ask/don?t
tell? should have been kept in place until conflict was over.
[S]
Table 1: Excerpt from Goffstown, NH debate (06/13/11), discussing marriage equality and the ?Don?t Ask/Don?t Tell? policy
[S]/ [NS] denote substantiveness of turns
tempt to shift topics and whether they succeed in
it or not. In order to correctly model topic shifts,
we ensure that the shifts happen in turns that con-
tribute substantial topical content to the interac-
tion. We introduce the notion of a ?non-substantial
turn?, and use a simple, but effective method to au-
tomatically identify non-substantial turns. This al-
lows us to identify different topic segments within
the interaction, while permitting (and capturing)
interruptions within those segments. We will com-
pare the segments that we obtain with those by
Nguyen et al. (2012) in future work.
3 Domain and Data
We use the same corpus as Prabhakaran et al.
(2013b). The corpus contains manual transcripts
of 20 debates held between May 2011 and Febru-
ary 2012 as part of the 2012 Republican pres-
idential primaries. The transcripts are obtained
from The American Presidency Project.
1
Each
turn is clearly demarcated in the transcripts and
their speakers are identified. The turns in the cor-
pus are preprocessed using the Stanford CoreNLP
package to perform basic NLP steps such as tok-
enization, sentence segmentation, parts-of-speech
tagging and lemmatization. We show an excerpt
1
http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/debates.php
from one of the debates in Table 1. This segment
of the debate discusses marriage equality followed
by the overturning of the ?Don?t Ask/Don?t Tell?
policy prohibiting openly gay, lesbian, or bisexual
persons from US military service.
Prabhakaran et al. (2013b) added each candi-
date?s power at the time of each debate to the cor-
pus, computed based on their relative standing in
recent public polls. We refer the reader to (Prab-
hakaran et al., 2013b) for the detailed description
of how the relative standings in national and state-
level polls from various sources are aggregated to
obtain candidates? power. The poll numbers cap-
ture how successful candidates are in convincing
the electorate of their candidature, which in turn
affects their confidence within the debates. These
debates serve as a rich domain to explore manifes-
tations of power since they are a medium through
which candidates pursue and maintain power over
other candidates.
4 Modeling Topics
Prabhakaran et al. (2013a) model topics in the de-
bates using Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), as-
signing topic probabilities to each turn. The num-
ber of topics was set to be 15 and the topic that was
assigned the highest probability for a turn was cho-
78
sen as its topic. Assigning topics to each turn in
this manner, however, is problematic. Not all turns
by themselves contribute to the conversational top-
ics in an interaction. A large number of turns,
especially by the moderator, manage the conver-
sation rather than contribute content to it. These
include turns redirecting questions to specific can-
didates (e.g., turns 224, 226 and 228 in Table 1) as
well as moderator interruptions (e.g., ?Quickly.?,
?We have to save time?). Furthermore, some other
turns address a topic only when considered to-
gether with preceding turns, but not when read in
isolation. These include turns that are short one-
word answers (e.g., turn 227) and turns that are
uninterpretable without resolving anaphora (e.g.,
?That?s right?). While these turns are substantive
to human readers, topic modeling approaches such
as LDA cannot assign them topics correctly be-
cause of their terseness.
We define the turns that do not, in isolation, con-
tribute substantially to the conversational topics as
non-substantive turns. In order to obtain a gold
standard for non-substantivity, two of the authors
manually annotated each turn in one entire debate
(dated 06/13/11) as either substantive (S) or non-
substantive (NS). The annotators were instructed
not to consider the identity of the speaker or the
context of the turn (preceding/following turns) in
making their assessment. We obtained a high
inter-annotator agreement (observed agreement =
89.3%; Kappa = .76). We took the assessments
by one of the annotators as the gold standard, in
which 108 (31.5%) of the 343 turns were identi-
fied as non-substantive. We show the S vs. NS
assessments for each turn in column 4 of Table 1.
Figure 1a shows the line graph of topic proba-
bilities assigned by LDA to the sequence of turns
in Table 1. As the graph shows, non-substantive
turns are assigned spurious topic probabilities by
LDA. For example, turn 224 by KING (?OK. Lets
just go through this.?) was assigned small prob-
abilities for all topics; the highest of which was
economy (probability of 0.12). This error is prob-
lematic when modeling topic shifts, since this turn
and the next one by PAUL would have been incor-
rectly identified as shifts in topic from their cor-
responding previous turns. Instead, if we assume
that the non-substantive turns follow the same
topic probabilities as the most recent substantive
turn, we obtain the line graph shown in Figure 1b.
This topic assignment captures the topic dynam-
(a) Topic Probabilities assigned by LDA
(b) Topic Probabilities after ignoring non-substantive turns
Figure 1: Line graphs of topic probabilities for turns in
Table 1 (legend shows only the top 5 topics in this segment)
ics in the segment more accurately. It identifies
Gay Rights as the predominant topic until turn 234
followed by a mix of Gay Rights and Military as
topics while discussing the ?Don?t Ask/Don?t Tell?
policy. It also captures the attempt by ROMNEY
in turn 242 to shift the topic to Economy.
4.1 Identifying Non-substantive Turns
In order to automatically detect non-substantive
turns, we investigate a few alternatives. A simple
observation is that many of the NS turns such as
redirections of questions or short responses have
only a few words. We tried a word count thresh-
old based method (WC Thresh) where we assign
a turn to be NS if the number of tokens (words) in
the turn is less than a threshold. Another intuition
is that for a non-substantive turn, it would be hard
for the LDA to assign topics and hence all topics
will get almost equal probabilities assigned. In or-
der to capture this, we used a method based on a
standard deviation threshold (SD Thresh), where
we assign a turn to be NS if the standard deviation
of that turn?s topic probabilities is below a thresh-
old. We also used a combination system where
we tag a turn to be NS if either system tags it to
be. We tuned for the value of the thresholds and
the best performances obtained for each case are
shown in Table 2. We obtained the best results
for the WC Thresh method with a threshold of 28
words, while for SD Thresh the optimal threshold
is .13 (almost twice the mean).
79
Method Accuracy (%) F-measure
WC Thresh 82.6 73.7
SD Thresh 76.2 64.7
WC Thresh + SD Thresh 76.8 70.4
Table 2: Accuracy and F-measure of different methods to
identify non-substantive turns
4.2 Topic Assignments
We first ran the LDA at a turn-level for all debates,
keeping the number of topics to be 15, and se-
lected the best model after 2000 iterations. Then,
we ran the WC Thresh method described above to
detect NS turns. For all NS turns, we replace the
topic probabilities assigned by LDA with the last
substantive turn?s topic probabilities. Note that an
S turn coming after one or more NS turns could
still be of the same topic as the last S turn, i.e.,
non-substantivity of a turn is agnostic to whether
the topic changes after that or not. A topic shift (or
attempt) happens only when LDA assigns a differ-
ent topic to a substantive turn.
5 Topical Dimensions
We now describe various features we use to cap-
ture the topical dynamics within each debate, with
respect to each candidate. When we compute a
feature value, we use the topic probabilities as-
signed to each turn as described in the previous
section. For some features we only use the topic
with the highest probability, while for some oth-
ers, we use the probabilities assigned to all topics.
We consider features along four dimensions which
we describe in detail below.
5.1 Topic Shift Patterns
We build various features to capture how of-
ten a candidate stays on the topic being dis-
cussed. We say a candidate attempted to shift
the topic in a turn if the topic assigned to that
turn differs from the topic of the previous (sub-
stantive) turn. We use a feature to count the
number of times a candidate attempts to shift
topics within a debate (TS Attempt#) and a
version of that feature normalized over the to-
tal number of turns (TS Attempt#
N
). We also
use a variation of these features which consid-
ers only the instances of topic shift attempts by
the candidates when responding to a question
from the moderator (TS AttemptAfterMod# and
TS AttemptAfterMod#
N
). We also compute a
softer notion of topic shift where we measure the
average Euclidean distance between topic proba-
bilities of each of the candidate turns and turns
prior to them (EuclideanDist). This feature in
essence captures whether the candidate stayed on
topic, even if he/she did not completely switch
topics in a turn.
5.2 Topic Shift Sustenance Patterns
We use a feature to capture the average number
of turns for which topic shifts by a candidate was
sustained (TS SustTurns). However, as discussed
in Section 4, the turns vary greatly in terms of
length. A more sensible measure is the time pe-
riod for which a topic shift was sustained. We
approximate the time by the number of word to-
kens and compute the average number of tokens
in the turns that topic shifts by a candidate were
sustained (TS SustTime).
5.3 Topic Shift Success Patterns
We define a topic shift to be successful if it was
sustained for at least three turns. We compute
three features ? total number of successful topic
shifts by a candidate (TS Success#), that number
normalized over the total number of turns by the
candidate (TS Success#
N
), and the success rate of
candidate?s topic shifts (TS SuccessRate)
5.4 Topic Introduction Patterns
We also looked at cases where a candidate intro-
duces a new topic, i.e., shifts to a topic which
is entirely new for the debate. We use the num-
ber of topics introduced by a candidate as a fea-
ture (TS Intro#). We also use features to cap-
ture how important those topics were, measured
in terms of the number of turns about those top-
ics in the en tire debate (TS IntroImpTurns) and
the time spent on those topics in the entire debate
(TS IntroImpTime).
6 Analysis and Results
We performed a correlation analysis on the fea-
tures described in the previous section with re-
spect to each candidate against the power he/she
had at the time of the debate (based on recent poll
scores). Figure 2 shows the Pearson?s product cor-
relation between each topical feature and candi-
date?s power. Dark bars denote statistically signif-
icant (p < 0.05) features.
80
Figure 2: Pearson Correlations for Topical Features
We obtained significant strong positive correla-
tion for TS Attempt# and TS AttemptAfterMod#.
However, the normalized measure TS Attempt#
N
did not have any significant correlation, suggest-
ing that the correlation obtained for TS Attempt#
is mostly due to the fact that candidates with
more power have more turns, a finding that is al-
ready established by Prabhakaran et al. (2013b).
However, interestingly, we obtained a weak,
but statistically significant, negative correlation
for TS AttemptAfterMod#
N
which suggests that
more powerful candidates tend to stay on topic
when responding to moderators. We did not ob-
tain any correlation for EuclideanDist.
We did not obtain any significant correlations
between candidate?s power and their topic shift
sustenance features. We obtained significant cor-
relation for topic shift success (TS Success#),
modeled based on the sustenance of topic shifts,
suggesting that powerful candidates have a higher
number of successful topic shifts. However,
TS SuccessRate or TS Success#
N
did not obtain
any significant correlation. We also found that
powerful candidates are more likely to introduce
new topics (TS Intro#) and that the topics they in-
troduce tend to be important (TS IntroImpTurns
and TS IntroImpTime).
7 Related Work
Studies in sociolinguistics (e.g., (Ng et al., 1993;
Ng et al., 1995)) have explored how dialog struc-
ture in interactions relates to power and influence.
Reid and Ng (2000) identified that factors such as
frequency of contribution, proportion of turns, and
number of successful interruptions are important
indicators of influence. Within the dialog commu-
nity, researchers have studied notions of control
and initiative in dialogs (Walker and Whittaker,
1990; Jordan and Di Eugenio, 1997). Walker and
Whittaker (1990) define ?control of communica-
tion? in terms of whether the discourse partici-
pants are providing new, unsolicited information
in their utterances. Their notion of control dif-
fers from our notion of power; however, the way
we model topic shifts is closely related to their
utterance level control assignment. Within the
NLP community, researchers have studied power
and influence in various genres of interactions,
such as organizational email threads (Bramsen et
al., 2011; Gilbert, 2012; Prabhakaran and Ram-
bow, 2013), online discussion forums (Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2012; Biran et al., 2012)
and online chat dialogs (Strzalkowski et al., 2012).
The correlates analyzed in these studies range
from word/phrase patterns, to derivatives of such
patterns such as linguistic coordination, to deeper
dialogic features such as argumentation and dialog
acts. Our work differs from these studies in that
we study the correlates of power in topic dynam-
ics. Furthermore, we analyze spoken interactions.
8 Conclusion
We studied the topical dynamics in the 2012 US
presidential debates and investigated their corre-
lation with the power differences between candi-
dates. We showed that a candidate?s power, mod-
eled after their poll scores, has significant correla-
tion with how often he/she introduces new topics,
attempts to shift topics, and whether they succeed
in doing so. In order to ensure the validity of our
topic shifts we devised a simple yet effective way
to eliminate turns which do not provide substan-
tial topical content to the interaction. Furthermore,
this allowed us to identify different topic segments
within the interaction. In future work, we will ex-
plore how our way of identifying segments com-
pares to other approaches on topic segmentation
in interactions (e.g., (Nguyen et al., 2012)).
Acknowledgments
This paper is based upon work supported by the
DARPA DEFT Program. The views expressed are
those of the authors and do not reflect the official
policy or position of the Department of Defense
or the U.S. Government. We also thank Debanjan
Ghosh and several anonymous reviewers for their
constructive feedback.
81
References
Or Biran, Sara Rosenthal, Jacob Andreas, Kathleen
McKeown, and Owen Rambow. 2012. Detecting
influencers in written online conversations. In Pro-
ceedings of the Second Workshop on Language in
Social Media, pages 37?45, Montr?eal, Canada, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Philip Bramsen, Martha Escobar-Molano, Ami Patel,
and Rafael Alonso. 2011. Extracting social power
relationships from natural language. In Proceedings
of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 773?782, Portland, Oregon, USA,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lillian Lee,
Bo Pang, and Jon Kleinberg. 2012. Echoes of
power: language effects and power differences in
social interaction. In Proceedings of the 21st in-
ternational conference on World Wide Web, WWW
?12, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Sean Gerrish and David Blei. 2011. Predicting legisla-
tive roll calls from text. In Lise Getoor and Tobias
Scheffer, editors, Proceedings of the 28th Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ?11,
pages 489?496, New York, NY, USA, June. ACM.
Eric Gilbert. 2012. Phrases that signal workplace hier-
archy. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, CSCW
?12, pages 1037?1046, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Marco Guerini, Carlo Strapparava, and Oliviero Stock.
2008. Corps: A corpus of tagged political speeches
for persuasive communication processing. Journal
of Information Technology & Politics, 5(1):19?32.
Pamela W. Jordan and Barbara Di Eugenio. 1997.
Control and initiative in collaborative problem solv-
ing dialogues. In Working Notes of the AAAI Spring
Symposium on Computational Models for Mixed Ini-
tiative, pages 81?84.
Sik Hung Ng, Dean Bell, and Mark Brooke. 1993.
Gaining turns and achieving high in influence rank-
ing in small conversational groups. British Journal
of Social Psychology, pages 32, 265?275.
Sik Hung Ng, Mark Brooke, and Michael Dunne.
1995. Interruption and in influence in discussion
groups. Journal of Language and Social Psychol-
ogy, pages 14(4),369?381.
Viet-An Nguyen, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Philip
Resnik. 2012. Sits: A hierarchical nonparametric
model using speaker identity for topic segmentation
in multiparty conversations. In Proceedings of the
50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 78?87, Jeju Island, Korea, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Viet-An Nguyen, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Philip Resnik,
Deborah A. Cai, Jennifer E. Midberry, and Yuanxin
Wang. 2013. Modeling topic control to detect in-
fluence in conversations using nonparametric topic
models. Machine Learning, pages 1?41.
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran and Owen Rambow. 2013.
Written dialog and social power: Manifestations of
different types of power in dialog behavior. In Pro-
ceedings of the IJCNLP, pages 216?224, Nagoya,
Japan, October. Asian Federation of Natural Lan-
guage Processing.
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Ajita John, and Dor?ee D.
Seligmann. 2013a. Power dynamics in spoken in-
teractions: a case study on 2012 republican primary
debates. In Proceedings of the 22nd international
conference on World Wide Web companion, pages
99?100. International World Wide Web Conferences
Steering Committee.
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Ajita John, and Dor?ee D.
Seligmann. 2013b. Who had the upper hand? rank-
ing participants of interactions based on their rela-
tive power. In Proceedings of the IJCNLP, pages
365?373, Nagoya, Japan, October. Asian Federation
of Natural Language Processing.
Scott A. Reid and Sik Hung Ng. 2000. Conversation as
a resource for in influence: evidence for prototypical
arguments and social identification processes. Euro-
pean Journal of Social Psych., pages 30, 83?100.
Andrew Rosenberg and Julia Hirschberg. 2009.
Charisma perception from text and speech. Speech
Communication, 51(7):640?655.
Yanchuan Sim, Brice D. L. Acree, Justin H. Gross, and
Noah A. Smith. 2013. Measuring ideological pro-
portions in political speeches. In Proceedings of the
2013 Conference on EMNLP, pages 91?101, Seattle,
Washington, USA, October. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Tomek Strzalkowski, Samira Shaikh, Ting Liu,
George Aaron Broadwell, Jenny Stromer-Galley,
Sarah Taylor, Umit Boz, Veena Ravishankar, and
Xiaoai Ren. 2012. Modeling leadership and influ-
ence in multi-party online discourse. In Proceedings
of COLING, pages 2535?2552, Mumbai, India, De-
cember. The COLING 2012 Organizing Committee.
Matt Thomas, Bo Pang, and Lillian Lee. 2006. Get out
the vote: Determining support or opposition from
congressional floor-debate transcripts. In Proceed-
ings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 327?335,
Sydney, Australia, July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Marilyn Walker and Steve Whittaker. 1990. Mixed ini-
tiative in dialogue: An investigation into discourse
segmentation. In Proceedings of the 28th annual
meeting on Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 70?78. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
82
