GoDiS  - An  Accommodat ing  Dia logue System 
Sta f fan  Larsson ,  Peter  L jung l6 f ,  Rob in  Cooper ,  E l i sabet  Engdah l ,  S t ina  Er i csson  
Depar tment  of linguistics, GSteborg University 
Box 200-295, Humanisten,  SE-405 30 G5teborg,  Sweden 
{s l ,  peb,  cooper ,  engdah l ,  s t inae}01 ing ,  gu. se 
Abst rac t  
This paper accompanies a demo of the GoDiS sys- 
tem. Work on~hi~ system was reported at IJCAI- 
99 (Bohlin et-al.~ 1999). GoDiS is a prototype 
dialogue system for information-seeking dialogue, 
capable of accommodating questions and tasks to 
enable the user to present information in any de- 
sired order, without explicitly naming the dialogue 
task. GoDiS is implemented using the TRINDIKIT 
software package, which enables implementation f 
these behaviours in a compact and natural way. 
1 In t roduct ion  
This paper accompanies a demo of the GoDiS 1 
system reported at IJCAI-99 (Bohlin et al, 
1999). GoDiS is a prototype dialogue system for 
information-seeking dialogue, capable of accommo- 
dating questions and tasks to enable the user to 
present information in any desired order, without 
explicitly naming the dialogue task. GoDiS is im- 
plemented using the TRINDIKIT 2 software package 
developed in the TRINDI project. The TRINDIKIT 
is a toolkit for building and experimenting with dia- 
logue move engines and information states (IS), We 
use the term information state to mean, roughly, 
the information stored internally by an agent, in 
this case a dialogue system. A dialogue move engine 
(DME) updates the information state on the basis 
of observed ialogue moves and selects appropriate 
moves to be performed. 
2 System Descr ip t ion  
The overall structure of the GoDiS system is 
illustrated below: 
1Work on GoDiS has been supported by the TRINDI 
(Task Oriented Instructional Dialogue), EC Project LE4- 
8314, SDS (Swedish Dialogue Systems), NUTEK/HSFR Lan- 
guage Technology Project F1472/1997, and INDI (Infor- 
mation Exchange in Dialogue), Riksbankens Jubileumsfond 
1997-0134, projects. 
2 .x~.n~. ling, gU. se/research/proJ ects/trlndi/ 
Like any dialogue system built using the 
TRINDIKIT, GoDiS consists of a number of mod- 
ules, an information state, and a number of resources 
hooked up to the information state. 
In addition to the control module, which wires 
together the other modules, there are six modules in 
? GoDiS: input, which receives input3from the user; 
interpret, which interprets utterances as dialogue 
moves with some content; generate, which gener- 
ates natural language from dialogue moves; out- 
put, which produces output to the user; update, 
which updates the information state based on in- 
terpreted moves; and select, which selects the next 
move(s) to perform 4. The last two are DME rood- 
ules, which means that they together make up the 
3GoDiS originally accepted written input only, but it is 
currently being hooked up to a speech recogniser toaccept 
spoken input. 
4This is done by updating the part of the information state 
containing the moves to be performed. 
7 
DME in GoDiS. DME modules consist of a set of up- 
date rules and (optionally) an update algorithm gov- 
erning the order in which rules are applied. Update 
rules are rules for updating the information state. 
They consist of a rule name, a precondition list, and 
an effect list. The preconditions are conditions on 
the information state, and the effects are operations 
on the information state. If the preconditions of a 
rule are true for the information state, then the ef- 
fects of that rule can be applied to the information 
state. 
There are three resources in GoDiS: a lexicon, a 
database and a domain resource containing (among 
other things) domain-specific dialogue plans. Cur- 
rently, there are GoDiS resources for a travel agency 
domain andS-the autoroute domain. Also, for each 
of these domains there are lexicons in both English 
and Swedish. 
The question about what should be included in 
the information state is central to any theory of dia- 
logue management. The notion of information state 
we are putting forward here is basically a simplified 
version of the dialogue game board which has been 
proposed by Ginzburg. We are attempting to use as 
simple a version as possible in order to have a more 
or less practical system to experiment with. 
The main division in the information state is be- 
tween information which is private to the agent and 
that which is (assumed to be) shared between the 
dialogue participants. What we mean by shared in- 
formation here is that which has been established 
(i.e. grounded) during the conversation, akin to 
what Lewis in (Lewis, 1979) called the "conversa- 
tional scoreboard". We represent information states 
of a dialogue participant as a record of the type 
shown in figure 1. 
The private part of the information state includes 
a set of beliefs and a dialogue plan, i.e. is a list 
of dialogue actions that the agent wishes to carry 
out. The plan can be changed during the course 
of the conversation. For example, if a travel agent 
discovers that his customer wishes to get information 
about a flight he will adopt a plan to ask her where 
she wants to go, when she wants to go, what price 
class she wants and so on. The agenda, on the other 
hand, contains the short term goals or obligations 
that the agent has, i.e. what the agent is going to do 
next. For example, if the other dialogue participant 
raises a question, then the agent will normally put 
an action on the agenda to respond to the question. 
This action may or may not be in the agent's plan. 
The private part of the IS also includes "tem- 
porary" shared information that saves the previ- 
ously shared information until the latest utterance is
grounded, i.e. confirmed as having been understood 
8 
by the other dialogue participant 5. In this way it 
is easy to retract the "optimistic" assumption that 
the information was understood if it should turn out 
that the other dialogue participant does not under- 
stand or accept it. If the agent pursues a cautious 
rather than an optimistic strategy then information 
will at first only be placed in the "temporary" slot 
until it has been acknowledged by the other dialogue 
participant whereupon it can be moved to the appro- 
priate shared field. 
The (supposedly) shared part of the IS consists 
of three subparts. One is a set of propositions 
which the agent assumes for the sake of the conversa- 
tion and which are established uring the dialogue. 
The second is a stack of questions under discussion 
(QUD). These are questions that have been raised 
and are currently under discussion in the dialogue. 
The third contains information about the latest ut- 
terance (speaker, moves and integration status). 
3 Accommodat ion in GoDiS 
Dialogue participants can address questions that 
have not been explicitly raised in the dialogue. How- 
ever, it is important hat a question be available to 
the agent who is to interpret it because the utter- 
ance may be elliptical. Here is an example from a 
travel agency dialogue6: 
$J: what month do you want to go 
SP: well around 3rd 4th april / some time 
there 
SP: as cheap as possible 
The strategy we adopt for interpreting elliptical 
utterances i to think of them as short answers (in 
the sense of Ginzburg (Ginzburg, 1998)) to questions 
on QUD. A suitable question here is What kind of 
price does P want for the ticket?. This question 
is not under discussion at the point when P says 
"as cheap as possible". But it can be figured out 
since J knows that this is a relevant question. In 
fact it will be a question which J has as an action 
in his plan to raise. On our analysis it is this fact 
which enables A to interpret he ellipsis. He finds 
the matching question on his plan, accommodates 
by placing it on QUD and then continues with the 
integration of the information expressed by as cheap 
as possible as normal. Note that if such a question is 
? not available then the ellipsis cannot be interpreted 
as in the dialogue below. 
A. What  time are you coming to pick up Maria? 
B. Around 6 p.m. As cheap as possible. 
5In discussing rounding we will assume that  there is just 
one other dialogue participant. 
6This dialogue has been collected by the University of 
Lund as part of the SDS project. We quote a translation 
of the transcription done in GSteborg as part of the same 
project. 
IS : 
PRIVATE : 
SHARED : 
PLAN : STACKSET(AcT1ON)  
AGENDA : STACK(ACTION) 
PaL : SET(PRoP) 
I BEL : SET(PRoP) 
QUD : STACK(QUESTION) 
TMP : \[ SPEAKER : 
LU : \[ MOVES : 
BEL : SET(PRoP)  
QUD : STACKSET(QUESTION) 
SPEAKER : PARTICIPANT 
LU : MOVES : 
PARTICIPANT 
ASsoCSET(MOvE,BOoL) 
ASsOCSET(MOvE,BooL) \] \] 
Figure 1: The type of information state we are assuming 
This dialogue is incoherent if what is being dis- 
cussed is when the child Maria is going to be picked 
up from her friend's house (at least under standard 
dialogue plans-that we might have for such a con- 
versation). 
Question accommodation has been implemented 
in GoDiS using a single information state update 
rule accommodateQuest ion,  seen below. When 
interpreting the latest utterance by the other par- 
ticipant, the system makes the assumption that it 
was a reply move with content A. This assump- 
tion requires accommodating some question Q such 
that A is a relevant answer to Q. The check operator 
"answer-to(A, Q)" is true if A is a relevant answer to 
Q given the current information state, according to 
a (domain-dependent) definition of question-answer 
relevance. 
RULE: accommodateQuest ion  
CLASS: accommodate  
val( SHARED.LU.SPEAKER, us r  ) 
in( SHARED.LU.MOVES, answer(A) ) 
not ( lexicon :: yn_answer(A) ) 
PRE: aSSOC( SHARED.LU.MOVES, answer(A), false ) 
in( PRIVATE.PLAN, raise(Q) ) 
domain :: relevant_answer(Q, A)
del( PRIVATE.PLAN, raise(Q) ) 
EFF: push( SHARED.QUD, Q ) 
After an initial exchange for establishing contact 
the first thing that P says to the travel agent in our 
dialogue is "flights to paris". This is again an el- 
lipsis which on our analysis has to be interpreted as 
the answer to a question (two questions, actually) 
in order to be understandable and relevant. As no 
questions have been raised yet in the dialogue (apart 
from whether the participants have each other's at- 
tention) the travel agent cannot find the appropriate 
question on his plan. Furthermore, as this is the first 
indication of what the customer wants, the travel 
agent cannot have a plan with detailed questions. 
We assume that the travel agent has various plan 
types in his domain knowledge determining what 
kind of conversations heis able to have. Each plan 
is associated with a task. E.g. he is able to book 
trips by various modes of travel, he is able to han- 
dle complaints, book hotels, rental cars etc. What 
he needs to do is take the customer's utterance and 
try to match it against questions in his plan types 
in his domain knowledge. When he finds a suitable 
match he will accommodate the corresponding task, 
thereby providing a plan to ask relevant question 
for flights, e.g. when to travel?, what date? etc. 
Once he has accommodated this task and retrieved 
the plan he can proceed as in the previous example. 
That is, he can accommodate the; QUD with the rel- 
evant question and proceed with the interpretation 
of ellipsis in the normal fashion. 
This example is interesting for a couple of reasons. 
It provides us with an example of "recursive" accom- 
modation. The QUD needs to be accommodated, 
but in order to do this the dialogue task needs to be 
accommodated and the plan retrieved. The other 
interesting aspect of this is that accommodating the 
dialogue task in this way actually serves to drive the 
dialogue forward. That is, the mechanism by which 
the agent interprets this ellipsis, gives him a plan for 
a substantial part of the rest of the dialogue. This is 
a way of capturing the intuition that saying flights to 
Paris to a travel agent immediately makes a number 
of questions become relevant. 
Task accommodation a d retrieval of the relevant 
plan has been implemented in GoDiS by two infor- 
mation state update rules. 
4 Sample dialogues 
We will give some examples of CoDiS dialogues in 
the English travel agency domain. One of the fea- 
tures of the TRINDIKIT is that it provides methods 
for inspecting the information state at any stage of 
a dialogue, and also to see which rules are applied. 
Unfortunately, because of space limitations, we are 
not able to include examples of this in this paper; 
however, it is an integral part of our demo. 
The first dialogue shows the typical behaviour of 
dialogue systems for information-seeking: each ques- 
tion is answered in turn, and the user always gives 
exactly the information requested. 
$S> Welcome to the travel agency! 
$U> hello 
9 
$S> What can I do for you? 
$U> I want price information on a trip 
please 
$S> How do you want to travel? 
$U> by plane 
$S> What city do you want to go to? 
SU> gothenburg 
$S> What city do you want to go from? 
SU> london 
$S> Do you want a return ticket? 
$U> yes 
$S> What month do you want to  leave?  
$U> april 
$S> What class did you have in mind? 
$U> as cheap as possible 
$S> It~wil-i cost 50 crowns 
SU> thanks-, bye! 
$S> Thank you for your visit! 
In contrast, the second dialogue (below) shows 
how GoDiS is able to accommodate the task and in- 
tegrate information i  the order that the user gives 
it. 
$S> Welcome to the travel agency! 
$U> flights to paris 
$S> What city do you want to go from? 
$U> gothenburg, in april, as cheap as 
possible 
$S> Do you want a return ticket7 
$U> no 
$S> It will cost 50 crowns 
SU> thanks~ bye! 
$S> Thank you for your visit! 
5 Limitat ions 
GoDiS is a small-scale prototype and as such it suf- 
fers from the familiar drawbacks of many experi- 
mental systems: its lexicons and databases are very 
small, and the domain knowledge is limited. The di- 
alogue plans cover only a small (but important) part 
of the kind of dialogues that can take place in the 
travel agency and autoroute domains. We hope to 
be able to extend both the number of domains and 
the scale of each domain in the future. 
Also, the focus in the development of GoDiS has 
been on the dialogue management, i.e. the dialogue 
move engine and the information state. Less effort 
has been put into the interpretation a d generation 
modules, which currently use (a slightly extended 
version of) keyword spotting and partially canned 
text, respectively. We hope to replace these by plug- 
ging in existing interpretation a d generation tech- 
nology to GoDiS. 
For the tasks that GoDiS currently is able to han- 
dle, full-blown semantics i not needed. We use a 
very limited semantics where propositions are essen- 
tially feature-value pairs. As a consequence, GoDiS 
10 
is e.g. not able to handle dialogue with more than 
one referent; for this, the information state would 
have to be amended with a set of referents, and 
propositions would have to include referent informa- 
tion. This is an area where we hope to improve 
GoDiS in the near future. 
Speech recognition and synthesis i currently be- 
ing added to GoDiS, but at the time of writing only 
written input and output is available. 
6 Contr ibut ions 
Currently, the main contribution of GoDiS is per- 
haps to show how an extended notion of accommo- 
dation can serve to make dialogue systems easier to 
interact with, by letting the user decide how and 
in what order to present information to the system. 
Also, the fact that accommodation can be imple- 
mented simply by adding three update rules indi- 
cates that information state update rules provide a 
natural and compact way of implementing dialogue 
strategies. An important issue for future research 
is the relation of question and task accommodation 
to plan recognition approaches to dialogue (Sidner, 
1985). 
GoDiS also features a simple grounding strategy 
which is nevertheless ufficient in many cases. The 
grounding mechanism is implemented by three up- 
date rules. It is possible to switch resources in mid- 
dialogue, e.g. to change language. Also, GoDiS 
is easily reconfigurable to new information-seeking 
domains. To adapt GoDiS to a new domain, one 
needs to supply a database, a lexicon and domain 
knowledge, including a set of dialogue plans. The 
GoDiS modules or information state don't need to 
be changed in any way. 
In general, as an example of a dialogue system ira- 
plemented using the TRINDIKIT package, GoDiS 
shows how the information state approach is use- 
ful for clarifying and comparing theories of dialogue, 
and for exploring new solutions. 
References 
P. Bohlin, R. Cooper, E. Engdahl, and S. Lars- 
son. 1999. Information states and dialogue move 
engines. In J. Alexandersson, editor, IJCAI-99 
Workshop on Knowledge and Reasoning in Prac- 
tical Dialogue Systems. 
? J. Ginzburg. 1998. Clarifying utterances. In J. Hul- 
stijn and A. Niholt, editors, Proc. of the Twente 
Workshop on the Formal Semantics and Pragmat- 
ics of Dialogues, pages 11-30, Enschede. Univer- 
siteit Twente, Faculteit Informatica. 
D. K. Lewis. 1979. Scorekeeping in a language 
game. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 8:339-359. 
C. L. Sidner. 1985. Plan parsing for intended re- 
sponse recognition in discourse. Computational 
Intelligence, 1 (1) :1-10, February. 
