Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality, pages 17?26,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 27, 2014.
c
?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Comparison of different feature sets for identification of variants in
progressive aphasia
Kathleen C. Fraser
1
, Graeme Hirst
1
, Naida L. Graham
2
, Jed A. Meltzer
3
,
Sandra E. Black
4
, and Elizabeth Rochon
2
1
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Toronto
2
Dept. of Speech-Language Pathology, University of Toronto, & Toronto Rehabilitation Institute
3
Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre, Toronto
4
LC Campbell Cognitive Neurology Research Unit, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto
{kfraser,gh}@cs.toronto.edu, {naida.graham,elizabeth.rochon}@utoronto.ca
jmeltzer@research.baycrest.org, sandra.black@sunnybrook.ca
Abstract
We use computational techniques to ex-
tract a large number of different features
from the narrative speech of individuals
with primary progressive aphasia (PPA).
We examine several different types of fea-
tures, including part-of-speech, complex-
ity, context-free grammar, fluency, psy-
cholinguistic, vocabulary richness, and
acoustic, and discuss the circumstances
under which they can be extracted. We
consider the task of training a machine
learning classifier to determine whether a
participant is a control, or has the fluent or
nonfluent variant of PPA. We first evaluate
the individual feature sets on their classifi-
cation accuracy, then perform an ablation
study to determine the optimal combina-
tion of feature sets. Finally, we rank the
features in four practical scenarios: given
audio data only, given unsegmented tran-
scripts only, given segmented transcripts
only, and given both audio and segmented
transcripts. We find that psycholinguis-
tic features are highly discriminative in
most cases, and that acoustic, context-free
grammar, and part-of-speech features can
also be important in some circumstances.
1 Introduction
In some types of dementia, such as primary pro-
gressive aphasia, language deficit is a core symp-
tom, and the analysis of narrative or conversa-
tional speech is important for assessing the extent
of an individual?s language impairment. Analy-
sis of connected speech has been limited in the
past because it is time-consuming and requires ex-
pert annotation. However, studies have shown that
it is possible for machine learning classifiers to
achieve high accuracy on some diagnostic tasks
when trained on features which were automati-
cally extracted from speech transcripts.
In this paper, we summarize previous research
on the automatic analysis of speech samples from
individuals with dementia, focusing in particular
on primary progressive aphasia. We discuss in de-
tail different types of features and compare their
effectiveness in the classification task. We sug-
gest some benefits and drawbacks of these differ-
ent features. We also examine the interactions be-
tween different feature sets, and discuss the rela-
tive importance of individual features across fea-
ture sets. Because we examine a large number
of features on a relatively small data set, we em-
phasize that this work is exploratory in nature;
nonetheless, our results are consistent with, and
extend, previous work in the field.
2 Background
In recent years, there has been growing interest in
using computer techniques to automatically detect
dementia from speech and language features de-
rived from a sample of narrative speech. Some re-
searchers have explored ways to use methods such
as part-of-speech tagging, statistical parsing, and
speech signal analysis to detect disorders such as
dementia of the Alzheimer?s type (DAT) (Bucks et
al., 2000; Singh et al., 2001; Thomas et al., 2005;
Jarrold et al., 2010) and mild cognitive impairment
(MCI) (Roark et al., 2011).
Here, we focus on a type of dementia called
primary progressive aphasia (PPA). PPA is a sub-
type of frontotemporal dementia (FTD) which is
characterized by progressive language impairment
without other notable cognitive impairment. There
are three subtypes of PPA: semantic dementia
(SD), progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA), and
logopenic progressive aphasia (LPA). SD, some-
times called ?fluent? progressive aphasia, is typi-
cally marked by fluent but empty speech, anomia,
17
deficits in comprehension, and spared grammar
and syntax (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011). In
contrast, PNFA is characterized by halting and
sometimes agrammatic speech, reduced syntac-
tic complexity, word-finding difficulties, and rela-
tively spared single-word comprehension (Gorno-
Tempini et al., 2011). The third subtype, LPA, is
characterized by slow speech and frequent word
finding difficulties; this subtype is not included in
the current analysis.
Although clear diagnostic criteria for PPA have
been established (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011),
there is no one test which can provide a diagno-
sis. Classification of PPA into subtypes requires
evaluation of spoken output, as well as neuropsy-
chological assessment and brain imaging. Quali-
tative evaluation of speech often can be done accu-
rately by clinicians or researchers, but the ability
to do this evaluation can require years of training
and experience. Some researchers have performed
detailed quantitative characterization of speech in
PPA, but the precise characteristics of speech are
not yet fully understood and this process is too
time-consuming for most clinicians.
Peintner et al. (2008) conducted one of the earli-
est automatic analyses of speech from individuals
with FTD, including SD and PNFA as well as a
behavioural variant. They considered psycholin-
guistic features as well as phoneme duration fea-
tures extracted from the audio samples. Although
they were fairly successful in classifying partici-
pants according to their subtype, they did not re-
port many details regarding the specific features
which were useful or how those features might re-
flect the underlying impairment of the speakers.
Pakhomov et al. (2010a) examined FTD speech
from an information-theoretic approach. They
constructed a language model of healthy control
speech, and then calculated the perplexity and out-
of-vocabulary rate for each of the patient groups
relative to that model. In another study, Pakhomov
et al. (2010b) extracted speech and language fea-
tures from samples of FTD speech. In a principal
components analysis, they discovered four com-
ponents which accounted for most of the variance
in their data: speech length, hesitancy, empty con-
tent, and grammaticality. However, they did not
perform any classification experiments.
Fraser et al. (2013a) attempted to classify par-
ticipants as either SD patients, PNFA patients, or
healthy controls using a large number of language
SD
(N = 11)
PNFA
(N = 13)
Control
(N = 16)
Male/Female 8/3 7/6 9/7
Age (yrs) 65.9 (7.1) 64.5 (10.4) 67.8 (8.2)
Education (yrs) 17.5 (5.8) 14.0 (3.5) 16.8 (4.3)
Table 1: Demographic information. Numbers are
given in the form: mean (standard deviation).
features extracted from manually-transcribed tran-
scripts. They distinguished between SD and con-
trol participants with very high accuracy, and were
also successful at distinguishing between PNFA
and control participants. However, their method
did not perform as well on the task of classify-
ing SD vs. PNFA speakers. In subsequent work
(Fraser et al., 2013b), they expanded their feature
set to include acoustic features extracted directly
from the audio file.
3 Methods
3.1 Data
Twenty-four patients with PPA were recruited
through three Toronto memory clinics, and 16 age-
and education-matched healthy controls were re-
cruited through a volunteer pool. All participants
were native speakers of English, or had completed
some of their education in English. Exclusion cri-
teria included a known history of drug or alcohol
abuse and a history of neurological or major psy-
chiatric illness. Each patient was diagnosed by a
behavioural neurologist and all met current crite-
ria for PPA (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011). Table 1
shows demographic information for each group.
To elicit a sample of narrative speech, partici-
pants were asked to tell the well-known story of
Cinderella. They were given a wordless picture
book to remind them of the story; then the book
was removed and they were asked to tell the story
in their own words. This procedure, described in
full by Saffran et al. (1989), is commonly used in
studies of connected speech in aphasia.
The narrative samples were transcribed by
trained research assistants. The transcriptions in-
clude filled pauses, repetitions, and false starts,
and were annotated with the total speech time.
Sentence boundaries were marked according to se-
mantic, syntactic, and prosodic cues.
3.2 Classification framework
Given the audio files and transcripts, we can then
calculate our features (described in detail below)
18
and use them to train a support vector machine
(SVM) classifier. We use a leave-one-out cross-
validation framework and report the average ac-
curacy (i.e. proportion of correctly classified in-
stances) across folds. We optimize the complexity
parameter and the kernel type in a nested cross-
validation loop over the training set. For compar-
ison, we also tested a na??ve Bayes classifier; how-
ever we found that the results were consistently
poorer and we do not report them here.
3.3 Features
In the following sections we will describe each of
the feature sets that we use and explain how the
features are computed, and we will discuss some
of the potential advantages and disadvantages as-
sociated with each set. In particular, we discuss
what types of data are necessary for the extraction
of these features. The data types are: unsegmented
transcripts, segmented transcripts, and audio.
3.3.1 Part-of-speech features
Different categories of words may be selectively
impaired in different types of dementia. In PPA,
individuals with SD tend to be more impaired
with respect to nouns than verbs, and may replace
nouns with pronouns or circumlocutory phrases.
In contrast, individuals with PNFA may have more
difficulty with verbs and may even demonstrate
agrammatism, which can result in the omission
of grammatical morphemes and function words.
Thus, it is often useful to compare the relative fre-
quencies with which words representing the differ-
ent parts-of-speech (POS) are produced in a sam-
ple, as in Table 2. Similar features have been re-
ported in computational studies of MCI (Roark et
al., 2011), FTD (Pakhomov et al., 2010b), and
DAT (Bucks et al., 2000). Numerous POS taggers
exist, although we use the Stanford tagger here
(Toutanova et al., 2003).
3.3.2 Complexity features
Changes in linguistic complexity may accompany
the onset of dementia, although some studies have
found a decrease in complexity (e.g. Kemper et al.
(2001)) while others have found an increase (e.g.
Le et al. (2011)).
The features in Table 3 vary in their ease of
computation. Mean word length can be calculated
from an unsegmented transcript, while mean sen-
tence length requires only sentence boundary seg-
mentation. Other measures, such as Yngve depth
Nouns # nouns / # words
Verbs # verbs / # words
Noun-verb ratio # nouns / # verbs
Noun ratio # nouns / (# nouns + # verbs)
Inflected verbs # inflected verbs / # verbs
Determiners # determiners / # words
Demonstratives # demonstratives / # words
Prepositions # prepositions / # words
Adjectives # adjectives / # words
Adverbs # adverbs / # words
Pronoun ratio # pronouns / (# nouns + # pronouns)
Function words # function words / # words
Interjections # interjections / # words
Table 2: Part-of-speech features.
Max depth maximum Yngve depth of each parse tree,
averaged over all sentences
Mean depth mean Yngve depth of each node in the
parse tree, averaged over all sentences
Total depth total sum of the Yngve depths of each node
in the parse tree, averaged over all sentences
Tree height height of each parse tree, averaged over
all sentences
MLS mean length of sentence
MLC mean length of clause
MLT mean length of T-unit
Subordinate conjunctions number of subordinate
conjunctions
Coordinate conjunctions number of coordinate con-
junctions
Subordinate:coordinate ratio ratio of number of sub-
ordinate conjunctions to number of coordinate
conjunctions
Mean word length mean length, in letters, of each
word in the sample
Table 3: Complexity features.
(Yngve, 1960), require full parses of the sentences
(we use the Stanford parser (Klein and Manning,
2003) and Lu?s Syntactic Complexity Analyzer
(Lu, 2010)).
3.3.3 CFG features
Although many of the complexity features above
are derived from parse trees, in this section we
present a set of features that take into account
the context-free grammar (CFG) labels on each
of the nodes. CFG features have been previously
used to assess the grammaticality of sentences in
an artificial error corpus (Wong and Dras, 2010)
and to distinguish human from machine transla-
tions (Chae and Nenkova, 2009). However, this
is the first time such features have been applied to
speech from participants with dementia.
In Table 4 we list a few examples of our 134
CFG features, as well as the three phrase-level fea-
tures (calculated for noun phrases, verb phrases,
and prepositional phrases).
19
NP ? NNS Noun phrases consisting of only a plural
noun
VP ? VBN PP Verb phrases consisting of a past-
participle verb and a prepositional phrase
ROOT? INTJ Trees consisting of only an interjec-
tion
Phrase type proportion Length of each phrase type
(noun phrase, verb phrase, or prepositional
phrase), divided by total narrative length
Average phrase type length Total number of words in
a phrase type, divided by the number of phrases
of that type
Phrase type rate Number of phrases of a given type,
divided by total narrative length
Table 4: CFG features.
Um Frequency of filled pause um
Uh Frequency of filled pause uh
NID Frequency of words Not In Dictionary (e.g. para-
phasias, neologisms)
Verbal rate Number of words per minute
Total words Total number of words produced
Table 5: Fluency features.
3.3.4 Fluency features
Park et al. (2011) found that listeners? judgements
of fluency were affected by a number of different
variables, and the three most discriminative fea-
tures were ?speech rate, speech productivity, and
audible struggle.? For our list of fluency features
(Table 5), we include only those features which
could be extracted from the transcripts alone (as-
suming the total speech time is given). We count
pauses filled by um and uh separately, as research
has suggested that they may indicate different cog-
nitive processes (Clark and Fox Tree, 2002).
The number of words in a sample could be eas-
ily generated using the word count feature in most
text-editing software (although we first exclude
filled pauses and NID tokens), and the verbal rate
can subsequently be calculated directly. The other
three features are easily calculated using string
matching and an electronic dictionary.
3.3.5 Psycholinguistic features
Some types of dementia are characterized by im-
pairments in semantic access. Such impairments
may be sensitive to psycholinguistic features such
as lexical frequency, familiarity, imageability, and
age of acquisition (Table 6). We use the SUBTL
frequency norms (Brysbaert and New, 2009) and
the combined Bristol and Gilhooly-Logie norms
(Stadthagen-Gonzalez and Davis, 2006; Gilhooly
and Logie, 1980) for familiarity, imageability, and
Frequency Frequency with which a word occurs in
some corpus of natural language
Familiarity Subjective rating of how familiar a word
seems
Imageability Subjective rating of how easily a word
generates an image in the mind
Age of acquisition Subjective rating of how old a per-
son is when they first learn that word
Light verbs Number of occurrences of be, have, come,
go, give, take, make, do, get, move, and put,
normalized by total number of verbs
Table 6: Psycholinguistic features.
age of acquisition (see Table 6). We compute the
average of each of these measures for all content
words, as well as for nouns and verbs separately.
Another measure that fits into this category is
the frequency of occurrence of light verbs, which
an impaired speaker may use to replace a more
specific verb. We use the same list of light verbs
as Breedin et al. (1998), given in Table 6.
One challenge associated with psycholinguis-
tic features is finding norms which provide ade-
quate coverage for the given data. Fraser et al.
(2013a) reported that the SUBTL frequency norms
had a coverage of above 90% on their data, but the
Bristol-Gilhooly-Logie norms had a coverage of
only around 30%.
3.3.6 Vocabulary richness features
Individuals experiencing semantic difficulty may
use a limited range of vocabulary. We can mea-
sure the vocabulary richness or lexical diversity
of a narrative sample using a number of different
metrics (see Table 7). Type-token ratio has been
a popular choice, perhaps due to its simplicity;
however it is sensitive to the length of the sample.
Bucks et al. (2000) were the first to apply Honor?e?s
statistic and Brun?et?s index to the study of demen-
tia, and found significant differences between in-
dividuals with DAT and healthy controls. Cov-
ington and McFall (2010) proposed a new mea-
sure called the moving-average type-token ratio
(MATTR), which is independent of text length.
This feature was later applied to aphasic speech in
a study by Fergadiotis and Wright (2011), and was
found to be one of the most unbiased indicators of
lexical diversity in impaired speakers.
The measures given in Table 7 are easily com-
puted from their respective formulae. In this work,
we lemmatize each word using NLTK (Bird et
al., 2009) before calculating the features. For
MATTR, we consider w = 10,20,30,40,50.
20
Honor
?
e?s statistic N
V
?0.165
/ where V is the number of
word types and N is the number of word tokens.
Brun
?
et?s index 100logN/(1?V
1
/V ) where V
1
is the
number of words used only once, V is the total
number of word types, and N is the number of
word tokens.
Type-token ratio (TTR) V/N where V is the num-
ber of word types and N is the number of word
tokens.
Moving-average type-token ratio (MATTR
w
) TTR
calculated over a moving window of size w,
and averaged over all windows.
Table 7: Vocabulary richness features.
3.3.7 Acoustic features
What we call acoustic features are extracted di-
rectly from the audio file. We consider the fea-
tures given in Table 8. Acoustic features have been
shown to be useful when automatically detecting
conditions such as Parkinson?s disease, in which
changes in speech are common (Little et al., 2009;
Tsanas et al., 2012). Acoustic features have also
been examined in studies of DAT (Meil?an et al.,
2014), FTD (Pakhomov et al., 2010b), and PPA
(Fraser et al., 2013b, whose software we use here).
An obvious benefit to acoustic features is that
they do not require a transcription, and can be cal-
culated immediately given an audio sample. The
corresponding drawback is that they tell us noth-
ing about the linguistic content of the narrative.
4 Experiments
We report the results of three experiments explor-
ing the discriminative power of the different fea-
tures. We first compare the classification accura-
cies using each individual feature set. We then per-
form an ablation study to determine which com-
bination of feature sets leads to the highest clas-
sification accuracy. We also look at individual
features across sets and discuss which ones are
the most discriminative, particularly in situations
where data might be limited.
4.1 Individual comparison of accuracy by set
The accuracies which result from using each fea-
ture set individually are given in Table 9. The
highest accuracy across the three tasks is achieved
in distinguishing SD participants from controls.
An accuracy of .963 can be achieved using all
the features together, or using the psycholinguis-
tic or POS features alone. This is consistent with
the semantic impairments that are observed in SD.
Total duration of speech Total length of all non-silent
segments
Phonation rate Total duration of speech / total dura-
tion of the sample (including pauses)
Mean pause duration Mean length of pauses > 0.15
ms
Short pause count # Pauses > 0.15 ms and < 0.4 ms
Long pause count # Pauses > 0.4 ms
Pause:word ratio Ratio of silent segments longer than
150 ms to non-silent segments
F
0:3
mean Mean of the fundamental frequency and the
first three formant frequencies
F
0:3
variance Variance of the fundamental frequency
and the first three formant frequencies
Mean instantaneous power Measure related to the
loudness of the signal
Mean 1st ACF Mean first autocorrelation function
Max 1st ACF Maximum first autocorrelation function
Skewness Measure of lack of symmetry, associated
with tense or creaky voice
Kurtosis Measure of the peakedness of the signal
ZCR Zero-crossing rate, can be used to distinguish
between voiced and unvoiced regions
MRPDE Mean recurrence period density entropy, a
measure of periodicity
Jitter Measure of the short-term variation in the pitch
(frequency) of a voice
Shimmer Measure of the short-term variation in the
loudness (amplitude) of a voice
Table 8: Acoustic features.
The measures of vocabulary richness do not distin-
guish between the SD and control groups, suggest-
ing it is the words themselves, and not the number
of different words being used, that is important.
In the case of PNFA participants vs. controls,
we find that the highest accuracy is achieved us-
ing all the features, and the second highest by us-
ing only acoustic features. This is not surprising,
considering that the acoustic features include mea-
sures of pausing and phonation rate, which can
detect the characteristic halting speech of PNFA.
The third best accuracy is achieved using the flu-
ency features, which also fits with this explana-
tion. However, we might have expected that the
complexity and CFG features would be more sen-
sitive to the grammatical impairments of PNFA.
Finally, the best accuracy for SD vs. PNFA
is lower than in the previous two cases, and is
achieved using only CFG features. This sug-
gests that there are some grammatical construc-
tions which occur with different frequencies in
the two groups. These differences do not appear
to be captured by the complexity features, which
could explain why Fraser et al. (2013a) did not find
syntactic differences between the SD and PNFA
groups. Interestingly, the results using CFG fea-
21
Feature set
SD vs.
controls
PNFA vs.
controls
SD vs.
PNFA
All .963 .931 .708
Acoustic .778 .862 .167
Psycholinguistic .963 .724 .708
POS .963 .690 .375
Complexity .852 .621 .667
Fluency .667 .828 .500
Vocab. richness .481 .586 .583
CFG .630 .690 .792
Table 9: Classification accuracies for each feature
set individually using a SVM classifier. Bold indi-
cates the highest accuracy for each task.
tures are actually higher than the results using all
features. This demonstrates that classifier perfor-
mance can be adversely affected by the presence
of irrelevant features, especially in small data sets.
4.2 Combining feature sets
In the previous section we examined the feature
sets individually; however, one type of feature
may complement the information contained in an-
other feature set, or it may contain redundant in-
formation. To examine the interactions between
the feature sets, we perform an ablation study.
Starting with all the features, we remove each fea-
ture set one at a time and measure the accuracy
of the classifier. The feature set whose removal
causes the smallest decrease in accuracy is then re-
moved permanently from the experiment, the rea-
soning being that the most important feature sets
will cause the greatest decrease in accuracy when
removed. In some cases, we observe that the clas-
sification accuracy actually increases when a set
is removed, which suggests that those features are
not relevant to the classification (at least in combi-
nation with the other sets). In the case of a tie, we
remove the feature set whose individual classifica-
tion accuracy on that task is lowest. The procedure
is then repeated on the remaining feature sets, con-
tinuing until only one set remains.
The results for SD vs. controls are given in Ta-
ble 10a. The best result, 1.00, is achieved by
combining the psycholinguistic and POS features.
This is unsurprising, since each of those feature
sets perform well individually. Curiously, the
same result can also be achieved by also including
the complexity, vocabulary richness, and CFG fea-
tures, but not in the intermediate stages between
those two optimal sets. We attribute this to the in-
teractions between features and the small data set.
For PNFA vs. controls, shown in Table 10b, the
(a) SD vs. controls.
Removed Remaining Features Accuracy
A+P+POS+C+F+VR+CFG .963
F A+P+POS+C+VR+CFG .963
A P+POS+C+VR+CFG 1.00
VR P+POS+C+CFG .926
CFG P+POS+C .926
C P+POS 1.00
POS P .963
(b) PNFA vs. controls.
Removed Remaining Features Accuracy
A+P+POS+C+F+VR+CFG .931
VR A+P+POS+C+F+CFG .931
C A+P+POS+F+CFG .931
POS A+P+F+CFG .931
CFG A+P+F .966
F A+P .966
P A .862
(c) SD vs. PNFA.
Removed Remaining Features Accuracy
A+P+POS+C+F+VR+CFG .708
POS A+P+C+F+VR+CFG .750
VR A+P+C+F+CFG .833
F A+P+C+CFG .833
A P+C+CFG .792
C P+CFG .917
P CFG .792
Table 10: A=acoustic, P=psycholinguistic,
POS=part-of-speech, C=complexity, F=fluency,
VR=vocabulary richness, CFG=CFG production
rule features. Bold indicates the highest accuracy
with the fewest feature sets.
best result of .966 is achieved using a combina-
tion of acoustic and psycholinguistic features. In
this case the removal of the fluency features, which
gave the second highest individual accuracy, does
not make a difference to the accuracy. This sug-
gests that the fluency features contain similar in-
formation to one of the remaining sets, presum-
ably the acoustic set.
In the case of SD vs. PNFA, we again see that
the best accuracy can be achieved by combining
two feature sets, as shown in Table 10c. Us-
ing psycholinguistic and CFG features, we can
achieve an accuracy of .917, a substantial im-
provement over the best accuracy for this task in
Table 9. In fact, in all three cases we see that us-
ing a carefully selected combination of feature sets
can result in better accuracy than using all the fea-
ture sets together or using any one set individually.
4.3 Best features for incomplete data
Up to this point, we have examined complete fea-
ture sets. We now briefly explore which individual
22
features are the most discriminative across feature
sets. We approach this as a practical consideration:
given the data that a researcher has, and limited re-
sources, what are the best features to measure? We
consider the following four scenarios:
1. Given audio files only. This scenario often
arises because it is relatively easy to record
speech, but difficult to have it transcribed.
Only acoustic features can be extracted.
2. Given basic transcriptions only (no audio).
We assume there is no sentence segmentation
and the time is not marked (e.g. as in the out-
put of automatic speech recognition). Thus,
we can measure psycholinguistic, POS, and
vocabulary measures. We can also measure
the fluency features except for verbal rate,
as well as mean word length and subordi-
nate/coordinate conjunctions from the com-
plexity set. Without sentence boundaries, we
cannot parse the transcripts.
3. Given fully segmented transcripts (no audio).
We can measure all features except for acous-
tic features.
4. Given audio and fully segmented transcripts.
We can measure all features.
For each scenario, we rank the available fea-
tures by their ?
2
value and choose the top 10 only
as input to the SVM classifier (see Manning et al.
(2008) for a complete explanation of ?
2
feature se-
lection). We only include features if ?
2
> 0, so in
cases where there are very few relevant features,
fewer than 10 features may be selected. Because
we perform cross-validation, the selected features
may vary across different folds. In the tables that
follow, we present the features ranked by the num-
ber of folds in which they appear (i.e. a feature
with the value 1.00 was selected in every fold).
Due to space constraints, only the top 10 ranked
features are shown.
The results for Scenario 1 are given in Ta-
ble 11a. For the SD vs. controls and PNFA vs.
controls, the most highly ranked features tend to
be related to fluency and rate of speech, as well
as voice quality (skewness and MRPDE). How-
ever, when distinguishing between the two patient
groups, the acoustic features are essentially use-
less. In most cases, we see that none of the acous-
tic features had a non-zero ?
2
value, and thus the
classifier could not be properly trained.
For Scenario 2 (Table 11b), the results for SD
vs. controls show that within the psycholinguistic
and POS feature sets, features relating to familiar-
ity and frequency are very important, as well as
nouns and demonstratives. In the PNFA vs. con-
trols case, we see that a number of the vocabulary
richness features are selected, which is in contrast
to the previous two experiments. However, it ap-
pears that only the MATTR feature is important
(with varying window lengths), so when we con-
sidered only full feature sets, that information was
obscured by the other, irrelevant features in that
set. The SD vs. PNFA case shows a mix of fea-
tures from the previous two cases.
For Scenario 3 (Table 11c), we add the com-
plexity and CFG features. These features do not
have a large effect in the SD vs. controls case, but
a few CFG features are selected in the PNFA vs.
controls and SD vs. PNFA cases.
In Scenario 4 (Table 11d), we consider all fea-
tures. In the SD vs. controls case this increases
the accuracy. However, for PNFA vs. controls and
SD vs. PNFA, the classification accuracy actually
decreases, relative to Scenario 3. When the num-
ber of features increases, the potential to overfit to
the training data fold also increases, and it seems
likely that that is occurring here. Nonetheless, we
expect that the features which are selected in every
fold are still highly relevant. These features are
unchanged between Scenarios 3 and 4 in the SD
vs. controls and SD vs. PNFA case, however in the
PNFA vs. controls case, the acoustic features are
now ranked more highly than some of the vocabu-
lary richness and CFG features from Scenario 3.
5 Discussion
While it may be tempting to calculate as many
features as possible and use them all in a classi-
fier, we have shown here that better results can be
achieved by choosing a small, relevant subset of
features. In particular, psycholinguistic features
such as frequency and familiarity were useful in all
three classification tasks. Acoustic features were
useful in discriminating patients from controls, but
not for discriminating between the two PPA sub-
types. We also found that MATTR was relevant
in some cases, although the other vocabulary rich-
ness features were not, and that the CFG features
were more useful than traditional measures of syn-
tactic complexity. POS features were useful only
in distinguishing between SD and controls.
One of the biggest challenges in this type
of work is the small amount of data available.
23
(a) Scenario 1: audio only.
SD vs. control, Acc: .852 PNFA vs. control, Acc: .793 SD vs. PNFA, Acc: .500
1.00 skewness 1.00 long pause count .083 max 1st ACF
1.00 phonation rate 1.00 phonation rate .042 mean F3
1.00 MRPDE 1.00 short pause count
1.00 mean duration of pauses 1.00 MRPDE
.037 long pause count 1.00 mean duration of pauses
.037 mean 1st ACF .966 pause:word ratio
.037 kurtosis .793 skewness
.793 ZCR
.345 mean inst. power
.035 jitter
(b) Scenario 2: unsegmented transcripts.
SD vs. control, Acc: .926 PNFA vs. control, Acc: .621 SD vs. PNFA, Acc: .792
1.00 familiarity 1.00 MATTR 50 1.00 familiarity
1.00 noun frequency 1.00 MATTR 40 1.00 noun frequency
1.00 noun familiarity 1.00 MATTR 30 1.00 noun familiarity
1.00 frequency 1.00 frequency 1.00 MATTR 20
1.00 verb frequency 1.00 MATTR 20 .708 MATTR 10
1.00 nouns .931 total words .208 MATTR 30
1.00 demonstratives .759 light verbs .042 MATTR 50
.778 pronoun ratio .690 adjectives .042 MATTR 40
.667 noun imageability .241 age of acquisition .042 light verbs
.630 Honor?e?s statistic .241 MATTR 10 .042 verbs
(c) Scenario 3: segmented transcripts.
SD vs. control, Acc: .926 PNFA vs. control, Acc: .897 SD vs. PNFA, Acc: .792
1.00 word length 1.00 MATTR 50 1.00 WHADVP?WRB
1.00 familiarity 1.00 MATTR 40 1.00 familiarity
1.00 noun frequency 1.00 WHNP?WP 1.00 noun familiarity
1.00 noun familiarity 1.00 frequency 1.00 noun frequency
1.00 frequency 1.00 MATTR 20 1.00 MATTR 20
1.00 demonstratives 1.00 verbal rate 1.00 NP? NNS
.889 nouns .966 MATTR 30 1.00 SBAR?WHADVP S
.852 verb frequency .827 S1? INTJ .667 MATTR 10
.630 MLS .483 total words .500 NP? DT JJ NNS
.630 total Yngve depth .414 word length .458 SQ? AUX NP VP
(d) Scenario 4: segmented transcripts + audio.
SD vs. control, Acc: .963 PNFA vs. control, Acc: .793 SD vs. PNFA, Acc: .750
1.00 word length 1.00 frequency 1.00 WHADVP?WRB
1.00 familiarity 1.00 phonation rate 1.00 familiarity
1.00 noun frequency 1.00 MRPDE 1.00 noun familiarity
1.00 noun familiarity 1.00 verbal rate 1.00 noun frequency
1.00 frequency 1.00 mean duration of pauses 1.00 MATTR 20
1.00 demonstratives .897 MATTR 50 1.00 NP? NNS
.963 phonation rate .897 WHNP?WP 1.00 SBAR?WHADVP S
.741 verb frequency .897 MATTR 20 .625 MATTR 10
.593 nouns .690 MATTR 40 .500 NP? DT JJ NNS
.333 MLS .690 MATTR 30 .458 SQ? AUX NP VP
Table 11: Classification accuracies and top 10 features for four different data scenarios.
Psychological studies are typically on the or-
der of only tens to possibly hundreds of partic-
ipants, while machine learning researchers often
tackle problems with thousands to millions of data
points. We have chosen techniques appropriate for
small data sets, but acknowledging the potential
weaknesses of machine learning methods when
training data are limited, these findings must be
considered preliminary. However, we also believe
that this is a promising approach for future ap-
plications, including automated screening for lan-
guage impairment, support for clinical diagnosis,
tracking severity of symptoms over time, and eval-
uating therapeutic interventions.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Natural Sciences and En-
gineering Research Council of Canada and the Canadian In-
stitutes of Health Research (grant #MOP-8277). Thanks to
Frank Rudzicz for the acoustic features software.
24
References
Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. 2009. Natural
language processing with Python. O?Reilly Media, Inc.
Sarah D. Breedin, Eleanor M. Saffran, and Myrna F.
Schwartz. 1998. Semantic factors in verb retrieval: An
effect of complexity. Brain and Language, 63:1?31.
Marc Brysbaert and Boris New. 2009. Moving beyond
Ku?cera and Francis: A critical evaluation of current word
frequency norms and the introduction of a new and im-
proved word frequency measure for American English.
Behavior Research Methods, 41(4):977?990.
R.S. Bucks, S. Singh, J.M. Cuerden, and G.K. Wilcock.
2000. Analysis of spontaneous, conversational speech in
dementia of Alzheimer type: Evaluation of an objective
technique for analysing lexical performance. Aphasiol-
ogy, 14(1):71?91.
Jieun Chae and Ani Nenkova. 2009. Predicting the fluency
of text with shallow structural features: case studies of ma-
chine translation and human-written text. In Proceedings
of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 139?147.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Herbert H. Clark and Jean E. Fox Tree. 2002. Using uh and
um in spontaneous speaking. Cognition, 84(1):73?111.
Michael A. Covington and Joe D. McFall. 2010. Cutting
the Gordian knot: The moving-average type?token ratio
(MATTR). Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 17(2):94?
100.
Gerasimos Fergadiotis and Heather Harris Wright. 2011.
Lexical diversity for adults with and without apha-
sia across discourse elicitation tasks. Aphasiology,
25(11):1414?1430.
Kathleen C. Fraser, Jed A. Meltzer, Naida L. Graham, Carol
Leonard, Graeme Hirst, Sandra E. Black, and Elizabeth
Rochon. 2013a. Automated classification of primary
progressive aphasia subtypes from narrative speech tran-
scripts. Cortex.
Kathleen C. Fraser, Frank Rudzicz, and Elizabeth Rochon.
2013b. Using text and acoustic features to diagnose pro-
gressive aphasia and its subtypes. In Proceedings of Inter-
speech.
K.J. Gilhooly and R.H. Logie. 1980. Age-of-acquisition, im-
agery, concreteness, familiarity, and ambiguity measures
for 1,944 words. Behavior Research Methods, 12:395?
427.
M.L. Gorno-Tempini, A.E. Hillis, S. Weintraub, A. Kertesz,
M. Mendez, S.F. Cappa, J.M. Ogar, J.D. Rohrer, S. Black,
B.F. Boeve, F. Manes, N.F. Dronkers, R. Vandenberghe,
K. Rascovsky, K. Patterson, B.L. Miller, D.S. Knopman,
J.R. Hodges, M.M. Mesulam, and M. Grossman. 2011.
Classification of primary progressive aphasia and its vari-
ants. Neurology, 76:1006?1014.
William Jarrold, Bart Peintner, Eric Yeh, Ruth Krasnow,
Harold Javitz, and Gary Swan. 2010. Language ana-
lytics for assessing brain health: Cognitive impairment,
depression and pre-symptomatic Alzheimer?s disease. In
Yiyu Yao, Ron Sun, Tomaso Poggio, Jiming Liu, Ning
Zhong, and Jimmy Huang, editors, Brain Informatics, vol-
ume 6334 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
299?307. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.
Susan Kemper, Marilyn Thompson, and Janet Marquis.
2001. Longitudinal change in language production: Ef-
fects of aging and dementia on grammatical complex-
ity and propositional content. Psychology and Aging,
16(4):600?614.
Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Accurate
unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the 41st Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
423?430.
Xuan Le, Ian Lancashire, Graeme Hirst, and Regina Jokel.
2011. Longitudinal detection of dementia through lex-
ical and syntactic changes in writing: a case study of
three British novelists. Literary and Linguistic Comput-
ing, 26(4):435?461.
Max A. Little, Patrick E. McSharry, Eric J. Hunter, Jennifer
Spielman, and Lorraine O. Ramig. 2009. Suitability
of dysphonia measurements for telemonitoring of Parkin-
son?s disease. Biomedical Engineering, IEEE Transac-
tions on, 56(4):1015?1022.
Xiaofei Lu. 2010. Automatic analysis of syntactic complex-
ity in second language writing. International Journal of
Corpus Linguistics, 15(4):474?496.
Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich
Sch?utze. 2008. Introduction to Information Retrieval.
Cambridge University Press.
Juan Jos?e G. Meil?an, Francisco Mart??nez-S?anchez, Juan
Carro, Dolores E. L?opez, Lymarie Millian-Morell, and
Jos?e M. Arana. 2014. Speech in Alzheimer?s disease:
Can temporal and acoustic parameters discriminate de-
mentia? Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders,
37(5-6):327?334.
Serguei V.S. Pakhomov, Glen E. Smith, Susan Marino, An-
gela Birnbaum, Neill Graff-Radford, Richard Caselli,
Bradley Boeve, and David D. Knopman. 2010a. A com-
puterized technique to asses language use patterns in pa-
tients with frontotemporal dementia. Journal of Neurolin-
guistics, 23:127?144.
S.V. Pakhomov, G.E. Smith, D. Chacon, Y. Feliciano,
N. Graff-Radford, R. Caselli, and D. S. Knopman. 2010b.
Computerized analysis of speech and language to identify
psycholinguistic correlates of frontotemporal lobar degen-
eration. Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology, 23:165?
177.
Hyejin Park, Yvonne Rogalski, Amy D. Rodriguez, Zvinka
Zlatar, Michelle Benjamin, Stacy Harnish, Jeffrey Ben-
nett, John C. Rosenbek, Bruce Crosson, and Jamie Reilly.
2011. Perceptual cues used by listeners to discriminate
fluent from nonfluent narrative discourse. Aphasiology,
25(9):998?1015.
Bart Peintner, William Jarrold, Dimitra Vergyri, Colleen
Richey, Maria Luisa Gorno Tempini, and Jennifer Ogar.
2008. Learning diagnostic models using speech and lan-
guage measures. In Engineering in Medicine and Biol-
ogy Society, 2008. EMBS 2008. 30th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE, pages 4648?4651.
Brian Roark, Margaret Mitchell, John-Paul Hosom, Kristy
Hollingshead, and Jeffery Kaye. 2011. Spoken language
derived measures for detecting mild cognitive impairment.
IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Pro-
cessing, 19(7):2081?2090.
25
Eleanor M. Saffran, Rita Sloan Berndt, and Myrna F.
Schwartz. 1989. The quantitative analysis of agrammatic
production: procedure and data. Brain and Language,
37:440?479.
Sameer Singh, Romola S. Bucks, and Joanne M. Cuerden.
2001. Evaluation of an objective technique for analysing
temporal variables in DAT spontaneous speech. Aphasiol-
ogy, 15(6):571?583.
Hans Stadthagen-Gonzalez and Colin J. Davis. 2006. The
Bristol norms for age of acquisition, imageability, and fa-
miliarity. Behavior Research Methods, 38(4):598?605.
Calvin Thomas, Vlado Keselj, Nick Cercone, Kenneth Rock-
wood, and Elissa Asp. 2005. Automatic detection and
rating of dementia of Alzheimer type through lexical anal-
ysis of spontaneous speech. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Mechatronics and Automa-
tion, pages 1569?1574.
Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher Manning, and
Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-speech tagging
with a cyclic dependency network. In Proceedings of the
2003 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 252?259.
Athanasios Tsanas, Max A. Little, Patrick E. McSharry, Jen-
nifer Spielman, and Lorraine O. Ramig. 2012. Novel
speech signal processing algorithms for high-accuracy
classification of Parkinson?s disease. IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering, 59(5):1264?1271.
Sze-Meng Jojo Wong and Mark Dras. 2010. Parser features
for sentence grammaticality classification. In Proceed-
ings of the Australasian Language Technology Association
Workshop, pages 67?75.
Victor Yngve. 1960. A model and hypothesis for language
structure. Proceedings of the American Physical Society,
104:444?466.
26
Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP 2014), pages 134?142,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26-27 2014.
c
?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Using statistical parsing to detect agrammatic aphasia
Kathleen C. Fraser
1
, Graeme Hirst
1
, Jed A. Meltzer
2
,
Jennifer E. Mack
3
, and Cynthia K. Thompson
3,4,5
1
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Toronto
2
Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre, Toronto
3
Dept. of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University
4
Dept. of Neurology, Northwestern University
4
Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer?s Disease Center, Northwestern University
{kfraser,gh}@cs.toronto.edu, jmeltzer@research.baycrest.org
{jennifer-mack-0,ckthom}@northwestern.edu
Abstract
Agrammatic aphasia is a serious language
impairment which can occur after a stroke
or traumatic brain injury. We present
an automatic method for analyzing apha-
sic speech using surface level parse fea-
tures and context-free grammar produc-
tion rules. Examining these features in-
dividually, we show that we can uncover
many of the same characteristics of agram-
matic language that have been reported
in studies using manual analysis. When
taken together, these parse features can
be used to train a classifier to accurately
predict whether or not an individual has
aphasia. Furthermore, we find that the
parse features can lead to higher classifica-
tion accuracies than traditional measures
of syntactic complexity. Finally, we find
that a minimal amount of pre-processing
can lead to better results than using either
the raw data or highly processed data.
1 Introduction
After a stroke or head injury, individuals may
experience aphasia, an impairment in the ability
to comprehend or produce language. The type
of aphasia depends on the location of the lesion.
However, even two patients with the same type
of aphasia may experience different symptoms. A
careful analysis of narrative speech can reveal spe-
cific patterns of impairment, and help a clinician
determine whether an individual has aphasia, what
type of aphasia it is, and how the symptoms are
changing over time.
In this paper, we present an automatic method
for the analysis of one type of aphasia, agram-
matic aphasia. characterized by the omission of
function words, the omission or substitution of
morphological markers for person and number, the
absence of verb inflection, and a relative increase
in the number of nouns and decrease in the number
of verbs (Bastiaanse and Thompson, 2012). There
is often a reduction in the variety of different syn-
tactic structures used, as well as a reduction in the
complexity of those structures (Progovac, 2006).
There may also be a strong tendency to use the
canonical word order of a language, for example
subject-verb-object in English (Progovac, 2006).
Most studies of narrative speech in agrammatic
aphasia are based on manually annotated speech
transcripts. This type of analysis can provide de-
tailed and accurate information about the speech
patterns that are observed. However, it is also very
time consuming and requires trained transcribers
and annotators. Studies are necessarily limited to
a manageable size, and the level of agreement be-
tween annotators can vary.
We propose an automatic approach that uses in-
formation from statistical parsers to examine prop-
erties of narrative speech. We extract context-
free grammar (CFG) production rules as well as
phrase-level features from syntactic parses of the
speech transcripts. We show that this approach can
detect many features which have been previously
reported in the aphasia literature, and that classifi-
cation of agrammatic patients and controls can be
achieved with high accuracy.
We also examine the effects of including speech
dysfluencies in the transcripts. Dysfluencies and
non-narrative words are usually removed from the
transcripts as a pre-processing step, but we show
that by retaining some of these items, we can ac-
tually achieve a higher classification accuracy than
by using the completely clean transcripts.
Finally, we investigate whether there is any ben-
efit to using the parse features instead of more tra-
ditional measures of syntactic complexity, such as
Yngve depth or mean sentence length. We find
that the parse features convey more information
134
about the specific syntactic structures being pro-
duced (or avoided) by the agrammatic speakers,
and lead to better classification accuracies.
2 Related Work
2.1 Syntactic analysis of agrammatic
narrative speech
Much of the previous work analyzing narrative
speech in agrammatic aphasia has been performed
manually. One widely used protocol is called
Quantitative Production Analysis (QPA), devel-
oped by Saffran et al. (1989). QPA can be used to
measure morphological content, such as whether
determiners and verb inflections are produced in
obligatory contexts, as well as structural complex-
ity, such as the number of embedded clauses per
sentence. Subsequent studies have found a num-
ber of differences between normal and agrammatic
speech using QPA (Rochon et al., 2000). Another
popular protocol called the Northwestern Narra-
tive Language Analysis (NNLA) was introduced
by Thompson et al. (1995). This protocol analyzes
each utterance at five different levels, and focuses
in particular on the production of verbs and verb
argument structure.
Perhaps more analogous to our work here,
Goodglass et al. (1994) conducted a detailed ex-
amination of the syntactic constituents used by
aphasic patients and controls. In that study, utter-
ances were grouped according to how many syn-
tactic constituents they contained. They found
that agrammatic participants were more likely to
produce single-constituent utterances, especially
noun phrases, and less likely to produce subor-
dinate clauses. They also found that agrammatic
speakers sometimes produced two-constituent ut-
terances consisting of only a subject and object,
with no verb. This pattern was never observed in
control speech.
A much smaller body of work explores the use
of computational techniques to analyze agramma-
tism. Holmes and Singh (1996) analyzed conver-
sational speech from aphasic speakers and con-
trols. Their features mostly included measures
of vocabulary richness and frequency counts of
various parts-of-speech (e.g. nouns, verbs); how-
ever they also measured ?clause-like semantic unit
rate?. This feature was intended to measure the
speaker?s ability to cluster words together, al-
though it is not clear what the criteria for segment-
ing clause-like units were or whether it was done
manually or automatically. Nonetheless, it was
found to be one of the most important variables
for distinguishing between patients and controls.
MacWhinney et al. (2011) presented several ex-
amples of how researchers can use the Aphasia-
Bank
1
database and associated software tools to
conduct automatic analyses (although the tran-
scripts are first hand-coded for errors by experi-
enced speech-language pathologists). Specifically
with regards to syntax, they calculated several fre-
quency counts and ratios for different parts-of-
speech and bound morphemes. There was one
extension beyond treating each word individually:
this involved searching for pre-defined colloca-
tions such as once upon a time or happily ever af-
ter, which were found to occur more rarely in the
patient transcripts than in the control transcripts.
We present an alternative, automated method of
analysis. We do not attempt to fully replicate the
results of the manual studies, but rather provide
a complementary set of features which can indi-
cate grammatic abnormalities. Unlike previous
computational studies, we attempt to move beyond
single-word analysis and examine which patterns
of syntax might indicate agrammatism.
2.2 Using parse features to assess
grammaticality
Syntactic complexity metrics derived from parse
trees have been used by various researchers in
studies of mild cognitive impairment (Roark et al.,
2011), autism (Prud?hommeaux et al., 2011), and
child language development (Sagae et al., 2005;
Hassanali et al., 2013). Here we focus specifically
on the use of CFG production rules as features.
Using the CFG production rules from statistical
parsers as features was first proposed by Baayen
et al. (1996), who applied the features to an au-
thorship attribution task. More recently, similar
features have been widely used in native language
identification (Wong and Dras, 2011; Brooke and
Hirst, 2012; Swanson and Charniak, 2012). Per-
haps most relevant to the task at hand, CFG pro-
ductions as well as other parse outputs have proved
useful for judging the grammaticality and fluency
of sentences. For example, Wong and Dras (2010)
used CFG productions to classify sentences from
an artificial error corpus as being either grammat-
ical or ungrammatical.
Taking a different approach, Chae and Nenkova
1
http://talkbank.org/AphasiaBank/
135
Agrammatic
(N = 24)
Control
(N = 15)
Male/Female 15/9 8/7
Age (years) 58.1 (10.6) 63.3 (6.4)
Education (years) 16.3 (2.5) 16.4 (2.4)
Table 1: Demographic information. Numbers are
given in the form: mean (standard deviation).
(2009) calculated several surface features based on
the output of a parser, such as the length and rel-
ative proportion of different phrase types. They
used these features to distinguish between human
and machine translations, and to determine which
of a pair of translations was the more fluent. How-
ever, to our knowledge there has been no work us-
ing parser outputs to assess the grammaticality of
speech from individuals with post-stroke aphasia.
3 Data
3.1 Participants
This was a retrospective analysis of data col-
lected by the the Aphasia and Neurolinguistics Re-
search Laboratory at Northwestern University. All
agrammatic participants had experienced a stroke
at least 1 year prior to the narrative sample col-
lection. Demographic information for the partic-
ipants is given in Table 1. There is no significant
(p < 0.05) difference between the patient and con-
trol groups on age or level of education.
3.2 Narrative task
To obtain a narrative sample, the participants were
asked to relate the well-known fairy tale Cin-
derella. Each participant was first given a word-
less picture book of the story to look through. The
book was then removed, and the participant was
asked to tell the story in his or her own words. The
examiner did not interrupt or ask questions.
The narratives were recorded and later tran-
scribed following the NNLA protocol. The data
was segmented into utterances based on syntac-
tic and prosodic cues. Filled pauses, repetitions,
false starts, and revisional phrases (e.g. I mean)
were all placed inside parentheses. The average
length of the raw transcripts was 332 words for
agrammatic participants and 387 words for con-
trols; when the non-narrative words were excluded
the average length was 194 words for the agram-
matic group and 330 for controls.
4 Methods
4.1 Parser Features
We consider two types of features: CFG pro-
duction rules and phrase-level statistics. For the
CFG production rules, we use the Charniak parser
(Charniak, 2000) trained on Wall Street Journal
data to parse each utterance in the transcript and
then extract the set of non-lexical productions.
The total number of types of productions is large,
many of them occurring very infrequently, so we
compile a list of the 50 most frequently occurring
productions in each of the two groups (agrammatic
and controls) and use the combined set as the set
of features. The feature values can be binary (does
a particular production rule appear in the narrative
or not?) or integer (how many times does a rule oc-
cur?). The CFG non-terminal symbols follow the
Penn Treebank naming conventions.
For our phrase-level statistics, we use a subset
of the features described by Chae and Nenkova
(2009), which are related to the incidence of dif-
ferent phrase types. We consider three different
phrase types: noun phrases, verb phrases, and
prepositional phrases. These features are defined
as follows:
? Phrase type proportion: Length of each
phrase type (including embedded phrases),
divided by total narrative length.
? Average phrase length: Total number of
words in a phrase type, divided by number
of phrases of that type.
? Phrase type rate: Number of phrases of a
given type, divided by total narrative length.
Because we are judging the grammaticality of
the entire narrative, we normalize by narrative
length (rather than sentence length, as in Chae and
Nenkova?s study). These features are real-valued.
We first perform the analysis on the transcribed
data with the dysfluencies removed, labeled the
?clean? dataset. This is the version of the tran-
script that would be used in the manual NNLA
analysis. However, it is the result of human ef-
fort and expertise. To test the robustness of the
system on data that has not been annotated in this
way, we also use the ?raw? dataset, with no dys-
fluencies removed (i.e. including everything inside
the parentheses), and an ?auto-cleaned? dataset,
in which filled pauses are automatically removed
from the raw transcripts. We also use a simple al-
gorithm to remove ?stutters? and false starts, by
136
removing non-word tokens of length one or two
(e.g. C- C- Cinderella would become simply Cin-
derella). This provides a more realistic view of the
performance of our system on real data. We also
hypothesize that there may be important informa-
tion to be found in the dysfluent speech segments.
4.2 Feature weighting and selection
We assume that some production rules will be
more relevant to the classification than others,
and so we want to weight the features accord-
ingly. Using term frequency?inverse document
frequency (tf-idf) would be one possibility; how-
ever, the tf-idf weights do not take into account
any class information. Supervised term weight-
ing (STW), has been proposed by Debole and Se-
bastiani (2004) as an alternative to tf-idf for text
classification tasks. In this weighting scheme, fea-
ture weights are assigned using the same algo-
rithm that is used for feature selection. For ex-
ample, one way to select features is to rank them
by their information gain (InfoGain). In STW,
the InfoGain value for each feature is also used
to replace the idf term. This can be expressed as
W (i,d) = df(i,d)? InfoGain(i), where W (i,d) is
the weight assigned to feature i in document d,
df(i,d) is the frequency of occurrence of feature i
in document d, and InfoGain(i) is the information
gain of feature i across all the training documents.
We considered two different methods of STW:
weighting by InfoGain and weighting by gain ratio
(GainRatio). The methods were also used as fea-
ture selection, since any feature that was assigned
a weight of zero was removed from the classifi-
cation. We also consider tf-idf weights and un-
weighted features for comparison.
4.3 Syntactic complexity metrics
To compare the performance of the parse features
with more-traditional syntactic complexity met-
rics (SC metrics), we calculate the mean length of
utterance (MLU), mean length of T-unit
2
(MLT),
mean length of clause (MLC), and parse tree
height. We also calculate the mean, maximum,
and total Yngve depth, which measures the pro-
portion of left-branching to right-branching in
each parse tree (Yngve, 1960). These measures
are commonly used in studies of impaired lan-
guage (e.g. Roark et al. (2011), Prud?hommeaux et
2
A T-unit consists of a main clause and its attached de-
pendent clauses.
al. (2011), Fraser et al. (2013b)). We hypothesize
that the parse features will capture more informa-
tion about the specific impairments seen in agram-
matic aphasia; however, using the general mea-
sures of syntactic complexity may be sufficient for
the classifiers to distinguish between the groups.
4.4 Classification
To test whether the features can effectively distin-
guish between the agrammatic group and controls,
we use them to train and test a machine learn-
ing classifier. We test three different classifica-
tion algorithms: naive Bayes (NB), support vec-
tor machine (SVM), and random forests (RF). We
use a leave-one-out cross-validation framework, in
which one transcript is held out as a test set, and
the other transcripts form the training data. The
feature weights are calculated on the training set
and then applied to the test set (as a result, each
fold of training/testing may use different features
and feature weights). The SVM and RF algo-
rithms are tuned in a nested cross-validation loop.
The classifier is then tested on the held-out point.
This procedure is repeated across all data points,
and the average accuracy is reported.
A baseline classifier which assigns all data to
the largest class would achieve an accuracy of .62
on this classification task. For a more realistic
measure of performance, we also compare our re-
sults to the baseline accuracy that can be achieved
using only the length of the narrative as input.
5 Results
5.1 Features using clean transcripts
We first present the results for the clean tran-
scripts. Although different features may be se-
lected in each fold of the cross-validation, for sim-
plicity we show only the feature rankings on the
whole data set. Table 2 shows the top features as
ranked by GainRatio. The frequencies are given to
indicate the direction of the trend; they represent
the average frequency per narrative for each class
(agrammatic = AG and control = CT). Boldface
indicates the group with the higher frequency. As-
terisks are used to indicate the significance of the
difference between the groups.
When working with clinical data, careful exam-
ination of the features can be beneficial. By com-
paring features with previous findings in the liter-
ature on agrammatism, we can be confident that
we are measuring real effects and not just artifacts
137
Rule AG
freq
CT
freq
p
1 PP? IN NP 10.3 24.9
???
2 ROOT? NP 2.9 0.2
???
3 NP? DT NN POS 0.0 0.7
?
4 NP? PRP$ JJ NN 0.5 0.7
?
5 VP? TO VP 4.2 7.5
?
6 NP? NNP 5.9 6.6
7 VP? VB PP 1.1 2.9
??
8 VP? VP CC VP 1.1 3.1
??
9 NP? DT NN NN 1.0 2.7
??
10 VP? VBD VP 0.1 0.5
?
11 WHADVP?WRB 0.5 1.4
?
12 FRAG? NP . 0.7 0.0
??
13 NP? JJ NN 0.7 0.0
??
14 SBAR?WHNP S 1.7 3.1
?
15 NP? NP SBAR 1.6 2.5
16 S? NP VP 7.8 16.1
??
17 NP? PRP$ JJ NNS 0.0 0.5
?
18 NP? PRP$ NN NNS 0.0 0.6
?
19 SBAR?WHADVP S 0.4 1.2
?
20 VP? VBN PP 0.4 2.0
?
Table 2: Top 20 features ranked by GainRatio us-
ing the clean transcripts. (
?
p < 0.05,
??
p < 0.005,
???
p < 0.0005).
of the parsing algorithm. This can also poten-
tially provide an opportunity to observe features of
agrammatic speech that have not been examined in
manual analyses. We examine the top-ranked fea-
tures in Table 2 in some detail, especially as they
relate to previous work on agrammatism. In par-
ticular, the top features suggest some of the fol-
lowing features of agrammatic speech:
? Reduced number of prepositional phrases.
This is suggested by feature 1, PP? IN NP.
It is also reflected in features 7 and 20.
? Impairment in using verbs. We can see in fea-
ture 2 (ROOT ? NP) that there is a greater
number of utterances consisting of only a
noun phrase. Feature 12 is also consistent
with this pattern (FRAG ? NP .). We also
observe a reduced number of coordinated
verb phrases (VP? VP CC VP).
? Omission of grammatical morphemes and
function words. The agrammatic speakers
use fewer possessives (NP? DT NN POS).
Feature 9 indicates that the control partic-
ipants more frequently produce compound
NB SVM RF
Narrative length .62 .56 .64
Binary, no weights .87 .87 .77
Binary, tf-idf .87 .90 .85
Binary, InfoGain .82 .90 .74
Binary, GainRatio .90 .82 .79
Frequency, no weights .90 .85 .85
Frequency, tf-idf .85 .82 .77
Frequency, InfoGain .90 .90 .82
Frequncy, GainRatio .90 .92 .74
SC metrics, no weights .85 .77 .82
SC metrics, InfoGain .85 .77 .79
SC metrics, GainRatio .85 .77 .82
Table 3: Average classification accuracy using the
clean transcripts. The highest classification accu-
racy for each feature set is indicated with boldface.
nouns with a determiner (often the glass
slipper or the fairy godmother). Feature 4
also suggests some difficulty with determin-
ers, as the agrammatic participants produce
fewer nouns modified by a possessive pro-
noun and an adjective. Contrast this with fea-
ture 13, which shows agrammatic speech is
more likely to contain noun phrases contain-
ing just an adjective and a noun. For example,
in the control narratives we are more likely to
see phrases such as her godmother . . . waves
her magic wand, while in the agrammatic
narratives phrases like Cinderella had wicked
stepmother are more common.
? Reduced number of embedded clauses and
phrases. Evidence for this can be found in
the reduced number of wh-adverb phrases
(WHADVP?WRB), as well as features 14,
15, and 19.
The results of our classification experiment on
the clean data are shown in Table 3. The results
are similar for the binary and frequency features,
with the best result of .92 achieved using an SVM
classifier and frequency features, with GainRatio
weights. The best results using parse features
(.85?.92) are the same or slightly better than the
best results using SC features (.85), and both fea-
ture sets perform above baseline.
5.2 Effect of non-narrative speech
In this section we perform two additional experi-
ments, using the raw and auto-cleaned transcripts.
138
Rule AG
freq.
CT
freq.
p
1 NP? DT NN POS 0.0 0.5
?
2 PP? IN NP 12.2 26.1
???
3 SBAR?WHADVP S 0.4 1.5
?
4 VP? VBD 0.75 1.1
5 VP? TO VP 4.3 7.3
?
6 S? CC PP NP VP . 0.04 0.5
?
7 NP? PRP$ JJ NNS 0.04 0.5
?
8 VP? AUX VP 3.7 6.0
9 ROOT? FRAG 4.5 0.7
??
10 ADVP? RB 9.8 12.3
11 NP? NNP 4.4 6.2
?
12 NP? DT NN 15.0 24.1
??
13 VP? VB PP 1.2 2.8
?
14 VP? VP CC VP 1.0 2.9
?
15 WHADVP?WRB 0.6 1.5
?
16 VP? VBN PP 0.4 2.0
?
17 INTJ? UH UH 3.5 0.3
?
18 VP? VBP NP 0.5 0.0
?
19 NP? NNP NNP 1.5 0.5
??
20 S? CC ADVP NP VP . 1.3 2.3
Table 4: Top 20 features ranked by GainRatio
using the raw transcripts. Bold feature numbers
indicate rules which did not appear in Table 2.
(
?
p < 0.05,
??
p < 0.005,
???
p < 0.0005).
We discuss the differences between the selected
features in each case, and the resulting classifica-
tion accuracies.
Using the raw transcripts, we find that the rank-
ing of features is markedly different than with the
human-annotated transcripts (Table 4, bold feature
numbers). Examining these production rules more
closely, we observe some characteristics of agram-
matic speech which were not detectable in the an-
notated transcripts:
? Increased number of dysfluencies. We ob-
serve a higher number of consecutive fillers
(INTJ ? UH UH) in the agrammatic data,
as well as a higher number of consecutive
proper nouns (NP ? NNP NNP), usually
two attempts at Cinderella?s name. Feature
18 (VP? VBP NP) also appears to support
this trend, although it is not immediately ob-
vious. Most of the control participants tell
the story in the past tense, and if they do
use the present tense then the verbs are of-
ten in the third-person singular (Cinderella
finds her fairy godmother). Looking at the
data, we found that feature 18 can indicate a
verb agreement error, as in he attend the ball.
However, in almost twice as many cases it in-
dicates use of the discourse markers I mean
and you know, followed by a repaired or tar-
get noun phrase.
? Decreased connection between sentences.
Feature 6 shows a canonical NP VP sentence,
preceded by a coordinate conjunction and a
prepositional phrase. Some examples of this
from the control transcripts include, And at
the stroke of midnight . . . and And in the pro-
cess . . . . The conjunction creates a connec-
tion from one utterance to the next, and the
prepositional phrase indicates the temporal
relationship between events in the story, cre-
ating a sense of cohesion. See also the similar
pattern in feature 20, representing sentence
beginnings such as And then . . . .
However, there are some features which were
highly ranked in the clean transcripts but do not
appear in Table 4. What information are we losing
by using the raw data? One issue with using the
raw transcripts is that the inclusion of filled pauses
?splits? the counts for some features. For example,
the feature FRAG? NP . is ranked 12th using the
clean transcripts but does not appear in the top 20
when using the raw transcripts. When we examine
the transcripts, we find that the phrases that are
counted in this feature in the clean transcripts are
actually split into three features in the raw tran-
scripts: FRAG? NP ., FRAG? INTJ NP ., and
FRAG? NP INTJ ..
The classification results for the raw transcripts
are given in Table 5. The results are similar to
those for the clean transcripts, although in this
case the best accuracy (.92) is achieved in three
different configurations (all using the SVM clas-
sifier). The phrase-level features out-perform the
traditional SC measures in only half the cases.
Using the auto-cleaned transcripts, we see some
similarities with the previous cases (Table 6).
However, some of the highly ranked features
which disappeared when using the raw transcripts
are now significant again (e.g. ROOT ? NP,
FRAG ? NP .). There are also three remain-
ing features which are significant and have not yet
been discussed. Feature 9 shows an increased use
of determiners with proper nouns (e.g. the Cin-
derella), a frank grammatical error. Feature 20
139
NB SVM RF
Narrative length .51 .62 .69
Binary, no weights .87 .92 .82
Binary, tf-idf .87 .92 .72
Binary, InfoGain .85 .87 .82
Binary, GainRatio .82 .87 .85
Frequency, no weights .85 .90 .69
Frequency, tf-idf .82 .92 .90
Frequency, InfoGain .85 .74 .85
Frequncy, GainRatio .85 .74 .82
SC metrics, no weights .74 .79 .82
SC metrics, InfoGain .77 .85 .85
SC metrics, GainRatio .77 .85 .87
Table 5: Average classification accuracy using
raw transcripts. The highest classification accu-
racy for each feature set is indicated with boldface.
provides another example of a sentence fragment
with no verb. Finally, feature 19 represents an in-
creased number of sentences or clauses consist-
ing of a noun phrase followed by adjective phrase.
Looking at the transcripts, this is not generally in-
dicative of an error, but rather use of the word
okay, as in she dropped her shoe okay.
The classification results for the auto-cleaned
data, shown in Table 7, show a somewhat differ-
ent pattern from the previous experiments. The
accuracies using the parse features are generally
higher, and the best result of .97 is achieved using
the binary features and the naive Bayes classifier.
Interestingly, this data set also results in the lowest
accuracy for the syntactic complexity metrics.
5.3 Phrase-level parse features
The classifiers in Tables 3, 5, and 7 used the
phrase-level parse features as well as the CFG
productions. Although these features were cal-
culated for NPs, VPs, and PPs, the NP features
were never selected by the GainRatio ranking al-
gorithm, and did not differ significantly between
groups. The significance levels of the VP and PP
features are reported in Table 8. PP rate and pro-
portion are significantly different in all three sets
of transcripts, which is consistent with the high
ranking of PP ? IN NP in each case. VP rate
and proportion are often significant, although less
so. Notably, PP and VP length are both significant
in the clean transcripts, but not significant in the
raw transcripts and only barely significant in the
auto-cleaned transcripts.
Rule AG
freq.
CT
freq.
p
1 PP? IN NP 12.0 26.0
???
2 NP? DT NN POS 0.0 0.7
?
3 VP? VP CC VP 0.8 2.9
??
4 S? CC SBAR NP VP . 0.0 0.5
5 SBAR?WHADVP S 0.4 1.5
?
6 NP? NNP 5.6 6.7
7 VP? VBD 0.8 1.1
8 S? CC PP NP VP . 0.04 0.6
?
9 NP? DT NNP 0.6 0.0
??
10 VP? TO VP 4.6 7.5
?
11 ROOT? FRAG 3.0 0.5
???
12 ROOT? NP 2.1 0.1
?
13 VP? VBP NP 1.7 3.6
14 NP? PRP$ JJ NNS 0.04 0.5
?
15 VP? VB PP 1.1 2.8
??
16 VP? VBN PP 0.4 1.9
?
17 FRAG? NP . 0.4 0.0
?
18 NP? NNP . 2.1 0.1
19 S? NP ADJP 0.4 0.0
?
20 FRAG? CC NP . 0.7 0.07
??
Table 6: Top 10 features ranked by GainRatio
using the auto-cleaned transcripts. Bold feature
numbers indicate rules which did not appear in Ta-
ble 2. (
?
p < 0.05,
??
p < 0.005,
???
p < 0.0005).
5.4 Analysis of variance
With a multi-way ANOVA we found significant
main effects of classifier (F(2,63) = 11.6, p <
0.001) and data set (F(2,63) = 11.2, p < 0.001)
on accuracy. A Tukey post-hoc test revealed sig-
nificant differences between SVM and RF (p <
0.001) and NB and RF (p < 0.001) but not be-
tween SVM and NB. As well, we see a sig-
nificant difference between the clean and auto-
cleaned data (p < 0.001) and the raw and auto-
cleaned data (p < 0.001) but not between the raw
and clean data. There was no significant main ef-
fect of weighting scheme or feature type (binary or
frequency) on accuracy. We did not examine any
possible interactions between these variables.
6 Discussion
6.1 Transcripts
We achieved the highest classification accuracies
using the auto-cleaned transcripts. The raw tran-
scripts, while containing more information about
dysfluent events, also seemed to cause more dif-
140
NB SVM RF
Narrative length .51 .62 .64
Binary, no weights .92 .95 .90
Binary, tf-idf .92 .95 .87
Binary, InfoGain .97 .90 .85
Binary, GainRatio .97 .90 .95
Frequency, no weights .90 .95 .77
Frequency, tf-idf .87 .95 .79
Frequency, InfoGain .92 .85 .82
Frequncy, GainRatio .92 .87 .95
SC metrics, no weights .79 .77 .74
SC metrics, InfoGain .79 .74 .72
SC metrics, GainRatio .79 .74 .67
Table 7: Average classification accuracy using
auto-cleaned transcripts. The highest classifica-
tion accuracy for each feature set is indicated with
boldface.
Clean Raw Auto
PP rate
??? ??? ???
PP proportion
??? ??? ??
PP length
??
VP rate
?? ?
VP proportion
??? ? ?
VP length
??? ?
Table 8: Significance of the phrase-level features
in each of the three data sets (
?
p < 0.05,
??
p <
0.005,
???
p < 0.0005).
ficulty for the parser, which mis-labelled filled
pauses and false starts in some cases. We also
found that the insertion of filled pauses resulted
in the creation of multiple features for a single un-
derlying grammatical structure. The auto-cleaned
transcripts appeared to avoid some of those prob-
lems, while still retaining information about many
of the non-narrative speech productions that were
removed from the clean transcripts.
Some of the features from the auto-cleaned tran-
scripts appear to be associated with the discourse
level of language, such as connectives and dis-
course markers. A researcher solely interested in
studying the syntax of language might resist the
inclusion of such features, and prefer to use only
features from the human-annotated clean tran-
scripts. However, we feel that such productions
are part of the grammar of spoken language, and
merit inclusion. From a practical standpoint, our
findings are reassuring: data preparation that can
be done automatically is much more feasible in
many situations than human annotation.
6.2 Features
CFG production rules can offer a more detailed
look at specific language impairments. We were
able to observe a number of important characteris-
tics of agrammatic language as reported in previ-
ous studies: fragmented speech with a higher in-
cidence of solitary noun phrases, difficulty with
determiners and possessives, reduced number of
prepositional phrases and embedded clauses, and
(in the raw transcripts), increased use of filled
pauses and repair phrases. For this reason, we be-
lieve that they are more useful for the analysis of
disordered or otherwise atypical language than tra-
ditional measures of syntactic complexity.
In some cases an in-depth analysis may not be
required, and in such cases it may be tempting to
simply use one of the more-general syntactic com-
plexity measures. Nevertheless, even in our simple
binary classification task, we found that using the
more-specific features gave us a higher accuracy.
6.3 Future work
Because of the limited data, we consider these re-
sults to be preliminary. We hope to replicate this
study as more data become available in the fu-
ture. We also plan to examine the effect, if any,
of the specific narrative task. Furthermore, we
have shown that these methods are effective for
the analysis of agrammatic aphasia, but there are
other types of aphasia in which semantic, rather
than syntactic, processing is the primary impair-
ment. We would like to extend this work to find
features which distinguish between different types
of aphasia.
Although we included manually transcribed
data in this study, these methods will be most use-
ful if they are also effective on automatically rec-
ognized speech. Previous work on speech recog-
nition for aphasic speech reported high error rates
(Fraser et al., 2013a). Our finding that the auto-
cleaned transcripts led to the highest classification
accuracy is encouraging, but we will have to test
the robustness to recognition errors and the depen-
dence on sentence boundary annotations.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Natural Sciences and En-
gineering Research Council of Canada and National Institutes
of Health R01DC01948 and R01DC008552.
141
References
Harald Baayen, Hans Van Halteren, and Fiona
Tweedie. 1996. Outside the cave of shadows:
Using syntactic annotation to enhance authorship
attribution. Literary and Linguistic Computing,
11(3):121?132.
Roelien Bastiaanse and Cynthia K. Thompson. 2012.
Perspectives on Agrammatism. Psychology Press.
Julian Brooke and Graeme Hirst. 2012. Robust, lex-
icalized native language identification. In Proceed-
ings of the 24th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 391?408.
Jieun Chae and Ani Nenkova. 2009. Predicting the
fluency of text with shallow structural features: case
studies of machine translation and human-written
text. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 139?147.
Eugene Charniak. 2000. A maximum-entropy-
inspired parser. In Proceedings of the 1st Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 132?139.
Franca Debole and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2004. Super-
vised term weighting for automated text categoriza-
tion. In Text mining and its applications, pages 81?
97. Springer.
Kathleen Fraser, Frank Rudzicz, Naida Graham, and
Elizabeth Rochon. 2013a. Automatic speech recog-
nition in the diagnosis of primary progressive apha-
sia. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on
Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Tech-
nologies, pages 47?54.
Kathleen C. Fraser, Jed A. Meltzer, Naida L. Graham,
Carol Leonard, Graeme Hirst, Sandra E. Black, and
Elizabeth Rochon. 2013b. Automated classification
of primary progressive aphasia subtypes from narra-
tive speech transcripts. Cortex.
Harold Goodglass, Julie Ann Christiansen, and
Roberta E. Gallagher. 1994. Syntatic construc-
tions used by agrammatic speakers: Comparison
with conduction aphasics and normals. Neuropsy-
chology, 8(4):598.
Khairun-nisa Hassanali, Yang Liu, Aquiles Iglesias,
Thamar Solorio, and Christine Dollaghan. 2013.
Automatic generation of the index of productive
syntax for child language transcripts. Behavior re-
search methods, pages 1?9.
David I. Holmes and Sameer Singh. 1996. A stylo-
metric analysis of conversational speech of apha-
sic patients. Literary and Linguistic Computing,
11(3):133?140.
Brian MacWhinney, Davida Fromm, Margaret Forbes,
and Audrey Holland. 2011. Aphasiabank: Methods
for studying discourse. Aphasiology, 25(11):1286?
1307.
Ljiljana Progovac. 2006. The Syntax of Nonsen-
tentials: Multidisciplinary Perspectives, volume 93.
John Benjamins.
Emily T. Prud?hommeaux, Brian Roark, Lois M.
Black, and Jan van Santen. 2011. Classification of
atypical language in autism. In Proceedings of the
2nd Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Compu-
tational Linguistics, CMCL ?11, pages 88?96.
Brian Roark, Margaret Mitchell, John-Paul Hosom,
Kristy Hollingshead, and Jeffery Kaye. 2011. Spo-
ken language derived measures for detecting mild
cognitive impairment. IEEE Transactions on Au-
dio, Speech, and Language Processing, 19(7):2081?
2090.
Elizabeth Rochon, Eleanor M. Saffran, Rita Sloan
Berndt, and Myrna F. Schwartz. 2000. Quantita-
tive analysis of aphasic sentence production: Further
development and new data. Brain and Language,
72(3):193?218.
Eleanor M. Saffran, Rita Sloan Berndt, and Myrna F.
Schwartz. 1989. The quantitative analysis of
agrammatic production: Procedure and data. Brain
and Language, 37(3):440?479.
Kenji Sagae, Alon Lavie, and Brian MacWhinney.
2005. Automatic measurement of syntactic develop-
ment in child language. In Proceedings of the 43rd
Annual Meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 197?204.
Ben Swanson and Eugene Charniak. 2012. Native lan-
guage detection with tree substitution grammars. In
Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 193?
197.
Cynthia K. Thompson, Lewis P. Shapiro, Ligang Li,
and Lee Schendel. 1995. Analysis of verbs and
verb-argument structure: A method for quantifica-
tion of aphasic language production. Clinical Apha-
siology, 23:121?140.
Sze-Meng Jojo Wong and Mark Dras. 2010. Parser
features for sentence grammaticality classification.
In Proceedings of the Australasian Language Tech-
nology Association Workshop, pages 67?75.
Sze-Meng Jojo Wong and Mark Dras. 2011. Exploit-
ing parse structures for native language identifica-
tion. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1600?1610.
Victor Yngve. 1960. A model and hypothesis for lan-
guage structure. Proceedings of the American Phys-
ical Society, 104:444?466.
142
