Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1624?1633,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automatic Generation of Related Work Sections in Scientific Papers: 
An Optimization Approach 
 
 
 Yue Hu and Xiaojun Wan 
Institute of Computer Science and Technology 
The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics 
Peking University, Beijing, China 
{ayue.hu,wanxiaojun}@pku.edu.cn 
 
 
  
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we investigate a challeng-
ing task of automatic related work gener-
ation. Given multiple reference papers as 
input, the task aims to generate a related 
work section for a target paper. The gen-
erated related work section can be used 
as a draft for the author to complete his 
or her final related work section. We 
propose our Automatic Related Work 
Generation system called ARWG to ad-
dress this task. It first exploits a PLSA 
model to split the sentence set of the giv-
en papers into different topic-biased parts, 
and then applies regression models to 
learn the importance of the sentences. At 
last it employs an optimization frame-
work to generate the related work section. 
Our evaluation results on a test set of 150 
target papers along with their reference 
papers show that our proposed ARWG 
system can generate related work sec-
tions with better quality. A user study is 
also performed to show ARWG can 
achieve an improvement over generic 
multi-document summarization baselines. 
1 Introduction 
The related work section is an important part of a 
paper. An author often needs to help readers to 
understand the context of his or her research 
problem and compare his or her current work 
with previous works. A related work section is 
often used for this purpose to show the differ-
ences and advantages of his or her work, com-
pared with related research works. In this study, 
we attempt to automatically generate a related 
work section for a target academic paper with its 
reference papers. This kind of related work sec-
tions can be used as a basis to reduce the author?s 
time and effort when he or she wants to complete 
his or her final related work section. 
Automatic related work section generation is a 
very challenging task. It can be considered a top-
ic-biased, multiple-document summarization 
problem. The input is a target academic paper, 
which has no related work section, along with its 
reference papers. The goal is to create a related 
work section that describes the related works and 
addresses the relationship between the target pa-
per and the reference papers. Here we assume 
that the set of reference papers has been given as 
part of the input. Existing works in the NLP and 
recommendation systems communities have al-
ready focused on the task of finding reference 
papers. For example, citation prediction (Nal-
lapati et al., 2008) aims at finding individual pa-
per citation patterns. 
Generally speaking, automatic related work 
section generation is a strikingly different prob-
lem and it is much more difficult in comparison 
with general multi-document summarization 
tasks. For example, multi-document summariza-
tion of news articles aims at synthesizing con-
tents of similar news and removing the redundant 
information contained by the different news arti-
cles. However, each scientific paper has much 
specific content to state its own work and contri-
bution. Even for the papers that investigate the 
same research topic, their contributions and con-
tents can be totally different. The related work 
section generation task needs to find the specific 
contributions of individual papers and arrange 
them into one or several paragraphs. 
In this study, we focus on the problem of au-
tomatic related work section generation and pro-
pose a novel system called ARWG to address the 
1624
problem. For the target paper, we assume that the 
abstract and introduction sections have already 
been written by the author and they can be used 
to help generate the related work section. For the 
reference papers, we only consider and extract 
the abstract, introduction, related work and con-
clusion sections, because other sections like the 
method and evaluation sections always describe 
the extreme details of the specific work and they 
are not suitable for this task. Then we generate 
the related work section using both sentence sets 
which are extracted from the target paper and 
reference papers, respectively. 
Firstly, we use a PLSA model to group both 
sentence sets of the target paper and its reference 
papers into different topic-biased clusters. Sec-
ondly, the importance of each sentence in the 
target paper and the reference papers is learned 
by using two different Support Vector Regres-
sion (SVR) models. At last, a global optimization 
framework is proposed to generate the related 
work section by selecting sentences from both 
the target paper and the reference papers. Mean-
while, the framework selects sentences from dif-
ferent topic-biased clusters globally. 
Experimental results on a test set of 150 target 
papers show our method can generate related 
work sections with better quality than those of 
several baseline methods. With the ROUGE 
toolkit, the results indicate the related work sec-
tions generated by our system can get higher 
ROUGE scores. Moreover, our related work sec-
tions can get higher rating scores based on a user 
study. Therefore, our related work sections can 
be much more suitable for the authors to prepare 
their final related work sections. 
2 Related Work 
There are few studies to directly address auto-
matic related work generation. Hoang and Kan 
(2010) proposed a related work summarization 
system given the set of keywords arranged in a 
hierarchical fashion that describes the paper?s 
topic. They used two different rule-based strate-
gies to extract sentences for general topics as 
well as detailed ones. 
A few studies focus on multi-document scien-
tific article summarization. Agarwal et al., (2011) 
introduced an unsupervised approach to the prob-
lem of multi-document summarization. The input 
is a list of papers cited together within the same 
source article. The key point of this approach is a 
topic based clustering of fragments extracted 
from each co-cited article. They rank all the clus-
ters using a query generated from the context 
surrounding the co-cited list of papers. Yeloglu 
et al., (2011) compared four different approaches 
for multi-document scientific articles summariza-
tion: MEAD, MEAD with corpus specific vo-
cabulary, LexRank and W3SS. 
Other studies investigate mainly on the single-
document scientific article summarization. Early 
works including (Luhn 1958; Baxendale 1958; 
Edumundson 1969) tried to use various features 
specific to scientific text (e.g., sentence position, 
or rhetorical clues features). They have proved 
that these features are effective for the scientific 
article summarization. Citation information has 
been already shown effective in summarize the 
scientific articles. Works including (Mei and 
Zhai 2008; Qazvinian and Radev 2008; Schwartz 
and Hearst 2006; Mohammad et al., 2009) em-
ployed citation information for the single scien-
tific article summarization. Earlier work (Nakov 
et al., 2004) indicated that citation sentences may 
contain important concepts that can give useful 
descriptions of a paper. 
Various methods have been proposed for news 
document summarization, including rule-based 
methods (Barzilay and Elhadad 1997; Marcu and 
Daniel 1997), graph-based methods (Mani and 
Bloedorn 2000; Erkan and Radev 2004; Michal-
cea and Tarau 2005), learning-based methods 
(Conroy et al., 2001; Shen et al., 2007; Ouyang 
et al., 2007; Galanis et al., 2008), optimization-
based methods (McDonald 2007; Gillick et al., 
2009; Xie et al., 2009; Berg-Kirkpatrick et al., 
2011; Lei Huang et al., 2011; Woodsend et al., 
2012; Galanis 2012), etc. 
The most relevant work is (Hoang and Kan, 
2010) as mentioned above. They also assumed 
the set of reference papers was given as part of 
the input. They also adopt the hierarchical topic 
tree that describes the topic structure in the target 
paper as an essential input for their system. 
However, it is non-trivial to build the hierar-
chical topic tree. Moreover, they do not consider 
the content of the target paper to construct the 
related work section, which is actually crucial in   
the related work section. To the best of our 
knowledge, no previous works have used super-
vised learning and optimization framework to 
deal with the multiple scientific article summari-
zation tasks. 
3 Problem Analysis and Corpus 
3.1 Problem Analysis 
1625
We firstly analyze the structure of related work 
sections briefly. By using examples for illustra-
tion, we can gain insight on how to generate re-
lated work sections. A specific related work ex-
ample is shown in Figure 1. 
This related work section introduces previous 
related works for a paper on Automatic Taxono-
my Induction. From Figure 1, we can have a 
glance at the structure of related work sections. 
Related work sections usually discuss several 
different topics, such as ?pattern-based? and 
?cluster-based? approaches shown in the Figure 
1. Besides the knowledge of previous works, the 
author often compares his own work with the 
previous works. The differences and advantages 
are generally mentioned. The example in Figure 
1 also indicates this phenomenon. 
Therefore, we design our system to generate 
related work sections according to the related 
work section structure mentioned above. Our 
system takes the target paper for which a related 
work section needs to be drafted besides its ref-
erence papers as input. The goal of our system is 
to generate a related work section with the above 
structure. The generated related work section 
should have several topic-biased parts. The au-
thor's own work is also needed to be described 
and its difference with other works is needed to 
be emphasized on. 
3.2 Corpus and Preprocessing 
We build a corpus that contains academic papers 
and their corresponding reference papers. The 
academic papers are selected from the ACL An-
thology 1 . The ACL Anthology currently hosts 
                                                 
1 http://aclweb.org/anthology/ 
over 24,500 papers from major conferences such 
as ACL, EMNLP, COLING in the fields of com-
putational linguistics and natural language pro-
cessing. We remove the papers that contain relat-
ed work sections with very short length, and ran-
domly select 1050 target papers to construct our 
whole corpus. 
The papers are all in PDF format. We extract 
their texts by using PDFlib 2  and detect their 
physical structures of paragraphs, subsections 
and sections by using ParsCit3 . For the target 
papers, the related work sections are directly ex-
tracted as the gold summaries. The references are 
also extracted. For the references that can be 
found in the ACL Anthology, we download them 
from the ACL Anthology. The other reference 
papers are searched and downloaded by using 
Google Scholar. References to books and PhD 
theses are discarded, for their verbosity may 
change the problem drastically (Mihalcea and 
Ceylan, 2007). 
The input of our system includes the abstract 
and introduction sections of the target paper, and 
the abstract, introduction, related work and con-
clusion sections of the reference papers. As men-
tioned above, the method and evaluation sections 
in the reference papers are not used as input be-
cause these sections usually describe extreme 
details of the methods and evaluation results and 
they are not suitable for related work generation. 
Note that it is reasonable to make use of the ab-
stract and introduction sections of the target pa-
per to help generate the related work section, 
because an author usually has already written the 
abstract and introduction sections before he or 
she wants to write the related work section for 
the target paper.  Otherwise, we cannot get any 
information about the author?s own work. All 
other sections in the target paper are not used.  
4 Our Proposed System 
4.1 Overview 
In this paper, we propose a system called ARWG 
to automatically generate a related work section 
for a given target paper. The architecture of our 
system is shown in Figure 2. We take both the 
target paper and its reference papers as input and 
they are represented by several sections men-
tioned in Section 3.2. After preprocessing, we 
extract the feature vectors for sentences in the 
target paper and the reference papers, respective-
                                                 
2 http://www.pdflib.com/ 
3 http://aye.comp.nus.edu.sg/parsCit/ 
 
 
Figure 1: A sample related work section (Yang and 
Callan 2009) 
There has been a substantial amount of research on automatic 
taxonomy induction. As we mentioned earlier, two main 
approaches are pattern-based and clustering-based.
Pattern-based approaches are the main trend for automatic 
taxonomy induction. ?
Pattern-based approaches started from and still pay a great deal 
of attention to the most common is-a relations. ?
Clustering-based approaches usually represent word contexts as 
vectors and cluster words based on similarities of the vectors 
(Brown et al., 1992; Lin, 1998). ?
Many clustering-based approaches face the challenge of 
appropriately labeling non-leaf clusters. ? In this paper, we take 
an incremental clustering approach,... The advantage of the 
incremental approach is that it eliminates the trouble of 
inventing cluster labels and concentrates on placing terms in the 
correct positions in a taxonomy hierarchy.
The o k by S ow et al. (2006) is the most similar to ours ? 
Moreover, our approach employs heterogeneous features from a 
wide rang ; hile heir approach only used syntactic dependency.
Two different 
topics
Comparison 
with the 
author?s work
1626
ly. The importance scores for sentences in the 
target paper and the reference papers are as-
signed by using two SVR based sentence scoring 
models. The two SVR models are trained for 
sentences in the target paper and the reference 
papers, respectively. Meanwhile, a topic model is 
applied to the whole set of sentences in both the 
target paper and reference papers. The sentences 
are grouped into several different topic-biased 
clusters. The sentences with importance scores 
and topic cluster information are taken as the 
input for the global optimization framework. The 
optimization framework extracts sentences to 
describe both the author?s own work and back-
ground knowledge. More details of each part will 
be discussed in the following sections. 
4.2 Topic Model Learning 
As mentioned in the previous section, the related 
work section usually addresses several different 
topics. The topics may be different research 
themes or different aspects of a broad research 
theme. The related work section should describe 
the specific details for each topic, respectively. 
Therefore, we aim to discover the hidden top-
ics of the input papers, and we use the Probabil-
istic latent semantic analysis (PLSA) (Hofmann, 
1999) to solve this problem.  
The PLSA approach models each word in a 
document as a sample from a mixture model. 
The mixture components are multinomial ran-
dom variables that can be viewed as representa-
tions of ?topics?. Different words in a document 
may be generated from different topics. Each 
document is represented a list of mixing propor-
tions for these mixture components and can be 
reduced to a probability distribution on a fixed 
set of topics. 
Considering that the sentences in one paper 
may relate to different topics, we treat each sen-
tence as a ?document? d. We treat the noun 
phases in the sentences as the ?words? w. In or-
der to extract the noun phrases, chunking imple-
mented by the OpenNLP toolkit 4 is applied to 
the sentences. Noun phrases that contain words 
such as ?paper? and ?data? are discarded.  
Then the sentences with their corresponding 
noun phrases are taken as input into the PLSA 
model. Here both the sentences in the target pa-
per and the sentences in the reference papers are 
treated the same in the model. Finally, we can 
get the sentence set with topic information and 
use it in the subsequent steps. Each sentence has 
a topic weight t in each topic. 
4.3 Sentence Important Assessment 
In our proposed system, sentence importance 
assessment aims to assign an importance score to 
each sentence in the target paper and reference 
papers. The score of each sentence will be used 
in the subsequent optimization framework. We 
propose to use the support vector regression 
model to achieve this goal. In the above topic 
model learning process, we do not distinguish the 
sentences in the target paper and reference pa-
pers. In contrast, we train two different support 
vector regression models separately for the sen-
tences in the target paper and the sentences in the 
reference papers. In the related work section, the 
sentences that describe the author?s own work 
usually address the differences from the related 
works, while the sentences that describe the re-
lated works often focus on the specific details. 
We think the two kinds of sentences should be 
treated differently. 
Scoring Method 
To construct training data based on the papers 
collected, we apply a similarity scoring method 
to assign the importance scores to the sentences 
in the papers. The main hypothesis is that the 
sentences in the gold related work sections 
should summarize the target paper and reference 
papers as well. Thus the sentences in the papers 
which are more similar to the sentences in the 
gold related work sections should be considered 
more important and suitable to be selected. Our 
scoring method should assign higher scores to 
them. 
                                                 
4 http://opennlp.apache.org/ 
 
 
Figure 2: System Architecture 
Target paper Reference papers
Preprocessing
Topic Model
Sentence Score 
Assessment(target)
Sentence Score 
Assessment(reference)
Optimization 
Framework
Postprocessing
Related Work 
Section
1627
We define the importance score of a sentence 
in the papers as below: 
?????(?) =  ???
??
????
(???(?, ??
?))      (1) 
where s is a sentence in the papers,  ?? is the set 
of the sentences in the corresponding gold relat-
ed work section. The standard cosine measure is 
employed as the similarity function. 
Considering the difference between the sen-
tences that describe the author?s work and the 
sentences that describe the related works, we 
split the set of sentences in the gold related work 
section into two parts: one discusses the author?s 
own work and the other introduces the related 
works. We observe that sentences related to the 
author?s own work often feature specific words 
or phrases (such as ?we?, ?our work?, ?in this 
paper? etc.) in the related work section.  So we 
check the sentences about whether they contain 
clue words or phrases (i.e., ?in this paper?, ?our 
work? and 18 other phrases). If the clue phrase 
check fails, the sentence belongs to the related 
work part. If not, it belongs the own work part. 
Thus for the sentences in the target paper,  ?? 
is the set of sentences in the own work part of the 
gold related work section, while for the sentences 
in the reference papers,  ?? is the set of sentences 
in the related work part of the gold related work 
section. Then we can use the scoring method to 
compute the target scores of the sentences in the 
training set. It is noteworthy that two SVR mod-
els can be trained on the two parts of the training 
data, respectively.  
Feature 
Each sentence is represented by a set of features. 
The common features used for the sentences of 
the target paper and reference papers are shown 
in Table 1. The additional features applied to the 
sentences of the target paper are introduced in 
Table 2. 
Here, s is a sentence that needs to extract fea-
tures. th is paper title, section headings and sub-
section headings set of the reference papers or 
target paper for the two SVR models, respective-
ly. Each feature with ?*? represent a feature set 
that contains similar features. 
All the features are scaled into [0, 1]. Thus we 
can learn SVR models based on the features and 
importance scores of the sentences, and then use 
the models to predict an importance score for 
each sentence in the test set. The SVR models 
are trained and applied for the target paper and 
reference papers, respectively. 
Table 1: Common features employed in the SVR 
models 
Feature Description 
???(?, ??)? The similarity between s and each 
title in th; Stop words are removed 
and stemming is employed. 
WS(s,th) Number of words shared by s and 
th. 
??(?)? The position of s in its section or 
subsection 
???(?)? The parse tree information of s, 
including the number of noun 
phrase and verb phrases, the depth 
of the parse tree, etc. 
??????(?)? Indicates whether s is the first sen-
tence of the section or subsection 
?????(?)? Indicates whether s is the last sen-
tence of the section or subsection 
SWP(s) The percentage of the stop words  
Length(s) The length of sentence s 
Length_rw(s) The length of s after removing stop 
words 
SI(s) The section index of s that indi-
cates which section s is from. 
??????????(?)? Indicates whether a clue phrase 
appears in s. the clue phrases in-
clude ?our work?, ?propose? and 
other 20 words. Each clue phrase 
corresponds to one feature. 
 
Table 2: Additional features for sentences in the 
target paper 
Feature Description 
HasCitation(s) Indicates whether s contains a 
citation 
?h??????????(?)? Indicates whether s contains 
words or phrases used for com-
parison such as ?in contrast?, 
?instead? and other 26 words. 
Each word or phrase corre-
sponds to one feature. 
 
4.4 A Global Optimization Framework 
In the above steps, we can get the predicted im-
portance score and topic information for each 
sentence in the target paper and reference papers. 
Here, we introduce a global optimization frame-
work to generate the related work section. 
According to the structure of the related work 
section mentioned above, the related work sec-
tion usually discusses several topics. In each top-
ic, the related works and their details are intro-
duced. Besides, the author often compares his 
own work with these previous works. 
Therefore, we propose to formulate the genera-
tion as an optimization problem. Basically, we 
will be searching for a set of sentences to opti-
mize the objective function. 
1628
Table 3: Notations used in this section 
Symbol Description 
???/??? the sentence in the reference/target paper 
???/??? the length of sentence ???/ ??? 
???/??? the importance score of ???/??? 
????/???? indicates whether ???/??? is selected into 
the part of topic j in the generated related 
work section 
nr/nt the number of sentences in the refer-
ence/target papers 
m the topic count 
??? the topic weight of  ???/???  in topic j from 
the PLSA model 
B the set of unique bigrams 
?? indicates whether bigram ??  is included 
in the result 
??? the count of the occurrences of bigram ?? 
in the both target paper and reference 
papers 
???? the maximum word count of the related 
work section 
??  the maximum word count of the part of 
topic j which depends on the percentage 
of sentences belong to topic j 
?? the total set of bigrams in the whole pa-
per set 
?? the set of bigrams that sentence  ???/??? 
contains 
???/??? the set of sentences that include bigram 
?? in the reference/target papers 
 ?1,  ?2, ?3 parameters for tuning 
 
To design the objective function, three aspects 
should be considered: 
1) First, the related work section we generate 
should introduce the previous works well. In 
our assumption, sentences with higher im-
portance scores are better to be selected. In 
addition, very short sentences should be pe-
nalized. So we introduce the first part of our 
objective function below: 
? (?????? ? ???????)
?
?=1
??
?=1                    (2) 
We add the sentence length as a multipli-
cation factor in order to penalize the very 
short sentences, or the objective function 
tends to select more and shorter sentences. 
At the same time, the objective function does 
not tend to select the very long sentences. 
The total length of the sentences selected is 
fixed. So if the objective function tends to 
select the longer sentences, the fewer sen-
tences can be selected. A tradeoff needs to be 
made between the number and the average 
length of the sentences selected. 
 The constraints introduced below ensure 
that the sentence can only be selected into 
one topic and the topic weight is used to 
measure the degree that the sentence is rele-
vant to the specific topic. 
2) Second, similar to the first part, we should 
consider the own work part of the related 
work section. Thus the second part of our ob-
jective function is shown as follows: 
? (?????? ? ???????)
?
?=1
??
?=1                    (3) 
3) At last, redundancy reduction should be con-
sidered in the objective function. The last 
part of the objective function is shown below: 
? ?????
|?|
?=1                               (4) 
The intuition is that the more unique bi-
grams the related work section contains, the 
less redundancy the related work section has. 
We add  ??? as the weight of the bigram in or-
der to include more important bigrams. 
By combing all the parts defined above, we 
have the following full objective function: 
max
??,??
?1? (
???
?????
??? ? ???????)
?
?=1 +
??
?=1
?2? (
???
(1??)????
??? ? ???????)
?
?=1
??
?=1 +
?3?
?????
|??|
|?|
?=1                                                       (5) 
Subject to: 
? ???????
??
?=1 + ? ???????
??
?=1 < ??, ??? ? = 1,? ,
?                        (6) 
? ? ???????
?
?=1
??
?=1 < ?????         (7) 
? ? ???????
?
?=1
??
?=1 < (1 ? ?)????         (8) 
 ? ????
?
?=1 ? 1, ??? ? = 1,? , ??           (9) 
? ????
?
?=1 ? 1, ??? ? = 1,? , ??          (10) 
? ???????  ? |??| ? ????
?
?=1 , ??? ? = 1,? , ?? (11) 
? ???????  ? |??| ? ????
?
?=1 , ??? ? = 1,? , ?? (12) 
? ? ????
?
?=1 + ? ? ????
?
?=1?????????????? ? ?? ,
? = 1,? |?|                                                    (13) 
????, ????, ?? ? {0,1}                  (14) 
All the three parts in the objective function are 
normalized to [0, 1] by using the maximum 
length ???? and the total number of bigrams |?
?|. 
 ?1, ?2 and ?3 are parameters for tuning the three 
parts and we set  ?1+?2+?3 = 1. 
We explain the constraints as follows: 
Constraint (6): It ensures that the total word 
count of the part of topic j does not exceed  ??. 
Constraints (7), (8): The two constraints try to 
balance the lengths of the previous works part 
and the own work part, respectively. ? is set to 
2/3. 
Constraints (9), (10): These two constraints 
guarantee that the sentence can only be included 
into one topic. 
1629
Constraints (11), (12): When these two con-
straints hold, all bigrams that ?? has are selected 
if ?? is selected.  
Constraint (13): This constraint makes sure 
that at least one sentence in ??? or ??? is select-
ed if bigram ?? is selected. 
Therefore, we transform our optimization 
problem into a linear programing problem. We 
solve this linear programming problem by using 
the IBM CPLEX optimizer5. It generally takes 
tens of seconds to solve the problem and it is 
very efficient. 
Finally, ARWG post-processes sentences to 
improve readability, including replacing agentive 
forms with a citation to the specific article (e.g., 
?our work? ? ?(Hoang and Kan, 2010)?) for the 
sentences extracted from reference papers. The 
sentences belonging to different topics are placed 
separately.  
5 Evaluation 
5.1 Evaluation Setup 
To set up our experiments, we divide our dataset 
which contains 1050 target papers and their ref-
erence papers into two parts: 700 target papers 
for training, 150 papers for test and the other 200 
papers for validation. The PLSA topic model is 
applied to the whole dataset. We train two SVR 
regression models based on the own work part 
and the previous work part of the training data 
and apply the models to the test data. The global 
optimization framework is used to generate the 
related work sections. We set the maximum word 
count of the generated related work section to be 
equal to that of the gold related work section. 
The parameter values of  ?1, ?2 and ?3 are set to 
0.3, 0.1 and 0.6, respectively. The parameter val-
ues are tuned on the validation data.  
We compare our system with five baseline sys-
tems: MEAD-WT, LexRank-WT, ARWG-WT, 
MEAD and LexRank. MEAD 6  (Radev et al., 
2004) is an open-source extractive multi-
document summarizer. LexRank 7  (Eran and 
Radev, 2004) is a multi-document summarization 
system which is based on a random walk on the 
similarity graph of sentences. We also implement 
the MEAD, LexRank baselines and our method 
                                                 
5 www-01.ibm.com/software/integration/optimization/cplex-
optimizer/ 
6 http://www.summarization.com/mead/ 
7 In our experiments, LexRank performs much better than 
the more complex variant - C-LexRank (Qazvinian and 
Radev, 2008), and thus we choose LexRank, rather than C-
LexRank, to represent graph-based summarization methods 
for comparison in this paper.  
with only the reference papers (i.e. the target pa-
per?s content is not considered). Those methods 
are signed by ?-WT?.  
To evaluate the effectiveness of the SVR mod-
els we employ, we implement a baseline system 
RWGOF that uses the random walk scores as the 
important scores of the sentences and take the 
scores as inputs for the same global optimization 
framework as our system to generate the related 
work section. The random walk scores are com-
puted for the sentences in the reference papers 
and the target paper, respectively. 
We use the ROUGE toolkit to evaluate the 
content quality of the generated related work sec-
tions. ROUGE (Lin, 2004) is a widely used au-
tomatic summarization evaluation method based 
on n-gram comparison. Here, we use the F-
Measure scores of ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2 and 
ROUGE-SU4. The model texts are set as the 
gold related work sections extracted from the 
target papers, and word stemming is utilized. 
ROUGE-N is an n-gram based measure between 
a candidate text and a reference text. The recall 
oriented score, the precision oriented score and 
the F-measure score for ROUGE-N are comput-
ed as follows: 
     ????? ? ???????  
= ? ? ??????????(?????)???????{????????? ????}  / 
   ? ? ?????(?????)???????{????????? ????}        (15) 
     ????? ? ??????????  
= ? ? ??????????(?????)???????{????????? ????}  / 
   ? ? ?????(?????)???????{????????? ????}       (16) 
     ????? ? ?????????? 
= 2 ? ????? ? ??????? ? ????? ? ?????????? / 
   ????? ? ??????? + ????? ? ??????????       (17) 
where n stands for the length of the n-gram 
????? , and ??????????(?????) is the maxi-
mum number of n-grams co-occurring in a can-
didate text and a reference text. 
In addition, we conducted a user study to sub-
jectively evaluate the related work sections to get 
more evidences. We selected the related work 
sections generated by different methods for 15 
random target papers in the test set. We asked 
three human judges to follow an evaluation 
guideline we design and evaluate these related 
work sections. The human judges are graduate 
students in the computer science field and they 
did not know the identities of the evaluated relat-
ed work sections. They were asked to give a rat-
ing on a scale of 1 (very poor) to 5 (very good) 
for the correctness, readability and usefulness of 
the related work sections, respectively: 
1630
1) Correctness: Is the related work section ac-
tually related to the target paper? 
2) Readability: Is the related work section 
easy for the readers to read and grasp the 
key content? 
3) Usefulness: Is the related work section 
useful for the author to prepare their final 
related work section? 
Paired T-Tests are applied to both the ROUGE 
scores and rating scores for comparing ARWG 
and baselines and comparing the systems with 
WT and without WT. 
5.2 Results and Discussion 
Table 4: ROUGE F-measure comparison results 
Method ROUGE-1 ROUGE-2 ROUGE-
SU4 
Mead-
WT 
0.39720 0.08785 0.14694 
LexRank-
WT 
0.43267 0.09228 0.16312 
ARWG-
WT 
0.45077?{1,2} 0.09987?{1,2} 0.16731?{1}#{2} 
Mead 0.41012?{1} 0.09642?{1} 0.15441?{1} 
LexRank 0.44235?{2} 0.10090?{2} 0.17067?{2} 
ARWG ?. ??????{???} ?. ??????{???} ?. ??????{???} 
(* represents pairwise t-test value p < 0.01; # rep-
resents p < 0.05; the numbers in the brackets rep-
resent the indices of the methods compared, e.g. 
1 for MEAD-WT, 2 for LexRank-WT, etc.) 
 
Table 5: Average rating scores of judges 
Method Correctness Readability Usefulness 
Mead 2.971 2.664 2.716 
LexRank 2.958 2.847 2.784 
ARWG 3.433?# 3.420?# 3.382?# 
(*# represents pairwise t-test value p < 0.01, 
compared with Mead and LexRank, respectively.)  
 
Table 6: ROUGE F-measure comparison of dif-
ferent sentence importance scores 
Method ROUGE-1 ROUGE-2 ROUGE-SU4 
RWGOF 0.46932 0.11791 0.18426 
ARWG 0.47940 0.12176 0.18618 
 
The evaluation results over ROUGE metrics are 
presented in Table 4. It shows that our proposed 
system can get higher ROUGE scores, i.e., better 
content quality. In our system, we split the sen-
tence set into different topic-biased parts, and the 
importance scores of sentences in the target pa-
per and reference papers are learned differently. 
So the obtained importance scores of the sen-
tences are more reliable.  
The global optimization framework considers 
the extraction of both the previous work part and 
the own work part. We can see the importance of 
the own work part by comparing the results of 
the methods with or without considering the own 
work part. MEAD, LexRank and our method all 
get a significant improvement after considering 
the own work part by extracting sentences from 
the target paper. The results also prove our as-
sumption about the related work section structure. 
Figure 3 presents the fluctuation of ROUGE 
scores when tuning the parameters ?1, ?2 and ?3. 
We can see our method generally performs better 
than the baselines. All the three parts in the ob-
jective function are useful to generate related 
work sections with good quality. 
The average scores rated by human judges for 
each method are showed in Table 5. We can see 
that the related work sections generated by our 
system are more related to the target papers. 
Moreover, because of the good structure of our 
generated related work sections, our generated 
related work sections are considered more reada-
ble and more useful for the author to prepare the 
final related work sections. 
T-test results show that the performance im-
provements of our method over baselines are 
statistically significant on both automatic and 
manual evaluations. Most of p-values for t-test 
are far smaller than 0.01. 
Overall, the results indicate that our method 
can generate much better related work sections 
0
0.6
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0 0.3 0.6 0.9 ?
1
R
O
U
G
E-
1
?2
ROUGE-1
0.4-
0.6
0.2-
0.4
0
0.6
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0 0.3 0.6 0.9
?
1
R
O
U
G
E-
2
?2
ROUGE-2
0.1-
0.15
0.05-
0.1
0
0.6
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0 0.3 0.6 0.9 ?
1R
O
U
G
E-
SU
4
?2
ROUGE-SU4
0.15
-0.2
0.1-
0.15
Figure 3: Parameter influences (horizontal, vertical axis are ?1, ?2 , respectively, ?3 = 1 ? ?1 ? ?2 ) 
1631
than the baselines on both automatic and human 
evaluations. 
Table 6 shows the comparison results between 
ARWG and RWGOF. We can see ARWG per-
forms better than RWGOF. It proves that the 
SVR models can better estimate the importance 
scores of the sentences. For the SVR models are 
trained from the large dataset, the sentence 
scores predicted by the SVR models can be more 
reliable to be used in the global optimization 
framework. 
6 Conclusion and Future Work 
This paper proposes a novel system called 
ARWG to generate related work sections for ac-
ademic papers. It first exploits a PLSA model to 
split the sentence set of the given papers into dif-
ferent topic-biased parts, and then applies regres-
sion models to learn the importance scores of the 
sentences. At last an optimization framework is 
proposed to generate the related work section. 
Evaluation results show that our system can gen-
erate much better related work sections than the 
baseline methods. 
In future work, we will make use of citation 
sentences to improve our system. Citation sen-
tences are the sentences that contains an explicit 
reference to another paper and they usually high-
light the most important aspects of the cited pa-
pers. So citation sentences are likely to contain 
important and rich information for generating 
related work sections. 
Acknowledgments 
The work was supported by National Natural 
Science Foundation of China (61170166, 
61331011), Beijing Nova Program (2008B03) 
and National Hi-Tech Research and Develop-
ment Program (863 Program) of China 
(2012AA011101). We also thank the anonymous 
reviewers for very helpful comments. The corre-
sponding author of this paper, according to the 
meaning given to this role by Peking University, 
is Xiaojun Wan. 
Reference 
Nitin Agarwal, Kiran Gvr, Ravi Shankar Reddy, and 
Carolyn Penstein Ros?. 2011. Towards multi-
document summarization of scientific articles: 
making interesting comparisons with SciSumm. 
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Automatic 
Summarization for Different Genres, Media, and 
Languages, pp. 8-15. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. 
Phyllis B. Baxendale. 1958. Machine-made index for 
technical literature: an experiment. IBM Journal of 
Research and Development 2, no. 4: 354-361. 
Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, Dan Gillick, and Dan Klein. 
2011. Jointly learning to extract and compress. 
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human 
Language Technologies-Volume 1, pp. 481-490. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Chih-Chung Chang, and Chih-Jen Lin. 2011. 
LIBSVM: a library for support vector ma-
chines. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems 
and Technology (TIST) 2, no. 3: 27. 
John M. Conroy, and Dianne P. O'leary. 2001. Text 
summarization via hidden markov models. 
In Proceedings of the 24th annual international 
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and develop-
ment in information retrieval, pp. 406-407. ACM. 
Harold P. Edmundson. 1969. New methods in auto-
matic extracting. Journal of the ACM (JACM) 16, 
no. 2: 264-285. 
G?nes Erkan, and Dragomir R. Radev. 2004. LexPag-
eRank: Prestige in Multi-Document Text Summa-
rization. In EMNLP, vol. 4, pp. 365-371. 
G?nes Erkan, and Dragomir R. Radev. 2004. 
LexRank: Graph-based lexical centrality as sali-
ence in text summarization. J. Artif. Intell. 
Res.(JAIR) 22, no. 1: 457-479. 
Dimitrios Galanis, Gerasimos Lampouras, and Ion 
Androutsopoulos. 2012. Extractive Multi-
Document Summarization with Integer Linear Pro-
gramming and Support Vector Regression. 
In COLING, pp. 911-926. 
Dimitrios Galanis, and Prodromos Malakasiotis. 2008. 
Aueb at tac 2008. InProceedings of the TAC 2008 
Workshop. 
Dan Gillick, and Benoit Favre. 2009. A scalable glob-
al model for summarization. InProceedings of the 
Workshop on Integer Linear Programming for 
Natural Langauge Processing, pp. 10-18. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics. 
Cong Duy Vu Hoang, and Min-Yen Kan. 2010. To-
wards automated related work summarization. 
In Proceedings of the 23rd International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics: Posters, pp. 
427-435. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. 
Lei Huang, Yanxiang He, Furu Wei, and Wenjie Li. 
2010. Modeling document summarization as multi-
objective optimization. In Intelligent Information 
Technology and Security Informatics (IITSI), 2010 
Third International Symposium on, pp. 382-386. 
IEEE. 
1632
Thomas Hofmann. 1999. Probabilistic latent semantic 
indexing. In Proceedings of the 22nd annual inter-
national ACM SIGIR conference on Research and 
development in information retrieval, pp. 50-57. 
ACM. 
Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic 
evaluation of summaries. InText Summarization 
Branches Out: Proceedings of the ACL-04 Work-
shop, pp. 74-81. 
Hans Peter Luhn. 1958. The automatic creation of 
literature abstracts. IBM Journal of research and 
development 2, no. 2: 159-165. 
Inderjeet Mani, and Eric Bloedorn. 1999. Summariz-
ing similarities and differences among related doc-
uments. Information Retrieval 1, no. 1-2: 35-67. 
Ryan McDonald. 2007. A study of global inference 
algorithms in multi-document summarization. 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
Qiaozhu Mei, and ChengXiang Zhai. 2008. Generat-
ing Impact-Based Summaries for Scientific Litera-
ture. In ACL, vol. 8, pp. 816-824. 
Rada Mihalcea, and Paul Tarau. 2005. A language 
independent algorithm for single and multiple doc-
ument summarization. 
Rada Mihalcea, and Hakan Ceylan. 2007. Explora-
tions in Automatic Book Summarization. 
In EMNLP-CoNLL, pp. 380-389. 
Saif Mohammad, Bonnie Dorr, Melissa Egan, Ahmed 
Hassan, Pradeep Muthukrishan, Vahed Qazvinian, 
Dragomir Radev, and David Zajic. 2009. Using ci-
tations to generate surveys of scientific paradigms. 
In Proceedings of Human Language Technologies: 
The 2009 Annual Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pp. 584-592. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. 
Preslav Nakov, Ariel Schwartz, and M. Hearst. 2004. 
Citation sentences for semantic analysis of biosci-
ence text. In Proceedings of the SIGIR'04 work-
shop on Search and Discovery in Bioinformatics. 
Ramesh M. Nallapati, Amr Ahmed, Eric P. Xing, and 
William W. Cohen. 2008. Joint latent topic models 
for text and citations. In Proceedings of the 14th 
ACM SIGKDD international conference on 
Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 542-
550. ACM. 
Vahed Qazvinian, and Dragomir R. Radev. 2008. Sci-
entific paper summarization using citation sum-
mary networks. In Proceedings of the 22nd Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics-
Volume 1, pp. 689-696. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. 
You Ouyang, Sujian Li, and Wenjie Li. 2007. Devel-
oping learning strategies for topic-based summari-
zation. In Proceedings of the sixteenth ACM con-
ference on Conference on information and 
knowledge management, pp. 79-86. ACM. 
Dragomir Radev, Timothy Allison, Sasha Blair-
Goldensohn, John Blitzer, Arda Celebi, Stanko 
Dimitrov, Elliott Drabek et al. 2004. MEAD-a plat-
form for multidocument multilingual text summa-
rization. Proceedings of the 4th International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation 
(LREC 2004). 
Ariel S. Schwartz, and Marti Hearst. 2006. Summariz-
ing key concepts using citation sentences. 
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Linking Natu-
ral Language Processing and Biology: Towards 
Deeper Biological Literature Analysis, pp. 134-135. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Dou Shen, Jian-Tao Sun, Hua Li, Qiang Yang, and 
Zheng Chen. 2007. Document Summarization Us-
ing Conditional Random Fields. In IJCAI, vol. 7, 
pp. 2862-2867. 
Andreas  Stolcke, Klaus Ries, Noah Coccaro, Eliza-
beth Shriberg, Rebecca Bates, Daniel Jurafsky, 
Paul Taylor, Rachel Martin, Carol Van Ess-
Dykema, and Marie Meteer. 2000. Dialogue act 
modeling for automatic tagging and recognition of 
conversational speech. Computational linguis-
tics 26, no. 3: 339-373. 
Kristian Woodsend, and Mirella Lapata. 2012. Multi-
ple aspect summarization using integer linear pro-
gramming. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Computational Natural 
Language Learning, pp. 233-243. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
Shasha Xie, Benoit Favre, Dilek Hakkani-T?r, and 
Yang Liu. 2009. Leveraging sentence weights in a 
concept-based optimization framework for extrac-
tive meeting summarization. In INTERSPEECH, 
pp. 1503-1506. 
Hui Yang, and Jamie Callan. 2009. A metric-based 
framework for automatic taxonomy induction. 
In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the 47th 
Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing of the AFNLP: Volume 1-Volume 1, pp. 
271-279. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. 
Ozge Yeloglu, Evangelos Milios, and Nur Zincir-
Heywood. 2011. Multi-document summarization of 
scientific corpora. In Proceedings of the 2011 ACM 
Symposium on Applied Computing, pp. 252-258. 
ACM. 
1633
Proceedings of the AHA! Workshop on Information Discovery in Text, pages 25?30,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23 2014.
Word Clustering Based on Un-LP Algorithm
Jiguang Liang1, Xiaofei Zhou1, Yue Hu1, Li Guo1?, Shuo Bai1,2
1National Engineering Laboratory for Information Security Technologies,
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100190, China
2Shanghai Stock Exchange, Shanghai 200120, China
{liangjiguang, zhouxiaofei, huyue, guoli, baishuo}@iie.ac.cn
Abstract
Word clustering which generalizes specific features cluster words in the same syntactic or seman-
tic categories into a group. It is an effective approach to reduce feature dimensionality and feature
sparseness which are clearly useful for many NLP applications. This paper proposes an unsu-
pervised label propagation algorithm (Un-LP) for word clustering which uses multi-exemplars
to represent a cluster. Experiments on a synthetic 2D dataset show the strong ability of self-
correcting of the proposed algorithm. Besides, the experimental results on 20NG demonstrate
that our algorithm outperforms the conventional cluster algorithms.
1 Introduction
Word clustering is the task of the division of words into a certain number of clusters (groups or cat-
egories). Each cluster is required to consist of words that are similar to one another in syntactic or
semantic construct and dissimilar to words in distinctive groups. Word clustering generalizes specific
features by considering the common characteristics and ignoring the specific characteristics among the
individual features. It is an effective approach to reduce feature dimensionality and feature sparseness
(Han et al., 2005).
Recently, word clustering offers great potential for various useful NLP applications. Several studies
have addressed dependency parsing (Koo et al., 2008; Sagae and Gordon, 2009). Momtazi and Klakow
(2009) propose a word clustering approach to improve the performance of sentence retrieval in Question
Answering (QA) systems. Wu et al. (2010) present an approach to integrate word clustering information
into the process of unsupervised feature selection. Sun et al. (2011) use large-scale word clustering for
a semi-supervised relation extraction system. It also contributes to word sense disambiguation (Jin et
al., 2007), named entity recognition (Turian et al., 2010), part-of-speech tagging (Candito and Seddah,
2010) and machine translation (Uszkoreit and Brants, 2008; Jeff et al., 2011).
This paper presents an unsupervised algorithm for word clustering based on a probabilistic transition
matrix. Given a text document dataset, a list of words is generated by removing stop words and very
unfrequent words. Each word is required to be represented by the documents in the dataset, which results
in a co-occurrence matrix. By calculating the similarity of words, a word similarity graph with transition
(propagation) probabilities as weight edges is created. Then, a new kind word clustering algorithm, based
on label propagation, is applied.
The remaining parts of this paper are organized as follows: Section 2 formulates word clustering
problem in the context of unsupervised learning. Then we describe the word clustering algorithm in
Section 3 and present our experiments in Section 4. Finally we conclude our work in Section 5.
2 Problem setup
Assume that we have a corpus with N documents denoted by D = {d
1
, d
2
, ? ? ? , d
N
}; each document in
the corpus consists of a list of words denoted by d
i
= {w
1
, w
2
, ? ? ? , w
N
d
} where each w
i
is an item from
a vocabulary index with V distinct terms denoted by W = {v
1
, v
2
, ? ? ? , v
V
} and N
d
is the document
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Page numbers and proceedings footer
are added by the organizers. License details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
25
Algorithm 1 Semi-supervised LP Algorithm Algorithm 2 Unsupervised LP Word Clustering
Input: Input:
W
l
= {v
i
}
l
i=1
labeled data W = {v
i
}
u
i=1
(u = V ) unlabeled words
W
u
= {v
i
}
V
i=u
unlabeled data T
uu
= {T
ij
} 1 ? i, j ? V transition matrix
T = {T
ij
} 1 ? i, j ? V transition matrix Output:
Output: Y
U
? = {(?
1
,?
2
, ? ? ? ,?
L
} word-clusters
1: Begin 1: Begin
2: Row-normalize T by T
ij
= T
ij
/
?
V
k=1
T
ik
2: {V 0
L
, Y
L
, T
0
ul
} = initialization(W )
3: While not converged do 3: While not converged do
4: Propagate the labels by Y t+1 = TY t 4: Y t+1
U
= Semi ? LP (V t
L
,Y
t
L
,T
0
ul
,T
uu
)
5: Row-normalize Y t+1 5: ?t+1 = partition cluster(Y t+1
U
)
6: Clamp the labeled data 6: {V t+1
L
, T
t+1
ul
} = update(?t+1)
7: End while 7: End while
8: End 8: End
9: Return Y
U
9: Return ?t+1
length. We define the vector of word v
i
in the vocabulary to be v
i
=< v
id
1
, v
id
2
, ? ? ? , v
id
N
>. This
allows us to define a V ? N word-document matrix WD for the vocabularies. WD
ij
is equal to 1 if
v
i
? d
j
and equal to 0 otherwise. Then we take these words as the vertices of a connected graph. In
this paper, we define the edge weight ?
ij
as the co-occurrence frequency between v
i
and v
j
. Obviously,
we expect that larger edge weights allow labels to travel through more easily. So we define a V ? V
probabilistic transition matrix T where T
ij
= P (v
j
? v
i
) = ?
ij
/
?
V
k=1
?
kj
.
The L value which is used to represent the number of word clusters is specified. We define a V ? L
label matrix Y . Clearly, y
i
? Y represents the label probability distributions of word v
i
and Y ?
i
=
argmax Y
ik
(0 < k ? L) is its cluster label. For example, suppose L = 3 and a word v has a label
distribution y =< 0.1, 0.8, 0.1 >, it implies that v belongs to the second class.
3 Unsupervised LP Word Clustering
Label propagation (Zhu and Ghahramani, 2002) is a semi-supervised algorithm (Semi-LP) which needs
labeled data. Let {(v
1
, y
1
), ? ? ? , (v
l
, y
l
)} be labeled data, {(v
l+1
, y
l+1
), ? ? ? , (v
l+u
, y
l+u
)} be unlabeled
ones where l + u = V , Y
L
= [y
1
, , ? ? ? , y
l
]
T and Y
U
= [y
l+1
, ? ? ? , y
l+u
]
T
. Y
U
is un-known and l << u.
The label propagation algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1.
In clustering problems, the goal is to select a set of exemplars from a dataset that are representative
of the dataset and each cluster is represented by one and only one exemplar (Krause and Gomes, 2010).
However, these exemplars are just all Semi-LP needs for clustering. LP lacks labeled data when is used
for unsupervised learning. In this paper, we are interested in partitioning words into several clusters
without any label priori using unsupervised LP (Un-LP) algorithm. Firstly we randomly select K (K ?
L, usually K is a multiple of L) words to construct an exemplar set E = {E
i
}
K
i=1
which is different
from the conventional exemplar-based cluster algorithms, assign class labels to them and construct the
corresponding probabilistic transition matrix T 0
ul
(initialization). These exemplars are considered as
labeled words and the rest U = W ? E are unlabeled words. T
ul
is the probability of transition from
unlabeled words to labeled ones. At this step, it needs the assurance that each class could be represented
by at least one exemplar and each exemplar could only be assigned one class label.
Now the connected weighted graph consists of two parts: G = (E ? U, T
ul
? T
uu
) where T
uu
is
the transition probability between unlabeled words. Next, our algorithm iterates between the following
three steps: given a set of LP parameters, we first propagate labels to unlabeled words with the initial
label distributions and get the corresponding labels (Semi?LP ). Then, these derived label distributions
are used to guide the partitioning of unlabeled data (partition cluster) to L clusters. We use residual
sum of squares (RSS) to choose the most centrally located words and replace the old exemplars that
represent the cluster. Specifically, for a word cluster c
i
= {v
1
, ? ? ? v
n
}, RSS
i
=
?
n
j=1
?
ij
. Then we sort
RSS
i
(0 < i < n) and update exemplars by the words with bigger RSS for this cluster (update). All
of the above steps, summarized in Algorithm 2, are iterated until convergence.
26
4 Experiment
4.1 Experimental Setup
To demonstrate properties of our proposed algorithm we investigate both a synthetic dataset and a real-
world dataset. Figure 1(a) shows the synthetic dataset. For a real world example we test Un-LP on a
subset of 20 Newsgroups (20NG) dataset which is preprocessed by removing common stop-words and
stemming. We use the classes atheism, hardware, hockey and space for test and randomly select
300 samples from each class as the test dataset in this section. However, 20NG is not suited for word
clustering evaluation. So, firstly, we reconstruct it by pair-wise testing which is a specification-based
testing criterion. Then we can obtain six (C2
4
= 6) pairwise subsets represented by {D
1
, ? ? ? ,D
6
}. In
order to facilitate the evaluation, we use those words that only occur in one class for clustering.
4.2 Exemplar Self-correction
This multi-step iterative method is simple to implement and surprisingly effective even with wrong initial
labeled data. To illustrate the point, we describe a simulated dataset with two-moon pattern. Obviously,
the points in one moon should be more similar to each other than the points across the moons as shown
in Figure 1(b). During the initialization phase, four points in the lower moon are selected and assigned
with different labels. The exemplars of the upper moon are mis-labeled as shown in Figure 1(c). In the
next five iteration steps, exemplars have been gradually moved to the center of the upper moon. Finally,
when t ? 5 Un-LP converges to a fixed assignment, which achieves an ideal cluster result.
?2 ?1 0 1 2 3
?2
?1
0
1
2
(1)  Synthetic Dataset
?2 ?1 0 1 2 3
?2
?1
0
1
2
(2) Ideal Cluster
?2 ?1 0 1 2 3
?2
?1
0
1
2
(3) t=1
?2 ?1 0 1 2 3
?2
?1
0
1
2
(4) t=2
?2 ?1 0 1 2 3
?2
?1
0
1
2
(5) t=3
?2 ?1 0 1 2 3
?2
?1
0
1
2
(6) t=4
?2 ?1 0 1 2 3
?2
?1
0
1
2
(7) t=5
?2 ?1 0 1 2 3
?2
?1
0
1
2
(8) t=6
Figure 1: Clustering result of unsupervised LP clustering algorithm on two-moon pattern dataset. (a)
Two-moon pattern dataset without any labeled points, (b) ideal clustering results. The convergence pro-
cess of unsupervised LP with t from 1 to 6 is shown from (c) to (h). Solid points are labeled data that are
selected to represent the clusters.
4.3 Word Clustering Performance
This section provides empirical evidence that the proposed algorithm performs well in the problem of
word clustering. Figure 2 shows the mean precisions and recalls over 10 runs of the baseline algorithms
as well as Un-LP.
From Figure 2, it can be clearly observed that Un-LP (K/L = 5) yields the best performance, followed
by Semi-LP with 20 labeled words. In general, the recalls with k-means and k-medoids are higher,
while the precisions are much lower. Figure 2 also shows the results of other two semi-supervised word
27
Cluster1 Cluster2 Cluster3 Cluster4
Atheism Hardware Hockey Space
geode religiously bene-
factor meng stacker
mcl mormon madden
mythology timmons cb-
newsj agnostics fanatism
engr chade tan falsifiable
existed ucsb sentence
driver soundblaster card-
s isbn manufacturer portal
prize mastering connectors
floppies dock adapter mul-
timedia installing bowman
configure physchem jumpers
motherboardsfdisk seagate
goalies bug hfd johansson
breton scorers carpenter
stevens smythe janney
fleury vancouver stl
cheveldae selanne win-
nipeg canadiens bure nyr
capitals
hub atom aug larson sts
orbital skydive parity
accelerations desire an-
niversary projects digital
protection atari temper-
atures voyagers zoology
updated teflon
Table 1: Top-20 words extracted by unsupervised LP word cluster algorithm.
clustering algorithms, PCK-means (Basu et al., 2004) and MPCK-means (Bilenko et al., 2004) with 200
must-link and cannot-link constraints. Also when comparing these unsupervised and semi-supervised
approaches previously mentioned, we can find that our unsupervised algorithm consistently achieves
significantly better results. Therefore, unsupervised LP seems to be a more reasonable algorithm design
in terms of word clustering.
0.4 0.7 1
0.8
0.9
1
Precision
R
ec
al
l
(b) D2
0.4 0.7 1
0.8
0.9
1
Precision
R
ec
al
l
(c) D3
0.4 0.7 1
0.8
0.9
1
Precision
R
ec
al
l
(d) D4
0.4 0.7 1
0.8
0.9
1
Precision
R
ec
al
l
(e) D5
0.4 0.7 1
0.8
0.9
1
Precision
R
ec
al
l
(f) D6
data3 K?medoids     PCK         MPCK    
0.4 0.7 1
0.6
0.8
1
Precision
R
ec
al
l
(a) D1
Un?LP          Semi?LP   K?means
Figure 2: Precision vs. recall of clustering results on 20NG where D
1
= {atheism vs. hardware}, D
2
=
{atheism vs. hockey}, D
3
= {atheism vs. space}, D
4
= {hardware vs. hcokey}, D
5
= {hardware
vs. space} and D
6
= {hockey vs. space}.
4.4 Effect of exemplar number e
We now investigate how the number of exemplar (e) for each cluster affects the clustering. In particular,
we are interested in performance under conditions when the number of exemplar grows - which is the
motivation for using more than one exemplars to represent a cluster. From Figure 3, we can observe that
when more words are labeled, Semi-LP shows further improvement in F-value. However, the changes
for PCK-means and MPCK-means are not obvious. Interestingly, even with the number of labeled data
growing, Semi-LP still performs worse than Un-LP. As is shown in Figure 3, Un-LP benefits much from
multi-exemplars (e ? 2). For D4, Un-LP is capable of achieving 99.58% in F-value when e = 7,
obtaining 21.32% improvement over the baseline (e = 1). This indicates that our algorithm leverages
the additional exemplars effectively.
4.5 Case Study
We conduct an experiment to illustrate the characteristics of the proposed algorithm in this subsection.
We cluster the words in all the four domain datasets and select the most representative words for each
cluster by sorting y
i
. In the experiment, we set L = 4 in order to match the class number of the
dataset. Table 1 shows top-20 representative words for each cluster, where the bold words are the ones
28
1 3 5 7 9
0.5
0.7
0.9
(a) Results on D1
1 3 5 7 9
0.5
0.7
0.9
(b) Results on D2
1 3 5 7 9
0.5
0.7
0.9
(c) Results on D3
1 3 5 7 9
0.5
0.7
0.9
(d) Results on D4
1 3 5 7 9
0.5
0.7
0.9
(e) Results on D5
1 3 5 7 9
0.5
0.7
0.9
(f) Results on D6
 
 
Semi?LP Un?LP PCK?Means MPCK?Means
Figure 3: Results on 20NG where X-axis is e, Y-axis is F-value.
domain meng configure johansson aug geode isbn bug parity
Atheism 100.00% 0 0 0 0 91.67% 89.47% 0
Hardware 0 90.91% 0 0 0 0 10.53% 66.67%
Hockey 0 9.09% 100.00% 0 0 8.33% 0 0
Space 0 0 0 100.00% 100.00% 0 0 33.33%
Table 2: Distributions of the incorrect words partitioned by the literal meaning.
with correct cluster label inferencing from the literal meaning. We observe that the accuracy of word
clustering on 20NG is very low (28.75%), which is at variance with the preceding conclusion. One
reason is that words in 20NG are stemmed, so, from Table 1 it can be clearly seen that there are some
non-English words (e.g., ?mcl?, ?hfd?, ?stl?, etc.) that don?t have actual meanings.
In order to gain further insights into the reasons, the distributions of these incorrect words have been
made in statistics. Partial results are shown in Table 2. From the distributions, we can find that many
words marked in italics in Table 1 have been correctly clustered, although they have nothing to do with
corresponding class in the literal meaning. Taking these words into account, the accuracy can reach
81.25% which demonstrates once again the effectiveness of Un-LP word clustering algorithm.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we propose an unsupervised label propagation algorithm to tackle the problem of word
clustering. The proposed algorithm uses a similarity graph based on co-occurrence information to en-
courage similar words to have similar cluster labels. One of the advantages of this algorithm is that it
uses multi-exemplars to represent a cluster, which can significantly improve the clustering results.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Strategic Priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences
(XDA06030602), National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 61202226), National 863 Program
(No. 2011AA010703), IIE Program (No.Y3Z0062201).
29
References
Basu S, Bilenko M, Mooney R J. 2004. A probabilistic framework for semi-supervised clustering. In Proceedings
of SIGKDD, pages 59-68.
Bilenko M, Basu S, Mooney R J. 2004. Integrating constraints and metric learning in semi-supervised clustering.
In Proceedings of ICML.
Blei D M, Ng A Y, Jordan M I. 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. The Journal of machine Learning research,
pages 993-1022.
Candito M, Seddah D. 2010. Parsing word clusters. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 First Workshop on
Statistical Parsing of Morphologically-Rich Languages, pages 76-84.
Han H, Manavoglu E, Zha H, et al. 2005. Rule-based word clustering for document metadata extraction. In
Proceedings of the 2005 ACM symposium on Applied computing, pages 1049-1053.
Jeff M A, Matsoukas S, Schwartz R. 2011. Improving Low-Resource Statistical Machine Translation with a Novel
Semantic Word Clustering Algorithm. In Proceedings of the MT Summit XIII.
Jin P, Sun X, Wu Y, et al. 2007. Word clustering for collocation-based word sense disambiguation. Computational
Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, pages 267-274.
Koo T, Carreras X, Collins M. 2008. Simple semi-supervised dependency parsing. In Proceedings of ACL-HLT,
pages 595-603.
Krause A, Gomes R G. 2010. Budgeted nonparametric learning from data streams. In Proceedings of ICML,
pages 391-398.
Momtazi S, Klakow D. 2009. A word clustering approach for language model-based sentence retrieval in question
answering systems. In Proceedings of CIKM, pages 1911-1914.
Sagae K, Gordon A S. 2009. Clustering words by syntactic similarity improves dependency parsing of predicate-
argument structures. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Parsing Technologies, pages 192-
201.
Sun A, Grishman R, Sekine S. 2011. Semi-supervised relation extraction with large-scale word clustering. In
Proceedings of ACL, pages 521-529.
Turian J, Ratinov L, Bengio Y. 2010. Word representations: a simple and general method for semi-supervised
learning. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 384-394.
Uszkoreit J, Brants T. 2008. Distributed Word Clustering for Large Scale Class-Based Language Modeling in
Machine Translation. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 755-762.
Wu Q, Ye Y, Ng M, et al. 2010. Exploiting word cluster information for unsupervised feature selection Trends in
Artificial Intelligence, pages 292-303.
Zhu X, Ghahramani Z. 2002. Learning from labeled and unlabeled data with label propagation. Technical Report
CMU-CALD-02-107, Carnegie Mellon University.
Zhu X, Ghahramani Z, Lafferty J. 2003. Semi-supervised learning using gaussian fields and harmonic functions.
In Proceedings of ICML, pages 912-919.
30
