CL for CALL in the Primary School 
Katrina Keogh, Thomas Koller, Monica Ward,  
Elaine U? Dhonnchadha , Josef  van Genabith 
School of Computing 
Dublin City University 
Dublin 9, Ireland 
{kkeogh, tkoller, mward}@computing.dcu.ie,  
Elaine.UiDhonnchadha@dcu.ie, josef@computing.dcu.ie 
 
Abstract 
This paper looks at how Computational 
Linguistics (CL) and Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) resources can be deployed in Computer-
Assisted Language Learning (CALL) materials for 
primary school learners.  We draw a broad 
distinction between CL and NLP technology and 
briefly review the use of CL/NLP in e-Learning in 
general, how it has been deployed in CALL to date 
and specifically in the primary school context.  We 
outline how CL/NLP resources can be used in a 
project to teach Irish and German to primary 
school children in Ireland. This paper focuses on 
the use of Finite State morphological analysis 
(FST) resources for Irish and Part of Speech (POS) 
taggers for German. 
1 Introduction 
CL/NLP has a lot to offer many disciplines. One 
particular area of interest is e-Learning for 
languages or more specifically Computer-Assisted 
Language Learning (CALL). CALL aims to 
develop useful learning tools with the focus on the 
learner. The following sections outline the use of 
CL/NLP in CALL (also known as Intelligent 
Computer-Assisted Language Learning - ICALL) 
for a particular target audience ? primary school 
students in Ireland.  
First we review CL/NLP in e-Learning and the 
case for using CL/NLP in CALL. Next we describe 
ICALL and the case for its use in primary school. 
Section 4 goes into detail on the CL/NLP 
technologies we use for primary school students 
learning Irish and German. 
2 CL/NLP in e-Learning 
2.1 CL/NLP ? A Broad Distinction 
To a first approximation CL/NLP technologies 
split into two broad categories ? A and B. Category 
A (sometimes referred to as CL proper) typically 
includes small coverage, proof of concept, often 
hand-crafted, knowledge- or rule-based systems. 
They are usually used to test a particular linguistic 
theory, tend to be of limited coverage and are often 
quite brittle. Example technologies include DCGs 
and many (but not all) formal grammar-based 
parsing and generation systems. 
Category B (sometimes referred to as NLP) 
typically includes broad coverage systems where 
the lingware is often (but not always ? see e.g. 
FST) automatically induced and processed using 
statistical approaches. They are usually large scale 
engineering applications and very robust. Example 
technologies include speech processing, HMM 
taggers, probabilistic parsing and FST. 
This distinction is, of course, nothing more than 
a useful over-generalisation with an entire and 
interesting grey area existing between the two 
extremes. Khader et al (2004), for example, show 
how a wide-coverage, robust rule-based system is 
used in CALL. In this paper we look at the 
suitability of type A and B CL/NLP technologies 
for primary school education, in the context of 
Ireland in particular. 
2.2 e-Learning  
CL is generally not to the fore in e-Learning, 
although it does have a potentially powerful role to 
play.  It can help to enhance the accessibility of 
online teaching material (particularly when the 
material is not in the learner?s L1), in analysing 
learner input and the automatic generation of 
simple feedback. It can also be used with 
Computer-Mediated Communication (CMC) 
environments.  However, to date, the use of 
CL/NLP in e-Learning in general has not been a 
main stream focus of either the Computational 
Linguistics or the e-Learning community nor has 
there been much CL/NLP technology transfer into 
commercially available and deployed systems.  
2.3 CALL 
Within the domain of e-Learning, the area with 
the greatest fit and potential deployment of 
CL/NLP resources is that of Computer-Assisted 
Language Learning (CALL). This paper focuses on 
asynchronous e-Learning for natural languages in 
the primary school context. CL/NLP resources 
lend themselves naturally to the domain of 
language learning, given that the ?raw material? in 
both fields is language. However, attempts to 
successfully marry the two fields have been 
limited.  Schulze (2003) outlines several reasons 
for this.  Computational Linguists are specifically 
interested in the use of the computer in analysing, 
generating and processing language.  They are 
interested in testing out linguistic theories and 
using the computer to confirm their hypotheses. 
Researchers in NLP tend to be interested in wide-
coverage, robust engineering approaches. For the 
most part, use of their tools for language 
learning/teaching applications is not high on their 
research agenda.  A review of COLING papers in 
the last twenty years reveals that there are very few 
papers that specifically deal with the use of 
CL/NLP in language learning.  Furthermore, as 
Schulze (2003) points out, within the unspoken 
hierarchy that exists in Computer Science 
departments throughout the world, working with 
CALL is considered less prestigious than say, 
working on cryptography. Thus, socio-cultural 
factors may have played a part in limiting the 
number of CL/NLP researchers interested in 
CALL. 
From a CALL researcher?s or practitioner?s 
point of view, attempts to integrate CL/NLP 
resources into CALL have not been very 
successful. Many remain unconvinced about the 
benefits of using CL/NLP techniques in CALL and 
whether they can be integrated successfully or not.  
They sometimes expect an ?all-singing, all-
dancing? machine and are disappointed 
/disillusioned with the results of ICALL research, 
especially when they incorporate category A CL 
technologies. CALL practitioners generally come 
from a language teaching background and are often 
more interested in pedagogy than technology.  
Some feel that the technical knowledge required to 
integrate CL/NLP tools is beyond their scope. 
They may be wary of claims from CL/NLP 
developers that a certain CL/NLP resource will be 
?ideal? for CALL, especially if they have heard 
such claims before.  Even if they are favourably 
disposed to the use of CL/NLP resources in CALL, 
it is often very difficult to reuse existing resources, 
as they demand that a certain (often non-standard) 
format be used for data (see Sections 4.2 and 5.2 
below).  Also, the interfaces to the resources may 
have assumed a techno-savvy or CL/NLP-savvy 
user, which mitigates against their (re)use.   
In summary, apart from notable exceptions (e.g. 
Glosser (Dokter & Nerbonne, 1998) and FreeText 
(2001), for various technical and non-technical 
reasons, CL/NLP resources have not been 
extensively deployed in main-stream CALL 
applications.  
 
One of the problems in using CL/NLP resources 
in CALL materials is that the coverage achieved by 
the CL/NLP tools has to be broad to be able to 
handle a general range of learner language. 
Furthermore, the resources must be robust as 
learner language will contain input that is not well-
formed and this can cause problems for some CL 
resources. Observations such as these point to type 
B NLP technologies as being the better type of 
technologies to employ in the context of language 
learning. However, below we argue that this is not 
necessarily the case. 
2.4 ICALL in the Primary School 
It may be natural to assume that CL/NLP 
resources customarily lend themselves to 
intermediate or advanced learners of a language, as 
they are more likely to have the linguistic 
competence to understand output generated by 
CL/NLP resources. Considering the other end of 
the language-learning spectrum, that of primary 
school learners, it may be perceived that CL/NLP 
resources could not be so easily deployed with 
linguistically less advanced learners - these 
students will not be interested in viewing 
concordances, morphological annotations or parse 
trees.  
However, it can be argued that there are certain 
natural circumstances supporting the use of even 
type A CL technology in CALL in this 
environment.  Firstly, in comparison to adults, 
young learners have limited first language (L1) 
performance (Brown, 1994). The target primary 
school students are aged between 7 and 13 years 
(second to sixth class in the Irish primary school 
system). They tend to produce simpler sentences 
and have a smaller range of vocabulary than an 
adult. These L1 features have a number of 
implications ? the students? L1 knowledge further 
constrains their emerging L2 production. Complex 
linguistic constructs are less likely to transfer into 
the target language. Effectively, the target 
language amounts to a controlled language. 
Controlled languages are easier suited to type A 
CL systems and produce better results (Arnold et 
al., 1994).  
Secondly, the students? target language(s) (Irish 
and German in this context) represent a limited 
domain or sublanguage. The Irish curriculum is 
followed in primary schools from the age of 4/5. 
Students can take German (where it?s available) 
during their senior years of primary school (aged 
10-13) and the language domain is limited to a 2 
year beginners? curriculum. It is possible to 
anticipate students? L2 knowledge, especially since 
they have been following set curricula. Machine 
Translation (MT) can be used to highlight an 
example of the success of sublanguages with 
CL/NLP. The M?t?o translation system is used 
successfully in Canada to translate weather 
forecasts bi-directionally between French and 
English (Hutchins and Somers, 1992). The 
?weather? sublanguage has a small vocabulary and 
uses a telegraphic style of writing and omits tense.  
Primary school students? L1 and L2 performance 
characteristics ? controlled language and limited 
domain ? imply that some scalability problems that 
are sometimes encountered in certain type A CL 
resources can be avoided. 
While primary school learners will not be 
interested in viewing concordances or parse trees ? 
technology can be used but hidden from the 
learner, to generate exercises and learner feedback 
and to present students with an animation based on 
information computed by the underlying CL/NLP 
engines embedded (but not visible) in the CALL 
application. In this way the learner will benefit 
from the technologies but not be confused by 
linguistic elements that are beyond their capacity 
as young learners.  
3 CL/NLP Resources for CALL 
In this paper we look at how CL/NLP resources 
can be integrated into CALL materials in general, 
as well as specifically for Primary Schools in 
Ireland, with a focus on CALL materials for Irish 
and German. This section will briefly outline how 
a range of CL/NLP resources can be used in this 
environment, while later sections will focus on the 
use of specific CL/NLP resources in more detail.  
We return to our dichotomy of A- and B-type 
CL/NLP systems outlined in Section 2.1. ICALL 
systems have used a range of technologies, 
including both type A and type B systems. 
Examples of type A-like systems include small-
scale Lexical Functional Grammar (LFG) ?based 
robust parsers to provide error recognition and 
feedback (Reuer, 2003) and parsing for viewing 
sentence structures and error diagnosis 
(Vandeventer Faltin, 2003). Examples of type B-
like systems include a broad-coverage English 
LFG-based grammar for grammar checking 
(Khader et al 2004), the Systran MT system to 
improve translation skills (La Torre, 1999) and 
using speech recognition for pronunciation training 
(Menzel et al 2001).  
It is relatively straightforward to integrate type B 
(NLP) technology into CALL applications for 
primary school learners. In Section 4 of this paper 
we show how broad-coverage FST technology can 
be used to morphologically analyse word forms or 
to generate all inflected forms given a root form. 
Output from a FST morphology engine is fed into 
an interface engine which sends the information in 
the appropriate format to an XML/Flash 
environment for animation (Koller, 2004). The 
learner input can be collated over time into a 
learner corpus and later analysed by the teacher to 
detect common errors amongst students.  Part-Of-
Speech (POS) taggers can be used to identify the 
parts of speech in electronic versions of learners? 
textbooks or a corpus collated around their 
curriculum (Section 5).  The output can then be 
used for a variety of uses, including the automatic 
generation of online exercises (e.g. hangman) and 
together with the FST morphological engine - 
automatic dictionary extraction. 
Mainly due to scalability problems, type A CL 
technologies can be difficult to deploy in general 
ICALL systems. However, they can be used in the 
primary school context quite effectively. As 
outlined in Section 2.4, the limited linguistic 
performance knowledge of the learners? L1 and 
especially their L2 amounts to a ?controlled? 
language scenario and type A CL technologies can 
be deployed successfully. Curricula used in 
primary schools (in Ireland and elsewhere) 
represent a limited domain in which type A 
technologies can be highly appropriate. Small 
coverage DCGs, for example, can be written for 
the anticipated L2 learner input and can be used to 
provide immediate feedback to the learner. 
Problems associated with difficulties in building 
wider-coverage grammars do not present 
themselves in this context, as the curriculum is 
limited. 
The are many other potential uses of CL/NLP in 
this context, but this paper will focus on the FST 
and POS tagging examples mentioned above.  
4 CL/NLP Resources for Irish Primary 
School CALL  
4.1 Background 
Irish is a compulsory subject in schools in 
Ireland.  Students generally tend to have a negative 
attitude towards the language, which hinders 
learning (Harris & Murtagh, 1999).  Until recently, 
Irish has been taught using the Audio-Lingual 
method (structural patterns are taught using 
repetitive drills) and it is only since 1999 that a 
new communicative curriculum (language teaching 
is structured around topics in terms of 
communicative situations) has been developed and 
integrated. Currently, there are very few CALL 
resources available for Irish (Hetherington, 2000) 
and those that do exist may not be as error-free as 
one would like, are not specifically aimed at 
primary school learners and are therefore not tied 
to the Primary School curriculum which hinders 
their integration into the classroom. 
4.2 A FST-Based Morphological Engine for 
Irish 
U? Dhonnchadha (2002) has developed an 
analyser and generator for Irish inflectional 
morphology using Finite-State Transducers 
(Beesley and Karttunen, 2003). The FST engine 
contains approximately 5,000 lexical stems, 
generates/recognises over 50,000 unique inflected 
surface forms with a total of almost 400,000 
morphological descriptions (due to ambiguous 
surface forms). The final FST is the result of 
composing intermediate transducers, each 
encoding a different morphological process. It is 
useful to have a record of the morphological 
processes involved in mapping between lexical 
(i.e. lemmas and morphological features) and 
surface forms. By including a marker in the surface 
form each time a process is applied, a record of the 
morphological processes involved can be 
maintained and used in other applications. 
The morphological processes covered include: 
(i) internal mutations such as lenition, ellipsis, 
stem internal modification and vocal prefixing; (ii) 
final mutation, such as vowel harmony with 
suffixes (broadening, slenderising and 
syncopation); as well as concatenative morphology 
(prefixing, suffixing). 
4.3 Technology - FST, Perl, XML and Flash 
Primary school learners are not interested in 
viewing output generated by a FST Morphology 
engine. The challenge in CALL applications 
(particularly in the primary school scenario) is to 
exploit underlying technology to present 
information in a manner appropriate to the learner. 
To this end we developed animation software 
interfaced with the output generated by the FST 
engine.  
Animation can enhance the learning process and 
is especially interesting for younger learners.  
Flash (2004) is a useful software environment to 
develop animations but it is difficult for non-
programmers to use and it is often difficult to use 
the same animation templates for different inputs.  
One solution is to use XML (Extensible Markup 
Language, XML (2004)) files as input into Flash, 
so that the information displayed is customisable 
according to the information in the input data file. 
We outline how animated CALL materials were 
developed for teaching the conjugation of verbs in 
the present tense in Irish. 
Output from the FST engine is fed to a Perl 
script which converts the information into a 
specified XML format.  The XML files are then 
used by Flash to generate the required animation.  
Figure 1 outlines the software architecture. Figure 
2 shows the conjugation of the verb cuir (to put) in 
the present tense in Irish. Figure 3 shows modified 
output from the FST engine to enable automatic 
animations to be generated (^INF indicates 
inflectional infix, ^PP indicates inflectional 
postposition and ^SUF indicates inflectional suffix  
for Flash).  
 
 FST 
Output
XML
Files
Perl  
 
 
Flash Animation  
Figure 1: Software architecture 
 1S Chuir m? 
2S Chuir t? 
3S Chuir s?/s? 
1P Chuireamar 
2P Chuir sibh 
3P Chuir siad 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Conjugation of "cuir" 
 
 
 
A
Flas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T
"cu
"h"
pos
A
any
FSTPastInd  c^INFuir^PP  
PastInd+1P+Pl  c^INFuir^SUF 
Figure 3: Sample output from FST engine 
 section of the XML file that feeds into the 
h program is shown in Figure 4. 
<verb>cuir</verb> 
<stem1>c</stem1> 
<stem2>uir</stem2> 
<infix>h</infix> 
<fir_sg><postpos>m?</postpos></fir_sg> 
<sec_s ostpos>t?</ sec_sg> 
<thi_sg><postpos>s?/s?</postpos></thi_sg>
<fir_ ffix>eamar</suffix pl> 
<sec ostpos </postp ec_pl>
<thi_ ostpos> </postp i_pl> 
F
he an
ir" is 
 is ins
tpositi
nimat
 verb 
 engpl><su
_pl><p
pl><pigure 4: XML file for Flas
imation movie demonstrat
split up into "c" and "uir"
erted between "c" and "u
on "m?" is added (Figure 
ions can be developed a
and morphological proce
ine, as all morphological></fir_
os></s
os></th
>sibh
siadg><p postpos></h program 
es that the stem 
. Then the infix 
ir". Finally the 
5).   
utomatically for 
ss known to the 
 operations are 
coded for Flash.  This removes the necessity of 
hand-coding animations and reduces the risk of 
human error. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Snapshot sequence from 
animation movie for past tense 1st person 
singular for the verb ?cuir? in Irish  
(Inn? means yesterday) 
 
The Flash-based interface dynamically displays 
XML data. It reads in XML data at runtime and 
generates an animation. Learners have full control 
over the animation. They can play, stop, rewind 
and skip through the animation. Further interaction 
is provided via menus to choose specific 
conjugations (e.g. number, person and tense.) 
The FST-Flash interface is language-
independent. The XML files contain detailed 
information about the different string operations 
and the corresponding targets. The only operations 
known to the Flash interface are insert, delete and 
replace. In this way, the animation of language 
data is abstracted from linguistic terms like 
prefixation, suffixation or lenition, thus avoiding 
the problem of varying definitions of these terms in 
different languages. The transformation of the 
(linguistically tagged) output from the morphology 
engine to the XML data necessary for animated 
presentation is done by Perl scripts which can be 
tailored specifically to each combination of 
language and output of a NLP tool. 
5 CL/NLP Resources for German Primary 
School CALL  
5.1 Background 
German is gradually being integrated into Irish 
primary schools through the Modern Languages in 
Primary School Initiative (MLPSI), which has 
been running since 1998. At present, over 300 
schools in Ireland are involved in the MLPSI.  
German is taught during the senior two years of 
the primary school cycle (children aged 10-13). 
Irish students do not receive any instruction in 
Modern Foreign Languages (MFL) up until this 
point (Irish is not considered a MFL). The 
communicative curriculum we developed is based 
on a draft curriculum which was developed by the 
National Council for Curriculum and Assessment 
(NCCA) (NCCA, 2004) for teachers participating 
in the MLPSI. 
The integration of type A CL technology into 
CALL in this environment is ideal. The target 
language is restricted to a beginner?s curriculum. 
This represents a restricted domain. Sentence 
constructions are simple with few structures that 
could present coverage or ambiguity difficulties to 
CL systems. Given that the target language is 
German, many CL tools are available for almost 
every aspect of language processing. 
In this section we will focus on the use of type B 
NLP technology in this environment to meet the 
needs of students learning German. These needs 
have been researched qualitatively through 
observation during German language lessons in a 
primary school in Ireland during the school year 
2003/4. Irish students are native English speakers 
(some are also native Irish speakers) and as such 
are unfamiliar with nouns being associated with 
genders as in German. These students also require 
extra practise with inflecting verbs correctly. 
Having being asked ?Wie hei?t du??, students will 
often respond with ?Ich hei?t ??, for example. We 
present the use of a POS tagger in the development 
of a tailored corpus which subsequently feeds into 
the automatic generation of exercises.    
5.2 Technology ? POS tagging, Perl and XML 
CALL courseware generally presents users with 
exercises to complete after they have studied a 
particular topic. These are usually static in content 
and are very time consuming to develop over the 
full set of language topics. Students are usually 
presented with a small number of exercises, which 
they will have completed in their entirety and 
become familiar with in a limited space of time. 
Larger sets of exercises prove beneficial in 
providing variety for the student ? they will not be 
presented with the same set of exercises each time 
they visit a topic. In addition, some students will 
complete exercises faster than others. This puts 
pressure on slower students to keep up and on 
teachers to provide alternative work to keep faster 
students occupied. Larger sets of exercises mean 
tha election can be randomised so that 
stu esented with new material each time 
the
less
stu
sam
req
C
gen
 
A
the
Sch
The
con
div
top
file
file
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
O
XM
suc
ext
gen
on 
ver
ide
can be practised when a student chooses the correct 
verb ending or article from a selection or types in 
the correct answer. A version of hangman (a game 
where students try to guess an unknown word by 
guessing letters in the word - they only get a 
certain number of chances for incorrect answers 
after which the game ends) can also be played with 
article-noun combinations. By simply specifying 
the topic section in the curriculum and the type of 
game, exercises are automatically generated. Each 
particular exercise is randomised so that the user is 
presented with a new variant of the problem each 
time they attempt an exercise or game. 
 
Multiple-choice
Exercises
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gap-fill 
Exercises
Annotated 
Corpus in XML
Ct exercise s
dents are pr
y visit the courseware; slower students will feel 
 pressure to work at a faster pace when faster 
dents complete additional exercises within the 
e language topic and teachers will not be 
uired to provide alternative material.  
L can significantly reduce the time needed to 
erate sets of exercises around language topics. 
 complete curriculum was developed around 
 NCCA guidelines and tagged using Helmut 
mid?s TreeTagger (see TreeTagger homepage). 
 annotated text file was then automatically 
verted to XML using Perl. The corpus is 
ided into separate XML files for each language 
ic. Additional information - audio and graphic 
 references were added manually to each topic 
 at this stage.  
 
 
 
Figure 6: Generating annotated corpus in XML 
nce the annotated corpus has been converted to 
L it can feed into a number of applications 
h as lesson generation, automatic dictionary 
raction, a concordancer and automatic 
eration of various exercise types. In focusing 
the latter, we are particularly interested in the 
bs, articles and nouns that the POS tagging 
ntifies. Inflection and article-noun combinations 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Automatic Exercise Generation 
 
Previous work in automatic exercise generation 
from corpora highlighted a number of potential 
pitfalls (Wilson, 1997). Most importantly, the 
language in the corpus used is best when the 
linguistic quality of the texts is appropriate for 
learning a language. Long and complex sentences 
are best avoided. Our design employs a corpus 
collated and tailored around the learner?s 
curriculum, thus avoiding this pitfall.  
The benefit of using CL resources here is similar 
to the situation in the Irish context. Exercises can 
be developed automatically for any verb or noun 
phrase within the curriculum and provide variety 
for the user. This removes the nec  hand-
coding each exercise and reduces th  human 
error. 
POS 
Tagger 
6 Conclusion 
It is difficult to integrate CL
CALL, especially as these 
generally designed with a CAL
However, there are environme
be successfully integrated, esp
imaginative and useful way.  T
not have to be particularly
complex - what is import
appropriately deployed.   
This paper outlined how two
be used in the development of 
primary schools.  It is novel in 
employ CL/NLP technologies 
especially when they are begi
Complete 
urriculum 
Perl 
Perl 
Annotated 
Corpus in XML
(individual 
language topics)
Hangman Game 
Additional info. ? 
graphics, audio files /NL
reso
L au
nts 
ecia
he 
 re
ant 
 NL
CAL
the 
for 
nneessity of
e risk ofP resources into 
urces are not 
dience in mind.  
where they can 
lly if used in an 
technology does 
volutionary or 
is that it is 
P resources can 
L resources for 
ICALL world to 
young learners, 
rs in learning a 
language. We outlined how the output of a FST 
engine can feed into the generation of Flash 
animations for Irish verb conjugations. We showed 
how a POS tagger can be used to annotate a 
curriculum to produce a corpus which can in turn 
be used to automatically generate exercises. Both 
of these initial modules will be comprehensively 
deployed and evaluated in the classroom during the 
coming school year (Sept. 2004-June 2005). Future 
modules will include type A CL technology like 
DCGs and will take advantage of the controlled 
languages and limited domains which exist in the 
primary school environment. Each module of the 
overall system is being developed so that 
concurrent evaluation can be carried out.  
This paper highlighted the point that even 
though neither of these NLP resources was 
developed with CALL applications in mind, when 
combined with relatively straightforward 
programming and interface techniques, they can be 
used fruitfully in a CALL environment. 
7 Acknowledgements 
This research has been funded by SFI Basic 
Research Grant SC/02/298 and IRCSET Embark 
Initiative Grant RS/2002/441-2. 
References  
D. Arnold, L. Balkan, S. Meijer, R. L. Humphreys 
and L. Sadler. 1994. Machine Translation - An 
Introductory Guide NCC Blackwell Ltd., 
London, USA. 
K. R. Beesley and L. Karttunen. 2003. Finite-State 
Morphology. Series: (CSLI-SCL) Center for the 
Study of Language and Information. 
H. D. Brown. 1994. Principles of Language 
Learning and Teaching. Prentice-Hall Inc, 
London, Sydney, Toronto, Mexico, New Delhi. 
D. Dokter and J. Nerbonne. 1998. A Session with 
Glosser-Rug. In ?Language Teaching and 
Language Technology? S. Jager, J. Nerbonne, 
and A. van Essen, ed., pages 88-94, Swets & 
Zeitlinger, Lisse. 
Flash. 2004.  Available at: 
http://www.macromedia.com/software/flash/ 
 [Accessed 10 April 2004] 
FreeText. 2001.  FreeText Homepage.  Available 
at: http://www.latl.unige.ch/freetext/ [Accessed 
10 April 2004] 
D. Hetherington. 2000.  Computer Resources for 
the Teaching of Irish at Primary and Secondary 
Levels. Language Centre NUI Maynooth, 
Ireland. 
J. Harris and L. Murtagh. 1999. Teaching and 
Learning Irish in Primary School. ITE, Dublin. 
W. J. Hutchins and H. L. Somers. 1992. An 
Introduction to Machine Translation. Academic 
Press, London. 
R. Khader, T. Holloway King and M. Butt. 2004. 
Deep CALL grammars: The LFG-OT 
experiment. DGfS 26.Jahrestagung, Mainz, 
Germany. 
T. Koller. 2004. Creating user-friendly, highly 
adaptable and flexible language learning 
environments via Flash, XML, Perl and PHP. 
Presentation at the EuroCALL SIG-LP workshop 
"Innovative Technologies and Their Didactic 
Application", Vienna, September 2004. 
M. D. La Torre. 1999. A web-based resource to 
improve translation skills. ReCALL, 11(3): 41-
49. 
W. Menzel, D. Herron, R. Morton, D. Pezzotta, P. 
Bonaventura, and P. Howarth. 2001. Interactive 
pronunciation training. ReCALL, 13(1): 67-78. 
NCCA. 2004. National Council for Curriculum   
   Assessment (NCCA) Homepage. Available at:    
   http://www.ncca.ie/j/index2.php?name=currinfo   
   [Accessed: 10 April 2004] 
V. Reuer. 2003. Error Recognition and Feedback 
with Lexical Functional Grammar. CALICO, 
20(3): 497-512 
M. Schulze. 2003. AI in CALL: Artifically Inated 
or Almost Imminent? WorldCALL 2003, Banff, 
Canada. 
TreeTagger Homepage. Available at: 
http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/projekte/corplex/ 
TreeTagger/DecisionTreeTagger.html 
[Accessed: 20 April 2004] 
E. U? Dhonnchadha. 2002. An Analyser and 
Generator for Irish Inflectional  
Morphology Using Finite-State Transducers. 
Msc Thesis. 
A. Vandeventer Faltin. 2003. Natural language 
processing tools for computer assisted language 
learning. Linguistik Online 17, 5/03 
E. Wilson. 1997. The Automatic Generation of 
CALL Exercises from General Corpora. In 
?Teaching and Language Corpora? A. 
Wichmann, S. Fligelstone, T. McEnery, and G. 
Knowles, ed., pages 116-130, Addison Wesley 
Longman, London. 
XML. 2004.  Extensible Markup Language.  
Available at: http://www.w3.org/XML 
[Accessed 10 April 2004] 
Proceedings of the First Celtic Language Technology Workshop, pages 6?17,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23 2014.
 Using Irish NLP resources in Primary School Education 
 
 
 
  
 
Abstract 
This paper looks at the use of Natural Language Processing (NLP) resources in primary school edu-
cation in     Ireland.  It shows how two Irish NLP resources, the Irish Finite State Transducer Mor-
phological Engine (IFSTME) (U? Dhonnchadha, 2002) and Gramad?ir (Scannell, 2005) were used 
as the underlying engines for two Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL) resources for 
Irish. The IFSTME was used to supply verb conjugation information for a Verb Checker Component 
of a CALL resource, while Gramad?ir was the underlying engine for a Writing Checker Component.  
The paper outlines the motivation behind the development of these resources which include trying to 
leverage some of the benefits of CALL for students studying Irish in primary school.  In order to de-
velop CALL materials that were not just an electronic form of a textbook, it was considered impor-
tant to incorporate existing NLP resources into the CALL materials.  This would have the benefit of 
not re-inventing the wheel and of using tools that had been designed and testing by a knowledgeable 
NLP researcher, rather than starting from scratch.  The paper reports on the successful development 
of the CALL resources and some positive feedback from students and teachers.  There are several 
non-technical reasons, mainly logistical, which hinder the deployment of Irish CALL resources in 
schools, but Irish NLP researchers should strive to disseminate their research and findings to a wider 
audience than usual, if they wish others to benefit from their work. 
1 Introduction 
This paper looks at how Irish NLP resources can be used in the development of Computer Assisted 
Language Learning (CALL) resources.  It reports on the motivation for using CALL and specifically 
NLP/CALL in the primary school context in Ireland.  Irish is a compulsory subject in primary schools 
in Ireland and most students spend 13 years studying the language (Murtagh, 2003), but it is not a par-
ticularly popular subject (? Riag?in and ? Gl?as?in, 1994, DCRGA, 2009) .  CALL has many poten-
tial benefits for the language learner and it is important the students learning Irish have access to reli-
able, good quality CALL resources.  However, it is difficult to develop such CALL resources, as usu-
ally a multi-disciplinary team is required, and such a team is often hard to assemble.  One approach is 
to try to adapt and reuse existing resources to speed up the development process and indeed, provide 
resources that might not otherwise exist. 
With this in mind, two existing NLP resources for Irish were used to develop CALL resources for 
students in the primary school context.  The use of the resources is not limited to primary school stu-
dents, but they were developed with these students as the target learning group.  The first tool that was 
used was the Irish Finite State Transducer Morphology Engine (U? Dhonnchadha, 2002).  It was used 
to provide verb conjugation information for the Verb Conjugation Component (VCC) of the CALL 
resources.  The aim of the VCC was to provide static and dynamic web pages with verb conjugation 
information and exercises/language games for the learner.  The second tool used was Gramad?ir 
(Scannell, 2005).  It is a grammar checking tool and provided the underlying engine for the Writing 
Checker Component for the CALL resources.  A wrapper was placed around Gramad?ir in order to 
adapt it for the target learners.  This included modifying the errors messages to be more young-learner 
friendly and separating spelling and grammar errors. CALL resources were developed using these 
Monica Ward 
School of Computing 
Dublin City University 
Ireland 
mward@computing.dcu.ie 
This work is licenced under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Page 
numbers and proceedings footer are added by the organizers. License details: http:// 
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
6
Irish NLP resources and deployed in two primary schools in Ireland.  The students were able to use the 
resources without any major difficulties, but long term use depends on factors other than the 
NLP/CALL integration ones.  However, in order to make use of the NLP resources that are currently 
available to CALL developers, it behoves NLP researchers to make their research widely available and 
comprehensible to a non-NLP knowledgeable audience.  Of course, CALL researchers should also try 
to interact with the NLP community for a fruitful exchange of ideas and knowledge. 
2 Background 
Irish used to be the lingua franca in Ireland many centuries ago, but this is no longer the case.  How-
ever, the vast majority of school students in Ireland study Irish for 13 years (Murtagh, 2003) in both 
primary and secondary school.  There are several challenges to the teaching of Irish, including attitude, 
potential pedagogical difficulties and lack of suitable resources (including computer-based resources).  
This section looks at the place of Irish in the primary school system in Ireland, the problem of lack of 
suitable, high-quality, reliable resources for Irish for learners in general and especially for primary 
school children.  It also looks at the role of Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Computer As-
sisted Language Learning (CALL) in the teaching and learning of Irish. 
 
2.1 Irish 
Irish is a morphologically-rich language that was the lingua-franca of the majority of people in Ireland 
until around the 17th century.  Its use started to decline around this time and today there are approxi-
mately 20,000 active speakers (? h?allaithe, 2004).  Irish has had a complex, paradoxical socio-
cultural role in Ireland.  On the one hand, people in Ireland appreciate the importance of having a na-
tional language that is distinct to Ireland and understand its cultural role (DCRGA, 2009).  However, 
they are somewhat ambivalent about its role in the education system.    
2.2 Education 
There are several pedagogical issues with the teaching of Irish in schools in Ireland.  It is one of the 
core subjects and is taught on a daily basis.  Often there is a lack of interest on the part of the students 
and their parents.  Reasons such as ?it?s a useless language, no one speaks it anymore?, or ?why don?t 
they teach French/Chinese instead?? are sometimes heard.  Some students find it difficult.  Eleven of 
the most commonly used verbs are highly irregular, which can be daunting and confusing for young 
learners.  There is also the issue with lack of resources.  Obviously, there is no large international 
market for Irish language primary school text books and publishers only have the internal market in 
Ireland.  This limits the financial incentive for publishers to provide materials for students.  In many 
primary schools, students have to pay for their own books, with some schools operating book rental 
schemes.  This means that for any schools there is little or no incentive to change the books series that 
they use for teaching Irish.  Furthermore, given the non-positive attitude some parents have towards 
the time/effort devoted to teaching and learning Irish in primary school, they are often not receptive to 
moving to a different book series if they do not have the option to buy pre-owned books for older chil-
dren in the school.  Harris and Murtagh (1999) and Hickey and Stenson (2010) provide a good over-
view of the Irish education field. 
 
2.3 Lack of Suitable Resources 
One possible strategy to incorporate a more modern approach is to use electronic resources.  However, 
many of the resources available are not particularly suitable for primary schools students, as they are 
aimed at adults or may not be very accurate.  Adults may be able to comprehend that the information 
that they see online may not be totally correct, but primary school students are not accustomed to this, 
as they expect the information to be correct all the time.  For example, an adult may understand that 
?The President has super powers? or ?London is the capital of Ireland? may not be true, but a child 
may just accept it as fact.   
 
7
2.4 NLP, Computer Assisted Language Learning and Irish 
Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL) can help in the language learning process.  It can help 
with learner motivation (e.g. Murphy and Hurd, 2011) and provide a degree of privacy for students.  It 
enables students to repeat exercises and revise as often as they like ? the computer will not tire of pro-
viding feedback to students (unlike, perhaps, a teacher in a classroom setting).  Students can work at 
their own pace when using CALL resources ? something which can be helpful in a mixed-ability class.  
CALL can be useful when there is limited or no access to a teacher e.g. in a minority or endangered 
language scenario.  CALL can perhaps enhance the prestige of a minority language, by demonstrating 
that the language as an electronic and/or online presence.  All these potential benefits can accrue to 
CALL for Irish.  The problem is that there are several issues which hinder the development and de-
ployment of CALL resources for Irish.  From a CALL resource development point of view, the teach-
ers may not have the time, knowledge or the expertise to develop CALL materials.  There may not be 
the computing resources for the students to have access to the CALL materials.  These factors pertain 
for Irish in the primary school context.  The teachers cover all primary school subjects and, in general, 
are not trained linguists or Irish language specialists.  Furthermore, while they may have reasonable 
computing skill, they may not have the skills and knowledge necessary required to develop Irish 
CALL materials.  In many primary schools in Ireland, there may not be a computer in the classroom 
and so the students have to use a computer lab. Often, the computers are relatively old and are of a low 
specification, and the students have limited access to the lab.  In their weekly computer slot, the 
teacher has to decide to use the time for English, mathematics or other school subjects. 
Many CALL resources do not use any NLP e.g. the BBC Languages (World Service English) (BBC, 
2014) is a general CALL resource for English language learners.  Intelligent CALL (ICALL) mainly 
draws on Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) (Matthews, 
1993).  NLP technologies can be used in CALL resources for concordancing, morphological process-
ing and syntactic processing (Nerbonne, 2003).  There are many reasons why NLP technologies are 
not widely used in CALL.  NLP is inherently difficult and there are difficulties in integrating NLP in 
CALL resources.  NLP researchers and NLP research is not CALL-based and there are difficulties in 
visualising how NLP can be used in CALL resources.  Furthermore, there is a lack of knowledge 
amongst CALL practitioners about NLP, as the use of NLP in CALL has been driven by NLP special-
ists rather than CALL practitioners.  Another difficulty is that NLP tools and techniques are often de-
signed to work with correct input (Vandeventer Faltin, 2003) and language learners produce incorrect 
input.  Also, some NLP CALL projects concentrate on the functionality/content and neglect the User 
Interface (UI) and this makes it difficult for the non-expert user to use the resources.  However, there 
is a growing interest in NLP resources for language learners, particularly in the area of error detection 
(Leacock et al., 2014).  There have been some successful NLP CALL programs (e.g. ALICE-chan 
(Levin and Evans, 1995)), but there are not many good examples that demonstrate the ability of NLP 
in CALL.  Many NLP/CALL projects finish at the prototype stage and progress no further.  The issue 
of using NLP in CALL without a good pedagogical basis must also be noted. There are also some 
socio-cultural factors that must also be considered including the attitudes of teachers, learners and 
NLP researchers to the NLP/CALL field.  There are very few NLP resources available for Irish.  
However, two of these resources, the IFSTE and Gramad?ir, are robust and informative and can be 
used in CALL resources for Irish and these are discussed below. 
3 Resources 
3.1 Approach 
As outlined above, there is a problem with the lack of suitable, high quality CALL resources for Irish.  
One potential solution to this problem is to use existing NLP resources for Irish in CALL resources for 
the language.  There are not too many such resources available for Irish, but two very useful resources 
are Gramad?ir (Scannell, 2005) and the Irish Finite State Transducer Morphology Engine (U? Dhon-
nchadha, 2002) (henceforth, IFSTME).  These are both high-quality, reliable and accurate resources 
that are publicly available.  These resources were integrated into two Irish CALL resources for pri-
mary school children.  Gramad?ir was used in a Writing Checker Component (WCC) and the IF-
STME was used in a Verb Conjugation Component (VCC).  The overall architecture ran on an Apache 
8
server, with static pages stored in the htdocs directory and dynamic pages stored in the cgi-bin 
directory.  XML technologies and Perl were core components of the CALL software. 
3.2 Verb Conjugation Component 
U? Dhonnchadh?s (2002) Irish Finite State Transducer Morphology Engine (IFSTME) is a comprehen-
sive resource which supplies morphological information for Irish words and sentences.  The IFSTME 
was used to generate the verb conjugations for verbs in the past simple tense. 
The aim of the Verb Conjugation Component (VCC) is to provide a tool to produce static and ani-
mated verb conjugation web pages based on externally supplied verb data.  The underlying engine is 
an Irish Finite State Transducer Morphology Engine (IFSTME) (U? Dhonnchadha, 2002).  It was 
combined with an animation tool (Koller, 2004) and a CALL Template (Ward, 2001) to provide an 
Irish verb learning tool for primary school students. Figure 1 shows the information flow for the VCC.  
The external source of verb information (i.e. the IFSTME) provides information on verbs to the VCC 
which uses the information in the CALL resources.    
 
 
 
Figure 1 Information Flow for the Verb Conjugation Component 
Figure 2 shows an overview of the VCC.  The external verb information (from the IFSTME) is 
combined with local code files and local configuration files in the VCC.  The teacher provided 
pedagogical input to the process.  The VCC combines this data with flash animation code to pro-
duce verb information files, activity files and report files for the learner to use.  The teacher can 
also see the report files. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Overview of the VCC 
External Source 
of Verb  
Information 
Verb Information 
and Games  
Pages 
Verb Information 
and Pedagogical  
Options 
Verb  
Conjugation 
Code 
System Config 
Files 
Local Config 
Files 
Verb Conjugation 
Component 
Local Code 
Files 
External Verb 
Information 
(IFSTME) 
Report 
Files 
Verb 
Output 
Files 
Activity 
Output 
Files 
Teacher Pedagogical 
Input 
Flash 
Animation 
Code 
9
The IFSTME provides an analyser and generator for Irish inflectional morphology for nouns, adjec-
tives and verbs.  Replace rule triggers (for stems and affixes) are combined with replace rules written 
as regular expressions (for word mutations) to produce a two-level morphological transducer for Irish.  
The VCC only uses a very small subset of the verb forms provided by the IME (there are 52 forms in 
all).  It has web pages for 20 verbs, in both static and dynamic forms.  Figure 3 shows the past indica-
tive information for bris (to break) supplied by the Irish Finite State Morphology Engine (U? Dhon-
nchadha, 2002).  Note that the output is not intended to be used as presented by the end-user, hence the 
presence of ^FH and ^FS tags in Figure 3.  Figure 4 shows the animated verb page for bris (past 
tense). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Past Indicative Information for bris (to break)       Figure 4: Animated Verb Page for bris 
3.3 Writing Checker Component 
The Writing Checker Component (WCC) provides a tool that checks the learner?s text input and pro-
vides feedback on spelling and grammar errors.  It adapts an externally supplied grammar checker, 
Gramad?ir (Scannell, 2005) to the needs of primary school students.  Gramad?ir is an open source 
grammar checker that has been implemented for Irish and it can be used on a variety of operating sys-
tems.  It is modular in design and provides separate components for sentence segmentation, spell 
checking, part-of-speech tagging and grammar checking.  It is easy to use and there is a simple com-
mand line interface and a web interface to the software.  It is corpus-based and is booted from web-
based corpora.  It is easy to port to other languages as the language developers? pack provided is de-
signed so that no programming experience is required.  It is scalable.  Spell checking packages can be 
developed in a few hours, while the engine also accommodates the development of a full-scale gram-
mar checker.  
Gramad?ir is an excellent, accurate Irish language resource.  It is aimed at linguistically-aware 
adults.  It can be used in white-box mode and be adapted to the needs of the users.  However, a black-
box approach was taken when developing a writing checker for primary school students.  Under this 
approach, the grammar error messages to the user were passed through a filter and substituted with 
more suitable error messages for the target learners. 
There was an initial pilot study to test the feasibility of the resources and there were several design 
modifications based on learner and teacher feedback.  For example, there was a need to convert the 
adult learner-oriented language of Gramad?ir?s errors messages to language more appropriate to 
younger learners.  Some of the original Gramad?ir?s error messages and their WCC equivalent are 
shown in Table 1.  Note that not all students would understand the words "ur?" and "s?imhi?" even 
thought the teacher may have explained them.  
There was a need to separate out spelling errors from grammar errors and an error classification file 
was used to classify Gramad?ir?s errors as either grammar or spelling errors. Sometimes, Gramad?ir 
failed to suggest any alternatives for spelling errors and the Levenshtein algorithm (implemented with 
code from Merriampark (2005)) was used to check suitable words from the local dictionary. The local 
dictionary consisted of words from the some class texts.  A word with a Levenshtien value of 1 was 
probably the word the student intended to use, while those with a value of 2 were probably suitable.  
There was also a need to be able to correct and resubmit a text.  The screen layout had to be changed 
so that more information could be viewed at once and to minimise scrolling.  A review of the errors 
detected and not detected by Gramd?ir was required and certain adaptations were necessary.     
Bris+Verb+PastInd  b^FHris 
Bris+Verb+PastInd+1P+Pl b^FHris^FSeamar 
Bris+Verb+PastInd+Auto  bris^FSeadh 
Bris+Verb+PastInd+Auto+Neg bris^FSeadh 
Bris+Verb+PastInd+Auto+NegQ bris^FSeadh 
Bris+Verb+PastInd+Auto+Q bris^FSeadh 
10
Gramad?ir Message Writing Checker Message 
 Humm, there might be an error here 
Definite article required  'an'  required 
Eclipsis missing You need a letter at the start of the word 
Lenition missing You might be missing a  'h' here 
Prefix \/d'\/ missing You need a  'd' here 
The dependent form of the verb ? The verb is not correct 
The genitive case You need to add something here 
 
Table 1. Gramad?ir Error Messages and their WCC Equivalent  
Table 2 shows some sample student text, along with some of the error types and the changes made to 
Gramad?ir?s error messages.  Note that the missing word ?seomra? before ?suite? was not detected in 
example 3 in Table 2.   
 
Error Type Text Gramad?ir Error 
Message 
Expected 
Error 
New Error Message 
Gramad?ir error 
OK 
T? bosca beag 
agam ach t? n?os 
bosca l? agat.. 
Usually used in the 
set phrase /n?os l?, 
is l?/ 
As expected Usually used in the 
set phrase /n?os l?, is 
l?/ 
Gramad?ir error 
OK, but msg not 
suitable 
T? tr? gloine at? 
an mbord. 
 
Unnecessary eclip-
sis 
As expected Maybe you should 
have ar an mbord 
Error detected, 
but should be ig-
nored 
Shuigh Ciara agus 
Maire sa suite ar 
an tolg. 
 
It seems unlikely 
that you intended to 
use the subjunctive 
here (Maire) 
  
Error incorrectly 
detected 
Fuair R?ona 
p?ip?ar. 
 
Unnecessary use of 
the genitive case 
  
Unreported error Shuil Eoin isteach 
seomra folctha.   
  Maybe you should 
have sa after the 
word isteach 
 
Table 2. Error Types and WCC Changes 
Table 3 shows some sample learner text and some of the key error phrases used for spelling errors.  
The fact that neither Gramad?ir nor the WCC was able to detect the word ?picture? is interesting, as it 
shows that they do not handle code-mixing, which would be quite common amongst primary school 
learners.  This could be an area of future interest. 
 
 
Table 3 Key Error Phrases for Spelling Errors 
 
The overall logic for the WCC is shown in Figure 5.  
 
Error Phrases Example Source Gramad?ir WCC 
Do you mean Nior tharraing s? Learner Do you mean /n?or/ ? N?or 
Unknown word Torraing Learner Unknown word ??? 
Not in database Picture Learner Not in database but may 
be a compound /pic+t?r/? 
??? 
11
Use the local error checking routines) 
Read and process learner text 
Depending on configuration options ?. 
- If External error checking on  ? check for external errors 
- if local error check on ? check for local errors 
Display user text with grammar and spelling messages (if any) 
 
Figure 5. Overall Logic for the WCC 
A sample of student text in the WCC is shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Sample of Student Text in WCC 
4 Deployment and Evaluation 
4.1 Deployment 
The VCC and the WCC were used by primary schools students in two English-medium schools in Ire-
land.  One of the schools was a mainstream, standard school (School 1) and the other was a school in a 
disadvantaged area (School 2).  Ethical approval was applied for and obtained from the University?s 
Research Ethics Committee and the parents.  3rd (age 8 ? 9) and 4th class students (age 9 - 10) from 
School 1 used the VCC and 4th class students from School 2 used the WCC.  The students used the 
resources over a period of several months on an ad-hoc basis.   
4.2 Evaluation 
Evaluation in the CALL field is complex.  Quantitative and qualitative evaluation and formative and 
summative evaluation are all important.  The VCC and WCC were evaluated using several different 
criteria.  The aim of using various different evaluation criteria was to try to evaluate the Irish CALL 
resources from different perspectives.  Chapelle?s (2001) and Colpaert?s (2004) CALL evaluation cri-
teria were used to evaluate the VCC and WCC as CALL artefacts.  The ICT4LT (2005) website which 
provides a CALL software evaluation checklist, was also used.  The limitations of the evaluations in-
clude that some of it is based on self-reporting by young learners and that it was a small scale study 
with irregular and uneven usage. 
The VCC was evaluated by the teacher and students in the mainstream school.  An anonymous 
questionnaire-based survey was completed by 20 students (6 students were missing on the day of the 
questionnaire).  There were both open and closed questions and students were encouraged to provide 
(negative) feedback.  With regards to the VCC, the students 40% liked the tool, 45% liked it a little 
and only 15% did not like it.  The majority found it helpful (45%) or a little helpful (35%), with only 
20% saying it was not helpful.  The majority preferred the animate mode (60%), over the static mode 
(15%), with 10% slightly preferring the animated mode, while 15% did not see the animated pages.  
The teacher found the resource useful as it was aligned with her teaching objectives for the class.  Ta-
ble 4 shows a summary of the student feedback on the VCC. 
12
 Question Yes No A little/Both Didn?t see 
Did you like the verb lessons? 40% 15% 45%  
Did you find them helpful? 45% 20% 35%  
Do you prefer the animated mode? 60% 15% 10% 15% 
 
Table 4. Student Feedback on the Verb Conjugation Component 
 
Students were also asked to give feedback after doing exercises/games with the VCC.  The total 
number of students who answered online was 22 (note that not all students answered all the questions).  
Most students (84%) reported that they found the verb pages at least somewhat helpful, with little dif-
ference between those who viewed the pages in static and animated modes.  It is interesting to note 
that more static mode students (26%) than animated mode students (10%) found the exercise/game 
hard.  Table 5 shows a summary of the online student feedback data on the VCC. 
 
Question No A Little Yes 
Did you find the verb lessons helpful? 
Static:                                                                                                          
Animated: 
16% 
17% 
35% 
35% 
35% 
49% 
48% 
50% 
Did you like the end of lesson games? 
Static: 
Animated: 
12% 
13% 
10% 
19% 
13% 
25% 
70% 
65% 
74% 
Did you find the end of lesson games hard? 
Static: 
Animated: 
46% 
35% 
57% 
36% 
39% 
33% 
18% 
26% 
10% 
 
Table 5. Student Online Feedback on the Verb Conjugation Component 
 
Students who did not find the VCC helpful said that they know the verbs already or that it was 
boring.  Those who found it helpful said it ?shows and tell what it means? and another reported that it 
cleared up confusion (?I was always getting confused and now I?m not?).  When asked about their 
preference between static and animated mode, students who preferred static mode said that they un-
derstand it when the teacher explains it or that they found the animation mode annoying.  Those who 
liked the animated mode said it was more enjoyable and it helped them.  A summary of students? com-
ments about the VCC are shown in Table 6.  Note that the comments are provided as written by the 
students. 
 
Did you find the Verb part helpful? 
No: 
Know already 
Too boring 
Did you find the Verb part helpful? 
Yes: 
Shows and tells what it means 
Tells you how to spell them and more 
I was always getting confused and now I?m not 
Which mode do you prefer? 
Static: 
I get it when the teacher tells me 
It?s annoying 
Which mode do you prefer? 
Animated: 
You would know more past tense verbs 
More fun 
Makes me understand 
It helps 
I kept on forgetting the h 
It will get you used to putting in silent letters 
What was the best part and why? 
Games: learn stuff in games, fun 
What was the least enjoyable part and why? 
Some games too part (paraphrased) 
 
Table 6. Students? Comments on the Verb Conjugation Component 
13
The teacher also provided an evaluation of the VCC.  She said that it had sufficient learning poten-
tial because it focused on verb conjugation forms and her students did well in the verb exercises.  She 
thought it was suitable for the learners, it was sufficiently challenging for them, it had the right level of 
difficulty and that the tasks were appropriate for them.  The teacher said that explicit exposure to verb 
conjugation forms was pedagogically appropriate for her students.  Note that another teacher was also 
involved in using and evaluating the VCC, but for external reasons was not able to use the resource to 
any  great extent and the findings from her class are excluded from the evaluation. 
Students in both schools used the WCC, but the findings here relate to the students in the main-
stream school, as the numbers who used the WCC in the disadvantaged school were limited.  The 
learners were asked to provide their feedback on the WCC via an anonymous open and closed ques-
tionnaire.  Nineteen students completed the survey (7 students were absent on the day of the survey).  
Students reported that they liked using the WCC (yes (20%) and a little (50%), but 28% did not like it 
and a minority (28%) did not find it helpful.  A sizeable minority reported that they did not understand 
the grammar error messages (42%) and spelling error messages (32%) and therefore, not surprisingly, 
many (grammar 47%, spelling 30%) said that they did not find them helpful.  Most students said that 
they corrected their grammar errors (75%) and spelling errors (59%), although the empirical data does 
confirm this.  It must be noted that only 11% said they liked writing in Irish and a majority (63%) said 
they would prefer to write in their copy than use the WCC. Table 7 provides a summary of the student 
feedback on the WCC. 
 
Question Yes A Little No 
Did you like using the WCC? 22% 50% 28% 
Did you find the WCC helpful? 44% 28% 28% 
Did you understand the grammar error messages? 16% 42% 42% 
Did you understand the spelling error messages? 26% 42% 32% 
Did you find the grammar error messages helpful? 29% 24% 47% 
Did you find the spelling error messages helpful? 35% 35% 30% 
Did you correct your grammar errors? 75%  25% 
Did you correct your spelling errors? 59%  41% 
Do you like writing in Irish? 11% 47% 42% 
Would you prefer to write in your copy? 63%  37% 
 
Table 7.  Student Feedback on the Writing Checker Component 
 
Some of the reasons given for not finding it helpful included: ?it was boring/hard?, ?I already 
know how to write? or ?I don?t like writing".  Those who thought it was helpful said it told them the 
errors in their texts.  Table 8 shows some of the students? comments on the WCC.  Note the comments 
are paraphrased, based on comments provided by the students. 
 
 
Question Finding 
Why do you like/dislike writing in Irish? Like: It?s our national language 
Dislike: Hard, boring, hard spellings, accents 
Would you prefer the WCC or your copy for writing? WCC: tells you your mistakes 
Copy: easier, faster, no keyboard problems 
 
Table 8. Student Comments on the Writing Checker Component 
 
The mainstream school teacher also completed a questionnaire and the feedback was positive.  
The teacher said that the WCC was beneficial for the students and enabled the students to construct 
sentences and stories.   She felt that it was at an appropriate level for the learners as all the students 
could use the software.  She said that it helped to consolidate classroom work.  She said the main 
problem was that she did not know enough about computers herself.  The teacher in the disadvantaged 
school initially came up with the idea to distinguish between grammar and spelling errors, as spelling 
14
errors were not a priority for her.  There were logistical difficulties for the teacher in that only four 
students (out of 17) were considered sufficiently competent to use and benefit from the WCC.  An-
other difficulty was the fact that the school computer lab was closed during the project academic year 
and students had to travel to another venue to actually use the WCC ? this obviously is not ideal. 
Although both schools were boys-only schools in the same city, there are some significant differ-
ences between them.  In the mainstream school, the students use the recommended textbook for their 
class, while in the disadvantaged school the students use a textbook for a more junior year.  Also, 
more students are exempt from studying Irish in the disadvantaged school and there are fewer above-
average students.  Classroom management is more difficult and there are students leaving and return-
ing to class from attending sessions with special needs teachers.  This highlights the need to have 
flexible resources that can be used as the teacher sees fit.  While the teacher in the disadvantaged 
school appreciated what the CALL resources can provide, their usage would probably be on a more 
ad-hoc basis than in the mainstream school. 
From a CALL development point of view, it was relatively straightforward to use both Irish NLP 
tools.  The IFSTME provides comprehensive information on Irish verbs.  For pedagogical reasons, the 
VCC only uses a small subset of the information.  The students were learning only a limited set of 
verbs, mainly regular verbs and some important irregular ones. In theory, the VCC could be modified 
easily to incorporate a more complete list of verbs, persons and tenses (although this was not required 
for this group of students).  There were some difficulties in mapping and interpreting the conjugation 
changes for irregular verbs, but it must be noted that the IFSTME was not intended as a verb conjuga-
tion mechanism.  It was used in white-box mode (i.e. some internal knowledge of the software was 
required for the VCC), but overall it was worthwhile using the IFSTME.  Likewise, Gramad?ir was a 
useful NLP resource for developing the WCC.  It was robust and reliable and it would not have been 
possible to build the WCC without it. 
5 Discussion 
The VCC and the WCC demonstrate that it is possible and feasible to develop pedagogical, targeted 
NLP CALL resources for Irish.  It helped that the two NLP tools used were robust and of a high qual-
ity.  The learners and teachers were unaware of the underlying technology (and this is desirable).  
However, as is often the case, the problems were logistical rather than technical (Egbert et al., 2002; 
Ward, 2007).  Access to computers and ?space in the timetable? hindered the continued deployment of 
the Irish CALL resources. 
It is important for NLP researchers working with any language to disseminate their findings and 
make their resources available to people outside the NLP community.  It is even more important for 
NLP researchers working with minority languages to do so, as the resources are usually limited 
(Woodbury, 2003; Lam et al., 2014) and the pool of people working with the language small.  Speak-
ers, learners and other interested parties of minority languages are used to trying to do a lot with a lit-
tle, and making NLP resources available to them could lead to the development of resources not ini-
tially envisioned by the NLP researchers. 
6 Conclusion 
This paper reports on how two NLP resources for Irish (i.e. the IFSTME and Gramad?ir) were used to 
develop CALL resources for primary school children learning Irish. It shows that these NLP resources 
for Irish can be adapted and used to develop appropriate CALL resources.  In order for the CALL ma-
terials to be successful, it is important that there is a seamless integration of the NLP tools in the 
CALL resources, so that the learner is unaware of their existence.  Suitable, robust and accurate NLP 
resources are required, if the CALL materials are to work in a real deployment situation.  The CALL 
resource should not fail or be inaccurate. The integration of the CALL resources with the curriculum 
itself is key if the resources are actually going to be used by the teacher and the students (Bull and 
Zakrzewski, 1997, Mc Carthy, 1999; Ward, 2007).  This applies regardless of the language being stud-
ied ? if the CALL resources do not help the teacher and aligned with the curriculum, they will not be 
used.  There are other, non-technical, non-NLP related factors that help or hinder the actual usage of 
CALL resources.  It should be noted that in order for the NLP resources to be used in the first place, 
there needs to be an awareness of their existence - teachers and CALL developers must know that 
15
relevant NLP resources are available.  This places an onus on NLP researchers to disseminate their 
research and tools to a wider audience than perhaps they would normally address.  They could interact 
with the CALL community via CALL conferences and especially with ICALL (Intelligent-CALL) 
researchers via their Special Interest Groups (SIGs), conferences and workshops. This is particularly 
pertinent in the minority and endangered language context (e.g. Irish and other Celtic languages), 
where technical, financial and researcher resources are limited. 
References 
BBC.  2014.  BBC Languages (World Service English).  Available at: 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/worldservice/learningenglish/ 
Joanna Bull and Stan Zakrzewski.  1997. Implementing learning technologies: a university-wide ap-
proach. Active Learning, 6, 15-19. 
Carol Chapelle.  2001. Computer applications in second language acquisition: Foundations for teaching testing 
and research. Cambridge: CUP 
Jozef Colpaert.  2004. Design of online interactive language courseware: conceptualization, specification and 
prototyping: research into the impact of linguistic-didactic functionality on software architecture.- 
Antwerpen: Universiteit Antwerpen, Faculteit Letteren en Wijsbegeerte, Departement Taalkunde, 2004 - 
Doctoral dissertation 
DCRGA.   2009.  20-year strategy for the Irish Language.  Prepared for the Department of Community, Rural 
and Gaeltacht Affairs.  Fiontar, Dublin City University.   
Joy Egbert,, Trena M. Paulus and Yoko  Nakamichi.  2002. The impact of CALL instruction on classroom com-
puter use: A foundation for rethinking technology in teacher education. Language Learning & Technol-
ogy, 6(3), 108-126. 
John Harris and Lelia Murtagh.   1999.  Teaching and Learning Irish in Primary School.  Dublin: IT?. 
Tina Hickey and Nancy Stenson..  2011. Irish orthography: what do teachers and learners need to know about it, 
and why?. Language, Culture and Curriculum,24(1). 
Thomas Koller.  2004. Creation and evaluation of animated grammars. Eurocall 2004, Vienna, Austria (3rd Sep-
tember 2004). 
ICT4LT.  2005. Information and Communications Technology for Language Teaching (ICT4LT) Pro-
ject: Evaluation Forms  
Lori S. Levin and David A. Evans.   1995.  ALICE-cha: A Case Study in ICALL Theory and Practice.  In: V. M. 
Holland, J.D. Kaplan and M.R. Sams (Eds.) Intelligent Language Tutors (pp. 327-44).  Mahwah: Lawrence 
Erlbaum  
Khang N. Lam, Feras Al Tarouti and Jugal Kalita.  2014. Creating Lexical Resources for Endangered Lan-
guages. ComputEL at ACL 2014. 
Claudia Leacock., Martin Chodorow, Michael Gamon and Joel Tetreault.   2014. Automated grammatical error 
detection for language learners. Synthesis lectures on human language technologies. Second Edition. 
C. Matthews.  1993.  Grammar frameworks in Intelligent CALL.  CALICO Journal 11, 1: 5-27.  
Brian McCarthy. 1999. Integration: the sine qua non of CALL. CALL-EJ Online,1(2), 1-12. 
Merriampark.   2005.  Levenshtein distance algorithm.  
Linda Murphy and Stella Hurd.  2011.  Fostering learner autonomy and motivation in blended teaching.  In: 
Nicolson, Margaret; Murphy, Linda and Southgate, Margaret eds. Language Teaching in Blended Con-
texts.Edinburgh, U.K.: Dunedin Academic Press Ltd, pp. 43?56. 
Lelia Murtagh.  2003. Retention and Attrition of Irish as a Second Language: a longitudinal study of general and 
communicative proficiency in Irish among second level school leavers and the influence of instructional 
background, language use and attitude/motivation variables.  PhD thesis, University of Groningen. 
John Nerbonne.  2003.  Natural Language Processing in Computer-Aided Language Learning.  In: S. Mitkov 
(Ed.) The Oxford Handbook of Computational Linguistics.  Oxford: OUP 
16
Donncha ? h?allaithe.  2004. From Language Revival to Survival. In: C. M. Murchaidh (ed.), Who Needs Irish? 
Reflections on the Importance of the Irish Language Today, Dublin: Veritas Publications. 
P?draig ? Riag?in. and M. ? Glias?in.  1994. National Survey on Languages 1993: Preliminary Report. Dublin: 
Institiuid Teangeolaiochta Eireann. 
Kevin Scannell.   2005.  An Gramad?ir.  Available at: http://borel.slu.edu/gramadoir/ 
Thornbury H., Elder M., Crowe D., Bennett P. & Belton V. 1996. Suggestions for successful integration. Active 
Learning, 4, 18-23. 
Elaine U? Dhonnchadha.   2002. Two-level Finite-State Morphology for Irish, In: Proceedings of LREC 2002 3 
rd International Conference on Language resources and Evaluation. Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain. 
Anne Vandeventer Faltin. 2003.  Syntactic Error Diagnosis in the context of Computer Assisted Language 
Learning.  PhD Thesis, Facult? des letters d l?Universit? de Gen?ve. 
Monica Ward.   2001.  A Template for CALL Programs for Endangered Languages.  Masters thesis Dublin City 
University.   
Monica Ward. 2007.   A template for CALL programs for endangered languages. (Doctoral dissertation, Dublin 
City University). 
Tony Woodbury.  2003. Defining documentary linguistics. Language documentation and description, 1(1), 35-
51. 
17
