A C lass i f i ca t ion  Approach  to  Word  Pred ic t ion*  
Ya i r  Even-Zohar  Dan Roth  
Depar tment  of Computer  Science 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign  
{evenzoha, danr}~uiuc, edu 
Abst rac t  
The eventual goal of a language model is to accu- 
rately predict he value of a missing word given its 
context. We present an approach to word prediction 
that is based on learning a representation for each 
word as a function of words and linguistics pred- 
icates in its context. This approach raises a few 
new questions that we address. First, in order to 
learn good word representations it is necessary to 
use an expressive representation f the context. We 
present away that uses external knowledge to gener- 
ate expressive context representations, along with a 
learning method capable of handling the large num- 
ber of features generated this way that can, poten- 
tially, contribute to each prediction. Second, since 
the number of words "competing" for each predic- 
tion is large, there is a need to "focus the attention" 
on a smaller subset of these. We exhibit he contri- 
bution of a "focus of attention" mechanism to the 
performance of the word predictor. Finally, we de- 
scribe a large scale experimental study in which the 
approach presented is shown to yield significant im- 
provements in word prediction tasks. 
1 In t roduct ion  
The task of predicting the most likely word based on 
properties of its surrounding context is the archetyp- 
ical prediction problem in natural language process- 
ing (NLP). In many NLP tasks it is necessary to de- 
termine the most likely word, part-of-speech (POS) 
tag or any other token, given its history or context. 
Examples include part-of speech tagging, word-sense 
disambiguation, speech recognition, accent restora- 
tion, word choice selection in machine translation, 
context-sensitive spelling correction and identifying 
discourse markers. Most approaches to these prob- 
lems are based on n-gram-like modeling. Namely, 
the learning methods make use of features which are 
conjunctions of typically (up to) three consecutive 
words or POS tags in order to derive the predictor. 
In this paper we show that incorporating addi- 
tional information into the learning process is very 
* This research is supported by NSF grants IIS-9801638 and 
SBR-987345. 
beneficial. In particular, we provide the learner with 
a rich set of features that combine the information 
available in the local context along with shallow 
parsing information. At the same time, we study 
a learning approach that is specifically tailored for 
problems in which the potential number of features 
is very large but only a fairly small number of them 
actually participates in the decision. Word predic- 
tion experiments hat we perform show significant 
improvements in error rate relative to the use of the 
traditional, restricted, set of features. 
Background 
The most influential problem in motivating statis- 
tical learning application in NLP tasks is that of 
word selection in speech recognition (Jelinek, 1998). 
There, word classifiers are derived from a probabilis- 
tic language model which estimates the probability 
of a sentence s using Bayes rule as the product of 
conditional probabilities, 
Pr(s) - = 
-- H~=lPr(wi \ ]wl , . . .Wi_ l  ) 
-- H?=lPr(wi\[hi ) 
where hi is the relevant history when predicting wi. 
Thus, in order to predict he most likely word in a 
given context, a global estimation of the sentence 
probability is derived which, in turn, is computed 
by estimating the probability of each word given its 
local context or history. Estimating terms of the 
form Pr (wlh  ) is done by assuming some generative 
probabilistic model, typically using Markov or other 
independence assumptions, which gives rise to es- 
timating conditional probabilities of n-grams type 
features (in the word or POS space). Machine learn- 
ing based classifiers and maximum entropy models 
which, in principle, are not restricted to features of 
these forms have used them nevertheless, perhaps 
under the influence of probabilistic methods (Brill, 
1995; Yarowsky, 1994; Ratnaparkhi et al, 1994). 
It has been argued that the information available 
in the local context of each word should be aug- 
mented by global sentence information and even in- 
formation external to the sentence in order to learn 
124 
better classifiers and language models. Efforts in 
this directions consists of (1) directly adding syn- 
tactic information, as in (Chelba and Jelinek, 1998; 
Rosenfeld, 1996), and (2) indirectly adding syntac- 
tic and semantic information, via similarity models; 
in this case n-gram type features are used when- 
ever possible, and when they cannot be used (due 
to data sparsity), additional information compiled 
into a similarity measure is used (Dagan et al, 
1999). Nevertheless, the efforts in this direction so 
far have shown very insignificant improvements, if 
any (Chelba and Jelinek, 1998; Rosenfeld, 1996). 
We believe that the main reason for that is that in- 
corporating information sources in NLP needs to be 
coupled with a learning approach that is suitable for 
it. 
Studies have shown that both machine learning 
and probabilistic learning methods used in NLP 
make decisions using a linear decision surface over 
the feature space (Roth, 1998; Roth, 1999). In this 
view, the feature space consists of simple functions 
(e.g., n-grams) over the the original data so as to 
allow for expressive nough representations u ing a 
simple functional form (e.g., a linear function). This 
implies that the number of potential features that 
the learning stage needs to consider may be very 
large, and may grow rapidly when increasing the ex- 
pressivity of the features. Therefore a feasible com- 
putational approach needs to be feature-efficient. I  
needs to tolerate a large number of potential features 
in the sense that the number of examples required 
for it to converge should depend mostly on the num- 
ber features relevant o the decision, rather than on 
the number of potential features. 
This paper addresses the two issues mentioned 
above. It presents a rich set of features that is con- 
structed using information readily available in the 
sentence along with shallow parsing and dependency 
information. It then presents a learning approach 
that can use this expressive (and potentially large) 
intermediate r presentation a d shows that it yields 
a significant improvement in word error rate for the 
task of word prediction. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In 
section 2 we formalize the problem, discuss the in- 
formation sources available to the learning system 
and how we use those to construct features. In sec- 
tion 3 we present he learning approach, based on 
the SNoW learning architecture. Section 4 presents 
our experimental study and results. In section 4.4 
we discuss the issue of deciding on a set of candi- 
date words for each decision. Section 5 concludes 
and discusses future work. 
2 In fo rmat ion  Sources  and  Features  
Our goal is to learn a representation for each word 
in terms of features which characterize the syntactic 
and semantic ontext in which the word tends to 
appear. Our features are defined as simple relations 
over a collection of predicates that capture (some of) 
the information available in a sentence. 
2.1 In fo rmat ion  Sources  
Def in i t ion  1 Let s =< wl,w2,. . . ,wn > be a sen- 
tence in which wi is the i-th word. Let :? be a col- 
lection of predicates over a sentence s. IS(s)) 1, the 
In fo rmat ion  source(s)  available for the sentence 
s is a representation ors as a list of predicates I E :r, 
XS(S) = {II(Wll  , ...Wl,),-.., /~g(W~l , ..-Wk,)}. 
Ji is the arity of the predicate I j .  
Example  2 Let s be the sentence 
< John, X, at,  the, clock, to, see, what, time, i t ,  i s  > 
Let ~={word, pos, subj-verb}, with the interpreta- 
tion that word is a unary predicate that returns the 
value of the word in its domain; pos is a unary 
predicate that returns the value of the pos of the 
word in its domain, in the context of the sentence; 
sub j -  verb is a binary predicate that returns the 
value of the two words in its domain if the second is 
a verb in the sentence and the first is its subject; it 
returns ? otherwise. Then, 
IS(s)  = {word(wl) = John, ..., word(w3) = at,... ,  
word(wn) = is,  pos(w4) = DET,. . . ,  
s bj - verb(w , w2) = {John, x}...}. 
The IS representation f s consists only of the pred- 
icates with non-empty values. E.g., pos(w6) = 
modal is not part of the IS for the sentence above. 
subj - verb might not exist at all in the IS even if the 
predicate is available, e.g., in The ba l l  was given 
to Mary. 
Clearly the I S  representation f s does not contain 
all the information available to a human reading s; 
it captures, however, all the input that is available 
to the computational process discussed in the rest 
of this paper. The predicates could be generated by 
any external mechanism, even a learned one. This 
issue is orthogonal to the current discussion. 
2.2  Generat ing  Features  
Our goal is to learn a representation for each word 
of interest. Most efficient learning methods known 
today and, in particular, those used in NLP, make 
use of a linear decision surface over their feature 
space (Roth, 1998; Roth, 1999). Therefore, in or- 
der to learn expressive representations one needs to 
compose complex features as a function of the in- 
formation sources available. A linear function ex- 
pressed irectly in terms of those will not be expres- 
sive enough. We now define a language that allows 
1We denote IS(s) as IS wherever it is obvious what the 
referred sentence we is, or whenever we want to indicate In- 
formation Source in general. 
125 
one to define "types" of features 2 in terms of the 
information sources available to it. 
Def in i t ion 3 (Basic Features )  Let I E Z be a 
k-ary predicate with range R. Denote w k = 
(Wjl , . . .  , wjk). We define two basic binary relations 
as follows. For a e R we define: 
1 iffI(w k)=a 
f ( I (wk) ,  a) = 0 otherwise (1) 
An existential version of the relation is defined by: 
l i f f3aERs . t I (w  k)=a 
f ( I (wk) ,x )  = 0 otherwise (2) 
Features, which are defined as binary relations, can 
be composed to yield more complex relations in 
terms of the original predicates available in IS. 
Def in i t ion 4 (Compos ing  features)  Let f l ,  f2 
be feature definitions. Then fand(fl,  f2)  for(f1, f2)  
fnot(fl) are defined and given the usual semantic: 
liff:----h=l 
fand(fl, f2) = 0 otherwise 
l i f f := l  o r f2=l  
fob(f1, f2)  = 0 otherwise 
{ l~f f l=O 
fnot(fx) = 0 otherwise 
In order to learn with features generated using these 
definitions as input, it is important hat features 
generated when applying the definitions on different 
ISs are given the same identification. In this pre- 
sentation we assume that the composition operator 
along with the appropriate IS element (e.g., Ex. 2, 
Ex. 9) are written explicitly as the identification of 
the features. Some of the subtleties in defining the 
output representation are addressed in (Cumby and 
Roth, 2000). 
2.3 S t ructured  Features  
So far we have presented features as relations over 
IS(s)  and allowed for Boolean composition opera- 
tors. In most cases more information than just a list 
of active predicates is available. We abstract his 
using the notion of a structural information source 
(SIS(s))  defined below. This allows richer class of 
feature types to be defined. 
2We note that we do not define the features will be used in 
the learning process. These are going to be defined in a data 
driven way given the definitions discussed here and the input 
ISs. The importance of formally defining the "types" is due 
to the fact that some of these are quantified. Evaluating them 
on a given sentence might be computationally intractable and 
a formal definition would help to flesh out the difficulties and 
aid in designing the language (Cumby and Roth, 2000). 
2.4 S t ructured  Instances  
Def in i t ion 5 (S t ructura l  In fo rmat ion  Source)  
Let s =< wl,w2, ...,Wn >. SIS(s)), the St ructura l  
In fo rmat ion  source(s)  available for the sentence 
s, is a tuple (s, E1, . . .  ,Ek) of directed acyclic 
graphs with s as the set of vertices and Ei 's, a set 
of edges in s. 
Example  6 (L inear  S t ructure)  The simplest 
SIS is the one corresponding to the linear structure 
of the sentence. That is, S IS(s )  = (s ,E)  where 
(wi, wj) E E iff the word wi occurs immediately 
before wj in the sentence (Figure 1 bottom left 
part). 
In a linear structure (s =< Wl,W2,...,Wn >,E) ,  
where E = {(wi,wi+l); i  = 1, . . .n -  1}, we define 
the chain 
c(w j ,  \[l, r\]) = {w,_ , , . . . ,  w j , . . ,  n s. 
We can now define a new set of features that 
makes use of the structural information. Structural 
features are defined using the SIS. When defining a 
feature, the naming of nodes in s is done relative to 
a distinguished node, denoted wp, which we call the 
focus word of the feature. Regardless of the arity 
of the features we sometimes denote the feature f
defined with respect o wp as f(wp). 
Def in i t ion  7 (P rox imi ty )  Let S IS (s )  = (s, E) be 
the linear structure and let I E Z be a k-ary predicate 
with range R. Let Wp be a focus word and C = 
C(wp, \[l, r\]) the chain around it. Then, the proximity 
features for I with respect o the chain C are defined 
as: 
fc(l(w), a) = { 1 i f I (w)  = a ,a  E R ,w E C 0 otherwise 
(3) 
The second type of feature composition defined 
using the structure is a collocation operator. 
Def in i t ion 8 (Col locat ion)  Let f l , . . . f k  be fea- 
ture definitions, col locc ( f l , f 2, . . . f k ) is a restricted 
conjunctive operator that is evaluated on a chain 
C of length k in a graph. Specifically, let C = 
{wj,, wj=, .. . , wjk } be a chain of length k in S IS(s) .  
Then, the collocation feature for f l , . . ,  fk with re- 
spect to the chain C is defined as 
collocc(fl, . . . , fk) = { 
1 ifVi = 1 , . . . k ,  f i(wj,) = 1 
0 otherwise 
(4) 
The following example defines features that are 
used in the experiments described in Sec. 4. 
126 
Example  9 Let s be the sentence in Example 2. We 
define some of the features with respect o the linear 
structure of the sentence. The word X is used as 
the focus word and a chain \[-10, 10\] is defined with 
respect o it. The proximity features are defined with 
respect o the predicate word. We get, for example: 
fc(word) ---- John; fc(word) = at; fc(word) = clock. 
Collocation features are defined with respect o a 
chain \[-2, 2\] centered at the focus word X.  They are 
defined with respect o two basic features f l ,  f2 each 
of which can be either f(word, a) or f(pos, a). The 
resulting features include, for example: 
collocc(word, word)= { John-  X}; 
collocc(word, word) = {X - at}; 
collocc(word, pos) = {at -  DET}.  
2.5 Non-L inear  S t ructure  
So far we have described feature definitions which 
make use of the linear structure of the sentence and 
yield features which are not too different from stan- 
dard features used in the literature e.g., n-grams 
with respect o pos or word can be defined as colloc 
for the appropriate chain. Consider now that we are 
given a general directed acyclic graph G = (s, E) 
on the the sentence s as its nodes. Given a distin- 
guished focus word wp 6 s we can define a chain in 
the graph as we did above for the linear structure 
of the sentence. Since the definitions given above, 
Def. 7 and Def. 8, were given for chains they would 
apply for any chain in any graph. This generaliza- 
tion becomes interesting if we are given a graph that 
represents a more involved structure of the sentence. 
Consider, for example the graph DG(s) in Fig- 
ure 1. DG(s) described the dependency graph of 
the sentence s. An edge (wi,wj) in DG(s) repre- 
sent a dependency between the two words. In our 
feature generation language we separate the infor- 
mation provided by the dependency grammar 3 to 
two parts. The structural information, provided in 
the left side of Figure 1, is used to generate SIS(s) .  
The labels on the edges are used as predicates and 
are part of IS(s).  Notice that some authors (Yuret, 
1998; Berger and Printz, 1998) have used the struc- 
tural information, but have not used the information 
given by the labels on the edges as we do. 
The following example defines features that are 
used in the experiments described in Sec. 4. 
Example  10 Let s be the sentence in Figure 1 
along with its IS that is defined using the predicates 
word, pos, sub j ,  obj ,  aux_vrb. A sub j -verb  
3This information can be produced by a functional de- 
pendency grammar (FDG), which assigns each word a spe- 
cific function, and then structures the sentence hierarchical ly 
based on it, as we do here (Tapanainen and Jrvinen, 1997), 
but can also be generated by an external  rule-based parser or 
a learned one. 
feature, fsubj-verb, can be defined as a collocation 
over chains constructed with respect to the focus 
word jo in .  Moreover, we can define fsubj-verb to 
be active also when there is an aux_vrb between 
the subj and verb, by defining it as a disjunction 
of two collocation features, the sub j -verb  and the 
subj-aux_vrb-verb.  Other features that we use are 
conjunctions of words that occur before the focus 
verb (here: j o in )  along all the chains it occurs in 
(here: wi l l ,  board,  as) and collocations of obj 
and verb. 
As a final comment on feature generation, we note 
that the language presented is used to define "types" 
of features. These are instantiated in a data driven 
way given input sentences. A large number of fea- 
tures is created in this way, most of which might not 
be relevant o the decision at hand; thus, this pro- 
cess needs to be followed by a learning process that 
can learn in the presence of these many features. 
3 The  Learn ing  Approach  
Our experimental investigation is done using the 
SNo W learning system (Roth, 1998). Earlier ver- 
sions of SNoW (Roth, 1998; Golding and Roth, 
1999; Roth and Zelenko, 1998; Munoz et al, 1999) 
have been applied successfully to several natural an- 
guage related tasks. Here we use SNo W for the task 
of word prediction; a representation is learned for 
each word of interest, and these compete at evalua- 
tion time to determine the prediction. 
3.1 The  SNOW Arch i tec ture  
The SNo W architecture is a sparse network of linear 
units over a common pre-defined or incrementally 
learned feature space. It is specifically tailored for 
learning in domains in which the potential number of 
features might be very large but only a small subset 
of them is actually relevant o the decision made. 
Nodes in the input layer of the network represent 
simple relations on the input sentence and are being 
used as the input features. Target nodes represent 
words that are of interest; in the case studied here, 
each of the word candidates for prediction is repre- 
sented as a target node. An input sentence, along 
with a designated word of interest in it, is mapped 
into a set of features which are active in it; this rep- 
resentation is presented to the input layer of SNoW 
and propagates to the target nodes. Target nodes 
are linked via weighted edges to (some of) the input 
features. Let At = {Q, . . .  , i,~} be the set of features 
that are active in an example and are linked to the 
target node t. Then the linear unit corresponding to
t is active iff 
t E w i > Ot, 
iEAt 
where w~ is the weight on the edge connecting the ith 
feature to the target node t, and Ot is the threshold 
127 
~ , Nov.29. 
will- board -~? 
Vi ~ ,~ t!e d i re~a 
Pierr/e Ye~ars old l 
-~ non-executive 
61 
Pierre -*Vinken-.-, -~ 61 -*-years -'*old ~ -" will - -  \] 
?join ---the -,-board -.- as--- a +non-executive I 
? 
director-.- 29. -=-Nov. 
~.  ,, Nov. 29. old 
aux_vrb obj 
~sub?" will J  b?~rd corped~%~ 
det pcomp det.. a-.. Vir~.n 
attr "moc l  tl~e director, 
Pier're years attr 
* non-eXecutive qnt 
6t 
Pierre Vinken, 61 years old, will join the board as a 
nonexecutive director Nov. 29. 
Figure 1: A sentence  w i th  a l inear and a dependency  grammar  s t ructure  
for the target node t. In this way, SNo W provides 
a collection of word representations rather than just 
discriminators. 
A given example is treated autonomously by each 
target subnetwork; an example labeled t may be 
treated as a positive example by the subnetwork 
for t and as a negative xample by the rest of the 
target nodes. The learning policy is on-line and 
mistake-driven; several update rules can be used 
within SNOW. The most successful update rule is 
a variant of Littlestone's Winnow update rule (Lit- 
tlestone, 1988), a multiplicative update rule that is 
tailored to the situation in which the set of input 
features is not known a priori, as in the infinite 
attribute model (Blum, 1992). This mechanism is 
implemented via the sparse architecture of SNOW. 
That is, (1) input features are allocated in a data 
driven way - an input node for the feature i is al- 
located only if the feature i was active in any input 
sentence and (2) a link (i.e., a non-zero weight) ex- 
ists between a target node t and a feature i if and 
only if i was active in an example labeled t. 
One of the important properties of the sparse ar- 
chitecture is that the complexity of processing an 
example depends only on the number of features ac- 
tive in it, na, and is independent of the total num- 
ber of features, nt, observed over the life time of the 
system. This is important in domains in which the 
total number of features is very large, but only a 
small number of them is active in each example. 
4 Exper imenta l  S tudy  
4.1 Task def in i t ion 
The experiments were conducted with four goals in 
mind: 
1. To compare mistake driven algorithms with 
naive Bayes, trigram with backoff and a simple 
maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) base- 
line. 
2. To create a set of experiments which is compa- 
rable with similar experiments hat were previ- 
ously conducted by other researchers. 
3. To build a baseline for two types of extensions of 
the simple use of linear features: (i) Non-Linear 
features (ii) Automatic focus of attention. 
4. To evaluate word prediction as a simple lan- 
guage model. 
We chose the verb prediction task which is sim- 
ilar to other word prediction tasks (e.g.,(Golding 
and Roth, 1999)) and, in particular, follows the 
paradigm in (Lee and Pereira, 1999; Dagan et al, 
1999; Lee, 1999). There, a list of the confusion sets is 
constructed first, each consists of two different verbs. 
The verb vl is coupled with v2 provided that they 
occur equally likely in the corpus. In the test set, 
every occurrence of vl or v2 was replaced by a set 
{vl, v2} and the classification task was to predict he 
correct verb. For example, if a confusion set is cre- 
ated for the verbs "make" and "sell", then the data 
is altered as follows: 
Once target subnetworks have been learned and 
the network is being evaluated, a decision sup- 
port mechanism is employed, which selects the 
dominant active target node in the SNoW unit 
via a winner-take-all mechanism to produce a fi- 
nal prediction. SNoW is available publicly at 
http ://L2R. cs. uiuc. edu/- cogcomp, html. 
make the paper --+ {make,sell} the paper 
sell sensitive data --~ {make,sell} sensitive data 
The evaluated predictor chooses which of the two 
verbs is more likely to occur in the current sentence. 
In choosing the prediction task in this way, we 
make sure the task in difficult by choosing between 
128 
competing words that have the same prior proba- 
bilities and have the same part of speech. A fur- 
ther advantage of this paradigm is that in future 
experiments we may choose the candidate verbs so 
that they have the same sub-categorization, pho- 
netic transcription, etc. in order to imitate the first 
phase of language modeling used in creating can- 
didates for the prediction task. Moreover, the pre- 
transformed data provides the correct answer so that 
(i) it is easy to generate training data; no supervi- 
sion is required, and (ii) it is easy to evaluate the 
results assuming that the most appropriate word is 
provided in the original text. 
Results are evaluated using word-error rate 
(WER). Namely, every time we predict the wrong 
word it is counted as a mistake. 
4.2 Data 
We used the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) of the years 
88-89. The size of our corpus is about 1,000,000 
words. The corpus was divided into 80% training 
and 20% test. The training and the test data were 
processed by the FDG parser (Tapanainen and Jrvi- 
nen, 1997). Only verbs that occur at least 50 times 
in the corpus were chosen. This resulted in 278 verbs 
that we split into 139 confusion sets as above. Af- 
ter filtering the examples of verbs which were not in 
any of the sets we use 73, 184 training examples and 
19,852 test examples. 
4.3 Results 
4.3.1 Features 
In order to test the advantages of different feature 
sets we conducted experiments using the following 
features ets: 
1. Linear features: proximity of window size 4-10 
words, conjunction of size 2 using window size 
4-2. The conjunction combines words and parts 
of speech. 
2. Linear + Non linear features: using the lin- 
ear features defined in (1) along with non 
linear features that use the predicates ub j ,  
obj ,  word, pos, the collocations ubj -verb,  
verb-obj  linked to the focus verb via the graph 
structure and conjunction of 2 linked words. 
The over all number of features we have generated 
for all 278 target verbs was around 400,000. In all 
tables below the NB columns represent results of the 
naive Bayes algorithm as implemented within SNoW 
and the SNoW column represents the results of the 
sparse Winnow algorithm within SNOW. 
Table 1 summarizes the results of the experiments 
with the features ets (1), (2) above. The baseline 
experiment uses MLE, the majority predictor. In 
addition, we conducted the same experiment using 
trigram with backoff and the WER is 29.3%. From 
Linear 
Non Linear 
Bline NB SNoW 
49.6 13.54 11.56 
49.6 12.25 9.84 
Table 1: Word Error Rate results for linear 
and non-linear features 
these results we conclude that using more expressive 
features helps significantly in reducing the WER. 
However, one can use those types of features only 
if the learning method handles large number of pos- 
sible features. This emphasizes the importance of 
the new learning method. 
Similarity NB SNoW 
54.6% 59.1% WSJ data 
AP news 47.6% 
Table 2: Compar i son  o f  the improvement 
achieved using similarity methods (Dagan et 
al., 1999) and using the methods presented in 
this paper. Results are shown in percentage 
of improvement in accuracy over the baseline. 
Table 2 compares our method to methods that use 
similarity measures (Dagan et al, 1999; Lee, 1999). 
Since we could not use the same corpus as in those 
experiments, we compare the ratio of improvement 
and not the WER. The baseline in this studies is 
different, but other than that the experiments are 
identical. We show an improvement over the best 
similarity method. Furthermore, we train using only 
73,184 examples while (Dagan et al, 1999) train 
using 587, 833 examples. Given our experience with 
our approach on other data sets we conjecture that 
we could have improved the results further had we 
used that many training examples. 
4.4 Focus of  attention 
SNoW is used in our experiments as a multi-class 
predictor - a representation is learned for each word 
in a given set and, at evaluation time, one of these 
is selected as the prediction. The set of candidate 
words is called the confusion set (Golding and Roth, 
1999). Let C be the set of all target words. In previ- 
ous experiments we generated artificially subsets of 
size 2 of C in order to evaluate the performance of 
our methods. In general, however, the question of 
determining a good set of candidates i interesting in
it own right. In the absence, of a good method, one 
might end up choosing a verb from among a larger 
set of candidates. We would like to study the effects 
this issue has on the performance of our method. 
In principle, instead of working with a single large 
confusion set C, it might be possible to,split C into 
subsets of smaller size. This process, which we call 
the focus of attention (FOA) would be beneficial 
only if we can guarantee that, with high probability, 
129 
given a prediction task, we know which confusion 
set to use, so that the true target belongs to it. In 
fact, the FOA problem can be discussed separately 
for the training and test stages. 
1. Training: Given our training policy (Sec. 3) ev- 
ery positive xample serves as a negative xam- 
ple to all other targets in its confusion set. For 
a large set C training might become computa- 
tionally infeasible. 
2. Testing: considering only a small set of words 
as candidates at evaluation time increases the 
baseline and might be significant from the point 
of view of accuracy and efficiency. 
To evaluate the advantage of reducing the size of 
the confusion set in the training and test phases, we 
conducted the following experiments u ing the same 
features et (linear features as in Table 1). 
Bline NB SNoW 
Tra in  All Test All 87.44 65.22 65.05 
Train All Test 2 49.6 13.54 13.15 
Train 2 Test 2 49.6 13.54 11.55 
Table 3: Evaluat ing Focus of  Attent ion:  Word 
Er ror  Rate  for Training and testing using 
all the words together  against using pairs of  
words. 
"Train All" means training on all 278 targets to- 
gether. "Test all" means that the confusion set is 
of size 278 and includes all the targets. The results 
shown in Table 3 suggest that, in terms of accuracy, 
the significant factor is the confusion set size in the 
test stage. The effect of the confusion set size on 
training is minimal (although it does affect raining 
time). We note that for the naive Bayes algorithm 
the notion of negative xamples does not exist, and 
therefore regardless of the size of confusion set in 
training, it learns exactly the same representations. 
Thus, in the NB column, the confusion set size in 
training makes no difference. 
The application in which a word predictor is used 
might give a partial solution to the FOA problem. 
For example, given a prediction task in the context 
of speech recognition the phonemes that constitute 
the word might be known and thus suggest a way 
to generate a small confusion set to be used when 
evaluating the predictors. 
Tables 4,5 present he results of using artificially 
simulated speech recognizer using a method of gen- 
eral phonetic lasses. That is, instead of transcrib- 
ing a word by the phoneme, the word is transcribed 
by the phoneme classes(Jurafsky and Martin, 200). 
Specifically, these experiments deviate from the task 
definition given above. The confusion sets used are 
of different sizes and they consist of verbs with dif- 
ferent prior probabilities in the corpus. Two sets of 
experiments were conducted that use the phonetic 
transcription ofthe words to generate confusion sets. 
Bl ine NB SNoW 
Train All Test PC  19.84 11.6 12.3 
Train PC  Test PC  19.84 11.6 11.3 
Table 4: Simulating Speech Recognizer:  Word  
Er ror  Rate  for Training and testing with 
confusion sets determined based on phonet ic  
classes (PC) f rom a s imulated speech recog- 
nizer. 
In the first experiment (Table 4), the transcription 
of each word is given by the broad phonetic groups 
to which the phonemes belong i.e., nasals, fricative, 
etc. 4. For example, the word "b_u_y" is transcribed 
using phonemes as "b_Y" and here we transcribe it
as "P_VI" which stands for "Plosive_Vowell". This 
partition results in a partition of the set of verbs 
into several confusions sets. A few of these confusion 
sets consist of a single word and therefore have 100% 
baseline, which explains the high baseline. 
Bline NB SNoW 
Train All Test PC  45.63 26.36 27.54 
Train PC  Test PC  45.63 26.36 25.55 
Table 5: Simulat ing Speech Recognizer:  Word  
Er ror  Rate  for Training and testing with 
confusion sets determined based on phonet ic  
classes (PC) f rom a s imulated speech recog- 
nizer. In this case only confusion sets that 
have less than 98% baseline are used, which 
explains the overall  lower baseline. 
Table 5 presents the results of a similar exper- 
iment in which only confusion sets with multiple 
words were used, resulting in a lower baseline. 
As before, Train All means that training is done 
with all 278 targets together while Train PC means 
that the PC confusion sets were used also in train- 
ing. We note that for the case of SNOW, used here 
with the sparse Winnow algorithm, that size of the 
confusion set in training has some, although small, 
effect. The reason is that when the training is done 
with all the target words, each target word repre- 
sentation with all the examples in which it does not 
occur are used as negative xamples. When a smaller 
confusion set is used the negative xamples are more 
likely to be "true" negative. 
5 Conc lus ion  
This paper presents a new approach to word predic- 
tion tasks. For each word of interest, a word repre- 
sentation is learned as a function of a common, but 
4In this experiment, he vowels phonemes were divided 
into two different groups to account for different sounds. 
130 
potentially very large set of expressive (relational) 
features. Given a prediction task (a sentence with 
a missing word) the word representations are evalu- 
ated on it and compete for the most likely word to 
complete the sentence. 
We have described a language that allows one to 
define expressive feature types and have exhibited 
experimentally the advantage ofusing those on word 
prediction task. We have argued that the success of 
this approach inges on the combination of using a 
large set of expressive f atures along with a learning 
approach that can tolerate it and converges quickly 
despite the large dimensionality of the data. We 
believe that this approach would be useful for other 
disambiguation tasks in NLP. 
We have also presented a preliminary study of a 
reduction in the confusion set size and its effects 
on the prediction performance. In future work we 
intend to study ways that determine the appropriate 
confusion set in a way to makes use of the current 
task properties. 
Acknowledgments 
We gratefully acknowledge helpful comments and 
programming help from Chad Cumby. 
References 
A. Berger and H. Printz. 1998. Recognition perfor- 
mance of a large-scale dependency-grammar lan- 
guage model. In Int'l Conference on Spoken Lan- 
guage Processing (ICSLP'98), Sydney, Australia. 
A. Blum. 1992. Learning boolean functions in 
an infinite attribute space. Machine Learning, 
9(4):373-386. 
E. Brill. 1995. Transformation-based error-driven 
learning and natural language processing: A case 
study in part of speech tagging. Computational 
Linguistics, 21(4):543-565. 
C. Chelba and F. Jelinek. 1998. Exploiting syntac- 
tic structure for language modeling. In COLING- 
A CL '98. 
C. Cumby and D. Roth. 2000. Relational repre- 
sentations that facilitate learning. In Proc. of 
the International Conference on the Principles of 
Knowledge Representation a d Reasoning. To ap- 
pear. 
I. Dagan, L. Lee, and F. Pereira. 1999. Similarity- 
based models of word cooccurrence probabilities. 
Machine Learning, 34(1-3):43-69. 
A. R. Golding and D. Roth. 1999. A Winnow based 
approach to context-sensitive spelling correction. 
Machine Learning, 34(1-3):107-130. Special Issue 
on Machine Learning and Natural Language. 
F. Jelinek. 1998. Statistical Methods for Speech 
Recognition. MIT Press. 
D. Jurafsky and J. H. Martin. 200. Speech and Lan- 
guage Processing. Prentice Hall. 
L. Lee and F. Pereira. 1999. Distributional similar- 
ity models: Clustering vs. nearest neighbors. In 
A CL 99, pages 33-40. 
L. Lee. 1999. Measure of distributional similarity. 
In A CL 99, pages 25-32. 
N. Littlestone. 1988. Learning quickly when irrel- 
evant attributes abound: A new linear-threshold 
algorithm. Machine Learning, 2:285-318. 
M. Munoz, V. Punyakanok, D. Roth, and D. Zimak. 
1999. A learning approach to shallow parsing. In 
EMNLP-VLC'99, the Joint SIGDAT Conference 
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro- 
cessing and Very Large Corpora, June. 
A. Ratnaparkhi, J. Reynar, and S. Roukos. 1994. A 
maximum entropy model for prepositional phrase 
attachment. In ARPA, Plainsboro, N J, March. 
R. Rosenfeld. 1996. A maximum entropy approach 
to adaptive statistical language modeling. Com- 
puter, Speech and Language, 10. 
D. Roth and D. Zelenko. 1998. Part of speech 
tagging using a network of linear separators. 
In COLING-ACL 98, The 17th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 
1136-1142. 
D. Roth. 1998. Learning to resolve natural language 
ambiguities: A unified approach. In Proc. Na- 
tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 
806-813. 
D. Roth. 1999. Learning in natural anguage. In 
Proc. of the International Joint Conference of Ar- 
tificial Intelligence, pages 898-904. 
P. Tapanainen and T. Jrvinen. 1997. A non- 
projective dependency parser. In In Proceedings 
of the 5th Conference on Applied Natural Lan- 
guage Processing, Washington DC. 
D. Yarowsky. 1994. Decision lists for lexical ambi- 
guity resolution: application to accent restoration 
in Spanish and French. In Proc. of the Annual 
Meeting of the A CL, pages 88-95. 
D. Yuret. 1998. Discovery of Linguistic Relations 
Using Lexical Attraction. Ph.D. thesis, MIT. 
131 
A Sequential Model for Multi-Class Classification  
Yair Even-Zohar Dan Roth
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

evenzoha,danr  @uiuc.edu
Abstract
Many classification problems require decisions
among a large number of competing classes. These
tasks, however, are not handled well by general pur-
pose learning methods and are usually addressed in
an ad-hoc fashion. We suggest a general approach
? a sequential learning model that utilizes classi-
fiers to sequentially restrict the number of compet-
ing classes while maintaining, with high probability,
the presence of the true outcome in the candidates
set. Some theoretical and computational properties
of the model are discussed and we argue that these
are important in NLP-like domains. The advantages
of the model are illustrated in an experiment in part-
of-speech tagging.
1 Introduction
A large number of important natural language infer-
ences can be viewed as problems of resolving ambi-
guity, either semantic or syntactic, based on proper-
ties of the surrounding context. These, in turn, can
all be viewed as classification problems in which
the goal is to select a class label from among a
collection of candidates. Examples include part-of
speech tagging, word-sense disambiguation, accent
restoration, word choice selection in machine trans-
lation, context-sensitive spelling correction, word
selection in speech recognition and identifying dis-
course markers.
Machine learning methods have become the
most popular technique in a variety of classifi-
cation problems of these sort, and have shown
significant success. A partial list consists of
Bayesian classifiers (Gale et al, 1993), decision
lists (Yarowsky, 1994), Bayesian hybrids (Gold-
ing, 1995), HMMs (Charniak, 1993), inductive
logic methods (Zelle and Mooney, 1996), memory-

This research is supported by NSF grants IIS-9801638, IIS-
0085836 and SBR-987345.
based methods (Zavrel et al, 1997), linear classi-
fiers (Roth, 1998; Roth, 1999) and transformation-
based learning (Brill, 1995).
In many of these classification problems a signif-
icant source of difficulty is the fact that the number
of candidates is very large ? all words in words se-
lection problems, all possible tags in tagging prob-
lems etc. Since general purpose learning algorithms
do not handle these multi-class classification prob-
lems well (see below), most of the studies do not
address the whole problem; rather, a small set of
candidates (typically two) is first selected, and the
classifier is trained to choose among these. While
this approach is important in that it allows the re-
search community to develop better learning meth-
ods and evaluate them in a range of applications,
it is important to realize that an important stage is
missing. This could be significant when the clas-
sification methods are to be embedded as part of
a higher level NLP tasks such as machine transla-
tion or information extraction, where the small set
of candidates the classifier can handle may not be
fixed and could be hard to determine.
In this work we develop a general approach to
the study of multi-class classifiers. We suggest a se-
quential learning model that utilizes (almost) gen-
eral purpose classifiers to sequentially restrict the
number of competing classes while maintaining,
with high probability, the presence of the true out-
come in the candidate set.
In our paradigm the sought after classifier has to
choose a single class label (or a small set of la-
bels) from among a large set of labels. It works
by sequentially applying simpler classifiers, each
of which outputs a probability distribution over the
candidate labels. These distributions are multiplied
and thresholded, resulting in that each classifier in
the sequence needs to deal with a (significantly)
smaller number of the candidate labels than the pre-
vious classifier. The classifiers in the sequence are
selected to be simple in the sense that they typically
work only on part of the feature space where the de-
composition of feature space is done so as to achieve
statistical independence. Simple classifier are used
since they are more likely to be accurate; they are
chosen so that, with high probability (w.h.p.), they
have one sided error, and therefore the presence of
the true label in the candidate set is maintained. The
order of the sequence is determined so as to maxi-
mize the rate of decreasing the size of the candidate
labels set.
Beyond increased accuracy on multi-class classi-
fication problems , our scheme improves the com-
putation time of these problems several orders of
magnitude, relative to other standard schemes.
In this work we describe the approach, discuss
an experiment done in the context of part-of-speech
(pos) tagging, and provide some theoretical justifi-
cations to the approach. Sec. 2 provides some back-
ground on approaches to multi-class classification
in machine learning and in NLP. In Sec. 3 we de-
scribe the sequential model proposed here and in
Sec. 4 we describe an experiment the exhibits some
of its advantages. Some theoretical justifications are
outlined in Sec. 5.
2 Multi-Class Classification
Several works within the machine learning commu-
nity have attempted to develop general approaches
to multi-class classification. One of the most
promising approaches is that of error correcting out-
put codes (Dietterich and Bakiri, 1995); however,
this approach has not been able to handle well a
large number of classes (over 10 or 15, say) and its
use for most large scale NLP applications is there-
fore questionable. Statistician have studied several
schemes such as learning a single classifier for each
of the class labels (one vs. all) or learning a discrim-
inator for each pair of class labels, and discussed
their relative merits(Hastie and Tibshirani, 1998).
Although it has been argued that the latter should
provide better results than others, experimental re-
sults have been mixed (Allwein et al, 2000) and in
some cases, more involved schemes, e.g., learning a
classifier for each set of three class labels (and de-
ciding on the prediction in a tournament like fash-
ion) were shown to perform better (Teow and Loe,
2000). Moreover, none of these methods seem to be
computationally plausible for large scale problems,
since the number of classifiers one needs to train is,
at least, quadratic in the number of class labels.
Within NLP, several learning works have already
addressed the problem of multi-class classification.
In (Kudoh and Matsumoto, 2000) the methods of
?all pairs? was used to learn phrase annotations for
shallow parsing. More than  different classifiers
where used in this task, making it infeasible as a
general solution. All other cases we know of, have
taken into account some properties of the domain
and, in fact, several of the works can be viewed as
instantiations of the sequential model we formalize
here, albeit done in an ad-hoc fashion.
In speech recognition, a sequential model is used
to process speech signal. Abstracting away some
details, the first classifier used is a speech signal an-
alyzer; it assigns a positive probability only to some
of the words (using Levenshtein distance (Leven-
shtein, 1966) or somewhat more sophisticated tech-
niques (Levinson et al, 1990)). These words are
then assigned probabilities using a different contex-
tual classifier e.g., a language model, and then, (as
done in most current speech recognizers) an addi-
tional sentence level classifier uses the outcome of
the word classifiers in a word lattice to choose the
most likely sentence.
Several word prediction tasks make decisions in
a sequential way as well. In spell correction con-
fusion sets are created using a classifier that takes
as input the word transcription and outputs a posi-
tive probability for potential words. In conventional
spellers, the output of this classifier is then given
to the user who selects the intended word. In con-
text sensitive spelling correction (Golding and Roth,
1999; Mangu and Brill, 1997) an additional classi-
fier is then utilized to predict among words that are
supported by the first classifier, using contextual and
lexical information of the surrounding words. In all
studies done so far, however, the first classifier ? the
confusion sets ? were constructed manually by the
researchers.
Other word predictions tasks have also con-
structed manually the list of confusion sets (Lee
and Pereira, 1999; Dagan et al, 1999; Lee, 1999)
and justifications where given as to why this is a
reasonable way to construct it. (Even-Zohar and
Roth, 2000) present a similar task in which the con-
fusion sets generation was automated. Their study
also quantified experimentally the advantage in us-
ing early classifiers to restrict the size of the confu-
sion set.
Many other NLP tasks, such as pos tagging,
name entity recognition and shallow parsing require
multi-class classifiers. In several of these cases the
number of classes could be very large (e.g., pos tag-
ging in some languages, pos tagging when a finer
proper noun tag is used). The sequential model sug-
gested here is a natural solution.
3 The Sequential Model
We study the problem of learning a multi-class clas-
sifier, 
	   where   ,  
ff