Proceedings of the Workshop on Embodied Language Processing, pages 25?32,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 28, 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Which way to turn? Guide orientation in virtual way finding
Mark Evers
Technical & Professional
Communication
University of Twente
The Netherlands
M.Evers@alumnus.utwente.nl
Marie?t Theune
Human Media Interaction
University of Twente
The Netherlands
M.Theune@utwente.nl
Joyce Karreman
Technical & Professional
Communication
University of Twente
The Netherlands
J.Karreman@utwente.nl
Abstract
In this paper we describe an experiment
aimed at determining the most effective and
natural orientation of a virtual guide that
gives route directions in a 3D virtual envi-
ronment. We hypothesized that, due to the
presence of mirrored gestures, having the
route provider directly face the route seeker
would result in a less effective and less nat-
ural route description than having the route
provider adapt his orientation to that of the
route seeker. To compare the effectiveness
of the different orientations, after having re-
ceived a route description the participants in
our experiment had to ?virtually? traverse the
route using prerecorded route segments. The
results showed no difference in effectiveness
between the two orientations, but suggested
that the orientation where the speaker di-
rectly faces the route seeker is more natural.
1 Introduction
When someone approaches us and asks which way
to go, we naturally turn ? if necessary ? so we face
the direction to take (which makes it also easier for
ourselves to imagine traversing the route). Gener-
ally, the route seeker then also turns to adapt his
or her orientation to match ours, and we end up
sharing the same perspective on the route to take.1
Presumably, this matching of physical orientation is
1This observation is based on personal experience. We also
observed this behaviour in a small corpus of route description
video?s.
meant to reduce the mental effort that is involved
in matching another person?s perspective on a spa-
tial scene for both speaker and hearer (Shelton and
McNamara, 2004). However, someone who faces
an embodied virtual agent presenting a route de-
scription in a virtual environment (projected on a
computer screen) cannot turn to match his or her
perspective with that of the agent, as turning away
from the screen would result in losing sight of both
the agent and the virtual environment. In this sit-
uation, the only way to bring the perspectives of
route provider (agent) and route seeker (user) closer
together is for the agent to adapt its orientation to
match that of the user. In this paper, we describe an
experiment carried out to determine if such a change
in orientation by the route provider helps the route
seeker with virtual way finding. Although the ex-
periment was aimed at determining the most effec-
tive and natural orientation of a Virtual Guide, we
used prerecorded route descriptions presented by a
human route provider. The Virtual Guide that we
have developed (see next section) was still being im-
plemented at the time.
2 The Virtual Guide
We have developed an embodied Virtual Guide2 that
can give route directions in a 3D environment, which
is a virtual reality replica of a public building in our
home town. When navigating through this virtual
environment, shown on the computer screen from a
first person perspective, the user can approach the
Virtual Guide to ask for directions. Currently the
2See http://wwwhome.cs.utwente.nl/?hofs/dialogue for an
online demo.
25
Guide is behind the reception desk (see Figure 1),
but she can be situated anywhere in the building.
The first part of the interaction between the Vir-
tual Guide and the user consists of a natural lan-
guage dialogue in which the Guide tries to find out
the user?s intended destination. This may involve
subdialogues, in which either the Guide or the user
asks the other for clarification, and the resolution of
anaphoric expressions (e.g., How do I get there?).
Input and output modalities include text, speech and
pointing. For an in-depth description of the dialogue
module of the Virtual Guide, see Hofs et al (2003).
When the user?s destination has been established,
the Virtual Guide gives a natural language route de-
scription, in the form of a monologue that cannot
be interrupted. This is somewhat unnatural since
in real direction giving, the route seeker tends to
give feedback and, if necessary, ask for clarification
while the route is being described. However, since
in our system dialogue management and the gener-
ation of route descriptions are handled by separate,
specialised modules this is currently not possible.
The route is presented as a sequence of segments,
which are mostly expressed as ?point+direction?
combinations (Dale et al, 2005). That is, they con-
sist of a turn direction combined with the location
where this turn is to be made, specified in terms
of a landmark. For example, You go left at the in-
formation sign. The route description is generated
as follows. First, the shortest path between starting
point and destination is computed based on prede-
fined paths in the virtual environment. Turn direc-
tions are derived from the relative angles of sub-
sequent path segments, and landmarks are selected
based on their relative salience (e.g., in terms of size
or colour) and proximity to a turning point. The se-
quence of turn directions and associated landmarks
is then given as input to the natural language gen-
eration component, which is based on Exemplars
(White and Caldwell, 1998). After a first version
of the route description has been generated using a
collection of standard sentence structures, this ini-
tial description is revised by randomly aggregating
some sentences and adding cue phrases such as and
then, after that etc. to achieve some variation in the
generated text.
To generate appropriate gestures to accompany
the verbal route description, the generated text is
Figure 1: The Virtual Guide.
extended with tags associating the words in the
route description with different types of gestures.
Currently this is done using a simple keyword ap-
proach. Direction words (left, right) are associated
with pointing gestures in the corresponding direc-
tions, and references to landmarks are associated
with deictic gestures pointing to either the absolute
or the relative location of these objects (see Sec-
tion 3). Some iconic gestures (i.e., gestures that have
a resemblance in shape to what they depict) are also
available, for example a horizontal tube-like gesture
that can be used in references to corridors and tun-
nels. Unlike the pointing gestures, which are gener-
ated ?on the fly?, the iconic gestures of the Virtual
Guide are generated by using canned animations.
For a more sophisticated approach to the generation
of iconic gestures, see the work by Kopp et al (in
press) who describe the dynamic planning of novel
iconic gestures by NUMACK, an embodied conver-
sational agent that functions as a virtual guide for the
Northwestern University campus.
The last stage of the route description process in
our Virtual Guide is to send the marked-up text to
the animation planner, which actually generates the
required animations in synchronization with text-to-
speech output. The animation planner is based on
the work by Welbergen et al (2006).
3 The Guide?s gestures and orientation
During the route description, the Virtual Guide can
make pointing gestures from either an ?objective?
viewpoint, i.e., pointing at the absolute locations of
objects, or from a ?character? viewpoint, i.e., point-
26
ing at locations relative to the position of a person
who is walking the route. An objective viewpoint
makes most sense when pointing at objects that are
(in principle) visible to both the agent and the user,
which is only the case for objects that are located at
the start of the route. So, most of the time the Guide
will be using the character viewpoint, pointing left
and right relative to its own body to indicate land-
marks and directions from the perspective of some-
one who is walking along the route being described.
The typical orientation of information presenting
agents is facing the user. However, it is not a priori
clear that this would be the best option for the Vir-
tual Guide. When facing the user, all pointing ges-
tures made by the guide from a character viewpoint
would mirrored in the eyes of the user, so the latter
would have to perform a mental 180? re-orientation
of the gestures. This would demand extra cognitive
effort on top of processing and storing the verbally
presented route information, and might negatively
influence the user?s ability to reproduce the route di-
rections during actual traversal of the route.
In actual direction giving situations, people of-
ten tend to minimize the difference in orientation
between them. Therefore we wondered if reducing
the difference in orientation between the agent and
the user would help the user to find his way dur-
ing traversal. If the agent would turn to face almost
the same direction as the user, its gestures could be
expressed as close to the route seeker?s perspective
as possible, thus reducing the cognitive load for the
user in processing them. Also, we wondered if this
configuration would yield a more natural effect than
having the agent directly face the user during the
route description. We investigated these questions
in an experiment where participants had to virtu-
ally follow a route, presented to them in one of two
versions that differed in the orientation of the route
provider. Because the Virtual Guide was still be-
ing implemented at the time, we used route descrip-
tions by a human route provider. The experimental
setup and its results are presented below, followed
by some conclusions and future research directions.
4 The orientation experiment
The goal of the experiment was to investigate the ef-
fect of speaker orientation on the effectiveness and
Figure 2: Angle between route provider and route
seeker (camera)
naturalness of a route description. For our exper-
iment, we opted to use prerecorded route descrip-
tions, as this matched the capabilities of our Vir-
tual Guide (which can only present the route as a
monologue with no interaction) and also ensured
an unlimited number of reproductions of constant
quality and content. We recorded two separate
route descriptions that differed in speaker orienta-
tion with respect to the route seeker, but were other-
wise (largely) the same:
180? version The route provider is oriented at a
180? angle with respect to the route seeker, i.e.,
he directly faces the camera lens, creating mir-
rored gestures (his left is seen as right by the
viewer and vice versa). See Figures 2(a) and
3(a).
120? version The route provider is oriented at a
120? angle toward the route seeker, as if to
adapt his orientation to that of the route seeker.
See Figures 2(b) and 3(b).
We chose an orientation of 120? for the route
seeker-oriented version, so as to maintain visibility
of non-verbal signals. If the route provider were to
assume an orientation of 90? or less, as illustrated
in Figure 2(c), not all gestures would be visible and
maintaining eye contact could make his posture un-
natural.
The 120? and the 180? condition only differed
in bodily orientation while eye contact remained
unchanged and facial expressions remained visi-
ble. Also, although wording slightly varied, the
presented information was the same in both condi-
tions. The route descriptions were recorded on lo-
cation in a small town with short streets and plenty
27
a) b)
Figure 3: ?Turn left at the white building? (a: 180?, b: 120?)
of landmarks. The route being described led from
the recording location to the town hotel. The verbal
description was similar in structure to those gener-
ated by the Virtual Guide. It mentioned five decision
points, each connected with one or two characteris-
tic landmarks. For example, At the men?s fashion
shop, you turn right. During the route description,
the route provider made beat gestures and pointing
gestures from a character viewpoint, taking his own
body orientation as a reference for left and right.
Apart from a few slight variations, the gestures used
in both versions of the route description were the
same; see Figure 3. At the start of the route de-
scription, both route provider and route seeker were
exactly (180? version) or almost (120? version) per-
pendicular to the starting direction of the route.
After viewing one of the two versions of the route
description, the participants in the experiment had
to ?virtually traverse? the route (to measure effec-
tiveness of the route description) and were asked
how natural they found the route description. The
most realistic way to measure effectiveness of the
route description would have been to have the partic-
ipants walk the route in reality after having received
the description, as was done by Fujii et al (2000)
and Michon and Denis (2001). However, conduct-
ing such an experiment is a very time consuming
activity. As a more practical alternative we devel-
oped a reconstructive method allowing participants
to traverse the route on the computer, instead of in
a real (live) environment. In this set-up, participants
?traversed? the route by viewing prerecorded route
segments, showing a moving scene from a first per-
son perspective as if they walked through the streets
themselves, accompanied by street sounds. Apart
from practical considerations, an additional advan-
tage of this set-up is that it yields full control with
respect to repeatability and the participation setting
because of its playback nature.
Our hypotheses were as follows:
1. The 120? version is more effective, i.e., yields
a more successful traversal than its 180? coun-
terpart.
2. The 120? version yields a more natural route
description than its 180? counterpart.
4.1 Participants
A total of 49 participants were involved in the ex-
periment, aged 20 to 64 years (with an average of 33
years). Since no participants were younger than 12
or post 70, no specific effect of age on their spatial
skills was expected (Hunt and Waller, 1999). Since
gender is an influential factor in orientation and way
finding (Hunt and Waller, 1999; Lawton, 1994), we
used a 50% male - 50% female test population. The
120? version of the route description was shown to
13 male and 12 female participants; the 180? version
to 11 male and 13 female participants.
4.2 Procedure
The experiment consisted of the following steps.
Introduction - After reading an introductory text
explaining the experiment, the participant filled in a
pre-questionnaire asking for age, gender, and edu-
cational level. We also asked how familiar the par-
ticipant was with the route location, indicated on a
28
5-point scale ranging from not at all familiar (1) to
very familiar (5). If the participant indicated being
moderately or more familiar with the location, his or
her results were discarded. The questionnaire was
followed by an example question to familiarize the
participant with the controls and with the set-up of
the traversal part of the experiment.
Route description - First, the participant was
shown a video impression of the location where he
or she, being lost in an unfamiliar town, supposedly
approached someone to ask the way to the hotel.
Then the participant watched one of the two pre-
recorded route descriptions. To compensate for the
fact that, unlike a real-life situation, there was no
opportunity to verify understanding or ask for clar-
ifications, the participants were allowed to play the
route description video twice.
Traversal - After having received the route de-
scription, the participant had to virtually traverse
the route by watching six prerecorded traversal seg-
ments in succession, appearing in a pop-up window.
The first segment began at the starting point of the
route and ended at the first decision point (intersec-
tion). Each following segment started where the pre-
vious one ended, with the final segment ending at
the destination of the route. At the end of each route
segment, an overview of the next intersection was
provided by moving the camera viewpoint gradu-
ally so the entire intersection was shown. The av-
erage length of each traversal segment was around
1.5 minutes.
After watching each segment, the participant had
to select which direction to take next from a lim-
ited set of options: left, straight ahead or right (if
applicable). Each option was accompanied with a
photo of the corresponding view from the crossing.
After answering the question, the participant was in-
formed which direction was correct. Then the par-
ticipant proceeded with the route traversal from the
correct turn, regardless whether the correct direction
had been chosen or not.3
3This differs from the effectiveness measure of Fujii et al
(2000), who used a movement failure rate defined as Out/N,
with Out being the number of times a participant lost the way
and was unable to return to the route, and N being the number
of trials. We found this method too complicated in design and
too confusing for the participants to be used in this experiment.
In our set-up, the participant was only allowed one trial per de-
cision point and always traveled along the correct route.
120? 180? Total
Male 3.46 (0.88) 3.27 (1.19) 3.38 (1.01)
Female 4.00 (1.04) 3.62 (0.77) 3.80 (0.91)
Total 3.72 (0.98) 3.46 (0.98) 3.59 (0.98)
Table 1: Number of correct decisions as a func-
tion of gender and version (results are presented as
Means with Std. Deviations in brackets).
Post-questionnaire - After route traversal, the
participants answered several questions about the
route description. Here we only focus on one of the
questions, i.e., ?Do you think the route provider de-
scribed the route in a natural way??, to be answered
on a 5-point scale ranging from very natural (1) to
very artificial (5). The participants were also offered
the opportunity to comment on their answer.
5 Results and discussion
Here we present and discuss the main findings from
our experiment.
5.1 Effectiveness of the route description
Hypothesis 1 concerned the influence of speaker ori-
entation on the effectiveness of the route description.
We measured this by counting the number of correct
turns taken by the participants during route traver-
sal. The route contained five decision points (inter-
sections), so participants? scores ranged from 0 to 5
correct turns. Gender has been proved to strongly in-
fluence way finding ability (Hunt and Waller, 1999;
Lawton, 1994), so gender was accounted for as a
fixed factor in our analysis.
The results are summarized in Table 1, which
shows that participants performed slightly better in
the 120? version than in the 180? version, and that
women performed slightly better than men. How-
ever, these differences were not significant; neither
for version nor gender. Thus, our first hypothesis is
not supported.
This lack of effect might be taken as evidence
that gestures hardly play a role in conveying in-
formation, so that a difference in their orientation
would not affect the route seeker?s mental process-
ing of the route description. It has been argued
that the main function of gestures in conversation
is not to transfer information to the interlocutor,
but to facilitate the cognitive process of speaking
29
(Rime? and Schiaratura, 1991; Morsella and Krauss,
2004). Still, though most spontaneous gestures may
not be produced for the interlocutor?s benefit, it has
been shown experimentally that people do make use
of the information conveyed by gestures (Kendon,
1994; Cassell et al, 1999; Kelly et al, 1999). The
communicative power of gestures does seem to de-
pend on the task and the type of gesture, however
(Bangerter and Chevalley, 2007). In fact, in our ex-
periment the gestures were not essential for under-
standing the route description. All pointing gestures
were accompanied by explicit verbal descriptions of
the corresponding landmarks and/or directions; in
other words, the gestures were redundant with re-
spect to speech. So, regarded from a purely informa-
tional point of view, these gestures were superfluous
and the participants may have paid only limited at-
tention to them or even consciously ignored them.
This explanation is supported by the comments of
various participants who said they tried to focus on
the verbal instructions because the description was
extensive and they found the gestures distracting.
We consciously limited the number of decision
points in the experiment to five, well within the 7?2
range of short term memory, but for each decision
point the route provider not only mentioned the di-
rection to take, but also one or two landmarks. Fur-
thermore, he gave some auxiliary hints of what to do
in-between turns (Walk straight ahead until you see
a traffic sign; there you keep walking straight ahead)
and some more details. In their comments, several
participants mentioned being distracted by too much
detail in the description, and said they found the di-
rections hard to remember. As a consequence, some
participants tended to ignore the gestures or look
away from the computer screen altogether. Obvi-
ously, doing so would clearly impair the effect of
speaker orientation to be demonstrated by the exper-
iment. On the other hand, not all participants ig-
nored the gestures (at least not initially) as in the
180? version, some participants declared that they
found the mirrored gestures annoying.
5.2 Naturalness of the route description
In Table 2, test results on the naturalness of the route
description are shown for speaker orientation and
gender. Orientation had an almost-significant effect
on participants? judgement of naturalness (two-way
ANOVA; F(1,45)=3.35, p=0.07 two-tailed).4 The
effect would have been significant if it had been the
other way around. The effect of gender was not sig-
nificant, and neither was the interaction of version
and gender.
Contrary to our hypothesis, the participants
judged the 180? version as being more natural than
the 120? version. This was contrary to what was ex-
pected, because ?in the real world? route providers
and seekers tend to minimize the difference in their
orientation. In fact, as mentioned above, several
participants reported being annoyed by the mirrored
gestures in the 180? version. These contradictory
findings suggest that it was not the route provider?s
gestures or their orientation that were crucial for
the judgement on naturalness, but only whether the
route provider?s body was fully turned toward his au-
dience ? directly addressing them ? or not. This may
be the result of many previous confrontations with
presenters (human or other) displayed on television
or computer screens, explaining things to an audi-
ence. Perhaps the natural tendency to make orienta-
tions as similar as possible when explaining a route
to someone does not transfer to a situation where the
route is presented by somebody on a screen: a form
of presentation in which we expect someone to be
facing us.
Furthermore, the fixed position of the camera dur-
ing the route description may also have interfered
with its naturalness. If the route provider points into
some direction, we tend to turn our heads to that di-
rection, maybe in the assumption he will point at
some landmark that can help us orientate or navi-
gate. The fixed position of the camera, in contrast
with the adaptive orientation of the route provider,
may have yielded an unnatural combination in the
case of the 120? version of the route description.
5.3 Gender effects
For both versions of the route description, women
performed better than men. Although not signifi-
cant, the difference in performance is sufficiently re-
markable to merit some discussion. We believe the
difference may be explained by the fact that women
and men employ different strategies for way find-
4A two-tailed test was performed in spite of our one-sided
hypothesis 2, because the effect was contrary to what was ex-
pected.
30
120? 180? Total
Male 2.62 (1.26) 1.73 (0.91) 2.21 (1.18)
Female 2.75 (1.14) 2.46 (1.13) 2.60 (1.12)
Total 2.68 (1.18) 2.13 (1.08) 2.41 (1.15)
Table 2: Naturalness as a function of gender and ver-
sion (results are presented as Means with Std. Devi-
ations in brackets).
ing (Hunt and Waller, 1999): women?s strategies are
most suited for tracking and piloting, whereas men
use strategies appropriate for navigation. Tracking
is a point-to-point way finding strategy that relies on
information limited to environmental characteristics
along the route. Piloting combines these environ-
mental characteristics with self-centered orientation
and direction (e.g., ?When you?re facing the main
entrance, turn to the right?). Navigation, on the other
hand, uses configurational information: routes are
derived from knowledge of the surroundings of the
destination or its global position. Thus, men tend to
pay attention to bearings while women often rely on
descriptions of control points and cues to the route
such as landmarks (Lawton, 1994).
Looking at the set-up of our experiment, we see
that it seems to favour a strategy of point-to-point
decision making instead of relying on a more gen-
eral and global sense of direction, as in naviga-
tion. First, the route description consisted entirely
of landmarks to identify decision points and turns
to be made when encountering them, fitting a track-
ing and piloting approach to way finding. Second,
both the route description and the traversal segments
were shown on a screen, with a restricted and forced
field of vision. This may have impeded the estima-
tion of global position, direction and distance, i.e.,
the kind of spatial knowledge men rely on for orien-
tation and way finding. So, the way finding strategy
that women already tend to employ in everyday life
may have been most suited to this experiment and
hence their higher score.
6 Conclusions and future work
The goal of this study was to find out which ori-
entation of the Virtual Guide would be most ef-
fective and natural for providing route descriptions
in a virtual environment. To test effectiveness, we
devised a method that allowed participants to ?vir-
tually? traverse a route by watching pre-recorded
route segments and making turn decisions at inter-
sections. We hypothesized that a speaker orientation
of 120? with respect to the route seeker would re-
sult in a more effective and natural route description
than a 180? orientation, because it would take the
route seeker less effort to match the speaker?s ges-
tures with his or her own perspective. However, we
found no effect of speaker orientation on task per-
formance. A possible explanation lies in the com-
plexity of our route description, which caused some
participants to focus only on the verbal part of the
description. Contrary to our expectation, the 180?
orientation was judged to be more natural, in spite
of the fact that some participants found the mirrored
gestures annoying. The reason for this may be that
people expect a speaker to be directly facing them
when presenting information on a screen.
Based on these results, we decided to stick to
the standard 180? orientation for our Virtual Guide.
However, some reservations are in order when ap-
plying the results of our study to the Virtual Guide.
For one thing, the route descriptions used in the ex-
periment were not given by an agent but by a real
human, albeit pre-recorded. This is still far from
the situation in which an embodied agent is com-
municating with a user by means of an interface.
A second difference with the Virtual Guide lies in
the participant?s navigational control. In the con-
text of the Virtual Guide, the user can actively nav-
igate through, and look around in, the environment
to be traversed. In our experiment, the participants?
view was restricted and forced by that of the camera
which severely restricted their possibilities for ori-
entation and navigation.
An obvious line of future research is therefore to
repeat our experiment with the Virtual Guide, and
have participants actually traverse the route by nav-
igating through the 3D virtual environment, with to-
tal freedom of movement. This will make the traver-
sal part more realistic and also more suitable for
male way finding strategies, thus providing a bet-
ter and more neutral measure for the effectiveness of
the route description. In addition, we expect that the
participants will be less inclined to see the guide as
a kind of TV presenter and more as a real presence,
because they will (virtually) share the same 3D en-
vironment with it. This may lead the participants to
31
be less biased toward a 180? orientation of the route
provider. Finally, all information not strictly nec-
essary for way finding will be left out of the route
description. This includes landmarks located along
traversal segments rather than at intersections, and
instructions to go ?straight ahead? (which several
participants found confusing in the current experi-
ment). With a less complex description, participants
may refrain from ignoring the gestures made by the
route provider and thereby be more susceptible to
manipulation of speaker orientation.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Mark Tempelman
and Job van den Wildenberg for their help with
the experiment. The Virtual Guide was imple-
mented by Dennis Hofs, Rieks op den Akker, Marco
van Kessel, Richard Korthuis and Martin Bouman.
The research reported here was carried out within
the context of the project ANGELICA (A Natural-
language Generator for Embodied, Lifelike Con-
versational Agents) sponsored by the Netherlands
Organisation for Scientific Research, NWO (grant
number 532.001.301).
References
A. Bangerter and E. Chevalley. 2007. Pointing and
describing in referential communication: When are
pointing gestures used to communicate? In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Multimodal Output Genera-
tion (MOG 2007), pages 17?28.
J. Cassell, D. McNeill, and K.E. McCullough. 1999.
Speech-gesture mismatches: Evidence for one under-
lying representation of linguistic and non-linguistic in-
formation. Pragmatics and Cognition, 7(1):1?33.
R. Dale, S. Geldof, and J. Prost. 2005. Using natural lan-
guage generation in automatic route description. Jour-
nal of Research and Practice in Information Technol-
ogy, 37(1):89?105.
K. Fujii, S. Nagai, Y. Miyazaki, and K. Sugiyama. 2000.
Navigation support in a real city using city metaphors.
In T. Ishida and K. Isbister, editors, Digital Cities, Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science 1765, pages 338?349.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.
D. Hofs, R. op den Akker, and A. Nijholt. 2003. A
generic architecture and dialogue model for multi-
modal interaction. In P. Paggio, K. Jokinen, and
A. Jnsson, editors, Proceedings of the 1st Nordic Sym-
posium on Multimodal Communication, volume 1,
pages 79?91, Copenhagen. CST Publication, Center
for Sprogteknologi.
E. Hunt and D. Waller. 1999. Orientation and wayfind-
ing: A review. ONR technical report N00014-96-
0380, Office of Naval Research, Arlington, VA.
S. D. Kelly, D. Barr, R.B. Church, and K. Lynch. 1999.
Offering a hand to pragmatic understanding: The role
of speech and gesture in comprehension and memory.
Journal of Memory and Language, 40:577?592.
A. Kendon. 1994. Do gestures communicate? a re-
view. Research on Language and Social Interaction,
27(3):175?200.
S. Kopp, P. Tepper, K. Striegnitz, and J. Cassell. in press.
Trading spaces: How humans and humanoids use
speech and gesture to give directions. In T. Nishida,
editor, Engineering Approaches to Conversational In-
formatics. John Wiley and Sons.
C.A. Lawton. 1994. Gender differences in wayfinding
strategies: Relationship to spatial ability and spatial
anxiety. Sex Roles, 30(11-12):765?779.
P. Michon and M. Denis. 2001. When and why are vi-
sual landmarks used in giving directions? In D.R.
Montello, editor, Spatial Information Theory. Foun-
dations of Geographic Information Science: Inter-
national Conference, COSIT 2001, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science 2205, pages 292?305. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.
E. Morsella and R. Krauss. 2004. The role of gestures in
spatial working memory and speech. American Jour-
nal of Psychology, 117(3):251?270.
B. Rime? and L. Schiaratura. 1991. Gesture and speech.
In R. Feldman and B. Rime?, editors, Fundamentals of
Nonverbal Behavior, pages 239?281. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge.
A.L. Shelton and T.P. McNamara. 2004. Spatial mem-
ory and perspective taking. Memory and Cognition,
32(3):416?426.
H. van Welbergen, A. Nijholt, D. Reidsma, and J. Zwiers.
2006. Presenting in virtual worlds: Towards an archi-
tecture for a 3d presenter explaining 2d-presented in-
formation. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 21(5):47?53.
M. White and T. Caldwell. 1998. EXEMPLARS: A
practical, extensible framework for dynamic text gen-
eration. In Proceedings of the Ninth International
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages
266?275.
32
