Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2011: the 12th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 341?343,
Portland, Oregon, June 17-18, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Engagement-based Multi-party Dialog with a Humanoid Robot
David Klotz and Johannes Wienke and Julia Peltason and Britta Wrede and Sebastian Wrede
Applied Informatics Group
Bielefeld University
{dklotz, jwienke, jpeltaso, bwrede, swrede}@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de
Vasil Khalidov and Jean-Marc Odobez
IDIAP Research Institute
{vasil.khalidov, odobez}@idiap.ch
Abstract
When a robot is situated in an environment
containing multiple possible interaction part-
ners, it has to make decisions about when to
engage specific users and how to detect and
react appropriately to actions of the users that
might signal the intention to interact.
In this demonstration we present the integra-
tion of an engagement model in an existing di-
alog system based on interaction patterns. As
a sample scenario, this enables the humanoid
robot Nao to play a quiz game with multiple
participants.
1 Introduction
Giving robotic systems the ability to join in conver-
sation with one or multiple users poses many new
challenges for the development of appropriate dia-
log systems and models. When a dialog system is
situated in the real, physical world and used in more
open settings, more effort needs to be spent on estab-
lishing and maintaining clear communication chan-
nels between the system and its users. E.g. the sys-
tem first needs to detect that there are potential users
with whom interacting would be possible, it needs to
decide if a detected person wants to interact with the
system at all and it needs to make decisions when
and how it should try to start an interaction with that
person.
Bohus and Horvitz (2009) have developed a
model for representing the current relation of a user
with such a system (their engagement state) and de-
termining if they want to be involved in an interac-
tion with the system (using explicit engagement ac-
tions and the more abstract engagement intention).
Each user can be engaged in specific interactions
(denoting different ?basic unit[s] of sustained, in-
teractive problem-solving?) and there can be multi-
ple such interactions, each with potentially different
users.
This demonstration shows how an engagement
model inspired by these ideas was integrated into
an existing dialog system and how it helps in real-
izing interactive scenarios with a robot that incorpo-
rate cues for the dialog from the system?s environ-
ment. Section 3 gives more details about this model
and how it is used by the dialog.
2 Scenario
As a scenario for this demonstration we chose a sim-
ple quiz game involving the robot Nao as a host play-
ing with one or multiple human users. At first, the
robot waits until one of the human interaction part-
ners approaches. When the person opens the interac-
tion (i.e. by greeting the robot), the system responds
with an appropriate greeting. While the person con-
tinues to show the intention to interact with the robot
(determined by the process described in section 3.1),
the robot will ask questions randomly chosen from
a predefined set and will try to judge if the person
answered them correctly.
When another person enters the robot?s field of
view, the system also tries to determine if they have
the intention to interact with it. If that is the case, the
system suspends the current interaction with the first
person and actively tries to engage the second per-
son, encouraging him or her to join the ongoing quiz
game. The prospective new player can then choose
341
Figure 1: Two persons interacting with the developed system.
to join or decline the request.
As long as one of the engaged participants shows
the intention to interact, the robot continues to ask
questions which all participants can try to answer.
The quiz game is stopped either by an explicit re-
quest of one the users or after all participants have
left the scene.
This scenario serves as a good testbed for the in-
tegration of different cues for the engagement model
and how that model affects the actions taken by the
dialog system. The right-hand side of figure 1 shows
two people interacting with the robot during the quiz
game.
3 System Overview
Figure 2 shows an overview of the different com-
ponents involved in the demonstrated system. This
includes components for the perception (e.g. access-
ing images from the robot?s camera and audio from
its microphones), for generating actions (e.g. using
the robot?s text-to-speech system), the dialog system
itself and a memory system for connecting these di-
verse components.
The dialog system used for this demonstration
is called PaMini, which is short for ?Pattern-based
Mixed-Initiative human-robot Interaction? and is
described in more detail by Peltason and Wrede
(2010). This dialog system was modified in Klotz
(2010) with a model of engagement based on the
ideas presented by Bohus and Horvitz (2009). In
our adaptation of this model, there are extension
points for integrating different sources of informa-
tion about the user?s engagement intentions and ac-
tions, described in the following section.
3.1 Determining the User?s Actions &
Intention
For determining the user?s actions (e.g. if the user
explicitly wants to start an interaction with the sys-
tem), this demonstration uses a set of possible utter-
ances which are simply matched against the results
of a speech recognition module.
To get an estimation of the user?s intention to in-
teract, the image from the robot?s camera is first used
to detect the faces of users and to estimate their cur-
rent visual focus of attention. A module based on
a framework by Ba and Odobez (2009) is used to
determine probabilities that the user is looking at
each of a pre-defined list of possible focus targets,
including the robot itself and other users visible in
the scene. The upper left of figure 1 shows a visu-
alization of this module?s output. Nao denotes the
robot as the focus target with the highest probabil-
ity, while the designation UN is short for the ?unfo-
cused? target.
This list of probabilities is then stored in a mem-
342
Figure 2: Components of the developed system.
ory system developed by Wienke and Wrede (2011).
The memory system provides temporal query capa-
bilities which are finally used to guess a user?s cur-
rent intention of interacting with the robot based on
the history of the probabilities that the robot was the
user?s current visual focus of attention target. This
result is also stored in the memory system together
will all other information known about a user.
3.2 Engagement Cues for the Dialog
The dialog system receives the information about the
user?s state and intention from the memory system
and uses it in several rules for controlling its own en-
gagement actions. The intention is e.g. used to deter-
mine if there is a new user that should be persuaded
to join the quiz game described in section 2 and if
any of the users still shows interest so that a new
question should be asked. The general state of the
detected users is also used e.g. to observe when the
users leave the robot?s field of view for a longer pe-
riod of time which causes the dialog system to close
its current interaction.
4 Conclusion
We have shown how an existing dialog system that
was enhanced using an explicit model of engage-
ment can be used to realize interactive scenarios
with a robot that is situated in the physical world.
An estimation of the user?s current visual focus of
attention is used to gauge their intention to engage
the robot in conversation.
A video recording of two people interacting with
the developed system is available online at http:
//youtu.be/pWZLVF2Xa8g
Acknowledgments
This work was done in the HUMAVIPS project,
funded by the European Commission Seventh
Framework Programme, Theme Cognitive Systems
and Robotics, Grant agreement no. 247525.
References
S. Ba and J.-M. Odobez. 2009. Recognizing Visual Fo-
cus of Attention from Head Pose in Natural Meetings.
IEEE Trans. on System, Man and Cybernetics: part B,
Cybernetics, 39:16?34.
Dan Bohus and Eric Horvitz. 2009. Models for multi-
party engagement in open-world dialog. In Proceed-
ings of the SIGDIAL 2009 Conference, pages 225?234,
London, UK. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
David Klotz. 2010. Modeling engagement in a multi-
party human-robot dialog. Master?s thesis, Bielefeld
University.
Julia Peltason and Britta Wrede. 2010. Modeling
human-robot interaction based on generic interaction
patterns. In AAAI Fall Symposium: Dialog with
Robots, Arlington, VA, USA.
Johannes Wienke and Sebastian Wrede. 2011. A spatio-
temporal working memory for multi-level data fusion.
In Proc. of IEEE/RSJ International Conference on In-
telligent Robots and Systems. submitted.
343
Proceedings of the Workshop on Open Infrastructures and Analysis Frameworks for HLT, pages 101?109,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23rd 2014.
EUMSSI: a Platform for Multimodal Analysis and Recommendation
using UIMA
Jens Grivolla
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
jens.grivolla@upf.edu
Maite Melero
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
maite.melero@upf.edu
Toni Badia
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
toni.badia@upf.edu
Cosmin Cabulea
Deutsche Welle
Bonn, Germany
cosmin.cabulea@dw.de
Yannick Est
`
eve
Universit?e du Maine
Le Mans, France
yannick.esteve@
lium.univ-lemans.fr
Eelco Herder
L3S Research Center
Hannover, Germany
herder@l3s.de
Jean-Marc Odobez
IDIAP Research Institute
Martigny, Switzerland
odobez@idiap.ch
Susanne Preu?
Gesellschaft zur F?orderung der
Angewandten Informationsforschung
Saarbr?ucken, Germany
susannep@iai.uni-sb.de
Ra?ul Mar??n
VSN Innovation
and Media Solutions
Alicante, Spain
rmarin@vsn.es
Abstract
The EUMSSI project (Event Understanding through Multimodal Social Stream Interpretation)
aims at developing technologies for aggregating data presented as unstructured information in
sources of very different nature. The multimodal analytics will help organize, classify and clus-
ter cross-media streams, by enriching its associated metadata in an interactive manner, so that
the data resulting from analysing one media helps reinforce the aggregation of information from
other media, in a cross-modal semantic representation framework. Once all the available de-
scriptive information has been collected, an interpretation component will dynamically reason
over the semantic representation in order to derive implicit knowledge. Finally the enriched in-
formation will be fed to a hybrid recommendation system, which will be at the basis of two
well-motivated use-cases. In this paper we give a brief overview of EUMSSI?s main goals and
how we are approaching its implementation using UIMA to integrate and combine various layers
of annotations coming from different sources.
1 Introduction
Nowadays, a multimedia journalist has access to a vast amount of data from a plurality of types of sources
to document a story. In order to put information into context and tell his story from all significant angles,
he needs to go through an enormous amount of records with information of very diverse degrees of
granularity. At the same time, he needs to reduce the noise of irrelevant content. This is extremely
time-consuming, especially when a topic or event is interconnected with multiple entities from different
domains. At a different level, many TV viewers are getting used to navigating with their tablets or iPads
while watching the TV, the tablet effectively functioning as a second screen, often providing background
information on the program or interaction in social networks about what is being watched. Both the
This work is licenced under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Page numbers and proceedings footer
are added by the organizers. License details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
101
journalist and the TV viewer would greatly benefit from a system capable of automatically analysing and
interpreting unstructured multimedia data stream and its social background, and, with this understanding,
be able of contextualising the data, and contributing with new, related information.
The FP7-ICT-2013-10 STREP project EUMSSI, which started in December 2013, is developing
methodologies and techniques for identifying and aggregating data presented as unstructured informa-
tion in sources of very different nature (video, image, audio, speech, text and social context), including
both online (e.g., YouTube) and traditional media (e.g. audiovisual repositories), and for dealing with
information of very different degrees of granularity.
This will be accomplished thanks to the integration in a UIMA-based
1
multimodal platform of state-
of-the-art information extraction and analysis techniques from the different fields involved (image, audio,
text and social media analysis). The multimodal interpretation platform, in an optimized process chain,
will analyze a vast amount of multimedia content, aggregate all the resulting information and semanti-
cally enrich it with additional metadata layers. The resulting system will be potentially useful for any
application in need of cross-media data analysis and interpretation, such as intelligent content manage-
ment, recommendation, real time event tracking, content filtering, etc. In particular, the EUMSSI project
will use the semantically enriched information to make personalized content-based recommendation.
2 Multimodal analytics and Semantic Enrichment
For reasoning with and about the multimedia data, the EUMSSI platform needs to recognize entities,
such as actors, places, topics, dates and genres. A core idea is that the process of integrating information
coming from different media sources is carried out in an interactive manner, so that the metadata resulting
from analyzing one media helps reinforce the aggregation of information from other media. For example,
the quality of speech recognition heavily depends on the audio quality and background noise. Existing
text, tags and other metadata will be exploited for disambiguation. Further, OCR on video data, speech
analysis and speaker recognition mutually reinforce one another. The combined and integrated results of
the audio, video and text analysis will significantly enhance the existing metadata, which can be used for
retrieval and recommendation. In addition, the extracted entities and other annotations will be exploited
for identifying specific video fragments in which a particular person speaks, a new topic begins, or an
entity is mentioned. Figure 1 illustrates some of the different layers of analysis that may exist for a video
content item.
Once the entities and concepts have been identified in the different modalities, all the information is ag-
gregated and semantically enriched, using general ontologies or structured knowledge bases. Wikipedia
categories have been successfully exploited with this purpose in different works: e.g. to describe chemi-
cal documents (K?ohncke and Balke, 2010), to identify topics of interest for Twitter users (Michelson and
Macskassy, 2010), and also to improve Web video categorization (Chen et al., 2010). Moreover, (Hahn et
al., 2010) have shown that the structured information gathered from Wikipedia infoboxes can be used to
answer complex questions, like ?Which Rivers flow into the Rhine and are longer than 50 kilometers??
For this purpose, text documents need to be previously annotated using DBpedia Spotlight (Mendes et
al., 2011), which automatically annotates text with links to articles in Wikipedia. The process of se-
mantic enrichment is still largely domain-dependent; therefore, apart from the available general-purpose
knowledge bases and ontologies (DBpedia, FOAF, DublinCore...), the EUMSSI platform needs special-
ized resources for categorizing videos on different dimensions. Linked Data technologies (Heath and
Bizer, 2011) and the Linked Open Data cloud
2
provide access to several of these resources, including
geodata, movie databases and program information.
3 Content-based Recommendation and the Demonstrators
The semantically enriched information is then used by the EUMSSI system to make personalized
content-based recommendation. We propose a novel recommender system that leverages matrix factor-
ization (Koren, 2008) with implicit feedback in order to integrate content-based similarity, usage history
1
Unstructured Information Management Architecture: http://uima.apache.org/
2
http://lod-cloud.net/
102
Figure 1: Video Mining Analysis
(i.e. collaborative filtering), as well as user demographics. This integrated approach reduces the cold-
start problems typical of collaborative filtering, both for new users and for new content. Recommendation
and aggregation of related content in EUMSSI is expected to use varying degrees of personalization, giv-
ing more weight in some cases to the individual user?s interests, based on his viewing history, but being
based primarily on the similarity to the currently shown content in other cases.
On top of the recommender, two demonstrators will be implemented within the EUMSSI project, each
catering to a different use-case: (i) a computer-assisted storytelling tool integrated in the workflow of a
multimedia news editor, empowering the journalist to monitor and gather up-to-date documents related
with his investigation, without the need of reviewing an enormous amount of insufficiently annotated
records; and (ii) a second-screen application for an end-user, able to make relevant suggestions of mul-
timedia content based on what the user is watching, what other people have watched, and what people
are saying about these contents in the social networks. Figure 2 shows how both applications build on a
common base of multimedia analysis and content aggregation/recommendation algorithms.
4 Architecture overview
All new content coming into the system is first normalized to a common metadata schema (based on
schema.org) and stored in a database (MAM/media asset manager, or MongoDB
3
) to make it available
for further processing. Analysis results, as well as the original metadata, are stored in CAS format to
allow integration of different aligned layers of analysis.
The process flow, pictured in Figure 3, can be summarized as follows:
1. new data arrives (or gets imported)
2. preprocessing stage
(a) make content available through unique URI (from central MAM)
(b) create initial CAS with aligned metadata / text content and content URI
3
it will be developed in parallel as an open source MongoDB based solution, as well as integrated into VSN?s proprietary
platform
103
Figure 2: Multimodal platform catering both for the journalist and the end-user?s use-cases
(c) add content to processing queues
3. processing / content analysis
(a) distributed analysis systems query queue when they have processing capacity
(b) retrieve CAS with existing data (or get relevant metadata from wrapper API)
(c) retrieve raw content based on content URI
(d) process
(e) update CAS (possibly through wrapper API)
(f) update queues
i. mark as processed
ii. add to queues for other processes that depend on previous analysis results
4. indexing when processing is complete for a content item (e.g. with Solr)
Note that this architecture design mainly depicts the data analysis part of the EUMSSI system ? the
deployment by Web applications is not visible in the figure. These will be built upon the Solr indexes
created from the CAS.
5 Aligned data representation
Much of the reasoning and cross-modal integration depends on an aligned view of the different annotation
layers, e.g., in order to connect person names detected from OCR with corresponding speakers from the
speaker recognition component, or faces detected by the face recognition.
The Apache UIMA
4
CAS (common analysis structure) representation is a good fit for the needs of the
EUMSSI project as it has a number of interesting characteristics:
? Annotations are stored ?stand-off?, meaning that the original content is not modified in any way by
adding annotations. Rather, the annotations are entirely separate and reference the original content
by offsets
4
http://uima.apache.org/
104
Data Sources
crawlers
DW
feeds
...
extract metadata / 
content
create 
initial CAS
add to / update 
processing queues
video 
analysis
audio 
analysis
text 
analysis
MAM / 
MongoDB
1. get raw content / 
previous CAS
2. process
3. update CAS
Preprocess
Processing
queue 
manager
...
Figure 3: Architecture design
? Annotations can be defined freely by defining a ?type system? that specifies the types of anno-
tations (such as Person, Keyword, Face, etc.) and the corresponding attributes (e.g. dbpediaUrl,
canonicalRepresentation, ...)
? Source content can be included in the CAS (particularly for text content) or referenced as external
content via URIs (e.g. for multimedia content)
? While each CAS represents one ?document? or ?content item?, it can have several Views that rep-
resent different aspects of that item, e.g. the video layer, audio layer, metadata layer, transcribed
text layer, etc., with separate source content (SofA or ?subject of annotation?) and separate sets of
annotations
? CASes can be passed efficiently in-memory between UIMA analysis engines
? CASes can be serialized in a standardised OASIS format
5
for storage and interchange
In the case of the EUMSSI project, the common base for alignment for different annotation layers
referring to multimedia content is timestamps relative to the original content.
Annotations based directly on multimedia content (video and audio) will naturally refer to that content
via timestamps, whereas text analysis modules normally work with character offsets relative to the text
content. It is therefore fundamental that any textual views created from multimedia content (e.g. via ASR
or OCR) refer back to the timestamps in the original content. This will be done by creating annotations,
e.g. tokens, that include the original timestamps as attributes in addition to the character offsets.
As an example, we may have a CAS with an audio view on which we apply automatic speech recogni-
tion (ASR), providing the transcription as a series of tokens/words with a timestamp for each word. The
system then creates a new view in the CAS that has the full plain-text transcription as SofA and a series
of Token annotations with both character offsets relative to the plain-text SofA, and timestamp offsets
relative to the multimedia content.
In this way it is possible to apply standard text analysis modules (that rely on character offsets) on the
textual representation, while maintaining the possibility to later map the resulting annotations back onto
the temporal scale.
Timestamps will be represented in milliseconds in order to avoid floating point values. In this way, all
annotations can be subtypes of the standard UIMA Annotation type
6
, which provides access to a number
5
http://docs.oasis-open.org/uima/v1.0/uima-v1.0.html
6
otherwise annotations would need to derive from the more generic TOP type
105
of utility functions that help find sets of overlapping annotations, retrieve annotations in offset order, etc.
SofA-aware UIMA components are able to work on multiple views, whereas ?normal? analysis en-
gines only see one specific view that is presented to them. This means that e.g. standard text analysis
engines don?t need to be aware that they are being applied to an ASR view or an OCR view; they just
see a regular text document. SofA-aware components, however, can explicitly work on annotations from
different views and can therefore be used to integrate and combine the information coming from different
sources or layers, and create new, integrated views with the output from that integration and reasoning
process.
6 Flow management
UIMA provides a platform for execution of analysis components (Analysis Engines or AEs), as well as
for managing the flow between those components.
CPE or uimaFIT
7
(Ogren and Bethard, 2009) can be used to design and execute pipelines made up of a
sequence of AEs (and potentially some more complex flows), and UIMA-AS
8
(Asynchronous Scaleout)
permits the distribution of the process among various machines or even a cluster (with the help of UIMA
DUCC
9
).
Analysis Engines can either be ?natively? written for UIMA or can be wrappers that translate inputs
and outputs for existing analysis components so they can be integrated in UIMA. All text analysis com-
ponents, as well as the integration and reasoning components, will be available as UIMA AEs and can
therefore be configured and executed directly within the UIMA environment.
There are some components of the EUMSSI platform, however, that do not integrate easily in this
fashion. This is the case of computationally expensive processes that are optimized for batch execution.
A UIMA AE needs to expose a process() method that operates on a single CAS (= document), and is
therefore not compatible with batch processing. This is particularly true for processes that need to be run
on a cluster, with significant startup overhead, such as many video and audio analysis tasks.
It is therefore necessary to have an alternative flow mechanism for offline or batch processes, which
needs to integrate with the processing performed within the UIMA environment.
The main architectural and integration issues revolve around the data flow, rather than the computa-
tion. In fact, the computationally complex and expensive aspects are specific to the individual analysis
components, and should not have an important impact on the design of the overall platform.
As such, the design of the flow management is presented in terms of transformations between data
states, rather than from the procedural point of view. The resulting system should only rely on the
robustness of those data states to ensure the reliability and robustness of the overall system, protecting
against potential problems from server failures or other causes. At any point, the system should be able
to resume its function purely from the state of the persisted data.
To ensure reliability and performance of the data persistence, we expect to use a well-established and
widely used database system such as MongoDB.
Figure 4 shows the general flow of the EUMSSI system, focusing on the data states needed for the
system to function.
In order to avoid synchronization issues, the state of the data processing is stored together with the
data, and the list of pending tasks can be extracted at any point through simple database queries.
For example in order to retrieve the list of content items that have been crawled or received from feeds,
but still need to be converted to the unified EUMSSI schema, it is sufficient to query for items that have
a ?source meta:original? but no ?source meta:eumssi?.
Similarly, the queues for analysis processes can be constructed directly from the ?processing state? of
an item by selecting (for a given queue) all items that have not yet been processed by that queue and that
fulfil all prerequisites (dependencies).
7
https://uima.apache.org/uimafit.html
8
http://uima.apache.org/doc-uimaas-what.html
9
http://uima.apache.org/doc-uimaducc-whatitam.html
106
Figure 4: data flow and transformations
As an illustration, each content item has approximately the following structure:
{
"content_id" : UUID,
"source_meta" : {
"original" : ORIGINAL_SOURCE_METADATA,
"eumssi" : EUMSSI_SOURCE_METADATA
},
"cas" : {
"xmi" : XMI_CAS,
"binary" : BINARY_CAS
},
"processing_state" : {
"queue1" : "done",
"queue2" : "in_process",
...
"queueN" : "pending"
},
"extracted_meta" : METADATA_FROM_CAS
}
where:
107
? UUID is a system-wide unique content id, created when first inserting the content into the system
? ORIGINAL SOURCE METADATA is the metadata as provided from the original content fields
? EUMSSI SOURCE METADATA is the original metadata mapped to the EUMSSI vocabulary /
schema
? XMI CAS is the CAS serialized in XMI format (and possibly compressed)
? BINARY CAS is the CAS serialized in binary format (alternative to XMI CAS)
? METADATA FROM CAS is metadata that is generated by EUMSSI analysis processes, using the
EUMSSI schema
Normally, the CAS will be stored only in one of the available formats, but potentially different serial-
izations could be used. The ?extracted meta? information can be used for analysis results that are used
as inputs to other annotators (such as detected Named Entities as input to speech recognition), to avoid
the overhead of extracting that information from the CAS on demand.
MongoDB allows to stored structured information (corresponding to a JSON structure), so that the
content of fields like ORIGINAL SOURCE METADATA can reflect whatever internal structure the orig-
inal data had.
The final applications are not expected to use the information stored in MongoDB directly, but rather
access Solr indexes created from that information to respond specifically to the types of queries needed
by the applications. Those indexes will typically be created from the CAS when all analysis steps have
been performed.
It is, however, possible to have indexing processes that only depend on a subset of analyses, and thus
make content items (at least partially) accessible to the applications before they have been fully processed
(which may take a relatively long time). The indexing processes can be managed in the same way as any
analysis process, with their own queues that specify the necessary dependencies, and taking the current
state of the CAS as input.
In its simplest form, the processes responsible for the data transitions are fully independent and poll
the database periodically to retrieve pending work. Those processes can then be implemented in any
language that can communicate comfortably with MongoDB. As an efficiency improvement, in order
to reduce the polling load, message queues (such as managed by ActiveMQ
10
) can be used to notify
processes of pending work after performing the preceding steps.
7 Conclusions and future work
In this paper, we have presented the main goals and approaches of the EUMSSI project, which aims
to innovatively integrate state-of-the-art text and A/V analysis technologies, semantic enrichment and
reasoning, social intelligence and collaborative content-based recommendation, in order to build a mul-
timodal, interoperable platform potentially useful for any application in need of automatic cross-media
data analysis and interpretation, such as intelligent content management, personalized recommendation,
real time event tracking, content filtering, etc.
The project is still in an early stage, and many aspects will need to be defined later on. The different
analysis modalities are handled by separate research groups that will each improve the individual types of
analysis in their are of expertise. This paper only reports on the platform that will integrate and combine
the analysis results.
Additionally, possible interactions between modalities will need to be defined as it becomes clearer
what information each analysis can provide or benefit from. We have at this point identified some of the
more obvious interactions, such as doing text analysis on speech recognition output, or adding Named
Entities from surrounding text to the vocabulary known to the ASR system, but many more may become
apparent as the different research groups learn from each other.
10
http://activemq.apache.org/
108
One of the main innovative aspects of the project also lies in the combination of the outputs of different
analysis layers, and the capacity to perform reasoning or inference over this combined view to create a
richer model of the content than can be obtained individually. This is an important research task that
has not started yet, and we hope to report on it in the near future. As such, this article is limited to the
technological foundation that will enable this work by providing a flexible platform with easy access to
all available information layers.
Development of the platform has recently begun and all developments will become publicly available
at https://github.com/EUMSSI/.
Acknowledgements
The work presented in this article is being carried out within the FP7-ICT-2013-10 STREP
project EUMSSI under grant agreement n
?
611057, receiving funding from the European
Union?s Seventh Framework Programme managed by the REA-Research Executive Agency
http://ec.europa.eu/research/rea.
References
Zhineng Chen, Juan Cao, Yicheng Song, Yongdong Zhang, and Jintao Li. 2010. Web video categorization based
on Wikipedia categories and content-duplicated open resources. In Proceedings of the international conference
on Multimedia - MM ?10, page 1107, New York, New York, USA, October. ACM Press.
Rasmus Hahn, Christian Bizer, Christopher Sahnwaldt, Christian Herta, Scott Robinson, Michaela B?urgle, Holger
D?uwiger, and Ulrich Scheel. 2010. Faceted wikipedia search. In Business Information Systems, pages 1?11.
Springer.
Tom Heath and Christian Bizer. 2011. Linked data: Evolving the web into a global data space. Synthesis Lectures
on the Semantic Web: Theory and Technology.
Benjamin K?ohncke and Wolf-Tilo Balke. 2010. Using Wikipedia categories for compact representations of chem-
ical documents. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM international conference on Information and knowledge
management - CIKM ?10, page 1809, New York, New York, USA, October. ACM Press.
Yehuda Koren. 2008. Factorization meets the neighborhood. In Proceeding of the 14th ACM SIGKDD interna-
tional conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining - KDD 08, page 426, New York, New York, USA,
August. ACM Press.
Pablo N. Mendes, Max Jakob, Andr?es Garc??a-Silva, and Christian Bizer. 2011. DBpedia spotlight. In Proceedings
of the 7th International Conference on Semantic Systems - I-Semantics ?11, pages 1?8, New York, New York,
USA, September. ACM Press.
Matthew Michelson and Sofus A. Macskassy. 2010. Discovering users? topics of interest on twitter. In Proceed-
ings of the fourth workshop on Analytics for noisy unstructured text data - AND ?10, page 73, New York, New
York, USA, October. ACM Press.
Philip V. Ogren and Steven J. Bethard. 2009. Building test suites for UIMA components. SETQA-NLP ?09
Proceedings of the Workshop on Software Engineering, Testing, and Quality Assurance for Natural Language
Processing, pages 1?4, June.
109
