Proceedings of the Analyzing Conversations in Text and Speech (ACTS) Workshop at HLT-NAACL 2006, pages 62?70,
New York City, New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
RETROSPECTIVE ANALYSIS OF COMMUNICATION EVENTS - Understanding the Dynamics of Collaborative Multi-Party Discourse.   Andrew J. Cowell Jereme Haack Adrienne Andrew  Rich Interaction Environments Pacific Northwest National Laboratory Richland, WA 99336 {andrew.cowell | jereme.haack | adrienne.andrew}@pnl.gov   Abstract This research is aimed at understanding the dynamics of collaborative multi-party dis-course across multiple communication mo-dalities. Before we can truly make significant strides in devising collaborative communica-tion systems, there is a need to understand how typical users utilize computationally sup-ported communications mechanisms such as email, instant messaging, video conferencing, chat rooms, etc., both singularly and in con-junction with traditional means of communi-cation such as face-to-face meetings, telephone calls and postal mail. Attempting to understand an individual?s communications profile with access to only a single modality is challenging at best and often futile. Here, we discuss the development of RACE ? Retro-spective Analysis of Communications Events ? a test-bed prototype to investigate issues re-lating to multi-modal multi-party discourse. We also examine future avenues of research for further enhancing our prototype and inves-tigating this area. 
1 Introduction Communication is the heart of what makes us so-cial creatures. Today, we have a myriad of tech-nologies that allow us to communicate in ways our forefathers could never have imagined. Computa-tionally supported modalities such as email and instant messaging have had immeasurable effect on the way we work, play and generally interact with 
those in our lives. Being able to understand how individuals communicate, the methods they use, their personal preferences etc., and are all part of a field called anthroposemiotics1. This field looks to uncover the mystery behind how we communicate with ourselves (intrapersonal communication), with others (interpersonal communication), within groups (group dynamics) and across cultures (cross-cultural communication). While there is a great deal of literature in these fields, there are few operational applications that allow for true hands-on investigation.  Perhaps nowhere is the application of this field more important than in the field of intelli-gence analysis. Intelligence analysts must make sound judgments, coherently constructed from scattered heterogeneous fragments of information while being faced with significant time constraints. The information they use is rarely complete, often unreliable and usually temporally and spatially diverse. These dimensions need to be aligned and the information understood to enable the analyst to recognize sequences of inter-related events and hypothesize about future actions. Our aim has been to aid the analyst by researching, designing and implementing a test-bed for the investigation of collaborative, multi-party discourse. The focus is on reducing the complexity of analyzing communications data through a triage process; from a large corpus to a small handful of relevant conversations to finally a highly detailed view of one or two conversations, with incorpo-rated socio-behavioral dimensions. Below we pre-sent our design methodology and discuss the latest version of the prototype.                                                            1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_communication 
62
2 Method The design methodology we used included a review of the literature, followed by in-depth focus group discussions with working analysts to deter-mine requirements. Following the group session, a participatory design process was used to gather more information from our user group, leading to a set of sketches that were used in the initial proto-type implementation. From these an initial proto-type was created. The test-bed is currently in its second phase of implementation that includes the integration of components developed under other auspices into the RACE environment. These in-clude indicators of affect and social roles. Finally, we have built and collected a number of data sources that we intend to use to evaluate the sys-tem. We describe these stages in the following sec-tions. 2.1 Prior Art This effort began with a thorough literature review across the fields of ubiquitous computing, visualization, multi-party discourse and communi-cations theory. A number of research systems with similarities to our goal were reviewed in order to be able to understand the landscape and determine where specific opportunities may lie. Here we dis-cuss some of the systems (mainly research proto-types) that are available for reviewing communications data. As both Internet communications and com-plex graphics capabilities have become more per-vasive in modern computing, there has been much interest in visualizing conversations. Due to the ease of data capture with computationally sup-ported communications, such communication mo-dalities as email, chat, and forum/newsgroup threads appear to be the most researched. Several systems have represented vast, multi-threaded newsgroup or forum posts such as USENET. ?Loom? can represent the activity patterns of indi-viduals relative to one another, helping to charac-terize individuals? participation and roles (Donath et al 1999). In another view, linked posts are graphed to represent threads, characterizing the newsgroup as a whole. ?Discourse Diagrams? de-scribes newsgroups with semantic graphs of related concepts, and also graphs people?s connectedness to one another in social networks (Sack, 2000). ?Conversation Thumbnails? uses an over-
view/detail display to contextualize a user?s post in the group as a whole while it is being composed (Wattenberg and Millen, 2003). ?PeopleGarden? represents each individual participant as a compos-ite of their history of posting. Having all partici-pants represented in the same screen provides insight into the dynamics of the group as a whole across its recorded history, although there is no way to track connections between individuals or threading (Xiong and Donath, 1999). In RACE, the topics of a multitude of con-versations are explored by an analyst looking for both episodic and social information. Through an iterative filtering process, the analyst examines individual conversations. Like the newsgroup visu-alizations above, the goals are (in addition to a general desire to understand what is going on) to determine an individual?s social role and dynamic of the group, but the concept of ?conversations? is more granular. Whereas the newsgroup visualiza-tions may represent hundreds or even thousands of users and conversation threads, the detailed visu-alization in RACE?s final screen represents a sin-gle discourse with as few as two people. Thus, the systems above deal with a higher level of abstrac-tion and do not convey information on ?lurkers? who may read but not post, emotional qualities of contributions, or the temporal information present in synchronous communication. RACE has the additional goals of denoting presence, affect, and what Viegas and Donath call ?negotiation of con-versational synchrony? (1999). Research on chat room conversation has produced some interesting visualizations that start to deal with these concepts. The ?Babble? system both facilitates and visualizes synchronous and asynchronous chat (Erickson and Laff, 2001). Us-ers are represented as colored dots on a social proxy called a ?cookie?. The more interactions they have with the system, whether posting or only reading, the more central they become in the visu-alization. With inactivity, the dots move slowly back out to the periphery of the cookie, conveying information about presence and activity level. ?Chat Circles? is designed for synchronous chat and creates a strong sense of location by situating participants (represented as colored circles) in a large 2D space and only allowing them to see the text posted by others positioned nearby (Viegas and Donath, 1999). The circles expand to encom-pass posted text and shrink when ample time to 
63
read the utterance has passed. Even people who are idling or only listening are represented spatially so others can see them. People can position their cir-cles to avoid the ?noise? of unrelated conversations (as one could do at a cocktail party) or signify whom they are addressing. Each post leaves a cu-mulative translucent trace, indicating how long the poster has been there and how active they have been. Thus, group dynamics such as a group con-versation fragmenting into smaller ones, relative verbosity, and relative position are available for interpretation. While each of the systems above is designed for a particular modality, RACE integrates email, instant messaging, text messaging, phone conver-sations and teleconferences, in-person meetings in addition to chat or newsgroup participation. The goal is to get a more holistic sense of an individual throughout their discrete conversations and com-munication methods. As a post-hoc analysis tool, RACE aids the analyst by adding system interpre-tations of affect and social dynamics to the infor-mation represented in the prior art. It should be noted that this effort violates one of Erickson?s six claims about social visualization: ?Portray actions, not interpretation? users understand the context better than the system ever will? (2003). We agree in theory, but the needs of our analysts differ from those of a contributor to the conversation. Content-driven interpretations of group dynamics, affect, and social role complement full-text transcripts of the conversations, providing shortcuts to insight. Below we discuss further the requirements of our user group. 2.2 Requirements Elicitation To ensure our research was applicable to our or-ganization?s missions and fulfilled the require-ments and expectations of our user group, we enlisted the help of four analysts to determine spe-cific requirements. These were to be our subject matter experts (SME?s). Through interactions with our SME?s we determined that while it is important to being able to understand a single conversation in time, it is just as, if not more, important to be able to comprehend the stream of conversations that occurs over longer periods, related to the same topic. For example, it is important to be able to intercept, process, and analyze a discussion be-tween two individuals talking about making a 
homemade bomb, but it is even more important to place such a discussion within the context of the set of communications leading to an understanding of the overarching plot. Such review can provide additional information that could be invaluable to the analyst. Other requirements identified as part of these sessions included: ? The system should allow the analyst to get back to original source documents and be able to review the provenance.  ? The system should allow the analyst to anno-tate the communication events. ? Consider the use of color for note taking and marking modalities. ? The system should allow the analyst to high-light conversation fragments (i.e., small parts of a larger conversation that are considered important). ? The system should provide basic translation mechanisms for foreign language support as well as provide some form of lexicon for terms that fall outside an analyst?s field of expertise. ? The system should be able to import and ex-port conversation fragments using common formats. The system should allow multiple analysts to work collaboratively within the same workspace.  ? The system should allow the analyst to cus-tomize the environment to their preferences. In addition to an informal list of requirements, a great deal of brainstorming was performed during this session. Following a participatory design proc-ess, system designers worked with SME?s to put together a work process and some initial sketches of the overall system that could be fed into the im-plementation stage.  The process was designed so that the analyst could (Figure 1) interact with the conversation corpus available to them (potentially produced as a result of a search), viewing the conversations as dots, clustered around major topics. This view could be filtered based on time period, participants involved and communications modality used.   
64
  Figure 1: Sketch of the Corpus View.  On selecting a subset of conversations to review further (Figure 2) the analyst moves through to a second screen (the sequence view) where they can analyze the conversations in rela-tion to when they occurred (the view is reminiscent of Microsoft Project?s Gant view). 
 Figure 2: Sketch of the Sequence View.  While icons and text will continue to de-pict the modality the conversation utilized, the fo-cus at this level is of fusing the conversations to build a sequenced stream of communications traf-fic so the underlying thread or purpose can be un-derstood. Finally (Figure 3), conversations of specific interest to the analyst can be pursued in further detail in a third screen, called the ?detail view?. Here, the full transcript is displayed and can be ?played? utterance by utterance in real time. As each utterance is reached, a text-to-speech engine speaks the words, while a number of visual repre-sentations indicate social constructs such as social roles and the dynamics between the individuals.  
 Figure 3: Sketch of the Detail View. 2.3 Implemented Prototype Using a participatory design process, in-formed by the sketches and requirements of our analysts and the limitations of current research sys-tems, we implemented a three-screen prototype analytical environment that allows a user to visual-ize a large corpus of communications events (Figure 4).   
 Figure 4: Analyst using the RACE Environment.  The environment can run on three screens simulta-neously, be split across three panes (useful for per-forming analysis on large displays like wall-mounted plasma displays) or on a single screen with the use of a window manager seen in the top right of each view. For the ?corpus view? (left hand screen, Figure 5) we customized some commercially available visualization software to present the con-versation corpus, clustered by topic. Zooming in to individual items brings up metadata about that spe-cific conversation. The different modalities may also be represented by different icons or colors, 
65
depending on the type of style sheet loaded. Filters currently available include the modality used, the participants involved and the time/date the conver-sation occurred (and shortcuts to selecting all or none, or the current inverse are also available). Finally, a navigation window ensures the user does not get lost when interacting with a massive data that is topically diverse.   
 Figure 5: The Corpus View.  The ?sequence view? (Figure 6) is where we envision the majority of an analyst?s time will be spent. It is here that they will review, in detail, a small subset of conversations that they found of interest in the corpus space. For example, in their exploration of the visualization, the analyst may find a group of discussions about a particular chemical substance. Knowing that this is relevant to a study they are performing, they simply drag a box around that subset and immediately those con-versations are shown in the sequence view. Each conversation has an independent time line and can be zoomed out to show the entire conversation or zoomed in to see the individual utterances (these may also be accessed using tool-tips). The conver-sation titles on the left hand side of the screen can be unexpanded to show all the participants in-volved. Clicking on the participant opens a dialog box containing known information about that indi-vidual (including any known aliases and other names they may use online). A global timeline at the bottom of the screen shows where each conver-sation falls in sequence.   
 Figure 6: The Sequence View.  Once an important conversation is uncov-ered through the triage process, it can be selected for deeper investigation in the details view (Figure 7). This view can enable the analyst to see beyond the individual utterances. Utilizing other research performed at the Pacific Northwest National Labo-ratory, the details view enables the analyst to gain insight into an individual?s opinion on the topics discussed. The transcript is color-coded to show the seven dimensions of affect (expression, power, ethics, attainment, skill, accomplishment and transactions), while a graph representation allows the analyst to compare individuals? affect against each other. In order to ingest the text in different ways, a ?text-to-speech? engine can be used to have the computer ?speak? the transcript. As it steps through the utterances, a group dynamics graphic (based on Erickson?s Social Proxy) shows how the individuals relate to each other, highlighting those involved in the conversation and those that are idle. This view also provides a hierarchical view of the topics discussed with the ability to trigger a multi-dimensional visualization that maps partici-pants to topics. 
66
 Figure 7: The Detail View. 3 Evaluation and Data Sets In addition to the prototype system, an evalua-tion plan was developed. The current dataset being used to demonstrate the system was synthesized from news reports about the London bombings of 7th July 2005. The evaluation will use a new dataset build up from telephone transcripts from the regional August 14, 2003 blackout2 to ensure any analysts used that were involved in the devel-opment of the prototype will not benefit from any potential learning effects.  This data is made up of several participants involved in many different conversations. These characteristics are exactly what RACE was designed for.  Another dataset is a transcript of a murder mystery held on a chat room.  While there was only space for characters to inter-act, there are many different threads of conversa-tion going on at once.  This data set will be useful for exploring the social dynamic part of RACE.  We hope to show who the conversational ?drivers? were and explore what characteristics give some-one away as hiding details they do not want other characters to discover. 4 Summary & Further Work The ultimate goal of the RACE project is to assist analysts as they try to extract meaning from a myriad of sources.  To this end, we started by talking with analysts themselves.  This is in recog-nition of the fact that no matter how powerful a tool might seem to its developers, it is useless un-                                                           2 http://www.nerc.com/~filez/blackout.html 
less the end users actually adopt it.  By working with analysts every step of the way, we are keeping that goal in sight. RACE?s design as a test bed enables other re-search to get in front of the analyst sooner.  The quick insertion of the text affect work illustrates the capability to make functionality available to the user for evaluation.  Showing an analyst a concrete example of an idea allows them to get a better un-derstanding of it and an easier way to elicit feed-back for future work. While this is an exciting first step, there are many avenues of crucial research still to be per-formed. In many fields, having access to all the communications events that occurred is rare. Re-search needs to be performed to determine how best to enable the analyst to fill in these blanks. Potential approaches include hypothesized infer-ence or the use placeholders.   Currently, the prototype analytical envi-ronment only processes and displays textual tran-scripts of communication events. This decision was made to handle textual content first so to en-sure proof of principle prior to expending effort on the more challenging aspect of fusing video, audio, still images and text (VAST). Some effort has been expended on looking for suitable design metaphors that could aid an analyst in making sense of such diverse media (e.g., video production user inter-faces such as Final Cut Pro) but more research, design and evaluation is required.  More effort needs to be expended on un-derstanding how best to fuse different modalities of communication. Currently, a time-shifting ap-proach is used to normalize an asynchronous email thread with similar-topic synchronous communica-tions (e.g., telephone call, instant messaging ses-sion). This approach works but needs to be refined in order to be successful. At one level, the modal-ity used is irrelevant ? it is the essence of the event that is of primary concern. Being able to boil down the associated threads into one specific stream (e.g., multiple conversations across a number of modalities, all around the topic of plotting to ex-plode a device at a particular location) is crucial in being able to support the analytical tradecraft and allow analysts to provide actionable intelligence to their superiors.  Conversations rarely keep to one single focused topic, and this can cause problems in the cluster visualization type approach used so far. 
67
Topic segmentation is a difficult research area and not one that we intend to pursue. There are at least three projects currently on the way at our institu-tion that deal with this area and this work intends to utilize the fruits of those labors.   Finally, there are many elements of multi-party discourse that exist outside linguistic bounda-ries. The words we use, how often we make an utterance, etc., all speak to who we are as individu-als. While some of this is obvious and can be ob-served with just a cursory review of a transcript of the source material, other elements are discrete and hidden. For example, conversational statistics can be recorded and used to determine an individual?s level of engagement in a topic. Detection of fa-miliarity (e.g., either by specific words not cur-
rently found in the present conversation or through the use of casual rather than formal speech) can indicate personal relationships between individuals in a dyad. Personality types can be inferred by markers indicative of leadership (e.g., number of interruptions performed/received, ability to change topic, use of power terms) or weaker, subversive roles (e.g., use of weak terms, submission of floor, deference to others). Analysts are rarely able to access such rich personality profiles of their sub-jects without performing an exhaustive analysis or calling in specialized help. While we are just be-ginning to integrate certain elements of social dis-course, there are many other dimensions to be considered. References Donath, J., Karahalios, K., and Viegas, F. 1999. "Visualizing conversations," Proceedings of HICSS-32, Persistent Conversations Track. Maui, Hawaii, January 5-8. Sack, W. 2000. "Discourse Diagrams: Interface Design for Very Large Scale Conversations," Pro-ceedings of the HICSS-33, Persistent Conversa-tions Track . Maui, Hawaii, January. Wattenberg, M. M & Millen, D. R., (2003) Con-versation Thumbnails for Large-Scale Discussions. . In Extended Abstracts ? CHI 2003. Ft. Lauder-dale, April 8-10. Xiong, R. and Donath, J. PeopleGarden: Creating Data Portraits for Users, in Proceedings of the 12 th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, New York: ACM, pp 37-44.         
  Viegas , F. B. & Donath, J. S. (1999). Chat Circles. CHI 1999 Conference Proceedings: Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. New York: ACM Press, 9-16.  Erickson T and Laff MR (2001) The design of the ?Babble? timeline: A social proxy for visualizing group activity over time. Extended Abstracts: Hu-man Factors in Computing System (CHI 2001), 329-220. Erickson, T. Designing Visualizations of Social Activity: Six Claims, The Proceedings of CHI 2003: Extended Abstracts. New York: ACM Press, 2003.
68
69
 70
