c? 2004 Association for Computational Linguistics
Inferable Centers, Centering Transitions,
and the Notion of Coherence
Laurel Fais?
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
A centering analysis of the corpus of Japanese e-mail that is examined in this article relies heavily
on the inclusion of inferable centers. However, utilizing this type of center results in a high level of
indeterminacy in labeling transitions and thus in characterizing the coherence of the corpus. The
difficulty lies in the requirement of identity of discourse entities in the definitions of transition
states. Lexical cohesion is proposed as a well-defined notion to replace the intuitions captured by
the use of inferable centers. Two new transitions, based on lexical relatedness instead of identity,
supplement the standard definitions and more adequately characterize coherence in this corpus.
Implications and extensions of the proposal are discussed.
1. Introduction
Centering has been proposed as a model of the local attentional states of speakers and
hearers involved in the mutual construction of conversation (Brennan, Friedman, and
Pollard 1987; Grosz and Sidner 1986, 1998; Walker 1998). Centering mechanisms are
designed to model the coherence of discourse by characterizing transitions between
utterances in terms of their inferential load and hence their naturalness. These char-
acterizations are intended to capture intuitions about the ?flow? (Chafe 1979) or the
?ongoing process of meaning? (Halliday 1994) in discourse.
In this work, we examine a corpus of Japanese e-mail to investigate the mecha-
nisms by which coherence is achieved. Because this corpus contains a high number
of discourse elements that are inferable from the discourse context, we have an op-
portunity to examine the interplay between standard centering transition definitions
and the presence of inferable discourse entities. We claim on the basis of intuitions of
native speakers that the actual level of coherence in the corpus is much higher than
the centering account implies, primarily by virtue of the fact that transitions involving
inferable entities are often difficult to specify. We conclude that the standard centering
account cannot accurately model the coherence in this corpus. Detailed analysis re-
veals that one major problem lies in the requirement of identity of discourse elements
in adjacent utterances in order for those elements to contribute to coherence. We de-
scribe this problem and propose two additions to the usual repertoire of transitions
that enable a more authentic account of coherence in this corpus, while remaining
within a centering framework.
The article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we briefly describe centering
mechanisms and their role in modeling coherence. We go on to outline the features
of the corpus in Section 3 and illustrate how standard centering mechanisms charac-
terize transitions and coherence in this corpus, suggesting that these mechanisms are
not adequate for the task. In Section 4, we describe more general problems with the
? Infant Studies Centre, University of British Columbia, Room 1401, 2136 West Mall, Vancouver, British
Columbia, V6T 1Z4 Canada. E-mail: jwlab@psych.ubc.ca.
120
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
inclusion of inferable discourse entities in centering theory and propose a revision to
the standard set of transitions that more accurately describes the corpus. In this sec-
tion as well, we explore the implications of this proposal for other areas of discourse
analysis. In Section 5, we outline some possibilities for improvement and extension of
the proposal, and we conclude in the final section.
2. Centering Mechanisms
The central intuitions of centering concern the relationships among the discourse en-
tities appearing or represented in adjacent utterances in a discourse (Walker, Joshi,
and Prince 1998). Each utterance Ui in a discourse is considered to contain a set of
discourse entities called forward-looking centers, or Cfs. These entities are ranked in
the Cf list for each utterance according to language-specific ranking principles. We
follow, in general, the ordering principles for Japanese given in Walker, Iida, and Cote
(1994) (with some adjustments for possessive phrases as noted in example (1)):
Cf ranking for Japanese:
(Grammatical OR ?) topic > empathy > subject > object2 > object > others
A special member of the Cf list, the backward-looking center, or Cb, represents
the ?topic?1 of Ui and is the highest-ranked Cf on the Cf list of Ui?1 which is realized
in Ui. In addition, the preferred center of Ui, or Cp, is the highest-ranked Cf in Ui.
Given Ui and Ui?1, then, there are four different ways in which their Cbs and Cps
may be related; each of these is defined as a type of transition state (Table 1).
There are two rules in a centering approach:
Rule 1: If some entity in the Cf list for Ui?1 is realized as a pronoun in Ui, then
so is the Cb for Ui.
Rule 2: Transition states are ordered such that CONTINUE is most preferred, fol-
lowed in order by RETAIN, SMOOTH SHIFT, and ROUGH SHIFT (Walker, Joshi, and Prince
1998).
Rule 2 captures the centering intuitions concerning coherence: Utterances that CON-
TINUE the topic of a previous utterance in a prominent position impose a lower infer-
ential load, and are thus more coherent, than utterances which relegate the topic to
less prominent positions or which change the topic.
The vast majority of the sentences in our corpus are complex sentences. Thus,
the question of how to interpret centering principles in complex sentences cannot be
ignored. We will consider the basic utterance unit of centering to be the tensed clause
Table 1
Transition definitions.
Cb(Ui) = Cb(Ui?1) OR Cb(Ui) = ? Cb(Ui) = Cb(Ui?1)
Cb(Ui) = Cp(Ui) CONTINUE SMOOTH SHIFT
Cb(Ui) = Cp(Ui) RETAIN ROUGH SHIFT
1 Whenever the word topic is used in this article, we mean the general notion of topic as the subject of a
discourse unit, not the specialized meaning of topic/comment.
121
Fais Transitions and Coherence
and will assume that these clauses form a flat, linear sequence of discourse units, such
that the centering output of the first clause in the sentence is the input to the next,
and so on, in the spirit of Kameyama (1998) and Suri and McCoy (1994).2
Because the notion of backward-looking center will be critical to the discussion that
follows, we look at this notion in greater detail here. According to Grosz, Joshi, and
Weinstein (1986, quoted in Walker, Joshi, and Prince [1998]), a center is realized in
an utterance U if it ?is an element of the situation described by U or the semantic
interpretation of some subpart of U? (page 4). As Walker, Joshi, and Prince (1998)
point out, this covers ?pronouns, zero pronouns, explicitly realized discourse entities,
and. . . entities inferable from the discourse situation? (page 4). The definition pro-
posed by Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein allows inferable entities, that is, entities that are
not expressed at the surface level of the utterance or immediately recoverable from
the subcategorization properties of the verb (as, for example, zero pronouns are) to
constitute centers of an utterance. However, the theory does not make explicit the
parameters within which to characterize the class of permissible inferable elements or
the constraints on doing so. We will return to this difficulty later.
3. The Corpus
3.1 The Nature of the Corpus
The data examined consist of a collection of 32 e-mail messages exchanged among
five employees of a Japanese company from June 5 to June 16, 1995. The messages
constitute a collective attempt to schedule a sports-watching outing convenient for
and interesting to all five in the group. Thus, the tone is usually casual. The authors
combine standard aspects of written text with various strategies for encoding speech-
like information in the messages: nonstandard uses of punctuation, katakana (the
syllabary for writing foreign words), and English; nonstandard spelling; emoticons;
discourse markers, sentence-final particles, tense, and formality typical of speech; and
fillers (Fais 2001; Fais and Yamura-Takei 2003). Quantitative information for the corpus
is given in Table 2.
Table 2
Number of messages, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and characters
per author.
Authors Messages Paragraphs Sentences Clauses Characters
H 5 9 20 60 880
I 10 46 50 122 1,904
M 5 27 39 84 1,268
R 5 29 56 125 1,805
U 7 35 60 127 2,015
Total 32 146 225 518 7,872
2 Kameyama (1998) also mentions two cases in which a hierarchical interpretation is warranted: reported
speech and nonreport complements. Our corpus does not contain examples of these kinds of
utterances. On the other hand, it does contain tensed clauses acting as ?relative clauses? and as verbal
complements. We have not separated these from their heads or matrix clauses. This has no effect on
the analysis presented in this article, except for the fact that had we separated these clauses, it would
have made the problematic situation we describe later even more marked. The status of these clauses
vis-a`-vis centering is a topic in need of extensive investigation.
122
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
3.2 Inferables and Transition States in the Corpus
Example (1) illustrates how centering mechanisms apply to the beginning of one of
the messages and how the CONTINUE and RETAIN transitions can model coherence:
1a. 3 18
watashi wa 18nichi no yakuluto-yokohamasen wa
me TOP 18th on Swallows vs. Baystars game TOP
Cb = (beginning)
Cf = Swallows
vs. Baystars game,4
18th, enthusiasm
motomoto noriki datta node
actually enthusiasm was since
CONTINUE
1b.
? OK desu
? OK is
?As for me, since I?m really up for the Swallows vs.
Baystars game on 18th, that is OK with me.?
Cb = SvsB game ?
Cf = SvsB game ?
RETAIN
1c. U-
demo tekondoh ni kyoumishinshin datta U-san ya
but taekwondo in keen interest was U-san and
Cb = it = Swallows
vs. Baystars game
Cf = U-san, M-san, it,
interest, taekwondo
M-
M-san wa koredeiindeshouka
M-san TOP I?m wondering if it is ok
?But I?m wondering if it is ok for U-san and M-san, who have
shown a keen interest in taekwondo.?
Clause (1a) has no Cb, since it occurs at the beginning of the message. The Cp of (1a) is
Swallows vs. Baystars game, by virtue of the fact that it is topic-marked. The subject of the
copular desu in (1b) is omitted; rule 1 implies that the referent for this zero argument
is Swallows vs. Baystars game, which is a correct assignment. A similar process resolves
the referent for kore ?this? in (1c). Note that the CONTINUE and RETAIN transitions do, in
fact, capture the intuition that this segment of the message is coherent and is ?about?
the Swallows vs. Baystars game.
Example (2) is much more typical of the messages in the corpus and is not as
well behaved as (1). Notice that all the Cbs in this example are inferable ?from the
discourse situation? of Ui?1. The preponderance of inferable Cbs is typical; out of
330 Cbs in the corpus, 250 (more than 75%) are entities other than pronouns, zero
3 We will ignore first-person arguments in this analysis, since centering is intended to handle only
third-person arguments. How topic-marked first-person arguments affect attentional states in discourse
is an interesting question, though beyond the scope of this article.
We use the following abbreviations for Japanese case markers in this article: TOP, topic; SUBJ,
subject; OBJ, object.
4 There is no consensus as to the ordering of the arguments in a Japanese A no B construction (roughly
equivalent to possessives; Tetreault 2001; Matsui 1999; but see Fais 2002). We have listed the arguments
in the order suggested in Fais (2002); this has little effect on the present discussion.
123
Fais Transitions and Coherence
arguments, or explicitly realized entities.5 This raises a question undiscussed in the
centering literature: How do we interpret inferable Cbs in the context of assigning
transition types? Example (2) illustrates the problems involved:
2a.
tokorode enseki nan desuga
by the way restaurant is
Cb = ?
Cf = restaurant
2b.
sendagaya kinpen ni sake wo nomeru
sendagaya neighborhood in alcohol OBJ can drink
Cb = ?
Cf = soba shop,
Sendagaya
neighborhood, alcohol
umai sobaya ga aruto miminishimashita
good soba shop SUBJ is have heard
?By the way, about the restaurant, I?ve heard there is a good
soba shop, which also serves alcohol, around Sendagaya.?
CONTINUE?
SMOOTH SHIFT?
2c.
heiten jikoku ga hayaisounanode
shop closing time SUBJ early seems because
Cb = shop closing time
(inferable)
Cf = shop closing time
SMOOTH SHIFT
2d.
? chotto mazui kamoshiremasen ga
? a little bad might be but
Cb = choosing this
restaurant ? (inferable)
Cf = choosing this
restaurant ?
2e. I-
I-sanatari gozonjidewa naideshouka
I-san information have
ROUGH SHIFT
Cb = information
?Choosing this restaurant may not be good because it closes
early. I-san, do you have information about this restaurant??
(about restaurant)
(inferable)
Cf = I-san, information
(about restaurant)
The Cb of (2a) is null, since that clause is the first in the discourse segment. Clause
(2b) has three centers, listed in the Cf list. All three of these entities are inferable from
the discourse context of (2a). We mentioned previously that there is no principled way
to determine the list of inferables of an utterance; it is even more difficult, then, to
5 In the subsequent discussion, for the sake of simplicity, we will refer to this group as ?explicit? centers,
realizing that zero arguments are not precisely ?explicit,? but setting them off in this way from
inferable centers.
124
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
Table 3
Transitions occurring in the corpus, by type.
Transition type Number Percentage
CONTINUE 54 16.4
RETAIN 22 6.7
SMOOTH SHIFT 2 0.6
ROUGH SHIFT 2 0.6
Transition to inferable Cb 138 41.8
NULL 112 33.9
Total 330
determine the order in which inferables should be listed on a Cf list. Therefore, we
cannot say which of the Cfs in (2b) is the ?highest ranked? and thus the Cb for (2b).
Since we cannot determine which is the Cb, we likewise cannot determine whether
the Cb of (2b) is the same as its Cp, and so we cannot label the transition at all.
The fact that there is only one Cf for (2c) simplifies the problem somewhat. That
Cf, which is inferable from (2b), must also be the Cb of (2c), but since we could not
ascertain the Cb of (2b), we do not know if the transition from (2b) to (2c) is a CONTINUE
or a SMOOTH SHIFT. Again, the presence of only one Cf in (2d) makes matters easier;
we are able to label the transition from (2c) to (2d) a SMOOTH SHIFT.
We surmise that I-san may not be inferable from the discourse context,6 though
information (about the restaurant) is, and thus the latter becomes the Cb of (2e). Because
this Cb is neither the same as the Cb of (2d) nor the same as its own Cp, the transition
from (2d) to (2e) is a ROUGH SHIFT.
Using the standard centering definitions, supplemented with the notion of NULL
transitions to label transitions to utterances that contain no Cb, we hand-tabulated
the number of transitions of each type occurring in the corpus (Table 3). The figures
for CONTINUE, RETAIN, SMOOTH SHIFT, and ROUGH SHIFT are those for transitions to
utterances containing either explicit, pronominal, or zero-argument Cbs. Given the
difficulties in accurately labeling transitions to utterances containing inferable Cbs, we
grouped these latter together separately from transitions to utterances with explicit,
pronominal, or zero-argument Cbs.
There are two points of special interest in Table 3. First, of course, is the particularly
high number of transitions to utterances containing inferable Cbs and the number of
NULL transitions. At over 40%, the utterances involved in transitions to utterances
containing inferable Cbs make up a substantial portion of the corpus. Second are the
relative proportions of CONTINUE, RETAIN, SMOOTH SHIFT, and ROUGH SHIFT transitions.
Note that, considering just these transitions to utterances containing explicitly realized
centers, these proportions are roughly what we expect of coherent text: Most of the
shifts are CONTINUE, followed by a respectable number of RETAINs, and a very few
SHIFTs.
6 Of course, in the absence of any principled way to determine this, this is merely conjecture. In fact,
because I-san is a part of the ongoing e-mail exchange, he could possibly be considered part of the
discourse context. The difficulty is, of course, the lack of any rigorous way to determine what the
elements in the discourse context are.
125
Fais Transitions and Coherence
4. Lexical Cohesion and Discourse Coherence: A Revision of Standard Transition
Types
4.1 Inferable Centers in Centering Theory
We saw in Section 3.2 that the introduction of inferable centers into a centering anal-
ysis leads to indeterminate transition identification. We also saw that transitions to
utterances with inferable centers make up a large proportion (over 40%) of the tran-
sitions in this corpus. It is important, then, if a centering analysis is to represent the
nature of coherence in this corpus accurately, that we make principled provisions for
the notion captured by inferable centers in the theory.
Only rarely are inferable entities actually listed in analyses in the literature, and
then usually when their presence is supported by previous explicit mention and by a
clear, tight semantic or syntactic relationship between the entities involved, as in (3),
taken from (17) in Kameyama (1998):
3a. It is the apparent intention of the Republi-
can Party to campaign on the carcass of what
they call Eisenhower Republicanism.
Cb = Republican Party
3b. but the heart stopped beating Cb = Republican Party (inferable
Possessor of the heart)
3c. and the lifeblood congealed Cb = Republican Party (inferable
Possessor of the lifeblood)
Note that (3) avoids at least one of the difficulties we encountered in (2); when there
is only one center to deal with, as there is in (2c) and (2d) and (3b) and (3c), the
choice of Cb is trivial. However, in cases such as (2a) and (2e), or in (3b) if it had been
something like but the heart and lifeblood stopped pumping, we cannot determine what
the Cb should be. Further, in these cases, it is impossible to identify the appropriate
transition to the following utterance; when the Cb of Ui?1 is undetermined (as it is
for (2b)), the transition to Ui (in this case, (2c)) is undeterminable.
4.2 Logical Difficulties with Inferable Centers
There are further problems resulting from taking the use of inferable centers to its
logical extreme. In our analysis so far, we have been concerned with explicit entities
in Ui that realize centers in Ui?1 that are inferable from the discourse context. To be
accurate, those inferable centers need to be listed in the Cf list for Ui?1. However, if
we process discourse incrementally, this leads to the conclusion that since we do not
know which inferable entity from Ui?1 will be evoked in Ui, we need to list every
inferable entity in the Cf list of Ui?1. This is both computationally untenable and,
in view of the lack of any parameters for determining what constitutes an allowable
inferable Cb, impossible. Even if it were possible and desirable, how could we define
for inferable entities the type of grammatical-role information essential to determining
the placement of these entities on a Cf list?
Again taking the definition of inferable centers to its extreme, we note another
problem. Every utterance, not just Ui?1, evokes inferable centers. There is nothing in
the theory to preclude a situation such as that shown in (4) (a version of (2) simplified
for illustrative purposes) (implicit inferable centers are given in italics):
126
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
4a.
sendagaya kinpen ni
sendagaya neighborhood in
Cb = ?
Cf = soba shop,
Sendagaya
neighborhood,
umai sobaya ga aruto miminishimashita
good soba shop SUBJ is have heard
?I?ve heard there is a good soba shop around Sendagaya.?
udon shop, sake
shop, shop clerk,
menu, food,
customers. . .
4b.
demo heiten jikoku ga hayaisounandesu
but shop closing time SUBJ is early
?But the shop closes early.?
Cb = shop clerk
Cf = shop closing time,
shop opening time,
shop, shop clerk,
door. . .
In (4), an inferable center from the Cf list of (4b) matches an inferable center from the
Cf list of (4a) and is chosen as the Cb. Of course, there could be numerous identical
inferable centers on the Cf lists of Ui and Ui?1, all ?vying? for Cb of Ui. Although
this is obviously an absurd extension of the inclusion of inferable centers in centering
theory, there is nothing, unfortunately, in the theory itself to rule it out.
4.3 Possible Solutions to the Problems of Inferable Centers
4.3.1 Inferable Centers as Bridging References. Inferable centers are similar to bridg-
ing references (Clark 1977); they have a conceptual relationship to entities in a previous
utterance. There is a sense that bridging references should participate in the creation of
coherence in a discourse (Hahn, Markert, and Strube 1996). But the work on bridging
references characterizes this relationship as referential or anaphoric; this can be seen
in the various terms under which this phenomenon is discussed: bridging references,
indirect anaphora, functional anaphora, and partial anaphora. Bridging references,
however, unlike the usual case of anaphora, may be mediated not only by a strict
identity condition, but also by any number of other semantic relationships (is-a, has-a,
made-of, at-time, etc.).
Unfortunately, the establishment of the semantic relationship between an anchor
and its bridging reference is notoriously difficult. Poesio et al (2000), even after
severely restricting the types of relationships to be labeled, had extremely poor inter-
labeler reliability on a first pass. Every account in which bridging references are ad-
dressed restricts allowable relationships to a small, relatively well-defined set (Vieira
and Poesio 2001; Poesio et al 2000; Murata, Isahara, and Nagao 1999; Strube and
Hahn 1999). Cote (1998) proposes the use of lexical-conceptual primitives instead of
grammatical relations in Cf templates and suggests that the conceptual information
that this approach provides might be rich enough to supply part-whole information
necessary to the resolution of bridging references. She points out as well, however, that
a number of other types of semantic relationships manifested in bridging references
would not be identifiable from lexical-conceptual information. Thus, although work
on bridging references has attempted to provide a characterization of the possible se-
mantic relationships involved, what success has been achieved is limited to a small
subset of cases.
127
Fais Transitions and Coherence
4.3.2 Restrictions on the Notion of Inferable Center. One possible way around the
logical problems introduced by inferable centers is to take into account only inferable
centers that are explicitly realized in an utterance when determining the Cb of that
utterance. This would mean, for example, considering soba shop, Sendagaya neighborhood,
and alcohol from (2b) in choosing the Cb for (2c). But how do we make the choice
among these possibilities? Any of these three different, explicit, inferable centers could
be chosen to be the Cb. But this is exactly the difficulty: We have no principled way
to make such a choice. We have no way of knowing which of these inferable centers
is ranked highest in the Cf list for (2a) so that we can select that Cf to be the Cb of
(2b).
A second possibility is to allow only explicitly realized (i.e., noninferable) centers.
This seems to be the approach taken by Passonneau (1998); her definition of a null
Cb seems to imply that a Cb must be (noninferable and) explicitly realized, and her
null Cbs constitute the cases in which there is no explicit Cb. In her examination
of the Pear Stories (recordings of people describing to another person a movie they
had seen; Chafe 1980), NULL transitions (transitions to an utterance with a null Cb)
represent the majority of transitions. Although her concern is discourse segmentation,
Passonneau does note that the patterning of transition types does not accurately reflect
the coherence of the stories.
Allowing only explicit centers would mean, for the corpus studied in this article,
that inferable Cbs become null Cbs and the proportion of NULL transitions becomes
75.7%. Under this assumption, this corpus would be characterized as extremely in-
coherent, a claim belied both by native-speaker intuitions (an acceptable level of co-
herency for these texts was confirmed by three native speakers) and also by the fact
that the task that was the central concern of these messages was successfully com-
pleted; the group exchanged a number of opinions and pieces of information and
came to a consensus regarding their sports outing, with no message showing confu-
sion about information contained in previous messages. Thus, the solution of allowing
only explicit centers does not yield an accurate characterization of the coherence of
this corpus.
Hurewitz (1998) chose to define allowable inferable Cbs fairly narrowly in her
English data, requiring functional dependency or a poset relationship to hold in order
for a Cb to be recognized. Even with this definition, which is more constrained than
we have taken ?inferable? to be in our previous discussion, she finds that 21% of
the Brown corpus (a variety of written texts) and 28% of the switchboard corpus
(taped telephone conversations) consist of what she calls a no-Cb condition. Poesio et
al. (2000) report a similarly high proportion of nonexplicit Cbs in their English text
corpora. They test a number of configurations of parameters of centering theory to
attempt to minimize the number of null Cbs (reasoning that the best configuration of
parameters would result in the fewest violations of the constraints of the theory, in
this case, the constraint that all utterances in the discourse except for the first have at
least one Cb). One way in which they are able to improve their results significantly is
by allowing a restricted set of three types of nonidentity relationships between centers,
that is, by recognizing three types of well-defined inferables. However, simply limiting
the type of inferables allowed still does not address the issue of the indeterminacy of
transitions to utterances containing inferable Cbs. And the central question raised
by the high number of nonexplicit Cbs found in naturally occurring texts remains
unaddressed: How can we characterize coherence in a text in which Cbs are so often
inferable and thus in which transition types are often indeterminate?
The crux of the problem lies in the application of standard centering processes to
inferable centers. In a nonproblematic case, a Cb in Ui is recognized by virtue of its
128
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
identity to a Cf in Ui?1. This is (relatively) straightforward in the case of explicit centers.
But now apply this process to inferable centers. In a standard centering approach, a
Cb in Ui can also be recognized by virtue of its identity to an inferable center in Ui?1.
This implies that we must somehow make available all the possible inferable centers
in Ui?1 in order to recognize (possibly) one of them as the Cb for Ui. We have already
noted that this position is untenable. Even if we recognize the inferable centers of
Ui?1 a posteriori by considering only those that appear in Ui, it is still impossible
to select which of these centers is highest ranked in Ui. What we need, instead, is a
way to recognize a Cb in Ui not by virtue of its identity with a preestablished list of
(explicit and inferable) centers, but by virtue of a relationship, other than identity, with
the explicit centers of Ui?1. We propose the relationship of lexical cohesion to fill this
function. The recognition of a lexically cohesive relationship, then, admits inferable
centers without allowing the virtually uncontrollable proliferation of hard-to-define
inferable centers in the Cf lists for utterances. We propose a principled way to define
this relationship that not only avoids the problems discussed above but also more
accurately characterizes the coherence of this corpus.
4.4 Coherence and Cohesion
Halliday (1994) characterizes cohesion in text as the establishment of ?relations within
the text that are not subject to [grammatical] limitations; relations that may involve
elements of any extent, both smaller and larger than clauses, from single words to
lengthy passages of text; and that may hold across gaps of any extent. . .without regard
to the nature of whatever intervenes? (page 309).7 Cohesion is that aspect ?whereby the
flow of meaning is channelled into a traceable current of discourse instead of spilling
out formlessly in every possible direction? (page 311). It is this ?traceable current of
discourse? that centering is meant to model.
Lexical cohesion contributes to textual coherence. In other words, strong semantic
and structural relationships among words in a text help to make that piece of text
?make sense.? Coherence is a property of discourse; cohesion is a property of dis-
course elements. Centering models coherence by characterizing relationships between
elements of discourse. We claim that it is not only the continuation of identical explicit
discourse elements that creates coherence, but also strong cohesion among discourse
elements.8
Halliday identifies four features of text that create cohesion among discourse el-
ements: conjunction, reference, ellipsis, and lexical cohesion. Insights concerning con-
junction types and their interactions with the processes of referent resolution have
been elaborated in a number of works (Nariyama 2000; Nakaiwa and Shirai 1996;
Kuno 1973) but have not been well integrated into the centering approach. Reference
and ellipsis are, of course, some of the mainstays of centering research. Lexical cohe-
sion, however, is an aspect of text coherence that has had only a trivial application
in a centering approach, although it has been incorporated into other aspects of natu-
ral language processing (see subsequent discussion). ?Lexical cohesion,? according to
Halliday, ?comes about through the selection of items that are related in some way
to those that have gone before? (page 330). In centering, that relationship has been
7 We follow Halliday in assuming that ?[f]or a text to be coherent, it must be cohesive; but it must be
more besides.? He characterizes the ?more? as being socially, semantically, and structurally
appropriate. We will not deal with these elements here but rather will limit ourselves to the
contribution of lexical cohesion to coherence.
8 Of course it is possible to have cohesion without coherence and vice versa; Morris and Hirst (1991)
give some nice examples. However, as they assert, ?most sentences that relate coherently do exhibit
cohesion as well? (page 26).
129
Fais Transitions and Coherence
assumed to be one of identity of centers; an element in Ui is required to be the same
as an element in Ui?1 (or in its discourse context) in order for it to be considered a
Cb. However, earlier we saw the difficulties of admitting inferables and the inability
of a centering approach to characterize coherence for inferable centers. Applying the
notion of lexical relatedness to cases involving inferables allows us to capture what
seems intuitively to constitute the relationship between clauses containing inferable
centers.
A number of other accounts provide relevant information concerning lexical cohe-
sion in text. These accounts are based upon the characterization of semantic relations
among discourse elements by reference to semantic information contained in WordNet
(Harabagiu 1998, 1999), thesauruses (Harabagiu 1998; Morris and Hirst 1991; Okumura
and Honda 1994), or dictionaries (Kasahara et al 1996; Kozima 1993; Kozima and Fu-
rugori 1993). In all of these approaches, the semantic distance or similarity between
(or among) words is computed, and in most of these accounts, the results are applied
to the segmentation of discourse.
The intuition behind the importance of lexical relatedness has been applied to a
number of other tasks in natural language processing and analysis as well. Lotfipour-
Saedi (1997) uses lexical cohesion to develop a rigorous notion of ?translation equiv-
alence?; Boguraev and Neff (2000) to improve document summarization techniques;
Sack (1999) to create ?diagrams of social cohesion? for newsgroup postings; and Oku-
mura and Honda (1994) to disambiguate word senses.
Halliday asserts that ?this interaction between lexical cohesion and reference. . . is
the principal means for tracking a participant through the discourse? (page 332), that
is, for modeling focus. Centering has provided us with a principled way of character-
izing the tracking of reference; the addition of the notion of lexical cohesion allows
centering to function in an even more empirically comprehensive way, by making
possible the principled inclusion of what have been called inferable centers. In the
next section, we outline how lexical cohesion can be incorporated into a centering
theory.
4.5 COHESIVE Transition and COMPLETE SHIFT
With the use of the sorts of techniques to establish semantic distance described in the
works cited earlier, it is possible to be precise about the notion of lexical cohesion.
In this section, we discuss how semantic distance is established using one of these
techniques, a semantic similarity measure derived from the Gainen Base (?Concept
Database?) (Kasahara et al 1996). We then indicate how semantic distance can be used
to define the notion of lexical cohesion as a crucial element in the creation of two
new types of transition: COHESIVE and COMPLETE SHIFT, which allow us to adequately
characterize coherence in a corpus containing a high proportion of nonexplicit Cbs.
The Gainen Base is a knowledge base built from machine-readable dictionaries of
Japanese. Each word in the knowledge base is defined by a list of weighted keywords
extracted from the dictionary definition of the word. The number of times a keyword
appears in the word?s definitions determines the weight for the keyword. Keywords
are standardized to take into account the presence of semantically similar words in
the definitions, and their weights are normalized to take into account the differing
lengths of definitions in the dictionaries. The semantic distance between two words
is calculated as a function of the nearness of the two words in a vector space.9 For
9 Each Wordi is defined by a list of standardized, weighted keywords from which is generated a
vectorized-Wordi. More specifically, then, semantic similarity is measured by a function R that satisfies
130
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
Table 4
Transition definitions.
Cb(Ui) = Cb(Ui?1)
OR Cb(Ui?1) = ? Cb(Ui) = Cb(Ui?1) Cb (Ui) = ?
and Cb(Ui) = ?
Cb(Ui) = Cp(Ui) CONTINUE SMOOTH SHIFT COHESIVE ?Cf(Ui) ? Cf(Ui?1)
Cb(Ui) = Cp(Ui) RETAIN ROUGH SHIFT COMPLETE SHIFT ?(?Cf(Ui) ? Cf(Ui?1))
our present purposes, then, we say that there is lexical cohesion between Ui and
Ui?1 when Cf(Ui) is semantically close to Cf(Ui?1) as determined using a well-defined
semantic similarity measure over the Gainen Base.10 We will examine in more detail
in Section 4.6 whether semantic similarity is best viewed as holding between the sets
of Cfs of utterances or between individual discourse entities in those utterances. For
now, we will talk equally of lexical cohesion between utterances and lexical cohesion
among the Cfs that participate in defining cohesion for those utterances. We define
the relation ? as indicating strong lexical cohesion, with a lexical cohesion factor of
one indicating identity.
We supplement the standard table of transition states, shown in the left side of
Table 4, with transitions defined in the right side. The sense of this table is as follows.
We assume all centers to be explicit, that is, pronouns, zero arguments, or explicitly
realized entities. The left portion of Table 4 allows us to model transition states in
well-behaved explicit contexts, tracking the focus of the discourse in a specific, local
way. It includes the cases in which the Cb of Ui?1 might be ??,? that is, that Ui?1 might
be the discourse-initial utterance or might simply have no Cb, while Ui does have (an
explicit) Cb. However, where there is not strict identity between any (explicit) element
in Ui and any (explicit) element in Ui?1, we have the situation in which Cb(Ui) = ?. We
propose a new interpretation for these cases, described in the right portion of Table 4.
Table 4 defines two new types of shift to utterances that do not contain an explicit
Cb. If there is at least one Cf in Ui that has a high lexical cohesion value with some
Cf(s) in Ui?1, then the transition from Ui?1 to Ui is a COHESIVE transition. This situation
is illustrated in clauses (2b), (2c), (2d), and (2e) of example (2). The transitions to
these clauses, under the present proposal, are reanalyzed as COHESIVE, as shown in a
reanalyzed version of example (2) (entities claimed to bear close semantic relationships
to one another are shown in boldface here and in subsequent examples):
the following conditions:
0 ? R(Worda, Wordb) ? 1
R(Worda, Wordb) = R(Wordb, Worda)
R(Worda, Worda) = 1
Wordb is more similar to Wordc than to Worda if R(Worda, Wordb)? R(Wordc, Wordb)
The function R = cosine A, where A is the angle defined by the vectors for Worda and Wordb, satisfies
these conditions and is therefore chosen as the function to define the similarity between Worda and
Wordb.
We refer the reader to Kasahara et al (1996) for a full discussion of the algorithms used to weight
and normalize keywords and to calculate semantic distance.
10 What constitutes ?semantically close? is an issue we will discuss briefly in Section 5.4; exactly how
semantic distance is measured is elaborated in Section 4.6.
131
Fais Transitions and Coherence
2a.
tokorode enseki nan desuga
by the way restaurant is
Cb = ?
Cf = restaurant
COHESIVE
2b.
sendagaya kinpen ni sake wo nomeru
sendagaya neighborhood in alcohol OBJ can drink
Cb = ?
Cf = soba shop,
Sendagaya
neighborhood,
alcohol
umai sobaya ga aruto miminishimashita
good soba shop SUBJ is have heard
?By the way, about the restaurant, I?ve heard there is a good
soba shop, which also serves alcohol, around Sendagaya.? COHESIVE
2c.
heiten jikoku ga hayaisounanode
shop closing time SUBJ early seems because
Cb = ?
Cf = shop
closing time
COHESIVE
2d.
? chotto mazui kamoshiremasen ga
? a little bad might be but
Cb = ?
Cf = choosing this
restaurant ?
COHESIVE
2e. I-
I-sanatari gozonjidewa naideshouka
I-san information have
Cb = ?
Cf = I-san,
information (about
restaurant)
?Choosing this restaurant may not be good because it closes
early. I-san, do you know about this restaurant??
Each COHESIVE transition in the modified version of (2) is justified by the presence
of a strong semantic relation between at least one Cf in Ui and at least one Cf in the
previous utterance. For example, soba shop in (2b) is semantically related to restaurant
in (2a), as is alcohol, probably to a lesser extent, and Sendagaya (if our database includes
the information that this is the name of a restaurant). Note that the transition from (2d)
to (2e) in this interpretation is a COHESIVE one, rather than a ROUGH SHIFT. Certainly the
Cp changes from restaurant to I-san, but since restaurant is still present in the Cf list for
(2e), the transition is by no means as abrupt as the designation ROUGH SHIFT implies.
The presence of a null Cb in and of itself, then, is not necessarily indicative of
incoherence. The level of coherence is captured instead by the proportions of the
various transition states present in a corpus, including COHESIVE transitions.
Not all utterances containing null Cbs are felt to be cohesive with previous utter-
ances, of course. If there is no explicit Cb and no Cf in Ui such that it has strong lexical
cohesion with a Cf in Ui?1, then the shift is considered COMPLETE. This is illustrated
in example (5), which shows the continuation of example (1):
132
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
5a. U-
demo tekondoh ni kyoumishinshin datta U-san ya
but taekwondo in keen interest was U-san and
Cb = it = game
Cf = U-san,
M-san, it,
taekwondo,
interest
M-
M-san wa koredeiindeshouka
M-san TOP I?m wondering if it is OK
?But I?m wondering if it is OK for U-san and M-san, who have
shown a keen interest in taekwondo.?
COMPLETE SHIFT
5b.
douyara tsuyuiri shitarashii toiu sengenmodeta
somehow rainy season has come declaration
Cb = ?
Cf = rain, today,
declaration,
beginning of rainy
season
youde kyou mo shikkari ame ga futteimasu
with today also heavily rain SUBJ is raining
?With the declaration that the rainy season has come, it is
raining heavily today.?
RETAIN
5c. 18
18nichi ga ame toiu kakuritsu mo taka soudesuyone
18th SUBJ rain probability high seems
?There seems to be a high probability that it will rain on the 18th.?
Cb = rain
Cf = 18th,
probability, rain
There is very low cohesion between the Cfs of (5b), that is, today, rain, declaration, and
beginning of rainy season, and those of (5a), namely, U-san, M-san, game, taekwondo, and
interest. Thus, we designate the transition from (5a) to (5b) as a COMPLETE SHIFT, which
matches our intuition that, in fact, the topic of the message has changed. This is further
corroborated by the fact that (5c) RETAINs the Cp of (5b) as its Cb; in other words, it
goes on to develop the new topic begun in (5b).
Since the two sides of Table 4 are complementary, it is perfectly possible for co-
herence to be characterized by various combinations of the transitions in the table.
Example (6) illustrates the interaction between the two sides of Table 4:
6a.
konouchi jinguu no hou wa 17 nichi to 18 nichi
of these Jingu TOP 17th and 18th
CONTINUE, from
above
Cb = these11
Cf = these, Jingu
Stadium,
Yokohama
133
Fais Transitions and Coherence
no yokohamasen ga iikato omotteimasu ga
game versus Yokohama SUBJ is good suppose but
game, 17th, 18th
COHESIVE
6b.
J-rihgu no hou wa kahdo nado
J-league TOP match-ups and others
Cb = ?
Cf = J-league,
match-up
information
kuwashiikoto ga fumei nanode
further information SUBJ unknown since
RETAIN
6c.
? wakaru hito wa ? oshiete kudasai
have information someone TOP let me know please
Cb = match-up
information
Cf = person,
match-up
information ?
?Of these, for Jingu Stadium I suppose the game versus Yoko-
hama on the 17th or the 18th would be good. As for J-league,
since I don?t have further information such as the match-ups,
please let me know if you have any information.?
COHESIVE
6d.
bokushingu wa kongetsu wa ii kahdo ga nai node
boxing TOP this month TOP good matches SUBJ no since
Cb = ?
Cf = boxing,
this month,
match-ups
CONTINUE
6e.
watashi wa ? pasu shitai
I TOP skip would like
Cb = boxing
Cf = boxing
?Since there are no good boxing match-ups in this month, I
would like to skip it this time.?
The transition from (6a) to (6b) is COHESIVE, since (6b) has no Cb and yet the Cfs
of the two utterances are semantically related. (6c) RETAINs match-up information from
(6b), which is then COHESIVE with match-ups and boxing in (6d). Since (6e) does in fact
have an explicit Cb identical both to the Cb of (6d) and to its own Cp, the transition to
(6e) is CONTINUE. This latter transition is an example of a non-discourse-initial utterance
11 It is a departure from the standard Cf template for Japanese to designate these as the Cb instead of the
topic-marked Jingu Stadium; however, this pronominal form comes immediately after the mention of
two options in the previous clause and so seems to be the Cb regardless of its lack of marking. This
choice of Cb has no bearing on the point of this example.
134
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
without a Cb that licenses a CONTINUE transition by virtue of the second part of the
OR disjunction in the second column of Table 4, namely, that the Cb(Ui?1) = ? and
Cb(Ui) = ?. (Note that (5) also demonstrates the interaction between the two sides of
Table 4, with a RETAIN transition following a COMPLETE SHIFT.)
The proposal to include COHESIVE and COMPLETE SHIFT in centering theory is moti-
vated by concerns about having to specify two identical entities in adjacent utterances
in order for those utterances to exhibit coherence. The requirement of identity leads
to the need to allow inferable entities to play a part. However, it is often impossible
to characterize transition states to utterances containing inferable Cbs. By including
the notion of COHESIVE transitions, we capture the relatedness of two entities without
the need to invoke inferable centers, and we can far better characterize the apparent
coherence in this corpus.
4.5.1 Transition States in the Corpus, Revisited. Given the inclusion of COHESIVE
and COMPLETE SHIFTs, we reinterpreted the labeling of transitions in the corpus (as
represented in Table 3) and hand-tabulated a revised distribution of transition types
(Table 5). The decision to designate transitions to inferable Cbs and NULL transitions
as COHESIVE or COMPLETE SHIFT was made on the basis of an intuitive assessment of
the possible semantic relations between entities in adjacent utterances. However, a
possible method for automatic determination is described in the next section.
4.6 A Preliminary Implementation
4.6.1 Preparation of the Corpus. In order to explore the computational feasibility of
COHESIVE and COMPLETE SHIFT, we subjected the corpus to an analysis of semantic
distance using the Gainen Base. Before implementing the analysis, we processed the
corpus so that it contained only the canonical forms of the words in each utterance,
the forms accepted by the Gainen Base algorithms. The first step in this procedure was
to run the corpus through a morphological analyzer, ALT-JAWS (Nippon Telegraph
and Telephone Corporation 1996), which rendered all word forms in their canonical
(usually kanji [Chinese character]) form. This is a necessary and standard preprocess-
ing step for most computational analyses of Japanese text, which contains no spaces
between word forms to indicate their morphological structure. In addition, writers of
e-mail may use hiragana or katakana (the two syllabaries used for writing primarily
function words and foreign words, respectively) even for words that have standard
kanji forms (Fais and Yamura-Takei 2003). These words need to be rendered in kanji
as well. The results of this analysis were checked and corrected by native speakers of
Japanese in order to eliminate cases in which the analyzer chose the incorrect kanji
form for a homophonous hiragana representation.
Table 5
Reanalysis of transitions occurring in the
corpus, by type.
Transition type Number Percentage
CONTINUE 54 16.4
RETAIN 22 6.7
SMOOTH SHIFT 2 0.6
ROUGH SHIFT 2 0.6
COHESIVE 138 41.8
COMPLETE SHIFT 112 33.9
Total 330
135
Fais Transitions and Coherence
The next step was to delete all but noun forms from the corpus. This step substan-
tiates the notion that the central factors in the centering approach are the discourse
entities of utterances (we will return to this in Section 5.3). Further, the antecedents
of all pronominal and zero-argument references were made explicit in the text.12 This
was done by inserting the kanji forms for these antecedents, as they appeared in the
text, into the utterance in which the pronominal or zero-argument form appeared. An-
tecedents were determined by a native speaker of Japanese. The same native speaker
assisted in dividing the text into clauses. Both of these steps, identifying antecedents
and parsing sentences into clauses, can be completed, in theory, by automatic, compu-
tational methods (Huls, Bos, and Claassen 1995; Nakaiwa and Shirai 1996; Paul and
Sumita 2001; Yamura-Takei et al 2002), but the success rate of these approaches is not
high enough to rely on them for completely accurate analyses of this type of corpus at
this time. Because our intent is to examine the effectiveness of the use of the Gainen
Base in determining lexical cohesion, and not to implement a fully automatic process,
we did not attempt to use entirely automatic methods in the preprocessing of the text.
4.6.2 Determining Semantic Similarity with the Gainen Base: The Problem of Cov-
erage. Of the 670 types of nouns present in the e-mail corpus, only 235 are found in
the machine-readable dictionaries with which the Gainen Base was constructed. What
makes this ratio even more problematic is that a number of these missing words (e.g.,
supo-tsu kansen, ?sports-watching event,? rakurosu, ?lacrosse,? and the names of sports
teams) are high-frequency words in this corpus.
The problem of coverage in automatic language-processing systems is a common
one (Hutchins 1995; Sag et al 2002; Fujita and Bond 2002). At the level of coverage
provided by the Gainen Base, however, we cannot usefully assess how well semantic
similarity characterizes coherence in this corpus as a whole. However, we can make
this assessment for those clauses in which every noun can be found in the Gainen Base.
In order to get an accurate assessment of lexical cohesion between adjacent clauses
that fall into this subset of the corpus, we included those cases in which all the nouns
in the clause itself as well as those in the clause before it were found the Gainen Base.
Out of an original 443 clauses, there are 66 clauses that meet these two criteria.
We measured semantic similarity between adjacent clauses in two ways. In the
first, we measured the semantic distance between the group of nouns in Ui?1 and the
group of nouns in Ui. In the second, we measured the semantic distances between
each individual noun in Ui and the group of nouns in Ui?1.13 The first method is far
?lighter? computationally, but the second method gives us useful information about
the contribution of each noun in Ui to the lexical cohesion between utterances. We will
compare the information derived from these two approaches hereafter.
4.6.3 Evaluation of the Use of Semantic Similarity. We assessed in three ways how
well semantic similarity can define COHESIVE transitions and thus contribute to the
characterization of coherence in the text. First, in the 66 clauses with full coverage
by the Gainen Base, we examined the 18 instances of what we had, on the basis of
intuitive human judgment, designated COHESIVE transitions. In particular, we focused
12 We did not, however, include the entities involved in event deixis; the identity of these entities is much
harder to determine, both for human judges and for automatic language-processing systems.
13 We actually measured semantic similarity in a third way as well, that is, between every possible
combination of the individual nouns in Ui?1 and those in Ui. This yielded the same results as the
individual-to-group method reported on here and, of course, is much ?heavier? computationally, so we
have restricted our discussion to the first two methods.
136
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
on the noun(s) we had singled out in our revised hand-tabulation of the corpus (Ta-
ble 5) as providing the lexical cohesion in these transitions.14 Using results from the
individual measures of semantic similarity (the second method described earlier), we
determined the noun in Ui with the highest level of semantic similarity to the nouns
in Ui?1. We then compared the nouns picked out by human judgment as providing
lexical cohesion with those determined computationally to see if they matched. We
eliminated three cases in which there was only one noun in Ui and thus only one
possible choice for the lexically cohering entity, which would, by default, have had
the highest semantic similarity to the preceding utterance. Out of the 15 remaining ex-
amples of COHESIVE transitions, in 13 cases, or 87% of the time, the human judgments
and the computationally determined choices matched.
The other two assessments of the results are based on centering claims for the rela-
tive ease of processing of the different transitions, claims captured in rule 2: CONTINUE
transitions impose the lowest inferential load on processors, ROUGH SHIFTs the highest.
Since COHESIVE transitions act like CONTINUE transitions but replace the identity con-
dition on Cbs with a similarity condition, we conjecture that they place only a slightly
higher load on processing than CONTINUE transitions. Likewise, since COMPLETE SHIFTs
represent an even greater discontinuity than ROUGH SHIFTs (there being not only no
Cb in the utterance, but also no entity even similar to entities in the previous ut-
terance), we conjecture that COMPLETE SHIFTs impose a higher processing load than
ROUGH SHIFTs.
We reason that greater semantic similarity corresponds to a lower processing
load.15 Granted this assumption, then, utterances that are connected by CONTINUE
transitions have the highest semantic similarity, since CONTINUE represents the lowest
processing load; those connected by COMPLETE SHIFTs, the lowest semantic similar-
ity, since COMPLETE SHIFT has the highest processing load. Although the particular
ranking of RETAIN, SMOOTH, ROUGH, and COHESIVE transitions is problematic, we are
saved from having to make an exact determination by the fact that, among the 66
clauses with full coverage, only CONTINUE, COHESIVE, and COMPLETE SHIFT transitions
are well-represented (we simply note the results for the two RETAIN transitions, since
this is hardly a large enough sample to be meaningful). Our reasoning then predicts
that CONTINUE transitions have the highest semantic similarity measures, followed by
COHESIVE SHIFTs, followed by COMPLETE SHIFTs.16
In our first assessment of this prediction, we averaged semantic measures for each
transition type over the 66 clauses with full coverage by the Gainen Base. Table 6
gives the averages obtained for both the groupwise and individual analyses. These
results support the ranking of transitions for processing load predicted on the basis
of similarity measures. However, averaging over all messages provides only a gross
approximation of the values for each transition type. To get a more detailed look at
this claim, we examined the semantic distances between entities involved in each type
of transition within messages.
The 66 clauses with full coverage include six messages with only one clause and
four messages with only one transition type represented; this resulted in the elimina-
14 Where there was more than one noun, as, for example in (2b), we chose the one that seemed,
intuitively, to have the strongest semantic connection to a center in the previous utterance.
15 This claim must, of course, be tested empirically and independently supported. However, it seems a
reasonable assumption and allows us to further evaluate the characterization of coherence by semantic
similarity.
16 We do not have nearly enough data to determine absolute values for each transition type (or even to
determine whether this would be a desirable course of action), and so we base our evaluation on
relative values for transition types (see Section 5.4 for further discussion).
137
Fais Transitions and Coherence
Table 6
Average similarity measures for each transition type, for both groupwise
and individual analyses.
Groupwise analysis Individual analysis
Transition type Number Average similarity Average similarity
CONTINUE 10 0.605 0.639
RETAIN 2 0.530 0.496
COHESIVE 18 0.204 0.231
COMPLETE SHIFT 36 0.068 0.069
Total 66
tion of 19 clauses (since it is impossible to determine relative values of transitions in
either of these cases), leaving us with a total of 47 clauses grouped into 12 messages.
We sorted the types of transitions to these clauses within each message by similarity
measure. For each transition, we ascertained whether it fulfilled the prediction for
ranking transitions by inferential load that was made on the basis of our earlier as-
sumptions concerning semantic distance. We assigned two scores for each transition:
whether it was appropriately positioned with respect to the preceding transition and
with respect to the following transition in the sort. Those transitions with the highest
and the lowest semantic measures were scored only with respect to the following and
the preceding transitions, respectively, and thus received just one score. Two consecu-
tive identical transitions were scored ?correct.?
Table 7 gives an example of how this scoring was performed for the clauses from
one representative message that have full coverage in the Gainen Base. It lists the
type of transition to each clause, the semantic distance to the previous clause, and the
scores designating whether that transition is appropriately positioned with respect to
the previous and following transitions. (Recall that the predicted order is CONTINUE,
COHESIVE, COMPLETE.) So, for example, the CONTINUE transition to clause 235 fulfills
the ranking prediction with respect to both the previous and the following clauses; its
semantic measure is lower than that of only one other clause, which is also a CONTINUE,
and is higher than that of a COHESIVE transition. The COMPLETE SHIFT to clause 227,
on the other hand, fulfills the prediction vis-a`-vis the previous transition on the list
Table 7
Ranking transitions in a representative message by similarity measure.
Semantic measure (semantic
Clause Transition to clause distance to previous clause) Score
220 CONTINUE 0.44113 Correct v
235 CONTINUE w/? 0.13974 Correct ?
Correct v
228 COHESIVE 0.06226 Correct ?
Correct v
227 COMPLETE 0.03922 Correct ?
Incorrect v
216 COHESIVE 0.01370 Incorrect ?
Correct v
234 COMPLETE 0.00000 Correct ?
138
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
Table 8
Evaluation of relative similarity measures for transition types.
Transition type Groupwise analysis Individual analysis
Number Percentage Number Percentage
CONTINUE 12/12 100 11/12 92
RETAIN Ranked before cohesive shift Ranked before cohesive shift
COHESIVE 26/29 90 25/29 86
COMPLETE SHIFT 25/28 89 24/28 89
Total 63/69a 91 60/69a 87
aSince we make no claim as to whether the placement of RETAIN is correct or
not, we do not count it in these totals.
(i.e., its semantic measure is lower than that of a COHESIVE transition) but violates the
prediction with respect to the following transition (i.e., its semantic measure is higher
than that of another COHESIVE transition). For 47 clauses over 12 messages, then, the
total number of such scores was 70: 24 scores for the transitions having the highest and
lowest measures in each message, and two each for the remaining 23 transitions, one
for their positions relative to the transitions above, and the other for their positions
relative to the transitions below them.
Recall that we determined similarity in two different ways: first, for the group
of nouns in Ui?1 and the group of nouns in Ui, and second, for the group of nouns
in Ui?1 and each individual noun in Ui.17 Table 8 reports the total number and per-
centage of correct and incorrect scores for each transition type in both the groupwise
and the individual analyses (the measure taken for Ui in the latter case is the maxi-
mum similarity measure out of the measures for all the nouns in Ui). The results in
this table suggest that similarity scores can accurately represent relative coherence as
characterized by the transitions in this small sample. That is, the similarity scores we
have examined here reflect the relative load on processing imposed by each type of
transition with between 86% and 100% accuracy, with groupwise scores being slightly
more accurate than those based on the highest individual score. In addition, similarity
measures never predict a CONTINUE transition with a higher processing load (i.e., lower
similarity score) than a COMPLETE SHIFT. That is, the relative positions of CONTINUE and
COMPLETE SHIFT are always correct.
We examined the cases in which similarity scores make an incorrect prediction
about relative placement in the scale of processing load. The one incorrect prediction
concerning a CONTINUE (in the individual-analysis method) involves an example in
which Ui?1 contains eight nouns; the similarity of each individual noun in Ui to the
group of nouns in Ui?1 is ?diluted? by the high number of nouns in Ui in this case
(the average number of nouns per clause in the corpus is 2.3).
The remaining incorrect predictions involve the assignment of lower similarity
scores to COHESIVE transitions than to COMPLETE SHIFTs. Some of these lower scores for
COHESIVE transitions are the result of the fact that world knowledge is necessary to
infer a connection between the two clauses. This is the case, for example, in (7):
17 Table 7 reported groupwise scores.
139
Fais Transitions and Coherence
7a.
toode demo Toukyo ni modotte kitatokorode
at a distance though Tokyo to come back
Cb = ? (from
previous clause)
Cf = distance,
Tokyo
COHESIVE
7b.
enkai taimu niwa choudo iidesuyone
drinking party time for TOP exact right
Cb = ?
Cf = party, time
?Even if it?s far we can come back to Tokyo just the right
time for a drinking party.?
It requires world knowledge to understand that there is a connection between how far
away something is and the time that it will take to travel there. Although humans can
make this inference intuitively, that understanding is not represented in the Gainen
Base.18
Other incorrect judgments are the result of how the database handles determining
the similarity scores, ?quirks? that don?t seem to match our intuitive judgments, as in
(8):
8a.
jikantekiniwa choudo taimingu wa iidarou shi
timewise TOP exact timing TOP seems good and
Cb = ? (from
previous clause)
Cf = time, timing
COHESIVE
8b. ?
chiritekini mo tookuwa nainde
geographically too far TOP not
Cb = ?
Cf = night game ?,
geography
?Timewise, the timing seems good, and the night game is not far
away either.?
The Gainen Base yielded a relatively low score for the similarity between jiken, ?time,?
and yoru, ?night,? despite our strong sense that these two words should be closely
related.19
Overall, however, similarity scores seem to provide a fairly accurate measure of
the relative coherence of this subset of the corpus. This result, coupled with the high
18 Recall that in 13 out of 15 cases, the Cf judged by humans to license a COHESIVE transition and the Cf
picked out by the similarity measure matched. (7a) is one of the two clauses in which the
human-chosen Cf did not match that chosen by the Gainen Base (the second is given in (8)). The
previous clause is If it is a day game. The discourse entity tode, ?at a distance,? was the Cf chosen by
human judgment to license the COHESIVE transition, since a human can make the connection that it is
the day game that is at a distance (as evidenced in the translation). However, the use of the Gainen Base
determined Tokyo to be more semantically similar to day game, with a score of 0.105 as compared to
0.005 for tode.
19 This is the second of the two cases in which human judgment and computational choice for lexically
cohering entity did not match.
140
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
level of correlation discussed earlier between lexically cohesive entities designated by
human judgment and those determined by semantic similarity, supports our proposal
that lexical cohesion, as measured by semantic distance, can feasibly be included as a
well-defined notion to capture crucial aspects of text coherence.
4.7 Exploring the Implications of the COHESIVE Transition and COMPLETE SHIFT
4.7.1 The Need to Identify Relation Type. The usefulness of relaxing the notion of
identity for Cbs has been recognized by Poesio et al (2000) and others (Hahn, Markert,
and Strube 1996; Murata, Isahara, and Nagao 1999). Poesio et al supplemented the
identity relation with three different possible semantic relations between Cfs in the
utterances: set membership, subset, and ?generalized possession.? Murata, Ishara, and
Nagao induced a number of possible relations between bridging reference and anchor
using a verb case frame dictionary and a corpus of Japanese A no B expressions (where
A and B are nominal arguments and the A no B construction encodes a wide variety of
semantic relations between the two nominal arguments [Shimazu, Naito, and Nomura
1987]).
As noted in Section 4.3.1, however, in all of these approaches, only a small subset
of examples of bridging relations can be handled, because they all attempt to identify
some particular relation existing between two elements. This is a necessary move for
resolving bridging references and building text understanding systems, but neither
of those is our aim here. We merely need to identify the level of semantic closeness
or similarity between Cfs in Ui and Cfs in Ui?1. Utilizing instead the more general
semantic-distance measure proposed here, then, has several advantages over the ex-
plicit choice of particular relation labels. First, it avoids the need to make choices about
which relations can or cannot, should or should not be included, as well as the dif-
ficulties with interlabeler reliability that Poesio et al note, since there is no labeling
in our approach. This is actually closely tied to another advantage: There is no need
to limit the types of semantic relationships into which the Cfs can enter. Thus, there
is no need to restrict our analysis to a subset of the phenomenon; our account will
handle inferable centers having any kind of semantic relationship to the centers in the
previous utterance.
4.7.2 Overestimation of COMPLETE SHIFTs. In examining Table 5, we see a high number
of COMPLETE SHIFTs. Is this number an accurate estimation of the (in)coherence in this
corpus? Of course, as we saw in (5), when a message makes a shift in topic, we
expect a COMPLETE SHIFT to occur. The writers of the messages in this corpus made 146
paragraphs (see Table 2); although we know that there is no guarantee that writers?
paragraphing will coincide with shifts in cohesion, this number at least gives us a
general estimation of a possible maximal number of COMPLETE SHIFTs (we would expect
writers to err on the side of more paragraphs than topics rather than on the side of
more topics than paragraphs). The number of COMPLETE SHIFTs is comfortably within
that range.
But there are two confounding factors that make this number higher than is ac-
tually appropriate for the nature of the corpus. The first is the inability of a centering
approach to handle event deixis (Fais and Yamura-Takei 2003). Consider (9):
9a. U-
kyukyo U-sanno shigotonotsugou jou 17nichi no
urgent U-san business because of 17th on
Cb = ?
Cf = U-san, business,
17th, match-up
141
Fais Transitions and Coherence
dou kahdo ni henkoushitai tonokotodesu
same match-up to want to change thing is
?Because of U-san?s urgent business, she would like to
change to the same match-up on the 17th.?
COMPLETE SHIFT
9b.
watashi wa ? OKnan desu ga
me TOP ? OK is but
?That?s OK with me.?
Cb = ?
Cf = that ?
RETAIN W/?
9c.
minna wa doudeshou
everyone TOP how is
Cb = that ?
Cf = everyone, that ?
?How is it for everyone else??
The zero argument translated as that in (9b) is an example of event deixis. When
we examine the Cf list for (9a) to ascertain the Cb of (9b), we do not encounter that
or its referent. In fact, we cannot encounter that. It is not possible for the discourse
element represented by that to have appeared in the Cf list in (9a); clauses do not
contain self-referential discourse elements. Thus, it is impossible to recognize, within
the theory, that the discourse element that in (9b) is functioning as a strong cohesive
element in the discourse. This is a problem to be resolved within centering theory
regardless of whether COHESIVE transitions and COMPLETE SHIFTs are countenanced.
However, sentential deixis does contribute to a slight skewing of the proportion of
COMPLETE SHIFTs found in this corpus, for example, the COMPLETE SHIFT resulting from
this problem in (9a)?(9b) and similar examples in the corpus.
The second confounding factor is actually simply a byproduct of the nature of the
corpus. Example (10), which is an entire message, illustrates:
10a. I-
I-sanno teian de subete OK desu
I-san?s proposal all OK are
?All of I-san?s proposals are OK with me.?
Cb = ?
Cf = all, I-san
suggestion
COMPLETE SHIFT
10b.
1ruigawademo ruigawademo kamaimasen
first-base side third-base side don?t mind
?I don?t mind the first-base side or the third-base side.?
Cb = ?
Cf = first-base side,
third-base side
COMPLETE SHIFT
10c.
sendagayanara ? tashou osokunattemo heikidesune
Sendagaya if ? quite late even if don?t care
Cb = ?
Cf = Sendagaya,
party
?, lack of caring
?If it?s Sendagaya, we don?t have to care even if the party goes
late.?
142
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
The COMPLETE SHIFTs in this passage are perfectly appropriate; there is no cohesion
among any of the discourse entities in this message. Why would anyone send a mes-
sage that was completely, by this account, incoherent? In fact, the statements in (10)
refer to the outcomes of various discussions held in the course of exchanging the mes-
sages in this corpus. This message occurs toward the end of the exchange of messages,
as resolution of the questions of what sports event to go to, where to sit, and what
restaurant to go to afterward is in sight. This writer is simply adding his opinions
on each of these apparently unrelated topics. The relationship among them all holds
only in the understanding of the coparticipants in the message exchange. Although
we might be able to imagine the sorts of mechanisms required to model this level of
understanding, we are a very long way from realizing them.
4.7.3 Lexical Cohesion and Text Understanding. The incorporation of a COHESIVE
transition into our centering account gives us a flexibility that is important for full-
text understanding of the discourse. Consider example (11):
11a.
watashi mo ? terebi de shika mitakotowanai node
I too ? TV on only have seen since
Cb = ?
Cf = lacrosse ?,20 TV
11b.
namade kansen shitaikimosuru nodesu ga
live game watching feel like because but
Cb = ?
Cf = live game
watching
11c.
? 25 nichi dato
? 25th is if
Cb = live game
watching ?
Cf = live game
watching ?, 25th
11d. M- H-
M-san H-san ga ? sanka dekinai desune
M-san H-san SUBJ ? join cannot isn?t it
Cb = ?
M-san, H-san,
game ?
?Since I have seen it only on TV, I feel like watching a live
game, but if it is on the 25th, M-san and H-san cannot
join us for the game, can they??
Lacrosse in (11a), (some) live game watching in (11b) and (11c), and (a) game (on the 25th) in
(11d) are actually semantically distinct elements, and recognizing their distinctiveness
is important for full-text understanding or summarizing. However, maintaining these
distinctions in a standard account means characterizing the transitions between the
utterances containing them as NULL SHIFTs. (It is not clear that we would even want
to say that (a) game (on the 25th) was an inferable center from (some) live game watching.)
Being able to designate these transitions as COHESIVE allows us both to maintain the
20 The message that this is taken from constitutes a sort of lesson on lacrosse from one of the authors to
all the others. The ? in (11a) refers to this global topic; however, neither lacrosse nor TV appears in the
preceding utterance, and so (11a) has no Cb.
143
Fais Transitions and Coherence
semantic distinctiveness of the discourse elements and to capture the coherence in this
portion of the discourse.
4.7.4 Lexical Cohesion and Discourse Segmentation. As we saw earlier, the use
of some notion of lexical cohesion to delineate discourse structure is fairly well re-
searched. In the lexical chain approach (Morris and Hirst 1991), a new discourse seg-
ment is hypothesized where the chain ?breaks,? that is, where subsequent entities
do not bear a semantic relationship to previous entities that would allow them to be
added to the chain. Kozima (1993) provides an algorithm for determining where, on
the graph of semantic cohesion values of words in a text, likely topic breaks occur and
validates that determination against human judgment. We would say, then, that once
a chain breaks or a significant dip in the semantic cohesion value graph occurs, the
utterance following such a break is considered the first utterance of a new discourse
segment.
In terms of semantic distance as determined by the Gainen Base, we suggest that
a sufficiently low similarity measure might characterize both COMPLETE SHIFTs and the
beginning of a new discourse segment. Once again, ?sufficiently? must be defined; in
light of the preliminary results we saw previously, we conjecture that the definition
of ?low? will be relative to the measures for similarity in the message under scrutiny
and not an absolute value (see Section 5.4).
In addition, examination of the particular entities contributing to high levels of
semantic similarity might also allow us to characterize the notion of ?global topic,?
albeit in a differentiated way. That is, if we determine not just one semantic distance
measure for the sets of entities in two adjacent utterances, but the individual distances
for each combination of those entities (as briefly described in note 13), we can deter-
mine those entities that are contributing the greatest amount of semantic similarity to
the measure and identify a cluster of entities that can be taken to represent a global
topic.
This concept is worth examining more closely, since it bears on some of the very
foundations of centering theory. The Cb of an utterance ?represents the discourse
entity that the utterance Ui most centrally concerns, similar to what is elsewhere called
the ?topic?? (Walker, Joshi, and Prince 1998, page 3). The presence of a Cb is taken
to be both a necessary and a sufficient condition for topic coherence. However, in
our account, utterances that have a coherent relationship to the immediate context
of discourse may nonetheless have no Cb; that is, the presence of a Cb is, in our
approach, only a sufficient condition. Our claim, then, is that this more accurately
reflects the nature of how coherence is maintained in discourse: not only through the
explicit repetition of a central entity, but also through the successive use of entities
that are closely related semantically. In our account, Cbs are recognized and function
just as in standard centering theory, but their absence, a common situation in at least
some kinds of discourse, does not signal a breakdown in coherence. Coherence may
be maintained as well by semantically similar entities, which can become Cbs in their
own right, as match-up information and boxing do in (6). Using an individuated approach
to determining semantic similarity, we can identify these particular entities.
5. Future Work
5.1 Refinement of the COHESIVE Transition
There are a number of aspects of the proposal that need further scrutiny. Note that
we have defined the COHESIVE transition by reference to any Cf in Ui. It might be the
case, in fact, that there is motivation to define two different COHESIVE transitions: a
144
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
?CONTINUE COHESIVE,? in which the Cp(Ui) has the highest similarity measure with
respect to Cf(Ui?1), and a ?RETAIN COHESIVE,? in which some other Cf has the highest
similarity to Cf(Ui?1). In our preliminary implementation with this corpus, the entity
in Ui with the maximum semantic similarity to Ui?1 was the Cp of Ui 55% of the time.
Whether such a distinction is a necessary or meaningful one is a completely open
question.
In a similar vein, we might suggest that the Cf in Ui with the highest similarity to
the Cfs in Ui?1 be designated as a type of Cb (say, Cb?). So, for example, if soba shop
in (2b) had the highest level of similarity to restaurant in (2a), soba shop would be the
Cb? of that utterance.21 What would be the ramifications of this move for the theory?
Certainly there would be far fewer utterances with Cb = ?. In terms of tracking
focus in the discourse, one of the major aims of the centering approach, this is a positive
result. However, if the Cb? is chosen simply on the basis of semantic similarity, we lose
another major insight of centering theory, namely, that focus is not dependent upon
semantics (Hudson-D?Zmura and Tanenhaus 1998) or upon word order (Gordon et al
1999; but see also Gordon, Grosz, and Gilliom 1993), but upon the grammatical roles
played by the Cfs. It is possible that for any given language, speakers tend to place
Cfs that have strong semantic ties to the previous utterance in grammatical roles high
on the Cf template, but this is an empirical question that we do not have the data to
answer here.
5.2 Scalability
The incorporation of scalable considerations into a centering account provides enor-
mous flexibility. It remains to be seen how best to use this added capability. For
example, some COHESIVE transitions seem more cohesive than others. Compare the
COHESIVE transition in (12) with the COHESIVE transitions in (13):
12a.
douyara tsuyuiri shitarashii toiu
rainy season beginning has happened
Cb = ?
Cf = beginning
of rainy season,
declaration
sengenmodeta youde
declaration with
COHESIVE
12b.
kyou mo shikkari ame ga futteimasu
today heavily rain SUBJ is raining
Cb = ?
Cf = rain, today
?With the declaration that the rainy season has come, it is raining
heavily today.?
21 We can?t corroborate this, because sobaya is not in the Gainen Base.
145
Fais Transitions and Coherence
13a.
watashi wa naniyorihitsuyounamono wa
me TOP more important than anything else TOP
Cb = ?
Cf = feeling,
most important
thing, strength
!!
tairyoku nari toiukoto wo misetsukerareta youna
physical strength OBJ was shown
ki ga shitanodesu ga
feeling SUBJ got but COHESIVE
13b. ?
? mita kata ga itara
watched person SUBJ if exists
Cb = ?
Cf = person,
game ?
COHESIVE
13c.
kansou wo kikasetekudasai
impression OBJ let me know
Cb = ?
Cf =
impressions
?That gave me a strong impression that PHYSICAL STRENGTH
IS MORE IMPORTANT THAN ANYTHING ELSE. If someone
else watched (that game), please let me know your impressions.?
We have the intuition that the COHESIVE transition in (12) can be characterized as
?more? COHESIVE than the ones in (13). Both of these examples come from the same
message, and the semantic similarity measures for each of these examples confirms
our intuitions: The measure for the COHESIVE transition between (12a) and (12b) is
0.583; for that between (13a) and (13b), 0.166; and for that between (13b) and (13c),
0.011.22 It is not clear to what use we might put this more detailed information about
the varying levels of strength of connection among utterances; however, it parallels the
observation in Fais (2001) that some e-mail authors make hierarchical distinctions in
marking paragraphs in their messages, using line breaks to separate utterance clusters
having some semantic connection and full spaces to separate utterance clusters having
weak or no semantic connection.
Recall, too, that lexical cohesion, as measured by semantic distance, is only one
aspect of coherence. Merging this measure with information provided by conjunctions,
22 We chose examples from the same message because comparison of raw measures across messages may
not be informative (see Section 5.4). However, we expect that measures within messages can be
compared with one another usefully.
The very low measure for the transition between (13b) and (13c) is consistent with the observation
that the cohesion between these two clauses actually may not reside in the similarity between person
and impressions, but in our intuitive understanding of a relationship between game and impressions (of
the game).
146
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
referential form, and other aspects of discourse would allow a more comprehensive
account of coherence.
5.3 Beyond Simplex Nominals
The ramifications of exploiting lexical cohesion within a centering theory are exciting.
Up to this point, we have considered only the cohesion exhibited by discourse entities.
But not only (simplex) nominal arguments enter into cohesive relationships. Consider
(14), in which the recognition of the contribution of the verb to the cohesion of the
excerpt could allow us to account more accurately for the coherence in the passage:
14a.
watashi wa asuno doyoubi wa shusshashinai node
I TOP tomorrow Saturday TOP won?t go to work since
Cb = ?
Cf = tomorrow,
Saturday
COHESIVE
14b.
chiketto ya shuugoubasho nado wa
tickets and meeting place and so on TOP
Cb = ?
Cf = ticket,
meeting
place, discussion,
Monday
getsuyoubi ni soudan toiukotoni shitaindesuga
Monday on discuss would like to COMPLETE SHIFT
14c.
hataraku hito gomennasai
working people sorry
(Cb = ?
Cf = working
people)
?Since I won?t go to the office tomorrow (Saturday), I?d like to
discuss tickets and a meeting place on Monday (sorry to those
who are working).?
The first transition shown is COHESIVE by virtue of the Cfs tomorrow and Saturday in
(14a) and Monday in (14b). But considering only the discourse entities appearing in
the Cf lists, working people in (14c) is not cohesive with any of the other elements in
this passage, although the inclusion of (14c) in this portion of the message seems quite
coherent and natural. However, if we allow verbal elements to contribute to cohesion,
working people then shows cohesion with shusshashinai, ?won?t go to work,? and we can
explain why the passage seems coherent.
In a similar vein, the incorporation of an adequate analysis for complex nominals
would allow us to refine our measurement of cohesion as well. Recall (2), in which
lexical cohesion exists among the entities enseki ?restaurant,? sake ?alcohol,? and sobaya,
?soba shop.? While the recognition of this cohesion allows us to characterize the co-
herence in the message, in fact, we probably underestimate the cohesion present if we
base our measures on the individual lexical items listed. If we could calculate lexical
cohesion not just for simplex nominals, but for complex nominals as well, we would
calculate cohesion for enseki and for the entire phrase sake wo nomeru umai sobaya, ?a
147
Fais Transitions and Coherence
good soba shop, which also serves alcohol,? possibly a much stronger cohesive con-
nection than that among the individual items.23
5.4 Improving Implementation
We demonstrated in Section 4.6 that semantic distance as measured by the Gainen
Base provides a feasible basis for a rigorous definition of lexical cohesion. In order for
this or any similar implementation of semantic distance measure to be fully effective,
however, two major areas need to be addressed. The first is coverage; while the lack of
complete coverage of the corpus by the Gainen Base does not prevent us from making
an assessment of the Gainen Base?s effectiveness over a subset of the data, it does make
it impossible to characterize cohesion over the corpus as a whole. The second area that
needs to be addressed has to do with definitions of distance for each transition type.
Throughout our discussion we have examined semantic distances as relative strengths
within messages; it would be useful to determine empirically whether it is possible
to set definitive, independent levels for each transition type. These levels might be
absolute (e.g., SMOOTH SHIFTs are those transitions having a semantic measure of 0.15?
0.3) or, what seems more likely, relative, such that a portion of the range of semantic
distance in a particular message is defined for each transition type (e.g., in a message
in which semantic distances measure from 0.005 to 0.875, SMOOTH SHIFTs correspond
to distances falling between 15% and 25% of the total range of 0.87, that is, from 0.13
to 0.22, for that message).
6. Conclusion
Upon subjecting a corpus of Japanese e-mail data to a centering analysis, it became
clear that a centering description of these messages had to rely heavily on inferable cen-
ters and was not adequate to capture the coherence this corpus displays. We couched
the notion of connectedness that inferable centers were intended to capture in terms of
the more principled and explicit relation of lexical relatedness. We used this relation,
then, to supplement the standard inventory of transitions with well-defined transition
types that more accurately characterize the nature of coherence in this corpus and
demonstrated the computational feasibility of this approach in a preliminary imple-
mentation. The proposed transition types provide a characterization of a previously
unaccounted-for situation in centering theory, namely, the coherence of sequences of
utterances containing inferable Cbs. This is a crucial improvement over the standard
model because of the high number of nonexplicit Cbs in this corpus (and others; see
Passonneau 1998). The inclusion of a COHESIVE transition and COMPLETE SHIFT allows
us to characterize the 76% of the corpus in which nonexplicit Cbs play a part, a portion
of the corpus undescribed in the standard approach, while maintaining the standard
operation of the usual transition states of centering theory in cases in which explicit
Cbs are present.
It may be the case that lexical cohesion and the notion of a COHESIVE transi-
tion can make other contributions to discourse analysis as well, such as allowing
us to characterize coherence in a discourse while still recognizing referentially dis-
tinct discourse elements. Further, these notions can augment the definition of the
topic of a discourse segment by virtue of the semantic information contained in a
cohesion analysis. Finally, such an analysis can provide clues to discourse segment
boundaries.
23 I would like to thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out.
148
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
The incorporation of the notion of lexical cohesion has been shown to be crucial
to the characterization of the coherence in this corpus. In addition, it can make a
variety of further contributions to discourse analysis. And finally, it opens the door to
a number of useful related strategies that can allow us to come closer to understanding
and comprehensively modeling coherence in discourse.
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Mitsuko Yamura-Takei
for critical observations concerning the
major points in this work, Francis Bond for
his insightful and gentle comments, and an
anonymous translator for the translations. I
would also like to acknowledge the
unflagging aid of Shigeaki Amano, Kaname
Kasahara, Takashi Hamo, Tomoko
Kawaguchi, and Yuuko Kanasugi in
providing the Gainen Base analysis.
References
Boguraev, Branimir K. and Mary S. Neff.
2000. Lexical cohesion, discourse
segmentation, and document
summarization. Paper presented at
RIAO-2000, Paris.
Brennan, Susan E., Marilyn W. Friedman,
and Carl J. Pollard. 1987. A centering
approach to pronouns. In Proceedings of the
25th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 155?162,
Stanford, CA.
Chafe, Wallace. 1979. The flow of thought
and the flow of language. In Talmy Givon,
editor, Syntax and Semantics: Discourse and
Syntax, volume 12. Academic Press, New
York, pages 159?182.
Chafe, Wallace. 1980. The Pear Stories:
Cognitive, Cultural and Linguistic Aspects of
Narrative Productions. Ablex, Norwood,
NJ.
Clark, Herbert H. 1977. Inferences in
comprehension. In David LaBerge and S.
Jay Samuels, editors, Basic Processes in
Reading: Perception and Comprehension.
Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, pages 83?112.
Cote, Sharon. 1998. Ranking
forward-looking centers. In Marilyn A.
Walker, Aravind K. Joshi, and Ellen F.
Prince, editors, Centering Theory in
Discourse. Clarendon, Oxford, pages
55?69.
Fais, Laurel. 2001. Discourse issues in the
translation of Japanese email. In
Proceedings of PACLING 2001, pages
93?102, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan.
Fais, Laurel. 2002. The Japanese A no B
construction and centering. In Proceedings,
Eighth Annual Meeting of the Association for
Natural Language Processing (NLP 2002),
pages 603?606, Keihanna, Japan.
Fais, Laurel and Mitsuko Yamura-Takei.
2003. The nature of referent resolution in
Japanese email. Discourse Processes,
36(3):167?204.
Fujita, Sanae and Francis Bond. 2002. A
method of adding new entries to a
valency dictionary by exploiting existing
lexical resources. In Proceedings of the Ninth
International Conference on Theoretical and
Methodological Issues in Machine Translation
(TMI-2002), pages 45?52, Keihanna, Japan.
Gordon, Peter C., Barbara J. Grosz, and
Laura A. Gilliom. 1993. Pronouns, names,
and the centering of attention in
discourse. Cognitive Science, 17:311?347.
Gordon, Peter C., Randall Hendrick, Kerry
Ledoux, and Chin Lung Yang. 1999.
Processing of reference and the structure
of grammar: An analysis of complex
noun phrases. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 14(4):353?379.
Grosz, Barbara J. and Candace L. Sidner.
1986. Attention, intentions, and the
structure of discourse. Computational
Linguistics, 12(3):175?204.
Grosz, Barbara J. and Candace L. Sidner.
1998. Lost intuitions and forgotten
intentions. In Marilyn A. Walker, Aravind
K. Joshi, and Ellen F. Prince, editors,
Centering Theory in Discourse. Clarendon,
Oxford, pages 39?51.
Hahn, Udo, Katja Markert, and Michael
Strube. 1996. A conceptual reasoning
approach to textual ellipsis. In Proceedings
of the 12th European Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, pages 572?576, Budapest.
Halliday, Michael A. K. 1994. An Introduction
to Functional Grammar. Arnold, London.
Harabagiu, Sanda M. 1998. WordNet?based
inference of textual cohesion and
coherence. In Proceedings of FLAIRS-98,
Sanibel Island, FL, pages 265?269.
Harabagiu, Sanda M. 1999. From lexical
cohesion to textual coherence: A data
driven perspective. Journal of Pattern
Recognition and Artificial Intelligence,
13(2):241?265.
Hudson-D?Zmura, Susan and Michael K.
Tanenhaus. 1998. Assigning antecedents
to ambiguous pronouns: The role of the
center of attention as the default
assignment. In Marilyn A. Walker,
Aravind K. Joshi, and Ellen F. Prince,
149
Fais Transitions and Coherence
editors, Centering Theory in Discourse.
Clarendon, Oxford, pages 199?226.
Huls, Carla, Edwin Bos, and Wim Claassen.
1995. Automatic referent resolution of
deictic and anaphoric expressions.
Computational Linguistics, 21(1):59?79.
Hurewitz, Felicia. 1998. A quantitative look
at discourse coherence. In Marilyn A.
Walker, Aravind K. Joshi, and Ellen F.
Prince, editors, Centering Theory in
Discourse. Clarendon, Oxford, pages
273?291.
Hutchins, John. 1995. Reflections on the
history and present state of machine
translation. In The MT Summit V
Proceedings, pages 89?96, Luxembourg.
Kameyama, Megumi. 1998. Intrasentential
centering: A case study. In Marilyn A.
Walker, Aravind K. Joshi, and Ellen F.
Prince, editors, Centering Theory in
Discourse. Clarendon, Oxford, pages
89?112.
Kasahara, Kaname, Kazumitsu Matsuzawa,
Tsutomu Ishikawa, and Tsukasa
Kawaoka. 1996. Viewpoint-based
measurement of semantic similarity
between words. In Douglas H. Fisher and
Hans Lenz, editors, Learning from Data: AI
and Statistics V. Springer-Verlag, New
York, pages 433?442.
Kozima, Hideki. 1993. Text segmentation
based on similarity between words. In
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 286?288, Columbus, OH.
Kozima, Hideki and Teiji Furugori. 1993.
Similarity between words computed by
spreading activation on an English
dictionary. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Conference of the European Chapter,
Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 232?239, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
Kuno, Susumu. 1973. The Structure of the
Japanese Language. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.
Lotfipour-Saedi, Kazem. 1997. Lexical
cohesion and translation equivalence.
Meta, 42(1):185?192.
Matsui, Tomoko. 1999. On the role of
context in relevance-based accessibility
ranking of candidate referents. In Paolo
Bouquet, Luciano Serafini, Patrick
Brezillon, Massimo Benerecetti, and
Francesca Castellani, editors, CONTEXT
?99 (Springer Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence, no. 1688), pages 228?241.
Morris, Jane and Graeme Hirst. 1991.
Lexical cohesion computed by thesaural
relations as an indicator of the structure of
text. Computational Linguistics, 17(1):21?48.
Murata, Masaki, Hitoshi Isahara, and
Makoto Nagao. 1999. Resolution of
indirect anaphora in Japanese sentences
using examples ?X no Y (Y of X).? In
Proceedings of the ACL99 Workshop on
Coreference and Its Applications, College
Park, MD.
Nakaiwa, Hiromi, and Satoshi Shirai. 1996.
Anaphora resolution of Japanese zero
pronouns with deictic reference. In
Proceedings of COLING-96, pages 812?817.
Nariyama, Shigeko. 2000. Referent
Identification for Ellipted Arguments in
Japanese. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone
Corporation, Communication Science
Laboratories. 1996. Reference Manual for
Morphological Analysis Program ALT-JAWS.
Keihanna, Japan: Nippon Telegraph and
Telephone.
Okumura, Manabu, and Takeo Honda. 1994.
Word sense disambiguation and text
segmentation based on lexical cohesion.
In Proceedings of the 15th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 755?761, Kyoto, Japan.
Passonneau, Rebecca J. 1998. Interaction of
discourse structure with explicitness of
discourse anaphoric noun phrases. In
Marilyn A. Walker, Aravind K. Joshi, and
Ellen F. Prince, editors, Centering Theory in
Discourse. Clarendon, Oxford, pages
327?358.
Paul, Michael and Eiichiro Sumita 2001. A
trainable method for pronominal
anaphora resolution using shallow
information. Shizen Gengo Shori [Journal of
Natural Language Processing], 8(3):59?85.
Poesio, Massimo, Hua Cheng, Renate
Henschel, Janet Hitzeman, Rodger Kibble,
and Rosemary Stevenson. 2000.
Specifying the parameters of centering
theory: A corpus-based evaluation using
text from application-oriented domains.
In Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Hong Kong, pages 400?407.
Sack, Warren. 1999. Diagrams of social
cohesion. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, Hong Kong.
Sag, Ivan A., Timothy Baldwin, Francis
Bond, Ann Copestake, and Dan
Flickinger. 2002. Multiword expressions:
A pain in the neck for NLP. In Alexander
Gelbuk, editor, Computational Linguistics
and Intelligent Text Processing: Third
International Conference (CICLing-2002),
Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg/Berlin, pages
1?15.
Shimazu, Akira, Shozo Naito, and Hirosato
150
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
Nomura. 1987. Semantic structure analysis
of Japanese noun phrases with adnominal
particles. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 123?130, Stanford, CA.
Strube, Michael, and Udo Hahn. 1999.
Functional centering?Grounding
referential coherence in information
structure. Computational Linguistics,
25(3):309?344.
Suri, Linda Z. and Kathleen F. McCoy. 1994.
RAFT/RAPR and centering: A
comparison and discussion of problems
related to processing complex sentences.
Computational Linguistics, 20(2):301?317.
Tetreault, Joel R. 2001. A corpus-based
evaluation of centering and pronoun
resolution. Computational Linguistics,
27(4):507?520.
Vieira, Renata, and Massimo Poesio. 2001.
An empirically based system for
processing definite descriptions.
Computational Linguistics, 26(4):539?593.
Walker, Marilyn A. 1998. Centering
anaphora resolution, and discourse
structure. In Marilyn A. Walker, Aravind
K. Joshi, and Ellen F. Prince, editors,
Centering Theory in Discourse. Clarendon,
Oxford, pages 401?435.
Walker, Marilyn A., Masayo Iida, and
Sharon Cote. 1994. Japanese discourse
and the process of centering.
Computational Linguistics, 20(2):193?231.
Walker, Marilyn A., Aravind Joshi, and
Ellen F. Prince. 1998. Centering in
naturally occurring discourse: An
overview. In Marilyn A. Walker, Aravind
K. Joshi, and Ellen F. Prince, editors,
Centering Theory in Discourse. Clarendon,
Oxford, pages 1?28.
Yamura-Takei, Mitsuko, Miho Fujiwara,
Makoto Yoshie, and Teruaki Aizawa. 2002.
Automatic linguistic analysis for language
teachers: The case of zeros. In Proceedings
of the 19th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING ?2002),
pages 1114?1120, Taipei, Taiwan.
