Proceedings of the Fifth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, pages 33?39,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semantic Analysis of Chinese Garden-Path Sentences
Yaohong Jin
Institute of Acoustics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China
jinyaohong@hotmail.com
Abstract
This paper presents a semantic model for
Chinese garden-path sentences. Based on
the Sentence Degeneration model of
HNC theory, a garden-path can arise
from two types of ambiguities: SD type
ambiguity and NP allocated ambiguity.
This paper provides an approach to proc-
ess garden-paths, in which ambiguity de-
tection and analysis take the place of re-
vision. The performance of the approach
is evaluated on a small manually anno-
tated test set. The results show that our
algorithm can analyze Chinese gar-
den-path sentences effectively.
1 Introduction
A characteristic of garden-path sentences is that
they contain a temporarily ambiguous verb
structure, in which a participle is confused with
the main verb of the sentence. For example, con-
sider the sentence While Anna dressed the baby
spit up on the bed. Initially the baby is assumed
to be the object of dressed, but when spit up is
encountered, some sort of error arises. This ini-
tial process, then, must be somehow revised.
This paper models the phenomenon of gar-
den-path sentences in Chinese and addresses the
mechanisms of semantic analysis. Let v1 be the
first verb in the sentence and v2 the second verb.
Modeling the garden-path that arising from two
verbs like v1 and v2 will the focus of this paper.
Models of reanalysis, which concern the syn-
tactic relationships between the error signal and
the head of the phrase that has been misanalyzed
(Frazier, 1998), attempt to explain how the revi-
sions take place. However, for Chinese gar-
den-path sentence analysis, the syntactic rela-
tionship is not enough because the same
syntactic relationship can have different semantic
interpretations. For example, ??????
which is temporarily ambiguous in Chinese has
different interpretations in the following two
sentences. In the first sentence ?(dog) is the
subject of ??(killed), and in the second it is
the object of ??(killed).
(1) ????????? (The dog, which
killed the hunter, had run away).
(2) ??????????????? (It
is the only way for the bear to run away that
killed the hunter?s dog).
So, semantic analysis is important for Chinese
garden-path sentences. In this paper, garden-path
sentences will be modeled using the Sentence
Degeneration model (SD) of the Hierarchical
Network of Concepts theory (HNC) (Huang,
1998; 2004). Furthermore, our analysis algorithm,
in which ambiguity analysis takes the place of a
revision process, is introduced. We evaluated the
model and the algorithm using a small sentence
set with grammatical structures like
NP1+V1+NP2+v2+NP3. The experiment results
show that our algorithm can efficiently process
Chinese garden-path sentences.
In the rest of this paper: Section 2 discusses
previous work. Section 3 gives a detailed defini-
tion of the Sentence Degeneration model. Sec-
tion 4 describes in detail the Semantic Model of
Chinese garden-path sentences. Section 5 de-
scribes the algorithm and section 6 gives evalua-
tion results. Section 7 presents our conclusions
and future work.
2 Previous Work
The phenomenon of garden-path sentences has
attracted a lot of attention in the research com-
33
munities of psycholinguistics and computational
linguistics. The goal of this research is to dis-
cover how people understand garden-path sen-
tences and how to analyze them automatically.
In English, garden-path sentences always in-
volve a subordinate clause and a main clause to-
gether with an NP that attaches initially to the
former but ultimately to the latter (Karl and Fer-
nanda, 2003). This NP is the point of misunder-
standing and the verb after the NP is always the
error signal. Models of reanalysis are aimed at
describing and motivating the mechanisms used
by the sentence comprehension system to detect
errors, deduce useful information about the na-
ture of the necessary repair of those errors, and
ultimately create a successful analysis (Ferreira
and Christianson, 2001). Fodor and Inoue(1998)
proposed the principles of Attach Anyway and
Adjust to explain how reanalysis processes oper-
ate. Ferreira and Christianson(2001) stated that
Reflexive Absolute Transitive (RAT) verbs, such
as wash, bathe, shave, scratch, groom, and so on,
are likely to give rise to garden-paths. Michael J.
Pazzani(1984) demonstrated how to reanalyze
one type of garden-path sentence that arises from
a passive participle and a main verb conflicting.
However Ferreira and Henderson(2001) demon-
strated that reanalysis is more difficult when the
head of the misanalyzed phrase (baby in the baby
that was small and cute) is distant from the error
signal.
In Chinese, there has been little research that
directly addresses the problem of garden-paths.
Zhiwei Feng(2003) interpreted the temporarily
ambiguous verb structure in a garden-path in two
ways; one is as a subordinate clause (MV), the
other is a Reduced Relative (RR). He defined
Garden Path Degree (GPD) as MV/RR. He stud-
ied some types of temporarily ambiguous verb
structures such as NP1+VP+NP2+de+NP3,
VP+NP1+de+NP2, V+Adj+de+N and
V+V+de+N, and stated that when GPD is larger
than 3, the temporarily ambiguous verb structure
may give rise to a garden-path. Moreover he
used the Earley algorithm to process garden-path
sentences.
3 Sentence Degeneration model (SD)
The Sentence Degeneration model, which is one
model of the Hierarchical Network of Concepts
theory (HNC), focuses on representing the sub-
ordinate clause in a sentence. The theory of the
Hierarchical Network of Concepts (HNC theory),
founded by Prof. Zengyang Huang of the Insti-
tute of Acoustics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
is a theoretical approach to Natural Language
Processing (NLP). The objective of HNC is to
establish natural language representation patterns
based on the association veins of concepts, which
can simulate the language perception process of
the human brain and can be applied to computa-
tional Natural Language Understanding.
Sentence Degeneration (SD) represents the
semantic patterns of the subordinate clause in a
sentence. There are three types of SD: prototype
SD, key-element SD, and packed SD.
In Prototype SD a subordinate clause wholly
acts as one role of the other sentence without any
alteration. For example, ?????????
?(China joined the WTO) is a complete sen-
tence. However in sentence (3) this sentence acts
as the subject of??(accelerate). Unlike Eng-
lish, in Chinese there is no relative pronoun, such
as that or which, to indicate that this is a subor-
dinate clause. This phenomenon is named Proto-
type SD.
(3) ?????????????????
??? (That China joined the WTO will accel-
erate the development of global economics.).
Key-element SD involves an NP which se-
mantically is an attributive clause. For example,
although in sentence (4) ?????????
?? is an NP, it can be transformed from the
sentence ?????????? by moving
the subject ?? to the tail and adding the Chi-
nese word ?(of or ?s) in front of it. We look at
this NP as a specific attributive clause1 in Chi-
nese, and look at ?? as the core concept of
this clause. Because the core concept of this
clause is the subject, which is the key element,
this phenomenon is called key-element SD. Be-
sides the subject, the object and the verb of the
sentence can be the core of key-element SD. For
example, in sentence (5) ?????????
? is one key-element SD transformed from the
sentence ????????, and the verb ?
? is its core.
(4) ?????????????????
??? (China, which joined WTO, will strictly
confirm the world trade rule.)
(5) ????????????????
(Everything of all reflected the influence that
China economics impacts on the world).
Packed SD is also an NP in which the attrib-
1 This NP has to be translated as an attributive clause using
which in English.
34
uter is a prototype SD or key-element SD. For
example, in sentence (6) and (7) both noun
phrases ????????????? and
???????????? are Packed SD?s.
Moreover, the attributer of ?? is ?????
????? which is a prototype SD, and the
attributer of ?? is ??????????
which is a key-element SD. The words ??
and ?? are called packed words.
(6) ?????????????????
(The news that China joined WTO is exciting.)
(7) ?????????????????
(The degree of influence that Chinese economics
impacts on the world is deeper and deeper.)
Let ElJ be the semantic structure of the subor-
dinate clause, GBKi be the subject/object, and El
be the verb of the clause. The semantic pattern of
the clause can be given as
ElJ=GBK1+El+GBK2+GBK3, where GBK2 and
GBK3 can be absent and the position of GBKi
can be changed. Suppose ElJ-GBKi stands for
the action of subtracting the GBKi from ElJ,
ElJ-El stands for subtracting the El. The seman-
tic patterns of SD can be given as follows:
1. ElJ. It means that ElJ is a prototype SD.
2. (ElJ-GBKi)+?+GBKi. It means that this
key-element SD can be transformed from the
clause ElJ by moving GBKi to the tail and
adding the Chinese word ? in front of
GBKi.
3. (ElJ-El)+ ? +El. It means that this
key-element SD can be transformed from the
clause ElJ by moving El to the tail and add-
ing the Chinese word ? in front of El. Al-
though this El looks like a noun because
there is Chinese word ? in front of it, it is
regarded as a verb when restored back to the
ElJ.
4. a prototype SD or key-element SD+{?
}+noun. It means the three patterns above
can serve as the attributer of the packed SD.
Although the key-element SD and packed SD
look like NP?s in Chinese, they need to be trans-
formed back into clauses during semantic analy-
sis. It means that in patterns 2 and 3 the GBKi
and El have to be restored into ElJ. This is why
we named these phenomena Sentence Degenera-
tion. Moreover, in patterns 2 and 3, the Chinese
word ? is necessary to indicate the transforma-
tion, and we call it a sign of SD.
Therefore, if an NP or other structure includes
a verb and the Chinese word ?, it has to be
analyzed as one type of SD. These semantic pat-
terns of SD are useful for describing the inter-
pretation of temporarily ambiguous verb struc-
tures, such as those in garden-path sentences.
4 Semantic Model of Chinese Gar-
den-Path Sentence
Based on the Sentence Degeneration model,
there are two types of Chinese Garden-Path Sen-
tences: SD type ambiguity garden-paths and NP
allocated ambiguity garden-paths.
A temporarily ambiguous verb structure in a
sentence always has more than one semantic in-
terpretation that can be represented as a type of
SD. This phenomenon we call SD type ambiguity.
If an SD type ambiguity includes a prototype SD,
a garden-path arises. For example, an ambiguous
structure like ?????? has two different
interpretations as A and B in sentence (1) and
(2):
A. It is a key-element SD in sentence (1),
where ?(dog) is the subject of ??(kill), and
??(hunter) is the object of ??(kill).
B. It is a prototype SD in sentence (2), where
?(dog) is the object of ??(kill), and ??
(hunter) is the attributer of?(dog).
Obviously, ?????? has SD type am-
biguity, and one type of SD is prototype SD.
Therefore, sentence (1) and sentence (2) are gar-
den-path sentences.
An NP allocated ambiguity garden-path is a
sentence in which one NP can be both the object
of v1 and the subject of v2. Given the structure
NP1+v1+NP2+v2+NP3, if NP1+v1+NP2 is a
clause, NP2+v2+NP3 is a clause, too; there is an
ambiguity about whether NP2 serves as either
the object of the first clause or the subject of the
second clause. Unlike the garden-path that arises
from an SD type ambiguity, NP allocated ambi-
guity garden-paths confuse the main verb of the
sentence. For example, Sentence (8) has two dif-
ferent interpretations as A and B. The difference
in the two interpretations is the role of the solu-
tion. So, sentence (8) is a garden-path sentence
with an NP allocated ambiguity.
(8)????????????? (The stu-
dent forgot the solution was in the back of the
book.)
A. the solution is the subject of was, the main
verb is forgot; the solution was in the back of the
book, which is a prototype SD, is the object of
35
forgot.
B. the solution is the object of forgot, the main
verb is was, the student forgot the solution, which
is a prototype SD, is the subject of was.
We can see that it is necessary for both types
of garden-path that NP1+v1+NP2 be a clause. If
there is an NP allocated ambiguity garden-path,
NP1+v1+NP2 is a clause together with
NP2+v2+NP3 as a clause. If there is an SD type
ambiguity garden-path, NP1+v1+NP2 has to be
a prototype SD together with one of other two
types of SD (Key-element SD or packed SD).
Thus, this clause, NP1+v1+NP2, is called a gar-
den-path detecting signal.
Therefore, in our model the garden-path is
represented as one of two types of ambiguity: the
SD type ambiguity and NP allocated ambiguity.
Garden-path processing involves detecting and
analyzing these two types of ambiguities.
5 Algorithm for processing Chinese Gar-
den-Path Sentences
A Chinese Garden-Path Sentence is processed
in four steps:
(1) Initially, v1 is analyzed as the main verb.
(2) When v2 is encountered, if there is a clause
before v2, this is a garden-path detecting
signal. It is necessary to detect and analyze
the garden-path in this sentence.
(3) Detect if v1 and v2 can give rise to a gar-
den-path (see section 5.1).
(4) Determine the main verb of the sentence and
the semantic interpretation of the gar-
den-path sentence (see section 5.2).
5.1 Garden-path detection
Given an input string S, suppose its gram-
matical structure is NP1+v1+NP2+v2+NP3,
where NP1 and NP3 can be absent. Therefore, a
garden-path detecting signal means that
NP1+v1+NP2 is a clause.
The garden-path can be detected in two steps
as follows:
Step 1: test if there is SD type ambiguity in
NP1+v1+NP2.
We can look at the clause NP1+v1+NP2 as a
prototype SD without any change. If this proto-
type SD can be analyzed as another type of SD,
such as key-element or packed SD, an SD type
ambiguity is found, and the input S is a gar-
den-path sentence. Otherwise, if there is no SD
type ambiguity, the input S is a non garden-path
sentence.
As mentioned above, sentence (1) has an am-
biguity between a prototype and a key-element
SD, and it is a garden-path sentence. Consider
another sentence (9), with grammatical structure
NP1+v1+NP2+v2. Because the Chinese word
?(of) in NP2 is a sign of SD, the structure can
be rewritten as NP1+v1+NP21+?+NP22+v2.
(9) ???????????? (The paper
which Mr. wang research on Luxun is published.)
The structure NP1+v1+NP21+?+NP22 can be
analyzed in two different ways as follows. Ob-
viously there is an ambiguity between prototype
SD and packed SD, and sentence (9) is a gar-
den-path sentence.
A. It is a prototype SD, where ??(paper) is
the object of ??(research), and ??(paper)
was written by??(Luxun).
B. It is a packed SD, where ??(Luxun) is
the object of ??(research), and ??(paper)
was written by ??(Mr. wang).
Although the structure v1+NP2+v2 in sen-
tence (1) and the structure NP1+v1+NP2+v2 in
sentence (9) can give rise to garden-paths, not all
the instances of these two structures are like this.
For example, in sentence group (10) ???
(younger) and ?(knife) disfavor being objects
of ??(love) and ?(peel), so ??????
?? is only analyzed as a key-element SD, and
??????? is only analyzed as a packed
SD. There is no garden-path detecting signal, so
these sentences are non garden-path sentences.
(10) ??????????? (The
younger who love his country go back.)
?????????? (The knife with
which Mr. wang peeled the apple is lost.)
Furthermore, in sentence group (11), v1+NP2
is a clause, so there is a garden-path detecting
signal. However, ?(fruit skin) disfavors being
the subject of ?(peel), and ?(door) is not a
packed word, so ????? and ?????
??? are only analyzed as prototype SD.
There is no SD type ambiguity, so these sen-
tences are non garden-path sentences.
(11) ???????? (Peeling the apple
need to be careful.)
?????????? (Mr. wang opened
the door and went away.)
Step 2: test if NP2+v2+NP3 is a clause.
If NP2+v2+NP3 is not a clause, definitely
there is no NP allocated ambiguity, and the sen-
tence is not a garden-path sentence. For example,
36
in sentence (12) ??????????(Iraq
is due to the crisis of energy) is not a clause, so
sentence (12) is a non garden-path sentence.
(12) ?????????????? (That
USA attacked Iraq is due to the crisis of energy)
If NP2+v2+NP3 is a clause, there are two in-
terpretations for v1 and v2.
First, v1 and v2 are serial verbs, and the sen-
tence can be divided into two separate sentences;
one is NP1+v1+NP2, the other is NP2+v2+NP3
and the subject of v2 is NP2. For example, sen-
tence (13) can be divided into sentences (14) and
(15). This phenomenon can be interpreted as
sentence (15) sharing ?? (conference) with
sentence (14), which is not NP allocated ambigu-
ity, so the sentence (13) is a non garden-path
sentence.
(13) ?????????? (The file will
be given to the conference to discuss.)
(14) ???????? (The file will be
given to the conference.)
(15) ???????? (The conference
will discuss the file.)
Second, one of v1 and v2 is the main verb of
the sentence, and NP2 has to be in NP1+v1+NP2
or NP2+v2+NP3, and cannot be shared. For
example, in sentence (8), the solution cannot be
shared by forgot and was. Absolutely this is an
NP allocated ambiguity, and the sentence is a
garden-path sentence.
The difference between a serial verb interpre-
tation and an NP allocated ambiguity interpreta-
tion is the semantic information of the two verbs.
Suppose VS(pro) is the set of all verbs whose
subject can be a prototype SD, VO(pro) is the set
of all verbs whose object can be a prototype SD.
Verbs about mental acts, emotions or other hu-
man feelings, such as forget, worry, cry, belong
to the VS(pro). Verbs about propositions, causes
and results, such as be, result in, be due to, be-
long to both VO(pro) and VS(pro).
If NP2+v2+NP3 is a clause, and if v1 is not one
of VO(pro) and v2 is not one of VS(pro), the sen-
tence is a non garden-path sentence and these
two verbs are serial verbs. Otherwise, the sen-
tence is a garden-path sentence.
5.2 Garden-path analysis
A garden-path is always affected by the selec-
tion of the main verb of a sentence. In the gar-
den-path caused by SD ambiguity, v1 is regarded
as the main verb initially, however, in the end, v2
is the real main verb. In the garden-path caused
by NP allocated ambiguity, both v1 and v2 can be
the main verb. So, the garden-path analysis in-
cludes two steps: the first step is determining the
main verb of the sentence; the second step is
disambiguating the SD type or the NP allocated
ambiguity, and determining the semantic struc-
ture of the sentence.
Given a garden-path sentence with grammati-
cal structure NP1+v1+NP2+v2+NP3, the analy-
sis process is as follows:
First, if an SD type ambiguity is detected, it
means NP1+v1+NP2 can be a prototype SD and
key-element or packed SD, and v2 always is the
main verb of the sentence. The ambiguity can be
processed as in Figure 1. For example, In sen-
tences (1) and (2), ?(is) is one of VS(pro) and
??(run away) is not, so ?????? is
processed as a key-element SD in sentence (1)
and a prototype SD in sentence (2).
Second, if an NP allocated ambiguity is de-
tected, it means that both NP1+v1+NP2 and
NP2+v2+NP3 can be clauses. The main verb can
be determined in Figure 2. The NP allocated am-
biguity can be processed as in Figure 3.
(16) ???????????? (Mr.
Zhang saw Miss. Li dancing.)
The result of garden-path analysis is a seman-
tic structure for the sentence. In Figures 1 and 3,
a flag of prototype SD, key-element SD and
packed SD, which indicates the semantic inter-
pretation, is added to the grammatical structure
of the sentence. Therefore, the main verb, which
is always outside the flag, and the semantic
structure of the sentence are both represented.
v2 is NP1+v1+NP2 is Sentence semantic structure Example
one of VS(pro)
not one of VS(pro)
not one of VS(pro)
a prototype SD
a key-element SD
a packed SD
(NP1+v1+NP2)+v2+NP3
<NP1+v1+NP2>+v2+NP3
{NP1+v1+NP2}+v2+NP3
Sentence (2)
Sentence (1)
Sentence (9)
Figure 1: The process of SD type ambiguity in garden-path sentences. Where ( ) is the flag
37
indicating that the content in it is prototype SD, < > is the flag of key-element SD, and { } is the
flag of packed SD.
V1 is v2 is the main verb is Example
one of VO(pro)
one of VO(pro)
not one of VO(pro)
not one of VS(pro)
one of VS(pro)
one of VS(pro)
v1
prior to be v1
v2
Sentence (16)
Sentence (8)
Sentence (12)
Figure 2: The main verb determining in garden-path sentences. Here prior to means that if v1 is
one of VO(pro) and v2 is one of VS(pro), the main verb is v1 in most cases. In some cases it depends
on the meaning of v1 and v2, whether v1 is the main verb. These cases are out of the scope of consid-
eration of this paper.
Main
verb is
NP2 is Sentence semantic
structure
Example Comment
v1 The subject
of v2
NP1+v1+(NP2+v2
+NP3)
Sentence
(8),(16)
NP2+v2+NP3 is a prototype SD,
this SD is the object of v1.
v2 The object
of v1
(NP1+v1+NP2)+v2
+NP3
Sentence (12) NP1+v1+NP2 is a prototype SD,
this SD is the subject of v2.
Figure 3: The process of NP allocated ambiguity in garden-path sentence. Where ( ) is the flag
indicating that the content in it is prototype SD.
6. Evaluation and Discussion
To conduct a reliable evaluation, a test sentence
set and a simple knowledge base were developed.
The test set includes 100 manually annotated
Chinese garden-path sentences and 100 non gar-
den-path sentences with grammatical structure
NP1+v1+NP2+v2+NP3. The knowledge base
includes two aspects: one is if the verb is one of
VS(pro) or VO(pro), the other is the concepts
which the subject/object of the verb favor. And
there are about 800 verbs in our knowledge base.
Next, two experiments have been conducted.
The first one is designed to test if our model can
detect garden-paths effectively. The second one
is designed to evaluate if garden-path sentences
can be correctly analyzed. The results of the ex-
periments are shown in Tables 1 and 2.
Total Num Detected Correct P(%) R(%) F(%)
100 85 79 92.9 79 85.4
Table 1: Performance of detection algorithm.
Total of
Detected
SD type ambiguity
Analysis Correct
NP allocated ambiguity
Analysis Correct
Total of
Correct
P(%)
85 53 24 77 90.6
Table 2: Performance of analysis algorithm.
Where, P is precision ratio, R is recall ratio, and
F is F-measure (F?=1, which is defined as
2PR/(P+R)).
We can see that on this small test set, our al-
gorithm achieves good performance in detection
and analysis of Chinese garden-path sentences.
We also conducted an error analysis, showing
that two main factors lead to detection errors.
The first is that attributer processing of NP2?s
is not considered. For example, in ?????
38
??(manage the friend?s company), ????
?(the friend?s company) is an NP which cannot
be divided to NP21(?? friend)+?+NP22(?
? company) and cannot be detected if there is
an SD type ambiguity.
The second is coordination ambiguity inter-
acting with NP allocated ambiguity, as in Sandra
bumped into the busboy and the waiter told her
to be careful, which has not been considered.
Furthermore, there are two sentences correctly
detected as Chinese garden-path sentences, but
there are neither SD type ambiguities nor NP al-
located ambiguities in them. This is why there
are 79 correct detections in Table 1, but only 77
correct analyses in Table 2. One of these sen-
tences is sentence (17), in which ????(I am
the mayor) looks like a prototype SD, however ?
????is used to emphasized ??(the mayor)
in Chinese.
(17) ????????It is the mayor that
instructed me to come here?
7. Conclusions and Future Work
The contributions of this paper are three-fold.
First, the Sentence Degeneration model is in-
troduced which can represent the differences in
interpretation of the same grammatical structure.
Second, we represent garden-paths as SD type
ambiguity and NP allocated ambiguity. These
two ambiguities come from semantics but not
grammar.
Third, we present a unified approach to proc-
essing garden-paths, in which ambiguity detec-
tion and analysis take the place of revision. The
result of our approach is the semantic structure of
a garden-path sentence.
The results of two experiments we conducted
show that our model and algorithm can analyze
Chinese garden-path sentences effectively. In our
future work, we will build a complex knowledge
base for verbs to support our semantic analysis.
We will also develop attributer processing and
coordination disambiguation to improve the per-
formance of our algorithm.
Moreover, we will extend our algorithm to
detect and analyze garden-paths caused by sen-
tences which have no verbs. This phenomenon is
a typical ambiguity in Chinese sentences, such as.
Sentence (18):
(18) ???????(She is beautiful dress-
ing skirt).
Acknowledgments
I thank Prof. Zengyang Huang and Dr. Chuanji-
ang Miao for their valuable comments on an
early draft of this paper. I also thank Zheng Wu
for his wonderful work in algorithm develop-
ment.
References
Frazier, L., & Clifton, C., Jr. 1998. Sentence reanaly-
sis and visibility. In J. D. Fodor & F.Ferreira (Eds.),
Reanalysis in sentence processing. Dordrecht,
Kluwer.
Fernanda Ferreira,etc. 2001. Misinterpretations of
Garden-Path Sentences: Implications for Models of
Sentence Processing and Reanalysis. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 30(1).
Michael J. Pazzani. 1984. Conceptual Analysis of
Garden-Path Sentences. Proceedings of the 10th in-
ternational conference on Computational linguis-
tics.
Karl G.D. Bailey, etc. 2003. Disfluencies affect the
parsing of garden-path sentences. Journal of Mem-
ory and Language, 49:183?200.
Zengyang Huang. 1998. The theory of Hierarchical
Network of Concepts (in Chinese). Tsinghua Uni-
versity Press, Beijing, China.
Zengyang Huang. 2004. The Basic Concepts and
expression of the Concepts space (in Chinese).
Ocean Press, Beijing, China.
Zhiwei Feng. 2003. The automatic parsing algo-
rithm for garden-path sentence (in Chinese).
Contemporary Linguistics, 5(4)
39
Proceedings of SADAATL 2014, pages 40?47,
Dublin, Ireland, August 24, 2014.
Pre-reordering Model of Chinese Special Sentences 
for Patent Machine Translation 
 
Renfen Hu, Zhiying Liu, Lijiao Yang, Yaohong Jin 
Institute of Chinese Information Processing, 
Beijing Normal University, 
Beijing 100875, China 
bnuhurenfen@126.com 
{liuzhy,yanglijiao,jinyaohong}@bnu.edu.cn 
 
  
Abstract 
Chinese prepositions play an important role in sentence reordering, especially in patent texts. In this paper, a 
rule-based model is proposed to deal with the long distance reordering of sentences with special prepositions. 
We firstly identify the prepositions and their syntax levels. After that, sentences are parsed and transformed to be 
much closer to English word order with reordering rules. After integrating our method into a patent MT system, 
the reordering and translation results of source language are effectively improved. 
1 Introduction 
As typical technical documents, Patents have proven to be suitable for automatic translation for its 
strict format and united writing pattern (Jin and Liu, 2011), and patent machine translation (MT) is one 
of the major application fields of MT. However, sentences in patent are known for their complicated 
structures with multiple verbs and prepositions. Some Chinese prepositions are used to change the 
original S-V-O order of sentences, such as ?(BA), which make it more difficult for reordering in 
Chinese-English machine translation. In ancient Chinese, these prepositions are mostly verbs or other 
notional words, and in modern Chinese they became grammatical markers after diachronic grammati-
calization. Huang(1998) and Miao(2005) discussed the reordering function of these prepositions, and 
defined them as Logic-0 (L0) words. 
A linguistic study by Zhang(2001) shows that more than 20% Chinese sentences are reordered by 
the prepositions, including ?(BA), ?(JIANG), ?(XIANG), ?(YU), ?(DUI), ?(GEI), ?(BEI), ?
(YOU) and ?(WEI). After analyzing sentences of 500 Chinese patent documents, we find that L0 
words appear more frequently in patent texts. Sentences with 1 L0 word occupy 30.75%, sentences 
with 2 L0 word occupy 9.05%, and sentences with ?3 L0 words occupy 2.10%. Therefore, Chinese 
special sentences with L0 words are concerned in this paper, and we will present a pre-reordering 
model of these special sentences for patent translation. 
Figure 1 and Figure 2 show an example illustrating some of the differences in word order between 
Chinese and English. 
 
 
Figure 1. Chinese syntax tree of the example sentence 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Page numbers and proceedings foot-
er are added by the organizers. License details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
40
 
Figure 2. English syntax tree of the example sentence 
 
The example shows a Chinese sentence whose literal translation in English is: 
A/an YOU(L0) ultraviolet activate DE adhesive BA(L0) the sensor housing secure to the middle 
bracket housing. (????????????????????????????) 
And where a natural translation in English would be 
An adhesive activated by ultraviolet secures the sensor housing to the middle bracket. 
As exemplified by this sentence, differences of word order between Chinese and English are deter-
mined by BA and YOU, and they are in two different levels in the syntax tree. 
In order to produce a good English translation, we firstly identify L0 words in two levels, and parse 
the sentence into chunks with core predicate and L0 words. Based on the sentence parsing, chunks are 
reordered according to related rules, transforming Chinese special sentence into a word order that is 
closer to that of English. After integrating into a patent MT system running in SIPO (State Intellectual 
Property Office of People's Republic of China)1, our model performs better than the baseline system 
and Google Translate in an open test, and it greatly improves the performance of patent translation. 
After a discussion of related work in section 2 and an introduction to semantic features in section 3, 
we will discuss the reordering model in section 4. Section 5 presents the processing steps, and section 
6 gives the experiment and evaluation. Finally we draw some conclusions in section 7. 
2 Related Works 
Nowadays statistical machine translation (SMT) is the most widely used method in MT field, and re-
ordering approaches are proved necessary in SMT performance(Xia and McCord, 2004; Collins et al, 
2005). Most SMT systems employ some mechanism that allows reordering of the source language 
during translation(Wang et al, 2007), and researchers find that reordering based on syntactic analysis 
are effective for handling systematic differences in word order between source and target languages 
(Xia and McCord, 2004; Collins et al, 2005). 
Although sentence structure of source language has been taken into consideration, most SMT sys-
tems make use of syntax information in decoding stage (Lin, 2004; Ding and Palmer, 2005; Quirk et al, 
2005; Liu et al, 2006, Huang et al, 2006). Wang et al.(2007) firstly incorporate a Chinese syntactic 
reordering method into preprocessing stage of a statistical MT system, and achieve a significant im-
provement in reordering accuracy. Zhang et al.(2007) propose a chunk-level method with reordering 
rules automatically learned from source-side chunks, it shows improvement of BLEU score and better 
computational efficiency than reordering during decoding in Chinese-English task. Genzel(2010) ap-
plies this approach to 8 different language pairs in phrase-based machine translation, and demonstrates 
that many important order transformations (SVO to SOV or VSO, head modifier, verb movement) can 
be captured by this approach. An automatic reordering model in preprocessing also works effectively 
in Japanese-English patent machine translation(Katz-Brown and Collins, 2008). 
However, existing methods face difficulties in Chinese-English patent translation. A Chinese patent 
sentence often contains multiple nested phrases with a number of verbs, prepositions and correlations. 
In addition to that, ambiguity of L0 words turns it more difficult for language parsers to make syntax 
analysis. Moreover, reordering rules can hardly be automatically learned from patent sentences with 
complicate structures. To deal with the long-distance reordering of special sentences in patent texts, 
                                                 
1 http://c2e.cnpat.com.cn/sesame.aspx 
41
we must fully consider semantic features of L0 words, including their positions, correlations, functions, 
ambiguities and levels. With the identification of L0 words and their levels, we can parse and reorder a 
sentence more explicitly. 
3 Semantic Features 
A linguistic survey shows that S-V-O account for more than 75% of the world's languages, suggesting 
it may be somehow more initially ?obvious? to human psychology(Crystal, 1997). Both modern Chi-
nese and English are S-V-O languages, however, word order in Chinese sentence is often changed by 
L0 words to emphasize a part of the sentence, or to make nuance of the meaning. Our work aims at 
reordering Chinese special sentences to organize phrases or words in English order without L0 words.  
We have defined 9 Chinese prepositions as L0 words in Section 1. To deal with the reordering of Chi-
nese special sentences with these words, we use semantic features from the Hierarchical Network of 
Concepts theory (HNC theory). In the opinion of HNC researchers, L0 words and verbs are important 
clues of syntactic and semantic analysis(Jin, 2010). Therefore, we will introduce the features of L0 
words and verbs in the following part. 
3.1 Types of L0 Words 
According to HNC theory, L0 words can be divided into 2 types, L01 and L02(Huang, 1998; Miao, 
2005). 
Sentence 1 Tom eats a banana. 
Sentence 2 Tom BA(?) a banana eat. 
Sentence 3 A banana BEI(?) Tom eat. 
In sentence 1, we know that Tom is an agent, and a banana is a patient. Sentence 2 and 3 are ex-
pressing the same meaning in Chinese with L0 words. It can be seen that the two L0 words reorder the 
sentence in different ways, BA(?) just exchanges the location of the predicate and the object, while 
BEI(?) changes the sentence from active to passive voice. BA(?) is a L02 word, and BEI(?) be-
longs to L01. The types of L0 words are presented in Table 1. 
 
Types Members Semantic format  Example sentence 
L01 ? (BEI), ?(YOU) , ?(WEI) Patient+L01+Agent+Predicate Tom BA(?) a banana eat. 
L02 ?(BA), ?(JIANG),?(XIANG),
?(DUI), ?(GEI), ?(YU) 
Agent+L02+Patient/Recipient+
Predicate 
A banana BEI(?) Tom eat. 
Table 1. Two types of L0 words 
3.2 Levels of L0 Words 
By comparing the syntax trees in Figure 1 and Figure 2, we can note that YOU(?) appears in a 
NP(noun phrase), while BA(?) appears independently in the sentence. To distinguish the two kinds of 
L0 words, we define a LEVEL value for L0 words according to their node locations in the syntax tree. 
L0 word as LEVEL[1] is a child node of S(sentence), while L0 as LEVEL[2] is a child node of NP.  
Accordingly, our reordering model includes two modules, the reordering of Sentence with L0 as 
LEVEL[1] and the reordering of NP with L0 as LEVEL[2]. Therefore, we need firstly identify the lev-
el of each L0 word in sentences. 
3.3 Collocation with Predicates 
More than one L0 word may appear in a sentence, but each L0 is in combination with a certain 
predicate. As exemplified by the sentence in Figure 1, YOU(?) goes with the verb activate, while 
BA(?) goes with the verb secure. For this reason, L0 and its level can also help to determine the 
core predicate when a sentence has more than one verb. 
Predicates are also classified into 2 types according to their levels in the syntax tree. We give 2 sim-
ple English sentences to explain the 2 types, P1 and P2. 
Sentence 4 Bob tells(P1) me a secret. 
Sentence 5 A secret told(P2) by Bob is spreading(P1). 
42
As labelled in the 2 examples, P1 refers to the core predicate, and P2 is the predicate in a noun 
phrase. L0 word in level 1 is in combination with P1, while L0 word in level 2 is in combination with 
P2. The identification of the two types of predicates is introduced in detail by Zhu(2012). Table 2 
shows the levels of L0 words and their collocations with predicates. 
 
L0 Level Parent Node Collocated Predicates 
LEVEL[1] Sentence P1 
LEVEL[2] NP P2 
Table 2. The collocations of L0 words and predicates 
 
4 Reordering Model of Chinese Special Sentences 
Our model aims at the reordering of Chinese special sentences with L0 words for patent machine 
translation. With the identification of predicates, L0 words, and their levels (Hu et al, 2013), we can 
parse the sentence and get a Chinese syntax tree. In this section, we will firstly introduce the transfor-
mations and rules in the reordering, and then discuss how to transform the syntax tree to make the 
word order closer to English sentence. Semantic features of L0 and verbs that we discussed in section 
3 will be applied into the model. 
4.1 Transformations in the Reordering 
There are 5 types of transformations in the processing of our reordering model. 
Deletion: L0 words are Chinese prepositions, so we need to delete or substitute them at first. 
Addition: Some L0 words have no real meanings, such as ?(BA) and ?(JIANG), we can make 
other transformations after deleting them. However, some L0 words have preposition meanings that 
cannot be neglected, so we need to add English prepositions to the new tree. This operation can also be 
interpreted as ?substitution?. 
Copying: In long distance reordering, some chunks do not need any transformation, so we just copy 
it to the new syntax tree. 
Rearrangement: We need to rearrange the chunks to make the word order closer to English. 
Voice Transition: A research by Liu(2011) shows that 95.6% English patent sentences use passive 
voice. Considering the voice difference between Chinese and English, we transform some active sen-
tences to passive sentences. 
4.2 Rule Description 
The above 5 transformations are integrated in our reordering rules. We will describe how rules work 
with Rule 1 as an example. 
Rule 1: 
(b){(-1)CHK[NP]}+(0)CHN[ ? ]&CHK[L0] +(1)CHK[NP]+(2)CHK[P1]&VV[2]=>(-1)+ COPY[-
1,0]+ DEL_NODE(0)+(2){VOI=P}+ ADD_NODE(ENG=[by])+(1) 
Each reordering rule includes a left part and a right part, with arrow ?=>? as the boundary. CHK is 
short for chunk, and VV is short for verb valency, which is a feature for verbs in our semantic 
knowledge base. The left part describes chunks in the Chinese syntax tree, and each chunk is marked 
with a node number. The right part describes the reordering result. In Rule 1, L0 ? is deleted, English 
preposition by is added, P1 is transformed to passive voice, contents between node 0 and node 1 are 
copied to the new syntax tree, and the chunks orders are rearranged from (-1)+(0)+(1)+(2) to (-
1)+COPY[-1,0]+(2)+by+(1). 
4.3 Reordering Analysis 
After an introduction to our rules and their functions, we will present two examples to illustrate the 
reordering work. 
4.3.1 Reordering of Sentences 
43
After analyzing sentences from 500 patent texts, 51 rules are made to deal with the sentences with L0 
as LEVEL[1]. We will discuss this reordering work with Sentence 6 as an example. 
Sentence 6 BA data to be transmitted divide into plural blocks. (?????????????
??) 
After identification of L0 words and predicates, we can get a syntax tree as shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. Syntax tree of Sentence 6 before reordering 
 
In reordering stage, the sentence will be transformed by matching the following rule. 
Rule 2: 
(b){!CHK[NP]}+(0)CHN[? ]&CHK[L0]+(1)CHK[NP]+(2)CHK[P1]&VV[3]+(3)CHK[NP] => 
DEL_NODE(0)+(1)+(2){VOI=P}+(3) 
 
After the transformation, we get a new syntax tree as shown in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4. Syntax tree of sentence 6 after reordering 
 
4.3.2 Reordering of Noun Phrases 
In patent texts, noun phrases are often long and complicated, as well as sentences. We have made 31 
rules to deal with the reordering of NPs with L0 words. Taking Sentence 7 as an example, we will pre-
sent the reordering of NPs. 
Sentence 7 The fastener has YU mounting hole formed on the blade fit DE projection. (????
???????????????) 
YU mounting hole formed on the blade fit DE projection is a NP with L0. In this NP, YU is identi-
fied as L0 in LEVEL[2], and fit is P2 in combination with L0. By matching Rule 3, we can transform 
the syntax tree in Figure 5 to a new syntax tree in Figure 6. 
Rule 3:  
(-3){CHK[L0]&CHN[ ? ]}+(-2)CHK[NP]+(-1)CHK[P2]+(0)CHN[ ? ] +(1)CHK[NP] => 
DEL_NODE(-3)+(1)+ADD_NODE(ENG=[which])+(-1){VOI=P}+ADD_NODE(ENG=[with])+(-
2)+ DEL_NODE(0) 
 
Figure 5. Syntax tree of the NP before reordering 
 
Figure 6. Syntax tree of the NP after reordering 
44
 
Obviously, the word order in Figure 6 is much closer to English sentence than in Figure 5. 
5 Processing Steps 
The reordering is processed in steps as follows. 
Step 1: To preprocess the Chinese sentence, including word segmentation and word-sense-
disambiguation. 
Step 2: To identify predicates, L0 words and their levels. 
Step 3: To segment the sentence into chunks with L0 words(Level[1]) and predicates(P1) as bound-
aries. 
Step 4: To reorder the sentences with L0 words(LEVEL[1]) based on transformation rules. 
Step 5: To reorder the NPs with L0 words(LEVEL[2]) based on transformation rules. 
Step 6: To generate a new syntax tree closer to English language order. 
6 Experiment and Discussion 
The experiment takes 500 authentic patent texts provided by SIPO (State Intellectual Property Office 
of China) as the training set. The evaluation will use the development data for the NTCIR-9 Patent 
Machine Translation Pilot Task2, containing 2,000 bilingual Chinese-English sentence pairs.  
After integrating into a rule-based patent machine translation system(Zhu et al, 2012), we will take 
a closed test on the training set, and an open test on the evaluation set. To evaluate the effects of the 
reordering rules, precision and recall are calculated by manual evaluation for both two tests. In the 
open test, NIST (Doddington et al, 2002) and BLEU score (Papineni et al, 2002) are also employed to 
evaluate the translation performance. Table 3 shows the result of the closed test. 
 
 
 
 
Table 3. Experiment Result on the Training Set 
 
It can be seen from table 3 that the reordering rules have higher accuracy and reliability than cover-
age, and the module of sentence reordering performs better than NP reordering. 
In the open test, comparison is made as shown in table 4. RB-MT is the baseline system. RB-
MT+PRM is the system integrated with our reordering model. GOOGLE is an online statistical MT 
system, the reordering result of which is inferred from its translation result. Table 4 shows the compar-
ison in reordering of the three systems. 
 
Systems Precision (%) Recall (%) F-score (%) 
RB-MT 71.23 62.02 66.31 
RB-MT+PRM 88.11 75.90 81.55 
GOOGLE 60.71 51.20 55.56 
Table 4. Compared Result of the Open Test 
 
The result of the open test shows that our model has effectively improved the reordering result of 
Chinese special sentences, and Google performs poorly in this test. It is mainly because statistical 
methods face difficulties in long distance reordering, and technical texts (including patent texts) ac-
count for a fairly low proportion in the training bilingual corpus. Thus, our method is advantageous in 
processing technical texts with long and complicated sentences.  
 
After calculating the precision and recall, we give NIST and BLEU scores of the three systems. In 
order to learn the impact of the pre-reordering model in statistical machine translation, we also put the 
                                                 
2 http://research.nii.ac.jp/ntcir/ntcir-9/ 
Types Precision (%) Recall (%) F-score (%) 
Sentences with L0 97.14 88.20 92.45 
NPs with L0 91.80 73.91 81.89 
45
pre-reordered Chinese sentences into GOOGLE Translate and get the English translation result as a 
comparison. The reordered sentences are obtained from intermediate outputs of RB-MT+PRM system. 
 
Systems NIST BLEU(%) 
RB-MT 4.85 19.97 
RB-MT+PRM 5.36 22.33 
GOOGLE  7.84 35.24 
GOOGLE+PRM 7.90 36.07 
Table 5. NIST and BLEU-4 Scores 
 
From table 5, we can see that after integrating the reordering model, NIST score of RB-MT system 
has increased by 10.52%, and BLEU score has increased by 11.82%. Google also has an improvement 
when input texts are replaced by reordered sentences. Since statistical machine translation has already 
worked efficiently in short-distance reordering, its improvement is slighter than rule-based systems.  
Besides, Google Translate performs better in this evaluation. It is mainly because the corpus domain 
is not limited, unknown terms or entities may result in a bad translation performance for rule-based 
systems. In addition, the module of word selection in RB-MT needs to be improved urgently. From the 
experiment, we also find that the pre-reordering model is strongly dependent on the completeness of 
rules and the accuracy of the knowledge base, which still need to be improved in the future work. 
7 Conclusion 
To deal with the reordering of Chinese special sentences, we use a source-language parser to distin-
guish the levels of L0 words and make transformations in the syntax tree. 
Our model improves the performance of patent machine translation. In the future, the rule set and 
knowledge base need to be improved, and our reordering method can be extended to machine transla-
tion of technical texts in other fields. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors are grateful to National High Technology Research and Development Program of China 
(No. 2012AA011104) for financial support. 
 
Reference 
Collins M., Koehn P., and Ivona K. 2005. Clause restructuring for statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of ACL: 531?540. 
Crystal D. 1997. The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language, 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK. 
Ding Y. and Palmer M. 2005. Machine translation using probabilistic synchronous dependency insertion gram-
mars. In Proceedings of ACL: 541?548. 
Doddington G. 2002. Automatic evaluation of machine translation quality using n-gram co-occurrence statistics, 
In Proceedings of Human Language Technology Research: 138-145. 
Genzel D. 2010. Automatically learning source-side reordering rules for large scale machine translation. In 
Proceedings of COLING: 376-384. 
Hu R.F., Zhu Y., and Jin Y.H. 2013. Semantic Analysis of Chinese Prepositional Phrases for Patent Machine 
Translation. Chinese Computational Linguistics and Natural Language Processing Based on Naturally Anno-
tated Big Data. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
Huang Z.Y.  1998. HNC (Hierarchical network of concepts) Theory (in Chinese). Tsinghua University Press, 
Beijing, China. 
46
Huang L. Knight K. and Joshi A. 2006. Statistical syntax-directed translation with extended domain of locality. 
In Proceedings of AMTA:223-226. 
Jin Y.H. 2010. A hybrid-strategy method combining semantic analysis with rule-based MT for patent machine 
translation. In Proceedings of NLP-KE: 1-4. 
Jin Y.H. and Liu Z. Y. 2011. Improving Chinese-English patent machine translation using sentence segmenta-
tion, In Proceedings of NLP-KE: 620-625. 
Katz-Brown J. and Collins M. 2008. Syntactic reordering in preprocessing for Japanese? English translation: 
MIT system description for NTCIR-7 patent translation task. In Proceedings of NTCIR-7 Workshop Meeting: 
409-414. 
Lin D. 2004. A path-based transfer model for machine translation. In Proceedings of COLING, Geneva, Swit-
zerland: 625?630. 
Liu Y., Liu Q. and Lin S. 2006. Tree-to-string alignment template for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL: 609?616. 
Liu Z.Y. 2011. The research of passive voice in Chinese-English patent machine translation. In Proceedings of 
NLP-KE: 300-303. 
Miao C.J. 2005. HNC (Hierarchical network of concepts) theory introduction (in Chinese). Tsinghua University 
Press, Beijing, China. 
Papineni K., Roukos S., Ward T, et al. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. 
In Proceedings of ACL: 311-318. 
Quirk C.  Menezes A.  and Cherry C. Dependency tree let translation: Syntactically informed phrasal SMT. In 
Proceedings of ACL: 271?279. 
Wang C. , Collins M. and Koehn P. 2007. Chinese Syntactic Reordering for Statistical Machine Translation. In 
Proceedings of Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational 
Natural Language Learning: 737?745. 
Xia F.  and McCord M.  2004. Improving a statistical MT system with automatically learned rewrite patterns. In 
Proceedings of ACL: 508. 
Zhang Y., Zens R. and Ney H. 2007. Chunk-level reordering of source language sentences with automatically 
learned rules for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT: 1-8. 
Zhang Y.H. 2001. Format transformation in English-Chinese translation (in Chinese). HNC theory and lan-
guage research. Wuhan University of Technology Press, Wuhan, China.  
Zhu Y.  and Jin Y.H. 2012. A Chinese-English patent machine translation system based on the theory of hierar-
chical network of concepts. The Journal of China Universities of Posts and Telecommunications, 19(2): 140-
146. 
47
