Automatic summarization of search engine hit lists 
Dragomir R. Radev 
School of Information, University of Michigan 
550 E. University St. 
Ann Arbor,/vii 48109 
radev@umich, edu 
Weiguo Fan 
University of Michigan Business School 
701 Tappan St. 
Ann Arbor, M148109 
wfan@umich, edu 
Abstract 
We present our work on open-domain 
multi-document summarization in the 
framework of Web search. Our system, 
SNS (pronounced "essence"), retrieves 
documents related to an unrestricted user 
query and summarizes a subset of them as 
selected by the user. We present a task- 
based extrinsic evaluation of the quality of 
the produced multi-document summaries. 
The evaluation results show that 
summarization quality is relatively high 
and does help improve the reading speed 
and judge the relevance of the retrieved 
URLs. 
1 Introduction 
Online information is increasingly available at 
an exponential rate. According to a recent 
study by NetSizer (2000), the number of web 
hosts has increased from 30 million in 
Jan.1998 to 44 million in Jan. 1999, and to 
more than 70 million in Jan. 2000. More than 
2 million new hosts were added to the Internet 
in Feb. 2000, according to this report. Similar 
Internet growth results were reported by 
Intemet Domain Service (IDS, 2000). The 
number of web pages on the Intemet was 320 
million pages in Dec. 1997 as reported by 
Lawrence t al. (1997), 800 million in Feb. 
1999 (Lawrence t al. 1999), and more than 
1,720 million in March, 2000 (Censorware, 
2000). The number of pages available on the 
Internet alost doubles every ear. 
To help alleviate the information overload 
problem and help users find the information 
they need, many search engines emerge. They 
build a huge centralized atabase to index a 
portion of the Intemet: ranging from 10 
million to more than 300 million of web 
pages. Search engines do help reduce the 
information overload problem by allowing a 
user to do a centralized search, but they also 
bring up another problem for the user: too 
many web pages are returned for a single 
query. To find out which documents are 
useful, the user often have to sift through 
hundreds of pages to find out that only a few 
of them are relevant. Moreover, browsing 
through the long list of retrieval results is so 
tedious that few users would be willing to go 
through. That's why research results have 
shown that search engine users often give up 
their search in the first try, examining no more 
than 10 documents (Jansen et al 2000). It 
would be very helpful if an effective search 
engine could be designed to help classify the 
retrieved web pages into clusters and provide 
more contextual nd summary information to 
help these users explore the retrieval set more 
efficiently. 
Recent advances in information retrieval, 
natural language processing, computational 
linguistics make it easier to build a helpful 
search engine based on summaries of hit lists. 
We describe in this paper a prototype system, 
SNS, which blends the traditional information 
retrieval technology with the advanced 
document clustering and multi-document 
summarization technology in an integrated 
framework. The following steps are performed 
for a given query: 
99 
Figure 1: Architecture diagram 
The general architecture of our system is 
shown in Figure 1. User interaction with SNS 
can be done in three different modes: 
? Web search mode. The user enters a 
general-domain query in the search engine 
(MySearch). The result is a set of related 
documents (the hit-list). The user then 
selects which of  the hits should be 
summarized. MEAD, the summarization 
component produces a cross-document 
summary of the documents selected by the 
user from the hit list. 
? Intranet mode. The user indicates what 
collection of documents needs to be 
summarized. These documents are not 
necessarily extracted from the Web. 
? Clustering mode. The user indicates that 
either the hit list of the search engine or a 
stand-alone document collection needs to 
be clustered. CIDR, the clustering 
component, creates clusters of documents. 
For each cluster, MEAD produces a cross- 
document summary. 
Our paper is organized as follows. Sections 2 
4 describe the system. More specifically: 
Section 2 explains how the search engine 
operates, Section 3 deals with the clustering 
module while Section 4 presents the multi- 
document summarizer. Section 5 describes the 
user interface of  the system. In Section 6, we 
present some experimental results. After we 
compare our work to related research in 
Section 7, we conclude the paper in Section 8. 
2 Search 
The search component of SNS is a 
personalized search engine called MySearch. 
MySearch utilizes a centralized relational 
database to store all the URL indexes and 
other related URL information. Spiders are 
used to fetch URLs from the Internet. After a 
URL is downloaded, the following steps are 
applied to index the URL: 
? Parse the HTML file, remove all those 
tags 
? Apply Porter's stemming algorithms to 
each keyword. 
? Remove stop words 
? Index each keyword into the database 
along with its frequency and position 
information. 
The contents of URLs are indexed based on 
the locations of the keywords: Anchor, Title, 
and Body. This allows weighted retrieval 
based on different word positions. For 
example, a user can specify that he'd like to 
give a weight 5 for the keyword appearing in 
the title, 4 for anchor, and 2 for body. This 
information can be saved in his personal 
profile and used for later weighted ranking. 
Besides the weighted search, MySearch also 
supports Boolean search and Vector Space 
search (Salton, 1989). For the vector space 
model, the famous TF-IDF is used for ranking 
purpose. We used a modified version of TF- 
IDF: log(or+O.5)*log(N/df), where if means the 
number of times a term appeared in the 
content of an URL, N is the total number of 
documents in the text collection, and dfstands 
for the number of  unique URLs in which a 
term appears in the entire collection. 
A user can choose which search method he 
wants to use. He/she can also combine 
Boolean search with Vector Space search. 
These options are provided to give users more 
flexibility to control the retrieval results as 
100 
past research indicated that different ranking 
functions give different performances (Salton, 
1989). 
A sample search for "Clinton" using the TF- 
IDF Vector Space search is shown in Figure 3. 
The keyword "Clinton" is highlighted using a 
different color to help users get more 
contextual information. The retrieval status 
value is shown in a bold black font after the 
URL title. 
3 Clustering 
Our system uses two types of clustered input- 
either the set of hits that the user has selected 
or the output of our own clustering engine -
CIDR (Columbia Intelligent Document 
Relater). CIDR is described in (Radev et al, 
1999). It uses an iterative algorithm that 
creates as a side product so-called "document 
centroids". The centroids contain the most 
highly relevant words to the entire cluster (not 
to the user query). We use these words to find 
the most salient "themes" in the cluster of 
documents. 
3.1 Finding themes within clusters 
One of the underlying assumptions behind 
SNS is that when a user selects a set of hits 
after reading the single-document summaries 
from the hit list retrieved by the system, he or 
she performs a cognitive activity whereby he 
or she selects documents which appear to be 
related to one or more common themes. The 
multi-document summarization algorithm 
attempts to identify these themes and to 
identify the most salient passages from the 
selected ocuments using a pseudo-document 
called the cluster centroid which is computed 
automatically from the entire list of hits 
selected by the user. 
3.2 Computing centroids 
Figure 2 describes a sample of a cluster 
centroid. The TF column indicates the average 
term frequency of a given term within the 
cluster. E.g., a TF value of 13.33 for three 
documents indicates that the term "'deny" 
appears 40 times in the three documents. The 
IDF values are computed from a mixture of 
200 MB of news and web-based ocuments. 
Term TF IDF Score 
app 20.67 8.90 'I 83.88 
lewinsky 34.67 5.25 182.03 
currie 15.33 7.60 116.50 
ms 32.00 3.06 '97.97 
january 25.33 3.30 83.60 
jordan 18.67 4.06 75.81 
referrai 9.00 7.43 66.88 
magaziner 6.67 10.00 66.64 
Deny 13.33 4.92 65.61 
Admit 13.00 4.92 63.97 
monica 14.67 4.29 62.85 
oic 5.67 I 0.00 56.64 
betty 8.00 6.01 48.06 
vernon 8.67 5.49 47.54 
'do .... 32.67 1.40 45.80 
Telephoned 6.67 6.86 45.74 
.you 36.33 1.19 43.30 
i 42.67 0.96 40.84 
clinton 16.33 2.23 36.39 
jones 11.33 3.17 35.88 
or 32.33 ~ 1.09 35.20 
gif 3.33 9.30 31.01 
white 12.00 2.50 30.01 
tripp 4.67 6.23 29.10 
ctv 3.00 ~ 9.30 27.91 
december 7.33 3.71 27.19 
Figure 2: A sample cluster centroifl 
4 Centroid-based summarization 
The main technique that we use for 
summarization is sentence extraction. We 
score individually each sentence within a 
cluster and output hese that score the highest. 
A more detailed escription of the summarizer 
can be found in (Radev et al, 2000). 
The input to the summarization component is
a cluster of documents. These documents can 
be either the result of a user query or the 
output of CIDR. 
The summarizer takes as input a cluster o ld  
documents with a total of n sentences as well 
as a compression ratio parameter r which 
indicates how much of the original cluster to 
preserve. 
101 
The output consists of a sequence of In * r\] 
sentences from the original documents in the 
same order as the input documents. The 
highest-ranking sentences are included 
according to the scoring formula below: 
S~ = wcC~ + wpPi + wfFi 
In the formula, we, wp, wf are weights. Ci is the 
centroid score of the sentence, P~ is the 
positional score of the sentence, and F~ is the 
score of the sentence according to the overlap 
with the first sentence of the document. 
4.1 Centroid value 
The centroid value C~ for sentence Si is 
computed as the sum of the centroid values Cw 
of all words in the sentence. For example, the 
sentence "President Clinton met with Vernon 
Jordon in January" gets a score of 243.34 
which is the sum of the individual eentroid 
values of the words (clinton = 36.39; vernon = 
47.54; jordan = 75.81; january = 83.60). 
Ci = E cw 
w 
4.2 Positional value 
The positional value is computed as follows: 
the first sentence in a document gets the same 
score Cm,~, as the highest-ranking sentence in 
the document according to the centroid value. 
The score for all sentences within a document 
is computed according to the following 
formula: 
Pi = (n - i + 1) . mFx(Ci ) 
n t 
For example, if the sentence described above 
appears as the third sentence out of 30 in a 
document and the largest centroid value of any 
sentence in the given document is 917.31, the 
positional value P3  will be = 28/30 * 917.31 
4.3 First-sentence overlap 
The overlap value is computed as the inner 
product of the sentence vectors for the current 
sentence i and the first sentence of the 
document. The sentence vectors are the n- 
dimensional representations of the words in 
each sentence whereby the value at position i
of  a sentence vector indicates the number of  
occurrences of that word in the sentence. 
Fi = Sl Si 
4.4 Combining the three parameters 
As indicated in (Radev & al., 2000) we have 
experimented with several weighting schemes 
for the three parameters (centroid, position, 
and first-sentence overlap). Until this moment, 
we have not come to the point in which the 
three weights we, wp, and wf are either 
automatically learned or derived from a user 
profile. Instead, we have experimented with 
various sets of empirically determined values 
for the weights. In this paper the results are 
based on equal weights for the three 
parameters wc = wp = wf= 1. 
5 User Interface 
We describe in this section the user interface 
for web search mode as described earlier in 
Section 1. 
One component of  our system is the search 
engine (MySearch). The detailed esign of the 
search component is discussed in Section 2. 
The result of  a sample query "'Clinton" to our 
search engine is shown starting in Figure 4. 
102 
SSEARCH 
Tcmponn'y 
Web In~fa~ 
? ~bgm 
._~J~ 
Displaying t lom 1-10 oftolal ~1~ N 
Sea'c.h: I .  court v online \[LgS\] r 
Court 'IV Onrme Tcxt ofPrtsident Cllhaton's respomcs to Judkkty 
Dragomir R. Radcv * httv:/fwww.?ourttv.?om/? ase ffiles/dlntonerisis/1127' '~ amwerptcxt.htrd 
43 KB 
0 Cohmabla U. 
1990-2000 
? ~. of Michipn 
2000 index JLJU.I~. STAR.R SCANDAl., A site chronicling the ?n'ongdoings ofth,c .., 
Shadow Oovcmmcat of Kcrmct5 W . . . . .  ~: 
? http.J/www, gt ocitles. ? om/c apitoll'lill/$~at e/9634/ 27KB '..'i 
Maintain?d by radev(~fumich.edu 
Figure 3: Sample user query 
A user has the option to choose a specific 
ranking function as well as the number of  
retrieval results to be shown in a single screen. 
The keyword contained in the query string will 
be automatically highlighted in the search 
results to provide contextual information for 
the user. 
The overall interface for SNS is shown in 
Figure 4. On the top right of the frame is the 
MySearch search engine. When a user 
submits a query, the screen in Figure 5 
appears. As can be seen from Figure 5, there is 
a check box along with each retrieved record. 
This allows the user to tell the summarization 
engine which documents he/she wants to 
summarize. After the user clicks the 
summarization button, the summarization 
option screen is displayed as shown in bottom 
of Figure 6. The summarization ption screen 
allows a user to specify the summarization 
compression ratio. Figure 7 shows the 
summarization result for four URLs with the 
compression ratio set as 30%. 
103 
_------:tl . . . . . . .  , : - - - -  ,,,~,,, I I I =1~i ,~ 
. . . . . .  >~,<... . . . .  _ .... ~,, ~7~L ,.~ ? ~.~ 
"raltllw.=y 
? Abou~ 
Wlllli0 Fmt 
Stmmii~=~mc 
o Columbh U. 
I~8.1000 
O U. of ~,clillm 
2OOO 
,==,~, , ,=  I I~  -~.~,!i l iq i 
Please click on "submit" in the frame above to continue. 
Mtilidm=d by rad~n,(~a, s i eh,~a~ 
F igure  4: SNS in ter face  (framed) 
SSEARCH s~ iop s~ ~_~a~ Io . . . .  
" - -  5 ~,,.B 
T ~ ' y  . ; 
Web \ ]n~l??  i! 9. ooficv ncws events ~ ~?f in l  rc~r t  dot=Is chinese ?s~ie~rm~? c f f~ \[1.76\] I~ 
? Ab~t  1~o~?y corn Niwi Evmts Dili~F Biiii~i i Cox Ripmt D, ctliRi Chi~st 
? ~ F..il#muqpl FJTolrtl TodI~fl NIwl  D.-. :: 
W "ti~t~ Fm Close Up Foundation U S PoFlcy Towlrd Cuba ~ Up Foundafiou Spctill :;:l 
Summ~mtfiom Tol~c Psq~ U S Poficy TowL.. 
Drlt!,omh" R. Rt~l~ o htlod/www.dgleuo.om/euba.hi m 291-~ :::! 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  : ................... 
o C~lumbil U. 
199g-2000 ENext 1 > >1 : ' : ~ I  
0 'I3. o f~ J~ i~ ........................................................................................................................................ 
2000 Pmme~ by MySQL. ~,~pacl~e m =~m L~m SP.~RC mv~. l~ySmscl ~s ~ sazm a~e sncegvv~at ~ 
e~cmmmezce Ib  l i  ~ U~,~.~'~ of ~,~c~s Bm~e~ 
Ally ~ ' , ,~et l  in~ llulllellion.l Io ttle syl l l=l  iloul~l be lt.ected Io lbe w ~b~ter .  
lease c !ck on su mi in he frame a ov e con :uue.  .... ~l 
ld .a ,~o4 by rade~,t~ch.fdu .I 
I 
~ . .  , - : s ,= .=o. . ; . ,  o : , . :  . , -  , .  , . :~ , . : . .+  , "<-  . . . . .  - ? . ~ - -  , - -  ~ ~  ~1 
~igure 5: Sea:ch output along with user selection of documents to be summarized 
104 
SSEARCH 
r~ 
Web Int~'fa~e 
? ,About 
10. dose foundatlon pol;c V cub:~ \[1.74;\] I~ 
Close Up Foundation U S Policy Toward Cuba Close Up F o ~  Special 
Topic Page U S Policy Towa... 
o http~',~.ww.ClOSeUp.o:~cu~htm 29 K~ 
S?areb: Stmm, m~2~ag 4 
welguo Fan 
:t0:i hnp.~/w~v ?!o,;c,~.o~cubxhtm 
o U. of Mid ian 
i ~ e d  by radev(~umfch.edu l 
t 
Figure 6: Selected documents for summarization 
SSEARCH 
Tempm'm'y 
Web Im:c:ffacc 
? .Abou+. 
Se~cl~ 
Wci~uo Fan 
Smmmeiantio~ 
Dragomir R. P, adev 
C Columbia U. 
1998-20130 
O U. of Miehi~n 
2OOO 
10. clos9 fotmda6on pol;c.y cuba !1.76\] I~ 
Summary @ 30% of the URLs that you 
htqrJ/www.?Om'ttv, eem/e~gf~s/c~tonczLt~/l12798_answerst~ht~ 
hl~'J/~,,w.scatllcl~c~ om/czlz~/l~owsc&tm~71~_O52297.hmd 
selected: 
ii I 
Snn'mq~,~ng 1360 .~cm, anccs ~ 30% = 408 scntc~nccs 
S '~, t ion  stmrt?d 
iTightcnmg tbc Embm'g?F?r akn?st fmW Yeses the Unlt?d States has n?t imported any Cubm ~53.71 
~ .nor allowed ~ ~ food.m~dk~ supplies.re', c~ to. ?~ ~ . . . . . .  i i ! 
~o o~c~ ?ounUy has joined lhc Umlcd States in the lmdc cmbmrgo agminst Cuba in fact the 
M=finta~ncd by r~evC,wnich.e~ 
Figure 7: Output of the summarizer 
105 
The following information is shown in the 
summarization result screen in Figure 7: 
? The number of sentences in the text of the 
set of  URLs that the user selected 
? The number of sentences in the summary 
The sentences representing the themes of those 
selected URLs and their relative scores. The 
sentences are ordered the same way they appear 
in the original set of documents. 
6 Experimental results 
Our system was evaluated using the task-based 
extrinsic measure as suggested in (Mani et al 
1999). The experiment was set up as follows: 
Three sets of  documents on different topics were 
selected prior to the experiment. The topics and 
their corresponding document information are 
shown in Table 1. 
~opie No. Lengtl~ 
S1 200k 
$2 Introduction to Data Mining 100k 
$3 Intelligent Agents and their application in 
Information retrieval 5 160k 
Table 1: Evaluation Topics and their corresponding document set information 
!i 
I 
The term data mining is then this high-level application techniques / tools used to 5^9..  
present and analyze data for decision makers ~ 
~! !  ~! '  ==I! i i1 \ ]  I i l I i=I i i~ " 
? ~,  = . . . . .  . . . . .  , ....... . ,= = ~.~ ,116111 =. ,  = ...... - .=  ...,... ......... ,, .......... = iI~.',=~ .==.,~ 
!\],!~:;= =!, I i  
Figure 8: A sample of the summarization result for $2 at 10% compression rate 
As Table 1 shows, the articles in topic set $1 are 
longer than both these in $2 and $3. The articles 
in $3 are the shortest, with each 32k in average. 
The number of documents in each topic set is 
106 
also different. The variations of document length 
and different number of documents in each topic 
set will help test the robustness of our 
summarization algorithms. 
We used SNS to generate both 10% and 20% 
summaries for each topic. A sample of the 10% 
summary for topic $2 is shown in Figure 8. Four 
users were selected for evaluation of these 
summarization results. Each user was asked to 
read through the set of full articles for each topic 
f'wst, followed by its corresponding 10% and 
20% summaries. After these 4 users finished 
each set, they were asked to assign a readability 
score (1-10) for each summary. The higher the 
readability score is, the more readable and 
meaningful for comprehension is the summary. 
The time of reading both full articles and 
summaries was tracked and recorded. 
Table 2: Summarization evaluation: detailed results 
7.92 
Table 3: Summary of the evaluation results 
The detailed evaluation results are shown in topics. The summaries generated by SNS are 
Table 2. Table 3 gives the summary of the Table also very readable. For example, The average 
2. It's shown in Table 2 that these four users readability score (which is obtained by 
have different reading speeds. However, their averaging the readability scores assigned by the 
reading speed is pretty consistent across the 3 four users) for 10% and 20% summaries for 
107 
topic S1, is 8, 8 respectively. For topic $3, the 
average readability score for 10% and 20% 
summaries is 7.75, and 8.75, respectively. 
Similarly, for $2 the average readability score 
for 10% and 20% summaries is 8 and 8.5, 
respectively. The differences in the average 
readability score also suggest that (a) our 
summarizer favors longer documents over 
shorter documents; (tO 20% summaries are 
generally favorable over 10% summaries. The 
difference in the readability score between 10% 
and 20% summaries i bigger in $3 (diff = 1.0) 
than in S1 (diff = 0). These interesting findings 
raise interesting questions for future research. 
As can be seen from Table 3, the 20% summary 
achieves better eadability score in overall than 
the 10% summary. The speedup of the 10% 
summary over full articles is 6.87. That is, with 
reading material reduced by 900%, the speedup 
in reading is only 687%. This suggests that there 
may be a little bit difficulty in reading the 10% 
summary result. This may be due to the simple 
sentence boundary detection algorithm we used. 
The feedback from users in the evaluation seems 
to corffirm the above reason. As more sentences 
were included in the 20% summaries, the 
speedup in reading (4.22) almost approached the 
optimal speedup ratio (5.0)L 
7 Related Work 
Neto et al (2000) describes a text mining tool 
that performs document clustering and text 
summarization. They used the Autoclass 
algorithm to perform document clustering and 
used TF-ISF (an adaptation of TF-IDF) to 
perform sentence ranking and generate the 
summarization output. Our work is different 
from theirs in that we perform personalized 
summarization based on the retrieval result from 
a generic personalized web-based search engine. 
A more complicated sentence ranking functions 
is employed to boost the ranking performance. 
The compression ratio for the summary is 
customizable by a user. Both single-document 
for a single URL and multiple-document 
i Since the length of the summary is only 20% of the 
original documents, he maximum speedup in terms of 
reading time is 1/0.2=5. 
summarization for a cluster of URLs are 
supported inour system. 
More related work can be found in Extractor 
web site http'J/extractor.iit.nrc.ca/. They use 
MetaCrawler to perform web-based search and 
automatically generate summaries for each 
URLs retrieved. They only support single 
document summarization i  their engine and the 
compression rate of the summarizer is also non- 
customizable. We not only support both single 
and multiple document summarization, but also 
allow the user to specify the summarization 
compression ratio as well as to get per-cluster 
summaries of automatically generated clusters, 
which, we believe, are more valuable to online 
users and give them more flexibility and control 
of the surnrnarization results. 
8 Conclusion and Future Work  
We described in this paper a prototype system 
SNS, which integrates natural language 
processing and information retrieval techniques 
to perform automatic ustomized summarization 
of search engine results. The user interface and 
detailed design of SNS's components are also 
discussed. Task-based extrinsic evaluation 
showed that the system is of reasonably high 
quality. 
The following issues will be addressed in the 
future. 
8.1 Interaction between sentence inclusion 
in a summary 
There are two types of interaction (or 
reinforcement) between sentences in a summary: 
negative and positive. 
Negative interaction occurs when the inclusion 
of one sentence in the summary indicates that 
another sentence should not appear in the 
summary. This is particularly relevant o multi- 
document summarization as in this case: 
negative interaction models the non-inclusion of 
redundant information. 
The case of positive interaction i volves positive 
reinforcement between sentences. For example, 
if a sentence with a referring expression is to be 
108 
included in a stma~lary, typically the sentence 
containing the antecedent should also be added. 
We will investigate specific setups in which 
positive and/or negative reinforcement between 
sentences i  practical and useful. 
8.2 Personalization 
We will investigate additional techniques for 
producing personalized summaries. Some of the 
approaches that we are considering are: 
Query words: favoring sentences that 
include words from the user query in the 
Web-based scenario 
Personal preferences and interaction history: 
we would favor sentences that match the 
user profile (e.g., overlapping with his or her 
long-term interests and/or recent queries 
logged by the system). 
8.3 Technical limitations 
The current version of our system uses a fairly 
basic sentence delimiting component. We will 
investigate the user of robust sentence boundary 
identification modules in the future. 
We will also investigate the possibility of some 
limited-form anaphora resolution component. 
8.4 Availability 
A demonstration version of SNS is available at 
the following UP.L: 
http://www.si.umich.edu/-radev/ssearch/ 
Lawrence, S., and Giles, C. L. (1997). Searching the 
World Wide Web, Science, 280(3), 98-100. 
Lawrence, S., and Giles, C. L. (1999). Accessibility of 
information on the web, Nature, 400, 107-109. 
Mani, I. and BIoedorn, E. (1999). Summarizing 
similarities and di~rences among related 
documents. Information Retrieval 1(1): 35--67. 
Mani, I., House, D., Klein, G., Hirschman, L., Obrst, 
L., Firmin, T., Chrzanowski, M., and Sundheim, B. 
(1998). The TIPSTER SUMMA C Text 
Summarization Evaluation. The MITRE 
Corporation Technical Report MTR 98W0000138, 
McLean, Virginia. 
McKeown, K. and D. R. Radev. Generating Summaries 
of Multiple News Articles. Proceedings, ACM 
Conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval S1GIR'95 (Seattle, WA, July 
1995). 
NetSizer (2000). http~//www.netsizer.com/. 
Neto, J. L., Santos, A. D., Kaestner, C. A. A., and 
Freitas, A. A. (2000). Document clustering and text 
summarization. In Proceedings, 4th Int. Conference 
on Practical Applications of Knowledge Discovery 
and Data Mining (PADD-2000), 41-55. London: 
The Practical Application Company. 
Radev, D. R., Hatzivassiloglou, V., and McKeown, 
K. A Description of the CIDR System as Used for 
TDT-2. Proceedings, DARPA Broadcast News 
Workshop, (Herndon, VA, February 1999). 
Radev, D. R, Jing, H., and Stys-Budzikowska, M.
Summarization of multiple documents: clustering, 
sentence xtraction, and evaluation. Proceedings, 
ANLP-NAACL Workshop on Automatic 
Summarization, (Seattle, WA, April 2000) 
Salton, G. (1989). Automatic Text Processing. 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Reading, MA, 
1989. 
References 
Carbonell, J. and Goldstein, J. (1998). The use of 
MMR, Diversity-Based Reranking for Reordering 
Documents and Producing Summaries. Poster 
Session, SIGIR'98, Melbourne, Australia. 
Censorware (2000). 
http://www.censorware.org/web size/. 
Extractor (2000). http://extractor.iit.nrc.ca/. 
IDS . (2000). lnternet Domain Survey. 
http://www:isc.org/dsl. 
Jansen, B. J., Spink, A., and Saracevic, T. (2000). 
Real life. real users, and real needs: a study and 
analysis of user queries on the web. Information 
Processing and Management. 36(2), 207-227. 
109 
Proceedings of Human Language Technology Conference and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (HLT/EMNLP), pages 153?160, Vancouver, October 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Discretization Based Learning Approach to Information Retrieval 
Dmitri Roussinov Weiguo Fan 
Department of Information Systems 
W.P. Carey School of Business 
Department of Information Systems and 
Computer Science 
Arizona State University Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University 
Tempe, AZ, 85287 Blacksburg, VA 24061 
dmitri.roussinov@asu.edu wfan@vt.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
We approached the problem as learning 
how to order documents by estimated 
relevance with respect to a user query. Our 
support vector machines based classifier 
learns from the relevance judgments 
available with the standard test collections 
and generalizes to new, previously unseen 
queries.  For this, we have designed a 
representation scheme, which is based on 
the  discrete representation of the local (lw) 
and global (gw) weighting functions, thus 
is capable of reproducing and enhancing 
the properties of such popular ranking 
functions as tf.idf, BM25 or those based on 
language models. Our tests with the 
standard test collections have demonstrated 
the capability of our approach to achieve 
the performance of the best known scoring 
functions solely from the labeled examples 
and without taking advantage of knowing 
those functions or their important 
properties or parameters.    
1. Introduction 
Our work is motivated by the objective to bring 
closer numerous achievements in the domains of 
machine learning and classification to the classical 
task of ad-hoc information retrieval (IR), which is 
ordering documents by the estimated degree of 
relevance to a given query. Although used with 
striking success for text categorization, 
classification-based approaches (e.g. those based on 
support vector machines, Joachims, 2001 ) have been 
relatively abandoned when trying to improve ad hoc 
retrieval in favor of empirical (e.g. vector space, 
Salton & McGill, 1983) or generative (e.g. language 
models; Zhai & Lafferty 2001; Song & Croft; 1999), 
which produce a ranking function that gives each 
document a score, rather than trying to learn a 
classifier that would help to discriminate between 
relevant and irrelevant documents and order them 
accordingly. A generative model needs to make 
assumptions that the query and document words are 
sampled from the same underlying distributions and 
that the distributions have certain forms, which entail 
specific smoothing techniques (e.g. popular 
Dirichlet-prior). A discriminative (classifier-based) 
model, on the other side, does not need to make any 
assumptions about the forms of the underlying 
distributions or the criteria for the relevance but 
instead, learns to predict to which class a certain 
pattern (document) belongs to based on the labeled 
training examples. Thus, an important advantage of a 
discriminative approach for the information retrieval 
task, is its ability to explicitly utilize the relevance 
judgments existing with standard test collections in 
order to train the IR algorithms and possibly enhance 
retrieval accuracy for the new (unseen) queries. 
Cohen, Shapire and Singer (1999) noted the 
differences between ordering and classification and 
presented a two-stage model to learn ordering. The 
first stage learns a classifier for preference relations 
between objects using any suitable learning 
mechanism (e.g. support vector machines; Vapnik, 
1998). The second stage converts preference 
relations into a rank order. Although the conversion 
may be NP complete in a general case, they 
presented efficient approximations. We limited our 
first study reported here to linear classifiers, in which 
conversion can be performed by simple ordering 
according to the score of each document. However, 
approaching the problem as ?learning how to order 
things? allowed us to design our sampling and 
training mechanisms in a novel and, we believe, 
more powerful way. 
Our classifier learns how to compare every pair of 
documents with respect to a given query, based on 
the relevance indicating features that the documents 
may have. As it is commonly done in information 
retrieval, the features are derived from the word 
overlap between the query and documents.  
According to Nallapati (2004), the earliest 
formulation of the classic IR problem as a 
classification (discrimination) problem was 
suggested by Robertson and Sparck Jones (1976), 
however performed well only when the relevance 
judgments were available for the same query but not 
generalizing well to new queries. Fuhr and Buckley 
(1991) used polynomial regression to estimate the 
coefficients in a linear scoring function combining 
such well-known features as a weighted term 
frequency, document length and query length. They 
tested their ?description-oriented? approach on the 
standard small-scale collections (Cranfield, NPL, 
INSPEC, CISI, CACM) to achieve the relative 
change in the average precision ranging from -17% 
153
to + 33% depending on the collection tested and the 
implementation parameters. Gey (1994) applied 
logistic regression in a similar setting with the 
following results: Cranfield +12%, CACM +7.9%, 
CISI -4.4%, however he did not test them on new 
(unseen by the algorithm) queries, hypothesizing that 
splitting documents into training and testing 
collections would not be possible since ?a large 
number of queries is necessary in order to train for a 
decent logistic regression approach to document 
retrieval.? Instead, he applied a regression trained on 
Cranfield to CISI collection but with a negative 
effect. 
Recently, the approaches based on learning have 
reported several important breakthroughs. Fan et al 
(2004) applied genetic programming in order to learn 
how to combine various terms into the optimal 
ranking function that outperformed the popular 
Okapi formula on robust retrieval test collection. 
Nallapati (2004) made a strong argument in favor of 
discriminative models and trained an SVM-based 
classifier to combine 6 different components (terms) 
from the popular ranking functions (such as tf.idf 
and language models) to achieve better than the 
language model performance in 2 out of 16 test cases 
(figure 3 in Nallapati, 2004), not statistically 
distinguishable in 8 cases and only 80% of the best 
performance in 6 cases. There have been studies 
using past relevance judgements to optimize 
retrieval. For example, Joachims (2002) applied 
Support Vector Machines to learn linear ranking 
function from user click-throughs while interfacing 
with a search engine.   
In this study, we have developed a representation 
scheme, which is based on the discretization of the 
global (corpus statistics) and local (document 
statistics) weighting of term overlaps between 
queries and documents.  We have empirically shown 
that this representation is flexible enough to learn the 
properties of the popular ranking functions: tf.idf, 
BM25 and the language models.  The major 
difference of our work from Fan et al (2004) or 
Nallapati (2004) or works on fusion (e.g. Vogt & 
Cottrell, 1999) is that we did not try to combine 
several known ranking functions (or their separate 
terms) into one, but rather we learn the weighting 
functions directly through discretization.  
Discretization allows representing a continuous 
function by a set of values at certain points. These 
values are learned by a machine learning technique 
to optimize certain criteria, e.g. average precision.   
Another important motivation behind using 
discretization was to design a representation with 
high dimensionality of features in order to combine 
our representation scheme with Support Vector 
Machines (SVM) (Vapnik, 1998), which are known 
to work well with a large number of features. SVM 
contains a large class of neural nets, radial margin 
separation (RBF) nets, and polynomial classifiers as 
special cases. They have been delivering superior 
performance in classification tasks in general 
domains, e.g. in face recognition (Hearst, 1998), and 
in text categorization (Joachims, 2001). 
Another important distinction of this work from the 
prior research is that we train our classifier not to 
predict the absolute relevance of a document d with 
respect to a query q, but rather to predict which of 
the two documents d1, d2 is more relevant to the 
query q.  The motivation for this distinction was that 
all the popular evaluation metrics in information 
retrieval (e.g. average precision) are based on 
document ranking rather than classification 
accuracy. This affected our specially designed 
sampling procedure which we empirically 
discovered to be crucial for successful learning. 
We have also empirically established that our 
combination of the representation scheme, learning 
mechanism and sampling allows learning from the 
past relevance judgments in order to successfully 
generalize to the new (unseen) queries. When the 
representation was created without any knowledge of 
the top ranking functions and their parameters, our 
approach reached the known top performance solely 
through the learning process.  When our 
representation was taking advantage of functions that 
are known to perform well and their parameters, the 
resulting combination was able to slightly exceed the 
top performance on large test collections. The next 
section formalizes our Discretization Based Learning 
(DBL) approach to Information Retrieval, followed 
by empirical results and conclusions. 
2. Formalization Of Our Approach 
2.1 Query and Document Representation 
We limit our representation to the so called lw.gw 
class: ?
?
=
q t 
)()),,(( d)R(q, tGddttfL ,  
where L, local weighting, is the function of the 
number of occurrences of the term in the document 
tf, possibly combined with the other document 
statistics, e.g. word length. G(t), global weighting, 
can be any collection level statistic of the term. For 
example, in the classical tf.idf formula L(tf, d) = tf / 
|d|, where tf is the number of occurrences of the term 
t in the document, |d| is the length of the document 
vector and G(t) = log (N / df(t)), where df(t) is the 
total number of documents in the collection that have 
term t and N is the total number of documents.  
Without loss of generality it may also be extended to 
handle a number of occurrences of the term in the 
query, but we omit it here in our formalization for 
simplicity. Lw.gw class includes the BM25 Okapi 
ranking function which performs well on TREC 
collections (Robertson et al, 1996).  It can be shown 
that many of the recently introduced language 
models fall into that category as well, specifically the 
best performing in TREC ad hoc tests Dirichlet 
smoothing, Jelinek Mercer smoothing, and Absolute 
Discounting approaches can be represented that way 
(see equation 6 and table I in Zhai & Lafferty, 2001). 
An lw.gw representation of Jelinek Mercer 
smoothing was used in Nallapati (2004).  It has been 
known for a long time that the shapes of the global 
and local weighting functions can dramatically affect 
the precision in standard test collections because it in 
154
fact determines the difference between such formulas 
as tf.idf, bm25 and language models. However, we 
are not aware of any attempts to learn those shapes 
directly from the labeled examples, which we 
performed in this study.  
2.2 Intuition behind the discretization-based 
learning 
The intuition behind discretization approach is to 
represent a function by values at the finite number of 
points. Then, the optimal shape of the function can 
be learned by using one of the machine learning 
techniques. Our discretization based learning (DBL) 
approach to information retrieval learns how 
important each class of an occurrence of a query 
term in a document. For example, in some very 
?primitive? DBL approach, we can define two 
classes:  Class S (?strong?), containing all multiple 
occurrences of a rare query term (e.g. 
?discretization?) in a document and Class W 
(?weak?), containing all single occurrences of a 
frequent term (e.g. ?information?). Then, the 
machine learning technique should discover that the 
occurrences of Class S are much stronger indicators 
of relevance than the occurrences of Class W. In the 
DBL implementation presented in this paper, each 
occurrence of a query term is assigned to a class 
(called bin) based on the term document frequency 
in the collection (df) and the number of occurrences 
within the document (tf). The bin determines the 
weight of the contribution of each occurrence of the 
query term in the ranking score. Thus, the relevance 
score is just the weighted sum of the numbers of 
occurrences within each bin. The other way of 
looking at it is that the score is produced by a linear 
classifier, where the total number of occurrences 
within each bin serves as the feature value. By 
learning the optimal weights, a linear classifier 
effectively learns the optimal shapes of the global 
(gw) and local (lw) weighting functions.  By learning 
the discrimination properties of each bin, rather 
than separate word terms, DBL method allows 
generalization to new queries.  
2.3 Discretizing global weighting 
We discretized the shape of the G(t) function by 
assigning each term to its global weighting bin g, 
which is an integer number in the [1, |B|] range, |B| 
is the total number of global weighting bins. The 
assignment of the term t to its global weighting bin 
g(t) is performed on the log linear scale according to 
the document frequency df of the term:   
)}
log(N) 
 (df(t)) log - (1|B{|  g(t) =    (1) 
where N is the total number of documents, {.} stands 
for rounding down to the nearest integer. The 
logarithmic scale allows more even term distribution 
among bins than simple linear assignment, which is 
desirable for more efficient learning. It is motivated 
by a typical histogram of df(t) distribution, which 
looks much more uniform in a logarithmic scale. It is 
important to note that it does not have anything to do 
with the log function in the classical idf weighting 
and that the formula for g(t) does not produce any 
weights but only assigns each term occurrence to a 
specific bin based on the term document frequency. 
The weights are later trained and effectively define 
any shape of global weighting, including such simple 
functions tried in the prior heuristic explorations as 
logarithm, square root, reciprocal and others.  
2.4 Discretizing local weighting 
Similarly to the global weighting, we assigned each 
occurrence of a term to its local weighting bin l, but 
this time by simply capping tf at the total number of 
local weighting bins |L|: 
        l (tf(t, d), d) = min( tf (t, d), |L|) ) (1a) 
Let?s note that this particular representation does not 
really need rounding since tf is already a positive 
integer. However, in a more general case, tf can be 
normalized by document length (as is done in BM25 
and language models) and thus local weighting 
would become a continuous function. It is important 
to note that our discrete representation does not 
ignore the occurrences above |L| but simply treats 
them the same way as tf = |L|. The intuition behind 
capping is that increasing tf above certain value (|L|) 
would not typically indicate the higher relevance of 
the document. Typically, a certain number of 
occurrences is enough to indicate the presence of the 
relevant passage. Please note again that this bin 
assignment does not assign any heuristic weights to 
the term occurrences. 
2.5 Final discretized ranking function 
The bin assignments based on tf and df specified in 
sections 2.3 and 2.4 are straightforward and do not 
involve any significant ?feature engineering.?  Each 
occurrence of a query term in a document 
corresponds to a local/global bin combination (g, l). 
Each (g,l) combination determines a feature in a 
vector representing a document-query pair f(d, q) 
and is denoted below as f( d, q) [g , l] . The 
dimensionality of the feature space is  |L| x |B|.  E.g. 
for 8 local weighting bins and 10 global weighting 
bins we would deal with the vector size of 80. A 
feature vector f(d, q) represents each document d 
with respect to query q. The value of each feature in 
the vector is just the number of the term occurrences 
assigned to the pair of bins (g, l): 
f ( d, q) [g , l]  =  ?
==? ldtlgtg ),(,)( q,t 
1  (2) 
Since our features capture local (tf) and global (df) 
term occurrence information, in order to represent a 
ranking function, we can simply use the dot product 
between the feature vector and the vector of learned 
optimal weights w:  
R(q, d) = w * f ( d, q). 
Ideally, the learning mechanism should assign higher 
weights to the more important bin combinations (e.g. 
multiple occurrence of a rare term) and low weights 
to the less important combinations (e.g. single 
occurrence of a common term). The exact learned 
values determine the optimal shape of global and 
local weighting.   
155
We still can make the representation more powerful 
by considering the learned weights w[g, l] not the 
replacements but rather the adjustments to some 
other chosen global G (t) and local L (t, d) weighting 
functions: 
f ( d, q) [g , l] = ?
==? lddttflgtg
tGdtL
)),,((,)( q,t 
)(),(       (2a)  
We define the specific choice of global G() and local 
L() weighting functions as starting ranking function 
(SRF). When all the bin weights w[g, l] are set to 1, 
our ranking function is the same as its SRF. The 
learning process finds the optimal values for w[g, l]  
for the collection of training queries and their 
relevance judgments, thus adjusting the important 
shapes of the global and local weighting to achieve 
better accuracy. SRF can be chosen from one of the 
known to perform well ranking functions (e.g. tf.idf 
or BM25 or based on language models) to take 
advantage of the fact that those formulas and their 
optimal parameters on the standard test collections 
are known for the researchers. Alternatively, we can 
set SRF to the constant value (e.g. 1 in formula 2), 
thus not taking advantage of any of the prior 
empirical investigations and to see if our framework 
is able to learn reasonable (or even top-notch) 
performance purely from labeled examples. Below, 
we describe our experiments with each approach. 
Since the score is linear with respect to the feature 
values, we can train the weights w as a linear 
classifier that predicts the preference relation 
between pairs of documents with respect to the given 
query. Document d1 is more likely to be relevant 
(has a higher score) than document d2 iff  f(d1, q) * 
w > f(d1, q) * w. An important advantage of using a 
linear classifier is that rank ordering of documents 
according to the learned pairwise preferences can be 
simply performed by ordering according to the linear 
score.  Please refer to Cohen et al (1999) for the 
ordering algorithms in a more general non linear 
case. 
We chose support vector machines (SVM) for 
training the classifier weights w[g, l] since they are 
known to work well with large numbers of features, 
ranging in our experiments from 8 to 512, depending 
on the number of bins. For our empirical tests, we 
used the SVMLight package freely available for 
academic research from Joachims (2001).  We 
preserved the default parameters coming with 
version V6.01. Although SVMLight package allows 
learning ranking, we opted for training it as a 
classifier to retain more control over sampling, 
which we found crucial for successful learning, as 
described in the section below. 
2.6 Sampling 
Since we were training a classifier to predict 
preference relations, but not the absolute value of 
relevance, we trained on the differences between 
feature vectors. Thus, for each selected (sampled) 
pair of documents (dr, di ), such that dr is a relevant 
document and di is irrelevant, the classifier was 
presented with a positive example created from the 
vector of differences of features fp = f(q, dr) ?  f(q, 
di), and also with the negative example as the 
inverse of it:   fn= f(q, di) ? f(q, dr). This approach 
also balances positive and negative examples.  
We also informally experimented with training on 
absolute relevance judgments, similar to the prior 
work mentioned in the Introduction but obtained 
much worse results. We explain it by the fact that 
relative judgments (pairwise comparisons) are more 
generalizable to new queries than absolute 
judgments (relevant/irrelevant). This may explain 
prior difficulties with applying discriminative 
approaches mentioned in our Introduction. 
Since presenting all pairs to the training mechanism 
would be overwhelming, we performed pseudo-
random sampling of documents by the following 
intuitive consideration. Since it is more efficient to 
present the classifier with the pairs from the 
documents that are likely to more strongly affect the 
performance metric (average precision), we first pre-
ordered the retrieved documents by any of the 
reasonably well-performing scoring function (e.g. 
tf.idf) and limited the sample of documents to the top 
1000. Then, for each query, each known relevant 
document dr from that subset was selected and 
?paired? with a certain number of randomly selected 
irrelevant documents. This number was linearly 
decreasing with the position of the relevant 
document in the pre-order. Thus, the higher the 
document was positioned in the pre-order, the more 
times it was selected for pairing (training). This 
placed more emphasis at correctly classifying the 
more important document pairs in the average 
precision computation. Again, without the correct 
emphasis during sampling the obtained results were 
much weaker. However, the choice of the ranking 
function to perform pre-order was found to be not 
important: virtually the same results were obtained 
using tf.idf or bm25 or language models. 
3. Empirical Evaluation 
3.1 Empirical setup 
We used the TREC, Disks 1 and 2, collections to test 
our framework. We used topics 101-150 for training 
and 151-200 for testing and vice-versa. For indexing, 
we used the Lemur package (Kraaij et al, 2003), 
with the default set of parameters, and no stop word 
removal or stemming. Although those procedures are 
generally beneficial for accuracy, it is also known 
that they do not significantly interfere with testing 
various ranking functions and thus are omitted in 
many studies to allow easier replication. 
We used only topic titles for queries, as it is 
commonly done in experiments, e.g. in Nallapati 
(2004). We used the most popular average (non-
interpolated) precision as our performance metric, 
computed by the script included with the Lemur 
toolkit (later verified by trec_eval). The 
characteristics of the collection after indexing are 
shown in Table 1. We also reproduced results similar 
to the reported below on the Disk 3 collection and 
156
topics 101-150, but did not include them in this 
paper due to size limitations. 
 
Collection 
Number of documents 
Number of terms 
Number of unique terms 
Average doc. length 
Topics 
TREC Disks 1 and 2
741,863 
325,059,876 
697,610 
438 
101-200 
Table 1. The characteristics of the test collection: 
TREC Disks 1,2   
 
3.2 The baseline 
In this study, we were interested exclusively in the 
improvements due to learning, thus still staying 
within the ?bag of words? paradigm. Although many 
enhancements can be easily combined within our 
framework, we limited our search for the baseline 
performance to ?bag of words? techniques to avoid 
unfair comparison. We used the results reported in 
Nallapati (2004) as guidance and verified that the 
best performing language model on this test 
collection was the one based on the Dirichlet 
smoothing with ? = 1900. Our average precision was 
lower (0.205 vs. 0.256), most likely due to the 
different indexing parameters, stemming or using a 
different stopword list.  By experimenting with the 
other ranking functions and their parameters, we 
noticed that the implementation of BM25, available 
in Lemur, provided almost identical performance 
(0.204). Its ranking function is  
BM25 (tf, df) =  tf / (tf + K* (1 ? b + b * |d| / |d|a) * 
log ( N /  (df + .5)), where |d| is the document word 
length and |d|a is its average across all documents. 
The optimal parameter values were close to the 
default K = 1.0 and b = .5. We noticed that the query 
term frequency components could be ignored 
without any noticeable loss of precision. This may be 
because the TREC topic titles are short and the 
words are very rarely repeated in the queries. Since 
the difference between this ranking function and the 
optimal from the available language models was 
negligible we selected the former as both our 
baseline and also as the starting ranking function 
(SRF) in our experiments. For simplicity, we call it 
simply BM25 throughout our paper. 
3.3 Discretization accuracy 
Before testing the learning mechanism, we verified 
that the loss due to discretization is minimal and thus 
the approach is capable of capturing global and local 
weighting. For this, we discretized our baseline 
BM25 formula replacing each score contribution of 
the occurrence of a term G(t)L(t,d) = BM25(t, d) 
with its average across all other occurrences within 
the same bin combination [g, l], which is determined 
by the formulas 1 and 1a. We discovered that for the 
|B| x |L| = 8 x 8 configuration, the loss in average 
precision did not exceed 2% (relatively). This 
demonstrates that the G(t)L(t,d) ranking functions 
can be discretized (replaced by values at certain 
points) at this level of granularity without losing 
much accuracy. We also verified that the weights 
w[g, l] can affect the performance significantly: 
when we set them to random numbers in the [0,1] 
range, the performance dropped by 50% relatively to 
the baseline. 
3.4 Ability to achieve top performance from 
scratch 
First, we were curious to see if our framework can 
learn reasonable performance without taking 
advantage of our knowledge of the top ranking 
functions and their parameters. For this, we set our 
starting ranking function (SRF) to a constant value, 
thus using only the minimum out of the empirical 
knowledge and theoretical models developed by 
information retrieval researchers during several 
decades: specifically only the fact that relevance can 
be predicted by tf and df 
Table 2 shows performance for the 16 x 8 
combination of bins. It can be  seen that our 
approach has reached 90-100% of the top 
performance (baseline) solely through the learning 
process. The original performance is the one 
obtained by assigning all the classifier weights to 1. 
It can be seen that the topics 151-200 are more 
amenable for the technique that is why they show 
better recovery when used as a test set even when the 
training set 101-150 recovers only 90%. In order to 
evaluate if more training data can help, we also ran 
tests using 90 topics for training and the remaining 
10 for testing. We ran 10 tests each time using 10 
different sequential topics for testing and averaged 
our results. In this case, the averaged performance 
was completely restored to the baseline level with 
the mean difference in precision across test queries 
+0.5% and 1% standard deviation of the mean.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Learning local weighting for various 
                          
Testing: 
 
101-150 
 
151-200 
Training: Original Learned Baseline Original Learned Baseline 
101-150 .119  .165 .174 .135 .180 .204 
151-200 .119 .175 .174 .135 .206 .204 
Table 2. Learning without any knowledge of ranking functions. 16 x 8 bin design.       
157
numbers of bins. Learning on 101-150 and testing on 
151-200.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Learning global weighting for various 
numbers of bins. Learning on 101-150 and testing on 
151-200.   
We believe this is a remarkable result considering 
the difficulties that the prior learning based 
approaches had with the classical information 
retrieval task. We attribute our success to both 
higher flexibility and generalizability of our discrete 
representation. We also varied the number of bins to 
evaluate the effect of granularity of representation. 
Figures 1 and 2 demonstrate that 8 bins suffice for 
both global and local weighting. Higher numbers did 
not result in noticeable improvements. 
When the same set was used for training and testing 
the result obviously overestimates the learning 
capability of the framework. However, it also gives 
the upper bound of performance of a discretized 
gw.lw combination assuming that the loss due to 
discretization is negligible which can be easily 
attained by using sufficiently large number of bins. 
Thus, the results indicate that gw.lw, which includes 
practically all the popular ?bag of words? ranking 
formulas such as tf.idf, BM25 or language models, 
has almost reached its upper limit and other classes 
of representations and ranking formulas need to be 
explored to attempt greater improvements. 
Figure 2. Learning global weighting for various 
numbers of bins. Learning on 101-150 and testing on 
151-200. 
3.5 Ability to surpass top performance 
In order to test whether our approach can exceed the 
baseline performance we set BM25 to be our starting 
ranking function (SRF). Thus, in this case: 
G(t) = log ( N /  (df + .5))  (6) 
L(tf, d) = tf / (tf + K  * (1 ? b + b * |d| / |d|a)  
Table 3 shows performance for the 8 by 8 bin design. 
Although the improvement is relatively small (2-3%) 
it is still statistically significant at the level of alpha 
< 0.1, when the paired t-test was performed. The 
value in ?% change? column shows the mean % 
improvement across all the queries and its standard 
deviation. It may differ from the % change of the 
mean performance since there is wide variability in 
the performance across queries but smaller 
variability in the improvement.  
We believe even such a small improvement is 
remarkable considering the amount of attention the 
researches have paid to optimizing the ranking 
functions for this specific data set which has been 
available for more than seven years. A number of 
recent studies reported comparable improvements on 
the same test collection by using more elaborate 
modeling or richer representations.  Of course the 
improvement due to the techniques such as those 
based on n-grams, document structures, natural 
language processing or query expansion can possibly 
achieve even better results. However in this study we 
deliberately limited our focus to the ?bags of words.?  
3.6 Shape of optimal local weighting 
Figure 3 shows the optimal shape of the local 
weighting function L(tf) learned on entire set of 100 
topics and plotted against their counterparts of 
BM25(t, d) = tf / (tf + 1) and tf.idf(t, d) = tf for 
comparison.  For plotting purposes, we assumed that 
the document length was equal to its average. The 
values were linearly scaled to meet at the  tf = 8 
point. It is easy to observe that the behavior of the 
optimal function is much closer to BM25 than to 
tf.idf, which explains the good performance of the 
former on this test set. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Learned optimal shape of local weighting. 
 
3.7 Shape of optimal global weighting 
Figure 4 shows the optimal shape of the global 
weighting function G(t) learned on the entire set of 
100 topics with |B| = 32 plotted in logarithmic scale 
against the popular idf weighting used in both tf.idf 
and BM25. The lower end of the X-axis (log10 df < 
2) corresponds to very infrequent terms, so the 
learned weights may not be very informative since 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
tf
G
w
(tf
)
TF-IDFDBL (Learned)
BM25
 
                      
Testing: 
101-150 151-200 
Training: Learned Baseline % change Learned Baseline  
101-150 .180 .174 +2.3 (+/- 0.9) .208 .204 +2.3 (+/- 1.0) 
151-200 .179 .174 +1.8 (+/- 1.0) .210 .204 +3.2 (+/- 1.3) 
Table 3. Surpassing the baseline performance. 8 x 8 bin design. 
158
the classifier encounters fewer occurrences of them 
and their impact on the overall accuracy is small. In 
the mid range (5,000 ? 10,000), the optimal weights 
are higher than idf, which indicates that the latter has 
an overly steep shape to discount high frequency 
terms. A more detailed interpretation of the optimal 
shape may require further investigation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Learned optimal shape of global weighting 
G(t). 
 
4. Conclusions 
We explored learning how to rank documents with 
respect to a given query using linear Support Vector 
Machines and discretization-based representation. 
Our approach represents a family of discriminative 
approaches, currently studied much less than 
heuristic (tf.idf, bm25) or generative approaches 
(language models). Our experiments indicate that 
learning from relevant judgments available with the 
standard test collections and generalizing to new 
queries is not only feasible but can be a source of 
improvement. When tested with a popular standard 
collection, our approach achieved the performance of 
the best well-known techniques (BM25 and language 
models), which have been developed as a result of 
extensive past experiments and elaborate theoretical 
modeling. When combined with the best performing 
ranking functions, our approach added a small (2-
3%), but statistically significant, improvement. 
Although practical significance of this study may be 
limited at the moment since it does not demonstrate a 
dramatic increase in retrieval performance in large 
test collections, we believe our findings have 
important theoretical contributions since they 
indicate that the power of discriminative approach is 
comparable to the best known analytical or heuristic 
apporaches. This work also lays the foundation for 
extending the discriminative approach to ?richer? 
representations, such as those using word n-grams, 
grammatical relations between words, and the 
structure of documents. 
Our results also indicate that gw.lw family, which 
includes practically all the popular ?bag of words? 
ranking formulas such as tf.idf, BM25 or language 
models, has almost reached its upper limit and other 
classes of representations and ranking formulas need 
to be explored in order to accomplish significant 
performance break-troughs. 
Of course, using only few test cases (topics sets and 
collections) is a limitation of this current study, 
which we are going to address in our future research. 
We view our approach as a complement, rather than 
competitive, to the analytical approaches such as 
language models. Our approach can be also used as 
an explorative tool in order to identify important 
relevance-indicating features, which can be later 
modeled analytically. We believe that our work and 
the ones referred in this paper may bring many of the 
achievements made in a more general area of 
classification and machine learning closer to the task 
of rank ordered information retrieval, thus making 
retrieval engines more helpful in reducing the 
information overload and meeting people?s needs. 
5. Acknowledgement 
Weiguo Fan's work is supported by NSF under the 
grant number ITR0325579. 
 
References 
Bartell, B., Cottrell, G., and Belew, R.(1994). 
Optimizing Parameters in a Ranked Retrieval 
System Using Multi-Query Relevance 
Feedback. Symposium on Document Analysis 
and Information Retrieval (SDAIR). 
Chengxiang Zhai and John Lafferty (2001). A 
study of smoothing methods for language 
models applied to Ad Hoc information retrieval. 
Proceedings of the Conference on Research and 
Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR), 
pp. 334 ? 342, 2001. 
Cohen, W., Shapire, R., and Singer, Y. (1999). 
Learning to order things. Journal of Artificial 
Intelligence Research, 10, 243-270, 1999.  
Dougherty, J., Kohavi, R., & Sahami, M. (1995). 
Supervised and unsupervised discretization of 
continuous features. Proceedings of the Twelfth 
International Conference on Machine Learning 
(pp. 194--202). Tahoe City, CA: Morgan 
Kaufmann. 
Fan, W., Luo, M., Wang, L., Xi, W., and Fox, A. 
(2004). Tuning Before Feedback: Combining 
Ranking Discovery and Blind Feedback for 
Robust Retrieval. Proceedings of the 
Conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval (SIGIR), 2004. 
Fuhr, N. and C. Buckley (1991). A probabilistic 
learning approach for document indexing. ACM 
Transactions on Information Systems, 9, 223?
248. 
Fuhr, N. and C. Buckley (1991). A probabilistic 
learning approach for document indexing. ACM 
Transactions on Information Systems, 9, 223?
248. 
Gey, F. C. (1994). Inferring probability of 
relevance using the method of logistic 
regression. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
log10 (df)
G
w
(t)
IDF
Learned
159
Conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval (SIGIR?94), pp. 222?231.  
Hearst, M.  (1998). Support Vector Machines. 
IEEE Intelligent Systems Magazine, Trends and 
Controversies, Marti Hearst, ed., 13(4), 
July/August 1998.  
Hun-Nan Hsu, Hung-Ju Huang and Tzu-Tsung 
Wong (2000). Why Discretization Works for 
Naive Bayesian Classifiers, In Proceedings of 
the 17th International Conference on Machine 
Learning (ICML-2000), Stanford, CA, USA. 
Page 399-406.  
Joachims, T. (2001).  A Statistical Learning Model 
of Text Classification with Support Vector 
Machines. Proceedings of the Conference on 
Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval (SIGIR), 2001. 
Joachims, T. (2002).  Optimizing Search Engines 
Using Clickthrough Data, Proceedings of the 
ACM Conference on Knowledge Discovery and 
Data Mining (KDD), ACM, 2002. 
Kraaij, W., Westerveld T. and Hiemstra, D. 
(2003)., The Lemur Toolkit for Language 
Modeling and Information Retrieval, 
http://www-2.cs.cmu.edu/~lemur 
Nallapati, R. (2004). Discriminative models for 
information retrieval. Proceedings of the 
Conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval (SIGIR), 2004, pp. 64-71. 
Robertson S. E. and Sparck Jones, K. (1976). 
Relevance weighting of search terms, Journal of 
American Society for Information Sciences, 
27(3), pp. 129-146, 1976. 
Robertson, S. E., Walker, S., Jones S., Hancock-
Beaulieu M.M., and Gatford, M. (1996)., Okapi 
at TREC-4, in D. K. Harman, editor, 
Proceedings of the Fourth Text Retrieval 
Conference, pp. 73?97. NIST Special 
Publication 500-236, 1996. 
Salton, G. and McGill, M.J. (1983). Introduction to 
Modern Information Retrieval. New York. 
McGraw-Hill. 
Song, F.  and W.B. Croft. (1999) A general 
language model for information retrieval. In 
Proceedings of Eighth International Conference 
on Information and Knowledge Management 
(CIKM?99). 
Vapnik, V. N. (1998).. Statistical Learning Theory. 
John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York, 1998. 
Vogt, C.,  G. Cottrell, G. (1999). Fusion Via a 
Linear Combination of Scores. Information 
Retrieval, 1(3), pp. 151?173. 
 
160
Proceedings of Human Language Technology Conference and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (HLT/EMNLP), pages 499?506, Vancouver, October 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Mining Context Specific Similarity Relationships Using The World Wide 
Web 
Dmitri Roussinov Leon J. Zhao Weiguo Fan 
Department of Information Systems 
W.P. Carey School of Business 
Department of Management 
Information Systems 
Department of Information 
Systems 
Arizona State University University of Arizona Virginia Tech 
Tempe, AZ, 85287 Tucson, AZ 85721 Blacksburg, VA 24061 
dmitri.roussinov@asu.edu lzhao@bpa.arizona.edu wfan@vt.edu 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
We have studied how context specific web 
corpus can be automatically created and 
mined for discovering semantic similarity 
relationships between terms (words or 
phrases) from a given collection of 
documents (target collection). These 
relationships between terms can be used to 
adjust the standard vectors space 
representation so as to improve the 
accuracy of similarity computation between 
text documents in the target collection. Our 
experiments with a standard test collection 
(Reuters) have revealed the reduction of 
similarity errors by up to 50%, twice as 
much as the improvement by using other 
known techniques.  
1 Introduction 
Many modern information management tasks such as 
document retrieval, clustering, filtering and 
summarization rely on algorithms that compute 
similarity between text documents. For example, 
clustering algorithms, by definition, place documents 
similar to each other into the same cluster. Topic 
detection algorithms attempt to detect documents or 
passages similar to those already presented to the 
users. ?Query by example? retrieval is based on 
similarity between a document selected as example 
and the other ones in the collection. Even a classical 
retrieval task can be formulated as rank ordering 
according to the similarity between the document 
(typically very short) representing user?s query and 
all the documents in the collection. 
For similarity computation, text documents are 
represented by terms (words or phrases) that they 
have, and encoded by vectors according to a 
predominantly used vector space model (Salton & 
McGill, 1983). Each coordinate corresponds to a 
term (word or phrase) possibly present within a 
document. Within that model, a high similarity 
between a pair of documents can be only indicated 
by sharing same terms. This approach has apparent 
limitations due to the notorious vocabulary problem 
(Furnas et al, 1997): people very often use different 
words to describe semantically similar objects. For 
example, within a classical vector space model, the 
similarity algorithm would treat words car and 
automobile as entirely different, ignoring semantic 
similarity relationship between them. 
It has been known for a long time that semantic 
similarity relationships between terms can be 
discovered by their co-occurrence in the same 
documents or in the vicinity of each other within 
documents (von Rijsbergen, 1977).  Until the 1990s, 
the studies exploring co-occurrence information for 
building a thesaurus and using it in automated query 
expansion (adding similar words to the user query) 
resulted in mixed results (Minker et al, 1972; Peat & 
Willett, 1991). The earlier difficulties may have 
resulted from the following reasons: 
1) The test collections were small, sometimes only 
few dozens of documents. Thus, there was only a 
small amount of data available for statistical co-
occurrence analysis (mining), not enough to establish 
reliable associations. 
2) The evaluation experiments were based on 
retrieval tasks,  short, manually composed queries. 
The queries were at times ambiguous and, as a result, 
wrong terms were frequently added to the query. E.g. 
initial query ?jaguar? may be expanded with the 
words ?auto?, ?power?, ?engine? since they co-occur 
with ?jaguar? in auto related documents. But, if the 
user was actually referring to an animal then the 
retrieval accuracy would degrade after the expansion.  
3) The expansion models were overly simplistic, e.g. 
by merely adding more keywords to Boolean queries 
(e.g. ?jaguar OR auto OR power OR car?). 
Although more recent works removed some of the 
limitations and produced more encouraging results 
(Grefenstette, 1994; Church et al, 1991; Hearst et 
al., 1992;  Schutze and Pedersen, 1997; Voorhees, 
1994) there are still a number of questions that 
remain open: 
1) What is the range for the magnitude of the 
improvement. Can the effect be of practical 
importance?  
2) What are the best mining algorithms and 
formulas? How crucial is the right choice of them? 
3) What is the best way to select a corpus for 
mining? Specifically, is it enough to mine only 
within the same collection that is involved in 
retrieval, clustering or other processing (target 
collection), or constructing and mining a larger 
499
external corpus (like a subset of World Wide Web) 
would be of much greater help? 
4) Even if the techniques studied earlier are effective 
(or not) for query expansion within the document 
retrieval paradigm, are they also effective for a more 
general task of document similarity computation? 
Similarity computation stays behind almost all 
information retrieval tasks including text document 
retrieval, summarization, clustering, categorization, 
query by example etc. Since documents are typically 
longer than user composed queries, their vector 
space representations are much richer and thus 
expanding them may be more reliable due to implicit 
disambiguation. 
Answering these questions constitutes the novelty of 
our work. We have developed a Context Specific 
Similarity Expansion (CSSE) technique based on 
word co-occurrence analysis within pages 
automatically harvested from the WWW (Web 
corpus) and performed extensive testing with a well 
known Reuters collection (Lewis, 1997). To test the 
similarity computation accuracy, we designed a 
simple combinatorial metric which reflects how 
accurately (as compared to human judgments) the 
algorithm, given a document in the collection, orders 
all the other documents in the collection by the 
perceived (computed) similarity. We believe that 
using this metric is more objective and reliable than 
trying to include all the traditional metrics specific to 
each application (e.g. recall/precision for document 
retrieval, type I/II errors for categorization, 
clustering accuracy etc.) since the latter may depend 
on the other algorithmic and implementation details 
in the system. For example, most clustering 
algorithms rely on the notion of similarity between 
text documents, but each algorithm (k-means, 
minimum variance, single link, etc.) follows its own 
strategy to maximize similarity within a cluster. 
We have found out that our CSSE technique have 
reduced similarity errors by up to 50%, twice as 
much as the improvement due to using other known 
techniques such as Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) 
and Pseudo Relevance Feedback (PRF) within the 
same experimental framework. In addition to this 
dramatic improvement, we have established the 
importance of the following for the success of the 
expansion: 1) using external corpus (a constructed 
subset of WWW) in addition to the target collection 
2) taking the context of the target collection into 
consideration 3) using the appropriate mining 
formulas. We suggest that these three crucial 
components within our technique make it 
significantly distinct from those explored early and 
also explain more encouraging results.  
The paper is structured as follows.  Section 2 
discusses previous research  results that are closely 
related to our investigation.  Section 3 presents  
algorithms implemented in our experiments. Section 
4 describes our  experiments including error 
reduction, sensitivity analysis, and  comparison with 
other techniques.  Finally, Section 5 concludes the 
paper by explaining our key contributions and 
outlining our future research. 
2 Related Work 
Most of the prior works performed only mining 
within the target collection itself and revealed results 
ranging from small improvements to negative effects 
(degrading performance). Throughout our paper, we 
refer to them as self -mining to distinguish from 
mining external corpus, which we believe is more 
promising for similarity computation between 
documents due to the following intuitive 
consideration. Within self-mining paradigm, terms t1 
and t2 have to frequently co-occur in the collection 
in order to be detected as associated (synonymic). In 
that case, expanding document D representation with 
a term t2 when the document already has term t1 is 
not statistically likely to enrich its representation 
since t2 is likely to be in document D anyway. We 
believe mining external larger and contextually 
related corpus has the potential to discover more 
interesting associations with much higher reliability 
than just from the target collection. That is why, this 
paper focuses on constructing and mining the 
external corpus.  
There are very few studies that used external corpus 
and standard evaluation collections. Grefenstette 
(1994) automatically built a thesaurus and applied it 
for query expansion, producing better results than 
using the original queries. Gauch et al (1998) used 
one standard collection for mining (TREC4) and 
another (TREC5) for testing and achieved 7.6% 
improvement. They also achieved 28.5% 
improvement on the narrow-domain Cystic Fibrosis 
collection. Kwok (1998) also reported similar results 
with TREC non Web collections.  Ballesteros and 
Croft (1998) used unlinked corpora to reduce the 
ambiguity associated with phrasal and term 
translation in Cross-Language Retrieval. 
There are even fewer studies involving semantic 
mining on the Web and its methodological 
evaluation. G?ry and Haddad G?ry (1999) used 
about 60,000 documents from one specific domain 
for mining similarity among French terms and tested 
the results using 4 ad hoc queries. Sugiura and 
Etzioni (2000) developed a tool called Q-Pilot that 
mined the web pages retrieved by commercial search 
engines and expanded the user query by adding 
similar terms. They reported preliminary yet 
encouraging results but tested only the overall 
system, which includes the other, not directly related 
to mining features, such as clustering, pseudo-
relevance feedback, and selecting the appropriate 
external search engine. Furthermore, they only used 
the correctness of the engine selection as the 
evaluation metric . There are some other well known 
techniques that do not perform mining for a 
thesaurus explicitly but still capture and utilize 
semantic similarity between the terms in an implicit 
way, namely Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) and 
Pseudo Relevance Feedback (PRF). Latent Semantic 
Indexing (Analysis) (Deerwester et al, 1998) a 
technique based on Singular Value Decomposition, 
was studied in a number of works . It reduces the 
number of dimensions in the document space thus 
reducing the noise (linguistic variations) and 
bringing semantically similar terms together, thus it 
500
takes into consideration the correlation between the 
terms. The reported improvements so far however 
have not exceeded 10-15% in standard collections) 
and sensitive to the choice of the semantic axis 
(reduced dimensions). The general idea behind the 
Pseudo Relevance Feedback (PRF) (Croft & 
Harper, 1979) or its more recent variation called 
Local Context Analysis (Xu & Croft, 2000) is to 
assume that the top rank retrieved documents are 
relevant and use certain terms from them for the 
query expansion. A simple approach has been found 
to increase performance over 23% on the TREC3 
and TREC4 collections and became internal part of 
modern IR systems. Although this idea has been only 
applied so far to users? queries, we extended it in this 
study to similarity computation between documents 
in order to compare with our approach. Although we 
believe this extension is novel, it is not the focus of 
this study. It is also worth mentioning that both LSI 
and PRF fall into ?self-mining? category since they 
do not require external corpus.  
A manually built and maintained ontology (a 
thesaurus), such as WorldNet, may serve as a source 
of similarity between terms and has been shown to 
be useful for retrieval tasks (Voorhees, 1994). 
However, one major drawback of manual approach 
is high cost of creating and maintaining. Besides, the 
similarity between terms is context specific. For 
example, for a campus computer support center the 
words student, faculty, user are almost synonyms, 
but for designers of educational software (e.g. 
Blackboard), the words student and faculty would 
represent entirely different roles. 
Although the terms ?mining?, ?web mining? and 
?knowledge discovery? have been used by other 
researchers in various contexts (Cooley, 1997), we 
believe it is legitimate to use them to describe our 
work for two major reasons: 1) We use algorithms 
and formulas coming from the data mining field, 
specifically signal to noise ratio association metric  
(Church, 1989; Church, 1991) 2) Our approach 
interacts with commercial search engines and 
harvests web pages contextually close to the target 
collection, and there is mining of resources (the 
search engine database) and discovery of content 
(web pages) involved. We admit that the term 
?mining? may be also used for a more sophisticated 
or different kind of processing than our approach 
here. 
3 Algorithms And Implementations  
The target collection (Reuters in our experiment) is 
indexed and its most representative terms are used to 
construct a corpus from an external source (e. g. 
World Wide Web). The term-to-term similarity 
matrix is created by co-occurrence analysis within 
the corpus and subsequently used to expand 
document vectors in order to improve the accuracy 
(correctness) of similarity computation between the 
documents in the target collection. Although in this 
work we do not study the effects on the individual 
applications of the similarity computation, it is 
crucial for such tasks as retrieval, clustering, 
categorization or topic detection. 
3.1 Building a Web Corpus  
We designed and implemented a heuristic algorithm 
that takes advantage of the capabilities provided by 
commercial web search engines. In our study, we 
used AltaVista (www.altavista.com), but most other 
search engines would also qualify for the task. 
Ideally, we would like to obtain web pages that 
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4
Average vector change
Er
ro
r R
ed
uc
tio
n 
(%
)
Thresh = .2 
Thresh = .3 
Thresh = .1 
Thresh = .4 
Thresh = .5 Thresh = .6  
Figure 1. The average error reduction (%) as a function of average document vector change Ca for various 
threshold parameters Thresh. 
501
contain the terms from the target collection in the 
similar context.  While constructing Web corpus, our 
spider automatically sends a set of queries to 
AltaVista and obtains the resulting URLs. The spider 
creates one query for each term ti out of 1000 most 
frequent terms in the target collection (stop words 
excluded) according to the following formula: 
qi = ?+? + ti + ? ? + context_hint 
, where + means string concatenation, quotes are 
used to represent text strings literally and 
context_hint is composed of the top most frequent 
terms in the target collection (stop words excluded) 
separated by empty space. Although this way of 
defining context may seem a bit simplistic , it still 
worked surprisingly well for our purpose.  
According to AltaVista, a word or phrase preceded 
by '+' sign has to be present in the search results. The 
presence of the other words and phrases (context hint 
string in our case) is only desirable but not required. 
The total number of the context hint terms (108 in 
this study) is limited by the maximum length of the 
query string that the search engine can accept.  
We chose to use only top 1000 terms for constructing 
corpus to keep the downloading time manageable. 
We believe using a larger corpus would demonstrate 
even larger improvement. Approximately 10% of 
those terms were phrases. We only used the top 200 
hits from each query and only first 20Kbytes of 
HTML source from each page to convert it into plain 
text. After removing duplicate URLs and empty 
pages, we had 19,198 pages in the Web corpus to 
mine.
Downloading took approximately 6 hours and was 
performed in parallel, spawning up to 20 java 
processes at a time, but it still remained the largest 
scalability bottleneck. 
3.2 Semantic Similarity Discovery 
CSSE performs co-occurrence analysis at the 
document level and computes the following values: 
df(t1, t2) is the joint document frequency, i.e., the 
number of web pages where both terms t1 and t2  
occur. df(t) is the document frequency of the term t, 
i.e., the number of web pages in which the term t 
occurs. Then, CSSE applies a well known signal to 
noise ratio formula coming from data mining 
(Church, 1991) to establish similarity between terms 
t1 and t2: 
sim(t1, t2)=
)2()1(
)2,1(log
tdftdf
ttdfN
?
?
/ Nlog ,         (1)  
 
where N is the total number of documents in the 
mining collection (corpus),  
log N is the normalizing factor, so the sim value 
would not exceed 1 and be comparable across 
collections of different size. 
Based on the suggestions from the other studies 
using formula (1), before running our tests, we 
decided to discard as spurious all the co-occurrences 
that happened only within one or two pages and all 
the similarities that are less than the specified 
threshold (Thresh).  
3.3 Vector Expansion 
Since we were modifying document vectors (more 
general case), but not queries as in the majority of 
prior studies, we refer to the process as vector 
expansion. As we wrote in literature review, there 
are many possible heuristic ways to perform vector 
expansion. After preliminary tests, we settled on the 
simple linear modification with post re-normalization 
as presented below. The context of the target 
collection is represented by the similarity matrix 
sim(t1, t2) mined as described in the preceding 
section. Our vector expansion algorithm adds all the 
related terms to the vector representation of the 
document D with the weights proportional to the 
degree of the relationships and the global inverse 
document frequency (IDF) weighting of the added 
terms: 
w(t, D)? = w(t, D) + 
?
? dt tdf
NttsimDtwa
1 )(
log),'(),'( , where 
- 8 0
- 6 0
- 4 0
- 2 0
0
2 0
0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5
A v e r a g e  v e c t o r  c h a n g e
Er
ro
r R
ed
uc
tio
n 
(%
)
Thresh = .6 
Thresh = .4 
Thresh = .3 
Thresh = .5 
Thresh = .2 
Thresh = .1 
Figure 2. The average error reduction (%) as a function of average document vector change Ca for various 
threshold parameters Tresh without ?context hint? terms. 
502
w(t, D) is the initial, not expanded, weight of the 
term t in the document D (assigned according to TF-
IDF weighting scheme in our case); w?(t, D) is the 
modified weight of the term t in the document D; t? 
iterates through all (possibly repeating) terms in the 
document D ; a is the adjustment factor (a parameter 
controlled in the expansion process). 
4 Experiments 
4.1 Similarity Error Reduction 
Since in this study we were primarily concerned with 
improving similarity computation but not retrieval 
per se, we chose a widely used for text categorization 
Reuters collection (Lewis, 1997) over TREC or 
similar collections with relevance judgments. We 
used a modified version of Lewis? (1992) suggestion 
to derive our evaluation metric, which is similar to 
the metric derived from Kruskal-Goodman statistics 
used in Haveliwala et al (2002) for a study with 
Yahoo web directory (www.yahoo.com). Intuitively, 
the metric reflects the probability of algorithm 
guessing the correct order (called ground truth), 
imposed by a manually created hierarchy (simplified 
to a partition in Reuters case). Ideally, for each 
document D, the similarity computation algorithm 
should indicate documents sharing one or more 
Reuters categories with document D to be more 
similar to the document D than the documents not 
sharing any categories with D. We formalized this 
intuitive requirement into a metric by the following 
way. Let?s define a test set Sa to be the set of all the 
document triples (D, D1, D2) such that D?D1, 
D?D2, D1?D2, and furthermore D shares at least one 
common category with D1 but no common 
categories with D2. We defined total error count 
(Ec) as the number of triples in the test set Sa such 
that sim(D, D1) < sim(D, D2) since it should be the 
other way around. Our accuracy metric reported 
below is the total error count normalized by the size 
of the test set Sa: similarity error = Ec / #Sa, 
computed for each Reuters topics and averaged 
across all of them. The metric ranges from 0 (ideal 
case) to .5 (random ordering). It also needed an 
adjustment to provide the necessary continuity as 
justified in the following. Since the documents are 
represented by very sparse vectors, very often (about 
5% of all triples) documents D, D1, D2 do not have 
any terms in common and as a result similarity 
computation results in a tie: sim(D,D1) = sim (D, 
D2). A tie can not be considered an error because in 
that case one can suggest a trivial improvement to 
the similarity algorithm by simply breaking the ties 
at random in any direction with an equal chance, and 
thus reducing errors in 50% of all ties. This is why 
the metric counts half of all the ties as errors, which 
completely removes this discontinuity.  
We used all the Reuters 78 topics from the 
?commodity code? group since they are the most 
?semantic ?, not trying the others (Economic 
Indicator Codes, Currency Codes, Corporate Codes). 
We discarded the topics that had only 1 document 
and used only the documents that had at least one of 
the topics. This reduced our test collection to 1841 
documents, still statistically powerful and 
computationally demanding since millions of triples 
had to be considered (even after some 
straightforward algorithmic optimizations). After 
indexing and stemming (Porter, 1980) the total 
number of unique stems used for the vector 
representation was 11461. 
Weighting 
Scheme 
boolean 
vectors 
TF only  IDF only  TF-
IDF 
Similarity Error 0.1750 0.1609 0.1278 0.1041 
Table 2. Comparison of different weighting schemes 
with the original (not expanded) documents. 
Table 2 lists the similarity error averaged by topics 
for the different weighting schemes we tried first in 
our experiment.  Since TF-IDF weighting was by far 
the best in this evaluation set up, we limited our 
expansion experiments to TF-IDF scheme only. For 
similarity measure between document vectors, we 
used the most common negative Euclidian distance 
after normalizing the vectors to unit length. It can be 
shown, that cosine metric (dot product), the other 
popular metric, results in the same order and, thus 
same similarity error as well. Without normalization 
or stemming the errors were almost twice as much 
larger. 
Although we varied the adjustment parameter a in 
our experiment, for better interpretation, we plotted 
our primary metric (average error reduction) as a 
function of Ca, the average Euclidian distance 
between the original and the modified document 
vectors when both vectors are normalized to unit 
length. Ca serves as a convenient parameter 
controlling the degree of change in the document 
vectors, better than a, because same values of a may 
result in different changes depending on the term-to-
term similarity matrix sim(t1, t2). In theory, Ca 
varies from 0 (no change) to 2 , the case of 
maximum possible change (no common terms 
between initial and expanded representation). By 
varying adjustment factor a from 0 to 10 and higher 
we observed almost the entire theoretical range of 
Ca: starting from negligible change and going all the 
way to 2 , where the added terms entirely 
dominated the original ones. The average number of 
terms in the document representation was in 60-70 
range before expansion and in 200-300 range after 
the expansion. This of course increased 
computational burden. Nevertheless, even after the 
expansion, the vector representations still remained 
sparse and we were able to design and implement 
some straightforward algorithmic improvements 
taking advantage of this sparsity to keep processing 
time manageable. The expansion for entire Reuters 
collection was taking less than one minute on a 
workstation with Pentium III 697 MHz processor, 
256 MB of RAM, with all the sparse representations 
of the documents and similarity matrix stored in 
primary memory. This renders the expansion suitable 
for online processing.  
To evaluate the performance of each technique, we 
used the error reduction (%) relatively to the baseline 
shown in Table 1 (TF-IDF column) averaged across 
all the topics, which corresponds to the lowest 
503
original non-expanded similarity error. Figure 1 
shows the error reduction as a function of Ca for 
various values of Thresh. We stopped increasing Ca 
once the improvement dropped below -10% to save 
testing time. Several facts can be observed from the 
results: 
1) The error reduction for Thresh in the mid range of 
Ca [.2-.4] is very stable, achieves 50% , which is 
very large compared with the other known 
techniques we used for comparison as discussed 
below. The effect is also comparable with the 
difference between various weighting functions 
(Table 2), which we believe renders the 
improvement practically significant. 
2) For small thresholds (Thresh < .1), the effect is 
not that stable, possibly since many non-reliable 
associations are involved in the expansion.  
3) Larger thresholds (Thresh > .4) are also not very 
reliable since they result in a small number of 
associations created, and thus require large values of 
adjustment parameter a in order to produce 
substantial average changes in the document vectors 
(Ca), which results in too drastic change in some 
document vectors.   
4) The error reduction curve is unimodal: it starts 
from 0 for small Ca, since document vectors almost 
do not change, and grows to achieve maximum for 
Ca somewhere in relatively wide .1 - .5 range. Then, 
it decreases, because document vectors may be 
drifting too far from the original ones, falling below 
0 for some large values of Ca.  
5) For thresholds (Thresh) .2 and .3, the effect stays 
positive even for large values of Ca, which is an 
interesting phenomenon because document vectors 
are getting almost entirely replaced by their 
expanded representations. 
Some sensitivity of the results with respect to the 
parameters Thresh, Ca is a limitation as occurs 
similarly to virtually all modern IR improvement 
techniques. Indeed, Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) 
needs to have number of semantic axis to be 
correctly set, otherwise the performance may 
degrade. Pseudo Relevance Feedback (PRF) depends 
on several parameters such as number of documents 
to use for feedback, adjustment factor, etc. All 
previously studied expansion techniques depend on 
the adjustment factor as  well. The specific choice of 
the parameters for real life applications is typically 
performed manually based on trial and error or by 
following a machine learning approach: splitting data 
into training and testing sets. Based on the above 
results, the similarity threshold (Thresh) in .2-.4 and 
Ca in .1-.5 range seem to be a safe combination, not 
degrading and likely to significantly (20-50%)  
improve performance. The performance curve being 
unimodal with respect to both Ca and Thresh also 
makes it easier to tune by looking for maxima. 
Although we have involved only one test collection 
in this study, this collection (Reuters) varies greatly 
in the content and the size of the documents, so we 
hope our results will generalize to other collections.  
We also verified that the effect typically diminishes 
when the size of the mining collection (corpus) is 
reduced by random sub-sampling. Those results were 
also similar to those obtained 4 months earlier, 
although only 80% of the pages in the mining corpus 
remained. 
 
-30
-20
-10
0
10
0 500 1000
Number of Semantic Axis
Er
ro
r R
ed
uc
tio
n 
(%
)
All topics Tough Topics Only
 
Figure 4. Comparing to LSI. 
-20
0
20
40
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2
Average vector change
Er
ro
r R
ed
uc
tio
n 
(%
)
Thresh = .3 
Thresh = .4 
Thresh = .2 
Thresh = .5 Thresh = .6 Thresh = .1 
Figure 3. The average error reduction (%) as a function of average document vector change Ca for 
various threshold parameters Tresh without using external mining collection. 
504
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Average vector change
Er
ro
r R
ed
uc
tio
n 
(%
)
Nc=5 Nc=10 Nc=20
 
 
Figure 5. The error reduction as the function of the 
average vector change due to Pseudo Relevance 
Feedback for several cut-off numbers Nc. 
4.2 Sensitivity Analysis  
To test the importance of the context, we removed 
the ?context hint? terms from the queries used by our 
agent, and created another (less context specific) 
corpus for mining. We obtained 175,336 unique 
URLs, much more than with using ?context hint? 
terms since the overlap between different query 
results was much smaller. We randomly selected 
25,000 URLs of them and downloaded the referred 
pages. Then, to make the comparison more objective, 
we randomly selected  19,198 pages (same number 
as with using context hint) of the non-empty 
downloaded pages. We mined the similarity 
relationships from the selected documents in the 
same way as described above. The resulting 
improvement (shown in the Figure 2) was indeed 
much smaller (13% and less) than with using 
?context hint? terms. It also degrades much quicker 
for larger Ca and more sensitive to the choice of 
Thresh. This may explain why mixed results were 
reported in the literate when the similarity thesaurus 
was constructed in a very general setting, but not 
specifically for the target collection in mind. It is 
also interesting to note a similar behavior of error 
reduction as the function of Ca and Thresh: it is 
unimodal with maximum in approximately same 
range of arguments. This may also serve as indirect 
evidence of stability of the effect (even if smaller in 
that case) with respect to the parameters involved. 
To verify the importance of using external corpus vs. 
self-mining, we mined the similarity relationships 
from the same collection (Reuters) that we used for 
the tests (target collection) using the same mining 
algorithms. Figure 3 shows that the effect of such 
?self-mining? is relatively modest (up to 20%), 
confirming that using the external corpus (the Web 
in our approach) was crucial. Again, the behavior of 
the error reduction (even smaller in that case) with 
respect to Ca and Thresh is similar to the context 
specific web corpus mining. 
4.3 Comparison with Other Techniques 
Figure 4 shows the similarity error reduction as a 
function of the number of semantic axis when LSI is 
applied. The effect with the entire collection (second 
column) is always negative. So, the Reuters 
collection in our experiment set up was found to be 
not a good application of LSI technique, possibly 
because many of the topics have already small errors 
even before applying LSI. To verify our 
implementation and the applicability of LSI to the 
similarity computation, we applied it only to the 
?tougher? 26 topics, those in the upper half if 
ordered by the original similarity error. As Figure 4 
reveals, LSI is effective in that case for numbers of 
semantic axis comparable with number of topics in 
the target collection. Our findings are well in line 
with reported in prior research. 
We adapted the classic Pseudo Relevance Feedback 
algorithm (Qiu, 1993), which has been so far applied 
only to document retrieval tasks, to similarity 
computation in a straightforward way and also tried 
several variations of if (not described here due to 
lack of space). Figure 5 shows the effect as a 
function of adjustment factor a for various cut-off 
parameters Nc (the number of top ranked documents 
used for feedback). The effect achieves the 
maximum of around 21%, consistent with the results 
reported in prior research. The improvement is close 
in magnitude to the one due to ?self-mining?  
described above. We do not claim that our approach 
is better than PRF since it is not entirely meaningful 
to make this comparison due to the number of 
parameters and implementation details involved in 
both. Also, more important, the techniques rely on 
different source of data: PRF is a ?self-mining? 
approach while CSSE builds and mines external 
corpus. Thus, CSSE can be used in addition to PRF.  
5 Conclusions  
In this paper, we proposed and empirically studied an 
approach to improve similarity computation between 
text documents by creating a context specific Web 
corpus and performing similarity mining within it. 
The results demonstrated that the similarity errors 
can be reduced by additional 50% after all the 
standard procedures such as stemming, term 
weighting, and vector normalization. We also 
established the crucial importance of the following 
three factors, which we believe make our technique 
distinct from those already explored early and 
explain more encouraging results that we obtained:  
1) Using external corpus. 2) Taking the context of 
the target collection into consideration. 3) Using the 
appropriate mining formula.  Another important 
distinction and possible explanation of a more 
dramatic effect is our focus on similarity 
computation between text documents, rather than on 
document retrieval tasks, which have been more 
extensively studied in the past. Similarity 
computation is a more general procedure, which in 
turns defines the quality of virtually all other specific 
tasks such as document retrieval, summarization, 
clustering, categorization, topic detection, query by 
example, etc.  Our future plans are to overcome some 
of the limitations in this study, specifically using 
more than a single (although standard and very 
diverse) collection and study other experimental 
setups, such as document retrieval, text 
categorization, or topic detection and tracking.  
505
6 Acknowledgement 
Weiguo Fan's work is supported by NSF under the 
grant number ITR0325579. 
References 
Church, K.W., Gale, W., Hanks, P., Hindle, D. 
(1991). Using Statistics in Lexical Analysis. In: 
Uri Zernik (ed.), Lexical Acquisition: Exploiting 
On-Line Resources to Build a Lexicon. New 
Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1991, pp. 115-164. 
Church, K.W., Hanks, P. (1989). Word Association 
Norms, Mutual Information and Lexicography. In 
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of the 
Association of Computational Linguistics, 1989, 
pp. 76-83. 
Cooley, R., Mobasher, B. and Srivastava, J. (1997). 
Web Mining: Information and Pattern Discovery 
on the World Wide Web (with R. Cooley and J. 
Srivastava), in Proceedings of the 9th IEEE 
International Conference on Tools with Artificial 
Intelligence (ICTAI'97), November 1997. 
Croft, W.B., and Harper, D.J. (1979). Using 
probabilistic models of document retrieval without 
relevance information. Journal of Documentation, 
35, pp. 285-295. 
Deerwester S., Dumais S., Furnas G., Landauer T.K., 
and Harshman R., Indexing by Latent Semantic 
Analysis. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science 41 (1990), 391-407. 
Furnas, G. W., Landauer, T. K., Gomez, L. M., & 
Dumais, S. T. (1987). The Vocabulary Problem in 
Human-System Communication. Communications 
of the ACM, 30(11), pp. 964-971. 
G?ry, M., Haddad, M. H. (1999). Knowledge 
Discovery for Automatic Query Expansion on the 
World Wide Web. International Workshop on the 
World-Wide Web and Conceptual Modeling 
(WWWCM'99), in conjunction with the 18th 
International Conference on Conceptual Modeling 
(ER'99), Paris, France, November 15-18, 1999, 
pp. 334-347. 
Grefenstette, G. (1994). Explorations in Automatic 
Thesaurus Discovery. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Moston, MA.  
Haveliwala, T.H, Gionis, A., Klein, D., Indyk, P. 
(2002). Evaluating Strategies for Similarity Search 
on the Web. WWW2002, May 7-11, 2002, 
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA.  
Hearst, M. (1992). Automatic Acquisition of 
Hyponyms from Large Text Corpora, Proceedings 
of the Fourteenth International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics, Nantes, France, July 
1992. 
Kwok, K.L. (1998). Improving two-stage ad-hoc 
retrieval for short queries. Twenty-First Annual 
International ACM SIGIR Conference on 
Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval, pp.  250-256, New York, August 1998. 
Lewis, D.D. (1992). Representation and Learning in 
Information Retrieval. Doctoral Dissertation. 
University of Massachusetts at Amherst.  
Lewis, D.D. (1997). Reuters-21578 text 
categorization test collection, Distribution 1.0, 
Sept 26, 1997. 
Minker, J., Wilson, G. A. & Zimmerman, B. H. 
(1972). An evaluation of query expansion by the 
addition of clustered terms for a document 
retrieval system. Information Storage and 
Retrieval, pp. 329-348. 
Peat, H. J. & Willett, P. (1991). The limitations of 
term co-occurrence data for query expansion in 
document retrieval systems. Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science, 42(5), 
pp. 378-383. 
Porter, M.F. (1980). An algorithm for suffix 
stripping. Program, 14, pp. 130--137, 1980. 
Qiu, Y. (1993). Concept Based Query Expansion. 
Proceedings of SIGIR-93, 16th ACM International 
Conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval. 
Salton, G. and McGill, M.J. (1983). Introduction to 
Modern Information Retrieval. New York. 
McGraw-Hill. 
Schutze, H. and Pedersen, J.O. (1997). A co-
occurrence-based thesaurus and two applications 
to information retrieval. Information Processing 
and Management. 33(3), pp. 307-318. 
Sugiura, A., and Etzioni, O. (2000). Query Routing 
for Web Search Engines: Architecture and 
Experiments. 9th International World Wide Web 
Conference, Amsterdam, May 15-19, 2000. 
van Rijsbergen, C.J.. (1977). A theoretical basis for 
the use of co-occurrence data in information 
retrieval. Journal of Documentation, 33(2):106--
119, 1977. 
Voorhees, E. M. (1994). Query expansion using 
lexical-semantic relations. In Proceedings of the 
17th Annual International ACM/SIGIR 
Conference, pp. 61-69, Dublin, Ireland.  
Xu, J. and Croft, W.B. (2000). Improving the 
effectiveness of information retrieval with local 
context analysis. ACM Transactions on 
Information Systems (TOIS), 18(1):79--112, 
2000.  
Ballesteros, L., Croft, W.B. (1998). Resolving 
Ambiguity for Cross-Language Retrieval. In 
Proceedings of the 21th Annual International 
ACM/SIGIR Conference, pp. 64-71.
 
506
