Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 244?254,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar.
c
?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Cognitive Model of Semantic Network Learning
Aida Nematzadeh, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Stevenson
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
{aida,afsaneh,suzanne}@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
Child semantic development includes
learning the meaning of words as well as
the semantic relations among words. A
presumed outcome of semantic develop-
ment is the formation of a semantic net-
work that reflects this knowledge. We
present an algorithm for simultaneously
learning word meanings and gradually
growing a semantic network, which ad-
heres to the cognitive plausibility require-
ments of incrementality and limited com-
putations. We demonstrate that the seman-
tic connections among words in addition
to their context is necessary in forming a
semantic network that resembles an adult?s
semantic knowledge.
1 Introduction
Child semantic development includes the acquisi-
tion of word-to-concept mappings (part of word
learning), and the formation of semantic connec-
tions among words/concepts. There is consid-
erable evidence that understanding the semantic
properties of words improves child vocabulary ac-
quisition. In particular, children are sensitive to
commonalities of semantic categories, and this
abstract knowledge facilitates subsequent word
learning (Jones et al., 1991; Colunga and Smith,
2005). Furthermore, representation of semantic
knowledge is significant as it impacts how word
meanings are stored in, searched for, and retrieved
from memory (Steyvers and Tenenbaum, 2005;
Griffiths et al., 2007).
Semantic knowledge is often represented as a
graph (a semantic network) in which nodes cor-
respond to words/concepts
1
, and edges specify
1
Here we assume that the nodes of a semantic network
are word forms and its edges are determined by the semantic
features of those words.
the semantic relations (Collins and Loftus, 1975;
Steyvers and Tenenbaum, 2005). Steyvers and
Tenenbaum (2005) demonstrated that a seman-
tic network that encodes adult-level knowledge of
words exhibits a small-world and scale-free struc-
ture. That is, it is an overall sparse network with
highly-connected local sub-networks, where these
sub-networks are connected through high-degree
hubs (nodes with many neighbours).
Much experimental research has investigated
the underlying mechanisms of vocabulary learn-
ing and characteristics of semantic knowledge
(Quine, 1960; Bloom, 1973; Carey and Bartlett,
1978; Gleitman, 1990; Samuelson and Smith,
1999; Jones et al., 1991; Jones and Smith,
2005). However, existing computational models
focus on certain aspects of semantic acquisition:
Some researchers develop computational models
of word learning without considering the acqui-
sition of semantic connections that hold among
words, or how this semantic knowledge is struc-
tured (Siskind, 1996; Regier, 2005; Yu and Bal-
lard, 2007; Frank et al., 2009; Fazly et al., 2010).
Another line of work is to model formation of
semantic categories but this work does not take
into account how word meanings/concepts are ac-
quired (Anderson and Matessa, 1992; Griffiths et
al., 2007; Fountain and Lapata, 2011).
Our goal in this work is to provide a cognitively-
plausible and unified account for both acquiring
and representing semantic knowledge. The re-
quirements for cognitive plausibility enforce some
constraints on a model to ensure that it is compa-
rable with the cognitive process it is formulating
(Poibeau et al., 2013). As we model semantic ac-
quisition, the first requirement is incrementality,
which means that the model learns gradually as
it processes the input. Also, there is a limit on
the number of computations the model performs
at each step.
In this paper, we present an algorithm for si-
244
multaneously learning word meanings and grow-
ing a semantic network, which adheres to the cog-
nitive plausibility requirements of incrementality
and limited computations. We examine networks
created by our model under various conditions,
and explore what is required to obtain a structure
that has appropriate semantic connections and has
a small-world and scale-free structure.
2 Related Work
Models of Word Learning. Given a word learn-
ing scenario, there are potentially many possible
mappings between words in a sentence and their
meanings (real-world referents), from which only
some mappings are correct (the mapping prob-
lem). One of the most dominant mechanisms
proposed for vocabulary acquisition is cross-
situational learning: people learn word mean-
ings by recognizing and tracking statistical reg-
ularities among the contexts of a word?s usage
across various situations, enabling them to nar-
row in on the meaning of a word that holds across
its usages (Siskind, 1996; Yu and Smith, 2007;
Smith and Yu, 2008). A number of computa-
tional models attempt to solve the mapping prob-
lem by implementing this mechanism, and have
successfully replicated different patterns observed
in child word learning (Siskind, 1996; Yu and Bal-
lard, 2007; Fazly et al., 2010). These models have
provided insight about underlying mechanisms of
word learning, but none of them consider the se-
mantic relations that hold among words, or how
the semantic knowledge is structured. Recently,
we have investigated properties of the semantic
structure of the resulting (final) acquired knowl-
edge of such a learner (Nematzadeh et al., 2014).
However, that work did not address how such
structural knowledge might develop and evolve in-
crementally within the learning model.
Models of Categorization. Computational mod-
els of categorization focus on the problem of form-
ing semantic clusters given a defined set of fea-
tures for words (Anderson and Matessa, 1992;
Griffiths et al., 2007; Sanborn et al., 2010). An-
derson and Matessa (1992) note that a cognitively
plausible categorization algorithm needs to be in-
cremental and only keep track of one potential
partitioning; they propose a Bayesian framework
(the Rational Model of Categorization or RMC)
that specifies the joint distribution on features and
category labels, and allows an unbounded number
of clusters. Sanborn et al. (2010) examine differ-
ent categorization models based on RMC. In par-
ticular, they compare the performance of the ap-
proximation algorithm of Anderson and Matessa
(1992) (local MAP) with two other approximation
algorithms (Gibbs Sampling and Particle Filters)
in various human categorization paradigms. San-
born et al. (2010) find that in most of the simula-
tions the local MAP algorithm performs as well as
the two other algorithms in matching human be-
havior.
The Representation of Semantic Knowledge.
There is limited work on computational models
of semantic acquisition that examine the represen-
tation of the semantic knowledge. Steyvers and
Tenenbaum (2005) propose an algorithm for build-
ing a network with small-world and scale-free
structure. The algorithm starts with a small com-
plete graph, incrementally adds new nodes to the
graph, and for each new node uses a probabilistic
mechanism for selecting a subset of current nodes
to connect to. However, their approach does not
address the problem of learning word meanings or
the semantic connections among them. Fountain
and Lapata (2011) propose an algorithm for learn-
ing categories that also creates a semantic network
by comparing all the possible word pairs. How-
ever, they too do not address the word learning
problem, and do not investigate the structure of the
learned semantic network to see whether it has the
properties observed in adult knowledge.
3 The Incremental Network Model
We propose here a model that unifies the incre-
mental acquisition of word meanings and forma-
tion of a semantic network structure that reflects
the similarities among those meanings. We use
an existing model to learn the meanings of words
(Section 3.1), and use those incrementally devel-
oping meanings as the input to the algorithm pro-
posed here for gradually growing a semantic net-
work (Section 3.2).
3.1 The Word Learner
We use the model of Fazly et al. (2010); this learn-
ing algorithm is incremental and involves limited
calculations, thus satisfying basic cognitive plausi-
bility requirements. A naturalistic language learn-
ing scenario consists of linguistic data in the con-
text of non-linguistic data, such as the objects,
245
Utterance: {let, find, a, picture, to, color }
Scene: {LET, PRONOUN, HAS POSSESSION, CAUSE,
ARTIFACT, WHOLE, CHANGE, . . .}
Table 1: A sample utterance-scene pair.
events, and social interactions that a child per-
ceives. This kind of input is modeled here as
a pair of an utterance (the words a child hears)
and a scene (the semantic features representing the
meaning of those words), as shown in Table 1 (and
described in more detail in Section 5.1). The word
learner is an instance of cross-situational learn-
ing applied to a sequence of such input pairs: for
each pair of a word w and a semantic feature f ,
the model incrementally learns P (f |w) from co-
occurrences of w and f across all the utterance-
scene pairs.
For each word, the probability distribution
over all semantic features, P (.|w), represents the
word?s meaning. The estimation of P (.|w) is
made possible by introducing a set of latent vari-
ables, alignments, that correspond to the possible
mappings between words and features in a given
utterance?scene pair. The learning problem is then
to find the mappings that best explain the data,
which is solved by using an incremental version
of the expectation?maximization (EM) algorithm
(Neal and Hinton, 1998). We skip the details of
the derivations and only report the resulting for-
mulas.
The model processes one utterance-scene pair at
a time. For the input pair processed at time t, first
the probability of each possible alignment (align-
ment probability) is calculated as:
2
P (a
ij
|u, f
i
) =
P
t?1
(f
i
|w
j
)
?
w
?
?u
P
t?1
(f
i
|w
?
)
(1)
where u is the utterance, and a
ij
is the alignment
variable specifying the word w
j
that is mapped
to the feature f
i
. P
t?1
(f
i
|w
j
) is taken from the
model?s current learned meaning of word w
j
. Ini-
tially, P
0
(f
i
|w
j
) is uniformly distributed. After
calculating the alignment probabilities, the learned
meanings are updated as:
P
t
(f
i
|w
j
) =
?
u?U
t
P (a
ij
|u, f
i
)
?
f
?
?M
?
u?U
t
P (a
ij
|u, f
?
)
(2)
where U
t
is the set of utterances processed so far,
andM is the set of features that the model has ob-
served. Note that for each w?f pair, the value of
the summations in this formula can be incremen-
tally updated after processing any utterance that
2
This corresponds to the expectation step of EM.
containsw; the summation does not have to be cal-
culated at every step.
3.2 Growing a Semantic Network
In our extended model, as we learn words incre-
mentally (as above), we also structure those words
into a semantic network based on the (partially)
learned meanings. At any given point in time, the
network will include as its nodes all the word types
the word learner has been exposed to. Weighted
edges (capturing semantic distance) will connect
those pairs of word types whose learned meanings
at that point are sufficiently semantically similar
(according to a threshold). Since the probabilis-
tic meaning of a word is adjusted each time it is
observed, a word may either lose or gain connec-
tions in the network after each input is processed.
Thus, to incrementally develop the network, at
each time step, our algorithm must both examine
existing connections (to see which edges should be
removed) and consider potential new connections
(to see which edges should be added).
A simple approach to achieve this is to examine
the current semantic similarity between a word w
in the input and all the current words in the net-
work, and include edges between only those word
pairs that are sufficiently similar. However, com-
paring w to all the words in the network each time
it is observed is computationally intensive (and not
cognitively plausible).
We present an approach for incrementally grow-
ing a semantic network that limits the computa-
tions when processing each input word w; see Al-
gorithm 1. After the meaning of w is updated, we
first check all the words that w is currently (di-
rectly) connected to, to see if any of those edges
need to be removed, or have their weight adjusted.
Next, to look for new connections forw, the idea is
to select only a small subset of words, S , to which
w will be compared. The challenge then is to se-
lect S in a way that will yield a network whose se-
mantic structure reasonably approximates the net-
work that would result from full knowledge of
comparing w to all the words.
Previous work has suggested picking ?impor-
tant? words (e.g., high-degree words) indepen-
dently of the target word w ? assuming these
might be words for which a learner might need
to understand their relationship to w in the future
(Steyvers and Tenenbaum, 2005). Our proposal
is instead to consider for S those words that are
246
Algorithm 1 Growing a network after each in-
put u.
for all w in u do
update P (.|w) using Eqn. (2)
update current connections of w
select S(w), a subset of words in the network
for all w
?
in S(w) do
if w and w
?
are sufficiently similar then
connect w and w
?
with an edge
end if
end for
end for
likely to be similar to w. That is, since the net-
work only needs to connect similar words to w, if
we can guess what (some of) those words are, then
we will do best at approximating the situation of
comparing w to all words.
The question now is how to find semantically
similar words to w that are not already connected
to w in the network. To do so, we incrementally
track semantic similarity among words usages as
their meanings are developing. Specifically we
cluster word tokens (not types) according to their
current word meanings. Since the probabilistic
meanings of words are continually evolving, in-
cremental clusters of word tokens can capture de-
veloping similarities among the various usages of
a word type, and be a clue to which words (types)
w might be similar to. In the next section, we de-
scribe the Bayesian clustering process we use to
identify potentially similar words.
3.3 Semantic Clustering of Word Tokens
We use the Bayesian framework of Anderson and
Matessa (1992) to form semantic clusters.
3
Recall
that for each word w, the model learns its mean-
ings as a probability distribution over all seman-
tic features, P (.|w). We represent this probability
distribution as a vector F whose length is the num-
ber of possible semantic features. Each element of
the vector holds the value P (f |w) (which is con-
tinuous). Given a word w and its vector F , we
need to calculate the probability that w belongs to
each existing cluster, and also allow for the pos-
sibility of it forming a new cluster. Using Bayes
rule we have:
P (k|F ) =
P (k)P (F |k)
?
k
?
P (k
?
)P (F |k
?
)
(3)
3
The distribution specified by this model is equivalent to
that of a Dirichlet Process Mixture Model (Neal, 2000).
where k is a given cluster. We thus need to calcu-
late the prior probability, P (k), and the likelihood
of each cluster, P (F |k).
Calculation of Prior. The prior probability that
word n + 1 is assigned to cluster k is calculated
as:
P (k) =
{
n
k
n+?
n
k
> 0
?
n+?
n
k
= 0 (new cluster)
(4)
where n
k
is the number of words in cluster k, n
is the number of words observed so far, and ? is a
parameter that determines how likely the creation
of a new cluster is. The prior favors larger clusters,
and also discourages the creation of new clusters
in later stages of learning.
Calculation of Likelihood. To calculate the like-
lihood P (F |k) in Eqn. (3), we assume that the fea-
tures are independent:
P (F |k) =
?
f
i
?F
P (f
i
= v|k) (5)
where P (f
i
= v|k) is the probability that the value
of the feature in dimension i is equal to v given
the cluster k. To derive P (f
i
|k), following An-
derson and Matessa (1992), we assume that each
feature given a cluster follows a Gaussian distri-
bution with an unknown variance ?
2
and mean ?.
(In the absence of any prior information about a
variable, it is often assumed to have a Gaussian
distribution.) The mean and variance of this dis-
tribution are inferred using Bayesian analysis: We
assume the variance has an inverse ?
2
prior, where
?
2
0
is the prior variance and a
0
is the confidence in
the prior variance:
?
2
? Inv-?
2
(a
0
, ?
2
0
) (6)
The mean given the variance has a Gaussian dis-
tribution with ?
0
as the prior mean and ?
0
as the
confidence in the prior mean.
?|? ? N(?
0
,
?
2
?
0
) (7)
Given the above conjugate priors, P (f
i
|k) can
be calculated analytically and is a Student?s t dis-
tribution with the following parameters:
P (f
i
|k) ? t
a
i
(?
i
, ?
2
i
(1 +
1
?
i
)) (8)
?
i
= ?
0
+ n
k
(9)
a
i
= a
0
+ n
k
(10)
247
?i
=
?
0
?
0
+ n
k
?
f
?
0
+ n
k
(11)
?
2
i
=
a
0
?
2
0
+ (n
k
? 1)s
2
+
?
0
n
k
?
0
+n
k
(?
0
+
?
f)
2
a
0
+ n
k
(12)
where
?
f and s
2
are the sample mean and variance
of the values of f
i
in k.
Note that in the above equations, the mean and
variance of the distribution are simply derived by
combining the sample mean and variance with
the prior mean and variance while considering the
confidence in the prior mean (?
0
) and variance
(a
0
). This means that the number of computations
to calculate P (F |K) is limited as w is only com-
pared to the ?prototype? of each cluster, which is
represented by ?
i
and ?
i
of different features.
Adding a word w to a cluster. We add w to
the cluster k with highest posterior probability,
P (k|F ), as calculated in Eqn. (3).
4
The parame-
ters of the selected cluster (k, ?
i
, ?
i
, ?
i
, and a
i
for
each feature f
i
) are then updated incrementally.
Using the Clusters to Select the Words in S(w).
We can now form S(w) in Algorithm 1 by select-
ing a given number of words n
s
whose tokens are
probabilistically chosen from the clusters accord-
ing to how likely each cluster k is given w: the
number of word tokens picked from each k is pro-
portional to P (k|F ) and is equal to P (k|F )?n
s
.
4 Evaluation
We evaluate a semantic network in two regards:
The semantic connectivity of the network ? to
what extent the semantically-related words are
connected in the network; and the structure of the
network ? whether it exhibits a small-world and
scale-free structure or not.
4.1 Evaluating Semantic Connectivity
The distance between the words in the network in-
dicates their semantic similarity: the more similar
a word pair, the smaller their distance. For word
pairs that are connected via a path in the network,
this distance is the weighted shortest path length
between the two words. If there is no path be-
tween a word pair, their distance is considered to
be? (which is represented with a large number).
We refer to this distance as the ?learned? semantic
similarity.
4
This approach is referred to as local MAP (Sanborn et al.,
2010); because of the incremental nature of the algorithm, it
maximizes the current posterior distribution as opposed to the
?global? posterior.
To evaluate the semantic connectivity of the
learned network, we compare these learned sim-
ilarity scores to ?gold-standard? similarity scores
that are calculated using the WordNet similarity
measure of Wu and Palmer (1994) (also known as
the WUP measure). We choose this measure since
it captures the same type of similarity as in our
model: words are considered similar if they belong
to the same semantic category. Moreover, this
measure does not incorporate information about
other types of similarities, for example, words are
not considered similar if they occur in similar con-
texts. Thus, the scores calculated with this mea-
sure are comparable with those of our learned net-
work.
Given the gold-standard similarity scores for
each word pair, we evaluate the semantic con-
nectivity of the network based on two perfor-
mance measures: coefficient of correlation and
the median rank of the first five gold-standard as-
sociates. Correlation is a standard way to com-
pare two lists of similarity scores (Budanitsky
and Hirst, 2006). We create two lists, one con-
taining the gold-standard similarity scores for all
word pairs, and the other containing their corre-
sponding learned similarity scores. We calculate
the Spearman?s rank correlation coefficient, ?, be-
tween these two lists of similarity scores. Note
that the learned similarity scores reflect the seman-
tic distance among words whereas the WordNet
scores reflect semantic closeness. Thus, a nega-
tive correlation is best in our evaluation, where the
value of -1 corresponds to the maximum correla-
tion.
Following Griffiths et al. (2007), we also cal-
culate the median learned rank of the first five
gold-standard associates for all words: For each
word w, we first create a ?gold-standard? asso-
ciates list: we sort all other words based on their
gold-standard similarity to w, and pick the five
most similar words (associates) to w. Similarly,
we create a ?learned associate list? for w by sort-
ing all words based on their learned semantic simi-
larity tow. For all words, we find the ranks of their
first five gold-standard associates in their learned
associate list. For each associate, we calculate the
median of these ranks for all words. We only re-
port the results for the first three gold-standard as-
sociates since the pattern of results is similar for
the fourth and fifth associates; we refer to the me-
dian rank of first three gold-standard associates as
248
1st
, 2
nd
, and 3
rd
.
4.2 Evaluating the Structure of the Network
A network exhibits a small-world structure when
it is characterized by short path length between
most nodes and highly-connected neighborhoods
(Watts and Strogatz, 1998). We first explain how
these properties are measured for a graph with N
nodes and E edges. Then we discuss how these
properties are used in assessing the small-world
structure of a graph.
5
.
Short path lengths. Most of the nodes of
a small-world network are reachable from other
nodes via relatively short paths. For a connected
network (i.e., all the node pairs are reachable from
each other), this can be measured as the average
distance between all node pairs (Watts and Stro-
gatz, 1998). Since our networks are not connected,
we instead measure this property using the median
of the distances (d
median
) between all node pairs
(Robins et al., 2005), which is well-defined even
when some node pairs have a distance of?.
Highly-connected neighborhoods. The neigh-
borhood of a node n in a graph consists of n and
all of the nodes that are connected to it. A neigh-
borhood is maximally connected if it forms a com-
plete graph ?i.e., there is an edge between all
node pairs. Thus, the maximum number of edges
in the neighborhood of n is k
n
(k
n
? 1)/2, where
k
n
is the number of neighbors. A standard metric
for measuring the connectedness of neighbors of
a node n is called the local clustering coefficient
(C) (Watts and Strogatz, 1998), which calculates
the ratio of edges in the neighborhood of n (E
n
)
to the maximum number of edges possible for that
neighborhood:
C =
E
n
k
n
(k
n
? 1)/2
(13)
The local clustering coefficient C ranges between
0 and 1. To estimate the connectedness of all
neighborhoods in a network, we take the average
of C over all nodes, i.e., C
avg
.
Small-world structure. A graph exhibits a
small-world structure if d
median
is relatively small
and C
avg
is relatively high. To assess this for
a graph g, these values are typically compared
to those of a random graph with the same num-
ber of nodes and edges as g (Watts and Strogatz,
5
We take the description of these measures from Ne-
matzadeh et al. (2014)
1998; Humphries and Gurney, 2008). The ran-
dom graph is generated by randomly rearranging
the edges of the network under consideration (Er-
dos and R?enyi, 1960). Because any pair of nodes
is equally likely to be connected as any other, the
median of distances between nodes is expected to
be low for a random graph. In a small-world net-
work, this value d
median
is expected to be as small
as that of a random graph: even though the random
graph has edges more uniformly distributed, the
small-world network has many locally-connected
components which are connected via hubs. On the
other hand, C
avg
is expected to be much higher
in a small-world network compared to its corre-
sponding random graph, because the edges of a
random graph typically do not fall into clusters
forming highly connected neighborhoods.
Given these two properties, the ?small-
worldness? of a graph g is measured as follows
(Humphries and Gurney, 2008):
?
g
=
C
avg
(g)
C
avg
(random)
d
median
(g)
d
median
(random)
(14)
where random is the random graph correspond-
ing to g. In a small-world network, it is ex-
pected that C
avg
(g)  C
avg
(random) and
d
median
(g) ? d
median
(random), and thus ?
g
>
1.
Note that Steyvers and Tenenbaum (2005) made
the empirical observation that small-world net-
works of semantic knowledge had a single con-
nected component that contained the majority of
nodes in the network. Thus, in addition to ?
g
,
we also measure the relative size of a network?s
largest connected component having size N
lcc
:
size
lcc
=
N
lcc
N
(15)
Scale-free structure. A scale-free network has
a relatively small number of high-degree nodes
that have a large number of connections to other
nodes, while most of its nodes have a small de-
gree, as they are only connected to a few nodes.
Thus, if a network has a scale-free structure, its de-
gree distribution (i.e., the probability distribution
of degrees over the whole network) will follow a
power-law distribution (which is said to be ?scale-
free?). We evaluate this property of a network by
plotting its degree distribution in the logarithmic
scale, which (if a power-law distribution) should
appear as a straight line. None of our networks ex-
249
hibit a scale-free structure; thus, we do not report
the results of this evaluation, and leave it to future
work for further investigation.
5 Experimental Set-up
5.1 Input Representation
Recall that the input to the model consists of a
sequence of utterance?scene pairs intended to re-
flect the linguistic data a child is exposed to, along
with the associated meaning a child might grasp.
As in much previous work (Yu and Ballard, 2007;
Fazly et al., 2010), we take child-directed utter-
ances from the CHILDES database (MacWhinney,
2000) in order to have naturalistic data. In partic-
ular, we use the Manchester corpus (Theakston et
al., 2001), which consists of transcripts of conver-
sations with 12 British children between the ages
of 1; 8 and 3; 0. We represent each utterance as
a bag of lemmatized words (see Utterance in Ta-
ble 1).
For the scene representation, we have no large
corpus to draw on that encodes the semantic por-
tion of language acquisition data.
6
We thus auto-
matically generate the semantics associated with
an utterance, using a scheme first introduced in
Fazly et al. (2010). The idea is to first create an
input generation lexicon that provides a mapping
between all the words in the input data and their
associated meanings. A scene is then represented
as a set that contains the meanings of all the words
in the utterance. We use the input generation lexi-
con of Nematzadeh et al. (2012) because the word
meanings reflect information about their semantic
categories, which is crucial to forming the seman-
tic clusters as in Section 3.3.
In this lexicon, the ?true? meaning for each
word w is a vector over a set of possible seman-
tic features for each part of speech; in the vec-
tor, each feature is associated with a score for that
word (see Figure 1). Depending on the word?s part
of speech, the features are extracted from various
6
Yu and Ballard (2007) created a corpus by hand-coding
the objects and cues that were present in the environment,
but that corpus is very small. Frank et al. (2013) provide a
larger manually annotated corpus (5000 utterances), but it is
still very small for longitudinal simulations of word learn-
ing. (Our corpus contains more than 100,000 utterances.)
Moreover, the corpus of Frank et al. (2013) is limited be-
cause a considerable number of words are not semantically
coded. (Only a subset of concrete objects in the environment
are coded.)
apple: { FOOD:1, SOLID:.72, ? ? ? , PLANT-PART:.22,
PHYSICAL-ENTITY:.17, WHOLE:.06, ? ? ? }
Figure 1: Sample true meaning features & their scores for
apple from Nematzadeh et al. (2012).
lexical resources such as WordNet
7
, VerbNet
8
, and
Harm (2002). The score for each feature is calcu-
lated using a measure similar to tf-idf that reflects
the association of the feature with the word and
with its semantic category: term frequency indi-
cates the strength of association of the feature with
the word, and inverse document frequency (where
the documents are the categories) indicates how
informative a feature is for that category. The se-
mantic categories of nouns (which we focus on in
our networks) are given by WordNet lex-names
9
,
a set of 25 general categories of entities. (We use
only nouns in our semantic networks because the
semantic similarity of words with different parts
of speech cannot be compared, since their seman-
tic features are drawn from different resources.)
The input generation lexicon is used to generate
a scene representation for an utterance as follows:
For each word w in the utterance, we probabilisti-
cally sample features, in proportion to their score,
from the full set of features in its true meaning.
The probabilistic sampling allows us to simulate
the noise and uncertainty in the input a child per-
ceives by omitting some meaning features from
the scene. The scene representation is the union
of all the features sampled for all the words in the
utterance (see Scene in Table 1).
5.2 Methods
We experiment with our network-growth method
that draws on the incremental clustering, and cre-
ate ?upper-bound? and baseline networks for com-
parison. Note that all the networks are created
using our Algorithm 1 (page 4) to grow networks
incrementally, drawing on the learned meanings of
words and updating their connections on the basis
of this evolving knowledge. The only difference
in creating the networks resides in how the com-
parison set S(w) is chosen for each target word w
that is being added to the growing network at each
time step. We provide more details in the para-
graphs below.
7
http://wordnet.princeton.edu
8
http://verbs.colorado.edu/
?
mpalmer/
projects/verbnet.html
9
http://wordnet.princeton.edu/wordnet/
man/lexnames.5WN.html
250
Upper-bound. Recall that one of our main goals
is to substantially reduce the number of similar-
ity comparisons needed to grow a semantic net-
work, in contrast to the straightforward method of
comparing each w to all current words. At the
same time, we need to understand the impact of
the increased efficiency on the quality of the re-
sulting networks. We thus need to compare the
target properties of our networks that are learned
using a small comparison set S , to those of an
?upper-bound? network that takes into account all
the pair-wise comparisons among words. We cre-
ate this upper-bound network by setting S(w) to
contain all words currently in the network.
Baselines. On the other hand, we need to evalu-
ate the (potential) benefit of our cluster-driven se-
lection process over a more simplistic approach to
selecting S(w). To do so, we consider three base-
lines, each using a different criteria for choosing
the comparison set S(w): The Random baseline
chooses the members of this set randomly from
the set of all observed words. The Context base-
line can be seen as an ?informed? baseline that at-
tempts to incorporate some semantic knowledge:
Here, we select words that are in the recent context
prior to w in the input, assuming that such words
are likely to be semantically related to w. We also
include a third baseline, Random+Context, that
picks half of the members of S randomly and half
of them from the prior context.
Cluster-based Methods. We report results for
three cluster-based networks that differ in their
choice of S(w) as follows: The Clusters-only net-
work chooses words in S(w) from the set of clus-
ters, proportional to the probability of each clus-
ter k given word w (as explained in Section 3.3).
In order to incorporate different types of semantic
information in selecting S, we also create a Clus-
ters+Context network that picks half of the mem-
bers of S from clusters (as above), and half from
the prior context. For completeness, we include a
Clusters+Random network that similarly chooses
half of words in S from clusters and half randomly
from all observed words.
We have experimented with several other meth-
ods, but they all performed substantially worse
than the baselines, and hence we do not report
them here. E.g., we tried picking words in S from
the best cluster. We also tried a few methods in-
spired by (Steyvers and Tenenbaum, 2005): E.g.,
we examined a method where if a member of S(w)
was sufficiently similar to w, we added the direct
neighbors of that word to S. We also tried to grow
networks by choosing the members of S according
to the degree or frequency of nodes in the network.
5.3 Experimental Parameters
We use 20, 000 utterance?scene pairs as our train-
ing data. Recall that we use clustering to help
guide our semantic network growth algorithm.
Given the clustering algorithm in Section 3.3, we
are interested to find the set of clusters that best
explain the data. (Other clustering algorithms can
be used instead of this algorithm.) We perform
a search on the parameter space, and select the
parameter values that result in the best clustering,
based on the number of clusters and their average
F-score. The value of the clustering parameters
are as follows: ? = 49, ?
0
= 1.0, a
0
= 2.0,
?
0
= 0.0, and ?
0
= 0.05. Two nouns with fea-
ture vectors F
1
and F
2
are connected in the net-
work if cosine(F1, F2) is greater than or equal to
0.6. (This threshold was selected following em-
pirical examination of the similarity values we ob-
serve among the ?true? meaning in our input gen-
eration lexicon.) The weight on the edge that con-
nects these nouns specifies their semantic distance,
which is calculated as 1? cosine(F1, F2).
Because we aim for a network creation method
that is cognitively plausible in performing a lim-
ited number of word-to-word comparisons, we
need to ensure that all the different methods of
selecting the comparison set S(w) yield roughly
similar numbers of such comparisons. Keeping
the size of S constant does not guarantee this,
because each method can yield differing num-
bers of connections of the target word w to other
words. We thus parameterize the size of S for
each method to keep the number of computations
similar, based on experiments on the development
data. In development work we also found that hav-
ing an increasing size of S over time improved
the results, as more words were compared as the
knowledge of learned meanings improved. To
achieve this, we use a percentage of the words
in the network as the size of S. In practice, the
setting of this parameter yields a number of com-
parisons across all methods that is about 8% of
the maximum possible word-to-word comparisons
that would be performed in the naive (computa-
tionally intensive) approach.
251
Note that all the Cluster-based, Random and
Random+Context methods include a random se-
lection mechanism; thus, we run each of these
methods 50 times and report the average ?, me-
dian ranks and size
lcc
(see Section 4). For the net-
works (out of 50 runs) that exhibit a small-world
structure (small-worldness greater than one), we
report the average small-worldness. We also re-
port the percentage of runs whose resulting net-
work exhibit a small-world structure.
6 Experimental Results and Discussion
Table 2 presents our results, including the eval-
uation measures explained above, for the Upper-
bound, Baseline, and Cluster-based networks cre-
ated by the various methods described in Sec-
tion 5.2.
10
Recall that the Upper-bound network is formed
from examining a word?s similarity to all other
(observed) words when it is added to the network.
We can see that this network is highly connected
(0.85) and has a small-world structure (5.5). There
is a statistically significant correlation of the net-
work?s similarity measures with the gold standard
ones (?0.38). For this Upper-bound structure, the
median ranks of the first three associates are be-
tween 31 and 42. These latter two measures on
the Upper-bound network give an indication of the
difficulty of learning a semantic network whose
knowledge matches gold-standard similarities.
Considering the baseline networks, we note that
the Random network is actually somewhat bet-
ter (in connectivity and median ranks) than the
Context network that we thought would provide
a more informed baseline. Interestingly, the cor-
relation value for both networks is no worse than
for the Upper-bound. The combination of Ran-
dom+Context yields a slightly lower correlation,
and no better ranks or connectivity than Random.
Note that none of the baseline networks exhibit a
small world structure (?
g
 1 for all three, except
for one out of 50 runs for the Random method).
Recall that the Random network is not a net-
work resulting from randomly connecting word
pairs, but one that incrementally compares each
target word with a set of randomly chosen words
when considering possible new connections. We
suspect that this approach performs reasonably
well because it enables the model to find a broad
10
All the reported co-efficients of correlation (?) are statis-
tically significant at p < 0.01.
range of similar words to the target; this might be
effective especially because the learned meanings
of words are changing over time.
Turning to the Cluster-based methods, we see
that indeed some diversity in the comparison set
for a target word might be necessary to good
performance. We find that the measures on the
Clusters-only network are roughly the same as on
the Random one, but when we combine the two in
Clusters+Random we see an improvement in the
ranks achieved. It is possible that the selection
from clusters does not have sufficient diversity to
find some of the valid new connections for a word.
We note that the best results overall occur with
the Clusters+Context network, which combines
two approaches to selecting words that have good
potential to be similar to the target word. The
correlation coefficient for this network is at a re-
spectable 0.36, and the median ranks are the sec-
ond best of all the network-growth methods. Im-
portantly, this network shows the desired small-
world structure in most of the runs (77%), with
the highest connectivity and a small-world mea-
sure well over 1.
The fact that the Clusters+Context network is
better overall than the networks of the Clusters-
only and Context methods indicates that both clus-
ters and context are important in making ?in-
formed guesses? about which words are likely
to be similar to a target word. Given the small
number of similarity comparisons used in our ex-
periments (only around 8% of all possible word-
to-word comparisons), these observations suggest
that both the linguistic context and the evolving
relations among word usages (captured by the in-
cremental clustering of learned meanings) contain
information crucial to the process of growing a se-
mantic network in a cognitively plausible way.
7 Conclusions
We propose a unified model of word learning and
semantic network formation, which creates a net-
work of words in which connections reflect struc-
tured knowledge of semantic similarity between
words. The model adheres to the cognitive plau-
sibility requirements of incrementality and use of
limited computations. That is, when incremen-
tally adding or updating a word?s connections in
the network, the model only looks at a subset of
words rather than comparing the target word to all
the nodes in the network. We demonstrate that
252
Comparing all Pairs
Semantic Connectivity Small World
Method ? 1
st
2
nd
3
rd
size
lcc
?
g
(%)
Upper-bound ?0.38 31 41 42 0.85 5.5
Baselines
Random ?0.38 56 76.9 68.9 0.6 5.2 (2)
Context ?0.39 97 115 89 0.5 0
Random+Context ?0.36 63.3 87.2 79.1 0.6 0 (0)
Cluster-based Methods
Clusters-only ?0.32 58.6 72.0 71.6 0.7 5.5 (43)
Clusters+Context ?0.36 53.9 67.6 64.8 0.7 7.2 (77)
Clusters+Random ?0.35 48.1 61.2 58.1 0.7 6.9 (48)
Table 2: Connectivity and small-worldness measures for the Upper-bound, Baseline, and Cluster-based
network-growth methods; best performances across the Baseline and Cluster-based methods are shown
in bold. ?: co-efficient of correlation between similarities of word pairs in network and in gold-standard;
1
st
, 2
nd
, 3
rd
: median ranks of corresponding gold-standard associates given network similarities; size
lcc
:
proportion of network in the largest connected component; ?
g
: overall ?small-worldness?, should be
greater than 1; %: the percentage of runs whose resulting networks exhibit a small-world structure. Note
there are 1074 nouns in each network.
using the evolving knowledge of semantic con-
nections among words as well as their context of
usage enables the model to create a network that
shows the properties of adult semantic knowledge.
This suggests that the information in the semantic
relations among words and their context can effi-
ciently guide semantic network growth.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Varada Kolhatkar for valu-
able discussion and feedback. We are also grateful
for the financial support from NSERC of Canada,
and University of Toronto.
References
John R. Anderson and Michael Matessa. 1992. Ex-
plorations of an incremental, bayesian algorithm for
categorization. Machine Learning, 9(4):275?308.
Lois Bloom. 1973. One word at a time: The use of
single word utterances before syntax, volume 154.
Mouton The Hague.
Alexander Budanitsky and Graeme Hirst. 2006. Eval-
uating wordnet-based measures of lexical semantic
relatedness. Computational Linguistics, 32(1):13?
47.
Susan Carey and Elsa Bartlett. 1978. Acquiring a sin-
gle new word.
Allan M. Collins and Elizabeth F. Loftus. 1975. A
spreading-activation theory of semantic processing.
Psychological review, 82(6):407.
Eliana Colunga and Linda B. Smith. 2005. From the
lexicon to expectations about kinds: A role for asso-
ciative learning. Psychological Review, 112(2):347?
382.
Paul Erdos and Alfr?ed R?enyi. 1960. On the evolution
of random graphs. Publ. Math. Inst. Hungar. Acad.
Sci, 5:17?61.
Afsaneh Fazly, Afra Alishahi, and Suzanne Steven-
son. 2010. A probabilistic computational model of
cross-situational word learning. Cognitive Science,
34(6):1017?1063.
Trevor Fountain and Mirella Lapata. 2011. Incremen-
tal models of natural language category acquisition.
In Proceedings of the 32st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Michael C. Frank, Noah D. Goodman, and Joshua B.
Tenenbaum. 2009. Using speakers referential inten-
tions to model early cross-situational word learning.
Psychological Science.
Michael C. Frank, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Anne
Fernald. 2013. Social and discourse contributions
to the determination of reference in cross-situational
word learning. Language Learning and Develop-
ment, 9(1):1?24.
Lila Gleitman. 1990. The structural sources of verb
meanings. Language Acquisition, 1(1):3?55.
Thomas L. Griffiths, Mark Steyvers, and Joshua B.
Tenenbaum. 2007. Topics in semantic representa-
tion. Psychological review, 114(2):211.
Michael W. Harm. 2002. Building large scale dis-
tributed semantic feature sets with WordNet. Tech-
nical Report PDP.CNS.02.1, Carnegie Mellon Uni-
versity.
253
Mark D. Humphries and Kevin Gurney. 2008. Net-
work small-world-ness: a quantitative method for
determining canonical network equivalence. PLoS
One, 3(4):e0002051.
Susan S. Jones and Linda B. Smith. 2005. Object name
learning and object perception: a deficit in late talk-
ers. J. of Child Language, 32:223?240.
Susan S. Jones, Linda B. Smith, and Barbara Landau.
1991. Object properties and knowledge in early lex-
ical learning. Child Development, 62(3):499?516.
Brian MacWhinney. 2000. The CHILDES Project:
Tools for Analyzing Talk, volume 2: The Database.
Erlbaum, 3rd edition.
Radford M. Neal and Geoffrey E. Hinton. 1998. A
view of the em algorithm that justifies incremental,
sparse, and other variants. In Learning in graphical
models, pages 355?368. Springer.
Radford M. Neal. 2000. Markov chain sampling meth-
ods for dirichlet process mixture models. Journal
of computational and graphical statistics, 9(2):249?
265.
Aida Nematzadeh, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne
Stevenson. 2012. Interaction of word learning and
semantic category formation in late talking. In Proc.
of CogSci?12.
Aida Nematzadeh, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne
Stevenson. 2014. Structural differences in the se-
mantic networks of simulated word learners.
Thierry Poibeau, Aline Villavicencio, Anna Korhonen,
and Afra Alishahi, 2013. Computational Modeling
as a Methodology for Studying Human Language
Learning. Springer.
Willard Van Orman Quine. 1960. Word and Object.
MIT Press.
Terry Regier. 2005. The emergence of words: Atten-
tional learning in form and meaning. Cognitive Sci-
ence, 29:819?865.
Garry Robins, Philippa Pattison, and Jodie Woolcock.
2005. Small and other worlds: Global network
structures from local processes1. American Journal
of Sociology, 110(4):894?936.
Larissa K. Samuelson and Linda B. Smith. 1999. Early
noun vocabularies: do ontology, category structure
and syntax correspond? Cognition, 73(1):1 ? 33.
Adam N. Sanborn, Thomas L. Griffiths, and Daniel J.
Navarro. 2010. Rational approximations to rational
models: alternative algorithms for category learning.
Jeffery Mark Siskind. 1996. A computational study
of cross-situational techniques for learning word-to-
meaning mappings. Cognition, 61:39?91.
Linda B. Smith and Chen Yu. 2008. Infants rapidly
learn word-referent mappings via cross-situational
statistics. Cognition, 106(3):1558?1568.
Mark Steyvers and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. 2005. The
large-scale structure of semantic networks: Statisti-
cal analyses and a model of semantic growth. Cog-
nitive science, 29(1):41?78.
Anna L. Theakston, Elena V. Lieven, Julian M. Pine,
and Caroline F. Rowland. 2001. The role of
performance limitations in the acquisition of verb?
argument structure: An alternative account. J. of
Child Language, 28:127?152.
Duncan J. Watts and Steven H. Strogatz. 1998. Col-
lective dynamics of small-worldnetworks. nature,
393(6684):440?442.
Zhibiao Wu and Martha Palmer. 1994. Verbs seman-
tics and lexical selection. In Proceedings of the 32nd
annual meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 133?138. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Chen Yu and Dana H. Ballard. 2007. A unified
model of early word learning: Integrating statistical
and social cues. Neurocomputing, 70(1315):2149
? 2165. Selected papers from the 3rd Interna-
tional Conference on Development and Learning
(ICDL 2004), Time series prediction competition:
the CATS benchmark.
Chen Yu and Linda B. Smith. 2007. Rapid word learn-
ing under uncertainty via cross-situational statistics.
Psychological Science, 18(5):414?420.
254
In: R. Levy & D. Reitter (Eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics (CMCL 2012), pages 80?89,
Montre?al, Canada, June 7, 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Computational Model of Memory, Attention, and Word Learning
Aida Nematzadeh, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Stevenson
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
{aida,afsaneh,suzanne}@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
There is considerable evidence that people
generally learn items better when the presen-
tation of items is distributed over a period of
time (the spacing effect). We hypothesize that
both forgetting and attention to novelty play
a role in the spacing effect in word learning.
We build an incremental probabilistic compu-
tational model of word learning that incorpo-
rates a forgetting and attentional mechanism.
Our model accounts for experimental results
on children as well as several patterns ob-
served in adults.
1 Memory, Attention, and Word Learning
Learning the meaning of words is an important com-
ponent of language acquisition, and an extremely
challenging task faced by young children (e.g.,
Carey, 1978; Bloom, 2000). Much psycholinguis-
tic research has investigated the mechanisms under-
lying early word learning, and the factors that may
facilitate or hinder this process (e.g., Quine, 1960;
Markman and Wachtel, 1988; Golinkoff et al, 1992;
Carpenter et al, 1998). Computational modeling has
been critical in this endeavor, by giving precise ac-
counts of the possible processes and influences in-
volved (e.g., Siskind, 1996; Regier, 2005; Yu, 2005;
Fazly et al, 2010). However, computational models
of word learning have generally not given sufficient
attention to the broader interactions of language ac-
quisition with other aspects of cognition and cogni-
tive development.
Memory limitations and attentional mechanisms
are of particular interest, with recent computational
studies reconfirming their important role in aspects
of word learning. For example, Frank et al (2010)
show that memory limitations are key to matching
human performance in a model of word segmenta-
tion, while Smith et al (2010) further demonstrate
how attention plays a role in word learning by form-
ing the basis for abstracting over the input. But
much potential remains for computational modeling
to contribute to a better understanding of the role of
memory and attention in word learning.
One area where there is much experimental evi-
dence relevant to these interactions is in the investi-
gation of the spacing effect in learning (Ebbinghaus,
1885; Glenberg, 1979; Dempster, 1996; Cepeda
et al, 2006). The observation is that people gen-
erally show better learning when the presentations
of the target items to be learned are ?spaced? ? i.e.,
distributed over a period of time ? instead of be-
ing ?massed? ? i.e., presented together one after
the other. Investigations of the spacing effect often
use a word learning task as the target learning event,
and such studies have looked at the performance of
adults as well as children (Glenberg, 1976; Pavlik
and Anderson, 2005; Vlach et al, 2008). While
this work involves controlled laboratory conditions,
the spacing effect is very robust across domains and
tasks (Dempster, 1989), suggesting that the underly-
ing cognitive processes likely play a role in natural
conditions of word learning as well.
Hypothesized explanations for the spacing effect
have included both memory limitations and atten-
tion. For example, many researchers assume that the
process of forgetting is responsible for the improved
performance in the spaced presentation: Because
participants forget more of what they have learned
in the longer interval, they learn more from sub-
sequent presentations (Melton, 1967; Jacoby, 1978;
80
Cuddy and Jacoby, 1982). However, the precise re-
lation between forgetting and improved learning has
not been made clear. It has also been proposed that
subjects attend more to items in the spaced presen-
tation because accessing less recent (more novel)
items in memory requires more effort or attention
(Hintzman, 1974). However, the precise attentional
mechanism at work in the spacing experiments is not
completely understood.
While such proposals have been discussed for
many years, to our knowledge, there is as yet no de-
tailed computational model of the precise manner in
which forgetting and attention to novelty play a role
in the spacing effect. Moreover, while mathemat-
ical models of the effect help to clarify its proper-
ties (Pavlik and Anderson, 2005), it is very impor-
tant to situate these general cognitive mechanisms
within a model of word learning in order to under-
stand clearly how these various processes might in-
teract in the natural word learning setting.
We address this gap by considering memory con-
straints and attentional mechanisms in the context
of a computational model of word-meaning acquisi-
tion. Specifically, we change an existing probabilis-
tic incremental model of word learning (Fazly et al,
2010) by integrating two new factors: (i) a forgetting
mechanism that causes the learned associations be-
tween words and meanings to decay over time; and
(ii) a mechanism that simulates the effects of atten-
tion to novelty on in-the-moment learning. The re-
sult is a more cognitively plausible word learning
model that includes a precise formulation of both
forgetting and attention to novelty. In simulations
using this new model, we show that a possible ex-
planation for the spacing effect is the interplay of
these two mechanisms, neither of which on its own
can account for the effect.
2 The Computational Model
We extend the model of Fazly et al (2010) ? hence-
forth referred to as FAS10 ? by integrating new
functionality to capture forgetting and attention to
novelty. The model of FAS10 is an appropriate start-
ing point for our study because it is an incremen-
tal model of word learning that learns probabilis-
tic associations between words and their semantic
properties from naturalistic data. Nonetheless, the
model assumes equal attention to all words and ob-
jects present in the input, and, although incremental,
it has a perfect memory for the internal represen-
tation of each processed input. Hence, as we will
show, it is incapable of simulating the spacing ef-
fects observed in humans.
2.1 The FAS10 Model
The input to the model is a sequence of utterances (a
set of words), each paired with a scene representa-
tion (a set of semantic features, representing what is
perceived when the words are heard), as in:
Utterance: { she, drinks, milk }
Scene: { ANIMATE, PERSON, FEMALE, CONSUME,
DRINK, SUBSTANCE, FOOD, DAIRY-PRODUCT }
For each word, the model of FAS10 learns a proba-
bility distribution over all possible features, p(.|w),
called the meaning probability of the word. Before
processing any input, all features are equally likely
for a word, and the word?s meaning probability is
uniform over all features. At each time step t, an
input utterance?scene pair (similar to the above
example) is processed. For each word w and seman-
tic feature f in the input pair, an alignment score,
at(w| f ), is calculated that specifies how strongly
the w? f pair are associated at time t. The alignment
score in FAS10 uses the meaning probabilities of
all the words in the utterance, which reflect the
knowledge of the model of word meanings up to
that point, as in:
at(w|f ) =
pt?1(f |w)
?
w??Ut
pt?1(f |w
?)
(1)
where pt?1( f |w) is the probability of f being part of
the meaning of word w at time t?1.
In the FAS10 model, pt(.|w) is then updated for
all the words in the utterance, using the accumulated
evidence from all prior and current co-occurrences
of w? f pairs. Specifically, an association score is
defined between a word and a feature, assoct(w, f ),
which is a summation of all the alignments for that
w and f up to time t.1 This association score is then
normalized using a smoothed version of the follow-
1In FAS10, assoct(w, f ) = assoct?1(w, f )+at(w| f ).
81
ing to yield pt( f |w):
pt( f |w) =
assoct( f , w)
?
f ??M
assoct( f
?, w)
(2)
whereM is the set of all observed features.
There are two observations to make about the
FAS10 model in the context of our desire to explore
attention and forgetting mechanisms in word learn-
ing. First, the calculation of alignments at(w| f ) in
Eqn. (1) treats all words equally, without special at-
tention to any particular item(s) in the input. Sec-
ond, the assoct( f ,w) term in Eqn. (2) encodes per-
fect memory of all calculated alignments since it is a
simple accumulated sum. These properties motivate
the changes to the formulation of the model that we
describe next.
2.2 Adding Attention to Novelty to the Model
As noted just above, the FAS10 model lacks any
mechanism to focus attention on certain words, as is
suggested by theories on the spacing effect (Hintz-
man, 1974). One robust observation in studies on
attention is that people attend to new items in a
learning scenario more than other items, leading to
improved learning of the novel items (e.g., Snyder
et al, 2008; MacPherson and Moore, 2010; Horst
et al, 2011). We thus model the effect of attention
to novelty when calculating alignments in our new
model: attention to a more novel word increases the
strength of its alignment with a feature ? and con-
sequently the learned word?feature association ?
compared to the alignment of a less novel word.
We modify the original alignment formulation of
FAS10 to incorporate a multiplicative novelty term
as follows (cf. Eqn. (1)):
at(w, f ) =
pt(f |w)
?
w??Ut
pt(f |w
?)
?noveltyt(w) (3)
where noveltyt(w) specifies the degree of novelty of
a word as a simple inverse function of recency. That
is, we assume that the more recently a word has been
observed by the model, the less novel it appears to
the model. Given a word w at time t that was last
observed at time tlastw , we calculate noveltyt(w) as:
noveltyt(w) = 1? recency(t, tlastw) (4)
where recency(t, tlastw) is inversely proportional
to the difference between t and tlastw . We set
novelty(w) to be 1 for the first exposure of the word.
2.3 Adding a Forgetting Mechanism to the
Model
Given the observation above (see end of Section 2.1)
that assoct(w, f ) embeds perfect memory in the
FAS10 model, we add a forgetting mechanism by re-
formulating assoct(w, f ) to incorporate a decay over
time of the component alignments at(w| f ). In or-
der to take a cognitively plausible approach to calcu-
lating this function, we observe that assoct(w, f ) in
FAS10 serves a similar function to activation in the
ACT-R model of memory (Anderson and Lebiere,
1998). In ACT-R, activation of an item is the sum
of individual memory strengthenings for that item,
just as assoct(w, f ) is a sum of individual align-
ment strengths for the pair (w, f ). A crucial dif-
ference is that memory strengthenings in ACT-R
undergo decay. Specifically, activation of an item
m after t presentations is calculated as: act(m)t =
ln(?tt ?=1 1/(t?t
?)d), where t ? is the time of each pre-
sentation, and d is a constant decay parameter.
We adapt this formulation for assoct(w, f ) with
the following changes: First, in the act formula, the
constant 1 in the numerator is the basic strength of
each presentation to memory. In our model, this
is not a constant but rather the strength of align-
ment, at(w| f ). Second, we assume that stronger
alignments should be more entrenched in memory
and thus decay more slowly than weaker alignments.
Thus, each alignment undergoes a decay which is
dependent on the strength of the alignment rather
than a constant decay d. We thus define assoct(w, f )
to be:
assoct( f ,w) = ln(
t
?
t ?=1
at ?(w| f )
(t? t ?)dat?
) (5)
where the decay for each alignment dat? is:
dat? =
d
at ?(w| f )
(6)
where d is a constant parameter. Note that the dat?
decreases as at ?(w| f ) increases.
82
apple: { FOOD:1, SOLID:.72, PRODUCE:.63,
EDIBLE-FRUIT:.32, PLANT-PART:.22,
PHYSICAL-ENTITY:.17, WHOLE:.06, ? ? ? }
Figure 1: True meaning features & scores for apple.
3 Input Generation
The input data consists of a set of utterances paired
with their corresponding scene representations. The
utterances are taken from the child-directed speech
(CDS) portion of the Manchester corpus (Theakston
et al, 2001), from CHILDES (MacWhinney, 2000),
which includes transcripts of conversations with 12
British children, ages 1;8 to 3;0. Every utterance
is considered as a bag of lemmatized words. Half of
the data is used as the development set, and the other
half in the final experiments.
Because no manually-annotated semantic repre-
sentation is available for any such large corpus of
CDS, we use the approach of Nematzadeh et al
(2012) to generate scene representations. For each
utterance a scene representation is generated artifi-
cially, by first creating an input-generation lexicon
that contains the true meaning (t(w)) of all the words
(w) in our corpus. The true meaning is a vector
of semantic features and their assigned scores (Fig-
ure 1). The semantic features for a word, depend-
ing on its part of speech, are chosen from different
sources such as WordNet.2 The score of each feature
is calculated automatically to give a higher value to
the more specific features (such as FRUIT for apple),
rather than more general features (like PHYSICAL-
ENTITY for apple).
To generate the scene representation S of an utter-
ance U, we probabilistically sample a subset of fea-
tures from the features in t(w) for each word w ?U.
Thus, in each occurrence of w some of its features
are missing from the scene, resulting in an imper-
fect sampling. This imperfect sampling allows us to
simulate noise and uncertainty in the input, as well
as the uncertainty of a child in determining the rele-
vant meaning elements in a scene. The scene S is the
union of all the features sampled for all the words in
the utterance. We note that the input-generation lex-
icon is only used in creating input corpora that are
naturalistic (based on child-directed speech), and not
in the learning of the model.
2http://wordnet.princeton.edu
4 Experiments
First, we examine the overall word learning be-
haviour in our new model. Then we look at spacing
effects in the learning of novel words. In both these
experiments, we compare the behavior of our model
with the model of FAS10 to clearly illustrate the ef-
fects of forgetting and attention to novelty in the new
model. Next we turn to further experiments explor-
ing in more detail the interaction of forgetting and
attention to novelty in producing spacing effects.
4.1 Word Learning over Time
Generally, the model of FAS10 has increasing com-
prehension of words as it is exposed to more input
over time. In our model, we expect attention to nov-
elty to facilitate word learning, by focusing more
on newly observed words, whereas forgetting is ex-
pected to hinder learning. We need to see if the new
model is able to learn words effectively when sub-
ject to the combined effects of these two influences.
To measure how well a word w is learned in each
model, we compare its learned meaning l(w) (a vec-
tor holding the values of the meaning probability
p(.|w)) to its true meaning t(w) (see Section 3):
acq(w) = sim(l(w), t(w)) (7)
where sim is the cosine similarity between the two
meaning vectors, t(w) and l(w). The better the
model learns the meaning of w, the closer l(w)
would get to t(w), and the higher the value of sim
would become. To evaluate the overall behaviour of
a model, at each point in time, we average the acq
score of all the words that the model has seen.
We train each model on 10,000 input utterance?
scene pairs and compare their patterns of word learn-
ing over time (Figure 2).3 We can see that in the
original model, the average acq score is mostly in-
creasing over time before leveling off. Our model,
starts at a higher average acq score compared to
FAS10?s model, since the effect of attention to nov-
elty is stronger than the effect of forgetting in early
stages of training. There is a sharp decrease in the
acq scores after the early training stage, which then
levels off. The early decrease in acq scores oc-
curs because many of the words the model is ex-
3The constant decay parameter d in Eqn. (6) is set to 0.03 in
this experiment.
83
Figure 2: Average acq score of the words over time, for
our model and FAS10?s model.
posed to early on are not learned very well initially,
and so forgetting occurs at a higher rate during that
stage. The model subsequently stabilizes, and the
acq scores level off although at a lower absolute
level than the FAS10 model. Note that when com-
paring these two models, we are interested in the
pattern of learning; in particular, we need to en-
sure that our new word learning model will even-
tually stabilize as expected. Our model stabilizes
at a lower average acq score since unlike FAS10?s
model, it does not implement a perfect memory.
4.2 The Spacing Effect in Novel Word
Learning
Vlach et al (2008) performed an experiment to in-
vestigate the effect of presentation spacing in learn-
ing novel word?object pairs in three-year-old chil-
dren. Each pair was presented 3 times in each of
two settings, either consecutively (massed presenta-
tion), or with a short play interval between each pre-
sentation (spaced presentation). Children were then
asked to identify the correct object corresponding to
the novel word. The number of correct responses
was significantly higher when the pairs were in the
spaced presentation compared to the massed presen-
tation. This result clearly demonstrates the spacing
effect in novel word learning in children.
Experiments on the spacing effect in adults have
typically examined and compared different amounts
of time between the spaced presentations, which we
refer to as the spacing interval. Another important
parameter in such studies is the time period between
the last training trial and the test trial(s), which we
refer to as the retention interval (Glenberg, 1976;
Bahrick and Phelps, 1987; Pavlik and Anderson,
2005). Since the experiment of Vlach et al (2008)
was designed for very young children, the proce-
dures were kept simple and did not vary these two
parameters. We design an experiment similar to that
of Vlach et al (2008) to examine the effect of spac-
ing in our model, but extend it to also study the role
of various spacing and retention intervals, for com-
parison to earlier adult studies.
4.2.1 Experimental Setup
First, the model is trained on 100 utterance?scene
pairs to simulate the operation of normal word learn-
ing prior to the experiment.4 Then a randomly
picked novel word (nw) that did not appear in the
training trials is introduced to the model in 3 teach-
ing trials, similar to Vlach et al?s (2008) experiment.
For each teaching trial, nw is added to a different ut-
terance, and its probabilistically-generated meaning
representation (see Section 3) is added to the corre-
sponding scene. We add nw to an utterance?scene
pair from our corpus to simulate the presentation of
the novel word during the natural interaction with
the child in the experimental setting.
The spacing interval between each of these 3
teaching trials is varied from 0 to 29 utterances, re-
sulting in 30 different simulations for each nw. For
example, when the spacing interval is 5, there are
5 utterances between each presentation of nw. A
spacing of 0 utterances yields the massed presenta-
tion. We run the experiment for 20 randomly-chosen
novel words to ensure that the pattern of the results
is not related to the meaning representation of a spe-
cific word.
For each spacing interval, we look at the acq score
of the novel word at two points in time, to simu-
late two retention intervals: One immediately after
the last presentation of the novel word (imm condi-
tion) and one at a later point in time (lat condition).
By looking at these two conditions, we can further
observe the effect of forgetting in our model, since
the decay in the model?s memory would be more se-
vere in the lat condition, compared to the imm con-
dition.5 The results reported here for each spacing
4In the experiments of Section 4.2.2 and Section 4.3, the
constant decay parameter d is equal to 0.04.
5Recall that each point of time in our model corresponds to
84
Figure 3: Average acq score of novel words over spacing
intervals, in our model and FAS10?s model.
interval average the acq scores of all the novel words
at the corresponding points in time.
4.2.2 The Basic Spacing Effect Results
Figure 3 shows the results of the simulations in
our model and the FAS10 model. We assume that
very small spacing intervals (but greater than 0)
correspond to the spaced presentation in the Vlach
et al (2008) experiments, while a spacing of 0 cor-
responds to the massed presentation. In the FAS10
model, the average acq score of words does not
change with spacing, and there is no difference be-
tween the imm and lat conditions, confirming that
this model fails to mimic the observed spacing ef-
fects. By contrast, in our model the average acq
score is greater in the small spacing intervals (1-
3) than in the massed presentation, mimicking the
Vlach et al (2008) results on children. This happens
because a nw appears more novel with larger spacing
intervals between each of its presentations resulting
in stronger alignments.
We can see two other interesting patterns in our
model: First, the average acq score of words for all
spacing intervals is greater in the imm condition than
in the lat condition. This occurs because there is
more forgetting in the model over the longer reten-
tion interval of lat. Second, in both conditions the
average acq score initially increases from a massed
presentation to the smaller spacing intervals. How-
ever, at spacing intervals between about 3 and 5,
processing an input pair. The acq score in the imm condition is
calculated at time t, which is immediately after the last presen-
tation of nw. The lat condition corresponds to t +20.
the acq score begins to decrease as spacing intervals
grow larger. As explained earlier, the initial increase
in acq scores for small spacing intervals results from
novelty of the words in a spaced presentation. How-
ever, for bigger spacing intervals the effect of nov-
elty is swamped by the much greater degree of for-
getting after a bigger spacing interval.
Although Vlach et al (2008) did not vary their
spacing and retention intervals, other spacing effect
studies on adults have done so. For example, Glen-
berg (1976) presented adults with word pairs to learn
under varying spacing intervals, and tested them af-
ter several different retention intervals (his experi-
ment 1). Our pattern of results in Figure 3 is in line
with his results. In particular, he found a nonmono-
tonic pattern of spacing similar to the pattern in our
model: learning of pairs was improved with increas-
ing spacing intervals up to a point, but there was a
decrease in performance for larger spacing intervals.
Also, the proportion of recalled pairs decreased for
longer retention intervals, similar to our lower per-
formance in the lat condition.
4.3 The Role of Forgetting and Attention
To fully understand the role as well as the neces-
sity of, both forgetting and attention to novelty in
our results, we test two other models under the same
conditions as the previous spacing experiment: (a) a
model with our mechanism for attention to novelty
but not forgetting, and (b) a model with our forget-
ting mechanism but no attention to novelty; see Fig-
ure 4 and Figure 5, respectively.
In the model that attends to novelty but does not
incorporate a memory decay mechanism (Figure 4),
the average acq score consistently increases as spac-
ing intervals grow bigger. This occurs because the
novel words appear more novel following bigger
spacing intervals, and thus attract more alignment
strength. Since the model does not forget, there is
no difference between the immediate (imm) and later
(lat) retention intervals. This pattern does not match
the spacing effect patterns of people, suggesting that
forgetting is a necessary aspect of our model?s abil-
ity to do so in the previous section.
On the other hand, in the model with forgetting
but no attentional mechanism (Figure 5), we see two
different behaviors in the imm and lat conditions. In
the imm condition, the average acq score decreases
85
Figure 4: Average acq score of the novel words over spac-
ing intervals, for the model with novelty but without for-
getting.
Figure 5: Average acq score of the novel words over spac-
ing intervals, for the model with forgetting but without
novelty.
consistently over spacing intervals. This is as ex-
pected, because the greater time between presenta-
tions means a greater degree of forgetting. Specif-
ically, the alignment scores decay more between
presentations of the word to be learned, given the
greater passage of time in larger spacing intervals.
The weaker alignments then lead to lower acq scores
in this condition.
Paradoxically, although this effect on learning
also holds in the lat condition, another factor is at
play, leading to better performance than in the imm
condition at all spacing intervals. Here the greater
retention interval ? the time between the last learn-
ing presentation and the test time ? leads to greater
forgetting in a manner that instead improves the acq
scores. Consider that the meaning representation
for a word includes some probability mass assigned
to irrelevant features ? i.e., those features that oc-
curred in an utterance?scene pair with the word but
are not part of its true meaning. Because such fea-
tures generally have lower probability than relevant
features (which are observed more consistently with
a word), a longer retention interval leads to them de-
caying more than the relevant features. Thus the lat
condition enables the model to better focus on the
features relevant to a word.
In conclusion, neither attention to novelty nor for-
getting alone achieves the pattern typical of the spac-
ing effects in people that our model shows in the
lower two plots in Figure 3. Hence we conclude that
both factors are necessary to our account, suggesting
that it is an interaction between the two that accounts
for people?s behaviour.
4.4 The ?Spacing Crossover Interaction?
In our model with attention to novelty and forgetting
(see Section 4.2), the average acq score was always
better in the imm condition than the lat condition.
However, researchers have observed other patterns
in spacing experiments. A particularly interesting
pattern found in some studies is that the plots of the
results for earlier and later retention intervals cross
as the spacing intervals are increased. That is, with
smaller spacing intervals, a shorter retention inter-
val (such as our imm condition) leads to better re-
sults, but with larger spacing intervals, a longer re-
tention interval (such as our lat condition) leads to
better results (Bahrick, 1979; Pavlik and Anderson,
2005). This interaction of spacing and retention in-
tervals results in a pattern referred to as the spacing
crossover interaction (Pavlik and Anderson, 2005).
This pattern is different from Glenberg?s (1976) ex-
periment and from the pattern of results shown ear-
lier for our model (Figure 3).
We looked at an experiment in which the spac-
ing crossover pattern was observed: Pavlik and An-
derson (2005) taught Japanese?English pairs to sub-
jects, varying the spacing and retention intervals.
One difference we noticed between the experiment
of Pavlik and Anderson (2005) and Glenberg (1976)
was that in the former, the presentation period of the
stimulus was 5 seconds, whereas in the latter, it was
3 seconds. We hypothesize that the difference be-
tween the amount of time for the presentation peri-
86
Figure 6: Average acq score of the novel words over spac-
ing intervals
ods might explain the different spacing patterns in
these experiments.
We currently cannot model presentation time di-
rectly in our model, since having access to an in-
put longer does not change its computation of align-
ments between words and features. However, we
can indirectly model a difference in presentation
time by modifying the amount of memory decay:
We assume that when an item is presented longer, it
is learned better and therefore subject to less forget-
ting. We run the spacing experiment with a smaller
forgetting parameter to model the longer presenta-
tion period used in Pavlik and Anderson?s (2005)
versus Glenberg (1976).6
Our results using the decreased level of forgetting,
given in Figure 6, show the expected crossover inter-
action between the retention and spacing intervals:
for smaller spacing intervals, the acq scores are bet-
ter in the imm condition, whereas for larger spacing
intervals, they are better in the lat condition. Thus,
our model suggests an explanation for the observed
crossover: in tasks which strengthen the learning of
the target item ? and thus lessen the effect of forget-
ting ? we expect to see a benefit of later retention
trials in experiments with people.
5 General Discussion and Future Work
The spacing effect (where people learn items better
when multiple presentations are spread over time)
has been studied extensively and is found to be ro-
bust over different types of tasks and domains. Many
6Here, the decay parameter is set to 0.03.
experiments have examined the spacing effect in the
context of word learning and other similar tasks.
Particularly, in a recent study of Vlach et al (2008),
young children demonstrated a spacing effect in a
novel word learning task.
We use computational modeling to show that by
changing a probabilistic associative model of word
learning to include both a forgetting and attentional
mechanism, the new model can account not only for
the child data, but for various patterns of spacing ef-
fect data in adults. Specifically, our model shows the
nonmonotonic pattern of spacing observed in the ex-
perimental data, where learning improves in shorter
spacing intervals, but worsens in bigger spacing in-
tervals. Our model can also replicate the observed
cross-over interaction between spacing and retention
intervals: for smaller spacing intervals, performance
is better when tested after a shorter retention inter-
val, whereas for bigger spacing intervals, it is better
after longer retention intervals. Finally, our results
confirm that by modelling word learning as a stan-
dalone development process, we cannot account for
the spacing effect. Instead, it is important to con-
sider word learning in the context of fundamental
cognitive processes of memory and attention.
Much remains to be investigated in our model.
For example, most human experiments examine the
effect of frequency of presentations of target items.
Also, the range of retention intervals that has been
studied is greater than what we have considered
here. In the future, we plan to study the effect of
these two parameters. In addition, with our current
model, the amount of time an item is presented to
the learner does not play a role. We can also re-
formulate our alignment mechanism to incorporate
a notion of the amount of time to consider an item
to be learned. Another interesting future direction,
especially in the context of word learning, is to de-
velop a more complete attentional mechanism, that
considers different parameters such as social cues
and linguistic cues. Finally, we will study the role
of forgetting and attention in modelling other rele-
vant experimental data (e.g., Kachergis et al, 2009;
Vlach and Sandhofer, 2010).
87
References
John .R. Anderson and Christian Lebiere. 1998. The
atomic components of thought. Lawrence Erl-
baum Associates.
Harry P. Bahrick. 1979. Maintenance of knowl-
edge: Questions about memory we forgot to ask.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
108(3):296?308.
Harry P. Bahrick and Elizabeth Phelps. 1987. Reten-
tion of Spanish vocabulary over 8 years. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 13(2):344?349.
Paul Bloom. 2000. How Children Learn the Mean-
ings of Words. MIT Press.
Susan Carey. 1978. The child as word learner. In
M. Halle, J. Bresnan, and G. A. Miller, editors,
Linguistic Theory and Psychological Reality. The
MIT Press.
Malinda Carpenter, Katherine Nagell, Michael
Tomasello, George Butterworth, and Chris
Moore. 1998. Social cognition, joint attention,
and communicative competence from 9 to 15
months of age. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 63(4).
Nicholas J. Cepeda, Harold Pashler, Edward Vul,
John T. Wixted, and Doug Rohrer. 2006. Dis-
tributed practice in verbal recall tasks: A review
and quantitative synthesis. Psychological Bul-
letin, 132(3):354 ? 380.
Lauren J. Cuddy and Larry L. Jacoby. 1982. When
forgetting helps memory: an analysis of repetition
effects. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 21(4):451 ? 467.
Frank Dempster. 1989. Spacing effects and their im-
plications for theory and practice. Educational
Psychology Review, 1:309?330.
Frank N. Dempster. 1996. Distributing and manag-
ing the conditions of encoding and practice. Mem-
ory, pages 317?344.
Hermann Ebbinghaus. 1885. Memory: A contri-
bution to experimental psychology. New York,
Teachers College, Columbia University.
Afsaneh Fazly, Afra Alishahi, and Suzanne Steven-
son. 2010. A probabilistic computational model
of cross-situational word learning. Cognitive Sci-
ence, 34(6):1017?1063.
Michael C. Frank, Sharon Goldwater, Thomas L.
Griffiths, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. 2010. Mod-
eling human performance in statistical word seg-
menation. Cognition, 117:107?125.
Arthur Glenberg. 1979. Component-levels theory of
the effects of spacing of repetitions on recall and
recognition. Memory and Cognition, 7:95?112.
Arthur M. Glenberg. 1976. Monotonic and non-
monotonic lag effects in paired-associate and
recognition memory paradigms. Journal of Ver-
bal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 15(1).
Roberta M. Golinkoff, Kathy Hirsh-Pasek, Leslie M.
Bailey, and Neil R. Wegner. 1992. Young chil-
dren and adults use lexical principles to learn new
nouns. Developmental Psychology, 28(1):99?
108.
Douglas L. Hintzman. 1974. Theoretical implica-
tions of the spacing effect.
Jessica S. Horst, Larissa K. Samuelson, Sarah C.
Kucker, and Bob McMurray. 2011. Whats new?
children prefer novelty in referent selection. Cog-
nition, 118(2):234 ? 244.
Larry L. Jacoby. 1978. On interpreting the effects
of repetition: Solving a problem versus remem-
bering a solution. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 17(6):649 ? 667.
George Kachergis, Chen Yu, and Richard Shiffrin.
2009. Temporal contiguity in cross-situational
statistical learning.
Amy C. MacPherson and Chris Moore. 2010. Un-
derstanding interest in the second year of life. In-
fancy, 15(3):324?335.
Brian MacWhinney. 2000. The CHILDES Project:
Tools for Analyzing Talk, volume 2: The
Database. Erlbaum, 3rd edition.
Ellen M. Markman and Gwyn F. Wachtel. 1988.
Children?s use of mutual exclusivity to constrain
the meanings of words. Cognitive Psychology,
20:121?157.
Arthur W. Melton. 1967. Repetition and retrieval
from memory. Science, 158:532.
88
Aida Nematzadeh, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne
Stevenson. 2012. Interaction of word learning and
semantic category formation in late talking. In
Proc. of CogSci?12. To appear.
Philip I. Pavlik and John R. Anderson. 2005. Prac-
tice and forgetting effects on vocabulary memory:
An activationbased model of the spacing effect.
Cognitive Science, 29:559?586.
W.V.O. Quine. 1960. Word and Object. MIT Press.
Terry Regier. 2005. The emergence of words: At-
tentional learning in form and meaning. Cognitive
Science, 29:819?865.
Jeffery Mark Siskind. 1996. A computational study
of cross-situational techniques for learning word-
to-meaning mappings. Cognition, 61:39?91.
Linda B Smith, Eliana Colunga, and Hanako
Yoshida. 2010. Knowledge as process:
Contextually-cued attention and early word
learning. Cogn Sci, 34(7):1287?314.
Kelly A. Snyder, Michael P. BlanK, and chad J. Mar-
solek. 2008. What form of memory underlies nov-
elty preferences? Psychological Bulletin and Re-
view, 15(2):315 ? 321.
Anna L. Theakston, Elena V. Lieven, Julian M. Pine,
and Caroline F. Rowland. 2001. The role of per-
formance limitations in the acquisition of verb?
argument structure: An alternative account. J. of
Child Language, 28:127?152.
Haley A Vlach and Catherine M Sandhofer. 2010.
Desirable difficulties in cross-situational word
learning.
Haley A. Vlach, Catherine M. Sandhofer, and Nate
Kornell. 2008. The Spacing Effect in Children?s
Memory and Category Induction. Cognition,
109(1):163?167, October.
Chen Yu. 2005. The emergence of links between
lexical acquisition and object categorization: A
computational study. Connection Science, 17(3?
4):381?397.
89
