Computer Processing of Arabic Script-based Languages:  
     Current State and Future Directions 
 
      Ali Farghaly 
                  SYSTRAN Software, Inc. 
                       9333 Genesee  Ave 
                  San Diego, CA 92121, USA 
                     alifarghaly@aol.com 
 
Arabic script-based languages do not belong to a single language family, and therefore   exhibit 
different linguistic properties. To name just a few:  Arabic is primarily a VSO language 
whereas Farsi  is an SVO  and  Urdu is an SOV language. Both Farsi and Urdu have light verbs 
whereas Arabic does not. Urdu and Arabic have grammatical gender while Farsi does not.  
There are, however, linguistic and non-linguistic factors that bring these languages together. On 
the linguistic side it is the use of the Arabic script, the right to left direction, the absence of 
characters representing short vowels  and the complex word structure.   Non-linguistic common 
properties that bind the majority of speakers of these languages include:  the Qur?an that every 
Moslem has to recite in Arabic,  proximity of the countries speaking these languages,  common 
history and, to a large extent, a common culture and historical influx .  It is not surprising, then, 
that the surge of interest in the study of these languages and the sudden availability for funding 
to support the development of  computational applications to process data in these languages 
come for all these languages at the same time.  
 
This also occurs at crucial period in the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP). It is 
becoming increasingly evident that statistical and corpus-based approaches, though necessary, 
are not sufficient to address all issues involved in building viable applications in NLP.  Arabic 
script-based languages share in different degrees an explosion of  homograph and word sense 
ambiguity. The absence of the representation of short vowels in normal texts dramatically  
increases the number of ambiguities. At SYSTRAN, the average number of ambiguities of a 
token in many languages is 2.3, whereas in Modern Standard Arabic, it reaches 19.2. Dealing 
with such a problem represents a real challenge to NLP systems. Resolving ambiguity in NLP 
requires representation not only of linguistic and contextual knowledge but also of domain and 
world knowledge. It is not clear how number crunching of linguistic data could address this 
problem.  Ambiguity in Arabic is enormous at every level: lexical, morphological and 
syntactic. Another serious problem is tokenization. It is extremely common in Arabic to find a 
token such as  ??????????????  which is actually a sentence consisting of a conjunction, a verb, a 
subject, an object in that order.   Moreover, within the verb itself,  there is tense, number and 
gender and mood. Within the object, which is only two alphabet letters, there is number, gender 
and case. The complexity of tokens and the abstractness of information, such as the meanings 
of   prosodic templates (McCarthy, 1981), present challenges in the processing of Arabic 
script?based languages.  
 
There has been steady progress in computational processing of Arabic  script-based languages     
in the last few years. The greatest leap since the pioneering   efforts made in the early 1980s in 
Arabic computational linguistics (Hlal, 1985;Ali 1985, 1987, 1988; Geith 1988; Farghaly, 
1987), is the availability of  Buckwalter?s morphological analyzer and dictionary which has 
recently given a boost  in that area. The great work at the LDC in the creation of a corpus of 
written and spoken Arabic as well as the Arabic tree bank is another important  resource  to the 
practitioners in the field. What is urgently needed in future research is work on syntactic 
analysis and ambiguity resolution.   
