Aligning and Using an English-Inuktitut Parallel Corpus
Joel Martin, Howard Johnson, Benoit Farley and Anna Maclachlan
Institute for Information Technology
National Research Council Canada
firstname.lastname@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca
Abstract
A parallel corpus of texts in English and
in Inuktitut, an Inuit language, is presented.
These texts are from the Nunavut Hansards.
The parallel texts are processed in two phases,
the sentence alignment phase and the word cor-
respondence phase. Our sentence alignment
technique achieves a precision of 91.4% and
a recall of 92.3%. Our word correspondence
technique is aimed at providing the broadest
coverage collection of reliable pairs of Inuktitut
and English morphemes for dictionary expan-
sion. For an agglutinative language like Inuk-
titut, this entails considering substrings, not
simply whole words. We employ a Pointwise
Mutual Information method (PMI) and attain a
coverage of 72.3% of English words and a pre-
cision of 87%.
1 Introduction
We present an aligned parallel corpus of Inuktitut and
English from the Nunavut Hansards. The alignment at
the sentence level and the word correspondence follow
techniques described in the literature with augmentations
suggested by the specific properties of this language pair.
The lack of lexical resources for Inuktitut, the unrelated-
ness of the two languages, the fact that the languages use
a different script and the richness of the morphology in
Inuktitut have guided our choice of technique. Sentences
have been aligned using the length-based dynamic pro-
gramming approach of Gale and Church (1993) enhanced
with a small number of lexical and non-alphabetic an-
chors. Word correspondences have been identified with
the goal of finding an extensive high quality candidate
glossary for English and Inuktitut words. Crucially, the
algorithm considers not only full word correspondences,
as most approaches do, but also multiple substring corre-
spondences resulting in far greater coverage.
2 An English-Inuktitut Corpus
2.1 The Parallel Texts
The corpus of parallel texts we present consists of
3,432,212 words of English and 1,586,423 words of Inuk-
titut from the Nunavut Hansards. These Hansards are
available to the public in electronic form in both English
and Inuktitut (www.assembly.nu.ca). The Legislative As-
sembly of the newly created territory of Nunavut began
sitting on April 1, 1999. Our corpus represents 155 days
of transcribed proceedings of the Nunavut Legislative As-
sembly from that first session through to November 1,
2002, which was part way through the sixth session of
the assembly.
We gather and process these 155 documents in vari-
ous ways described in the rest of this paper and make
available a sentence-aligned version of the parallel texts
(www.InuktitutComputing.ca/NunavutHansards). Like
the French-English Canadian Hansards of parliamentary
proceedings, this corpus represents a valuable resource
for Machine Translation research and corpus research as
well as for the development of language processing tools
for Inuktitut. The work reported here takes some first
steps toward these ends, and it is hoped that others will
find ways to expand on this work. One reason that the
Canadian Hansards, a large parallel corpus of English-
French, are particularly useful for research is that they
are comparatively noise free as parallel text collections
go (Simard and Plamondon, 1996). This should be true
of the Nunavut Hansard collection as well. The Canadian
Hansard is transcribed in both languages so what was said
in English is transcribed in English and then translated
into French and vice versa. For the Nunavut Hansard, in
contrast, a complete English version of the proceedings
is prepared and then this is translated into Inuktitut, even
when the original proceedings were spoken in Inuktitut.
2.2 The Inuktitut Language
Inuktitut is the language of the Inuit living in North East-
ern Canada, that is, Nunavut (Keewatin and Baffin Is-
land), Nunavik and Labrador. It includes six closely
related spoken dialects: Kivalliq, Aivilik, North Baffin,
South Baffin, Arctic Quebec (Nunavik), and Labrador.
Inuktitut is a highly agglutinative language. Noun and
verb roots occur with two main types of suffixes and there
are many instantiations of these suffixes. The seman-
tic suffixes modify the meaning of the root (over 250 of
these in North Baffin dialect) and the grammatical suf-
fixes indicate features like agreement and mood (approx-
imately 700 verbal endings and over 300 nominal endings
in North Baffin dialect).
A single word in Inuktitut is often translated with
multiple English words, sometimes corresponding to a
full English clause. For example, the Inuktitut word
r???'???rk?'n
n
c
?k???rk?rk (which is transliterated as
qaisaaliniaqquunngikkaluaqpuq) corresponds to these
eight English words: ?Actually he will probably not come
early today?. The verbal root is qai ?come?, the semantic
suffixes are -saali-, -niaq-, -qquu-, -nngit- and -galuaq-
meaning ?soon?, ?a little later today or tomorrow?, ?proba-
bility?, ?negation?, and ?actuality? respectively, and finally
the grammatical suffix -puq expresses the 3rd person sin-
gular of the indicative mood. This frequently occurring
one-to-many correspondence represents a challenge for
word correspondence. The opposite challenging situa-
tion, namely instances of many-to-one correspondences,
also arises for this language pair but less frequently. The
latter is therefore not addressed in this paper.
Yet another challenge is the morphophonological com-
plexity of Inuktitut as reflected in the orthography, which
has two components. First, the sheer number of pos-
sible suffixes mentioned above is problematic. Second,
the shape of these suffixes is variable. That is, there are
significant orthographic changes to the individual mor-
phemes when they occur in the context of a word. This
type of variability can be seen in the above example at the
interface of -nngit- and -galuaq-, which together become
-nngikkaluaq-.
Finally, it is important to note that Inuktitut has a syl-
labic script for which there is a standard Romanization.
To give an idea of how the scripts compare, our corpus
of parallel texts consists of 20,124,587 characters of En-
glish and 13,457,581 characters in Inuktitut syllabics as
compared to 21,305,295 characters of Inuktitut in Roman
script.
3 Sentence Alignment
3.1 Sentence Alignment Approach
The algorithm used to align English-Inuktitut sentences is
an extension of that presented in Gale and Church (1993).
It does not identify crossing alignments where the sen-
tence order within paragraphs in the parallel texts differs.
Sentence alignments typically involve one English sen-
tence matching one Inuktitut sentence (a 1-to-1 bead),
but may also involve 2-to-1, 1-to-2, 0-to-1, 1-to-0 and
2-to-2 sentence matching patterns, or beads. Using such
a length-based approach where the length of sentences
is measured in characters is appropriate for our language
pair since the basic assumption generally holds. Namely,
longer English sentences typically correspond to longer
Inuktitut sentences as measured in characters.
One problem with the approach, as pointed out by
Macklovitch and Hannan (1998), is that from the point
where a paragraph is misaligned, it is difficult to ensure
proper alignment for the remainder of the paragraph. We
observed this effect in our alignment. We also observed
that the large number of small paragraphs with almost
identical length caused problems for the algorithm.
Many alignment approaches have addressed such prob-
lems by making use of additional linguistic clues specific
to the languages to be aligned. For our language pair,
it was not feasible to use most of these. For example,
some alignment techniques make good use of cognates
(Simard and Plamondon, 1996). The assumption is that
words in the two languages that share the first few let-
ters are usually translations of each other. English and
Inuktitut, however, are too distantly related to have many
cognates. Even the translation of a proper name does not
usually result in a cognate for our language pair, since the
translation between scripts induces a phonetic translation
rather than a character-preserving translation of the name,
as these pairs illustrate Peter, Piita; Canada, Kanata;
McLean, Makalain.
Following a suggestion in Gale and Church (1993),
the alignment was aided by the use of additional an-
chors that were available for the language pair. These
anchors consisted of non-alphabetic sequences (such as
9:00, 42-1(1) and 1999) and 8 reliable word cor-
respondences that occurred frequently in the corpus, in-
cluding words beginning with these character sequences
speaker/uqaqti and motion/pigiqati, for ex-
ample.
3.2 Steps in Sentence Alignment
Preprocessing: Preprocessing the Inuktitut and the En-
glish raised separate issues. For English, the main is-
sue was ensuring that illegal or unusual characters are
mapped to other characters to simplify later processing.
For Inuktitut the main issue was the array of encodings
used for the syllabic script. Inuktitut syllabics can be rep-
resented using a 7-bit encoding called ProSyl, which is
in many cases extended to an 8-bit encoding Tunngavik.
Each syllabic character can be encoded in multiple ways
that need to be mapped into a uniform scheme, such as
Unicode. Each separate file was converted to HTML us-
ing a commercial product LogicTran r2net. Then, the
Perl package HTML::TreeBuilder was used to purge the
text of anomalies and set up the correct mappings. The
output of this initial preprocessing step was a collection
of HTML files in pure Unicode UTF8.
Boundary Identification: The next step was to iden-
tify the paragraph and sentence boundaries for the Inuk-
titut and English texts. Sentences were split at periods,
question marks, colons and semi-colons except where the
following character was a lower case letter or a number.
This resulted in a number of errors but was quite accurate
in general. Paragraph boundaries were inserted where
such logical breaks occurred as signaled in the HTML
and generally correspond to natural breaks in the orig-
inal document. Using HTML indicators contributed to
the number of very short paragraphs, especially toward
the beginning of each document. As mentioned in sec-
tion 3.1, these short paragraphs were problematic for the
alignment algorithm. The collection consists of 348,619
sentences in 112,346 paragraphs in English and 352,486
sentences in 118,733 paragraphs in Inuktitut. After this
step, document, paragraph and sentence boundaries were
available to use as hard and soft boundaries for the Gale
and Church algorithm.
Syllabic Script Conversion: The word correspon-
dence phase required a Roman script representation of
the Inuktitut texts. The conversion from unicode syllab-
ics to Roman characters was performed at this stage in the
sentence alignment process using the standard ICI con-
version method.
Anchors: The occurrences of the lexical anchors men-
tioned above were found and used with a dynamic pro-
gramming search to find the path with the largest number
of alignments. This algorithm was written in Perl and re-
quired about two hours to process the whole corpus. All
alignments that occurred in the first two sentences of each
paragraph were marked as hard boundaries for the Gale
and Church (1993) program as provided in their paper.
3.3 Sentence Alignment Evaluation
Three representative days of Hansard (1999/04/01,
2001/02/21 and 2002/10/29) were selected and manually
aligned at the sentence level as a gold standard. Precision
and recall were then measured as suggested in Isabelle
and Simard (1996).
Results: The number of sentence alignments in the
gold standard was 3424. The number automatically
aligned by our method was 3459. The number of
those automatic alignments that were correct as measured
against the gold standard was 3161. This represents a pre-
cision of 91.4% and a recall rate of 92.3%. For compari-
son, the Gale and Church (1993) program, which did not
make use of additional anchors, had poorer results over
our corpus. Their one-pass approach, which ignores para-
graph boundaries, had a precision of 66.7% and a recall
of 71.5%. Their two-pass approach, which aligns para-
graphs in one pass and then aligns sentences in a second
pass, had a precision of 85.6% and a recall of 87.0%.
4 Word Correspondence
Having built a sentence-aligned parallel corpus, we next
attempted to use that corpus. Our goal was to extract
as many reliable word associations as possible to aid in
developing a morphological analyzer and in expanding
Inuktitut dictionaries. The output of this glossary discov-
ery phase is a list of suggested pairings that a human can
consider for inclusion in a dictionary. Inuktitut dictio-
naries often disagree because of spelling and dialectical
differences. As well, many contemporary words are not
in the existing dictionaries. The parallel corpus presented
here can be used to augment the dictionaries with current
words, thereby providing an important tool for students,
translators, and others.
In our approach, a glossary is populated with pairs of
words that are consistent translations of each other. For
many language pairs, considering whole word to whole
word correspondences for inclusion in a glossary would
yield good results. However, because Inuktitut is aggluti-
native, the method must discover pairs of an English word
and the corresponding root of the Inuktitut word, or the
corresponding Inuktitut suffix, or sometimes the whole
Inuktitut word. In other words, it is essential to consider
substrings of words for good coverage for a language pair
like ours.
4.1 Substring Correspondence Method
Searching for substring correspondences is reduced to a
counting exercise. For any pair of substrings, you need to
know how many parallel regions contained the pair, how
many regions in one language contained the first, how
many regions in the other language contained the second,
and how many regions there are in total. For example,
the English word ?today? and the Inuktitut word ?ullumi?
occur in 2092 parallel regions. The word ?today? appears
in a total of 3065 English regions; and ?ullumi? appears
in 2702 Inuktitut regions. All together, there are 332,154
aligned regions. It is fairly certain that these two words
should be a glossary pair because each usually occurs as
a translation of the other.
The PMI Measure: We measure the degree of asso-
ciation between any two substrings, one in the English
and one in the Inuktitut, using Pointwise Mutual Infor-
mation (PMI). PMI measures the amount of information
that each substring conveys about the occurrence of the
other. We recognize that PMI is badly behaved when the
counts are near 1. To protect against that problem, we
compute the 99.99999% confidence intervals around the
PMI (Lin, 1999), and use the lower bound as a measure
of association. This lower bound rises as the PMI rises
or as the amount of data increases. Many measures of
association would likely work as well as the lower confi-
dence bound on PMI. We used that bound as a metric in
this study for three reasons. First, that metric led to bet-
ter performance than Chi-squared on this data. Second, it
addressed the problem of low frequency events. Third, it
makes the correct judgment on Gale and Church?s well-
known chambre-communes problem (Gale and Church,
1991).
The decision to include pairs of substrings in the glos-
sary proceeds as follows. Include the highest PMI scoring
pairs if neither member of the pair has yet been included.
If two pairs are tied, check whether the Inuktitut members
of the pairs are in a substring relation. If they are, then
add the pair with the longer substring to the glossary; if
not, then add neither pair.
Many previous efforts have used a similar methodol-
ogy but were only able to focus on word to word cor-
respondences (Gale and Church, 1991). Here, the En-
glish words can correspond to any substring in any Inuk-
titut word in the aligned region. This means that statis-
tics have to be maintained for many possible pairs. Un-
der our approach, we maintain all these statistics for all
English words, all Inuktitut words as well as substrings
with length of between one and 10 Roman characters, and
all co-occurrences that have frequency greater than three.
This approach thereby addresses the challenge of Inuk-
titut roots and multiple semantic suffixes corresponding
to individual English words. It also addresses the chal-
lenge of orthographic variation at morpheme boundaries
to some degree since it will truncate morphemes appro-
priately in many cases.
4.2 Glossary Evaluation
This method suggested 4362 word-substring pairs for in-
clusion in a glossary. This represents a 72.3% coverage of
English word occurrences in the corpus (omitting words
of fewer than 3 characters). One hundred of these word-
substring pairs were chosen at random and judged for ac-
curacy using two existing dictionaries and a partial suffix
list. An Inuktitut substring was said to match an English
word exactly if the Inuktitut root plus all the suffixes car-
ried the same meaning as the English word and conveyed
the same grammatical features (e.g., grammatical number
and case). The correspondence was said to be good if the
Inuktitut root plus the left-most lexical suffixes conveyed
the same meaning as the English word. In those cases, the
Inuktitut word conveyed additional semantic or grammat-
ical information.
About half of the exact matches were uninflected
proper nouns. A typical example of the other exact
matches is the pair inuup and person?s. In this pair, inu-
means person and -up is the singular genitive case. A typ-
ical example of a good match is the pair pigiaqtitara and
deal. In this pair, pigiaqti- means deal and -tara conveys
first person singular subject and third person singular ob-
ject. For example, ?I deal with him?.
Of the 100 pairs, 43 were deemed exact matches and
44 were deemed good matches. The remaining 13 were
incorrect. Taken together 87% of the pairs in the sample
were useful to include in a glossary. This level of perfor-
mance will improve as we introduce morphological anal-
ysis to both the Inuktitut and English words.
5 Conclusion
We have shown that aligning an English text with a highly
agglutinative language text can have very useful out-
comes. The alignment of the corpus to the sentence level
was achieved accurately enough to build a usable parallel
corpus. This is demonstrated by the fact that we could
create a glossary tool on the basis of this corpus that
suggested glossary pairings for 72.3% of English words
in the text with a precision of 87%. We hope that our
work will generate further interest in this newly available
English-Inuktitut parallel corpus.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank Gavin
Nesbitt of the Legislative Assembly of Nunavut for pro-
viding the Hansards, Peter Turney for useful sugges-
tions, and Canadian Heritage for financial support of this
project.
References
William A. Gale and Kenneth Ward Church. 1991. Iden-
tifying word correspondance in parallel text. In Pro-
ceedings of the DARPA NLP Workshop.
William A. Gale and Kenneth Ward Church. 1993. A
program for aligning sentences in bilingual corpora.
Computational Linguistics, 19(1):75?103.
Pierre Isabelle and Michel Simard. 1996. Propo-
sitions pour la repre?sentation et l?e?valuation des
alignements de textes paralle`les. [http://www.lpl.univ-
aix.fr/projects/arcade/2nd/sent/metrics.html]. In Rap-
port technique, CITI.
Dekang Lin. 1999. Automatic identification of non-
compositional phrases. In Proceedings of the ACL.
Elliot Macklovitch and Marie-Louise Hannan. 1998.
Line ?em up: Advances in alignment technology and
their impact on translation support tools. Machine
Translation, 13(1).
Michel Simard and Pierre Plamondon. 1996. Bilingual
sentence alignment: Balancing robustness and accu-
racy. In Proceedings of the Conference of the Associa-
tion for Machine Translation in the Americas (AMTA).
