Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1426?1434,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Extracting Clusters of Specialist Terms from Unstructured Text
Aaron Gerow
Computation Institute
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL, USA
gerow@uchicago.edu
Abstract
Automatically identifying related special-
ist terms is a difficult and important task
required to understand the lexical struc-
ture of language. This paper develops
a corpus-based method of extracting co-
herent clusters of satellite terminology ?
terms on the edge of the lexicon ? us-
ing co-occurrence networks of unstruc-
tured text. Term clusters are identi-
fied by extracting communities in the co-
occurrence graph, after which the largest
is discarded and the remaining words are
ranked by centrality within a community.
The method is tractable on large corpora,
requires no document structure and min-
imal normalization. The results suggest
that the model is able to extract coher-
ent groups of satellite terms in corpora
with varying size, content and structure.
The findings also confirm that language
consists of a densely connected core (ob-
served in dictionaries) and systematic, se-
mantically coherent groups of terms at the
edges of the lexicon.
1 Introduction
Natural language consists of a number of rela-
tional structures, many of which can be obscured
by lexical idiosyncrasies, regional variation and
domain-specific conventions. Despite this, pat-
terns of word use exhibit loose semantic struc-
ture, namely that proximate words tend to be re-
lated. This distributional hypothesis has been op-
erationalized in a variety of ways, providing in-
sights and solutions into practical and theoretical
questions about meaning, intention and the use of
language. Distributional analyses rely primarily
on observing natural language to build statistical
representations of words, phrases and documents
(Turney and Pantel, 2010). By studying dictio-
naries and thesauri, lexicographic and terminolog-
ical research has proposed that a core lexicon is
used to define the remaining portions of vocabu-
lary (It?o and Mester, 1995; Mass?e et al., 2008).
Though many words that comprise general lan-
guage use reside in this core lexicon, even the
most general language contains specialist or so-
called ?satellite? words. This paper introduces a
method of extracting this peripheral structure, with
co-occurrence networks of unstructured text.
The core-periphery structure has been observed
in dictionaries where definitions tend to use a re-
stricted vocabulary, repetitively employing a core
set of words to define others (Sinclair, 1996; Pi-
card et al., 2013). In the farther regions of the lex-
icon, it is more difficult to find systematic seman-
tic definition with corpus-based techniques due to
the overwhelming number of infrequent words.
Unfortunately, the fringe of the lexicon can be
more important than the core because this is where
domain-specific terminology resides ? features
that may be more important than frequent.
Examining dictionaries, (Picard et al., 2013)
propose that the lexicon consists of four main
parts: a core set of ubiquitous words used to de-
fine other words, a kernel that makes up most of
the lexicon, a minimal grounding set that includes
most of the core and some of the kernel, leav-
ing a set of satellites in the periphery. This to-
pography, reproduced in Figure 1, has been found
in the way dictionary entries use words to define
one another. In networks of dictionary defini-
tions, the core component tends to form a strongly
connected component (SCC) leaving satellites in
smaller SCCs with relatively weak links to the
core. This paper explores whether these these
satellites form systematic, cohesive groups and
whether they are observable in natural language.
1426
Figure 1: Dictionary studies have proposed that
the lexicon consists of a strongly connected core,
around which there is a kernel, an asymmetric
grounding set and satellites. Adapted from (Picard
et al., 2013).
Words with relatively specific definitions within
subjects, referred to as terms in lexicographic re-
search, are apparent in nearly all domains of dis-
course. Here, the goal is to explore structure
among these peripheral terms without a dictio-
nary. To do this, a method based on commu-
nity detection in textual co-occurrence networks
is developed. Such graph-based methods have be-
come increasingly popular in a range of language-
related tasks such as word clustering, document
clustering, semantic memory, anaphora resolution
and dependency parsing (see Mihalcea and Radev,
2011 for a review).
This paper seeks to address two important ques-
tions about the observed landscape of the lexicon
in natural language: to investigate whether satel-
lite clusters found in dictionaries can be observed
in text, and more importantly, to explore whether
statistical information in co-occurrence networks
can elucidate this peripheral structure in the lexi-
con. We frame these questions as the task of ex-
tracting clusters of related terms. If satellites are
systematically organized, then we can expect to
find cohesive clusters in this region. Moreover, if
the networked structure of dictionary entries sup-
ports the landscape in Figure 1, a similar structure
may be present in co-occurrence patterns in natu-
ral text.
2 Method
Word clustering, as a means to explore underly-
ing lexical structure, should accommodate fuzzy
and potentially contradictory notions of similarity.
For example, red and green are at once similar,
being colors, but as colors, they are very differ-
ent. Alternatively, the words car, fast, wheel, ex-
port and motorists share a thematic similarity in
their relation to automobiles. One conception of
word clustering is to construct a thesaurus of syn-
onyms (Calvo et al., 2005), but clustering could
allow other lexical semantic relationships. One
such database, WordNet, defines specific seman-
tic relationships and has been used to group words
according to explicit measures of relatedness and
similarity (Miller, 1995; Pedersen et al., 2004).
Distributional, corpus-based techniques that de-
fine words as feature vectors (eg. word-document
co-occurrences), can address many limitations of
manually created lexicons (see Turney et al., 2010
for a review). Clustering nouns by argument struc-
ture can uncover naturally related objects (Hin-
dle, 1990) and spectral methods can relate dis-
tinct classes of nouns with certain kinds of verbs
to induce selectional preferences (Resnik, 1997;
Sun and Korhonen, 2009; Wilks, 1975) and assist
metaphor processing (Shutova et al., 2013).
A pervasive weakness of many existing ap-
proaches to word-clustering, is an underlying pri-
oritization of frequent words. To help address
this sparsity, many models collapse words into
stems, preclude uncommon words, or underesti-
mate the relevance of infrequent words (Dagan
et al., 1999). Probabilistic topic models have
emerged as a uniquely flexible kind of word-
clustering used in content analysis (Steyvers and
Griffiths, 2007), text classification (Wei and Croft,
2006) and provide an extensible framework to ad-
dress other tasks (Blei, 2012). Because the struc-
ture of satellite terms is not likely to rely on spe-
cific (much less consistent) lexical semantic re-
lationships, we adopt a measure of semantic co-
herence, commonly used to qualify the results of
topic models, as an indirect measure of what peo-
ple tend to view as a cohesive set of words. This
measure, which is defined in the next section, is
particularly attractive because it is corpus-based,
does not assume any specific semantic relationship
and correlates with expert evaluations (Mimno et
al., 2011; Newman et al., 2010). Using semantic
coherence provides a way of measuring the qual-
1427
ity of word-associations without appeal to a dic-
tionary or assuming rigid relationships among the
clustered words.
The first step is to construct a co-occurrence
graph from which communities are extracted.
Then the centrality of each word is computed
within a community to generate cluster-specific
rankings. The goal is not to categorize words
into classes, nor to provide partitions that sepa-
rate associated words across a corpus. Instead, the
method is designed to extract qualifiable sets of
specialist terms found in arbitrary text. Crucially,
the method is designed to require no document
structure and minimal pre-processing: stop-words
and non-words are not removed and no phrasal,
sentence or document structure is required. Al-
though stemming or lemmatization could pro-
vide more stream-lined interpretations, the mini-
mal pre-processing allows the method to operate
efficiently on large amounts of unstructured text
of any language.
Co-occurrence networks have been used in a
variety of NLP applications, the basic idea be-
ing to construct a graph where proximate words
are connected. Typically, words are connected
if they are observed in an n-word window. We
set this window to a symmetric 7 words on ei-
ther side of the target and did not use any weight-
ing
1
. In the resulting network, edge frequen-
cies are set to the number of times the given co-
occurrence is observed. The resulting networks
are typically quite dense and exhibit small-world
structure where most word-pairs are only a few
edges apart (Baronchelli et al., 2013; Ferror i Can-
cho and Sol?e, 2001). To explore the effect of
this density, different minimum node- and edge-
frequencies were tested (analogous to the word-
and co-occurrence frequencies in text). It was
found that not setting any thresholds provided the
best results (see Figure 2), supporting our minimal
pre-processing approach.
To extract clusters from the co-occurrence ma-
trix, the Infomap community detection algorithm
was used. Infomap is an information-theoretic
method that optimizes a compression dictionary
using it to describe flow through connected nodes
(Rosvall and Bergstrom, 2008). By minimizing a
description of this flow, the algorithm can also ex-
tract nested communities (Rosvall and Bergstrom,
1
7 was found to be the optimal window-size in terms of
coherence. These preliminary results are available at knowl-
edgelab.org/docs/coherent clusters-data.xls.
Corpus Docs Tokens Nodes Edges
TASA 38,972 10.7M 58,357 1,319,534
NIPS 3,742 5.2M 28,936 1,612,659
enTenTen 92,327 72.2M 69,745 7,721,413
Table 1: Co-occurrence networks of each corpus.
2011). In our experiments, we used the co-
occurrence frequencies as edge-weights and ran
50 trials for each run of the algorithm. Co-
occurrence networks tended to form one mono-
lithic community, corresponding to the lexicon?s
core SCC, surrounded by a number of smaller
communities. The monolithic community is dis-
carded out-right, as it represents the core of the
lexicon where few specialist terms reside. As we
will see, the community detection algorithm nat-
urally identifies this SCC, distinguishing satellite
clusters of terminology. Though we do not explore
its effect, the sensitivity of Infomap can be tuned
to vary the relative size of the core SCC compared
to the satellites, effectively allowing less modular
communities to be considered satellites.
To compare and interpret the resulting clus-
ters, various measures of centrality were tested for
ranking words within their communities. The goal
of this ranking is to find words that typify or de-
fine their community without assuming its under-
lying semantics. The results in the next section
show that a number of common centrality mea-
sures work comparably well for this task. The fi-
nal output of the system is a set of communities,
in which words are ranked by their centrality.
3 Results & Analysis
Three corpora were used for evaluation: the
TASA, NIPS and enTenTen collections. TASA
consists of paragraph-length excerpts from high-
school level, American English texts (Landauer
and Dumais, 1997). The NIPS collection contains
17 volumes of annual proceedings from the con-
ference of the same name. The enTenTen corpus
is a web-based collection of text-heavy, English
web-sites. Table 1 summarizes the collections and
their co-occurrence networks.
The extracted communities, which consist of
word-centrality pairs, are similarly structured to
the output of topic models. Because appeals to
human judgement are expensive and can introduce
issues of consistency (Chang et al., 2009; Hu et al.,
2011), a corpus-based measure of semantic coher-
ence has been proposed (Mimno et al., 2011). Co-
1428
herence is used as a proxy for human judgments.
A general form of semantic coherence can be de-
fined as the mean pair-wise similarity over the top
n words in a topic or cluster t
C(t) =
1
n
n
?
(w
i
,w
j
)?t
i<j
S(w
i
, w
j
)
where S is a symmetric measure of similarity.
Newman, et al. (2010) surveyed a number of simi-
larity metrics and found that mean point-wise mu-
tual information (PMI) correlated best to human
judgements. PMI is a commonly used measure of
how much more information co-occurring words
convey together compared to their independent
contributions (Church and Hanks, 1990; Bouma,
2009). Using PMI as S, we can define a version of
coherence, known as UCI Coherence:
C
UCI
(t) =
1
n
n
?
(w
i
,w
j
)?t
i<j
log
p(w
i
, w
j
)
p(w
i
)p(w
j
)
where p(w) is estimated as relative frequency in
a corpus:
f(w)?
i
f(w
i
)
. Using coherence to optimize
topic models, Mimno et al. (2011) found that a
simplified measure, termed UMass Coherence, is
more strongly correlated to human judgments than
C
UCI
. For topic t, C
UMass
is defined as follows:
C
UMass
(t) =
1
n
n
?
(w
i
,w
j
)?t
i<j
log
D(w
i
, w
j
) + 1
D(w
j
)
where D(w) is the number of documents con-
taining w, and D(w,w
?
) is the number of doc-
uments containing both w and w
?
. Note that D
relies crucially on document segmentation in the
reference corpus, which is not encoded in the co-
occurrence networks derived by the method de-
scribed above. Thus, though the networks be-
ing analyzed and the coherence scores are both
based on co-occurrence information, they are dis-
tinct from one another. Following convention,
we compute coherence for the top 10 words in a
given community. C
UMass
was used as the mea-
sure of semantic coherence. and D was computed
over the TASA corpus, which means the resulting
scores are not directly comparable to (Mimno et
al., 2011), though comparisons to other published
results are provided below.
3.1 Ranking Functions & Frequency
Thresholds
After communities are extracted from the co-
occurrence graph, words are ranked by their cen-
trality in a community. Six centrality measures
were tested as ranking functions: degree centrality,
closeness centrality, eigenvector centrality, Page-
rank, hub-score and authority-score (Friedl et al.,
2010). Degree centrality uses a node?s degree
as its centrality under the assumption that highly
connected nodes are central. Closeness centrality
measures the average distance between a node and
all other nodes, promoting nodes that are ?close?
to the rest of the network. Eigenvector centrality
favors well-connected nodes that are themselves
connected to well-connected nodes. Pagerank is
similar to eigenvector centrality, but also promotes
nodes that mediate connections between strongly
connected nodes. Hub and authority scores mea-
sure interconnectedness (hubs) and connectedness
to interconnected nodes (authorities). Figure 2
shows the average coherence, across all commu-
nities extracted from the TASA corpus, for each
centrality measure. The average coherence scores
are highest using hub-score, though not signifi-
cantly better than auth-score, eigenvector central-
ity or closeness centrality. In the results that fol-
low, hub-scores were used to rank nodes within
communities.
Figure 2: Mean coherence for six centrality mea-
sures. Error-bars are ?2 SE of the mean.
1429
Imposing minimum node and edge frequencies
in the co-occurrence graph was also tested. How-
ever, applying no thresholds provided the high-
est average coherence. Figure 3 shows the aver-
age coherence for eight threshold configurations.
Though we used the TASA corpus for these tests,
we have no reason to believe the results would dif-
fer significantly for the other corpora.
Figure 3: Mean coherence for different mini-
mum node and edge frequencies, corresponding
to thresholds for word and co-occurrence counts.
Error-bars are ?2 SE of the mean.
3.2 Community Coherence
Table 2 shows three communities of specialist
terms extracted from each text collection, with
their normalized hub-scores. Normalizing the
scores preserves their rank-ordering and provides
an indication of relative centrality within the com-
munity itself. For example, compare the first
and last words from the top TASA and NIPS
clusters: the difference between thou and craven
(TASA) is considerably more than model and net-
work (NIPS). In general, higher ranked words ap-
pear to typify their communities, with words like
model, university and nuclear in the NIPS ex-
amples. These clusters are typical of those pro-
duced by the method, though in some cases, the
communities contain less than 10 terms and were
not included in the coherence analysis. Note that
these clusters are not systematic in any lexical se-
mantic sense, though in almost every case there
are discernible thematic relations (middle-English
words, Latin America and seafood in TASA).
TASA NIPS enTenTen
thou 1.00 model 1.00 cortex 1.00
shalt 0.72 learning 0.99 prefrontal 0.88
hast 0.49 data 0.96 anterior 0.41
thyself 0.26 neural 0.94 cingulate 0.33
dost 0.24 using 0.85 medulla 0.28
wilt 0.24 network 0.85 parietal 0.13
canst 0.12 training 0.73 insula 0.13
knowest 0.10 algorithm 0.66 cruciate 0.11
mayest 0.10 function 0.63 striatum 0.11
craven 0.01 networks 0.62 ventral 0.10
peru 1.00 university 1.00 pradesh 1.00
ecuador 0.84 science 0.85 andhra 0.67
bolivia 0.80 computer 0.83 madhya 0.56
argentina 0.67 department 0.74 uttar 0.50
paraguay 0.54 engineering 0.30 bihar 0.21
chile 0.52 report 0.30 rajasthan 0.19
venezuela 0.48 technical 0.29 maharashtra 0.16
uruguay 0.28 institute 0.26 haryana 0.12
lima 0.17 abstract 0.25 himachal 0.10
parana 0.11 california 0.23 arunachal 0.04
clams 1.00 nuclear 1.00 cilia 1.00
crabs 0.87 weapons 0.66 peristomal 0.73
oysters 0.87 race 0.57 stalk 0.62
crab 0.67 countries 0.40 trochal 0.51
lobsters 0.66 rights 0.37 vorticella 0.35
shrimp 0.62 india 0.27 campanella 0.32
hermit 0.50 russia 0.26 hairlike 0.17
mussels 0.27 philippines 0.26 swimmers 0.15
lice 0.23 brazil 0.25 epistylis 0.12
scallops 0.20 waste 0.22 telotroch 0.11
Table 2: Sample clusters from the TASA, NIPS
and enTenTen collections. Shown are the clusters?
top ten words, ranked by their normalized hub-
score within the community. Note the differences
in hub-score distributions between clusters.
Figure 4 shows the average coherence for our
method, compared to that of a 20-topic latent
Dirichlet allocation (LDA) model fit to the same
corpora. Results from an LDA model fit to our
corpora, as well as from a sample of published
topics, are provided as a baseline to calibrate read-
ers? intuitions about coherence
2
. Although topics
from LDA do not necessarily consist of special-
ist terms those in the current model, the expec-
tation of coherence remains: probable or central
words should comprise a cohesive group. In every
case, coherence is calculated over the top 10 words
ranked using within-community hub-scores, for
every community of 10 or more words. The results
show that LDA provides relatively consistent co-
herence across collections, though with generally
more variance than the communities of specialist
terms. The term clusters are more coherent for the
enTenTen collection than the others, which may
2
Coherence was computed for the published results with
C
UMass
using TASA as the reference corpus.
1430
be due to its larger size. This up-tick on the largest
corpus may have to do with the proportional size
of the monolithic community for the less struc-
tured documents in enTenTen. Figure 5 depicts
how the proportional size of the core would effect
the number and size of satellite clusters. It was
found that the largest community (the core SCC)
comprised 95% of TASA, 90% of NIPS and 97%
of enTenTen. It may be that specialized language
will have a proportionally smaller core and more
satellite communities, whereas more general lan-
guage will have a larger core and fewer satellites.
A critical question remains as to whether the
method is actually observing the core-periphery
structure of the lexicon or if it is an artifact. To
test this, the frequencies of words in satellite com-
munities were compared to those in the monolithic
cases. If the monolithic community does indeed
correspond to the core proposed in Figure 1, words
in the satellites should have significantly lower fre-
quencies. Indeed, the monolithic community in
every corpus contained words that were signifi-
cantly more frequent than those in the communi-
ties (Wilcoxon rank-sum test; Table 3). Taken with
Figure 4: Mean coherence (C
UMass
) for satellite
clusters and topics from LDA on the TASA, NIPS
and enTenTen collections (top). Also shown are
the mean coherence of topics found in published
models (LDA, a dynamic topic model, DTM and a
correlated topic model, CTM; bottom). Error-bars
are ?2 SE of the mean.
the coherence scores, these results show that there
is coherent structure in the periphery of the lexi-
con, that can be extracted from unstructured text.
Figure 5: A proportionally larger core SCC (right)
would force satellite communities to be smaller,
less numerous and more isolated. Alternatively,
with a small core (left), satellite communities
would be more numerous and prominent.
Corpus mean f
c
mean f
s
W df
TASA 112.3 7.3 39985454 40895
NIPS 211.5 10.7 28342663 25077
enTenTen 365.1 15.9 246095083 72695
Table 3: Comparison of frequency for core words,
f
c
, found in the monolithic community and spe-
cialist terms, f
s
, found in the satellite communities
(Wilcoxon rank-sum test). All differences were
significant at p < 0.001.
4 Discussion
The results of our method show that outlying
structure in the lexicon can be extracted directly
from large collections of unstructured text. The
lexicon?s topography, previously explored in dic-
tionary studies, contains modular groups of satel-
lite terms that are observable without appeal to ex-
ternal resources or document structure and with
minimal normalization. The contribution of this
method is two-fold: it confirms the structure of the
observed lexicon is similar to that apparent in the
organization of dictionaries (Picard et al., 2013).
Second, it offers a tractable, reliable means of ex-
tracting and summarizing structure in the fringes
of the lexicon.
The output of the model developed here is sim-
ilar to topic models, but with some important
differences. Topic models produce a probability
distribution over words to define a topic, which
can be summarized by the top 10 to 20 most
likely words. Instead of probabilities, the within-
1431
community hub-scores were used to rank words in
each cluster. This means that the actual structure
of the community (to which topics have no ana-
logue) is responsible for producing the scores that
rate words? internal relevance. Another crucial
difference is that topic size from a single sampling
iteration tends to correlate with coherence (Mimno
et al., 2011), but in the current method, there is
no correlation between cluster size and coherence
(p = 0.98). The other important difference is that
whereas topic models produce a topic-document
mixture that can be used for posterior inference, to
perform such inference with our method, the out-
put would have to be used indirectly.
One understated strength of the community
detection method is the minimal required pre-
processing. Whereas many solutions in NLP
(including topic models) require document seg-
mentation, lexical normalization and statistical
normalizations on the co-occurrence matrix it-
self, the only variable in our method is the co-
occurrence window size. However, lemmatiza-
tion (or stemming) could help collapse morpho-
syntactic variation among terms in the results,
but stop-word removal, sentence segmentation and
TF-IDF weighting appear unnecessary. What
might be most surprising given the examples in Ta-
ble 2 is that word-document occurrence informa-
tion is not used at all. This makes the the method
particularly useful for large collections with little
to no structure.
One question overlooked in our analysis con-
cerns the effect the core has on the satellites. It
could be that the proportional size of a collection?s
core is indicative of the degree of specialist ter-
minology contained in the collection. Also, the
raw number of satellite communities might indi-
cate the level of diversity in a corpus. Addressing
these questions could yield measures of previously
vague and latent variables like specialty or topi-
cal diversity, without employing a direct semantic
analysis. By measuring a collection?s core size,
relative to its satellites, one could also use mea-
sure changes in specialization. The Infomap algo-
rithm could accommodate such an experiment: by
varying the threshold of density that constitutes a
community, the core could be made smaller, yield-
ing more satellites, the coherence of which could
be compared to those reported here. One could ex-
amine the position of individual words in the satel-
lite(s) to explore what features signal important,
emerging and dying terms or to track diachronic
movement of terms like computer or gene from the
specialized periphery to core of the lexicon.
At the level of inter-related term clusters, there
are likely important or central groups that influ-
ence other satellites. There is no agreed upon mea-
sure of ?community centrality? in a network sense
(Eaton and Mansbach, 2012). One way to measure
the importance of a community would be to use
significance testing on the internal link mass com-
pared to the external (Csardi and Nepusz, 2006).
However, this approach discards some factors for
which one might want to account, such as cen-
trality in the network of communities and their
composition. Future work could seek to com-
bine graph-theoretic notions of centrality and in-
tuitions about the defining features of term clus-
ters. Another avenue for future research would
be to use mixed membership community detection
(Gopalan and Blei, 2013). Allowing terms to be
represented in more than one community would
accommodate words like nuclear, that might be
found relating to weaponry, energy production and
physics research at the same time. Using co-
occurrence networks to extract clusters of special-
ist terms, though an important task, is perhaps only
a starting point for exploring the observed lexicon.
Network-based analysis of language offers a gen-
eral and powerful potential to address a range of
questions about the lexicon, other NLP tasks and
language more generally.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to E. Duede and three reviewers for com-
ments on earlier versions of this manuscript. This
work was supported by a grant from the Templeton
Foundation to the Metaknowledge Research Net-
work and grant #1158803 from the National Sci-
ence Foundation.
References
Andrea Baronchelli, Ramon Ferrer i Cancho, Ro-
mualdo Pastor-Satorras, Nick Chater, and Morten H.
Christiansen. 2013. Networks in cognitive science.
Trends in cognitive sciences, 17(7):348?360.
David M. Blei. 2012. Probabilistic topic models.
Communications of the ACM, 55(4):77?84.
Gerlof Bouma. 2009. Normalized (pointwise) mutual
information in collocation extraction. Proceedings
of the German Society for Computational Linguis-
tics & Language Technology, pages 31?40.
1432
Hiram Calvo, Alexander Gelbukh, and Adam Kilgar-
riff. 2005. Distributional thesaurus versus word-
net: A comparison of backoff techniques for unsu-
pervised pp attachment. In Computational Linguis-
tics and Intelligent Text Processing, pages 177?188.
Springer.
Jonathan Chang, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Sean Gerrish,
Chong Wang, and David M. Blei. 2009. Reading
tea leaves: How humans interpret topic models. In
Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 22,
pages 288?296.
Kenneth Ward Church and Patrick Hanks. 1990. Word
association norms, mutual information, and lexicog-
raphy. Computational linguistics, 16(1):22?29.
Gabor Csardi and Tamas Nepusz. 2006. The igraph
software package for complex network research. In-
terJournal, Complex Systems:1695.
Ido Dagan, Lillian Lee, and Fernando C.N. Pereira.
1999. Similarity-based models of word cooccur-
rence probabilities. Machine Learning, 34(1-3):43?
69.
Eric Eaton and Rachael Mansbach. 2012. A spin-glass
model for semi-supervised community detection. In
Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intel-
ligence.
Ramon Ferror i Cancho and Richard V. Sol?e. 2001.
The small world of human language. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological
Sciences, 268(1482):2261?2265.
Dipl-Math Bettina Friedl, Julia Heidemann, et al.
2010. A critical review of centrality measures in
social networks. Business & Information Systems
Engineering, 2(6):371?385.
Prem K. Gopalan and David M. Blei. 2013. Efficient
discovery of overlapping communities in massive
networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 110(36):14534?14539.
Donald Hindle. 1990. Noun classification from
predicate-argument structures. In Proceedings of the
28th annual meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 268?275.
Yuening Hu, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Brianna Sati-
noff. 2011. Interactive topic modeling. In Pro-
ceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies-Volume 1, pages 248?257.
Junko It?o and Armin Mester. 1995. The core-periphery
structure of the lexicon and constraints on rerank-
ing. University of Massachusetts occasional papers
in linguistics, 18:181?209.
Thomas K. Landauer and Susan T. Dumais. 1997.
A solution to plato?s problem: The latent semantic
analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and rep-
resentation of knowledge. Psychological review,
104(2):211.
A. Blondin Mass?e, Guillaume Chicoisne, Yassine Gar-
gouri, Stevan Harnad, Olivier Picard, and Odile
Marcotte. 2008. How is meaning grounded in
dictionary definitions? In Proceedings of the 3rd
Textgraphs Workshop on Graph-Based Algorithms
for Natural Language Processing, pages 17?24.
Rada Mihalcea and Dragomir Radev. 2011. Graph-
based natural language processing and information
retrieval. Cambridge University Press.
George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical
database for english. Communications of the ACM,
38(11):39?41.
David Mimno, Hanna M. Wallach, Edmund Talley,
Miriam Leenders, and Andrew McCallum. 2011.
Optimizing semantic coherence in topic models. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 262?
272.
David Newman, Jey Han Lau, Karl Grieser, and Tim-
othy Baldwin. 2010. Automatic evaluation of
topic coherence. In Human Language Technologies:
The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 100?108.
Ted Pedersen, Siddharth Patwardhan, and Jason Miche-
lizzi. 2004. Wordnet::similarity: measuring the re-
latedness of concepts. In Demonstration Papers at
HLT-NAACL 2004, pages 38?41.
Olivier Picard, M?elanie Lord, Alexandre Blondin-
Mass?e, Odile Marcotte, Marcos Lopes, and Stevan
Harnad. 2013. Hidden structure and function in the
lexicon. NLPCS 2013: 10th International Workshop
on Natural Language Processing and Cognitive Sci-
ence, Marseille, France.
Philip Resnik. 1997. Selectional preference and sense
disambiguation. In Proceedings of the ACL SIGLEX
Workshop on Tagging Text with Lexical Semantics:
Why, What, and How, pages 52?57.
Martin Rosvall and Carl T. Bergstrom. 2008. Maps of
random walks on complex networks reveal commu-
nity structure. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 105(4):1118?1123.
Martin Rosvall and Carl T. Bergstrom. 2011. Mul-
tilevel compression of random walks on networks
reveals hierarchical organization in large integrated
systems. PloS one, 6(4):e18209.
Ekaterina Shutova, Simone Teufel, and Anna Korho-
nen. 2013. Statistical metaphor processing. Com-
putational Linguistics, 39(2):301?353.
John Sinclair. 1996. The empty lexicon. International
Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 1(1):99?119.
Mark Steyvers and Tom Griffiths. 2007. Probabilistic
topic models. Handbook of latent semantic analysis,
427(7):424?440.
1433
Lin Sun and Anna Korhonen. 2009. Improving verb
clustering with automatically acquired selectional
preferences. In Proceedings of the 2009 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: Volume 2-Volume 2, pages 638?647.
Peter D. Turney and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From
frequency to meaning: Vector space models of se-
mantics. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
37(1):141?188.
Xing Wei and Bruce Croft. 2006. Lda-based docu-
ment models for ad-hoc retrieval. In Proceedings
of the 29th annual international ACM SIGIR confer-
ence on Research and development in information
retrieval, pages 178?185.
Yorick Wilks. 1975. A preferential, pattern-seeking,
semantics for natural language inference. Artificial
Intelligence, 6(1):53?74.
1434
Proceedings of TextGraphs-9: the workshop on Graph-based Methods for Natural Language Processing, pages 48?55,
October 29, 2014, Doha, Qatar.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Modular Community Structure of Linguistic Predication Networks
Aaron Gerow
Computation Institute
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL, USA
gerow@uchicago.edu
James Evans
Dept. of Sociology & Computation Institute
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL, USA
jevans@uchicago.edu
Abstract
This paper examines the structure of lin-
guistic predications in English text. Iden-
tified by the copular ?is-a? form, predi-
cations assert category membership (hy-
pernymy) or equivalence (synonymy) be-
tween two words. Because predication
expresses ontological structure, we hy-
pothesize that networks of predications
will form modular groups. To measure
this, we introduce a semantically mo-
tivated measure of predication strength
to weight relevant predications observed
in text. Results show that predications
do indeed form modular structures with-
out any weighting (Q ? 0.6) and that
using predication strength increases this
modularity (Q ? 0.9) without discard-
ing low-frequency items. This high
level of modularity supports the network-
based analysis and the use of predication
strength as a way to extract dense semantic
clusters. Additionally, words? centrality
within communities exhibits slight corre-
lation with hypernym depths in WordNet,
underscoring the ontological organization
of predication.
1 Introduction & Background
Statistical patterns in language use are evident at
many levels and have proved useful in an increas-
ingly wide range of computational and cognitive
applications. Statistical regularities offer a way
to quantify and model how people create, encode
and use knowledge about the world. Statements
specifically about ?what things are? (ie. onto-
logical statements) offer uniquely transparent evi-
dence about peoples? knowledge of the world. Our
research adopts a corpus-based approach in which
networks of predications are analyzed to assess the
underlying structure of ontological assertions.
Word-word predications, observed as the copu-
lar is-a form in English, are important because,
unlike most grammatical constructions that have
few semantic constraints, predications tend to im-
ply category membership or equivalence. Take (i)
and (ii) for example:
(i) Safety is always a primary concern.
(ii) This organization is an institution
where [...].
(i) is a category assertion (safety as a type of con-
cern) and (ii) is an equivalence assertion (organi-
zation is an institution). Most predications can be
interpreted as category memberships like (i); ex-
plicit articulation of equivalence is actually quite
rare in language (Cimiano, 2006; Cimiano and
V?olker, 2005). Although some categorical pred-
ications are metaphorical, many of these are inter-
preted using category matching or analogical map-
ping processes (Glucksberg et al., 1997; Bowdle
and Gentner, 2005). In both semantic interpreta-
tions, predications naturally form a directed net-
work of words. Consisting primarily of category
assertions, the structure of this network should ex-
hibit a degree of natural clustering owing natural
categories of the those things it represents.
Network representations of language have been
used to describe a wide range of structures in lan-
guage, including word-word and word-document
co-occurrences, term collocations, dependency
structure and named entity relations. Networks of
grammatical relations have been found to differ-
entiate word-classes (Ferrer i Cancho et al., 2004)
and semantic networks can be used to model vo-
cabulary growth (Steyvers and Tenenbaum, 2005).
Co-occurrence networks, which are perhaps the
most widely studied natural language network, are
the foundation of many vector-space models (Lan-
dauer and Dumais, 1997; Turney et al., 2010)
and can be used to mine synonyms (Cohen et
al., 2005), disambiguate word senses (Agirre et
48
al., 2014; Biemann, 2006) and even help mark
the quality of essays (Foltz et al., 1999). Spec-
tral methods applied to linguistic networks have
been used to differentiate languages (Ferrer i Can-
cho et al., 2004), word-classes (Sun and Korho-
nen, 2009) and genres of text (Ferrer i Cancho et
al., 2007). Using spectral methods, research has
also found that syntactic and semantic distribu-
tional similarity networks have considerably dif-
ferent structure (Biemann et al., 2009). The use
of lexical graphs (networks of words) in particu-
lar, pre-dates modern NLP (Rapoport et al., 1966),
though the approach continues to influence a va-
riety of NLP and information retrieval tasks like
summarization and retrieval (Erkan and Radev,
2004; V?eronis, 2004). Network-based methods
have even used community detection, similar to
the algorithm described in this paper, to extract
specialist terms from sets of multi-theme docu-
ments (Grineva et al., 2009) as well as unstruc-
tured texts (Gerow, 2014).
Because predications naturally form directed
chains of ontological assertions, we hypothesize
that their underlying structure is systematic and
modular, given its representation of naturally or-
ganized things in the world. Our method employs
community detection on networks of noun-noun
predications as a way to assess the overall struc-
ture of predication, but it could be extended to
hypernym and category extraction tasks (Hearst,
1992; Caraballo, 1999). Specifically, we test for
community structure in predications and explore
whether this structure becomes more highly re-
solved when using a semantic measure of predica-
tion strength introduced in the following section.
We also predict that central nodes (i.e. words)
in individual modules will correlate to categori-
cal super-ordinance or hypernymy. Thus, we first
seek to assess the overall community structure
of predication, testing whether or not it is more
resolved using a novel measure of predication
strength. Second, within communities of predi-
cations, we compare the words? closeness central-
ity to their positions in WordNet?s hypernym tree
(Miller, 1995).
2 Method
Unlike co-occurrence networks, where words are
related simply by proximity, predication networks
are built using extracted grammatical relation-
ships. The implied relationship in a co-occurrence
network provides a natural way to weight edges,
but predications have no analogue to a proximity-
based weighting scheme. One option would be to
weight edges by the number of times given pred-
ications were observed. While this is perhaps the
most obvious way to account for important predi-
cations, it risks exaggerating high-frequency items
that are common for reasons other than importance
(perhaps they are idioms, collocates or found in
abnormally strong colligational structures). Fre-
quency weighting would also be susceptible to
noise from the many low-frequency items. To ad-
dress these concerns, we introduce a semantically
informed measure of predication relevance.
Wilks? (1975; 1978) theory of preference se-
mantics proposes that subject- and object-verb re-
lationships evince ?selectional preference?, which
can be thought of as the disposition verbs have
to select certain arguments ? particular classes of
subjects or objects. To operationalize selectional
preference, Resnik (1997) introduced selectional
preference strength to measure the disposition or
?preference? of a verb, v:
S
R
(v) =
?
c?C
P (c|v) log
P (c|v)
P (c)
(1)
where C is a set of semantic classes from which
v can select and R is the grammatical relation in
question. Note that S
R
(v) is effectively the sum
K-L divergence between the probabilities of v and
c for all classes. In a corpus-based setting, the
probability of any word can be estimated by its
relative frequency: P (x) =
f(x)
?
i
f(x
i
)
. Resnik goes
on to define a measure of selectional association
between a verb and a specific class, c:
A
R
(v, c) =
1
S
R
(v)
P (c|v) log
P (c|v)
P (c)
(2)
In the typical form of selectional preference induc-
tion ? the task of estimating likelihoods over all
classes ? Eq. 2 is used to measure a verb?s pref-
erence for classes of nominal subjects or objects
like vehicles, insects, birds, etc. (Resnik, 1997;
Shutova et al., 2013).
To test our assumptions regarding the modu-
lar structure of predications in English, a mea-
sure like selectional association should account
for predicates? diversity (or uniformity) of attach-
ment. That is, the preference a predicate has to
49
operate on a wide or narrow range of words. To ac-
count for this, we add a term, U(p), to account for
the relative number of unique words a predicate p
has been observed to predicate. Note that this is
not the total number of predications involving p,
which would produce problematically high values
were p to collocate strongly with the words it pred-
icates. Instead, U(p) addresses and normalizes for
the diversity with which p is applied. Additionally,
instead of using a pre-set collection of semantic
classes on which predication is assumed to oper-
ate, each predicate is treated as its own class. For
a predication consisting of word w predicated by
p, predication strength is defined as follows:
PS(w, p) =
1
S
R
(p)
log
P (w|p)
U(p)P (w)
(3)
PS thus combines three important properties of
predications: the relative frequency of a given
predication P (w|p), the relative frequency of a
word P (w) and the diversity of a word?s poten-
tial predications U(p). Defined like this, U(p)
helps diminish the contribution of predicates that
are widely applicable, under the assumption that
being widely used, they are in-fact somewhat less
significant. Using this measure to weight edges
in a predication network should help diminish
the contribution of exceptionally frequent predica-
tions as well as that from low-frequency predica-
tions without excluding them.
An example predication network is shown in
Figure 1. In these networks, a network is con-
structed over a set of documents where nodes are
the words in a predication, the direction follow-
ing the is-a link. Thus, example (i) would re-
sult in a link from safety to concern with weight
1. Were another predication involving concern to
be observed, another edge would be added from
that node. Note that circularities are allowed even
though this example is acyclic. To assess predi-
cation strength as a relevance function, we com-
pare the community structure of weighted and
unweighted networks. The example in Figure 1
shows a sample network (top) and the communi-
ties extracted from the unweighted and weighted
versions of the same network (middle and bottom).
Note the changes in community assignments from
the unweighted version to the weighted. In par-
ticular, observe the new clusters in the weighted
network around money, factor and murder. If our
Figure 1: Predication network from the enTen-
Ten corpus (pruned by frequency ? 170): the ini-
tial network (top), communities assigned by the
Infomap algorithm for the unweighted network
(middle) and for the network weighted by predi-
cation strength (bottom).
50
intuitions about the systematic nature of linguis-
tic predication is correct, there should be at least
a moderate degree of community structure in the
unweighted networks, and if predication displays
semantic preference similar to selectional associa-
tion, this community structure should be stronger
for networks weighted by predication strength.
The school librarian may be the person that controls [...]
You may find Rachel is the one person who may [...]
Neither the state nor its government is a person.
An arbitrator is a person who is appointed [...]
On the other hand, an expert is a person to fix [...]
After all, the vendor is the person best able to [...]
An expert need not be an individual person.
The innocent party is a natural person.
If the indemnifier is a natural person, [...]
consumers who are natural persons under the Directive.
Table 1: Sample predications involving forms of
the word person as the target in the BNC. In each
case an edge would connect the predicate (in ital-
ics) to person (in bold).
3 Results
To explore the structure of predication networks,
we analyzed two corpora using the method de-
scribed above: the British National Corpus (BNC)
(Leech et al., 2001) and the enTenTen web corpus.
Predications were extracted templates over a POS-
tagged version of each corpus using the Sketch En-
gine
1
tool (Kilgarriff et al., 2004). The BNC con-
tained about 112 million tokens and the enTenTen
collection has 3.2 billion tokens. For each collec-
tion, the top 1,000 most frequent nouns provided
a seed set from which to extract all predicate
and predicate of relations
2
(see examples in
Table 1). For the BNC, this resulted in 40,721
predications (14,319 unique) and 260,555 (20,651
unique) for the enTenTen collection. Predication
strength scores were computed for every pred-
ication using within-corpus relative frequencies.
These scores were used to weight edges in one
version of the predication network, whereas the
edge-weights of the ?unweighted? version were
uniformly set to 1.0. No node-weighting was ap-
plied in either case.
1
http://www.sketchengine.co.uk/
2
"NN.?.?" [tag="WP"|tag="PNQ"|tag="CJT"]
?[tag="RB.?"|tag="RB"|tag="VM"]0,5
[lemma="be" & tag="V.
*
"] "RB.?"0,2
[tag="DT.?"|tag="PP$"]0,1 "CD"0,2
[tag="JJ.?"|tag="RB.?"|word=","]0,3
"NN.?.?"0,2 2:"NN.?.?" [tag!="NN.?.?"]
Two methods were used to extract communities
from the predication networks: the Infomap and
walktrap algorithms. By using two methods, we
attain some assurance that our findings are not ar-
tifacts of the assumptions underlying either algo-
rithm. The Infomap algorithm is an information-
theoretic method that exploits the analogue be-
tween optimizing a compression dictionary and
simplifying a graph by describing ?flow? through
nodes (Rosvall and Bergstrom, 2008). Infomap as-
sumes edges in a network induce such flow and
by deriving a minimum description of this flow,
the algorithm can find multi-level communities
in large networks (Rosvall and Bergstrom, 2011).
The second method, walktrap, operationalizes the
intuition that a large set of short random walks on
a network will leave walkers on some groups of
nodes more often than others (Pons and Latapy,
2005). By setting the walk distance to a small
value, relative to a network?s density, walkers will
tend toward communities if the walker sample is
sufficient. These algorithms are both known to
work well with large, directed networks and nei-
ther imposed intractable computational burdens at
our scale (Fortunato, 2010; Lancichinetti and For-
tunato, 2009). Because both algorithms require a
connected network, our analysis is restricted to the
largest connected component (LCC) for all net-
works, though we have no reason to believe results
would differ significantly for other components.
Community assignments can be assessed by
measuring how self-contained or ?modular? the
resulting communities are. Modularity was intro-
duced as a way to choose the level of an optimal
cut for hierarchical partitioning algorithms, analo-
gous to the level in the dendrogram that yields the
best communities (Newman and Girvan, 2004).
For a network with adjacency matrix A and com-
munity assignments c, modularity is defined as:
Q =
1
2m
?
ij
A
ij
?
k
i
k
j
2m
?(c
i
, c
j
) (4)
where m is the number of edges and k
i
is the
degree of node i. ?(c
i
, c
j
) is 1 when the com-
munity assignment of node i is the same as that
for node j. Modularity measures how likely it is
that nodes in a community are connected to one
another as opposed to nodes in other communi-
ties. Modularity is defined from -1.0 to 1.0 and
graphs where Q > 0.6 are conventionally said to
have relatively strong community structure (New-
51
man, 2010). Here, we use modularity instead of
a measure of semantic similarity or semantic co-
herence because predication is seldom an asser-
tion of equivalence or similarity. This means that
although words in predication communities may
be related in an ontological sense, such an assess-
ment would not expose the level of independence
between the communities.
Weighted and unweighted networks from both
corpora were submitted to each community detec-
tion algorithm, the results of which were assessed
using modularity. We also carried out this anal-
ysis on frequency-weighted networks, the results
of which were similar to the unweighted config-
uration, but are not reported for sake of brevity.
Figure 2 shows the modularity for each config-
uration with varying minimum predication fre-
quency (the number of times a predication had
to occur to be included). Varying the minimum
frequency thresholds helps simulate the effect of
corpus-size on the algorithm. In the BNC, un-
weighted networks with no minimum edge fre-
quency show slight modularity (Q = 0.30),
whereas in weighted networks it is quite strong
(Q = 0.89). The enTenTen corpus exhibits a
gap between the unweighted (Q = 0.61) and
weighted networks (Q = 0.88) at low edge thresh-
olds. This shows that predication strength is help-
ful in weighting relevant items without exclud-
ing low-frequency observations. The lower mod-
ularity scores (Q; Eq. 4) in the unweighted net-
works may be due to more novel, loose or figura-
tive associations found in low-frequency predica-
tions that inappropriately connect unrelated com-
munities. Interestingly, scores for unweighted and
weighted networks converge up to a point as the
minimum frequency increases (reducing the size
of the network). This pruning is helpful for the
unweighted networks, but has little effect on the
weighted versions. In all cases, sparsity takes a
toll as the LCC becomes quite small. The reason
for the eventual decline as the LCC shrinks below
70 nodes is because communities are less likely to
form at all in small networks.
In addition to the highly modular structure, the
communities of predications themselves are likely
to represent some semantic organization. Specifi-
cally, we looked for a categorical structure within
the communities by comparing words to the hy-
pernym tree in WordNet (Miller, 1995). Intu-
itively, one would expect words that are central in
Figure 2: Modularity of predication networks in
the BNC (top) and enTenTen (bottom). Note, as
the minimum frequency increases (bottom axis)
and the LCC contains fewer and fewer nodes (top
axis), the community detection algorithms may
not produce a solution with more than one com-
munity, resulting in undefined modularity.
a community to be members of higher-level cate-
gories. In figure 1, for example, summer, hour and
holiday all point to time, one could infer that time
is a shared hypernym. We use closeness centrality,
a graph-theoretic measure of node?s average prox-
imity to other nodes, as a within-community mea-
sure of super-ordinance (i.e. hypernymy). Though
there a number of network centrality measures,
closeness centrality is a robust measure, though it
tends not to scale well to larger networks because
it requires computing the distance between every
pair of nodes (Friedl et al., 2010).
52
The centrality scores in the communities were
compared to WordNet using the first sense-entry
for each node (which is typically the most com-
mon) and words not found in the tree were dis-
carded. For the unweighted networks across both
corpora, we found a mean Spearman correlation of
r=0.35 (p < 0.01; using Fisher?s transformation)
for the Infomap algorithm and r=0.38 (p < 0.01)
for walktrap. In the weighted versions, Infomap
produced r=0.41 (p < 0.01) and walktrap pro-
duced r=0.44 (p < 0.01). This confirms that
predication communities tend to specify categor-
ical knowledge is moderately similar to WordNet.
Note these correlation values are comparable be-
tween the weighted and unweighted networks, im-
plying that relevance, as selectional association, is
not an important marker of the communities? hy-
pernymic composition.
4 Discussion
The analysis in this paper is an attempt to iden-
tify whether or not ontological knowledge ex-
pressed in text consists of meaningful clusters.
With the network representation and our measure
of predication strength, results indicate that pred-
ication forms strong community structures. Over-
all, results point to the highly modular nature of
predication, previously unreported in language.
This confirms our prediction that predication com-
prises systematic clusters of related things and the
higher modularity observed in networks weighted
by predication strength implies that predication
exhibits a form of selectional preference. Predi-
cation?s strong community structure is important
because it supports the use of linguistic patterns
in establishing ontological representations, which
naturally form higher-level groups.
Technically, our measure of predication
strength, which is built on prior assessments of
selectional preference, identifies the modular
semantic structure of predication even when
low frequency predications are included. This
may be because low-frequency predications are
more likely to inscribe novel, loose or figurative
associations that reach between semantic clusters
to inappropriately decrease the overall modularity
if not down-weighted. As a result, more sys-
tematic comparison of weighted and unweighted
networks, and the relative location of predica-
tion within these structures, will reveal where
semantic innovation and figurative assertions are
most likely to occur. The predication networks
analyzed rely on a relatively tight definition of
predication, one that, in other languages, may not
be accessible by the copular form. Additionally,
the two literal interpretations of linguistic predica-
tions, equivalence or category membership, may
also not be common in all languages. To the extent
that parsers or taggers are available, a comparative
analysis would broaden the understanding of
predication in general.
Given their high modularity, predication struc-
tures could be exploited further for a number of
NLP tasks. The correlations between centrality
and hypernym depth mean that predication net-
works could help construct or update categorical
taxonomies. For example, these networks could
help automate the construction of a hypernym tax-
onomy with weighted branches, potentially aug-
menting resources like WordNet (Ruiz-Casado et
al., 2005; Miller, 1995). One could also ex-
amine the growth, combination and bifurcation
of specific communities to help track ontological
commitments, either over time as shifts in lan-
guage structures (Gerow and Ahmad, 2012), or
across genre and domain (Davies, 2010). Fur-
ther, because predication encodes categorical in-
formation, its community structure may also en-
code higher-level relations where strong inter-
community links imply relationships between
classes of objects.
Our study examined the topographical struc-
ture of English predications in general, struc-
ture that consists, in large part, of hypernym re-
lations. Though the relations in the examined
networks are defined by copular is-a predica-
tion structure, within-community hierarchies cor-
related only moderately with the hypernym hierar-
chy in WordNet. This implies that the predications
comprising our networks are either not entirely
hypernymic or that WordNet is not a good base-
line. Indeed, predication is a grammatical rela-
tionship that often asserts synonymy or figurative
hypernymy (perhaps sometimes also metonymy)
and it is not apparent from the surface structure
how these semantic interpretation could be disam-
biguated. One reason this correlation is not higher
is likely to do with the low coverage of the copular
form as evidence of hypernymy (Hearst, 1992).
Further work regarding the structure of predi-
cations could build on the network framework to
evaluate the communities themselves. What prop-
53
erties differentiate communities? Are there se-
mantic, lexical or statistical properties that con-
tribute to the formation of communities? Are there
discernible differences between words that typify
communities as opposed to those that bridge com-
munities? Predication communities are primar-
ily semantic in nature, implying that central nodes
would typify meaningful aspects of their commu-
nity. It would also be relatively easy to extend
network representations to address more qualita-
tive aspects such as coherence, word norms and
word associations. Indeed, a variety of corpus-
based research could employ network-based meth-
ods like those exemplified in this paper, capitaliz-
ing on graph-theory, social network analysis and
statistical physics, without departing from rela-
tional structures inherent to language.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from the
Templeton Foundation to the Metaknowledge Re-
search Network and grant #1158803 from the Na-
tional Science Foundation.
References
Eneko Agirre, Oier Lpez de Lacalle, and Aitor Soroa.
2014. Random walks for knowledge-based word
sense disambiguation. Computational Linguistics,
40(1):57?84.
Chris Biemann, Monojit Choudhury, and Animesh
Mukherjee. 2009. Syntax is from mars while se-
mantics from venus!: insights from spectral analysis
of distributional similarity networks. In Proceedings
of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers,
pages 245?248.
Chris Biemann. 2006. Chinese whispers: an efficient
graph clustering algorithm and its application to nat-
ural language processing problems. In Proceedings
of the first workshop on graph based methods for
natural language processing, pages 73?80.
Brian F. Bowdle and Dedre Gentner. 2005. The career
of metaphor. Psychological Review, 112(1):193.
Sharon A. Caraballo. 1999. Automatic construction
of a hypernym-labeled noun hierarchy from text. In
Proceedings of the 37th annual meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics on Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 120?126.
Philipp Cimiano and Johanna V?olker. 2005.
Text2onto. In Natural language processing and in-
formation systems, pages 227?238. Springer.
Philipp Cimiano. 2006. Ontology learning from text.
Springer.
Aaron M. Cohen, William R. Hersh, Christopher
Dubay, and K. Spackman. 2005. Using co-
occurrence network structure to extract synonymous
gene and protein names from medline abstracts.
BMC Bioinformatics, 6(1):103.
Mark Davies. 2010. The corpus of contemporary
american english as the first reliable monitor cor-
pus of english. Literary and linguistic computing,
25(4):447?464.
G?unes Erkan and Dragomir R Radev. 2004. Lexrank:
Graph-based lexical centrality as salience in text
summarization. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research, 22(1):457?479.
Ramon Ferrer i Cancho, Ricard V Sol?e, and Reinhard
K?ohler. 2004. Patterns in syntactic dependency net-
works. Physical Review E, 69(5):051915.
Ramon Ferrer i Cancho, Andrea Capocci, and Guido
Caldarelli. 2007. Spectral methods cluster words
of the same class in a syntactic dependency net-
work. International Journal of Bifurcation and
Chaos, 17(07):2453?2463.
Peter W. Foltz, Darrell Laham, and Thomas K. Lan-
dauer. 1999. Automated essay scoring: Applica-
tions to educational technology. In World Confer-
ence on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia and
Telecommunications, pages 939?944.
Santo Fortunato. 2010. Community detection in
graphs. Physics Reports, 486(3):75?174.
Dipl-Math Bettina Friedl, Julia Heidemann, et al.
2010. A critical review of centrality measures in
social networks. Business & Information Systems
Engineering, 2(6):371?385.
Aaron Gerow and Khurshid Ahmad. 2012. Diachronic
variation in grammatical relationships. In Proceed-
ings of the 24th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics (COLING 2012).
Aaron Gerow. 2014. Extracting clusters of special-
ist terms from unstructured text. In Proceedings of
2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (forthcoming).
Sam Glucksberg, Matthew S. McGlone, and Deanna
Manfredi. 1997. Property attribution in metaphor
comprehension. Journal of memory and language,
36(1):50?67.
Maria Grineva, Maxim Grinev, and Dmitry Lizorkin.
2009. Extracting key terms from noisy and multi-
theme documents. In Proceedings of the 18th inter-
national conference on World wide web, pages 661?
670.
Marti A Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hy-
ponyms from large text corpora. In Proceedings
of the 14th conference on computational linguistics-
Volume 2, pages 539?545.
54
Adam Kilgarriff, Pavel Rychl, Pavel Smr, and David
Tugwell. 2004. The sketch engine. In Proceedings
of EURALEX 2004, pages 105?116.
Andrea Lancichinetti and Santo Fortunato. 2009.
Community detection algorithms: a comparative
analysis. Physical Review E, 80(5):056117.
Thomas K. Landauer and Susan T. Dumais. 1997.
A solution to plato?s problem: The latent semantic
analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and rep-
resentation of knowledge. Psychological Review,
104(2):211.
Geoffrey Leech, Paul Rayson, and Andrew Wilson.
2001. Word frequencies in written and spoken En-
glish: based on the British National Corpus. Long-
man.
George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical
database for english. Communications of the ACM,
38(11):39?41.
Mark E. J. Newman and M. Girvan. 2004. Finding and
evaluating community structure in networks. Physi-
cal Review E, 69(2):026113.
Mark E. J. Newman. 2010. Networks: an introduction.
Oxford University Press.
Pascal Pons and Matthieu Latapy. 2005. Computing
communities in large networks using random walks.
In Computer and Information Sciences-ISCIS 2005,
pages 284?293. Springer.
Anatol Rapoport, Amnon Rapoport, William P Livant,
and John Boyd. 1966. A study of lexical graphs.
Foundations of Language, pages 338?376.
Philip Resnik. 1997. Selectional preference and sense
disambiguation. In Proceedings of the ACL SIGLEX
Workshop on Tagging Text with Lexical Semantics:
Why, What, and How, pages 52?57.
Martin Rosvall and Carl T. Bergstrom. 2008. Maps of
random walks on complex networks reveal commu-
nity structure. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 105(4):1118?1123.
Martin Rosvall and Carl T. Bergstrom. 2011. Mul-
tilevel compression of random walks on networks
reveals hierarchical organization in large integrated
systems. PloS one, 6(4):e18209.
Maria Ruiz-Casado, Enrique Alfonseca, and Pablo
Castells. 2005. Automatic extraction of semantic
relationships for wordnet by means of pattern learn-
ing from wikipedia. In Natural Language Process-
ing and Information Systems, pages 67?79. Springer.
Ekaterina Shutova, Simone Teufel, and Anna Korho-
nen. 2013. Statistical metaphor processing. Com-
putational Linguistics, 39(2):301?353.
Mark Steyvers and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. 2005. The
large-scale structure of semantic networks: Statisti-
cal analyses and a model of semantic growth. Cog-
nitive Science, 29(1):41?78.
Lin Sun and Anna Korhonen. 2009. Improving verb
clustering with automatically acquired selectional
preferences. In Proceedings of the 2009 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: Volume 2-Volume 2, pages 638?647.
Peter D. Turney, Patrick Pantel, et al. 2010. From
frequency to meaning: Vector space models of se-
mantics. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
37(1):141?188.
Jean V?eronis. 2004. Hyperlex: lexical cartography
for information retrieval. Computer Speech & Lan-
guage, 18(3):223?252.
Yorick Wilks. 1975. A preferential, pattern-seeking,
semantics for natural language inference. Artificial
Intelligence, 6(1):53?74.
Yorick Wilks. 1978. Making preferences more active.
Artificial Intelligence, 11(3):197?223.
55
