An Interlingual-based Approach to Reference Resolution 
David Farwell 
Computing Research Laboratory 
Box 30001/3CRL 
New Mexico State University 
Las Cruces, New Mexico 88003 
david@crl.nmsu.edu 
Stephen Helmreieh 
Computing Research Laboratory 
Box 30001/3CRL 
New Mexico State University 
Las Cruces, New Mexico 88003 
shelmrei@cri.nmsu.edu 
Abstract 
In this paper we outline an interlingual- 
based procedure for resolving reference 
and suggest a practical approach to 
implementing it. We assume a two-stage 
language analysis system. First, a 
syntactic analysis of an input text results 
in a functional structure in which certain 
cases of pronominal reference are 
resolved. Second, the f-structure is 
mapped onto an interlingual 
representation. As part of this mapping, 
the reference of the various f-structure 
elements is resolved resulting in the 
addition of information to certain 
existing IL objects (coreference) or in 
the creation of new IL objects which are 
added to the domain of discourse (initial 
reference). 
For this effort, we adopt Text Meaning 
Representation forour IL and rely on the 
ONTOS ontology (Mahesh & Nirenburg, 
1995) as a general knowledge base. 
Since the central barrier to developing 
such a system today is the 
incompleteness of the knowledge base, 
we outline a strategy starting with the 
implementation f a series of form-based 
resolution algorithms that are applied 
directly to the referring expressions of 
the input text. These are initially 
supplemented by a knowledge-based 
resolution procedure which, as the 
knowledge base grows and the adequacy 
of the f-structure and IL-representation 
increases, takes on more and more of the 
processing load. 
We examine the operation of the form- 
based algorithms on a sample Spanish 
text and show their limitations. We then 
demonstrate how an IL-based approach 
can be used to resolve the problematic 
cases of reference. This research effort is 
part of the CREST project at the CRL 
funded by DARPA 1. 
1 Introduction and Background 
This paper describes a practical approach to 
implementing an interlingual-based reference 
resolution procedure. This effort is part of a 
recently initiated research project at the 
Computing Research Laboratory at New 
Mexico State University which aims to 
develop a system that will automatically 
construct an epistemic knowledge base from 
text. The procedure will also support machine 
translation (e.g., Mikrokosmos, see 
Onyshkevych & Nirenburg, 1994; Carlson & 
Nirenburg, 1990) as well as other multilingual 
NLP tasks. Since the system itself is in the 
early stages of development, descriptions of 
performance are projected rather than actual. 
Current approaches to reference resolution 
focus on surface forms (see Sundheim & 
Grishman, 1995, and MUC-7, 1998, for a 
general introduction). They include string 
match algorithms for proper noun phrases 
(PNs) and common oun phrases (NPs) (e.g., 
Bagga & Baldwin, 1998) and syntactically 
constrained morphological matching for 
pronominals and deictic NPs (Lappin & Leass, 
1994). In some cases, they include constraints 
related to clause structure or larger textual 
units (e.g., Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein, 1995). 
1 DOD contract N 66001-99-1-8915 
They do not generally consider implicit 
references or, in the case of Spanish (e.g., 
Ferrhndez et al 1998), references to 
contextually clear possessors using determiners 
rather than possessive adjectives. All such 
approaches are supplemented, if not entirely 
determined, by heuristics which, more 
recently, have been induced statistically from 
corpora (e.g., Hirsehman et al 1998, Popescu- 
Belis, 1998). The only approaches ofwhich the 
authors are aware that attempted toaccount for 
implicit referents or implicit references are 
those developed within AI over two decades 
.ago (e.g., Hobbs, 1979, or DeJong, 1979). 
This approach suggested here differs 
radically in thaf reference resolution is 
triggered by elements of interlingual (IL) 
representation rather than surface text 
expressions. The referents in the domain of 
discourse consist of elements of IL 
representation as well. Thus, implicit 
references and implicit referents are accounted 
for and, at the same time, empty references are 
ignored. 
Below, in Section 2, we outline a proposal 
for practically implementing an IL-based 
approach, beginning with a description of a 
target procedure which resolves the reference 
of each new IL element as it is being produced, 
clause by clause. We then present a series of 
form-based procedures, which are to be 
gradually replaced (or, in some cases, 
transmogrified) as the IL analysis ystem and 
supporting knowledge bases are extended. In 
Section 3, we briefly describe the relevant 
aspects of the sample Spanish used as a basis 
for the presentation. I  Section 4, we examine 
the operation of the procedures ingreater detail 
and demonstrate how the IL-based approach 
can resolve those problematic references that 
are beyond the scope of the form-based 
approaches. 
2 Resolution Procedures 
2.1 IL-based Resolution Procedure 
The proposed approach relies on the capability 
of a system to provide a reasonably adequate 
interlingual representation for a text. Here the 
interlingua we rely on is a variant of Text 
Meaning Representation (TMR) (see 
http://crl.nmsu.edu/Research/Projects/mikro/in 
dex.html) and we focus on a sample Spanish 
text and its interlingual analysis, which is 
known to be reproducible automatically. 
The first step of the analysis process is to 
produce a functional (syntactic) structure for 
the text. As part of the process of establishing 
the f-structure, various structurally governed, 
clause and sentence internal anaphorie 
relations will be resolved, the relevant 
anaphors being coindexed (or assigned 
differing indexes) as determined by the syntax. 
Thus some syntactic o-reference r lationships 
such as those related to clitics and relative 
pronouns will be identified before the IL 
procedure begins. 
The second step is to map from the f- 
structure to the TMR. A TMR includes, among 
other epresentational objects, instantiations of
object ypes, relation types and property types. 
These are constructed from ontological 
concepts which are associated with the lexical 
items in f-structure and which are filled out on 
the basis of the surrounding f-structure. 
For instance, the Spanish verb comprar (to 
buy) might be associated with the ontological 
concept named PURCHASE which is a 
generic frame structure corresponding to 
purchasing events. It might in part look like: 
TIME: T \[time\] 
LOCATION: L \[place\] 
PURCHASE 
AGENT: P \[human/organization\] 
THEME: O \[object\] 
SOURCE: S \[human/organization\] 
AMOUNT: C \[currency\] 
etc. 
where TIME, LOCATION, AGENT, THEME, 
human, organization, object, etc. are all 
ontological concepts. On some particular use 
of comprar in a text (or more specifically in 
the f-structure representation f a text), the 
PURCHASE frame is called forth and 
instantiated, i.e., indexed and filled in with 
instantiated representational objects derived 
from other ontological concepts associated 
with other lexical items of the surrounding f- 
structure. 
For instance, if the f-structure in question is 
for: 
2 
Roche compra Docteur Andreu 
Roche and Docteur Andreu will each be 
associated with and instantiate an ontological 
concept for COMPANY. Such a 
representational element might look like: 
COMPANY 
NAME: N \[text\] 
HEADQUARTERS: H \[office\] 
BRANCHES: B \[set:office\] 
SUBSIDIARIES: S \[set:company\] 
EMPLOYEES: E \[set:human\] 
SALES: V \[currency\] 
PROFITS: P-\[currency\], 
etc. 
where  ' NAME, HEADQUARTERS, 
BRANCH, text, office, etc. are all ontological 
concepts. This frame is instantiated according 
to the f-structure context for each of the two 
proper names and then the instantiated frames 
are inserted (actually indexed) appropriately in
the PURCHASE frame. The result is: 
COMPANY- 1 
NAME: Roche \[text\] 
HEADQUARTERS: \[office\] 
etc. 
COMPANY-2 
NAME: Docteur Andreu \[text\] 
HEADQUARTERS: \[office\] 
etc. 
TIME: dateline-time \[time\] 
LOCATION: L \[place\] 
PURCHASE-1 
AGENT: COMPANY-1 \[humanlorg\] 
THEME: COMPANY-2 \[object\] 
SOURCE: S \[human/org\] 
AMOUNT: C \[currency\] 
etc. 
These instantiated representational objects are, 
in turn, referents in the discourse context when 
the next sentence is processed. As part of this 
mapping, the reference of the various f- 
structure lements is resolved resulting in the 
addition of information to certain existing IL 
objects (coreference) or in the creation of new 
IL objects which are added to the domain of 
discourse (initial reference). Which occurs 
depends on whether a connection can be 
inferred between the current IL object and an 
already-existing IL object on the basis of 
ontological or epistemie information. 
Note that reference resolution is driven by 
the process of instantiating TMR objects rather 
than by linguistic forms. At the same time, 
various aspects of reference resolution are 
being done on the basis of form. Certain 
anaphors are coindexed or differently indexed 
on the basis of morphosyntax sthe f-structure 
is being constructed. Ontological concepts of 
similar or related type may be called forth 
during the mapping of similar or related lexical 
items onto TMR. Articles and other 
determiners affect the form of the instantiated 
TMR objects corresponding to the NPs 
containing them. Finally, aspects of the 
instantiated TMR objects refer to literals such 
as the NAME attribute of a COMPANY. 
These can be used to implement string- 
matching algorithms. 
2.2 Approach to Implementation 
Because the target procedure relies on a highly 
sophisticated, and as yet incomplete, language 
analysis ystem, the approach to implementing 
it begins by assuming that none of the IL 
apparatus i  available for processing. Instead, 
we implement an initial set of standard, form- 
based algorithms which vary according to the 
syntactic ategory of referring expression. 
Generally, if the referring expression is a 
proper noun phrase, a full or partial string 
match with each prior PN is used to establish a
eoreference link. Otherwise, the PN is assumed 
to refer to a new referent. For standard 
pronominals, a recency algorithm is used 
which checks the morphosyntactic constraints 
(gender, number, etc.) and, if possible, the 
semantic lass to filter potential coreferents. 
When a match is found, the coreference link is 
established. Common noun phrases follow a 
bifurcated algorithm. If the noun phrase is 
indefinite or has no article, then it is assumed 
to refer to a new referent. If it is a definite 
noun phrase, then the head noun string is 
matched against hat of previous NPs. If the 
heads of two NPs match and the complement 
:3 
strings do not mismatch, the two NPs are 
assumed to corefer. 
As the IL analysis system and supporting 
knowledge bases grow and the ability to 
produce appropriate f-structures and TMRs is 
extended, the target procedures will bear 
increasingly more of the resolution task. 
3 The Data 
For this presentation, we focus the discussion 
on a single Spanish text, a newswire article 
concerning a corporate buyout (see Appendix I 
for the original text and its translation into 
English). It is taken from the ARPA Machine 
Translation Evaluation corpus (White et al 
1994) and contains 347 words, 17 sentences 
and 11 paragraphs. 
There are 144 referring expressions 
altogether including 14 proper noun phrases 
(9.7%), 76 common oun phrases (52.8%), 20 
pronominal-like expressions (13.9%), 31 
verbal expressions (21.5%) and 3 prepositional 
phrases (2.1%). Of the common oun phrases 
(NP), 43 were definite NPs, 8 were indefinite 
NPs and 25 NPs had no explicit determiner. Of 
the pronominal expressions, 12 were pronouns 
(Pron) or deicties such as hey (today), aqui 
(here) or ahora (now), 3 were ellipted (subject) 
pronouns (PRO) and 5 were definite articles 
which function as possessive adjectives (Det \[= 
Pron\]) as in: 
E l  beneficio neto ... se elev6 .... 
The\[= Its\] net profits ... increased .... 
However, there are in addition 129 implicit 
references made which need to be resolved as 
well. Implicit references are those that are 
implied by the slots of TMR objects. They may 
be of unexpressed participants ofan event (say, 
a seller in a PURCHASE event), or 
unexpressed times or locations of events. 
Altogether, then, there are 273 references of 
which 52.75% are explicit and an almost equal 
amount, 47.25%, are implicit. Taking the 
implicit references into account, the proper 
noun phrases (PN) represent 5.1% of the 
referring expressions, the common noun 
phrases NP about 27.8%, pronominal-like 
expressions 7.3%, verbal expressions 11.4% 
and prepositional phrases about 1.1%. These 
results are summarized in Tables I and 2. 
As for referents, there are 138 altogether. Of 
these 108 (78.25%) are referred to explicitly 
on at least one occasion while 30 (21.75%) are 
referred to implicitly only. There are 40 (29%) 
referents hat are referred to more than once, of  
Total 
References 
Explicit 
References 
Implicit 
References 
273 144 129 
100% 52.75% 47.25% 
Table 1. Total references 
Proper Comn Prons Vrbls Prep 
Nouns Nouns Phrases 
14 76 20 31 3 
9.7% 52.8% 13.9% 21.5% 2.1% 
Table 2. Types of Explicit References 
which 31 (77.5%) are explicitly referred to at 
some point and 9 (22.5%) are implicitly 
referred to only. 
Thus, there were 135 eoreferences altogether 
(273 total references- 138 referents), 41 
explicit coreferences and 94 implicit 
coreferences. Of the explicit coreferences, 9 
were made by PNs, 10 by NPs, 20 by 
pronominal-like expressions (12 by Prons, 3 by 
PROs, 5 by Dets \[= Pron\]) and 2 by verbal 
expressions. 
It is perhaps of some interest that very few of 
these references were figurative, that is, 
metonymic or metaphorical. There was one 
clearly metonymic reference, and one or two 
other possible metonymie r ferences. 
4. 
4 Reference Resolution 
What follows here is a discussion of what is 
needed to resolve the 273 references made in 
the example Spanish text. In each section, the 
cases that could be handled by a form-based 
method are discussed, then cases that would 
require an IL-based approach for resolution. 
4.1 Resolving Proper Noun Phrases 
As mentioned, there are 14 PNs in the sample 
text, 9.7% of the explicit referring expressions 
or 5.1% of all references. In addition, there 
were 4 cases of common oun phrases which 
were in apposition with proper noun phrases 
and which will be considered here as well. 
For PNs, the basic resolution strategy is to 
match the form of the expression with that of 
each of the PNs used previously. If there is a 
match, assume the current PN is being used to 
corefer to the referent of the matching PN. 
This applies in 4 of 18 cases. If no match is 
found, attempt a partial positive form match. 
That is, if any part of either form for which 
there is a partial match does not match a 
corresponding substring in the other form, then 
the match fails. Thus, El grupo Roche matches 
Roche and Productos Roche SA also matches 
Roche because there is no substring of the 
phrase Roche that does not match with El 
? grupo or Productos. On the other hand, 
Productos Roche SA does NOT match El 
grupo Roche because Productos does not 
match El grupo. This handles 3 further cases of 
the 18 (assuming that having matched El grupo 
Roche with Roche, Productos Roche SA will 
not match because it does not match with El 
grupo Roche). 
If no positive partial match can be found, it is 
assumed that the PN is not being used to 
corefer to an existing referent and introduces a 
new referent. This takes care of 9 additional 
cases. 
This basic PN resolution procedure, then, 
handles 16 of the 18 PNs (89%). That leaves 2 
cases which it will not handle, Doctor Andreu 
coreferring to Docteur Andreu and Productos 
Roche SA coreferring to su compa~ia en 
Espa~a 
The second problem is not all that rare. 
Here, the PN is being used to corefer to a 
referent that was initially introduced by a 
common noun phrase. The first step is to 
identify the semantic lass of the PN, possibly 
through some independent PN classifying 
procedure or possibly by looking at any 
semantic constraints that arise from the 
context. In the case of Productos Roche SA, 
for instance, it might be classed as a 
COMPANY by some independent PN 
classifying procedure, say, on the basis of the 
SA, or by inspecting its context. 
... la operaci6n realizada entre 
... the transaction carried out between 
Productos Roche SA y Uni6n Explosivos 
Productos Roche SA and Uni6n Explosivo 
Rio...  
Rio ... 
In example (1), the expression la operaci6n is 
used to refer to some transaction that, as the 
text goes on to report, was carried out between 
Productos Roche and Uni6n Explosivos Rio 
Tinto. If transactions are carried out by 
companies (general semantic knowledge), then 
Productos Roche and Uni6n Explosivos must 
be companies. 
Having established the semantic ategory of 
Produetos Roche, the next step is to establish a
plausible connection between Productos Roche 
and an established referent of the same 
semantic ategory. That is, the procedure is 
now to inspect all the established referents of 
the category COMPANY (i.e., the Roche 
group, Doctor Andreu and Roche's company in 
Spain). We know from prior text that Roche 
bought Doctor Andreu and that Roche 
acquired Doctor Andreu through its subsidiary 
in Spain (epistemie knowledge). From the 
current ext, we know that Productos Roche 
and Uni6n Explosivos were actually involved 
in the transaction and that Uni6n Explosive 
had been a majority shareholder but, by 
implication, no longer is (epistemic 
knowledge). Thus, Uni6n Explosivos appears 
to be the seller and, by implication, Productos 
Roche could be the buyer, i.e., Roche's 
company in Spain. 
The same procedure can be used to 
establishing that the reference of Doctor 
Andreu is the same as that ofDocteur Andreu: 
establish the semantic lass of Doctor Andreu, 
inspect each existing referent of that class to 
5 
see whether or not a plausible connection can 
be established. 
4.2 Resolving Pronominals 
In the sample Spanish text, there are 19 
pronominal expressions, 13.9% of the explicit 
referring expressions or7.3% of all references. 
Of these, there are 15 explicit forms and 4 
ellipted forms. The 15 explicit forms include 6 
possessive pronouns, 4 deictie adverbials and 5 
definite articles. The 4 ellipted forms include 3 
eilipted subjects of finite verbs and 1 ellipted 
head of a relative complementizer. 
#.2.1 Explicit pronouns 
The basic form-based strategy for resolving 
pronominal reference is to begin by inspecting 
in reverse order of mention those referring 
expressions whose forms are compatible with 
the morphological constraints imposed by the 
pronominal. This strategy is usually 
constrained by various yntactic heuristics such 
as that a non-reflexive pronoun in object 
position cannot corefer to the subject or a 
pronominal complement of a noun cannot 
corefer to the head (e.g., Ferrfindez et al 
1998). Such a resolution procedure will 
account for 4 of the 6 cases (66%) in the 
sample text. 
To resolve the remaining cases, it is 
necessary to check the referent of the 
antecedent to see whether it is semantically 
compatible with the contextual function of the 
anaphor. So, for instance, in resolving the 
reference ofsu (its, his, her or their) in: 
El beneficio neto -el mejor de su 
The\[=its\] net profits the best in its 
historia- se elev6 a 641,5 millones de 
history increased to 641.5 million 
j '~ 'anco3  . . .  
Francs ... 
the procedure is to first shuffle back through 
the referring expressions until a third person 
form is encountered. Here, the first third 
person referring expression isEl beneficio neto 
(some company's net profits). The procedure 
next needs to establish through infereneing that 
the referent of El beneficio neto can serve the 
function of the anaphor su, that is, can have a 
history. In this case, a plausible inference 
cannot be established, and so the procedure 
moves on to consider the next most recently 
mentioned referent, he Roche group which is 
being referred to by the E1 of El beneficio neto 
which is being used to express a possessor 
relation. Here, on the basis of ontological 
knowledge about what companies can or 
cannot have, su is understood as coreferring to 
the referent of El. 
4.2.2 Ellipted pronominals 
For the ellipted pronominals in the sample 
Spanish text, syntax will have to identify such 
ellipted elements in order to trigger the 
reference resolution process. However, once 
identified, the basic strategy described above 
for explicit pronouns hould apply unaltered 
although, unlike possessive pronouns, the 
morphological constraints of the anaphor must 
be extracted from the morphosyntactic context. 
So, for instance, the ellipted subject of: 
... cuenta PRO con compa~las en m6s 
... has companies in more 
de 50 paises ... 
than 50 countries ... 
must be a third person singular eferent (given 
the conjugation of the verb cuenta). In this 
case, the basic resolution procedure correctly 
resolves 2 of the 4 eases (50%). 
For the remainder, the semantic function of 
the ellipted element is also extracted from 
context, i.e., it functions as the subject of 
contar con compa~ias (has companies). Thus, 
in the example above, it must be something 
that can own companies. Among the third 
singular candidate expressions, in reverse 
order of mention: el diagn6stico (diagnosis), la
comercializaci6n (the marketing), la 
producci6n (the manufacture), el desarrollo 
(the development), Basilea (Suiza) (Basel, 
Switzerland) and sede central (home office), 
none are potential owners of companies. The 
next most remote referring expression to be 
inspected is el grupo Roche (the Roche Group) 
which, as it turns out, is something that can 
own companies and, therefore, the PRO is 
identified as coreferring to the same referent. 
6 
4.2.3 Deictic Elements 
Deictic elements, such as the adverbs hey 
(today), aqui (here), ahora (now), and so on, 
are resolved directly to properties of the 
utterance context: the day of utterance, the 
place of utterance, the time of utterance, and so 
on. There were 4 such pronouns in the sample 
text, 3 referring (hey, aqul, ahora") and 1 
coreferring (hey). It should be noted that all 
these elements are, in fact, coreferent with 
implicit temporal and spatial references of 
various finite verbs that are used to report 
certain events or states of affairs. 
4.2.4 Articles with pronominal force 
Perhaps the most contentious of the 
pronominal elements to be discussed here are 
the definite articles of noun phrases which Can 
be contextually interpreted as having the force 
of possessive adjectives. There are 6 examples 
of this in the sample text. However, these are 
by no means all the definite articles found and, 
in addition, of these six example, four were 
translated as possessive adjectives, one as a 
definite article, the, and one was omitted 
altogether in translation. In other words, not 
only is an ambiguity introduced for a very 
common lexical item, but even when resolved 
in favor of the possessor interpretation, it may 
not be translated as a possessive adjective. On 
the other hand, the major reason for assuming a 
distinction is that it is very important o 
establish such relationships in order to 
understand or translate a document. For 
instance, if it is not established that the cash 
flow referred to in: 
El "cash flow" se increraent6 en un 21 
its cash flow increased by about 21 
per ciento ... 
per cent ... 
is that of company X, then it will be impossible 
to determine whether the cash flow referred to 
later in the text in: 
... y el "cash f low" de ... 
... and its cash flow ... 
is that of company X or of some other 
company. That means that such information 
will not only be unavailable for use during 
translation (e.g., selecting a possessive 
adjective in the target language) but for any 
other purpose that might come along (e.g., 
information extraction). 
In any case, the procedure for resolving the 
reference of definite articles is the basic 
pronominal resolution procedure except hat no 
morphological constraints can be placed on the 
antecedent expression. Still, syntactic 
constraints on the antecedent may be applied. 
Following this strategy, 5 of the 6 cases (83%) 
are resolved correctly although it is not clear 
whether it leads to false positives. Otherwise, 
potential referents are considered until one is 
found which can serve the appropriate 
possessor function. Since a positive connection 
must be inferred, the likelihood of false 
positives is greatly decreased. 
4.3 Resolving Common Noun Phrases 
If proper noun phrases and pronominals were 
the only type of referring expressions, form- 
based resolution techniques might prove 
sufficient. They account, however, for only 
23.6% of the explicit referring expression or 
12.4% of all references. It is for the resolution 
of common oun phrases, clauses and implicit 
references that an interlingual-based procedure 
will eventually prove necessary. 
There are 76 common noun expressions in 
sample Spanish text. Of these 42 are definite 
noun phrases (32 referring, 10 coreferring), 9 
are indefinite noun phrases (all 9 referring), 
and 25 are noun phrases having no article (all 
25 referring). 
Since none of the indefinite noun phrases or 
the noun phrases without articles are used to 
corefer, an initial basic resolution strategy for 
common oun phrases begins by inspecting the 
form of the referring expression. If it is an 
indefinite noun phrase or noun phrase without 
article, it is assumed to refer to something new 
and a new referent is added to the referents in 
the domain of discourse. That successfully 
resolves the reference of 34 of the 76 common 
noun phrases (45%) in the text. 
Of the 42 definite noun phrases, 36 are used 
to refer (or corefer) to specific individuals or 
stuff or are inferrably unique given a general 
knowledge of individuals, stuff or situations 
that were being discussed. Of these 36, 24 
were used to refer to particular individuals or 
stuff, 8 to processes, 2 to particular groups of 
objects and 2 to logically unique objects. Of 
the remaining 6 definite noun phrases, 4 were 
used to refer to portions (percentages) of stuff 
and 2 were used to refer to generic lasses. 
In regard to the resolution of definite noun 
phrases, then, the basic strategy is to first 
identify whether the expression is being used 
to refer to specific individuals or stuff, to 
portions (percentages) of stuff or, if possible, 
to a generic lass. So, for instance, given the 
expression el 7, 4 por ciento in: 
la rentabilidad sobre las ventas aument6 
its profit "over sales increased 
del 6,3 al 7,4 por ciento. 
from 6.3 to 7.4 per cent 
it is sufficient to identify that the expression is
being used to refer to a percentage (of sales) in 
order to assume the the expression is used to 
refer to something new. Identifying a generic 
reference on the basis of form is less obvious 
but, in any case, this will resolve 4 to 6 of the 
42 cases. 
Second, for the 36 definite noun phrases used 
to refer to a particular individual or stuff, the 
basic procedure is to match the head noun 
expression against each of the common noun 
expressions that have been used previously. If 
one is found, the complement expressions are 
then matched. If these are compatible, the NP 
under consideration is assumed to eorefer to 
the referent of the matching NP. This will 
successfully resolve 27 of the 36 eases (75%) 
but leaves 9 incorrectly resolved, 5 setting up 
new referents when in fact they are coreferring 
and 4 false positive ases ofcoreference. 
The third step, then, is to inspect each 
referent for semantic ompatibility. Semantic 
information is established on the basis of the 
expression's form and context. For instance, in 
looking for a possible referent for la 
rentabilidad sobre las ventas (its profit over 
sales ratio) above, it is first necessary to 
establish that the potential referent must be 
some measurement of financial performance 
which has increased uring some particular 
period of time for some particular company. 
At the time a reference for la rentabilidad 
sobre las ventas is sought, there are some 98 
existing referents (53 objects, 34 events, 11 
implicit objects). The more recent of these 
include "641.5 million Swiss Francs", "Roche 
Group's net profit", "Roche Group's 
pharmaceutical division", "41% of Roche 
Group's total sales", "8.69 billion Swiss 
Francs", "Roche Group's total sales", "1988" 
and so on. Of these, only "Roche Group's net 
profit" and "Roche Group's total sales" are 
possible measurements of a company's 
financial performance. However, both these 
measurements should be ontologically distinct 
from a company's profit over sales as well as 
from each other. Thus, they fail to satisfy the 
semantic requirements of a potential referent 
for the expression. In the end, no semantically 
appropriate referent will be found among the 
pool of existing referents and so a new referent 
is introduced to the pool. 
If an existing referent meets the 
informational constraints on potential referent 
of the expression being processed, the 
expression is assumed to refer to that referent. 
If no existing referent satisfies those 
constraints, the expression is assumed to refer 
to something new and a new referent is added 
to the pool of referents. 
4.2.4 Resolving Clauses 
Noun phrases, of course, are not the only type 
of constituent that is used to refer to things in 
the world. Clauses may be used to refer (or 
corefer) to particular events or states-of-affairs 
or to classes of events or states-of-affairs. 
These may be finite (main, relative, 
complement or adverbial clauses), participials 
(present or passive), infinitival or absolutive. 
Of the 45 events referred to in the text, there 
were 3 events that were referred to on more 
than one occasion. The first, the purchasing of 
Doctor Andreu, was coreferred to 4 times. But 
of these, only one was by way of a (finite) 
clause. The other three were all by way of NPs, 
2 explicit and 1 impli~zit. The second, the 
announcing of the purchase, was coreferred to 
only once by way of a NP. The third, Roche's 
investing in R&D, was coreferred to once by 
way of an implicit pro-verb introduced for 
syntactic reasons in the context of a parallel, 
conjoined structure. 
8 
The only form-based resolution procedure 
for resolving clausal reference would be to 
look for prior verbs having the same form and 
then inspecting the complements for 
contradictions. This procedure might be 
extended by inspecting prior verb forms that 
are related by, say, Spanish WordNet 
(Rodrfguez, 1998) or an on-line Spanish 
thesaurus (if any should exist). However, this 
extension could also open the door to many 
false positives. 
Such an approach might possibly resolve as 
many as 26 of the 27 cases of clausal 
refei'ences to events or states of affairs 
correctly. In any case, an IL-based approach 
has the advantage of having the events 
mentioned in prior text already represented 
formally aid in a language neutral form. Thus, 
the need for additional on-line resources for 
each language isassuaged. 
4.2.5 Resolving Implicit References 
As mentioned, there were 45 events or states- 
of-affairs referred to in the sample Spanish text 
which introduce an additional 30 implied 
referents (5 times, 22 places and 3 actors). 
These events, and the implicit referents they 
introduce, need to be identified for successfully 
carrying out the coreference task. They may 
act as referents that are later referred to in the 
text or they may serve to assist in constraining 
or establishing coreference between later 
expressions and other existing referents. For 
instance, of the 22 implied locations, 6are later 
referred to in the text and, of the 5 implied 
times, 3 are later referred to. 
Clearly, there is no obvious form-based 
resolution procedure for such elements, since 
they have no explicit form. Thus, in order to 
resolve these implicitly introduced referents, 
the basic procedure is to treat them as 
pronominals. That is, every event or state-of- 
affairs in the TMR has an implicit "at that 
time" and "at that place" associated with it 
which has to be resolved as part of the 
reference task. Beyond the fact that the 
potential referents must times and locations 
respectively, any further constraints will have 
to be derived from what is known about the 
event and about its relative (temporal or local) 
status with respect o the other .events which 
have previously been mentioned. A primary 
source of information for dealing with such 
issues will be scripts (Schank & Ableson, 
1977). Similarly, the identification of implied 
actors will be dependent on the ontological 
(not lexical) definitions of the class of event or 
state-of-affairs eferred to and any additional 
information that may be extracted from the 
particular events or states-of-affairs that have 
been previously mentioned. 
Given the informational constraints gathered, 
the procedure is then to inspect referents of 
like type (time, location, actor type) in reverse 
order of mention until one is found which is 
compatible with those additional informational 
constraints. 
Conclusion 
The advantages of the interlingual approach to 
reference resolution include the following: 
? only expressions related to actual referents 
are processed for coreference (i.e., no 
pleonastic pronouns, no clitic pronouns, no 
relative pronouns, etc.), 
? implicit as well as explicit referents are 
processes for coreference, 
? knowledge-based inferencing (both 
ontological and epistemic) is available for 
resolving (many) problematical cases, 
? ontologically connected actors, say, the 
different participants in a sequence of 
events making up a script, can be used to 
establish coreference, 
? texts in different languages can be 
processed in the same way, 
? all form-based procedures either are or can 
be implemented in any ease. 
The central disadvantages are: 
? some surface text level ordering 
information is lost in the TMR, 
? discourse-structural information may be 
lost in the TMR, . . 
? the need for a large and sophisticated 
knowledge sources, 
? the need for sound and appropriately- 
directed inferencing.. 
As a result of the loss of ordering information, 
strict recency-based resolution procedures 
cannot be implemented. The referents in the 
domain are not ordered in terms of when they 
9 
were introduced. The processing of the 
different arguments in f-structure does not 
necessarily correspond to the surface sequence 
of their mention. This "defect" could possibly 
be overcome by simply indexing each new the 
TMR object with the prior index plus one 
(assuming the indexes are integers). The tacit 
assumption is that, at the level of the clause, 
first the predicate is processed and then the 
arguments are processed in left to right order 
as they appear in f-structure. 
As for the lack of information about the 
discourse structure, it may be the ease that this 
is a defect of the TMR representation system. 
That is to say, it is not unreasonable to assume 
that the larger orgafiisational spects of a text, 
the topics, their order of presentation, the 
structure of the argumentation, etc., should in 
fact be captured in any adequate representation 
of the text. It has been, however, the goal of 
TMR to focus on capturing the information 
content exclusively and not on how the 
information ispresented. 
References 
Bagga, A., and B. Baldwin. 1998. Entity-Based 
Cross-Document Coreferencing Using the 
Vector-Space Model. Proceedings of the 36 ~h 
Annual Meeting of the Association o f  
Computational Linguistics and the 1 7,~ 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, 
Montreal, Canada. 
Carlson, L., and S. Nirenburg. 1990. World 
Modeling for NLP. Technical Report 90-121. 
Center for Machine Translation, Carnegie Mellon 
University, Pittsburgh, PA. 
Ferrfindez, A., M. Palomar, and L. Moreno. 1998. 
Anaphora resolution in unrestricted texts with 
partial parsing. Proceedings of the 36 th Annual 
Meeting of the Association of Computational 
Linguistics and the I 7 ~h Conference on 
Computational Linguistics, Montreal, Canada. 
DeJong, G. 1979. Skimming stories in real time: an 
experiment in integrated understanding. Ph.D. 
dissertation. Research report #158, Dept. of 
Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT. 
Grosz, B., A. Joshi, and S. Weinstein. 1995. 
Centering: A Framework for Modeling the Local 
Coherence of Discourse. Computational 
Linguistics, 21(2): 203-225. 
Hirschman, L., P. Robinson, J. Burger, and M. 
Vilain. 1998. Automating Coreference: The Role 
of Annotated Training Data. Proceedings of 
AAAI 98 Spring Symposium on Applying 
Machine Learning to Discourse Processing. 
Hobbs, J. 1979. Coherence and Coreference. 
Cognitive Science 3: 67-90. 
Lappin, S., and H. Leass. 1994. An Algorithm for 
Pronominal Anaphora Resolution. Computational 
Linguistics, 20(4), 535-56 I.
Mahesh, K., and S. Nirenburg. 1995. A Situated 
Ontology for Practical NLP. Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Basic Ontological lssues in 
Knowledge Sharing, International Joint 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Montr6al, 
Canada. 
MUC-7. 1998. Proceedings of the Seventh Message 
Understanding Conference, April 1998. 
Onyshkevych, B., and S. Nirenburg. (1994). The 
Lexicon in the Scheme of KBMT Things. 
Memoranda inCognitive and Computer Science: 
MCCS 94-277, Computing Research Laboratory, 
New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM. 
Popescu-Belis, A. 1998. How Corpora with 
Anotated Coreferenee Links Improve Reference 
Resolution. In Rubio, A., N. Gallardo, R. Castro 
& A. Tejada (eds.) Proceedings of the first 
International Conference on Language Resource 
and Evaluation, pp. 567-571. Granada, Spain, 
May 1998. 
Rodrfguez, H., S. Climent, P. Vossen, L. Bloksma, 
W.Peters, A. Alonge, F. Bertagna, and A. 
Roventini. 1998. The Top-Down Strategy for 
Building EuroWordNet: Vocabulary Coverage, 
Base Concepts and Top Ontology. Computers 
and the Humanities, 32(2/3): 117-152 
Sehank, R., and R. Abelson. 1977. Scripts, plans, 
goals, and understanding. Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates: Hillsdale, NJ. 
Sundheim, B., and R. Grishman (eds.). 1995. Sixth 
Message Understanding Conference (MUC-6). 
San Francisco: Morgan Kaufman. 
White, J., T. O'Connell and F. O'Mara. 1994. The 
ARPA MT Evaluation Methodologies: Evolution, 
Lessons, and Future Approaches, in Technology 
Partnerships for Crossing the Language Barrier: 
Proceedings of the First Conference of the 
Association for Machine Translation in the 
Americas, Columbia, MD, pp. 193-205. 
10 
Appendix 
Spanish Evaluation Text 93-1 
Roche Compra Docteur Andreu 
El grupo Roche, a trav6s de su compafila en Espafla, 
adquiri6 el laboratorio farmac6utico Doctor Andreu, 
se inform6 hoy aqut. 
La comunicaci6n oficial no precis6 el monto de 
la operaci6n realizada entre Productos Roche SAy 
Uni6n Explosivos Rio Tinto SA, hasta ahora 
mayoritaria en el accionariado. 
Fuentes financieras consultadas cifraron la 
0peraci6n en unos I0.000 millones de pesetas. 
Seg~n el acuerdo firmado hoy en Madrid, los 
productos del Doctor Andreu continuarin siendo 
producidos y comercializados con el mismo 
nombre. Doctor Andreu, cuya fama la obtuvo a 
partir de las "pastillitas" para la tos, estfi bien 
introducido en las ireas de cardiologla, 
reumatologla y especialidades publicitarias. 
Las actividades del grupo Roche, con sede central 
en Basilea (Suiza), incluyen el desarrollo, la 
producci6n y la comercializaci6n de medicamentos, 
productos para el diagn6stico, as| como de 
vitaminas y productos qulmicos. 
A nivel mundial, cuenta con compafiias en mils 
de 50 pafses con casi 50.000 empleados. Doctor 
Andreu es una compaflia farmac6utica dedicada  la 
producci6n y comercializaci6n de ffirmacos y 
productos veterinarios. Con sede en Barcelona, 
cuenta con mfiSs de 400 empleados. 
En el ejercicio pasado factur6 unos 3.490 
millones de pesetas. 
En 1988, el Grupo Roche alcanz6 unas ventas 
totales de 8.690 millones de francos suizos, de las 
que aproximadamente un 41 por ciento 
correspondieron a su divisi6n farmac6utica. E! 
beneficio nero -el mejor de su historia- se elev6 a 
641,5 millones de francos suizos y la rentabilidad 
sobre las ventas aument6 del 6,3 al 7,4 por ciento. 
El "cash flow" se increment6 en un 21 por ciento, 
alcanzando 1.179 miilones de francos o el 14 por 
eiento de las ventas del grupo. 
Las inversiones en investigaci6n y desarrollo 
(I+D) fueron de 1.210 millones de francos uizos, el 
14 pot ciento del total de sus ventas. 
Productos Roche cuenta con una plantilla de 600 
personas y alcanz6 unas ventas totales de 9.747 
millones de pesetas, un 12,5 por ciento superiores al
afio 1987. 
Sus beneficios fueron de 218 millones y el "cash 
flow" de 356 millones. Las inversiones realizadas 
totalizaron 223 millones de pesetas. 
English Translation of Text 93-1 
Roche Buys Docteur Andreu 
The Roche Group acquired the pharmaceutical 
laboratory Doctor Andreu through its company in 
Spain, it was announced here today. 
The official announcement did not specify the 
exact amount of the transaction which took place 
between Productos Roche SA and Uni6n 
Explosivos Rio Tinto SA, which until now had held 
the mayority of the stock. 
Financial sources consulted estimate the 
transaction value at around 10 million pesetas. 
According to the agreement signed today in 
Madrid, Doctor Andreu's products will continue to 
be produced and marketed under the same name. 
Doctor Andreu, which became well known for its 
cough drops, is well established in the areas of 
cardiology, rheumatology, and advertising 
specialties. 
Activities of the Roche Group, headquartered in 
Basel (Switzerland), include the development, 
production, and marketing of drugs, diagnostic 
products, as well as vitamins and chemical 
products. 
The Roche Group has subsidiaries in more than 
50 countries and almost 50,000 employees 
worldwide. Doctor Andreu is a pharmaceutical 
company which produces and markets medicines 
and veterinary products. Headquartered in 
Barcelona, ithas more than 400 employees. 
In the last fiscal year its sales totaled some 3.49 
billion pesetas. 
In 1988, the Roche Group's total sales reached 
8.69 billion Swiss francs, of which approximately 
41 per cent corresponded to its pharmaceutical 
division. Its net profits--the best in its history-- 
went up to 641.5 million Swiss francs and the 
profitability over sales increased from 6.3 to 7.4 per 
cent. 
Its cash flow increased by 21 per cent, to 1.179 
billion francs or 14 per cent oft.he group's ales. 
Investments in research and development (R&D) 
totaled 1.210 billion Swiss ffi'ancs or 14 per cent of 
total sales. 
Productos Roche employs 600 people and its 
total sales reached 9.747 billion pesetas, 12.5 per 
cent more than in 1987. 
Its profits totaled 218 million and its cash flow 
356 million. Actual investments totaled 223 
million pesetas. 
11 
Interlingual Annotation of Multilingual Text Corpora 
 
Stephen Helmreich 
David Farwell 
Computing Research Laboratory 
New Mexico State University 
david@crl.nmsu.edu
shelmrei@crl.nmsu.edu
Florence Reeder 
Keith Miller 
Information Discovery & Understanding 
MITRE Corporation 
freeder@mitre.org
keith@mitre.org   
Bonnie Dorr 
Nizar Habash 
Institute for Advanced Computer Studies 
University of Maryland 
bonnie@umiacs.umd.edu
habash@umiacs.umd.edu
 
Eduard Hovy 
Information Sciences Institute 
University of Southern California 
hovy@isi.edu 
Lori Levin 
Teruko Mitamura 
Language Technologies Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University 
lsl@cs.cmu.edu
teruko@cs.cmu.edu 
Owen Rambow 
Advaith Siddharthan 
Department of Computer Science 
Columbia University 
rambow@cs.columbia.edu
as372@cs.columbia.edu  
 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes a multi-site project to 
annotate six sizable bilingual parallel corpora 
for interlingual content. After presenting the 
background and objectives of the effort, we 
describe the data set that is being annotated, 
the interlingua representation language used, 
an interface environment that supports the an-
notation task and the annotation process itself. 
We will then present a preliminary version of 
our evaluation methodology and conclude 
with a summary of the current status of the 
project along with a number of issues which 
have arisen.  
1 Introduction 
This paper describes a multi-site National Science 
Foundation project focusing on the annotation of six 
sizable bilingual parallel corpora for interlingual content 
with the goal of providing a significant data set for im-
proving knowledge-based approaches to machine trans-
lation (MT) and a range of other Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) applications. The project participants 
include the Computing Research Laboratory at NMSU, 
the Language Technologies Institute at CMU, the In-
formation Science Institute at USC, UMIACS at the 
University of Maryland, the MITRE Corporation and 
Columbia University. In the remainder of the paper, we 
first present the background and objectives of the pro-
ject. We then describe the data set that is being anno-
tated, the interlingual representation language being 
used, an interface environment that is designed to sup-
port the annotation task, and the process of annotation 
itself. We will then outline a preliminary version of our 
evaluation methodology and conclude with a summary 
of the current status of the project along with a set of 
issues that have arisen since the project began.  
2 Project Goals and Expected Outcomes 
The central goals of the project are: 
? to produce a practical, commonly-shared system 
for representing the information conveyed by a 
text, or ?interlingua?, 
? to develop a methodology for accurately and 
consistently assigning such representations to 
texts across languages and across annotators, 
? to annotate a sizable multilingual parallel corpus 
of source language texts and translations for IL 
content. 
This corpus is expected to serve as a basis for improving 
meaning-based approaches to MT and a range of other 
natural language technologies.  The tools and annotation 
standards will serve to facilitate more rapid annotation 
of texts in the future. 
3 Corpus 
The target data set is modeled on and an extension of 
the DARPA MT Evaluation data set (White and 
O?Connell 1994) and includes data from the Linguistic 
Data Consortium (LDC) Multiple Translation Arabic, 
Part 1 (Walker et al, 2003). The data set consists of 6 
bilingual parallel corpora. Each corpus is made up of 
125 source language news articles along with three 
translations into English, each produced independently 
by different human translators. However, the source 
news articles for each individual language corpus are 
different from the source articles in the other language 
corpora.  Thus, the 6 corpora themselves are comparable 
to each other rather than parallel. The source languages 
are Japanese, Korean, Hindi, Arabic, French and Span-
ish.  Typically, each article is between 300 and 400 
words long (or the equivalent) and thus each corpus has 
between 150,00 and 200,000 words. Consequently, the 
size of the entire data set is around 1,000,000 words. 
Thus, for any given corpus, the annotation effort is 
to assign interlingual content to a set of 4 parallel texts, 
3 of which are in the same language, English, and all of 
which theoretically communicate the same information. 
The following is an example set from the Spanish cor-
pus: 
S: Atribuy? esto en gran parte a
una pol?tica que durante muchos a?os
tuvo un "sesgo concentrador" y repre-
sent? desventajas para las clases me-
nos favorecidas.
T1: He attributed this in great
part to a type of politics that
throughout many years possessed a
"concentrated bias" and represented
disadvantages for the less favored
classes.
T2: To a large extent, he attrib-
uted that fact to a policy which had
for many years had a "bias toward
concentration" and represented disad-
vantages for the less favored
classes.
T3: He attributed this in great
part to a policy that had a "centrist
slant" for many years and represented
disadvantages for the less-favored
classes.
 
The annotation process involves identifying the 
variations between the translations and then assessing 
whether these differences are significant. In this case, 
the translations are, for the most part, the same although 
there are a few interesting variations.  
For instance, where this appears as the translation 
of esto in the first and third translations, that fact 
appears in the second. The translator choice potentially 
represents an elaboration of the semantic content of the 
source expression and the question arises as to whether 
the annotation of the variation in expressions should be 
different or the same.  
More striking perhaps is the variation between 
concentrated bias, bias toward concen-
tration and centrist slant as the translation 
for sesgo concentrador. Here, the third transla-
tion offers a clear interpretation of the source text au-
thor?s intent. The first two attempt to carry over the 
vagueness of the source expression assuming that the 
target text reader will be able to figure it out. But even 
here, the two translators appear to differ as to what the 
source language text author?s intent actually was, the 
former referring to bias of a certain degree of strength 
and the second to a bias  in a certain direction. Seem-
ingly, then, the annotation of each of these expressions 
should differ. 
Furthermore, each source language has different 
methods of encoding meaning linguistically. The resul-
tant differing types of translation mismatch with English 
should provide insight into the appropriate structure and 
content for an interlingual representation. 
The point is that a multilingual parallel data set of 
source language texts and English translations offers a 
unique perspective and unique problem for annotating 
texts for meaning. 
4 Interlingua 
Due to the complexity of an interlingual annotation as 
indicated by the differences described in the previous 
section, the representation has developed through three 
levels and incorporates knowledge from sources such as 
the Omega ontology and theta grids.  Since this is an 
evolving standard, the three levels will be presented in 
order as building on one another. Then the additional 
data components will be described.  
4.1 Three Levels of Representation 
We now describe three levels of representation, referred 
to as IL0, IL1 and IL2. The aim is to perform the annota-
tion process incrementally, with each level of represen-
tation incorporating additional semantic features and 
removing existing syntactic ones. IL2 is intended as the 
interlingua, that abstracts away from (most) syntactic 
idiosyncrasies of the source language. IL0 and IL1 are 
intermediate representations that are useful starting 
points for annotating at the next level. 
4.1.1 IL0 
IL0 is a deep syntactic dependency representation. It 
includes part-of-speech tags for words and a parse tree 
that makes explicit the syntactic predicate-argument 
structure of verbs. The parse tree is labeled with syntac-
tic categories such as Subject or Object , which refer to 
deep-syntactic grammatical function (normalized for 
voice alternations).  IL0 does not contain function words 
(determiners, auxiliaries, and the like): their contribu-
tion is represented as features.  Furthermore, semanti-
cally void punctuation has been removed.  While this 
representation is purely syntactic, many disambiguation 
decisions, relative clause and PP attachment for exam-
ple, have been made, and the presentation abstracts as 
much as possible from surface-syntactic phenomena.  
Thus, our IL0 is intermediate between the analytical and 
tectogrammatical levels of the Prague School (Haji? et 
al 2001). IL0 is constructed by hand-correcting the out-
put of a dependency parser (details in section 6) and is a 
useful starting point for semantic annotation at  IL1, 
since it allows annotators to see how textual units relate 
syntactically when making semantic judgments.  
4.1.2 IL1 
IL1 is an intermediate semantic representation. It asso-
ciates semantic concepts with lexical units like nouns, 
adjectives,  adverbs and verbs (details of the ontology in 
section 4.2). It also replaces the syntactic relations in 
IL0, like subject and object, with thematic roles, like 
agent, theme and goal (details in section 4.3). Thus, like 
PropBank (Kingsbury et al2002), IL1 neutralizes dif-
ferent alternations for argument realization.  However, 
IL1 is not an interlingua; it does not normalize over all 
linguistic realizations of the same semantics. In particu-
lar, it does not address how the meanings of individual 
lexical units combine to form the meaning of a phrase or 
clause. It also does not address idioms, metaphors and 
other non-literal uses of language.  Further, IL1 does not 
assign semantic features to prepositions; these continue 
to be encoded as syntactic heads of their phrases, al-
though these might have been annotated with thematic 
roles such as location or time. 
4.1.3 IL2 
IL2 is intended to be an interlingua, a representation of 
meaning that is reasonably independent of language. IL2 
is intended to capture similarities in meaning across 
languages and across different lexical/syntactic realiza-
tions within a language. For example, IL2 is expected to 
normalize over conversives (e.g. X bought a book from 
Y vs. Y sold a book to X)  (as does FrameNet (Baker et 
al 1998)) and non-literal language usage (e.g. X started 
its business vs. X opened its doors to customers).  The 
exact definition of IL2 will be the major research con-
tribution of this project. 
4.2 The Omega Ontology 
In progressing from IL0 to IL1, annotators have to se-
lect semantic terms (concepts) to represent the nouns, 
verbs, adjectives, and adverbs present in each sentence.  
These terms are represented in the 110,000-node ontol-
ogy Omega (Philpot et al, 2003), under construction at 
ISI.  Omega has been built semi-automatically from a 
variety of sources, including Princeton's WordNet (Fell-
baum, 1998), NMSU?s Mikrokosmos (Mahesh and Ni-
renburg, 1995), ISI's Upper Model (Bateman et al, 
1989) and ISI's SENSUS (Knight and Luk, 1994).  After 
the uppermost region of Omega was created by hand, 
these various resources? contents were incorporated and, 
to some extent, reconciled.  After that, several million 
instances of people, locations, and other facts were 
added (Fleischman et al, 2003).  The ontology, which 
has been used in several projects in recent years (Hovy 
et al, 2001), can be browsed using the DINO browser at 
http://blombos.isi.edu:8000/dino; this browser forms a 
part of the annotation environment.  Omega remains 
under continued development and extension.  
4.3 The Theta Grids 
Each verb in Omega is assigned one or more theta grids 
specifying the arguments associated with a verb and 
their theta roles (or thematic role).  Theta roles are ab-
stractions of deep semantic relations that generalize 
over verb classes.  They are by far the most common 
approach in the field to represent predicate-argument 
structure.  However, there are numerous variations with 
little agreement even on terminology (Fillmore, 1968; 
Stowell, 1981; Jackendoff, 1972; Levin and Rappaport-
Hovav, 1998). 
The theta grids used in our project were extracted 
from the Lexical Conceptual Structure Verb Database 
(LVD) (Dorr, 2001).  The WordNet senses assigned to 
each entry in the LVD were then used to link the theta 
grids to the verbs in the Omega ontology.  In addition to 
the theta roles, the theta grids specify the mapping be-
tween theta roles and their syntactic realization in argu-
ments, such as Subject, Object or Prepositional Phrase, 
and the Obligatory/Optional nature of the argument, 
thus facilitating IL1 annotation.  For example, one of the 
theta grids for the verb ?load? is listed in Table 1 (at the 
end of the paper). 
Although based on research in LCS-based MT 
(Dorr, 1993; Habash et al 2002), the set of theta roles 
used has been simplified for this project.  This list (see 
Table 2 at the end of the paper), was used in the Inter-
lingua Annotation Experiment 2002 (Habash and 
Dorr).1  
4.4 Incremental Annotation 
As described earlier, the development and annota-
tion of the interlingual notation is incremental in nature.  
This necessitates constraining the types and categories 
of attributes included in the annotation during the be-
ginning phases.  Other topics not addressed here, but 
considered for future work include time, aspect, loca-
tion, modality, type of reference, types of speech act, 
causality, etc.  
Thus, IL2 itself is not a final interlingual representa-
tion, but one step along the way. IL0 and IL1 are also 
intermediate representations, and as such are an occa-
sionally awkward mixture of syntactic and semantic 
information. The decisions as to what to annotate, what 
to normalize, what to represent as features at each level 
are semantically and syntactically principled, but also 
governed by expectations about reasonable annotator 
tasks. What is important is that at each stage of trans-
formation, no information is lost, and the original lan-
guage recoverable in principle from the representation. 
5 Annotation Tool 
We have assembled a suite of tools to be used in the 
annotation process.  Some of these tools are previously 
existing resources that were gathered for use in the pro-
ject, and others have been developed specifically with 
the annotation goals of this project in mind.  Since we 
are gathering our corpora from disparate sources, we 
need to standardize the text before presenting it to 
automated procedures.  For English, this involves sen-
tence boundary detection, but for other languages, it 
may involve segmentation, chunking of text, or other 
?text ecology? operations.  The text is then processed 
with a dependency parser, the output of which is viewed 
and corrected in TrED (Haji?, et al, 2001), a graphi-
cally-based tree editing program, written in Perl/Tk2.  
The revised deep dependency structure produced by this 
process is the IL0 representation for that sentence. 
In order to derive IL1 from the IL0 representation, 
annotators use Tiamat, a tool developed specifically for 
                                                           
1 Other contributors to this list are Dan Gildea and Karin 
Kipper Schuler. 
2 http://quest.ms.mff.cuni.cz/pdt/Tools/Tree_Editors/Tre
d/ 
this project.  This tool enables viewing of the IL0 tree 
with easy reference to all of the IL resources described 
in section 4 (the current IL representation, the ontology, 
and the theta grids).  This tool provides the ability to 
annotate text via simple point-and-click selections of 
words, concepts, and theta-roles.  The IL0 is displayed 
in the top left pane, ontological concepts and their asso-
ciated theta grids, if applicable, are located in the top 
right, and the sentence itself is located in the bottom 
right pane.  An annotator may select a lexical item (leaf 
node) to be annotated in the sentence view; this word is 
highlighted, and the relevant portion of the Omega on-
tology is displayed in the pane on the left.  In addition, 
if this word has dependents, they are automatically un-
derlined in red in the sentence view.  Annotators can 
view all information pertinent to the process of deciding 
on appropriate ontological concepts in this view.  Fol-
lowing the procedures described in section 6, selection 
of concepts, theta grids and roles appropriate to that 
lexical item can then be made in the appropriate panes. 
Evaluation of the annotators? output would be daunt-
ing based solely on a visual inspection of the annotated 
IL1 files.  Thus, a tool was also developed to compare 
the output and to generate the evaluation measures that 
are described in section 7.  The reports generated by the 
evaluation tool allow the researchers to look at both 
gross-level phenomena, such as inter-annotator agree-
ment, and at more detailed points of interest, such as 
lexical items on which agreement was particularly low, 
possibly indicating gaps or other inconsistencies in the 
ontology being used. 
6 Annotation Task 
To describe the annotation task, we first present the 
annotation process and tools used with it as well as the 
annotation manuals.  Finally, setup issues relating to 
negotiating multi-site annotations are discussed. 
6.1 Annotation process 
The annotation process was identical for each text. For 
the initial testing period, only English texts were anno-
tated, and the process described here is for English text. 
The process for non-English texts will be, mutatis mu-
tandis, the same. 
Each sentence of the text is parsed into a depend-
ency tree structure. For English texts, these trees were 
first provided by the Connexor parser at UMIACS 
(Tapanainen and Jarvinen, 1997), and then corrected by 
one of the team PIs. For the initial testing period, anno-
tators were not permitted to alter these structures. Al-
ready at this stage, some of the lexical items are 
replaced by features (e.g., tense), morphological forms 
are replaced by features on the citation form, and certain 
constructions are regularized (e.g., passive) and empty 
arguments inserted.  It is this dependency structure that 
is loaded into the annotation tool and which each anno-
tator then marks up. 
The annotator was instructed to annotate all nouns, 
verbs, adjectives, and adverbs. This involves annotating 
each word twice ? once with a concept from Wordnet 
SYNSET and once with a Mikrokosmos concept; these 
two units of information are merged, or at least inter-
twined in Omega. One of the goals and results of this 
annotation process will be a simultaneous coding of 
concepts in both ontologies, facilitating a closer union 
between them.  
In addition, users were instructed to provide a se-
mantic case role for each dependent of a verb. In many 
cases this was ?NONE? since adverbs and conjunctions 
were dependents of verbs in the dependency tree. LCS 
verbs were identified with Wordnet classes and the LCS 
case frames supplied where possible. The user, how-
ever, was often required to determine the set of roles or 
alter them to suit the text. In both cases, the revised or 
new set of case roles was noted and sent to a guru for 
evaluation and possible permanent inclusion. Thus the 
set of event concepts in the ontology supplied with roles 
will grow through the course of the project. 
6.2 The annotation manuals 
Markup instructions are contained in three manuals: a 
users guide for Tiamat (including procedural instruc-
tions), a definitional guide to semantic roles, and a 
manual for creating a dependency structure (IL0). To-
gether these manuals allow the annotator to (1) under-
stand the intention behind aspects of the dependency 
structure; (2) how to use Tiamat to mark up texts; and 
(3) how to determine appropriate semantic roles and 
ontological concepts. In choosing a set of appropriate 
ontological concepts, annotators were encouraged to 
look at the name of the concept and its definition, the 
name and definition of the parent node, example sen-
tences, lexical synonyms attached to the same node, and 
sub- and super-classes of the node. All these manuals 
are available on the IAMTC website3. 
6.3 The multi-site set up 
For the initial testing phase of the project, all annotators 
at all sites worked on the same texts. Two texts were 
provided by each site as were two translations of the 
same source language (non-English) text. To test for the 
effects of coding two texts that are semantically close, 
since they are both translations of the same source 
document, the order in which the texts were annotated 
differed from site to site, with half the sites marking one 
translation first, and the other half of the sites marking 
the second translation first. Another variant tested was 
                                                           
3 http://sparky.umiacs.umd.edu:8000/IAMTC/annotation
_manual.wiki?cmd=get&anchor=Annotation+Manual 
to interleave the two translations, so that two similar 
sentences were coded consecutively. 
During the later production phase, a more complex 
schedule will be followed, making sure that many texts 
are annotated by two annotators, often from different 
sites, and that regularly all annotators will mark the 
same text. This will help ensure continued inter-coder 
reliability. 
In the period leading up to the initial test phase, 
weekly conversations were held at each site by the an-
notators, going over the texts coded. This was followed 
by a weekly conference call among all the annotators. 
During the test phase, no discussion was permitted. 
One of the issues that arose in discussion was how 
certain constructions should be displayed and whether 
each word should have a separate node or whether cer-
tain words should be combined into a single node. In 
view of the fact that the goal was not to tag individual 
words, but entities and relations, in many cases words 
were combined into single nodes to facilitate this proc-
ess. For instance, verb-particle constructions were com-
bined into a single node. In a sentence like ?He threw it 
up?, ?throw? and ?up? were combined into a single 
node ?throw up? since one action is described by the 
combined words. Similarly, proper nouns, compound 
nouns and copular constructions required specialized 
handling.    In addition, issues arose about whether an-
notators should change dependency trees; and in in-
structing the annotators on how best to determine an 
appropriate ontology node.    
7 Evaluation 
The evaluation criteria and metrics continue to evolve 
and are in the early stages of formation and implementa-
tion.  Several possible courses for evaluating the annota-
tions and resulting structures exist.  In the first of these, 
the annotations are measured according to inter-
annotator agreement.  For this purpose, data is collected 
reflecting the annotations selected, the Omega nodes 
selected and the theta roles assigned.  Then, inter-coder 
agreement is measured by a straightforward match, with 
agreement calculated by a Kappa measure (Carletta, 
1993) and a Wood standard similarity (Habash and 
Dorr, 2002).  This is done for three agreement points:  
annotations, Omega selection and theta role selection.  
At this time, the Kappa statistic?s expected agreement is 
defined as 1/(N+1) where N is the number of choices at 
a given data point.  In the case of Omega nodes, this 
means the number of matched Omega nodes (by string 
match) plus one for the possibility of the annotator trav-
ersing up or down the hierarchy. Multiple measures are 
used because it is important to have a mechanism for 
evaluating inter-coder consistency in the use of the IL 
representation language which does not depend on the 
assumption that there is a single correct annotation of a 
given text.  The tools for evaluation have been modified 
from pervious use (Habash and Dorr, 2002). 
Second, the accuracy of the annotation is measured.  
Here accuracy is defined as correspondence to a prede-
fined baseline.  In the initial development phase, all 
sites annotated the same texts and many of the varia-
tions were discussed at that time, permitting the devel-
opment of a baseline annotation.  While not a useful 
long-term strategy, this produced a consensus baseline 
for the purpose of measuring the annotators? task and 
the solidity of the annotation standard.  
The final measurement technique derives from the 
ultimate goal of using the IL representation for MT, 
therefore, we are measuring the ability to generate accu-
rate surface texts from the IL representation as anno-
tated.  At this stage, we are using an available generator, 
Halogen (Knight and Langkilde, 2000).  A tool to con-
vert the representation to meet Halogen requirements is 
being built.  Following the conversion, surface forms 
will be generated and then compared with the originals 
through a variety of standard MT metrics (ISLE, 2003).   
8 Accomplishments and Issues 
In a short amount of time, we have identified languages 
and collected corpora with translations.  We have se-
lected representation elements, from parser outputs to 
ontologies, and have developed an understanding of 
how their component elements fit together.  A core 
markup vocabulary (e.g., entity-types, event-types and 
participant relations) was selected.  An initial version of 
the annotator?s toolkit (Tiamat) has been developed and 
has gone through alpha testing.  The multi-layered ap-
proach to annotation  decided upon reduces the burden 
on the annotators for any given text as annotations build 
upon one another.  In addition to developing individual 
tools, an infrastructure exists for carrying out a multi-
site annotation project.   
In the coming months we will be fleshing out the 
current procedures for evaluating the accuracy of an 
annotation and measuring inter-coder consistency.  
From this, a multi-site evaluation will be produced and  
results reported.  Regression testing, from the interme-
diate stages and representations will be able to be car-
ried out.  Finally, a growing corpus of annotated texts 
will become available.   
In addition to the issues discussed throughout the 
paper, a few others have not yet been identified.  From a 
content standpoint, looking at IL systems for time and 
location should utilize work in personal name, temporal 
and spatial annotation (e.g., Ferro et al, 2001).  Also, an 
ideal IL representation would also account for causality, 
co-reference, aspectual content, modality, speech acts, 
etc.  At the same time, while incorporating these items, 
vagueness and redundancy must be eliminated from the 
annotation language.  Many inter-event relations would 
need to be captured such as entity reference, time refer-
ence, place reference, causal relationships, associative 
relationships, etc.  Finally, to incorporate these, cross-
sentence phenomena remain a challenge.     
From an MT perspective, issues include evaluating 
the consistency in the use of an annotation language 
given that any source text can result in multiple, differ-
ent, legitimate translations (see Farwell and Helmreich, 
2003) for discussion of evaluation in this light.  Along 
these lines, there is the problem of annotating texts for 
translation without including in the annotations infer-
ences from the source text.   
9 Conclusions  
This is a radically different annotation project from 
those that have focused on morphology, syntax or even 
certain types of semantic content (e.g., for word sense 
disambiguation competitions). It is most similar to 
PropBank (Kingsbury et al2002) and FrameNet (Baker 
et al1998).  However, it is novel in its emphasis on:  (1) 
a more abstract level of mark-up (interpretation); (2) the 
assignment of a well-defined meaning representation to 
concrete texts; and (3) issues of a community-wide con-
sistent and accurate annotation of meaning. 
By providing an essential, and heretofore non-
existent, data set for training and evaluating natural lan-
guage processing systems, the resultant annotated multi-
lingual corpus of translations is expected to lead to 
significant research and development opportunities for 
Machine Translation and a host of other Natural Lan-
guage Processing technologies including Question-
Answering and Information Extraction.  
References 
Baker, C., J. Fillmore and J B. Lowe, 1998.  The Berke-
ley FrameNet Project.  Proceedings of ACL. 
Bateman, J.A., R. Kasper, J. Moore, and R. Whitney. 
1989. A General Organization of Knowledge for 
Natural Language Processing: The Penman Upper 
Model. Unpublished research report, USC / Informa-
tion Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey, CA.  
Carletta, J. C. 1996. Assessing agreement on classifica-
tion tasks: the kappa statistic. Computational Lin-
guistics, 22(2), 249-254 
Conceptual Structures and Documentation, UMCP. 
http://www.umiacs.umd.edu/~bonnie/LCS_Database
_Documentation.html  
Dorr, B. J. 2001.  LCS Verb Database, Online Software 
Database of Lexical  
Dorr, B. J., 1993. Machine Translation: A View from the 
Lexicon, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Farwell, D., and S. Helmreich.  2003.  Pragmatics-based 
Translation and MT Evaluation.  In Proceedings of 
Towards Systematizing MT Evaluation.  MT-Summit 
Workshop, New Orleans, LA. 
Fellbaum, C. (ed.). 1998. WordNet: An On-line Lexical 
Database and Some of its Applications. MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA. 
Ferro, L., I. Mani, B. Sundheim and G. Wilson.  2001. 
TIDES Temporal Annotation Guidelines. Version 
1.0.2 MITRE Technical Report, MTR 01W0000041 
Fillmore, C..  1968. The Case for Case. In E. Bach and 
R. Harms, editors, Universals in Linguistic Theory, 
pages 1--88. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.  
Fleischman, M., A. Echihabi, and E.H. Hovy. 2003. 
Offline Strategies for Online Question Answering: 
Answering Questions Before They Are Asked.  Pro-
ceedings of the ACL Conference. Sapporo, Japan. 
Habash, N. and B. Dorr. 2002. Interlingua Annotation 
Experiment Results. AMTA-2002 Interlingua Reli-
ability Workshop. Tiburon, California, USA. 
Habash, N., B. J. Dorr, and D. Traum, 2002. "Efficient 
Language Independent Generation from Lexical 
Conceptual Structures," Machine Translation, 17:4. 
Haji?, J.; B. Vidov?-Hladk?; P. Pajas.  2001: The Pra-
gue Dependency Treebank: Annotation Structure and 
Support. In Proceeding of the IRCS Workshop on 
Linguistic Databases, pp. . University of Pennsyl-
vania, Philadelphia, USA, pp. 105-114. 
Hovy, E., A. Philpot, J. Ambite, Y. Arens, J. Klavans, 
W. Bourne, and D. Saroz.  2001. Data Acquisition 
and Integration in the DGRC's Energy Data Collec-
tion Project, in Proceedings of the NSF's dg.o 2001. 
Los Angeles, CA. 
ISLE 2003.  Framework for Evaluation of Machine 
Translation in ISLE.  
http://www.issco.unige.ch/projects/isle/femti/ 
Jackendoff, R. 1972. Grammatical Relations and Func-
tional Structure. Semantic Interpretation in Genera-
tive Grammar. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Kingsbury, P and M Palmer and M Marcus , 2002.  
Adding Semantic Annotation to the Penn TreeBank. 
Proceedings of the Human Language Technology 
Conference (HLT 2002).  
Knight, K., and I. Langkilde. 2000.  Preserving Ambi-
guities in Generation via Automata Intersection. 
American Association for Artificial Intelligence con-
ference (AAAI). 
Knight, K, and S. K. Luk.  1994. Building a Large-Scale 
Knowledge Base for Machine Translation.  Proceed-
ings of AAAI. Seattle, WA. 
Levin, B. and M. Rappaport-Hovav. 1998. From Lexical 
Semantics to Argument Realization. Borer, H. (ed.) 
Handbook of Morphosyntax and Argument Structure. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Mahesh, K., and Nirenberg, S.  1995. A Situated Ontol-
ogy for Practical NLP, in Proceedings on the Work-
shop on Basic Ontological Issues in Knowledge 
Sharing at IJCAI-95. Montreal, Canada. 
Philpot, A., M. Fleischman, E.H. Hovy. 2003. Semi-
Automatic Construction of a General Purpose Ontol-
ogy.  Proceedings of the International Lisp Confer-
ence.  New York, NY. Invited. 
Stowell, T. 1981. Origins of Phrase Structure. PhD the-
sis, MIT, Cambridge, MA.  
Tapanainen, P. and T Jarvinen.  1997.  A non-projective 
dependency parser.  In the 5th Conference on Applied 
Natural Language Processing / Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Washington, DC. 
White, J., and T. O?Connell.  1994.  The ARPA MT 
evaluation methodologies: evolution, lessons, and fu-
ture approaches.  Proceedings of the 1994 Confer-
ence, Association for Machine Translation in the 
Americas 
Walker, K., M. Bamba, D. Miller, X. Ma, C. Cieri, and 
G. Doddington 2003.  Multiple-Translation Arabic 
Corpus, Part 1. Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC) 
catalog num. LDC2003T18 & ISBN 1-58563-276-7. 
 
 
Role Description Grid Syntax Type 
Agent The entity that does the action Agent:  load 
Theme  with possessed 
SUBJ OBLIGATORY 
Theme The entity that is worked on Agent:  load 
Theme with possessed 
OBJ OBLIGATORY 
Possessed The entity controlled or owned Agent:  load 
Theme  with possessed 
PP OPTIONAL 
Table 1 :  A theta grid for the verb "load" 
 
 
Role and Definition Examples 
Agent:  Agents have the features of volition, sentience, causation and 
independent exist 
? Henry pushed/broke the vase. 
Instrument: An instrument should have causation but no volition. Its 
sentience and existence are not relevant. 
? The Hammer broke the vase. 
? She hit him with a baseball bat 
Experiencer: An experiencer has no causation but is sentient and 
exists independently. Typically an experiencer is the subject of verbs 
like feel, hear, see, sense, smell, notice, detect, etc. 
? John heard the vase shatter.   
? John shivered. 
Theme: The theme is typically causally affected or experiences a 
movement and/or change in state. The theme can appear as the infor-
mation in verbs like acquire, learn, memorize, read, study, etc. It can 
also be a thing, event or state (clausal complement). 
? John went to school.  
? John broke the vase.   
? John memorized his lines.  
? She buttered the bread with marga-
rine.   
Perceived: Refers to a perceived entity that isn't required by the verb 
but further characterizes the situation. The perceived is neither caus-
ally affected nor causative. It doesn't experience a movement or 
change in state. Its volition and sentience are irrelevant. Its existence 
is independent of an experiencer. 
? He saw the play.   
? He looked into the room.  
? The cat's fur feels good to John.   
? She imagined the movie to be loud.    
Predicate: Indicates new modifying information about other thematic 
roles. 
? We considered him a fool.   
? She acted happy.   
Source: Indicates where/when the theme started in its motion, or 
what its original state was, or where its original (possibly abstract) 
location/time was. 
? John left the house. 
Goal: Indicates where the theme ends up in its motion, or what its 
final state is, or where/when its final (possibly abstract) location/time 
is. It also can indicate the thing/event resulting from the verb's occur-
rence (the result). 
? John ran home.   
? John ran to the store.  
? John gave a book to Mary.   
? John gave Mary a book. 
Location: Indicates static locations---as opposed to a source or goal, 
i.e., the (possibly abstract) location of the theme or event. 
? He lived in France.   
? The water fills the box.   
? This cabin sleeps five people 
Time Indicates time. ? John sleeps for five hours.   
? Mary ate during the meeting. 
Beneficiary: Indicates the thing that receives the benefit/result of the 
event/state. 
? John baked the cake for Mary.   
? John baked Mary a cake.  
? An accident happened to him.   
Purpose: Indicates the purpose/reason behind an event/state ? He studied for the exam.  
? He searched for rabbits.  
Possessed: Indicates the possessed entity in verbs such as own, have, 
possess, fit, buy, and carry. 
? John has five bucks.  
? He loaded the cart with hay.   
? He bought it for five dollars 
Proposition: Indicates the secondary event/state ? He wanted to study for the exam. 
Modifier: Indicates a property of a thing such as color, taste, size, 
etc. 
? The red book sitting on the table is 
old.  
Null Indicates no thematic contribution. Typical examples are imper-
sonal it and there. 
? It was raining all morning in Miami. 
 
TABLE 2:  List of Theta Roles 
