Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1902?1911,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automatic Inference of the Tense of Chinese Events Using Implicit
Linguistic Information
Yuchen Zhang
Brandeis University
415 South Street
Waltham, MA
yuchenz@brandeis.edu
Nianwen Xue
Brandeis University
415 South Street
Waltham, MA
xuen@brandeis.edu
Abstract
We address the problem of automatically
inferring the tense of events in Chinese
text. We use a new corpus annotated with
Chinese semantic tense information and
other implicit Chinese linguistic informa-
tion using a ?distant annotation? method.
We propose three improvements over a rel-
atively strong baseline method ? a statisti-
cal learning method with extensive feature
engineering. First, we add two sources
of implicit linguistic information as fea-
tures ? eventuality type and modality of
an event, which are also inferred automat-
ically. Second, we perform joint learning
on semantic tense, eventuality type, and
modality of an event. Third, we train arti-
ficial neural network models for this prob-
lem and compare its performance with
feature-based approaches. Experimental
results show considerable improvements
on Chinese tense inference. Our best per-
formance reaches 68.6% in accuracy, out-
performing a strong baseline method.
1 Introduction
As a language with no grammatical tense, Chinese
does not encode the temporal location of an event
directly in a verb, while in English, the grammati-
cal tense of a verb is a strong indicator of the tem-
poral location of an event. In this paper we ad-
dress the problem of inferring the semantic tense,
or the temporal location of an event (e.g., present,
past, future) in Chinese text. The semantic tense is
defined relative to the utterance time or document
creation time, and it does not always agree with
the grammatical tense in languages like English
where there is grammatical tense. Inferring se-
mantic tense potentially benefits natural language
processing tasks such as Machine Translation and
Information Extraction (Xue, 2008; Reichart and
Rappoport, 2010; Ye et al., 2006; Ye, 2007; Liu et
al., 2011), but previous work has shown that auto-
matic inference of the semantic tense of events in
Chinese is a very challenging task (Xue, 2008; Ye
et al., 2006; Liu et al., 2011).
There are at least two reasons why this is a dif-
ficult problem. First, since Chinese does not have
grammatical tense which could serve as an impor-
tant clue when annotating the semantic tense of
an event, generating consistent annotation for Chi-
nese semantic tense has proved to be a challenge.
Xue and Zhang (2014) use a ?distant annotation?
method to address this problem. They take advan-
tage of an English-Chinese parallel corpus with
manual word alignments (Li et al., 2012) , and per-
form annotation on the English side, which pro-
vides more explicit information such as grammati-
cal tense that helps annotators decide the appropri-
ate semantic tense. The annotations are then pro-
jected to the Chinese side via the word alignments.
They show consistent annotation agreements on
semantic tense. Second, the lack of grammatical
tense also makes automatic inference of Chinese
semantic tense challenging since the grammatical
tense would be an important source of information
for predicting the semantic tense. Previous work
has shown that it is very difficult to achieve high
accuracy using standard machine learning tech-
niques such as Maximum Entropy and Conditional
Random Field classifiers combined with extensive
feature engineering.
We address these challenges in two ways. First
of all, we take advantage of the newly annotated
corpus described in (Xue and Zhang, 2014) in
which semantic tense is annotated together with
eventuality type and modality using the distant an-
notation method. This makes it possible to use
these two additional sources of information to help
predict tense. Eventuality type and modality are
intricately tied to tense. For example, Smith and
1902
Erbaugh (2005) show that states by default hold in
the present but (episodic) events occur by default
in the past. This means knowing the eventuality
type of an event would help determine the tense.
Eventuality type and modality are also annotated
on the English side and then projected onto the
Chinese side via manual word alignments, taking
advantage of the rich morphosyntactic clues in En-
glish. High inter-annotator agreement scores are
also reported on eventuality type and modality.
We experimented with two ways of using even-
tuality type and modality information. In the first
approach, we first train statistical machine learn-
ing models to predict eventuality type and modal-
ity and then use these two sources of information
as features to predict semantic tense. In the sec-
ond approach we trained joint learning models be-
tween semantic tense and eventuality type, and be-
tween semantic tense and modality. We show both
approaches improve the tense inference accuracy
over a baseline where these two sources of infor-
mation are not used. Second, in our statistical
machine learning experiments on tense inference
using feature engineering, we find that the design
of feature templates has great influence on the re-
sults. So in order to explore more possible feature
combinations and mitigate the feature engineering
work, we apply artificial neural network models to
this problem. This shows improvements on tense
inference accuracy as well in some of the experi-
ment settings.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 discusses related work in automatic
tense inference. Section 3 briefly introduces the
distant annotation method. In section 4, we de-
scribe our experiments and analyze the experimen-
tal results. We conclude this paper in section 7.
2 Related Work
Inferring the semantic tense of events in Chinese
text is not a new topic. There have been several
attempts at it, yet high accuracy in this task has
proved to be elusive. Using a corpus with tense
annotated directly in Chinese text, Xue (2008) per-
formed extensive feature engineering in a machine
learning framework to address this problem. They
used both local lexical features and structured fea-
tures extracted from manually annotated syntactic
parsing trees. In our baseline method, we adopt
most of their features as the baseline, only on a
new corpus in which semantic tenses are not an-
notated directly on Chinese events but projected
from annotations from the English side of a par-
allel Chinese-English corpus. In our experiments,
we also use structural features extracted from au-
tomatic parse trees, so our experimental settings
are more realistic.
Ye et al. (2006) took a similar approach in
which they predict tense with feature engineering
in a statistical learning framework. They also used
a Chinese-English parallel corpus and projected
tense for English events onto Chinese events via
human alignments. The main difference between
their data and ours is that they used the gram-
matical tense of the English events, while we use
human-annotated semantic tense which we believe
are more ?transferrable? across languages as it
is free of the language-specific idiosyncrasies of
grammatical tense. In addition, they also used hu-
man annotated linguistic information as ?latent?
features in their work, which are similar to our
implicit linguistic features. However, the ?latent?
features that they used in their system are human-
annotated, while the eventuality type and modality
features in our system are predicted automatically.
Another difference is that they ignored events that
are not verbs. For example, they excluded ver-
bal expressions in Chinese that are translated into
nominal phrases in English. In contrast, we kept
all events in our data, and they can be realized as
verbs, nouns, as well as words in other parts of
speech. We performed separate experiments on
events realized as verbal expressions and events
not in verbal expressions to investigate their im-
pact on semantic tense inference.
Liu et al. (2011) introduced more global fea-
tures in a machine learning framework, and on
top of that proposed an iterative learning algorithm
which better handles noisy data, but they also ig-
nored events that are not realized as verbal ex-
pressions, or events that are verbal expressions but
have more than one verb in them. They mainly
focused on events that are one-verb expressions.
In a similar work on inferring tense in English
text, Reichart and Rappoport (2010) aimed at in-
ferring fine-grained semantic tenses for events in
English. They introduced a fine-grained sense tax-
onomy for tense in a more general Tense Sense
Disambiguation (TSD) task to annotate and dis-
ambiguate semantic tenses. The underlying senses
include ?things that are always true?, ?general and
repeated actions and habits?, ?plans, expectations
1903
and hopes?, etc., which encode a combination of
tense, eventuality type and modality. In the corpus
that we use, the same information is organized in
a more structured manner along three dimensions
? semantic tense, eventuality type, and modality.
3 Distant Annotation
Figure 1 shows the distant annotation procedure
from (Xue and Zhang, 2014). Starting with a
word-aligned parallel English-Chinese corpus, all
sentences are part-of-speech (POS) tagged first
and then all verb instances in the English text as
well as expressions aligned with verb instances
on the Chinese side are targeted for annotation.
As we will show in Section 4, these expressions
include verbs as well as nouns, prepositions and
word sequences ?headed? by a verb. We consider
those expressions as events. Annotators work only
on the English side and tag every event with a
pre-defined semantic tense label. These labels are
then projected from the English side to the Chi-
nese side via word alignments. The resulting cor-
pus contains events annotated with semantic tense
labels in both languages. Categories for seman-
tic tense are ?Past?, ?Present?, ?Future?, ?Relative
Past?, ?Relative Present?, ?Relative Future?, and
?None?.
Events annotated with relative tenses are also
linked to another event that serves as the tempo-
ral reference for the event in question. In some
cases the relative tense can be resolved to an ab-
solute tense. For example, if an event is anno-
tated with a ?relative past? tense to a reference
event that is annotated with a present tense, then
the semantic tense of that event can resolve to an
absolute ?past? tense. In other cases, they can
not be resolved. For example, if an event is la-
beled with a ?relative future? tense and the refer-
ence event has a past tense, then its tense cannot
be resolved to an absolute tense, which is defined
with regard to the utterance time or document cre-
ation time. In our work, where possible, we re-
solve these links and keep only absolute tense la-
bels. For events with relative tenses that can not
be resolved (i.e. events which are ?Relative Fu-
ture? to ?Past? events, or events which are ?Rela-
tive Past? to ?Future? events), we use ?None? as
the default label.
Eventuality type and modality are labeled in the
same way as auxiliary annotation that can help
with the inference of tense. Labels for eventual-
ity type include ?Episodic?, ?Habitual?, ?State?,
?Progressive?, ?Completed?, and ?None?. Labels
for modality are ?Actual?, ?Intended?, ?Hypothet-
ical?, ?Modalized?, and ?None?. Readers are ref-
ered to (Xue and Zhang, 2014) for detailed expla-
nations of each label.
Figure 1: Distant annotation procedure.
As we mentioned in Section 2, in this corpus
not only verbs but also their counterparts on the
opposite language are considered as events, yield-
ing events that may not be verbs. For example,
in the following sentence pair (1), the Chinese
verb (VV) ???? is aligned with an English noun
(NN) ?use?. In the sentence pair (2), the English
verb (VBG) ?opening? is aligned with an Chinese
noun (NN) ????.
(1) Statistics show that , in the past five years ,
Guangxi?s foreign trade and its use of foreign
investments has expanded rapidly.
?????????????????
???(li4yong4)?????????
(2) Beihai has already become a bright star aris-
ing from China?s policy of opening up to the
outside world.
???????????(kai1fang4) ?
????????
In this corpus, events could be either one verb,
or a verb compound, or a verb sequence ?headed?
by a verb, or even nouns and words of other parts
of speech.
4 Experiments
4.1 Experimental Setting
Xue and Zhang (2014) annotated semantic tense,
eventuality type and modality on top of the Par-
allel Aligned Treebank (Li et al., 2012), a corpus
1904
of word-aligned Chinese-English sentences tree-
banked based on the Penn TreeBank (Marcus et
al., 1993) and the Chinese TreeBank (Xue et al.,
2005) standards. Human annotation of tense is
performed on the newswire and webblog sections
of this corpus. They report that the average pair-
wise agreement among three annotators consis-
tently stays above 80% and the average Kappa
score consistently exceeds 70%, indicating reli-
able annotation.
Apart from using the entire corpus, we also con-
ducted experiments on three different subsets of
the corpus. An examination of the data indicates
that newswire data is grammatically more for-
mal and complete than webblog data, so we also
conducted separate experiments on newswire data
only. Considering that the diversity of the parts
of speech of the events may affect the inference
accuracy and that most of our features extracted
from the parse trees assume that our events being
verbs, we also conducted experiments exclusively
on ?v events?. ?v events? consist of two parts.
One part is events that are realized as a single word
and the word is a verb; the other one is events
which have multiple words but there is only one
verb among them. In the latter case, we stripped
off words tagged with other parts of speech and
only keep the verbs as events. This makes it more
effective to use features from previous work that
are designed for single verbs. One such feature is
the aspect marker. Distinctions between newswire
and webblog data and between v events and other
events are further explored in Section 5.1 and Sec-
tion 5.2. Table 1 presents the statistics for each
subset of the experimental data.
dataset # of v events # of all events
nw 6,686 8,268
all 17,153 20,885
Table 1: Statistics of four subsets of the annotated
corpus (Chinese side). ?nw? denotes the newswire
data. ?v events? denotes events that consist of or
can be reduced to only a single verb.
For each subset, randomly selected 80% were
used as the training set, while 10% were used as
the development set and 10% were used as the test
set.
4.2 Baseline
Based on previous approaches on Chinese tense
inference, we used a Maximum Entropy model
with extensive feature engineering as our baseline
method. We use the implementation of the Maxi-
mum Entropy algorithm in Mallet
1
for our exper-
iments. The corpus is parsed using the Berkeley
Parser for the purpose of extracting structure fea-
tures. Since the Parallel Alignment TreeBank is
a subset of the Chinese TreeBank (CTB) 8.0, we
automatically parsed the CTB 8.0 by doing a 10-
fold cross validation. The bracketing F-score is
80.5%. Feature extractions are performed on the
automatic parse trees. Adopted features include
previous word and its POS tag, next word and
its POS tag, aspect marker following the event,
?following the event, the governing verb of the
event, the character string of the main verb in the
previous clause that is coordinated with the clause
the event is in, whether the event is in quote, and
left modifiers of the event including head of adver-
bial phrases, temporal noun phrases, prepositional
phrases, localizer phrases, as well as subordinat-
ing clauses. Readers are referred to (Xue, 2008)
for details of these features. Since in this corpus
an event can span over more than one verb, we
also use the character string and the POS string of
the entire event instead of one word and one POS
tag as features.
? The character string of an event ? it could
be one or more words. In our corpus, only
69.7% events consist of single word (e.g. ??
??, ?live?), the other 30.3% of the events are
expressed with two or more words (e.g. ??
?+??, ?have caused?).
? The POS string of an event ? it could be
verbs, nouns, or POS sequences of other
word sequences. Table 2 shows the top ten
POS tag or POS tag sequences with example
word or word sequences.
Other features that we used in the baseline sys-
tem are as follows.
? DEC ? if the word immediately following an
event has the POS tag ?DEC?, use its charac-
ter string as a feature. In most cases, ?DEC?
is the POS tag for ??? when it used as a com-
plementizer marking the boundary in a rela-
tive clause. This feature implies that an event
1
http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/
1905
POS freq examples
VV 48.2% ??(live)
NN 5.8% ??(opening)
VC 5.2% ?(is)
VV+AS 5.2% ??+?(have caused)
VV+DEC 3.2% ??+?(isolated)
AD+VV 3.0% ??+??(is suggesting)
VA 3.0% ?(is big)
AD 2.0% ??(seemed)
VE 1.9% ?(there is)
P 1.8% ??(according to)
Table 2: Frequencies and examples of the ten most
frequent POS tag or POS tag sequences for events
in our corpus.
is inside a relative clause modifying a noun
phrase and it is more often stative than even-
tive.
? Determiners ? we find the subject of an event
from its parse tree and extract the determiner
of the subject, if there is one, as a fea-
ture. This feature indicates different types
of agents, and different types of agents of-
ten signal different types of events. For ex-
ample, individual agents tend to perform one-
time episodic actions which are by default lo-
cated in the past or described by a state in
the present, while multiple agents tend to in-
volved in habitual actions that spans over a
long period of time.
Baseline results are reported in Table 5 and Ta-
ble 6, in MaxEnt b rows.
4.3 Eventuality Type and Modality as
Features
Xue and Zhang (2014) reports that gold eventual-
ity type and modality labels significantly help the
inference of tense in Chinese, improving the ac-
curacy by more than 20%. However, it is unreal-
istic to expect to have human annotated eventual-
ity type and modality labels in a random new data
set if we want to use these two sources of implicit
linguistic information in any Chinese text. So we
trained statistical learning models to automatically
extract these two labels. We trained Maximum En-
tropy models and ran a 10-fold cross validation on
the entire corpus in order to get automatic labels
for every event. Feature used for labeling modal-
ity are as follows. Table 3 shows the average ac-
curacies for automatic modality labeling.
? The character string of an event.
? The POS string of an event.
? The character string of an event?s governing
verb and its POS tag.
? Whether the event is in a conditional clause.
If an event is in a subtree with the func-
tional tag ?CND?, return ?True?; otherwise,
return ?False?. This feature indicates that the
event?s modality label is ?Hypothetical?.
? Whether the event is in a purpose or reason
clause. If an event is in a subtree with the
functional tag ?PRP?, return ?True?; other-
wise, return ?False? as a feature. This feature
indicates the event?s modality label is ?In-
tended?.
? Whether the event string is the start of a sen-
tence. If an event is the start of a sentence, re-
turn ?True?; otherwise, return ?False?. Sen-
tences that start with an event is often impera-
tive, and the event generally has ?modalized?
modality label.
dataset v events all events
nw 81.1% 81.2%
all 75.4% 76.4%
Table 3: Average modality labeling accuracy, us-
ing a 10-fold cross validation.
Statistics show that the five labels for modality
have a skewed distribution in this corpus. Among
all events, 67.3% of them fall in the ?Actual? cat-
egory, while the events of all the other categories
are around or less than 10%. Similar distributions
are found in all four subsets of the data. Still, com-
pared with always choosing the most frequent la-
bel (around 67% accuracy), we still get a big im-
provement from our statistical model, even though
only a very simple set of features are used.
Features used for labeling eventuality type are
as follows. Table 4 shows the average accuracies
for automatic eventuality type labeling.
? The character string of an event.
? The POS string of an event.
1906
? Adverbs on the left that modifies the event.
? Aspect marker following the event
? Whether the event is Inside a relative clause.
If an event is in a CP subtree with the word
??? and POS tag ?DEC? as its last node,
return ?True?; otherwise, return ?False?.
Events in relative clauses modifying a noun
phrase and tend to be more often stative than
eventive.
dataset v events all events
nw 68.7% 67.7%
all 65.3% 65.1%
Table 4: Average automatic eventuality type label-
ing accuracy using a 10-fold cross validation.
The six labels of eventuality type are also dis-
tributed unevenly. The first group of columns in
Figure 3 shows the distribution of all events. Over
65% of events are either ?Episodic? or ?State?,
while the other types of events are less than 15%.
There are two categories that are even less than
5%. However, even though we only use some sim-
ple features, our model still beats the most fre-
quent label baseline (around 35% accuracy) by a
big margin, as shown in Table 4.
Tense inference accuracies using automatic
eventuality type and/or modality features are re-
ported in Table 5 and Table 6, in MaxEnt e, Max-
Ent m, and MaxEnt em rows.
4.4 Joint Learning
Apart from using eventuality type and modality la-
bels as features, we also conducted joint learning
experiments on them. Joint learning are applied
on 1) tense and eventuality type, and 2) tense and
modality. Features used are the union of the two
sets of features in inferring each single label. Max-
Ent jle and MaxEnt jlm rows in Table 5 and Table
6 present the experimental results on joint learn-
ing.
4.5 Artificial Neural Network
For each of the experiments using the maximum
entropy algorithm, we conducted a neural network
experiment using the same setting in order to ex-
plore more possible feature combinations and mit-
igate the feature engineering work. We convert
the features in each of our tense inference meth-
ods into feature vectors. If a feature is not a word,
we use a one-hot representation for that feature (a
vector with all 0s except for a 1 at the place of the
feature?s index in our feature lexicon). If a feature
is a word, we convert it into a word embedding. To
get a dictionary of word embeddings, we use the
word2vec tool
2
(Mikolov et al., 2013) and train it
on the Chinese Gigaword corpus (LDC2003T09).
For each word embedding, a 300-dimensional vec-
tor is used. Artificial neural networks are built us-
ing the theano package
3
(Bergstra et al., 2010).
We use 5000 hidden units for all networks and set
the learning rate ? = 0.01. Experimental results
are presented in the ANN rows of Tables 5 and 6.
5 Results Analysis
A comparison of the baseline accuracy for the four
different subsets of the data shows that (1) tense
inference is slightly better on v events than on all
events, but the difference is not substantial; and
(2) tense inference on newswire data performs bet-
ter than on all data by around 8% on v events and
around 5% on all events, verifying our assump-
tion that automatic tense inference is easier on
newswire data than webblog data. Although our
experiments are performed on different data sets
from that of previous work, our baseline method
still shows strong results compared with previous
work (Xue, 2008; Ye et al., 2006; Liu et al., 2011).
Adding automatic eventuality type and modal-
ity labels as features for semantic tense inference
leads to improvements over the baseline on all four
data subsets. In fact they provide considerable
improvements (around 2% increase) on newswire
v events dataset. MaxEnt e rows report results
when only automatic eventuality type is added
as a feature, and MaxEnt m rows report results
when only automatic modality is added as a fea-
ture. They both outperform (or, in several datasets,
match) the baseline results on all datasets. Max-
Ent em rows report results when both automatic
linguistic labels are added as features, and they
show further improvements over when only one
source of information is used. Analysis of the
results shows again that tense inference accuracy
is higher than webblog data under this experi-
ment condition. The results also show that after
adding eventuality type and modality as features,
2
http://code.google.com/p/word2vec/
3
http://deeplearning.net/software/theano/
1907
method all data nw data
MaxEnt b 58.9% 66.8%
MaxEnt e 59.5% 67.9%
MaxEnt m 59.5% 67.1%
MaxEnt em 59.6% 68.6%
MaxEnt jle 59.6% 63.5%
MaxEnt jlm 60.5% 66.9%
MaxEnt ge 74.6% 77.4%
MaxEnt gm 66.6% 70.0%
MaxEnt gem 76.2% 76.9%
ANN b 63.4% 67.2%
ANN e 62.6% 66.1%
ANN m 63.4% 59.8%
ANN em 59.7% 68.3%
ANN jle 62.7% 64.5%
ANN jlm 62.0% 65.6%
Table 5: Accuracy of tense inference on v events.
Best performances for each group of methods are
in bold.
the improvements on v events (0.7% and 1.8%)
are much bigger than that on all events (0.2% and
0.4%), regardless of the data genre (newswire or
weblog).
In order to test the potential for these two new
features, we also conducted experiments using
gold eventuality type and/or modality labels as
features for the Maximum Entropy models (Table
5 and Table 6, MaxEnt ge, MaxEnt gm, and Max-
Ent gem rows.). They outperform our best Max-
Ent results by around 10% on newswire data and
around 15% on all data, indicating strong poten-
tials for more accurately classified automatic even-
tuality type and modality labels.
Results also show that joint learning with
modality proves to be working better than the
baseline (Table 5 and Table 6, MaxEnt jle, Max-
Ent jlm). In fact, on the datasets with all events,
joint learning with modality produces the highest
accuracy among all approaches. However, joint
learning with eventuality is even worse than the
baseline. One possible explanation is that the
lower eventuality type classification accuracy af-
fects the tense inference accuracy. We also believe
there is still room for improvement with features
tuned for the joint learning model. Simply adding
the features may not be the best strategy.
On the entire dataset, regardless of v events or
other events, results of the neural network models
show improvements over the maximum entropy
method all data nw data
MaxEnt b 59.7% 65.1%
MaxEnt e 59.9% 65.1%
MaxEnt m 59.9% 65.4%
MaxEnt em 59.9% 65.5%
MaxEnt jle 59.7% 62.7%
MaxEnt jlm 60.4% 65.6%
MaxEnt ge 75.3% 76.1%
MaxEnt gm 67.1% 69.0%
MaxEnt gem 76.2% 75.9%
ANN b 63.0% 64.0%
ANN e 63.2% 66.9%
ANN m 60.1% 64.7%
ANN em 57.8% 66.1%
ANN jle 61.4% 63.0%
ANN jlm 62.9% 63.5%
Table 6: Accuracy of tense inference on all events.
Best performances for each group of methods are
in bold.
models under most experimental conditions. A
clear trend is that artificial neural networks help
more on all data than on newswire data only, in-
dicating greater potentials of the neural network
models to select and combine features with care-
fully trained parameters, given noisier but larger
training sets.
Experimental results also show significant dif-
ferences in accuracy between newswire data and
webblog data, and smaller but still recognizable
difference between v events and all events. There-
fore, we specifically look into distinctions be-
tween these data sets.
5.1 Newswire Data vs. Webblog Data
Considering the big gap in accuracy between
newswire and webblog data in our baseline results,
we delve deeper into the data and found several
major distinctions between these two domains that
might have contributed to the rather significant dif-
ference in performance on tense inference. First,
we look into the word frequency distribution of the
two datasets. Here by ?word? we mean the char-
acter string of an event. We find that both datasets
have a small portion of words with high frequen-
cies, but the webblog dataset contains much more
low-frequent words than the newswire dataset. In
Figure 2, the x-axis shows possible frequencies of
words and the y-axis shows the number of words at
a particular frequency. It can be seen that the num-
1908
ber of words that appear only once in the webblog
dataset is about three times as large as that in the
newswire dataset. The entire newswire dataset has
a vocabulary of only 2671 entries, while the web-
blog dataset has a vocabulary size of 6117. This
greatly reduces the coverage of features extracted
from the training dataset on the events in the test
dataset.
Second, webblog data contains more events
that are ?inherently? ambiguous on temporal lo-
cation. Among four possible labels for tense
in this corpus, ?None? is for events whose tem-
poral locations are not clear even to human an-
notators. Statistics show that in webblog data
about 13.4% of the events are tagged as ?None?,
while in newswire data only around 6.7% are
?None?. Another piece of evidence showing web-
blog data is harder to process is the different inter-
annotator agreement scores for tense annotation
on newswire and webblog data reported by (Xue
and Zhang, 2014). Newswire data has a 89.0%
agreement score and a 84.9% kappa score, while
webblog data only has a 81.0% agreement score
and a 72.7% kappa. Third, automatic parse trees
for newswire data is also more accurate than that
for webblog data. The bracketing F-score of au-
tomatically parsed newswire data is 83.0% while
it is only 80.4% for weblog data. Moreover, sen-
tences in newswire data are more grammatically
complete. Analysis shows that webblog data has
more dropped constituents in sentences. There
are around 40.5% sentences in newswire data that
have nominal empty categories, while in webblog
data the number is 48.1%. Dropped constituents
affect the structures of parse trees and some of
the features, which can affect tense inference ac-
curacy.
0	 ?
500	 ?
1000	 ?
1500	 ?
2000	 ?
2500	 ?
3000	 ?
3500	 ?
4000	 ?
4500	 ?
5000	 ?
1	 ? 2	 ? 3	 ? 4	 ? 5	 ? 6	 ? 7	 ? 8	 ? 9	 ? 10	 ?
wo
rd	 ?
cou
nt 
word	 ?frequency	 ?
 nw	 ?dataset	 ?
 wb	 ?dataset	 ?
Figure 2: Word frequency distribution in newswire
and webblog datasets.
5.2 V events vs. All Events
In our definition, v events are (1) events that are
single verbs (example 1, 3, 7, 9 in Table 2), and
(2) events that are multi-word sequences but only
one word among them is a verb and any non-verb
words are stripped off (verbs in example 4, 5, 6
in Table 2). Conversely, events that do not fall into
this definition include (1) events that have no verbs
in their surface form (example 2, 8, 10 in Table 2),
and (2) events that have more than one verb in their
surface form (e.g. ??+??(shi3+cheng2wei2)?,
VV+VV, ?make it become?). So from the point
of view of a statistical learning algorithm, ev-
ery v event has one and only one verb. This
makes sure that all features that we used are ap-
plicable to v events. For other events, however,
some features may be not applicable. For ex-
ample, for an event which has a nominal expres-
sion, aspect marker, DER, and DEC features are
all ?None? because these features are only appli-
cable to verbs. Another major distinction between
v events and ?other events? is that the distributions
of eventuality type labels on them are very differ-
ent, presented in the second and third groups of
columns in Figure 3. There is a rather high per-
centage of ?State? among ?other events? and very
low percentage of ?Completed? and ?None?. The
highly uneven distribution of eventuality type la-
bels make it less effective as a feature for tense
inference.
0.0%	 ?
5.0%	 ?
10.0%	 ?
15.0%	 ?
20.0%	 ?
25.0%	 ?
30.0%	 ?
35.0%	 ?
40.0%	 ?
45.0%	 ?
50.0%	 ?
all	 ?events	 ? v_events	 ? other	 ?events	 ?
Episodic	 ?
Habitual	 ?
State	 ?
Progressive	 ?
Completed	 ?
None	 ?
Figure 3: Statistics of eventuality types on differ-
ent events.
We also find that, on newswire datasets, max-
imum entropy models and neural network mod-
els do not show much difference in performance.
To understand this result better, we plot learn-
ing curves of the artificial neural network model,
trained and tested on newswire v events dataset.
In Figure 4, the black line represents the error rate
on training set, and the grey line represents the er-
1909
ror rate on test set. As the size of training data
grows, the error rate on the training set gets larger
because with more training examples the training
set becomes noisier and it gets harder to model all
samples with the same number of features; and the
error rate on the test set gets smaller because a big-
ger training set reduces the data sparsity and trains
the parameters better. Both lines end at a rather
high error rate (around 30%, i.e. only around 70%
in accuracy) which means the current network is
general enough to cover most cases in the test set,
but it is under-fitting the training data. The cur-
rent model is not specific enough to better cap-
ture the fine distinctions between the tense cat-
egories. The black line being not very smooth
is also understandable, given that there are only
around 6000 training examples in the newswire
v events dataset.
0.0%	 ?
5.0%	 ?
10.0%	 ?
15.0%	 ?
20.0%	 ?
25.0%	 ?
30.0%	 ?
35.0%	 ?
40.0%	 ?
10%
	 ?
20%
	 ?
30%
	 ?
40%
	 ?
50%
	 ?
60%
	 ?
70%
	 ?
80%
	 ?
90%
	 ?
100
%	 ?
Err
or
	 ?ra
te
 
Percentage	 ?of	 ?training	 ?data 
 train	 ?
 test	 ?
Figure 4: Learning curves of the artificial neural
network model, trained and tested on newswire
v events dataset.
6 Error Analysis
In order to get a better understanding of the use
of eventuality type and modality, we look into the
error rates for each error type in greater detail.
In Table 7, ?Pa? stands for ?Past?, ?Pre? is short
for ?Present?, ?Fu? is for ?Future?, and ?No? is
?None?. For each error type, the left-hand side
is the gold-standard tense, and the right-hand side
is the wrongly assigned label. Statistics are col-
lected on the newswire v events data test set. Ta-
ble 7 compares the different error types between
the baseline method and the MaxEnt em method,
the best approach for this dataset. We can see that
(1) ?Present? and ?Past? is the most frequently
confused tense pair, and (2) eventuality type and
modality information help disambiguate ?Present?
and ?Past? events greatly, and reduce the errors
due to mis-classifying ?Past? as ?Future?, or ?Fu-
ture? as ?Present?, or ?None? as ?Present?.
error type MaxEnt b MaxEnt em
Pre? Pa 11.7% 11.2%
Pa? Pre 9.8% 9.2%
Pa? Fu 2.5% 2.3%
No? Pa 2.0% 2.0%
Fu? Pre 1.9% 1.6%
Pre? Fu 1.4% 1.4%
Fu? Pa 1.4% 1.4%
No? Pre 1.6% 1.2%
No? Fu 0.5% 0.5%
Pa? No 0.3% 0.3%
Pre? No 0.2% 0.2%
Fu? No 0.0% 0.0%
Table 7: Tense inference error rates for different
error types on newswire v events test set.
A closer examination of the sentences in which
events are assigned the wrong tense reveals that
?Pre ? Pa? error is prone to occur on events
in relative clauses. The Chinese verb implies a
past episodic event, while the event is actually a
present state or habitual event. As a good example,
the ???(sheng1chan3)? event in Sentence (3) is
wrongly labeled as ?Past? by MaxEnt b but cor-
rectly classified as ?Present? by MaxEnt em with
eventuality type ?Habitual? and modality tag ?Ac-
tual? (the underlined part in the Chinese sentence
is the relative clause). It is also found that most
?Pa ? Pre? errors occur on events that are more
stative. It is reasonable since classifiers tend to
assign ?Present? to states and ?Past? to episodic
events. MaxEnt em managed to correct some with
?episodic? as their correct eventuality type.
(3) ??????(sheng1chan3)???? ?
?????????????????
??????????????????
??
At present , the Pu Kang Company
, which produces the vaccine in this zone ,
has already formed a production scale of 5
million doses per year , which has great sig-
nificance in effectively controlling the hepati-
tis A epidemic .
We are also surprised to see that over 2% ?Past?
events are classified as ?Future? events, ranking
1910
third among all error types. This mistake seems
very unlikely, but it is still possible when per-
forming tense inference on a language with no
grammatical tense at all. Take the following sen-
tence pair (4) as an example. In the Chinese sen-
tence, MaxEnt b classifies ???(tao3lun4)? as
?Future? because there is no grammatical indica-
tor in the Chinese sentence implying that the ?dis-
cussion? has already happened and it is reason-
able to assume the ?discussion? is in the near fu-
ture. However, with eventuality type ?Episodic?
and modality label ?Actual?, MaxEnt em classi-
fies it as ?Past? correctly, because episodic events
tend to occur in the past and future events tend to
get ?Intended? or ?Hypothetical? modality labels.
(4) ??????????????????
?????????(tao3lun4) ????
????????????
He also said, the French government ?even
directed its representative not to vote Yes
when the Security Council discussed the res-
olution on sanctions on Cuba?.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we address the problem of automatic
inference of Chinese semantic tense. We took ad-
vantage of a new corpus annotated with rich lin-
guistic information, and experimented with three
approaches. In the first approach, we use two
sources of implicit linguistic information, even-
tuality type and modality, automatically derived,
as features in tense inference. We then conducted
joint learning on tense and each of these two infor-
mation types. Finally, we experimented with using
artificial neural networks to train models for tense
prediction. All three approaches outperformed a
strong baseline, a maximum entropy model with
extensive engineering. Our future work will in-
clude exploring ways to improve automatic even-
tuality type and modality labeling accuracy to fur-
ther improve tense inference accuracy.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the three anonymous re-
viewers for their suggestions and comments. This
work is supported by the National Science Foun-
dation via Grant No. 0910532 entitled ?Richer
Representations for Machine Translation?. All
views expressed in this paper are those of the au-
thors and do not necessarily represent the view of
the National Science Foundation.
References
James Bergstra, Olivier Breuleux, Fr?ed?eric Bastien,
Pascal Lamblin, Razvan Pascanu, Guillaume Des-
jardins, Joseph Turian, David Warde-Farley, and
Yoshua Bengio. 2010. Theano: a CPU and
GPU math expression compiler. In Proceedings
of the Python for Scientific Computing Conference
(SciPy), June. Oral Presentation.
Xuansong Li, Stephanie Strassel, Stephen Grimes, Safa
Ismael, Mohamed Maamouri, Ann Bies, and Nian-
wen Xue. 2012. Parallel Aligned Treebanks at
LDC: New Challenges Interfacing Existing Infras-
tructures. In Proceedings of LREC-2012, Istanbul,
Turkey.
Feifan Liu, Fei Liu, and Yang Liu. 2011. Learning
from chinese-english parallel data for chinese tense
prediction. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages
1116?1124, November.
Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of english: The penn treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 19(2):313?330.
Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. In Proceedings of Workshop
at ICLR.
Roi Reichart and Ari Rappoport. 2010. Tense sense
disambiguation: A new syntactic polysemy task.
In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
325?334, Cambridge, MA, October. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Carlota S. Smith and Mary Erbaugh. 2005. Tempo-
ral interpretation in Mandarin Chinese. Linguistics,
43(4):713?756.
Nianwen Xue and Yuchen Zhang. 2014. Buy one get
one free: Distant annotation of chinese tense, event
type, and modality. In Proceedings of LREC-2014,
Reykjavik, Iceland.
Nianwen Xue, Fei Xia, Fu dong Chiou, and Martha
Palmer. 2005. The Penn Chinese TreeBank: Phrase
Structure Annotation of a Large Corpus. Natural
Language Engineering, 11(2):207?238.
Nianwen Xue. 2008. Automatic Inference of the Tem-
poral Location of Situations in Chinese Text. In
EMNLP-2008, Honolulu, Hawaii.
Yang Ye, Victoria Li Fossum, and Steven Abney. 2006.
Latent features in automatic tense translation be-
tween Chinese and English. In The Proceedings
of the 5th SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language
Processing, Sydney, Australia.
Yang Ye. 2007. Automatic Tense and Aspect Trans-
lation between Chinese and English. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Michigan.
1911
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, pages 143?152,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Towards Robust Linguistic Analysis Using OntoNotes
Sameer Pradhan1, Alessandro Moschitti2,3, Nianwen Xue4, Hwee Tou Ng5
Anders Bjo?rkelund6, Olga Uryupina2, Yuchen Zhang4 and Zhi Zhong5
1 Boston Childrens Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
2 University of Trento, University of Trento, 38123 Povo (TN), Italy
3 QCRI, Qatar Foundation, 5825 Doha, Qatar
4 Brandeis University, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02453, USA
5 National University of Singapore, Singapore, 117417
6 University of Stuttgart, 70174 Stuttgart, Germany
Abstract
Large-scale linguistically annotated cor-
pora have played a crucial role in advanc-
ing the state of the art of key natural lan-
guage technologies such as syntactic, se-
mantic and discourse analyzers, and they
serve as training data as well as evaluation
benchmarks. Up till now, however, most
of the evaluation has been done on mono-
lithic corpora such as the Penn Treebank,
the Proposition Bank. As a result, it is still
unclear how the state-of-the-art analyzers
perform in general on data from a vari-
ety of genres or domains. The completion
of the OntoNotes corpus, a large-scale,
multi-genre, multilingual corpus manually
annotated with syntactic, semantic and
discourse information, makes it possible
to perform such an evaluation. This paper
presents an analysis of the performance of
publicly available, state-of-the-art tools on
all layers and languages in the OntoNotes
v5.0 corpus. This should set the bench-
mark for future development of various
NLP components in syntax and semantics,
and possibly encourage research towards
an integrated system that makes use of the
various layers jointly to improve overall
performance.
1 Introduction
Roughly a million words of text from the Wall
Street Journal newswire (WSJ), circa 1989, has
had a significant impact on research in the lan-
guage processing community ? especially those
in the area of syntax and (shallow) semantics, the
reason for this being the seminal impact of the
Penn Treebank project which first selected this text
for annotation. Taking advantage of a solid syn-
tactic foundation, later researchers who wanted to
annotate semantic phenomena on a relatively large
scale, also used it as the basis of their annota-
tion. For example the Proposition Bank (Palmer et
al., 2005), BBN Name Entity and Pronoun coref-
erence corpus (Weischedel and Brunstein, 2005),
the Penn Discourse Treebank (Prasad et al, 2008),
and many other annotation projects, all annotate
the same underlying body of text. It was also con-
verted to dependency structures and other syntac-
tic formalisms such as CCG (Hockenmaier and
Steedman, 2002) and LTAG (Shen et al, 2008),
thereby creating an even bigger impact through
these additional syntactic resources. The most re-
cent one of these efforts is the OntoNotes corpus
(Weischedel et al, 2011). However, unlike the
previous extensions of the Treebank, in addition
to using roughly a third of the same WSJ subcor-
pus, OntoNotes also added several other genres,
and covers two other languages ? Chinese and
Arabic: portions of the Chinese Treebank (Xue et
al., 2005) and the Arabic Treebank (Maamouri and
Bies, 2004) have been used to sample the genre of
text that they represent.
One of the current hurdles in language process-
ing is the problem of domain, or genre adaptation.
Although genre or domain are popular terms, their
definitions are still vague. In OntoNotes, ?genre?
means a type of source ? newswire (NW), broad-
cast news (BN), broadcast conversation (BC), mag-
azine (MZ), telephone conversation (TC), web data
(WB) or pivot text (PT). Changes in the entity and
event profiles across source types, and even in the
same source over a time duration, as explicitly ex-
pressed by surface lexical forms, usually account
for a lot of the decrease in performance of mod-
els trained on one source and tested on another,
usually because these are the salient cues that are
relied upon by statistical models.
Large-scale corpora annotated with multiple
layers of linguistic information exist in various
languages, but they typically consist of a single
source or collection. The Brown corpus, which
consists of multiple genres, have been usually used
to investigate issues of genres of sensitivity, but it
is relatively small and does not include any infor-
1A portion of the English data in the OntoNotes corpus
is a selected set of sentences that were annotated for parse
and word sense information. These sentences are present in a
document of their own, and so the documents for parse layers
for English are inflated by about 3655 documents and for the
word sense are inflated by about 8797 documents.
143
Language Parse Proposition Sense Name Coreference
Documents Words Documents Verb Prop. Noun Prop. Documents Verb Sense Noun Sense Documents Words Documents Words
English 7,9671 2.6M 6,124 300K 18K 12K 173K 120K 3,637 2.0M 2,384(3493) 1.7M
Chinese 2002 1.0M 1861 148K 7K 1573 83K 1K 1,911 988K 1,729(2,280) 950K
Arabic 599 402K 599 30K - 310 4.3K 8.7K 446 298K 447(447) 300K
Table 1: Coverage for each layer in the OntoNotes v5.0 corpus, by number of documents, words, and
some other attributes. The numbers in parenthesis are the total number of parts in the documents.
mal genres such as web data. Very seldom has it
been the case that the exact same phenomena have
been annotated on a broad cross-section of the
same language before OntoNotes. The OntoNotes
corpus thus provides an opportunity for studying
the genre effect on different syntactic, semantic
and discourse analyzers.
Parts of the OntoNotes Corpus have been used
for various shared tasks organized by the language
processing community. The word sense layer was
the subject of prediction in two SemEval-2007
tasks, and the coreference layer was the subject
of prediction in the SemEval-20102 (Recasens et
al., 2010), CoNLL-2011 and 2012 shared tasks
(Pradhan et al, 2011; Pradhan et al, 2012). The
CoNLL-2012 shared task provided predicted in-
formation to the participants, however, that did not
include a few layers such as the named entities
for Chinese and Arabic, propositions for Arabic,
and for better comparison of the English data with
the CoNLL-2011 task, a smaller OntoNotes v4.0
portion of the English parse and propositions was
used for training.
This paper is a first attempt at presenting a co-
herent high-level picture of the performance of
various publicly available state-of-the-art tools on
all the layers of OntoNotes in all three languages,
so as to pave the way for further explorations in
the area of syntax and semantics processing.
The possible avenues for exploratory studies
on various fronts are enormous. However, given
space considerations, in this paper, we will re-
strict our presentation of the performance on all
layers of annotation in the data by using a strat-
ified cross-section of the corpus for training, de-
velopment, and testing. The paper is organized
as follows: Section 2 gives an overview of the
OntoNotes corpus. Section 3 explains the param-
eters of the evaluation and the various underlying
assumptions. Section 4 presents the experimental
results and discussion, and Section 5 concludes the
paper.
2 OntoNotes Corpus
The OntoNotes project has created a large-scale
corpus of accurate and integrated annotation of
2A small portion 125K words in English was used for this
evaluation.
multiple layers of syntactic, semantic and dis-
course information in text. The English lan-
guage portion comprises roughly 1.7M words and
Chinese language portion comprises roughly 1M
words of newswire, magazine articles, broadcast
news, broadcast conversations, web data and con-
versational speech data3. The Arabic portion is
smaller, comprising 300K words of newswire ar-
ticles. This rich, integrated annotation covering
many layers aims at facilitating the development
of richer, cross-layer models and enabling bet-
ter automatic semantic analysis. The corpus is
tagged with syntactic trees, propositions for most
verb and some noun instances, partial verb and
noun word senses, coreference, and named enti-
ties. Table 1 gives an overview of the number of
documents that have been annotated in the entire
OntoNotes corpus.
2.1 Layers of Annotation
This section provides a very concise overview of
the various layers of annotations in OntoNotes.
For a more detailed description, the reader is re-
ferred to (Weischedel et al, 2011) and the docu-
mentation accompanying the v5.04 release.
2.1.1 Syntax
This represents the layer of syntactic annotation
based on revised guidelines for the Penn Tree-
bank (Marcus et al, 1993; Babko-Malaya et al,
2006), the Chinese Treebank (Xue et al, 2005)
and the Arabic Treebank (Maamouri and Bies,
2004). There were two updates made to the parse
trees as part of the OntoNotes project: i) the in-
troduction of NML phrases, in the English portion,
to mark nominal sub-constituents of flat NPs that
do not follow the default right-branching structure,
and ii) re-tokenization of hyphenated tokens into
multiple tokens in English and Chinese. The Ara-
bic Treebank on the other hand was also signifi-
cantly revised in an effort to increase consistency.
2.1.2 Word Sense
Coarse-grained word senses are tagged for the
most frequent polysemous verbs and nouns, in or-
3These numbers are for the portion that has all layers of
annotations. The word count for each layer is mentioned in
Table 1
4For all the layers of data used in this study, the
OntoNotes v4.99 pre-release that was used for the CoNLL-
2012 shared task is identical to the v5.0 release.
144
der to maximize token coverage. The word sense
granularity is tailored to achieve very high inter-
annotator agreement as demonstrated by Palmer et
al. (2007). These senses are defined in the sense
inventory files. In the case of English and Arabic
languages, the sense-inventories (and frame files)
are defined separately for each part of speech that
is realized by the lemma in the text. For Chinese,
however the sense inventories (and frame files) are
defined per lemma ? independent of the part of
speech realized in the text.
2.1.3 Proposition
The propositions in OntoNotes are PropBank-style
semantic roles for English, Chinese and Arabic.
Most English verbs and few nouns were anno-
tated using the revised guidelines for the English
PropBank (Babko-Malaya et al, 2006) as part of
the OntoNotes effort. Some enhancements were
made to the English PropBank and Treebank to
make them synchronize better with each other:
one of the outcomes of this effort was that two
types of LINKs that represent pragmatic coref-
erence (LINK-PCR) and selectional preferences
(LINK-SLC) were added to the original PropBank
(Palmer et al, 2005). More details can be found in
the addendum to the PropBank guidelines5 in the
OntoNotes v5.0 release. A part of speech agnostic
Chinese PropBank (Xue and Palmer, 2009) guide-
lines were used to annotate most frequent lem-
mas in Chinese. Many verbs and some nouns and
adjectives were annotated using the revised Ara-
bic PropBank guidelines (Palmer et al, 2008; Za-
ghouani et al, 2010).
2.1.4 Named Entities
The corpus was tagged with a set of 18 well-
defined proper named entity types that have been
tested extensively for inter-annotator agreement
by Weischedel and Burnstein (2005).
2.1.5 Coreference
This layer captures general anaphoric corefer-
ence that covers entities and events not limited
to noun phrases or a limited set of entity types
(Pradhan et al, 2007). It considers all pronouns
(PRP, PRP$), noun phrases (NP) and heads of verb
phrases (VP) as potential mentions. Unlike En-
glish, Chinese and Arabic have dropped subjects
and objects which were also considered during
coreference annotation6. The mentions formed by
these dropped pronouns total roughly about 11%
for both Chinese and Arabic. Coreference is the
only document-level phenomenon in OntoNotes.
Some of the documents in the corpus ? especially
the ones in the broadcast conversation, web data,
5doc/propbank/english-propbank.pdf
6As we will see later these are not used during the task.
and telephone conversation genre ? are very long
which prohibited efficient annotation in their en-
tirety. These are split into smaller parts, and each
part is considered a separate document for the sake
of coreference evaluation.
3 Evaluation Setting
Given the scope of the corpus and the multitude of
settings one can run evaluations, we had to restrict
this study to a relatively focused subset. There has
already been evidence of models trained on WSJ
doing poorly on non-WSJ data on parses (Gildea,
2001; McClosky et al, 2006), semantic role label-
ing (Carreras and Ma`rquez, 2005; Pradhan et al,
2008), word sense (Escudero et al, 2000; ?), and
named entities. The phenomenon of coreference is
somewhat of an outlier. The winning system in the
CoNLL-2011 shared task was one that was com-
pletely rule-based and not directly trained on the
OntoNotes corpus. Given this overwhelming evi-
dence, we decided not to focus on potentially com-
plex cross-genre evaluations. Instead, we decided
on evaluating the performance on each layer of an-
notation using an appropriately selected, stratified
training, development and test set, so as to facili-
tate future studies.
3.1 Training, Development and Test
Partitions
In this section we will have a brief discussion
on the logic behind the partitioning of the data
into training, development and test sets. Before
we do that, it would help to know that given the
range and peculiarities of the layers of annota-
tion and presence of various resource and techni-
cal constraints, not all the documents in the cor-
pus are annotated with all the layers of informa-
tion, and token-centric phenomena (such as word
sense and propositions of predicates) were not an-
notated with 100% coverage. Most of the propo-
sition annotation in English and Arabic is for the
verb predicates, with a few nouns annotated in
English and some adjectives in Arabic. In Chi-
nese, the selection is part of speech agnostic, and is
based on the lemmas that can be considered predi-
cates. Some documents in the corpora are actually
snippets from larger documents, and have been an-
notated for a combination of parse, propositions,
word sense and names, but not coreference. If one
considers each layer independently, then an ideal
partitioning scheme would create a separate parti-
tion for each layer such that it maximizes the num-
ber of examples that can be extracted for that layer
from the corpus. The upside is that one would
get as much data there is to train and estimate the
performance of each layer across the entire cor-
pus. The downside is that this might cover vari-
145
ous cross sections of the documents in the corpus,
and would not provide a clean picture when look-
ing at the collective performance for all the lay-
ers. The documents that are annotated with coref-
erence correspond to the intersection of all anno-
tations. These are the documents that have also
been annotated with all the other layers of infor-
mation. The amount of data we can get together
in such a test set is big enough to be represen-
tative. Therefore, we decided that it would be
ideal to choose a portion of these documents as
the test collection for all layers. An additional ad-
vantage is that it is the exact same test set used
in the CoNLL-2012 shared task, and so in a way
is already a standard. On the training and devel-
opment side however, one can still imagine using
all possible information for training models for a
particular layer, and that is what we decided to
do. The training and development data is gener-
ated by providing all documents with all available
layers of annotation for input, however, the test
set is generated by providing as input to the algo-
rithm the set of documents in the corpus that have
been annotated for coreference. This algorithm
tries to reuse previously established partitions for
English, i.e., the WSJ portion. Unfortunately, in
the case of Chinese and Arabic, either the histor-
ical partitions were not in the selection used for
OntoNotes, or were partially overlapping with the
ones created using this scheme, and/or had a very
small portion of OntoNotes covered in the test set.
Therefore, we decided to create a fresh partition
for the Chinese and Arabic data. Note, however,
that the these test sets also match the ones used
in the CoNLL-2012 evaluation. The algorithm for
selecting the training, development and test parti-
tions is described on the CoNLL-2012 shared task
webpage, along with the list of training, develop-
ment, and test document IDs7.
3.2 Assumptions
Next we had to decide on a set of assumptions
to use while designing the experiments to mea-
sure the automatic prediction accuracy for each of
the layers. Since some of these decisions affect
more than one layer of annotation, we will de-
scribe these in this section instead of in the section
where we discuss the experiment with a particular
layer of annotation.
7http://conll.cemantix.org/2012/download/ids/
For each language there are two sub-directories ? ?all?
contains more general lists which include documents
that had at least one of the layers of annotation, and
?coref? contains the lists that include documents that
have coreference annotation. The former were used to
generate training, development, test sets for layers other
than coreference, and the latter was used to generate
training/development/test sets for the coreference layer
used in the CoNLL-2012 shared task.
Word Segmentation The three languages that
we are evaluating are from quite different lan-
guage families. Arabic has a complex morphol-
ogy, English has limited morphology, whereas
Chinese has very little morphology. English word
segmentation amounts to rule-based tokenization,
and is close to perfect. In the case of Chinese and
Arabic, although the tokenization/segmentation is
not as good as English, the accuracies are in the
high 90s. Given this we decided to use gold,
Treebank segmentation for all languages. In the
case of Chinese, the words themselves are lem-
mas, whereas in English they can be predicted
with very high accuracy. For Arabic, by default
written text is unvocalised, and lemmatization is a
complex process which we considered out of the
scope of this study, so we decided to use correct,
gold standard lemmas, along with the correct vo-
calized version of the tokens.
Traces and Function Tags Treebank traces
have hardly played a role in the mainstream parser
and semantic role labeling evaluation. Function
tags also have received similar treatment in the
parsing community, and though they are impor-
tant, there is also a significant information overlap
between them and the proposition structure pro-
vided by the PropBank layer. Whereas in English,
most traces represent syntactic phenomena such
as movement and raising, in Chinese and Arabic,
they can also represent dropped subjects/objects.
These subset of traces directly affect the corefer-
ence layer, since, unlike English, traces in Chinese
and Arabic (*pro* and * respectively) are legit-
imate targets of mentions and are considered for
coreference annotation in OntoNotes. Recovering
traces in text is a hard problem, and the most re-
cently reported numbers in literature for Chinese
are around a F-score of 50 (Yang and Xue, 2010;
Cai et al, 2011). For Arabic there have not been
much studies on recovering these. A study by
Gabbard (2010) shows that these can be recovered
with an F-score of 55 with automatic parses and
roughly 65 using gold parses. Considering the low
level of prediction accuracy of these tokens, and
their relative low frequency, we decided to con-
sider predicting traces in trees out of the scope of
this study. In other words, we removed the man-
ually identified traces and function tags from the
Treebanks across all three languages, in all the
three ? training, development and test partitions.
This meant removing any and all dependent an-
notation in layers such as PropBank and Coref-
erence. In the case of PropBank these are the
argument bearing traces, whereas in coreference
these are the mentions formed by these elided sub-
jects/objects.
146
Disfluencies One thing that needs to be dealt
with in conversational data is the presence of dis-
fluencies (restarts, etc.). In the English parses of
the OntoNotes, disfluencies are marked using a
special EDITED8 phrase tag ? as was the case for
the Switchboard Treebank. Computing the accu-
racy of identifying disfluencies is also out of the
scope of this study. Given the frequency of dis-
fluencies and the performance with which one can
identify them automatically,9 a probable process-
ing pipeline would filter them out before parsing.
We decided to remove them using oracle infor-
mation available in the English Treebank, and the
coreference chains were remapped to trees with-
out disfluencies. Owing to various technical con-
straints, we decided to retain the disfluencies in the
Chinese data.
Spoken Genre Given the scope of this study, we
make another significant assumption. For the spo-
ken genres ? BC, BN and TC ? we use the manual
transcriptions rather than the output of a speech
recognizer, as would be the case in real world. The
performance on various layers for these genres
would therefore be artificially inflated, and should
be taken into account while analyzing results. Not
many studies have previously reported on syntac-
tic and semantic analysis for spoken genre. Favre
et al (2010) report the performance on the English
subset of an earlier version of OntoNotes.
Discourse The corpus contains information on
the speaker for broadcast communication, conver-
sation, telephone conversation and writer for the
web data. This information provides an important
clue for correctly linking anaphoric pronouns with
the right antecedents. This information could be
automatically deduced, but is also not within the
scope of our study. Therefore, we decided to pro-
vide gold, instead of predicted, data both during
training and testing. Table 2 lists the status of the
layers.
4 Experiments
In this section, we will report on the experiments
carried out using all available data in the train-
ing set for training models for a particular layer,
and using the CoNLL-2012 test set as the test set.
8There is another phrase type ? EMBED in the telephone
conversation genre which is similar to the EDITED phrase
type, and sometimes identifies insertions, but sometimes con-
tains logical continuation of phrases by different speakers, so
we decided not to remove that from the data.
9A study by Charniak and Johnson (2001) shows that one
can identify and remove edits from transcribed conversational
speech with an F-score of about 78, with roughly 95 precision
and 67 recall.
10The predicted part of speech for Arabic are a mapped
down version of the richer gold version present in the Tree-
bank
Layer English Chinese Arabic
Segmentation ? ? ?
Lemma ? ? ?
Parse ? ? ?10
Proposition ? ? ?
Predicate Frame ? ? ?
Word Sense ? ? ?
Name Entities ? ? ?
Coreference ? ? ?
Speaker ? ? ?
Number ? ? ?
Gender ? ? ?
Table 2: Status of layers used during prediction
of other layers. A ??? indicates gold annotation,
a ??? indicates predicted, a ??? indicates an ab-
sence of the predicted layer, and a ??? indicates
that the layer is not applicable to the language.
The predicted annotation layers input to down-
stream models were automatically annotated by
using NLP processors learned with n-cross fold
validation on the training data. This way, the n
chunks of training data are annotated avoiding de-
pendencies with the data used for training the NLP
processors.
4.1 Syntax
Predicted parse trees for English were produced
using the Charniak parser11 (Charniak and John-
son, 2005). Some additional tag types used in
the OntoNotes trees were added to the parser?s
tagset, including the nominal (NML) tag, and the
rules used to determine head words were extended
correspondingly. Chinese and Arabic parses were
generated using the Berkeley parser (Petrov and
Klein, 2007). In the case of Arabic, the pars-
ing community uses a mapping from rich Arabic
part of speech tags to Penn-style part of speech
tags. We used the mapping that is included with
the Arabic Treebank. The predicted parses for
the training portion of the data were generated us-
ing 10-fold (5-folds for Arabic) cross-validation.
For testing, we used a model trained on the entire
training portion. Table 3 shows the precision, re-
call and F1-scores of the re-trained parsers on the
CoNLL-2012 test along with the part of speech ac-
curacies (POS) using the standard evalb scorer.
The performance on the PT genre for English is
the highest among other English genres. This is
possibly because of the professional, clean trans-
lations of the underlying text, and are mostly
shorter sentences. The MZ genre and the NW both
of which contain well edited text, share similar
scores. There is a few points gap between these
and the other genres. As for Chinese, the per-
formance on MZ is the highest followed by BN.
Surprisingly, the WB genre has a similar score and
the others are close behind except for TC. As ex-
pected, the Arabic parser performance is the low-
11http://bllip.cs.brown.edu/download/reranking-parserAug06.tar.gz
147
All Sentences
N POS P R F
English BC 2,211 97.33 86.36 86.11 86.23
BN 1,357 97.32 87.61 87.03 87.32
MZ 780 96.58 89.90 89.49 89.70
NW 2,327 97.15 87.68 87.25 87.47
TC 1,366 96.11 85.09 84.13 84.60
WB 1,787 96.03 85.46 85.26 85.36
PT 1,869 98.77 95.29 94.66 94.98
Overall 11,697 97.09 88.08 87.65 87.87
Chinese BC 885 94.79 80.17 79.35 79.76
BN 929 93.85 83.49 80.13 81.78
MZ 451 97.06 88.48 83.85 86.10
NW 481 94.07 82.26 77.28 79.69
TC 968 92.22 71.90 69.19 70.52
WB 758 92.37 82.57 78.92 80.70
Overall 4,472 94.12 82.23 78.93 80.55
Arabic NW 1,003 94.12 74.71 75.67 75.19
Table 3: Parser performance on the CoNLL-2012
test set.
est among the three languages.
4.2 Word Sense
We used the IMS12 (It Makes Sense) (Zhong and
Ng, 2010) word sense tagger. IMS was trained on
all the word sense data that is present in the train-
ing portion of the OntoNotes corpus using cross-
validated predictions on the input layers similar
to the proposition tagger. During testing, for En-
glish and Arabic, IMS must first use the auto-
matic POS information to identify the nouns and
verbs in the test data, and then assign senses to
the automatically identified nouns and verbs. In
the case of Arabic, IMS uses gold lemmas. Since
automatic POS tagging is not perfect, IMS does
not always output a sense to all word tokens that
need to be sense tagged due to wrongly predicted
POS tags. As such, recall is not the same as pre-
cision on the English and Arabic test data. For
Chinese the measure of performance is just the
accuracy since the senses are defined per lemma
rather than per part of speech. Since we provide
gold word segmentation, IMS attempts to sense
tag all correctly segmented Chinese words, so re-
call and precision are the same and so is the F1-
score. Table 4 shows the performance of this clas-
sifier aggregated over both the verbs and nouns
in the CoNLL-2012 test set and an overall score
split by nouns and verbs for English and Ara-
bic. For both nouns and verbs in English, the
F1-score is over 80%. The performance on En-
glish nouns is slightly higher than English verbs.
Comparing to the other two languages, the perfor-
mance on Arabic is relatively lower, especially the
performance on Arabic verbs, whose F1-score is
less than 70%. For English, genres PT and TC,
and for Chinese genres TC and WB, no gold stan-
dard senses were available, and so their accuracies
could not be computed. Previously, Zhong et al
(2008) reported the word sense performance on
the Wall Street Journal portion of an earlier ver-
12http://www.comp.nus.edu.sg/?nlp/sw/IMS v0.9.2.1.tar.gz
Performance
P R F A
English BC 81.2 81.3 81.2 -
BN 82.0 81.5 81.7 -
MZ 79.1 78.8 79.0 -
NW 85.7 85.7 85.7 -
WB 77.5 77.6 77.5 -
Overall 82.5 82.5 82.5 -
Nouns 83.4 83.1 83.2 -
Verbs 81.8 81.9 81.8 -
Chinese BC - - - 80.5
BN - - - 85.4
MZ - - - 82.4
NW - - - 89.1
Overall - - - 84.3
Arabic NW 75.9 75.2 75.6 -
Nouns 79.2 77.7 78.4 -
Verbs 68.8 69.5 69.1 -
Table 4: Word sense performance on the CoNLL-
2012 test set.
sion of OntoNotes, but the results are not directly
comparable.
4.3 Proposition
The revised PropBank has introduced two new
links ? LINK-SLC and LINK-PCR. Since the com-
munity is not used to the new PropBank represen-
tation which (i) relies heavily on the trace struc-
ture in the Treebank and (ii) we decided to ex-
clude, we unfold the LINKs back to their original
representation as in the PropBank 1.0 release. We
used ASSERT15 (Pradhan et al, 2005) to predict
the propositional structure for English. We made
a small modification to ASSERT, and replaced
the TinySVM classifier with a CRF16 to speed
up training the model on all the data. The Chi-
nese propositional structure was predicted with the
Chinese semantic role labeler described in (Xue,
2008), retrained on the OntoNotes v5.0 data. The
Arabic propositional structure was predicted us-
ing the system described in Diab et al (2008).
(Diab et al, 2008) Table 5 shows the detailed per-
14The Frame ID column indicates the F-score for English
and Arabic, and accuracy for Chinese for the same reasons as
word sense.
15http://cemantix.org/assert.html
16http://leon.bottou.org/projects/sgd
Frame Total Total % Perfect Argument ID + Class
ID Sent. Prop. Prop. P R F
English BC 93.2 1994 5806 52.89 80.76 69.69 74.82
BN 92.7 1218 4166 54.78 80.22 69.36 74.40
MZ 90.8 740 2655 50.77 79.13 67.78 73.02
NW 92.8 2122 6930 46.45 79.80 66.80 72.72
TC 91.8 837 1718 49.94 79.85 72.35 75.91
WB 90.7 1139 2751 42.86 80.51 69.06 74.35
PT 96.6 1208 2849 67.53 89.35 84.43 86.82
Overall 92.8 9,261 26,882 51.66 81.30 70.53 75.53
Chinese BC 87.7 885 2,323 31.34 53.92 68.60 60.38
BN 93.3 929 4,419 35.44 64.34 66.05 65.18
MZ 92.3 451 2,620 31.68 65.04 65.40 65.22
NW 96.6 481 2,210 27.33 69.28 55.74 61.78
TC 82.2 968 1,622 32.74 48.70 59.12 53.41
WB 87.8 758 1,761 35.21 62.35 68.87 65.45
Overall 90.9 4,472 14,955 32.62 61.26 64.48 62.83
Arabic NW 85.6 1,003 2337 24.18 52.99 45.03 48.68
Table 5: Proposition and frameset disambiguation
performance14 in the CoNLL-2012 test set.
148
formance numbers17. The CoNLL-2005 scorer18
was used to compute the scores. At first glance,
the performance on the English newswire genre is
much lower than what has been reported for WSJ
Section 23. This could be attributed to several fac-
tors: i) the newswire in OntoNotes not only con-
tains WSJ data, but also Xinhua news, and some
other newswire evaluation data, ii) The WSJ train-
ing and test portions in OntoNotes are a subset of
the standard ones that have been used to report
performance earlier; iii) the PropBank guidelines
were significantly revised during the OntoNotes
project in order to synchronize well with the Tree-
bank, and finally iv) it includes propositions for
be verbs missing from the original PropBank. It
looks like the newly added Pivot Text data (com-
prised of the New Testament) shows very good
performance. The Chinese and Arabic19 accuracy
is much worse. In addition to automatically pre-
dicting the arguments, we also trained the IMS
system to tag PropBank frameset IDs.
Language Genre Entity Performance
Count P R F
English BC 1671 80.17 77.20 78.66
BN 2180 88.95 85.69 87.29
MZ 1161 82.74 82.17 82.45
NW 4679 86.79 84.25 85.50
TC 362 74.09 61.60 67.27
WB 1133 77.72 68.05 72.56
Overall 11186 84.04 80.86 82.42
Chinese BC 667 72.49 58.47 64.73
BN 3158 82.17 71.50 76.46
NW 1453 86.11 76.39 80.96
MZ 1043 65.16 56.66 60.62
TC 200 48.00 60.00 53.33
WB 886 80.60 51.13 62.57
Overall 7407 78.20 66.45 71.85
Arabic NW 2550 74.53 62.55 68.02
Table 6: Performance of the named entity recog-
nizer on the CoNLL-2012 test set.
4.4 Named Entities
We retrained the Stanford named entity recog-
nizer20 (Finkel et al, 2005) on the OntoNotes data.
Table 6 shows the performance details for all the
languages across all 18 name types broken down
by genre. In English, BN has the highest perfor-
mance followed by the NW genre. There is a sig-
nificant drop from those and the TC and WB genre.
Somewhat similar trend is observed in the Chi-
nese data, with Arabic having the lowest scores.
Since the Pivot Text portion (PT) of OntoNotes
was not tagged with names, we could not com-
pute the accuracy for that cross-section of the data.
Previously Finkel and Manning (2009) performed
17The number of sentences in this table are a subset of the
ones in the table showing parser performance, since these are
the sentences for which at least one predicate has been tagged
with its arguments
18http://www.lsi.upc.es/?srlconll/srl-eval.pl
19The system could not not use the morphology features in
Diab et al (2008).
20http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/CRF-NER.shtml
a joint estimation of named entity and parsing.
However, it was on an earlier version of the En-
glish portion of OntoNotes using a different cross-
section for training and testing and therefore is not
directly comparable.
4.5 Coreference
The task is to automatically identify mentions of
entities and events in text and to link the corefer-
ring mentions together to form entity/event chains.
The coreference decisions are made using auto-
matically predicted information on other structural
and semantic layers including the parses, seman-
tic roles, word senses, and named entities that
were produced in the earlier sections. Each docu-
ment part from the documents that were split into
multiple parts during coreference annotation were
treated as separate document.
We used the number and gender predictions
generated by Bergsma and Lin (2006). Unfortu-
nately neither Arabic, nor Chinese have compara-
ble data available. Chinese, in particular, does not
have number or gender inflections for nouns, but
(Baran and Xue, 2011) look at a way to infer such
information.
We trained the Bjo?rkelund and Farkas (2012)
coreference system21 which uses a combination of
two pair-wise resolvers, the first is an incremen-
tal chain-based resolution algorithm (Bjo?rkelund
and Farkas, 2012), and the second is a best-first
resolver (Ng and Cardie, 2002). The two resolvers
are combined by stacking, i.e., the output of the
first resolver is used as features in the second one.
The system uses a large feature set tailored for
each language which, in addition to classic coref-
erence features, includes both lexical and syntactic
information.
Recently, it was discovered that there is pos-
sibly a bug in the official scorer used for the
CoNLL 2011/2012 and the SemEval 2010 corefer-
ence tasks. This relates to the mis-implementation
of the method proposed by (Cai and Strube, 2010)
for scoring predicted mentions. This issue has also
been recently reported in Recasens et al, (2013).
As of this writing, the BCUBED metric has been
fixed, and the correctness of the CEAFm, CEAFe
and BLANC metrics is being verified. We will
be updating the CoNLL shared task webpages22
with more detailed information and also release
the patched scripts as soon as they are available.
We will also re-generate the scores for previous
shared tasks, and the coreference layer in this pa-
per and make them available along with the mod-
els and system outputs for other layers. Table
7 shows the performance of the system on the
21http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/?anders/coref.html
22http://conll.cemantix.org
149
CoNLL-2012 test set, broken down by genre. The
same metrics that were used for the CoNLL-2012
shared task are computed, with the CONLL col-
umn being the official CONLL measure.
Language Genre MD MUC BCUBED CEAFm CEAFe BLANC CONLL
PREDICTED MENTIONS
English BC 73.43 63.92 61.98 54.82 42.68 73.04 56.19
BN 73.49 63.92 65.85 58.93 48.14 72.74 59.30
MZ 71.86 64.94 71.38 64.03 50.68 78.87 62.33
NW 68.54 60.20 65.11 57.54 45.10 73.72 56.80
PT 86.95 79.09 68.33 65.52 50.83 77.74 66.08
TC 80.81 76.78 71.35 65.41 45.44 82.45 64.52
WB 74.43 66.86 61.43 54.76 42.05 73.54 56.78
Overall 75.38 67.58 65.78 59.20 45.87 75.8 59.74
Chinese BC 68.02 59.6 59.44 53.12 40.77 73.63 53.27
BN 68.57 61.34 67.83 60.90 48.10 77.39 59.09
MZ 55.55 48.89 58.83 55.63 46.04 74.25 51.25
NW 89.19 80.71 73.64 76.30 70.89 82.56 75.08
TC 77.72 73.59 71.65 64.30 48.52 83.14 64.59
WB 72.61 65.79 62.32 56.71 43.67 77.45 57.26
Overall 66.37 58.61 66.56 59.01 48.19 76.07 57.79
Arabic NW 60.55 47.82 61.16 53.42 44.30 69.63 51.09
GOLD MENTIONS
English BC 85.63 76.09 68.70 61.73 49.87 76.24 64.89
BN 82.11 73.56 71.52 63.67 52.29 75.70 65.79
MZ 85.65 77.73 78.82 72.75 60.09 83.88 72.21
NW 80.68 73.52 73.08 65.63 51.96 81.06 66.19
PT 93.20 85.72 73.25 70.76 58.81 79.78 72.59
TC 90.68 86.83 78.94 73.87 56.26 85.82 74.01
WB 88.12 80.61 69.86 63.45 51.13 76.48 67.20
Overall 86.16 78.7 72.67 66.32 53.23 79.22 68.2
Chinese BC 84.88 76.34 69.89 62.02 49.29 76.89 65.17
BN 80.97 74.89 76.88 68.91 55.56 81.94 69.11
MZ 78.85 73.06 70.15 61.68 46.86 78.78 63.36
NW 93.23 86.54 86.70 80.60 76.60 85.75 83.28
TC 92.91 88.31 84.51 79.49 63.87 90.04 78.90
WB 85.87 77.61 69.24 60.71 47.47 77.67 64.77
Overall 83.47 76.85 76.30 68.30 56.61 81.56 69.92
Arabic NW 76.43 60.81 67.29 59.50 49.32 74.61 59.14
Table 7: Performance of the coreference system
on the CoNLL-2012 test set.
The varying results across genres mostly meet
our expectations. In English, the system does best
on TC and the PT genres. The text in the TC set
often involve long chains where the speakers re-
fer to themselves which, given speaker informa-
tion, is fairly easy to resolve. The PT section
includes many references to god (e.g. god and
the lord) which the lexicalized resolver is quite
good at picking up during training. The more dif-
ficult genres consist of texts where references to
many entities are interleaved in the discourse and
is as such harder to resolve correctly. For Chi-
nese the numbers on the TC genre are also quite
good, and the explanation above also holds here
? many mentions refer to either of the speak-
ers. For Chinese the NW section displays by far
the highest scores, however, and the reason for
this is not clear to us. Not surprisingly, restricting
the set of mentions only to gold mentions gives
a large boost across all genres and all languages.
This shows that mention detection (MD) and sin-
gleton detection (which is not part of the annota-
tion) remain a big source of errors for the coref-
erence resolver. For these experiments we used
a combination of training and development data
for training ? following the CoNLL-2012 shared
task specification. Leaving out the development
set has a very negligible effect on the CoNLL-
score for all the languages (English: 0.14; Chi-
nese 0.06; Arabic: 0.40 F-score respectively). The
effect on Arabic is the most (0.40 F-score) most
likely because of its much smaller size. To gauge
the performance improvement between 2011 and
2012 shared tasks, we performed a clean com-
parison of over the best performing system and
an earlier version of this system (Bjo?rkelund and
Nugues, 2011) on the CoNLL 2011 test set us-
ing the CoNLL 2011 train and development set
for training. The current system has a CoNLL
score of 60.09 (64.92+69.84+45.513 )23 as opposed tothe 54.53 reported in bjo?rkelund (Bjo?rkelund and
Nugues, 2011), and the 57.79 reported for the best
performing system of CoNLL-2011. One caveat
is that these score comparison are done using the
earlier version (v4) of the CoNLL scorer. Nev-
ertheless, it is encouraging to see that within a
short span of a year, there has been significant
improvement in system performance ? partially
owing to cross-pollination of research generated
through the shared tasks.
5 Conclusion
In this paper we reported work on finding a rea-
sonable training, development and test split for
the various layers of annotation in the OntoNotes
v5.0 corpus, which consists of multiple genres in
three typologically very different languages. We
also presented the performance of publicly avail-
able, state-of-the-art algorithms on all the different
layers of the corpus for the different languages.
The trained models as well as their output will
be made publicly available24 to serve as bench-
marks for language processing community. Train-
ing so many different NLP components is very
time-consuming, thus, we hope the work reported
here has lifted the burden of having to create rea-
sonable baselines for researchers who wish to use
this corpus to evaluate their systems. We created
just one data split in training, development and test
set, covering a collection of genres for each layer
of annotation in each language in order to keep the
workload manageable However, the results do not
discriminate the performance on individual gen-
res: we believe such a setup is still a more realistic
gauge for the performance of the state-of-the-art
NLP components than a monolithic corpus such
as the Wall Street Journal section of the Penn Tree-
bank. It can be used as a starting point for devel-
oping the next generation of NLP components that
are more robust and perform well on a multitude
of genres for a variety of different languages.
23(MUC + BCUBED + CEAFe)/3
24http://cemantix.org
150
6 Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the support of the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA/IPTO) under the GALE program,
DARPA/CMO Contract No. HR0011-06-C-0022for sponsoring the creation of the OntoNotes
corpus. This work was partially supported
by grants R01LM10090 and U54LM008748
from the National Library Of Medicine, and
R01GM090187 from the National Institutes ofGeneral Medical Sciences. We are indebted toSlav Petrov for helping us to retrain his syntactic
parser for Arabic. Alessandro Moschitti and
Olga Uryupina have been partially funded by
the European Community?s Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under the grant
number 288024 (LIMOSINE). The content
is solely the responsibility of the authors and
does not necessarily represent the official views
of the National Institutes of Health. NianwenXue and Yuchen Zhang are supported in part
by the DAPRA via contract HR0011-11-C-0145
entitled ?Linguistic Resources for Multilingual
Processing.?
References
Olga Babko-Malaya, Ann Bies, Ann Taylor, Szuting Yi,
Martha Palmer, Mitch Marcus, Seth Kulick, and Libin
Shen. 2006. Issues in synchronizing the English treebank
and propbank. In Workshop on Frontiers in Linguistically
Annotated Corpora 2006, July.
Elizabeth Baran and Nianwen Xue. 2011. Singular or plural?
exploiting parallel corpora for Chinese number prediction.
In Proceedings of Machine Translation Summit XIII, Xia-
men, China.
Shane Bergsma and Dekang Lin. 2006. Bootstrapping path-
based pronoun resolution. In Proceedings of the 21st In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics and
44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 33?40, Sydney, Australia, July.
Anders Bjo?rkelund and Richa?rd Farkas. 2012. Data-driven
multilingual coreference resolution using resolver stack-
ing. In Joint Conference on EMNLP and CoNLL - Shared
Task, pages 49?55, Jeju Island, Korea, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Anders Bjo?rkelund and Pierre Nugues. 2011. Exploring lex-
icalized features for coreference resolution. In Proceed-
ings of the Fifteenth Conference on Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning: Shared Task, pages 45?50, Port-
land, Oregon, USA, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Jie Cai and Michael Strube. 2010. Evaluation metrics for
end-to-end coreference resolution systems. In Proceed-
ings of the 11th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest
Group on Discourse and Dialogue, SIGDIAL ?10, pages
28?36.
Shu Cai, David Chiang, and Yoav Goldberg. 2011.
Language-independent parsing with empty elements. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 212?216, Portland, Oregon, USA, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Xavier Carreras and Llu??s Ma`rquez. 2005. Introduction to
the CoNLL-2005 shared task: Semantic role labeling. In
Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), Ann Arbor, MI,
June.
Eugene Charniak and Mark Johnson. 2001. Edit detection
and parsing for transcribed speech. In Proceedings of the
Second Meeting of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, June.
Eugene Charniak and Mark Johnson. 2005. Coarse-to-fine
n-best parsing and maxent discriminative reranking. In
Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL), Ann Arbor, MI,
June.
Mona Diab, Alessandro Moschitti, and Daniele Pighin. 2008.
Semantic role labeling systems for Arabic using kernel
methods. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages 798?
806, Columbus, Ohio, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Gerard Escudero, Lluis Marquez, and German Rigau. 2000.
An empirical study of the domain dependence of super-
vised word disambiguation systems. In 2000 Joint SIG-
DAT Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Very Large Corpora, pages 172?
180, Hong Kong, China, October. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Benoit Favre, Bernd Bohnet, and D. Hakkani-Tur. 2010.
Evaluation of semantic role labeling and dependency
parsing of automatic speech recognition output. In
Proceedings of 2010 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), page
5342?5345.
Jenny Rose Finkel and Christopher D. Manning. 2009. Joint
parsing and named entity recognition. In Proceedings of
Human Language Technologies: The 2009 Annual Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 326?334, Boulder,
Colorado, June. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher Man-
ning. 2005. Incorporating non-local information into in-
formation extraction systems by Gibbs sampling. In Pro-
ceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, page 363?370.
Ryan Gabbard. 2010. Null Element Restoration. Ph.D. the-
sis, University of Pennsylvania.
Daniel Gildea. 2001. Corpus variation and parser perfor-
mance. In 2001 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP), Pittsburgh, PA.
Julia Hockenmaier and Mark Steedman. 2002. Acquir-
ing compact lexicalized grammars from a cleaner tree-
bank. In Proceedings of the Third LREC Conference, page
1974?1981.
Mohamed Maamouri and Ann Bies. 2004. Developing an
Arabic treebank: Methods, guidelines, procedures, and
tools. In Ali Farghaly and Karine Megerdoomian, edi-
tors, COLING 2004 Computational Approaches to Arabic
Script-based Languages, pages 2?9, Geneva, Switzerland,
August 28th. COLING.
Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated corpus
of English: The Penn treebank. Computational Linguis-
tics, 19(2):313?330, June.
David McClosky, Eugene Charniak, and Mark Johnson.
2006. Effective self-training for parsing. In Proceedings
of the Human Language Technology Conference/North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (HLT/NAACL), New York City, NY, June.
151
Vincent Ng and Claire Cardie. 2002. Improving machine
learning approaches to coreference resolution. In Pro-
ceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL-02), pages 104?111.
Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury. 2005.
The Proposition Bank: An annotated corpus of semantic
roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1):71?106.
Martha Palmer, Hoa Trang Dang, and Christiane Fellbaum.
2007. Making fine-grained and coarse-grained sense dis-
tinctions, both manually and automatically. Journal of
Natural Language Engineering, 13(2).
Martha Palmer, Olga Babko-Malaya, Ann Bies, Mona Diab,
Mohammed Maamouri, Aous Mansouri, and Wajdi Za-
ghouani. 2008. A pilot Arabic propbank. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC), Marrakech, Morocco, May 28-
30.
Slav Petrov and Dan Klein. 2007. Improved inferencing for
unlexicalized parsing. In Proc of HLT-NAACL.
Sameer Pradhan, Kadri Hacioglu, Valerie Krugler, Wayne
Ward, James Martin, and Dan Jurafsky. 2005. Support
vector learning for semantic argument classification. Ma-
chine Learning, 60(1):11?39.
Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw, Ralph Weischedel, Jes-
sica MacBride, and Linnea Micciulla. 2007. Unre-
stricted coreference: Indentifying entities and events in
OntoNotes. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Semantic Computing (ICSC), September
17-19.
Sameer Pradhan, Wayne Ward, and James H. Martin. 2008.
Towards robust semantic role labeling. Computational
Linguistics Special Issue on Semantic Role Labeling,
34(2).
Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw, Mitchell Marcus, Martha
Palmer, Ralph Weischedel, and Nianwen Xue. 2011.
CoNLL-2011 shared task: Modeling unrestricted corefer-
ence in OntoNotes. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Con-
ference on Computational Natural Language Learning:
Shared Task, pages 1?27, Portland, Oregon, USA, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue, Olga
Uryupina, and Yuchen Zhang. 2012. CoNLL-2012 shared
task: Modeling multilingual unrestricted coreference in
OntoNotes. In Joint Conference on EMNLP and CoNLL -
Shared Task, pages 1?40, Jeju Island, Korea, July. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Miltsakaki,
Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie Webber. 2008.
The Penn discourse treebank 2.0. In Proceedings of the
Sixth International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC?08), Marrakech, Morocco, May.
Marta Recasens, Llu??s Ma`rquez, Emili Sapena, M. Anto`nia
Mart??, Mariona Taule?, Ve?ronique Hoste, Massimo Poesio,
and Yannick Versley. 2010. Semeval-2010 task 1: Coref-
erence resolution in multiple languages. In Proceedings of
the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation,
pages 1?8, Uppsala, Sweden, July.
Marta Recasens, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, and Christo-
pher Potts. 2013. The life and death of discourse enti-
ties: Identifying singleton mentions. In Proceedings of
the 2013 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pages 627?633, Atlanta, Geor-
gia, June. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Libin Shen, Lucas Champollion, and Aravind K. Joshi. 2008.
LTAG-spinal and the treebank. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 42(1):1?19, March.
Ralph Weischedel and Ada Brunstein. 2005. BBN pro-
noun coreference and entity type corpus LDC catalog no.:
LDC2005T33. BBN Technologies.
Ralph Weischedel, Eduard Hovy, Mitchell Marcus, Martha
Palmer, Robert Belvin, Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw,
and Nianwen Xue. 2011. OntoNotes: A large train-
ing corpus for enhanced processing. In Joseph Olive,
Caitlin Christianson, and John McCary, editors, Hand-
book of Natural Language Processing and Machine
Translation: DARPA Global Autonomous Language Ex-
ploitation. Springer.
Nianwen Xue and Martha Palmer. 2009. Adding semantic
roles to the Chinese Treebank. Natural Language Engi-
neering, 15(1):143?172.
Nianwen Xue, Fei Xia, Fu dong Chiou, and Martha Palmer.
2005. The Penn Chinese TreeBank: phrase structure an-
notation of a large corpus. Natural Language Engineer-
ing, 11(2):207?238.
Nianwen Xue. 2008. Labeling Chinese predicates with se-
mantic roles. Computational Linguistics, 34(2):225?255.
Yaqin Yang and Nianwen Xue. 2010. Chasing the ghost:
recovering empty categories in the Chinese treebank.
In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING), Beijing, China.
Wajdi Zaghouani, Mona Diab, Aous Mansouri, Sameer Prad-
han, and Martha Palmer. 2010. The revised Arabic prop-
bank. In Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation
Workshop, pages 222?226, Uppsala, Sweden, July.
Zhi Zhong and Hwee Tou Ng. 2010. It makes sense: A wide-
coverage word sense disambiguation system for free text.
In Proceedings of the ACL 2010 System Demonstrations,
pages 78?83, Uppsala, Sweden.
Zhi Zhong, Hwee Tou Ng, and Yee Seng Chan. 2008.
Word sense disambiguation using OntoNotes: An empiri-
cal study. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1002?
1010.
152
