Proceedings of the EMNLP 2014 Workshop on Arabic Natural Langauge Processing (ANLP), pages 87?92,
October 25, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semantic Query Expansion for Arabic Information Retrieval 
 
Ashraf Y. Mahgoub  Mohsen A. Rashwan 
Computer Engineering Department, Cairo 
University, Egypt 
Electronics and Communications 
Engineering Department, Cairo University, 
Egypt 
ashraf.thunderstorme@gmail.com mrashwan@rdi-eg.com 
 
 
Hazem Raafat Mohamed A. Zahran 
Computer Science Department, Kuwait 
University, Kuwait City, Kuwait 
Computer Engineering Department, Cairo 
University, Egypt 
hazem@cs.ku.edu.kw moh.a.zahran@eng.cu.edu.eg 
 
  
Magda B. Fayek  
Computer Engineering Department, Cairo 
University, Egypt 
 
magdafayek@ieee.org  
 
 
Abstract 
Traditional keyword based search is found to 
have some limitations. Such as word sense 
ambiguity, and the query intent ambiguity 
which can hurt the precision. Semantic search 
uses the contextual meaning of terms in 
addition to the semantic matching techniques 
in order to overcome these limitations. This 
paper introduces a query expansion approach 
using an ontology built from Wikipedia pages 
in addition to other thesaurus to improve 
search accuracy for Arabic language. Our 
approach outperformed the traditional keyword 
based approach in terms of both F-score and 
NDCG measures. 
1 Introduction 
 As traditional keyword based search 
techniques are known to have some limitations, 
many researchers are concerned with overcoming 
these limitations by developing semantic 
information retrieval techniques. These techniques 
are concerned with the meaning the user seeks 
rather than the exact words of the user?s query. 
We consider four main features that make users 
prefer semantic based search systems over 
keyword-based: Handling Generalizations, 
Handling Morphological Variants, Handling 
Concept matches, and Handling synonyms with 
the correct sense (Word Sense Disambiguation). 
2 Semantic-based Search Features 
In this section we will discuss the main features 
of semantic search that makes it more tempting 
choice over the traditional keyword based 
techniques. 
2.1 Handling Generalization 
Handling generalizations allows the system 
to provide the user with pages that contains 
material relevant to sub-concepts of the user?s 
query. Consider the following example in Table 1 
where a query contains a general term or concept 
???(Violence). 
 
87
User?s Query In Arabic Equivalent Query In 
English  
??????? ?? ??? ?????   
 
?Violence in Africa? 
 
Table1: Example Query 1 
 
Semantic-based search engines should be able to 
recognise pages with sub-concepts like: 
?????(extermination), ???  (suppression),????? 
(torture) as relevant to user?s query.  
 
2.2 Handling Morphological Variations   
Handling morphological variations allows the 
system to provide the user with pages that contain 
words derived from the same root as those in 
user?s query. Consider the following example in 
Table 2.  
    
User?s Query In Arabic Equivalent Query In 
English  
?????? ?????????? ?? 
 
?Development in the 
Middle East? 
 
Table2: Example Query 2 
 
Pages that contain morphological variants of 
the word ???????? (Development) such as ????????, 
????????, and ?????????? should also be considered 
relevant to user?s query. 
2.3 Handling Concept Matches 
The system should also be aware of concepts 
or named entities that may be addressed with 
different words. Consider the following example 
in Table 3. 
 
User?s Query In Arabic Equivalent Query In 
English  
??? 
 
?Egypt? 
 
Table3: Example Query 3 
 
The term ????? has other equivalent 
expressions like [???????? ??? ????????, ? ???
????????, ??????? ???]. So documents that contain any of 
these expressions should be considered relevant.  
2.4 Handling Synonyms With Correct Sense 
Although the meaning of many Arabic words 
depends on the word?s diacritics, most Arabic text 
is un-vowelized. For example, Table 4 shows the 
word ????? has more than a single meaning 
depending on its diacritization. System should be 
aware which meaning to consider for expansion.   
 
Arabic vowelized 
word 
English 
equivalent 
Arabic 
synonyms 
????? People, nation ???,??????? 
????? Branches ???? 
 
Table4: Different senses for word ??? 
 
3 Related Work 
Query expansion techniques have been 
considered by many researchers. The most 
successful query expansion techniques depend on 
automatic relevance feedback with no 
consideration of semantic relations. 
   (Jinxi Xu and Ralph, 2001) used the highest 
TF-IDF 50 terms extracted from the top 10 
retrieved documents from AFP (i.e. the 
TREC2001 corpus). These 50 terms where 
weighted due to their TF-IDF scores and added to 
the original query -with addition to terms from 
other thesaurus-with the following formula: 
 
      ( )           ( )      ?      (   )
    
 
 
Where D is the top retrieved documents and t 
is the original term. Larkey and Connell (2001) 
used a similar technique, but with a different 
scoring method. 
Wikipedia has been considered as an 
ontology source by many researchers. This is due 
to its large coverage, up-to-date, and domain 
independency. As in (Alkhalifa and Rodrguez, 
2008), they proposed an automatic technique for 
extending Named Entities of Arabic WordNet 
using Wikipedia. They depended mainly on 
Wikipedia?s ?redirect? pages and Cross-Lingual 
links. Also a large scale taxonomy from 
Wikipedia deriving technique was proposed by 
(Pozetto and Strube, 2007).  
88
(Abouenour et al., 2010) proposed a system 
that uses Arabic WordNet to enhance Arabic 
question/answering. Synonyms from WordNet are 
used to expand the question in order to extract the 
most semantically relevant passages to the 
question. 
(Milne et al., 2007) proposed a system called 
?KORU? for query expansion using Wikipedia?s 
most relevant articles to user?s query. The system 
allows the user to refine the set of Wikipedia 
pages to be used for expansion. KORU used 
?Redirect? pages for expansion; ?Hyper Links? 
and ?Disambiguation Pages? to disambiguate 
unrestricted text. 
 
Our proposed system differs from KORU in 
several points:  
 
(1) Adding ?Subcategories? to handle 
generalization.     
(2) Adding Wikipedia ?Gloss? ? First phrase 
of the article ? when there is no 
?Redirect? pages available. 
(3) Allowing the user to either expand all 
terms in a single query, or expand each 
term separately producing multiple 
queries. The result lists of these multiple 
queries are then combined into a single 
result list. 
(4) Adding terms from another two 
supportive thesaurus, namely ?Al Raed? 
dictionary and our constructed 
?Google_WordNet? dictionary. 
4 Proposed System 
4.1 Arabic Resources 
We depend in our query expansion 
mechanism on three Arabic resources: (1) Arabic 
Wikipedia Dump, (2) ?Al Raed? Dictionary. (2) 
?Google_WordNet? Dictionary. 
4.1.1 Arabic Wikipedia 
Our system depends mainly on Arabic 
Wikipedia as the main semantic information 
source. According to Wikipedia, the Arabic 
Wikipedia is currently the 23rd largest edition of 
Wikipedia by article count, and is the first Semitic 
language to exceed 100,000 articles. 
We were able to extract 397,552 Arabic 
Semantic set, with 690,236 collocations. The term 
?Semantic Set? stands for a set of expressions that 
refer to the same Meaning or Entity. For example, 
the following set of concepts forms a semantic set 
for ?????????? (Britain): [?????????? ??????? ????????, 
????????? ?????? ????????? ??????? ????????, ?????????, ? ???????
???????]. 
To extract the semantic sets, we depend on 
the ?redirect? pages in addition to the article gloss 
that may contain a semantic match. This match 
appears in the first paragraph of the article in a 
bold font. The categorization system of Wikipedia 
is very useful in the task of expanding generic 
queries in a more specified form. This is done by 
adding ?subcategories? of the original term to the 
expanded terms. 
4.1.2 The Al Raed Monolingual Dictionary: 
The ?Al Raed? Dictionary is a monolingual 
dictionary for modern words 1 . The dictionary 
contains 204303 modern Arabic expressions.  
4.1.3 The Google_WordNet Dictionary 
We collected all the words in WordNet, and 
translated them to Arabic using Google Translate. 
For each English word, Google Translate provides 
different Arabic translations for the English word 
each corresponds to a different sense, each sense 
has a list of different possible English synonyms. 
Using this useful information we were able to 
extend WordNet Synset entries into a bilingual 
Arabic-English dictionary that maps a set of 
Arabic synonyms to its equivalent set of English 
synonyms. The basic idea is that, two sets of 
English synonyms (each allegedly belongs to a 
different sense) can be fused together into one 
sense if the number of overlapping words between 
the two sets is two or more. Fusing two English 
sets together will fuse also their Arabic 
translations into one set, thus forming a list of 
Arabic synonyms matched to a list of English 
synonyms. Table 5 shows a sample of Google 
Translate for the word ?tough?. We can fuse the 
first and the fourth sense together because they 
have two words in common namely ?strong? and 
?robust?. The same applies to the second and the 
third senses with ?strict? and ?tough? in common. 
                                                          
1 Available at 
http://www.almaany.com/appendix.php?language=arabic&cat
egory=??????&lang_name=???? 
89
Thus forming two new mappings as shown in 
Table 6. 
 
 
???? solid, strong, robust, firm, 
durable 
???? strict, rigorous, tough, rigid, 
firm, stringent 
???? tough, harsh, rough, severe, 
strict, stern 
??? strong, powerful, sturdy, 
robust, vigorous 
 
Table 5: A sample of Google Translate result for the 
word ?tough? 
 
????, ??? solid, strong, robust, firm, 
durable, powerful, sturdy, 
vigorous 
????, ???? strict, rigorous, tough, rigid, 
firm, stringent, harsh, rough, 
severe, stern 
 
Table 6: Mapping between a set of Arabic synonyms to 
a set of English synonyms. 
 
Finally, we use words of the same Arabic set as 
an expansion to each other in queries. 
 
4.2 Indexing and Retrieval 
  Our system depends on ?LUCENE?, which is 
free open source information retrieval library 
released under the Apache Software License. 
LUCENE was originally written in Java, but it has 
ported to other programming languages as well. 
We use the ?.Net? version of LUCENE. 
LUCENE depends on the Vector Space Model 
(VSM) of information retrieval, and the Boolean 
model to determine how relevant a given 
Document is to a User's query. LUCENE has very 
useful set of features, as the ?OR? and ?AND? 
operators that we depend on for our expanded 
queries. Documents are analyzed before adding to 
the index on two steps: diacritics and stop-words 
Removal, and text Normalization. A list of 75 
words (Contains: Pronouns, Prepositions?etc.) 
has been used as stop-words.  
4.2.1 Normalization  
Three normalization rules were used: 
? Replace ??? with ???. 
? Replace ???, ???, ??? with ??? 
? Replace ??? with ??? 
4.2.2 Stemming 
We implemented Light-10 stemmer developed 
by Larkey (2007), as it showed superior 
performance over other stemming approaches. 
Instead of stemming the whole corpus before 
indexing, we grouped set of words with the same 
stem and found in the same document into a 
dictionary, and then use this dictionary in 
expansion. This reduces the probability of 
matching between two words sharing the same 
stem but with different senses, as they must be 
found in the same document in corpus to be used 
in expansion.  
Consider the following example in table 7: 
Arabic Word Stem English 
Equivalent 
??????  ??? ?? Obedience 
??????? ?? ?? Plague 
 
Table 