Chinese Segmentation and New Word Detection
using Conditional Random Fields
Fuchun Peng, Fangfang Feng, Andrew McCallum
Computer Science Department, University of Massachusetts Amherst
140 Governors Drive, Amherst, MA, U.S.A. 01003
{fuchun, feng, mccallum}@cs.umass.edu
Abstract
Chinese word segmentation is a difficult, im-
portant and widely-studied sequence modeling
problem. This paper demonstrates the abil-
ity of linear-chain conditional random fields
(CRFs) to perform robust and accurate Chi-
nese word segmentation by providing a prin-
cipled framework that easily supports the in-
tegration of domain knowledge in the form of
multiple lexicons of characters and words. We
also present a probabilistic new word detection
method, which further improves performance.
Our system is evaluated on four datasets used
in a recent comprehensive Chinese word seg-
mentation competition. State-of-the-art perfor-
mance is obtained.
1 Introduction
Unlike English and other western languages, many
Asian languages such as Chinese, Japanese, and
Thai, do not delimit words by white-space. Word
segmentation is therefore a key precursor for lan-
guage processing tasks in these languages. For Chi-
nese, there has been significant research on find-
ing word boundaries in unsegmented sequences
(see (Sproat and Shih, 2002) for a review). Un-
fortunately, building a Chinese word segmentation
system is complicated by the fact that there is no
standard definition of word boundaries in Chinese.
Approaches to Chinese segmentation fall roughly
into two categories: heuristic dictionary-based
methods and statistical machine learning methods.
In dictionary-based methods, a predefined dictio-
nary is used along with hand-generated rules for
segmenting input sequence (Wu, 1999). However
these approaches have been limited by the impos-
sibility of creating a lexicon that includes all pos-
sible Chinese words and by the lack of robust sta-
tistical inference in the rules. Machine learning ap-
proaches are more desirable and have been success-
ful in both unsupervised learning (Peng and Schuur-
mans, 2001) and supervised learning (Teahan et al,
2000).
Many current approaches suffer from either lack
of exact inference over sequences or difficulty in in-
corporating domain knowledge effectively into seg-
mentation. Domain knowledge is either not used,
used in a limited way, or used in a complicated way
spread across different components. For example,
the N-gram generative language modeling based ap-
proach of Teahan et al(2000) does not use domain
knowledge. Gao et al(2003) uses class-based lan-
guage for word segmentation where some word cat-
egory information can be incorporated. Zhang et
al (2003) use a hierarchical hidden Markov Model
to incorporate lexical knowledge. A recent advance
in this area is Xue (2003), in which the author uses
a sliding-window maximum entropy classifier to tag
Chinese characters into one of four position tags,
and then covert these tags into a segmentation using
rules. Maximum entropy models give tremendous
flexibility to incorporate arbitrary features. How-
ever, a traditional maximum entropy tagger, as used
in Xue (2003), labels characters without considering
dependencies among the predicted segmentation la-
bels that is inherent in the state transitions of finite-
state sequence models.
Linear-chain conditional random fields (CRFs)
(Lafferty et al, 2001) are models that address
both issues above. Unlike heuristic methods, they
are principled probabilistic finite state models on
which exact inference over sequences can be ef-
ficiently performed. Unlike generative N-gram or
hidden Markov models, they have the ability to
straightforwardly combine rich domain knowledge,
for example in this paper, in the form of multiple
readily-available lexicons. Furthermore, they are
discriminatively-trained, and are often more accu-
rate than generative models, even with the same fea-
tures. In their most general form, CRFs are arbitrary
undirected graphical models trained to maximize
the conditional probability of the desired outputs
given the corresponding inputs. In the linear-chain
special case we use here, they can be roughly un-
derstood as discriminatively-trained hidden Markov
models with next-state transition functions repre-
sented by exponential models (as in maximum en-
tropy classifiers), and with great flexibility to view
the observation sequence in terms of arbitrary, over-
lapping features, with long-range dependencies, and
at multiple levels of granularity. These beneficial
properties suggests that CRFs are a promising ap-
proach for Chinese word segmentation.
New word detection is one of the most impor-
tant problems in Chinese information processing.
Many machine learning approaches have been pro-
posed (Chen and Bai, 1998; Wu and Jiang, 2000;
Nie et al, 1995). New word detection is normally
considered as a separate process from segmentation.
However, integrating them would benefit both seg-
mentation and new word detection. CRFs provide a
convenient framework for doing this. They can pro-
duce not only a segmentation, but also confidence
in local segmentation decisions, which can be used
to find new, unfamiliar character sequences sur-
rounded by high-confidence segmentations. Thus,
our new word detection is not a stand-alone process,
but an integral part of segmentation. Newly detected
words are re-incorporated into our word lexicon,
and used to improve segmentation. Improved seg-
mentation can then be further used to improve new
word detection.
Comparing Chinese word segmentation accuracy
across systems can be difficult because many re-
search papers use different data sets and different
ground-rules. Some published results claim 98% or
99% segmentation precision and recall, but these ei-
ther count only the words that occur in the lexicon,
or use unrealistically simple data, lexicons that have
extremely small (or artificially non-existant) out-
of-vocabulary rates, short sentences or many num-
bers. A recent Chinese word segmentation competi-
tion (Sproat and Emerson, 2003) has made compar-
isons easier. The competition provided four datasets
with significantly different segmentation guidelines,
and consistent train-test splits. The performance of
participating system varies significantly across dif-
ferent datasets. Our system achieves top perfor-
mance in two of the runs, and a state-of-the-art per-
formance on average. This indicates that CRFs are a
viable model for robust Chinese word segmentation.
2 Conditional Random Fields
Conditional random fields (CRFs) are undirected
graphical models trained to maximize a conditional
probability (Lafferty et al, 2001). A common
special-case graph structure is a linear chain, which
corresponds to a finite state machine, and is suitable
for sequence labeling. A linear-chain CRF with pa-
rameters ? = {?1, ...} defines a conditional proba-
bility for a state (label) sequence y = y1...yT (for
example, labels indicating where words start or have
their interior) given an input sequence x = x1...xT
(for example, the characters of a Chinese sentence)
to be
P?(y|x) = 1Zx exp
( T?
t=1
?
k
?kfk(yt?1, yt,x, t)
)
,
(1)
where Zx is the per-input normalization that makes
the probability of all state sequences sum to one;
fk(yt?1, yt,x, t) is a feature function which is of-
ten binary-valued, but can be real-valued, and ?k is
a learned weight associated with feature fk. The
feature functions can measure any aspect of a state
transition, yt?1 ? yt, and the entire observation se-
quence, x, centered at the current time step, t. For
example, one feature function might have value 1
when yt?1 is the state START, yt is the state NOT-
START, and xt is a word appearing in a lexicon of
people?s first names. Large positive values for ?k
indicate a preference for such an event; large nega-
tive values make the event unlikely.
The most probable label sequence for an input x,
y? = argmaxy P?(y|x),
can be efficiently determined using the Viterbi al-
gorithm (Rabiner, 1990). An N -best list of label-
ing sequences can also be obtained using modi-
fied Viterbi algorithm and A* search (Schwartz and
Chow, 1990).
The parameters can be estimated by maximum
likelihood?maximizing the conditional probability
of a set of label sequences, each given their cor-
responding input sequences. The log-likelihood of
training set {(xi, yi) : i = 1, ...M} is written
L? =
?
i
logP?(yi|xi)
=
?
i
( T?
t=1
?
k
?kfk(yt?1, yt,x, t)? logZxi
)
.
Traditional maximum entropy learning algorithms,
such as GIS and IIS (della Pietra et al, 1995), can
be used to train CRFs. However, our implemen-
tation uses a quasi-Newton gradient-climber BFGS
for optimization, which has been shown to converge
much faster (Malouf, 2002; Sha and Pereira, 2003).
The gradient of the likelihood is ?P?(y|x)/??k =
?
i,t
fk(yt?1, y(i)t ,x(i), t)
?
?
i,y,t
P?(y|x(i))fk(yt?1, yt,x(i), t)
CRFs share many of the advantageous properties
of standard maximum entropy classifiers, including
their convex likelihood function, which guarantees
that the learning procedure converges to the global
maximum.
2.1 Regularization in CRFs
To avoid over-fitting, log-likelihood is usually pe-
nalized by some prior distribution over the parame-
ters. A commonly used prior is a zero-mean Gaus-
sian. With a Gaussian prior, log-likelihood is penal-
ized as follows.
L? =
?
i
logP?(yi|xi)?
?
k
?2k
2?2k
(2)
where ?2k is the variance for feature dimension k.
The variance can be feature dependent. However
for simplicity, constant variance is often used for
all features. We experiment an alternate version of
Gaussian prior in which the variance is feature de-
pendent. We bin features by frequency in the train-
ing set, and let the features in the same bin share
the same variance. The discounted value is set to be
?k
dck/Me??2 where ck is the count of features, M is
the bin size set by held out validation, and dae is the
ceiling function. See Peng and McCallum (2004)
for more details and further experiments.
2.2 State transition features
Varying state-transition structures with different
Markov order can be specified by different CRF
feature functions, as determined by the number of
output labels y examined together in a feature func-
tion. We define four different state transition feature
functions corresponding to different Markov orders.
Higher-order features capture more long-range de-
pendencies, but also cause more data sparseness
problems and require more memory for training.
The best Markov order for a particular application
can be selected by held-out cross-validation.
1. First-order: Here the inputs are examined in
the context of the current state only. The
feature functions are represented as f(yt,x).
There are no separate parameters for state tran-
sitions.
2. First-order+transitions: Here we add parame-
ters corresponding to state transitions. The fea-
ture functions used are f(yt,x), f(yt?1, yt).
3. Second-order: Here inputs are examined in the
context of the current and previous states. Fea-
ture function are represented as f(yt?1, yt,x).
4. Third-order: Here inputs are examined in
the context of the current, and two previous
states. Feature function are represented as
f(yt?2, yt?1, yt,x).
3 CRFs for Word Segmentation
We cast the segmentation problem as one of se-
quence tagging: Chinese characters that begin a new
word are given the START tag, and characters in
the middle and at the end of words are given the
NONSTART tag. The task of segmenting new, un-
segmented test data becomes a matter of assigning
a sequence of tags (labels) to the input sequence of
Chinese characters.
Conditional random fields are configured as a
linear-chain (finite state machine) for this purpose,
and tagging is performed using the Viterbi algo-
rithm to efficiently find the most likely label se-
quence for a given character sequence.
3.1 Lexicon features as domain knowledge
One advantage of CRFs (as well as traditional max-
imum entropy models) is its flexibility in using ar-
bitrary features of the input. To explore this advan-
tage, as well as the importance of domain knowl-
edge, we use many open features from external re-
sources. To specifically evaluate the importance of
domain knowledge beyond the training data, we di-
vide our features into two categories: closed fea-
tures and open features, (i.e., features allowed in the
competition?s ?closed test? and ?open test? respec-
tively). The open features include a large word list
(containing single and multiple-character words), a
character list, and additional topic or part-of-speech
character lexicons obtained from various sources.
The closed features are obtained from training data
alone, by intersecting the character list obtained
from training data with corresponding open lexi-
cons.
Many lexicons of Chinese words and characters
are available from the Internet and other sources.
Besides the word list and character list, our lexicons
include 24 lists of Chinese words and characters ob-
tained from several Internet sites1 cleaned and aug-
mented by a local native Chinese speaker indepen-
dently of the competition data. The list of lexicons
used in our experiments is shown in Figure 1.
3.2 Feature conjunctions
Since CRFs are log-linear models, feature conjunc-
tions are required to form complex, non-linear de-
cision boundaries in the original feature space. We
1http://www.mandarintools.com,
ftp://xcin.linux.org.tw/pub/xcin/libtabe,
http://www.geocities.com/hao510/wordlist
noun (e.g.,?,?) verb (e.g.,?)
adjective (e.g.,?,?) adverb (e.g.,!,?)
auxiliary (e.g.,,?) preposition (e.g.,?)
number (e.g.,,) negative (e.g.,X,:)
determiner (e.g.,?,?,Y) function (e.g. ?,?)
letter (English character) punctuation (e.g., # $)
last name (e.g.,K) foreign name (e.g.,?)
maybe last-name (e.g.,?,[) plural character (e.g.,?,?)
pronoun (e.g.,fi,?,?) unit character (e.g.,G,?)
country name (e.g.,?,?) Chinese place name (e.g.,?)
organization name title suffix (e.g.,?,?)
title prefix (e.g.,,?) date (e.g.,#,?,?)
Figure 1: Lexicons used in our experiments
C?2: second previous character in lexicon
C?1: previous character in lexicon
C1: next character in lexicon
C2: second next character in lexicon
C0C1: current and next character in lexicon
C?1C0: current and previous character in lexicon
C?2C?1: previous two characters in lexicon
C?1C0C1: previous, current, and next character in the lexicon
Figure 2: Feature conjunctions used in experiments
use feature conjunctions in both the open and closed
tests, as listed Figure 2.
4 Probabilistic New Word Identification
Since no vocabulary list could ever be complete,
new word (unknown word) identification is an im-
portant issue in Chinese segmentation. Unknown
words cause segmentation errors in that these out-
of-vocabulary words in input text are often in-
correctly segmented into single-character or other
overly-short words (Chen and Bai, 1998). Tradi-
tionally, new word detection has been considered as
a standalone process. We consider here new word
detection as an integral part of segmentation, aiming
to improve both segmentation and new word detec-
tion: detected new words are added to the word list
lexicon in order to improve segmentation; improved
segmentation can potentially further improve new
word detection. We measure the performance of
new word detection by its improvements on seg-
mentation.
Given a word segmentation proposed by the CRF,
we can compute a confidence in each segment. We
detect as new words those that are not in the existing
word list, yet are either highly confident segments,
or low confident segments that are surrounded by
high confident words. A confidence threshold of 0.9
is determined by cross-validation.
Segment confidence is estimated using con-
strained forward-backward (Culotta and McCal-
lum, 2004). The standard forward-backward algo-
rithm (Rabiner, 1990) calculates Zx, the total like-
lihood of all label sequences y given a sequence x.
Constrained forward-backward algorithm calculates
Z ?x, total likelihood of all paths passing through
a constrained segment (in our case, a sequence of
characters starting with a START tag followed by a
few NONSTART tags before the next START tag).
The confidence in this segment is then Z
?
x
Zx , a real
number between 0 and 1.
In order to increase recall of new words, we con-
sider not only the most likely (Viterbi) segmen-
tation, but the segmentations in the top N most
likely segmentations (an N -best list), and detect
new words according to the above criteria in all N
segmentations.
Many errors can be corrected by new word de-
tection. For example, person name ????? hap-
pens four times. In the first pass of segmentation,
two of them are segmented correctly and the other
two are mistakenly segmented as ?? ? ?? (they
are segmented differently because Viterbi algorithm
decodes based on context.). However, ?????
is identified as a new word and added to the word
list lexicon. In the second pass of segmentation, the
other two mistakes are corrected.
5 Experiments and Analysis
To make a comprehensive evaluation, we use all
four of the datasets from a recent Chinese word seg-
mentation bake-off competition (Sproat and Emer-
son, 2003). These datasets represent four different
segmentation standards. A summary of the datasets
is shown in Table 1. The standard bake-off scoring
program is used to calculate precision, recall, F1,
and OOV word recall.
5.1 Experimental design
Since CTB and PK are provided in the GB encod-
ing while AS and HK use the Big5 encoding, we
convert AS and HK datasets to GB in order to make
cross-training-and-testing possible. Note that this
conversion could potentially worsen performance
slightly due to a few conversion errors.
We use cross-validation to choose Markov-order
and perform feature selection. Thus, each training
set is randomly split?80% used for training and the
remaining 20% for validation?and based on vali-
dation set performance, choices are made for model
structure, prior, and which word lexicons to include.
The choices of prior and model structure shown in
Table 2 are used for our final testing.
We conduct closed and open tests on all four
datasets. The closed tests use only material from the
training data for the particular corpus being tested.
Open tests allows using other material, such as lex-
icons from Internet. In open tests, we use lexi-
cons obtained from various resources as described
Corpus Abbrev. Encoding #Train words #Test Words OOV rate (%)
UPenn Chinese Treebank CTB GB 250K 40K 18.1
Beijing University PK GB 1.1M 17K 6.9
Hong Kong City U HK Big 5 240K 35K 7.1
Academia Sinica AS Big 5 5.8M 12K 2.2
Table 1: Datasets statistics
bin-Size M Markov order
CTB 10 first-order + transitions
PK 15 first-order + transitions
HK 1 first-order
AS 15 first-order + transitions
Table 2: Optimal prior and Markov order setting
in Section 3.1. In addition, we conduct cross-dataset
tests, in which we train on one dataset and test on
other datasets.
5.2 Overall results
Final results of CRF based segmentation with new
word detection are summarized in Table 3. The up-
per part of the table contains the closed test results,
and the lower part contains the open test results.
Each entry is the performance of the given metric
(precision, recall, F1, and Roov) on the test set.
Closed
Precision Recall F1 Roov
CTB 0.828 0.870 0.849 0.550
PK 0.935 0.947 0.941 0.660
HK 0.917 0.940 0.928 0.531
AS 0.950 0.962 0.956 0.292
Open
Precision Recall F1 Roov
CTB 0.889 0.898 0.894 0.619
PK 0.941 0.952 0.946 0.676
HK 0.944 0.948 0.946 0.629
AS 0.953 0.961 0.957 0.403
Table 3: Overall results of CRF segmentation on
closed and open tests
To compare our results against other systems,
we summarize the competition results reported
in (Sproat and Emerson, 2003) in Table 4. XXc and
XXo indicate the closed and open runs on dataset
XX respectively. Entries contain the F1 perfor-
mance of each participating site on different runs,
with the best performance in bold. Our results are
in the last row. Column SITE-AVG is the average
F1 performance over the datasets on which a site re-
ported results. Column OUR-AVG is the average F1
performance of our system over the same datasets.
Comparing performance across systems is diffi-
cult since none of those systems reported results
on all eight datasets (open and closed runs on 4
datasets). Nevertheless, several observations could
be made from Table 4. First, no single system
achieved best results in all tests. Only one site (S01)
achieved two best runs (CTBc and PKc) with an av-
erage of 91.8% over 6 runs. S01 is one of the best
segmentation systems in mainland China (Zhang et
al., 2003). We also achieve two best runs (ASo and
HKc), with a comparable average of 91.9% over the
same 6 runs, and a 92.7% average over all the 8 runs.
Second, performance varies significantly across dif-
ferent datasets, indicating that the four datasets have
different characteristics and use very different seg-
mentation guidelines. We also notice that the worst
results were obtained on CTB dataset for all sys-
tems. This is due to significant inconsistent segmen-
tation in training and testing (Sproat and Emerson,
2003). We verify this by another test. We randomly
split the training data into 80% training and 20%
testing, and run the experiments for 3 times, result-
ing in a testing F1 of 97.13%. Third, consider a
comparison of our results with site S12, who use
a sliding-window maximum entropy model (Xue,
2003). They participated in two datasets, with an
average of 93.8%. Our average over the same two
runs is 94.2%. This gives some empirical evidence
of the advantages of linear-chain CRFs over sliding-
window maximum entropy models, however, this
comparison still requires further investigation since
there are many factors that could affect the perfor-
mance such as different features used in both sys-
tems.
To further study the robustness of our approach
to segmentation, we perform cross-testing?that is,
training on one dataset and testing on other datasets.
Table 5 summarizes these results, in which the rows
are the training datasets and the columns are the
testing datasets. Not surprisingly, cross testing re-
sults are worse than the results using the same
ASc ASo CTBc CTBo HKc HKo PKc PKo SITE-AVG OUR-AVG
S01 93.8 88.1 88.1 90.1 95.1 95.3 91.8 91.9
S02 87.4 91.2 89.3 87.2
S03 87.2 82.9 88.6 92.5 87.8 93.6
S04 93.9 93.7 93.8 94.4
S05 94.2 73.2 89.4 85.6 91.5
S06 94.5 82.9 92.4 92.4 90.6 91.9
S07 94.0 94.0 94.6
S08 90.4 95.6 93.6 93.8 93.4 94.0
S09 96.1 94.6 95.4 94.9
S10 83.1 90.1 94.7 95.9 91.0 90.8
S11 90.4 88.4 87.9 88.6 88.8 93.6
S12 95.9 91.6 93.8 94.2
95.6 95.7 84.9 89.4 92.8 94.6 94.1 94.6 92.7
Table 4: Comparisons against other systems: the first column contains the 12 sites participating in bake-off
competition; the second to the ninth columns contain their results on the 8 runs, where a bold entry is the
winner of that run; column SITE-AVG contains the average performance of the site over the runs in which it
participated, where a bold entry indicates that this site performs better than our system; column OUR-AVG
is the average of our system over the same runs, where a bolded entry indicates our system performs better
than the other site; the last row is the performance of our system over all the runs and the overall average.
source as training due to different segmentation
policies, with an exception on CTB where mod-
els trained on other datasets perform better than the
model trained on CTB itself. This is due to the data
problem mentioned above. Overall, CRFs perform
robustly well across all datasets.
From both Table 3 and 5, we see, as expected,
improvement from closed tests to open tests, indi-
cating the significant contribution of domain knowl-
edge lexicons.
Closed
CTB PK HK AS
CTB 0.822 0.810 0.815
PK 0.816 0.824 0.830
HK 0.790 0.807 0.825
AS 0.890 0.844 0.864
Open
CTB PK HK AS
CTB 0.863 0.870 0.894
PK 0.852 0.862 0.871
HK 0.861 0.871 0.889
AS 0.898 0.867 0.871
Table 5: Crossing test of CRF segmentation
5.3 Effects of new word detection
Table 6 shows the effect of new word detection
on the closed tests. An interesting observation is
CTB PK HK AS
w/o NWD 0.792 0.934 0.916 0.956
NWD 0.849 0.941 0.928 0.946
Table 6: New word detection effects: w/o NWD is
the results without new word detection and NWD is
the results with new word detection.
that the improvement is monotonically related to the
OOV rate (OOV rates are listed in Table 1). This
is desirable because new word detection is most
needed in situations that have high OOV rate. At
low OOV rate, noisy new word detection can result
in worse performance, as seen in the AS dataset.
5.4 Error analysis and discussion
Several typical errors are observed in error anal-
ysis. One typical error is caused by inconsistent
segmentation labeling in the test set. This is most
notorious in CTB dataset. The second most typi-
cal error is in new, out-of-vocabulary words, espe-
cially proper names. Although our new word detec-
tion fixes many of these problems, it is not effective
enough to recognize proper names well. One solu-
tion to this problem could use a named entity ex-
tractor to recognize proper names; this was found to
be very helpful in Wu (2003).
One of the most attractive advantages of CRFs
(and maximum entropy models in general) is its the
flexibility to easily incorporate arbitrary features,
here in the form domain-knowledge-providing lex-
icons. However, obtaining these lexicons is not a
trivial matter. The quality of lexicons can affect
the performance of CRFs significantly. In addition,
compared to simple models like n-gram language
models (Teahan et al, 2000), another shortcoming
of CRF-based segmenters is that it requires signifi-
cantly longer training time. However, training is a
one-time process, and testing time is still linear in
the length of the input.
6 Conclusions
The contribution of this paper is three-fold. First,
we apply CRFs to Chinese word segmentation and
find that they achieve state-of-the art performance.
Second, we propose a probabilistic new word de-
tection method that is integrated in segmentation,
and show it to improve segmentation performance.
Third, as far as we are aware, this is the first work
to comprehensively evaluate on the four benchmark
datasets, making a solid baseline for future research
on Chinese word segmentation.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the Center for In-
telligent Information Retrieval, in part by The Cen-
tral Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency
and National Science Foundation under NSF grant #IIS-
0326249, and in part by SPAWARSYSCEN-SD grant
number N66001-02-1-8903.
References
K.J. Chen and M.H. Bai. 1998. Unknown Word Detec-
tion for Chinese by a Corpus-based Learning Method.
Computational Linguistics and Chinese Language
Processing, 3(1):27?44, Feburary.
A. Culotta and A. McCallum. 2004. Confidence Esti-
mation for Information Extraction. In Proceedings of
Human Language Technology Conference and North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics(HLT-NAACL).
S. della Pietra, V. della Pietra, and J. Lafferty. 1995. In-
ducing Features Of Random Fields. IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
19(4).
J. Gao, M. Li, and C. Huang. 2003. Improved Source-
Channel Models for Chinese Word Segmentation. In
Proceedings of the 41th Annual Meeting of Associa-
tion of Computaional Linguistics (ACL), Japan.
J. Lafferty, A. McCallum, and F. Pereira. 2001. Condi-
tional Random Fields: Probabilistic Models for Seg-
menting and Labeling Sequence Data. In Proceedings
of the 18th International Conf. on Machine Learning,
pages 282?289.
R. Malouf. 2002. A Comparison of Algorithms for Max-
imum Entropy Parameter Estimation. In Sixth Work-
shop on Computational Language Learning (CoNLL).
J. Nie, M. Hannan, and W. Jin. 1995. Unknown Word
Detection and Segmentation of Chinese using Statis-
tical and Heuristic Knowledge. Communications of
the Chinese and Oriental Languages Information Pro-
cessing Society, 5:47?57.
F. Peng and A. McCallum. 2004. Accurate Informa-
tion Extraction from Research Papers using Condi-
tional Random Fields. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technology Conference and North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics(HLT-NAACL), pages 329?336.
F. Peng and D. Schuurmans. 2001. Self-Supervised Chi-
nese Word Segmentation. In F. Hoffmann et al, ed-
itor, Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium
of Intelligent Data Analysis, pages 238?247. Springer-
Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
L. Rabiner. 1990. A Tutorial on Hidden Markov Mod-
els and Selected Applications in Speech Recognition.
In Alex Weibel and Kay-Fu Lee, editors, Readings in
Speech Recognition, pages 267?296.
R. Schwartz and Y. Chow. 1990. The N-best Algorithm:
An Efficient and Exact Procedure for Finding the N
most Likely Sentence Hypotheses. In Proceedings of
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech,
and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
F. Sha and F. Pereira. 2003. Shallow Parsing with Con-
ditional Random Fields. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technology Conference and North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics(HLT-NAACL).
R. Sproat and T. Emerson. 2003. First International Chi-
nese Word Segmentation Bakeoff. In Proceedings of
the Second SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language
Processing.
R. Sproat and C. Shih. 2002. Corpus-based Methods
in Chinese Morphology and Phonology. In Proceed-
ings of the 19th International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics (COLING).
W. J. Teahan, Y. Wen, R. McNab, and I. H. Wit-
ten. 2000. A Compression-based Algorithm for Chi-
nese Word Segmentation. Computational Linguistics,
26(3):375?393.
A. Wu and Z. Jiang. 2000. Statistically-Enhanced New
Word Identification in a Rule-Based Chinese System.
In Proceedings of the Second Chinese Language Pro-
cessing Workshop, pages 46?51, Hong Kong, China.
Z. Wu. 1999. LDC Chinese Segmenter.
http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/ Projects/ Chinese/ seg-
menter/ mansegment.perl.
A. Wu. 2003. Chinese Word Segmentation in MSR-
NLP. In Proceedings of the Second SIGHAN Work-
shop on Chinese Language Processing, Japan.
N. Xue. 2003. Chinese Word Segmentation as Charac-
ter Tagging. International Journal of Computational
Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing, 8(1).
H. Zhang, Q. Liu, X. Cheng, H. Zhang, and H. Yu.
2003. Chinese Lexical Analysis Using Hierarchical
Hidden Markov Model. In Proceedings of the Second
SIGHAN Workshop, pages 63?70, Japan.
