Frozen Sentences of Portuguese: Formal Descriptions for NLP 
Jorge Baptista 
Universidade do Algarve 
Campus de Gambelas 
 P-8005-139 FARO 
jbaptis@ualg.pt 
Anabela Correia 
Universidade do Algarve 
Campus de Gambelas 
 P-8005-139 FARO 
 
Gra?a Fernandes 
Universidade do Algarve 
Campus de Gambelas 
 P-8005-139 FARO 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents on-going research on the build-
ing of an electronic dictionary of frozen sentences 
of European Portuguese. It will focus on the prob-
lems arising from the description of their formal 
variation in view of natural language processing 
1 Introduction 
Defining frozen sentences is not easy, and many 
conceptual and terminological disputes on concur-
rent terms (?idioms?, ?collocations?, ?phras?mes?, 
etc.) can be found in the literature (M. Gross 1988; 
G.Gross 1996; Mejri 1997; Mel?cuk 1993; Mogor-
r?n-Huerta 2002; Gaatone 2000; Jurafsky & Mar-
tin 2000: 571-573; McKeown & Rodev 2000; 
Mutsimoto 2003: 395). As a first approach to a 
(consensual?) definition, frozen sentences are ele-
mentary sentences where the main verb and at least 
one of its argument noun-phrases are distribution-
ally constraint, and usually the global meaning of 
the expression cannot be calculated from the indi-
vidual meaning of its component elements when 
they are used independently (M. Gross 1982, 1989, 
1996; G. Gross 1996; Ranchhod 2003). For that 
reason, the whole expression must be taken as a 
complex, multiword lexical unit. For example, in: 
(1) O Jo?o matou dois coelhos de uma cajadada 
(lit: ?John killed two rabbits with one blow?, John 
killed two birds with one stone) the verb-object 
combination (matar-coelhos) is frozen. One cannot 
replace coelhos (rabbits) for another animal and 
the numeral determinant is necessarily dois (two). 
Also, it is not possible to modify coelhos with any 
free adjective (dois coelhos *gordos/ *grandes, 
two fat/big rabbits). In addition, the adverbial de 
uma cajadada (with one blow) can hardly be ze-
roed, or the meaning of the sentence becomes lit-
eral. On the other hand, frozen sentences usually 
present some, often highly constraint, formal varia-
tion. For the most part, this variation is strictly 
lexical. In this case, in the adverbial, the noun ca-
jadada (lit: a blow with a stick) can be replaced by 
assentada and vez (turn), but the meaning of the 
expression remains unchanged. This variation does 
not happens elsewhere. Furthermore, if we disre-
gard proverbs1, completely frozen sentences are 
rare. Usually, one or more of its argument noun 
phrases are distributionally free. In this case, any 
human noun can adequately occupy the structural 
position of subject. The frozen verb-noun combi-
nation is responsible for this distributional con-
straint, which can be considerably different from 
the constraints imposed by the verb when func-
tioning as an independent lexical unit. For exam-
ple, the verb matar (to kill) admits both human and 
non-human (animate and abstract) nouns for its 
subject when its object is coelhos (rabbits): (2a) O 
Jo?o/a raposa/o tiro/a praga matou dois coelhos 
(John/the fox/ shooting/ plague killed two rabbits). 
Another way frozen sentences often differ from 
free sentences is the fact that they block transfor-
mations that should otherwise be possible, given 
the syntactic properties of the main verb and its ar-
guments. Hence, while it is possible to form from 
(2a) the passive sentence (2b): (2b) Dois coelhos 
foram mortos pelo Jo?o/ a raposa/ o tiro/ a praga 
(Two rabbits were killed by John/ the fox/ shoot-
                                                          
1 Proverbs differ from frozen sentences (a) from not 
having any free elements, (b) in the way they function 
in discourse, which is similar to quotations and (c) for 
their general value as advices or as atemporal truths 
about human life. However, partly because of their be-
ing an oral tradition, even proverbs can show some for-
mal variation (Chacoto 1994). 
Second ACL Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Integrating Processing, July 2004, pp. 72-79
ing/ plague), the same does not happen with (1): 
(1a) ?Dois coelhos foram mortos pelo Jo?o de uma 
cajadada (Two rabbits were killed by John with 
one blow), since the meaning of the sentence be-
comes literal (this is shown by symbol ???). Finally, 
frozen sentences constitute a non-trivial problem 
for many NLP applications. Since they are multi-
word expressions functioning as meaning units, 
they have to be identified as a block. However, 
their elements can appear discontinuously and they 
can also present some formal variation. They are 
often ambiguous, the same sequence having both a 
literal and a figurative meaning ? and in this case, 
only an extended context can disambiguate them. 
They constitute an important part of the lexicon, 
comparable to (but probably much larger than) 
simple verbs. 
2 Classification of Frozen Sentences 
Many frozen sentences, especially those that are 
most usual or most obviously idiomatic, have al-
ready been collected both in general and in spe-
cialized dictionaries of ?idioms?. In these diction-
aries, frozen sentences are usually undistinguished 
from other types of multiword expressions, such as 
compound nouns, adverbs, prepositions, conjunc-
tions, proverbs, and so on. In order to build an 
electronic dictionary of frozen sentences of Euro-
pean Portuguese, several sources where used, in-
cluding specialized dictionaries2, and completed 
with newspapers, magazines, etc. and our knowl-
edge as native speakers of Portuguese. The formal 
framework of M. Gross (1982, 1989, 1996; see Le-
cl?re 2002, for an updated overview) was adopted 
to classify frozen sentences. The classification is 
based on the sentence structure, the number and 
type of noun phrases attached to the main verb, 
their frozen or free nature, as well as the syntactic 
properties of the construction. Table 1 shows some 
formal classes3, their internal structure, an illustra-
                                                          
2 Basically, Mello 1986, Moreira 1996, Neves 2000, 
Santos 1990 and Sim?es 1993. The electronic dictionary 
of frozen sentences of Brazilian Portuguese (Vale 2001) 
was also consulted, but many of those sentences either 
do not exist if European Portuguese or else present sub-
stantial syntactical and lexical differences, so that a de-
tailed comparative study is in order. 
3 Frozen sentences with sentential subjects or objects, or 
with frozen subject noun phrases were not considered in 
this paper. N and C stand for noun phrases; N is a free 
tive example, and the approximate number of sen-
tences collected so far. Compared with figures 
available for other languages ?  French (+20,000; 
M.Gross 1996), Spanish (3,500; Mogorr?n-Huerta 
2002), Greek (4,500; Fotopoulou 1993) and Bra-
zilian Portuguese (3,500; Vale 2001), it is clear 
that these lists are still far from complete and 
should, in fact, be completed, probably using other 
corpus-based methods for lexical acquisition 
(McKeown & Rodev 2000, Mutsimoto 2003). 
 
Table 1- Classification of frozen sentences (extract) 
Class Structure/Example Size 
C1 N0 V C1  
 O Pedro matou a galinha dos ovos de ouro 800  
CAN N0 V (C de N)1 = C1 a N2  
 O Pedro arrefecer os ?nimos de=? Ana 200 
CDN  N0 V (C de N)1  
 O Pedro queria a cabe?a da Ana 100 
CP1  N0 V Prep C1  
 O Pedro bateu com a porta 900 
CPN  N0 V Prep (C de N)1 
 O Pedro foi aos cornos do Jo?o 100 
C1PN  N0 V C1 Prep N2  
 O Pedro arrastou a asa ? Ana 400 
CNP2  N0 V N1 Prep C2  
 O Pedro tirou o rel?gio do prego 350 
C1P2  N0 V C1 Prep C2 
 O Pedro deitou m?os ? obra 400 
CPP  N0 V Prep C1 Prep C2 
 O Pedro foi de cavalo para burro 200 
CPPN  N0 V C1 Prep C2 Prep C3 
 O Pedro deitou o beb? fora com a ?gua do banho 50 
Total 3,500 
3 Format of Dictionary 
The electronic dictionary is composed of several 
matrices, one per formal class. In these matrices, 
each line is a frozen sentence and the columns con-
tain the lexical elements of the sentence and their 
syntactic (distributional and transformational) 
properties. The set of matrices constitute the lexi-
con-grammar of frozen sentences. Table 2 is a 
sample of class CPN. This class is defined by hav-
ing a prepositional phrase where only the head-
noun C is frozen with the verb, while its determi-
native complement de N (of N) is free: N0 V Prep 
(C de N)1. 
 
                                                                                           
and C is frozen noun phrase; N0 is the subject, N1 and N2 
the first and second complement; V is the verb and Prep 
a preposition. 
Table 2 ? Class CPN (extract)  
 
  N
0=
:N
hum
 
  N
0=
:N
-hum
 
V 
  Vse 
  N
egO
brig 
  Prep 
  D
et 
C 
  N
1=
:N
hum
 
  N
1=
:N
-hum
 
  de N
=
a N
 
  de N
=
Poss 
Example 
+ - <acabar> - - com a ra?a + + + + O Pedro acabou com a ra?a da Ana 
+ - <atirar> + - a os p?s + - + + O Pedro atirou-se aos p?s da Ana 
+ - <chegar> - + a os calcanhares + - + + O Pedro n?o chega aos calcanhares da Ana 
+ - <cortar> - - em a casaca + - + - O Predro cortava na casaca da Ana 
+ - <ir> - - a as trombas + - + - O Pedro foi ?s trombas do Jo?o 
+ - <ir> - - em a cantiga + - - + O Pedro foi na cantiga da Ana 
+ - <ir> - - a a cara + - + - A Ana foi ? cara do Pedro 
+ - <pegar> - - em a deixa + - + + O Pedro pegou na deixa da Ana 
+ - <rir> - - em a cara + - + + O Pedro riu na cara da Ana 
+ - <rir> + - em a cara + - + + O Pedro riu-se na cara da Ana 
- + <sair> - - de o pelo + - + - O sal?rio sai-lhe do pelo 
- + <subir> - - a a cabe?a + - + + A fama subiu ? cabe?a do Pedro 
+ - <viver> - - em  a sombra + + - + O Pedro vive na sombra da Ana 
A B C D E F G H I J K L M 
 
 
4 Syntactic Properties 
For lack of space, only some of the most promi-
nent properties will be considered here. For each 
sentence, the distributional constraints (human/ 
non-human noun) on the free noun phrases are 
indicated: ?+? if the sentence admits it, ?-? if it 
does not. In this class, these are the subject and 
the determinative complement of C. Usually, the 
verb can inflect freely, thus its lemma is shown in 
brackets < >.  In some sentences, V presents an 
intrinsically reflexive construction (noted Vse): 
(3) O Pedro atirou-se aos p?s da Ana <e pediu-
lhe para ficar> (Peter threw himself to the feet of 
Ana <and begged her to stay>. The reflex pro-
noun cannot be replaced by a noun phrase of the 
same distributional nature but not coreferent to 
the subject: O Pedro atirou *o Jo?o / ?o livro aos 
p?s da Ana (Peter threw John/the book to the feet 
of Ana). Usually, this reflex pronoun cannot be 
zeroed. However, some verbs allow this zeroing 
of the pronoun: (4) O Pedro riu(-se) na cara da 
Ana (Peter laughs (himself) at the face of Ana). In 
this case, the simplest way is to double the entry. 
Also in some cases, there is an obligatory nega-
tion (NegObrig): (5) O Pedro n?o /nunca /nem 
chega aos calcanhares da Ana (lit: Peter does 
not/never/not even gets to the heels of Ana, Peter 
is not a match for Ana). The half-frozen noun 
phrase can often undergo an operation called da-
tive restructuring (Lecl?re 1995), that splits the 
noun phrase in two and where the determinative 
complement becomes a dative complement a N 
(to N) of the verb: (6) O Pedro foi ?s trombas do 
Jo?o = ao Jo?o (lit: Peter went to the snouts of/to 
John, Peter hit John). This operation depends on 
the metonymical relation between C and the noun 
of its free determinative complement. The new 
dative complement can be reduced to a dative 
clitic pronoun (-lhe): (6a) Pedro foi-lhe (= ao 
Jo?o) ?s trombas do Jo?o. However, dative re-
structuring must be systematically checked for 
each sentence, since some sentences do not admit 
it: (7) O Pedro foi na cantiga do Jo?o/ *ao Jo?o/ 
*-lhe (lit: Peter went in the song of John, Peter 
was persuaded by John?s ill-intended words). In 
some cases, however, the restructured noun 
phrase: (8a) O sal?rio do Pedro sai-lhe do pelo 
(lit: Peter?s salary gets him out from the fur, To 
earn his salary, Peter has to work very hard) is 
much more acceptable than its basic form: ?*O 
sal?rio sai do pelo do Pedro (The salary gets out 
from Peter?s fur) 4. The determinative comple-
ment can also be reduced to an oblique or to a 
possessive pronoun: (7a) O Pedro foi na cantiga 
do Jo?o = na cantiga dele = na sua cantiga, but 
in some cases, the reduction to a possessive is 
blocked: (6b) O Pedro foi ?s trombas do Jo?o = 
??s trombas dele = *??s suas  trombas. Finally, 
there can be some facultative, free insertions be-
                                                          
4 In this case, the pronouncing may blocked by the 
(double) metonymical relation of Pedro with both the 
head noun of both the subject and object noun phrase. 
tween the verb and the prepositional phrase: (9) A 
fama subiu (rapidamente/logo) ? cabe?a do 
Pedro (Fame went up (quickly/soon) to Peter?s 
head). As one can see, these properties may be 
independent from each other and some of them 
can appear in combination in the same sentence. 
For example, obligatory negation can combine 
with the reduction do possessive pronoun: (5a) O 
Pedro n?o chega aos seus calcanhares (lit: Peter 
does not get to the his heels, Peter is not a match 
for him) or with the dative pronoun resulting 
from the noun phrase restructuring: (5b) O Pedro 
n?o te chega aos calcanhares (lit: Peter does not 
get you to the heels, Peter is not a match for you). 
In both cases, the pronouns appear inserted be-
tween the characteristic (and fixed) elements of 
this frozen sentence. 
 
 
Figure 1. Reference graph for class CPN 
 
5 Lexical Finite-State Transducers: 
building a reference graph 
The lexicon-grammar of frozen sentences (i.e. the 
set of matrices) cannot be directly applied to rec-
ognize these expressions in texts. Using INTEX 
linguistic development platform (M. Silberztein 
1993, 2004)5 it is now possible to build lexical 
finite state transducer that can identify and tag 
frozen sentences in the texts where they occur. 
This is done by building a reference graph for 
each matrix. Fig. 1 (above) shows a simplified 
version of the reference graph for class CPN.  
This graph describes the formal sequences of 
the components of the frozen sentences. In this 
graph, variables such as @X refer to the content of 
the matrix (at column X). Furthermore, this graph 
is an enhanced transducer, where it is possible to 
define variables containing strings of elements 
and to reuse these variables in the transduction. 
                                                          
5 http://www.nyu.edu/pages/linguistics/intex/. 
For example, in the top line of the graph, vari-
able V (inside brackets) stores the verb (repre-
sented by @C). This is followed by a facultative 
subgraph, for any eventual insertions (in the 
shadowed box), and it is then followed by vari-
able CP1, containing the frozen prepositional 
phrase. The two variables are then reused in the 
transduction (the output in bold, on the right), 
providing the multiword lexical entry and its ade-
quate tags: $V $PC1,@C @F @G @H 
@I.V+CPN, so that for the frozen sentence: (7c) 
O Pedro foi na cantiga do Jo?o the system would 
produce the tag: O Pedro {foi na can-
tiga,ir em a cantiga.V+CPN} do Jo?o. 
Notice that the inflected form of the verb appear-
ing in the text is lemmatized (after the coma) us-
ing the @X variables to retrieve the lexical ele-
ments in the matrix: in this case, the infinitive ir 
(to go); also in the lemma, the contraction (na) of 
preposition em and the definite article a is split in 
its component elements. Finally, variables @D, 
@E, @K and @L function as switches, reading 
the ?+? or ?-? of the corresponding columns in the 
matrix so that the remaining transitions are either 
activated or collapsed. These variables corre-
spond to the syntactic properties of the entries. In 
this way, it is possible to compile a detailed FST 
that complies with the syntactic restrictions de-
scribed in the matrix. 
After building the reference graph, the system 
is then able to compile the lexical transducer for 
this class, exploring, for each line of the matrix, 
all the paths of the graph, and then determinizing 
and minimizing the resulting transducer. With 
this methodology, the linguistic information 
stored in the lexicon grammar is represented in-
dependently from the lexical transducers and can 
be regularly revised or updated. The reference 
graph can also be seen as describing linguistic in-
formation regarding the surface disposition of the 
lexical elements entering the frozen sentences of 
the matrix. Of course, strict formal coherence in 
needed between the reference graph and the ma-
trix.  
6 Application to texts: some experiences 
In order to evaluate the performance of the elec-
tronic dictionary on real texts, experiences were 
made using INTEX6 on three different texts. Two 
smaller texts, one obtained from the on-line edi-
tion of the Expresso weekly newspaper 7 and the 
other a composite text 8 obtained from several 
sources and used on the MorphOlimpics evalua-
                                                          
6 We also used an electronic dictionary of simple 
words of Portuguese (Ranchhod et al 1999), from the 
public linguistic resources built by LabEL: 
http://label.ist.utl.pt. 
7 http://www.expresso.pt/. This is a 976 Kb text, with 
83,269 (5,764 different) words.  
8 http://acdc.linguateca.pt/aval_conjunta/morfolimpia 
das/ts_ml.txt [29-03-2004] This is a 215 Kb text, with 
35,053 (10,070 different) words. 
tion campaign for Portuguese 9. We also used a 
larger, publicly available, journalistic corpus 
(CETEM-P?blico)10. Tables 3 to 5 show results 
from the application of the modules of the four 
largest classes to these texts: 
 
Table 3 ? Application of dictionary of frozen 
sentences to text from Portuguese MorphOlimpics 
Class DLE ?L M Precision 
C1 6 6 6 100 % 
C1P2 1 1 1 100 % 
C1PN 5 5 6 100 % 
CP1 5 5 5 100 % 
Totals 17 17 18 100 % 
Table 4 ? Application of dictionary of frozen 
sentences to text from Expresso newspaper 
Class DLE ?L M Precision 
C1 15 13 16 75 % 
C1P2 2 2 2 100 % 
C1PN 24 18 33 94 % 
CP1 37 32 39 100 % 
Totals 78 65 90 93 % 
Table 5 ? Application of dictionary of frozen 
sentences to text from CETEMP?blico 
Class DLE ?L M Precision 
C1 541 217 939 78.4 % 
C1P2 104 61 157 99.0 % 
C1PN 434 96 1,357 96.5 % 
CP1 963 309 1,270 88.2 % 
Totals 2,042 638 3,723 89.6 % 
DLE ? number of inflected lexical entries obtained from the 
text; ?L ? number of different lemmas; M ? number of 
matched strings in text. 
 
These preliminary results must take into con-
sideration the different size of the texts (number 
of words) and the number of matched sequences. 
Several comparisons are thus made in Table 6 
(below). The size (in number of simple words - 
W) of Expresso is approximately 2.4 times larger 
than MorphOlimpics, and the size of 
CETEMP?blico is 116 times larger than Expresso:  
W(Exp)=2.4xW(MO);W(Pub)=116xW(Exp). 
Naturally, the number of matches (M) does not 
increase in the same proportion: 
                                                          
9 http://acdc.linguateca.pt/aval_conjunta/morfolimpiad
as/index.html [29-03-2004]. 
10 http://www.linguateca.pt/CETEMPublico/. Only the 
first fragment of this corpus was used. This is a text 
file of approximately 60 Mb, with 9.6 million (177,368 
different) words. 
M(Exp)=5xM(MO);M(Pub)=41.38xM(Exp). 
In fact, in the smaller texts, precision scores are 
not very significant in view of the reduced num-
ber of matches. However, precision does not drop 
abruptly in the larger corpus (CETEM-P?blico), 
even if the size of the text and the number of 
matches increase significantly. 
 
Table 6 ? Size of texts and scores of dictionary of 
frozen sentences (Classes C1, C1P2, C1PN, CP1) 
Text W ?W {S} 
MO 35,053 10,070 527 
Exp 83,269 5,764 8060 
Pub 9,632,623 177,368 447,125 
 
Text DLE  ?L M CM P(%) 
MO 17 17 18 18 100.0 
Exp 78 65 90 84 93.0 
Pub 2,042 638 3,725 3,336 89.6 
 
Text LexDiv LexDiv/P CMDiv CMDiv/P FS/S (?) 
MO 1.000 1.000 1.059 1.059 3.416 
Exp 1.200 1.286 1.292 1.385 1.042 
Pub 3.201 3.574 5.229 5.839 0.746 
 
MO ? MorphOlimpics; Exp ? Expresso; Pub ? CETEM-
P?blico; W ? number of simple words; ?W ? different sim-
ple words; {S} ? sentences; DLE ? lexical entries of frozen 
sentences; ?L ?different lemmas of lexical entries; M ? 
matches; CM ? correct matches;  P ? Precision (%); LexDiv 
? lexical diversity of DLE  (DLE/?L); CMDiv ? lexical di-
versity of correct matches (CM/?L); FS/S ? average number 
of frozen sentences per thousand sentences (?). 
 
Another measure is the ratio between the lexi-
cal diversity (LexDiv) of DLE (number of en-
tries/different lemmas) and precision (P). The 
higher the diversity of the DLE, the lower should 
be the precision. This, however, does not happen: 
even if the larger corpus shows lower DLE diver-
sity, the ratio LexDiv/P is higher than in the two 
smaller texts. Therefore, lower precision in 
CETEMP?blico is not significant. Similarly, one 
could compare ratio between the lexical diversity 
of correct matches (correct matches/different 
lemmas) and precision. In theory, this ratio 
should be smaller if the lexical diversity of cor-
rect matches were higher. Instead, CETEMP?blico 
shows a higher CMDiv/P ratio than the two 
smaller texts, therefore confirming the signifi-
cance of the precision rate obtained with the fro-
zen sentences? dictionary. Finally, we present, as 
an indication of frequency, the average number of 
correctly matched frozen sentences per thousand 
sentences in each text. This varies from 1.042 ? 
(Expresso) to 0.746 ? (CETEMP?blico).  
7 Discussion 
As it was said above, precision of the results is 
relatively high. In fact, most word combinations 
in the dictionary of frozen sentences are unique, 
therefore, unambiguous combinations. The finite-
state approach adopted here is based on matching 
strings that could correspond to the characteristic 
word sequence of each frozen sentence.  How-
ever, going through the concordances manually, 
some incorrect matches were detected and it 
would be impossible to comment on all those 
cases here, so only a few cases (all from 
CETEMP?blico), will be discussed.  
Mostly, mismatches were due to morphologi-
cally (orthographically) ambiguous words. In the 
sentence: O general Ant?nio Ramalho Eanes est? 
de volta ? cena pol?tica (General Ant?nio Rama-
lho Eanes is back to the political scene) volta is 
not verb, but a noun. Still, this noun is a nomi-
nalization of voltar (with a resultative aspectual 
value): voltar ? cena = estar de volta a cena , so 
that the overall meaning is stil the same. Other 
nominalizations of the same kind were also 
founded, e.g. usar da palavra = fazer uso da pa-
lavra (to speak, in a formal situation). Therefore, 
the study of frozen sentences with verbal predi-
cates should be extended to their corresponding 
nominalizations (M. Gross 1986). Another inter-
esting aspect of this example is the fact that the 
noun cena appears with the adjective pol?tica (po-
litical, referring to politics). In the dictionary, the 
entry of the frozen sentence was just voltar ? 
cena. As one can see, it will still be necessary to 
complete the dictionary allowing C to be modi-
fied by this kind of adjectives, with which they 
form compound nouns (G. Gross 1988). 
Sometimes, the matched string is formally am-
biguous with free constructions: Como resultado, 
a Comunidade d? de si uma imagem de paralisia 
(Has a result, the Community gives of itself an 
image of paralysis). The expression dar de si 
(class CP1) usually has a non-human subject 
meaning ?to break?,?to fall apart?. In this case, 
however, we have a construction of the noun im-
agem, with two distributionally free comple-
ments, such as we find in the next example: Isso 
deu uma imagem negativa da comunidade (That 
gave a negative image of the community). If it 
were possible  to identify the noun phrase a Co-
munidade and its head as a human noun, and to 
associate a construction to the noun imagem, the 
ambiguity would not arise, since the distributional 
properties stated in the CP1 matrix for dar de si 
would prevent it from being tagged. However, 
this goes well beyond the mere task of lexical 
analysis and it would require some parsing proce-
dure to avoid the incorrect lexical tag. Ambiguity 
also arises from the syntactic operations under-
went by a free sentence. These transformations 
may produce strings that are superficially identi-
cal to frozen sentences. In the following example: 
[?] e em vez de se dirigir ?s m?quinas, foi para 
a rua que J?lia Pinho teve de caminhar [?] (in-
stead of approaching the machines, it was to the 
street that JP had to walk), we find a cleft sen-
tence with the form foi of verb ser (to be). This 
sentence can be obtained from: JP teve de camin-
har para a rua (JP had to walk to the street). 
Now, foi of verb ser (to be) is ambiguous with foi 
of verb ir (to go/walk) appearing in the frozen 
sentence ir para a rua (lit: to go to the street, ?to 
be fired?). Again, ambiguous strings will not be 
resolved unless some syntactic parsing is done in 
order to recognize transformations (in this case, 
clefting).  
The components of certain frozen sentences 
may, also, be particularly apt to become ambigu-
ous strings. For example, in the expression fazer 
das suas (lit: to do of his-fem.pl., to do mischief) 
the possessive pronoun is a lexical constant, in-
variable in both gender, and number, while agree-
ing in person with the subjet: Fergie tornou  fazer 
das suas (Fergie has done mischief again). How-
ever, the possessive often appears as a mere de-
terminant on a free construction, e.g. Jo?o Hon-
rado nunca fez das suas certezas uma muralha de 
arrog?ncia (JH has never done of his certainties a 
wall of arrogance). One could think that people 
tend avoid this kind of ambiguity, but it is not al-
ways so: 6 out of 14 matched sequences fazer das 
suas do not correspond to the frozen sentence. 
Likewise, with the expression partir do zero/nada 
(to start from scratch) 7 out of 14 matches corre-
spond to the compound adverb a partir do 
zero/nada (from scratch). Notice also that this 
frozen adverb, undoubtedly related with the fro-
zen sentence but appearing with various verbs, 
also composed of a compound preposition a par-
tir de (from), so the expression is three times am-
biguous grammatically. A similar ambiguity be-
tween occurs between frozen sentence N0 dizer 
respeito a N2 (N0 concerns to N1; 299 matches) 
and the related compound adverb no que diz re-
speito a N (concerning N; 215 matches). 
Finally, while most frozen sentences constitute 
unique word combinations and present a clear-
cut, single meaning (however difficult it may be 
to define it precisely), more rarely, some of them 
show multiple meanings. This is the case of en-
trar em campo (to enter the field) or entrar em 
cena (enter the scene) used in some sports or in 
theater jargon and as a general metaphor to ?begin 
some activity?. These multi-meaning frozen sen-
tences can be dealt with in the same way as 
polisemic simple words, by multiplying the num-
ber of entries in the lexicon-grammar. 
8 Final words 
Being an on-going research, it is still too early 
to write ?conclusions?. We believe that with the 
continuation of current work the size of the elec-
tronic dictionary of frozen sentences of European 
Portuguese will still increase in a significant way. 
Present experiments on large corpora will un-
doubtedly contribute to this goal. Statistical 
methods for collecting frozen sentences should be 
combined with our more traditional method of pe-
rusing dictionaries.  
Finite-state techniques prove to be adequately 
for the lexical analysis of frozen sentences. Fro-
zen sentences constitute an important part of mul-
tiword lexical units of any language. Their identi-
fication is an essential part of lexical analysis of 
texts in view of many NLP applications. They 
present several, non-trivial difficulties to this 
task. They may be formed of non-adjacent words 
or allow some lexically constraint variation of 
some of their elements. They allow several syn-
tactic transformations, but those operations are 
lexically determined. They may be ambiguous 
with free sentences, depending on the linear ar-
rangement of their components. Their accurate 
recognition may often depend on the previous 
syntactic parsing of the sentence, which may in-
clude checking the semantic attributes of nearby 
noun phrases. On the other hand, parsing depends 
on the availability of information regarding mul-
tiword lexical units. 
Acknowledgement  
Research for this paper was partially funded by 
FCT-MCES (project grant POSI/PLP/34729/99). 
References 
Ara?jo-Vale, Oto, 2001. Express?es Cristalizadas do 
Portugu?s do Brasil: Uma Proposta de Tipologia 
(Ph.D. Thesis). Araquara (Brazil): UNESP. 
Chacoto, Luc?lia, 1994. Estudo e Formaliza??o das 
Propriedades L?xico-Sint?cticas das Express?es 
Fixas Proverbiais. (M.A. Thesis). Lisbon: FLUL. 
Fotopoulou, Aggeliki, 1993. Une classification des 
phrases ? compl?ments fig?s en grec moderne. 
(PhD Thesis). Paris : Univ. Paris 8. 
Gaatone, David, 2000. A quoi sert la notion 
d? ?expression fig?e? ?, in Buvet, P.-A., D. le 
Pesant, M. Mathieu-Colas (eds.), Lexique, Syntaxe 
et S?mantique, BULAG (hors s?rie), Besan?on : 
Centre Lucien Tesni?re/PUFC, pp. 295-308. 
Gross, Gaston, 1988. Degr?e de figement des noms 
compos?s. Langages 90. Paris : Larousse, pp.57-72. 
Gross, Gaston, 1996. Les Expressions Fig?es en 
Fran?ais. Paris: Ophrys. 
Gross, Maurice 1982. Une classification des phrases 
?fig?es? du fran?ais. Revue Qu?b?coise de 
Linguistique 11-2. Montr?al : UQAM, p. 151-185. 
Gross, Maurice 1986. Les nominalisations 
d?expressions fig?es. Langue Fran?aise 69, Paris: 
Larousse, pp. 64-84. 
Gross, Maurice 1988. Les limites de la phrase fig?e. 
Langages 90. Paris: Larousse, pp.   7-22.  
Gross, Maurice 1989. Les expressions fig?es : une 
description des expressions fran?aises et ses 
cons?quences th?oriques. Rapport T?chnique 8. 
Paris : LADL-Univ. Paris 7 / CERIL. 
Gross, Maurice 1996. Lexicon-Grammar. in K. Brown 
and J. Miller (eds.). Concise Encyclopedia of Syn-
tactic Theories. Cambridge: Pergamon, pp. 
244-259. 
Jurafsky, Daniel and James H. Martin, 2000, Speech 
and Language Processing. New Jersey: Prentice 
Hall. 
Lecl?re, Christian, 1995. Sur une restructuration da-
tive. Language Research 31-1. Seoul: LRI- Seoul 
National Univ, pp. 179-198. 
Lecl?re, Christian, 2002. Organization of the Lexicon-
Grammar of French Verbs, Linguisticae Investiga-
tiones 25-1, Amesterdam: John Benjamins Pub. 
Co., pp. 29-48. 
McKeown, Kathleen R. and Dragomir Rodev, 2000, 
Collocations, in Dale, R., H. Moisl and H. Sommers 
(eds.) Handbook of Natural Language Processing. 
New York: Marcel Dekker Inc., pp. 507-523. 
Mejri, Salah, 1997. Le figment lexical. Description 
linguistique et structuration s?mantique. La Ma-
nouba (Tunis) : Pub. Fac. Lettres. 
Mel?cuk, I, 1993. La phraseologie et son r?le dans 
l?enseignment / apprentissage d?une langue 
?trang?re. ELA, Didier ?rudition, pp. 82-113. 
Mello, Fernando R., 1986. Nova Recolha de Prov?r-
bios Portugueses e Outros Lugares-Comuns (2nd. 
ed.). Lisbon: Ed. Afrodite.  
Mogorr?n-Huerta, Pedro, 2002. La expressividad en 
las locuciones verbales espa?olas y francesas. Ali-
cante: Pub. Univ. Alicante. 
Moreira, Ant?nio, 1996. Prov?rbios Portugueses. Lis-
bon : Ed. Not?cias. 
Mutsimoto, Yuji, 2003. Lexical Knowledge Acquisi-
tion, in Miktov, R. (ed.) The Oxford Handbook of 
Computational Linguistics. Oxford: OUP, pp. 
395-413. 
Neves, Orlando, 2000. Dicion?rio de Express?es Cor-
rentes (2nd. ed.) Lisbon: Ed. Not?cias. 
Ranchhod, Elisabete, Cristina Mota, Jorge Baptista, 
1999. A Computational Lexicon for Automatic Text 
Parsing, Proceedings of SIGLEX?99: ACL/NScF, 
pp. 74-80. 
Ranchhod, Elisabete M., 2003. O lugar das express?es 
?fixas? na gram?tica do Portugu?s. in Castro, I. and 
I. Duarte (eds.), Raz?o e Emo??o, vol. II, Lisbon: 
INCM, pp. 239-254. 
Santos, Ant?nio, 1990. Novos Dicion?rios de Expres-
s?es Idiom?ticas. Lisbon: Jo?o S? da Costa. 
Silberztein, Max, 1993. Dictionnaires ?lectroniques et 
analyse automatiques de textes : le syst?me INTEX. 
Paris : Masson. 
Silberztein, Max, 2004. Intex Manual.  
http://intex.univ-fcomte.fr/downloads/Manual.pdf 
Sim?es, Guilherme A., 1993. Dicion?rio de Expres-
s?es Populares Portuguesas. Lisbon: D. Quixote. 
