WSD Based on Mutual Information and Syntactic Patterns
David Ferna?ndez-Amoro?s
Departamento de Lenguajes y Sistemas Informa?ticos
UNED
david@lsi.uned.es
Abstract
This paper describes a hybrid system for WSD, pre-
sented to the English all-words and lexical-sample
tasks, that relies on two different unsupervised ap-
proaches. The first one selects the senses according
to mutual information proximity between a context
word a variant of the sense. The second heuristic
analyzes the examples of use in the glosses of the
senses so that simple syntactic patterns are inferred.
This patterns are matched against the disambigua-
tion contexts. We show that the first heuristic ob-
tains a precision and recall of .58 and .35 respec-
tively in the all words task while the second obtains
.80 and .25. The high precision obtained recom-
mends deeper research of the techniques. Results
for the lexical sample task are also provided.
1 Introduction
We will describe in this paper the system that we
presented to the SENSEVAL-3 competition in the
English all-words and lexical-sample tasks. It is an
unsupervised system that relies only on dictionary
information and raw coocurrence data that we col-
lected from a large untagged corpus. There is also
a supervised extension of the system for the lexical
sample task that takes into account the training data
provided for the lexical sample task. We will de-
scribe two heuristics; the first one selects the sense
of the words? synset with a synonym with the high-
est Mutual Information (MI) with a context word.
This heuristic will be covered in section 2. The sec-
ond heuristic relies on a set of syntactic structure
rules that support particular senses. This rules have
been extracted from the examples in WordNet sense
glosses. Section 3 will be devoted to this technique.
In section 4 we will explain the combination of both
heuristics to finish in section 5 with our conclusions
and some considerations for future work.
2 Selection of the closest variant
In the second edition of SENSEVAL, we presented
a system, described in (Ferna?ndez-Amoro?s et al,
2001), that assigned scores to each word sense
adding up Mutual Information estimates between all
the pairs (word-in-context, word-in-gloss). We have
identified some problems with this technique.
? This exhaustive use of the mutual information
estimates turned out to be very noisy, given that
the errors in the individual mutual information
estimates often correlated, thus affecting the fi-
nal score for a sense.
? Sense glosses usually contain vocabulary that
is not particularly relevant to the specific sense.
? Another typical problem for unsupervised sys-
tems is that the sense inventory contains many
senses with little or no presence in actual texts.
This last problem has been addressed in a very
straightforward manner, since we have dis-
carded the senses for a word with a relative fre-
quency below 10%.
The first problem might very well improve by it-
self when larger untagged corpora are available and
increasing computing power eliminates the need for
a limited controlled vocabulary in the MI calcula-
tions. Anyway, a solution that we have tried to im-
plement for this source of problems, that is, cumula-
tive errors in estimates biasing the final result, con-
sists in restricting the application of the MI measure
to promising candidates.
An interesting criterion for the selection of these
candidates is to select those words in the context
that form a collocation with the word to be disam-
biguated, in the sense that is defined in (Yarowsky,
1993). Yarowsky claimed that collocations are
nearly monosemous, so identifying them would al-
low us to focus on very local context, which should
make the disambiguation process, if not more effi-
cient, at least easier to interpretate.
One example of test item that was incor-
rectly disambiguated by the systems described in
(Ferna?ndez-Amoro?s et al, 2001) is the word church
in the sentence :
                                             Association for Computational Linguistics
                        for the Semantic Analysis of Text, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004
                 SENSEVAL-3: Third International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems
An ancient stone church stands amid the fields,
the sound of bells cascading from its tower, calling
the faithful to evensong.
The applicable collocation here would be
noun/noun so that stone is the context word to be
used.
To address the second problem, the use of non-
relevant words in the glosses, we have decided
to consider only the variants (the synonyms in a
synset,in the case of WordNet) of each sense. These
synonyms (i.e. variants of a sense) constitute the
intimate matter of WordNet synsets, a change in a
synset implies a change in the senses of the cor-
responding words, while the glosses are just addi-
tional information of secondary importance in the
design of the sense inventory. To continue with
the example, the synonyms for the three synsets
for church in WordNet are (excluding church itself,
which is obviously common to all the synsets) :
? Christian church ? Christian (16), Christian-
ity (11)
? church building ? building (187)
? church service ? service (6)
We didn?t compute MI of compound words so
instead we splitted them. Since church is the
word to be disambiguated, Christian church is con-
verted to church, church building to building and
church service to service. The numbers in paren-
thesis indicate the MI 1 between the term and stone.
In this case we have a clear and strong preference
for the second sense, which happens to be in accor-
dance with the gold standard.
Unfortunately, we didn?t have the time to finish a
collocation detection procedure, we just had enough
time to POS-tag the text with the Brill tagger (Brill,
1992) and parse it with the Collins parser (Collins,
1999). That effort was put to use in the syntactic
pattern-matching heuristic in the next section, so in
this case we just limited ourselves to detect, for each
variant, the context word with the highest MI.
It is important to note that this heuristic is not
dependent on the glosses and it is completely un-
supervised, so that it is possible to apply it to any
language with a sense inventory based on variants,
as is the case with the languages in EuroWordNet,
and an untagged corpus.
We have evaluated this heuristic and the results
are shown in table 1
1for words a and b, MI(a,b)= p(a?b)p(a)?p(b) , the probabilities are
estimated in a corpus.
Task Attempted Prec Recall
all words 1215 / 2041 .58 .35
lexical sample 938 / 3944 .45 .11
Table 1: Closest variant heuristic results
the
DT
art
NN
 TT
NP
of
IN
*
NP
 LL
PP
 @@
NP
Figure 1: Example of syntactic pattern
3 Syntactic patterns
This heuristic exploits the regularity of syntactic
patterns in sense disambiguation. These repetitive
patterns effectively exist, although they might cor-
respond to different word meanings . One example
is the pattern in figure 1
which usually corresponds to a specific sense of
art in the SENSEVAL-2 English lexical sample
task.
This regularities can be attached to different de-
grees of specificity. One system that made use of
these regularities is (Tugwell and Kilgarriff, 2001).
The regularities were determined by human inter-
action with the system. We have taken a different
approach, so that the result is a fully automatic sys-
tem. As in the previous heuristic, we didn?t take into
consideration the senses with a relative frequency
below 10%.
Due to time constraints we couldn?t devise a
method to identify salient syntactic patterns useful
for WSD, although the task seems challenging. In-
stead, we parsed the examples in WordNet glosses.
These examples are usually just phrases, not com-
plete sentences, but they can be used as patterns
straightaway. We parsed the test instances as well
and looked for matches of the example inside the
parse tree of the test instance. Coverage was very
low. In order to increase it, we adopted the follow-
ing strategy : To take a gloss example and go down
the parse tree looking for the word to disambiguate.
The subtrees of the visited nodes are smaller and
smaller. Matching the whole syntactic tree of the
example is rather unusual but chances increase with
each of the subtrees. Of course, if we go too low in
the tree we will be left with the single target word,
which should in principle match all the correspond-
architecture
NN
NP
be
VBZ
the
DT
art
NN
 TT
NP
of
IN
wasting
VBG
space
NN
  
l
l
NP
 LL
PP
!!!!
@
@
NP
beatifully
RB
AVDP
          
XXXXXXX
VP
((((((((((
bbb
S
Figure 2: Top-level syntactic pattern
be
VBZ
the
DT
art
NN


T
T
NP
of
IN
wasting
VBG
space
NN
  
l
l
NP
 LL
PP
!!!! @@
NP
beatifully
RB
AVDP
        
 
 
XXXXXXX
VP
Figure 3: Second syntactic pattern
ing trees of the test items of the same word. We
will illustrate the idea with an example. An exam-
ple of an art sense gloss is : Architecture is the art
of wasting space beatifully. We can see the parse
tree depicted in figure 2.
We could descend from the root, looking for the
occurrence of the target word and obtain a second,
simpler, pattern, shown in figure 3.
Following the same procedure we would acquire
the patterns shown in figures 4 y 5, and the we
would be left with mostly useless pattern shown in
figure 6
Since there is an obvious tradeoff between cover-
age and precision, we have only made disambigua-
tion rules based on the first three syntactic levels,
and rejected rules with a pattern with only one word.
Still, coverage seems to be rather low and there
are areas of the pattern that look like they could be
generalized without much loss of precision, even
when it might be difficult to identify them. Our
the
DT
art
NN
 TT
NP
of
IN
wasting
VBG
space
NN
  
l
l
NP

L
L
PP
!!!! @@
NP
Figure 4: third syntactic pattern
the
DT
art
NN


T
T
NP
Figure 5: fourth syntactic pattern
hypothesis is that function words play an impor-
tant role in the discovery of these syntactic patterns.
We had no time to further investigate the fine-tuning
of these patterns, so we added a series of transfor-
mations for the rules already obtained. In the first
place, we replaced every tagged pronoun form with
a wildcard meaning that every word tagged as a pro-
noun would match. In order to increase even more
the number of rules we derive more rules keeping
the part-of-speech tags and replacing content words
with wilcards.
We wanted to derive a larger set of rules, with the
two-fold intention of achieving increased coverage
and also to test if the approach was feasible with a
rule set in the order of the hundreds of thousands
or even millions. Every rule specifies the word for
which it is applicable (for the sake of efficiency) and
the sense the rule supports, as well as the syntactic
pattern. We derived new rules in which we substi-
tuted the word to be disambiguated for each of its
variants in the corresponding sense (i.e. the syn-
onyms in the corresponding synset). The substitu-
tion was carried out sensibly in all the four fields of
the rule, with the new word-sense (corresponding to
art
NN
Figure 6: fifth syntactic pattern
the same synset as the old one), the new variant and
the new syntactic pattern. This way we were able to
effectively multiply the size of the rule set.
We have also derived a set of disambiguation
rules based on the training examples for the English
lexical sample task. The final rule set consists of
more than 300000 rules. The score for a sense is
determined by the total number of rules it matches.
We only take the sense with the highest score.
The results of the evaluation for this heuristic are
shown in table 2
Task Attempted Prec Recall
all words 648 / 2041 .80 .25
lexical sample 821 / 3944 .51 .11
Table 2: Syntactic pattern heuristic results
4 Combination
Since we are interested in achieving a high recall
and both our heuristics have low coverage, we de-
cided to combine the results in a blind way with
the first sense heuristic. We did a linear combina-
tion of the three heuristics, weighting the three of
them equally, and returned the sense with the high-
est score.
5 Conclusions and future work
The official results clearly show that the dependency
of the system on the first sense heuristic is very
strong. We should have been more confident in our
heuristics so that maybe a linear combination giv-
ing more weight to them in opposition to the first
sense baseline would have produced better results.
The supervised extension of the algorithm, in which
the syntactic patterns are learnt from the training ex-
amples as well as from the synset?s glosses doesn?t
offer any improvement at all. The simple explana-
tion is that the increase in the number of rules from
the unsupervised heuristic to the supervised exten-
sion is only 17% so no changes are noticeable at the
answer level.
The results for the two heuristics are very encour-
aging. There are several points that deserve further
investigation. It should be relatively easy to detect
Yarowsky?s collocations from a parse tree and that
is likely to offer even better results in terms of preci-
sion, although the potential for increased coverage
is unclear. As far as the other heuristic is concerned,
it seems worthwhile to spend some time determin-
ing syntactic patterns more accurately. A good point
to start could be statistical language modeling over
large corpora, now that we have adapted the existing
resources and parsing massive text collections is rel-
atively easy. Of course, a WSD system aimed for fi-
nal applications should also take advantage of other
knowledge sources researched in previous work.
References
Eric Brill. 1992. A simple rule-based part-of-
speech tagger. In Proceedings of ANLP-92, 3rd
Conference on Applied Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 152?155, Trento, IT.
Michael Collins. 1999. Head-Driven Statistical
Models for Natural Language Parsing. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Pennsylvania.
D. Ferna?ndez-Amoro?s, J. Gonzalo, and F. Verdejo.
2001. The UNED systems at SENSEVAL-2.
In Second International Workshop on Evaluat-
ing Word Sense Disambiguation Systems (SEN-
SEVAL), Toulouse, pages 75?78.
David Tugwell and Adam Kilgarriff. 2001. Wasp-
bench : A lexicographic tool supporting word
sense disambiguation. In David Yarowsky and
Judita Preiss, editors, Second International Work-
shop on Evaluating Word Sense Disambiguation
Systems (SENSEVAL), Toulouse, pages 151?154.
David Yarowsky. 1993. One Sense per Collocation.
In Proceedings, ARPA Human Language Tech-
nology Workshop, pages 266?271, Princeton.
