Annotated web as corpus 
 
Paul Rayson 
Computing Department, 
Lancaster University, UK 
p.rayson@lancs.ac.uk
James Walkerdine 
Computing Department, 
Lancaster University, UK 
j.walkerdine@lancs.ac.uk 
William H. Fletcher 
United States Naval  
Academy, USA 
fletcher@usna.edu 
Adam Kilgarriff 
Lexical Computing Ltd., UK 
adam@lexmasterclass.com 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a proposal to facili-
tate the use of the annotated web as cor-
pus by alleviating the annotation bottle-
neck for corpus data drawn from the web. 
We describe a framework for large-scale 
distributed corpus annotation using peer-
to-peer (P2P) technology to meet this 
need. We also propose to annotate a large 
reference corpus in order to evaluate this 
framework. This will allow us to investi-
gate the affordances offered by distrib-
uted techniques to ensure replicability of 
linguistic research based on web-derived 
corpora. 
1 Introduction 
Linguistic annotation of corpora contributes cru-
cially to the study of language at several levels: 
morphology, syntax, semantics, and discourse. 
Its significance is reflected both in the growing 
interest in annotation software for word sense 
tagging (Edmonds and Kilgarriff, 2002) and in 
the long-standing use of part-of-speech taggers, 
parsers and morphological analysers for data 
from English and many other languages. 
Linguists, lexicographers, social scientists and 
other researchers are using ever larger amounts 
of corpus data in their studies. In corpus linguis-
tics the progression has been from the 1 million-
word Brown and LOB corpora of the 1960s, to 
the 100 million-word British National Corpus of 
the 1990s. In lexicography this progression is 
paralleled, for example, by Collins Dictionaries? 
initial 10 million word corpus growing to their 
current corpus of around 600 million words. In 
addition, the requirement for mega- and even 
giga-corpora1 extends to other applications, such 
as lexical frequency studies, neologism research, 
and statistical natural language processing where 
models of sparse data are built. The motivation 
for increasingly large data sets remains the same. 
Due to the Zipfian nature of word frequencies, 
around half the word types in a corpus occur 
only once, so tremendous increases in corpus 
size are required both to ensure inclusion of es-
sential word and phrase types and to increase the 
chances of multiple occurrences of a given type.  
In corpus linguistics building such mega-
corpora is beyond the scope of individual re-
searchers, and they are not easily accessible 
(Kennedy, 1998: 56) unless the web is used as a 
corpus (Kilgarriff and Grefenstette, 2003). In-
creasingly, corpus researchers are tapping the 
Web to overcome the sparse data problem (Kel-
ler et al, 2002). This topic generated intense in-
terest at workshops held at the University of Hei-
delberg (October 2004), University of Bologna 
(January 2005), University of Birmingham (July 
2005) and now in Trento in April 2006. In addi-
tion, the advantages of using linguistically anno-
tated data over raw data are well documented 
(Mair, 2005; Granger and Rayson, 1998). As the 
size of a corpus increases, a near linear increase 
in computing power is required to annotate the 
text. Although processing power is steadily 
growing, it has already become impractical for a 
single computer to annotate a mega-corpus.  
Creating a large-scale annotated corpus from 
the web requires a way to overcome the limita-
tions on processing power. We propose distrib-
uted techniques to alleviate the limitations on the 
                                                 
1 See, for example, those distributed by the Linguistic 
Data Consortium: http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/ 
27
volume of data that can be tagged by a single 
processor. The task of annotating the data will be 
shared by computers at collaborating institutions 
around the world, taking advantage of processing 
power and bandwidth that would otherwise go 
unused. Such large-scale parallel processing re-
moves the workload bottleneck imposed by a 
server based structure. This allows for tagging a 
greater amount of textual data in a given amount 
of time while permitting other users to use the 
system simultaneously. Vast amounts of data can 
be analysed with distributed techniques. The fea-
sibility of this approach has been demonstrated 
by the SETI@home project2. 
The framework we propose can incorporate 
other annotation or analysis systems, for exam-
ple, lemmatisation, frequency profiling, or shal-
low parsing. To realise and evaluate the frame-
work, it will be developed for a peer-to-peer 
(P2P) network and deployed along with an exist-
ing lexicographic toolset, the Sketch Engine. A 
P2P approach allows for a low cost implementa-
tion that draws upon available resources (existing 
user PCs). As a case study for evaluation, we 
plan to collect a large reference corpus from the 
web to be hosted on servers from Lexical Com-
puting Ltd. We can evaluate annotation speed 
gains of our approach comparatively against the 
single server version by utilising processing 
power in computer labs at Lancaster University 
and the United States Naval Academy (USNA) 
and we will call for volunteers from the corpus 
community to be involved in the evaluation as 
well.  
A key aspect of our case study research will be 
to investigate extending corpus collection to new 
document types. Most web-derived corpora have 
exploited raw text or HTML pages, so efforts 
have focussed on boilerplate removal and clean-
up of these formats with tools like Hyppia-BTE, 
Tidy and Parcels 3  (Baroni and Sharoff, 2005). 
Other document formats such as Adobe PDF and 
MS-Word have been neglected due to the extra 
conversion and clean-up problems they entail. 
By excluding PDF documents, web-derived cor-
pora are less representative of certain genres 
such as academic writing. 
                                                 
                                                
2 http://setiathome.ssl.berkeley.edu/ 
3 http://www.smi.ucd.ie/hyppia/, 
http://parcels.sourceforge.net and 
http://tidy.sourceforge.net. 
2 Related Work  
The vast majority of previous work on corpus 
annotation has utilised either manual coding or 
automated software tagging systems, or else a 
semi-automatic combination of the two ap-
proaches e.g. automated tagging followed by 
manual correction. In most cases a stand-alone 
system or client-server approach has been taken 
by annotation software using batch processing 
techniques to tag corpora. Only a handful of 
web-based or email services (CLAWS4, Amal-
gam5, Connexor6) are available, for example, in 
the application of part-of-speech tags to corpora. 
Existing tagging systems are ?small scale? and 
typically impose some limitation to prevent over-
load (e.g. restricted access or document size). 
Larger systems to support multiple document 
tagging processes would require resources that 
cannot be realistically provided by existing sin-
gle-server systems. This corpus annotation bot-
tleneck becomes even more problematic for vo-
luminous data sets drawn from the web. The use 
of the web as a corpus for teaching and research 
on language has been proposed a number of 
times (Kilgarriff, 2001; Robb, 2003; Rundell, 
2000; Fletcher, 2001, 2004b) and received a spe-
cial issue of the journal Computational Linguis-
tics (Kilgarriff and Grefenstette, 2003). Studies 
have used several different methods to mine web 
data. Turney (2001) extracts word co-occurrence 
probabilities from unlabelled text collected from 
a web crawler. Baroni and Bernardini (2004) 
built a corpus by iteratively searching Google for 
a small set of seed terms. Prototypes of Internet 
search engines for linguists, corpus linguists and 
lexicographers have been proposed: WebCorp 
(Kehoe and Renouf, 2002), KWiCFinder 
(Fletcher, 2004a) and the Linguist?s Search En-
gine (Kilgarriff, 2003; Resnik and Elkiss, 2003). 
A key concern in corpus linguistics and related 
disciplines is verifiability and replicability of the 
results of studies. Word frequency counts in 
internet search engines are inconsistent and unre-
liable (Veronis, 2005). Tools based on static cor-
pora do not suffer from this problem, e.g. 
BNCweb7, developed at the University of Zurich, 
and View 8  (Variation in English Words and 
Phrases, developed at Brigham Young University) 
 
4 http://www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/ucrel/claws/trial.html 
5 http://www.comp.leeds.ac.uk/amalgam/amalgam/ 
amalghome.htm 
6 http://www.connexor.com 
7 http://homepage.mac.com/bncweb/home.html 
8 http://view.byu.edu/ 
28
are both based on the British National Corpus. 
Both BNCweb and View enable access to anno-
tated corpora and facilitate searching on part-of-
speech tags. In addition, PIE9 (Phrases in Eng-
lish), developed at USNA, which performs 
searches on n-grams (based on words, parts-of-
speech and characters), is currently restricted to 
the British National Corpus as well, although 
other static corpora are being added to its data-
base. In contrast, little progress has been made 
toward annotating sizable sample corpora from 
the web. 
?Real-time? linguistic analysis of web data at 
the syntactic level has been piloted by the Lin-
guist?s Search Engine (LSE). Using this tool, 
linguists can either perform syntactic searches 
via parse trees on a pre-analysed web collection 
of around three million sentences from the Inter-
net Archive (www.archive.org) or build their 
own collections from AltaVista search engine 
results. The second method pushes the new col-
lection onto a queue for the LSE annotator to 
analyse. A new collection does not become 
available for analysis until the LSE completes 
the annotation process, which may entail signifi-
cant delay with multiple users of the LSE server. 
The Gsearch system (Corley et al, 2001) also 
selects sentences by syntactic criteria from large 
on-line text collections. Gsearch annotates cor-
pora with a fast chart parser to obviate the need 
for corpora with pre-existing syntactic mark-up. 
In contrast, the Sketch Engine system to assist 
lexicographers to construct dictionary entries 
requires large pre-annotated corpora. A word 
sketch is an automatic one-page corpus-derived 
summary of a word's grammatical and colloca-
tional behaviour. Word Sketches were first used 
to prepare the Macmillan English Dictionary for 
Advanced Learners (2002, edited by Michael 
Rundell). They have also served as the starting 
point for high-accuracy Word Sense Disam-
biguation. More recently, the Sketch Engine was 
used to develop the new edition of the Oxford 
Thesaurus of English (2004, edited by Maurice 
Waite). 
Parallelising or distributing processing has 
been suggested before. Clark and Curran?s (2004) 
work is in parallelising an implementation of 
log-linear parsing on the Wall Street Journal 
Corpus, whereas we focus on part-of-speech tag-
ging of a far larger and more varied web corpus, 
a technique more widely considered a prerequi-
site for corpus linguistics research. Curran (2003) 
                                                 
9 http://pie.usna.edu/ 
suggested distributed processing in terms of web 
services but only to ?allow components devel-
oped by different researchers in different loca-
tions to be composed to build larger systems? 
and not for parallel processing. Most signifi-
cantly, previous investigations have not exam-
ined three essential questions: how to apply dis-
tributed techniques to vast quantities of corpus 
data derived from the web, how to ensure that 
web-derived corpora are representative, and how 
to provide verifiability and replicability. These 
core foci of our work represent crucial innova-
tions lacking in prior research. In particular, rep-
resentativeness and replicability are key research 
concerns to enhance the reliability of web data 
for corpora. 
In the areas of Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) and computational linguistics, proposals 
have been made for using the computational Grid 
for data-intensive NLP and text-mining for e-
Science (Carroll et al, 2005; Hughes et al 2004). 
While such an approach promises much in terms 
of emerging infrastructure, we wish to exploit 
existing computing infrastructure that is more 
accessible to linguists via a P2P approach. In 
simple terms, P2P is a technology that takes ad-
vantage of the resources and services available at 
the edge of the Internet (Shirky, 2001). Better 
known for file-sharing and Instant Messenger 
applications, P2P has increasingly been applied 
in distributed computational systems. Examples 
include SETI@home (looking for radio evidence 
of extraterrestrial life), ClimatePrediction.net 
(studying climate change), Predictor@home (in-
vestigating protein-related diseases) and Ein-
stein@home (searching for gravitational signals).  
A key advantage of P2P systems is that they 
are lightweight and geared to personal computing 
where informal groups provide unused process-
ing power to solve a common problem. Typically, 
P2P systems draw upon the resources that al-
ready exist on a network (e.g. home or work 
PCs), thus keeping the cost to resource ratio low. 
For example the fastest supercomputer cost over 
$110 million to develop and has a peak perform-
ance of 12.3 TFLOPS (trillions of floating-point 
operations per second). In contrast, a typical day 
for the SETI@home project involved a perform-
ance of over 20 TFLOPS, yet cost only $700,000 
to develop; processing power is donated by user 
PCs. This high yield for low start-up cost makes 
it ideal for cheaply developing effective compu-
tational systems to realise, deploy and evaluate 
our framework. The deployment of computa-
tional based P2P systems is supported by archi-
29
tectures such as BOINC10, which provide a plat-
form on which volunteer based distributed com-
puting systems can be built. Lancaster's own P2P 
Application Framework (Walkerdine et al, sub-
mitted) also supports higher-level P2P applica-
tion development and can be adapted to make 
use of the BOINC architecture.  
3 Research hypothesis and aims 
Our research hypothesis is that distributed com-
putational techniques can alleviate the annotation 
bottleneck for processing corpus data from the 
web. This leads us to a number of research ques-
tions: 
? How can corpus data from the web be di-
vided into units for processing via distrib-
uted techniques? 
? Which corpus annotation techniques are 
suitable for distributed processing? 
? Can distributed techniques assist in corpus 
clean-up and conversion to allow inclu-
sion of a wider variety of genres and to 
support more representative corpora? 
In the early stages of our proposed research, 
we are focussing on grammatical word-class 
analysis (part-of-speech tagging) of web-derived 
corpora of English and aspects of corpus clean-
up and conversion. Clarifying copyright issues 
and exploring models for legal dissemination of 
corpora compiled from web data are key objec-
tives of this stage of the investigation as well. 
4 Methodology 
The initial focus of the work will be to develop 
the framework for distributed corpus annotation. 
Since existing solutions have been centralised in 
nature, we first must examine the consequences 
that a distributed approach has for corpus annota-
tion and identify issues to address. 
A key concern will be handling web pages 
within the framework, as it is essential to mini-
mise the amount of data communicated between 
peers. Unlike the other distributed analytical sys-
tems mentioned above, the size of text document 
and analysis time is largely proportional for cor-
pora annotation. This places limitations on work 
unit size and distribution strategies. In particular, 
three areas will be investigated: 
? Mechanisms for crawling/discovery of a 
web corpus domain - how to identify 
pages to include in a web corpus. Also 
                                                 
10 BOINC, Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network 
Computing. http://boinc.berkeley.edu. 
investigate appropriate criteria for han-
dling pages which are created or modi-
fied dynamically.  
? Mechanisms to generate work units for 
distributed computation - how to split 
the corpus into work units and reduce the 
communication / computation time ratio 
that is crucial for such systems to be ef-
fective. 
? Mechanisms to support the distribution 
of work units and collection of results - 
how to handle load balancing. What data 
should be sent to peers and how is the 
processed information handled and ma-
nipulated? What mechanisms should be 
in place to ensure correctness of results?  
How can abuse be prevented and secu-
rity concerns of collaborating institutions 
be addressed?  BOINC already provides 
a good platform for this, and these as-
pects will be investigated within the pro-
ject. 
Analysis of existing distributed computation 
systems will help to inform the design of the 
framework and tackle some of these issues. Fi-
nally, the framework will also cater for three 
common strategies for corpus annotation: 
? Site based corpus annotation - in which 
the user can specify a web site to anno-
tate 
? Domain based corpus annotation - in 
which the user specifies a content do-
main (with the use of keywords) to  an-
notate 
? Crawler based corpus annotation - more 
general web based corpus annotation in 
which crawlers are used to locate web 
pages 
From a computational linguistic view, the 
framework will also need to take into account the 
granularity of the unit (for example, POS tagging 
requires sentence-units, but anaphoric annotation 
needs paragraphs or larger). Secondly, we need 
to investigate techniques for identifying identical 
documents, virtually identical documents and 
highly repetitive documents, such as those pio-
neered by Fletcher (2004b) and shingling tech-
niques described by Chakrabarti (2002).  
The second stage of our work will involve im-
plementing the framework within a P2P envi-
ronment. We have already developed a prototype 
of an object-oriented application environment to 
support P2P system development using JXTA 
(Sun's P2P API). We have designed this envi-
ronment so that specific application functionality 
30
can be captured within plug-ins that can then in-
tegrate with the environment and utilise its func-
tionality. This system has been successfully 
tested with the development of plug-ins support-
ing instant messaging, distributed video encoding 
(Hughes and Walkerdine, 2005), distributed vir-
tual worlds (Hughes et al, 2005) and digital li-
brary management (Walkerdine and Rayson, 
2004). It is our intention to implement our dis-
tributed corpus annotation framework as a plug-
in. This will involve implementing new func-
tionality and integrating this with our existing 
annotation tools (such as CLAWS11). The devel-
opment environment is also flexible enough to 
utilise the BOINC platform, and such support 
will be built into it. 
Using the P2P Application Framework as a 
basis for the development secures several advan-
tages. First, it reduces development time by al-
lowing the developer to reuse existing function-
ality; secondly, it already supports essential as-
pects such as system security; and thirdly, it has 
already been used successfully to deploy compa-
rable P2P applications. A lightweight version of 
the application framework will be bundled with 
the corpus annotation plug-in, and this will then 
be made publicly available for download in 
open-source and executable formats. We envis-
age our end-users will come from a variety of 
disciplines such as language engineering and lin-
guistics. For the less-technical users, the proto-
type will be packaged as a screensaver or instant 
messaging client to facilitate deployment. 
5 Evaluation 
We will evaluate the framework and prototype 
developed by applying it as a pre-processor step 
for the Sketch Engine system. The Sketch Engine 
requires a large well-balanced corpus which has 
been part-of-speech tagged and shallow parsed to 
find subjects, objects, heads, and modifiers. We 
will use the existing non-distributed processing 
tools on the Sketch Engine as a baseline for a 
comparative evaluation of the AWAC frame-
work instantiation by utilising processing power 
and bandwidth in learning labs at Lancaster Uni-
versity and USNA during off hours. 
We will explore techniques to make the result-
ing annotated web corpus data available in static 
form to enable replication and verification of 
corpus studies based on such data. The initial 
solution will be to store the resulting reference 
                                                 
                                                
11 http://www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/ucrel/claws/ 
corpus in the Sketch Engine. We will also inves-
tigate whether the distributed environment un-
derlying our approach offers a solution to the 
problem of reproducibility in web-based corpus 
studies based in general. Current practise else-
where includes the distribution of URL lists, but 
given the dynamic nature of the web, this is not 
sufficiently robust. Other solutions such as com-
plete caching of the corpora are not typically 
adopted due to legal concerns over copyright and 
redistribution of web data, issues considered at 
length by Fletcher (2004a). Other requirements 
for reference corpora such as retrieval and stor-
age of metadata for web pages are beyond the 
scope of what we propose here. 
To improve the representative nature of web-
derived corpora, we will research techniques to 
enable the importing of additional document 
types such as PDF. We will reuse and extend 
techniques implemented in the collection, encod-
ing and annotation of the PERC Corpus of Pro-
fessional English12. A majority of this corpus has 
been collected by conversion of on-line academic 
journal articles from PDF to XML with a combi-
nation of semi-automatic tools and techniques 
(including Adobe Acrobat version 6). Basic is-
sues such as character encoding, table/figure ex-
traction and maintaining text flow around em-
bedded images need to be dealt with before an-
notation processing can begin. We will compara-
tively evaluate our techniques against others such 
as pdf2txt, and Multivalent PDF ExtractText13. 
Part of the evaluation will be to collect and anno-
tate a sample corpus. We aim to collect a corpus 
from the web that is comparable to the BNC in 
content and annotation. This corpus will be 
tagged using the P2P framework. It will form a 
test-bed for the framework and we will utilise the 
non-distributed annotation system on the Sketch 
Engine as a baseline for comparison and evalua-
tion. To evaluate text conversion and clean-up 
routines for PDF documents, we will use a 5-
million-word gold-standard sub-corpus extracted 
 
12 The Corpus of Professional English (CPE) is a ma-
jor research project of PERC (the Professional Eng-
lish Research Consortium) currently underway that, 
when finished, will consist of a 100-million-word 
computerised database of English used by profession-
als in science, engineering, technology and other 
fields. Lancaster University and Shogakukan Inc. are 
PERC Member Institutions. For more details, see 
http://www.perc21.org/ 
13 http://multivalent.sourceforge.net/ 
31
from the PERC Corpus of Professional 
English14.  
                                                
6 Conclusion 
Future work includes an analysis of the balance 
between computational and bandwidth require-
ments. It is essential in distributing the corpus 
annotation to achieve small amounts of data 
transmission in return for large computational 
gains for each work-unit.  
In this paper, we have discussed the require-
ment for annotation of web-derived corpus data. 
Currently, a bottleneck exists in the tagging of 
web-derived corpus data due to the voluminous 
amount of corpus processing involved. Our pro-
posal is to construct a framework for large-scale 
distributed corpus annotation using existing peer-
to-peer technology. We have presented the chal-
lenges that lie ahead for such an approach. Work 
is now underway to address the clean-up of PDF 
data for inclusion into corpora downloaded from 
the web. 
Acknowledgements 
We wish to thank the anonymous reviewers who 
commented our paper. We are grateful to Shoga-
kukan Inc. (Tokyo, Japan) for supporting re-
search at Lancaster University into the process of 
conversion and clean-up of PDF to text, and to 
the Professional English Research Consortium 
for the provision of the gold-standard corpus for 
our evaluation. 
References  
Baroni, M. and Bernardini, S. (2004). BootCaT: 
Bootstrapping Corpora and Terms from the Web. 
In Proceedings of LREC2004, Lisbon, pp. 1313-
1316. 
Baroni, M. and Sharoff, S. (2005). Creating special-
ized and general corpora using automated search 
engine queries. Web as Corpus Workshop, Bir-
mingham University, UK, 14th July 2005. 
Carroll, J., R. Evans and E. Klein (2005) Supporting 
text mining for e-Science: the challenges for Grid-
enabled natural language processing. In Workshop 
on Text Mining, e-Research And Grid-enabled 
Language Technology at the Fourth UK e-Science 
Programme All Hands Meeting (AHM2005), Not-
tingham, UK. 
 
14 This corpus has already been manually re-typed at 
Shogakukan Inc. from PDF originals downloaded 
from the web. 
Chakrabarti, S. (2002) Mining the Web: Discovering 
Knowledge from Hypertext Data. Morgan Kauf-
mann. 
Clark, S. and Curran, J. R.. (2004). Parsing the wsj 
using ccg and log-linear models. In Proceedings of 
the 42nd Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL ?04). 
Corley, S., Corley, M., Keller, F., Crocker, M., & 
Trewin, S. (2001). Finding Syntactic Structure in 
Unparsed Corpora: The Gsearch Corpus Query 
System. Computers and the Humanities, 35, 81-94. 
Curran, J.R. (2003). Blueprint for a High Performance 
NLP Infrastructure. In Proc. of Workshop on Soft-
ware Engineering and Architecture of Language 
Technology Systems (SEALTS) Edmonton, Canada, 
2003, pp. 40 ? 45. 
Edmonds, P and Kilgarriff, A. (2002). Introduction to 
the special issue on evaluating word sense disam-
biguation systems. Journal of Natural Language 
Engineering, 8 (2), pp. 279-291. 
Fletcher, W. H. (2001).  Concordancing the Web with 
KWiCFinder.  Third North American Symposium 
on Corpus Linguistics and Language Teaching, 
Boston, MA, 23-25 March 2001.  
Fletcher, W. H. (2004a). Facilitating the compilation 
and dissemination of ad-hoc Web corpora. In G. 
Aston, S. Bernardini and D. Stewart (eds.), Cor-
pora and Language Learners, pp. 271 ? 300, John 
Benjamins, Amsterdam. 
Fletcher, W. H. (2004b). Making the Web More Use-
ful as a Source for Linguistic Corpora. In Ulla 
Connor and Thomas A. Upton (eds.) Applied Cor-
pus Linguistics. A Multidimensional Perspective. 
Rodopi, Amsterdam, pp. 191 ? 205. 
Granger, S., and Rayson, P. (1998). Automatic profil-
ing of learner texts. In S. Granger (ed.) Learner 
English on Computer. Longman, London and New 
York, pp. 119-131. 
Hughes, B, Bird, S., Haejoong, K., and Klein, E. 
(2004). Experiments with data-intensive NLP on a 
computational grid. Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Workshop on Human Language Technology. 
http://eprints.unimelb.edu.au/archive/00000503/. 
Hughes, D., Gilleade, K., Walkerdine, J. and Mariani, 
J., Exploiting P2P in the Creation of Game Worlds. 
In the proceedings of ACM GDTW 2005, Liver-
pool, UK, 8th-9th November, 2005. 
Hughes, D. and Walkerdine, J. (2005), Distributed 
Video Encoding Over A Peer-to-Peer Network. In 
the proceedings of PREP 2005, Lancaster, UK, 
30th March - 1st April, 2005 
Kehoe, A. and Renouf, A. (2002) WebCorp: Applying 
the Web to Linguistics and Linguistics to the Web. 
32
World Wide Web 2002 Conference, Honolulu, Ha-
waii. 
Keller, F., Lapata, M. and Ourioupina, O. (2002). 
Using the Web to Overcome Data Sparseness. Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods 
in Natural Language Processing, Philadelphia, 
July 2002, pp. 230-237. 
Kennedy, G. (1998). An introduction to corpus lin-
guistics. Longman, London. 
Kilgarriff, A. (2001). Web as corpus. In Proceedings 
of Corpus Linguistics 2001, Lancaster University, 
29 March - 2 April 2001, pp. 342 ? 344. 
Kilgarriff, A. (2003). Linguistic Search Engine. In 
proceedings of Workshop on Shallow Processing of 
Large Corpora (SProLaC 2003), Lancaster Uni-
versity, 28 - 31 March 2003, pp. 53 ? 58. 
Kilgarriff, A. and Grefenstette, G (2003). Introduction 
to the Special Issue on the Web as Corpus. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 29: 3, pp. 333-347. 
Mair, C. (2005). The corpus-based study of language 
change in progress: The extra value of tagged cor-
pora. Presentation at the AAACL/ICAME Confer-
ence, Ann Arbor, May 2005. 
Resnik, P. and Elkiss, A. (2003) The Linguist's Search 
Engine: Getting Started Guide. Technical Report: 
LAMP-TR-108/CS-TR-4541/UMIACS-TR-2003-
109, University of Maryland, College Park, No-
vember 2003. 
Robb, T. (2003) Google as a Corpus Tool? In ETJ 
Journal, Volume 4, number 1, Spring 2003. 
Rundell, M. (2000). "The biggest corpus of all", Hu-
manising Language Teaching. 2:3; May 2000. 
Shirky, C. (2001) Listening to Napster, in Peer-to-
Peer: Harnessing the power of Disruptive Tech-
nologies, O'Reilly. 
Turney, P. (2001). Word Sense Disambiguation by 
Web Mining for Word Co-occurrence Probabili-
ties. In proceedings of SENSEVAL-3, Barcelona, 
Spain, July 2004 pp. 239-242. 
Veronis, J. (2005). Web: Google's missing pages: 
mystery solved? 
http://aixtal.blogspot.com/2005/02/web-googles-
missing-pages-mystery.html (accessed April 28, 
2005). 
Walkerdine, J., Gilleade, K., Hughes, D., Rayson, P., 
Simms, J., Mariani, J., and Sommerville, I. A 
Framework for P2P Application Development. Pa-
per submitted to Software Practice and Experience. 
Walkerdine, J. and Rayson, P. (2004) P2P-4-DL: 
Digital Library over Peer-to-Peer. In Caronni G., 
Weiler N., Shahmehri N. (eds.) Proceedings of 
Fourth IEEE International Conference on Peer-to-
Peer Computing (PSP2004) 25-27 August 2004, 
Zurich, Switzerland. IEEE Computer Society 
Press, pp. 264-265. 
 
 
33
 34
