Models for the Semantic Classification of Noun Phrases
Dan Moldovan, Adriana Badulescu,
Marta Tatu, and Daniel Antohe
Computer Science Department
University of Texas at Dallas
Dallas, Texas
moldovan@utdallas.edu
Roxana Girju
Department of Computer Science
Baylor University
Waco, Texas
girju@cs.baylor.edu
Abstract
This paper presents an approach for detecting
semantic relations in noun phrases. A learning
algorithm, called semantic scattering, is used
to automatically label complex nominals, gen-
itives and adjectival noun phrases with the cor-
responding semantic relation.
1 Problem description
This paper is about the automatic labeling of semantic
relations in noun phrases (NPs).
The semantic relations are the underlying relations be-
tween two concepts expressed by words or phrases. We
distinguish here between semantic relations and semantic
roles. Semantic roles are always between verbs (or nouns
derived from verbs) and other constituents (run quickly,
went to the store, computer maker), whereas semantic
relations can occur between any constituents, for exam-
ple in complex nominals (malaria mosquito (CAUSE)),
genitives (girl?s mouth (PART-WHOLE)), prepositional
phrases attached to nouns (man at the store (LOCATIVE)),
or discourse level (The bus was late. As a result, I missed
my appointment (CAUSE)). Thus, in a sense, semantic
relations are more general than semantic roles and many
semantic role types will appear on our list of semantic
relations.
The following NP level constructions are consid-
ered here (cf. the classifications provided by (Quirk
et al1985) and (Semmelmeyer and Bolander 1992)):
(1) Compound Nominals consisting of two consecutive
nouns (eg night club - a TEMPORAL relation - indicat-
ing that club functions at night), (2) Adjective Noun con-
structions where the adjectival modifier is derived from a
noun (eg musical clock - a MAKE/PRODUCE relation), (3)
Genitives (eg the door of the car - a PART-WHOLE rela-
tion), and (4) Adjective phrases (cf. (Semmelmeyer and
Bolander 1992)) in which the modifier noun is expressed
by a prepositional phrase which functions as an adjective
(eg toy in the box - a LOCATION relation).
Example: ?Saturday?s snowfall topped a one-day record
in Hartford, Connecticut, with the total of 12.5 inches,
the weather service said. The storm claimed its fatal-
ity Thursday, when a car which was driven by a college
student skidded on an interstate overpass in the moun-
tains of Virginia and hit a concrete barrier, police said?.
(www.cnn.com - ?Record-setting Northeast snowstorm
winding down?, Sunday, December 7, 2003).
There are several semantic relations at the noun phrase
level: (1) Saturday?s snowfall is a genitive encoding a
TEMPORAL relation, (2) one-day record is a TOPIC noun
compound indicating that record is about one-day snow-
ing - an ellipsis here, (3) record in Hartford is an adjective
phrase in a LOCATION relation, (4) total of 12.5 inches
is an of-genitive that expresses MEASURE, (5) weather
service is a noun compound in a TOPIC relation, (6) car
which was driven by a college student encodes a THEME
semantic role in an adjectival clause, (7) college student is
a compound nominal in a PART-WHOLE/MEMBER-OF re-
lation, (8) interstate overpass is a LOCATION noun com-
pound, (9) mountains of Virginia is an of-genitive show-
ing a PART-WHOLE/PLACE-AREA and LOCATION rela-
tion, (10) concrete barrier is a noun compound encoding
PART-WHOLE/STUFF-OF.
1.1 List of Semantic Relations
After many iterations over a period of time we identified a
set of semantic relations that cover a large majority of text
semantics. Table 1 lists these relations, their definitions,
examples, and some references. Most of the time, the
semantic relations are encoded by lexico-syntactic pat-
terns that are highly ambiguous. One pattern can express
a number of semantic relations, its disambiguation be-
ing provided by the context or world knowledge. Often
semantic relations are not disjoint or mutually exclusive,
two or more appearing in the same lexical construct. This
is called semantic blend (Quirk et al1985). For example,
the expression ?Texas city? contains both a LOCATION as
well as a PART-WHOLE relation.
Other researchers have identified other sets of seman-
tic relations (Levi 1979), (Vanderwende 1994), (Sowa
1994), (Baker, Fillmore, and Lowe 1998), (Rosario and
Hearst 2001), (Kingsbury, et al 2002), (Blaheta and
Charniak 2000), (Gildea and Jurafsky 2002), (Gildea
and Palmer 2002). Our list contains the most frequently
used semantic relations we have observed on a large cor-
pus.
Besides the work on semantic roles, considerable in-
terest has been shown in the automatic interpretation of
complex nominals, and especially of compound nomi-
nals. The focus here is to determine the semantic re-
lations that hold between different concepts within the
same phrase, and to analyze the meaning of these com-
pounds. Several approaches have been proposed for em-
pirical noun-compound interpretation, such as syntactic
analysis based on statistical techniques (Lauer and Dras
1994), (Pustejovsky et al 1993). Another popular ap-
proach focuses on the interpretation of the underlying se-
mantics. Many researchers that followed this approach
relied mostly on hand-coded rules (Finin 1980), (Van-
derwende 1994). More recently, (Rosario and Hearst
2001), (Rosario, Hearst, and Fillmore 2002), (Lapata
2002) have proposed automatic methods that analyze and
detect noun compounds relations from text. (Rosario and
Hearst 2001) focused on the medical domain making use
of a lexical ontology and standard machine learning tech-
niques.
2 Approach
2.1 Basic Approach
We approach the problem top-down, namely identify
and study first the characteristics or feature vectors of
each noun phrase linguistic pattern, then develop mod-
els for their semantic classification. This is in contrast to
our prior approach ( (Girju, Badulescu, and Moldovan
2003a)) when we studied one relation at a time, and
learned constraints to identify only that relation. We
study the distribution of the semantic relations across dif-
ferent NP patterns and analyze the similarities and dif-
ferences among resulting semantic spaces. We define a
semantic space as the set of semantic relations an NP con-
struction can encode. We aim at uncovering the general
aspects that govern the NP semantics, and thus delineate
the semantic space within clusters of semantic relations.
This process has the advantage of reducing the annotation
effort, a time consuming activity. Instead of manually an-
notating a corpus for each semantic relation, we do it only
for each syntactic pattern and get a clear view of its se-
mantic space. This syntactico-semantic approach allows
us to explore various NP semantic classification models
in a unified way.
This approach stemmed from our desire to answer
questions such as:
1. What influences the semantic interpretation of various
linguistic constructions?
2. Is there only one interpretation system/model that
works best for all types of expressions at all syntactic lev-
els? and
3. What parameters govern the models capable of seman-
tic interpretation of various syntactic constructions?
2.2 Semantic Relations at NP level
It is well understood and agreed in linguistics that con-
cepts can be represented in many ways using various con-
structions at different syntactic levels. This is in part why
we decided to take the syntactico-semantic approach that
analyzes semantic relations at different syntactic levels
of representation. In this paper we focus only on the be-
havior of semantic relations at NP level. A thorough un-
derstanding of the syntactic and semantic characteristics
of NPs provides valuable insights into defining the most
representative feature vectors that ultimately drive the
discriminating learning models.
Complex Nominals
Levi (Levi 1979) defines complex nominals (CNs) as ex-
pressions that have a head noun preceded by one or more
modifying nouns, or by adjectives derived from nouns
(usually called denominal adjectives). Most importantly
for us, each sequence of nouns, or possibly adjectives and
nouns, has a particular meaning as a whole carrying an
implicit semantic relation; for example, ?spoon handle?
(PART-WHOLE) or ?musical clock? (MAKE/PRODUCE).
CNs have been studied intensively in linguistics,
psycho-linguistics, philosophy, and computational lin-
guistics for a long time. The semantic interpretation
of CNs proves to be very difficult for a number of rea-
sons. (1) Sometimes the meaning changes with the
head (eg ?musical clock? MAKE/PRODUCE, ?musical cre-
ation? THEME), other times with the modifier (eg ?GM
car? MAKE/PRODUCE, ?family car? POSSESSION). (2)
CNs? interpretation is knowledge intensive and can be id-
iosyncratic. For example, in order to interpret correctly
?GM car? we have to know that GM is a car-producing
company. (3) There can be many possible semantic re-
lations between a given pair of word constituents. For
example, ?USA city? can be regarded as a LOCATION as
well as a PART-WHOLE relation. (4) Interpretation of CNs
can be highly context-dependent. For example, ?apple
juice seat? can be defined as ?seat with apple juice on the
table in front of it? (cf. (Downing 1977)).
Genitives
The semantic interpretation of genitive constructions
No. Semantic Definition / Example
Relation
1 POSSESSION an animate entity possesses (owns) another entity; (family estate; the girl has a new car.), (Vanderwende 1994)
2 KINSHIP an animated entity related by blood, marriage, adoption or strong affinity to another animated entity; (Mary?s daughter;
my sister); (Levi 1979)
3 PROPERTY/ characteristic or quality of an entity/event/state; (red rose; The thunderstorm was awful.); (Levi 1979)
ATTRIBUTE-HOLDER
4 AGENT the doer or instigator of the action denoted by the predicate;
(employee protest; parental approval; The king banished the general.); (Baker, Fillmore, and Lowe 1998)
5 TEMPORAL time associated with an event; (5-o?clock tea; winter training; the store opens at 9 am),
includes DURATION (Navigli and Velardi 2003),
6 DEPICTION- an event/action/entity depicting another event/action/entity; (A picture of my niece.),
DEPICTED
7 PART-WHOLE an entity/event/state is part of another entity/event/state (door knob; door of the car),
(MERONYMY) (Levi 1979), (Dolan et al 1993),
8 HYPERNYMY an entity/event/state is a subclass of another; (daisy flower; Virginia state; large company, such as Microsoft)
(IS-A) (Levi 1979), (Dolan et al 1993)
9 ENTAIL an event/state is a logical consequence of another; (snoring entails sleeping)
10 CAUSE an event/state makes another event/state to take place; (malaria mosquitoes; to die of hunger; The earthquake
generated a Tsunami), (Levi 1979)
11 MAKE/PRODUCE an animated entity creates or manufactures another entity; (honey bees; nuclear power plant; GM makes cars) (Levi 1979)
12 INSTRUMENT an entity used in an event/action as instrument; (pump drainage; the hammer broke the box) (Levi 1979)
13 LOCATION/SPACE spatial relation between two entities or between an event and an entity; includes DIRECTION; (field mouse;
street show; I left the keys in the car), (Levi 1979), (Dolan et al 1993)
14 PURPOSE a state/action intended to result from a another state/event; (migraine drug; wine glass; rescue mission;
He was quiet in order not to disturb her.) (Navigli and Velardi 2003)
15 SOURCE/FROM place where an entity comes from; (olive oil; I got it from China) (Levi 1979)
16 TOPIC an object is a topic of another object; (weather report; construction plan; article about terrorism); (Rosario and Hearst 2001)
17 MANNER a way in which an event is performed or takes place; (hard-working immigrants; enjoy immensely; he died of
cancer); (Blaheta and Charniak 2000)
18 MEANS the means by which an event is performed or takes place; (bus service; I go to school by bus.) (Quirk et al1985)
19 ACCOMPANIMENT one/more entities accompanying another entity involved in an event; (meeting with friends; She came with us) (Quirk et al1985)
20 EXPERIENCER an animated entity experiencing a state/feeling; (Mary was in a state of panic.); (Sowa 1994)
21 RECIPIENT an animated entity for which an event is performed; (The eggs are for you) ; includes BENEFICIARY; (Sowa 1994)
22 FREQUENCY number of occurrences of an event; (bi-annual meeting; I take the bus every day); (Sowa 1994)
23 INFLUENCE an entity/event that affects other entity/event; (drug-affected families; The war has an impact on the economy.);
24 ASSOCIATED WITH an entity/event/state that is in an (undefined) relation with another entity/event/state; (Jazz-associated company;)
25 MEASURE an entity expressing quantity of another entity/event; (cup of sugar;
70-km distance; centennial rite; The jacket cost $60.)
26 SYNONYMY a word/concept that means the same or nearly the same as another word/concept;
(NAME) (Marry is called Minnie); (Sowa 1994)
27 ANTONYMY a word/concept that is the opposite of another word/concept; (empty is the opposite of full); (Sowa 1994)
28 PROBABILITY OF the quality/state of being probable; likelihood
EXISTENCE (There is little chance of rain tonight); (Sowa 1994)
29 POSSIBILITY the state/condition of being possible; (I might go to Opera tonight); (Sowa 1994)
30 CERTAINTY the state/condition of being certain or without doubt; (He definitely left the house this morning);
31 THEME an entity that is changed/involved by the action/event denoted by the predicate;
(music lover; John opened the door.); (Sowa 1994)
32 RESULT the inanimate result of the action/event denoted by the predicate; includes EFFECT and PRODUCT.
(combustion gases; I finished the task completely.); (Sowa 1994)
33 STIMULUS stimulus of the action or event denoted by the predicate (We saw [the painting].
I sensed [the eagerness] in him. I can see [that you are feeling great].) (Baker, Fillmore, and Lowe 1998)
34 EXTENT the change of status on a scale (by a percentage or by a value) of some entity;
(The price of oil increased [ten percent]. Oil?s price increased by [ten percent]. ); (Blaheta and Charniak 2000)
35 PREDICATE expresses the property associated with the subject or the object through the verb;
(He feels [sleepy]. They elected him [treasurer]. ) (Blaheta and Charniak 2000)
Table 1: A list of semantic relations at various syntactic levels (including NP level), their definitions, some examples,
and references.
is considered problematic by linguists because they
involve an implicit relation that seems to allow for
a large variety of relational interpretations; for ex-
ample: ?John?s car?-POSSESSOR-POSSESSEE, ?Mary?s
brother?-KINSHIP, ?last year?s exhibition?-TEMPORAL,
?a picture of my nice?-DEPICTION-DEPICTED, and ?the
desert?s oasis?-PART-WHOLE/PLACE-AREA. A charac-
teristic of these constructions is that they are very pro-
ductive, as the construction can be given various inter-
pretations depending on the context. One such example
is ?Kate?s book? that can mean the book Kate owns, the
book Kate wrote, or the book Kate is very fond of.
Thus, the features that contribute to the semantic in-
terpretation of genitives are: the nouns? semantic classes,
the type of genitives, discourse and pragmatic informa-
tion.
Adjective Phrases are prepositional phrases attached to
nouns acting as adjectives (cf. (Semmelmeyer and
Bolander 1992)). Prepositions play an important role
both syntactically and semantically. Semantically speak-
ing, prepositional constructions can encode various se-
mantic relations, their interpretations being provided
most of the time by the underlying context. For instance,
the preposition ?with? can encode different semantic re-
lations: (1) It was the girl with blue eyes (MERONYMY),
(2) The baby with the red ribbon is cute (POSSESSION),
(3) The woman with triplets received a lot of attention
(KINSHIP).
The conclusion for us is that in addition to the nouns se-
mantic classes, the preposition and the context play im-
portant roles here.
In order to focus our research, we will concentrate for
now only on noun - noun or adjective - noun composi-
tional constructions at NP level, ie those whose mean-
ing can be derived from the meaning of the constituent
nouns (?door knob?, ?cup of wine?). We don?t consider
metaphorical names (eg, ?ladyfinger?), metonymies (eg,
?Vietnam veteran?), proper names (eg, ?John Doe?), and
NPs with coordinate structures in which neither noun is
the head (eg, ?player-coach?). However, we check if
the constructions are non-compositional (lexicalized) (the
meaning is a matter of convention; e.g., ?soap opera?,
?sea lion?), but only for statistical purposes. Fortunately,
some of these can be identified with the help of lexicons.
2.3 Corpus Analysis at NP level
In order to provide a unified approach for the detection of
semantic relations at different NP levels, we analyzed the
syntactic and semantic behavior of these constructions on
a large open-domain corpora of examples. Our intention
is to answer questions like: (1) What are the semantic re-
lations encoded by the NP-level constructions?, (2) What
is their distribution on a large corpus?, (3) Is there a com-
mon subset of semantic relations that can be fully para-
phrased by all types of NP constructions?, (4) How many
NPs are lexicalized?
The data
We have assembled a corpus from two sources: Wall
Street Journal articles from TREC-9, and eXtended
WordNet glosses (XWN) (http://xwn.hlt.utdallas.edu).
We used XWN 2.0 since all its glosses are syntacti-
cally parsed and their words semantically disambiguated
which saved us considerable amount of time. Table 2
shows for each syntactic category the number of ran-
domly selected sentences from each corpus, the num-
ber of instances found in these sentences, and finally the
number of instances that our group managed to annotate
by hand. The annotation of each example consisted of
specifying its feature vector and the most appropriate se-
mantic relation from those listed in Table 1.
Inter-annotator Agreement
The annotators, four PhD students in Computational Se-
mantics worked in groups of two, each group focusing
on one half of the corpora to annotate. Noun - noun
(adjective - noun, respectively) sequences of words were
extracted using the Lauer heuristic (Lauer 1995) which
looks for consecutive pairs of nouns that are neither
preceded nor succeeded by a noun after each sentence
was syntactically parsed with Charniak parser (Charniak
2001) (for XWN we used the gold parse trees). More-
over, they were provided with the sentence in which the
pairs occurred along with their corresponding WordNet
senses. Whenever the annotators found an example en-
coding a semantic relation other than those provided or
they didn?t know what interpretation to give, they had
to tag it as ?OTHERS?. Besides the type of relation, the
annotators were asked to provide information about the
order of the modifier and the head nouns in the syntac-
tic constructions if applicable. For instance, in ?owner
of car?-POSSESSION the possessor owner is followed by
the possessee car, while in ?car of John?-POSSESSION/R
the order is reversed. On average, 30% of the training
examples had the nouns in reverse order.
Most of the time, one instance was tagged with one
semantic relation, but there were also situations in which
an example could belong to more than one relation in the
same context. For example, the genitive ?city of USA?
was tagged as a PART-WHOLE/PLACE-AREA relation and
as a LOCATION relation. Overall, there were 608 such
cases in the training corpora. Moreover, the annotators
were asked to indicate if the instance was lexicalized or
not. Also, the judges tagged the NP nouns in the training
corpus with their corresponding WordNet senses.
The annotators? agreement was measured using the
Kappa statistics, one of the most frequently used mea-
sure of inter-annotator agreement for classification tasks:
 
	



, where ff