Example-based Complexity--Syntax and Semantics as the 
Production of Ad-hoc Arrangements of Examples 
Robert John FREEMAN 
rj freeman@email.com 
Abstract 
Computational linguists have traditionally 
sought to model language by finding 
underlying parameters which govern 
numerous examples. I describe a different 
approach which argues that numerous 
examples themselves, by virtue of their 
many possible arrangements, provide the 
only way to specify a sufficiently rich set of 
"parameters". 
Essentially I argue for a different 
relationship between example and 
parameter. With examples primary, and 
parameterizafions of them secondary, the 
real "productions". Rather than representing 
a redundant complexity, examples hould 
actually be seen as a simplification, a basis 
for the numerous arrangements of their 
"parameterizations". 
Another way of looking at it is to say I argue 
arrangements of examples, rather than 
simply revealing underlying parameters, 
represent in themselves an ignored resource 
for the modelling of syntactic, and semantic, 
complexity. 
I have implemented a small, working, 
"shallow parser" based on these ideas. 
Introduction--Machine Learning, Data, 
and Parameterizations 
! contrast my work with Machine Learning. 
There are similarities in the emphasis on the 
analysis of relationships among data, but there 
are also differences in the assumptions about he 
nature of the system. I think there has been a 
tacit assumption in Machine Learning that 
language system consists of underlying 
parameters which generate a variety of 
examples. My argument is that you can turn that 
relationship around and get a great deal more 
descriptive power in the form of varying 
parameterizations of the order in a set of 
examples. 
Under the umbrella of Machine Learning I 
include a wide variety of data based analyses of 
language which have become popular in recent 
years. Both distributed and statistical data based 
models fit in that category: back-propagation 
networks, Hidden Markov Models, maximum 
entropy parametefizafions. Apart from their 
emphasis on data, however, they have one thing 
in common, and in common with earlier 
symbolic attempts to codify language system. 
They all hypothesize parameters for distributions 
of data. I say it is worth considering that the 
essence of language is not in such underlying 
parameters but the collections of examples we 
seek them through. That there are no underlying 
parameters, only the chaos of example, much as 
is the case in a population of people (see also 
Kenneth Pike "analogies between linguistic 
structure and the structure of society", in de 
Beaugrande ( 1991)). 
One way to describe this is to say that language 
might be "irreducibly distributed". A system 
where a collection of examples is the smallest 
set which describes all its structure. Although 
there might be different levels of this 
independence (along with differing abilities to 
parameterize: viz. phonology, morphology, 
syntax). We might contrast irreducibly 
distributed systems with those which are 
parametrically distributed, like a letter 
recognition system. Certainly, however, we 
could contrast them with statistical, systems, 
where only the likelihood of the outcomes is 
variable. 
47 
R from N and the Descriptive Power of 
Sets 
The best thing about such "irreducibly 
distributed" systems i  their power. 
The number of combinations of R objects taken 
from N is C(N,R) = N!/(N-R)!R!. This is the 
number of "word association classes" N word 
associations can model, for instance. 
The idea that we can model syntactic lasses as 
"word association classes" is not new. There are 
numerous tudies dating from the early 1990's 
and before which take this approach e.g. 
Schuetze (1993), Finch (1993); and Powers 
(1996) lists references back to Pike's 
Tagmemics. What is different in my approach is
the assumed relationship between these classes 
and the data which reveal them. If the variety of 
example can be generated by a small number of 
abstract parameters then we expect one set of 
relationships among that data to be more 
important than the others. If on the other hand 
we consider the full range of relationships 
possible among all the examples then we have 
an enormous range of structure at our disposal. 
Given the problems we have had describing 
language according to parameters, it is 
surprising that we have not more widely 
considered the attraction of this power. 
Consider the evidence that we need this power: 
a) Structure 
Collocation, phraseology. The data based 
analysis of language has bought home more and 
more strongly that some structure is beyond any 
logic we can enumerate. Face to face with the 
reality of use this realization has been most 
widely accepted in areas of linguistics which 
deal with language acquisition and teaching. 
Examples of relevant discussions are Pawley 
and Syder (1983), Nattinger (1980), Weinert 
(1995). We are talking about explaining why 
you might say "strong tea" but not "powerful 
tea". 
In practical terms a processor based 
fundamentally ondistributions should be able to 
tell that "strong tea" is idiomatic and "powerful 
tea" less so because the "word association 
distributions", say, of "strong" and "powerful" 
are different in detail, though not in generalities. 
A system based on labels, an assumption of 
underlying parameters, will not be able to do 
that (for a set of labels smaller than the set of all 
such distinct utterances). 
An irreducibly distributed representation gives 
us the power to model collocation. We would 
need a different syntactic class for every 
collocational restriction otherwise. 
b) Meaning 
N!/(N-R)!R! groupings give you an essentially 
infinite set of configurations. We have the power 
to associate a different configuration with 
everything we might ever want to say, if we like. 
In fact, by default we will do so. This means we 
have the power to represent not only syntactic 
idiosyncrasy, but the complexity of meaning, 
directly. 
The idea of meaning implied by the association 
is interesting in itself, h is an organization of 
data. But this is reasonable. And if we accept it 
then we have a fundamental definition of 
meaning in terms we can quantify. Meaning is 
synonymous with an organization of data: 
events, observations. New organization equals 
new meaning. 
There is an interesting topical analogy to be 
made here: a Web search engine. In a sense any 
collection of documents found "represent" he 
meaning of a set of search keys. There are many 
more subtleties of collection possible than can 
ever be labeled in an index. 
In a way my argument isjust.that if we want to 
model the full complexity of syntactic 
restriction, or semantic subjectivity, we have no 
choice but to demote categories from being 
central, make them a product, and base them on 
the reorganization f content much the way they 
are treated in most Web search engines. 
Such an irreducibly distributed definition 
explains many puzzling properties of thought. It 
provides anatural mechanism for how: 
48 
? new concepts can be created (novel 
reorganization ofold examples--"Aha\[") 
? new meaning can be communicated (I force 
you to reorganize your examples in the way 
I've just reorganized mine) 
? language (and conceptual) drift can occur 
(slow shift in balance of examples). 
As well as the usual useful properties of 
distributed representations: 
? flexibility (the group can vary) 
? robustness (it does not matter of a few 
elements are missing) 
? ambiguity (intersection sets) 
? subjectivity (sub-sets etc.) 
There is also an interesting tie in between this 
(meaning, and the primacy of data over 
parameter) and the vigorous "rebel" linguistic 
school of Systemic Functional Grammar. Most 
importantly in SFG the only irreducible 
definition of meaning, or structure, is a set of 
contrasts between events, or observations. 
Unfortunately in SFG an overemphasis on 
abstract parameters (function/meaning) means 
that in practice the flail power of contrasts 
among sets to model complexity is not applied. 
Nevertheless, there are strong parallels between 
my model and the core tenets of Systemic 
Functional Grammar. I find that a natural 
analysis according to the principles I have 
outlined above results in structure along lines of 
functional category. In fact the association 
groupings on which I base my analysis lead me 
to propose an "inverse" relationship (in a sense 
that can be precisely defined) between 
functional category, about which SFG is 
described, and categories based on syntactic 
regularities of the type which have traditionally 
been seen as important. 
A Simple "Association Parser" 
I have implemented a small "association parser" 
based on these principles and the initial results 
have been interesting. I provide a list of typical 
"parses" in the appendix. Essentially it scores 
the grammaticality and provides a structural 
breakdown of each string of words it is 
presented with. Among more interesting 
observations, as I mentioned above, is the fact 
that my parser seems to naturally identify 
structure along lines of functional equivalence. 
Rather like the kind of analysis a Systemic 
Functional Grammarian might favor. 
Since processing is essentially a search over a 
database for similar examples the main 
bottleneck is the inefficiency of a serial 
processor for nearest neighbor search. There are 
two key complexities. The search over one I 
have managed to reduce to linear time. The other 
remains to be resolved. 
References 
Beaugrande, Robert de (1991) Linguistic Theory: The 
Discourse of Fundamental Works, section 5.84, 
Harlow: Longman. 
Finch, Steven (1993) Finding Structure in Language. 
Ph.D. Thesis, University of Edinburgh. 
Nattinger, James R: (1980) A lexical Phrase 
Grammar for ESL, TESOL Quarterly Vol. XIV., 
No. 3, pp. 33%334. 
Pawley, A. & Syder F. (1983) Two puzzles for 
linguistic theory: nativelike selection and nativelike 
fluency, in L Richards and IL Schmidt (eds.) 1983: 
Language and Communication, pp. 191-226. 
London: Longman. 
Powers, D. M. W. (1996) Unsupervised learning of 
linguistic structure: An empirical evaluation, 
International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 1#2. 
Schuetze, H. (1993) Distributed Syntactic 
Representations with an Application to Part-of- 
Speech Tagging, 1993 IEEE International 
Conference on Neural Networks, p1504-9 vol. 3. 
Weinert, Regina. (1995) The Role of Formulaic 
Language in Second Language Acquisition: A 
Review, Applied Linguistics, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 
181-205. 
Appendix--Examples of Parses Produced 
by my "Association Parser" Prototype 
make some products 
Parsed: (make (some products)), score: 1.329954 
Parsed: ((make some) products), score: 0.023665 
make some money 
Parsed: (make (some money)), score: 1.555408 
Parsed: ((make some) money), score: 0.042059 
49 
make a car 
Parsed: (make (a car)), score: 5.689303 
Parsed: ((make a) car), score: 2.120204 
make another car 
Parsed: (make (another car)), score: 1.642482 
Parsed: ((make another) car), score: O. 189554 
make another try 
Parsed: ((make another) try), score: 0.051537 
Parsed: (make (another try)), score: 0.039471 
go with the president 
Parsed: ((go with) (the president)), score: 
7.983729 
Parsed: (go (with (the president))), score: 
4.620297 
Parsed: (go ((with the) president)), score: 
0.771305 
Parsed: (((go with) the) president), score: 
0.318181 
Parsed: ((go (with the)) president), score: 
0.065606 
I try to go 
Parsed: (i ((try to) go)), score: 4.343059 
Parsed: (((i try) to) go), score: 1.297454 
Parsed: ((i (try to)) go), score: 1.174891 
Parsed: (i (try (to go))), score: 0.553270 
Parsed: ((i try) (to go)), score: 0.474397 
the election results 
Parsed: (the (election results)), score: 89.247596 
Parsed: ((the election) results), score: 15.212562 
they held an election 
Parsed: (they (held (an election))), score: 
0.000238 
Parsed: ((they held) (an election)), score: 
0.000007 
Parsed: (((they held) an) election), score: 
0.000000 
go with her 
Parsed: ((go with) her), score: 9.073902 
Parsed: (go (with her)), score: O. 107435 
50 
