Proceedings of Human Language Technology Conference and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (HLT/EMNLP), pages 819?826, Vancouver, October 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automatic Question Generation for Vocabulary Assessment 
 
Jonathan C. Brown Gwen A. Frishkoff Maxine Eskenazi 
Language Technologies Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213  USA 
Learning Research &  
Development Center 
University of Pittsburgh 
Pittsburgh, PA 15260  USA 
Language Technologies Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213  USA 
jonbrown@cs.cmu.edu gwenf@pitt.edu max@cs.cmu.edu 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
In the REAP system, users are automati-
cally provided with texts to read targeted to 
their individual reading levels. To find ap-
propriate texts, the user?s vocabulary 
knowledge must be assessed. We describe 
an approach to automatically generating 
questions for vocabulary assessment. Tra-
ditionally, these assessments have been 
hand-written. Using data from WordNet, 
we generate 6 types of vocabulary ques-
tions. They can have several forms, includ-
ing wordbank and multiple-choice. We 
present experimental results that suggest 
that these automatically-generated ques-
tions give a measure of vocabulary skill 
that correlates well with subject perform-
ance on independently developed human-
written questions. In addition, strong corre-
lations with standardized vocabulary tests 
point to the validity of our approach to 
automatic assessment of word knowledge.  
1 Introduction 
The REAP system automatically provides users 
with individualized authentic texts to read. These 
texts, usually retrieved from the Web, are chosen 
to satisfy several criteria. First, they are selected to 
match the reading level of the student (Collins-
Thompson and Callan, 2004). They must also have 
vocabulary terms known to the student. To meet 
this goal, it is necessary to construct an accurate 
model of the student?s vocabulary knowledge 
(Brown and Eskenazi, 2004). Using this model, the 
system can locate documents that include a given 
percentage (e.g., 95%) of words that are known to 
the student. The remaining percentage (e.g. 5%) 
consists of new words that the student needs to 
learn. This percentage is controlled so that there is 
not so much stretch in the document that the stu-
dent cannot focus their attention on understanding 
the new words and the meaning of the text. After 
reading the text, the student?s understanding of 
new words is assessed. The student?s responses are 
used to update the student model, to support re-
trieval of furture documents that take into account 
the changes in student word knowledge.  
In this paper, we describe our work on automatic 
generation of vocabulary assessment questions. We 
also report results from a study that was designed 
to assess the validity of the generated questions. In 
addition to the importance of these assessments in 
the REAP system, tests of word knowledge are 
central to research on reading and language and are 
of practical importance for student placement and 
in enabling teachers to track improvements in word 
knowledge throughout the school year. Because 
tests such as these are traditionally hand-written, 
development is time-consuming and often relies on 
methods that are informal and subjective. The re-
search described here addresses these issues 
through development of automated, explicit meth-
ods for generation of vocabulary tests. In addition, 
these tools are designed to capture the graded and 
complex nature of word knowledge, allowing for 
more fine-grained assessment of word learning.  
2 Measuring Vocabulary Knowledge 
Word knowledge is not all-or-none. Rather, there 
are different aspects, such as knowledge of the 
spoken form, the written form, grammatical behav-
819
ior, collocation behavior, word frequency, stylistic 
register constraints, conceptual meaning, and the 
associations a word has with other related words 
(Nation, 1990). In this paper, we focus on knowl-
edge of conceptual word meaning. Because word 
meaning itself is complex, our focus is not simply 
on all-or-none estimates of vocabulary knowledge, 
but also on graded and incomplete knowledge of 
meanings that readers possess for different words 
and at different stages of acquisition.  
Several models have been proposed to account 
for these multiple levels of word knowledge. For 
example, Dale posited four stages of knowledge of 
word meaning (Dale and O?Rourke, 1965). In 
stage 1, the subject has never seen the word. In 
stage 2, she has seen the word but is unable to ver-
balize its meaning. In stage 3, the subject recog-
nizes the word in a given context and has partial 
word knowledge. In stage 4, the subject has full 
word knowledge, and can explain the word mean-
ing so that its usage is clear in multiple contexts.  
Stahl (1986) proposed a similar model of word 
knowledge, the levels of which overlap with Dale?s 
last two stages. According to this model, the first 
level is characterized by association processing, or 
the passive association of the new word meaning 
with other, familiar concepts. The second level, 
comprehension processing, involves active com-
prehension of the word in a particular context. The 
third level, generation processing, requires usage 
of a word in a novel context reflecting a deep (and 
multidimensional) understanding of its meaning.  
Taking Stahl?s framework as a working model, 
we constructed multiple types of vocabulary ques-
tions designed to assess different ?stages? or ?lev-
els? of word knowledge. 
3 Question Generation 
In this section, we describe the process used to 
generate vocabulary questions. After introducing 
the WordNet resource we discuss the six question 
types and the forms in which they appear. The use 
of distractors is covered in section 3.3. 
3.1 WordNet 
WordNet is a lexical resource in which English 
nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs are grouped 
into synonym sets. A word may appear in a num-
ber of these synonym sets, or synsets, each corre-
sponding to a single lexical concept and a single 
sense of the word (Fellbaum ed., 1998). The word 
?bat? has ten distinct senses and thus appears in ten 
synsets in WordNet. Five of these senses corre-
spond to noun senses, and the other five corre-
spond to verb senses. The synset for the verb sense 
of the word which refers to batting one?s eyelashes 
contains the words ?bat? and ?flutter?, while the 
synset for the noun sense of the word which refers 
to the flying mammal contains the words ?bat? and 
?chiropteran?. Each sense or synset is accompa-
nied by a definition and, often, example sentences 
or phrases. A synset can also be linked to other 
synsets with various relations, including synonym, 
antonym, hypernym, hyponym, and other syntactic 
and semantic relations (Fellbaum ed., 1998). For a 
particular word sense, we programmatically access 
WordNet to find definitions, example phrases, etc. 
3.2 Question Types 
Given Stahl?s three levels of word mastery and the 
information available in WordNet, we generated 6 
types of questions: definition, synonym, antonym, 
hypernym, hyponym, and cloze questions.  
In order to retrieve data from WordNet, we must 
choose the correct sense of the word. The system 
can work with input of varying specificity. The 
most specific case is when we have all the data: the 
word itself and a number indicating the sense of 
the word with respect to WordNet?s synsets. When 
the target words are known beforehand and the 
word list is short enough, the intended sense can be 
hand-annotated. More often, however, the input is 
comprised of just the target word and its part of 
speech (POS). It is much easier to annotate POS 
than it is to annotate the sense. In addition, POS 
tagging can be done automatically in many cases. 
In the REAP system, where the user has just read a 
specific text, the words of the document were al-
ready automatically POS annotated. When there is 
only one sense of the word per part of speech, we 
can simply select the correct sense of the word in 
WordNet. Otherwise, we select the most frequently 
used sense of the word with the correct POS, using 
WordNet?s frequency data. If we have only the 
word, we select the most frequent sense, ignoring 
part of speech. Future work will use word sense 
disambiguation techniques to automatically deter-
mine the correct word sense given a document that 
includes the target word, as in REAP (Brown and 
Eskenazi, 2004). 
820
Once the system has determined the word sense, 
it can retrieve data from WordNet for each of the 6 
question types. The definition question requires a 
definition of the word, available in WordNet?s 
gloss for the chosen sense. The system chooses the 
first definition which does not include the target 
word. This question should provide evidence for 
the first of Stahl?s three levels, association process-
ing, although this was not explicitly evaluated. 
The synonym question has the testee match the 
target word to a synonym. The system can extract 
this synonym from WordNet using two methods. 
One method is to select words that belong to the 
same synset as the target word and are thus syno-
nyms. In addition, the synonym relation in Word-
Net may connect this synset to another synset, and 
all the words in the latter are acceptable synonyms. 
The system prefers words in the synset to those in 
synonym synsets. It also restricts synonyms to sin-
gle words and to words which are not morphologi-
cal variants of the target word. When more than 
one word satisfies all criteria, the most frequently 
used synonym is chosen, since this should make 
the question easier. This question could be consid-
ered either association processing or comprehen-
sion processing. If the testee has seen this synonym 
(e.g. as a hint), this question type would require 
association processing as a word is simply being 
associated with another already-presented word. 
Otherwise, this may require comprehension proc-
essing ? understanding beyond memorization. 
The antonym question requires matching a word 
with an antonymous word. WordNet provides two 
kinds of relations that can be used to procure anto-
nyms: direct and indirect antonyms. Direct anto-
nyms are antonyms of the target word, whereas 
indirect antonyms are direct antonyms of a syno-
nym of the target. The words ?fast? and ?slow? are 
direct antonyms of one another. The word ?quick? 
does not have a direct antonym, but it does have an 
indirect antonym, ?slow?, via ?fast?, its synonym. 
When more than one antonym is available, the 
most frequently used is chosen. Unless the testee 
has already seen the antonym, this type of question 
is normally considered to provide evidence for 
Stahl?s second level, comprehension processing. 
The hypernym and hyponym questions are simi-
lar in structure. Hypernym is the generic term used 
to describe a whole class of specific instances. The 
word ?organism? is a hypernym of ?person?. Hy-
ponyms are members of a class. The words 
?adult?, ?expert? and ?worker? are hyponyms of 
?person?. For the questions the testee matches the 
target word to either a hypernym or hyponym. For 
more than one possibility, the most frequently used 
term is chosen. Unless the testee has previously 
seen the hypernym or hyponym, these questions 
are normally regarded as providing evidence for 
Stahl?s second level. 
Cloze is the final question type. It requires the 
use of the target word in a specific context, either a 
complete sentence or a phrase. The example sen-
tence or phrase is retrieved from the gloss for a 
specific word sense in WordNet. There is often 
more than one example phrase. The system prefers 
longer phrases, a feature designed to increase the 
probability of retrieving complete sentences. Pas-
sages using the target word are preferred, although 
examples for any of the words in the synset are 
appropriate. The present word is replaced by a 
blank in the cloze question phrase. Some consider 
a cloze question to be more difficult than any of 
the other question types, but it is still expected to 
provide evidence for Stahl?s second level. 
Although our question types provide evidence 
for the highest level of schemes such as Dale?s 
four stages, they do not provide evidence for 
Stahl?s highest level, generation processing, where 
the testee must, for instance, write a sentence using 
the word in a personalized context. We expect 
questions that provide evidence of this level to re-
quire free-form or near-free-form responses, which 
we do not yet alow. We expect the six question 
types to be of increasing difficulty, with definition 
or synonym being the easiest and cloze the hardest. 
3.3 Question Forms 
Each of the 6 types of questions can be generated 
in several forms, the primary ones being wordbank 
and multiple-choice. In wordbank, the testee sees a 
list of answer choices, followed by a set of ques-
tions or statements (see Figure 1). For the defini-
tion version, each of the items below the wordbank 
is a definition. The testee must select the word 
which best corresponds to the definition. For the 
synonym and antonym questions, the testee selects 
the word which is the most similar or the most op-
posite in meaning to the synonym or antonym. For 
the hypernym and hyponym question types, the 
testee is asked to complete phrases such as ?___ is 
a kind of person? (with target ?adult?) or ?person 
821
is a kind of ___? (with target ?organism?). In the 
cloze question, the testee fills in the blank with the 
appropriate word. There is traditionally one ques-
tion for each target word in the wordbank. These 
questions require no information beyond the target 
words and their definitions, synonyms, hypernyms, 
etc. 
 
Wordbank: 
verbose   infallible   obdurate   opaque 
 
Choose the word from the wordbank that best completes each 
phrase below: 
 
1. ___ windows of the jail 
2. the Catholic Church considers the Pope ___ 
3. ___ and ineffective instructional methods 
4. the child's misery would move even the most ___ heart 
 
Fig. 1.  Example Wordbank Question 
 
The second generated form is multiple-choice, 
with one question per target word. The testee sees 
the main question, the stem, followed by several 
answer choices, of which only one is correct (see 
Figure 2). Depending on the question type, the tar-
get word may appear in either the stem or the an-
swer choices. For the definition question type, the 
stem holds the definition of the target word and 
one of the answer choices is the target word. For 
the word ?verbose?, the stem would be ?using or 
containing too many words? and the choices ?an-
cillary?, ?churlish?, ?verbose?, and ?convivial?. 
The cloze question is of a similar form, with the 
stem containing the example sentence or phrase 
with a blank where the target word should be used. 
For ?verbose?, we have the stem ?___ and ineffec-
tive instructional methods? and choices ?verbose?, 
?incipient?, ?invidious?, and ?titular?. For the 
synonym, antonym, hypernym, and hyponym ques-
tions, the target word appears in the stem instead of 
the answer choices. The synonym question for the 
word ?verbose? would have the stem ?Select the 
word that is most similar in meaning to the word 
verbose? with choices ?inflammable?, ?piping?, 
matrilineal?, and ?long-winded?. The antonym 
question would have the stem ?Select the word that 
is most opposite in meaning to the word verbose? 
and the choices ?discernable?, ?concise?, ?unbro-
ken?, and ?soused?. Figure 2 shows a formatted 
example of an automatically generated multiple-
choice cloze question for the word ?obdurate?. 
 
Choose the word that best completes the phrase below: 
 
the child's misery would move even the most ___ heart 
 
A) torpid 
B) invidious 
C) stolid 
D) obdurate 
 
Fig. 2.  Example Multiple-Choice Cloze Question 
 
Two issues to consider when creating multiple-
choice format questions are the wording or appear-
ance of the questions and the criteria for selection 
of distractors. We followed the guidelines for good 
multiple-choice questions described by researchers 
such as Graesser and Wisher (2001). In accord 
with these guidelines, our questions had 4 choices, 
although the number of choices is a variable sup-
plied to the question generation software. We also 
considered the most appropriate wording for these 
questions, leading us to choose stems such as ?Se-
lect the word that is most similar in meaning to the 
word plausible? for the synonym question rather 
than ?Choose the word that means the same as the 
word plausible.? The latter would be problematic 
when the correct answer is a near-synonym rather 
than a word with precisely the same meaning.  
Concerning distractor choice, the question gen-
eration system chooses distractors of the same part 
of speech and similar frequency to the correct an-
swer, as recommended by Coniam (1997). For the 
synonym, antonym, hypernym, and hyponym ques-
tions, the correct answer is the highest frequency 
word of all the words chosen from WordNet that 
satisfy all the criteria. Thus, the distractors are of 
the same POS and similar frequency to the syno-
nym, antonym, or whatever word is the correct 
answer, as opposed to the target word. The system 
chooses distractors from Kilgarriff?s (1995) word 
frequency database, based on the British National 
Corpus (BNC) (Burnage, 1991). The system 
chooses 20 words from this database that are of the 
same POS and are equal or similar in frequency to 
the correct answer, and randomly chooses the dis-
tractors from these words. Since the distractors 
may be different for each run of the question gen-
eration software, slightly different versions of the 
same basic question may appear. The words of the 
BNC and the word frequency database have been 
POS tagged using the CLAWS tagger (Leech, 
1994). This tagger uses detailed POS tags, ena-
bling us to choose distractors that are, for instance, 
822
verbs in the past tense, when the correct answer is 
such as verb, instead of selecting verbs of un-
known tense. In the definition and cloze questions, 
the correct answer is the target word itself, so dis-
tractors are chosen based on this word. The system 
also restricts distractors to be in the list of target 
words so that the testee cannot simply choose the 
word that appears in the stems of other questions. 
An alternate multiple-choice question format is 
used when the testee has just read a document us-
ing the target word, as in the REAP system (Brown 
and Eskenazi, 2004). In this case, the system also 
attempts to finds words which may be semantically 
related to the correct answer, as in (Nagy, 1985). 
This is done by choosing distractors that satisfy the 
standard criteria and were present in the document. 
This should increase the chance that the distractors 
are semantically related and eliminate the chance 
that a testee will simply select as the correct an-
swer the word that appeared in the document they 
just read, without understanding the word meaning.  
4 Question Assessment 
The validity of the automatically generated vo-
cabulary questions was examined in reference to 
human-generated questions for 75 low-frequency 
English words. We compared student performance 
(accuracy and response time) on the computer and 
human-generated questions. We focused on the 
automatically generated multiple-choice questions, 
with distractors based on frequency and POS. We 
did not examine using more complicated strategies 
for picking distractors or assume there was an as-
sociated text. Four of the six computer-generated 
question types were assessed: the definition, syno-
nym, antonym, and cloze questions. Hypernym and 
hyponym questions were excluded, since we were 
unable to generate a large number of these ques-
tions for adjectives, which constitute a large por-
tion of the word list. Subject scores on the 
computer and human-generated assessments were  
compared with scores on standardized measures of 
reading and vocabulary skill, as described below. 
4.1 Question Coverage 
Potential experimental stimuli comprised 156 low-
frequency and rare English words that have been 
used in previous studies of vocabulary skill in na-
tive English-speaking adults. We first examined 
the percentage of words for which we could gener-
ate various question types. We were unable to gen-
erate any questions for 16 of these words, or ~9% 
of the list, since they were not in WordNet. Table 1 
shows the percentage of words for which each of 
the four question types was generated. All four 
questions were able to be generated for only 75 
(about half) of the words. Therefore, the experi-
mental word list included only these 75 items. 
Given the rarity of the words, we predicted that the 
percentage of words for which we could generate 
questions would be lower than average. However, 
we expected that the percentage of words for 
which we could generate synonym and antonym 
questions to be higher than average, due to the 
heavy focus on adjectives in this list. 
 
Question type Percentage of Questions 
Generated  
Definition Question 91% 
Synonym Question 80% 
Antonym Question 60% 
Cloze Question 60% 
Table 1. Question Coverage for the 156-Word List 
4.2 Experiment Design 
Behavioral measures of vocabulary knowledge 
were acquired for the 75 target words using the 
four computer-generated question types described 
above, as well as five human-generated question 
types. The human-generated questions were devel-
oped by a group of three learning researchers, 
without knowledge of the computer-generated 
question types. Researchers were asked merely to 
develop a set of question types that could be used 
to assess different levels, or different aspects, of 
word knowledge. Examples of each question type 
(including distractors) were hand-written for each 
of the 75 words. 
Two of the five human-generated assessments, 
the synonym and cloze questions, were similar in 
form to the corresponding computer-generated 
question types in that they had the same type of 
stem and answer. The other three human-generated 
questions included an inference task, a sentence 
completion task, and a question based on the Os-
good semantic differential (Osgood, 1970). In the 
inference task, participants were asked to select a 
context where the target word could be meaning-
fully applied. For example, the correct response to 
823
the question ?Which of the following is most likely 
to be lenitive?? was ?a glass of iced tea,? and dis-
tractors were ?a shot of tequila,? ?a bowl of rice,? 
and ?a cup of chowder.? In the sentence comple-
tion task, the participant was presented with a sen-
tence fragment containing the target word and was 
asked to choose the most probable completion. For 
example, the stem could be ?The music was so 
lenitive?,? with the correct answer ??it was 
tempting to lie back and go to sleep,? and with dis-
tractors such as ??it took some concentration to 
appreciate the complexity.? The fifth question type 
was based on the Osgood semantic differential, a 
factor-analytic model of word-level semantic di-
mensions (Osgood, 1970). Numerous studies using 
the Osgood paradigm have shown that variability 
in the semantic ?structure? of word meanings can 
largely be accounted for in terms of three dimen-
sions, valence (good?bad), potency (strong?weak), 
and activity (active?passive). In our version of the 
Osgood task, subjects were asked to classify a 
word such as ?lenitive? along one of these dimen-
sions (e.g., more good or more bad).  
In addition to the human-generated questions, 
we administered a battery of standardized tests, 
including the Nelson-Denny Reading Test, the Ra-
ven?s Matrices Test, and the Lexical Knowledge 
Battery. The Nelson-Denny Reading Test is a stan-
dardized test of vocabulary and reading compre-
hension (Brown, 1981). The Raven?s Matrices Test 
is a test of non-verbal reasoning (Raven, 1960). 
The Lexical Knowledge Battery has multiple sub-
sections that test orthographic and phonological 
skills (Perfetti and Hart, 2001).  
Twenty-one native-English speaking adults par-
ticipated in two experiment sessions. Session 1 
lasted for about one hour and included the battery 
of vocabulary and reading-related assessments de-
scribed above. Session 2 lasted between two and 
three hours and comprised 10 tasks, including the 
five human and four computer-generated ques-
tions. The experiment began with a confidence-
rating task, in which participants indicated with a 
key press how well they knew the meaning of each 
target word (on a 1?5 scale). This task was not 
speeded. For the remaining tasks, subjects were 
asked to respond ?as quickly as possible without 
making errors.? Test items for a given question 
type were answered together. The order of the 
tasks (question types) and the order of the 75 items 
within each task were randomized across subjects.  
4.3 Experiment Results 
We report on four aspects of this study: participant 
performance on questions, correlations between 
question types, correlations with confidence rat-
ings, and correlations with external assessments. 
Mean accuracy scores for each question type 
varied from .5286 to .6452. Performance on indi-
vidual words and across subjects (averaging across 
words) varied widely. The easiest question types 
(those with the highest average accuracy), were the 
computer-generated definition task and the human-
generated semantic differential task, both having 
mean accuracy scores of .6452. The hardest was 
the computer-generated cloze task, with a mean 
score of .5286. The accuracy on computer-
generated synonym and antonym questions fall 
between these two limits, with slightly greater ac-
curacy on the synonym type. This implies a gen-
eral ordering of difficulty from definition to cloze, 
as expected. The accuracies on the other human-
generated questions also fall into this range.  
We also computed correlations between the dif-
ferent question types. Mean accuracies were highly 
and statistically significantly correlated across the 
nine question types (r>.7, p<.01 for all correla-
tions). The correlation between participant accu-
racy on the computer-generated synonym and the 
human-generated synonym questions was particu-
larly high (r=.906), as was the correlation between 
the human and computer cloze questions (r= .860). 
The pattern of correlations for the response-time 
(RT) data was more complicated and is discussed 
elsewhere (Frishkoff et al In Prep). Importantly, 
RTs for the human versus computer versions of 
both the synonym and cloze questions were 
strongly correlated (r>.7, p<.01), just as for the 
accuracy results. The accuracy correlations imply 
that the computer-generated questions are giving a 
measure of vocabulary skill for specific words that 
correlates well with that of the human-generated 
questions.  
An item analysis (test item discrimination) was 
also performed. For each word, scores on a particu-
lar question type were compared with the compos-
ite test score for that word. This analysis revealed 
relatively low correlations (.12 < r < .25) between 
the individual question types and the test as a 
whole (without that question type). Since the ques-
tion types were designed to test different aspects of 
vocabulary knowledge, this result is encouraging.  
824
In addition, the average total-score correlations 
for the four computer-generated questions (r=.18) 
and for the five human-generated questions (r=.19) 
were not significantly different. This is positive, 
since it suggests that the human and computer-
generated vocabulary test are accounting for simi-
lar patterns of variance across the different ques-
tion types. 
The average correlation between accuracy on 
the question types and confidence ratings for a par-
ticular word was .265. This correlation was unex-
pectedly low. This may be because participants 
thought they knew these words, but were confused 
by their rarity, or because confidence simply does 
not correlate well with accuracy. Further work is 
needed to determine whether confidence ratings 
can be accurate predictors of vocabulary knowl-
edge. 
Finally, we examined correlations between par-
ticipant performance on the nine question types 
and the external assessments. The correlations be-
tween the accuracy on each of the nine question 
types and the Nelson-Denny vocabulary subtest 
were fairly high (.61 < r < .85, p=.01 for all com-
parisons). Thus, both the computer and human-
generated questions show good correspondence 
with an external assessment of vocabulary skill. 
Correlations between the accuracy on the question 
types and the Nelson-Denny reading comprehen-
sion test were mixed, showing a higher correlation 
with vocabulary than reading comprehension. Cor-
relations between the accuracy on the nine ques-
tion types and the Raven?s Matrices test of 
nonverbal reasoning were positive, but low and not 
statistically significant. This provides strong evi-
dence that the computer-generated vocabulary 
questions tap vocabulary knowledge specifically, 
rather than intelligence in general. 
5 Related Work 
Cloze tests are one area of related work. They were 
originally intended to measure text readability 
(Taylor, 1953) since native speakers should be able 
to reproduce certain removed words in a readable 
text. Other researchers have used it to assess read-
ing comprehension (Ruddell, 1964), with students 
filling in the blanks, given a high quality text. The 
main issue in automating the creation of cloze tests 
is determining which words to remove from the 
text. Coniam (1997) examined a several options for 
determining the words to remove and produced 
relatively good-quality cloze tests by removing 
words with the same POS or similar frequency.  
Wolfe (1976) automatically generated reading 
comprehension questions. This involved various 
techniques for rewriting sentences into questions, 
testing syntactic understanding of individual sen-
tences. Of the 50 questions Wolfe was able to gen-
erate for a single text, 34 were found to be 
satisfactory. More recently, Kunichika (2003) car-
ried out work in automatically generating reading 
comprehension questions that included both syn-
tactic and semantic questions, and was able to gen-
erate several different types of questions, including 
asking about the content of a sentence, using dic-
tionaries of synonyms and antonyms to generate 
questions such as ?Is Jane busy?? from sentences 
like ?Jane is free.?, and testing semantic under-
standing across sentence boundaries. Approx. 93% 
of the generated questions were found to be satis-
factory. 
Aist (2001) automatically generated factoids to 
assist students reading. The factoids gave a syno-
nym, an antonym, or a hypernym for the word, 
which were automatically extracted from Word-
Net. He also automated the creation of a single 
type of vocabulary question, with the target word 
in the stem and the correct answer a synonym, hy-
pernym, or sibling from WordNet. It is unclear 
what type of vocabulary knowledge this question 
would tap, given the different possible answers. 
6 Conclusions 
Extending our experiments to the question types 
that we have not yet assessed is an important next 
step. In addition, we want to assess questions indi-
vidually, evaluating their use of distractors. Fi-
nally, we need to assess questions generated on 
word lists with different characteristics. 
There are also a number of ongoing extensions 
to this project. One is the creation of new question 
types to test other aspects of word knowledge. An-
other is using other resources such as text collec-
tions to enable us to generate more questions per 
word, especially for the cloze questions. In addi-
tion, we are looking at ways to predict word 
knowledge using confidence ratings and morpho-
logical and semantic cohorts in situations where 
we cannot perform a standard assessment or cannot 
test all the vocabulary words we would like to. 
825
In this paper, we have described our work in 
automatically generating questions for vocabulary 
assessment. We have described the six types of 
computer-generated questions and the forms in 
which they appear. Finally, we have presented evi-
dence that the computer-generated questions give a 
measure of vocabulary skill for individual words 
that correlates well with human-written questions 
and standardized assessments of vocabulary skill. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank Jamie Callan and 
Kevyn Collins-Thompson for their help in this re-
search. The authors would also like to thank Eve 
Landen, Erika Taylor, and Charles Perfetti for their 
assistance with experimental stimuli and data col-
lection. This project is supported U.S. Department 
of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, 
Award #R305G030123, and the APA/IES Postdoc-
toral Education Research Training fellowship 
awarded by the Department of Education, Institute 
of Education Sciences, Grant #R305U030004. Any 
opinions, findings and conclusions or recommen-
dations expressed in this material are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of 
the U.S. Department of Education.  
References  
Gregory Aist. 2001. Towards automatic glossarization: 
automatically constructing and administering vo-
cabulary assistance factoids and multiple-choice as-
sessment, International Journal of AI in Ed., 2001.  
James Brown, J. M. Bennett, and Gerald Hanna. 1981. 
The Nelson-Denny Reading Test. Chicago: The Riv-
erside Publishing Company. 
Jonathan Brown and Maxine Eskenazi. 2004. Retrieval 
of Authentic Documents for Reader-Specific Lexical 
Practice. In Proceedings of InSTIL/ICALL Sympo-
sium 2004. Venice, Italy, 2004. 
Gavin Burnage. 1991. Text Corpora and the British Na-
tional Corpus. Computers & Texts 2, Nov, 1991.  
Kevyn Collins-Thompson and Jamie Callan. 2004. A 
language modeling approach to predicting reading 
difficulty. In Proceedings of the HLT/NAACL 2004 
Conference. Boston, 2004.  
David Coniam. 1997. A preliminary inquiry into using 
corpus word frequency data in the automatic genera-
tion of English language cloze tests. CALICO Jour-
nal, Volume 14, No. 2. 
Edgar Dale and Joseph O?Rourke. 1986. Vocabulary 
building. Columbus, Ohio: Zaner-Bloser. 
Christiane Fellbaum, Ed. 1998. WordNet. An electronic 
lexical database. Ed. by Christiane Fellbaum, preface 
by George Miller. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; 1998. 
Arthur C. Graesser, R. A. Wisher. 2001. Question Gen-
eration as a Learning Multiplier in Distributed 
Learning Environments. Army research inst for the 
behavioral and social sciences Alexandria VA. Re-
port number A654993, 2001. 
Adam Kilgarriff. 1995. 
http://www.itri.brighton.ac.uk/~Adam.Kilgarriff/bnc-
readme.html 
H. Kunichika, T. Katayama, T. Hirashima, and A. Ta-
keuchi. 2003. Automated question generation meth-
ods for intelligent English learning systems and its 
evaluation. Proceedings of ICCE2004, Hong Kong. 
G. Leech, R. Garside, and M. Bryant. 1994. CLAWS4: 
The tagging of the British National Corpus. In Proc. 
of 15th International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics, Kyoto, Japan, 622-628, 1994. 
W.E. Nagy, P.A. Herman, and R.C. Anderson. 1985. 
Learning words from context. Reading Research 
Quarterly, 20, 233-253. 
Paul Nation. 1990. Teaching and learning vocabulary. 
Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Charles E. Osgood, P. H. Tannenbaum, and G. J. Suci. 
1957. The Measurement of Meaning. Urbana: Uni-
versity of Illinois Press. 
Charles A. Perfetti, and Lesley Hart. 2001. The lexical 
quality hypothesis. In L. Verhoeven, C. Elbro & P. 
Reitsma (Eds.), Precursors of Functional Literacy 
(Vol. 11, pp. 67?86). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
J.C. Raven. 1960. Progressive matrices, standard. San 
Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.  
R. B. Ruddell. 1964. A study of the cloze comprehen-
sion technique in relation to structurally controlled 
reading material. Improvement of Reading Through 
Classroom Practice, 9, 298-303. 
Steven A. Stahl. 1986. Three principals of effective vo-
cabulary instruction. Journal of Reading, 29. 
W.L. Taylor. 1953. Cloze procedure: a new tool for 
measuring readability. Journalism Quarterly, 30. 
John H. Wolfe. 1976. Automatic question generation 
from text - an aid to independent study. ACM 
SIGCUE Bulletin, 2(1), 104-112. 
826
