             For foreigners kanji are very difficult to
learn, to memorize, to read and to write. To
make things worse, most teaching material on
Although nowadays kanji are very often
written with a word processor, it is still verythe world. In Japanese it is described as kanji
kanamajiri bun (  ), mean- 
ing that Japanese uses the originally Chinese
characters?kanji?together with kana, i.e.
hiragana and katakana, which are cursive or
shortened versions of former kanji and which
represent only the sounds of syllables. 
  
about 900 kanji (Monbush? 1958). Calligra-
phers stress, that these proposals often don?t
show the mainly used character forms or
stroke orders (Emori 2003: 8?16). 
 
3 Problem: Learning to Read and to 
Write Kanji
 The modern Japanese writing system is con-
sidered as one of the most complex ones in
instructions on the stroke order and the kanji
forms, that should be taught at school forBuilding a Graphetic Dictio
Character Look Up Based on Bru
the Display of Ka
Ulrich Apel
National Institute of Informatics
Hitotsubashi 2-1-2 Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 101-8430 
Japan
ulrich_apel@t-online.de
Abstract
Reading and writing Japanese isn?t easy for
Japanese and foreigners alike. While Japa-
nese learn these skills at school, foreigners
should be helped by good teaching material
and dictionaries.
Kanji lexica have to be very different from
other dictionaries. Unfortunately existing
lexica normally expect that the users already
have a lot of information on a character to
look it up?the character?s stroke count, its
radical or its pronunciation. Beginners nor-
mally don?t have such information. 
This project creates data to allow for eas-
ier and more flexible look up of Japanese
characters and to build better teaching mate-
rial. It develops different approaches to make
use of this data.
1 Introduction: Kanji as Main 
Obstacle for Learning Japanesenary for Japanese Kanji?
sh Strokes or Stroke Groups, and 
nji as Path Data 
Julien Quint 
National Institute of Informatics
Hitotsubashi 2-1-2 Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 101-8430 
Japan
quint@nii.ac.jp
kanji contains too little information on how
kanji are actually written. This concerns for
example correct stroke order, stroke direc-
tions, possible glyph variations or kanji com-
ponents. 
2 History of Kanji and Variations in 
Kanji Forms
Chinese characters were developed in the
second millennium before Christ. Kanji were
introduced in Japan in the fourth century AD.
There are kanji dictionaries with tens of
thousands of kanji, but in Japan there were
never more than about 6,000 in actual use.
Developments after WW II lead to a sepa-
ration of kanji forms in Japan, China, Taiwan
and Korea. Japan and even more mainland
China introduced shortened forms of kanji,
while e.g. Taiwan uses the traditional kanji.
The Japanese Ministry for Education se-
lected a number of around 2000 kanji for offi-
cial and general public use. It also published 
important to be able to write them by hand
too. 
For learners of Japanese writing kanji by
hand is still one of the best ways to memorize
them. To recognize Japanese handwriting one
has to identify the original strokes which are
often joined, seeming hardly to be individual
strokes. On computer screens strokes are also
often almost unrecognizable.
Most lexica don?t give information con-
cerning the stroke order, and if they do, they
only do so for a small number of characters.
Normal kanji lexica contain little material on
stroke forms and their variations in kanji
components. Ordinary paper lexica are of lit-
tle help if one is able to recognize only parts
of a kanji. One has to recognize the whole
kanji in order to be able to look it up.
4 Kanji Strokes, Stroke Groups and 
Path Data 
In this project, kanji are considered as
graphic information, hence, they are ana-
lysed in different ways. This new data is
combined with existing data. 
A very abstract and basic way to analyse
kanji consists in a graphetic approach which
leads to the recognition of graphemes.
Graphemes are the smallest meaning distin-
guishing units. In the case of kanji this can be
stroke length (as in  and  ), angle of the
stroke (as in  ,  and  ), stroke direction
(as in   and  ), or ending of a stroke (as in
 and  ).
A more concrete analysis which also takes
the act of writing into account would use
strokes as basic units of kanji. A stroke is a
graphical element that can be drawn e.g. with
a brush or a pencil without interruptions.
Most kanji consist of more than one stroke. 
Our analysis of strokes uses 25 basic
forms of brush strokes for kanji. It considers
stroke direction, bending of the strokes,
stroke endings (blunt or with a short bend)
and so on. The stroke forms are numbered    
and every stroke of a kanji is assigned with
the corresponding number of its stroke form.
Strokes can be grouped together not only
to build full kanji but also to combine smaller
units which frequently occur in kanji. We call
these smaller units grapheme elements. Many
kanji dictionaries use a subset of such graph-
eme elements to classify characters (  
bushu
 
, engl. ?radicals?). For the time being
our analysis of the grapheme elements uses
mostly existing kanji or given radicals.
The data concerning stroke forms, graph-
eme elements and relative position can, of
course, be used for kanji look up.
To display the collected information con-
cerning a kanji and its components, graphical
data is needed. This is achieved in our case
using a vector graphics software (Adobe Il-
lustrator). Here kanji strokes are represented
by paths. The stroke order is identical with
the order of the path input. 
To allow for later review and to have more
flexible data, numbers for the stroke order are
put beside the strokes. 
 
4.1 Possible Applications of the Data
 
The data presented here allows new ways to
look up kanji:
? Search for kanji by the form of their dif-
ferent strokes; 
? Input of stroke forms on the numbers
block of the keyboard in a matrix like
style;
? Search for strokes in the correct stroke or-
der;
? Search for grapheme elements: 
? Search for stroke forms, radicals and
grapheme elements according to there po-
sition.
The data allows new ways to display kanji: 
? Kanji can be build up according to their
stroke order. This could be used in dic- 
   tionaries or new teaching material (see
figure 1);
? Practising sheets to write kanji can be
generated automatically;
? Animation can be achieved automatically;
? Grapheme elements and stroke groups
can be highlighted (see figure 2) etc. 
4.2 An Example: Automatic Animation 
of Kanji Strokes
The path data created with Illustrator was ex-
ported into Scalable Vector Graphics format.
SVG is an application of XML proposed by
the World Wide Web Consortium. It provides
a clear description of the graphical data well
suited for the task at hand.
Figure 1: Building up a kanji by its strokes 
according to their stroke order 
Figure 2: Highlighting grapheme elements with 
coloursThe graphical description of a kanji con-
sists mostly of an ordered list of strokes. In
SVG, we represent a stroke by a path ele-
ment. For instance, the first stroke of the kanji
 ( kan , ?Han-China?) is: 
<path d="M21.38, 19.75, c3.31, 
1.47, 8.54, 6.05, 9.37, 8.34"/>
 
The d attribute of the path element contains
the path data in a compact form. This data is
a list of drawing commands that an SVG ren-
derer will execute to draw the path. The path
data for every stroke will consist of a se-
quence of B?zier curves, which are paramet-
ric curves defined by four control points.
Several paths can be grouped together un-
der a group element, which allows the associ-
ation of groups of paths (i.e., lists of strokes)
with every grapheme element of a kanji. It is
then possible to deal directly with grapheme
elements in the graphic representation of the
kanji, in order to highlight such elements (as
in figure 2) or to link them to other SVG
files?e.g. clicking on the left component of
 would link it to the kanji  ( mizu , ?wa- 
ter?), which is this component?s standard
form. 
The SVG data available so far is static.
Our goal is to present it in a dynamic fashion,
showing strokes one by one, in the order and
the direction in which they should be drawn.
We will add an animated child element to
every path in the static SVG file to create its
animated counterpart. The animate element
controls the moment at which the path is
drawn, and the shape it should take.
Unfortunately there is no special com-
mand in SVG to draw a path progressively. A
solution is to divide every path in several
smaller ones, and to draw each segment one
after another, giving the impression of an in-
visible pen drawing the kanji. Our division
strategy is to segment every curve in a path
into a fixed number of elements. That number
of element is set to a power of two, because
  
          dividing B?zier curves into two is very easy
to do. Longer strokes will consist of more
curves than shorter ones, and it will take more
to time to draw them; the distribution of the
control points along the curves makes the an-
imation look quite natural.
At the end, an animation is controlled by
two parameters: the number of segments into
which a curve is split and the time between
the drawing of two strokes. Modifying these
values will make the drawing slower or faster,
and more or less smooth.
The first stroke of our example kanji will
now look like shown below. The animation
will start at time 0; it lasts for 0.45 seconds
and it will iterate over the values given by the
value?s attribute. The d attribute in the path
parent element will take these successive val-
ues over time. 
<path d="">
<animate attributeName="d" 
begin="0" dur="0.45s" 
values="M21.38 19.75 C21.79 
19.93 22.23 20.16 22.69 20.43; 
M21.38 19.75 C21.79 19.93 22.23 
20.16 22.69 20.43 C23.16 20.7 
23.63 21.01 24.12 21.35;?"/>
</path>
4.3 Future Work
Based on the existing data, it is easy to de-
velop further data concerning variations in
stroke order or kanji form.
Especially the stroke descriptions could
be used for better graphical character recog-
nition. It may even lead to software that is
able to recognize incorrect input, and is capa-
ble of explaining the user how to correct it.
So far we deal only with Japanese kanji,
but, of course, the same approach could be
used for other characters like hiragana and
katakana or the traditional and the shortened
Chinese characters.   
5 Conclusion
Neither the analysis of kanji into strokes or
grapheme elements, nor animation of kanji
stroke order or the highlighting of grapheme
elements are totally new. 
The problem until now has been that for
each of these tasks one had to build new data
practically from scratch. This is the reason
why existing grapheme analysis, movie files
with animated strokes, or kanji graphics with
numbered strokes deal only with a few hun-
dred kanji (see some examples in the refer-
ences). In contrast our data cover already sev-
eral thousands of characters and glyph varia-
tions. Corresponding animations etc. can be
generated automatically. 
In sum, our data seem to be very adapta-
ble. They have the potential of being used for
a wide range of applications?many of which
we haven?t even thought of ourselves.
References 
Hadumod Bu?mann. 1990. Lexikon der
Sprachwissenschaft. Kr?ner, Stuttgart.
Emori Kenji. 2003. Kai gy? s??hitsujun jitai
jiten. Sanseido Tokyo.
Eduardo Fazzioli. 1987. Gemalte W?rter. 214
chinesische Schriftzeichen ? Vom Bild zum
Begriff. L?bbe, Bergisch Gladbach.
John Ferraiolo, Fujisawa Jun and Dean Jack-
son, editors. 2003. Scalable Vector Gra-
phics (SVG) 1.1 Specification. http://
www.w3.org/TR/SVG11/. 
Wolfgang Hadamitzky. 1995. Langenscheidts
Handbuch der japanischen Schrift ? Kanji
und Kana 1. Handbuch. Langenscheidt,
Berlin et al
K?dansha Encyclopedia of Japan. 1998.
K?dansha, Tokyo.
Monbush?. 1958. Hitsujun shid? no tebiki.
Hakubund?, Tokyo.
Berthold Schmidt. 1995. Einf?hrung in die
Schrift und Aussprache des Japanischen.
Buske, Hamburg. 
