Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 5?8,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
The MILE Corpus for Less Commonly Taught Languages 
 
Alison Alvarez, Lori Levin, Robert 
Frederking, Simon Fung, Donna 
Gates 
Language Technologies Institute 
5000 Forbes Avenue 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
[nosila, lsl, ref+, 
sfung, dmg] 
@cs.cmu.edu  
Jeff Good 
Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology 
Deutscher Platz 6 
04103 Leipzig 
good@eva.mpg.de 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes a small, struc-
tured English corpus that is 
designed for translation into Less 
Commonly Taught Languages 
(LCTLs), and a set of re-usable 
tools for creation of similar cor-
pora. 1  The corpus systematically 
explores meanings that are known to 
affect morphology or syntax in the 
world?s languages.  Each sentence 
is associated with a feature structure 
showing the elements of meaning 
that are represented in the sentence.   
The corpus is highly structured so 
that it can support machine learning 
with only a small amount of data.   
As part of the REFLEX program, 
the corpus will be translated into 
multiple LCTLs, resulting in paral-
lel corpora can be used for training 
of MT and other language technolo-
gies. Only the untranslated English 
corpus is described in this paper.  
 
1   Introduction 
 
Of the 6,000 living languages in the world 
only a handful have the necessary monolin-
gual or bilingual resources to build a 
working statistical or example-based ma-
chine translation system.  Currently, there 
                                                 
1 AVENUE/MILE is supported by the US Na-
tional Science Foundation NSF grant number 
IIS-0121-631 and the US Government?s 
REFLEX Program. 
are efforts to build language packs for Less 
Commonly Taught Languages (LCTLs).  
Each language pack includes parallel cor-
pora consisting of naturally occurring text 
translated from English into the LCTL or 
vice versa.  
This paper describes a small corpus 
that supplements naturally occurring text 
with highly systematic enumeration of 
meanings that are known to affect morphol-
ogy and syntax in the world?s languages.   
The supplemental corpus will enable the 
exploration of constructions that are sparse 
or obscured in natural data.  The corpus 
consists of 12,875 English sentences, total-
ing 76,202 word tokens.    
This paper describes the construc-
tion of the corpus, including tools and 
resources that can be used for the construc-
tion of similar corpora.   
 
2 Structure of the corpus 
 
| 247: John said "The woman is a teacher." 
| 248: John said the woman is not a teacher. 
| 249: John said "The woman is not a teacher." 
| 250: John asked if the woman is a teacher. 
| 251: John asked "Is the woman a teacher?" 
| 252: John asked if the woman is not a teacher. 
| ?
| 1488: Men are not baking cookies. 
| 1489: The women are baking cookies.
| ?
| 1537: The ladies' waiter brought appetizers. 
| 1538: The ladies' waiter will bring appetizers. 
Figure 1: A sampling of sentences from 
the complete elicitation corpus 
5
srcsent: Mary was not a doctor. 
context: Translate this as though it were spoken to a peer co-worker; 
 
((actor ((np-function fn-actor)(np-animacy anim-human)(np-biological-gender bio-gender-female) 
(np-general-type  proper-noun-type)(np-identifiability identifiable) 
 (np-specificity specific)?))     
(pred ((np-function fn-predicate-nominal)(np-animacy anim-human)(np-biological-gender bio-
gender-female) (np-general-type common-noun-type)(np-specificity specificity-neutral)?)) 
(c-v-lexical-aspect state)(c-copula-type copula-role)(c-secondary-type secondary-copula)(c-
solidarity solidarity-neutral) (c-power-relationship power-peer) (c-v-grammatical-aspect gram-
aspect-neutral)(c-v-absolute-tense past) (c-v-phase-aspect phase-aspect-neutral) (c-general-
type declarative-clause)(c-polarity polarity-negative)(c-my-causer-intentionality intentionality-
n/a)(c-comparison-type comparison-n/a)(c-relative-tense relative-n/a)(c-our-boundary boundary-
n/a)?) 
Figure 2:  An abridged feature structure, sentence and context field 
The MILE (Minor Language Elicitation) 
corpus is a highly structured set of English 
sentences.  Each sentence represents a 
meaning or combination of meanings that 
we want to elicit from a speaker of an 
LCTL.  For example, the corpus excerpts 
in Figure 1 explore quoted and non quoted 
sentential complements, embedded ques-
tions, negation, definiteness, biological 
gender, and possessive noun phrases.   
Underlying each sentence is a feature 
structure that serves to codify its meaning.  
Additionally, sentences are accompanied by 
a context field that provides information that 
may be present in the feature structure, but 
not inherent in the English sentence.  For 
example, in Figure 2, the feature structure 
specifies solidarity with the hearer and 
power relationship of the speaker and hearer, 
as evidenced by the features-value pairs (c-
solidarity solidarity-neutral) and (c-power-
relationship power-peer).  Because this is 
not an inherent part of English grammar, this 
aspect of meaning is conveyed in the context 
field.   
 
3 Building the Corpus 
 
Figure 3 shows the steps in creating the 
corpus.  Corpus creation is driven by a Fea-
ture Specification.  The Feature 
Specification defines features such as tense, 
person, and number, and values for each 
feature such past, present, future, remote 
past, recent past, for tense.  Additionally, 
the feature specification defines illegal com-
binations of features, such as the use of a 
singular number with an inclusive or exclu-
sive pronoun (We = you and me vs we = me 
and other people).  The inventory of fea-
tures and values is informed by typological 
studies of which elements of meaning are 
known to affect syntax and morphology in 
some of the world?s languages. The feature 
specification currently contains 42 features 
and 340 values and covers. In order to select 
the most relevant features we drew guidance 
from Comrie and Smith (1977) and Bouqui-
aux and Thomas (1992).  We also used the 
World Atlas of Language Structures 
(Haspelmath et al 2005) as a catalog of ex-
isting language features and their prevalence.  
In the process of corpus creation, feature 
structures are created before their corre-
sponding English sentences.   There are 
three reasons for this.  First, as mentioned 
above, the feature structure may contain 
elements of meaning that are not explicitly 
represented in the English sentence.  Sec-
ond, multiple elicitation languages can be 
generated from the same set of feature struc-
tures.  For example, when we elicit South 
American languages we use Spanish instead 
of English sentences.  Third, what we want 
to know about each LCTL is not how it 
translates the structural elements of English 
such as determiners and auxiliary verbs, but 
how it renders certain meanings such as 
6
List of semantic 
features and 
values 
The Corpus
Feature Maps:  which 
combinations of 
features and values 
are of interest 
Clause-
Level 
Noun-
Phrase
Tense &
Aspect Modality 
Feature Structure Sets
Feature 
Specification 
Reverse Annotated Feature Structure
Sets: add English sentences
Smaller   CorpusSampling
?
Figure 3: An overview of the elicitation corpus production process 
definiteness, tense, and modality, which are 
not in one-to-one correspondence with Eng-
lish words.    
Creation of feature structures takes place 
in two steps.  First, we define which com-
binations of features and values are of 
interest.  Then the feature structures are 
automatically created from the feature speci-
fication.    
Combinations of features are specified 
in Feature Maps (Figure 3).  These maps 
identify features that are known to interact 
syntactically or morphologically in some 
languages.  For example, tense in English 
is partially expressed using the auxiliary 
verb system.  An unrelated aspect of mean-
ing, whether a sentence is declarative or 
interrogative, interacts with the tense system 
in that it affects the word order of auxiliary 
verbs (He was running, Was he running), 
Thus there is an interaction of tense with 
interrogativity.   We use studies of lan-
guage typology to identify combinations of 
features that are known to interact.   
Feature Maps are written in a concise 
formalism that is automatically expanded 
into a set of feature structures.  For exam-
ple, we can formally specify that we want 
three values of tense combined with three 
values of person, and nine feature structures 
will be produced.  These are shown as Fea-
ture Structure Sets in Figure 3.   
 
 
4 Sentence Writing 
 
 As stated previously, our corpus 
consists of feature structures that have been 
human annotated with a sentence and con-
text field.  Our feature structures contain 
functional-typological information, but do 
not contain specific lexical items.  This 
means that our set of feature structures can 
be interpreted into any language using ap-
propriate word choices and used for 
elicitation.  Additionally, this leaves the 
human annotator with some freedom when 
selecting vocabulary items.  Due to feed-
back from previous elicitation subjects we 
chose basic vocabulary words while steering 
clear of overly primitive subject matter that 
may be seen as insulting.  Moreover, we 
did our best to avoid lexical gaps; for exam-
ple, many languages do not have a single 
word that means winner.   
7
 Translator accuracy was also an im-
portant objective and we took pains to 
construct natural sounding, unambiguous 
sentences.  The context field is used to 
clarify the sentence meaning and spell out 
features that may not manifest themselves in 
English. 
 
5 Tools 
 
 In conjunction with this project we 
created several tools that can be reused to 
make new corpora with other purposes. 
? An XML schema and XSLT can be used 
to make different feature specifications 
? A feature structure generator that can be 
used as a guide to specify and design 
feature maps 
? A feature structure browser can be used 
to make complicated feature structures 
easier to read and annotate 
 
6 Conclusion 
 
The basic steps for creating a func-
tional-typological corpus are: 
  
1. Combinations of features are selected 
2. Sets of feature structures representing all 
feature combinations are generated 
3. Humans write sentences with basic vo-
cabulary that represent the meaning in 
the feature structure 
4. If the corpus is too large, some or all of 
the corpus can be sampled 
 
We used sampling and assessments of 
the most crucial features in order to compile 
our corpus and restrict it to a size small 
enough to be translatable by humans.  As a 
result it is possible that this corpus will miss 
important feature combinations in some lan-
guages.  However, a corpus containing all 
possible combinations of features would 
produce hundreds of billions of feature 
structures.   
Our future research includes building a 
Corpus Navigation System to dynamically 
explore the full feature space.  Using ma-
chine learning we will use information de-
tected from translated sentences in order to 
decide what parts of the feature space are 
redundant and what parts must be explored 
and translated next. A further description of 
this process can be read in Levin et al 
(2006). 
Additionally, we will change from using 
humans to write sentences and context fields 
to having them generated by using a natural 
language generation system (Alvarez et al 
2005).   
We also ran small scale experiments to 
measure translator accuracy and consistency 
and encountered positive results. Hebrew 
and Japanese translators provided consistent, 
accurate translations.  Large scale experi-
ments will be conducted in the near future to 
see if the success of the smaller experiments 
will carry over to a larger scale. 
 
7 References 
 
Alvarez, Alison, and Lori Levin, Robert  
  Frederking, Jeff Good, Erik Peterson  
 September 2005, Semi-Automated Elicitation 
 Corpus Generation. In Proceedings of MT 
 Summit X, Phuket: Thailand. 
 
Bouquiaux, Luc and J.M.C. Thomas. 1992.  
Studying and Describing Unwritten Lan-
guages. Dallas, TX: The Summer Institute of 
Linguistcs. 
 
Comrie, Bernard and N. Smith. 1977.  
  Lingua descriptive series: Questionnaire. In:      
  Lingua, 42:1-72. 
 
Haspelmath, Martin and Matthew S. Dryer,     
  David Gil, Bernard Comrie, editors. 2005    
  World Atlas of Language Strucutures. Oxford  
  University Press. 
 
Lori Levin, Alison Alvarez, Jeff Good, and     
  Robert Frederking. 2006 "Automatic Learning    
  of Grammatical Encoding." To appear in Jane 
  Grimshaw, Joan Maling, Chris Manning, Joan    
  Simpson and Annie Zaenen (eds)  
  Architectures, Rules and Preferences: A  
  Festschrift for Joan Bresnan , CSLI Publica  
  tions.  In Press. 
 
8
