Unsupervised Discovery of Persian Morphemes  
Mohsen Arabsorkhi 
Computer Science and Engineering Dept., 
Shiraz University, 
Shiraz, Iran 
marabsorkhi@cse.shirazu.ac.ir
Mehrnoush Shamsfard 
Electrical and Computer Engineering Dept., 
Shahid Beheshti University, 
Tehran, Iran 
m-shams@sbu.ac.ir
Abstract 
This paper reports the present results of a 
research on unsupervised Persian mor-
pheme discovery. In this paper we pre-
sent a method for discovering the mor-
phemes of Persian language through 
automatic analysis of corpora. We util-
ized a Minimum Description Length 
(MDL) based algorithm with some im-
provements and applied it to Persian cor-
pus. Our improvements include enhanc-
ing the cost function using some heuris-
tics, preventing the split of high fre-
quency chunks, exploiting penalty for 
first and last letters and distinguishing 
pre-parts and post-parts. Our improved 
approach has raised the precision, recall 
and f-measure of discovery by respec-
tively %32, %17 and %23. 
1 Introduction 
According to linguistic theory, morphemes are 
considered to be the smallest meaning-bearing 
elements of a language. However, no adequate 
language-independent definition of the word as a 
unit has been agreed upon. If effective methods 
can be devised for the unsupervised discovery of 
morphemes, they could aid the formulation of a 
linguistic theory of morphology for a new lan-
guage. The utilization of morphemes as basic 
representational units in a statistical language 
model instead of words seems a promising 
course [Creutz, 2004].  
Many natural language processing tasks, includ-
ing parsing, semantic modeling, information re-
trieval, and machine translation, frequently re-
quire a morphological analysis of the language at 
hand. The task of a morphological analyzer is to 
identify the lexeme, citation form, or inflection 
class of surface word forms in a language. It 
seems that even approximate automated morpho-
logical analysis would be beneficial for many NL
applications dealing with large vocabularies (e.g. 
text retrieval applications). On the other hand, 
the construction of a comprehensive
morphological analyzer for a language based on
linguistic theory requires a considerable amount
of work by experts. This is both slow and 
expensive and therefore not applicable to all 
languages. Consequently, it is important to 
develop methods that are able to discover and
induce morphology for a language based on 
unsupervised analysis of large amounts of data. 
Persian is the most-spoken of the modern Iranian 
languages, which, according to traditional classi-
fication, with the Indo-Aryan language constitute 
the Indo-Iranian group within the Satem branch 
of the Indo-European family. Persian is written 
right-to-left in the Arabic alphabet with a few 
modifications. Three of 32 Persian letters do 
double duty in representing both consonant and 
vowels: /h/, /v/, /y/, doubling, as /e/ (word fi-
nally), /u/, and /I/ respectively [Mahootian 97]. 
Persian morphology is an affixal system consist-
ing mainly of suffixes and a few prefixes. The 
nominal paradigm consists of a relatively small 
number of affixes [Megerdoomian 2000]. The 
verbal inflectional system is quite regular and 
can be obtained by the combination of prefixes, 
stems, inflections and auxiliaries. Persian mor-
phologically is a powerful language and there are 
a lot of morphological rules in it. For example 
we can derive more than 200 words from the 
stem of the verb ?raftan? (to go). Table 1 shows 
some morphological rules and table 2 illustrates 
some inflections and derivations as examples.  
There is no morphological irregularity in Persian 
and all of the words are stems or derived words, 
except some imported foreign words, that are not 
compatible with Persian rules (such as irregular 
Arabic plural forms imported to Persian.) 
simple past verb past stem + identifier 
continuous present verb Mi+present stem+identifier 
Noun present stem +  (y)e? 
Table 1. Some Persian morphological rules. 
175
POS Persian Translation 
Verb Infinitive Nega?t?n to write 
Present Verb Stem Negar Write 
Past Verb Stem Nega?t wrote 
Continuous Present verb mi-negar-?m I am writing 
Simple Past verb nega?t-?m I wrote 
Noun from verb Neg?re? Writing 
Table 2. Some example words. 
2 Related Works 
There are several approaches for inducing mor-
phemes from text. Some of them are supervised 
and use some information about words such as 
part of speech (POS) tags, morphological rules, 
suffix list, lexicon, etc. Other approaches are un-
supervised and use only raw corpus to extract 
morphemes. In this section we concentrate on 
some unsupervised methods as related works. 
[Monson 2004] presents a framework for unsu-
pervised induction of natural language morphol-
ogy, wherein candidate suffixes are grouped into 
candidate inflection classes, which are then 
placed in a lattice structure. With similar ar-
ranged inflection classes placed near one candi-
date in the lattice, it proposes this structure to be 
an ideal search space in which to isolate the true 
inflection classes of a language. [Schone and Ju-
rafsky 2000] presents an unsupervised model in 
which knowledge-free distributional cues are 
combined orthography-based with information 
automatically extracted from semantic word co-
occurrence patterns in the input corpus.
Word induction from natural language text 
without word boundaries is also studied in 
[Deligne and Bimtol 1997], where MDL- based 
model optimization measures are used. Viterbi or 
the forward- backward algorithm (an EM algo-
rithm) is used for improving the segmentation of 
the corpus. Some of the approaches remove 
spaces from text and try to identify word bounda-
ries utilizing e.g. entropy- based measures, as in 
[Zellig and Harris, 1967; Redlich, 1993].  
[Brent, 1999] presents a general, modular prob-
abilistic model structure for word discovery. He 
uses a minimum representation length criterion 
for model optimization and applies an incre-
mental, greedy search algorithm which is suit-
able for on- line learning such that children 
might employ. 
[Baroni, et al 2002] proposes an algorithm 
that takes an unannotated corpus as its input, and 
a ranked list of probable returning related pairs 
as its output. It discovers related pairs by looking 
morphologically for pairs that are both ortho-
graphically and semantically similar. 
[Goldsmith 2001] concentrates on stem+suffix-
languages, in particular Indo-European lan-
guages, and produces output that would match as 
closely as possible with the analysis given by a 
human morphologist. He further assumes that 
stems form groups that he calls signatures, and 
each signature shares a set of possible affixes. He 
applies an MDL criterion for model optimiza-
tion.  
3 Inducing Persian Morphemes 
Our task is to find the correct segmentation of 
the source text into morphemes while we don?t 
have any information about words or any struc-
tural rules to make them. So we use an algorithm 
that works based on minimization of some heu-
ristic cost function. Our approach is based on a 
variation of MDL model and contains some 
modifications to adopt it for Persian and improve 
the results especially for this language.  
Minimum Description Length (MDL) analysis is 
based on information theory [Rissanen 1989]. 
Given a corpus, an MDL model defines a de-
scription length of the corpus. Given a probabil-
istic model of the corpus, the description length 
is the sum of the most compact statement of the 
model expressible in some universal language of 
algorithms, plus the length of the optimal com-
pression of the corpus, when we use the prob-
abilistic model to compress the data. The length 
of the optimal compression of the corpus is the 
base 2 logarithm of the reciprocal of the prob-
ability assigned to the corpus by the model. 
Since we are concerned with morphological 
analysis, we will henceforth use the more spe-
cific term the morphology rather than model. 
(1)
)|(log)(log
),(
22 MCpMp
MModelCCorpusnLengthDescriptio

 
MDL analysis proposes that the morphology M 
which minimizes the objective function in (1) is 
the best morphology of the corpus. Intuitively, 
the first term (the length of the model, in bits) 
expresses the conciseness of the morphology, 
giving us strong motivation to find the simplest 
possible morphology, while the second term ex-
presses how well the model describes the corpus 
in question.  
The method proposed at [Creutz 2002; 2004] is a 
derivation of MDL algorithm which we use as 
the basis of our approach. In this algorithm, each 
time a new word token is read from the input, 
different ways of segmenting it into morphs are 
evaluated, and the one with minimum cost is se-
lected. First, the word as a whole is considered to 
176
be a morph and added to the morph list. Then, 
every possible splits of the word into two parts 
are evaluated. The algorithm selects the split (or 
no split) that yields the minimum total cost. In 
case of no split, the processing of the word is 
finished and the next word is read from input. 
Otherwise, the search for a split is performed 
recursively on the two segments. The order of 
splits can be represented as a binary tree for each 
word, where the leaves represent the morphs 
making up the word, and the tree structure de-
scribes the ordering of the splits.  
During model search, an overall hierarchical data 
structure is used for keeping track of the current 
segmentation of every word type encountered so 
far. There is an occurrence counter field for each 
morph in morph list. The occurrence counts from 
segments flow down through the hierarchical 
structure, so that the count of a child always 
equals the sum of the counts of its parents. The 
occurrence counts of the leaf nodes are used for 
computing the relative frequencies of the 
morphs. To find out the morph sequence that a 
word consists of, we look up the chunk that is 
identical to the word, and trace the split indices 
recursively until we reach the leaves, which are 
the morphs. This algorithm was applied on Per-
sian corpus and results were not satisfiable. So 
we gradually, applied some heuristic functions to 
get better results. Our approach contains (1) Util-
izing a heuristic function to compute cost more 
precisely, (2) Using Threshold to prevent split-
ting high frequency chunks, (3) Exerting Penalty 
for first and last letters and (4) Distinguishing 
Pre-parts and post-parts. 
After analyzing the results of the initial algo-
rithm, we observed that the algorithm tries to 
split words into some morphemes to keep the 
cost minimum based on current morph list so 
recognized morphemes may prevent extracting 
new correct morphemes. Therefore we applied a 
new reward function to find the best splitting 
with respect to the next words. In fact our func-
tion (equation (2)) rewards to the morphemes 
that are used in next words frequently.  
(2)  }/)1)((*)({ WNLPlenLPfreqRF
          CWNRPlenRPfreq *}/)1)((*)({ 
In which LP is the left part of word, RP is the 
right part of it, Len (p) is the length of part P 
(number of characters), freq(p) is the frequency 
of part P in corpus, WN is the number of words 
(corpus size) and C is a constant number. 
In this cost function freq(LP)/WN can be inter-
preted as the probability of LP being a morph in 
the corpus. We use len(P) to increase the reward 
for long segments that are frequent and it is de-
creased by 1 to avoid mono-letter splitting. We 
found the parameter C empirically. Figure 1 
shows the results of the algorithm for various 
amounts of C.  
40
50
60
70
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Recall
Precision
f-measure
Figure 1. Algorithm results for various Cs. 
Our experiments showed that the best value for C 
is 8. It means that RP is 8 times more important 
that LP. This may be because of the fact that Per-
sian is written right-to-left and moreover most of 
affixes are suffixes. 
The final cost function in our algorithm is shown 
in equation (3). 
(3) RFEF ' 
In which E is the description length, calculated in 
equation (1) and RF the cost function described 
in equation (2). Since RF values are in a limited 
range, they are large numbers (in comparison 
with other function values) in the first iterations, 
but after processing some words, cost function 
values will become large so that the RF is not 
significant any more. So we used the difference 
of cost function in two sequential processes (two 
iterations) instead of the cost function itself. In 
other words in our algorithm the cost function 
(E) is re-evaluated and replaced with its changes 
(?E). This improvement causes better splitting in 
some words such as the words shown in table 3. 
(Each word is shown by its written form in Eng-
lish alphabet : its pronunciation (its translation)).    
word Initial alg.  Improved alg. 
?n: ?en (sand) ?n ?n
?nva: ?en?va 
(that can hear)
?n + va ?nv (hear) + 
 a (subjective 
adjective sign)
mi-?nvm: 
mi-?en?v?m 
(I hear)
mi (continuous 
tense sign) + 
?n + v + m
mi + ?nv + m 
(first person 
pronoun)
Table 3. Comparing the results of the initial and  
               improved algorithm. 
We also used a frequency threshold T to avoid 
splitting words that are observed as a substring in 
other words. It means that in the current algo-
rithm, for each word we first compute its fre-
quency and it will be splitted just when it is used 
177
less than the threshold. Based on our experi-
ments, the best value for T is 4.One of the most 
wrong splitting is mono-letter splitting which 
means that we split just the first or the last letter 
to be a morpheme. Our experiments show that 
the first letter splitting occurs more than the last 
letter. So we apply a penalty factor on splitting in 
these positions to avoid creating mono-letter 
morphemes.  
Another improvement is that we distinguished 
between pre-part and post-part. So splitting 
based on observed morphemes will become more 
precise. In this process each morpheme that is 
observed at the left corner of a word, in the first 
splitting phase, is post-part and each of them at 
the right corner of a word is pre-part. Other mor-
phemes are added to both pre and post-part lists. 
4 Experimental Results 
We applied improved algorithm on Persian cor-
pus and observed significant improvements on 
our results. Our corpus contains about 4000 
words from which 100 are selected randomly for 
tests. We split selected words to their morphemes 
both manually and automatically and computed 
precision and recall factors. For computing recall 
and precision, we numerated splitting positions 
and compared with the gold data. Precision is the 
number of correct splits divided to the total num-
ber of splits done and recall is the number of cor-
rect splits divided by total number of gold splits. 
Our experiments showed that our approach re-
sults in increasing the recall measure from 45.53 
to 53.19, the precision from 48.24 to 63.29 and f-
measure from 46.91 to 57.80. Precision im-
provement is significantly more than recall. This 
has been predictable as we make algorithm to 
prevent unsure splitting. So usually done splits 
are correct whereas there are some necessary 
splitting that have not been done. 
5 Conclusion 
In this paper we proposed an improved approach 
for morpheme discovery from Persian texts. Our 
algorithm is an improvement of an existing algo-
rithm based on MDL model. The improvements 
are done by adding some heuristic functions to 
the split procedure and also introducing new cost 
and reward functions. Experiments showed very 
good results obtained by our improvements. 
The main problems for our experiments were the 
lack of good, safe and large corpora and also 
handling the foreign words which do not obey 
the morphological rules of Persian.
Our proposed improvements are rarely language-
dependent (such as right-to-left feature of Per-
sian) and could be applied to other languages 
with a little customization. To extend the project 
we suppose to work on some probabilistic distri-
bution functions which help to split words cor-
rectly. Moreover we plan to test our algorithm on  
large Persian and also English corpora. 
References 
Marco Baroni, Johannes Matiasek, Harald Trost 2002. 
Unsupervised discovery of morphologically related 
words based on orthographic and semantic similar-
ity, ACL Workshop on Morphological and 
Phonological Learning.
Michael R. Brent. 1999. An efficient, probabilistically 
sound algorithm for segmentation and word dis-
covery, Machine Learning, 34:71?105. 
Mathias Creutz, Krista Lagus, 2002. Unsupervised 
discovery of morphemes. Workshop on Morpho-
logical and Phonological Learning of ACL?02, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA, 21?30. 
Mathias Creutz, Krista Lagus, 2004. Induction of a 
simple morphology for highly inflecting languages. 
Proceedings of 7th Meeting of SIGPHON, Bar-
celona. 43?51 
S. Deligne and F. Bimbot. 1997. Inference of vari-
able-length linguistic and acoustic units by multi-
grams. Speech Communication, 23:223?241. 
John Goldsmith, 2001. Unsupervised learning of the 
morphology of a natural language, Computational 
Linguistics, 27(2): 153?198 
Zellig. Harris, 1967. Morpheme Boundaries within 
Words: Report on a Computer Test. Transforma-
tions and Discourse Analysis Papers, 73.
Shahrzad Mahootian, 1997. Persian, Routledge. 
Karine Megerdoomian, 2000 Persian Computational 
Morphology: A unification-based approach, 
NMSU, CLR, MCCS Report. 
Christian Monson. 2004. A Framework for Unsuper-
vised Natural Language Morphology Induction, 
The Student Workshop at ACL-04. 
A. Norman Redlich. 1993. Redundancy reduction as a 
strategy for unsupervised learning. Neural Com-
putation, 5:289?304. 
Jorma Rissanen 1989, Stochastic Complexity in 
Statistical Inquiry, World Scientific. 
P. Schone and D. Jurafsky. 2000. Knowldedge-free 
induction of morphology using latent semantic 
analysis, Proceedings of the Conference on 
Computational Natural Language Learning.
178
