Handling Figures in Document Summarization 
 
Robert P. Futrelle  
Biological Knowledge Laboratory 
College of Computer & Information Science WVH202 
Northeastern University 
Boston, MA 02115, USA 
futrelle@ccs.neu.edu 
  
           
 
  
    Abstract  
  Some document genres contain a large number of 
figures.  This position paper outlines approaches to 
diagram summarization that can augment the many 
well-developed techniques of text summarization.  
We discuss figures as surrogates for entire docu-
ments, thumbnails, extraction, the relations between 
text and figures as well as how automation might be 
achieved.  The focus is on diagrams (line drawings) 
because they allow parsing techniques to be used, in 
contrast to the difficulties of general image under-
standing. We describe the advances in raster image 
vectorization and parsing needed to produce cor-
pora for diagram summarization. 
1 Introduction 
Many documents contain figures, both images and 
line drawings (diagrams).  The Biology literature, 
the focus of our group's work, is replete with fig-
ures.  A surprising 50% of the typical Biology pa-
per is figure-related (see Appendix A). A million 
or so Biology papers are published each year, most 
with abstracts.  But given their high figural con-
tent, work on diagram summarization could also 
be quite useful.  This is a position paper that ex-
plores this topic, outlining a variety of approaches 
to the construction of automated diagram summa-
rization systems.  System building and use awaits 
the creation of the requisite corpora, as explained 
in the next section.  This paper builds on our ear-
lier, more lengthy work, extending it in various 
ways (Futrelle, 1999). 
 
2 The Current State of the Diagrams 
Field 
Automated text summarization has at its disposal, 
electronic documents that allow the use of all the 
techniques of computational linguistics.  Dia-
grams in documents are in a more primitive state.  
The overwhelming majority of diagrams avail-
able in the electronic forms of the research litera-
ture today are in raster format.  What is needed 
are diagrams in vector format in which an object 
such as a line is represented not by pixels, but as 
a line object defined by its endpoints and width.  
We found only 52 pages containing vector-based 
diagrams in a collection of 20,000 recent Biology 
papers in PDF format (Futrelle, Shao, Cieslik, & 
Grimes, 2003).  Vectorization converts raster dia-
grams to vector format, much as OCR converts 
rasters to characters.  But the resulting vectorized 
diagram is an unordered collection of objects in a 
two dimensional space.  An additional analysis 
step of parsing is required.  Our system for pars-
ing diagrams (Futrelle &  Nikolakis, 1995) pro-
duces descriptions for a data graph, for example, 
by discovering structures such as scale lines and 
sets of data points. 
     There appear to be no non-proprietary vectori-
zation systems that are up to the task of vectoriz-
ing the diagrams from the scientific literature, so 
our group is currently focused on developing a 
system for this in Java. We are also redeveloping 
our parsing system in Java.  Until this work is 
completed, there will be few diagrams available 
for the application of diagram summarization 
techniques.  This notwithstanding, diagram sum-
marization is an interesting and ultimately impor-
tant task, which is why we are discussing it here.  
This work is part of our laboratory's long-term ef-
fort to characterize the conceptual content of the 
Biology literature, including the text and figural 
content. 
 
3 Figures as Surrogate Documents 
Some time ago, when Lesk asked chemists what 
two parts of Chemistry papers would be most in-
formative, they said they would like to know the 
names of the authors and to see the figures (Mi-
chael Lesk, personal communication).  
Recently, journals are beginning to implement 
approaches in this spirit.  The Journal of Proteome 
Research lists in the table of contents, in both the 
print and online editions, an entry for each paper 
that includes the title, authors, abstract and one 
uncaptioned figure from the paper, typically in 
color. Science and Nature also include some fig-
ures in their contents pages.  The new open-access 
journal, PLoS Biology, offers five ?Views? of a 
paper: HTML, Tables, Figures, Print PDF and 
Screen PDF.  The Figures View is an HTML slide 
show of the figures, each including a large version 
of the figure, the caption and the article citation.  
Figure Views represent a new and important 
type of summary of entire articles, allowing the 
rapid browsing that such visual displays provide.  
One can imagine that authors will adapt to this new 
mode, packing the major content of their papers 
into the figures and captions, reducing the need to 
read the full text.   
 
4 Thumbnail Images are Summaries 
Thumbnails are images that have been reduced in 
size and/or cropped to a smaller size.  Shrinking an 
entire image so that it acts as a summary is an ana-
log operation that has no parallel in text.  For some 
images, shrinking them too much can produce an 
illegible result, a practice that has been roundly 
criticized (item 4 in Nielsen, 2003); cropped im-
ages may be useful in such cases. 
An example of cropping two very large images 
resulting in informative thumbnails appears in the 
Figure Gallery item on our site, 
http://diagrams.org/fig?pages/f00022.htm. 
The thumbnails are reproduced here in Figures 1 
and 2.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1:A full-scale analog extract  (1% of the origi-
nal) of the "classic" London Underground map.  This 
is an informative summary with respect to the map 
style, but is only indicative of the full map. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: The same type of summary extract, except 
that it is taken from a geographically correct view of 
the same section of the Underground as shown in 
Fig. 1. 
 
 
5 Extraction for Summarization 
One of the most important techniques used in text 
summarization, is extraction, typically the extrac-
tion of carefully chosen whole sentences.  A simi-
lar approach can be used for diagram 
summarization, but some thought needs to be 
given to what the sentence-like elements in dia-
grams might be.  It is not difficult to give exam-
ples of diagram extraction, but automating it is 
difficult. 
 
 
 
Figure 3 : A typical diagram that allows summarization 
by extraction. From (Holtzendorff, 2004).  In this case, 
retention of one of the two bar graphs in A, one of the 
four rows in B and all of C would result in a modest, 
indicative summary of the three-part figure.  The keys at 
the bottom of part A would have to be retained. 
 
Fig. 3: from an issue of Science, is typical of dia-
grams that appear in the Biology research litera-
ture. The extraction suggested in our caption picks 
one item from each of two sets of similar items to 
produce and indicative summary. 
 
6 Diagram-Related Text 
It might be argued that the most salient content of 
documents with figures can be found in the text; 
that the figures are redundant, merely ?illustra-
tive?.  This is often not the case. There are queries 
to documents that cannot be answered based on the 
content of the text or diagrams considered sepa-
rately (Futrelle & Rumshisky, 2001).  In Biology it 
is not unusual for a caption to explain only the 
methods used to produce the data shown. 
The independent contribution of diagram con-
tent to a paper is often signaled by cue phrases.  
In referring to data graphs, phrases such as 
?shows a significant difference? or ?are similar? 
or ?a pronounced effect? require that the reader 
examine the data shown in the figure in order to 
understand what the phrases refer to. 
Fig. 4 (Nijhout, 2003) appeared in the popular 
scientific journal, American Scientist, and is more 
carefully explained than most.  The Fig. 4 caption 
text illustrates some limitations of captions.  For 
example, the phrase, ?The possible combina-
tions? does not spell out what combinations are 
possible or are illustrated.  The reader must study 
the figure to discover that there are in fact three 
distinct combinations. 
 
Figure 4: The original caption for this figure, with 
bolding added, was: " Enzyme activity is a function of 
allele identity. In this example, the allele A encodes an 
enzyme that has three times greater activity than the 
enzyme encoded by allele a. The possible combina-
tions of A and a in an individual yield a wide range of 
overall activity levels."  
 
The references to A and a in Fig. 4, are deictic 
references, pointing to objects visible in the con-
text, in the figure. In ordinary conversation, such 
a reference would point to some physical object 
in the view of the listener. 
A summarization of Figure 4 should include 
the entire diagram.  The last sentence of the cap-
tion would be a suitable summary of the caption. 
The non-caption text and the text within fig-
ures play important roles and need to be taken 
into account in any attempt to produce a sum-
mary.  Space precludes further discussion of 
these.  
 
7 Prospects for Automation 
Some degree of summarization might be possible 
based entirely on the classes of the diagrams or 
subdiagrams in a paper.  We have been able to lo-
cate subdiagrams in vector-based diagrams in 
PDFs and successfully classify them using Support 
Vector Machines (Futrelle, Shao, Cie slik, & 
Grimes, 2003). 
But any more detailed summarization decisions 
would require parsed representations of the dia-
grams.  For example, our parser can discover and 
analyze the two bar charts in Fig. 3, allowing a 
system to extract only one of them, though without 
any knowledge as to which is the most salient.  
The parser can also locate keys, such as the ones in 
Fig. 3, so they can be extracted also. Standard 
strategies from text summarization, such as ex-
tracting the diagrams most often referred to, dia-
grams appearing near the beginning and end of a 
paper, etc., are all possible. Clearly, automation of 
diagram summarization presents a new set of chal-
lenges and is no easier than text summarization. 
Large scale evaluation of diagram summariza-
tion will offer its own challenges, cf. text summa-
rization evaluation (Radev et al, 2003). 
 
 
8 Related Work 
Automated text summarization has advanced sub-
stantially in the last decade. See for example, the 
major collection of papers, (Mani & Maybury, 
1999) and the special journal issue (Radev, Hovy, 
& McKeown, 2002).  Reviews include (Hovy, 
2002; Marcu, 2003). A recent useful monograph is 
(Mani, 2001). Another recent work is (Barzilay, 
2003), focused on mult idocument summarization 
and going beyond sentence extraction to consider 
phrases. 
Paradoxically, work on the summarization of 
scientific articles is inhibited by the fact that virtu-
ally all scientific articles have abstracts as a sta n-
dard component.  But there are other tasks such as 
developing user-tailored summaries (Teufel & 
Moens, 2002).  
The generation of coordinated explanations in-
volving text and graphics offers insight into the 
relations between them (Feiner & McKeown, 
1990).  This task involves dealing with the internal 
structure of diagrams, as do problems of image 
retrieval, which can be aided by developing ontol-
ogy-based descriptions of the images (Hyv?nen, 
Styrman, & Saarela, 2002). 
Diagrams form a part of a coordinated dis-
course, so that diagram summarization can profit 
from the work done on text summarization that 
focuses on discourse structure.  Examples of dis-
course-related approaches include (Boguraev & 
Neff, 2000; Marcu, 1997a, 1997b; Teufel & 
Moens, 2002). 
9 Conclusions  
Document summarization including diagrams 
seems both possible and desirable. Work in this 
area is waiting on the development of a corpus of 
parsed object-based diagrams.  The vectorization 
and parsing systems required are under develop-
ment. 
 
10 Acknowledgements 
This material is based upon work supported by 
the National Science Foundation under Grants 
No. DBI-0211047 and IIS-9978004 and the 
Northeastern University Institute for Complex 
Scientific Software, 
http://www.icss.neu.edu/. 
References  
Barzilay, R. (2003). Information Fusion for Mut-
lidocument Summarization: Paraphrasing and 
Generation. Unpublished PhD, Columbia Uni-
versity. 
Boguraev, B. K., & Neff, M. S. (2000). Discourse 
segmentation in aid of document summariza-
tion. In Proceedings of the 33rd Hawaii Inte r-
national Conference on System Sciences, page 
10. 
Feiner, S. K., & McKeown, K. R. (1990). Coor-
dinating text and graphics in explanation 
generation. In AAAI 90, pages 442-449. 
Futrelle, R. P., & Nikolakis, N. (1995). Efficient 
analysis of complex diagrams using constraint-
based parsing. In ICDAR-95  (Intl. Conf. on 
Document Analysis & Recognition), pages 
782-790,   Montreal, Canada. 
Futrelle, R. P. (1999). Summarization of dia-
grams in documents. In I. Mani & M. Maybury 
(Eds.), Advances in Automated Text Summari-
zation, pages 403-421. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. 
Futrelle, R. P., & Rumshisky, A. (2001). Discourse 
structure of text-graphics documents. In 1st In-
ternational Symposium on Smart Graphics. 
Hawthorne, NY: ACM. 
Futrelle, R. P., Shao, M., Cieslik, C., & Grimes, A. 
E. (2003). Extraction, layout analysis and classi-
fication of diagrams in PDF documents. In 
ICDAR 2003 (Intl. Conf. Document Analysis & 
Recognition, pages 1007-1014,  IEEE Computer 
Society, Edinburgh, Scotland.  
Holtzendorff, J., Hung, D., Brende, P., Reisenauer, 
A., Viollier, P. H., McAdams, H. H., et al 
(2004). Oscillating global regulators control the 
genetic circuit driving a bacterial cell cycle. Sci-
ence, 304, 983-987.
Hyv?nen, E., Styrman, A., & Saarela, S. (2002). 
Ontology-based image retrieval. In Towards the 
semantic web and web services, Proceedings of 
XML Finland 2002 Conference, pages 15-27. 
Mani, I. (2001). Automatic Summarization. John 
Benjamins, Amsterdam. 
Mani, I., & Maybury, M. T. (Eds.). (1999). Ad-
vances in Automatic Text Summarization. MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Marcu, D. (1997a). From discourse structures to 
text summaries. In I. Mani & M. Maybury 
(Eds.), Workshop on Intelligent Scalable Text 
Summarization, pages 82-88, ACL, Madrid.  
Marcu, D. (1997b). The Rhetorical Parsing, Sum-
marization, and Generation of Natural Lan-
guage Texts. Unpublished Ph.D., U. Toronto, 
Toronto. 
Marcu, D. (2003). Automatic abstracting. Encyclo-
pedia of Library and Information Science, pages 
245-256. 
Nielsen, J. (2003). Jakob Nielsen ?s Alertbox, De-
cember 22, 2003: Top Ten Web Design Mistakes 
of 2003. Retrieved May 15, 2004, from 
http://www.useit.com/alertbox/20031222.html 
Nijhout, H. F. (2003). The importance of context in 
genetics. American Scientist, 91(5): 416-423. 
Radev, D. R., Hovy, E., & McKeown, K. (2002). 
Introduction to the special issue on summariza-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 28(4): 399-
408   
Radev, D. R., Lam, W., Celebi, A., Teufel, S., 
Blitzer, J., Liu, D., et al (2003). Evaluation 
challenges in large-scale multi-document sum-
marization. In ACL-2003, pages 375-382. 
Teufel, S., & Moens, M. (2002). Summarizing 
scientific articles: Experiments with relevance 
and rhetorical status. Computational Linguis-
tics, 28(4): 409-445. 
 
 
Appendix A: 50% of the Content of Biology 
Papers is Figure -Related 
 
We arrived at the 50% figure by sampling a vari-
ety of recent papers in journals including Science, 
Nature, PNAS (USA).  The column-inches occu-
pied by figures in the hardcopy or equivalent 
PDF versions of the papers were measured and 
compared to the total column-inches, omitting the 
title, abstract and references.  Word counts of the 
captions and direct running text reference sen-
tences were estimated, e.g., ?Fig. 3 shows ...?. 
Then estimates were made of the sentences that 
indirectly discussed the figures, often the sen-
tences immediately following direct reference 
sentences and containing  anaphoric and definite 
noun phrase references to the figures, often in 
deictic form.  The total of the figure and figure 
reference content consistently amounted to about 
50% of the papers sampled. 
 
