A Qualitative Comparison of Scientific and Journalistic Texts from the 
Perspective of Extracting Definitions 
Igal Gabbay 
Documents and Linguistic  
Technology Group 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Limerick 
Limerick, Ireland 
Igal.Gabbay@ul.ie 
Richard F. E. Sutcliffe 
Documents and Linguistic  
Technology Group 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Limerick 
Limerick, Ireland 
Richard.Sutcliffe@ul.ie 
 
Abstract 
In this paper we highlight a selection of 
features of scientific text which distinguish it 
from news stories. We argue that features such 
as structure, selective use of past tense, voice 
and stylistic conventions can affect question 
answering in the scientific domain. We 
demonstrate this through qualitative 
observations made while working on 
retrieving definitions to terms related to 
salmon fish. 
1 Introduction 
An information retrieval system informs on the 
existence (or non-existence) and whereabouts of 
documents relating to the request of a user 
(Lancaster, 1968). On the other hand, a question 
answering (QA) system allows a user to ask a 
question in natural language and receive a concise 
answer, possibly with a validating context 
(Hirschman and Gaizauskas, 2001). 
Questions asking about definitions of terms (i.e., 
?What is X??) occur frequently in the query logs of 
search engines (Voorhees, 2003). However, due to 
their complexity, recent work in the field of 
question answering has largely neglected them and 
concentrated instead on answering factoid 
questions for which the answer is a single word or 
short phrase (Blair-Goldensohn et al, 2003). Much 
of this work has been motivated by the question 
answering track of the Text REtrieval Conference 
(TREC), which evaluates systems by providing 
them with a common challenge.  
In a recent project inspired by our experiences in 
TREC (Sutcliffe et al, 2003), a system was built 
for extracting definitions of technical terms from 
scientific texts. The topic was salmon fish biology, 
a very different one from that of news articles. 
What, then, is the effect of domain on the 
applicability of QA? In this paper we attempt to 
answer this question, focusing on definitions and 
drawing on our findings from previous projects. 
 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: 
First, we review recent related work. Second, we 
summarise the objectives, methods and findings of 
the SOK-I QA project, named after the sockeye 
salmon. Third, we compare the characteristics of 
scientific text with those of newspaper articles 
illustrating our points with examples from our 
SOK-I collection as well from the New York 
Times, CLEF 1994 Los Angeles Times collection 
and AQUAINT corpus. Fourth, we discuss the 
implications that these have for definitional QA. 
Finally, we draw conclusions from the study. 
2 Recent Related Work 
Zweigenbaum (2003) describes biomedicine as a 
specialised domain and argues that it is not 
necessarily simpler than an open domain as is 
sometimes assumed. He identifies the following 
characteristics: 
 
? A  highly specialised language for both queries 
and articles; 
? A potential difference in technical level 
between user questions and target documents; 
? A problem concerning the variable (and 
possibly unknown) reliability of source 
documents and hence that of answers drawn 
from them; 
? A potential for using a taxonomy of general 
clinical questions to route queries to 
appropriate knowledge resources.  
The gap in technical level between non-expert 
users and target documents is addressed by 
Klavans and Muresan (2001). Their system, 
DEFINDER, mines consumer-oriented full text 
medical articles for terms and their definitions.  
The usefulness and readability of the definitions 
retrieved by DEFINDER were both rated by non-
experts as being significantly higher than those of 
online dictionaries. However, Klavans and 
Muresan do not focus specifically on the 
characteristics of the source documents in their 
domain. 
The view of Teufel and Moens (2002) that 
summarization of scientific articles requires a 
different approach from the one used in 
summarization of news articles may perhaps apply 
to QA. The innovation of their work is in defining 
principles for content selection specifically for 
scientific articles. As an example they observe that 
information fusion (the comparison of results from 
different sources to eliminate mis-information and 
minimize the loss of data caused by unexpected 
phrasing) will be inefficient when summarizing 
scientific articles, because new ideas are usually 
the main focus of scientific writing, whereas in the 
news domain events are frequently repeated over a 
short time.  
The lack of redundancy as a feature of technical 
domains is also mentioned by Moll? et al (2003). 
They argue that because of this and the limited 
amount of text, data-intensive approaches, which 
are often used in TREC, do not work well in 
technical domains. Instead, intensive NLP 
techniques are required.  They also mention formal 
writing and the use of technical terms not defined 
in standard lexicons as additional features.  
3 Answering Definition Questions Related to 
Salmon (the SOK-I Project) 
Many of the observations in this paper are based 
on a recent study concerned with answering 
definition related to salmon (Gabbay, 2004). While 
a full treatment of the work falls outside the scope 
of this paper, we summarise  the key points here. 
The objectives of the project were: 
 
? To test the effectiveness of lexical patterns 
without deep linguistic knowledge in capturing 
definitions in scientific papers; 
? To discover simple features which indicate 
sentences containing definitions; 
? To study the stylistic characteristics of 
definitions retrieved from scientific text. 
We chose the terminology-rich field of salmon 
fish biology as the research domain. A collection 
of 1,000 scientific articles (Science Direct, 2003) 
matching the keyword ?salmon? was used as the 
source of definitions. Most of the documents were 
in agricultural and biological sciences. Each 
sentence in the articles was indexed as a separate 
document. 
A system was then developed which could take 
as input a term (e.g. ?smolt?) and carry out the 
following steps: 
 
1. Retrieve all sentences in the collection 
containing the term; 
2. Extract any portions of these which 
matched a collection of syntactic patterns. 
 
The patterns used were similar to the ones used 
by Hearst (1992), Joho and Sanderson (2000) and 
Liu et al (2003) to retrieve hyponyms from an 
encyclopedia, descriptive phrases from news 
articles and definitions from Web pages, 
respectively.   
To evaluate the system four test collections of 
terms were used: 42 terms which were suggested 
by salmon researchers, and three collections 
containing 3,920, 2,000 and 1,120 terms 
respectively. The latter were extracted from a 
database on the Web called FishBase (2003). For 
each collection, the output corresponding to a term 
was inspected manually and each phrase matching 
a pattern was judged to be either Vital, Okay, 
Uncertain or Wrong.  
While a complete discussion of the results and 
methods used to obtain them can be found in 
Gabbay (2004), the main quantitative finding of 
the project was that techniques adopted could 
achieve a Recall of up to 60%. 
Drawing from our experiences in SOK-I and 
TREC, we turn in the next section to some specific 
observations regarding differences between salmon 
biology texts and newspaper articles. 
4 Scientific and Journalistic Texts Compared 
4.1 Outline 
From our QA studies in the salmon biology field 
as well as experiences with news articles in TREC 
and CLEF, many interesting differences between 
these areas have come to light which we 
summarise here. The comparison is divided into 
six features: structure, tense, voice, references, 
terminology and style. 
4.2 Structure 
Scientific articles normally follow the structure 
known as IMRAD (Introduction, Methods, Results, 
and Discussion). This is the most common 
organisation of scientific papers that report original 
research (Day, 1998).  For example, the guidelines 
to authors submitting papers to the journal 
Aquaculture (Elsevier Author Guide, 2003) specify 
the following required sections: Abstract, 
Keywords, Introduction, Methods and Materials, 
Results, Discussion, Conclusion, Acknowledg-
ments and References.  
The structure of a news story is often described 
as an inverted pyramid, with the most essential 
information at the top (Wikipedia, 2004).  The 
most important element is called the lead and is 
comparable to the abstract of scientific articles but 
limited to one or two sentences (leads are often 
absent in longer feature articles).  
The introduction of a scientific paper on the 
other hand often begins with general statements 
about the significance of the topic and its history in 
the field; the ?news? is generally given later (Teufel 
and Moens, 2002). 
4.3 Tense 
In scientific writing it is customary to use past 
tense when reporting original work and present 
tense when describing established knowledge 
(Day, 1998). For example, the following sentence 
reports an accepted fact:  
 
?The idea behind using short-term temperature 
manipulations to mark juvenile fish otoliths is 
to alter the appearance of D- and L-zones in one 
or more increments to produce an obvious 
pattern of events.?  (SD-1) 
Contrast this with the sentence  
 
?Otoliths (sagittal otoliths) were taken from 
each fish in the total sample or a subsample of 
the total catch.?  (SD-2) 
 
which describes a technique used specifically in 
the reported study.  Therefore, it is reasonable to 
expect that verbs in the past tense will be 
concentrated in the Methods and Results sections. 
The past tense seems to dominate journalistic 
writing. In news reporting the past tense is 
considered slower, whereas the present tense is 
used for dramatic effect (Evans, 1972). The 
following excerpt gives a sense of urgency due to 
the use of the present progressive: 
 
?Pacific salmon contaminated by industrial 
pollutants in the ocean are carrying the chemicals 
to Alaska?s lakes?? (NYT-1) 
 
4.4 Voice 
The passive voice is a major stylistic feature of 
scientific discourse where according to Ding 
(1998) it represents the world in terms of objects, 
things and materials. Therefore, grammatical 
subjects are more likely to refer to inanimate 
objects  than to humans.   
Journalistic prose generally uses the active voice 
which is thought to assist in reading 
comprehension but also reflects the focus of news 
reporting on people and organizations (and indeed 
80% of the definition questions in TREC were 
about a person or an organisation). For example, 
compare the first two sentences of a report 
appearing in the Brief Communication section of 
the journal Nature to the lead of the same report as 
it was printed in popularized form in the New York 
Times:  
 
?Pollutants are widely distributed by the 
atmosphere and the oceans. Contaminants can 
also be transported by salmon and amplified 
through the food chain.?  (NAT) 
?Pacific salmon contaminated by industrial  
pollutants in the ocean are carrying the 
chemicals to Alaska?s lakes, where they may 
affect people and wildlife?? (NYT-1)  
In the first excerpt the subject is the 
contaminants being transported by the salmon 
(passive), whereas in the second the subject is the 
salmon carrying them (active). 
4.5  Citations 
Previously published work is cited frequently in 
scientific text using a consistent format such as the 
Harvard author-year citation style which is being 
used in this paper. Most of the citations are silent 
(i.e., both the name(s) and the date are enclosed in 
brackets) and often appear at the end of sentences.  
In the news domain, sources are often quoted 
directly. If the source is another publication, it is 
mentioned but rarely referenced in a detailed 
format with volume, issue, page numbers etc. 
For example, the author of the study which was 
published in Nature is quoted directly:  
 
??They die in such huge numbers that it almost 
looks like you can walk across the lakes?, an 
author of the of the study Dr. Jules Blais, said?. 
(NYT-1) 
 
People can also be quoted indirectly by reported 
speech as in the following example, 
 
 ?The salmon act as biological pumps, Dr. Blais 
said?? (NYT-1) 
 
 
 
 
4.6  Terminology 
Specialised terms abound in scientific writing 
and constitute a jargon. Such terms do not usually 
appear in news stories. For example, in the entire 
TREC AQUAINT collection the term ?smolt? 
appears eight times but more than 1,300 times in 
the SOK-I collection we created for our project. 
The term ?smoltification? which appears almost 
600 times in SOK-I is missing entirely from 
AQUAINT. 
Journalistic prose relies much less on jargon. 
Journalists tend to favour short common words 
over long infrequent ones.  Compare the 
vocabulary of Nature:  
 
?Here we show that groups of migrating 
sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) can act 
as bulk-transport vectors of persistent industrial 
pollutants known as polychlorinated biphenyls 
(PCBs), which they assimilate from the ocean 
and then convey over vast distances back to 
their natal spawning lakes. After spawning, the 
fish die in their thousands - delivering their 
toxic cargo to the lake sediment and increasing 
its PCB content by more than sevenfold when 
the density of returning salmon is high.? (NAT) 
 to the same story in the New York Times: 
?After spending most of their lives in the ocean, 
where they absorb widespread industrial 
chemicals like PCB?s, sockeye salmon flock to 
Alaska?s interior lakes in huge numbers to 
spawn and then die. Each salmon accumulates 
just a small quantity of PCB?s. But when the 
fish die together in the thousands, their 
decaying carcasses produce a sevenfold 
increase in the PCB concentrations of the 
spawning lakes, the study found.? (NYT-1) 
Note, for example, that the abbreviation ?PCB? is 
never expanded in the New York Times report. 
Presumably, the precise chemical name is of little 
interest to the average reader of the Times, 
whereas in scientific text there is a need to avoid 
any technical ambiguity. The Nature report also 
uses the more technical terms ?vectors? ?assimilate? 
and ?sediment?.  
4.7  Style 
Apart from a particular citation style, which is a 
dominant feature of scientific text, entities such as 
species or chemical compounds are usually written 
according to standard nomenclature and format. 
For example, the common name of an animal 
species is normally followed by the binomial 
scientific name in italics and often bracketed: 
 
?Here we show that groups of migrating 
sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) can 
act??   (NAT) 
News stories usually only use the common name of 
a species (e.g. sockeye salmon). 
In the next section we will see how such features 
affect definitional QA. 
 
5 Implications for Definitional QA 
5.1  Structure 
Blair-Goldensohn, McKeown and Schlaikjer 
(2003) and Joho and Sanderson (2000) who 
worked in the news domain observed that 
definitions are likely to be found nearer the 
beginning of the document than its end. They 
relied on relative and absolute sentence position as 
a feature indicating the presence of definitions. 
However, our observations suggest that at least in 
the SOK-I collection, sentence position (either 
relative or absolute) is not a good indicator of text 
containing definitions. This might be the result of 
the structured organisation of scientific papers, 
where each section is more self-contained than 
paragraphs are in news reports. We expected to 
find most of the definitions in the Introduction but 
other sections yielded many definitions. Early in 
the project we considered discarding the 
References section during the document pre-
processing stage but later discovered it can contain 
definitions  such as: 
 
?Canthaxanthin: a pigmenter for salmonids? 
(SD-3)  
However, definitions from different sections of 
the paper may differ in nature and style. For 
instance, definitions extracted from the Methods 
are more technical: 
  
?Dry matter eaten was defined as dry matter 
waste feed collected divided by recovery 
percentage, subtracted from the dry matter fed.? 
(SD-4)  
It is worth exploring whether certain types of 
terms are more likely to be defined in particular 
sections. A similar approach was suggested by 
Shah at al. (2003) for extracting keywords from 
full-text papers in genetics. 
 
5.2 Tense 
Since the present tense is often used to state 
established knowledge, we expected that lexical 
patterns in the present tense would be more likely 
to match definitions to terms. We observed that 
many of the wrong answers in our output  matched 
the past tense version of the copular pattern 
(TERM was/were DEFINITION). Sometimes, 
however, actions performed on or by the term can 
elucidate it. This is especially common in the 
Methods section of papers. For example, the term 
?Secchi disc? is defined in FishBase as: 
 
 ?A 20 cm diameter disc marked in 2 black and 
2 white opposing quadrants, lowered into the 
water. The average of the depth at which it 
disappears from sight and the depth at which it 
reappears when lowered and raised in the water 
column is the Secchi disc reading, a measure of 
transparency.? 
We retrieved the following answer which was 
judged as Okay:  
?Secchi disc was used to measure water 
visibility (m of visibility) at 1400h?? (SD-5)  
5.3  Voice 
Certain lexical patterns for definitions are in  
passive voice.  For example the pattern 
DEFINITION is termed TERM matched the 
following sentence in the SOK-I collection: 
 
?The best-known physical damage caused by 
aggression is inflicted on the fins and is termed 
fin damage, fin erosion or fin rot.? (SD-6) 
On the other hand definitions to technical terms 
in news stories are more likely to be attached to 
their definers?experts such as ?biologists? in the 
following example: 
 
?human illness from the virus will probably 
remain rare since humans are likely to remain 
what biologists call ``dead-end hosts': they can 
be infected, but their immune systems almost 
always prevent the virus from multiplying 
enough to be passed back to mosquitoes and 
then to other hosts.? (NYT-2) 
 
5.4 Citations 
One of the most common definition patterns is a 
term followed by its definition in brackets: 
 
?Grilse (fish maturing after 1.5 years in sea 
water)? (SD-7) 
In our first experiment we observed that the 
pattern falsely matched citations, and references to 
figures and tables as in the following case: 
?redd (Fleming, 1998)? (SD-8) 
These were eliminated by creating a list of 
stopwords which are typical to bracketed 
references (e.g., ?et al?, ?fig.?, years).  
 
Sometimes we encountered names of cited authors 
which matched a term to be defined or part of it 
(e.g. Fry, Fish). In the future these names need to 
be disambiguated.  
5.5 Terminology 
Definitions in scientific text are generally more 
technical and precise than in the news domain. For 
example, in SOK-I we matched the following 
definition of smolt: 
 
?In Atlantic salmon culture, smolt is usually 
defined as a juvenile salmon that is able to 
survive and grow normally in sea water.? (SD-
9) 
In a newspaper we may find ?smolts? defined as in 
the following sentence: 
?Young, six-inch-long first-year salmon, called 
by the old Anglo-Saxon name of smolts, 
migrate to two main oceanic feeding areas from 
their home streams in New England?? (NYT-
3) 
In the last definition the focus was on the word  
?smolt? which may be foreign to many newspaper 
readers. On the other hand, the readers of scientific 
papers on salmon biology are probably familiar 
with the term but may need to know its exact 
usage.   
Scientific names of species are taxonomically 
informative to biologists but would normally mean 
little to a non-expert. For instance, in  scientific 
text ?steelhead trout? would be followed by its 
scientific name Oncorhynchus mykiss which tells 
the informed reader it is a species of the same 
genus to which other pacific salmons belong. In a 
news articles, we found the following sentences: 
 
?But in this case, the endangered animal is the 
steelhead trout, a relative of the salmon?? 
(LA-1) 
?Copper River king salmon, magnificent sea 
beasts as big and fleshy as Chinese temple 
dogs, had been running?? (LA-2) 
Often definitions of species and other terms will 
just burden the readers of a newspaper and 
therefore are unnecessary. For example, unlike 
biologists, they do not require an exact definition 
of ?salt water? which specifies the concentration of 
salt or of ?colour? in the context of salmon meat 
quality. 
Sometimes definitions retrieved from scientific 
text were found to contain terms which would have 
to be defined in a news article. For example 
?smolt? can be defined in terms of degree days?
the product of the daily water temperature, 
multiplied by the number of days it takes the 
salmon to reach the smolt stage. 
Even though the papers in the SOK-I collection 
seemed to target a homogenous audience, it was 
possible to find definitions which are suitable for 
different levels of expertise. For instance, the 
system retrieved the  chemical name   
 
?(3,3'-dihydroxy-,-carotene-4,4'-dione)? (SD-
10) 
 in response to the query ?astaxanthin?. Such an 
answer, although incomplete, could satisfy an 
expert in biochemistry. Another answer was:  
 
?Astaxanthin is an approved colour additive in 
the feed of salmonids? (SD-11) 
 
The first definition was found in a biochemistry 
paper on the digestability and accumulation of 
astaxanthin, whereas the second one was extracted 
from a fishery research paper which discusses 
potential issues for human health and safety from 
net-pen salmon farming. The readers of the second 
paper may be experts on fish biology but not 
necessarily on chemicals, food safety or even 
salmon farming, whereas the first paper is more 
limited to a single discipline.  
5.6  Style 
The standardised forms of species and chemical 
names in scientific text lend themselves to 
information extraction techniques which would not 
be effective in the news domain. Templates could 
be created for certain categories of biological 
terms. For example, for the category Species we 
can fill the slots for the scientific name, taxonomic 
family or order, distribution, life cycle, synonym, 
and threats to the species; In our experiments the 
pattern TERM (DEFINTION) was effective in 
recognising the scientific name when the query 
term was the common name of a species.  
 
6 Conclusions 
In this paper, we demonstrated how scientific and 
journalistic texts differ in structure, tense, voice, 
references, terminology and style. Our 
observations are based on a project in which we 
retrieved definitions to terms in the salmon fish 
domain. The above features could be exploited 
specifically in scientific QA. Features such as 
voice may play a more significant role in QA 
systems which employ deeper NLP techniques 
than the simple patterns we used. The uniform 
structure of scientific documents may allow us to 
typify definitions in each section before combining 
them to suit the need of users. Further analysis of 
the news domain may perhaps yield more 
observations which will also contribute to current 
mainstream open-domain QA research as seen in 
TREC and CLEF. 
  
7.  Sources of Cited Examples 
LA-1: CLEF 03 LA Times LA120894-0019 
LA-2: CLEF 03 LA Times LA070794-0021 
NAT: Nature, 425(6955), 255. 
NYT-1: 
http://www.nytimes.com/2003/09/23/science/ 
23SALM.html?ex=1079499600&en=1083ff4683d
95e8e&ei=5070 
NYT-2: AQUAINT NYT20000807.0291 
NYT-3: AQUAINT NYT19990913.0215 
SD-1: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6T6
N-3XNJYSC-
P/2/704eaa76fae2ceb6b79ec11d844a44dd 
SD-2:  
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6T6
N-409630G-
V/2/9bc703e5948960159743f99269998fb6 
SD-3:  
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6T4
D-428FK2P-
C/2/d9e2c93377b34beb5ecc47165a4b1098 
SD-4: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6T4
D-460WH4M-
1/2/fba8df4de8a057a606cc582a60046c09 
SD-5: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6T4
C-43X1B91-
4/2/b7b7058db2c954eaf9d72b7bf2b5d141 
SD-6: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6T4
D-3YXJYY2-
9/2/e3ddd1ccfbbece503a0ae26304a4b443 
 
 
SD-7: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6T4
D-3WN6GV4-
/2/13a6aa37050ce68845d85c8eb111a82b 
SD-8:  
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6T6
N-472BJBX-
4/2/054a7ff897821495aed30fe697c3b1c7 
SD-9: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6T4
D-40FG8N8-
G/2/459f344b039746dc9dff2a3ca1f17679 
SD-10: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6T2
R-41JM957-
K/2/5317d1c1daefee0ddadbc86a31288eb2 
SD-11: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6T6
N-4846K7G-
2/2/1c8d6922218aabc83ad653b376d39ed9 
 
References  
Blair-Goldensohn, S., McKeown, K. R. and 
Schlaikjer, A. H. (2003). Retrieved November 
30, 2003. http://trec.nist.gov/act_part/ 
   t12_notebook/papers/columbiau.qa.pdf 
Day, R. A. (1998) How to write & publish a 
scientific paper, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge. 
Ding, D. (1998) In Essays in the study of scientific 
discourse : methods, practice, and pedagogy (Ed, 
Battalio, J. T.) Albex Publishing, Stamford, CT, 
pp. 117-138. 
Elsevier Author Guide (2003). Retrieved 
December 20, 2003. http://authors.elsevier.com/ 
   GuideForAuthors.html 
Evans, H. (1972) Editing and design : a five-
volume manual of English, typography and 
layout--Book 1 : Newsman's English, Heineman, 
London. 
FishBase (2003). http:\\www.fishbase.org 
Gabbay, I. 2004. Retrieving Definitions from 
Scientific Text in the Salmon Fish Domain by 
Lexical Pattern Matching. MA thesis in 
Technical Communication, University of 
Limerick, Limerick, Ireland. 
Hearst, M. A. (1992). "Automatic Acquisition of 
Hyponyms from Large Text Corpora". In 
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics (COLING-'92). 
Nantes, France, ed. 539-545. 
Hirschman, L. and Gaizauskas, R. (2001) "Natural 
Language Question Answering: The View from 
Here". Journal of Natural Language Engineering, 
7(4), 325?342. 
Joho, H. and Sanderson, M. (2000). "Retrieving 
Descriptive Phrases from Large Amounts of Free 
Text". In Proceedings of the ninth international 
conference on Information and knowledge 
management (CIKM). McLean, VA, ed. 180-
186. 
Klavans, J. and Muresan, S. (2001). "Evaluation of 
DEFINDER: a system to mine definitions from 
consumer-oriented medical text". In ACM/IEEE 
Joint Conference on Digital Libraries, JCDL 
2001. Roanoke, Virginia. 201-202. 
Lancaster, F. W. (1968) Information Retrieval 
Systems: Characteristics, Testing and 
Evaluation, Wiley, New York. 
Liu, B., Wee, C. and Ng, H. T. (2003). "Mining 
topic-specific concepts and definitions on the 
web". In Proceedings of the twelfth international 
conference on World Wide Web. Budapest, 
Hungary. 251 - 260. 
Moll?, D., Schwitter, R., Rinaldi, F., Dowdall, J. 
and Hess, M. (2003). "NLP for Answer 
Extraction in Technical Domains". In Workshop 
on Natural Language Processing for Question 
Answering, EACL 2003. Budapest, de Rijke, M. 
and Webber, B., eds. 5-11. 
Shah, P., Perez-Iratxeta, C., Bork, P. and Andrade, 
M. (2003) "Information extraction from full text 
scientific articles: Where are the keywords?" 
BMC Bioinformatics, 4(1), 20. 
Sutcliffe, R. F. E., Gabbay, I., Mulcahy, M. and 
White, K. (2003). Retrieved November 2003 
http://trec.nist.gov/ 
    act_part/t12_notebook/papers/ulimerick.qa.pdf 
Teufel, S. and Moens, M. (2002) "Summarizing 
scientific articles: experiments with relevance 
and rhetorical status". Computational 
Linguistics, 28(4), 409-445. 
Voorhees, E. (2003). Retrieved November 30, 
2003. 
http://trec.nist.gov/act_part/t12_notebook/t12_no
tebook.html 
Wikipedia (2004). Retrieved March 10, 2004. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/News_style 
Zweigenbaum, P. (2003). "Question answering in 
biomedicine". In Workshop on Natural Language 
Processing for Question Answering, EACL 
2003. Budapest, de Rijke, M. and Webber, B., 
eds. 1-4. 
 
