An HMM Approach to Vowel Restoration in Arabic and Hebrew

Ya?akov Gal
Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
gal@eecs.harvard.edu

Abstract
Semitic languages pose a problem to
Natural Language Processing since
most of the vowels are omitted from
written prose, resulting in consider-
able ambiguity at the word level.
However, while reading text, native
speakers can generally vocalize each
word based on their familiarity with
the lexicon and the context of the
word. Methods for vowel restoration
in previous work involving morpho-
logical analysis concentrated on a sin-
gle language and relied on a parsed
corpus that is difficult to create for
many Semitic languages. We show
that Hidden Markov Models are a use-
ful tool for the task of vowel restora-
tion in Semitic languages. Our tech-
nique is simple to implement, does
not require any language specific
knowledge to be embedded in the
model and generalizes well to both
Hebrew and Arabic. Using a publicly
available version of the Bible and the
Qur?an as corpora, we achieve a suc-
cess rate of 86% for restoring the ex-
act vowel pattern in Arabic and 81%
in Hebrew. For Hebrew, we also re-
port on 87% success rate for restoring
the correct phonetic value of the
words.
1 Introduction
In both Hebrew and in Arabic, modern writ-
ten texts are composed in script that leaves out
most of the vowels of the words. Because many
words that have different vowel patterns may
appear identical in a vowel-less setting, consid-
erable ambiguity exists at the word level.
In Hebrew, Levinger et al (1995) computed
that 55% out of 40,000 word tokens taken from
a corpus of the Israeli daily Ha?aretz were am-
biguous. For example, the non-voweled Hebrew
word , written in Latin transliteration as SPR,
may represent the noun ?book? (pronounced
/sepher/), the third person singular form of the
verb ?to count? (pronounced /saphar/) or at least
four other possible interpretations. In Arabic,
there are almost five possible morphological
analyses per word on average (Beesley 1998).
Take, for example, the Arabic word  , writ-
ten in Latin transliteration as KTAAB. One pos-
sible interpretation is the noun ?book? (pro-
nounced /kitaab/) and another is the plural of the
noun ?secretary?, (pronounced /kuttaab/). Fur-
ther contributing to this ambiguity is the fact
that Hebrew and Arabic morphology is com-
plex: most words are derived from roots that are
cast in templates that govern the ordering of
letters and provide semantic information. In
addition, prefixes and suffixes can also be at-
tached to words in a concatenative manner, re-
sulting in a single string that represents verb
inflections, prepositions, pronouns, and connec-
tives.
Vowel restoration in Hebrew and Arabic text
is a non-trivial task. In both languages, vowels
are marked by both letters and diacritics. In
Hebrew, there are twelve different vowel diacrit-
ics, and in general, most diacritics are left out of
modern script. In Arabic, there are six vowels,
which can be divided into three pairs consisting
of a short vowel and a long vowel. Each pair
corresponds to a different phonetic value. In
written Arabic text, the short vowels are gener-
ally left out.
Surprisingly, native speakers of Arabic or
Hebrew can, in most cases, accurately vocalize
words in text based on their context and the
speaker?s knowledge of the grammar and lexi-
con of the language. However, speakers of He-
brew are not as successful in restoring the exact
vowel diacritics of words. Since many vowels
have the same pronunciation in modern Hebrew,
and speakers of Hebrew generally use non-
voweled script in reading and writing text, they
are not familiar with the precise vowel pattern of
words.
Throughout this paper, we refer to a word
that is fully voweled,1  i.e. supplied with its full
diacritical marking, as diacritisized (Beesley
1998). A system that could restore the diacri-
tisized form of scripts, i.e. supply the full dia-
critical markings, would greatly benefit non-
native speakers, sufferers of dyslexia and could
assist in diacritisizing children?s and poetry
books, a task that is currently done manually.
2 A Statistical Approach
Identifying contextual relationships is crucial
in deciphering lexical ambiguities in both He-
brew and Arabic and is commonly used by na-
tive speakers. Hidden Markov Models have been
traditionally used to capture the contextual de-
pendencies between words (Charniak 1995). We
demonstrate the utility of Hidden Markov Mod-
els for the restoration of vowels in Hebrew and
Arabic. As we show, our model is straightfor-
ward and simple to implement. It consists of
hidden states that correspond to diacritisized
words from the training corpus, in which each
hidden state has a single emission leading to an
undiacritisized (non-voweled) word observation.
Our model does not require any handcrafted
linguistic knowledge and is robust in the sense
that it generalizes well to other languages. The
rest of this paper is organized as follows: in
Section 3, we provide an explanation of the
corpora we used in our experiment. Section 4
and 5 describe the models we designed as well
as our experimental setup for evaluating them.
Section 6 describes related work done in mor-
phological analysis and vowel restoration in
                                                   
1
 In literature relating to Hebrew morphology
analysis, this is often refered to as a pointed word.
Hebrew and in Arabic. Finally, Section 7 dis-
cusses future work.
3 Evaluation Methodology
We compare a baseline approach using a
unigram model to a bigram model. We train
both models on a corpus of diacritisized text,
and then check the models? performance on an
unseen test set, by removing the vowel diacritics
from part of the corpus. For both Hebrew and
Arabic, we evaluate performance by measuring
the percentage of words in the test set whose
vowel pattern was restored correctly, i.e. the
vowel pattern suggested by the system exactly
matched the original. We refer to this
performance measure as word accuracy. For
Hebrew, we also divided the vowel symbols into
separate groups, each one corresponding to a
specific phonetic value. We then measured the
percentage of words whose individual letters
were fitted with a vowel diacritic belonging to
the same phonetic group as the correct vowel
diacritic in the test set. In other words, the
restored vowels, while perhaps not agreeing
exactly with the original pattern, all belonged to
the correct phonetic group. This performance
measure, which corresponds to vocalization of
non-voweled text, is useful for applications such
as text-to-speech systems.2  We refer to this
performance measure as phonetic group
accuracy.
There is an unfortunate lack of data for
vowel-annotated text in both modern Hebrew
and Arabic. The only easily accessible sources
are the Hebrew Bible and the Qur?an, for which
on-line versions transliterated into Latin charac-
ters are available. Ancient Hebrew and Arabic
bear enough syntactical and semantic resem-
blance to their modern language equivalents to
justify usage of these ancient texts as corpora.
For Hebrew, we used the Westminster Hebrew
Morphological Database (1998), a corpus con-
taining a complete transcription of the graphical
form of the Massoretic text of the Hebrew Bible
containing roughly 300,000 words. For the
Qur?an, we used the transliterated version pub-
licly available from the sacred text archive at  
                                                   
2
 In modern Hebrew, it is generally sufficient to
associate each vowel symbol with its phonetic group
in order to vocalize the word correctly.

ba-ra
elo-him
missing

#















www.sacred-texts.com. This corpus contains
roughly 90,000 words.
For both languages, we tested our model on
10% of the corpus. We measured performance
by evaluating word accuracy for both Hebrew
and Arabic. In addition, we measured phonetic
group accuracy for Hebrew.
4 Baseline : A Unigram Model
To assess the difficulty of the problem, we
counted the number of times each diacriticized
word appeared in the training set. For each non-
voweled word encountered in the test set, we
searched through all of the words with the same
non-voweled structure and picked the
diacriticized word with the highest count in the
table. Figure 1 shows the ambiguity distribution
in the training set.

Figure 1. Ambiguity Distribution in
Training Set
0
10
20
30
0 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
No. of Possible Interpretations per Word
Pe
rc
en
ta
ge

o
f
Tr
ai
n
in
g
Se
t
Hebrew Arabic




















Note that for both languages, only about 30%
of the words in the training set were
unambiguous, i.e. had a single interpretation.
For the baseline model, we achieved a word
accuracy rate of 68% for Hebrew and 74% for
Arabic. We note that even though the size of the
Arabic training set was about a third of the size
of the Hebrew training set, we still achieved a
higher success rate of restoring vowels in
Arabic. We attribute this to the fact that there
are only three possible missing vowel diacritics
in modern Arabic text, compared to twelve in
Hebrew.
5 A Bigram Model
We constructed a bigram Hidden Markov
Model (HMM) where hidden states were
vowel-annotated (diacritisized) words, and ob-
servations were vowel-less words. One example
of a path through the HMM for reconstructing a
Hebrew sentence is given in Figure 2; ovals
represent hidden states that correspond to diacri-
tisized words; rectangles represent observations
of vowel-less words; solid edges link the states
that mark the transition through the model for
generating the desired sentence; each edge car-
ries with it a probability mass, representing the
probability of transitioning between the two
hidden states connected by the edge. This tech-
nique was used for Arabic in a similar way.
Our model consists of a set of hidden states
nTT ,..,1  where each hidden state corresponds to
BR^$YT
BR
    be-re-shit
^LWHYM
Figure 2. HMM path for the non-voweled phrase ?in the beginning god created??
pronounced /be-reshit bara elohim/

an observed word in our training corpus. Thus,
each hidden state corresponds to a word contain-
ing its complete vowel pattern. From each hid-
den state iT , there is a single emission, which
simply consists of the word in its non-voweled
form. If we make the assumption that the prob-
ability of observing a given word depends only
on the previous word, we can compute the prob-
ability of observing a sentence nn wwW ,...,1,1 =
by summing over all of the possible hidden
states that the HMM traversed while generating
the sentence, as denoted in the following equa-
tion.
)1|()(
1,1
,1  ?
+
?=
nT
n TiTipi
Wp 

These probabilities of transitions through the
states of the model are approximated by bigram
counts, as described below. Note that the symbol
?#? in the figure serves to ?anchor? the initial
state of the HMM and facilitate computation.
Thereafter, the hidden states actually consist of
vowel-annotated bigrams. The probability of
any possible path in our model that generates
this phrase can be computed as follows:
)|()( 1,1 ??= iin wwpiWp
This equation decomposes into the following
maximum likelihood probability estimations,
denoted by p? ,  in which c(word)  denotes the
number of instances that word had occurred in
the training set and c(word1, word2)  denotes the
number of joint occurrences of word1 and
word2 in the training set.

)(
),()|(?
)(
),()|(?
),()|(#?
,1)|#(#?
himeloc
himelorabachimelorabap
rabac
rabashitrebec
rabashitrebep
shitrebecshitrebep
p
?
??
=??
?
???
=???
??=??
=


In order to be able to compute the likelihood of
each bigram, we kept a look-up table consisting
of counts for all individual and joint occurrences
in the training set. We implemented the Viterbi
algorithm to find the most likely path transitions
through the hidden states that correspond to the
observations. The likelihood of observing the
sentence nW ,1  while traversing the hidden state
path nT ,1  is taken to be ),( ,1,1 nn TWp . We  ig-
nore the normalizing factor )(
,1 nWp . More
formally, the most likely path through the model
is defined as
),(maxarg
)(
),(
maxarg)|(maxarg
,1,1
,1
,1
,1,1
,1,1,1,1
nn
nT
n
nn
nTnnnT
TWp
Wp
TWp
WTpr
=
=

5.1 Dealing with Sparse Data
Because our bigram model is trained from a
finite corpus, many words are bound to be miss-
ing from it. For example, in the unigram model,
we found that as many as 16% of the Hebrew
words in the test set were not present. The
amount of unseen bigrams was even higher, as
much as 20 percent. This is not surprising, as we
expect some unseen bigrams to consist of words
that were both seen before individually. We did
not specifically deal with sparse data in the uni-
gram base line model.
As many of the unseen unigrams were non
ambiguous, we would have liked to look up the
missing words in a vowel-annotated dictionary
and copy the vowel pattern found in the diction-
ary. However, as noted in Section 2, morphol-
ogy in both Hebrew and Arabic is non-
concatenative. Since dictionaries contain only
the root form of verbs and nouns, without a
sound morphological analyzer we could not
decipher the root. Therefore, proceeded as fol-
lows: We employed a technique proposed by
Katz (1987) that combines a discounting method
along with a back-off method to obtain a good
estimate of unseen bigrams. We use the Good-
Turing discounting method (Gale & Sampson
1991) to decide how much total probability mass
to set aside for all the events we haven?t seen,
and a simple back-off algorithm to tell us how to
distribute this probability. Formally, we define

)1|2()1()1|2(
)1|2()1|2(
wwpwwwp
wwPwwp d
?=
=




Here, dP  is the discounted estimate using the
Good-Turing method, p is a probability esti-
mated by the number of occurrences and )1(w?
is a normalizing factor that divides the unknown
if c(w2,w1)>0
if c(w2,w1)=0
probability mass of unseen bigrams beginning
with w1.



=
>
?
?
=
0)2,1(:2
0)2,1(:2
)1|2(1
)1|2(1
)1(
wwcw
wwcw
d
wwp
wwP
w?

In order to compute Pd we create a separate
discounting model for each word in the training
set. The reason for this is simple: If we use only
one model over all of the bigram counts, we
would really be approximating )1,2( wwPd .
Because we wish to estimate )1|2( wwPd , we
define the discounted frequency counts as fol-
lows:
)2,1(
1)2,1()2,1()2,1(*
wwc
wwc
n
n
wwcwwc
+
+=
where cn  is the number of different bigrams in
the corpus that have frequency c. Following
Katz, we estimate the probability of unseen bi-
grams to be


p(w2|w1) ?



If the missing bigram is composed of two in-
dividually observed words, this technique allows
us to estimate the probability mass of the unseen
bigram. In some cases, the unseen bigram con-
sists of individual words that have never been
seen. In other words, w2 itself is unseen and
c(w2)  cannot be computed. In this case, we es-
timate the probability for p(w2|w1) by comput-
ing p(unseen|w1). We do this by allocating some
probability mass to unseen words, keeping a
special count for bigrams that were seen less
then k times.3  We allocate a separate hidden
state for unseen words, as depicted in Figure 2.
In this case, we do not attempt to fit any vowel
pattern to the unseen word; the word is left bare
of its diacritics. However, we can still assign a
probability mass, p(unseen|w1), to prevent the
Viterbi algorithm from computing a zero prob-
                                                   
3
 k  was arbitrarily set to three in our experiment.
Alternatively, we could get a more exact estimation
of the missing probability mass by discounting the
unigram probabilities of w2.
ability. We can compute the probabilities
p(w2|unseen) in a similar manner. 
5.2 Results
Figure 3.  Results of Bigram Model
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
40 60 90
Percentage of Training Data
W
o
rd

Ac
cu
ra
cy

Pe
rc
en
ta
ge
Hebrew 1 Hebrew2 Arabic

Figure 3 presents our results using the bigram
HMM model, where ?Hebrew 1? measures word
accuracy be in Hebrew, ?Hebrew 2? measures
phonetic group accuracy, and ?Arabic?
measures word accuracy in Arabic. Using the
bigram model for Hebrew, we achieved 81%
word accuracy and 87% phonetic group
accuracy. For Arabic, we achieved 86% word
accuracy. For Hebrew, the system was more
successful in restoring the phonetic group vowel
pattern than restoring the exact diacritics. This is
because the number of possible vowel symbols
in Hebrew is larger than in Arabic. However, for
text-to-speech systems, it is sufficient to
associate each vowel with the correct phonetic
group. For word accuracy, most of the errors in
Hebrew (11%) and in Arabic (8%) were due to
words that were not found in the training corpus.
Therefore, we believe that acquiring a
sufficiently large modern corpus of the language
would greatly improve performance. However,
the number of parameters for our model is
quadratic in the number of word types in the
training set. Therefore, we suggest using limited
morphological analysis to improve performance
of the system by attempting to identify the stem
or root of the words in the test set, as well as the
conjugation. Since conjugation templates in
Semitic languages have fixed vowel patterns,
even limited success in morphological analyses
would greatly improve performance of the
system, while not incurring a blowup in the
number of parameters.



 p(w2)      if c(w2) > 0
 p(unseen|w1)      if c(w2) = 0
6  Related Work
Performing a full morphological analysis of a
Hebrew or Arabic sentence would greatly assist
the vowel restoration problem. That is, if we
could correctly parse each word in a sentence,
we could eliminate ambiguity and restore the
correct vowel pattern of the word according to
its grammatical form and part of speech.
For Arabic, a morphological analyzer,
developed by the Xerox Research Centre Europe
(Beesley 1998) is freely available.4  The system
uses finite state transducers, traditionally used
for modeling concatenative morphology. Since
the system is word based, it cannot disambiguate
words in context and outputs all possible
analyses for each word. The system relies on
handcrafted rules and lexicon that govern Arabic
morphology.
For Hebrew, a morphological analyzer called
Nakdan Text  exists, as part of the Rav Milim
project for the processing of modern Hebrew
(Choueka and Neeman 1995). Given a sentence
in modern Hebrew,  Nakdan  Text restores its
vowel diacritics by first finding all possible
morphological analyses and vowel patterns of
every word in the sentence. Then, for every such
word, it chooses the correct context-dependent
vowel pattern using short-context syntactical
rules as well as some probabilistic models. The
authors report 95% success rate in restoring
vowel patterns. It is not clear if this refers to
word accuracy or letter accuracy.5
 Segel (1997) devised a statistical Hebrew
lexical analyzer that takes contextual dependen-
cies into account. Given a non-voweled Hebrew
texts as input and achieves 95% word accuracy
on test data extracted from the Israeli daily
Ha?aretz. However, this method requires fully
analyzed Hebrew text to train on. Segel used a
morphological hand-analyzed training set con-
sisting of only 500 sentences. Because there is
currently no tree bank of analyzed Hebrew text,
this method is not applicable to other domains,
such as novels or medical texts.
                                                   
4
 http://www.arabic-morphology.com/
5
 This program was demonstrated at BISFAI-95, the
fifth Bar Ilan international symposium on Artificial
Intelligence, but no summary or article was included
in its proceedings, and to the best of our knowledge
no article has been published describing the methods
of Nakdan text.

Kontorovich and Lee (2001) use an HMM
approach to vocalizing Hebrew text. Their
model consists of fourteen hidden states, with
emissions for each word of the training set.
Initially, the parameters of the model are chosen
at random and training of the model is done
using the EM algorithm. They achieve a success
rate of 81%, when unseen words are discarded
from the test set.

7 Future Work
Since most of the errors in the model can be
attributed to missing words, we plan to address
this problem from two perspectives. First, we
plan to include a letter-based HMM to be used
for fitting an unseen word with a likely vowel
pattern. The model would be trained separately
on words from the training set. Its hidden states
would correspond to vowels in a language, mak-
ing this model language dependent. We also
plan to use a trigram model for the task of vowel
restoration, backing off to a bigram model for
sparse trigrams.
Second, we plan to use some degree of mor-
phological analysis to assist us with the restora-
tion of unseen words. At the very least, we could
use a morphological analyzer as a dictionary for
words that have unique diacritization, but are
missing from the model. Since analyzers for
Arabic that are commonly available  (Beesley
1998) are word based, they output all possible
morphological combinations of the word, and it
is still unclear how we could choose the most
likely parse given the context.
Finally, since the size of our corpora is
relatively small, we also plan to use cross
validation to get a better estimate of the gener-
alization error.
8 Conclusion
In this paper, we demonstrated the use of a
statistically based approach for vowel restora-
tion in Semitic languages. We wish to demon-
strate that HMMs are a useful tool for computa-
tional processing of Semitic languages, and that
these models generalize to other languages.  For
the task of vocalizing the vowels according to
their phonetic classification, the system we have
proposed achieves an accuracy of 87% for He-
brew. For the task of restoring the exact vowel
pattern, we achieved an accuracy of 81% for
Hebrew texts and 86% for Arabic texts. Thus,
we have shown that the contextual information
gained by using HMMs is beneficial for this
task.


Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Stuart Shieber, Chris-
tian R. Lange, Jill Nickerson, Emir Kapanci,
Wheeler Ruml and Chung-chieh Shan for useful
discussions.
References
Academy of the Hebrew Language  1957. ?The
rules for Hebrew-Latin transcription,?  In
Memiors of the Academy of the Hebrew Lan-
guage, pages 5-8 (in Hebrew)
Beesley, K. 1998. "Arabic finite-state
morphological analysis and generation," in
COLING-96 Proceedings 1 : 89-94,
Copenhagen.
Charniak, E. 1995. Statistical Language Learn-
ing, MIT Press.
Choueka, Y. and Neeman, Y. 1995. ?Nakdan-
Text, (an In-Context Text-Vocalizer for Mod-
ern Hebrew),? BISFAI-95, The Fifth Bar Ilan
Symposium for Artificial Intelligence
Dagan, D., Pereira P., and Lee L. 1994. ?Simi-
larity-based estimation of word cooccurrence
probabilities,? In Proceedings of the 32nd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Gale, W. A. and Sampson, G. 1995. ?Good-
Turing Frequency Estimation Without Tears,?
Journal of Quantitative Linguistics 2, 217-
237.
Katz, S., ?Estimation of probabilities from
sparse data for the language model component
of a speech recognizer,? In IEEE Transactions
on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing.
Kontorovich L.and Lee D. 2001. ?Problems in
Semitic NLP,? NIPS Workshop on Machine
Learning Methods for Text and Images
Levinger, M., Ornan U., Itai A. 1995. ?Learning
Morpho-Lexical Probabilities from an
Untagged Corpus with an Application to
Hebrew, ? Computational Linguistics,
21(3): 383-404
Segel, A. 1997. ?A probabilistic Morphological
Analyzer for Hebrew undotted text,? MSc the-
sis, Israeli Institute of Technology, Technion.
(in Hebrew)
Westminster Theological Seminar 1998.  "The
Hebrew Morphological Database",
Philadelphia, PA
Unifying Annotated Discourse Hierarchies to Create a Gold Standard
Marco Carbone, Ya?akov Gal, Stuart Shieber, and Barbara Grosz
Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
33 Oxford St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
mcarbone,gal,shieber,grosz@eecs.harvard.edu
Abstract
Human annotation of discourse corpora typi-
cally results in segmentation hierarchies that
vary in their degree of agreement. This paper
presents several techniques for unifying multi-
ple discourse annotations into a single hierar-
chy, deemed a ?gold standard? ? the segmen-
tation that best captures the underlying linguis-
tic structure of the discourse. It proposes and
analyzes methods that consider the level of em-
beddedness of a segmentation as well as meth-
ods that do not. A corpus containing annotated
hierarchical discourses, the Boston Directions
Corpus, was used to evaluate the ?goodness?
of each technique, by comparing the similar-
ity of the segmentation it derives to the original
annotations in the corpus. Several metrics of
similarity between hierarchical segmentations
are computed: precision/recall of matching ut-
terances, pairwise inter-reliability scores (   ),
and non-crossing-brackets. A novel method for
unification that minimizes conflicts among an-
notators outperforms methods that require con-
sensus among a majority for the   and precision
metrics, while capturing much of the structure
of the discourse. When high recall is preferred,
methods requiring a majority are preferable to
those that demand full consensus among anno-
tators.
1 Introduction
The linguistic structure of a discourse is composed of
utterances that exhibit meaningful hierarchical relation-
ships (Grosz and Sidner, 1986). Automatic segmentation
of discourse forms the basis for many applications, from
information retrieval and text summarization to anaphora
resolution (Hearst, 1997). These automatic methods, usu-
ally based on supervised machine learning techniques,
require a manually annotated corpus of data for train-
ing. The creation of these corpora often involves multiple
judges annotating the same discourses, so as to avoid bias
from using a single judge?s annotations as ground truth.
Usually, for a particular discourse, these multiple annota-
tions are unified into a single annotation, either manually
by the annotators? discussions or automatically. How-
ever, annotation unification approaches have not been for-
mally evaluated, and although manual unification might
be the best approach, it can be time-consuming. In-
deed, much of the work on automatic recognition of dis-
course structure has focused on linear, rather than hi-
erarchical segmentation (Hearst, 1997; Hirschberg and
Nakatani, 1996), because of the difficulties of obtain-
ing consistent hierarchical annotations. In addition, those
approaches that do handle hierarchical segmentation do
not address automatic unification methods (Carlson et al,
2001; Marcu, 2000).
There are several reasons for the prevailing emphasis
on linear annotation and the lack of work on automatic
methods for unifying hierarchical discourse annotations.
First, initial attempts to create annotated hierarchical cor-
pora of discourse structure using naive annotators have
met with difficulties. Rotondo (1984) reported that ?hi-
erarchical segmentation is impractical for naive subjects
in discourses longer than 200 words.? Passonneau and
Litman (1993) conducted a pilot study in which subjects
found it ?difficult and time-consuming? to identify hi-
erarchical relations in discourse. Other attempts have
had more success using improved annotation tools and
more precise instructions (Grosz and Hirschberg, 1992;
Hirschberg and Nakatani, 1996). Second, hierarchical
segmentation of discourse is subjective. While agreement
among annotators regarding linear segmentation has been
found to be higher than 80% (Hearst, 1997), with respect
to hierarchical segmentation it has been observed to be
as low as 60% (Flammia and Zue, 1995). Moreover, the
precise definition of ?agreement? with respect to hierar-
chical segmentation is unclear, complicating evaluation.
It is natural to consider two segments in separate annota-
tions to agree if they both span precisely the same utter-
ances and agree on the level of embeddedness. However,
it is less clear how to handle segments that share the same
utterances but differ with respect to the level of embed-
dedness.
In this paper, we show that despite these difficulties it is
possible to automatically combine a set of multi-level dis-
course annotations together into a single gold standard, a
segmentation that best captures the underlying linguis-
tic structure of the discourse. We aspire to create cor-
pora analogous to the Penn Treebank in which a unique
parse tree exists for each sentence that is agreed upon by
all to convey the ?correct? parse of the sentence. How-
ever, whereas the Penn Treebank parses are determined
through a time-consuming negotiation between labelers,
we aim to derive gold standard segmentations automati-
cally.
There are several potential benefits for having a unify-
ing standard for discourse corpora. First, it can constitute
a unique segmentation of the discourse that is deemed the
nearest approximation of the true objective structure, as-
suming one exists. Second, it can be used as a single uni-
fied version with which to train and evaluate algorithms
for automatic discourse segmentation. Third, it can be
used as a preprocessing step for computational tasks that
require discourse structure, such as anaphora resolution
and summarization.
In this work, we describe and evaluate several ap-
proaches for unifying multiple hierarchical discourse seg-
mentations into one gold standard. Some of our ap-
proaches measure the agreement between annotations by
taking into account the level of embeddedness and others
ignore the hierarchy. We also introduce a novel method,
called the Conflict-Free Union, that minimizes the num-
ber of conflicts between annotations. For our experi-
ments, we used the Boston Directions Corpus (BDC).1
Ideally, each technique would be evaluated with re-
spect to a single unified segmentation of the BDC that
was deemed ?true? by annotators who are experts in dis-
course theory, but we did not have the resources to at-
tempt this task. Instead, we measure each technique by
comparing the average similarity between its gold stan-
dard and the original annotations used to create it. Our
similarity metrics measure both hierarchical and linear
segment agreement using precision/recall metrics, inter-
reliability similarities among annotations using the (   )
metric, and percentage of non-crossing-brackets.
We found that there is no single approach that does
1The Boston Directions Corpus was designed and collected
by Barbara Grosz, Julia Hirschberg, and Christine H. Nakatani.
well with respect to all of the similarity metrics. How-
ever, the Conflict-Free Union approach outperforms the
other methods for the   and precision metrics. Also, tech-
niques that include majority agreements of annotators
have better recall than techniques which demanded full
consensus among annotators. We also uncovered some
flaws in each technique; for example, we found that gold
standards that include dense structure are over-penalized
by some of the metrics.
2 Methods for Creating a Gold Standard
It is likely that there is no perfect way to find and evaluate
a gold standard, and in some cases there may be multiple
segmentations that are equally likely to serve as a gold
standard. In the BDC corpus, unlike the Penn Treebank,
there are multiple annotations for each discourse which
were not manually combined into one gold standard an-
notation. In this paper, we explore automatic methods to
create a gold standard for the BDC corpus. These meth-
ods could also be used on other corpora with non-unified
annotations. Next, we present several automatic methods
to combine multiple human-annotated discourse segmen-
tations into one gold standard.
2.1 Flat vs. Hierarchical Approaches
Most previous work that has combined multiple an-
notations has used linear segmentations, i.e. dis-
course segmentations without hierarchies (Hirschberg
and Nakatani, 1996). In general, the hierarchical nature
of discourse structure has not been considered when com-
puting labeler inter-reliability and in evaluations of agree-
ment with automatic methods. Since computational dis-
course theory relies on the hierarchy of its segments, we
will consider it in this paper. For each approach that fol-
lows, we consider both a ?flat? version, which does not
consider level of embeddedness, and a ?full? approach,
which does. We analyze the differences between the flat
and full versions for each approach.
2.2 Segment Definition
A discourse is made up of a sequence of utterances,
  	 
 
. In this paper, we define a segment as
a triple

	
, where  