Towards Automatic Sign Translation
Jie Yang, Jiang Gao, Ying Zhang, Alex Waibel 
Interactive Systems Laboratory 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA 
{yang+,jgao,joy,waibel}@cs.cmu.edu
ABSTRACT 
Signs are everywhere in our lives. They make our lives easier 
when we are familiar with them. But sometimes they also pose 
problems. For example, a tourist might not be able to understand 
signs in a foreign country. In this paper, we present our efforts 
towards automatic sign translation. We discuss methods for 
automatic sign detection. We describe sign translation using 
example based machine translation technology. We use a user-
centered approach in developing an automatic sign translation 
system. The approach takes advantage of human intelligence in 
selecting an area of interest and domain for translation if needed. 
A user can determine which sign is to be translated if multiple 
signs have been detected within the image. The selected part of 
the image is then processed, recognized, and translated. We have 
developed a prototype system that can recognize Chinese signs 
input from a video camera which is a common gadget for a tourist, 
and translate them into English text or voice stream. 
Keywords 
Sign, sign detection, sign recognition, sign translation. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Languages play an important role in human communication. 
We communicate with people and information systems 
through diverse media in increasingly varied environments. 
One of those media is a sign. A sign is something that 
suggests the presence of a fact, condition, or quality. Signs 
are everywhere in our lives. They make our lives easier 
when we are familiar with them.  But sometimes they also 
pose problems. For example, a tourist might not be able to 
understand signs in a foreign country. Unfamiliar language 
and environment make it difficult for international tourists 
to read signs, take a taxi, order food, and understand the 
comments of passersby.  
At the Interactive Systems Lab of Carnegie Mellon 
University, we are developing technologies for tourist 
applications [12]. The systems are equipped with a unique 
combination of sensors and software. The hardware 
includes computers, GPS receivers, lapel microphones and 
earphones, video cameras and head-mounted displays. This 
combination enables a multimodal interface to take 
advantage of speech and gesture inputs to provide 
assistance for tourists. The software supports natural 
language processing, speech recognition, machine 
translation, handwriting recognition and multimodal fusion. 
A vision module is trained to locate and read written 
language, is able to adapt to new environments, and is able 
to interpret intentions offered by the user, such as a spoken 
clarification or pointing gesture.  
In this paper, we present our efforts towards automatic sign 
translation. A system capable of sign detection and 
translation would benefit three types of individuals: tourists, 
the visually handicapped and military intelligence.  Sign 
translation, in conjunction with spoken language 
translation, can help international tourists to overcome these 
barriers. Automatic sign recognition can help us to increase 
environmental awareness by effectively increasing our field 
of vision. It can also help blind people to extract 
information. A successful sign translation system relies on 
three key technologies: sign extraction, optical character 
recognition (OCR), and language translation. Although 
much research has been directed to automatic speech 
recognition, handwriting recognition, OCR, speech and text 
translation, little attention has been paid to automatic sign 
recognition and translation in the past. Our current research 
is focused on automatic sign detection and translation while 
taking advantage of OCR technology available. We have 
developed robust automatic sign detection algorithms. We 
have applied Example Based Machine Translation (EBMT) 
technology [1] in sign translation.  
Fully automatic extraction of signs from the environment is 
a challenging problem because signs are usually embedded 
in the environment. Sign translation has some special 
problems compared to a traditional language translation 
task. They can be location dependent. The same text on 
different signs can be treated differently. For example, it is 
not necessary to translate the meanings for names, such as 
street names or company names, in most cases. In the 
system development, we use a user-centered approach. The 
 
 
 
approach takes advantage of human intelligence in selecting 
an area of interest and domain for translation if needed. For 
example, a user can determine which sign is to be translated 
if multiple signs have been detected within the image. The 
selected part of the image is then processed, recognized, 
and translated, with the translation displayed on a hand-held 
wearable display, or a head mounted display, or synthesized 
as a voice output message over the earphones. By focusing 
only on the information of interest and providing domain 
knowledge, the approach provides a flexible method for 
sign translation. It can enhance the robustness of sign 
recognition and translation, and speed up the recognition 
and translation process. We have developed a prototype 
system that can recognize Chinese sign input from a video 
camera which is a common gadget for a tourist, and 
translate the signs into English text or voice stream.  
The organization of this paper is as follows: Section 2 
describes challenges in sign recognition and translation. 
Section 3 discusses methods for sign detection. Section 4 
addresses the application of EBMT technology into sign 
translation. Section 5 introduces a prototype system for 
Chinese sign translation. Section 6 gives experimental 
results. Section 7concludes the paper. 
2. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION  
A sign can be a displayed structure bearing letters or 
symbols, used to identify or advertise a place of business. It 
can also be a posted notice bearing a designation, direction, 
or command. Figure 1 and Figure 2 illustrate two examples 
of signs. Figure 1 shows a Russian sign completely 
embedded in the background. Figure 2 is a sign that 
contains German text with no verb and article. In this 
research, we are interested in translating signs that have 
direct influence upon a tourist from a different country or 
culture. These signs, at least, include the following 
categories: 
? Names: street, building, company, etc. 
? Information: designation, direction, safety 
advisory, warning, notice, etc. 
? Commercial: announcement, advertisement, etc. 
? Traffic: warning, limitation, etc. 
? Conventional symbol: especially those are 
confusable to a foreign tourist, e.g., some symbols 
are not international. 
Fully automatic extraction of signs from the environment is 
a challenging problem because signs are usually embedded 
in the environment. The related work includes video OCR 
and automatic text detection. Video OCR is used to capture 
text in the video images and recognize the text.  Many 
video images contain text contents. Such text can come 
from computer-generated text that is overlaid on the 
imagery (e.g., captions in broadcast news programs) or text 
that appears as a part of the video scene itself (e.g., a sign 
outside a place of business, or a post). Location and 
recognition of text in video imagery is challenging due to 
low resolution of characters and complexity of background. 
Research in video OCR has mainly focused on locating the 
text in the image and preprocessing the text area for OCR 
[4][6][7][9][10]. Applications of the research include 
automatically identifying the contents of video imagery for 
video index [7][9], and capturing documents from paper 
source during reading and writing [10]. Compared to other 
video OCR tasks, sign extraction takes place in a more 
dynamic environment. The user?s movement can cause 
unstable input images. Non-professional equipment can 
make the video input poorer than that of other video OCR 
tasks, such as detecting captions in broadcast news 
programs. In addition, sign extraction has to be 
implemented in real time using limited resources. 
 
Figure 1 A sign embedded in the background 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 A German sign 
Sign translation requires sign recognition. A straightforward 
idea is to use advanced OCR technology. Although OCR 
technology works well in many applications, it requires 
some improvements before it can be applied to sign 
recognition. At current stage of the research, we will focus 
our research on sign detection and translation while taking 
advantage of state-of-the-art OCR technologies. 
Sign translation has some special problems compared to a 
traditional language translation task. The function of signs 
lead to the characteristic of the text used in the sign: it has 
to be short and concise. The lexical mismatch and structural 
mismatch problems become more severe in sign translation 
because shorter words/phrases are more likely to be 
ambiguous and insufficient information from the text to 
resolve the ambiguities which are related to the 
environment of the sign.  
We assume that a tourist has a video camera to capture 
signs into a wearable or portable computer. The procedure 
of sign translation is as follows: capturing the image with 
signs, detecting signs in the image, recognizing signs, and 
translating results of sign recognition into target language.  
3. AUTOMATIC SIGN DETECTION  
Fully automatic extraction of signs from the environment is 
very difficult, because signs are usually embedded in the 
environment. There are many challenges in sign detection, 
such as variation, motion and occlusion. We have no 
control in font, size, orientation, and position of sign texts. 
Originating in 3-D space, text on signs in scene images can 
be distorted by slant, tilt, and shape of objects on which 
they are found [8]. In addition to the horizontal left-to-right 
orientation, other orientations include vertical, circularly 
wrapped around another object, slanted, sometimes with the 
characters tapering (as in a sign angled away from the 
camera), and even mixed orientations within the same text 
area (as would be found on text on a T-shirt or wrinkled 
sign). Unlike other text detection and video OCR tasks, sign 
extraction is in a more dynamic environment. The user?s 
movement can cause unstable input images. Furthermore, 
the quality of the video input is poorer than that of other 
video OCR tasks, such as detecting captions in broadcast 
news programs, because of low quality of equipment. 
Moreover, sign detection has to be real-time using a limited 
resource. Though automatic sign detection is a difficult 
task, it is crucial for a sign translation system.  
We use a hierarchical approach to address these challenges. 
We detect signs at three different levels. At the first level, 
the system performs coarse detection by extracting features 
from edges, textures, colors/intensities. The system 
emphasizes robust detection at this level and tries to 
effectively deal with the different conditions such as 
lighting, noise, and low resolution. A multi-resolution 
detection algorithm is used to compensate different lighting 
and low contrasts. The algorithm provides hypotheses of 
sign regions for a variety of scenes with large variations in 
both lighting condition and contrast. At the second level, 
the system refines the initial detection by employing various 
adaptive algorithms. The system focuses on each detected 
area and makes elaborate analysis to guarantee reliable and 
complete detection. In most cases, the adaptive algorithms 
can lead to finding the regions without missing any sign 
region. At the third level, the system performs layout 
analysis based on the outcome from the previous levels. 
The design and layout of signs are language and culture 
dependent. For example, many Asia languages, such as 
Chinese and Japanese, have two types of layout: the 
horizontal and the vertical. The system provides 
considerable flexibility to allow the detection of slanted 
signs and signs with non-uniform character sizes.  
4. SIGN TRANSLATION  
Sign translation has some special problems compared to a 
traditional language translation task. Sign translation 
depends not only on domain but also on functionality of the 
sign. The same text on different signs can be treated 
differently. In general, the text used in the sign is short and 
concise. For example, the average length of each sign in our 
Chinese sign database is 6.02 Chinese characters. The 
lexical mismatch and structural mismatch problems become 
more severe for sign translation because shorter 
words/phrases are more likely to be ambiguous and there 
isn?t sufficient information from the text to resolve the 
ambiguities which are related to the environment of the 
sign. For example, in order to make signs short, 
abbreviations are widely used in signs, e.g.,  (/ji 
yan suo/) is the abbreviation for ,(/ji 
sheng chong yan jiu suo/ institute of parasites), such 
abbreviations are difficult, if not impossible, even for a 
human to understand without knowledge of the context of 
the sign. Since designers of signs always assume that 
readers can use the information from other sources to 
understand the meaning of the sign, they tend to use short 
words. e.g.  in sign (/man xing/, drive slowly), the 
word (/xing/, walk, drive) is ambiguous, it can mean 
  (/xing zou/ ?move of human,? walk) or  
?move of a car,? drive). The human reader can understand 
the meaning if he knows it is a traffic sign for cars, but 
without this information, MT system cannot select the 
correct translation for this word. Another problem in sign is 
structural mismatch. Although this is one of the basic 
problems for all MT systems, it is more serious in sign 
translation: some grammatical functions are omitted to 
make signs concise. Examples include: (1) the subject ?we? 
is omitted in (/li mao dai ke/, treat customers 
politely); (2) the sentence is reordered to emphasize the 
topic: rather than saying 
(/qing jiang bao zhuang zhi 
tou ru la ji xiang/, please throw wrapping paper into the 
garbage can), using (/bao 
zhuang zhi qing tou ru la ji xiang/, wrapping paper, please 
throw it into the garbage can) to highlight the ?wrapping 
paper.? With these special features, sign translation is not a 
trivial problem of just using existing MT technologies to 
translate the text recognized by OCR module.  
 
Although a knowledge-based MT system works well with 
grammatical sentences, it requires a great amount of human 
effort to construct its knowledge base, and it is difficult for 
such a system to handle ungrammatical text that appears 
frequently in signs.  
We can use a database search method to deal with names, 
phrases, and symbols related to tourists. Names are usually 
location dependent, but they can be easily obtained from 
many information sources such as maps and phone books. 
Phrases and symbols related to tourists are relative fixed for 
a certain country. The database of phrases and symbols is 
relatively stable once it is built 
We propose to apply Generalized Example Based Machine 
Translation (GEBMT) [1][2] enhanced with domain 
detection to a sign translation task. This is a data-driven 
approach. What EBMT needs are a set of bilingual corpora 
each for one domain and a bilingual dictionary where the 
latter can be constructed statistically from the corpora. 
Matched from the corpus, EBMT can give the same style of 
translations as the corpus. The domain detection can be 
achieved from other sources. For example, shape/color of 
the sign and semantics of the text can be used to choose the 
domain of the sign. 
We will start with the EBMT software [1]. The system will 
be used as a shallow system that can function using nothing 
more than sentence-aligned plain text and a bilingual 
dictionary; and given sufficient parallel text, the dictionary 
can be extracted statistically from the corpus.  In a 
translation process, the system looks up all matching 
phrases in the source-language half of the parallel corpus 
and performs a word-level alignment on the entries 
containing matches to determine a (usually partial) 
translation. Portions of the input for which there are no 
matches in the corpus do not generate a translation. 
Because the EBMT system does not generate translations 
for 100% of its input text, a bilingual dictionary and phrasal 
glossary are used to fill any gaps.  Selection of the ?best? 
translation is guided by a trigram model of the target 
language and a chart table [3]. 
5. A PROTOTYPE SYSTEM  
We have developed a prototype system for Chinese sign 
recognition and translation. Figure 3 shows the architecture 
of the prototype system. A user can interactively involve 
sign recognition and translation process when needed. For 
example, a user can select the area of interest, or indicate 
that the sign is a street name. The system works as follows. 
The system captures the sign in a natural background using 
a video camera. The system then automatically detects or 
interactively selects the sign region. The system performs 
sign recognition and translation within the detected/selected 
region. It first preprocesses the selected region, binarizes 
the image to get text or symbol, and feeds the binary image 
into the sign recognizer. OCR software from a third party is 
used for text recognition. The recognized text is then 
translated into English. The output of the translation is fed 
to the user by display on screen or synthesized speech. 
Festival, a general purpose multi-lingual text-to-speech 
(TTS) system is used for speech synthesis.  
 
 
 
Figure 3 Architecture of the prototype system 
 
 
 
Figure 4  The interface of the prototype system 
An efficient user interface is important to a user-centered 
system. Use of interaction is not only necessary for an 
interactive system, but also useful for an automatic system. 
A user can select a sign from multiple detected signs for 
translation, and get involved when automatic sign detection 
is wrong. Figure 4 is the interface of the system. The 
window of the interface displays the image from a video 
camera. The translation result is overlaid on the location of 
the sign. A user can select the sign text using pen or mouse 
anywhere in the window. 
6. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  
We have evaluated the prototype system for automatic sign 
detection and translation. We have built a Chinese sign 
database with about 800 images taken from China and 
Singapore. We have tested the automatic detection module 
using 50 images randomly selected from the database. 
Table 1 shows the test result of automatic sign detection. 
Figure 5 and Figure 6 show examples of automatic sign 
detection with white rectangles indicating the sign regions. 
Figure 5 shows correct detection after layout analysis. 
Figure 6 illustrates a result with a false detection (Note the 
small detection box below and to the left of the larger 
detection).  
 
Table 1 Test Results of Automatic Detection on 50 
Chinese Signs 
Detection 
without missing 
characters 
Detection 
with false 
alarm 
Detection with 
missing characters 
43 12 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 An example of automatic sign detection 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 An example of false detection 
 
Figure 7 illustrates two difficult examples of sign detection. 
The text in Figure 7(a) is easily confused with the reflective 
background. The sign in Figure 7(b) is embedded in the 
background  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     (a)                                                (b) 
Figure 7 Difficult examples of sign detection 
 
We have also tested the EBMT based method. We assume 
perfect sign recognition in our test. We randomly selected 
50 signs from our database. We first tested the system 
includes a Chinese-English dictionary from the Linguistic 
Data Consortium, and a statistical dictionary built from the 
HKLC (Hong Kong Legal Code) corpus. As a result, we 
only got about 30% reasonable translations. We then 
trained with a small corpus of 670 pairs of bilingual 
sentences [7], The accuracy is improved from 30% to 52% 
on 50 test signs. Some examples of errors are illustrated 
below: 
Mis-segmentaion: 
Chinese with wrong segmentation: 
  
/ge zhong che liang qing rao xing/ 
Translation from MT: 
 All vehicles are please wind profession  
Correct segmentation: 
   
Translation if segmentation is correct: 
 All vehicles please use detour 
Lack-domain information: 
Chinese with segmentation: 
  
 /qing wu dong shou/ 
 Please don?t touch it 
Translation from MT: 
 Please do not get to work 
Domain knowledge needed to translate : 
?start to work? in domain such as work plan and 
?don?t touch? in domains like tourism, exhibition 
etc. 
Proper Name: 
Chinese with segmentation: 
  
 /bei jing tong ren yi yuan/ 
 Beijing Tongren Hospital 
Translation from MT: 
 Beijing similar humane hospital 
is translated to the meaning of each 
character because it is not identified as a proper 
name which then should only be represented by its 
pronunciation. 
Figure 8 illustrates error analysis of the translation module. 
It is interesting to note that 40% of errors come from mis-
segmentation of words. There is a big room for 
improvement in proper word segmentation.  In addition, we 
can take advantage of the contextual information provided 
by the OCR module to further improve the translation 
quality.  
Error source
41.11%
31.11%
10.00%
14.44%
3.33%
Mis-segmentation
Lack domain knowledge
Mis-detection of proper
name
Corpus/dict not large enough
Other
 
Figure 8 Error analysis of the translation module 
7. CONCLUSION 
We have reported progress on automatic sign translation in 
this paper. Sign translation, in conjunction with spoken 
language translation, can help international tourists to 
overcome language barriers. A successful sign translation 
system relies on three key technologies: sign extraction, 
OCR, and language translation. We have developed 
algorithms for robust sign detection. We have applied 
EBMT technology for sign translation. We have employed 
a user-centered approach in developing an automatic sign 
translation system. The approach takes advantage of human 
intelligence in selecting an area of interest and domain for 
translation if needed. We have developed a prototype 
system that can recognize Chinese signs input from a video 
camera which is a common gadget for a tourist, and 
translate them into English text or voice stream. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank Dr. Ralf Brown and Dr. Robert 
Frederking for providing initial EBMT software and 
William Kunz for developing the interface for the prototype 
system. We would also like to thank other members in the 
Interactive Systems Labs for their inspiring discussions and 
support. This research is partially supported by DARPA 
under TIDES project. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R.D. Brown. Example-based machine translation in the 
pangloss system. Proceedings of the 16th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 169-
174, 1996. 
[2] R.D. Brown. Automated generalization of translation 
examples". In Proceedings of the Eighteenth 
International Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING-2000), p. 125-131. Saarbr?cken, Germany, 
August 2000. 
[3] C. Hogan and R.E. Frederking. An evaluation of the 
multi-engine MT architecture. Machine Translation 
and the Information Soup: Proceedings of the Third 
Conference of the Association for Machine Translation 
in the Americas (AMTA ?98), vol. 1529 of Lecture 
Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 113-123. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, October. 
[4] A.K. Jain and B. Yu. Automatic text location in images 
and video frames. Pattern Recognition, vol. 31, no. 12, 
pp. 2055--2076, 1998. 
[5] C. C. Kubler. "Read Chinese Signs". Published by 
Chheng & Tsui Company, 1993. 
[6] H. Li and D. Doermann, Automatic Identification of 
Text in Digital Video Key Frames, Proceedings of 
IEEE International Conference of Pattern Recognition, 
pp. 129-132, 1998. 
[7] R. Lienhart, Automatic Text Recognition for Video 
Indexing, Proceedings of ACM Multimedia 96, pp. 11-
20, 1996. 
[8] J. Ohya, A. Shio, and S. Akamatsu. Recognition 
characters in scene images. IEEE Transactions on 
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 16, no. 
2, pp. 214--220, 1994. 
[9] T. Sato, T. Kanade, E.K. Hughes, and M.A. Smith. 
Video ocr for digital news archives. IEEE Int. 
Workshop on Content-Based Access of Image and 
Video Database, 1998. 
[10] M.J. Taylor, A. Zappala, W.M. Newman, and C.R. 
Dance, Documents through cameras, Image and Vision 
Computing, vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 831-844, 1999. 
[11] V. Wu, R. Manmatha, and E.M. Riseman, Textfinder: 
an automatic system to detect and recognize text in 
images. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and 
Machine Intelligence, vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 1224-1229, 
1999. 
[12] J. Yang, W. Yang, M. Denecke, and A. Waibel. Smart 
sight: a tourist assistant system.  Proceedings of Third 
International Symposium on Wearable Computers, pp. 
73--78. 1999. 
 
