Generat ing  Text  w i th  a Theorem Prover  
Ivfin I. Gar ibay  
School of Computer  Science 
University of Central  F lor ida 
Orlando, FL  
igaribay@cs.ucf.edu 
Abst rac t  
The process of documenting designs is tedious and 
often error-prone. We discuss a system that au- 
tomatically generates documentation for the single 
step transition behavior of Statecharts with particu- 
lar focus on the correctness ofthe result in the sense 
that the document will present all and only the facts 
corresponding to the design being documented. 
Our approach is to translate the Statechart into 
a propositional formula, then translate this formula 
into a natural language report. In the later transla- 
tion pragmatic effects arise due to the way the in- 
formation is presented. Whereas uch effects can be 
difficult to quantify, we account for them within an 
abstract framework by applying a series of transfor- 
mations on the structure on the report while pre- 
serving soundness and completeness of the logical 
content. The result is an automatically generated 
hypertext report that is both logically correct and, 
to a relatively high degree of confidence, free of mis- 
leading implicatures. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Producing technical documentation is a time- 
consuming and expensive task. For instance, Re- 
iter et al (1995), report cases of engineers expend- 
ing five hours on documentation foreach hour spent 
on design and of airplane documentation sets which 
weigh more than the actual airplane being docu- 
mented. Part of the reason for this problem is the 
gap between Computer Aided Design (CAD) tools 
and similar tools for assisting the documentation f 
those designs. Since research efforts focus primarily 
in the former, this situation is likely to get worse as 
the CAD tools get more powerful while documenta- 
tion tools lag far behind. 
In this paper we address the matter of automatic 
generation oftechnical documentation (Reiter et al, 
1992; Reiter et al, 1995; RSsner and Stede, 1992; 
Svenberg, 1994; Punshon et al, 1997) by studying 
the problem of automatically generating documents 
describing the single step transition behavior of Stat- 
echarts. 
From a natural anguage generation (NLG) per- 
Statechart 
Content Planning Question tree + Tree transformations 
Text Planning i Hypermxt ~s implicit text planner (user)\[ 
~ Theoreml 
, _?_T;_ J 
I.oa!izatioo Tomp,ato I 
Hyper-t exit Document 
Figure 1: Conceptual view Of the system. 
spective, this problem is distinguished in that the 
formal correctness of the document being generated 
is crucial while felicitousness of the style is rela- 
tively unimportant. This leads us to a solution 
based on formally verifiable theorem-proving tech- 
niques which allows us to approach strategic NLG is- 
sues within a highly abstract and conceptually clear 
framework. 
The system takes a statechart in the form of a 
labeled directed graph and translates it into a set 
of propositional formulae defining its transition be- 
havior. A hyper-text natural language document is
generated on-demand from this set of formulae in 
response to the reader's interaction with the appli- 
cation. 
Figure 1 depicts a comparative (Moore and Paris, 
1993; Paris et al, 1991; Hovy, 1988) conceptual view 
of the system while Fig. 2 shows the system archi- 
tecture. A prototype has been fully implemented 
with the exception of the statechart axiomatization 
module, x 
2 A Log ica l  Semant ics  for 
Statechar ts  
The graphical language of statecharts as proposed 
by David Harel (Harel et al, 1987; Harel and Naa- 
mad, 1996), has been widely recognized as a impor- 
tant tool for analyzing complex reactive systems. 
It has been implemented in commercial applica- 
tions like STATEMATE (Harel and Politi, 1998) 
1A full description of this algorithmic translation of a stat- 
echart from its graphical formalism to the propositional logic 
input format used in this work is described in Garibay (2000). 
13 
Statechart 
. . . . .  t . . . . .  
~ Axlomatlzatlon ) 
' Module ' I . . . . . . . . .  I 
\[ Statechart Axioms 
Reduction to ~ 
I MRCNF module IN ,  
? ~ 
I - I  to CN, module 
I Question Tree ,ode ~ 
\[Information Eitraction Module ~'~ k. 
Hyper-text Organization/Realization M dul~ 
Generated Hyper-text Page 
User Interface (Browser) \] 
Theorem \] 
Prover 
Figure 2: System architecture of the theorem prover 
based generator. The dotted box is not imple- 
mented. 
"rv 
IMAGE 
WOR HNG { PIC OFF 
SOUND 
o J VhmN(  
Figure 3: Example Statechart. 
and RHAPSODY from ilogix (I-Logix Inc., 2000) 
and has been adopted as a part of the Unified Mod- 
eling Language (UML Revision Task Force, 1999; 
Booch, 1999), an endeavor to standardize a language 
of blueprints for software. 
Statecharts (Fig. 3) are an extension of conven- 
tional finite state machines in which the states may 
have a hierarchical structure. A configuration is de- 
fined as a maximal set of non-conflicting states which 
are active at a given time. A transition connects 
states and is labeled with the set of events that trig- 
ger it, and a second set of events that are generated 
when the transition is taken. A step of the statechart 
relates the current configuration and the events that 
are active to the next configuration and the events 
that are generated. A configuration and the set of 
events that are active is referred to as a status. 
We capture a step of a statechart as a pair of 
propositional models, one for the current status and 
((TV ~ WORKING v WAIT ING)  
(TV.next ~ WORKING.next  V WAIT ING,next)  
(WORKING --~ ~ WAIT ING)  
(WORKING.next  --~ ~ WAIT ING.next )  
(WAIT ING --~ ~ WORKING)  
(WAITING.next  --+ ~ WORKING.next )  
(WORKING ~ IMAGE A SOUND) 
(WORKING.next  ~ IMAGE.next  A SOUND.next)  
? .. ) 
((TV) A 
( (WORKING A P ICTURE A P IC -OFF  A WAIT ING.next)  V 
(WORKING ^~ (P ICTURE A P IC -OFF)  A 
( ( IMAGE A P ICTURE A P IC -OFF  A WAIT ING.next)  V 
( IMAGE A~ (P ICTURE A P IC-OFF)  A 
( (P ICTURE A P IC -OFF  A WAIT ING.next )  V 
(P ICTURE A TXT  A MUTE.next  A TEXT.next)  V 
(P ICTURE A~ OFF  A9 TXT  A P ICTURE.next )  
) ? .. ))) 
Figure 4: Section of the propositional logic transla- 
tion of the example statechart (Fig. 3). 
one for the next status. In practice, we incorpo- 
rate this into a single model with two versions of 
each propositional variable: P for the truth value in 
the current status and Pn for the truth value in the 
next status 2. A full description of the algorithm 
for translating statecharts to sets of formulae can 
be found in Garibay (2000). For a example of this 
translation see Fig. 4. 
3 The Min imum Clausal Theory of 
the Statecharts 
At this point, we have a formula that entails the the- 
ory of the single step transition behavior of a Stat- 
echart. We can fulfill our requirement of generat- 
ing a sound and complete report just by translating 
this formula into English. However, this approach 
presents a number of problems. For instance, the 
AND and OR connectives do not in general have the 
same meaning in English as they do in logic (Gazdar, 
1979), furthermore, unlike in the logical formula the 
scope of the connectives in English is not, in gen- 
eral, well defined (Holt and Klein, 1999). To mini- 
mize the ambiguity, we need to take the formula to 
a form with minimal nesting of operators. 
Potentially a more significant problem is the fact 
that much of the theory (the formula plus all its logi- 
cal consequences) i  obtainable only via complicated 
inferences. Since the reader understands the trans- 
lation of the formula at an intuitive level, making 
only limited inferences, a direct translation will fail 
to communicate the entire theory. Hence, we would 
like to take the formula to a form that is closed, in 
some sense, under logical consequences. 
We address both issues by using what we refer to 
as minimal (fully) resolved conjunctive normal form 
(MRCNF). A formula is in a MRCNF if and only if 
2These single step models will form the basis for a tem- 
poral model capturing the full behavior of the statecharts a
described by Harel and Naamad (1996). 
14 
it is in conjunctive normal form (CNF) and is closed 
under resolution, absorption and tautology (Fitting, 
1990; Rogers and Vijay-Shanker, 1994). The clo- 
sure under resolution is effectively a finite approx- 
imation of closure under consequence, that is, ev- 
ery clause that is a logical consequence of the the- 
ory entailed by the formula is a direct consequence 
of some clause in the MRCNF. The other two op- 
erations guarantee minimality in size by removing 
clauses that are trivially true (tautology), and those 
that are proper super-sets of another (absorption). 
Hence, the translation will communicate not only 
the initial facts but also those inferred by resolution. 
Moreover, a formula in this form is just a conjunc- 
tion of disjunctions--eliminating the scoping prob- 
lem. If we interpret he disjunctions as implications, 
the translation into English will be just a sequence 
of implicative sentences that are to be interpreted 
conjunctively--a typical structure for such informa- 
tion in English. 
4 Organ iz ing  the  Hyper - text  
Repor t :  The  Quest ion  Tree  
A formula in MRCNF is organized in a way that 
resembles a sequence of implicative sentences. The 
problem now is the size of this sequence. Large to 
begin with, its size is increased by the transforma- 
tion to CNF and closure under resolution. Hence, 
the translation of MRCNF directly into a sequence 
of statements would present an uninterpretable s - 
quence of facts. If they are going to be understood 
by the reader there is a need for some kind of struc- 
ture. The correct organization depends heavily on 
the reader's goals and expectations. However, be- 
yond the assumption that the reader's generic goal 
is to obtain information about the transition behav- 
ior of the statechart under consideration, we do not 
make any assumptions about what the particular 
reader's goals may be. Instead we present he report 
as a hyper-text document and allow the reader to in- 
teractively refine their goal by following hyper-links. 
Effectively, the reader's queries focus the theory of 
the statechart in a particular aspect of its behavior 3.
In this way, as in Reiter et al (1992) and Levine 
et al (1991), we use hyper-text as an implicit text 
planner, in the sense that we account for every pos- 
sible model of the user/system interaction and let 
the actual reader decide which goal to pursue. 
We will call the reader's elections choices. Each 
choice the reader makes narrows the information we 
have to convey, limiting it to all and only the part 
that is logically consistent with that choice. We will 
say that the reader refines the theory by making 
the choice. At each point, the choices available to 
the reader are all the propositional variables that 
3In a process that will be precisely described shortly. 
the theory is contingent upon. The reader effec- 
tively fixes the valuation of one of these variables 
to true or false. The system then adds the reader's 
choice to the theory and recalculates the MRCNF. If 
the newly obtained theory remains contingent upon 
some variables, the reader then will have available 
a new set of choices. If not, the reader will have 
reached a set of non-contingent facts (henceforth 
facts) which are consequences of all the previous 
choices. 
While this process makes the information more 
accessible by giving it a logical structure, it does 
nothing to reduce the size of the report. We resolve 
this by generating the document on demand. While 
the refinement process (the core computation for on- 
demand generation) can potentially be very expen- 
sive in terms of time, the fact that we are adding sin- 
gleton clauses to an already minimum set of clausal 
consequences allows us to use a simplified form of 
the theorem prover with asymptotic time complex- 
ity linear in the number of clauses. 
We can visualize the process of the reader mak- 
ing choices as navigating a question tree, in which 
each branch is labeled with a choice and each node 
contains the theory of the Statechart as refined by 
the path of choices from the root to that node. In 
this tree, a reader's choice is equivalent to the ques- 
tion: "What are the circumstances/situations if X 
is true/false?." The root is the full theory of the 
transition behavior of the Statechart. The children 
of a node are obtained by fixing the valuation of 
each of its contingent propositional variables in turn 
and recomputing the MRCNF. The leaves are non- 
contingent theories (those containing only facts) a 
Conceptually, the labels of each path from the root 
to a leaf together with each one of the facts in that 
leaf corresponds to all and only the valuations which 
are models of the original theory. Therefore, the 
question tree is sound and complete in the logical 
sense. 
5 Generat ing  the  Hyper - text  Page  
under  P ragmat ic  Cons iderat ions :  
In fo rmat ion  Ext ract ion  Modu le  
This tree turns out to provide a useful framework 
to address pragmatic issues--those that arise princi- 
pally from the structure of the report itself (Gazdar, 
1979). By addressing these issues in the context of 
the question tree, rather than in its realization as a 
report, we abstract away from a great deal of sub- 
tle semantic detail that would otherwise obscure the 
analysis. Our approach consists of applying a se- 
ries of transformations that resolve these issues while 
4In general this structure is a directed acyclic graph which 
Reiter et al call the question space (Reiter et al, 1995), but 
since we work with a tree that  spans it, we prefer question 
tree. 
15 
preserving logical soundness and completeness of the 
document. 
5.1 P romot ing  facts 
In the question tree, the facts are either reported at 
the end of a chain of choices or are encoded in the 
choices themselves. A sequence of these choices is 
analogous to a chain of nested implications in which 
the antecedents are the choices made by the user 
and the consequence is the theory as refined by the 
choices. This refinement continues until we obtain 
a non-contingent theory--one in which all variables 
have valuations. Thus, the chain of implications 
eventually leads to a set of facts as its final con- 
sequence. The pragmatic problem in this case re- 
lates to the amount of information to be provided 
(Grice's Maxim of Quantity (Grice, 1975)). This 
maxim states that speakers will make their contri- 
bution as informative as is required, but not more 
informative than that (Gazdar, 1979). Under this 
assumption, reporting a fact as a consequence of a 
sequence of choices explicitly denies that this fact is 
a consequence of any prefix of that sequence, in con- 
trast to the logical semantics of implication. Such 
implicatures, while not consequences of the logical 
content, are valid inferences that people make on 
the basis of well established expectations about the 
communicative act. 
To avoid this false implicature, we present the 
facts to the reader as soon as they become available, 
that is, as soon as they become non-contingent in
the theory. The transformation, in this case, moves 
the facts from the leaves to the interior nodes. This 
transformation does not change the set of models 
represented in the tree simply because the move- 
ment of facts does not eliminate any path of the tree. 
Hence, the transformation preserves oundness and 
completeness of the tree. 
In practice, the facts are just the singleton clauses 
of a theory, therefore we can realize this transforma- 
tion by simply reporting singleton clauses as soon as 
they appear in the theory. 
5.2 Repor t ing  facts on ly  once 
On the other hand, facts in a theory are also facts in 
every consistent refinement of that theory. Hence, 
reporting all the facts at each node of the question 
tree leads us to report many of them repeatedly. In 
effect, every fact reported in a node will be reported 
in each of its children as well. This repetition of facts 
violates the "upper-bound" of Quantity-- it  reports 
more than is relevant. In this case Quantity requires 
us to report only information that is "new". 
In general, what is new will depend not only on 
what is reported but on inferences the reader is likely 
to have made (McDonald, 1992). We have, however, 
already committed to being explicit; our assumption 
is that the reader makes essentially no inferences, 
that they know all and only what we have explicitly 
reported. Therefore, we can satisfy the upper bound 
of Quantity by reporting each fact exactly once on 
each branch--when it first becomes non-contingent. 
To do this, we simply keep a list of all facts that 
have been reported in the current branch; this is the 
extent of our model of the user. 
This transformation does not change the set of 
models represented in the tree, since it only elimi- 
nates repeated literals. 
5.3 P romot ing  single level impl icat ions  
One of the difficulties in using Quantity is to deter- 
mine what information is "required". At each node 
of the question tree we have a current heory to re- 
port. The issue, in essence, is what to report at that 
node and what to report at its descendents. On one 
hand, it seems clear that we are, at least, required 
to report the non-contingent facts at each node. On 
the other hand, we don't want to report the whole 
theory at the root. 
Our intuition is that the degree to which facts 
are relevant is inversely proportional to the diffi- 
culty of interpreting them. Under these circum- 
stances, un-nested implications (i.e., binary disjunc- 
tions) are simple enough that the reader is likely to 
expect hem to be reported. From the perspective 
of the question tree, this suggest, that in addition 
to the facts at a node, we should also report, as im- 
plications, the facts at its non-contingent children 
(those that are leaves). We refer to the choices lead- 
ing to non-contingent theories as conclusive choices. 
These are reported as single-level implications ("If X 
then (some sequence of facts~"). This has the effect 
of promoting the leaves of the tree to their parent 
pages. 
Note that a choice that is conclusive at some page 
will also be conclusive at each page in the subtree 
rooted at that page (or, rather, at each page reached 
by a sequence of choices consistent with that choice). 
In keeping with the principle of reporting a fact ex- 
actly once along each path, we must avoid reporting 
the implication at the descendent pages. To this 
end, after reporting each of the conclusive choices 
on a page, we report the remainder of the tree be- 
low that page under an "Otherwise" choice in which 
the theory has been refined with the complements 
of the conclusive choices. This has the effect of dra- 
matically restructuring the tree: each of the non- 
contingent leaves is promoted to the highest page at 
which the choice that selects it becomes conclusive. 
Once again this transformation reorganizes the 
branches of the question tree without changing the 
set of models it represents. 
To find the conclusive choices we run the theorem 
prover on the current heory extended, in turn, with 
each literal upon which it is contingent. If the re- 
sulting theory is non-contingent, then that literal is a 
1{} 
~far :  
* ( the  cur rent  conf igurat ion  does  not  inc lude  the  s ta te  WORKING) 
* ( the event  OFF is  not  ac t ive) .  
Facts :  
* the  next  conf igurat ion  w i l l  not  inc lude  the  s ta te  ~URKING. 
Independent  o f f  whether :  
* the event  PIC-OFF i s  act ive ,  
Depends on whether :  
* the  cur rent  conf igurat ion  inc ludes  the  s ta tes  SON and SOP. 
the  event  MUTE Is active. 
Cho ices :  
e I f  the  cur rent  conf igurat ion  i nc ludes  the  s ta te  SUN \[ then . . .  \] 
* If the current configuration duel not include the state SON ~ teen... \] 
* If the current configuration includes the state SOP \[ then... \] 
* I f  the  cur rent  conf igurat ion  does not  inc lude  the  s ta te  SOP \[ then . . .  \] 
* If the event  MUTE iS active \[ then.,. \] 
* I f  the  event  MUTE i s  not  ac t ive  \[ then . . .  \] 
Figure 5: Example of generated hyper-text page. 
The fo l low ing  cho ices  are  conc lus ive :  
* I f  the  event  OFF i s  ac t ive  then:  
- the  next  conf igurat ion  wlll i nc lude  the  s ta te  WAITING, 
but  e l l l  no t  inc lude  ?hm s ta tes  PICTURE or  TEXT. 
- the  event  h'UTE r i l l  not  be generated .  
* I f  the  next  conf igurat ion  tnc lude l  the  s ta te  WAITING then:  
the  event  OFF lw ac t ive .  
- the  next  conf igurat ion  s i l l  not  inc lude  the  s ta tes  PICTURE or  TEXT 
- the  event  NUTE w i l l  not  be generated .  
\ [Otherwise  . . . \ ]  
Figure 6: Conclusive choices section (up), non- 
conclusive otherwise section (bottom). 
conclusive choice. To find the remainder of the tree 
to be reported under the "Otherwise" case we ex- 
tend the current heory with the negation of each of 
the conclusive choices. If the resulting theory is in- 
consistent we will say that the conclusive choices are 
exhaustive, if the result is a contingent theory we will 
say that the conclusive choices are non-exhaustive 
with non-conclusive otherwise, and if the result is 
a non-contingent theory we will say that the con- 
clusive choices, in this case, are non-exhaustive with 
conclusive otherwise. 
5.4 Aggregat ing  pairs  of  single condi t ionals  
It frequently happens that, at some page, two con- 
clusive choices lead to the same model. In this case, 
we would report that each implies (among other 
things) the other. However, these two implications 
can be aggregated to form a biconditional. Further- 
more, Quantity requires us to select the strongest 
connective that applies in any such case because if 
a weaker connective is selected it suggests that no 
stronger one applies (a scalar implicature). Con- 
sequently, we are actually compelled to aggregate 
these two facts into a single biconditional. 
In practice, we use the theorem prover to either 
prove or disprove, for every implication, whether its 
converse is a theorem of the current heory. If proved 
then the biconditional is reported. 
Bicond i t iona l  I |p l i ca t ions :  
- the  next  conf igurat ion  r i l l  inc lude  the  s ta te  $OFF i f  and on ly  i f  
the  next  conf igurat ion  w i l l  not  inc lude  the  s ta te  SON. 
One of  ~he fo l low ing  must be the  case :  
Either: 
- the  cur rent  conf igurat ion  inc ludes  the  , ta ts  SOFF, 
but  does not  inc lude  the  s ta te  TEXT. 
- the  event  ESOUNU t~ not  ac t ive .  
- the  next  conf igurat ion  r i l l  inc lude  the  s~ate  SOFF, 
but  wi l l  not  inc lude  the  s ta te  SON. 
- the event ESOUND will not be generated. 
O~:the current configuration Includel the state SUFF, 
hut  does not  inc lude  the  s ta te  TEXT. 
- the  event  ESOUND is  ac t ive .  
- the  next  conf igurat ion  wlll i nc lude  the  s ta te  SON, 
but wlll not include the state SDFF. 
- the event ESOOND .Iii not be generated. 
Figure 7: Biconditional implications and models ec- 
tions. 
OtherWise:  
- the  cur rent  conf igurat ion  does  ~ot  inc lude  the  i ra te  TEXT 
- the  next  conf igurat ion  w i l l  not  inc lude  the  s ta te  SON. 
Figure 8: Conclusive otherwise section. 
6 Hyper - text  Organ izat ion  and  
Rea l i za t ion  Modu le  
The organization of the hyper-text page generated 
from each node of the question tree visited by the 
user is shown in Fig. 5. At the top of the page we 
report (parenthetically) the set of choices that have 
led to this page. Next we report all of the new facts 
obtained from the current heory as described in sec- 
tions 5.1 and 5.2. Then, the propositions that the 
theory is no longer dependent on (those which no 
longer occur in the theory ) followed by the list of 
propositions on which it does depend. Finally we 
present he choices or, if there are any, the conclu- 
sive choices. In the first (Fig. 5), each choice is pre- 
sented as an implicative sentence with a hyper-text 
link leading to another page (another node of the 
question tree). In the second (Fig. 6 top), we present 
the set of conclusive choices followed by one of the 
three possible cases (described in Section 5.3) for 
the "Otherwise" case. If the conclusive choices are 
exhaustive (the otherwise case is inconsistent), we 
report the biconditional implications (Section 5.4) 
followed by the final models (Fig 7). If they are ex- 
haustive with a conclusive otherwise, we report the 
otherwise as another conclusive choice (Fig 8). Fi- 
nally, if they are exhaustive with a non-conclusive 
otherwise, we report only an otherwise hyper-link 
(Fig 6 bottom). 
The realization module is, in essence, a pattern 
matching and template filling process. It's basic 
component simply translates facts into fixed English 
language sentences. 5 Facts are represented by lit- 
erals. These are classified into the following cate- 
gories: current state, current event, next state, and 
next event and the literais in each category are syn- 
5With added html mark-up. 
17 
Set  o f  L i te ra l s  ( fac ts )  
t 
((WAITING.next OFF WORKING -PICTURE,next TXT)\] 
Order ing  and  Aggregat ion  
((WORKING) (~)FF TXT) (WAITING.next -PICTUga.ne~,)) 
Template  based  rea l i za t ion  
The cur~n! configuration i cludes ti~ state WORKING 
The next configuration will include the state WAITING, but will not include tbu state PICTURE J The cv?nts OFF and TXT an: active 
Figure 9: Example of realization. 
tactically aggregated (Dalianis, 1999). The process 
is illustrated in Figure 9. 
Re ferences  
Grady Booch. 1999. UML in action. Communica- 
tions of the ACM, 42(10). 
Hercules Dalianis. 1999. Aggregation in natural 
language generation. Computational Intelligence, 
15(4):384-414. 
Melvin Fitting. 1990. First-order Logic and Au- 
tomated Theorem Proving. Springer-Verlag, New 
York. 
Iv?n Ibargiien Garibay. 2000. Automatic genera- 
tion of natural anguage documentation from stat- 
echarts. Master's thesis, University of Central 
Florida. 
Gerald Gazdar. 1979. Pragmatics: Implicature, 
Presupposition, and Logical Form. Academic 
Press. 
H. Paul Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. In 
Peter Cole and Jerry L. Morgan, editors, Syntax 
and Semantics: Speech Acts, volume 3, pages 41- 
58. Academic Press. 
David Harel and Amnon Naamad. 1996. The 
STATEMATE semantics of statecharts. ACM 
Transactions on Software Engineering and 
Methodology, 5(4):293-333, Oct. 
David Harel and Machal Politi. 1998. Modeling 
Reactive Systems with Statecharts: The STATE- 
MATE Approach. McGraw-Hill. QA 76.9 .$88 
H3677 1998. 
D. Harel, A. Pnueli, J. P. Schmidt, and R. Sherman. 
1987. On the formal semantics of statecharts. In 
Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, pages 
54-64. Computer Society of the IEEE, Computer 
Society Press, June. 
Alexander Holt and Ewan Klein. 1999. A 
semantically-derived subset of english for hard- 
ware verification. In Proceedings of the 37th An- 
nual Meeting of the Association for Computa- 
tional Linguistics. 
Eduard H. Hovy. 1988. Generating Natural Lan- 
guage under Pragmatic Constraints. Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates. 
I-Logix Inc. 2000. http://www.ilogix.com. 
John Levine, Alison Cawsey, Chris Mellish, 
Lawrence Poynter, Ehud Reiter, Paul Tyson, and 
John Walker. 1991. IDAS: Combining hypertext 
and natural anguage generation. In Third Euro- 
pean Workshop on Natural Language Generation, 
pages 55-62, Innsbruck, Austria. 
David D. McDonald. 1992. Type-driven suppres- 
sion of redundancy in the generation of inference- 
rich reports. In R. Dale, E. Hovy, D. RSsner, 
and O. Stock, editors, Aspects of Automated Nat- 
ural Language Generation, volume 587 of Lec- 
ture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 73-88. 
Springer-Velag. 
Johanna D. Moore and C6cile L. Paris. 1993. Plan- 
ning text for advisory dialogues: Capturing inten- 
tional and rhetorical information. Computational 
Linguistics, 19(4):651-694. 
C~cile L. Paris, William R. Swartout, and 
William C. Mann, editors. 1991. Natural Lan- 
guage Generation in Artificial Intelligence and 
Computational Linguistics. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers. 
J. M. Punshon, J. P. Tremblay, P. G. Sorenson, and 
P. S. Findeisen. 1997. From formal specifications 
to natural language: A case of study. In 12th 
IEEE International Conference Automated Soft- 
ware Engineering, pages 309-310, Incline Village, 
Nevada; USA, November. IEEE Computer Soci- 
ety. 
Ehud Reiter, Chris Mellish, and John Levine. 1992. 
Automatic generation of on-line documentation in 
the IDAS project. In Third Conference on Ap- 
plied Natural Language Processing (ANLP-1992), 
pages 64-71, Trento, Italy. 
Ehud Reiter, Chris Mellish, and John Levine. 1995. 
Automatic generation of technical documentation. 
Applied Artificial Intelligence, 9(3):259-287. 
James Rogers and K. Vijay-Shanker. 1994. Obtain- 
ing trees from their descriptions: An application 
to tree-adjoining grammars. Computational Intel- 
ligence, 10:401-421. 
D. RSsner and M. Stede. 1992. Customizing rst 
for the automatic production of technical man- 
uals. In R. Dale et al, editors, Aspects of Auto- 
mated Natural Language Generation, number 587 
in Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 
199-214, Berlin. Springer Verlag. 
S. Svenberg. 1994. Representing conceptual nd lin- 
guistic knowledge for multi-lingual generation in 
a technical domain. In Proceedings of the 7th In- 
ternational Workshop on Natural Language Gen- 
eration, pages 245-248, Kennebunkport. 
UML Revision Task Force, 1999. OMG Unified Mod- 
eling Language Specification , v. 1.3. Document 
ad/99-06-09. Object Management Group, June. 
18 
