Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Feature Engineering for Machine Learning in NLP, pages 40?47,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Identifying non-referential it: a machine learning approach incorporating
linguistically motivated patterns
Adriane Boyd
Department of Linguistics
The Ohio State University
1712 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
adriane@ling.osu.edu
Whitney Gegg-Harrison & Donna Byron
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Ohio State University
2015 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
{geggharr,dbyron}@cse.osu.edu
Abstract
In this paper, we present a machine learn-
ing system for identifying non-referential
it. Types of non-referential it are ex-
amined to determine relevant linguistic
patterns. The patterns are incorporated
as features in a machine learning system
which performs a binary classification of
it as referential or non-referential in a
POS-tagged corpus. The selection of rel-
evant, generalized patterns leads to a sig-
nificant improvement in performance.
1 Introduction
The automatic classification of it as either referen-
tial or non-referential is a topic that has been rel-
atively ignored in the computational linguistics lit-
erature, with only a handful of papers mentioning
approaches to the problem. With the term ?non-
referential it?, we mean to refer to those instances
of it which do not introduce a new referent. In the
previous literature these have been called ?pleonas-
tic?, ?expletive?, and ?non-anaphoric?. It is impor-
tant to be able to identify instances of non-referential
it to generate the correct semantic interpretation of
an utterance. For example, one step of this task is to
associate pronouns with their referents. In an auto-
mated pronoun resolution system, it is useful to be
able to skip over these instances of it rather than at-
tempt an unnecessary search for a referent for them,
The authors would like to thank the GE Foundation Faculty
for the Future grant for their support of this project. We would
also like to thank Detmar Meurers and Erhard Hinrichs for their
helpful advice and feedback.
only to end up with inaccurate results. The task of
identifying non-referential it could be incorporated
into a part-of-speech tagger or parser, or viewed as
an initial step in semantic interpretation.
We develop a linguistically-motivated classifi-
cation for non-referential it which includes four
types of non-referential it: extrapositional, cleft,
weather/condition/time/place, and idiomatic, each
of which will be discussed in more detail in Section
2. A subset of the BNC Sampler Corpus (Burnard,
1995) was chosen for our task because of its ex-
tended tagset and high tagging accuracy. Non-
referential it makes up a significant proportion of the
occurrences of it in our corpus, which contains a se-
lection of written texts of various genres, approxi-
mately one-third prose fiction, one-third newspaper
text, and one-third other non-fiction. In our corpus,
there are 2337 instances of it, 646 of which are non-
referential (28%). It appears in over 10% of the sen-
tences in our corpus. The corpus is described in fur-
ther detail in Section 3.
Previous research on this topic is fairly lim-
ited. Paice and Husk (1987) introduces a rule-based
method for identifying non-referential it and Lappin
and Leass (1994) and Denber (1998) describe rule-
based components of their pronoun resolution sys-
tems which identify non-referential it. Evans (2001)
describes a machine learning system which classi-
fies it into seven types based on the type of referent.
Their approaches are described in detail in Section
4. In Section 5 we describe our system which com-
bines and extends elements of the systems developed
by Paice and Husk (1987) and Evans (2001), and the
results are presented in Section 6.
40
2 Classification
The first step is to create a classification system for
all instances of it. Though the goal is the binary clas-
sification of it as referential or non-referential, an
annotation scheme is used which gives more detail
about each instance of non-referential it, since they
occur in a number of constructions. The main types
of non-referential it are taken from the Cambridge
Grammar of the English Language in the section
on ?Special uses of it?, Section 2.5, Huddleston and
Pullum (2002). Five main uses are outlined: extra-
positional, cleft, weather/condition/time/place, id-
iomatic, and predicative. As noted in the Cambridge
Grammar, predicative it seems to be more referen-
tial that the other types of non-referential it. Pred-
icative it can typically be replaced with a demonstra-
tive pronoun. Consider the example: It is a dreary
day. It can be replaced with This with no change in
grammaticality and no significant change in mean-
ing: This is a dreary day. In contrast, replacing the
other types of it with this results in nonsense, e.g.,
*This seems that the king is displeased.
For our purposes, if a particular it can be re-
placed with a demonstrative pronoun and the result-
ing sentence is still grammatical and has no signif-
icant change in meaning, this it is referential and
therefore annotated as referential. The demonstra-
tive pronoun replacement test is not quite perfect
(e.g., *This is a dreary day in Paris), but no such
instances of predicative it were found in the corpus
so predicative it is always classified as referential.
This leaves four types of it, each of which are de-
scribed in detail below. The main examples for each
type are taken from the corpus. See Section 3 for
details about the corpus.
2.1 Extrapositional
When an element of a sentence is extraposed, it is
often inserted as a placeholder in the original posi-
tion of the now extraposed element. Most often, it
appears in the subject position, but it can also ap-
pear as an object. Example (1) lists a few instances
of extrapositional it from our corpus.
(1) a. It has been confirmed this week that politi-
cal parties will no longer get financial sub-
sidies.
b. She also made it clear that Conductive Ed-
ucation is not the only method.
c. You lead life, it seems to me, like some rit-
ual that demands unerring performance.
The extraposed element is typically a subordinate
clause, and the type of clause depends on lexical
properties of verbs and adjectives in the sentence,
see (2).
(2) * It was difficult that X.
It was difficult to X.
* It was clear to X.
It was clear that X.
As (1c) shows, extrapositional it can also appear
as part of a truncated extrapositional phrase as a kind
of parenthetical comment embedded in a sentence.
2.2 Cleft
It appears as the subject of it-cleft sentences. When
an it-cleft sentence is formed, the foregrounded
phrase becomes the complement of the verb be and
the rest of sentence is backgrounded in a relative
clause. The foregrounded phrase in a cleft sentence
can be a noun phrase, prepositional phrase, adjective
phrase, adverb phrase, non-finite clause, or content
clause.
(3) a. It was the military district commander
who stepped in to avoid bloodshed. (noun
phrase)
b. It is on this point that the views of the
SACP and some Soviet policymakers di-
vide. (prepositional phrase)
c. ?Tis glad I am to ?ear it, me lord. (adjective
phrase)
Additionally, the foregrounded phrase can some-
times be fronted:
(4) He it was who ushered in the new head of state.
More context than the immediate sentence is
needed to accurately identify it-cleft sentences.
First, clefts with a foregrounded noun phrase are am-
biguous between cleft sentences (5a) and sentences
where the noun phrase and relative clause form a
constituent (5b).
41
(5) a. A: I heard that the general stepped in to
avoid bloodshed.
B: No, it was the military district comman-
der who stepped in.
b. A: Was that the general being interviewed
on the news?
B: No, it was the military district comman-
der who stepped in to avoid bloodshed.
Due to this ambiguity, we expect that it may be
difficult to classify clefts. In addition, there are dif-
ficulties because the relative clause does not always
appear in full. In various situations the relative pro-
noun can be omitted, the relative clause can be re-
duced, or the relative clause can be omitted entirely.
2.3 Weather/Condition/Time/Place
It appears as the subject of weather and other
related predicates involving condition, time, and
place/distance:
(6) a. It was snowing steadily outside.
b. It was about midnight.
c. It was no distance to Mutton House.
d. It was definitely not dark.
2.4 Idiomatic
In idioms, it can appear as the subject, object, or
object of a preposition.
(7) a. After three weeks it was my turn to go to
the delivery ward at Fulmer.
b. Cool it!
c. They have not had an easy time of it.
2.5 General Notes
Non-referential it is most often the subject of a sen-
tence, but in extrapositional and idiomatic cases, it
can also be the object. Idioms are the only cases
where non-referential it is found as the object of a
preposition.
3 Corpus
The BNC Sampler Corpus (Burnard, 1995) was cho-
sen for its extended tagset and high tagging accu-
racy. The C7 tagset used for this corpus has a unique
Prose fiction 32%
Newspaper text 38%
Other non-fiction 30%
Table 1: Text types in our corpus
# of Instances % of Inst.
Extrapositional 477 20.4%
Cleft 119 5.1%
Weather 69 2.9%
Idiomatic 46 2.0%
Referential 1626 69.6%
Total 2337 100%
Table 2: Instances of it in our corpus
tag for it, which made the task of identifying all oc-
currences of it very simple. We chose a subset con-
sisting of 350,000 tokens from written texts in vari-
ety of genres. The breakdown by text type can be
seen in Table 1.
The two lead authors independently annotated
each occurence with one of the labels shown in Ta-
ble 2 and then came to a joint decision on the fi-
nal annotation. The breakdown of the instances of it
in our corpus is shown in Table 2. There are 2337
occurrences of it, 646 of which are non-referential
(28%). Ten percent of the corpus, taken from all
sections, was set aside as test data. The remaining
section, which contains 2100 instances of it, became
our training data.
4 Previous Research
Paice and Husk (1987) reports a simple rule-based
system that was used to identify non-referential it in
the technical section of the Lancaster-Oslo/Bergen
Corpus. Because of the type of text, the distribution
of types of non-referential it is somewhat limited, so
they only found it necessary to write rules to match
extrapositional and cleft it (although they do men-
tion two idioms found in the corpus). The corpus
was plain text, so their rules match words and punc-
tuation directly.
Their patterns find it as a left bracket and search
for a right bracket related to the extrapositional and
cleft grammatical patterns (to, that, etc.). For the
extrapositional instances, there are lists of words
which are matched in between it and the right
42
Accuracy 92%
Precision 93%
Recall 97%
Table 3: Paice and Husk (1987): Results
Accuracy 79%
Precision 80%
Recall 31%
Table 4: Replicating Paice and Husk (1987)
bracket. The word lists are task-status words (STA-
TUS), state-of-knowledge words (STATE), and a list
of prepositions and related words (PREP), which is
used to rule out right brackets that could potentially
be objects of prepositions. Patterns such as ?it STA-
TUS to? and ?it !PREP that? were created. The
left bracket can be at most 27 words from the right
bracket and there can be either zero or two or more
commas or dashes between the left and right brack-
ets. Additionally, their system had a rule to match
parenthetical it: there is a match when it appears im-
mediately following a comma and another comma
follows within four words. Their results, shown in
Table 3, are impressive.
We replicated their system and ran it on our test-
ing data, see Table 4. Given the differences in text
types, it is not surprising that their system did not
perform as well on our corpus. The low recall seems
to show the limitations of fixed word lists, while the
reasonably high precision shows that the simple pat-
terns tend to be accurate in the cases where they ap-
ply.
Lappin and Leass (1994) and Denber (1998) men-
tion integrating small sets of rules to match non-
referential it into their larger pronoun resolution sys-
tems. Lappin and Leass use two words lists and
a short set of rules. One word list is modal adjec-
tives (necessary, possible, likely, etc.) and the other
is cognitive verbs (recommend, think, believe, etc.).
Their rules are as follows:
It is Modaladj that S
It is Modaladj (for NP) to VP
It is Cogv-ed that S
It seems/appears/means/follows (that) S
NP makes/finds it Modaladj (for NP) to VP
Accuracy 71%
Precision 73%
Recall 69%
Table 5: Evans (2001): Results, Binary Classifica-
tion
It is time to VP
It is thanks to NP that S
Their rules are mainly concerned with extraposi-
tional it and they give no mention of cleft it. They
give no direct results for this component of their
system, so it is not possible to give a comparison.
Denber (1998) includes a slightly revised and ex-
tended version of Lappin and Leass?s system and
adds in detection of weather/time it. He suggests
using WordNet to extend word lists.
Evans (2001) begins by noting that a significant
percentage of instances of it do not have simple
nominal referents and describes a system which uses
a memory-based learning (MBL) algorithm to per-
form a 7-way classification of it by type of refer-
ent. We consider two of his categories, pleonas-
tic and stereotypic/idiomatic, to be non-referential.
Evans created a corpus with texts from the BNC
and SUSANNE corpora and chose to use a memory-
based learning algorithm. A memory-based learn-
ing algorithm classifies new instances on the basis of
their similarity to instances seen in the training data.
Evans chose the k-nearest neighbor algorithm from
the Tilburg Memory-Based Learner (TiMBL) pack-
age (Daelemans et al, 2003) with approximately 35
features relevant to the 7-way classification. Al-
though his system was created for the 7-way classi-
fication task, he recognizes the importance of the bi-
nary referential/non-referential distinction and gives
the results for the binary classification of pleonastic
it, see Table 5. His results for the classification of
idiomatic it (33% precision and 0.7% recall) show
the limitations of a machine learning system given
sparse data.
We replicated Evans?s system with a simplified set
of features to perform the referential/non-referential
classification of it. We did not include features that
would require chunking or features that seemed rel-
evant only for distinguishing kinds of referential it.
The following thirteen features are used:
43
Accuracy 76%
Precision 57%
Recall 60%
Table 6: Replicating Evans (2001)
1-8. four preceding and following POS tags
9-10. lemmas of the preceding and following verbs
11. lemma of the following adjective
12. presence of that following
13. presence of an immediately preceding preposi-
tion
Using our training and testing data with the same
algorithm from TiMBL, we obtained results similar
to Evans?s, shown in Table 6. The slightly higher
accuracy is likely due to corpus differences or the
reduced feature set which ignores features largely
relevant to other types of it.
Current state-of-the-art reference resolution sys-
tems typically include filters for non-referential
noun phrases. An example of such a system is Ng
and Cardie (2002), which shows the improvement
in reference resolution when non-referential noun
phrases are identified. Results are not given for the
specific task of identifying non-referential it, so a di-
rect comparison is not possible.
5 Method
As seen in the previous section, both rule-based
and machine learning methods have been shown to
be fairly effective at identifying non-referential it.
Rule-based methods look for the grammatical pat-
terns known to be associated with non-referential it
but are limited by fixed word lists; machine learning
methods can handle open classes of words, but are
less able to generalize about the grammatical pat-
terns associated with non-referential it from a small
training set.
Evans?s memory-based learning system showed a
slight integration of rules into the machine learning
system by using features such as the presence of fol-
lowing that. Given the descriptions of types of non-
referential it from Section 2, it is possible to create
more specific rules which detect the fixed grammat-
ical patterns associated with non-referential it such
as it VERB that or it VERB ADJ to. Many of these
patterns are similar to Paice and Husk?s, but hav-
ing part-of-speech tags allows us to create more gen-
eral rules without reference to specific lexical items.
If the results of these rule matches are integrated
as features in the training data for a memory-based
learning system along with relevant verb and ad-
jective lemmas, it becomes possible to incorporate
knowledge about grammatical patterns without cre-
ating fixed word lists. The following sections exam-
ine each type of non-referential it and describe the
patterns and features that can be used to help auto-
matically identify each type.
5.1 Extrapositional it
Extrapositional it appears in a number of fairly fixed
patterns, nine of which are shown below. Interven-
ing tokens are allowed between the words in the pat-
terns. F4-6 are more general versions of F1-3 but
are not as indicative of non-referential it, so it useful
to keep them separate even though ones that match
F1-3 will also match F4-6. F7 applies when it is the
object of a verb. To simplify patterns like F8, all
verbs in the sentence are lemmatized with morpha
(Minnen et al, 2001) before the pattern matching
begins.
F1 it VERB ADJ that
F2 it VERB ADJ
what/which/where/whether/why/how
F3 it VERB ADJ to
F4 it VERB that
F5 it VERB what/which/where/whether/why/how
F6 it VERB to
F7 it ADJ that/to
F8 it be/seem as if
F9 it VERB COMMA
For each item above, the feature consists of the
distance (number of tokens) between it and the end
of the match (the right bracket such that or to).
By using the distance as the feature, it is possible
to avoid specifying a cutoff point for the end of a
match. The memory-based learning algorithm can
adapt to the training data. As discussed in Sec-
tion 2.1, extraposition is often lexically triggered,
so the specific verbs and adjectives in the sentence
are important for its classification. For this reason,
it is necessary to include information about the sur-
rounding verbs and adjectives. The nearby full verbs
44
(as opposed to auxiliary and modal verbs) are likely
to give the most information, so we add features for
the immediately preceding full verb (for F7), the
following full verb (for F1-F6), and the following
adjective (for F1-3,7). The verbs were lemmatized
with morpha and added as features along with the
following adjective.
F10 lemma of immediately preceding full verb
F11 lemma of following full verb within current
sentence
F12 following adjective within current sentence
5.2 Cleft it
Two patterns are used for cleft it:
F13 it be who/which/that
F14 it who/which/that
As mentioned in the previous section, all verbs in
the sentence are lemmatized before matching. Like-
wise, these features are the distance between it and
the right bracket. Feature F14 is used to match a
cleft it in a phrase with inverted word order.
5.3 Weather/Condition/Time/Place it
Ideally, the possible weather predicates could be
learned automatically from the following verbs, ad-
jectives, and nouns, but the list is so open that it
is better in practice to specify a fixed list. The
weather/time/place/condition predicates were taken
from the training set and put into a fixed list. Some
generalizations were made (e.g., adding the names
of all months, weekdays, and seasons), but the list
contains mainly the words found in the training set.
There are 46 words in the list. As Denber men-
tioned, WordNet could be used to extend this list.
A feature is added for the distance to the nearest
weather token.
The following verb lemma feature (F10) added
for extrapositional it is the lemma of the follow-
ing full verb, but in many cases the verb following
weather it is the verb be, so we also added a binary
feature for whether the following verb is be.
F15 distance to nearest weather token
F16 whether the following verb is be
5.4 Idiomatic it
Idioms can be identified by fixed patterns. All verbs
in the sentence are lemmatized and the following
patterns, all found as idioms in our training data, are
used:
if/when it come to pull it off
as it happen fall to it
call it a NOUN ask for it
on the face of it be it not for
have it not been for like it or not
Short idiom patterns such as ?cool it? and ?watch
it? were found to overgeneralize, so only idioms in-
cluding at least three words were used. A binary
feature was added for whether an idiom pattern was
matched for the given instance of it (F17). In addi-
tion, two common fixed patterns were included as a
separate feature:
it be ... time
it be ... my/X?s turn
F17 whether an idiom pattern was matched
F18 whether an additional fixed pattern was
matched
5.5 Additional Restrictions
There are a few additional restrictions on the pattern
matches involving length and punctuation. The first
restriction is on the distance between the instance
of it and the right bracket (that, to, who, etc.). On
the basis of their corpus, Paice and Husk decided
that the right bracket could be at most 27 words
away from it. Instead of choosing a fixed distance,
features based on pattern matches are the distance
(number of tokens) between it and the right bracket.
The system looks for a pattern match between it
and the end of the sentence. The end of a sentence
is considered to be punctuation matching any of the
following: . ; : ? ! ) ] . (Right parenthesis or
bracket is only included if a matching left parenthe-
sis or bracket has not been found before it.) If there
is anything in paired parentheses in the remainder of
the sentence, it is omitted. Quotes are not consistent
indicators of a break in a sentence, so they are ig-
nored. If the end of a sentence is not located within
50 tokens, the sentence is truncated at that point and
the system looks for the patterns within those tokens.
45
As Paice and Husk noted, the presence of a sin-
gle comma or dash between it and the right bracket
is a good sign that the right bracket is not rele-
vant to whether the instance of it is non-referential.
When there are either zero or two or more commas
or dashes it is difficult to come to any conclusion
without more information. Therefore, when the to-
tal comma count or total dash count between it and
the right bracket is one, the pattern match is ignored.
Additionally, unless it occurs in an idiom, it is
also never the object of a preposition, so there is
an additional feature for whether it is preceded by
a preposition.
F19 whether the previous word is a preposition
Finally, the single preceding and five following
simplified part-of-speech tags were also included.
The part-of-speech tags were simplified to their first
character in the C7 tagset, adverb (R) and nega-
tive (X) words were ignored, and only the first in-
stance in a sequence of tokens of the same simplified
type (e.g., the first of two consecutive verbs) was in-
cluded in the set of following tags.
F20-25 surrounding POS tags, simplified
6 Results
Training and testing data were generated from our
corpus using the the 25 features described in the
previous section. Given Evans?s success and the
limited amount of training data, we chose to also
use TiMBL?s k-nearest neighbor algorithm (IB1).
In TiMBL, the distance metric can be calculated
in a number of ways for each feature. The nu-
meric features use the numeric metric and the re-
maining features (lemmas, POS tags) use the de-
fault overlap metric. Best performance is achieved
with gain ratio weighting and the consideration of
2 nearest distances (neighbors). Because of overlap
in the features for various types of non-referential
it and sparse data for cleft, weather, and idiomatic
it, all types of non-referential it were considered at
the same time and the output was a binary classifi-
cation of each instance of it as referential or non-
referential. The results for our TiMBL classifier
(MBL) are shown in Table 7 alongside our results
using a decision tree algorithm (DT, described be-
low) and the results from our replication of Evans
Our MBL
Classifier
Our DT
Classifier
Repl. of
Evans
Accuracy 88% 81% 76%
Precision 82% 82% 57%
Recall 71% 42% 60%
Table 7: Results
Extrapositional 81%
Cleft 45%
Weather 57%
Idiomatic 60%
Referential 94%
Table 8: Recall by Type for MBL Classifier
(2001). All three systems were trained and evalu-
ated with the same data.
All three systems perform a binary classifica-
tion of each instance of it as referential or non-
referential, but each instance of non-referential it
was additionally tagged for type, so the recall for
each type can be calculated. The recall by type can
been seen in Table 8 for our MBL system. Given that
the memory-based learning algorithm is using previ-
ously seen instances to classify new ones, it makes
sense that the most frequent types have the highest
recall. As mentioned in Section 2.2, clefts can be
difficult to identify.
Decision tree algorithms seem suited to this kind
of task and have been used previously, but C4.5
(Quinlan, 1993) decision tree algorithm did not per-
form as well as TiMBL on our data, compare the
TiMBL results (MBL) with the C4.5 results (DT) in
Table 7. This may be because the verb and adjective
lemma features (F10-F12) had hundreds of possible
values and were not as useful in a decision tree as in
the memory-based learning algorithm.
With the addition of more relevant, generalized
grammatical patterns, the precision and accuracy
have increased significantly, but the same cannot be
said for recall. Because many of the patterns are
designed to match specific function words as the
right bracket, cases where the right bracket is omit-
ted (e.g., extraposed clauses with no overt comple-
mentizers, truncated clefts, clefts with reduced rela-
tive clauses) are difficult to match. Other problem-
atic cases include sentences with a lot of intervening
46
material between it and the right bracket or simple
idioms which cannot be easily differentiated. The
results for cleft, weather, and idiomatic it may also
be due in part to sparse data. When only 2% of the
instances of it are of a certain type, there are fewer
than one hundred training instances, and it can be
difficult for the memory-based learning method to
be very successful.
7 Conclusion
The accurate classification of it as referential or non-
referential is important for natural language tasks
such as reference resolution (Ng and Cardie, 2002).
Through an examination of the types of construc-
tions containing non-referential it, we are able to de-
velop a set of detailed grammatical patterns associ-
ated with non-referential it. In previous rule-based
systems, word lists were created for the verbs and
adjectives which often occur in these patterns. Such
a system can be limited because it is unable to adapt
to new texts, but the basic grammatical patterns
are still reasonably consistent indicators of non-
referential it. Given a POS-tagged corpus, the rele-
vant linguistic patterns can be generalized over part-
of-speech tags, reducing the dependence on brittle
word lists. A machine learning algorithm is able
to adapt to new texts and new words, but it is less
able to generalize about the linguistic patterns from
a small training set. To be able to use our knowl-
edge of relevant linguistic patterns without having to
specify lists of words as indicators of certain types
of it, we developed a machine learning system which
incorporates the relevant patterns as features along-
side part-of-speech and lexical information. Two
short lists are still used to help identify weather it
and a few idioms. The k-nearest neighbors algo-
rithm from the Tilburg Memory Based Learner is
used with 25 features and achieved 88% accuracy,
82% precision, and 71% recall for the binary classi-
fication of it as referential or non-referential.
Our classifier outperforms previous systems in
both accuracy and precision, but recall is still a prob-
lem. Many instances of non-referential it are diffi-
cult to identify because typical clues such as com-
plementizers and relative pronouns can be omitted.
Because of this, subordinate and relative clauses
cannot be consistently identified given only a POS-
tagged corpus. Improvements could be made in the
future by integrating chunking or parsing into the
pattern-matching features used in the system. This
would help in identifying extrapositional and cleft it.
Knowledge about context beyond the sentence level
will be needed to accurately identify certain types of
cleft, weather, and idiomatic constructions.
References
L. Burnard, 1995. Users reference guide for the British
National Corpus. Oxford.
Walter Daelemans, Jakub Zavrel, Ko van der Sloot, and
Antal van den Bosch. 2003. TiMBL: Tilburg Mem-
ory Based Learner, version 5.0, Reference Guide. ILK
Technical Report 03-10. Technical report.
Michel Denber. 1998. Automatic resolution of anaphora
in English. Technical report, Imaging Science Divi-
son, Eastman Kodak Co.
Richard Evans. 2001. Applying machine learning to-
ward an automatic classification of It. Literary and
Linguistic Computing, 16(1):45 ? 57.
Rodney D. Huddleston and Geoffrey K. Pullum. 2002.
The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Shalom Lappin and Herbert J. Leass. 1994. An Algo-
rithm for Pronominal Anaphora Resolution. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 20(4):535?561.
Guido Minnen, John Caroll, and Darren Pearce. 2001.
Applied morphological processing of English. Natu-
ral Language Engineering, 7(3):207?223.
Vincent Ng and Claire Cardie. 2002. Identifying
anaphoric and non-anaphoric noun phrases to improve
coreference resolution. Proceedings of the 19th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING-2002).
C. D. Paice and G. D. Husk. 1987. Towards an automatic
recognition of anaphoric features in English text; the
impersonal pronoun ?it?. Computer Speech and Lan-
guage, 2:109 ? 132.
J. Ross Quinlan. 1993. C4.5: Programs for Machine
Learning. Morgan Kaufmann.
47
