Efficient Unsupervised Recursive Word Segmentation Using Minimum
Description Length
Shlomo ARGAMONa Navot AKIVAb Amihood AMIRb Oren KAPAHb
aIllinois Institute of Technology, Dept. of Computer Science, Chicago, IL 60616, USA
argamon@iit.edu
bBar-Ilan University, Dept. of Computer Science, Ramat Gan 52900, ISRAEL
{navot,amir,kapaho}@cs.biu.ac.il
Abstract
Automatic word segmentation is a basic re-
quirement for unsupervised learning in morpho-
logical analysis. In this paper, we formulate a
novel recursive method for minimum descrip-
tion length (MDL) word segmentation, whose
basic operation is resegmenting the corpus on
a prefix (equivalently, a suffix). We derive a
local expression for the change in description
length under resegmentation, i.e., one which de-
pends only on properties of the specific prefix
(not on the rest of the corpus). Such a formula-
tion permits use of a new and efficient algorithm
for greedy morphological segmentation of the
corpus in a recursive manner. In particular, our
method does not restrict words to be segmented
only once, into a stem+affix form, as do many
extant techniques. Early results for English and
Turkish corpora are promising.
1 Introduction
Although computational morphological analyzers
have existed for many years for a number of lan-
guages, there are still many languages for which no
such analyzer exists, but for which there is an abun-
dance of electronically-available text. Developing
a morphological analyzer for a new language by
hand can be costly and time-consuming, requiring
a great deal of effort by highly-specialized experts.
Supervised learning methods, on the other hand, re-
quire annotated data, which is often scarce or non-
existent, and is also costly to develop. For this
reason, there is increasing interest in unsupervised
learning of morphology, in which unannotated text
is analysed to find morphological structures. Even
approximate unsupervised morphological analysis
can be useful, as an aid to human annotators.
This paper addresses a key task for unsuper-
vised morphological analysis: word segmentation,
segmenting words into their most basic meaning-
ful constituents (substrings), called morphs (ortho-
graphic realizations of morphemes). We adopt the
minimum description length (MDL) approach to
word segmentation, which has been shown to be ef-
fective in recent work (notably (Goldsmith, 2001)
and (Brent et al, 1995)). The minimum descrip-
tion length principle (Barron et al, 1998) is an
information-theoretic criterion to prefer that model
for observed data which gives a minimal length cod-
ing of the observed data set (given the model) to-
gether with the model itself.
1.1 Our approach
Our approach in this paper is to better clarify the
use of MDL for morphological segmentation by en-
abling direct use of a variety of MDL coding criteria
in a general and efficient search algorithm. Issues of
computational efficiency have been a bottleneck in
work on unsupervised morphological analysis, lead-
ing to various approximations and heuristics being
used. Our key contribution is to show how a lo-
cal formulation of description length (DL) for word
segmentation enables an efficient algorithm (based
on pattern-matching methods) for greedy morpho-
logical segmentation of the corpus. We thus provide
a search framework method which avoids some re-
strictions needed in previous work for efficiency. In
particular, our method segments words in the cor-
pus recursively, enabling multiple morphs to be ex-
tracted from a single word, rather than just allow-
ing a single stem+affix pair for a given word, as in
many previous approaches. For example, we might
find the segmentation inter+nation+al+ist,
whereas a single-boundary method would segment
the word on just one of those boundaries.
This paper describes the first step in a larger re-
search program; it?s purpose is to show how to most
efficiently recursively segment the words in a cor-
pus based on an MDL criterion, rather than exhibit a
full morphological analysis system. The procedure
developed here is a component of a larger planned
system, which will use semantic and structural in-
formation to correct word segmentation errors and
will cluster morphological relations into productive
paradigms.
1.2 Related work
Several systems for unsupervised learning of mor-
phology have been developed over the last decade or
so. De?jean (1998), extending ideas in Harris (1955),
describes a system for finding the most frequent af-
fixes in a language and identifying possible mor-
pheme boundaries by frequency bounds on the num-
ber of possible characters following a given char-
acter sequence. Brent et al (1995) give an in-
formation theoretic method for discovering mean-
ingful affixes, which was later extended to enable
a novel search algorithm based on a probabilistic
word-generation model (Snover et al, 2002). Gold-
smith (2001) gives a comprehensive heuristic al-
gorithm for unsupervised morphological analysis,
which uses an MDL criterion to segment words
and find morphological paradigms (called signa-
tures). Similarly, Creutz and Lagus (2002) use an
MDL formulation for word segmentation. All of
these approaches assume a stem+affix morpholog-
ical paradigm.
Further, the above approaches only consider in-
formation in words? character sequences for im-
prove morphological segmentation, and do not con-
sider syntactic or semantic context. Schone and Ju-
rafsky (2000) extend this by using latent semantic
analysis (Dumais et al, 1988) to require that a pro-
posed stem+affix split is sufficiently semantically
similar to the stem before the split is accepted. A
conceptually similar approach is taken by Baroni et
al. (2002) who combine use of edit distance to mea-
sure orthographic similarity and mutual information
to measure semantic similarity, to determine mor-
phologically related word pairs.
2 Overview of the Approach
In this section we provide an overview of our ap-
proach to greedy construction of a set of morphs
(a dictionary), using a minimal description length
(MDL) criterion (Barron et al, 1998) (we present
three alternative MDL-type criteria below, of vary-
ing levels of sophistication). The idea is to initialize
a dictionary of morphs to the set of all word types in
the corpus, and incrementally refine it by resegment-
ing affixes (either prefixes or suffixes) from the cor-
pus. Resegmenting on a prefix p (depicted in Fig-
ure 1) means adding the prefix as a new morph, and
removing it from all words where it occurs as a pre-
fix. Some of the morphs thus created may already
exist in the corpus (e.g., ?cognition? in Fig. 1). We
denote the set of morphs starting with p as Vp, and
the set of continuations that follow p by Sp (i.e.,
Vp = pSp). The number of occurrences of a morph
m in the corpus (as currently segmented) is denoted
Dictionary before Dictionary after
relic re
retire lic
recognition tire
relive cognition
tire live
cognition farm
farm
Figure 1: Illustration of resegmenting on the prefix re-.
Note that Vre ={relic, retire, recognition, relive}, and
Sre ={lic, tire, cognition, live}.
by C(m), and the number of tokens in the corpus
with prefix p is denoted B(p) = ?vk?Vp C(vk).
The algorithm examines all prefixes of current
morphs in the dictionary as resegmentation candi-
dates. The candidate p? that would give the greatest
decrease in description length upon resegmentation
is chosen, and the corpus is then resegmented on p?.
This is repeated until no candidate can decrease de-
scription length.
Key to this process is efficient resegmentation of
the corpus, which entails incremental update of the
description length change that each prefix p will
give upon resegmentation, denoted ?CODEp (the
change in the coding cost CODE(M,Data) for the
corpus plus the model M ). This is achieved in two
ways. First, we develop (Sec. 3) expressions for
?CODEp which depend only on simple properties
of p, Vp, and Sp, and their occurrences in the corpus.
This locality property obviates the need to exam-
ine most of the corpus to determine ?CODEp. Sec-
ond, we use a novel word/suffix indexing data struc-
ture which permits efficient resegmentation and up-
date of the statistics on which ?CODEp depends
(Sec. 4). Initial experimental results for the different
models using our algorithm are given in Section 5.
3 Local Description Length Models
As we show below, the key to efficiency is deriving
local expressions for the change in coding length
that will be caused by resegmentation on a partic-
ular prefix p. That is, this coding length change,
?CODEp, should depend only on direct properties
of p, those morphs Vp = {vk = psk} for which it is
a prefix, and those strings Sp = {sk|psk ? Vp} (p?s
continuations). This enables us to efficiently main-
tain the necessary data about the corpus and to up-
date it on resegmentation, avoiding costly scanning
of the entire corpus on each iteration.
We now describe three description length mod-
els for word segmentation. First, we introduce local
description length via two simple models, and then
give a derivation of a local expression for descrip-
tion length change for a more realistic description
length measure.
3.1 Model 1: Dictionary count
Perhaps the simplest possible model is to find a seg-
mentation which minimizes the number of morphs
in the dictionary CODE1(M,Data) = |M |. Al-
though the global minimum will almost always be
the trivial solution where each morph is an individ-
ual letter, this trivial solution may be avoided by
enforcing a minimal morph length (of 2, say). Fur-
thermore, when implemented via a greedy prefix (or
suffix) resegmenting algorithm, this measure gives
surprisingly good results, as we show below.
Locality in this model is easily shown, as
?CODE1p(M) = 1 + |Sp ?M | ? |Vp|
= 1 ? |Sp ?M |
since p is added to M as are all its continuations
not currently in M , while each morph vk ? Vp is re-
moved (being resegmented as the 2-morph sequence
psk).
3.2 Model 1a: Adjusted count
We also found a heuristic modification of Model
1 to work well, based on the intuition that an af-
fix with more continuations that are current morphs
will be better, while to a lesser extent more contin-
uations that are not current morphs indicates lower
quality. This gives the local heuristic formula:
?CODE1ap (M) = 1 + |Sp ?M | ? ?|Sp ?M |
where ? is a tunable parameter determining the rel-
ative weights of the two factors.
3.3 Model 2: MDL
A more theoretically motivated model seeks to min-
imize the combined coding cost of the corpus and
the dictionary (Barron et al, 1998):
CODE2(Data|M) + CODE2(M)
where we assume a minimal length code for the cor-
pus based on the morphs in the dictionary1 .
The coding cost of the dictionary M is:
CODE2(M) = CODE2(M)
= b?m?M len(m)
1As is well known, MDL model estimation is equivalent to
MAP estimation for appropriately chosen prior and conditional
data distribution (Barron et al, 1998).
where b is the number of bits needed to represent a
character and len(m) is the length of m in charac-
ters.
The coding cost CODE(Data|M) of the corpus
given the dictionary is simply the total number of
bits to encode the data using M ?s code:
CODE2(Data|M)
= CODE(M(Data) = M1...N )
= ??Ni=1 log P (mi)
= ??|M |j=1C(mj) log P (mj)
= ??|M |j=1C(mj)(logC(mj) ? logN)
where M(Data) is the corpus segmented according
to M , N is the number of morph tokens in the seg-
mented corpus, mi is the ith morph token in that
segmentation, P (m) is the probability of morph
m in the corpus estimated as P (m) = C(m)/N ,
C(m) is the number of times morph m appears in
the corpus, |M | is the total number of morph types
in M , and mj is the jth morph type in the M .
Now suppose we wish to add a new morph to M
by resegmenting on a prefix p from all morphs shar-
ing that prefix, as above. First, consider the total
change in cost for the dictionary. Note that the ad-
dition of the new morph p will cause an increase of
blen(p) bits to the total dictionary size. At the same
time, each new morph s ? Sp ? M will add its
coding cost blen(s), while each preexisting morph
s? ? Sp?M will not change the dictionary length at
all. Finally, each vk is removed from the dictionary,
giving a change of ?blen(vk). The total change in
coding cost for the dictionary by resegmenting on p
is thus:
?CODE2p(M) = b (len(p)
+?sk?(Sp?M) len(sk)
??k len(vk))
Now consider the change in coding cost for the
corpus after resegmentation. First, consider each
preexisting morph type m 6? Vp, with the same
count after resegmentation (since it does not con-
tain p). The coding cost of each occurrence of m,
however, will change, since the total number of to-
kens in the corpus will change. Thus the total cost
change for such an m is:
?CODE2p(Data|m 6? Vp)
= C(m)(log P (m) ? log P? (m))
= C(m)(logC(m) ? logN ? logC(m) + log N?)
= C(m)(log N? ? logN)
= C(m)(log(N + B(p)) ? logN)
The total corpus cost change for unchanged morphs
depends only on N and B(p):
?CODE2p(Data|M ? Vp)
=?m?M?Vp C(m)(log(N + B(p)) ? logN)
= (?m?M?Vp C(m))(log(N + B(p)) ? logN)
= (N ??vk C(vk))(log(N + B(p)) ? logN)
= (N ?B(p))(log(N + B(p)) ? logN)
Now, consider explicitly each morph vk ? Vp
which will be split after resegmentation. First,
remove the code for each occurrence of vk from
the corpus coding: C(vk) log P (vk). Next, add a
code for each occurrence of the new morph cre-
ated by the prefix: ?C(vk) log P? (p), where P? (p) =
B(p)/(N + B(p)) is the probability of morph p
in the resegmented corpus. Finally, code the con-
tinuations sk: ?C(vk) log P? (sk) (where P? (sk) =
C?(sk)
N? =
C(vk)+C(sk)
N? is the probability of the ?new?
morph sk). Putting this together, we have the cor-
pus coding cost change for Vp (noting that B(p) =
?
vk C(vk)):
?CODE2p(Data|Vp)
=?vk C(vk)[ logP (vk) ? log P? (p) ? log P? (sk) ]
=
?
vk C(vk) (logC(vk) ? logN
+ log N? ? logB(p)
+ log N? ? log C?(sk))
= ?vk C(vk)(logC(vk) ? log C?(sk))
+B(p)(2 log N? ? logN)
?B(p) logB(p)
Thus the cost change for resegmenting on p is:
?CODE2p(M,Data)
= ?CODE2p(M) + ?CODE2p(Data|M)
= ?CODE2p(M) + ?CODE2p(Data|M ? Vp)
+?CODE2p(Data|Vp)
= b
[
len(p) +
?
sk?(Sp?M) len(sk) ?
?
vk len(vk)
]
+ (N ?B(p)) (log(N + B(p)) ? logN)
+ ?vk C(vk)(logC(vk) ? log C?(sk))
+B(p)(2 log N? ? logN)
?B(p) logB(p)
Note that all terms are local to the prefix p, its in-
cluding morphs Vp and its continuations Sp. This
will enable an efficient incremental algorithm for
greedy segmentation of all words in the corpus, as
described in the next section.
4 Efficient Greedy Prefix Search
The straightforward greedy algorithm schema for
finding an approximately minimal cost dictio-
nary is to repeatedly find the best prefix p? =
argminp ?CODEp(M,Data) and resegment the
corpus on p?, until no p? exists with negative
?CODE. However, the expense of passing over the
entire corpus repeatedly would be prohibitive. Due
to lack of space, we sketch here our method for
caching corpus statistics in a pair of tries, in such
a way that ?CODEp can be easily computed for any
prefix p, and such that the data structures can be ef-
ficiently updated when resegmenting on a prefix p.
(A heap is also used for efficiently finding the best
prefix.)
The main data structures consist of two tries. The
first, which we term the main suffix trie (MST), is a
suffix trie (Gusfield, 1997) for all the words in the
corpus. Each node in the MST represents either the
prefix of a current morph (initially, a word in the
corpus), or the prefix of a potential morph (in case
its preceding prefix gets segmented). Each such
node is labeled with various statistics of its prefix p
(denoted by the path to it from the root) and its suf-
fixes, such as its prefix length len(p), its count B(p),
the number of its continuations |Sp|, and the col-
lective length of its continuations
?
sk?Sp len(sk),
as well as the current value of ?CODEp(M,Data)
(computed from these statistics). Also, each node
representing the end of an actual word in the corpus
is marked as such.
The second trie, the reversed prefix trie (RPT),
contains all the words in the corpus in reverse.
Hence each node in the RPT corresponds to the suf-
fix of a word in the corpus. We maintain a list of
pointers at each node in the RPT to each node in the
MST which has an identical suffix. This allows ef-
ficient access to all prefixes of a given string. Also,
those nodes corresponding to a complete word in
the corpus are marked.
Initial construction of the data structures can be
done in time linear in the size of the corpus, us-
ing straightforward extensions of known suffix trie
construction techniques (Gusfield, 1997). Finding
the best prefix p? can be done efficiently by stor-
ing pointers to all the prefixes in a heap, keyed by
?CODEp. To then remove all words prefixed by p?
and add all its continuations as new morphs (as well
as p? itself), proceed as follows, for each continua-
tion sk:
1. If sk is marked in RPT, then it is a complete
word, and only its count needs to be updated.
2. Otherwise
(a) Mark sk?s node in MST as a complete
word, and update its statistics
(b) Add sRk to RPT and mark the correspond-
ing nodes in MST as accepting stems.
3. Update the heap for the changed prefixes.
Prefixes
re- *ter-
un- im-
in- com-
de- trans-
con- sub-
dis- *se-
pre- en-
ex- *pa-
pro- *pe-
over- *mi-
Suffixes
-?s *-at
-ing -ate
-ed -ive
-es -able
-ly -ment
-er -or
?-ers -en
-ion ?-ors
?-ions ?-ings
-al *-is
Figure 2: The first 20 English prefix and suffix morphs
extracted from Reuters-21578 corpus using Model 1.
Meaningless morphs are marked by ?*?; nonminimal
meaningful morphs by ???.
Prefixes Suffixes
? = 1 ? = 2 ? = 1 ? = 2
over-
non-
under-
mis-
food-
stock-
feed-
view-
work-
export-
book-
warn-
borrow-
depres-
market-
high-
narrow-
turn-
trail-
steel-
un-
over-
non-
*der-
dis-
mis-
out-
inter-
trans-
re-
super-
fore-
up-
down-
tele-
stock-
im-
air-
euro-
mid-
-?s
-ly
-ness
-ship
?-ships
?-ization
-ize
?-ized
?-isation
?-izing
?-izes
?-holders
?-izations
?-isations
-water
?-ised
-ise
?-ising
?-ises
?-iser
-?s
-ly
-ness
-ment
?-ments
?-ized
-ize
?-ization
?-izing
?-isation
?-ised
-ise
?-ising
?-ises
-ship
-men
?-ened
?-ening
?-izes
*-mental
Figure 3: The first 20 English prefix and suffix morphs
extracted using Model 1a, as above.
The complexity for resegmenting on p is
O(len(p) +
?
sk?Sp
len(sk) + NSUF(Sp) log(|M |))
where NSUF(Sp) is the number of different morphs
in the previous dictionary that have a suffix in Sp
(which need to be updated in the heap).
5 Experimental Results
In this section we give initial results for the above
algorithm in English and Turkish, showing how
meaningful morphs are extracted using different
greedy MDL criteria. Recall that the models and
algorithm described in this paper are intended as
parts of a more comprehensive morphological anal-
ysis system, as we describe below in future work.
5.1 English
For evaluation in English, we used the standard
Reuters-21578 corpus of news articles (comprising
1.7M word tokens and 32,811 unique words). For
each of the 3 models described above, we extracted
morphs either by resegmenting on prefixes or on
suffixes (looking at the words reversed). When seg-
menting according to Models 1 and 2, a minimum
prefix length of 2 was enforced, to improve morph
quality (though not for suffixes, since in English
there are some one-letter suffixes such as -s).
First, consider morphs found by Model 1 (Fig. 2).
The prefix morphs found are surprisingly good for
this simple model, with only one wrong in the first
15 extracted. That erroneous morph is ter-, which
is part of inter-, however in- was extracted
first; this kind of error could be ameliorated by
a merging postprocessing step. The suffixes are
similarly good, although oddly the system did not
find -s, which caused it to find several compos-
ite morphs, such as -ers and -ions, which can
get resegmented into their components (-er+s and
-ion+s) later.
Model 1a also performs extremely well, for dif-
ferent values of ? (we show just ? = 1 and ? = 2
in Fig. 3, for lack of space). Note that the morphs
found by this model differ qualitatively from those
found by Model 1, in that we get longer morphs
more related to agglutination than to regular inflec-
tion patterns. This suggests that multiple statistical
models should be used together to extract different
facets of a language?s morphological composition.
Finally, morphs from the more complex Model
2 are given in Fig. 4. As in Model 1a, Model
2 gives more agglutinative morphs than inflective
morphs, and has a greater tendency to segment com-
plex morphs (such as -ification-), which pre-
sumably will later be resegmented into their com-
ponent parts (e.g., -if+ic+at+ion). This may
enable construction of hierarchical models of mor-
phological composition in the future.
5.2 Turkish
In addition to English, we tested the method?s abil-
ity to extract meaningful morphs on a small corpus
of Turkish texts from the Turkish Natural Language
Processing Initiative (Oflazer, 2001), which consists
of one foreign ministry press release, texts of two
treaties, and three journal articles on translation.
The corpus comprises 20,284 individual words, of
which 5961 are unique. Turkish is a highly aggluti-
native language, hence a prime candidate for recur-
sive morphological segmentation. Results for Mod-
els 1 and 2 are shown in Tables 5?8. Meaningful
Prefixes
non- rein-
bio- over-
?disi- *ine-
diss- ?interc-
video- fluor-
financier- wood-
quadr- key-
*kl- *kar-
weather- vin-
*jas- ?kings-
Suffixes
-?s -ville
-town -field
?-ification ?-ians
?-alize ?-alising
?-ically ?-ological
-tech -wood
?-ioning ?-etic
?-sively -point
?-nating -tally
?-tational *-uting
Figure 4: The first 20 English prefix and suffix morphs
extracted using Model 2, as above, with b = 8.
p Meaning
bahs- talk (about)
terk- leaving
redd- refuse, rejected
zikr- mention (someone)
bey- Mr., sir
akt- agree
haps- (im)prison
birbirlerin- one to another
s?efin- your chief
tedbirler- precautions
birin- somebody
hu?ku?mlerin- your opinions
u?lkesin- his country
elimiz- our hand
du?zenlemelerin- your arrangements
yerin- your place
kendin- yourself
devletler- governments
bic?imin- your style
istedig?im- (thing) that I want
Figure 5: Turkish morphs segmented as prefixes using
Model 1.
morphs were found using all models, with Model 2
finding longer morphs, as in English. We do note
some issues with boundary letters for Model 2 pre-
fixes, however.
6 Conclusions
We have given a firmer foundation for the use of
minimal description length (MDL) criteria for mor-
phological analysis by giving a novel local formula-
tion of the change in description length (DL) upon
resegmentation of the corpus on a prefix (or suffix),
p Meaning
-nin of
-n?n of
-n? your
-na to your
-ler plural form
-leri plural form
-nda at your
-ni your
-lerin your (things)
-ki that
p Meaning
-si of
-ndan from
-lar? plural form
-lar plural form
-s? of
-lar?n your (pl.) (things)
-lerine to your (pl.) (things)
-ya to
-lara to (pl.)
-dir is
Figure 6: Turkish morphs segmented as suffixes using
Model 1.
p Meaning
hizmet(l)- service
neden(l)- reason
madd- material
birbir- one another
belg- document
izlenim- observation
nitelik- specification
en- width
dil- language
bilg(i)- knowledge
p Meaning
bahs- mention
zih(in)- memory
verg(i)- tax
person(el)- employee
biri- one of
verme- giving
vere(n)- giver
belirsi(z)- unknown
bildirim- announcement
zikr- mention
Figure 7: Turkish morphs segmented as prefixes using
Model 2. Turkish letters in parentheses are not in the
segmented morphs, though a better segmentation would
have included them.
which enables an efficient algorithm for greedy con-
struction of a morph dictionary using an MDL cri-
terion. The algorithm we have devised is generic, in
that it may easily be applied to any local description
length model. Early results of our method, as evalu-
ated by examination of the morphs it extracts, show
high accuracy in finding meaningful morphs based
solely on orthographic considerations; in fact, we
find that Model 1, which depends only on the num-
ber of morphs in the dictionary (and not on frequen-
cies in the corpus at all) gives surprisingly good re-
sults, though Model 2 may generally be preferable
(more experiments on varied and larger corpora still
remain to be run).
We see two immediate directions for future work.
The first comprises direct improvements to the tech-
niques presented here. Rather than segmenting pre-
fixes and suffixes separately, the data structures and
algorithms should be extended to segment both pre-
fixes and suffixes in the current morph list, depend-
ing on which gives the best overall DL improve-
ment. Related is the need to enable approximate
matching of ?boundary? characters due to ortho-
graphic shifts such as -y to -i-, as well as incorpo-
rating other orthographic filters on possible morphs
(such as requiring prefixes to contain a vowel). An-
other algorithmic extension will be to develop an
p Meaning
-isine toward (someone)
-nlerinin of their (things)
-taki which at
-isini from, towards
-yeti to
-iyorsa if (pres.)
-ili with
-likte at (the place of)
-?in of
-imizden from our
p Meaning
-ilerine to (pl.)
-lemektedir it does
*-tik
-ilemez cannot do
-lerimizi our things
-mun from my
-mlar (plural)
-tmak to
-unca while
-lu with
Figure 8: Turkish morphs segmented as suffixes using
Model 2; tables as in Figure 5.
efficient beam-search algorithm (avoiding copying
the entire data structure), which may improve accu-
racy over the current greedy search method. In ad-
dition, we will investigate the use of more sophisti-
cated DL models, including, for example, semantic
similarity between candidate affixes and stems, us-
ing the probability of occurrence of individual char-
acters for coding, or using n-gram probabilities for
coding the corpus as a sequence of morphs (instead
of the unigram coding model used here and previ-
ously).
The second direction involves integrating the cur-
rent algorithm into a larger system for more compre-
hensive morphological analysis. As noted above,
due to the greedy nature of the search, a recombi-
nation step may be needed to ?glue? morphs that
got incorrectly separated (such as un- and -der-).
More fundamentally, we intend to use the algorithm
presented here (with the above extensions) as a sub-
routine in a paradigm construction system along the
lines of Goldsmith (2001). It seems likely that effi-
cient and accurate MDL segmentation as we present
here will enable more effective search through the
space of possible morphological signatures.
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Moshe Fresko and Kagan Agun for help
with the Turkish translations, as well as the anony-
mous reviewers for their comments.
References
M. Baroni, J. Matiasek, and H. Trost. 2002. Unsu-
pervised discovery of morphologically related words
based on orthographic and semantic similarity. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Morphological
and Phonological Learning of ACL/SIGPHON-2002,
pages 48?57.
Andrew Barron, Jorma Rissanen, and Bin Yu. 1998. The
minimum description length principle in coding and
modeling. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
44(6):2743?2760, October.
Michael R. Brent, Sreerama K. Murthy, and Andrew
Lundberg. 1995. Discovering morphemic suffixes: A
case study in minimum description length induction.
In Proceedings of the Fifth International Workshop on
Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, Ft. Lauderdale,
FL.
Mathias Creutz and Krista Lagus. 2002. Unsupervised
discovery of morphemes. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Morphological and Phonological Learning of
ACL-02, pages 21?30, Philadelphia.
Herve? De?jean. 1998. Morphemes as necessary concept
for structures discovery from untagged corpora. In
Workshop on Paradigms and Grounding in Natural
Language Learning, pages 295?299, Adelaide.
S. T. Dumais, G. W. Furnas, T. K. Landauer, S. Deer-
wester, and R. Harshman. 1988. Using latent seman-
tic analysis to improve access to textual information.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing systems, pages 281?285. ACM
Press.
John Goldsmith. 2001. Unsupervised learning of the
morphology of a natural language. Computational
Linguistics, 27:153?198.
Dan Gusfield. 1997. Algorithms on Strings, Trees, and
Sequences - Computer Science and Computational Bi-
ology. Cambridge University Press.
Zellig Harris. 1955. From phoneme to morpheme. Lan-
guage, 31:190?222.
Kemal Oflazer. 2001. English Turkish aligned
parallel corpora. Turkish Natural Language
Processing Initiative, Bilkent University.
http://www.nlp.cs.bilkent.edu.tr/Turklang/
corpus/par-corpus/.
Patrick Schone and Daniel Jurafsky. 2000. Knowledge
free induction of morphology using latent semantic
analysis. In Proceedings of CoNLL-2000 and LLL-
2000, pages 67?72, Lisbon.
Matthew Snover, Gaja Jarosz, and Michael Brent. 2002.
Unsupervised learning of morphology using a novel
directed search algorithm: Taking the first step. In
ACL-2002 Workshop on Morphological and Phono-
logical Learning.
Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2007, pages 308?315,
Rochester, NY, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Extracting Appraisal Expressions
Kenneth Bloom and Navendu Garg and Shlomo Argamon
Computer Science Department
Illinois Institute of Technology
10 W. 31st St.
Chicago, IL 60616
{kbloom1,gargnav,argamon}@iit.edu
Abstract
Sentiment analysis seeks to characterize
opinionated or evaluative aspects of nat-
ural language text. We suggest here that
appraisal expression extraction should be
viewed as a fundamental task in sentiment
analysis. An appraisal expression is a tex-
tual unit expressing an evaluative stance
towards some target. The task is to find
and characterize the evaluative attributes
of such elements. This paper describes a
system for effectively extracting and dis-
ambiguating adjectival appraisal expres-
sions in English outputting a generic rep-
resentation in terms of their evaluative
function in the text. Data mining on ap-
praisal expressions gives meaningful and
non-obvious insights.
1 Introduction
Sentiment analysis, which seeks to analyze opin-
ion in natural language text, has grown in interest
in recent years. Sentiment analysis includes a vari-
ety of different problems, including: sentiment clas-
sification techniques to classify reviews as positive
or negative, based on bag of words (Pang et al,
2002) or positive and negative words (Turney, 2002;
Mullen and Collier, 2004); classifying sentences in
a document as either subjective or objective (Riloff
and Wiebe, 2003; Pang and Lee, 2004); identifying
or classifying appraisal targets (Nigam and Hurst,
2004); identifying the source of an opinion in a text
(Choi et al, 2005), whether the author is expressing
the opinion, or whether he is attributing the opinion
to someone else; and developing interactive and vi-
sual opinion mining methods (Gamon et al, 2005;
Popescu and Etzioni, 2005). Much of this work has
utilized the fundamental concept of ?semantic orien-
tation?, (Turney, 2002); however, sentiment analysis
still lacks a ?unified field theory?.
We propose in this paper that a fundamental task
underlying many of these formulations is the extrac-
tion and analysis of appraisal expressions, defined
as those structured textual units which express an
evaluation of some object. An appraisal expression
has three main components: an attitude (which takes
an evaluative stance about an object), a target (the
object of the stance), and a source (the person tak-
ing the stance) which may be implied.
The idea of appraisal extraction is a generaliza-
tion of problem formulations developed in earlier
works. Mullen and Collier?s (2004) notion of classi-
fying appraisal terms using a multidimensional set
of attributes is closely tied to the definition of an
appraisal expression, which is classified along sev-
eral dimensions. In previous work (Whitelaw et
al., 2005), we presented a related technique of find-
ing opinion phrases, using a multidimensional set
of attributes and modeling the semantics of mod-
ifiers in these phrases. The use of multiple text
classifiers by Wiebe and colleagues (Wilson et al,
2005; Wiebe et al, 2004) for various kinds of senti-
ment classification can also be viewed as a sentence-
level technique for analyzing appraisal expressions.
Nigam and Hurst?s (2004) work on detecting opin-
ions about a certain topic presages our notion of
connecting attitudes to targets, while Popescu and
Etzioni?s (2005) opinion mining technique also fits
well into our framework.
In this paper we describe a system for extracting
adjectival appraisal expressions, based on a hand-
built lexicon, a combination of heuristic shallow
parsing and dependency parsing, and expectation-
maximization word sense disambiguation. Each ex-
308
tracted appraisal expression is represented as a set of
feature values in terms of its evaluative function in
the text. We have applied this system to two domains
of texts: product reviews, and movie reviews. Man-
ual evaluation of the extraction shows our system to
work well, as well as giving some directions for im-
provement. We also show how straightforward data
mining can give users very useful information about
public opinion.
2 Appraisal Expressions
We define an appraisal expression to be an elemen-
tary linguistic unit that conveys an attitude of some
kind towards some target. An appraisal expression
is defined to comprise a source, an attitude, and a
target, each represented by various attributes. For
example, in ?I found the movie quite monotonous?,
the speaker (the Source) expresses a negative Atti-
tude (?quite monotonous?) towards ?the movie? (the
Target). Note that attitudes come in different types;
for example, ?monotonous? describes an inherent
quality of the Target, while ?loathed? would describe
the emotional reaction of the Source.
Attitude may be expressed through nouns, verbs,
adjectives and metaphors. Extracting all of this in-
formation accurately for all of these types of ap-
praisal expressions is a very difficult problem. We
therefore restrict ourselves for now to adjectival ap-
praisal expressions that are each contained in a sin-
gle sentence. Additionally, we focus here only on
extracting and analyzing the attitude and the target,
but not the source. Even with these restrictions, we
obtain interesting results (Sec. 7).
2.1 Appraisal attributes
Our method is grounded in Appraisal Theory, devel-
oped by Martin and White (2005), which analyzes
the way opinion is expressed. Following Martin and
White, we define:
Attitude type is type of appraisal being
expressed?one of affect, appreciation, or
judgment (Figure 1). Affect refers to an
emotional state (e.g., ?happy?, ?angry?), and
is the most explicitly subjective type of ap-
praisal. The other two types express evaluation
of external entities, differentiating between
intrinsic appreciation of object properties (e.g.,
?slender?, ?ugly?) and social judgment (e.g.,
?heroic?, ?idiotic?).
Orientation is whether the attitude is positive
Attitude Type
Appreciation
Composition
Balance: consistent, discordant, ...
Complexity: elaborate, convoluted, ...
Reaction
Impact: amazing, compelling, dull, ...
Quality: beautiful, elegant, hideous, ...
Valuation: innovative, profound, inferior, ...
Affect: happy, joyful, furious, ...
Judgment
Social Esteem
Capacity: clever, competent, immature, ...
Tenacity: brave, hard-working, foolhardy, ...
Normality: famous, lucky, obscure, ...
Social Sanction
Propriety: generous, virtuous, corrupt, ...
Veracity: honest, sincere, sneaky, ...
Figure 1: The Attitude Type taxonomy, with exam-
ples of adjectives from the lexicon.
(?good?) or negative (?bad?).
Force describes the intensity of the appraisal. Force
is largely expressed via modifiers such as
?very? (increased force), or ?slightly? (de-
creased force), but may also be expressed lex-
ically, for example ?greatest? vs. ?great? vs.
?good?.
Polarity of an appraisal is marked if it is scoped in
a polarity marker (such as ?not?), or unmarked
otherwise. Other attributes of appraisal are af-
fected by negation; e.g., ?not good? also has the
opposite orientation from ?good?.
Target type is a domain-dependent semantic type
for the target. This attribute takes on values
from a domain-dependent taxonomy, represent-
ing important (and easily extractable) distinc-
tions between targets in the domain.
2.2 Target taxonomies
Two domain-dependent target type taxonomies are
shown in Figure 2. In both, the primary distinction
is between a direct naming of a kind of ?Thing? or a
deictic/pronominal reference (e.g., ?those? or ?it?),
since the system does not currently rely on corefer-
ence resolution. References are further divided into
references to the writer/reader (?interactants?) and to
other people or objects.
The Thing subtrees for the two domains dif-
fer somewhat. In the movie domain, Things such
as ?this movie?, ?Nicholas Cage?, or ?cinematogra-
phy?, are classified into six main categories: movies
(the one being reviewed, or another one), people
309
Movie Target Type
Movie Thing
Any Movie
This Movie
Other Movie
Movie Person
Real Person. . .
Character
Movie Aspect. . .
Company
Marketing
Reference
Interactant
First Person
Second Person
Other
Third Person
Deictic
Product Target Type
Product Thing
Any Product
This Product
Other Product
Product Part
Integral
Replaceable
Experience
Company
Marketing
Support
Reference
Interactant
First Person
Second Person
Other
Third Person
Deictic
Figure 2: Target taxonomies for movie and product
reviews.
(whether characters, or real people involved in mak-
ing the film), aspects of the movie itself (its plot,
special effects, etc.), the companies involved in mak-
ing it, or aspects of marketing the movie (such
as trailers). For target Things in product reviews,
we replace ?Movie Person? and ?Movie Aspect? by
?Product Part? with two subcategories: ?Integral?, for
parts of the product itself (e.g., wheels or lenses),
and ?Replaceable?, for parts or supplies meant to
be periodically replaced (e.g., batteries or ink car-
tridges). The categories of ?Support?, for references
to aspects of customer support, and ?Experience? for
things associated with the experience of using the
product (such as ?pictures? or ?resolution?, were also
added.
3 Appraisal Extraction
In our system, appraisal extraction runs in several in-
dependent stages. First, the appraisal extractor finds
appraisal expressions by finding the chunks of text
that express attitudes and targets. Then, it links each
attitude group found to a target in the text. Finally, it
uses a probabilistic model to determine which atti-
tude type should be assigned when attitude chunks
were ambiguous.
3.1 Chunking
The chunker is based on our earlier work (Whitelaw
et al, 2005), which finds attitude groups and tar-
gets using a hand-built lexicon (Sec. 4). This lexi-
con contains head adjectives (which specify values
for the attributes attitude type, force, polarity, and
orientation), and appraisal modifiers (which specify
transformations to the four attributes). Some head
adjectives are ambiguous, having multiple entries in
the lexicon with different attribute values. In all
cases, different entries for a given word have dif-
ferent attitude types. If the head adjective is am-
biguous, multiple groups are created, to be disam-
biguated later. See our previous work (Whitelaw et
al., 2005) for a discussion of the technique.
Target groups are found by matching phrases in
the lexicon with corresponding phrases in the text
and assigning the target type listed in the lexicon.
3.2 Linking
After finding attitude groups and candidate targets,
the system links each attitude to a target. Each
sentence is parsed to a dependency representation,
and a ranked list of linkage specifications is used
to look for paths in the dependency tree connecting
some word in the source to some word in the target.
Such linkage specifications are hand-constructed,
and manually assigned priorities, so that when two
linkage specifications match, only the highest prior-
ity specification is used. For example, the two high-
est priority linkage specifications are:
1. target
nsubj
???? x
dobj
??? y
amod
???? attitude
2. attitude
amod
???? target
The first specification selects the subject of a sen-
tence where the appraisal modifies a noun in the
predicate, for example ?The Matrix? in ?The Matrix
is a good movie?. The second selects the noun mod-
ified by an adjective group, for example ?movie? in
?The Matrix is a good movie?.
If no linkage is found connecting an attitude to a
candidate target, the system goes through the link-
age specifications again, trying to find any word in
the sentence connected to the appraisal group by a
known linkage. The selected word is assigned the
generic category ofmovie thing or product thing (de-
pending on the domain of the text). If no linkage is
found at all, the system assigns the default category
movie thing or product thing, assuming that there is
an appraised thing that couldn?t be found using the
given linkage specifications.
310
3.3 Disambiguation
After linkages are made, this information is used to
disambiguate multiple senses that may be present
in a given appraisal expression. Most cases are
unambiguous, but in some cases two, or occasion-
ally even three, senses are possible. We bootstrap
from the unambiguous cases, using a probabilistic
model, to resolve the ambiguities. The attitude
type places some grammatical/semantic constraints
on the clause. Two key constraints are the syntactic
relation with the target (which can differentiate af-
fect from the other types of appraisal), and whether
the target type has consciousness (which helps dif-
ferentiate judgment and affect from appreciation).
To capture these constraints, we model the proba-
bility of a given attitude type being correct, given
the target type and the linkage specification used to
connect the attitude to the target, as follows.
The correct attitude type of an appraisal expres-
sion is modeled by a random variable A, the set of
all attitude types in the system is denoted by A, and
a specific attitude type is denoted by a. As described
above, other attributes besides attitude type may
also vary between word senses, but attitude type
always changes between word senses, so when the
system assigns a probability to an attitude type, it
is assigning that probability to the whole word sense.
We denote the linkage type used in a given ap-
praisal expression by L, the set of all possible link-
ages asL, and a specific linkage type by l. Note that
the first attempt with a linkage specification (to find
a chunked target) is considered to be different from
the second attempt with the same linkage specifica-
tion (which attempts to find any word). Failure to
find an applicable linkage rule is considered as yet
another ?linkage? for the probability model. Since
our system uses 29 different linkage specifications,
there are a total of 59 different possible linkages
types.
The target type of a given appraisal expression is
denoted by T , the set of all target types by T , and a
specific target type by t. We consider an expression
to have a given target type T = t only if that is its
specific target type; if its target type is a descendant
of t, then its target type is not t in the model. E
denotes the set of all extracted appraisal expressions.
The term exp denotes a specific expression.
Our goal is to estimate, for each appraisal expres-
sion exp in the corpus, the probability of its attitude
type being a, given the expression?s target type t
and linkage type l
P (A = a|exp) = P (A = a|T = t, L = l)
To do this, we define a model M of this probability,
and then estimate the maximum likelihood model
using Expectation-Maximization.
We model PM (A = a|T = t, L = l) by first
applying Bayes? theorem:
PM (A = a|T = t, L = l) =
PM (T = t, L = l|A = a)PM (A = a)
PM (T = t, L = l)
Assuming conditional independence of target type
and linkage, this becomes:
PM (T = t|A = a)PM (L = l|A = a)PM (A = a)
PM (T = t)PM (L = l)
M ?s parameters thus represent the conditional and
marginal probabilities on this right-hand-side.
Given a set of (possibly ambiguous) appraisal ex-
pressions E identified by chunking and linkage de-
tection, we seek the maximum likelihood model
M? = argmax
M
?
exp?E
?
a?A
M(A = a|exp)
M? will be our best estimate of P , given the pro-
cessed data in a given corpus. The system esti-
mates M? using an implementation of Expectation-
Maximization over the entire corpus. The highest-
probability attitude type (hence sense) according to
M is then chosen for each appraisal expression.
4 The Lexicon
As noted above, attitude groups were identified via a
domain-independent lexicon of appraisal adjectives,
adverbs, and adverb modifiers. 1 For the movie
domain, appraised things were identified based on
a manually constructed lexicon containing generic
movie words, as well as automatically constructed
lexicons of proper names specific to each movie be-
ing reviewed. For each product type considered, we
manually constructed a lexicon containing generic
product words; we did not find it necessary to con-
struct product-specific lexicons.
1All of the lexicons used in the paper can be
found at http://lingcog.iit.edu/arc/
appraisal lexicon 2007a.tar.gz
311
For adjectival attitudes, we used the lexicon
developed we developed in our previous work
(Whitelaw et al, 2005) on appraisal. We reviewed
the entire lexicon to determine its accuracy and
made numerous improvements.
Generic target lexicons were constructed by start-
ing with a small sample of the kind of reviews
that the lexicon would apply to. We examined
these manually to find generic words referring to ap-
praised things to serve as seed terms for the lexicon
and used WordNet (Miller, 1995) to suggest addi-
tional terms to add to the lexicon.
Since movie reviews often refer to the specific
contents of the movie under review by proper names
(of actors, the director, etc.), we also automatically
constructed a specific target lexicon for each movie
in the corpus, based on lists of actors, characters,
writers, directors, and companies listed for the film
at imdb.com. Each such specific lexicon was only
used for processing reviews of the movie it was gen-
erated for, so the system had no specific knowledge
of terms related to other movies during processing.
5 Corpora
We evaluated our appraisal extraction system on two
corpora. The first is the standard publicly available
collection of movie reviews constructed by Pang and
Lee (2004). This standard testbed consists of 1000
positive and 1000 negative reviews, taken from the
IMDb movie review archives2. Reviews with ?neu-
tral? scores (such as three stars out of five) were re-
moved by Pang and Lee, giving a data set with only
clearly positive and negative reviews. The average
document length in this corpus is 764 words, and
1107 different movies are reviewed.
The second corpus is a collection of user prod-
uct reviews taken from epinions.com supplied
in 2004 for research purposes by Amir Ashkenazi
of Shopping.Com. The base collection contains re-
views for three types of products: baby strollers, dig-
ital cameras, and printers. Each review has a numer-
ical rating (1?5); based on this, we labeled positive
and negative reviews in the same way as Pang and
Lee did for the movie reviews corpus. The prod-
ucts corpus has 15162 documents, averaging 442
words long. This comprises 11769 positive docu-
ments, 1420 neutral documents, and 1973 negative
documents. There are 905 reviews of strollers, 5778
2See http://www.cs.cornell.edu/people/pabo
/movie-review-data/
reviews of ink-jet printers and 8479 reviews of digi-
tal cameras, covering 516 individual products.
Each document in each corpus was preprocessed
into individual sentences, lower-cased, and tok-
enized. We used an implementation of Brill?s (1992)
part-of-speech tagger to find adjectives and modi-
fiers; for parsing, we used the Stanford dependency
parser (Klein and Manning, 2003).
6 Evaluating Extraction
We performed two manual evaluations on the sys-
tem. The first was to evaluate the overall accuracy
of the entire system. The second was to specifi-
cally evaluate the accuracy of the probabilistic dis-
ambiguator.
6.1 Evaluating Accuracy
We evaluated randomly selected appraisal expres-
sions for extraction accuracy on a number of binary
measures. This manual evaluation was performed
by the first author.We evaluated interrater reliability
between this rater and another author on 200 ran-
domly selected appraisal expressions (100 on each
corpus). The first rater rated an additional 120 ex-
pressions (60 for each corpus), and combined these
with his ratings for interrater reliability to compute
system accuracy, for a total of 320 expressions (160
for each corpus). The (binary) rating criteria were as
follows. Relating to the appraisal group:
APP Does the expression express appraisal at all?
ARM If so, does the appraisal group have all rele-
vant modifiers?
HEM Does the appraisal group include extra mod-
ifiers? (Results are shown negated, so that
higher numbers are better.)
Relating to the target:
HT If there is appraisal, is there an identifiable tar-
get (even if the system missed it)?
FT If there is appraisal, did the system identify
some target? (Determined automatically.)
RT If so, is it the correct one?
Relating to the expression?s attribute values (if it ex-
presses appraisal):
Att Is the attitude type assigned correct?
Ori Is the orientation assigned correct?
Pol Is the polarity assigned correct?
Tar Is the target type assigned correct?
Pre Is the target type the most precise value in the
taxonomy for this target?
312
Table 1: System accuracy at evaluated tasks. 95%
confidence one-proportion z-intervals are reported.
Measure Movies Products Combined
APP 86% ? 3% 81% ? 3% 83% ? 2%
ARM 94% ? 2% 95% ? 2% 95% ? 1%
? HEM 99% ? 1% 100% 99.6% ? 0.4%
HT 91% ? 2% 97% ? 2% 94% ? 1%
FT 96% ? 2% 94% ? 2% 95% ? 1%
RT 77% ? 4% 73% ? 4% 75% ? 3%
Att 78% ? 4% 80% ? 4% 79% ? 2%
Ori 95% ? 2% 95% ? 2% 94% ? 1%
Pol 97% ? 1% 96% ? 2% 97% ? 1%
Tar 84% ? 3% 86% ? 3% 85% ? 2%
Pre 70% ? 4% 77% ? 4% 73% ? 3%
Table 2: Interrater reliability of manual evaluation.
95% confidence intervals are reported.
Measure Movies Products Combined
APP 71% ? 9% 87% ? 7% 79% ? 6%
ARM 95% ? 5% 91% ? 6% 93% ? 4%
? HEM 98% ? 3% 100% 99% ? 1%
HT 97% ? 4% 99% ? 3% 98% ? 3%
FT N/A N/A N/A
RT 94% ? 6% 97% ? 4% 96% ? 4%
Att 79% ? 10% 86% ? 8% 83% ? 6%
Ori 93% ? 6% 94% ? 5% 93% ? 4%
Pol 96% ? 4% 94% ? 5% 95% ? 4%
Tar 94% ? 6% 90% ? 7% 91% ? 5%
Pre 86% ? 10% 90% ? 8% 88% ? 6%
Results are given in Table 1, and interrater relia-
bility is given in Table 2. In nearly all cases agree-
ment percentages are above 80%, indicating good
inter-rater consensus. Regarding precision, we note
that most aspects of extraction seem to work quite
well. The area of most concern in the system is
precision of target classification. This may be im-
proved with further development of the target lex-
icons to classify more terms to specific leaves in
the target type hierarchy. The other area of con-
cern is the APP test, which encountered difficulties
when a word could be used as appraisal in some
contexts, but not in others, particularly when an ap-
praisal word appeared as a nominal classifier.
6.2 Evaluating Disambiguation
The second experiment evaluated the accuracy of
EM in disambiguating the attitude type of appraisal
expressions. We evaluated the same number of ex-
pressions as used for the overall accuracy experi-
ment (100 used for interrater reliability and accu-
racy, plus 60 used only for accuracy on each corpus),
each having two or more word senses, presenting all
of the attitude types possible for each appraisal ex-
pression, as well as a ?none of the above? and a ?not
appraisal? option, asking the rater to select which
one applied to the selected expression in context.
Baseline disambiguator accuracy, if the computer
were to simply pick randomly from the choices
specified in the lexicon is 48% for both corpora. In-
terrater agreement was 80% for movies and 73% for
products (taken over 100 expressions from each cor-
pus.)
Considering just those appraisal expressions
which the raters decided were appraisal, the dis-
ambiguator achieved 58% accuracy on appraisal ex-
pressions from the movies corpus and 56% accuracy
on the products corpus. Further analysis of the re-
sults of the disambiguator shows that most of the er-
rors occur when the target type is the generic cate-
gory thing which occurs when the target is not in the
target lexicon. Performance on words recognized as
having more specific target types is better: 68% for
movies, and 59% for products. This indicates that
specific target type is an important indicator of at-
titude type.
7 Opinion Mining
We (briefly) demonstrate the usefulness of appraisal
expression extraction by using it for opinion mining.
In opinion mining, we find large numbers of reviews
and perform data mining to determine which aspects
of a product people like or dislike, and in which
ways. To do this, we search for association rules de-
scribing the appraisal features that can be found in
a single appraisal expression. We generally look for
rules that contain attitude type, orientation, thing
type, and a product name, when these rules occur
more frequently than expected.
The idea is similar to Agrawal and
Srikant?s (1995) notion of generalized associa-
tion rules. We treat each appraisal expression as
a transaction, with the attributes of attitude type,
orientation, polarity, force, and thing type, as well
as the document attributes product name, product
type, and document classification (based on the
number of stars the reviewer gave the product).
We use CLOSET+ (Wang et al, 2003) to find all
of the frequent closed itemsets in the data, with a
support greater than or equal to 20 occurrences.
Let ?b, a1, a2, . . . an? or ?b, A? denote the contents
of an itemset, and c (?b, A?) denote the support for
this itemset. For a given item b, pi(b) denotes its
immediate parent its value taxonomy, or ?root? for
flat sets.
313
Table 3: The most interesting specific rules for products.
b A Doc.
Int. Product Name Attitude Target Type Orientation Polarity class
45.7 Peg Perego Pliko Matic (1) ? quality this-product positive unmarked
42.8 Lexmark Color JetPrinter 1100 ? reaction this-product negative unmarked neg
41.9 Peg Perego Milano XL ? reaction this-product positive unmarked pos
41.1 Peg Perego Pliko Matic ? reaction this-product positive unmarked
40.8 Peg Perego Milano XL ? quality this-product positive unmarked pos
37.5 Peg Perego Milano XL ? reaction this-product positive unmarked
37.1 Peg Perego Milano XL ? quality this-product positive unmarked
36.3 Agfa ePhoto Smile (2) ? reaction experience negative unmarked neg
36.0 Agfa ePhoto Smile (2) ? reaction experience negative neg
33.9 KB Gear KG-JC3S Jamcam ? quality experience negative neg
Table 4: The most interesting oppositional rules for products.
b A Doc.
Int. Product Name Attitude Target Orient. Polarity class
31.6 Lexmark Color JetPrinter 1100 (3) ? reaction this-product positive neg
31.5 Lexmark Color JetPrinter 1100 ? quality this-product positive neg
29.5 Lexmark Color JetPrinter 1100 ? reaction this-product positive unmarked neg
29.2 Lexmark Color JetPrinter 1100 ? quality this-product positive unmarked neg
28.9 Lexmark Color JetPrinter 1100 ? appreciation this-product positive neg
For each item set, we collect rules ?b, A? and
compute their interestingness relative to the itemset
?pi(b), A?. Interestingness is defined as follows:
Int =
P (A|b)
P (A|pi(b))
=
c(?b, A?)? c(?pi(b)?)
c(?pi(b), A?)? c(?b?)
Int is the relative probability of finding the child
itemset in an appraisal expression, compared to find-
ing it in a parent itemset. Values greater than 1 in-
dicate that the child itemset appears more frequently
than we would expect.
We applied two simple filters to the output, to help
find more meaningful results. Specificity requires
that b be a product name, and that attitude type and
thing type be sufficiently deep nodes in the hier-
archy to describe something specific. (For exam-
ple, ?product thing? gives no real information about
what part of the product is being appraised.) Oppo-
sition chooses rules with a different rating than the
review as a whole, that is, document classification
is the opposite of appraisal orientation. The filter
also ensures that thing type is sufficiently specific,
as with specificity, and requires that b be a product
name.
We present the ten most ?interesting? rules from
each filter, for the products corpus. Rules from the
specificity filter are shown in Table 3 and rules from
the opposition filter are shown in Table 4. We con-
sider the meaning of some of these rules.
The first specificity rule (1) describes a typical ex-
ample of users who like the product very well over-
all. An example sentence that created this rule says
?Not only is it an excellent stroller, because of it?s
[sic] size it even doubled for us as a portable crib.?
The specificity rules for the Agfa ePhoto Smile
Digital Camera (2) are an example of the kind of
rule we expect to see when bad user experience con-
tributes to bad reviews. The text of the reviews that
gave these rules quite clearly convey that users were
not happy specifically with the photo quality.
In the oppositional rules for the Lexmark Color
JetPrinter 1100 (3), we see that users made positive
comments about the product overall, while neverthe-
less giving the product a negative review. Drilling
down into the text, we can see some examples of re-
views like ?On the surface it looks like a good printer
but it has many flaws that cause it to be frustrating.?
8 Conclusions
We have presented a new task, appraisal expres-
sion extraction, which, we suggest, is a fundamental
tasks for sentiment analysis. Shallow parsing based
on a set of appraisal lexicons, together with sparse
use of syntactic dependencies, can be used to ef-
fectively address the subtask of extracting adjectival
appraisal expressions. Indeed, straightforward data
mining applied to appraisal expressions can yield in-
sights into public opinion as expressed in patterns of
evaluative language in a corpus of product reviews.
Immediate future work includes extending the ap-
proach to include other types of appraisal expres-
314
sions, such as where an attitude is expressed via a
noun or a verb. In this regard, we will be examin-
ing extension of existing methods for automatically
building lexicons of positive/negative words (Tur-
ney, 2002; Esuli and Sebastiani, 2005) to the more
complex task of estimating also attitude type and
force. As well, a key problem is the fact that eval-
uative language is often context-dependent, and so
proper interpretation must consider interactions be-
tween a given phrase and its larger textual context.
References
Rakesh Agrawal and Ramakrishnan Srikant. 1995. Min-
ing generalized association rules. In Umeshwar Dayal,
Peter M. D. Gray, and Shojiro Nishio, editors, Proc.
21st Int. Conf. Very Large Data Bases, VLDB, pages
407?419. Morgan Kaufmann, 11?15 September.
Eric Brill. 1992. A simple rule-based part of speech tag-
ger. In Proc. of ACL Conference on Applied Natural
Language Processing.
Yejin Choi, Claire Cardie, Ellen Riloff, and Siddharth
Patwardhan. 2005. Identifying sources of opinions
with conditional random fields and extraction patterns.
Human Language Technology Conference/Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (HLT-EMNLP 2005), October.
Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2005. Determin-
ing the semantic orientation of terms through gloss
analysis. In Proceedings of CIKM-05, the ACM SIGIR
Conference on Information and Knowledge Manage-
ment, Bremen, DE.
Michael Gamon, Anthony Aue, Simon Corston-Oliver,
and Eric Ringger. 2005. Pulse: Mining customer
opinions from free text. In Proceedings of IDA-05, the
6th International Symposium on Intelligent Data Anal-
ysis, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Madrid, ES.
Springer-Verlag.
Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Accu-
rate unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the 41st
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
J. R. Martin and P. R. R. White. 2005. The Language of
Evaluation: Appraisal in English. Palgrave, London.
(http://grammatics.com/appraisal/).
George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: A lexical database for
English. Commun. ACM, 38(11):39?41.
TonyMullen and Nigel Collier. 2004. Sentiment analysis
using support vector machines with diverse informa-
tion sources. In Proceedings of EMNLP-04, 9th Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, Barcelon, ES.
Kamal Nigam and Matthew Hurst. 2004. Towards a ro-
bust metric of opinion. In Proceedings of the AAAI
Spring Symposium on Exploring Attitude and Affect in
Text: Theories and Applications, Standford, US.
Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2004. A sentimental education:
Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summarization
based on minimum cuts. In Proc. 42nd ACL, pages
271?278, Barcelona, Spain, July.
Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up? sentiment classification using ma-
chine learning techniques. In Proceedings of EMNLP.
Ana-Maria Popescu and Oren Etzioni. 2005. Ex-
tracting product features and opinions from reviews.
In Proceedings of HLT-EMNLP-05, the Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference/Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, Vancou-
ver, CA.
Ellen Riloff and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Learning extrac-
tion patterns for subjective expressions. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP.
Peter D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down? se-
mantic orientation applied to unsupervised classifica-
tion of reviews. In Proceedings 40th Annual Meeting
of the ACL (ACL?02), pages 417?424, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
Jianyong Wang, Jiawei Han, and Jian Pei. 2003.
CLOSET+: searching for the best strategies for min-
ing frequent closed itemsets. In Pedro Domingos,
Christos Faloutsos, Ted Senator, Hillol Kargupta,
and Lise Getoor, editors, Proceedings of the ninth
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-03), pages
236?245, New York, August 24?27. ACM Press.
Casey Whitelaw, Navendu Garg, and Shlomo Argamon.
2005. Using appraisal taxonomies for sentiment anal-
ysis. In Proceedings of CIKM-05, the ACM SIGIR
Conference on Information and Knowledge Manage-
ment, Bremen, DE.
Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, Rebecca Bruce, Matthew
Bell, and Melanie Martin. 2004. Learning subjective
language. Computational Linguistics, 30(3).
Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
level sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of Hu-
man Language Technologies Conference/Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (HLT/EMNLP 2005), Vancouver, CA.
315
