Evaluating Multiple Aspects of Coherence in Student Essays
Derrick Higgins
Educational
Testing Service
Jill Burstein
Educational
Testing Service
Daniel Marcu
University of Southern
California
/ Information Sciences
Institute
Claudia Gentile
Educational
Testing Service
Abstract
CriterionSM Online Essay Evaluation Service
includes a capability that labels sentences in
student writing with essay-based discourse el-
ements (e.g., thesis statements). We describe
a new system that enhances Criterion?s capa-
bility, by evaluating multiple aspects of co-
herence in essays. This system identifies fea-
tures of sentences based on semantic similarity
measures and discourse structure. A support
vector machine uses these features to capture
breakdowns in coherence due to relatedness
to the essay question and relatedness between
discourse elements. Intra-sentential quality is
evaluated with rule-based heuristics. Results
indicate that the system yields higher perfor-
mance than a baseline on all three aspects.
1 Overview
This work is motivated by a need for advanced discourse
analysis capabilities for writing instruction applications.
CriterionSM Online Essay Evaluation Service is an appli-
cation for writing instruction which includes a capability
to annotate sentences in student essays with discourse el-
ement labels. These labels include the categories Thesis
Statement, Main Idea, Supporting Idea, and Conclusion
(Burstein et al, 2003b). Though it accurately annotates
sentences with essay-based discourse labels, Criterion
does not provide an evaluation of the expressive quality
of the sentences that comprise a discourse segment. The
system might accurately label a student?s essay as hav-
ing all of the typically expected discourse elements: the-
sis statement, 3 main ideas, supporting evidence linked
to each main idea, and a conclusion. As teachers have
pointed out, however, an essay may have all of these or-
ganizational elements, but the quality of individual ele-
ments may need improvement.
In this paper, we present a capability that captures ex-
pressive quality of sentences in the discourse segments
of an essay. For this work, we have defined expressive
quality in terms of four aspects related to global and lo-
cal essay coherence. The first two dimensions capture
global coherence, and the latter two relate to local coher-
ence: a) relatedness to the essay question (topic), b) re-
latedness between discourse elements, c) intra-sentential
quality, and d) sentence-relatedness within a discourse
segment. Each dimension represents a different aspect
of coherence.
Essentially, the goal of the system is to be able to pre-
dict whether a sentence in a discourse segment has high
or low expressive quality with regard to a particular co-
herence dimension. We have deliberately developed an
approach to essay coherence that is comprised of multi-
ple dimensions, so that an instructional application may
provide appropriate feedback to student writers, based on
the system?s prediction of high or low for each dimen-
sion. For instance, sentences in the student?s thesis state-
ment may have a strong relationship to the essay topic,
but may have a number of serious grammatical errors that
make it hard to follow. For this student, we may want to
point out that on the one hand, the sentences in the thesis
address the topic, but the thesis statement as a discourse
segment might be more clearly stated if the grammar er-
rors were fixed. By contrast, the sentences that comprise
the student?s thesis statement may be grammatically cor-
rect, but only loosely related to the essay topic. For this
student, we would also want the system to provide ap-
propriate feedback to, so that the student could revise the
thesis statement text appropriately.
In earlier work, Foltz, Kintsch & Landauer (1998),
and Wiemer-Hastings & Graesser (2000) have devel-
oped systems that also examine coherence in student
writing. Their systems measure lexical relatedness be-
tween text segments by using vector-based similarity
between adjacent sentences. This linear approach to
similarity scoring is in line with the TextTiling scheme
(Hearst and Plaunt, 1993; Hearst, 1997), which may
be used to identify the subtopic structure of a text.
Miltsakaki and Kukich (2000) have also addressed the is-
sue of establishing the coherence of student essays, using
the Rough Shift element of Centering Theory. Again, this
previous work looks at the relatedness of adjacent text
segments, and does not explore global aspects of text co-
herence.
Hierarchical models of discourse have been applied to
the question of coherence (Mann and Thompson, 1986),
but so far these have been more useful in language gen-
eration than in determining how coherent a given text is,
or in identifying the specific problem, such as the break-
down of coherence in a document.
Our approach differs in fundamental ways from this
earlier work that deals with student writing. First, Foltz
et al (1998), Wiemer-Hastings and Graesser (2000),
and Miltsakaki and Kukich (2000) assume that text co-
herence is linear. They calculate the similarity between
adjacent segments of text. By contrast, our approach
considers the discourse structure in the text, following
Burstein et al (2003b). Our method considers sentences
with regard to their discourse segments, and how the sen-
tences relate to other text segments both inside (such as
the essay thesis) and outside (such as the essay topic) of a
document. This allows us to identify cases in which there
may be a breakdown in coherence due to more global as-
pects of essay-based discourse structure. Second, previ-
ous work has used Latent Semantic Analysis as a seman-
tic similarity measure (Landauer and Dumais, 1997). We
have adapted another vector-based method of semantic
representation: Random Indexing (Kanerva et al, 2000;
Sahlgren, 2001). Another difference between our sys-
tem and earlier systems is that we use essays manually
annotated on the four coherence dimensions to train our
system.
The final system employs a hybrid approach to classify
the first two of the four coherence dimensions with a high
or low quality rank. For these dimensions, a support vec-
tor machine is used to model features derived from Ran-
dom Indexing and from essay-based discourse structure
information. A third local coherence dimension compo-
nent is driven by rule-based heuristics. A fourth dimen-
sion related to coherence within a discourse segment can-
not be classified due to a lack of data characterizing low
expressive quality. This is fully explained later in the pa-
per.
2 Protocol Development and Human
Annotation
2.1 Protocol Development
The development of this system required a corpus of hu-
man annotated essay data for modeling purposes. In the
end, the goal is to have the system make judgments sim-
ilar to those made by a human with regard to ranking the
coherence of an essay on four dimensions. Therefore, we
created a detailed protocol for annotating the expressive
quality of essay-based discourse elements in essays with
regard to four aspects related to global and local essay
coherence. This protocol was designed for the following
purposes:
1. To yield annotations that are useful for the purpose
of providing students with feedback about the ex-
pressive relatedness of discourse elements in their
essays, given four relatedness dimensions;
2. To permit human annotators to achieve high levels
of consistency during the annotation process;
3. To produce annotations that have the potential of be-
ing derivable by computer programs through train-
ing on corpora annotated by humans.
2.1.1 Expressive Quality of Discourse Segments:
Protocol Description
According to writing experts who collaborated in this
work, the expressive relatedness of a sentence discourse
element may be characterized in terms of four dimen-
sions: a) relationship to prompt (essay question topic),
b) relationship to other discourse elements, c) relevance
with discourse segment, and d) errors in grammar, us-
age, and mechanics. For the sake of brevity, we refer to
these four dimensions as DimP (relatedness to prompt),
DimT (typically, relatedness to thesis), DimS (related-
ness within a discourse segment), and DimERR.
The two annotators were required to label each sen-
tence of an essay for expressive quality on the four di-
mensions (above). For the 989 essays used in this study,
each sentence had already been manually annotated with
these discourse labels: background material, thesis, main
idea, supporting idea, and conclusion (Burstein et al,
2003b).1 An assignment of high (1) or low (0) was given
to each sentence, on the dimensions relevant to the dis-
course element. Not all dimensions apply to all discourse
elements. The protocol is extremely specific as to how
annotators should label the expressive quality for each
sentence in a discourse element with regard to the four
dimensions. In this paper, we provide a brief description
of the labeling protocol, so that the purpose of each di-
mension is clear.
Figure 1 shows a sample essay and prompt. A hu-
man judge has assigned a label to each sentence in the
essay, resulting in the illustrated division into discourse
segments. In addition, the figure indicates human annota-
tors? ratings for two of our coherence dimensions (DimP
and DimT , discussed below). By and large, the essay
consistently follows up on the ideas of the essay thesis,
and so most sentences get a high relatedness score on
DimT . However, much of the essay fails to directly ad-
dress the question posed in the essay prompt, and so many
sentences are assigned low relatedness on DimP .
Dimension 1: DimP (Relatedness to Prompt)
The text of the discourse element and the prompt (text
of the essay question) must be related. Specifically, the
thesis statement, main ideas, and conclusion statement
should all contain text that is strongly related to the essay
topic. If this relationship does not exist, this is perhaps
evidence that the student has written an off-topic essay.
For this dimension, a high rank is assigned to each sen-
tence from background material, thesis, main idea and
conclusion statement that is related to the prompt text;
otherwise a low rank is assigned.
1The annotated data from the Burstein et al (2003b) study
were used to develop a commercial application that automati-
cally assigns these discourse labels to student essays.
Discourse Sentence DimP DimT
Segment
Prompt Images of beauty?both male and female?are promoted in magazines, in movies, on
billboards, and on television. Explain the extent to which you think these images can
be beneficial or harmful.
Background
A lot of people really care about how they look or how other people look. Low High
A lot of people like reading magazines or watch t.v about how you can fix your looks if
you don?t like the way your looks are. High High
Thesis
People that care about how they look is because they have problems at home, their parents
don?t pay attention to them or even that they have a high self-steem which that is not good. Low N/A
A lot of people get to the extent of killing themselfs just because they?re not happy with
there looks. Low N/A
Support Many people go thru make-overs to experiment how they will look but, some people stilldon?t like themself. N/A High
Main Point
The people that don?t like themselfs need some helps and they probably feel like that be-
cause they have told them oh! your ugly , you look like Blank! or maybe a guy never ask a
her out.
Low Low
Support
In case of a guy probably the same comments but he won?t dare to ask a girl out because
he feels that the girl is going to say no because of the way he looks. N/A High
Things like this make people don?t like each other. N/A High
Conclusion I suggest that a those people out here that are not happy with their looks get some help. Low HighTheirs alot of programs that you can get help. Low Low
Figure 1: Student essay with discourse segments and two coherence dimensions as annotated by human judge
Dimension 2: DimT (Relatedness to Thesis)
The relationship between a discourse element and
other discourse elements in the text governs the global
coherence of the essay text. For a text to hold together,
certain discourse elements must be related or the text will
appear choppy and will be difficult to follow. Specifi-
cally, a high rank is assigned to each sentence in the back-
ground material, main ideas and conclusion that is related
to the thesis, and supporting idea sentences that relate to
the relevant main idea. A conclusion sentence may also
be given a high rank if it is related to a main idea or back-
ground information. Low ranks are assigned to sentences
that do not have these relationships.
Dimension 3: DimS (Relatedness within Segment)
This dimension indicates the cohesiveness of the mul-
tiple sentences in a discourse segment of a text. This
dimension distinguishes a text segment that may go off
task within a discourse segment. For this dimension, a
high rank was assigned to each sentence in a discourse
segment that related to at least one other sentence in the
segment; otherwise the sentence received a low rank. If
the discourse segment contained only one sentence, then
the DimT label was assigned as the default.
Dimension 4: DimERR (Technical Errors)
Dimension 4 measures a sentence?s relatedness of ex-
pression with regard to grammar, mechanics and word
usage. More specifically, a sentence is considered to be
low on this dimension if it contains frequent patterns of
error, defined as follows: (a) contains 2 errors in gram-
mar, word usage or mechanics (i.e., spelling, capitaliza-
tion or punctuation), (b) is an incomplete sentence, or (c)
is a run-on sentence (i.e., 4 or more independent clauses
within a sentence).
2.2 Topics, Human Annotation, and Human
Agreement
2.2.1 Topics & Writing Genre
Essays written to two genres were used: five of the top-
ics were persuasive, and one was expository. Persuasive
writing requires the reader to state an opinion on a par-
ticular topic, support the stated opinion, and convince the
reader that the perspective is valid and well-supported.
An expository topic requires the writer only to state an
opinion on a topic. This typically elicits more personal
and descriptive writing. Four of the five sets of persua-
sive essay responses were written by college freshman,
and the fifth by 12th graders. The set of expository re-
sponses were also written by 12th graders.
2.2.2 Human Annotation
Two human judges participated in this study. The
judges were instructed to assign relevant dimension la-
bels to each sentence. Pre-training of the judges was done
using a set of approximately 50 essays across the six top-
ics in the study. During this phase, the authors and the
judges discussed and labeled the essays together. During
the next training phase, the judges labeled a total of 292
essays across six topics. They labeled the identical set of
essays, and were allowed to discuss their decisions. In the
next annotation phase, the judges did not discuss their an-
notations. In this post-training phase (annotation phase),
each judge labeled an average of about 278 unique es-
says for each of four prompts (556 essays together). Each
judge also labeled an additional set of 141 essays that was
overlapping. So, about 20 percent of the data annotated
by each judge in the annotation phase was overlapping,
Agreement ?
DimP (N=779) 99% .99
DimT (N=1890) 100% .99
DimS (N=2119) 100% .99
DimERR (N=2170) 99% .98
Table 1: Annotator agreement across coherence
dimensions?data from annotation phase
and 80 percent was unique. The 20 percent is used to ob-
tain human agreement.2 During both the training and an-
notation phases, Kappa statistics were run on their judg-
ments regularly, and if the Kappa for any particular cate-
gory fell below 0.8, then the judges were asked to review
the protocol until their agreement was acceptable. At the
end of the annotation phase, we had a total of 989 labeled
essays: 292 (training phase) + 278 ? 2 (unique essays
from annotator 1 + annotator 2, annotation phase) + 141
(overlapping set, annotation phase).
Human Judge Agreement
It is critical that the annotation process yields agree-
ment that is high enough between human judges, such
that it suggests that people can agree on how to categorize
the discourse elements. As is stated in the above section,
during the training of the judges for this study, Kappa
statistics were computed on a regular basis. Kappa be-
tween the judges for each category had to be maintained
at least 0.8, since this is believed to represent strong
agreement (Krippendorff, 1980). In Table 1 we report
human agreement for overlapping data from the four top-
ics on all four dimensions. Clearly, the level of human
agreement is quite high across all four coherence dimen-
sions. In addition, if we look at kappas of sentences based
on discourse category, no kappa falls below 0.9.
3 Method
Our final system uses a hybrid approach to label three of
the four coherence dimensions. For DimP and DimT ,
assigning coherence judgments to sentences in an essay
proceeds in three stages 1) identifying the discourse label
associated with each sentence in an essay, 2) computing
features that quantify the semantic similarity between dif-
ferent discourse segments of the essay, and 3) applying a
classifier to make a coherence judgment on a dimension.
Consistent with the human annotated data, a coherence
judgment on any dimension is either ?high? or ?low.? The
method for DimERR is rule-based, and is discussed later.
3.1 Discourse element feature identification
As noted earlier, the two human judges in this study anno-
tated the four coherence dimensions according to the hu-
2For the annotation phase, we were unable to collect data
for two essay prompts because of our annotators? availability.
This means that we only have inter-annotator agreement statis-
tics on 4 prompts, although some data from all six prompts was
available for training and testing our models (with the extra two
prompts being represented in the training phase of annotation).
man discourse label assignments. Accordingly, we also
used the human assigned discourse labels as features for
predicting coherence judgments. In a deployed system,
however, we would use discourse element labels gener-
ated from Criterion?s discourse analysis system (Burstein
et al, 2003b). Further evaluation is, of course, necessary
in order to determine the effect of using these automat-
ically assigned labels in place of the gold standard dis-
course labels.
3.2 Semantic similarity features
Given the partition of an essay into discourse segments,
we then derive a set of features from the essay in order
to predict how closely related each sentence is to various
important text segments, such as the essay topic, and dis-
course elements, such as thesis statement. As described
in Section 4, the features that are most useful for clas-
sifying sentences according to coherence are semantic
similarity features derived from Random Indexing (Kan-
erva et al, 2000; Sahlgren, 2001). Random Indexing is
a vector-based semantic representation system similar to
Latent Semantic Analysis. Our Random Indexing (RI)
semantic space is trained on about 30 million words of
newswire text.
When we extract a feature such as ?RI similarity to
prompt? for a sentence, this essentially measures to what
extent the sentence contains terms in the same semantic
domain as compared to those found in the prompt. Within
any discourse segment, any semantic information that is
word-order dependent is lost.
3.3 Support vector classification
Finally, for each sentence in the essay we use the fea-
tures derived from the essay to make a determination as
to whether it meets our criteria for coherence in these
dimensions (DimP and DimT ). To make this determi-
nation, we use a support vector machine (SVM) classi-
fier (Vapnik, 1995; Christianini and Shawe-Taylor, 2000).
Specifically, we use an SVM with a radial basis function
kernel, which exhibited good performance on a subset of
about 30 essays from the pre-training data.
4 Results
In each of the experiments below, the results are re-
ported for the entire set of 989 essays annotated for this
project. We performed ten-fold cross-validation, training
our SVM classifier on 910 of the data at a time, and testing
on the remaining 110 . We report the results on the cross-
validation set for all runs combined.
For each dimension, we also report the performance
of a simple baseline measure, which assumes that all of
our essay coherence criteria are satisfied. That is, our
baseline assigns category 1 (high relevance) to every
sentence, on every dimension.
These essays were written in response to six different
prompts, and had an average (human-assigned) score of
Score DimP DimT DimS DimERR
1?2 64.1% 71.2% 94.8% 61.1%
5?6 72.0% 70.9% 97.2% 92.9%
Table 2: Baseline performance on each coherence dimen-
sion, broken down by essay score point
4.0 on a six-point scale. Therefore, a priori, it seems pos-
sible that we could build a better baseline model by con-
ditioning its predictions on the overall score of the essay
(assigning 1?s to sentences from better-scoring essays,
and 0?s to sentences from lower-scoring essays). How-
ever, the coherence requirements of each of our dimen-
sions are usually met even in the lowest-scoring essays,
as shown in Table 2, which lists the percentage of sen-
tences in different essay score ranges which our human
annotators assigned category 1. Looking at the highest
and lowest score points on our six-point scale, it is clear
that higher-scoring essays do tend to have fewer problems
with coherence, but this effect is not overwhelming. (The
largest gap between the highest- and lowest-scoring es-
says is on DimERR, which deals with errors in grammar,
usage, and mechanics.)
4.1 DimP
According to the protocol, there are four discourse ele-
ments for which DimP , the degree of relatedness to the
essay prompt, is relevant: Background, Conclusion, Main
Point, and Thesis. The Supporting Idea category of sen-
tence is not required to be related to the prompt, because
it may express an elaboration of one of the main points of
the essay, and has a more tenuous and mediated logical
connection to the essay prompt text.
The features which we provide to the SVM for predict-
ing a sentence?s relatedness to the prompt are:
1. The RI similarity score of the target sentence with
the entire essay prompt,
2. The maximum RI similarity score of the target sen-
tence with any sentence in the essay prompt,
3. The RI similarity score of the target sentence with
the required task sentence (a designated portion of
the prompt text which contains an explicit directive
to the student to write about a specific topic),
4. The RI similarity score of the target sentence with
the entire thesis of the essay,
5. The maximum RI similarity score of the target sen-
tence with any sentence in the thesis,
6. The maximum RI similarity score of the target sen-
tence with any sentence in the preceding discourse
chunk,
7. The number of sentences in the current chunk,
8. The offset of the target sentence (sentence number)
from the beginning of the current discourse chunk,
9. The number of sentences in the current chunk whose
similarity with the prompt is greater than .2,
10. The number of sentences in the current chunk whose
similarity with the required task sentence is greater
than .2,
11. The number of sentences in the current chunk whose
similarity with the essay thesis is greater than .2,
12. The number of sentences in the current chunk whose
similarity with the prompt is greater than .4,
13. The number of sentences in the current chunk whose
similarity with the required task sentence is greater
than .4,
14. The number of sentences in the current chunk whose
similarity with the essay thesis is greater than .4,
15. The length of the target sentence in words,
16. A Boolean feature indicating whether the target sen-
tence contains a transition word, such as ?however?,
or ?although?,
17. A Boolean feature indicating whether the target sen-
tence contains an anaphoric element, and
18. The category of the current chunk. (This is encoded
as five Boolean features: one bit for each of ?Back-
ground?, ?Conclusion?, ?Main Point?, ?Supporting
Idea?, and ?Thesis?.)
In calculating features 2, 5, and 6, we use the maximum
similarity score of the sentence with any other sentence in
the relevant discourse segment, rather than simply using
the similarity score of the sentence with the entire text
chunk. We add this feature based on the intuition that for
a sentence to be relevant to another discourse segment, it
need only be connected to some part of that segment.
It is perhaps surprising that we include features which
measure the degree of similarity between the sentence
and the thesis, since we are trying to predict its related-
ness to the prompt, rather than the thesis. However, there
are two reasons we believe this is fruitful. First, since we
are dealing with a relatively small amount of text, com-
paring a single sentence to a short essay prompt, looking
at the thesis as well helps to overcome data sparsity is-
sues. Second, it may be that the relevance of the current
sentence to the prompt is mediated by the student?s thesis
statement. For example, the prompt may ask the student
to take a position on some topic. They may state this po-
sition in the thesis, and provide an example to support it
as one of their Main Points. In such a case, the example
would be more clearly linked to the Thesis, but this would
suffice for it to be related to the prompt.
Considering the similarity scores of sentences in the
current discourse segment is also, in part, an attempt to
overcome data sparsity issues, but is also motivated by
the idea that it may be an entire discourse segment which
can properly be said to be (ir)relevant to the essay prompt.
The sentence length and transition word features do
not directly reflect the relatedness of a sentence to the
prompt, but they are likely to be useful correlates.
Finally, the feature (#17) indicating the presence of
a pronoun is to help the system deal with cases in
which a sentence contains very few content words, but
is still linked to other material in the essay by means of
anaphoric elements, such as ?This is shown by my argu-
ment.? In such as case, the sentence would normally get
a low similarity score with the prompt (and other parts of
the essay), but the information that it contains a pronoun
might still allow the system to classify it correctly.
Table 3 shows results using the baseline algorithm to
classify sentences according to their relatedness to the
prompt. Table 4 presents the results using the SVM clas-
sifier. We provide precision, recall, and f-measure for the
assignment of the labels 1 and 0, and an overall accuracy
measure in the far right column. (The accuracy measure
is the value for precision and recall when 1 and 0 ranks
are collapsed. Precision and recall will be the same, since
the number of labels assigned by the model is equal to the
number of labels in the target assignment.)
The SVM model outperforms the baseline on every
subcategory, with the largest gains on Background sen-
tences, most of which are, in fact, unrelated to the prompt
according to our human judges. This low baseline result
on Background sentences could indicate that many stu-
dents have a problem with providing unnecessary and ir-
relevant prefaces to the important points in their essays.
Note that the trained SVM has around .9 recall on the
class of sentences which according to our human annota-
tors have high relevance to the prompt. This means that
our system is less likely to incorrectly assign a low rank
to a sentence that is high. So, the system will tend to err
on the side of the student, which is a preferable trade-off.
In part, this is due to the nature of the semantic similarity
measure we are using, which does not take word order
into account. While RI does allow us to capture a richer
meaning component than simply matching words which
co-occur in the target sentence and prompt, it still does
not encompass all that goes into determining whether a
sentence ?relates? to another chunk of text. Students of-
ten write something which bears a loose topical connec-
tion with the essay prompt, but does not directly address
the question. This sort of problem is hard to address with
a tool such as LSA or RI; the vocabulary of the sentence
on its own will not provide a clue to the sentence?s failure
to address the task.
4.2 DimT
The annotation protocol states that these four discourse
elements come into play for DimT : Background, Con-
clusion, Main Point, and Supporting Idea. Because this
dimension indicates the degree of relatedness to the the-
sis of the essay (and also other discourse segments in the
case of Supporting Idea and Conclusion sentences; see
Section 2.1.1 above), we do not consider thesis sentences
with regard to this aspect of coherence.
The features which we provide to the SVM for pre-
dicting whether or not a given sentence is related to the
thesis are almost the same ones used for DimP . The only
difference is that we omit features #12 and #13 in our
model of DimT . These are the features which evaluate
how many sentences in the current chunk have a simi-
larity score with the prompt and required task sentence
greater than 0.4. While DimP is to some degree sensitive
to the similarity of a sentence to the thesis, and DimT can
likewise benefit from the information about a sentence?s
similarity to the prompt, it seems that the latter link is less
important, so a single cutoff suffices for this model.
Tables 5?6 present the results for our SVM model and
for a baseline which assigns all sentences ?high? rele-
vance. The improvements on DimT are smaller than the
ones reported for DimP , but we still record an overall
gain of four percentage points in accuracy. Only on con-
clusion sentences were we unable to produce an improve-
ment over the baseline; we need to investigate this further.
Again, the system achieves high recall on sentences
with high relatedness. It outperforms the baseline by cor-
rectly identifying a modest percentage of the sentences
labeled as having low relatedness with the thesis.
4.3 DimS
DimS , which concerns whether the target sentence re-
lates to another sentence within the same discourse seg-
ment, seems another good candidate for applying our se-
mantic similarity score to the task of establishing coher-
ence. At present, however we have not made substan-
tial progress on this task. The baselines for DimS are
substantially higher than those for dimensions DimP and
DimT ? 98.1% of all sentences in our data were anno-
tated as ?highly related? with respect to this dimension.
This indicates that it is relatively rare to find a sentence
which is not related to anything in the same discourse
segment. This makes our task, to characterize those sen-
tences which are not related to the discourse segment,
much more difficult, since there are so few examples of
sentences with low-ranking coherence.
4.4 DimERR
DimERR is clearly a different kind of problem. Here, we
are looking for clarity of expression, or coherence within
a sentence. We base this solely on technical correctness.
We are able to automatically assign high and low ranks to
essay sentences using a set of rules based on the number
of grammar, usage and mechanics errors. The rules used
for DimERR are as follows: a) assign a low label if the
sentence is a fragment, if the sentence contains 2 or more
grammar, usage, and mechanics errors, or if the sentence
is a run-on, b) assign a high label if no criteria in (a) apply.
Criterion?s discourse analysis system also provides
an essay score with e-rater?, and qualitative feedback
about grammar, usage, mechanics, and style (Leacock
High Low Total
Precision Recall F-measure Precision Recall F-measure Accuracy
Background (N = 1077) 0.486 1.000 0.654 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.486
Conclusion (N = 1830) 0.757 1.000 0.862 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.757
Main Point (N = 1566) 0.663 1.000 0.797 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.663
Thesis (N = 1899) 0.712 1.000 0.832 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.712
All sentence types (N = 6372) 0.675 1.000 0.806 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.675
Table 3: Baseline performance on DimP
High Low Total
Precision Recall F-measure Precision Recall F-measure Accuracy
Background (N = 1077) 0.714 0.702 0.708 0.723 0.735 0.729 0.719
Conclusion (N = 1830) 0.784 0.959 0.863 0.578 0.175 0.269 0.768
Main Point (N = 1566) 0.729 0.888 0.801 0.616 0.352 0.448 0.708
Thesis (N = 1899) 0.771 0.929 0.843 0.644 0.318 0.426 0.753
All sentence types (N = 6372) 0.759 0.901 0.824 0.665 0.407 0.505 0.740
Table 4: SVM performance on DimP
High Low Total
Precision Recall F-measure Precision Recall F-measure Accuracy
Background (N = 1060) 0.793 1.000 0.885 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.793
Conclusion (N = 1829) 0.834 1.000 0.909 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.834
Main Point (N = 1556) 0.742 1.000 0.852 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.742
Support (N = 10332) 0.664 1.000 0.798 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.664
All sentence types (N = 14777) 0.702 1.000 0.825 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.702
Table 5: Baseline performance on DimT
High Low Total
Precision Recall F-measure Precision Recall F-measure Accuracy
Background (N = 1060) 0.856 0.980 0.914 0.827 0.368 0.509 0.853
Conclusion (N = 1829) 0.834 1.000 0.910 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.834
Main Point (N = 1556) 0.776 0.997 0.873 0.958 0.172 0.292 0.785
Support (N = 10332) 0.709 0.945 0.810 0.684 0.237 0.352 0.706
All sentence types (N = 14777) 0.744 0.962 0.839 0.709 0.221 0.337 0.741
Table 6: SVM performance on DimT
and Chodorow, 2000; Burstein et al, 2003a). We can
easily use Criterion?s outputs about grammar, usage, and
mechanics errors to assign high and low ranks to essay
sentences, using the rules described in the previous sec-
tion.
The performance of the module that does the DimERR
assignments is in Table 7. We used half of the 292 essays
from the training phase of annotation for development,
and the remaining data from the training and post-training
phases of annotation for cross-validation. Results are re-
ported for the cross-validation set. Text labeled as titles,
or opening or closing salutations, are not included in the
results. The baselines were computed by assigning all
sentences a high rank label. The baseline is high; how-
ever, the algorithm outperforms the baseline.
5 Discussion and Conclusions
There were multiple goals in this work. We wanted to in-
troduce a concept of essay coherence comprising multi-
ple aspects, and investigate what linguistic features drive
each aspect in student essay writing. Further, we wanted
Sentence N Precision Recall F-measure
Baseline
High 11789 0.83 1.00 0.91
Low 2351 0.00 0.00 0.00
Overall 14140 0.83 0.83 0.83
Algorithm
High 11789 0.88 0.96 0.92
Low 2351 0.63 0.34 0.44
Overall 14140 0.86 0.86 0.86
Table 7: Performance on DimERR
to build a system to automatically evaluate these multiple
aspects of coherence, so that appropriate feedback can be
provided through a writing instruction application.
To accomplish these goals, we have worked with writ-
ing experts to develop a comprehensive protocol that de-
tails how coherence in writing can be evaluated, either
manually or automatically. Using this protocol, human
annotators labeled a corpus of student essays, using the
coherence dimensions. These annotations built on a pre-
vious set of annotations for these data, whereby discourse
element labels were assigned. The result is a richly anno-
tated data set with information about discourse elements,
as well as their coherence in the context of the discourse
structure. Using this data set, we were able to learn what
linguistic features can be used to evaluate various aspects
of coherence in student writing. We then developed a
prototype system that ranks global and local aspects of
coherence in an essay. This capability shows promise in
ranking three aspects of coherence in essays: a) relation-
ship to essay topic, b) relationship between discourse ele-
ments, and c) intra-sentential technical quality. More low
ranking data on a fourth dimension, coherence within a
discourse segment, needs to be identified and annotated
before this dimension can be modeled.
The approach used is innovative, since it moves beyond
earlier methods of evaluating coherence in student writ-
ing that capture only local information between adjacent
sentences. Two methods are used to model the aspects
of coherence handled by the system. For the two global
coherence dimensions, DimP and DimT , a support vec-
tor machine provides a coherence ranking of sentences
based on features related to essay-based discourse infor-
mation, and semantic similarity values derived from the
RI algorithm. Using this classification method, we are
able to rank the expressive quality of sentences in essay-
based discourse segments, with regard to relatedness to
the text of the prompt, and also as they relate to the thesis
statement. With regard to the local coherence dimension,
DimERR, we use a rule-based heuristic to rank intra-
sentential quality. This addresses the issue of sentences in
essays that have serious grammatical problems that may
interfere with a reader?s comprehension. We take advan-
tage of Criterion?s identification of grammar, usage, and
mechanics errors to design the rules for ranking this local
coherence dimension.
We hope that in further investigation of this richly an-
notated data set, we will be able to build on the current
prototype and develop a full-scale writing instruction ca-
pability that provides feedback on the coherence dimen-
sions described in this paper.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Irma Lorenz and Shauna Cooper
for advice on protocol development and for the annota-
tion work, and Martin Chodorow for discussions about
Random Indexing. We thank the anonymous reviewers
for their helpful feedback.
Any opinions expressed here are those of the authors
and not necessarily of the Educational Testing Service.
References
Jill Burstein, Martin Chodorow, and Claudia Leacock.
2003a. CriterionSM: Online essay evaluation: An ap-
plication for automated evaluation of student essays.
In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual Conference on
Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, Aca-
pulco, Mexico.
Jill Burstein, Daniel Marcu, and Kevin Knight. 2003b.
Finding the WRITE stuff: Automatic identification of
discourse structure in student essays. IEEE Trans-
actions on Intelligent Systems: Special Issue on Ad-
vances in Natural Language Processing, 181:32?39.
Nello Christianini and John Shawe-Taylor. 2000. Sup-
port Vector Machines and other Kernel-based Learn-
ing Methods. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, UK.
Peter Foltz, Walter Kintsch, and Thomas K. Landauer.
1998. The measurement of textual coherence with
Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse Processes,
25(2&3):285?307.
Marti A. Hearst and Christian Plaunt. 1993. Subtopic
structuring for full-length document access. In Pro-
ceedings of ACM SIGIR, pages 59?68.
Marti A. Hearst. 1997. TextTiling: Segmenting text
into multi-paragraph subtopic passages. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 23(1):33?64.
P. Kanerva, J. Kristoferson, and A. Holst. 2000. Random
indexing of text samples for Latent Semantic Analysis.
In L. R. Gleitman and A. K. Josh, editors, Proc. 22nd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Klaus Krippendorff. 1980. Content Analysis: An Intro-
duction to Its Methodology. Sage Publications.
Thomas K. Landauer and Susan T. Dumais. 1997. A so-
lution to Plato?s problem: The Latent Semantic Analy-
sis theory of acquisition, induction, and representation
of knowledge. Psychological Review, 104:211?240.
Claudia Leacock and Martin Chodorow. 2000. An unsu-
pervised method for detecting grammatical errors. In
Proceedings of NAACL 2000, pages 140?147.
William Mann and Sandra Thompson. 1986. Relational
processes in discourse. Discourse Processes, 9:57?90.
Eleni Miltsakaki and Karen Kukich. 2000. Automated
evaluation of coherence in student essays. In Proceed-
ings of LREC 2000, Athens, Greece.
Magnus Sahlgren. 2001. Vector based semantic analy-
sis: Representing word meanings based on random la-
bels. In Proceedings of the ESSLLI 2001 Workshop on
Semantic Knowledge Acquisition and Categorisation.
Helsinki, Finland.
Vladimir Vapnik. 1995. The Nature of Statistical Learn-
ing Theory. Springer Verlag, New York.
Peter Wiemer-Hastings and Arthur Graesser. 2000.
Select-a-Kibitzer: A computer tool that gives mean-
ingful feedback on student compositions. Interactive
Learning Environments, 8(2):149?169.
