What?s There to Talk About? 
A Multi-Modal Model of Referring Behavior  
in the Presence of Shared Visual Information 
Darren Gergle 
Human-Computer Interaction Institute 
School of Computer Science 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburg, PA  USA 
dgergle+cs.cmu.edu
Abstract 
This paper describes the development of 
a rule-based computational model that 
describes how a feature-based representa-
tion of shared visual information com-
bines with linguistic cues to enable effec-
tive reference resolution. This work ex-
plores a language-only model, a visual-
only model, and an integrated model of 
reference resolution and applies them to a 
corpus of transcribed task-oriented spo-
ken dialogues. Preliminary results from a 
corpus-based analysis suggest that inte-
grating information from a shared visual 
environment can improve the perform-
ance and quality of existing discourse-
based models of reference resolution. 
1 Introduction 
In this paper, we present work in progress to-
wards the development of a rule-based computa-
tional model to describe how various forms of 
shared visual information combine with linguis-
tic cues to enable effective reference resolution 
during task-oriented collaboration. 
A number of recent studies have demonstrated 
that linguistic patterns shift depending on the 
speaker?s situational context. Patterns of prox-
imity markers (e.g., this/here vs. that/there) 
change according to whether speakers perceive 
themselves to be physically co-present or remote 
from their partner (Byron & Stoia, 2005; Fussell
et al, 2004; Levelt, 1989). The use of particular 
forms of definite referring expressions (e.g., per-
sonal pronouns vs. demonstrative pronouns vs. 
demonstrative descriptions) varies depending on 
the local visual context in which they are con-
structed (Byron et al, 2005a). And people are 
found to use shorter and syntactically simpler 
language (Oviatt, 1997) and different surface 
realizations (Cassell & Stone, 2000) when ges-
tures accompany their spoken language. 
More specifically, work examining dialogue 
patterns in collaborative environments has dem-
onstrated that pairs adapt their linguistic patterns 
based on what they believe their partner can see 
(Brennan, 2005; Clark & Krych, 2004; Gergle et 
al., 2004; Kraut et al, 2003). For example, when 
a speaker knows their partner can see their ac-
tions but will incur a small delay before doing so, 
they increase the proportion of full NPs used 
(Gergle et al, 2004). Similar work by Byron and 
colleagues (2005b) demonstrates that the forms 
of referring expressions vary according to a part-
ner?s proximity to visual objects of interest. 
Together this work suggests that the interlocu-
tors? shared visual context has a major impact on 
their patterns of referring behavior. Yet, a num-
ber of discourse-based models of reference pri-
marily rely on linguistic information without re-
gard to the surrounding visual environment (e.g., 
see Brennan et al, 1987; Hobbs, 1978; Poesio et 
al., 2004; Strube, 1998; Tetreault, 2005). Re-
cently, multi-modal models have emerged that 
integrate visual information into the resolution 
process. However, many of these models are re-
stricted by their simplifying assumption of com-
munication via a command language. Thus, their 
approaches apply to explicit interaction tech-
niques but do not necessarily support more gen-
eral communication in the presence of shared 
visual information (e.g., see Chai et al, 2005; 
Huls et al, 1995; Kehler, 2000). 
It is the goal of the work presented in this pa-
per to explore the performance of language-
based models of reference resolution in contexts 
where speakers share a common visual space. In 
particular, we examine three basic hypotheses 
7
regarding the likely impact of linguistic and vis-
ual salience on referring behavior. The first hy-
pothesis suggests that visual information is dis-
regarded and that linguistic context provides suf-
ficient information to describe referring behav-
ior. The second hypothesis suggests that visual 
salience overrides any linguistic salience in gov-
erning referring behavior. Finally, the third hy-
pothesis posits that a balance of linguistic and 
visual salience is needed in order to account for 
patterns of referring behavior. 
In the remainder of this paper, we begin by 
presenting a brief discussion of the motivation 
for this work. We then describe three computa-
tional models of referring behavior used to ex-
plore the hypotheses described above, and the 
corpus on which they have been evaluated.  We 
conclude by presenting preliminary results and 
discussing future modeling plans. 
2 Motivation 
There are several motivating factors for develop-
ing a computational model of referring behavior 
in shared visual contexts. First, a model of refer-
ring behavior that integrates a component of 
shared visual information can be used to increase 
the robustness of interactive agents that converse 
with humans in real-world situated environ-
ments. Second, such a model can be applied to 
the development of a range of technologies to 
support distributed group collaboration and me-
diated communication. Finally, such a model can 
be used to provide a deeper theoretical under-
standing of how humans make use of various 
forms of shared visual information in their every-
day communication. 
The development of an integrated multi-modal 
model of referring behavior can improve the per-
formance of state-of-the-art computational mod-
els of communication currently used to support 
conversational interactions with an intelligent 
agent (Allen et al, 2005; Devault et al, 2005; 
Gorniak & Roy, 2004). Many of these models 
rely on discourse state and prior linguistic con-
tributions to successfully resolve references in a 
given utterance. However, recent technological 
advances have created opportunities for human-
human and human-agent interactions in a wide 
variety of contexts that include visual objects of 
interest. Such systems may benefit from a data-
driven model of how collaborative pairs adapt 
their language in the presence (or absence) of 
shared visual information. A successful computa-
tional model of referring behavior in the pres-
ence of visual information could enable agents to 
emulate many elements of more natural and real-
istic human conversational behavior. 
A computational model may also make valu-
able contributions to research in the area of com-
puter-mediated communication. Video-mediated 
communication systems, shared media spaces, 
and collaborative virtual environments are tech-
nologies developed to support joint activities 
between geographically distributed groups. 
However, the visual information provided in 
each of these technologies can vary drastically. 
The shared field of view can vary, views may be 
misaligned between speaking partners, and de-
lays of the sort generated by network congestion 
may unintentionally disrupt critical information 
required for successful communication (Brennan, 
2005; Gergle et al, 2004). Our proposed model 
could be used along with a detailed task analysis 
to inform the design and development of such 
technologies. For instance, the model could in-
form designers about the times when particular 
visual elements need to be made more salient in 
order to support effective communication. A 
computational model that can account for visual 
salience and understand its impact on conversa-
tional coherence could inform the construction of 
shared displays or dynamically restructure the 
environment as the discourse unfolds. 
A final motivation for this work is to further 
our theoretical understanding of the role shared 
visual information plays during communication. 
A number of behavioral studies have demon-
strated the need for a more detailed theoretical 
understanding of human referring behavior in the 
presence of shared visual information. They sug-
gest that shared visual information of the task 
objects and surrounding workspace can signifi-
cantly impact collaborative task performance and 
communication efficiency in task-oriented inter-
actions (Kraut et al, 2003; Monk & Watts, 2000; 
Nardi et al, 1993; Whittaker, 2003). For exam-
ple, viewing a partner?s actions facilitates moni-
toring of comprehension and enables efficient 
object reference (Daly-Jones et al, 1998), chang-
ing the amount of available visual information 
impacts information gathering and recovery from 
ambiguous help requests (Karsenty, 1999), and 
varying the field of view that a remote helper has 
of a co-worker?s environment influences per-
formance and shapes communication patterns in 
directed physical tasks (Fussell et al, 2003). 
Having a computational description of these 
processes can provide insight into why they oc-
cur, can expose implicit and possibly inadequate 
simplifying assumptions underlying existing 
8
theoretical models, and can serve as a guide for 
future empirical research. 
3 Background and Related Work 
A review of the computational linguistics lit-
erature reveals a number of discourse models 
that describe referring behaviors in written, and 
to a lesser extent, spoken discourse (for a recent 
review see Tetreault, 2005). These include mod-
els based primarily on world knowledge (e.g., 
Hobbs et al, 1993), syntax-based methods 
(Hobbs, 1978), and those that integrate a combi-
nation of syntax, semantics and discourse struc-
ture (e.g., Grosz et al, 1995; Strube, 1998; 
Tetreault, 2001). The majority of these models 
are salience-based approaches where entities are 
ranked according to their grammatical function, 
number of prior mentions, prosodic markers, etc. 
In typical language-based models of reference 
resolution, the licensed referents are introduced 
through utterances in the prior linguistic context. 
Consider the following example drawn from the 
PUZZLE CORPUS1 whereby a ?Helper? describes to 
a ?Worker? how to construct an arrangement of 
colored blocks so they match a solution only the 
Helper has visual access to: 
(1)  Helper: Take the dark red piece. 
 Helper: Overlap it over the orange halfway. 
In excerpt (1), the first utterance uses the defi-
nite-NP ?the dark red piece,? to introduce a new 
discourse entity. This phrase specifies an actual 
puzzle piece that has a color attribute of dark red 
and that the Helper wants the Worker to position 
in their workspace. Assuming the Worker has 
correctly heard the utterance, the Helper can now 
expect that entity to be a shared element as estab-
lished by prior linguistic context. As such, this 
piece can subsequently be referred to using a 
pronoun. In this case, most models correctly li-
cense the observed behavior as the Helper speci-
fies the piece using ?it? in the second utterance. 
3.1 A Drawback to Language-Only Models 
However, as described in Section 2, several be-
havioral studies of task-oriented collaboration 
have suggested that visual context plays a critical 
role in determining which objects are salient 
parts of a conversation. The following example 
from the same PUZZLE CORPUS?in this case from 
a task condition in which the pairs share a visual 
space?demonstrates that it is not only the lin-
guistic context that determines the potential ante-
                                                
1
 The details of the PUZZLE CORPUS are described in ?.4. 
cedents for a pronoun, but also the physical con-
text as well: 
(2)  Helper: Alright, take the dark orange block. 
 Worker: OK. 
 Worker: [ moved an incorrect piece ]
 Helper: Oh, that?s not it. 
In excerpt (2), both the linguistic and visual 
information provide entities that could be co-
specified by a subsequent referent. In this ex-
cerpt, the first pronoun ?that,? refers to the ?[in-
correct piece]? that was physically moved into 
the shared visual workspace but was not previ-
ously mentioned. While the second pronoun, 
?it,? has as its antecedent the object co-specified 
by the definite-NP ?the dark orange block.? This 
example demonstrates that during task-oriented 
collaborations both the linguistic and visual con-
texts play central roles in enabling the conversa-
tional pairs to make efficient use of communica-
tion tactics such as pronominalization. 
3.2 Towards an Integrated Model 
While most computational models of reference 
resolution accurately resolve the pronoun in ex-
cerpt (1), many fail at resolving one or more of 
the pronouns in excerpt (2). In this rather trivial 
case, if no method is available to generate poten-
tial discourse entities from the shared visual en-
vironment, then the model cannot correctly re-
solve pronouns that have those objects as their 
antecedents. 
This problem is compounded in real-world 
and computer-mediated environments since the 
visual information can take many forms. For in-
stance, pairs of interlocutors may have different 
perspectives which result in different objects be-
ing occluded for the speaker and for the listener. 
In geographically distributed collaborations a 
conversational partner may only see a subset of 
the visual space due to a limited field of view 
provided by a camera. Similarly, the speed of the 
visual update may be slowed by network conges-
tion. 
Byron and colleagues recently performed a 
preliminary investigation of the role of shared 
visual information in a task-oriented, human-to-
human collaborative virtual environment (Byron 
et al, 2005b). They compared the results of a 
language-only model with a visual-only model, 
and developed a visual salience algorithm to rank 
the visual objects according to recency, exposure 
time, and visual uniqueness. In a hand-processed 
evaluation, they found that a visual-only model 
accounted for 31.3% of the referring expressions, 
and that adding semantic restrictions (e.g., ?open 
9
that? could only match objects that could be 
opened, such as a door) increased performance to 
52.2%. These values can be compared with a 
language-only model with semantic constraints 
that accounted for 58.2% of the referring expres-
sions. 
While Byron?s visual-only model uses seman-
tic selection restrictions to limit the number of 
visible entities that can be referenced, her model 
differs from the work reported here in that it does 
not make simultaneous use of linguistic salience 
information based on the discourse content. So, 
for example, referring expressions cannot be re-
solved to entities that have been mentioned but 
which are not visible. Furthermore, all other 
things equal, it will not correctly resolve refer-
ences to objects that are most salient based on 
the linguistic context over the visual context. 
Therefore, in addition to language-only and vis-
ual-only models, we explore the development of 
an integrated model that uses both linguistic and 
visual salience to support reference resolution. 
We also extend these models to a new task do-
main that can elaborate on referential patterns in 
the presence of various forms of shared visual 
information. Finally, we make use of a corpus 
gathered from laboratory studies that allow us to 
decompose the various features of shared visual 
information in order to better understand their 
independent effects on referring behaviors. 
The following section provides an overview of 
the task paradigm used to collect the data for our 
corpus evaluation. We describe the basic ex-
perimental paradigm and detail how it can be 
used to examine the impact of various features of 
a shared visual space on communication. 
4 The Puzzle Task Corpus 
The corpus data used for the development of the 
models in this paper come from a subset of data 
collected over the past few years using a referen-
tial communication task called the puzzle study 
(Gergle et al, 2004). 
In this task, pairs of participants are randomly 
assigned to play the role of ?Helper? or 
?Worker.? It is the goal of the task for the Helper 
to successfully describe a configuration of pieces 
to the Worker, and for the Worker to correctly 
arrange the pieces in their workspace. The puzzle 
solutions, which are only provided to the Helper, 
consist of four blocks selected from a larger set 
of eight. The goal is to have the Worker correctly 
place the four solution pieces in the proper con-
figuration as quickly as possible so that they 
match the target solution the Helper is viewing. 
Each participant was seated in a separate room 
in front of a computer with a 21-inch display. 
The pairs communicated over a high-quality, 
full-duplex audio link with no delay. The ex-
perimental displays for the Worker and Helper 
are illustrated in Figure 1. 
Figure 1. The Worker?s view (left) and the 
Helper?s view (right). 
The Worker?s screen (left) consists of a stag-
ing area on the right hand side where the puzzle 
pieces are held, and a work area on the left hand 
side where the puzzle is constructed. The 
Helper?s screen (right) shows the target solution 
on the right, and a view of the Worker?s work 
area in the left hand panel. The advantage of this 
setup is that it allows exploration of a number of 
different arrangements of the shared visual 
space. For instance, we have varied the propor-
tion of the workspace that is visually shared with 
the Helper in order to examine the impact of a 
limited field-of-view. We have offset the spatial 
alignment between the two displays to simulate 
settings of various video systems. And we have 
added delays to the speed with which the Helper 
receives visual feedback of the Worker?s actions 
in order to simulate network congestion. 
Together, the data collected using the puzzle 
paradigm currently contains 64,430 words in the 
form of 10,640 contributions collected from over 
100 different pairs. Preliminary estimates suggest 
that these data include a rich collection of over 
5,500 referring expressions that were generated 
across a wide range of visual settings. In this pa-
per, we examine a small portion of the data in 
order to assess the feasibility and potential con-
tribution of the corpus for model development. 
4.1 Preliminary Corpus Overview 
The data collected using this paradigm includes 
an audio capture of the spoken conversation sur-
rounding the task, written transcriptions of the 
spoken utterances, and a time-stamped record of 
all the piece movements and their representative 
state in the shared workspace (e.g., whether they 
are visible to both the Helper and Worker). From 
10
these various streams of data we can parse and 
extract the units for inclusion in our models. 
For initial model development, we focus on 
modeling two primary conditions from the PUZ-
ZLE CORPUS. The first is the ?No Shared Visual 
Information? condition where the Helper could 
not see the Worker?s workspace at all. In this 
condition, the pair needs to successfully com-
plete the tasks using only linguistic information. 
The second is the ?Shared Visual Information? 
condition, where the Helper receives immediate 
visual feedback about the state of the Worker?s 
work area. In this case, the pairs can make use of 
both linguistic information and shared visual in-
formation in order to successfully complete the 
task. 
As Table 1 demonstrates, we use a small ran-
dom selection of data consisting of 10 dialogues 
from each of the Shared Visual Information and 
No Shared Visual Information conditions. Each 
of these dialogues was collected from a unique 
participant pair. For this evaluation, we focused 
primarily on pronoun usage since this has been 
suggested to be one of the major linguistic effi-
ciencies gained when pairs have access to a 
shared visual space (Kraut et al, 2003). 
Task 
Condition 
Corpus 
Statistics 
   
Dialogues Contri-
butions 
Words Pro-
nouns 
No Shared 
Visual 
Information 
10 218 1181 30 
Shared  
Visual 
Information 
10 174 938 39 
Total 20 392 2119 69 
Table 1. Overview of the data used. 
5 Preliminary Model Overviews 
The models evaluated in this paper are based 
on Centering Theory (Grosz et al, 1995; Grosz 
& Sidner, 1986) and the algorithms devised by 
Brennan and colleagues (1987) and adapted by 
Tetreault (2001). We examine a language-only 
model based on Tetreault?s Left-Right Centering 
(LRC) model, a visual-only model that uses a 
measure of visual salience to rank the objects in 
the visual field as possible referential anchors, 
and an integrated model that balances the visual 
information along with the linguistic information 
to generate a ranked list of possible anchors. 
5.1 The Language-Only Model 
We chose the LRC algorithm (Tetreault, 2001) to 
serve as the basis for our language-only model. It 
has been shown to fare well on task-oriented spo-
ken dialogues (Tetreault, 2005) and was easily 
adapted to the PUZZLE CORPUS data. 
LRC uses grammatical function as a central 
mechanism for resolving the antecedents of ana-
phoric references. It resolves referents by first 
searching in a left-to-right fashion within the cur-
rent utterance for possible antecedents. It then 
makes co-specification links when it finds an 
antecedent that adheres to the selectional restric-
tions based on verb argument structure and 
agreement in terms of number and gender. If a 
match is not found the algorithm then searches 
the lists of possible antecedents in prior utter-
ances in a similar fashion. 
The primary structure employed in the lan-
guage-only model is a ranked entity list sorted by 
linguistic salience. To conserve space we do not 
reproduce the LRC algorithm in this paper and 
instead refer readers to Tetreault?s original for-
mulation (2001). We determined order based on 
the following precedence ranking:  
Subject  Direct Object  Indirect Object
Any remaining ties (e.g., an utterance with two 
direct objects) were resolved according to a left-
to-right breadth-first traversal of the parse tree. 
5.2 The Visual-Only Model 
As the Worker moves pieces into their work-
space, depending on whether or not the work-
space is shared with the Helper, the objects be-
come available for the Helper to see. The visual-
only model utilized an approach based on visual 
salience. This method captures the relevant vis-
ual objects in the puzzle task and ranks them ac-
cording to the recency with which they were ac-
tive (as described below). 
Given the highly controlled visual environ-
ment that makes up the PUZZLE CORPUS, we have 
complete access to the visual pieces and exact 
timing information about when they become 
visible, are moved, or are removed from the 
shared workspace. In the visual-only model, we 
maintain an ordered list of entities that comprise 
the shared visual space. The entities are included 
in the list if they are currently visible to both the 
Helper and Worker, and then ranked according to 
the recency of their activation.2
                                                
2
 This allows for objects to be dynamically rearranged de-
pending on when they were last ?touched? by the Worker. 
11
5.3 The Integrated Model 
We used the salience list generated from the lan-
guage-only model and integrated it with the one 
from the visual-only model. The method of or-
dering the integrated list resulted from general 
perceptual psychology principles that suggest 
that highly active visual objects attract an indi-
vidual?s attentional processes (Scholl, 2001).  
In this preliminary implementation, we de-
fined active objects as those objects that had re-
cently moved within the shared workspace. 
These objects are added to the top of the linguis-
tic-salience list which essentially rendered them 
as the focus of the joint activity. However, peo-
ple?s attention to static objects has a tendency to 
fade away over time. Following prior work that 
demonstrated the utility of a visual decay func-
tion (Byron et al, 2005b; Huls et al, 1995), we 
implemented a three second threshold on the 
lifespan of a visual entity. From the time since 
the object was last active, it remained on the list 
for three seconds. After the time expired, the ob-
ject was removed and the list returned to its prior 
state. This mechanism was intended to capture 
the notion that active objects are at the center of 
shared attention in a collaborative task for a short 
period of time. After that the interlocutors revert 
to their recent linguistic history for the context of 
an interaction. 
It should be noted that this is work in progress 
and a major avenue for future work is the devel-
opment of a more theoretically grounded method 
for integrating linguistic salience information 
with visual salience information. 
5.4 Evaluation Plan 
Together, the models described above allow us to 
test three basic hypotheses regarding the likely 
impact of linguistic and visual salience: 
Purely linguistic context. One hypothesis is 
that the visual information is completely disre-
garded and the entities are salient purely based 
on linguistic information. While our prior work 
has suggested this should not be the case, several 
existing computational models function only at 
this level. 
Purely visual context. A second possibility is 
that the visual information completely overrides 
linguistic salience. Thus, visual information 
dominates the discourse structure when it is 
available and relegates linguistic information to a 
subordinate role. This too should be unlikely 
given the fact that not all discourse deals with 
external elements from the surrounding world. 
A balance of syntactic and visual context. A 
third hypothesis is that both linguistic entities 
and visual entities are required in order to accu-
rately and perspicuously account for patterns of 
observed referring behavior. Salient discourse 
entities result from some balance of linguistic 
salience and visual salience. 
6 Preliminary Results 
In order to investigate the hypotheses described 
above, we examined the performance of the 
models using hand-processed evaluations of the 
PUZZLE CORPUS data. The following presents the 
results of the three different models on 10 trials 
of the PUZZLE CORPUS in which the pairs had no 
shared visual space, and 10 trials from when the 
pairs had access to shared visual information rep-
resenting the workspace. Two experts performed 
qualitative coding of the referential anchors for 
each pronoun in the corpus with an overall 
agreement of 88% (the remaining anomalies 
were resolved after discussion). 
As demonstrated in Table 2, the language-only 
model correctly resolved 70% of the referring 
expressions when applied to the set of dialogues 
where only language could be used to solve the 
task (i.e., the no shared visual information condi-
tion). However, when the same model was ap-
plied to the dialogues from the task conditions 
where shared visual information was available, it 
only resolved 41% of the referring expressions 
correctly. This difference was significant, 2(1, 
N=69) = 5.72, p = .02. 
No Shared Visual 
Information 
Shared Visual 
Information 
Language 
Model 
70.0%   (21 / 30) 41.0%   (16 / 39) 
Visual 
Model 
n/a 66.7%  (26 / 39) 
Integrated 
Model 
70.0%  (21 / 30) 69.2%  (27 / 39) 
Table 2. Results for all pronouns in the subset 
of the PUZZLE CORPUS evaluated. 
In contrast, when the visual-only model was 
applied to the same data derived from the task 
conditions in which the shared visual information 
was available, the algorithm correctly resolved 
66.7% of the referring expressions. In compari-
son to the 41% produced by the language-only 
model. This difference was also significant, 2(1, 
N=78) = 5.16, p = .02. However, we did not find 
evidence of a difference between the perform-
ance of the visual-only model on the visual task 
conditions and the language-only model on the 
12
language task conditions, 2(1, N=69) = .087, p = 
.77 (n.s.). 
The integrated model with the decay function 
also performed reasonably well. When the inte-
grated model was evaluated on the data where 
only language could be used it effectively reverts 
back to a language-only model, therefore achiev-
ing the same 70% performance. Yet, when it was 
applied to the data from the cases when the pairs 
had access to the shared visual information it 
correctly resolved 69.2% of the referring expres-
sions. This was also better than the 41% exhib-
ited by the language-only model, 2(1, N=78) = 
6.27, p = .012; however, it did not statistically 
outperform the visual-only model on the same 
data, 2(1, N=78) = .059, p = .81 (n.s.). 
In general, we found that the language-only 
model performed reasonably well on the dia-
logues in which the pairs had no access to shared 
visual information. However, when the same 
model was applied to the dialogues collected 
from task conditions where the pairs had access 
to shared visual information the performance of 
the language-only model was significantly re-
duced. However, both the visual-only model and 
the integrated model significantly increased per-
formance. The goal of our current work is to find 
a better integrated model that can achieve sig-
nificantly better performance than the visual-
only model. As a starting point for this investiga-
tion, we present an error analysis below. 
6.1 Error Analysis 
In order to inform further development of the 
model, we examined a number of failure cases 
with the existing data. The first thing to note was 
that a number of the pronouns used by the pairs 
referred to larger visible structures in the work-
space. For example, the Worker would some-
times state, ?like this??, and ask the Helper to 
comment on the overall configuration of the puz-
zle. Table 3 presents the performance results of 
the models after removing all expressions that 
did not refer to pieces of the puzzle. 
No Shared Visual 
Information 
Shared Visual 
Information 
Language 
Model 
77.7%  (21 / 27) 47.0%  (16 / 34) 
Visual 
Model 
n/a 76.4%  (26 / 34) 
Integrated 
Model 
77.7%  (21 / 27) 79.4%  (27 / 34) 
Table 3. Model performance results when re-
stricted to piece referents. 
In the errors that remained, the language-only 
model had a tendency to suffer from a number of 
higher-order referents such as events and actions. 
In addition, there were several errors that re-
sulted from chaining errors where the initial ref-
erent was misidentified. As a result, all subse-
quent chains of referents were incorrect.
The visual-only model and the integrated 
model had a tendency to suffer from timing is-
sues. For instance, the pairs occasionally intro-
duced a new visual entity with, ?this one?? How-
ever, the piece did not appear in the workspace 
until a short time after the utterance was made. 
In such cases, the object was not available as a 
referent on the object list. In the future we plan 
to investigate the temporal alignment between 
the visual and linguistic streams.
In other cases, problems simply resulted from 
the unique behaviors present when exploring 
human activities. Take the following example,  
(3) Helper: There is an orange red that obscures 
             half of it and it is to the left of it
In this excerpt, all of our models had trouble 
correctly resolving the pronouns in the utterance. 
However, while this counts as a strike against the 
model performance, the model actually presented 
a true account of human behavior. While the 
model was confused, so was the Worker. In this 
case, it took three more contributions from the 
Helper to unravel what was actually intended. 
7 Future Work 
In the future, we plan to extend this work in 
several ways. First, we plan future studies to help 
expand our notion of visual salience. Each of the 
visual entities has an associated number of do-
main-dependent features. For example, they may 
have appearance features that contribute to over-
all salience, become activated multiple times in a 
short window of time, or be more or less salient 
depending on nearby visual objects. We intend to 
explore these parameters in detail. 
Second, we plan to appreciably enhance the 
integrated model. It appears from both our initial 
data analysis, as well as our qualitative examina-
tion of the data, that the pairs make tradeoffs be-
tween relying on the linguistic context and the 
visual context. Our current instantiation of the 
integrated model could be enhanced by taking a 
more theoretical approach to integrating the in-
formation from multiple streams. 
Finally, we plan to perform a large-scale com-
putational evaluation of the entire PUZZLE CORPUS
in order to examine a much wider range of visual 
13
features such as limited field-of-views, delays in 
providing the shared visual information, and 
various asymmetries in the interlocutors? visual 
information. In addition to this we plan to extend 
our model to a wider range of task domains in 
order to explore the generality of its predictions. 
Acknowledgments 
This research was funded in by an IBM Ph.D. 
Fellowship. I would like to thank Carolyn Ros? 
and Bob Kraut for their support. 
References 
Allen, J., Ferguson, G., Swift, M., Stent, A., Stoness, S., 
Galescu, L., et al (2005). Two diverse systems built using 
generic components for spoken dialogue. In Proceedings 
of Association for Computational Linguistics, Companion 
Vol., pp. 85-88. 
Brennan, S. E. (2005). How conversation is shaped by vis-
ual and spoken evidence. In J. C. Trueswell & M. K. Ta-
nenhaus (Eds.), Approaches to studying world-situated 
language use: Bridging the language-as-product and lan-
guage-as-action traditions (pp. 95-129). Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
Brennan, S. E., Friedman, M. W., & Pollard, C. J. (1987). A 
centering approach to pronouns. In Proceedings of 25th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pp. 155-162. 
Byron, D. K., Dalwani, A., Gerritsen, R., Keck, M., Mam-
pilly, T., Sharma, V., et al (2005a). Natural noun phrase 
variation for interactive characters. In Proceedings of 1st 
Annual Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital En-
tertainment Conference, pp. 15-20. AAAI. 
Byron, D. K., Mampilly, T., Sharma, V., & Xu, T. (2005b). 
Utilizing visual attention for cross-modal coreference in-
terpretation. In Proceedings of Fifth International and In-
terdisciplinary Conference on Modeling and Using Con-
text (CONTEXT-05), pp. 
Byron, D. K., & Stoia, L. (2005). An analysis of proximity 
markers in collaborative dialog. In Proceedings of 41st an-
nual meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society, pp. Chi-
cago Linguistic Society. 
Cassell, J., & Stone, M. (2000). Coordination and context-
dependence in the generation of embodied conversation. In 
Proceedings of International Natural Language Genera-
tion Conference, pp. 171-178. 
Chai, J. Y., Prasov, Z., Blaim, J., & Jin, R. (2005). Linguis-
tic theories in efficient multimodal reference resolution: 
An empirical investigation. In Proceedings of Intelligent 
User Interfaces, pp. 43-50. NY: ACM Press. 
Clark, H. H., & Krych, M. A. (2004). Speaking while moni-
toring addressees for understanding. Journal of Memory & 
Language, 50(1), 62-81. 
Daly-Jones, O., Monk, A., & Watts, L. (1998). Some advan-
tages of video conferencing over high-quality audio con-
ferencing: Fluency and awareness of attentional focus. In-
ternational Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 49, 21-
58. 
Devault, D., Kariaeva, N., Kothari, A., Oved, I., & Stone, 
M. (2005). An information-state approach to collaborative 
reference. In Proceedings of Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Companion Vol., pp. 
Fussell, S. R., Setlock, L. D., & Kraut, R. E. (2003). Effects 
of head-mounted and scene-oriented video systems on re-
mote collaboration on physical tasks. In Proceedings of 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '03), pp. 513-
520. ACM Press. 
Fussell, S. R., Setlock, L. D., Yang, J., Ou, J., Mauer, E. M., 
& Kramer, A. (2004). Gestures over video streams to sup-
port remote collaboration on physical tasks. Human-
Computer Interaction, 19, 273-309. 
Gergle, D., Kraut, R. E., & Fussell, S. R. (2004). Language 
efficiency and visual technology: Minimizing collabora-
tive effort with visual information. Journal of Language & 
Social Psychology, 23(4), 491-517. 
Gorniak, P., & Roy, D. (2004). Grounded semantic compo-
sition for visual scenes. Journal of Artificial Intelligence 
Research, 21, 429-470. 
Grosz, B. J., Joshi, A. K., & Weinstein, S. (1995). Center-
ing: A framework for modeling the local coherence of dis-
course. Computational Linguistics, 21(2), 203-225. 
Grosz, B. J., & Sidner, C. L. (1986). Attention, intentions 
and the structure of discourse. Computational Linguistics, 
12(3), 175-204. 
Hobbs, J. R. (1978). Resolving pronoun references. Lingua, 
44, 311-338. 
Hobbs, J. R., Stickel, M. E., Appelt, D. E., & Martin, P. 
(1993). Interpretation as abduction. Artificial Intelligence, 
63, 69-142. 
Huls, C., Bos, E., & Claassen, W. (1995). Automatic refer-
ent resolution of deictic and anaphoric expressions. Com-
putational Linguistics, 21(1), 59-79. 
Karsenty, L. (1999). Cooperative work and shared context: 
An empirical study of comprehension problems in side by 
side and remote help dialogues. Human-Computer Interac-
tion, 14(3), 283-315. 
Kehler, A. (2000). Cognitive status and form of reference in 
multimodal human-computer interaction. In Proceedings 
of American Association for Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 
2000), pp. 685-689. 
Kraut, R. E., Fussell, S. R., & Siegel, J. (2003). Visual in-
formation as a conversational resource in collaborative 
physical tasks. Human Computer Interaction, 18, 13-49. 
Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articu-
lation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Monk, A., & Watts, L. (2000). Peripheral participation in 
video-mediated communication. International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies, 52(5), 933-958. 
Nardi, B., Schwartz, H., Kuchinsky, A., Leichner, R., 
Whittaker, S., & Sclabassi, R. T. (1993). Turning away 
from talking heads: The use of video-as-data in neurosur-
gery. In Proceedings of Interchi '93, pp. 327-334. 
Oviatt, S. L. (1997). Multimodal interactive maps: Design-
ing for human performance. Human-Computer Interaction, 
12, 93-129. 
Poesio, M., Stevenson, R., Di Eugenio, B., & Hitzeman, J. 
(2004). Centering: A parametric theory and its instantia-
tions. Computational Linguistics, 30(3), 309-363. 
Scholl, B. J. (2001). Objects and attention: the state of the 
art. Cognition, 80, 1-46. 
Strube, M. (1998). Never look back: An alternative to cen-
tering. In Proceedings of 36th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1251-1257. 
Tetreault, J. R. (2001). A corpus-based evaluation of center-
ing and pronoun resolution. Computational Linguistics, 
27(4), 507-520. 
Tetreault, J. R. (2005). Empirical evaluations of pronoun 
resolution. Unpublished doctoral thesis, University of 
Rochester, Rochester, NY. 
Whittaker, S. (2003). Things to talk about when talking 
about things. Human-Computer Interaction, 18, 149-170. 
14
