Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 611?618,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Examining the Role of Linguistic Knowledge Sources in the Automatic
Identification and Classification of Reviews
Vincent Ng and Sajib Dasgupta and S. M. Niaz Arifin
Human Language Technology Research Institute
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75083-0688
{vince,sajib,arif}@hlt.utdallas.edu
Abstract
This paper examines two problems in
document-level sentiment analysis: (1) de-
termining whether a given document is a
review or not, and (2) classifying the po-
larity of a review as positive or negative.
We first demonstrate that review identifi-
cation can be performed with high accu-
racy using only unigrams as features. We
then examine the role of four types of sim-
ple linguistic knowledge sources in a po-
larity classification system.
1 Introduction
Sentiment analysis involves the identification of
positive and negative opinions from a text seg-
ment. The task has recently received a lot of
attention, with applications ranging from multi-
perspective question-answering (e.g., Cardie et al
(2004)) to opinion-oriented information extraction
(e.g., Riloff et al (2005)) and summarization (e.g.,
Hu and Liu (2004)). Research in sentiment analy-
sis has generally proceeded at three levels, aim-
ing to identify and classify opinions from doc-
uments, sentences, and phrases. This paper ex-
amines two problems in document-level sentiment
analysis, focusing on analyzing a particular type
of opinionated documents: reviews.
The first problem, polarity classification, has
the goal of determining a review?s polarity ? pos-
itive (?thumbs up?) or negative (?thumbs down?).
Recent work has expanded the polarity classifi-
cation task to additionally handle documents ex-
pressing a neutral sentiment. Although studied
fairly extensively, polarity classification remains a
challenge to natural language processing systems.
We will focus on an important linguistic aspect
of polarity classification: examining the role of a
variety of simple, yet under-investigated, linguis-
tic knowledge sources in a learning-based polarity
classification system. Specifically, we will show
how to build a high-performing polarity classifier
by exploiting information provided by (1) high or-
der n-grams, (2) a lexicon composed of adjectives
manually annotated with their polarity information
(e.g., happy is annotated as positive and terrible as
negative), (3) dependency relations derived from
dependency parses, and (4) objective terms and
phrases extracted from neutral documents.
As mentioned above, the majority of work on
document-level sentiment analysis to date has fo-
cused on polarity classification, assuming as in-
put a set of reviews to be classified. A relevant
question is: what if we don?t know that an input
document is a review in the first place? The sec-
ond task we will examine in this paper ? review
identification ? attempts to address this question.
Specifically, review identification seeks to deter-
mine whether a given document is a review or not.
We view both review identification and polar-
ity classification as a classification task. For re-
view identification, we train a classifier to dis-
tinguish movie reviews and movie-related non-
reviews (e.g., movie ads, plot summaries) using
only unigrams as features, obtaining an accuracy
of over 99% via 10-fold cross-validation. Simi-
lar experiments using documents from the book
domain also yield an accuracy as high as 97%.
An analysis of the results reveals that the high ac-
curacy can be attributed to the difference in the
vocabulary employed in reviews and non-reviews:
while reviews can be composed of a mixture of
subjective and objective language, our non-review
documents rarely contain subjective expressions.
Next, we learn our polarity classifier using pos-
itive and negative reviews taken from two movie
611
review datasets, one assembled by Pang and Lee
(2004) and the other by ourselves. The result-
ing classifier, when trained on a feature set de-
rived from the four types of linguistic knowl-
edge sources mentioned above, achieves a 10-fold
cross-validation accuracy of 90.5% and 86.1% on
Pang et al?s dataset and ours, respectively. To our
knowledge, our result on Pang et al?s dataset is
one of the best reported to date. Perhaps more im-
portantly, an analysis of these results show that the
various types of features interact in an interesting
manner, allowing us to draw conclusions that pro-
vide new insights into polarity classification.
2 Related Work
2.1 Review Identification
As noted in the introduction, while a review can
contain both subjective and objective phrases, our
non-reviews are essentially factual documents in
which subjective expressions can rarely be found.
Hence, review identification can be viewed as an
instance of the broader task of classifying whether
a document is mostly factual/objective or mostly
opinionated/subjective. There have been attempts
on tackling this so-called document-level subjec-
tivity classification task, with very encouraging
results (see Yu and Hatzivassiloglou (2003) and
Wiebe et al (2004) for details).
2.2 Polarity Classification
There is a large body of work on classifying the
polarity of a document (e.g., Pang et al (2002),
Turney (2002)), a sentence (e.g., Liu et al (2003),
Yu and Hatzivassiloglou (2003), Kim and Hovy
(2004), Gamon et al (2005)), a phrase (e.g., Wil-
son et al (2005)), and a specific object (such as a
product) mentioned in a document (e.g., Morinaga
et al (2002), Yi et al (2003), Popescu and Etzioni
(2005)). Below we will center our discussion of
related work around the four types of features we
will explore for polarity classification.
Higher-order n-grams. While n-grams offer a
simple way of capturing context, previous work
has rarely explored the use of n-grams as fea-
tures in a polarity classification system beyond un-
igrams. Two notable exceptions are the work of
Dave et al (2003) and Pang et al (2002). Interest-
ingly, while Dave et al report good performance
on classifying reviews using bigrams or trigrams
alone, Pang et al show that bigrams are not use-
ful features for the task, whether they are used in
isolation or in conjunction with unigrams. This
motivates us to take a closer look at the utility of
higher-order n-grams in polarity classification.
Manually-tagged term polarity. Much work has
been performed on learning to identify and clas-
sify polarity terms (i.e., terms expressing a pos-
itive sentiment (e.g., happy) or a negative senti-
ment (e.g., terrible)) and exploiting them to do
polarity classification (e.g., Hatzivassiloglou and
McKeown (1997), Turney (2002), Kim and Hovy
(2004), Whitelaw et al (2005), Esuli and Se-
bastiani (2005)). Though reasonably successful,
these (semi-)automatic techniques often yield lex-
icons that have either high coverage/low precision
or low coverage/high precision. While manually
constructed positive and negative word lists exist
(e.g., General Inquirer1), they too suffer from the
problem of having low coverage. This prompts us
to manually construct our own polarity word lists2
and study their use in polarity classification.
Dependency relations. There have been several
attempts at extracting features for polarity classi-
fication from dependency parses, but most focus
on extracting specific types of information such as
adjective-noun relations (e.g., Dave et al (2003),
Yi et al (2003)) or nouns that enjoy a dependency
relation with a polarity term (e.g., Popescu and Et-
zioni (2005)). Wilson et al (2005) extract a larger
variety of features from dependency parses, but
unlike us, their goal is to determine the polarity of
a phrase, not a document. In comparison to previ-
ous work, we investigate the use of a larger set of
dependency relations for classifying reviews.
Objective information. The objective portions
of a review do not contain the author?s opinion;
hence features extracted from objective sentences
and phrases are irrelevant with respect to the po-
larity classification task and their presence may
complicate the learning task. Indeed, recent work
has shown that benefits can be made by first sepa-
rating facts from opinions in a document (e.g, Yu
and Hatzivassiloglou (2003)) and classifying the
polarity based solely on the subjective portions of
the document (e.g., Pang and Lee (2004)). Moti-
vated by the work of Koppel and Schler (2005), we
identify and extract objective material from non-
reviews and show how to exploit such information
in polarity classification.
1http://www.wjh.harvard.edu/?inquirer/
spreadsheet guid.htm
2Wilson et al (2005) have also manually tagged a list of
terms with their polarity, but this list is not publicly available.
612
Finally, previous work has also investigated fea-
tures that do not fall into any of the above cate-
gories. For instance, instead of representing the
polarity of a term using a binary value, Mullen
and Collier (2004) use Turney?s (2002) method to
assign a real value to represent term polarity and
introduce a variety of numerical features that are
aggregate measures of the polarity values of terms
selected from the document under consideration.
3 Review Identification
Recall that the goal of review identification is
to determine whether a given document is a re-
view or not. Given this definition, two immediate
questions come to mind. First, should this prob-
lem be addressed in a domain-specific or domain-
independent manner? In other words, should a re-
view identification system take as input documents
coming from the same domain or not?
Apparently this is a design question with no
definite answer, but our decision is to perform
domain-specific review identification. The reason
is that the primary motivation of review identifi-
cation is the need to identify reviews for further
analysis by a polarity classification system. Since
polarity classification has almost exclusively been
addressed in a domain-specific fashion, it seems
natural that its immediate upstream component ?
review identification ? should also assume do-
main specificity. Note, however, that assuming
domain specificity is not a self-imposed limita-
tion. In fact, we envision that the review identifica-
tion system will have as its upstream component a
text classification system, which will classify doc-
uments by topic and pass to the review identifier
only those documents that fall within its domain.
Given our choice of domain specificity, the next
question is: which documents are non-reviews?
Here, we adopt a simple and natural definition:
a non-review is any document that belongs to the
given domain but is not a review.
Dataset. Now, recall from the introduction that
we cast review identification as a classification
task. To train and test our review identifier, we
use 2000 reviews and 2000 non-reviews from the
movie domain. The 2000 reviews are taken from
Pang et al?s polarity dataset (version 2.0)3, which
consists of an equal number of positive and neg-
ative reviews. We collect the non-reviews for the
3Available from http://www.cs.cornell.edu/
people/pabo/movie-review-data.
movie domain from the Internet Movie Database
website4, randomly selecting any documents from
this site that are on the movie topic but are not re-
views themselves. With this criterion in mind, the
2000 non-review documents we end up with are
either movie ads or plot summaries.
Training and testing the review identifier. We
perform 10-fold cross-validation (CV) experi-
ments on the above dataset, using Joachims?
(1999) SVMlight package5 to train an SVM clas-
sifier for distinguishing reviews and non-reviews.
All learning parameters are set to their default
values.6 Each document is first tokenized and
downcased, and then represented as a vector of
unigrams with length normalization.7 Following
Pang et al (2002), we use frequency as presence.
In other words, the ith element of the document
vector is 1 if the corresponding unigram is present
in the document and 0 otherwise. The resulting
classifier achieves an accuracy of 99.8%.
Classifying neutral reviews and non-reviews.
Admittedly, the high accuracy achieved using such
a simple set of features is somewhat surpris-
ing, although it is consistent with previous re-
sults on document-level subjectivity classification
in which accuracies of 94-97% were obtained (Yu
and Hatzivassiloglou, 2003; Wiebe et al, 2004).
Before concluding that review classification is an
easy task, we conduct an additional experiment:
we train a review identifier on a new dataset where
we keep the same 2000 non-reviews but replace
the positive/negative reviews with 2000 neutral re-
views (i.e., reviews with a mediocre rating). In-
tuitively, a neutral review contains fewer terms
with strong polarity than a positive/negative re-
view. Hence, this additional experiment would al-
low us to investigate whether the lack of strong
polarized terms in neutral reviews would increase
the difficulty of the learning task.
Our neutral reviews are randomly chosen from
Pang et al?s pool of 27886 unprocessed movie re-
views8 that have either a rating of 2 (on a 4-point
scale) or 2.5 (on a 5-point scale). Each review then
undergoes a semi-automatic preprocessing stage
4See http://www.imdb.com.
5Available from svmlight.joachims.org.
6We tried polynomial and RBF kernels, but none yields
better performance than the default linear kernel.
7We observed that not performing length normalization
hurts performance slightly.
8Also available from Pang?s website. See Footnote 3.
613
where (1) HTML tags and any header and trailer
information (such as date and author identity) are
removed; (2) the document is tokenized and down-
cased; (3) the rating information extracted by reg-
ular expressions is removed; and (4) the document
is manually checked to ensure that the rating infor-
mation is successfully removed. When trained on
this new dataset, the review identifier also achieves
an accuracy of 99.8%, suggesting that this learning
task isn?t any harder in comparison to the previous
one.
Discussion. We hypothesized that the high accu-
racies are attributable to the different vocabulary
used in reviews and non-reviews. As part of our
verification of this hypothesis, we plot the learn-
ing curve for each of the above experiments.9 We
observe that a 99% accuracy was achieved in all
cases even when only 200 training instances are
used to acquire the review identifier. The abil-
ity to separate the two classes with such a small
amount of training data seems to imply that fea-
tures strongly indicative of one or both classes are
present. To test this hypothesis, we examine the
?informative? features for both classes. To get
these informative features, we rank the features by
their weighted log-likelihood ratio (WLLR)10:
P (wt|cj) log
P (wt|cj)
P (wt|?cj)
,
where wt and cj denote the tth word in the vocab-ulary and the jth class, respectively. Informally,
a feature (in our case a unigram) w will have a
high rank with respect to a class c if it appears fre-
quently in c and infrequently in other classes. This
correlates reasonably well with what we think an
informative feature should be. A closer examina-
tion of the feature lists sorted by WLLR confirms
our hypothesis that each of the two classes has its
own set of distinguishing features.
Experiments with the book domain. To under-
stand whether these good review identification re-
sults only hold true for the movie domain, we
conduct similar experiments with book reviews
and non-reviews. Specifically, we collect 1000
book reviews (consisting of a mixture of positive,
negative, and neutral reviews) from the Barnes
9The curves are not shown due to space limitations.
10Nigam et al (2000) show that this metric is effec-
tive at selecting good features for text classification. Other
commonly-used feature selection metrics are discussed in
Yang and Pedersen (1997).
and Noble website11, and 1000 non-reviews that
are on the book topic (mostly book summaries)
from Amazon.12 We then perform 10-fold CV ex-
periments using these 2000 documents as before,
achieving a high accuracy of 96.8%. These results
seem to suggest that automatic review identifica-
tion can be achieved with high accuracy.
4 Polarity Classification
Compared to review identification, polarity classi-
fication appears to be a much harder task. This
section examines the role of various linguistic
knowledge sources in our learning-based polarity
classification system.
4.1 Experimental Setup
Like several previous work (e.g., Mullen and Col-
lier (2004), Pang and Lee (2004), Whitelaw et al
(2005)), we view polarity classification as a super-
vised learning task. As in review identification,
we use SVMlight with default parameter settings
to train polarity classifiers13 , reporting all results
as 10-fold CV accuracy.
We evaluate our polarity classifiers on two
movie review datasets, each of which consists of
1000 positive reviews and 1000 negative reviews.
The first one, which we will refer to as Dataset A,
is the Pang et al polarity dataset (version 2.0). The
second one (Dataset B) was created by us, with the
sole purpose of providing additional experimental
results. Reviews in Dataset B were randomly cho-
sen from Pang et al?s pool of 27886 unprocessed
movie reviews (see Section 3) that have either a
positive or a negative rating. We followed exactly
Pang et al?s guideline when determining whether
a review is positive or negative.14 Also, we took
care to ensure that reviews included in Dataset B
do not appear in Dataset A. We applied to these re-
views the same four pre-processing steps that we
did to the neutral reviews in the previous section.
4.2 Results
The baseline classifier. We can now train our
baseline polarity classifier on each of the two
11www.barnesandnoble.com
12www.amazon.com
13We also experimented with polynomial and RBF kernels
when training polarity classifiers, but neither yields better re-
sults than linear kernels.
14The guidelines come with their polarity dataset. Briefly,
a positive review has a rating of ? 3.5 (out of 5) or ? 3 (out
of 4), whereas a negative review has a rating of ? 2 (out of 5)
or ? 1.5 (out of 4).
614
System Variation Dataset A Dataset B
Baseline 87.1 82.7
Adding bigrams 89.2 84.7
and trigrams
Adding dependency 89.0 84.5
relations
Adding polarity 90.4 86.2
info of adjectives
Discarding objective 90.5 86.1
materials
Table 1: Polarity classification accuracies.
datasets. Our baseline classifier employs as fea-
tures the k highest-ranking unigrams according to
WLLR, with k/2 features selected from each class.
Results with k = 10000 are shown in row 1 of Ta-
ble 1.15 As we can see, the baseline achieves an
accuracy of 87.1% and 82.7% on Datasets A and
B, respectively. Note that our result on Dataset
A is as strong as that obtained by Pang and Lee
(2004) via their subjectivity summarization algo-
rithm, which retains only the subjective portions
of a document.
As a sanity check, we duplicated Pang et al?s
(2002) baseline in which all unigrams that appear
four or more times in the training documents are
used as features. The resulting classifier achieves
an accuracy of 87.2% and 82.7% for Datasets A
and B, respectively. Neither of these results are
significantly different from our baseline results.16
Adding higher-order n-grams. The negative
results that Pang et al (2002) obtained when us-
ing bigrams as features for their polarity classi-
fier seem to suggest that high-order n-grams are
not useful for polarity classification. However, re-
cent research in the related (but arguably simpler)
task of text classification shows that a bigram-
based text classifier outperforms its unigram-
based counterpart (Peng et al, 2003). This
prompts us to re-examine the utility of high-order
n-grams in polarity classification.
In our experiments we consider adding bigrams
and trigrams to our baseline feature set. However,
since these higher-order n-grams significantly out-
number the unigrams, adding all of them to the
feature set will dramatically increase the dimen-
15We experimented with several values of k and obtained
the best result with k = 10000.
16We use two-tailed paired t-tests when performing signif-
icance testing, with p set to 0.05 unless otherwise stated.
sionality of the feature space and may undermine
the impact of the unigrams in the resulting clas-
sifier. To avoid this potential problem, we keep
the number of unigrams and higher-order n-grams
equal. Specifically, we augment the baseline fea-
ture set (consisting of 10000 unigrams) with 5000
bigrams and 5000 trigrams. The bigrams and tri-
grams are selected based on their WLLR com-
puted over the positive reviews and negative re-
views in the training set for each CV run.
Results using this augmented feature set are
shown in row 2 of Table 1. We see that accu-
racy rises significantly from 87.1% to 89.2% for
Dataset A and from 82.7% to 84.7% for Dataset B.
This provides evidence that polarity classification
can indeed benefit from higher-order n-grams.
Adding dependency relations. While bigrams
and trigrams are good at capturing local dependen-
cies, dependency relations can be used to capture
non-local dependencies among the constituents of
a sentence. Hence, we hypothesized that our n-
gram-based polarity classifier would benefit from
the addition of dependency-based features.
Unlike most previous work on polarity classi-
fication, which has largely focused on exploiting
adjective-noun (AN) relations (e.g., Dave et al
(2003), Popescu and Etzioni (2005)), we hypothe-
sized that subject-verb (SV) and verb-object (VO)
relations would also be useful for the task. The
following (one-sentence) review illustrates why.
While I really like the actors, the plot is
rather uninteresting.
A unigram-based polarity classifier could be con-
fused by the simultaneous presence of the posi-
tive term like and the negative term uninteresting
when classifying this review. However, incorpo-
rating the VO relation (like, actors) as a feature
may allow the learner to learn that the author likes
the actors and not necessarily the movie.
In our experiments, the SV, VO and AN re-
lations are extracted from each document by the
MINIPAR dependency parser (Lin, 1998). As
with n-grams, instead of using all the SV, VO and
AN relations as features, we select among them
the best 5000 according to their WLLR and re-
train the polarity classifier with our n-gram-based
feature set augmented by these 5000 dependency-
based features. Results in row 3 of Table 1 are
somewhat surprising: the addition of dependency-
based features does not offer any improvements
over the simple n-gram-based classifier.
615
Incorporating manually tagged term polarity.
Next, we consider incorporating a set of features
that are computed based on the polarity of adjec-
tives. As noted before, we desire a high-precision,
high-coverage lexicon. So, instead of exploiting a
learned lexicon, we manually develop one.
To construct the lexicon, we take Pang et al?s
pool of unprocessed documents (see Section 3),
remove those that appear in either Dataset A or
Dataset B17, and compile a list of adjectives from
the remaining documents. Then, based on heuris-
tics proposed in psycholinguistics18 , we hand-
annotate each adjective with its prior polarity (i.e.,
polarity in the absence of context). Out of the
45592 adjectives we collected, 3599 were labeled
as positive, 3204 as negative, and 38789 as neu-
tral. A closer look at these adjectives reveals that
they are by no means domain-dependent despite
the fact that they were taken from movie reviews.
Now let us consider a simple procedure P for
deriving a feature set that incorporates information
from our lexicon: (1) collect all the bigrams from
the training set; (2) for each bigram that contains at
least one adjective labeled as positive or negative
according to our lexicon, create a new feature that
is identical to the bigram except that each adjec-
tive is replaced with its polarity label19; (3) merge
the list of newly generated features with the list
of bigrams20 and select the top 5000 features from
the merged list according to their WLLR.
We then repeat procedure P for the trigrams
and also the dependency features, resulting in a
total of 15000 features. Our new feature set com-
prises these 15000 features as well as the 10000
unigrams we used in the previous experiments.
Results of the polarity classifier that incorpo-
rates term polarity information are encouraging
(see row 4 of Table 1). In comparison to the classi-
fier that uses only n-grams and dependency-based
features (row 3), accuracy increases significantly
(p = .1) from 89.2% to 90.4% for Dataset A, and
from 84.7% to 86.2% for Dataset B. These results
suggest that the classifier has benefited from the
17We treat the test documents as unseen data that should
not be accessed for any purpose during system development.
18http://www.sci.sdsu.edu/CAL/wordlist
19Neutral adjectives are not replaced.
20A newly generated feature could be misleading for the
learner if the contextual polarity (i.e., polarity in the presence
of context) of the adjective involved differs from its prior po-
larity (see Wilson et al (2005)). The motivation behind merg-
ing with the bigrams is to create a feature set that is more
robust in the face of potentially misleading generalizations.
use of features that are less sparse than n-grams.
Using objective information. Some of the
25000 features we generated above correspond to
n-grams or dependency relations that do not con-
tain subjective information. We hypothesized that
not employing these ?objective? features in the
feature set would improve system performance.
More specifically, our goal is to use procedure P
again to generate 25000 ?subjective? features by
ensuring that the objective ones are not selected
for incorporation into our feature set.
To achieve this goal, we first use the following
rote-learning procedure to identify objective ma-
terial: (1) extract all unigrams that appear in ob-
jective documents, which in our case are the 2000
non-reviews used in review identification [see Sec-
tion 3]; (2) from these ?objective? unigrams, we
take the best 20000 according to their WLLR com-
puted over the non-reviews and the reviews in the
training set for each CV run; (3) repeat steps 1 and
2 separately for bigrams, trigrams and dependency
relations; (4) merge these four lists to create our
80000-element list of objective material.
Now, we can employ procedure P to get a list of
25000 ?subjective? features by ensuring that those
that appear in our 80000-element list are not se-
lected for incorporation into our feature set.
Results of our classifier trained using these sub-
jective features are shown in row 5 of Table 1.
Somewhat surprisingly, in comparison to row 4,
we see that our method for filtering objective fea-
tures does not help improve performance on the
two datasets. We will examine the reasons in the
following subsection.
4.3 Discussion and Further Analysis
Using the four types of knowledge sources pre-
viously described, our polarity classifier signifi-
cantly outperforms a unigram-based baseline clas-
sifier. In this subsection, we analyze some of these
results and conduct additional experiments in an
attempt to gain further insight into the polarity
classification task. Due to space limitations, we
will simply present results on Dataset A below,
and show results on Dataset B only in cases where
a different trend is observed.
The role of feature selection. In all of our ex-
periments we used the best k features obtained via
WLLR. An interesting question is: how will these
results change if we do not perform feature selec-
tion? To investigate this question, we conduct two
616
experiments. First, we train a polarity classifier us-
ing all unigrams from the training set. Second, we
train another polarity classifier using all unigrams,
bigrams, and trigrams. We obtain an accuracy of
87.2% and 79.5% for the first and second experi-
ments, respectively.
In comparison to our baseline classifier, which
achieves an accuracy of 87.1%, we can see that
using all unigrams does not hurt performance, but
performance drops abruptly with the addition of
all bigrams and trigrams. These results suggest
that feature selection is critical when bigrams and
trigrams are used in conjunction with unigrams for
training a polarity classifier.
The role of bigrams and trigrams. So far we
have seen that training a polarity classifier using
only unigrams gives us reasonably good, though
not outstanding, results. Our question, then, is:
would bigrams alone do a better job at capturing
the sentiment of a document than unigrams? To
answer this question, we train a classifier using all
bigrams (without feature selection) and obtain an
accuracy of 83.6%, which is significantly worse
than that of a unigram-only classifier. Similar re-
sults were also obtained by Pang et al (2002).
It is possible that the worse result is due to the
presence of a large number of irrelevant bigrams.
To test this hypothesis, we repeat the above exper-
iment except that we only use the best 10000 bi-
grams selected according to WLLR. Interestingly,
the resulting classifier gives us a lower accuracy
of 82.3%, suggesting that the poor accuracy is not
due to the presence of irrelevant bigrams.
To understand why using bigrams alone does
not yield a good classification model, we examine
a number of test documents and find that the fea-
ture vectors corresponding to some of these docu-
ments (particularly the short ones) have all zeroes
in them. In other words, none of the bigrams from
the training set appears in these reviews. This sug-
gests that the main problem with the bigram model
is likely to be data sparseness. Additional experi-
ments show that the trigram-only classifier yields
even worse results than the bigram-only classifier,
probably because of the same reason.
Nevertheless, these higher-order n-grams play a
non-trivial role in polarity classification: we have
shown that the addition of bigrams and trigrams
selected via WLLR to a unigram-based classifier
significantly improves its performance.
The role of dependency relations. In the previ-
ous subsection we see that dependency relations
do not contribute to overall performance on top
of bigrams and trigrams. There are two plausi-
ble reasons. First, dependency relations are simply
not useful for polarity classification. Second, the
higher-order n-grams and the dependency-based
features capture essentially the same information
and so using either of them would be sufficient.
To test the first hypothesis, we train a clas-
sifier using only 10000 unigrams and 10000
dependency-based features (both selected accord-
ing to WLLR). For Dataset A, the classifier
achieves an accuracy of 87.1%, which is statis-
tically indistinguishable from our baseline result.
On the other hand, the accuracy for Dataset B is
83.5%, which is significantly better than the cor-
responding baseline (82.7%) at the p = .1 level.
These results indicate that dependency informa-
tion is somewhat useful for the task when bigrams
and trigrams are not used. So the first hypothesis
is not entirely true.
So, it seems to be the case that the dependency
relations do not provide useful knowledge for po-
larity classification only in the presence of bigrams
and trigrams. This is somewhat surprising, since
these n-grams do not capture the non-local depen-
dencies (such as those that may be present in cer-
tain SV or VO relations) that should intuitively be
useful for polarity classification.
To better understand this issue, we again exam-
ine a number of test documents. Our initial in-
vestigation suggests that the problem might have
stemmed from the fact that MINIPAR returns de-
pendency relations in which all the verb inflections
are removed. For instance, given the sentence My
cousin Paul really likes this long movie, MINIPAR
will return the VO relation (like, movie). To see
why this can be a problem, consider another sen-
tence I like this long movie. From this sentence,
MINIPAR will also extract the VO relation (like,
movie). Hence, this same VO relation is cap-
turing two different situations, one in which the
author himself likes the movie, and in the other,
the author?s cousin likes the movie. The over-
generalization resulting from these ?stemmed? re-
lations renders dependency information not useful
for polarity classification. Additional experiments
are needed to determine the role of dependency re-
lations when stemming in MINIPAR is disabled.
617
The role of objective information. Results
from the previous subsection suggest that our
method for extracting objective materials and re-
moving them from the reviews is not effective in
terms of improving performance. To determine the
reason, we examine the n-grams and the depen-
dency relations that are extracted from the non-
reviews. We find that only in a few cases do these
extracted objective materials appear in our set of
25000 features obtained in Section 4.2. This ex-
plains why our method is not as effective as we
originally thought. We conjecture that more so-
phisticated methods would be needed in order to
take advantage of objective information in polar-
ity classification (e.g., Koppel and Schler (2005)).
5 Conclusions
We have examined two problems in document-
level sentiment analysis, namely, review identifi-
cation and polarity classification. We first found
that review identification can be achieved with
very high accuracies (97-99%) simply by training
an SVM classifier using unigrams as features. We
then examined the role of several linguistic knowl-
edge sources in polarity classification. Our re-
sults suggested that bigrams and trigrams selected
according to the weighted log-likelihood ratio as
well as manually tagged term polarity informa-
tion are very useful features for the task. On the
other hand, no further performance gains are ob-
tained by incorporating dependency-based infor-
mation or filtering objective materials from the re-
views using our proposed method. Nevertheless,
the resulting polarity classifier compares favorably
to state-of-the-art sentiment classification systems.
References
C. Cardie, J. Wiebe, T. Wilson, and D. Litman. 2004. Low-
level annotations and summary representations of opin-
ions for multi-perspective question answering. In New Di-
rections in Question Answering. AAAI Press/MIT Press.
K. Dave, S. Lawrence, and D. M. Pennock. 2003. Mining
the peanut gallery: Opinion extraction and semantic clas-
sification of product reviews. In Proc. of WWW, pages
519?528.
A. Esuli and F. Sebastiani. 2005. Determining the semantic
orientation of terms through gloss classification. In Proc.
of CIKM, pages 617?624.
M. Gamon, A. Aue, S. Corston-Oliver, and E. K. Ringger.
2005. Pulse: Mining customer opinions from free text.
In Proc. of the 6th International Symposium on Intelligent
Data Analysis, pages 121?132.
V. Hatzivassiloglou and K. McKeown. 1997. Predicting
the semantic orientation of adjectives. In Proc. of the
ACL/EACL, pages 174?181.
M. Hu and B. Liu. 2004. Mining and summarizing customer
reviews. In Proc. of KDD, pages 168?177.
T. Joachims. 1999. Making large-scale SVM learning prac-
tical. In Advances in Kernel Methods - Support Vector
Learning, pages 44?56. MIT Press.
S.-M. Kim and E. Hovy. 2004. Determining the sentiment of
opinions. In Proc. of COLING, pages 1367?1373.
M. Koppel and J. Schler. 2005. Using neutral examples for
learning polarity. In Proc. of IJCAI (poster).
D. Lin. 1998. Dependency-based evaluation of MINIPAR.
In Proc. of the LREC Workshop on the Evaluation of Pars-
ing Systems, pages 48?56.
H. Liu, H. Lieberman, and T. Selker. 2003. A model of tex-
tual affect sensing using real-world knowledge. In Proc.
of Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI), pages 125?132.
S. Morinaga, K. Yamanishi, K. Tateishi, and T. Fukushima.
2002. Mining product reputations on the web. In Proc. of
KDD, pages 341?349.
T. Mullen and N. Collier. 2004. Sentiment analysis using
support vector machines with diverse information sources.
In Proc. of EMNLP, pages 412?418.
K. Nigam, A. McCallum, S. Thrun, and T. Mitchell. 2000.
Text classification from labeled and unlabeled documents
using EM. Machine Learning, 39(2/3):103?134.
B. Pang and L. Lee. 2004. A sentimental education: Senti-
ment analysis using subjectivity summarization based on
minimum cuts. In Proc. of the ACL, pages 271?278.
B. Pang, L. Lee, and S. Vaithyanathan. 2002. Thumbs
up? Sentiment classification using machine learning tech-
niques. In Proc. of EMNLP, pages 79?86.
F. Peng, D. Schuurmans, and S. Wang. 2003. Language and
task independent text categorization with simple language
models. In HLT/NAACL: Main Proc. , pages 189?196.
A.-M. Popescu and O. Etzioni. 2005. Extracting product
features and opinions from reviews. In Proc. of HLT-
EMNLP, pages 339?346.
E. Riloff, J. Wiebe, and W. Phillips. 2005. Exploiting sub-
jectivity classification to improve information extraction.
In Proc. of AAAI, pages 1106?1111.
P. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down? Semantic ori-
entation applied to unsupervised classification of reviews.
In Proc. of the ACL, pages 417?424.
C. Whitelaw, N. Garg, and S. Argamon. 2005. Using ap-
praisal groups for sentiment analysis. In Proc. of CIKM,
pages 625?631.
J. M. Wiebe, T. Wilson, R. Bruce, M. Bell, and M. Martin.
2004. Learning subjective language. Computational Lin-
guistics, 30(3):277?308.
T. Wilson, J. M. Wiebe, and P. Hoffmann. 2005. Recogniz-
ing contextual polarity in phrase-level sentiment analysis.
In Proc. of EMNLP, pages 347?354.
Y. Yang and J. O. Pedersen. 1997. A comparative study on
feature selection in text categorization. In Proc. of ICML,
pages 412?420.
J. Yi, T. Nasukawa, R. Bunescu, and W. Niblack. 2003.
Sentiment analyzer: Extracting sentiments about a given
topic using natural language processing techniques. In
Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Data Min-
ing (ICDM).
H. Yu and V. Hatzivassiloglou. 2003. Towards answer-
ing opinion questions: Separating facts from opinions and
identifying the polarity of opinion sentences. In Proc. of
EMNLP, pages 129?136.
618
