Reasoning in Metaphor Understanding:
The ATT-Meta Approach and System
John Barnden, Sheila Glasbey, Mark Lee, Alan Wallington
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham
Birmingham B15 2TT
{J.A.Barnden, S.R.Glasbey, M.G.Lee, A.M.Wallington}@cs.bham.ac.uk
Abstract
A detailed approach has been developed for
core aspects of the task of understanding a
broad class of metaphorical utterances. The
utterances in question are those that depend
on known metaphorical mappings but that
nevertheless contain elements not mapped
by those mappings. A reasoning system has
been implemented that partially instantiates
the theoretical approach. The system, called
ATT-Meta, will be demonstrated. The paper
briefly indicates how the system works, and
outlines some specific aspects of the system,
approach and the overall project.
Introduction
The sentence In the far reaches of her mind,
Anne believed that Kyle was having an affair1
can be analyzed as depending on metaphorical
views of MIND AS PHYSICAL SPACE and
IDEAS AS PHYSICAL OBJECTS (see Barnden
2001a). These views are, plausibly, familiar to
typical users of English. However, it is
reasonable to assume that typical users do not
already have a mapping into the mental domain
of the physical notion of "far reaches". Our
approach to metaphor is predicated on the notion
that one should, when possible, avoid
constructing source-to-target mappings for such
elements of a metaphorical utterance that
transcend the already known mappings in the
metaphorical views underlying the utterance.
Instead, we advocate the use of metaphor-
pretence "cocoons" (reasoning spaces) where the
utterance is taken as literally true. Within-
                                                     
1
 Slightly adapted from real discourse.
cocoon reasoning will attempt to connect these
"map-transcending" elements to aspects of the
source using a set of specified conversion rules.
The far-reaches qualification in the sentence
implies by source-domain reasoning that Anne
could only to a very low degree physically
manipulate the idea that Kyle was having an
affair. Then, if we can appeal to a conversion
rule, i.e. a known mapping of ability to
physically manipulate an idea to ability to
consciously process it, we can draw the
reasonable conclusion that Anne only had a very
low degree of ability to consciously process the
idea. In our presentation, we shall demonstrate
how the ATT-Meta system deals with this
example.
Note that the rules of reasoning are given a
qualitative certainty level, and that predicates
can be graded, using a scale of qualitative
degrees. For instance, someone can be
represented as understanding a situation to a
"medium" degree.
Our approach also makes heavy use of "view-
neutral mapping adjuncts" (VNMAs). These are
general mapping principles (inspired by the
work of Carbonell 1982) that apply, though only
by default, no matter what metaphorical views
are in play. For instance, the ability to do things
and the degrees with which states of affairs hold
are automatically mapped by VNMAs. In many
examples of metaphor, most of the real mapping
work is done by VNMAs.
Much of the approach has been implemented in
the ATT-Meta system, which is an uncertain
rule-based system operating by backchaining
(see also Barnden 1998, Barnden 2001, Lee &
Barnden, 2001a). ATT-Meta performs
reasoning, but does not yet interface directly to
natural language. Instead, hand-constructed
logical forms couching the source-domain
meaning of metaphorical sentences are passed to
it. In the above example, the source-domain
meaning is that Anne?s believing was literally
physically located in the physical far reaches of
her mind.
The following sections summarize various
abilities of the system, principles of the
approach, and aspects of ongoing theoretical
work aimed at further extensions to the system.
A major item of current implementational work
is a fuller realization of VNMAs.
1 Uncertainty
Although reasoning conflict and uncertainty are
intricately involved in metaphor, very few
approaches attempt to grapple with the issues.
Propositions and reasoning within both the
target and source domains, being largely of
common-sense varieties, are typically uncertain.
It can be uncertain what metaphorical views are
involved; information transferred from the
source domain can conflict with target-domain
information; and transfers can even conflict with
each other. The ATT-Meta system handles all
these types of uncertainty and conflict. Its
uncertainty handling is based on fairly crude
qualitative uncertainty annotations on rules and
propositions, but there is a sophisticated
conflict-resolution mechanism.
The uncertainty-handling and conflict-resolution
are almost entirely orthogonal to the provisions
for metaphor. This leads to clean design and
helps to address long-standing issues about
metaphor. One such issue is the conflict between
information transferred from the source domain
and the target information. ATT-Meta allows
either side to win, depending on standard
specificity principles. This goes against a naive
assumption in most of the literature that target
information should automatically override
transfers. But, this is only convincing when the
target information is certain. Indeed, we claim
that metaphor is often used precisely to describe
an exception to a target-domain default.
2 Mixed Metaphors
Issues such as reasoning about uncertainty are
particularly important in the processing of mixed
metaphors. Mixed metaphors need not feature
obvious cases of conflict but can include
graceful combinations of metaphors, such as the
following sentence to be examined below: One
part of John hotly resented the verdict. This
combines a view of John as made up of sub-
agents and a view of agents? emotional states as
things that can have temperature. It is possible to
distinguish two types of mixed metaphor:
parallel mixes and serial mixes. In a parallel
mixed metaphor, the target (A) is seen partly
through an A-as-B metaphor and partly through
another metaphor, A-as-B?. B and B? are in
general different domains, but may overlap.
Also, different aspects of A may be involved in
the two metaphors. In a serial mixed metaphor
(commonly called a chained metaphor), the
target (A) is seen as a source (B), which is in
turn then seen as a different source (C).
Previous work on the understanding of metaphor
has assumed that mixing is a relatively rare
phenomenon that can be handled once a more
theory of simple metaphor is developed. We
argue that this assumption is detrimental to
progress since mixed metaphors rely on the
same conceptual knowledge as simple
metaphors and can, therefore, provide valuable
insight into the processes and representations
underlying metaphorical reasoning. Moreover,
we claim that the reasoning processes and data
structures involved in understanding mixed
metaphors are identical to those used in
understanding simple metaphors. Therefore, any
current theory of metaphor should (at least in
principle) be extensible to deal with mixing. To
this end, ATT-Meta handles mixed metaphor in
a manner consistent with the way it handles
simple metaphors. The two types of metaphor
are processed in subtly different ways. Parallel
mixed metaphors create separate pretence-
cocoons that are mapped in parallel to the target
domain where their respective contributions are
understood. Serial mixed metaphors create
nested pretence cocoons where the metaphorical
view of B as C is nested within a pretence
cocoon with the view of A as B.
3 Reverse Transfers in Metaphor
The use of metaphor involves a flow of effects
of some kind from the source domain to the
target domain, where effects can include insights
into the target, hypotheses about the target, or
the highlighting of parts of the target. However,
although the overall effect flow is always from
source to target, in many cases, this does not
preclude a reverse flow where a literal
proposition, command, or question is mapped
onto an equivalent within the current
metaphorical domain.
The ATT-Meta system allows conversion rules
to map from propositions in the source domain
to propositions in the target domain and also in
the opposite direction. So a source domain
proposition such as "Socrates was the midwife
for an idea" might be mapped onto the target
domain proposition "Socrates helped in the
production of the idea". However, the rules
would equally allow the proposition "Socrates
helped in the production of the idea" to be
mapped to the source domain proposition
"Socrates was the midwife for an idea". We
argue that there are at least three reasons why
ATT-Meta should have this ability:
(1) Given that metaphors are ultimately used to
have an effect on the target domain, the use of a
metaphorical utterance can be seen as
answering, in some sense, a target domain
query. This sets up a choice between taking the
metaphorical utterance and applying all
conversion rules to it in the hope that one of the
resulting propositions might provide a suitable
answer, or taking the question and converting it
into a question in terms of the current metaphor.
We argue that the latter is often more efficient.
(2) Certain source domain propositions would
allow ATT-Meta to draw a tentative conclusion,
which would, were it more strongly supported,
provide an argument via a chain of reasoning for
some other, target level, proposition or query. A
target-level statement might give the added
support, but for this to be the case it would first
need to be converted into its source-level
equivalent.
(3) The combination of source and target domain
information within a discourse that only
intermittently maintains a metaphorical view of
the target domain may best be done in the source
domain after the target domain information has
been "metaphorized". This would be especially
so if the source domain was information-rich
compared to the target domain, so allowing
much more reasoning to be carried out than
would be possible in the target domain.
4 Non-Declarative Metaphor
Almost all examples of metaphorical language
discussed in the literature are of declarative
utterances rather than questions, commands,
ejaculations, etc. However, these other forms of
utterance can obviously occur. For instance, just
as one can state "John is a steamroller?? one can
ask "Is John a steamroller??? Just as one can state
"The champion knocked the cream-puff out?? one
can issue the command "Knock that cream-puff
out!?? The observation that questions, in
particular, can be metaphorical, plays a
significant role in our theoretical approach. This
is because their processing is contiguous with
that of implicit queries generated within the
metaphorical pretence cocoon (see Introduction)
during ATT-Meta?s goal-directed reasoning.
However, the theoretical significance of non-
declarative metaphorical utterances is even
greater, because such utterances call into
question accounts of metaphor that assume the
task of understanding is to work out what claim
about the target domain the metaphorical
utterance is making.
Compiling such examples is an additional goal
of our corpus work (see section 6).
5 Time and change
Work is ongoing which addresses the temporal,
aspectual and causal facets of metaphor. A
survey of metaphors in the ATT-Meta Databank
reveals, unsurprisingly, that the metaphorical
expressions there involve a wide range of tense
and aspectual constructions in English, including
past, present and future tenses, simple and
progressive aspects, and the full set of aspectual
classes. A wide variety of temporal adverbials is
also present. A key topic under investigation is
the mapping of temporal and aspectual
information between source and target domains.
For example, if an event is telic in the source
domain, to what extent does that telicity carry
over to the target domain? Preliminary
investigations confirm the expectation that such
aspectual information is preserved in the
majority of cases. Exceptions exist, however,
and these merit further study.
The mapping of temporal duration between
domains is also being investigated. In some
cases, a mapping appears to exist whereby an
event of long duration relative to the source
domain maps to an event with long duration
relative to the target domain. This can be
captured by an appropriate VNMA, which maps
relative durations between domains. The logic of
ATT-Meta is episode-based, which means that it
is relatively straightforward to express this kind
of constraint and employ it in reasoning.
Currently underway is a detailed examination of
metaphorical expressions involving both explicit
and implicit temporal durations. This will result
in a set of VNMAs covering a wide range of
tense/aspect/temporal-adverbial constructions.
A second strand of the work on time involves a
detailed study of the metaphors used to describe
times, states and events, including spatial
metaphor for time (Lakoff 1994).
6 Corpus Studies of Metaphor
As an adjunct to the development of the ATT-
Meta approach and system, we have been
conducting corpus studies of metaphor, mainly
using the British National Corpus but also using
the Bank of English and, to a limited extent, web
search engines. We have used both hand-
annotation of small numbers of documents from
the BNC and automated search for particular
types of metaphorical phraseology (mainly
relatively fixed metaphorical phrases concerning
mental states) over the whole of corpora.
Current objectives are (a) to develop large
databanks of examples of various types of
metaphorical utterance, for the benefit of
metaphor researchers in general, (b) to
demonstrate more extensively and objectively
the importance in discourse of "map-
transcending" metaphorical utterances (see
Introduction), (c) relatedly, to reveal the degree
to which relatively conventional metaphor
phraseology can be varied in real discourse (cf.
Moon 1998), and (d) to uncover (in small
numbers of documents) the degree to which
metaphorical utterances relate to context: how
much their understanding depends on context
and how much the understanding of the context
depends in turn on them. We are interested in (d)
because in the ATT-Meta approach the process
of metaphorical understanding is partially
guided by discourse goals set up by context.
This feature goes a long way to side-stepping
problems of apparent indeterminacy of meaning
of metaphorical utterances when taken in
isolation.
We also have the methodological objectives of
developing a good annotation regime for
metaphor and better-automated search
techniques for metaphor. As part of the latter,
we plan to investigate the usefulness of a large
set of morphological, lexical, syntactic and
phraseological clues to the presence of
metaphor, inspired by the clues discussed by
Goatly (1997). These clues are only present in a
minority of metaphorical utterances but could
nevertheless form a useful weapon in the
automated search armoury.
Metaphor detection techniques developed for
corpus study should also help with developing a
means for an understanding system to notice the
presence of metaphor. Such noticing is not
currently performed by ATT-Meta but is an
important topic for future research.
Conclusion
The ATT-Meta project is making headway in
showing how metaphorical utterances can be
computationally processed. It is based on a
distinctive set of principles as to how to
understand metaphor, some of which are original
and some related to those of previous
researchers. In particular, it seeks to avoid
expensive computation of new analogical
mappings between domains as a regular part of
metaphorical understanding. This is inspired
partly by the observation that genuinely novel
pairings of domains are relatively rare in real
discourse. What are more common are novel
extensions of familiar metaphorical views, and
novel mixes of views. This is true even in poetry
(Lakoff and Turner 1989). The project is also
seeking to take full account of the important role
that uncertainty, gradedness and dynamism of
situations plays in metaphor.
The approach and system have been evaluated in
a number of ways. We have applied the
implemented system or the theoretical approach
to (simplified versions of) selected real-
discourse examples from an existing databank
(http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/~jab/
ATT-Meta/Databank): see Barnden (2001a),
Barnden & Lee (2001a) and Barnden & Lee
(2001b). We have applied the implemented
system to examples of all the metaphors of
mental states listed in the Master Metaphor List
(Lakoff 1994, Lee & Barnden 2001a). The
examples here were found by search over the
Bank of English. Finally, we have applied the
theoretical approach to various real-discourse
examples included in Goatly (1997): see
Barnden (2001b).
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by grant GR/M64208
from the Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council of the UK.
References
Barnden, J. A. (1998a)  Combining uncertain belief
reasoning and uncertain metaphor-based
reasoning. In "Procs. Twentieth Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society", Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Hillsdale, N.J, pp.114-119.
Barnden, J.A. (2001a)  Application of the ATT-Meta
Metaphor-Understanding Approach to Various
Examples in the ATT-Meta Project Databank.
Technical Report CSRP-01-02, School of
Computer Science, The University of Birmingham,
U.K.
Barnden, J.A. (2001b)  Application of the ATT-Meta
metaphor-understanding approach to selected
examples from Goatly. Technical Report CSRP-01-
01, School of Computer Science, The University of
Birmingham, U.K.
Barnden, J.A (2001c)  Uncertainty and conflict
handling in the ATT-Meta context-based system for
metaphorical reasoning. In ?Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence?, J.G.Carbonell and
J.Siekmann, eds, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Barnden, J.A. and Lee, M.G. (1999)  An implemented
context system that combines belief reasoning,
metaphor-based reasoning and uncertainty
handling. In " Modelling and Using Context", P.
Bouquet, P. Brezillon, L. Serafini ed., Lecture
Notes in Artificial Intelligence, No. 1688,
Springer-Verlag, pp. 28-41.
Barnden, J.A. and Lee, M.G. (2001a)  Understanding
open-ended usages of familiar conceptual
metaphors: An approach and artificial intelligence
system. Technical Report CSRP-01-05, School of
Computer Science, The University of Birmingham,
U.K.
Barnden, J.A. and Lee, M.G. (2001b)  Application of
the ATT-Meta metaphor-understanding system to
an example of the metaphorical view of MIND
PARTS AS PERSONS. Technical Report CSRP-01-
09, School of Computer Science, The University of
Birmingham, U.K.
Carbonell, J.G. (1982)  Metaphor: an inescapable
phenomenon in natural-language comprehension.
In "Strategies for Natural Language Processing",
W. Lehnert & M. Ringle ed., Lawrence Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, N.J, pp.415-434.
Goatly, A. (1997)  The language of metaphors.
Routledge, London and New York.
Lakoff, G. (1994)  The Master Metaphor List.
http://cogsci.berkeley.edu/, University of
California, Berkeley.
Lakoff, G. and Turner, M. (1989)  More than cool
reason: a field guide to poetic metaphor.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Lee, M. G. and Barnden, J. A. (2001a)  Reasoning
about mixed metaphors within an implemented AI
system. Metaphor and Symbol 16, 1& 2, pp. 29-42.
Lee, M. G. and Barnden, J. A. (2001b)  Mental
Metaphors from the Master Metaphor List:
Empirical Examples and the Application of the
ATT-Meta System Technical Report CSRP-01-03,
School of Computer Science, The University of
Birmingham, U.K.
Moon, R. (1998)  Fixed idioms and expressions in
English. Clarendon Press, Oxford, U.K.
57
58
59
60
61
62
Let?s Paint the Town Red for a Few Hours:
Composition of Aspect in Idioms
Sheila R. Glasbey
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham
Edgbaston
Birmingham B15 2TT, UK
S.R.Glasbey@cs.bham.ac.uk
                            Abstract
It has recently been claimed that as-
pect is compositional in idioms, just
as it is in literal language (McGinnis
2002). We show that, although this
is true for many idioms, there appear
to be a number of interesting excep-
tions. We present examples of idio-
matic expressions where aspect is
not derived compositionally ? or at
least, not in McGinnis?s sense.
Many (but not all) of these excep-
tions fall into a class described by
Jackendoff (1997a) as ?fake object
resultatives?. We draw some tenta-
tive conclusions about the nature
and classification of those idioms
which show apparent non-
compositionality of aspect.  Fur-
thermore, we suggest that such idi-
oms might be regarded as
aspectually compositional, if aspec-
tual composition is taken to include
as part of its input Krifka?s (1992)
?thematic relations?.
1 Aspectual class of idioms
Consider the idiomatic verb phrase ?paint the town
red? (meaning, according to the Longman Diction-
ary of Idioms (1979), ?have a very enjoyable time,
esp. in a lively and noisy manner?). This phrase,
according to our intuitions, and examples found in
a web search using the Google? search engine,
combines readily with temporal for-adverbials to
form sentences such as:
1. Mary and her friends painted the town red for a
few hours [id].
(Note: ?[id]? conveys that ?paint the town red? here
receives an idiomatic interpretation.)
 An example found in the web search is:
2. Board the Chiva Arubanita Party Bus ? and
paint the town red for six hours [id].
(http://travel.discovery.com/destinations/fodors/aru
ba/tips.html, consulted 6/05/03).
?Paint the town red? does not, however, combine
readily with temporal in-adverbials, making (3)
difficult or impossible to interpret:
3. ?? Mary and her friends painted the town red
in a few hours1 [id].
According to standard tests for aspectual class (see,
e.g., Vendler 1967, Dowty 1979), this shows that
the eventuality described by ?Mary and her friends
                                                          
1
 We ignore here the inceptive reading where ?in a few
hours?  measures the time between some contextually
defined instant and the beginning of the painting.
painted the town red? 2 is an activity rather than an
accomplishment. Now compare a literal interpreta-
tion of ?paint the town red? .
1a.   ? Mary and her friends painted the town red
        for a few hours [lit].
(Note: ?[lit]?  conveys that ?paint the town red?  is
here interpreted literally.)
Since it may be difficult for the reader to ignore the
idiomatic interpretation and focus on the literal
one, we will replace ?red?  in (1a) by ?green? . In
order to make the scenario more plausible, we will
also replace ?town?  by ?shed? , assuming that the
aspectual class of the eventuality described by the
literally-interpreted sentence is not thereby af-
fected.
1b.   ? Mary and her friends painted the shed green
        for a few hours [lit].
It is now clear that (1b) is unacceptable or at best
marginal. (1c), on the other hand, is perfectly ac-
ceptable:
1c.   Mary and her friends painted the shed green in
        a few hours [lit].
?Mary and her friends painted the town/shed
red/green? , on a literal interpretation, is clearly,
therefore, a description of an accomplishment and
not an activity. Thus we have an example of a
phrase which, when interpreted literally, has a dif-
ferent aspectual class from when it is interpreted
figuratively, contra (McGinnis 2002). Since the
aspect conveyed by the literal interpretation is pre-
sumably derived by the usual process of aspectual
composition (as described by Krifka 1992, Smith
1991 and others), we may conclude, at least for the
time being, that the aspectual class conveyed by
the idiomatic interpretation is non-compositional,
i.e. not derived by the usual process of aspectual
composition. According to this process, the aspec-
tual class of the eventuality described by the full
sentence is derived by combining properties of the
verb, its tense (etc.), its object argument(s), any
                                                          
2
 We take aspectual class to be a property of eventuali-
ties ? an eventuality being a cover term for an event or
state.
specified resultative state (?green?  in (1c)), its sub-
ject argument, any adverbial modifiers and various
?thematic relations?  between the object and the
eventuality (see later). An analysis such as that of
(Krifka 1992) predicts, correctly, that ?Mary and
her friends painted the shed green?  describes an
accomplishment. McGinnis? s claim is that the as-
pectual class of idiomatically-described eventuali-
ties is also compositional ? thus ?Mary and her
friends painted the town red?  would describe an
accomplishment. If McGinnis? s claim were cor-
rect, then presumably the aspectual class would be
the same under an idiomatic interpretation as under
a literal interpretation (McGinnis 2002, p.668).
We have identified a number of other related
examples, all of which fall into the class described
by Jackendoff (1997a) as ?fake object resultatives? .
That is, syntactically they appear to be resultatives,
but the resultative state, on the idiomatic interpre-
tation, is not ?real?. Examples include:
4. I cried my eyes out for some time and then I
went back to work.
(http://members.aol.com/wolfie1030/instinct.html,
consulted 30/4/03).
Clearly ?I cried my eyes out?  describes an activity
(hence its compatibility with the for-adverbial).
Yet ?I cried my eyes out? , would, if taken as a lit-
erally-interpreted resultative, be expected to de-
scribe an accomplishment. That is, if aspectual
class were derived by the usual compositional pro-
cesses, we would expect an accomplishment.
However, no examples were found in a web search
in which ?cried X? s eyes out?  combines with a
temporal in-adverbial. Moreover, ?I cried my eyes
out [id]?  fails other standard tests for accomplish-
ments (e.g. ???It took me two hours to cry my eyes
out [id].) Intuitively, the reason for this is that there
is no clearly defined, natural endpoint to an even-
tuality of (idiomatically) crying one? s eyes out  ?
there is no time point in the domain described by
the idiom which corresponds to the point at which,
in the domain described by the literal interpreta-
tion, one? s eyes actually fall out as a result of the
crying. In order to be an accomplishment, of
course, an eventuality must have such a clearly
defined natural endpoint. The lack of such an end-
point makes the eventuality an activity instead. The
idiom  ?to cry one? s eyes out?  does not convey such
a natural endpoint ? it simply means, according to
the Longman Dictionary of English Idioms, ?to cry
a great deal?.3 Once again, then, we have a mis-
match between the aspectual class of the literally
described eventuality (henceforth ?literal eventual-
ity? ) and that of the idiomatically described even-
tuality (henceforth ?idiom eventuality? ).
     Similar observations are made with a number of
other idiomatic expressions, where in each case
corpus usage and speaker intuitions strongly sug-
gest an activity, while literal interpretation would
give rise to an accomplishment.
     Consider ?sang X? s heart out [id]? . Examples
such as (5), found in the web search, show that this
idiom can be combined with temporal for-
adverbials.
5. Patsy sang her heart out for over two minutes.
(http://www.patsyclinehta.com/excerpts.htm,
 consulted 6/05/03).
No examples were found where ?sang X? s heart
out?  combines with a temporal in-adverbial, and
indeed such a construction sounds very odd:
6. ?? Patsy sang her heart out in two min-
utes/hours/days.
Once more, then, we have a construction which
describes accomplishments under a literal inter-
pretation, and activities under an idiomatic inter-
pretation.
     The idiomatic expressions ?yelled X? s head off?
and ?poured X? s heart out?  behave in a similar way.
But note that it may just about be acceptable to
say:
7. Patsy poured her heart out in two hours, on the
phone to her sister.
(We did not, however, find any such examples in
our web search.)
                                                          
3
 As one of the reviewers for the ACL workshop points
out, expressions like ?cry X? s eyes out?  may be seen as
?conventionalized hyperbolae? or exaggerations.
     Why should (7), at least according to our intui-
tions, be marginally acceptable? We suggest that
the reason is that it may be possible to identify a
natural endpoint to the process of (idiomatically)
pouring out one? s heart. Taking the idiom to mean
(following Longman) ?to tell all one? s personal
worries, problems, feelings, etc? then it is possible,
at least in principle, to see this process as having a
natural endpoint when all the worries, problems,
etc, have been expressed. Thus there is some
counterpart, in reality, to the contents of the suf-
ferer? s figurative heart. This provides, in turn, a
counterpart to the end of the literal process of
pouring out the contents of  that heart. This may be
enough to make ?pour X? s heart out [id]?  describe,
at least in some contexts, an accomplishment, and
therefore be acceptable in combination with an in-
adverbial.
     All the examples considered so far have been
cases of Jackendoff? s (1997a) class of ?fake resul-
tatives? .  There are other idioms, however, which
do not belong to this class and which also lack
compositionality of aspect.
     Consider the idiom ?drive one? s pigs to market? ,
which means, according to Longman? s dictionary,
?snore?. According to Krifka (1992) and others,
the presence of  the location adverbial ?to market? ,
pinpointing the destination or endpoint of the jour-
ney, makes ?Fred drove his pigs to market?  de-
scribe an accomplishment. And indeed, if we take
the literal interpretation, then we can readily say:
8. Fred drove his pigs to market in two hours
[lit].
But (9) is not acceptable:
9. ?? Fred drove his pigs to market for two hours
[lit].
On the other hand, (8) is not good on the idiomatic
interpretation. If the sentence refers to Fred? s
snoring, then (9), not (8), is acceptable. Thus we
have another example where the idiomatic inter-
pretation gives rise to an activity, while the literal
interpretation gives an accomplishment. We might
speculate at this point  (we return to this later) that
the reason for this may be that there is no counter-
part in reality to the destination described in the
pretence world as ?to market? . There is no inherent,
natural endpoint to the process of snoring.
     Interestingly, there is an idiom ?saw logs?  that
means ? to sleep? , mentioned in (Nunberg, Sag &
Wasow 1994, p.497). Here, the aspectual class of
the eventuality described by ?Fred sawed logs?  is
the same on both the literal and idiomatic inter-
pretations. In either case, ?Fred sawed logs for two
hours?  is acceptable and  ?Fred sawed logs in two
hours?  is not. Here, in both cases, we have an ac-
tivity. But the reason that the literal interpretation
gives an activity is because ?logs?  is a bare plural ?
the process of sawing logs (as opposed to that of
sawing six logs) does not have a natural endpoint.
Thus it appears, here, almost ? accidental?  that lit-
eral and idiomatic interpretations give the same
aspectual class.
     Another idiom where aspectual class does not
seem to be compositional is ?drowned X? s sor-
rows? , which appears to describe an activity rather
than an accomplishment:
10. Fred drowned his sorrows for a few hours.
11. ??Fred drowned his sorrows in a few hours.
On our intuitions and those of our informants, (10)
is acceptable but (11) is not.
     Now compare ?drowned X? s rats4? , interpreted
literally, which appears to describe an accom-
plishment:
12. ? Fred drowned his rats for a few hours.
13. Fred drowned his rats in a few hours.
Unfortunately we were unable to find any exam-
ples in our web search, so our claims here rest only
upon our own judgements and those of our infor-
mants. The majority of the latter agreed with us
finding (12) unacceptable, but a minority found
(12) marginal or even fully acceptable, on the as-
sumption that Fred had a large number of rats. This
is the reason for the single ???  with which we label
(12).
     Taking the majority view, we have here another
example of non-compositionality of aspectual class
for an idiom. A similar ? explanation?  presents it-
self ? there is no natural endpoint to the process of
                                                          
4
 Apologies to rat lovers.
drowning one? s sorrows, given that the idiom
means (according to Longman) ? to seek escape
from one? s sadness, distress, etc., by drinking al-
cohol? . Unless we can envisage the drinking proc-
ess as having an inherent endpoint at which the
final sorrow disappears5, then drowning one? s sor-
rows seems to describe an activity. This contrasts
with ?drowning one? s rats? , where there is pre-
sumably a natural endpoint corresponding to the
ending of the life of the last rat.
     Although we have given a number of examples
of idioms with non-composition of aspect, we do
not wish to claim that there is a multitude of such
examples. Indeed, examples of idioms lacking
compositionality of aspect were not particularly
easy to find. The majority of idioms do appear to
show such compositionality. We now need an ex-
planation of why this should be the case, while also
accounting for the exceptions.
2  Towards an explanation
McGinnis (2002) claims that all idioms exhibit
compositionality of aspect. We have shown that
although many idioms do so, there is a significant
minority which do not.
     McGinnis takes the compositionality of idiom
aspect to support Halle and Marantz? s (1993) the-
ory of Distributed Morphology (DM). DM uses
Levin and Rappaport Hovav? s (1998) division of
meaning into two components ? structural and
idiosyncratic, where the structural component in-
teracts with the syntax, and the idiosyncratic com-
ponent makes fine-grained distinctions irrelevant
to the syntax. In McGinnis? s words (McGinnis
2002, p.667),  ? ?[DM] maintains that the struc-
tural components of meaning are bundled into
lexical items manipulated by the syntax, while
idiosyncratic components are added post-
syntactically?  This ? predicts that the syntactic
                                                          
5
 This may just be possible, but on our judgement it is
stretching things. It would involve being able to ? count
one? s sorrows?  and to envisage their being consumed,
as a gradual process (though not necessarily one by one)
as the drinking proceeds. Presumably one would then be
able to say, at a certain point ?I have drowned all my
sorrows now? . This does not seem impossible, but has
some feel of a joke about it, as though the idiom is be-
ing deliberately stretched too far.
derivation of idioms has semantic consequences.?
One of these consequences, McGinnis argues, is
that aspect is predicted to be compositionally de-
rived in idioms. In her words again (p.668), ? ? it
predicts that even if a VP has a noncompositional
idiosyncratic meaning, it will have a compositional
structural meaning. Specifically, it will have the
same aspectual properties as any VP with the same
syntactic properties? .
     McGinnis contrasts DM with Jackendoff? s
(1997b) theory of Representational Modularity
(RM), which treats idioms as involving an arbitrary
mapping between conceptual structure (CS) and
syntactic structure. RM has both structural and
idiosyncratic meaning encoded at CS, with the re-
sult that both type of meaning will be subject to
arbitrary mapping ? thus predicting that aspect will
be non-compositional in idioms.
     If we are required to choose between RM and
DM, then the fact that most idioms appear to show
aspectual composition offers support for the former
theory. However, we are more concerned with the
need to account for the idioms we have identified
where aspect is not compositional. Let us now re-
turn to these exceptions and examine what is ? dif-
ferent?  about them.
     We remarked earlier that in the cases like ?paint
the town red? , we have an eventuality in the do-
main of literal interpretation (let us call this the
?literal eventuality? ) which has a natural endpoint
(the state of redness of the town), and a eventuality
in the domain of idiomatic interpretation (hence-
forth the ?idiom eventuality? ) which has no corre-
sponding natural endpoint. Further to this, we
observe that, not only does the literal eventuality
have a natural endpoint, but it has what Krifka
(1992) calls the gradual patient property, whereby
the progress of the eventuality corresponds to a
gradual change in the state of one of the partici-
pants of the eventuality ? in this case the degree of
redness of the town. Roughly speaking, as the
painting proceeds, the town gets redder. There is
no corresponding gradual patient property in the
idiom eventuality. Now, according to Krifka? s
(1992) account of aspectual composition, thematic
properties such as gradual patient are part of the
input to the process of aspectual composition. Such
properties explain why ?Fred stroked the cat?  is an
activity, while ?Fred washed the cat?  is an accom-
plishment. The subject NP, the object NP, and the
verb tense are identical in the two cases ? all that is
different is the fact that washing the cat involves a
gradual change of state of the cat (towards a state
of cleanliness), whereas stroking the cat involves
no such gradual change.
     This may give us a way of ? rescuing?  the idea
that all idiom aspect is compositional. If we follow
Krifka in assuming that the input to the composi-
tional process involves not only properties of the
subject NP, object NP, verb, adverbials, etc, but
also thematic relations such as gradual patient,
then the latter may well be different in the idio-
matic interpretation of a phrase from that in the
literal interpretation. We have just seen this in the
case of ?paint the town red?  ? there is a gradual
patient relation in the literal interpretation but not
in the idiomatic one.
     Now, for many idioms, thematic relations may
well be the same in the idiomatic interpretation as
in the literal one. To take just one example:
14. Fred painted a bleak picture of the city.
This may, of course, be read literally or as an id-
iom. In either case, it appears to describe an ac-
complishment, given that we may add an in-
adverbial but not a for-adverbial on either inter-
pretation.
14a.  Fred painted a bleak picture of the city
         in/*for  a couple of hours [lit, id].
     In both cases there seems to be a gradual patient
relation between the state of completion of the
? picture?  (be it a literal picture, say on a canvas, or
a verbal one) and the progress of the event of cre-
ating it.  It is interesting to note, too, that the pic-
ture exists in both cases ? on the literal
interpretation there is a ? real?  picture, and on the
idiomatic interpretation there is something, such as
a verbal description, which is described as a pic-
ture. Contrast this with ?paint the town red?  where
no equivalent of  ? the town?  exists on the idio-
matic interpretation.
     This suggests, returning to our earlier idea, that
the cases where the aspectual class of the idiom
eventuality corresponds to that of the literal even-
tuality are (at least roughly) those cases where
counterparts exist in the domain of idiomatic inter-
pretation to the objects in the domain of literal in-
terpretation, and where the thematic relations
between those objects and the eventuality are the
same in the literal and the idiomatic cases. These
cases appear to correspond with those idioms that
Nunberg, Sag and Wasow (1994) classify as idio-
matically combining expressions. These are idioms
? whose parts carry identifiable parts of their idio-
matic meanings?  (p. 497ff). Nunberg, Sag and Wa-
sow give as an example ?John was able to pull
strings to get the job? , where ?pull strings?  means
something like ? exploit personal connections? , and
?pull?  can be seen to correspond to ?exploit?  and
?strings?  to ?personal connections? .6
     Idioms which do not have identifiable ? parts?  in
this way are called idiomatic phrases by Nunberg,
Sag and Wasow. They include expressions such as
?saw logs? , where there is no identifiable equiva-
lent in the domain of idiomatic interpretation to the
logs in the domain of literal interpretation. These
idioms, Nunberg, Sag and Wasow suggest, must be
entered in the lexicon as complete phrases. In gen-
eral, according to these authors, they cannot un-
dergo passivisation, topicalisation, ellipsis and
similar operations, as consequence of the fact that
they do not have identifiable semantic parts.  We
are suggesting that, for the same reasons, they do
not show compositionality of aspect.
     It seems, then, that we have found a way to
characterise those idioms which do not undergo
aspectual composition (or, at least, not in the sense
of McGinnis, where the aspectual class is the same
on the idiomatic interpretation as it is on the literal
one).
3 Conclusion
We may conclude that a certain class of idioms
show compositionality of aspect in the sense of
(McGinnis 2002) ? meaning that the aspectual
class is the same on the idiomatic interpretation as
it is on the literal one. This class of idioms we may
tentatively identify as those that Nunberg, Sag and
Wasow (1994) call idiomatically combining ex-
pressions. (We need to be careful here, however,
as it is possible that there may be idioms which are
idiomatically combining expressions, but where
the thematic relations differ in the literal and idio-
                                                          
6
 Nunberg, Sag and Wasow (1994) reject the term
?compositional? , used previously by them and others to
refer to such idioms, on the grounds that ?composi-
tional?  has been interpreted in a variety of different
ways and may cause confusion.
matic interpretations. We are not clear at present
whether or not this may be the case ? further work
is needed to investigate this.) Idioms which do not
belong to this class (the ones that Nunberg, Sag
and Wasow call idiomatic phrases) are able to de-
scribe eventualities of a different aspectual class
from the eventuality described in the literal inter-
pretation.  (Of course the aspectual classes may, as
we saw earlier, be the same, purely by coincidence.
This is true of ?Fred sawed logs? , which describes
an activity on both the literal and the idiomatic in-
terpretation.)
     We have also suggested that, if we take the pro-
cess of aspectual composition to include, as in
(Krifka 1992), thematic relations such as gradual
patient as its input, then idioms which are not
idiomatically combining expressions can also be
said to undergo aspectual composition. The differ-
ence here is that, because the thematic relations
may be different in the idiomatic interpretation
than in the literal interpretation, the result of the
aspectual composition may also be different. Thus,
although these idioms can be said to undergo as-
pectual composition, they will describe eventuali-
ties which have an aspectual class that may be
different from the aspectual class described on the
literal interpretation. This may have the interesting
consequence that, provided we identify the neces-
sary thematic relations for these idioms, we may
not need to list their aspectual class in the lexical
entry for the idiom, but instead we may be able to
derive their aspectual properties via the same kind
of compositional process as for the first class, the
idiomatically combining expressions. All that will
differ is the thematic relations. It will be necessary,
however, to explore this idea in more detail in fu-
ture work. Such work will need to involve the de-
tailed investigation of a wide range of idioms and
the exact process of their aspectual composition.
References
Dowty, D. 1979. Word  Meaning and Montague
     Grammar. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Halle, M. & A. Marantz.1993. Distributed mor-
phology and the pieces of inflection. In The
view from Building 20: Essays in linguistics in
honour of Sylvain Bromberger, ed. by K. Hale
& S. J. Keyser, 111-176. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Jackendoff, R. (1997a). Twistin?  the night away.
Language 73, pp 534-559.
Jackendoff, R. (1997b). The Architecture of the
Language Faculty. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Levin, B. & M. Rappaport Hovav (1998). Building
verb meanings. In The projection of argu-
ments: Lexical and compositional factors, ed.
by M. Butt and W. Geuder, pp 97-134. Stan-
ford, Ca.: CSLI Publications.
Krifka, M. (1992). Thematic relations as links be-
tween nominal reference and temporal con-
stitution. In I. Sag and A. Szabolsci, (eds.),
Lexical Matters, CSLI Lecture Notes, Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, Chicago.
McGinnis, M. (2002). On the systematic aspect of
idioms. Linguistic Inquiry 33.4, pp 665-672.
Nunberg, G., I. Sag & T. Wasow (1994). Idioms.
Language, 70:3, pp 491?538.
Smith, C. (1991). The Parameter of Aspect.  Klu-
wer Academic Press, Dordrecht.
Vendler, Z. (1967). Verbs and times. In Linguistics
in Philosophy, pp. 97-121. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cor-
nell University Press.
Considerations on the nature of metaphorical
meaning arising from a computational
treatment of metaphor interpetation
A.M.Wallington, R.Agerri, J.A.Barnden, S.R.Glasbey and M.G.Lee
School of Computer Science,
University of Birmingham, UK)
A. M. Wallington@ cs. bham. ac. uk
Abstract
This paper argues that there need not be a full correspondence between source and
target domains when interpreting metaphors. Instead, inference is performed in
the source domain, and conclusions transferred to the target. A description of a
computer system, ATT-Meta, that partially implements these ideas is provided.
1 Introduction
It is now generally accepted, especially since the work of Lakoff and associates
(e.g. [14,13,15]) that much of everyday discourse shows evidence of metaphor.
Consequently, the question of how metaphor should be interpreted and what
the semantic consequences are of using a metaphor is of major importance in
determining how discourse should be interpreted.
Like Stern [19], we take the position that much of the interpretation of
metaphor is highly context dependent and involves pragmatics. However, we
believe that, for metaphor, pragmatics must be informed by theories of Artifi-
cial Intelligence and psychology. Thus we have some sympathy for Levinson?s
([16] p.161) claim that:
?the interpretation of metaphor must rely on features of our general ability
to reason analogically. ... It could be claimed that linguistic pragmatics alone
should not be expected to provide such a general theory of analogy, without
considerable help from psychological theory 1 .?
We depart from Levinson with respect to analogy, and in this paper, we
shall challenge current theories of analogy (e.g. [7,8,11] and what might
1 Levinson makes it clear that psychological theory includes Artificial Intelligence.
be termed correspondence theories of metaphor (e.g, Lakoff?s Conceptual
Metaphor Theory) in which a source domain is put in correspondence with
a target domain. We shall attempt to show that there is far less parallelism
between source and target than is often assumed and that the process of inter-
preting a metaphor often requires heavy use of inferencing in order to associate
source domain entities for which there is no parallel target equivalent, what
we term ?Map-Transcending Entities? (MTEs), with information that is in-
volved in source to target transfer. Now other AI approaches to metaphor also
emphasise the role of source domain inference, Hobbs [10] and Narayanan [18]
for example. And, Martin?s MIDAS system includes a process of extending
conventional source to target mappings [17]. However, apart from important
technical differences between these systems and our own, we would wish to
stress the implications extensive inferencing has for source-target parallelism
and the repercussions this has for the semantics and pragmatics.
We do not yet have a fully developed semantics and pragmatics of metaphor
(although see [9] for some preliminary suggestions based on Stern). However,
what we do provide is an extensively developed (though informal) inference-
based model of metaphor understanding that employs an event-based formal-
ism similar to that of Hobbs [10], combined with a realization of this approach
in a fully implemented system (ATT-Meta) that effects the type of reasoning
that we claim is at the heart of much metaphor understanding (See [1,4,21]).
2 Correspondence approaches to interpreting metaphor
The work of Lakoff and Johnson e.g. [14,15] not only stressed the ubiquity of
metaphor in everyday discourse, but also noted that many metaphorical utter-
ances could be systematically related to each other, all appealing to different
aspects of the same source domain and being used to describe the same target
domain. In other words, what is involved in metaphor is the mapping of one
cognitive domain into another. For example, Lakoff [13] notes that the follow-
ing metaphors all involve a source domain of journeys being used to describe
a target domain of the progress of a love affair: Look how far we?ve come.
It?s been a long, bumpy road. We can?t turn back now. We?re at a crossroads.
The relationship isn?t going anywhere. We may have to go our separate ways.
We?re spinning our wheels. Our relationship is off the track. The marriage is
on the rocks. We may have to bail out of this relationship. To account for this
generalization, Lakoff assumes a ?LOVE-AS-JOURNEY? mapping, i.e. ?a set
of ontological correspondences that characterize epistemic correspondences by
mapping knowledge about journeys onto knowledge about love? ([13] p207).
Specifically, he assumes the following ontological correspondences:
THE LOVE-AS-JOURNEY MAPPING
i. The lovers correspond to travellers.
ii. The love relationship corresponds to the vehicle.
iii. The lovers? common goals correspond to their common destination.
iv. Difficulties in the relationship correspond to impediments to travel.
Lakoff does not spell out in any detail exactly how the epistemic corre-
spondences function, and how inferences made in the source transfer to the
target. He does however, claim that mappings ?project source domain infer-
ence patterns onto target domain inference patterns? ([13] p245, emphasis
added). However, we might turn to more formal work in analogy for a pos-
sible mechanism. Gentner (e.g. [7]) argues that complex systematic relations
between source domain entities such as causal relations also transfer, whilst
non-systematic relations such as attributes do not.
3 Map Transcending Entities
Let us return to Lakoff?s list above of travel metaphors. Consider the state-
ment that we?re spinning our wheels. How might we infer from this that the
love relationship is not progressing as it might? Plausibly, the following chain
of inferences might be entertained. If wheels are referred to, then, defeasibly 2 ,
a vehicle is involved. The spinning wheels are causing the vehicle not to move
as it should. If the vehicle is not moving as it should then it is not moving
towards its destination.
What can we make of this pattern of inferences? Both the vehicle and
the destination have correspondents in the target domain of the love affair,
namely the love relationship and the lovers? common goals. With these cor-
respondences, we might assume that the source domain conclusion can be
transferred to become a target domain conclusion. But, this is the transfer of
it conclusion. It could never have been reached without the premise that some-
thing -the spinning wheels- was causing the vehicle not to proceed. So what
is the target correspondent of the spinning wheels whose presence is needed
in order to allow the entire inference pattern as opposed to just the conclu-
sion to transfer from source to target? Nothing in the list of four ontological
correspondences would seem to be appropriate.
If we look at the other examples listed, we find similar cases where the
lack of a target domain correspondent would prevent crucial aspects of the
inference pattern mapping from source to target. For example, what is the
target domain correspondent of the rocks in the utterance our marriage is on
the rocks? A similar point can be made about the location off the track in
our relationship is off the track. It is not that these statements are uninter-
pretable. Both would seem to permit the same conclusion that was reached
about the spinning wheels, namely that the relationship/vehicle is not pro-
gressing towards the destination and hence not towards the lovers? goal.
Note that it does not seem quite right to assume that the spinning wheels,
rocks or lack of tracks are ?impediments? in the sense of the third of Lakoff?s
2 We shall henceforth assume that inferences are defeasible unless otherwise stated.
correspondences. There may be an interpretation under which the bumps in
the statement its been a long bumpy road refer to specific, listable, difficulties
in the love relationship, and similarly, the rocks may refer, for some, to a par-
ticular event, but both could be used more generally. Whatever, if anything,
wheels might refer to it is a vague and very unspecific target domain entity.
Let us now consider the utterance: We?re at a crossroads. Stating that we
are at some location on a road might be taken to implicate that we are going
somewhere along the road and hence have a destination. This would map to
a target domain ?common goal? However, there is no specific correspondent
given for crossroads. The source domain inference that if one is at a crossroads,
then there is a choice of possible destinations cannot transfer to the target
domain inference that there is a choice of possible relationship goals, if, as is
stated, inference patterns are mapped from one domain to another.
Now, a lack of target correspondents for source domain entities is not pe-
culiar to the LOVE AS A JOURNEY conceptual metaphor, but is generally
the case. In section 3, we shall give a description of our approach to metaphor-
ical reasoning and our computational system ATT-Meta that performs such
reasoning. A sentence that we shall analyse in some detail is the following:
1 In the far reaches of her mind, Mary believed Kyle was having an affair.
We assume that there is a mapping between ideas such as the idea that
Kyle was having an affair and physical, manipulable, objects. This reification
of ideas has a wide currency. We shall also assume here that the mind is often
viewed as a physical space. However, what does the far reaches refer to?
So what are we to make of these lacunae which prevent the step by step
transfer of inferences about the source becoming inferences about the tar-
get? Note that the absence of target domain correspondents of source domain
entities is not a mere technical problem in determining how source domain
implications transfer and become target domain implications, nor should we
assume that Lakoff?s claim that entire inference patterns as opposed to
certain conclusions transfer is just an imprecise form of words. If there are
no target domain correspondents of source domain entities, then we must as-
sume that there are entities in texts have no reference even indirectly via a
target domain equivalent to anything in the real world. There are entities
that can only be made sense of in terms of their literal meaning in the source
domain; a somewhat similar conclusion to Davidson?s [5] well known claim
that metaphors have only a literal meaning.
One possibility is that the four correspondences given in the LOVE AS A
JOURNEY mapping in section 2 are not intended to be exhaustive and the
mapping would if properly specified include correspondences for the entities we
have discussed. For example, the crossroads example might motivate adding
the following correspondence to the mapping.
v. A choice of goals corresponds to a choice of destinations.
However, a number of objections can be made to this view. Many concep-
tual metaphors are open-ended allowing almost any entity associated with the
source domain to be used when speaking of the target. Now, not all of these
might be conventional. They might make use of what Lakoff and Johnson
([14] p 53) call ?the unused part? of the source domain. For example, Lakoff
[13] gives an example of a creative use of the conceptual metaphor LOVE IS
A JOURNEY, the song lyric we?re riding in the fast lane on the freeway of
love. There is no correspondent listed for fast lane nor for a freeway of love.
It would seem that no finite list of correspondents would ever be enough. This
criticism would also defeat lexically based treatments of metaphor.
The last example contained very little that could plausibly correspond to
target-domain entities; perhaps just the inference that a journey and thus
a destination is involved. However, it might be conceded that whilst many
modifier phrases often do not correspond, overall statement-like constituents
of the source will correspond to statements in the target. However, consider
the following example from real discourse of a particular metaphorical view
running through several consecutive statement-like utterances:
?She was too confused to judge anything. If he?d done nothing else, he?d
at least invaded her thoughts and tossed them around until there was only
chaos in her head.?
We shall assume that the clauses he?d at least invaded her thoughts, [he
had] tossed them around and there was only chaos in her head all rely on
the metaphorical views of IDEAS AS PHYSICAL OBJECTS and MIND AS
PHYSICAL SPACE, and taken together partially convey, in target-domain
terms, that the man, ?he?, had done something that had resulted in the
thoughts of the woman, ?her?, not functioning as they ought. But is
there any need to assume a specific target-domain parallel for tossing physical
objects around? A similar point can be made about the statement he?d ...
invaded her thoughts : the invading is just mentioned as a way of emphasizing
that he had done something that had had a strong effect on her thoughts.
Now, it is possible that the mention of invading may have been used if
the man had introduced thoughts into the woman?s mind by saying things
to her; the invading corresponding to introducing. It is then these thoughts
that caused the tossing of the woman?s pre-existing thoughts. However, it is
possible to imagine the above discourse segment occurring in a context where
it is clear that the man had not communicated anything to her.
In short, even a sentence, the traditional unit of analysis of truth, might
have no meaning other than in terms of the source domain. In the rest of this
paper we shall describe our approach and implemented computational model,
ATT-Meta, for reasoning with metaphorical utterances that contain MTEs.
4 Inferencing and ATT-Meta
Recall that our proposed fifth correspondence in the previous section had a
?choice? in the target corresponding to a ?choice? in the source. If we look at the
fourth correspondence, we find something similar. A target domain ?difficulty?
corresponds to a type of difficulty or ?impediment? in the source. Note also
that Lakoff argues a-propos the ?fast lane? song lyric that driving in the fast
lane is exciting and that the excitement transfers to the target. And we could
give examples in which other emotional states transfer from the source to the
target. In the ?invasion? passage, the conclusion that the woman?s mind was
not functioning properly was likewise transferred. What all these cases have in
common is that they involve essentially ?invariant? transfers from the source
to the target. These are of a very different nature from the cross-domain
correspondences between say journeys and love affairs. We argue that such
transfers are affected by what we term ?View-Neutral Mapping Adjuncts?
and argue that they apply universally, at least by default, regardless of what
cross-domain mappings are in play and our system has made a start both
at investigating what VNMAs are required and at formalising some of them.
(See [2,3,21] for more details.)
In order to sketch our approach let us return to the Anne/Kyle example:
1 In the far reaches of her mind, Anne believed Kyle was having an affair[.]
and compare it to the following variant:
2 Anne had in her mind the belief that Kyle was having an affair.
We assume that both sentences utilize the conceptual metaphors (a term
which we replace with the more neutral ?metaphorical view? in our work):
(A) IDEAS AS PHYSICAL OBJECTS (B) MIND AS PHYSICAL SPACE.
We assume that one correspondence included under view (A) is the fol-
lowing: ?Conscious mental processing corresponds to physical manipulation.?
(See [12] for motivation). We also assume that with activities such as pro-
cessing/manipulating, which one can have the ability to perform to a greater
or lesser degree, DEGREE is a VNMA and maps over from source to target
in an invariant manner. Thus a very low ability to mentally process an idea
corresponds to a very low ability to physically manipulate an object.
We assume that accompanying metaphorical view (B) are two ancillary as-
sumptions. Firstly, that the conscious self of the mind?s possessor is metaphor-
ically cast as a person physically located in (a central part of) the mind-region.
Secondly, that when a cognitive state (such as believing) is cast as located in
a physical sub-region of a mind, then the idea or whatever that is the object
of the state is also to be thought of as physically located in that sub-region.
As we suggested in the previous section, we assume that there is no known
correspondent for the far reaches; it is a map-transcending entity.
So how does the informational contribution of (1) and (2) differ? Plausibly,
what (2) principally conveys to the reader is that Anne has the ability to
operate in a conscious mental way on the idea that Kyle was having an affair.
In brief: Anne is aware of the affair. By contrast, what (1) seems to convey
is that the ability to operate holds only to a very low degree. In brief: Anne
had very little conscious awareness of the affair.
Thus, the situation described by the ?far reaches? utterance is cast as being
one where Anne?s conscious self is a person in a central part of Anne?s mind-
region, and the idea that Kyle was having an affair is in the far reaches of
the mind-region. Now, let us assume that the understander?s common sense
knowledge of physical space and physical objects includes the following:
* things in the far reaches of a region are usually distant from things in a
central part (distance being relative to the scale of the whole region).
* if a person is physically distant from a physical object then the person usually
has only a very low degree of ability to manipulate that object physically.
Thus, the understander can reason, within the terms of the source domains
of the metaphorical views (PHYSICAL SPACE and PHYSICAL OBJECTS),
that, probably, Anne?s conscious self has only 3 a very low degree of ability to
physically manipulate the idea that Kyle was having an affair.
This conclusion can become the target-domain conclusion that Anne has
only a very low degree of ability to operate in a conscious mental way on the
idea that Kyle was having an affair, by virtue of the correspondence between
physical manipulation and conscious mental processing that was assumed as
an aspect of the IDEAS AS PHYSICAL OBJECTS mapping, and by virtue
of the VNMA invariantly mapping the very low degree from source to target.
In our approach source-target correspondences are implicit in transfer
rules. In the case of the correspondences just mentioned, English glosses of
the relevant rules include:
* IF in reality X is a person and K is an idea
* AND K is being viewed as a physical object
* AND person X?s conscious self is being viewed as being able to
operate physically on K to at least degree D
* THEN presumably in reality X can mentally operate consciously
on K to degree at least D.
This rule allows one aspect of the source-domain conclusion to lead to the
target-domain conclusion that Anne can mentally operate consciously on the
Kyle-affair idea to degree at least ?very low?.
In sum, our approach involves the following main types of processing:
* Construction of a representation of the direct, source-domain meaning of
the utterance, i.e. the meaning it has by taking only the source-domain senses
of the metaphorically-used words/phrases in the utterance. This meaning
consists of one or more propositions.
* In some cases, application of ancillary assumptions associated with the rele-
vant metaphorical views to create further propositions in source-domain terms.
* Usually, performance of source-domain reasoning on the basis of the direct
3 A very low degree of ability might implicate that Anne does not have a higher degree,
but does not entail it. Hence our addition of ?only?.
source-domain meaning, the products of ancillary assumptions, and general
knowledge relevant to the source domain meaning.
* Source-to-target transfer acts by application of transfer rules (and VNMAs).
This listing does not imply any particular temporal ordering of the types
of processing. Indeed in ATT-Meta the reasoning actually works backwards
from reasoning queries posed internally within the system and can involve any
intertwining and ordering of instances of the above types of reasoning.
An important feature of our approach that we have not yet mentioned is
that it encapsulates the source-domain reasoning based on the literal meaning
of the utterance within a special computational context we call a pretence
cocoon. Metaphorical transfer acts based on rules such as those above oper-
ate between the inside of the pretence cocoon and the reality-context outside.
Thus, for the Anne/Kyle example, the understander pretends, within the co-
coon, that Anne?s mind really is a physical space and that the believing really
does occur in the far reaches of this space. Consequences of this are inferred
in the pretence cocoon, possibly by substantial amounts of reasoning, using
ancillary assumptions and knowledge about physical objects and space. The
conclusions reached may then be able to be transmuted, via transfer rules
forming part of the relevant metaphorical views, into propositions in the re-
ality environment. However, we ought to stress that many different lines of
reasoning will be explored, many ultimately proving unsuccessful.
We should also stress that when a pretence cocoon is created, it is not
tagged as having to do with any particular metaphorical view. Only by hav-
ing the utterance?s direct source-domain meaning placed within it, such as the
mind having far-reaches, can an inference be made that that the particular
metaphorical view MIND AS PHYSICAL SPACE with its associated corre-
spondences is being used. Thus, even the question of the metaphorical views
involved in an utterance results from a possibly extensive web of inferences.
Finally note that although Anne?s mind is categorized in the pretence
as a physical region, this is in addition to its being categorized there as a
mind. (Thus, a pretence cocoon is reminiscent of a blend space in Blending
Theory: [6].) Given the existence of suitable knowledge rules, such as that
a mind is not a physical region, we can get conflicting propositions arising
within the pretence, because in general it is wrong to prevent rules about the
target domain operating within the pretence. In the present case we would
get both strong support for the mind being a physical region and for its not
being a physical region. The ATT-Meta system implements conflict-resolution
mechanisms that deal with reasoning conflicts in general, and that embody
a small number of general principles about conflict resolution in metaphor
[1,20]. In the present case, the mechanisms ensure that the proposition that
Anne?s mind is a physical region wins over the proposition that it is not.
5 Conclusion
We have provided a brief outline of some of the ideas in our implemented,
inference-based approach to metaphor. Much more detail, including the ap-
plication to other examples, can be found elsewhere [1,2,4].
The main point has been the use of inference to connect source-domain as-
pects that are raised by an utterance but not handled by known metaphorical
mappings to source-domain aspects in mappings that the understander does
know, and particularly to knowledge of what invariant aspects of metaphorical
utterances are likely to transfer. By this means, the approach can deal with
open-ended extensions of metaphorical beyond what can be readily dealt with
by known mappings by themselves, without the need for creating mappings
for the unmapped source-domain aspects.
We thus radically downplay source/target parallelism in metaphor in favour
of inference, and place great weight on the thesis that metaphors often intro-
duce source-domain aspects that do not need any correspondents in the target
domain (let alne already have any): their only purpose is to support useful
lines of source-domain inference that connect to known mappings. One of
the interesting semantic issues raised is that these unmapped aspects do not
by themselves have any meaning in target-domain terms, and it would be a
mistake to try to specify such meaning.
6 acknowledgements
This work has been supported by current and past grants: EP/C538943/1 and
GR/M64208, from the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council.
References
[1] Barnden, J.A. (2001) Uncertainty and conflict handling in the ATT-Meta
context-based system for metaphorical reasoning. In, V. Akman, P. Bouquet,
R. Thomason and R.A. Young (Eds), Procs. Third International Conference on
Modeling and Using Context. Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 2116.
Berlin: Springer, 15-29.
[2] Barnden, J.A. and Lee, M.G., (2001). Understanding open-ended usages of
familiar conceptual metaphors: An approach and artificial intelligence system.
Technical Report CSRP-01-05, School of Computer Science, University of
Birmingham.
[3] Barnden, J.A., Glasbey, S.R., Lee M.G. and Wallington, A.M. (2003). Domain-
transcending mappings in a system for metaphorical reasoning. In Proceedings
of the Research Note Sessions of the 10th Conference of EACL.
[4] Barnden, J.A., Glasbey, S.R., Lee, M.G. and Wallington, A.M. (2004), Varieties
and directions of inter-domain influence in metaphor. Metaphor and Symbol
19(1), 1?30.
[5] Davidson, D. (1979). What metaphors mean. In, S. Sacks (Ed.), On Metaphor.
U. Chicago Press, 29-45.
[6] Fauconnier, G and Turner, M. (2002). The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending
and the Minds Hidden Complexities. NY: Basic Books.
[7] Gentner, G. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy.
Cognitive Science, 7(2), 155?170.
[8] Gentner, D., Falkenhainer, B. and Skorstad, J. (1988). Viewing metaphor as
analogy. In D.H. Helman (Ed.), Analogical reasoning. Dordrecht. Kluwer.
[9] Glasbey, S.R and Barnden, J.A. (submitted). Towards a situation-based
discourse semantics for metaphor. Submitted to the journal Research on
Language and Computation.
[10] Hobbs, J.R. (1990) Literature and Cognition CSLI Lecture Notes, Center for
the Study of Language and Information, Stanford University.
[11] Holyoak, K J. and Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by constraint
satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13(3), 295-355.
[12] Jaekel, O. (1995). The Metaphorical Concept of Mind, in J.R. Taylor and R.E.
MacLaury (eds), Language and the Cognitive Construal of the World. Berlin New
York, Mouton de Gruyter. 197?229.
[13] Lakoff, G. (1993). The contemporary theory of metaphor. In A Ortony (Ed.),
Metaphor and Thought, 2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
[14] Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By. University of
Chicago Press.
[15] Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh. NY: Basic Books.
[16] Levinson, S. (1983). Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[17] Martin, J. H. (1990). A Computational Model of Metaphor Interpretation. NY:
Academic Press.
[18] Narayanan, S. (1999). ?Moving right along: A computational model of
metaphoric reasoning about events,? Procs. National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, pp.121?128. AAAI Press.
[19] Stern, J. (2000). Metaphor in Context. Cambridge, MA and London, UK:
Bradford Books, MIT Press.
[20] Wallington, A.M and Barnden, J.A. (2004). Uncertainty in Metaphorical
Reasoning. In Procs of the Workshop on Computational Models of Natural
Argument (CMNA) at ECAI 2004. August 2004, Valencia, Spain.
[21] Wallington, A.M., Barnden, J.A. Glasbey S.R. and Lee M. G. (2006).
Metaphorical reasoning with an economical set of mappings. Delta, 22:1.
