Towards a  Speech-to-Speech Machine Translation Quality Metric
Kurt Godden
Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Laboratories
1 Federal Street
Camden, New Jersey   08102
kgodden@atl.lmco.com
Abstract
General characteristics of a pragmatic
metric for the production evaluation of
speech-to-speech translations are dis-
cussed. While these characteristics con-
strain the space of allowable metrics,
infinite definition space remains from
which to select and define any particular
metric. The recommended characteistics
are drawn from the author?s experience
as primary developer of a text-based
translation quality metric used in a pro-
duction environment. The primary contri-
bution is that of strict category ordering
and two meta-rules that reduce the
variance in assignment of errors to
categories.
1  Introduction
When we consider speech-to-speech (S2S)
translation systems, several abstract models are
possible.
In Model 1 (Figure 1) we treat the entire
software system as a ?black box,? just recognizing
that the input is a source language utterance (SLU)
and the output is a target language utterance
(TLU).
SLU
S2S
TLU
Figure 1.  Model 1.
In Model 2 (Figure 2) we break the previous
black box into several traditional components,
reflecting typical language processing modules.
The source language utterance is transformed to a
source language text (SLT) by an automatic speech
recognition (ASR) system. The SLT is then
translated by a machine translation (MT) system to
a target language text (TLT), which is in turn
converted to the target language utterance by a
text-to-speech (TTS) system.
SLU
ASR
MT
TTS
SLT
TLU
TLT
Figure 2.  Model 2.
Model 3 (Figure 3) illustrates how the source
language text and MT component may be replaced
by a natural language generation (NLG) system,
given a rich enough semantic representation. Other
models are certainly possible, depending upon how
the various processing tasks are subdivided.
SLU
ASR
NLG TLU
Semantic
Rep
Figure 3.  Model 3.
Regardless of how many levels and
components there are in a given implementation,
different metrics could be applied around any
input-output pair of interest to help drive quality
improvements. In Model 2 above, for example, we
could have a metric around each processing
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                         Algorithms and Systems, Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 117-120.
                          Proceedings of the Workshop on Speech-to-Speech Translation:
module; that is, one metric for the mapping SLU to
SLT, another metric for SLT to TLT, and a third
from TLT to TLU. Each metric would be used to
study the effectiveness of the system module of
interest.
However, since the only guaranteed input-
output pair regardless of the particular combination
of technologies used would be SLU to TLU, and
since all systems can be abstracted into Model 1
above, let us focus on an abstract metric which we
will call the utterance-to-utterance (U2U) Metric.
What do we require of our abstract U2U metric?
2  Metric Characteristics
I will not take a position on a particular metric,
since metrics may vary depending upon the
purpose of the people using them. However, I will
take a position on various general characteristics of
a metric for production use.
These arguments are based on my experience
as principal author of the J2450 translation quality
metric that has been adopted by the Society of
Automotive Engineers as a recommended practice
for evaluation of service information translations.
[SAE]
In production environments?as opposed to
system development?translation metrics are
typically applied to random samples of source and
target language translations. Metrics based on
static reference translations for the automatic
evaluation of system quality during system
development [Doddington] are thus not in the
domain of this discussion.
Evaluation is usually performed by a qualified
translator with domain knowledge, who is general-
ly employed by a translation agency, though client
companies sometimes perform their own internal
evaluations.
2.1  Primary Categories
First, a U2U metric for production use should
consist of approximately seven categories of
errors, plus or minus two. Seven categories are
enough to provide adequate linguistic coverage yet
are few enough to be usable by people in the real
world. This is consistent with most metrics  used
by translation agencies.
For example, one category may refer to the
appropriate mapping of source language words to
target language words, where appropriate  is
defined by the category description. Another
category may refer to word order. Given that we
are discussing speech-to-speech systems, a
category may be reserved for the intelligibility of
the target language audio. Again, the particular
categories will be dictated by the purpose of the
people employing the metric. System application
developers will have different interests from
researchers working on the base technologies, and
clients will have different interests than suppliers
of the technologies.
With respect to categories, I would suggest
that any particular U2U metric not include a
primary category called mistranslation. While
many translators use this term, and many transla-
tion agencies employ their own proprietary metrics
that have an error category by this name, it is
rarely, if ever, defined with any precision. The
word mistranslation itself tends to evoke strong
emotions in the translation industry, and for that
reason alone it is not a good term to use for what is
hoped will be a relatively objective, scientifically
motivated metric.
2.2  Numeric Scores
The next characteristic of a U2U metric should be
that it produces numeric scores for the utterance
evaluations. That is, each category should itself
produce a numeric score, and each category can be
weighted or not, according to the goals of the
metric?s users. The presence and categorization of
the errors are generally matters of human judge-
ment, but once the error is recognized and
categorized, a numeric result has numerous advan-
tages. Given appropriate sample sizes it allows
reasonable comparisons across different translation
systems. It also allows easy use of statistical
control charts for quality control [Godden 1996].
Employing a numeric score as the basis for a
quality evaluation does not ipso facto allow the
identification of a translation as good, bad or
indifferent. Two different people may use the same
metric, producing the same evaluation scores and
yet define the notion of acceptable quality entirely
differently. One person may define acceptable
quality as a normalized quality score of .80 or
higher, while another person may define
acceptable quality only with a score of .90. The
threshold of acceptance is independent of the
metric, and is a business, not a technical decision.
2.3  Major and Minor Subcategories
Another necessary characteristic for a production
metric encompasses the notion of a major vs. a
minor error. An example will clarify both the
concept and its utility. Suppose that a source
language utterance contained the phrase a door,
but that the S2S system translated it as a window.
This is a lexical translation error that is major. An
example of a lexical error that is minor would be a
target language utterance of an door. It is ill-
advised to penalize both errors with the same
numeric score, which would happen if a ?wrong
word? category always resulted in a single numeric
value. Adding the major vs. minor distinction with
different numeric scores allows the evaluator to
penalize the first error more than the second.
Thus we have now constrained our metrics to
include approximately seven primary error
categories and two secondary categories (major
versus minor) for a total of roughly fourteen
distinct classifications of any given error. When an
error in a translation is detected, the evaluator
therefore has two assignments to make, the
primary category and one of its two secondary
categories. These primary and secondary category
assignments are not always clear. Since translation
quality judgements are generally human judge-
ments, there will be evaluation variance across
evaluators.
Is an incorrect gender on an article an example
of an incorrect term or a syntax error?  If the two
categories have different penalty scores, then the
category assignment can be a significant source of
variance. Is the translation of a definite article as
an indefinite article a minor error or a major one?
That will depend upon the context of course, but it
may also depend upon the person performing the
evaluation.
2.4  Reducing Variance
To the extent that this human variance can be
reduced, then the metric used by that evaluator will
become more valuable.
The most effective way in which variance can
be reduced is to give as precise a definition as
possible of each error category, both primary and
secondary. If a category of wrong term is to be
used, then the notions of both wrong and term need
to be defined precisely. Is ?gas pedal? one term or
two? Are function words regarded as terms? If the
source language term is ambiguous, then what
constitutes a wrong term in the target language?
Definitions of error categories should be amply
illustrated with examples.
The second most effective way to reduce
variance is to provide training for evaluators.
Sample utterances and translations with deliberate
errors should be prepared in advance, offering
several examples of each error category. Ideally,
an entire training course would be designed around
these examples and no person would perform
working evaluations without taking the course.
Also, evaluators should only be drawn from the
ranks of qualified translators.
2.5  Ordering and Meta-Rules
But there is an additional way to reduce the
variance in category assignment that can be
incorporated into the metric itself. This can be
done by employing rule ordering coupled with two
meta-rules. The seven (plus or minus two) primary
categories should be totally ordered by the numeric
demerit penalty values referenced in the two
subcategories.
For example, if primary category X has a
major penalty demerit of five and a minor demerit
of two, then it should be ordered before another
primary category Y with major and minor demerits
of four and three. If primary categories X and Y
have major/minor demerits of three/four and
three/five, respectively, then Y should be ordered
before X.
Any potential ambiguities may be resolved by
arbitrary sort order rules. The important concept is
that each primary category be ordered with respect
to every other primary category. Within a category,
the major subtype is always ordered before the
minor subtype.
Once the ordering is determined, then two
meta-rules may be used to reduce error category
assignment variance. The first meta-rule states that
if the evaluator is unsure which primary category
to assign to an error, then he or she should
automatically assign it to that primary category
highest in the sort order. Thus, if two evaluators
are both unsure about which of two primary
categories X or Y to assign to a given error, this
first meta-rule forces them both to make the same
decision. They will both select X, if X precedes Y
in the sort order.
Similarly, the second meta-rule states that once
the primary error category is assigned, if an
evaluator is unsure whether the error constitutes a
major or a minor instance of that error, then the
evaluator should automatically regard it as a major
error.
In this way, the metric itself?which now
contains the two meta-rules?is removing some of
the decision-making authority from the human
evaluators, with the effect of reducing the variance
in quality score demerit assignments. We must
assume, of course, the honest and unbiased
application of the metric by the evaluator. We also
assume that both the metric definition as well as
the training course and materials clearly emphasize
the application and importance of the meta-rules.
The meta-rules impose a bias toward higher
demerits, which is somewhat arbitrary. We could
as easily have made the bias favor lower demerits.
Any definition of acceptable quality, i.e., an
acceptance threshold, based on the numeric scores
can be adjusted up or down, according to the needs
of the organization employing the metric. As
previously stated, such acceptance criteria are
business decisions, not technical ones. The
important effect of the meta-rules is to reduce the
variance in assignment of errors to categories.
3  Summary and Conclusions
The recommended U2U metric characteristics are
summarized in Table 1.
Table 1.  Characteristics of Metric.
Seven (+/- two) primary categories
Two secondary categories (major/minor) for each
primary category.
Numeric demerits for each major and minor
category.
Primary categories sorted by demerits.
Meta-Rule 1 removes ambiguity of primary
category assignment.
Meta-Rule 2 removes ambiguity of secondary
category assignment.
While I have discussed several characteristics
of what I consider to be required elements of any
adequate U2U translation quality metric for
production use, these constraints still permit
infinite variation in the definition of any particular
metric. Primary categories may be drawn from any
number of classifications that divide the error
space, e.g. lexical, syntactic, semantic, phonetic,
etc. Numeric demerits may be taken from any
desired range, be it 0-1 or 1-1000.
Finally, let me say that just because a U2U
metric conforms to the characteristics discussed in
this paper, that metric does not automatically
become a good metric. As previously discussed,
the category definitions are of extreme impor-
tance, as are the examples used to illustrate the
definitions and the training materials created for
evaluators. Without clear, unambiguous and
precise error definitions no metric will be of any
practical value.
References
Doddington, G. 2002. ?Automatic Evaluation of
Machine Translation Quality Using N-gram
Co-Ocurrence Statistics.? Notebook Proceed-
ings. Human Language Technology. San
Diego, CA. pp. 128-132.
Godden, K. 1996. ?Statistical Control Charts in
Natural Language Processing.?  Proceedings.
Natural Language Processing and Industrial
Applications. Moncton, NB, Canada. pp. 111-
117.
SAE. 2001. ?Translation Quality Metric.? Docu-
ment Number J2450. Available through
www.sae.org/technicalcommittees/j2450p1.htm
