BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 137?144,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Interpreting Comparative Constructions in Biomedical Text 
Marcelo Fiszman,1   Dina Demner-Fushman,2    
Francois M. Lang,2  Philip Goetz,2 
Thomas C. Rindflesch2 
1University of Tennessee ? GSM, Knoxville, TN 37920 
mfiszman@utmck.edu 
2Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications 
National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD 20894 
{ddemner|goetzp|flang|trindflesch}@mail.nih.gov 
 
Abstract 
We propose a methodology using 
underspecified semantic interpretation to 
process comparative constructions in 
MEDLINE citations, concentrating on two 
structures that are prevalent in the research 
literature reporting on clinical trials for 
drug therapies. The method exploits an 
existing semantic processor, SemRep, 
which constructs predications based on the 
Unified Medical Language System. Results 
of a preliminary evaluation were recall of 
70%, precision of 96%, and F-score of 
81%. We discuss the generalization of the 
methodology to other entities such as 
therapeutic and diagnostic procedures. The 
available structures in computable format 
are potentially useful for interpreting 
outcome statements in MEDLINE 
citations. 
1 Introduction 
As natural language processing (NLP) is 
increasingly able to support advanced information 
management techniques for research in medicine 
and biology, it is being incrementally improved to 
provide extended coverage and more accurate 
results. In this paper, we discuss the extension of 
an existing semantic interpretation system to 
address comparative structures. These structures 
provide a way of explicating the characteristics of 
one entity in terms of a second, thereby enhancing 
the description of the first. This phenomenon is 
important in clinical research literature reporting 
the results of clinical trials.  
In the abstracts of these reports, a treatment for 
some disease is typically discussed using two types 
of comparative structures. The first announces that 
the (primary) therapy focused on in the study will 
be compared to some other (secondary) therapy. A 
typical example is (1). 
(1) Lansoprazole compared with 
ranitidine for the treatment of 
nonerosive gastroesophageal reflux 
disease. 
An outcome statement (2) often appears near the 
end of the abstract, asserting results in terms of the 
relative merits of the primary therapy compared to 
the secondary. 
(2) Lansoprazole is more 
effective than ranitidine in 
patients with endoscopically 
confirmed non-erosive reflux 
esophagitis. 
The processing of comparative expressions such 
as (1) and (2) was incorporated into an existing 
system, SemRep [Rindflesch and Fiszman, 2003; 
Rindflesch et al, 2005], which constructs semantic 
predications by mapping assertions in biomedical 
text to the Unified Medical Language System? 
(UMLS)? [Humphreys et al, 1998].  
2 Background 
2.1 Comparative structures in English 
The range of comparative expressions in English is 
extensive and complex. Several linguistic studies 
have investigated their characteristics, with 
differing assumptions about syntax and semantics 
(for example [Ryan, 1981; Rayner and Banks, 
1990; Staab and Hahn, 1997; Huddleston and 
Pullum, 2002]). Our study concentrates on  
137
structures in which two drugs are compared with 
respect to a shared attribute (e.g. how well they 
treat some disease). An assessment of their relative 
merit in this regard is indicated by their positions 
on a scale. The compared terms are expressed as 
noun phrases, which can be considered to be 
conjoined. The shared characteristic focused on is 
expressed as a predicate outside the comparative 
structure. An adjective or noun is used to denote 
the scale, and words such as than, as, with, and to 
serve as cues to identify the compared terms, the 
scale, and the relative position of the terms on the 
scale.  
The first type of structure we address (called  
comp1 and illustrated in (3)) merely asserts that the 
primary and secondary terms (in bold) are being 
compared. A possible cue for identifying these 
structures is a form of compare. A further 
characteristic is that the compared terms are 
separated by a conjunction, or a preposition, as in 
(3). 
(3) To compare misoprostol with 
dinoprostone for cervical ripening 
and labor induction. 
As shown in (4), a scale may be  mentioned 
(efficacy); however, in this study, we only identify 
the compared terms in structures of this type.  
(4) To compare the efficacy of 
misoprostol with dinoprostone for 
cervical ripening and labor 
induction. 
In the more complex comparative expression we 
accommodate (called comp2), the relative ranking 
of two compared terms is indicated on a scale 
denoted by an adjective (e.g. effective in (5)). The 
relative position of the compared terms in scalar 
comparative structures of this type expresses either 
equality or inequality. Inequality is further divided 
into superiority, where the primary compared term 
is higher on the scale than the secondary, and 
inferiority, where the opposite is true. Cues 
associated with the adjective designating the scale 
signal these phenomena (e.g. as ADJ as in (5) for 
equality, ADJer than in (6) for superiority, and less 
ADJ than in (7) for inferiority).  
(5) Azithromycin is as effective 
as erythromycin estolate for the 
treatment of pertussis in children. 
(6) Naproxen is safer than 
aspirin in the treatment of the 
arthritis of rheumatic fever. 
(7) Sodium valproate was 
significantly less effective than 
prochlorperazine in reducing pain 
or nausea. 
In examples (3) through (7), the characteristic the 
compared drugs have in common is treatment of 
some disorder, for example treatment of pertussis 
in children in (5).  
Few studies describe an implemented automatic 
analysis of comparatives; however, Friedman 
[Friedman, 1989] is a notable exception. Jindal and 
Liu [Jindal and Liu, 2006] use machine learning to 
identify some comparative structures, but do not 
provide a semantic interpretation. We exploit 
SemRep machinery to interpret the aspects of 
comparative structures just described. 
2.2 SemRep 
SemRep [Rindflesch and Fiszman, 2003; 
Rindflesch et al, 2005] recovers underspecified 
semantic propositions in biomedical text based on 
a partial syntactic analysis and structured domain 
knowledge from the UMLS. Several systems that 
extract entities and relations are under 
development in both the clinical and molecular 
biology domains. Examples of systems for clinical 
text are described in [Friedman et al, 1994], 
[Johnson et al, 1993], [Hahn et al, 2002], and 
[Christensen et al, 2002]. In molecular biology, 
examples include [Yen et al, 2006], [Chun et al, 
2006], [Blaschke et al, 1999], [Leroy et al, 2003], 
[Rindflesch et al, 2005], [Friedman et al, 2001], 
and [Lussier et al, 2006].  
During SemRep processing, a partial syntactic 
parse is produced that depends on lexical look-up 
in the SPECIALIST lexicon [McCray et al, 1994] 
and a part-of-speech tagger [Smith et al, 2004]. 
MetaMap [Aronson, 2001] then matches noun 
phrases to concepts in the Metathesaurus? and 
determines the semantic type for each concept. For 
example, the structure in (9), produced for (8), 
allows both syntactic and semantic information to 
be used in further SemRep processing that 
interprets semantic predications.  
(8) Lansoprazole for the 
treatment of gastroesophageal 
reflux disease 
138
(9) [[head(noun(Lansoprazole),me
taconc(?lansoprazole?:[phsu]))],[p
rep(for),det(the),head(noun(treatm
ent))],[prep(of),mod(adj(gastroeso
phageal)),mod(noun(reflux)),head(n
oun(disease),metaconc(?Gastroesoph
ageal reflux disease?:[dsyn]))]] 
Predicates are derived from indicator rules that 
map syntactic phenomena (such as verbs and 
nominalizations) to relationships in the UMLS 
Semantic Network. Argument identification is 
guided by dependency grammar rules as well as 
constraints imposed by the Semantic Network. In 
processing (8), for example, an indicator rule links 
the nominalization treatment with the Semantic 
Network relation ?Pharmacologic Substance 
TREATS Disease or Syndrome.? Since the 
semantic types of the syntactic arguments 
identified for treatment in this sentence 
(?Pharmacologic Substance? for ?lansoprazole? and 
?Disease or Syndrome? for ?Gastroesophageal 
reflux disease?) match the corresponding semantic 
types in the relation from the Semantic Network, 
the predication in (10) is constructed, where 
subject and object are Metathesaurus concepts.  
(10) lansoprazole TREATS 
Gastroesophageal reflux disease 
3 Methods 
3.1 Linguistic patterns 
We extracted sentences for developing 
comparative processing from a set of  some 10,000 
MEDLINE citations reporting on the results of 
clinical trials, a rich source of comparative 
structures. In this sample, the most frequent 
patterns for comp1 (only announces that two terms 
are compared) and comp2 (includes a scale and 
positions on that scale) are given in (11) and (12). 
In the patterns, Term1 and Term2 refer to the 
primary and secondary compared terms, 
respectively. ?{BE}? means that some form of be 
is optional, and slash indicates disjunction. These 
patterns served as guides for enhancing SemRep 
argument identification machinery but were not 
implemented as such. That is, they indicate 
necessary components but do not preclude 
intervening modifiers and qualifiers.   
(11) comp1: Compared terms 
C1:   Term1 {BE} compare with/to Term2 
C2:   compare Term1 with/to Term2 
C3:   compare Term1 and/versus Term2 
C4a: Term1 comparison with/to Term2 
C4b: comparison of Term1 with/to Term2 
C4c: comparison of Term1 and/versus Term2 
C5   Term1 versus Term2 
(12) comp2: Scalar patterns 
S1:   Term1 BE as ADJ as {BE} Term2 
S2a: Term1 BE more ADJ than {BE} Term2 
S2b: Term1 BE ADJer than {BE}Term2  
S2c: Term1 BE less ADJ than {BE} Term2 
S4:   Term1 BE superior to Term2 
S5:   Term1 BE inferior to Term2 
As with SemRep in general, the interpretation of 
comparative structures exploits underspecified 
syntactic structure enhanced with Metathesaurus 
concepts and semantic types. Semantic groups 
[McCray et al, 2001] from the Semantic Network 
are also available. For this project, we exploit the 
group Chemicals & Drugs, which contains such 
semantic types as ?Pharmacologic Substance?, 
?Antibiotic?, and ?Immunologic Factor?. (The 
principles used here also apply to compared terms 
with semantic types from other semantic groups, 
such as ?Procedures?.) In the comp1 patterns, a 
form of compare acts as an indicator of a 
comparative predication. In comp2, the adjective 
serves that function. Other words appearing in the 
patterns cue the indicator word (in comp2) and 
help identify the compared terms (in both comp1 
and comp2). The conjunction versus  is special in 
that it cues the secondary compared term (Term2) 
in comp1, but may also indicate a comp1 structure 
in the absence of a form of compare (C5).  
3.2 Interpreting comp1 patterns  
When SemRep encounters a form of compare, it 
assumes a comp1 structure and looks to the right 
for the first noun phrase immediately preceded by 
with, to, and, or versus. If the head of this phrase is 
mapped to a concept having a semantic type in the 
group Chemicals & Drugs, it is marked as the 
secondary compared term. The algorithm then 
looks to the left of that term for a noun phrase 
having a semantic type also in the group Chemicals 
& Drugs, which becomes the primary compared 
term. When this processing is applied to (13), the 
semantic predication (14) is produced, in which the 
predicate is COMPARED_WITH; the first 
argument is the primary compared term and the 
139
other is the secondary. As noted earlier, although a 
scale is sometimes asserted in these structures (as 
in (13)), SemRep does not retrieve it. An assertion 
regarding position on the scale never appears in 
comp1 structures.  
(13) To compare the efficacy and 
tolerability of Hypericum 
perforatum with imipramine in 
patients with mild to moderate 
depression. 
(14) Hypericum perforatum 
COMPARED_WITH Imipramine 
SemRep considers noun phrases occurring 
immediately to the right and left of versus as being 
compared terms if their heads have been mapped to 
Metathesaurus concepts having semantic types 
belonging to the group Chemicals & Drugs. Such 
noun phrases are interpreted as part of a comp1 
structure, even if a form of compare has not 
occurred. The predication (16) is derived from 
(15).  
(15) Intravenous lorazepam versus 
dimenhydrinate for treatment of 
vertigo in the emergency 
department: a randomized clinical 
trial. 
(16) Lorazepam COMPARED_WITH 
Dimenhydrinate 
SemRep treats compared terms as being 
coordinated. For example, this identification 
allows both ?Lorazepam? and ?Dimenhydrinate? 
to function as arguments of TREATS in (15). 
Consequently, in addition to (16), the predications 
in (17) are returned as the semantic interpretation 
of (15). Such processing is done for all comp1 and 
comp2 structures (although these results are not 
given for (13) and are not further discussed in this 
paper). 
(17) Lorazepam TREATS Vertigo  
 Dimenhydrinate TREATS 
Vertigo 
3.3 Interpreting comp2 patterns  
In addition to identifying two compared terms 
when processing comp2 patterns, a scale must be 
named and the relative position of the terms on that 
scale indicated. The algorithm for finding 
compared terms in comp2 structures begins by 
locating one of the cues as, than, or to and then 
examines the next noun phrase to the right. If its 
head has been mapped to a concept with a 
semantic type in the group Chemicals & Drugs, it 
is marked as the secondary compared term. As in 
comp1, the algorithm then looks to the left for the 
first noun phrase having a head in the same 
semantic group, and that phrase is marked as the 
primary compared term.  
To find the scale name, SemRep examines the 
secondary compared term and then locates the first 
adjective to its left. The nominalization of that 
adjective (as found in the SPECIALIST Lexicon) 
is designated as the scale and serves as an 
argument of the predicate SCALE in the 
interpretation. For adjectives superior and inferior 
(patterns S4 and S5 in (12)) the scale name is 
?goodness.? 
In determining relative position on the scale, 
equality is contrasted with inequality. If the 
adjective of the construction is immediately 
preceded by as (pattern S1 in (12) above), the two 
compared terms have the same position on the 
scale (equality), and are construed as arguments of 
a predication with predicate SAME_AS. In all 
other comp2 constructions, the compared terms are 
in a relationship of inequality. The primary 
compared term is considered higher on the scale 
unless the adjective is inferior or is preceded by 
less, in which case the secondary term is higher. 
The predicates HIGHER_THAN and 
LOWER_THAN are used to construct predications 
with the compared terms to interpret position on 
the scale. The equality construction in (18) is 
expressed as the predications in (19).  
(18) Candesartan is as effective 
as lisinopril once daily in 
reducing blood pressure. 
(19) Candesartan COMPARED_WITH 
lisinopril 
 SCALE:Effectiveness  
 Candesartan SAME_AS 
lisinopril 
The superiority construction in (20) is expressed as 
the predications in (21).  
(20) Losartan was more effective 
than atenolol in reducing 
cardiovascular morbidity and 
mortality in patients with 
hypertension, diabetes, and LVH. 
(21) Losartan COMPARED_WITH 
Atenolol 
140
 SCALE:Effectiveness 
 Losartan HIGHER_THAN 
Atenolol 
The inferiority construction in (22) is expressed as 
the predications in (23).  
(22) Morphine-6-glucoronide was 
significantly less potent than 
morphine in producing pupil 
constriction. 
(23) morphine-6-glucoronide 
COMPARED_WITH Morphine 
 SCALE:Potency 
 morphine-6-glucoronide 
LOWER_THAN Morphine 
3.4 Accommodating negation  
Negation in comparative structures affects the 
position of the compared terms on the scale, and is 
accommodated differently for equality and for 
inequality. When a scalar comparison of equality 
(pattern S1, as ADJ as) is negated, the primary 
term is lower on the scale than the secondary 
(rather than being at least equal). For example, in 
interpreting the negated equality construction in 
(24), SemRep produces (25). 
(24) Amoxicillin-clavulanate was 
not as effective as ciprofloxacin 
for treating uncomplicated bladder 
infection in women. 
(25) Amoxicillin-clavulanate 
COMPARED_WITH Ciprofloxaci 
 SCALE:Effectiveness 
 Amoxicillin-clavulanate 
LOWER_THAN Ciprofloxacin 
For patterns of inequality, SemRep negates the 
predication indicating position on the scale. For 
example, the predications in (27) represent the 
negated superiority comparison in (26). Negation 
of inferiority comparatives (e.g. ?X is not less 
effective than Y?) is extremely rare in our sample.  
(26) These data show that 
celecoxib is not better than 
diclofenac (P = 0.414) in terms of 
ulcer complications. 
(27) celecoxib COMPARED_WITH 
diclofenac 
 SCALE:Goodness  
 celecoxib NEG_HIGHER_THAN 
diclofenac 
3.5 Evaluation 
To evaluate the effectiveness of the developed 
methods we created a test set of 300 sentences 
containing comparative structures. These were 
extracted by the second author (who did not 
participate in the development of the methodology) 
from 3000 MEDLINE citations published later in 
date than the  citations used to develop the 
methodology. The citations were retrieved with a 
PubMed query specifying randomized controlled 
studies and comparative studies on drug therapy.  
Sentences containing direct comparisons of the 
pharmacological actions of two drugs expressed in 
the target structures (comp1 and comp2) were 
extracted starting from the latest retrieved citation 
and continuing until 300 sentences with 
comparative structures had been examined. These 
were annotated with the PubMed ID of the citation, 
names of two drugs (COMPARED_WITH 
predication), the scale on which they are compared 
(SCALE), and the relative position of the primary 
drug with respect to the secondary (SAME_AS, 
HIGHER_THAN, or LOWER_THAN).  
The test sentences were processed using 
SemRep and evaluated against the annotated test 
set. We then computed recall and precision in 
several ways: overall for all comparative 
structures, for comp1 structures only, and for 
comp2 structures only. To understand how the 
overall identification of comparatives is influenced 
by the components of the construction, we also 
computed recall and precision separately for drug 
names, scale, and position on scale (SAME_AS, 
HIGHER_THAN and LOWER_THAN taken 
together). Recall measures the proportion of 
manually annotated categories that have been 
correctly identified automatically. Precision 
measures what proportion of the automatically 
annotated categories is correct.  
In addition, the overall identification of 
comparative structures was evaluated using the F-
measure [Rijsbergen, 1979], which combines recall 
and precision. The F-measure was computed using 
macro-averaging and micro-averaging. Macro-
averaging was computed over each category first 
and then averaged over the three categories (drug 
names, scale, and position on scale). This approach 
gives equal weight to each category. In micro-
averaging (which gives an equal weight to the 
performance on each sentence) recall and precision 
141
were obtained by summing over all individual 
sentences. Because it is impossible to enumerate 
all entities and relations which are not drugs, scale, 
or position we did not use the classification error 
rate and other metrics that require computing of 
true negative values. 
4 Results 
Upon inspection of the SemRep processing results 
we noticed that the test set contained nine 
duplicates.  In addition, four sentences were not 
processed for various technical reasons. We report 
the results for the remaining 287 sentences, which 
contain 288 comparative structures occurring in 
168 MEDLINE citations. Seventy four citations 
contain 85 comp2 structures. The remaining 203 
structures are comp1.  
Correct identification of comparative structures 
of both types depends on two factors: 1) 
recognition of both drugs being compared, and 2) 
recognition of the presence of a comparative 
structure itself. In addition, correct identification of 
the comp2 structures depends on recognition of the 
scale on which the drugs are compared and the 
relative position of the drugs on the scale. Table 1 
presents recall, precision, and F-score reflecting 
these factors. 
 
Table 1. SemRep performance 
Task Recall Precision F-score
Overall 0.70 0.96 0.81 
Drug extraction 0.69 0.96 0.81 
Comp1 0.74 0.98 0.84 
Comp2  0.62 0.92 0.74 
Scale  0.62 1.00 0.77 
Position on scale 0.62 0.98 0.76 
 
We considered drug identification to be correct 
only if both drugs participating in the relationship 
were identified correctly. The recall results 
indicate that approximately 30% of the drugs and 
comparative structures of comp1, as well as 40% 
of comp2 structures, remain unrecognized; 
however, all components are identified with high 
precision. Macro-averaging over compared drug 
names, scale, and position on scale categories we 
achieve an F-score = 0.78. The micro-average 
score for 287 comparative sentences is 0.5. 
5 Discussion 
In examining SemRep errors, we determined that 
more than 60% of the false negatives (for both 
comp1 and comp2) were due to ?empty heads? 
[Chodorow et al, 1985; Guthrie et al, 1990], in 
which the syntactic head of a noun phrase does not 
reflect semantic thrust. Such heads prevent 
SemRep from accurately determining the semantic 
type and group of the noun phrase. In our sample, 
expressions interpreted as empty heads include 
those referring to drug dosage and formulations, 
such as extended release (the latter often 
abbreviated as XR). Examples of missed 
interpretations are in sentences (28) and (29), 
where the empty heads are in bold. Ahlers et al 
[Ahlers et al, 2007] discuss enhancements to 
SemRep for accommodating empty heads. These 
mechanisms are being incorporated into the 
processing for comparative structures.  
(28) Oxybutynin 15 mg was more 
effective than propiverine 20 mg 
in reducing symptomatic and 
asymptomatic IDCs in ambulatory 
patients. 
(29) Intravesical atropine was as 
effective as oxybutynin immediate 
release for increasing bladder 
capacity and it was probably 
better with less antimuscarinic 
side effects 
False positives were due exclusively to word 
sense ambiguity. For example, in (30) bid (twice a 
day) was mapped to the concept ?BID protein?, 
which belongs to the semantic group Chemicals & 
Drugs. The most recent version of MetaMap, 
which will soon be called by comparative 
processing, exploits word sense disambiguation 
[Humphrey et al, 2006] and will likely resolve 
some of these errors.  
(30) Retapamulin ointment 1% (bid) 
for 5 days was as effective as 
oral cephalexin (bid) for 10 days 
in treatment of patients with SID, 
and was well tolerated. 
Although, in this paper, we tested the method on 
structures in which the compared terms belong to 
the semantic group Chemicals & Drugs, we can 
straightforwardly generalize the method by adding 
other semantic groups to the algorithm. For 
142
example, if SemRep recognized the noun phrases 
in bold in (31) and (32) as belonging to the group 
Procedures, comparative processing could proceed 
as for Chemicals & Drugs.  
(31) Comparison of multi-slice 
spiral CT and magnetic resonance 
imaging in evaluation of the un-
resectability of blood vessels in 
pancreatic tumor. 
(32) Dynamic multi-slice spiral 
CT is better than dynamic magnetic 
resonance to some extent in 
evaluating the un-resectability of 
peripancreatic blood vessels in 
pancreatic tumor. 
The semantic predications returned by SemRep 
to represent comparative expressions can be 
considered a type of executable knowledge that 
supports reasoning. Since the arguments in these 
predications have been mapped to the UMLS, a 
structured knowledge source, they can be 
manipulated using that knowledge. It is also 
possible to compute the transitive closure of all 
SemRep output for a collection of texts to 
determine which drug was asserted in that 
collection to be the best with respect to some 
characteristic. This ability could be very useful in 
supporting question-answering applications. 
As noted earlier, it is common in reporting on 
the results of randomized clinical trials and 
systematic reviews that a comp1 structure appears 
early in the discourse to announce the objectives of 
the study and that a comp2 structure often appears 
near the end to give the results. Another example 
of this phenomenon appears in (33) and (34) (from 
PMID 15943841).  
(33) To compare the efficacy of 
famotidine and omeprazole in 
Japanese patients with non-erosive 
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease 
by a prospective randomized 
multicentre trial. 
(34) Omeprazole is more effective 
than famotidine for the control of 
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease 
symptoms in H. pylori-negative 
patients. 
We suggest one example of an application that 
can benefit from the information provided by the 
knowledge inherent in the semantic interpretation 
of comparative structures, and that is the 
interpretation of outcome statements in MEDLINE 
citations, as a method for supporting automatic 
access to the latest results from clinical trials 
research. 
6 Conclusion 
We expanded a symbolic semantic interpreter to 
identify comparative constructions in biomedical 
text. The method relies on underspecified syntactic 
analysis and domain knowledge from the UMLS.  
We identify two compared terms and scalar 
comparative structures in MEDLINE citations. 
Although we restricted the method to comparisons 
of drug therapies, the method can be easily 
generalized to other entities such as diagnostic and 
therapeutic procedures. The availability of this 
information in computable format can support the 
identification of outcome sentences in MEDLINE, 
which in turn supports translation of biomedical 
research into improvements in quality of patient 
care. 
Acknowledgement This study was supported in 
part by the Intramural Research Programs of the 
National Institutes of Health, National Library of 
Medicine. 
References  
Ahlers C, Fiszman M, Demner-Fushman D, Lang F, 
Rindflesch TC. 2007. Extracting semantic 
predications from MEDLINE citations for 
pharmacogenomics. Pacific Symposium on 
Biocomputing  12:209-220. 
Aronson AR. 2001. Effective mapping of biomedical 
text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: The MetaMap 
program. Proc AMIA Symp, 17-21. 
Blaschke C, Andrade MA, Ouzounis C, and Valencia A. 
1999. Automatic extraction of biological information 
from scientific text: protein-protein interactions. 
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on 
Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology. Morgan 
Kaufman Publishers, San Francisco, CA. 
Christensen L, Haug PJ, and Fiszman M. 2002. 
MPLUS: A probabilistic medical language 
understanding system. Proceedings of the Workshop 
on Natural Language Processing in the Biomedical 
Domain, Association for Computational Linguistics, 
29-36. 
Chodorow MS, Byrd RI, and Heidom GE. 1985. 
Extracting Semantic Hierarchies from a Large On-
143
Line Dictionary. Proceedings of the 23rd Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 299-304. 
Chun HW, Tsuruoka Y, Kim J-D, Shiba R, Nagata N, 
Hishiki T, and Tsujii J. 2006, Extraction of gene-
disease relations from Medline using domain 
dictionaries and machine learning. Pac Symp 
Biocomput, 4-15. 
Friedman C. 1989. A general computational treatment 
of the comparative. Proc 27th Annual Meeting Assoc 
Comp Linguistics, 161-168. 
Friedman C, Alderson PO, Austin JH, Cimino JJ, and 
Johnson SB. 1994.  A general natural-language text 
processor for clinical radiology. J Am Med Inform 
Assoc, 1(2):161-74. 
Friedman C, Kra P, Yu H, Krauthammer M, and 
Rzhetsky A. 2001.  GENIES: a natural-language 
processing system for the extraction of molecular 
pathways from journal articles. Bioinformatics, 17 
Suppl 1:S74-S82. 
Guthrie L, Slater BM, Wilks Y, Bruce R. 1990. Is there 
content in empty heads? Proceedings of the 13th 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, v3:138 ? 
143.   
Hahn U, Romacker M, and Schulz S. 2002. 
MEDSYNDIKATE--a natural language system for 
the extraction of medical information from findings 
reports. Int J Med Inf, 67(1-3):63-74. 
Huddleston R, and Pullum GK. 2002. The Cambridge 
Grammar of the English Language. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Humphrey SM, Rogers WJ, Kilicoglu H, Demner-
Fushman D, Rindflesch TC. 2006. Word sense 
disambiguation by selecting the best semantic type 
based on Journal Descriptor Indexing: Preliminary 
experiment. J Am Soc Inf SciTech 57(1):96-113. 
Humphreys BL, Lindberg DA, Schoolman HM, and 
Barnett OG. 1998. The Unified Medical Language 
System: An informatics research collaboration. J Am 
Med Inform Assoc, 5(1):1-11. 
Jindal, Nitin and Bing Liu. 2006. Identifying 
comparative sentences in text documents. 
Proceedings of the 29th Annual International ACM 
SIGIR Conference on Research & Development on 
Information Retrieval. 
Johnson SB, Aguirre A, Peng P, and Cimino J. 1993. 
Interpreting natural language queries using the 
UMLS. Proc Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care, 
294-8. 
Leroy G, Chen H, and Martinez JD. 2003 A shallow 
parser based on closed-class words to capture 
relations in biomedical text. J Biomed Inform, 
36(3):145-158. 
Lussier YA, Borlawsky T, Rappaport D, Liu Y, and 
Friedman C. 2006 PhenoGO: assigning phenotypic 
context to Gene Ontology annotations with natural 
language processing. Pac Symp Biocomput, 64-75. 
McCray AT, Srinivasan S, and Browne AC. 1994. 
Lexical methods for managing variation in 
biomedical terminologies. Proc Annu Symp Comput 
Appl Med Care, 235-9. 
McCray AT, Burgun A, and Bodenreider O. 2001 
Aggregating UMLS semantic types for reducing 
conceptual complexity. Medinfo, 10(Pt 1): 216-20. 
Rayner M and Banks A. 1990. An implementable 
semantics for comparative constructions. 
Computational Linguistics, 16(2):86-112. 
Rindflesch TC. 1995. Integrating natural language 
processing and biomedical domain knowledge for 
increased information retrieval effectiveness. Proc 
5th  Annual Dual-use Technologies and Applications 
Conference, 260-5. 
Rindflesch TC and Fiszman M. 2003. The interaction of 
domain knowledge and linguistic structure in natural 
language processing: Interpreting hypernymic 
propositions in biomedical text. J Biomed Inform, 
36(6):462-77. 
Rindflesch TC, Marcelo Fiszman , and Bisharah Libbus.  
2005. Semantic interpretation for the biomedical 
research literature. Medical informatics: Knowledge 
management and data mining in biomedicine. 
Springer, New York, NY. 
Rijsbergen V. 1979.  Information Retrieval, 
Butterworth-Heinemann, Newton, MA. 
Ryan K. 1981. Corepresentational grammar and parsing 
English comparatives. Proc 19th Annual Meeting  
Assoc Comp Linguistics, 13-18. 
Smith L, Rindflesch T, and Wilbur WJ. 2004. MedPost: 
a part-of-speech tagger for biomedical text. 
Bioinformatics, 20(14):2320-1. 
Staab S and Hahn U. Comparatives in context. 1997. 
Proc 14th National Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence and 9th Innovative Applications of 
Artificial Intelligence Conference, 616-621. 
Yen YT, Chen B, Chiu HW, Lee YC, Li YC, and Hsu 
CY. 2006. Developing an NLP and IR-based 
algorithm for analyzing gene-disease relationships.
 
144
