Cross-Document Coreference on a Large Scale Corpus 
 
 
 
Abstract 
     In this paper, we will compare and evaluate the 
effectiveness of different statistical methods in the 
task of cross-document coreference resolution. We 
created entity models for different test sets and 
compare the following disambiguation and 
clustering techniques to cluster the entity models in 
order to create coreference chains: 
Incremental Vector Space  
KL-Divergence 
Agglomerative Vector Space  
1. Introduction 
     Coreference analysis refers to the process of 
determining whether or not two mentions of entities 
refer to the same person (Kibble and Deemter, 2000).  
For example, consider the following short passage of 
text: 
 
John Smith was appointed chair of the committee.  
Because of his past experience, Mr. Smith seemed the 
perfect choice.  His good friend John, however, was not 
considered. 
 
     Coreference analysis attempts to decide whether 
John Smith and Mr. Smith refer to the same person, and 
whether John is also the same person.  The task is often 
extended to include references such as his or even his 
good friend, though we do not explore that extension in 
this study. 
     Addressing this problem is important to support 
systems such as those that search for, extract, and 
process mentions of ?people of interest? in news or 
transcripts (BBN 2001), or for other information 
organization tasks that might benefit from precise 
knowledge of how names occur, such as Topic 
Detection and Tracking (Allan 2002). 
     Cross-document coreference analysis pushes the task 
into considering whether mentions of a name in 
different documents are the same.  The problem 
becomes more complex because documents might come  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from different sources, will probably have different 
authors and different writing conventions and 
styles(Bagga and Baldwin,1998), and may even be in 
different languages.    
     There has been little published work on cross-
document coreference analysis and that has generally 
been evaluated on a small corpus of documents.  A 
major contribution of this work is to develop a 
substantially larger (more than two orders of magnitude) 
corpus for evaluation.  We show that the previous 
approach is effective but that a variation on it, 
agglomerative vector space, provides improved and 
much more stable results. 
    We begin in Section 2 by describing how cross-
document coreference analysis is evaluated.  We sketch 
prior work in Section 3 and describe our two evaluation 
corpora in Section 4.  Section 5 discusses the three 
algorithms that we explore for this task and then Section 
6 describes our experimental results on both corpora.  In 
Section 7 we provide some additional analysis that 
attempts to explain some surprising results.  We 
conclude in Section 8 with a description of our plans for 
future work. 
2. Evaluation 
     Given a collection of named entities from 
documents, the coreferencing task is to put them into 
equivalence classes, where every mention in the same 
class refers to the same entity (person, location, 
organization, and so on).  The classes are referred to as 
?coreference chains? because the entities are chained 
together. 
     To evaluate the coreference chains emitted by a 
system, we need truth data: the chains of entities that are 
actually referring to the same person.  Evaluation then 
proceeds by comparing the true chains to the system?s 
hypothesized chains. 
     We use the B-CUBED scoring algorithm (Bagga and 
Baldwin 1998) because it is the one used in the 
published research.    The algorithm works as follows. 
     For each entity mention e in the evaluation set, we 
first locate the truth chain TC that contains that mention 
(it can be in only one truth chain) and the system?s 
hypothesized chain HC that contains it (again, there can 
Chung Heong Gooi and James Allan 
Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Massachusetts 
Amherst, MA 01003 
{cgooi,allan}@cs.umass.edu 
be only one hypothesis chain).   We then compute a 
precision and recall score for those two chains.  
Precision is the proportion of mentions in HC that are 
also in TC and recall is the proportion of mentions in TC 
that are also in HC.  If the chains match perfectly, recall 
and precision will both be one.  If the hypothesis chain 
contains only the single mention e, then its precision 
will be one, and its recall will be 1/|TC|, the inverse of 
the size of the truth chain.  Note that it is not possible to 
have a precision or recall of zero since entity e is always 
in common between the two chains. Our 
implementation of the B-CUBED algorithm is used 
specifically to evaluate an existing set of coreference 
chains and does not utilize any smoothing to handle 
system output which contains no entities.  
     Overall precision and recall values are determined by 
averaging the individual values over all mentions in the 
evaluation set.  These are the primary evaluation 
measures for cross-document coreference analysis. 
3. Related Work 
     TIPSTER Phase III first identified cross-document 
coreference as an area for research since it is a central 
tool to drive the process of producing summaries from 
multiple documents and for information fusion (Bagga 
and Baldwin, 1998). The Sixth Message Understanding 
Conference (MUC-6) identified cross-document 
coreference as a potential task but it was not included 
because it was considered to be too difficult (Bagga and 
Baldwin, 1998).  
     ISOQuest?s NetOwl and IBM?s Textract attempted 
to determine whether multiple named entities refer to 
the same entity but neither had the ability to distinguish 
different entities with the same name. Entity detection 
and tracking looks at the same tasks as cross document 
coreferencing.  
     Much of the work in this study is based on that by 
Bagga and Baldwin (1998), where they presented a 
successful cross-document coreference resolution 
algorithm to resolve ambiguities between people having 
the same name using the vector space model.  We have 
implemented a simplified version of their algorithm that 
achieves roughly equivalent accuracy, but will show 
that the algorithm does not work as well when translated 
to a substantially larger corpus of documents. 
     There has been significant work recently in the 
information extraction community on a problem known 
as Entity Detection and Tracking within the Automatic 
Content Extraction (ACE) evaluations (NIST 2003).  
That work includes an optional sub-task referred to 
alternately as either Entity Tracking or Entity Mention 
Detection.  The goal is to pull together all mentions of 
the same entity across multiple documents.   This task is 
a small and optional part of the complete ACE 
evaluation and results from it do not appear to be 
published.  
4. Corpora 
     To evaluate the effectiveness of our various 
techniques for cross document coreference, we use the 
same ?John Smith? corpus created by Bagga and 
Baldwin (1998). In addition, we created a larger, richer 
and highly ambiguous corpus that we call the ?Person-x 
corpus.? 
4.1 John Smith Corpus 
     Bagga and Baldwin tested their coreference 
algorithm against a set of 197 articles from 1996 and 
1997 editions of the New York Times, all of which refer 
to ?John Smith?. All articles either contain the name 
John Smith or some variation with a middle name or 
initial. There are 35 different John Smiths mentioned in 
the articles.  Of these, 24 refer to a unique John Smith 
entity which is not mentioned in the other 173 articles 
(197 minus 24).  
     We present results on this corpus for comparison 
with past work, to show that our approximation of those 
algorithms is approximately as effective as the originals.  
The corpus also permits us to show how our additional 
algorithms compare on that data.  However, our 
primarily evaluation corpus is the larger corpus that we 
now discuss. 
4.2 Person-x Corpus 
     Since the task of annotating documents is time 
consuming, we used a different technique to create a 
large test set with different entities of the same name. 
The technique used to construct this corpus is similar to 
the well known technique of creating artificial sense 
tagged corpora. Artificial sense tagged corpora is used 
to evaluate word sense disambiguation algorithms and is 
created by adding ambiguity to a corpus. Similarly, we 
consider the task of coreferencing multiple occurrences 
of ?John Smith? to be similar to coreferencing multiple 
occurrences of ?person-x?, where the occurrences of 
?person-x? are a disguise of multiple named entities 
such as ?George Bush? and ?Saddam Hussein?.  This 
approach simplifies the task of looking for a large 
collection of ?John Smith? articles and obtaining the 
actual coreference links between the many ?John 
Smith? entities.  It also allows us to create a vastly 
larger corpus of documents mentioning the ?same 
person.? 
     We first obtained from 10,000 to 50,000 unique 
documents from the TREC 1, 2 and 3 volumes using the 
Inquery search engine from UMass Amherst for each of 
the following subjects: art, business, education, 
government, healthcare, movies, music, politics, 
Number of 
occurrences 
Percentage 
of entities 
1 46.66 
2 18.78 
3 9.03 
4 4.55 
5 1.86 
6 1.16 
7 0.83 
8 0.46 
9 or more 16.67 
 
Table 1: Breakdown of distribution by number of 
occurrences within the Person X corpus. 
religion, science and sports. Then, we ran the 
documents through Identifinder, a named entity 
extraction system developed by BBN, to tag the named 
entities in the documents. 
     Next, we selected one person entity randomly from 
each document.  Since Identifinder occasionally tags an 
entity incorrectly, we manually went through each 
selection to filter out entities that were not people?s 
names. We also manually filter out cases where the 
tagged entity is only one word (e.g., John, Alex, etc.). 
     We replaced the occurrences of the selected entity in 
each document with ?person-x? as follows: 
 
In the late 1970s, the company hired producers 
<enamex type="person">jon peters</enamex>  and 
<enamex type="person">peter guber </enamex>  to 
start a studio from scratch.      
 
In the late 1970s, the company hired producers 
<enamex type="person">jon peters</enamex>  and 
<enamex type="person"> person-x </enamex>  to start 
a studio from scratch.      
 
     We also replaced all additional occurrences of the 
same name and names that matched (except for a 
middle initial or name) in that document with ?person-
x?.  For example, in the case above, other occurrences 
of Peter Guber or names such as Peter X. Guber would 
be replaced by ?person-x?. 
     We now have a large set of documents containing a 
reference to ?Person X? and we know for each 
document ?which? person entity it is referring to. We 
actually verified that names of the same name were the 
same entity, though with the large number of entities, 
the task was potentially overwhelming.  However, since 
the entities are categorized according to domain (by the 
query that found the document), determining the actual 
coreference links becomes significantly easier. In an 
article discussing sports, the multiple occurrences of the 
name ?Michael Chang? are most likely to be pointing to 
the tennis player?and the same tennis player.   
     These mappings from ?Person X? to their true names 
will serve as our evaluation/true coreference chains. 
Since we know the name that ?Person X? replaced, we 
assume that if those names are identical, they refer to 
the same person.  So all references to ?Person X? that  
correspond to, say, ?Bill Clinton,? will be put into the 
same coreference chain. 
     We manually removed documents whose Person X 
entity pointed to a different person than the person in its 
corresponding chain. Consider the scenario where we 
have four documents, three of which contains Person X 
entities pointing to John Smith (president of General 
Electric Corporation) and the other pointing to John 
Smith (the character in Pocahontas). The last John 
Smith document will be removed from the chain and the 
entire corpus. The final Person X corpus contains 
34,404 unique documents. Hence, there are 34,404 
?Person X?s in the corpus and they point to 14,767 
different actual entities. 15.24% of the entities occur in 
more than one domain subject. 
     Table 1 displays the distribution of entities versus 
their occurrences in our corpus. Slightly over 46% of 
entities occur only once in the collection of 34,404 
entities.  That compares to about 12% in the John Smith 
corpus.  Of the total of 315,415 unique entities that 
Identifinder recognized in the entire corpus, just under 
49% occurred precisely once, so our sample appears to 
be representative of the larger corpus even if it does not 
represent how ?John Smith? appears.  
     A potential shortcoming that was noted is that 
variation of names such as ?Bob Matthews? versus 
?Robert Matthews? may have been missed during the 
construction of this corpus. However, this problem did 
not show up in a set entities randomly sampled for 
analysis.  
      
5. Methodology 
     In all cases, we represented the mention of an entity 
(i.e., an occurrence of ?John Smith? or ?Person-x? 
depending on the corpus used) by the words around all 
occurrences of the entity in a document.   Based on 
exploratory work on training data, we choose a window 
of 55 words centered on each mention, merged those, 
and called the result a ?snippet.?  (In many cases the 
snippet incorporates text from only a single occurrence 
of the entity, but there are documents that contain 2-3 
?person-x? instances, and those are merged together.)  
We then employ three different methods for comparing 
snippets to determine whether their corresponding 
mentions are or are not to the same entity.  In the 
remainder of this section, we describe the three 
methods: incremental vector space, KL divergence, and 
agglomerative vector space.      
 
 5.1. Incremental vector space  
 
     Our intent with the incremental vector space model 
is to approximate the work reported by Bagga and 
Baldwin (1998).   Their system takes as input properly 
formatted documents and uses the University of 
Pennsylvania?s CAMP system to perform within-
document coreference resolution, doing more careful 
work to find additional mentions of the entity in the 
document. It then extracts all sentences that are relevant 
for each entity of interest based on the within-document 
coreference chains produced by CAMP. The sentences 
extracted form a summary that represents the entity (in 
contrast to our 55-word snippets). The system then 
computes the similarity of that summary with each of 
the other summaries using the vector space model. If the 
similarity computed is above a predefined threshold, 
then the two summaries are considered to be coreferent. 
     Each of the summaries was stored as a vector of 
terms. The similarity between two summaries S1 and S2 
is computed as by the cosine of the angle between their 
corresponding vectors.  Terms are weighted by a tf-idf 
weight as tf?log(N/df), where tf is the number of times 
that a term occurs in the summary, N is the total number 
of documents in the collection, and df is the number of 
documents that contain the term.   
     Because we did not have the same within-document 
coreference tools, we opted for a simpler variation on 
Bagga and Baldwin?s approach.  In our implementation, 
we represent snippets (combined 55-word sections of 
text) as vectors and use this model to represent each 
entity.  We calculated term weights and similarity in the 
same way, however.  The only difference is the text 
used to represent each mention. 
     For both cases, the system operates incrementally on 
the list of entities as follows.  We first create one 
coreference chain containing a single entity mention 
(one vector).  We then take the next entity vector and 
compare it against the entity in the link. If the two 
vectors have a similarity above a pre-defined threshold, 
then they are regarded to be referring to the same entity 
and the latter will be added into the same chain. 
Otherwise, a new coreference link is created for the 
entity.  
     We continue creating links using this incremental 
approach until all of the entities have been clustered into 
a chain. At each step, a new entity is compared against 
all existing coreference chains and is added into the 
chain with the highest average similarity if it is above 
the predefined threshold.   Our implementation differs 
from that of Bagga and Baldwin in the following ways: 
 
Bagga and Baldwin use a single-link technique to 
compare an entity with the entities in a coreference 
chain. This means they include an entity into a chain as 
soon as they find one pair-wise entity to entity 
comparison that is above the predefined threshold. We 
utilize an average-link comparison and compared an 
entity to each other entity in a coreference chain, then 
used the average similarity to determine if the entity 
should be included into the chain. 
 
They utilized the CAMP system developed by the 
University of Pennsylvania to resolve within document 
coreferencing and extract a summary for each entity. In 
our system, we simply extract the snippets for each 
entity and do not depend on within document 
coreferencing of an entity. 
 
5.2 KL Divergence 
The second technique that we implemented for entity 
disambiguation was based on Kullback-Leibler 
Divergence. For this technique, we represent the 
snippets in the form of a probability distribution of 
words, creating a so-called entity language model (Allan 
and Raghavan, 2002). The KL divergence is a classic 
measure of the ?distance? between two probability 
distributions. The more dissimilar the distributions are, 
the higher the KL divergence.  It is given by the 
equation: 
?
=
x xr
xq
xqrqD )(
)(log)()||(
  
where x ranges over the entire vocabulary. The smaller 
the distance calculated by KL divergence, the more 
similar a document is with another. If the distance is 0, 
then the two distributions are identical.  To deal with 
zero probabilities, we need some type of smoothing, and 
we chose to use the asymmetric skew divergence, 
mixing one distribution with the other as determined by 
a ? (Lee,2001): D(r || ?q + (1 ? ?)r) 
     Skew divergence best approximates KL divergence 
when the parameter ? is set to a value close to 1. In our 
experiments, we let ?=0.9 
     We used the incremental approach of Section 5.1, 
but with probability distributions.  Each of the 
distributions created (from a snippet) was evaluated 
against the distributions for existing coreference chains. 
Smaller distances computed through skew divergence 
indicate that the entity is similar to the entities in the 
chain. If the distance computed is smaller than a 
predefined threshold, then the new entity is added into 
the coreference chain and the probabilistic distribution 
of the coreference chain?s model is updated accordingly. 
We start with one entity in one coreference chain and 
continue comparing, inserting, and creating coreference 
chains until all of the entities have been resolved.  
     Note that the KL divergence approach is modeled 
directly after the incremental vector space approach.  
The difference is that the vector is replaced by a 
probability distribution and the comparison uses 
divergence rather than cosine similarity. 
5.3 Agglomerative vector space 
     In our explorations with the previous algorithm, we 
noticed that if early coreference chains contained 
misplaced entities, those entities attracted other entities 
with high similarity and ?polluted? the coreference 
chain with entities that are not part of the truth chain.  
We therefore switched to an agglomerative approach 
that builds up the clusters in a way that is order 
independent.  This approach is typically known as 
bottom-up agglomerative clustering.  It is also done in 
the vector space model, so we again represent the 
snippets by vectors.  
     We first create a coreference chain containing one 
entity for every entity to be resolved. For each 
coreference chain, we then find its nearest neighbor by 
computing the similarity of the chain against all other 
chains using the technique described above in Section 
5.1. If the highest similarity computed is above a 
predefined threshold, then we merge those two chains 
together. If any merging was performed in this iteration, 
we repeat the whole process of looking for the most 
similar pair and merging then in the next iteration. We 
continue this until no more merging is done?i.e., the 
highest similarity is below the threshold. 
     The only difference between this approach and that 
in the previous section is that the agglomerative 
technique requires more comparisons and takes more 
time.  On the other hand, it minimizes problems caused 
by a single spurious match and it is order independent. 
 
6. Experiments and Results 
     To evaluate our various techniques for the task of 
cross-document coreferencing, we used the two test 
corpora mentioned in Section 4 and the three 
coreference approaches described in Section 5. The 
coreference chains are then evaluated using the B-
CUBED algorithm to measure precision and recall as 
described in Section 2.  We present the results by 
corpus. 
 
6.1 John Smith Corpus Results 
Our main goal for the John Smith corpus is to demon-
strate that we have successfully approximated the 
algorithm of Bagga and Baldwin (1998).  Figure 1 
shows how recall and precision trade off against each 
other as the decision threshold (should a name be put 
into a chain) varies in the incremental vector space 
approach.  This graph is nearly identical to the tradeoff 
curves shown by Bagga and Baldwin, so we believe our 
variation on their approach is sufficiently accurate to 
draw conclusions.  A key point to note about the graph 
is that although there is an excellent recall/precision 
tradeoff point, the results are not stable around that 
threshold.  If the threshold is shifted slightly higher, 
recall plummets; if it is lowered slightly, precision drops 
off rapidly. 
     Figure 2 provides an alternative view of the same 
information, and overlays the other algorithms on it.  In 
this case we show a recall/precision tradeoff curve.  
Again, in all cases the tradeoff drops off rapidly, though 
the agglomerative vector space approach takes longer to 
fall from high accuracy. 
   Figure 3 provides another comparison of the three 
approaches by highlighting how the F-measure varies 
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  1
Pe
rc
e
n
ta
ge
Threshold
precision
recall
F-Measure
Figure 1: Results of cross-document coreferencing 
on the John Smith corpus using the incremental 
vector space approach.  
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100
Pr
ec
isi
o
n
Recall
Incremental VS
KL Divergence
Agglomerative VS
Breck and Bagga
Figure 2: Recall and precision tradeoff of three 
algorithms on the John Smith Corpus.  Results from 
Baldwin and Bagga (1998) are estimated and 
overlaid onto the graph. 
with the threshold.  Note that the agglomerative vector 
space approach has the highest measure and has a 
substantially less ?pointed? curve: it is much less 
sensitive to threshold selection and therefore more 
stable. 
     The agglomerative vector space achieved a peak F 
measure of 88.2% in comparison to the incremental 
approach that peaked at 84.3% (comparable to Bagga 
and Baldwin?s reported 84.6%).  We also created a 
single-link version of our incremental algorithm.  It 
achieved a peak F measure of only 81.4%, showing the 
advance of average link (when compared to our 
approach) and the advantage of using within-document 
coreference to find related sentences (when compared to 
their work). 
6.2 Person-x Results 
     We next evaluated the same three algorithms on the 
much larger Person X corpus. The recall/precision graph 
in Figure 4, when compared to that in Figure 2, clearly 
demonstrates that the larger corpus has made the task 
much harder.  However, the agglomerative vector space 
approach has been impacted the least and maintains 
excellent performance. 
        Figure 5 shows the F-measure graph.  In 
comparison to Figure 3, all of the techniques are less 
sensitive to threshold selection, but the two vector space 
approaches are less sensitive than the KL divergence 
approach.  It is unclear why this is, though may reflect 
problems with using the skewed divergence for 
smoothing.  
7. Further Exploration 
     We conducted additional analysis to explore the 
issues surrounding cross-document coreferencing. We 
ran experiments with the John Smith corpus to explore  
 
the question of the effectiveness of a model based on the 
amount of text used to represent an entity. 
7.1 Window size and recall/precision 
Allan and Raghavan (2002) showed that the size of the 
snippets correlates positively with the ?clarity? (non-
ambiguity) of the model. As the size of the snippet 
increases, the ambiguity of the model increases, 
presumably because it is more likely to include 
extraneous information from the surrounding text.  
     In our experiment with the John Smith corpus, we 
used the incremental vector space approach with a 
threshold of 0.1 and evaluated precision/recall using 
various window sizes for the snippets. Figure 6 shows 
the variation.  We discovered that the F-Measure peaks 
at 84.3% with a window size of 55 words. This is the 
window size that we used for all of our other 
experiments. 
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100
Pr
e
ci
si
o
n
Recall
Incremental VS
KL Divergence
Agglomerative VS
Figure 4: Recall and precision tradeoff for the 
person-x corpus. 
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  1
F-
M
e
a
su
re
Threshold
Breck and Baldwin
Incremental VS
KL Divergence
Agglomerative VS
Figure 3: Comparison of F-Measure on the John 
Smith Corpus.    
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  1
F-
M
e
a
su
re
Threshold
Incremental VS
KL Divergence
Agglomerative VS
Figure 5: Comparison of F-Measure on the Person-x 
Corpus.    
7.2 Domain-specific sub-corpora 
 
     The person-x corpus may appear to be biased due to 
the manner of its construction. Since the documents 
were selected by subject, one may argue that the task of 
clustering entities will be much easier if the entities are 
clearly from different genres. However, if this is true, 
then it may account for about 85% of the entities in the 
person-x corpus that occur only in one domain subject. 
We hypothesized that coreferencing entities in the same 
genre domain can be considered to be harder in terms 
of achieving high precision because the consistency of 
the contents between documents in the same genre 
domain makes it significantly harder to create a unique 
model for each entity to aid the task of distinguishing 
one entity from another.  
     In order to see how our techniques measure up 
against this, we reevaluated the effectiveness of our 
methods of cross-document coreference resolution on a 
modified version of the person-x corpus. We clustered 
the documents into their original genre domain (recall 
that they were created using simple information 
retrieval queries). Then, we evaluated the 
precision/recall for each of the clusters and averaged 
the results to obtain a final precision/recall score. This 
eliminates the potential bias that clustering the entities 
becomes easier if the entities are clearly from different 
genres. Hypothetically, it also makes the task of cross-
document coreferencing more challenging than in 
reality when performed on actual corpora that is not 
clustered according to genre. Table 2 shows the 
breakdown of documents and entities in each genre.  
     The results of the experiments show that clustering 
documents by their domain specific attributes such as 
domain genre will hurt cross-document coreferencing. 
The highest F-Measure that was achieved with 
agglomerative vector space dropped 6% to 77% and 
incremental dropped a similar 5%.  The KL divergence 
approach, on the other hand, showed a modest increase 
of 3% to 77%, equaling the agglomerative approach. 
The reason for this may be because KL divergence 
relies more on the global property of the corpus and this 
approach is more effective when the nearest neighbor 
computation is degraded by the consistency of the word 
distributions between documents in the same genre 
domain.  
 
 
7.3 Runtime comparison. 
 
    An important observation in our comparison among 
the algorithms is running time. While we have shown 
that the agglomerative vector space approach produced 
the best results in our experiments, it is also important 
to  note  that  it  was  noticeably  slower.  The  estimated  
 
 
running time for the agglomerative vector space 
experiment  on  the  large  corpus was  approximately  3  
times longer than that of the incremental vector space 
and KL-Divergence. The runtimes of incremental 
approaches are linear whereas the runtime of our 
agglomerative vector space approach is O(n?).  
     Is the improvement in our results worth the 
difference in runtime? The noticeable run time 
difference in our experiment is caused by the need to 
cluster a large number of Person-x entities (34,404 
entities). In reality, it would be rare to find such a large 
number of entities across documents with the same 
name. In the analysis of our reasonably large corpus, 
less than 16% of entities occur more than 10 times. If 
the mean size of entities to be disambiguated is 
relatively small, then there will not be a significant 
degrade in runtime on the agglomerative approach. Thus, 
Genre 
Number of 
Documents  
Number of person-
x entities 
Art      3346       1455 
Business        315         182 
Education      6177       2351 
Government      3374         945 
Healthcare        914         405 
Movies        677       2292 
Music        976         366 
Politics      4298         949 
Religion      2699       1030 
Science      7211       2783 
Sports      4417       2009 
 
Table 2: Breakdown of document and entity 
distribution in the domain subject specific clusters. 
 
 50
 55
 60
 65
 70
 75
 80
 85
 90
 95
 100
 0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100
Pe
rc
e
n
ta
ge
Window Size
Precision
Recall
F-Measure
 
Figure 6: Relationship between the window size of the 
snippet and recall/precision on the John Smith corpus. 
 
our conclusion is that the tradeoff between coreference 
quality versus runtime in our agglomerative approach is 
definitely worthwhile if the number of same-named 
entities to be disambiguated is relatively small. 
8. Conclusion and Future Work 
 
     We were able to compare and contrast our results 
directly with previous work of Bagga and Baldwin by 
using the same corpus and evaluation technique. In 
order to perform a careful excursion into the limited 
work on cross document coreferencing, we deployed 
different information retrieval techniques for entity 
disambiguation and clustering. In our experiments, we 
have shown that the agglomerative vector space 
clustering algorithm consistently yields better precision 
and recall throughout most of the tests. It outperforms 
the incremental vector space disambiguation model and 
is much more stable with respect to the decision 
threshold.  Both vector space approaches outperform 
KL divergence except when the entities to be clustered 
belong to the same genre.    
     We are pleased that our snippet approach worked 
well on the task of cross document coreferencing since 
it was easier than running a within document 
coreference analyzer first.  It was also interesting to 
discover that previous techniques that worked well on a 
smaller corpus did not show the same promising recall 
and precision tradeoff on a larger corpus.  
     We are interested in continuing these evaluations in 
two ways.  First, colleagues of ours are working on a 
more realistic corpus that is not just large but also 
contains a much richer set of marked up entities.  We 
look forward to trying out techniques on that data when 
it is available.  Second, we intend to extend our work to 
include new comparison and clustering approaches.  It 
appears that sentence-based snippets and within-
document coreference information may provide a small 
gain.  And the subject information has apparently value 
in some cases, so we hope to determine how to use the    
information more broadly. 
Acknowledgements 
The John Smith corpus was provided by Breck Baldwin, 
and we are grateful to him for digging through his 
archives to find the data. This work was supported in 
part by the Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval, 
in part by SPAWARSYSCEN-SD grant number 
N66001-02-1-8903 and in part by Advanced Research 
and Development Activity under contract number 
MDA904-01-C-0984. Any opinions, findings and 
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this 
material are the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect 
those of the sponsor. 
References 
Allan, James, ed.  Topic Detection and Tracking: Event-
based Information Organization, Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 2002. 
Allan, James and Raghavan, Hema. Entity Models: 
Construction and Application. Center for Intelligent 
Information Retrieval, Department of Computer 
Science, University of Massachusetts, 2002. 
Bagga, Amit and Breck Baldwin. Algorithms for 
Scoring Coreference Chains. In Proceedings of the 
Linguistic Coreference Workshop at The First 
International Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation (LREC'98), pp563-566, 1998. 
Bagga, Amit and Breck Baldwin. Entity-Based Cross-  
Document Coreferencing Using the Vector Space 
Model. Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics and 
the 17th International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING-ACL'98),pp.79-85, 1998. 
Bagga, Amit and Breck Baldwin. Coreference as the 
Foundations for Link Analysis Over Free Text 
Databases. In Proceedings of the COLING-ACL'98 
Content Visualization and Intermedia 
Representations Workshop (CVIR'98), pp. 19-24, 
1998. 
Bagga, Amit, and Biermann, Alan. A Methodology for 
Cross-Document Coreference.  In Proceedings of the 
Fifth Joint Conference on Information Sciences 
(JCIS 2000), pp. 207-210, 2000. 
Bagga, Amit and Baldwin, Breck. How Much 
Processing Is Required for Cross-Document 
Coreference? In Proceedings of the Linguistic 
Coreference Workshop (LREC'98), pp. 563-566, 
1998. 
BBN Technologies.  Rough ?n? Ready?: Audio Index-
ing for Meetings and News.   http://www.bbn.com/-
speech/roughnready.html (2001) 
Kibble, Rodger and Kees, van Deemter. Coreference 
Annotation: Whither? Proceedings of LREC2000, 
Athens, pp. 1281-1286, 2000. 
Lee, Lillian. On the Effectiveness of the Skew 
Divergence for Statistical Language Analysis, 
Technical Report, Department of Computer Science, 
Cornell University, 2001. 
