The Annotation of Temporal Information
in Natural Language Sentences
Graham Katz and Fabrizio Arosio
SFB 411
Univertit?t T?bingen
Nauklerstr. 35
D-72074 T?bingen, Germany
graham.katz@uni-tuebingen.de
fabrizio.arosio@uni-tuebingen.de
.
Abstract
The aim of this paper is to present
a language-neutral, theory-neutral
method for annotating sentence-
internal temporal relations. The
annotation method is simple and
can be applied without special
training. The annotations are
provided with a well-defined
model-theoretic interpretation for
use in the content-based
comparison of annotations.
Temporally annotated corpora
have a number of applications, in
lexicon/induction, translation and
linguistic investigation. A
searchable multi-language
database has already been created.
1 Introduction
In interpreting narratives the most essential
information to be extracted is who did what
where, when and why, the classic journalistic
imperatives. The ?who? and ?what? information
is usually expressed overtly, and this has made it
possible to apply empirical techniques to
problems in this domain (such as word-sense
classification and argument structure mapping).
The ?when? and ?where? information is,
however, often left implicit, or, at least, only
partially specified, making it difficlut to apply
such techniques to this domain.
Formal semantic theories of temporal
interpretation (e.g. Kamp & Reyle 1993;
Ogihara 1996; Abusch 1997) have been quite
successful at specifying the contribution that
such overt markers as tenses and temporal
adverbials make to the meaning of a sentence or
discourse. Investigations into the interpretation
of narrative discourse (Lascarides & Asher
1993, Reyle & Rossdeutscher 2000) have,
however, shown that very specific lexical
information plays an important role in
determining temporal interpretation. As of yet it
is not clear how this kind of lexical information
could be automatically acquired. The most
promising avenue for acquiring lexical
information appears to be automatic induction
from very large annotated corpora (Rooth, et. al.
1998). In order to apply these techniques to the
temporal domain it is necessary that the
temporal information be made explicit.  Our task
here is to provide a system of temporal
annotation that fulfills this requirement.
 The systems for temporal annotation we are
familiar with have been concerned either with
absolute temporal information (Wiebe, et. al.
1998, Androutsopoulos, Rithie & Thanisch
1997), or with the annotation of overt markers
(Setzer & Gaizauskas 2000). Much temporal
information, however, is not absolute but
relative and not overtly marked but implicit. We
are frequently only interested (and only have
information about) the order events occurred in.
And while there are sometimes overt markers
for these temporal relations, the conjunctions
before, after and when being the most obvious,
usually this kind of relational information is
implicit. The examples in (1) illustrate the
phenomenon.
(1) a. John kissed the girl he met at the party.
b. Leaving the party, John walked home.
c. He remembered talking to her and asking
her for her name.
Although there are no obvious markers for the
temporal ordering of the events described in
these sentences, native speakers have clear
intuitions about what happened when: we know
that the kissing took place after the meeting and
that the asking was part of the talking. But how
do we know this? And ? more importantly ?
how could this information be automatically
extracted from these sentences? These are the
questions that motivate the development of our
annotation system.
We believe that the creation of a large scale
treebank annotated with relational temporal
information as well as standard morphological
and syntactic information will make it possible
to investigate these issues productively. The
annotated treebank must be large scale for the
obvious reason that the application of stochastic
methods requires this. It should be syntactically
as well as semantically annotated because we
consider it quite likely that syntactic as well as
lexical information plays a role in temporal
interpretation. We don?t know a priori whether
in (1a) it is the lexical relationship between kiss
and meet that is crucial to determining the
temporal interpretation, or whether the fact that
meet is in a subordinate clause ? the syntactic
relation ? also plays a role. To answer these
kinds of questions it is necessary to encode the
temporal information conveyed by a sentence in
a way which makes addressing such questions
possible.
What we describe below is a practical system
for encoding relational temporal information
that is suited to large-scale hand annotation of
texts. This system has a number of applications
beyond this, both in the domain of cross-
linguistic investigation and in empirical NLP.
2 Temporal annotation
The idea of developing a treebank enriched with
semantic information is not new. In particular
such semantically annotated corpora have been
used in research on word sense disambiguation
(wordNet, Eagles, Simple) and semantics role
interpretation (Eagles). The public availability
of large syntactically annotated treebanks (Penn,
Verbmobil, Negra) makes such work attractive,
particularly in light of the success that empirical
methods have had (Kilgarriff & Rosenzweig
2000). Traditional semantic representational
formalisms such as DRT (Kamp & Reyle 1993)
are ill suited to semantic annotation. Since these
formalisms are developed in the service of
theories of natural language interpretation, they
are ? rightly ? both highly articulated and highly
constrained. In short, they are often too complex
and sometimes not expressive enough for the
purposes at hand (as the experience of Poesio et.
al. (1999) makes clear). Our proposal here is to
adopt a radically simplified semantic formalism
which, by virtue of its simplicity, is suited the
temporal-annotation application.
The temporal interpretation of a sentence, for
our purposes, can simply be taken to be the set
of temporal relations that a speaker naturally
takes to hold among the states and events
described by the verbs of the sentence. To put it
more formally, we associate with each verb a
temporal interval, and concern ourselves with
relations among these intervals. Of the interval
relations discussed by Allen (1984), we will be
concerned with only two: precedence and
inclusion. Taking ttalk to be the time of talking
task to be the time of asking and tremember to be the
time of remembering, the temporal
interpretation (1c), for example, can be given by
the following table:
ttalk task tremember
ttalk <
task ? <
tremember
Such a table, in effect, stores the native
speaker?s judgement about the most natural
temporal interpretation of the sentence.
Since our goal was to annotate a large number of
sentences with their temporal interpretations,
with the goal of examining the interaction
between the lexical and syntactic structure, it
was imperative that the interpretation be closely
tied to its syntactic context. We needed to keep
track of both the semantic relations among times
referred to by the words in a sentence and the
syntactic relations among the words in the
sentences that refer to these times, but not much
more. By adopting existing technology for
syntactic annotation, we were able do this quite
directly, by essentially building the information
in this table into the syntax.
2.1 The annotation system
To carry out our temporal annotation, we made
use of the Annotate tool for syntactic annotation
developed in Saarbr?cken by Brants and Plaehn
(2000). We exploited an aspect of the system
originally designed for the annotation of
anaphoric relations: the ability to link two
arbitrary nodes in a syntactic structure by means
of labeled ?secondary edges.? This allowed us to
add a layer of semantic annotation directly to
that of syntactic annotation.
A sentence was temporally annotated by linking
the verbs in the sentence via secondary edges
labeled with the appropriate temporal relation.
As we were initially only concerned with the
relations of precedence and inclusion, we only
had four labels: ?<? , ???, and their duals.
Sentence (1a), then, is annotated as in (2).
(2)     John kissed the girl he met at the party
The natural ordering relation between the
kissing and the meeting is indicated by the
labeled edge. Note that the edge goes from the
verb associated with the event that fills the first
argument of the relation to the verb associated
with the event that fills the second argument of
the relation.
The annotation of (1c), which was somewhat
more complex, indicates the two relations that
hold among the events described by the
sentence.
(3) He remembered talking and asking her name
In addition to encoding the relations among the
events described in a sentence, we anticipated
that it would be useful to encode also the
relationship between these events and the time at
which the sentence is produced. This is, after all,
what tenses usually convey. To encode this
temporal indexical information, we introduce
into the annotation an explicit representation of
the speech time. This is indicated by the ? ? ?
symbol, which is automatically prefaced to all
sentences prior to annotation.
The complete annotation for sentence (1a), then,
is (4).
(4)    ?   John kissed the girl he met at the party
As we see in (5), this coding scheme enables us
to represent the different interpretations that past
tensed and present tensed clauses have.
(5)    ?   John kissed the girl who is at the party
Notice that we do not annotate the tenses
themselves directly.
Note that in the case of reported speech, the time
associated with the embedding verb plays, for
the embedded sentence, much the same role that
the speech time plays for the main clause.
Formally, in fact, the relational analysis implicit
in our notation makes it possible to avoid many
of the problems associated with the treatment of
these constructions (such as those discussed at
length by von Stechow (1995)).  We set these
issues aside here.
It should be clear that we are not concerned with
giving a semantics for temporal markers, but
rather with providing a language within which
we can describe the temporal information
conveyed by natural language sentences. With
the addition of temporal indexical annotation,
our annotation system gains enough expressive
power to account for most of the relational
information conveyed by natural language
sentences. Left out at this point is temporal-
metrical information such as that conveyed by
the adverbial ?two hours later.?
2.2 Annotation procedure
The annotation procedure itself is quite
straightforward. We begin with a syntactically
annotated treebank and add the speech time
marker to each of the sentences.  The annotator
then simply marks the temporal relations among
verbs and the speech time for each sentence in
the corpus. This is accomplished in accordance
with the following conventions:
(i) temporal relations are encoded with
directed ?secondary edges?;
>
> >
> ?
> ?
(ii) the edge goes from the element that fills
the first argument of the relation to the
element that fills the second;
(iii) edge labels indicate the temporal relation
that holds;
(iv) edge labels can be ?>?, ?<?, ??? and ???
Annotators are instructed to annotate the
sentences as they naturally understand them.
When the treebank is made up of a sequence of
connected text, the annotators are encouraged to
make use of contextual information.
The annotation scheme is simple, explicit and
theory neutral. The annotator needs only to
exercise his native competence in his language
and he doesn?t need any special training in
temporal semantics or in any specific formal
language; in pilot studies we have assembled
small temporal annotated databases in few
hours. Our current database consists of 300
sentences from six languages.
2.3 Comparing annotations
It is well known that hand-annotated corpora are
prone to inconsistency (Marcus, Santorini &
Marcinkiewicz, 1993) and to that end it is
desirable that the corpus be multiply annotated
by different annotators and that these
annotations be compared. The kind of semantic
annotation we are proposing here introduces an
additional complexity to inter-annotation
comparison, in that the consistency of an
annotation is best defined not in formal terms
but in semantic terms. Two annotations should
be taken to be equivalent, for example, if they
express the same meanings, even if they use
different sets of labeled edges.
To make explicit what semantic identity is, we
provide our annotations with a model theoretic
interpretation. The annotations are interpreted
with respect to a structure D,<,? , where D is
the domain (here the set of verbs tokens in the
corpus) and < and ? are binary relations on D.
Models for this structure are assignments of
pairs of entities in D to < and ? satisfying the
following axioms:
- ?x,y,z.  x<y & y<z ? x<z
- ?x,y,z.  x?y & y?z ? x?z
- ?w,x,y,z. x<y & z?x & w?y ? z<w
- ?w,x,y,z. x<y & y<z & x ?w & z?w ? y?w
Thus < and ? have the properties one would
expect for the precedence and inclusion relation.
We are assuming that in the cases of interest
verbs refer to simply convex events.  Intuitively,
the set of verb tokens in the corpus corresponds
the set of times at which an event or state of the
type indicated by the verb takes place or holds.
In our corpus the number of sentences that
involved quantified or generic event reference
was quite low.
An annotated relation of the following form
X1  X2
is satisfied in a model iff the model assigns
<X1,X2> to R if R is < or ?, or <X2,X1> to R if
R is > or ?.  A sentence is satisfied by a model
iff all relations associated with the sentence are
satisfied by the model.  Intuitively an annotated
is satisfied by a model if the model assigns the
appropriate relation to the verbs occurring in the
sentence.
There are four semantic relations that can hold
among between annotations. These can be
defined in model-theoretic terms:
? Annotation A and B are equivalent if all
models satisfying A satisfy B and all models
satisfying B satisfy A.
? Annotation A subsumes annotation B iff all
models satisfying B satisfy A.
? Annotations A and B are consistent iff there
are models satisfying both A and B.
? Annotations A and B are inconsistent if
there are no models satisfying both A and B.
We can also define the minimal model satisfying
an annotation in the usual way. We can then
compute a distance measure between two
annotations by comparing set of models
satisfying the annotations. Let MA be the models
satisfying A and MB be those satisfying B and
MAB be those satisfying both (simply shorthand
for the intersection of MA and MB). Then the
distance between A and B can be defined as:
     d(A,B) = (|MA- MAB| + |MB-MAB|)/ |MAB|
In other words, the distance is the number of
relation pairs that are not shared by the
annotations normalized by the number that they
R
do share. We can use this metric to quantify the
?goodness? of both annotations and annotators.
Consider again (1c). We gave one annotation for
this in (3). In (6) and (7) there are two
alternative annotations.
(6) He remembered talking and asking her name
(7) He remembered talking and asking her name
As we can compute on the basis of the semantics
for the annotations (6) is equivalent with (3) ?
they are no distance apart, while (7) is
inconsistent with (3) ? they are infinitely far
apart. The annotation (8) is compatible (7) and is
a distance of 1 away from it.
(8) He remembered talking and asking her name
As in the case of structural annotation, there are
a number of ways of resolving inter-annotator
variation. We can chose the most informative
annotation as the correct one, or the most
general. Or we can combine annotations. The
intersection of two compatible annotations gives
an equally compatible annotation which contains
more information than either of the two alone.
We do not, as of yet, have enough data to
determine which of these strategies is most
effective.
In preliminary work, we had two annotators
annotate 50 complex sentences extracted
randomly from the BNC.  The results were quite
encouraging.  Although the annotations were
identical in only 70% of the cases, the
annotations were semantically consistent in 85%
of the cases.
3 Applications of temporal
annotation
There are any number of applications for a
temporally annotated corpus such as that we
have been outlining. Lexicon induction is the
most interesting, but, as we indicated at the
outset, this is a long-term project, as it requires a
significant investment in hand annotation. We
hope to get around this problem. But even still,
there are a number of other applications which
require less extensive corpora, but which are of
significant interest. One of these has formed the
initial focus of our research, and this is the
development of a searchable multilingual
database.
3.1 Multilingual database
Our annotation method has been applied to
sentences from a variety of languages, creating a
searchable multi-language treebank. This
database allows us to search for sentences that
express a given temporal relation in a language.
We have already developed a pilot multilingual
database with sentences from the Verbmobil
database (see an example in fig. 1) and we have
developed a query procedure in order to extract
relevant information.
Fig.1 A temporally annotated sentence from the Verbmobil
English treebank as displayed by @nnotate.
As can be seen, the temporal annotation is
entirely independent of the syntactic annotation.
In the context of the Annotate environment a
number of tools have been developed (and are
under development) for the querying of
structural relations. Since each sentence is stored
in the relational database with both syntactic and
temporal semantic annotations, it is possible to
make use of these querying tools to query on
structures, on meanings, and on structures and
meanings together. For example a query such as:
?Find the sentences containing a relative clause
which is interpreted as temporally overlapping
the main clause? can be processed. This query is
> >
>
> ?
>
encoded as a partially specified tree, as indicated
below:
In this structure, both the syntactic configuration
of the relative clause and the temporal relations
between the matrix verb and the speech time and
between the matrix verb and the verb occurring
in the relative clause are represented. Querying
our temporally annotated treebank with this
request yields the following result:
The application to cross-linguistic research
should be clear. It is now possible to use the
annotated tree-bank as an informant by storing
the linguistically relevant aspects of the
temporal system of a language in a compact
searchable database.
3.2 Aid for translation technology
Another potential application of the annotation
system is as an aid to automatic translation
systems. That the behaviour of tenses differ
from language to language makes the translation
of tenses difficult. In particular, the application
of example-based techniques faces serious
difficulties (Arnold, et. al. 1994). Adding the
intended temporal relation to the database of
source sentences makes it possible to moderate
this problem.
For example in Japanese (9a) is properly
translated as (10a) on one reading, where the
embedded past tense is translated as a present
tense, but as (10b) on the other, where the verb
is translated as a past tense.
(9) a. Bernard said that Junko was sick
(10)a. Bernard-wa Junko ga byookida to it-ta
    lit: Bernard said Junko is sick
b. Bernard-wa Junko-ga byookidata to it-ta.
          lit: Bernard said Junko was sick.
Only the intended reading can distinguish these
two translations. If this is encoded as part of the
input, we can hope to achieve much more
reasonable output.
3.3 Extracting cues for temporal
interpretation
While we see this sort of cross-linguistic
investigation as of intrinsic interest, our real
goal is the investigation of the lexical and
grammatical cues for temporal interpretation. As
already mentioned, the biggest problem is one of
scale. Generating a temporally annotated
treebank of the size needed is a serious
undertaking.
It would, of course, be of great help to be able to
partially automate this task. To that end we are
currently engaged in research attempting to use
overt cues such as perfect marking and temporal
conjunctions such as before and after to
bootstrap our way towards a temporally
annotated corpus. Briefly, the idea is to use
these overt markers to tag a corpus directly and
to use this to generate a table of lexical
preferences. So, for example, the sentence (11)
can be tagged automatically, because of the
presence of the perfect marking.
(11)    ?   John kissed the girl he had met
This automatic tagging will allow us to assemble
an initial data set of lexical preferences, such as
that that would appear to hold between kiss and
meet. If this initial data is confirmed by
comparison with hand-tagged data, we can use
S
VB
S
HD
VB
?
HD
[ST]
>
ADJ
> >
this information to automatically annotate a
much larger corpus based on these lexical
preferences. It may then be possible to begin to
carry out the investigation of cues to temporal
interpretation before we have constructed a large
hand-coded temporally annotated treebank.
4 Conclusions
We have described a simple and general
technique for the annotation of relational
temporal information in naturally occurring
sentences.  This annotation system is intended
for use in the large-scale annotation of corpora.
The annotations are provided with a model
theoretic semantics.  This semantics provides the
basis for a content-based system for comparing
and evaluating inter-annotator agreement.
Temporally annotated corpora such as those we
are developing have a number of applications in
both corpus-based theoretical work, and in
practical applications. Of particular interest to us
is the promise such annotated databases bring to
the problem of extracting automatically lexical
information about stereotypical ordering
relations among events that are used by native
speakers to interpret sentences temporally.  We
see this application as the main future research
to be carried out.
References
Abusch, Dorit. 1997. Sequence of Tense and
Temporal De Re. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 20: 1-50.
Allen, James F. 1984. A General Model of
Action and Time. Artificial Intelligence
23, 2.
Androutsopoulos, Ion, Graeme D. Ritchie and
Peter Thanisch. 1998. Time, Tense and
Aspect in Natural Language Database
Interfaces. Natural Language Engineering,
vol. 4, part 3: 229-276, Cambridge
University Press.
Arnold, Doug, Lorna Balkan, R. Lee
Humphreys, Siety Meijer and Louisa Sadler.
1994. Machine Translation: an introductory
guide. Blackwells/NCC, London.
Brants, Thorsten and Oliver Plaehn. 2000.
Interactive Corpus Annotation. In Second
International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2000),
Athens, Greece.
Kamp, Hans and Uwe Reyle. 1993. From
Discourse to Logic. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht, Holland.
Kilgarriff, Adam and Joseph Rosenzweig. 2000.
Framework and Results for English
SENSEVAL. Special Issue on SENSEVAL:
Computers and the Humanities, 34 (1-2):
15-48.
Lascarides, Alex and Nicholas Asher. 1993. A
Semantics and Pragmatics for the Pluperfect.
In Proceedings of the Sixth European
Chapter of the Association of Computational
Linguistics, Utrecht.
Marcus, Mitchell P., Beatrice Santorini and
Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a
large annotated corpus of English: the Penn
Treebank. Computational linguistics, 19:
313-330.
Ogihara, Toshiyuki. 1996. Tense, Scope and
Attitude Ascription. Kluwer, Dordrecht,
Holland.
Poesio, Massimo, Renate Henschel, Janet
Hitzeman, Rodger Kibble, Shane Montague,
and Kees van Deemter. 1999. ?Towards An
Annotation Scheme For Noun Phrase
Generation?, Proc. of the EACL Workshop
on Linguistically Interpreted Corpora.
Bergen.
Reyle, Uwe and Antje Rossdeutscher. 2000.
Understanding very short stories, ms. Institut
f?r Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung,
Universit?t Stuttgart.
Rooth, Mats, Stefan Riezler, Detlef Prescher,
Sabine Schulte im Walde, Glenn Carroll and
Franz Beil. 1998. Inducing Lexicons with the
EM Algorithm. AIMS Report 4(3). Institut f?r
Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung, Universit?t
Stuttgart.
Setzer, Andrea and Robert Gaizauskas. 2000.
Annotating Events and Temporal
Information in Newswire Texts. In Second
International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2000),
Athens, Greece.
von Stechow, Arnim. 1995. The Proper
Treatment of Tense. In Proceedings of
Semantics and Linguistic Theory V. 362-386.
CLC Publications. Cornell University.
Ithaca, NY.
Vazov, Nikolay and Guy Lapalme. 2000.
Identification of Temporal Structure in
French. Proceeding of the Workshop of the
7th International Conference on Principles of
Knowledge Representation and Reasoning,
Breckenridge, Colorado.
Wiebe, Janyce, Tom O?Hara, Kenneth
McKeever, and Thorsten ?hrstr?m-
Sandgren. 1998. An Empirical Approach to
Temporal Reference Resolution. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 9: 247-293.
