Proceedings of the BioNLP Workshop on Linking Natural Language Processing and Biology at HLT-NAACL 06, pages 124?125,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Pragmatic Approach to Summary Extraction in Clinical Trials 
 
Graciela Rosemblat 
National Library of Medicine 
NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 
rosem@nlm.nih.gov 
Laurel Graham 
National Library of Medicine 
 NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 
 lagraham@mail.nih.gov 
Background and Introduction 
ClinicalTrials.gov, the National Library of 
Medicine clinical trials registry, is a monolingual 
clinical research website with over 29,000 records 
at present. The information is presented in static 
and free-text fields. Static fields contain high-level 
informational text, descriptors, and controlled vo-
cabularies that remain constant across all clinical 
studies (headings, general information). Free-text 
data are detailed and trial-specific, such as the Pur-
pose section, which presents each trial?s goal, with 
large inter-trial variability in length as well as in 
technical difficulty. The crux of the trial purpose is 
generally found in 1-3 sentences, often introduced 
by clearly identified natural language markers. 
 
In the Spanish cross-language information re-
trieval (CLIR) ClinicalTrials.gov prototype, indi-
vidual studies are displayed as abridged Spanish-
language records, with Spanish static field descrip-
tors, and a manual Spanish translation for the free-
text study title. The Purpose section of these ab-
breviated documents only contains a link (in Span-
ish) to the full-text English record. The premise 
was that the gist could be obtained from the Span-
ish title, the link to the English document, and the 
Spanish descriptors. However, in a recently con-
ducted user study on the Spanish CLIR prototype, 
Spanish-speaking consumers did not use the Pur-
pose section link, as doing so entailed leaving a 
Spanish webpage to go to an English one. Further, 
feedback from an earlier study indicated a need for 
some Spanish text in the Purpose section to pro-
vide the gist of the trial while avoiding the infor-
mation overload in the full-text English record. 
Thus, in an alternative display format, extractive 
summarization plus translation was used to en-
hance the abbreviated Spanish document and sup-
plement the link to the English record. The trial 
purpose--up to three sentences--was algorithmi-
cally extracted from the English document Purpose 
section, and translated into Spanish via post-edited 
machine translation for display in the Spanish re-
cord Purpose section (Rosemblat et al, 2005). 
 
Our extraction technique, which combines sen-
tence boundary detection, regular expressions, and 
decision-based rules, was validated by the user 
study for facilitating user relevance judgment. All 
participants endorsed this alternative display for-
mat over the initial schematic design, especially 
when the Purpose extract makes up the entire Pur-
pose section in the English document, as is the case 
in 48% of all trials. For Purpose sections that span 
many paragraphs and exceed 1,000 words, human 
translation is not viable. Machine translation is 
used to reduce the burden, and using excerpts of 
the original text as opposed to entire documents 
further reduces the resource cost. Human post-
editing ensures the accuracy of translations. Auto-
mated extraction of key goal-describing text may 
provide relevant excerpts of the original text via 
topic recognition techniques (Hovy, 2003). 
1 RegExp Detection and Pattern Match-
ing 
Linguistic analysis of the natural language ex-
pressions in the clinical trial records? Purpose sec-
tion was performed manually on a large sample of 
documents. Common language patterns across 
studies introducing the purpose/goal of each trial 
served as cue phrases. These cue phrases contained 
both quality features and the rhetorical role of 
GOAL (Teufel and Moens, 1999). The crux of the 
purpose was generally condensed in 1-3 sentences 
within the Purpose section, showing definite pat-
terns and a limited set of productive, straightfor-
ward linguistic markers. From these common 
patterns, the ClinicalTrials.gov Purpose Extractor 
Algorithm (PEA) was devised, and developed in 
Java (1.5) using the native regexp package. 
 
124
Natural language expressions in the purpose 
sentences include three basic elements, making 
them well suited to regular expressions: 
a)   A small, closed set of verbs (determine, test)  
b)   Specific purpose triggers or cues (goal, aim) 
c)   Particular types of sentence constructs, as in: 
This study will evaluate two medications? 
 
PEA incorporates sentence boundary detection 
(A), purpose statement matching (B), and a series 
of decision steps (C) to ensure the extracted text is 
semantically and syntactically correct: 
A)   To improve regexp performance and en-
sure that extraction occurred in complete sen-
tences, sentence boundary detection was 
implemented. Grok (OpenNLP), open source Java 
NLP software, was used for this task, corpus-
trained and validated, and supplemented with 
rules-based post-processing. 
B)  Regular expressions were rank ordered 
from most specific to the more general with a de-
fault expression should all others fail to match. The 
regexp patterns allowed for possible tense and op-
tional modal variations, and included a range of all 
possible patterns that resulted from combining 
verbs and triggers, controlled for case-sensitivity. 
The default for cases that differed from the stan-
dard patterns relied solely on the verb set provided. 
C)  Checks were made for (a) length normali-
zation (a maximum of 450 characters), with pur-
pose-specific text in enumerated or bulleted lists 
overriding this restriction; and (b) discourse mark-
ers pointing to extra-sentential information for the 
semantic processing of the text. In this case, PEA 
determines the anchor sentence (main crux of the 
purpose), and then whether to include a leading 
and trailing sentence, or two leading sentences or 
two trailing ones, to reach the 3-sentence limit. 
 
  RegExp Patterns Description  Case 
 PURPOSE  Sentence label (purpose) Yes 
 To VERB_SET Study action starts section No 
 In THIS STUDY General actions in study No 
Table 1. Some purpose patterns used by PEA 
2 Evaluation 
Manual PEA validation was done on a random 
sample of 300 trials. For a stricter test, the 13,110 
studies with Purpose sections short enough to in-
clude in full without any type of processing or de-
cision were not part of the random sample. 
Judgments were provided by the authors, one of 
whom was not involved in the development of 
PEA code. The 300 English extracts (before trans-
lation) were compared against the full-text Purpose 
sections in the clinical trials, with compression rate 
averaging 30%. Evaluation was done on a 3-point 
scale: perfect extraction, appropriate, wrong text. 
Inter-annotator agreement using Cohen?s kappa 
was considered to be good (Kappa = 0.756987). 
Table 2 shows evaluation results after inter-rater 
differences were reconciled: 
 
CRITERIA TRIALS RATIO 
 Perfect extraction 275   92% 
 Appropriate extraction  18     6% 
 Extraction of wrong text    7     2% 
Table 2: Results: 300 Clinical trials random sample 
3 Conclusion 
This pragmatic approach to task-specific (pur-
posive) summary extraction in a limited domain 
(ClinicalTrials.gov) using regular expressions has 
shown a 92% precision. Further research will de-
termine if this method is appropriate for CLIR and 
query language display via machine translation and 
subsequent post-editing in clinical trials informa-
tion systems for other registries and sponsors. 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors thank Tony Tse and the anonymous 
reviewers for valuable feedback. Work supported 
by the NIH, NLM Intramural Research Program. 
References 
Eduard Hovy. 2003. Text Summarization. In Ruslan 
Mitkov (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Computa-
tional Linguistics (pp. 583-598). Oxford University 
Press. 
Graciela Rosemblat, Tony Tse, Darren Gemoets, John 
E. Gillen, and Nicholas C. Ide. 2005. Supporting Ac-
cess to Consumer Health Information Across Lan-
guages. Proceedings of the 8th International ISKO 
Conference. London, England. pp. 315-321 
Grok part of the OpenNLP project. [Accessed at 
http://grok.sourceforge.net] 
Simone Teufel and Marc Moens. 1999. Argumentative 
classification of extracted sentences as a step towards 
flexible abstracting. In Advances in Automatic Text 
Summarization, I. Mani and M.T. Maybury (eds.), 
pp. 155-171. MIT Press. 
125
