Linguistic Knowledge can Improve Information Retrieval 
Wi l l iam A .  Woods  and Lawrence  A .  Bookman*  and Ann Houston  and 
Rober t  J .  Kuhns  and Pau l  Mar t in  and Stephen Green  
Sun Microsystems Laborator ies 
1 Network Drive 
Bur l ington,  MA 01803 
{Wi l l iam.Woods ,Ann.Houston,Robert .Kuhns ,Pau l .Mart in ,Stephen.Green}@east .sun.com 
Abstract 
This paper describes the results of some experiments 
using a new approach to information access that 
combines techniques from natural language process- 
ing and knowledge representation with a penalty- 
based technique for relevance estimation and passage 
retrieval. Unlike many attempts to combine natural 
language processing with information retrieval, these 
results how substantial benefit from using linguistic 
knowledge. 
1 In t roduct ion  
An online information seeker often fails to find what 
is wanted because the words used in the request are 
different from the words used in the relevant mate- 
rial. Moreover, the searcher usually spends a signifi- 
cant amount of time reading retrieved material in or- 
der to determine whether it contains the information 
sought. To address these problems, a system has 
been developed at Sun Microsystems Laboratories 
(Ambroziak and Woods, 1998) that uses techniques 
from natural language processing and knowledge 
representation, with a technique for dynamic pas- 
sage selection and scoring, to significantly improve 
retrieval performance. This system is able to locate 
specific passages in the indexed material where the 
requested information appears to be, and to score 
those passages with a penalty-based score that is 
highly correlated with the likelihood that they con- 
tain relevant information. This ability, which we call 
"Precision Content Retrieval" is achieved by com- 
bining a system for Conceptual Indexing with an 
algorithm for Relaxation-Ranking Specific Passage 
Retrieval. 
In this paper, we show how linguistic knowledge is
used to improve search effectiveness in this system. 
This is of particular interest, since many previous at- 
tempts to use linguistic knowledge to improve infor- 
mation retrieval have met with little or mixed suc- 
cess (Fagan, 1989; Lewis and Sparck Jones, 1996; 
Sparck Jones, 1998; Varile and Zampolli, 1997; 
Voorhees, 1993; Mandala et al, 1999) (but see the 
latter for some successes as well). 
* Lawrence  Bookman is now at  Tor rent  Systems,  Inc.  
2 Conceptua l  Indexing 
The conceptual indexing and retrieval system used 
for these experiments automatically extracts words 
and phrases from unrestricted text and organizes 
them into a semantic network that integrates syn- 
tactic, semantic, and morphological relationships. 
The resulting conceptual taxonomy (Woods, 1997) is 
used by a specific passage-retrieval algorithm to deal 
with many paraphrase r lationships and to find spe- 
cific passages of text where the information sought is 
likely to occur. It uses a lexicon containing syntac- 
tic, semantic, and morphological information about 
words, word senses, and phrases to provide a base 
source of semantic and morphological relationships 
that are used to organize the taxonomy. In addi- 
tion, it uses an extensive system of knowledge-based 
morphological rules and functions to analyze words 
that are not already in its lexicon, in order to con- 
struct new lexical entries for previously unknown 
words (Woods, 2000). In addition to rules for han- 
dling derived and inflected forms of known words, 
the system includes rules for lexical compounds and 
rules that are capable of making reasonable guesses 
for totally unknown words. 
A pilot version of this indexing and retrieval 
system, implemented in Lisp, uses a collection of 
approximately 1200 knowledge-based morphologi- 
cal rules to extend a core lexicon of approximately 
39,000 words to give coverage that exceeds that of an 
English lexicon of more than 80,000 base forms (or 
150,000 base plus inflected forms). Later versions 
of the conceptual indexing and retrieval system, im- 
plemented in C++, use a lexicon of approximately 
150,000 word forms that is automatically generated 
by the Lisp-based morphological nalysis from its 
core lexicon and an input word list. The base lexicon 
is extended further by an extensive name dictionary 
and by further morphological nalysis of unknown 
words at indexing time. This paper will describe 
some experiments u ing several versions of this sys- 
tem. In particular, it will focus on the role that the 
linguistic knowledge sources play in its operation. 
The lexicon used by the conceptual indexing sys- 
tem contains yntactic information that can be used 
262 
for the analysis of phrases, as well as morphologi- 
cal and semantic information that is used to relate 
more specific concepts to more general concepts in 
the conceptual taxonomy. This information is inte- 
grated into the conceptual taxonomy by considering 
base forms of words to subsume their derived and 
inflected forms ("root subsumption") and more gen- 
eral terms to subsume more specific terms. The sys- 
tem uses these relationships as the basis for infer- 
ring subsumption relationships between more gen- 
eral phrases and more specific phrases according to 
the intensional subsumption logic of Woods (Woods, 
1991). 
The largest base lexicon used by this system cur- 
rently contains semantic subsumption information 
for something in excess of 15,000 words. This infor- 
mation consists of basic "kind of" and "instance of" 
information such as the fact that book is a kind of 
document and washing is a kind of cleaning. The 
lexicon also records morphological roots and affixes 
for words that are derived or inflected forms of other 
words, and information about different word senses 
and their interrelationships. For example, the con- 
ceptual indexing system is able to categorize becomes 
black as a kind of color change because becomes i  an 
inflected form of become, become is a kind of change, 
and black is a color. Similarly, color disruption is 
recognized as a kind of color change, because the 
system recognizes disruption as a derived form of 
disrupt, which is known in the lexicon to be a kind 
of damage, which is known to be a kind of change. 
When using root subsumption as a technique for 
information retrieval, it is important o have a core 
lexicon that knows correct morphological analyses 
for words that the rules would otherwise analyze in- 
correctly. For example, the following are some ex- 
amples of words that could be analyzed incorrectly if
the correct interpretations were not specified in the 
lexicon: 
de legate  (de4.1eg4.ate) take the legs from 
caress (car + ess) female car 
cashier  (cashy 4. er) more wealthy 
daredev i l  (dared + evil) serious risk 
lacerate (lace 4. rate) speed of tatting 
pant ry  (pant + ry) heavy breathing 
p igeon (pig + eon) the age of peccaries 
ratify (rat 4- ify) infest with rodents 
in fant ry  (infant + ry) childish behavior 
Although they are not always as humorous as the 
above examples, there are over 3,000 words in the 
core lexicon of 39,000 English words that would re- 
ceive false morphological nalyses like the above ex- 
amples, if the words were not already in the lexicon. 
3 Re laxat ion  Rank ing  and  Spec i f i c  
Passage  Ret r ieva l  
The system we are evaluating uses a technique called 
"relaxation ranking" to find specific passages where 
as many as possible of the different elements of 
a query occur near each other, preferably in the 
same form and word order and preferably closer 
together. Such passages are ranked by a penalty 
score that measures the degree of deviation from an 
exact match of the requested phrase, with smaller 
penalties being preferred. Differences in morpholog- 
ical form and formal subsumption of index terms 
by query terms introduce small penalties, while in- 
tervening words, unexplained permutations of word 
order, and crossing sentence boundaries introduce 
more significant penalties. Elements of a query that 
cannot be found nearby introduce substantial penal- 
ties that depend on the syntactic ategories of the 
missing words. 
When the conceptual indexing system is presented 
with a query, the relaxation-ranking retrieval algo- 
rithm searches through the conceptual taxonomy for 
appropriately related concepts and uses the posi- 
tions of those concepts in the indexed material to 
find specific passages that are likely to address the 
information eeds of the request. This search can 
find relationships from base forms of words to de- 
rived forms and from more general terms to more 
specific terms, by following paths in the conceptual 
taxonomy. 
For example, the following is a passage retrieved 
by this system, when applied to the UNIX ? operat- 
ing system online documentation (the "man pages"): 
Query: print a message from the mail tool 
6. -2.84 print mail mail mai l tool  
Print sends copies of all the selected mail 
items to your default printer. If there are 
no selected items, mailtool sends copies of 
those items you axe currently... 
The indicated passage is ranked 6th in a returned 
list of found passages, indicated by the 6 in the above 
display. The number -2.84 is the penalty score as- 
signed to the passage, and the subsequent words 
print, mail, mail, and mailtool indicate the words 
in the text that are matched to the corresponding 
content words in the input query. In this case, print 
is matched to print, message to mail, mail to mail, 
and tool to mailtool, respectively. This is followed 
by the content of the actual passage located. The 
information provided in these hit displays gives the 
information seeker a clear idea of why the passage 
was retrieved and enables the searcher to quickly 
skip down the hit list with little time spent looking 
at irrelevant passages. In this case, it was easy to 
263 
identify that the 6th ranked hit was the best one and 
contained the relevant information. 
The retrieval of this passage involved use of a se- 
mantic subsumption relationship to match message 
to mail, because the lexical entry for mail recorded 
that it was a kind of message. It used a morpho- 
logical root subsumption to match tool to mailtool 
because the morphological nalyzer analyzed the un- 
known word mailtool as a compound of mail and tool 
and recorded that its root was tool and that it was 
a kind of tool modified by mail. Taking away the 
ability to morphologically analyze unknown words 
would have blocked the retrieval of this passage, 
as would eliminating the lexical subsumption entry 
that recorded mail as a kind of message. 
Like other approaches to passage retrieval 
(Kaszkiel and Zobel, 1997; Salton et al, 1993; 
Callan, 1994), the relaxation-ranking retrieval algo- 
rithm identifies relevant passages rather than simply 
identifying whole documents. However, unlike ap- 
proaches that involve segmenting the material into 
paragraphs or other small passages before indexing, 
this algorithm dynamically constructs relevant pas- 
sages in response to requests. When responding to 
a request, it uses information i  the index about po- 
sitions of concepts in the text to identify relevant 
passages. In response to a single request, identified 
passages may range in size from a single word or 
phrase to several sentences or paragraphs, depend- 
ing on how much context is required to capture the 
various elements of the request. 
In a user interface to the specific passage retrieval 
system, retrieved passages are reported to the user 
in increasing order of penalty, together with the rank 
number, penalty score, information about which tar- 
get terms match the corresponding query terms, and 
the content of the identified passage with some sur- 
rounding context as illustrated above. In one version 
of this technology, results are presented in a hyper- 
text interface that allows the user to click on any 
of the presented items to see that passage in its en- 
tire context in the source document. In addition, 
the user can be presented with a display of portions 
of the conceptual taxonomy related to the terms in 
the request. This frequently reveals useful gener- 
alizations of the request hat would find additional 
relevant information, and it also conveys an under- 
standing of what concepts have been found in the 
material that will be matched by the query terms. 
For example, in one experiment, searching the on- 
line documentation for the Emacs text editor, the 
request jump to end of file resulted in feedback show- 
ing that jump was classified as a kind of move in the 
conceptual taxonomy. This led to a reformulated 
request, move to end of file, which successfully re- 
trieved the passage 9o to end of buffer. 
4 Experimental Eva luat ion  
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of the above 
techniques, a set of 90 queries was collected from 
a naive user of the UNIX operating system, 84 of 
which could be answered from the online documen- 
tation known as the man pages. A set of "correct" 
answers for each of these 84 queries was manually de- 
termined by an independent UNIX operating system 
expert, and a snapshot of the man pages collection 
was captured and indexed for retrieval. In order 
to compare this methodology with classical docu- 
ment retrieval techniques, we assign a ranking score 
to each document equal to the ra~king score of the 
best ranked passage that it contains. 
In rating the performance of a given method, we 
compute average recall and precision values at 10 
retrieved ocuments, and we also compute a "suc- 
cess rate" which is simply the percentage of queries 
for which an acceptable answer occurs in the top 
ten hits. The success rate is the principal factor 
on which we base our evaluations, ince for this ap- 
plication, the user is not interested in subsequent 
answers once an acceptable answer has been found, 
and finding one answer for each of two requests i  a 
substantially better esult than finding two answers 
to one request and none for another. 
These experiments were conducted using an ex- 
perimental retrieval system that combined a Lisp- 
based language processing stage with a C++ im- 
plementation of a conceptual indexer. The linguis- 
tic knowledge sources used in these experiments in- 
cluded a core lexicon of approximately 18,000 words, 
a substantial set of morphological rules, and spe- 
cialized morphological algorithms covering inflec- 
tions, prefixes, suffixes, lexical compounding, and 
a variety of special forms, including numbers, ordi- 
nals, Roman numerals, dates, phone numbers, and 
acronyms. In addition, they made use of a lexical 
subsumption taxonomy of approximately 3000 lex- 
ical subsumption relations, and a small set of se- 
mantic entailment axioms (e.g., display entails see, 
but is not a kind of see). This system is described 
in (Woods, 1997). The database was a snapshot of 
the local man pages (frozen at the time of the ex- 
periment so that it wouldn't change during the ex- 
periment), consisting of approximately 1800 files of 
varying lengths and constituting a total of approxi- 
mately 10 megabytes of text. 
Table 1 shows the results of comparing three ver- 
sions of this technology with a textbook implementa- 
tion of the standard tfid\] algorithm (Salton, 1989) 
and with the SearchItWMsearch application devel- 
oped at Sun Microsystems, Inc., which combines a
264 
Table 1: A comparison of different retrieval techniques. 
System 
tfidf 
SearchIt system 
Recall II 
w/o morph 
w/o knowledge 
Success Rate 
28.6% 
44.0% 
60.7% 
50.0% 
42.9% 
Recall 
(10 docs) 
14.8% 
28.5% 
38.6% 
not measured 
not measured 
Precision 
(10 docs) 
2.9% 
7.4% 
7.3% 
not measured 
not measured 
simple morphological query expansion with a state- 
of-the-art commercial search engine. In the table, 
Recall II refers to the full conceptual indexing and 
search system with all of its knowledge sources and 
rules. The line labeled "w/o morph" refers to this 
system with its dynamic morphological rules turned 
off, and the line labeled "w/o knowledge" refers to 
this system with all of its knowledge sources and 
rules turned off. The table presents the success 
rate and the measured recall and precision values 
for 10 retrieved ocuments. We measured recall and 
precision at the 10 document level because inter- 
nal studies of searching behavior had shown that 
users tended to give up if an answer was not found 
in the first ten ranked hits. We measured success 
rate, rather than recall and precision, for our ab- 
lation studies, because standard recall and precision 
measures are not sensitive to the distinction between 
finding multiple answers to a single request versus 
finding at least one answer for more requests. 
5 D iscuss ion  
Table 1 shows that for this task, the relaxation- 
ranking passage retrieval algorithm without its sup- 
plementary knowledge sources (Recall II w/o knowl- 
edge) is roughly comparable in performance (42.9% 
versus 44.0% success rate) to a state-of-the-art com- 
mercial search engine (SearchIt) at the pure docu- 
ment retrieval task (neglecting the added benefit of 
locating the specific passages). Adding the knowl- 
edge in the core lexicon (which includes morpho- 
logical relationships, emantic subsumption axioms, 
and entailment relationships), but without morpho- 
logical analysis of unknown words (Recall II w/o 
morph), significantly improves these results (from 
42.9% to 50.0%). Further adding the morphologi- 
cal analysis capability that automatically analyzes 
unknown words (deriving additional morphological 
relationships and some semantic subsumption rela- 
tionships) significantly improves that result (from 
50.0% to 60.7%). In contrast, we found that adding 
the same semantic subsumption relationships to the 
commercial search engine, using its provided the- 
saurus capability degraded its results, and results 
were still degraded when we added only those facts 
that we knew would help find relevant documents. 
It turned out that the additional relevant documents 
found were more than offset by additional irrelevant 
documents hat were also ranked more highly. 
6 Anecdota l  Eva luat ion  o f  Spec i f i c  
Passage  Ret r ieva l  Benef i t s  
As mentioned above, comparing the relaxation- 
ranking algorithm with document retrieval systems 
measures only a part of the benefit of the specific 
passage retrieval methodology. Fully evaluating the 
quality and ranking of the retrieved passages in- 
volves a great many subtleties. However, two in- 
formal evaluations have been conducted that :shed 
some light on the benefits. 
The first of these was a pilot study of the tech- 
nology at a telecommunications company. In that 
study, one user found that she could use a single 
query to the conceptual indexing system to find both 
of the items of information ecessary to complete a
task that formerly required searching two separate 
databases. The conclusion of that study was that the 
concept retrieval technology performs well enough to 
be useful to a person talking live with a customer. 
It was observed that the returned hits can be com- 
pared with one another easily and quickly by eye, 
and attention is taken directly to the relevant con- 
tent of a large document: The automatic indexing 
was considered a plus compared with manual meth- 
ods of content indexing. It was observed that an area 
of great potential may be in a form of knowledge 
management that involves organizing and providing 
intelligent access to small, unrelated "nuggets" of 
textual knowledge that are not amenable to conven- 
tional database archival or categorization. 
A second experiment was conducted by the Hu- 
man Resources Webmaster of a high-tech company, 
an experienced user of search engines who used this 
technology to index his company's internal HR web 
site. He then measured the time it took him to pro- 
cess 15 typical HR requests, first using conventional 
search tools that he had available, and then using 
the Conceptual Indexing technology. In both cases, 
he measured the time it took him to either find the 
answer or to conclude that the answer wasn't in 
the indexed material. His measured times for the 
total suite were 55 minutes using the conventional 
265 
tools and 11 minutes using the conceptual index- 
ing technology. Of course, this was an uncontrolled 
experiment, and there is some potential that infor- 
mation learned from searching with the traditional 
tools (which were apparently used first) might have 
provided some benefit when using the conceptual in- 
dexing technology. However, the fact that he found 
things with the latter that he did not find with the 
former and the magnitude of the time difference sug- 
gests that there is an effect, albeit perhaps not as 
great as the measurements. As a result of this ex- 
perience, he concluded that he would expect many 
users to take much longer to find materials or give 
up, when using the traditional tools. He anticipated 
that after finding some initial materials, more time 
would be required, as users would end up having 
to call people for additional information. He esti- 
mated that users could spend up to an hour trying 
to get the information they needed...having to call 
someone, wait to make contact and finally get the 
information they needed. Using the conceptual in- 
dexing search engine, he expected that these times 
would be at least halved. 
7 Conc lus ion  
We have described some experiments using lin- 
guistic knowledge in an information retrieval sys- 
tem in which passages within texts are dynami- 
cally found in response to a query and are scored 
and ranked based on a relaxation of constraints. 
This is a different approach from previous meth- 
ods of passage retrieval and from previous attempts 
to use linguistic knowledge in information retrieval. 
These experiments show that linguistic knowledge 
can significantly improve information retrieval per- 
formance when incorporated into a knowledge-based 
relaxation-ranking algorithm for specific passage re- 
trieval. 
The linguistic knowledge considered here includes 
the use of morphological relationships between 
words, taxonomic relationships between concepts, 
and general semantic entailment relationships be- 
tween words and concepts. We have shown that the 
combination of these three knowledge sources can 
significantly improve performance in finding appro- 
priate answers to specific queries when incorporated 
into a relaxation-ranking algorithm. It appears that 
the penalty-based relaxation-ranking algorithm fig- 
ures crucially in this success, since the addition of 
such linguistic knowledge to traditional information 
retrieval models typically degrades retrieval perfor- 
mance rather than improving it, a pattern that was 
borne out in our own experiments. 
Acknowledgments  
Many other people have been involved in creating 
the conceptual indexing and retrieval system de- 
scribed here. These include: Gary Adams, Jacek 
Ambroziak, Cookie Callahan, Chris Colby, Jim 
Flowers, Ellen Hays, Patrick Martin, Peter Norvig, 
Tony Passera, Philip Resnik, Robert Sproull, and 
Mark Torrance. 
Sun, Sun Microsystems, and SearchIt are trade- 
marks or registered trademarks of Sun Microsys- 
tems, Inc. in the U.S. and other countries. 
UNIX is a registered trademark in the United 
States and other countries, exclusively licensed 
through X/Open Company, Ltd. UNIX est une 
marque enregistree aux Etats-Unis et dans d'autres 
pays et licenci~e xclusivement par X/Open Com- 
pany Ltd. 
Re ferences  
Jacek Ambroziak and William A. Woods. 1998. 
Natural language technology in precision content 
retrieval. In International Conference on Natural 
Language Processing and Industrial Applications, 
Moncton, New Brunswick, Canada, August. 
www.stm.com/research/techrep/1998/abstract- 
69.html. 
Jamie P. Callan. 1994. Passage-level vidgnce in 
document retrieval. SIGIR, pages 302-309. 
J. L. Fagan. 1989. The effectiveness of a nonsyntac- 
tic approach to automatic phrase indexing for doc- 
ument retrieval. Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science, 40(2):115-132, March. 
Martin Kaszkiel and Justin Zobel. 1997. Passage 
retrieval revisited. SIGIR, pages 302-309. 
David D. Lewis and Karen Sparck Jones. 1996. Nat- 
ural language processing for information retrieval. 
CACM, 39(1):92-101. 
Rila Mandala, Takenobu Tokunaga, and Hozumi 
Tanaka. 1999. Combining multiple evidence from 
different ypes of thesaurus for query expansion. 
In Proceedings on the 22nd annual international 
A CM SIGIR conference on Research and develop- 
ment in information retrieval. ACM-SIGIR. 
Gerald Salton, James Allan, and Chris Buckley. 
1993. Approaches to passage retrieval in full text 
information systems. SIGIR, pages 49-58. 
Gerard Salton. 1989. Automatic Text Processing. 
Addison Wesley, Reading, MA. 
Karen Sparck Jones. 1998. A look back and a look 
forward. SIGIR, pages 13-29. 
Giovanni Varile and Antonio Zampolli, editors. 
1997. Survey of the State of the Art in Human 
Language Technology. Cambridge Univ. Press. 
Ellen M. Voorhees. 1993. Using wordnet o disam- 
biguate word senses for text retrieval. In Pro- 
ceedings of 16th ACM SIGIR Conference. ACM- 
SIG1R. 
William A. Woods. 1991. Understanding subsump- 
tion and taxonomy: A framework for progress. 
In John Sowa, editor, Principles of Semantic 
2ti f f  
Networks: Explorations in the Representation o/
Knowledge, pages 45-94. Morgan Kaufmann, San 
Mateo, CA. 
William A. Woods. 1997. Conceptual indexing: 
A better way to organize knowledge. Technical 
Report SMLI TR-97-61, Sun Microsystems 
Laboratories, Mountain View, CA, April. 
www.sun.com/research/techrep/1997/abstract- 
61.html. 
William A. Woods. 2000. Aggressive morphology 
for robust \]exical coverage. In (these proceedings). 
267 
