Proceedings of the Workshop on A Broader Perspective on Multiword Expressions, pages 17?24,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Design and Implementation of a Lexicon of Dutch Multiword Expressions
Nicole Gre?goire
Uil-OTS
University of Utrecht
Utrecht, The Netherlands
Nicole.Gregoire@let.uu.nl
Abstract
This paper describes the design and imple-
mentation of a lexicon of Dutch multiword
expressions (MWEs). No exhaustive re-
search on a standard lexical representation
of MWEs has been done for Dutch before.
The approach taken is innovative, since it
is based on the Equivalence Class Method.
Furthermore, the selection of the lexical en-
tries and their properties is corpus-based.
The design of the lexicon and the standard
representation will be tested in Dutch NLP
systems. The purpose of the current paper is
to give an overview of the decisions made in
order to come to a standard lexical represen-
tation and to discuss the description fields
this representation comprises.
1 Introduction
This paper describes the design and implementa-
tion of a lexicon of Dutch multiword expressions
(MWEs). MWEs are known to be problematic for
natural language processing. A considerable amount
of research has been conducted in this area. Most
progress has been made especially in the field of
multiword identification (Villada Moiro?n and Tiede-
mann, 2006; Katz and Giesbrecht, 2006; Zhang
et al, 2006). Moreover, interesting papers have
been written on the representation of MWEs, most
of them focusing on a single class of MWEs, see
section 2. This paper elaborates on a standard
lexical representation for Dutch MWEs developed
within the STEVIN IRME project.1 Part of the
project focused on the design and implementation
of an electronic resource of 5,000 Dutch expressions
that meets the criterion of being highly theory- and
implementation-independent, and which can be used
in various Dutch NLP systems. The selection of the
lexical entries and their properties is corpus-based.
Work has been conducted on collecting Dutch
MWEs in the past, yielding one commercial printed
dictionary (de Groot, 1999), and an electronic
resource called the Referentiebestand Nederlands
(?Reference Database of The Dutch Language?)
(Martin and Maks, 2005), both mainly meant for
human users. No focus had been put on creating
a standard representation for Dutch MWEs that can
be converted into any system specific representation.
The approach taken is innovative, since it is based
on the Equivalence Class Method (ECM) (Odijk,
2004b). The idea behind the ECM is that MWEs
that have the same pattern require the same treat-
ment in an NLP system. MWEs with the same
pattern form so-called Equivalence Classes (ECs).
Having the ECs, it requires some manual work to
convert one instance of an EC into a system specific
representation, but all other members of the same
EC can be done in a fully automatic manner. This
method is really powerful since very detailed pattern
descriptions can be used for describing the charac-
teristics of a group of MWEs. Besides the descrip-
tion of the MWE patterns, we designed a uniform
representation for the description of the individual
expressions. Both the pattern descriptions and the
MWE descriptions are implemented in the Lexicon
1http://www-uilots.let.uu.nl/irme/
17
of Dutch MWEs.
The purpose of this paper is to give an overview
of the decisions made in order to come to a standard
lexical representation and furthermore to discuss the
description fields that are part of this representation.
The paper starts with an overview of related re-
search in section 2. This is followed by elaborating
the Lexicon of Dutch MWEs in section 3, a discus-
sion in section 4, and a conclusion in section 5.
2 Related research: classes and
representations
The area of multiword expressions includes many
different subtypes, varying from fixed expressions
to syntactically more flexible expressions. Sag et al
(2001) wrote a well-known paper on subclasses of
MWEs, in which they make a distinction between
lexicalized phrases and institutionalized phrases.
Lexicalized phrases are subdivided into fixed, semi-
fixed and flexible expressions. The most important
reason for this subdivision is the variation in the de-
gree of syntactic flexibility of MWEs. Roughly they
claim that syntactic flexibility is related to semantic
decomposability. Semantically non-decomposable
idioms are idioms the meaning of which cannot
be distributed over its parts and which are there-
fore not subject to syntactic variability. Sag et al
state that ?the only types of lexical variation ob-
servable in non-decomposable idioms are inflection
(kicked the bucket) and variation in reflexive form
(wet oneself).? Examples of non-decomposable id-
ioms are the oft-cited kick the bucket and shoot the
breeze. On the contrary, semantically decomposable
idioms, such as spill the beans, tend to be syntacti-
cally flexible to some degree. Mapping the bound-
aries of flexibility, however, is not always easy and
no one can predict exactly which types of syntactic
variation a given idiom can undergo.
One subtype of flexible expressions discussed in
Sag et al (2001) is the type of Light Verb Con-
structions (or Support Verb Constructions (SVCs)).
SVCs are combinations of a verb that seems to
have very little semantic content and a prepositional
phrase, a noun phrase or adjectival phrase. An SVC
is often paraphrasable by means of a single verb or
adjective. Since the complement of the verb is used
in its normal sense, the constructions are subject to
standard grammar rules, which include passiviza-
tion, internal modification, etc. The lexical selection
of the verb is highly restricted. Examples of SVCs
are give/*make a demo, make/*do a mistake.
As stated, no exhaustive research on a standard
representation of MWEs has been done for Dutch
before. Work on this topic has been conducted
for other languages, which in most cases focused
on a single subtype. Both Dormeyer and Fischer
(1998) and Fellbaum et al (2006) report on work
on a resource for German verbal idioms, while the
representation of German PP-verb collocations is
addressed in (Krenn, 2000). Kuiper et al (2003)
worked on a representation of English idioms, and
Villavicencio et al (2004) proposed a lexical encod-
ing of MWEs in general, by analysing English id-
ioms and verb-partical constructions. Except for the
SAID-database (Kuiper et al, 2003), which com-
prises over 13,000 expression, the created resources
contain no more than 1,000 high-frequent expres-
sions. Both Fellbaum et al and Krenn support their
lexical annotation with a corpus-based investigation.
In our approach, we also use data extracted from cor-
pora as empirical material, see section 3.2.
In most resources addressed, some kind of syn-
tactic analysis is assigned to individual expressions.
The most sophisticated syntactic analysis is done
in the SAID-database. The approach taken by
Kuiper et al (2003) would have been more theory-
independent, if it included a textual description, ac-
cording to which classes of idioms could be formed.
Villavicencio et al (2004) defined a specific meta-
type for each particular class of MWEs. The meta-
types can be used to map the semantic relations be-
tween the components of an MWE into grammar
specific features. Examples of meta-types specified
are verb-object-idiom and verb-particle-np. They
state that the majority of the MWEs in their database
could be described by the meta-types defined. But
since only a sample of 125 verbal idioms was used
for the classification, no estimation can be given of
how many classes this approach yields, when con-
sulting a larger set of various types of MWEs. Fell-
baum et al (2006) provide a dependency structure
for each expression, but not with the intention of
grouping the entries accordingly.
To conclude this section, although our approach is
in line with some of the projects described, our work
18
is also distinctive because (1) it focuses on Dutch;
(2) it does not solely focus on one type of MWEs,
but on MWEs in general; (3) the lexicon includes
5,000 unique expressions, and (4) for an initial ver-
sion of the lexicon a conversion to the Dutch NLP
system Alpino2 has been tested. In the remainder
of this paper we discuss our approach to the lexical
representation of MWEs.
3 A Lexicon of Dutch MWEs
In our research multiword expressions are defined as
a combination of words that has linguistic properties
not predictable from the individual components or
the normal way they are combined (Odijk, 2004a).
The linguistic properties can be of any type, e.g. in
line is an MWE according to its syntactic character-
istics, since it lacks a determiner preceding the sin-
gular count noun line, which is obligatory in stan-
dard English grammar.
Various aspects played a role in the representa-
tion as it is in the Lexicon of Dutch MWEs. First of
all, the main requirement of the standard encoding
is that it can be converted into any system specific
representation with a minimal amount of manual
work. The method adopted to achieve this goal is the
Equivalence Class Method (ECM) (Odijk, 2004b).
As stated, the ECM is based on the idea that given
a class of MWE descriptions, representations for a
specific theory and implementation can be derived.
The procedure is that one instance of an Equivalence
Class (EC) must be converted manually. By defin-
ing and formalizing the conversion procedure, the
other instances of the same EC can be converted in a
fully automatic manner. In other words, having the
ECs consisting of MWEs with the same pattern, it
requires some manual work to convert one instance
of each EC into a system specific representation, but
all other members of the same EC can be done fully
automatically. In the current approach, a formal rep-
resentation of the patterns has been added to the pat-
tern descriptions. Since this formal representation
is in agreement with a de facto standard for Dutch
(van Noord et al, 2006), most Dutch NLP systems
are able to use it for the conversion procedure, yield-
ing an optimal reduction of manual labor.
The creation of MWE descriptions is a very time-
2http://odur.let.rug.nl/?vannoord/alp.
consuming task and of course we aim at an error-
free result. Accordingly, we decided to describe the
minimal ingredients of an MWE that are needed for
successful incorporation in any Dutch NLP system.
For the development of the representation two Dutch
parsers are consulted, viz. the Alpino parser and the
Rosetta MT system (Rosetta, 1994).
Another requirement of the lexicon structure is
that the information needed for the representation
is extractable from corpora, since we want to avoid
analyses entirely based on speaker-specific intu-
itions.
3.1 Subclasses
Each MWE in the lexicon is classified as either
fixed, semi-flexible or flexible. In general, our clas-
sification conforms to the categorization given in
Sag et al (2001), any differences are explicitly dis-
cussed below.
3.1.1 Fixed MWEs
Fixed MWEs always occur in the same word
order and there is no variation in lexical item
choice. Fixed MWEs cannot undergo morpho-
syntactic variation and are contiguous, i.e. no other
elements can intervene between the words that are
part of the fixed MWE. Examples of Dutch fixed
MWEs are: ad hoc, ter plaatse ?on the spot?, van
hoger hand ?from higher authority?.
3.1.2 Semi-flexible MWEs
The following characteristics are applicable to the
class of semi-flexible MWEs in our lexicon:
1. The lexical item selection of the elements of the
expression is fixed or very limited.
2. The expression can only be modified as a
whole.3
3. The individual components can inflect, unless
explicitly marked otherwise with a parameter.
Examples of Dutch semi-flexible MWEs are: de
plaat poetsen (lit. ?to polish the plate?, id. ?to clear
off?), witte wijn ?white wine?, bijvoeglijk naam-
woord ?adjective?.
3We abstract away from the reason why some external mod-
ifiers, such a proverbial in he kicked the proverbial bucket, may
intrude in these semi-flexible expressions.
19
The characteristics of this class differ on one point
from the characteristics of the semi-fixed class dis-
cussed in Sag et al (2001), viz. on the fact that ac-
cording to Sag et al semi-fixed expressions are not
subject to syntactic variability and the only types of
lexical variation are inflection and variation in the
reflexive form. This degree of fixedness does not
apply to our class of semi-flexible MWEs, i.e. in
Dutch (and also in other Germanic languages like
German), operations that involve movement of the
verb such as verb second, verb first and verb raising,
see (1)-(3), are also applicable to the class of semi-
flexible expressions (Schenk, 1994).
(1) Hij
he
poetste
polished
de
the
plaat.
plate
?He cleared off.?
(2) Poetste
polished
hij
he
the
the
plaat?
plate
?Did he clear off??
(3) ...
...
omdat
because
hij
he
de
the
plaat
plate
wilde
wanted
poetsen.
polish
?... because he wanted to clear off?
3.1.3 Flexible MWEs
The main characteristic of flexible MWEs is the
fact that, contrary to semi-flexible MWEs, the in-
dividual components within flexible MWEs can be
modified. This contrast accounts for differences
between de plaat poetsen versus een bok schieten
(lit. ?to shoot a male-goat?, id. ? to make a blun-
der?) and blunder maken/begaan (? to make a blun-
der?). Although both een bok schieten and blunder
maken/begaan are flexible MWEs, there is a differ-
ence between the two expressions. According to the
classification proposed by Sag et al (2001), een bok
schieten is a decomposable idiom, of which the in-
dividual components cannot occur independently in
their idiomatic meaning and een blunder maken is a
support verb construction. We also want to use this
classification, and represent these expressions as fol-
lows:
1. Expressions of which one part is lexically fixed
and the other part is selected from a list of one
or more co-occuring lexemes. Dutch examples
are: scherpe/stevige kritiek (?severe criticism?),
blunder maken/begaan.
2. Expressions of which the lexical realization of
each component consists of exactly one lex-
eme. A Dutch example is een bok schieten.
The difference between the two subtypes is made
visible in the representation of the MWE and the
MWE pattern.
3.2 The data
We use data extracted from the Twente Nieuws Cor-
pus (TwNC) (Ordelman, 2002) as empirical mate-
rial.4 This corpus comprises a 500 million words of
newspaper text and television news reports. From
the TwNC, a list of candidate expressions is ex-
tracted, including for each expression the following
properties:
? the pattern assigned to the expression by the
Alpino parser
? the frequency
? the head of the expression
? the ten most occurring subjects
? internal complements and for each comple-
ment: its head, the head of the complement of
the head (in the case of PP complements), its
dependency label assigned by Alpino, the num-
ber of the noun, whether the noun is positive of
diminutive, the ten most occurring determiners,
the ten most occurring premodifiers, and the ten
most occurring postmodifiers.
? six examples sentences
The use of corpora is necessary but not suffi-
cient. It is necessary because we want our lexicon
to reflect actual language usage and because we do
not want to restrict ourselves to a linguist?s imag-
ination of which uses are possible or actually oc-
cur. On the other hand, using the corpora to ex-
tract the MWEs is not sufficient for the following
reasons: (1) text corpora may contain erroneous us-
age, and the technique used cannot distinguish this
from correct usage; (2) the extraction is in part based
on an automatic syntactic parse of the corpus sen-
tences, and these parses may be incorrect; (3) the
4The identification of MWEs is done by Begon?a Villada
Moiro?n working at the University of Groningen.
20
extraction techniques cannot distinguish idiomatic
versus literal uses of word combinations; (4) the ex-
traction techniques group different expressions that
share some but not all words together. Therefore the
data extracted were carefully analyzed before creat-
ing entries for MWEs.
3.3 The lexical represention
3.3.1 Pattern description
In the Lexicon of Dutch MWEs, expressions are
classified according to their pattern. In the origi-
nal ECM the pattern is an identifier which refers to
the structure of the idiom represented as free text
in which the uniqueness of the pattern is described.
This description includes the syntactic category of
the head of the expression, the complements it takes
and the description of the internal structure of the
complements. Furthermore it is described whether
individual components can be modified. In the cur-
rent approach the description of the pattern contains
besides a textual description also a formal notation,
see (4).
(4) Expressions headed by a verb, taking a fixed
direct object constisting of a determiner and
a noun ? [.VP [.obj1:NP [.det:D (1) ] [.hd:N
(2) ]] [.hd:V (3) ]]
The notation used to describe the patterns is a for-
malization of dependency trees, in particular CGN
(Corpus Gesproken Nederlands ?Corpus of Spoken
Dutch?) dependency trees (Hoekstra et al, 2003).
CGN dependency structures are based on traditional
syntactic analysis described in the Algemene Neder-
landse Spraakkunst (Haeseryn et al, 1997) and are
aimed to be as theory neutral as possible.
The patterns are encoded using a formal language,
which is short and which allows easy visualization
of dependency trees. The dependency labels (in
lower case) and category labels (in upper case) are
divided by a colon (:), e.g. obj1:NP. For leaf nodes,
the part-of-speech is represented instead of the cate-
gory label. Leaf nodes are followed by an index that
refers to the MWE component as represented in the
CL-field (see section 3.3.2), e.g. (1) refers to the first
component of the CL, (2) to the second, etc.
A fixed expression can be represented in two ways
depending on its internal structure:
1. For fixed expressions that are difficult to as-
sign an internal structure, we introduced a la-
bel fixed. The pattern for expressions such as
ad hoc and ter plaatste is [.:Adv fixed(1 2) ]
2. Fixed expressions with an analyzable internal
structure are represented according to the nor-
mal pattern description rules:
(5) de volle buit (?everything?)
[.NP [.det:D (1) ] [.mod:A (2) ] [.hd:N (3) ]]
Semi-flexible MWEs are also represented accord-
ing to normal pattern description rules. To make a
distinction between (1) an NP of which all elements
are fixed, and (2) an NP of which some elements
are lexically fixed, but which is still subject to stan-
dard grammar rules, a new syntactic category N1 has
been introduced. N1 indicates that the expression
can be modified as a whole and can take a deter-
miner as specifier:
(6) witte wijn
[.N1 [.mod:A (1) ] [.hd:N (2) ]]
The pattern of flexible expressions of which the
lexical realization of each component consists of ex-
actly one lexeme is encoded using the syntactic cat-
egory N1. We can use the same category as in (6),
since what we want to describe is the fact that the
components in the NP are fixed, but can be modified
as a whole and can take a determiner as specifier.
(7) bok schieten
[.VP [.obj1:N1 [.hd:N (1) ]] [.hd:V (2) ]]
Expressions of which one part is fixed and the
other part is selected from a list of one or more co-
occuring lexemes are represented with a so-called
LIST-index in the pattern. The fixed part of the ex-
pression has its literal sense. The combination of
the literal part with other lexemes is not predicable
from the meaning of the combining lexeme. Since
the meaning of an MWE or its parts is not included
in the representation, we can list every single com-
ponent with which the fixed part can combine in the
same MWE entry. For this list of components we
created a LISTA-field and LISTB-field in the MWE
description. Lists and variables are represented sim-
ilar to MWE components, attached to the leaf node,
in lower case and between (), e.g. [.hd:X (list) ],
[obj1:NP (var) ], [obj2:NP (var) ], etc.:
21
(8) iemand de helpende hand bieden (lit. ?offer
s.o. the helping hand?, id. ?lend s.o. a hand?)
[.VP [.obj2:NP (var) ] [.obj1:NP [.det:D (1)
] [.mod:A (2) ] [.hd:N (3) ]] [.hd:V (4) ]]
Our characterization of the classes of MWEs and
the formal notation of the patterns do not fully cover
the range of different types of MWEs that are de-
scribed in the lexicon. The strength of the ECM is,
however, that any expression can be included in the
lexicon, regardless of whether it fits our classifica-
tion, because of the textual description that can be
assigned. Expressions that cannot be assigned a de-
pendency structure, because of the limitations of the
notation, are classified according to the textual de-
scription of its pattern. A revision of the formal no-
tation might be done in the future.
The pattern is part of the MWE pattern descrip-
tion which includes, besides a pattern name, a pat-
tern and a textual description, five additional fields,
which are both maintenance field and fields needed
for a successful implementation of the standard rep-
resentation into a system specific representation.
Examples of MWE pattern descriptions stored in the
Lexicon of Dutch MWEs are given in Table 1.
3.3.2 MWE description
In addition to the MWE pattern descriptions, the
lexicon contains MWE descriptions, see Table 2 for
a list of examples. An MWE description comprises
8 description fields. The PATTERN NAME is used
to assign an MWE pattern description to the expres-
sion. The EXPRESSION-field contains the obligatory
fixed components of an MWE in the full form.
The Component List (CL) contains the same com-
ponents as the EXPRESSION-field. The difference is
that the components in the CL are in the canonical
(or non-inflected) form, instead of in the full form.
Parameters are used to specify the full form char-
acteristics of each component. The term parame-
ter is a feature and can be defined as an occurrence
of the pair <parameter category,parameter value>,
where parameter category refers to the aspect we
parameterize, and parameter value to the value a pa-
rameter category takes. Examples of parameters are
<nnum,sg> for singular nouns,<afrm,sup> for su-
perlative adjectives, <vfrm,part> for particle verbs
(Gre?goire, 2006). Parameter values are realized be-
tween square brackets directly on the right of the
item they parameterize.
The LISTA-field and LISTB-field are used to store
components that can be substituted for the LIST-
index in the pattern, yielding one or more expres-
sions. The reason for using two LIST-fields is to
separate predefined list values from special list val-
ues. The predefined list values are high frequent
verbs that are known to occur often as so-called light
verbs, especially with PPs. Two sets of verbs are
predefined:
1. blijken (?appear?) blijven (?remain?) gaan
(?go?) komen (?come?) lijken (?appear?) raken
(?get?) schijnen (?seem?) vallen (?be?) worden
(?become?) zijn (?be?)
2. brengen (?bring?) doen (?do?) geven (?give?)
hebben (?have?) houden (?keep?) krijgen (?get?)
maken (?make?) zetten (?put?)
A complement co-occurs either with verbs from
set 1 or with verbs from set 2. Each verb from the
chosen set is checked against the occurrences found
in the corpus data. If a verb does not occur in the
corpus data and also not in self-constructed data,
it is deleted from the LISTA-field. The LISTB-field
contains lexemes that are not in the predefined set
but do co-occur with the component(s) in the EX-
PRESSION-field. The information in the LISTB-field
is merely based on corpus data and therefore may
not be exhaustive.
The EXAMPLE-field contains an example sen-
tence with the expression. The only requirement of
this field is that its structure is identical for each ex-
pression with the same PATTERN NAME. The PO-
LARITY-field is none by default and takes the value
NPI if an expression can only occur in negative en-
vironments, and PPI if an expression can only occur
in positive environments. Finally, the MWE descrip-
tion contains a field with a reference to a plain text
file in which the information extracted from the cor-
pora is stored.
4 Discussion
We have given an overview of the decisions made
in order to come to a standard lexical representa-
tion for Dutch MWEs and discussed the description
22
NAME PATTERN DESCRIPTION
EC1 [.VP [.obj1:NP [.det:D (1) ] [.hd:N (2) ]] [.hd:V (3) ]] Expressions headed by a verb, taking
a fixed direct object contisting of a
determiner and a noun.
EC2 [.VP [.obj1:N1 [.hd:N (1) ]] [.hd:V (list) ]] Expressions headed by a verb, taking
a direct object consisting of a fixed
modifiable and inflectable noun (list).
EC9 [.VP [.obj1:N1 [.hd:N (1) ]] [.hd:V (list) ] Expressions headed by a verb, taking
[.pc:PP [.hd:P (2) ] [obj1:NP (var) ]]] (1) a direct object consisting of a fixed
modifiable noun, and (2) a PP-argument
consisting of a fixed preposition and a
variable complement (list).
Table 1: List of MWE pattern descriptions.
PATTERN EXPRESSION CL LIST
EC1 zijn kansen waarnemen zijn kans[pl] waarnemen -
(?to seize the opportunity?)
EC2 blunder (?mistake?) blunder begaan (?commit?) maken (?make?)
EC9 kans op kans op lopen (?get?) maken
(?to stand a change of s.th.?)
Table 2: List of MWE descriptions.
fields this representation comprises. Contrary to re-
lated work, we did not solely focus on one type of
MWEs, but on MWEs in general. The Lexicon of
Dutch MWEs includes 5,000 unique expressions and
for an initial version a conversion to the Dutch NLP
system Alpino has been tested. The strength of our
method lies in the ability of grouping individual ex-
pressions according to their pattern, yielding mul-
tiple classes of MWEs. The advantage of creating
classes of MWEs is that it eases the conversion of
the standard representation into any system specific
representation.
Describing a class of MWEs using free text is
already very useful in its current form. To help
speeding up the process of converting the standard
representation into a system specific representation,
we introduced a formal notation using dependency
structures, which are aimed to be as theory neutral as
possible. However, our current notation is unable to
cover all the patterns described in the lexicon. The
notation can be extended, but we must make sure
that it does not become too ad hoc and more compli-
cated than interpreting free text.
We have created a resource that is suited for a
wide variety of MWEs. The resource describes a set
of essential properties for each MWE and classifies
each expression as either fixed, semi-flexible or flex-
ible. The set of properties can surely be extended,
but we have limited ourselves to a number of core
properties because of resource limitations. We are
confident that this resource can form a good basis
for an even more complete description of MWEs.
5 Conclusion
This paper described the design and implementa-
tion of a lexicon of Dutch multiword expressions.
No exhaustive research on a standard representation
of MWEs has been done for Dutch before. Data
extracted form large Dutch text corpora were used
as empirical material. The approach taken is inno-
vative, since it is based on the Equivalence Class
Method (ECM). The ECM focuses on describing
MWEs according to their pattern, making it possible
to form classes of MWEs that require the same treat-
ment in natural language processing. The Lexicon of
23
Dutch MWEs constitutes 5,000 unique expressions
and for an initial version of the lexicon a conversion
to the Dutch NLP system Alpino has been tested.
Acknowledgements
The IRME project is carried out within the STEVIN
programme which is funded by the Dutch and Flem-
ish Governments (http://taalunieversum.org/stevin).
The author would like to thank Jan Odijk and two
anonymous reviewers for their valuable input to this
paper.
References
Hans de Groot. 1999. Van Dale Idioomwoordenboek.
Van Dale Lexicografie, Utrecht.
Ricarda Dormeyer and Ingrid Fischer. 1998. Building
lexicons out of a database for idioms. In Antonio
Rubio, Nativiad Gallardo, Rosa Castro, and Antonio
Tejada, editors, Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
pages 833 ? 838.
Christiane Fellbaum, Alexander Geyken, Axel Herold,
Fabian Koerner, and Gerald Neumann. 2006. Corpus-
Based Studies of German Idioms and Light Verbs. In-
ternational Journal of Lexicography, 19(4):349?361.
Nicole Gre?goire. 2006. Elaborating the parameterized
equivalence class method for dutch. In Nicoletta Cal-
zolari, editor, Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2006), pages 1894?99, Genoa, Italy. ELRA.
W. Haeseryn, K. Romijn, G. Geerts, J. de Rooij, and
M.C. van den Toorn. 1997. Algemene Nederlandse
Spraakkunst. Martinus Nijhoff and Wolters Plantyn,
Groningen en Deurne.
Heleen Hoekstra, Michael Moortgat, Bram Renmans,
Machteld Schouppe, Ineke Schuurman, and Ton
van der Wouden. 2003. Cgn syntactische annotatie.
Graham Katz and Eugenie Giesbrecht. 2006. Auto-
matic identification of non-compositional multi-word
expressions using latent semantic analysis. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL 2006 Workshop on Multiword
Expressions: Identifying and Exploiting Underlying
Properties., Sydney, Australia.
Brigitte Krenn. 2000. CDB - a database of lexical collo-
cations. In 2nd International Conference on Language
Resources & Evaluation (LREC ?00), May 31 - June 2,
Athens, Greece. ELRA.
Koenraad Kuiper, Heather McCann, Heidi Quinn,
Therese Aitchison, and Kees van der Veer. 2003.
SAID: A syntactically annotated idiom dataset. Lin-
guistic Data Consortium, LDC2003T10, Pennsylva-
nia.
Willy Martin and Isa Maks. 2005. Referentie bestand
nederlands documentatie. Technical report, INL.
Jan Odijk. 2004a. Multiword expressions in NLP.
Course presentation, LOT Summerschool, Utrecht,
July.
Jan Odijk. 2004b. A proposed standard for the lexical
representation of idioms. In EURALEX 2004 Proceed-
ings, pages 153?164. Universite? de Bretagne Sud, July.
R.J.F. Ordelman. 2002. Twente nieuws corpus (TwNC).
M T. Rosetta. 1994. Compositional Translation. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2001. Multiword ex-
pressions: A pain in the neck for NLP. LinGO Work-
ing Paper, (2001-03).
Andre? Schenk. 1994. Idioms and collocations in com-
positional grammars. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Utrecht.
Gertjan van Noord, Ineke Schuurman, and Vincent Van-
deghinste. 2006. Syntactic annotation of large cor-
pora in stevin. In Proceedings of the Fifth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC 2006), Genoa - Italy.
Begona Villada Moiro?n and Joerg Tiedemann. 2006.
Identifying idiomatic expressions using automatic
word-alignment. In Proceedings of the EACL 2006
Workshop on Multiword Expressions in a Multilingual
Context, Trento, Italy.
Aline Villavicencio, Ann Copestake, Benjamin Waldron,
and Fabre Lambeau. 2004. The lexical encoding of
MWEs. In T. Tanaka, A. Villavicencio, F. Bond, and
A. Korhonen, editors, Proceedings of the ACL 2004
Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Integrating Pro-
cessing, Barcelona, Spain.
Yi Zhang, Valia Kordoni, Aline Villavicencio, and Marco
Idiart. 2006. Automated multiword expression pre-
diction for grammar engineering. In Proceedings
of the ACL 2006 Workshop on Multiword Expres-
sions: Identifying and Exploiting Underlying Proper-
ties., Sydney, Australia.
24
