Senseval-3: The Italian All-words Task 
Marisa ULIVIERI 
ILC-CNR 
Via Moruzzi 1  
Pisa, Italy, 56124 
marisa.ulivieri@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Francesca BERTAGNA 
ILC-CNR 
Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56124 
francesca.bertagna@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Elisabetta GUAZZINI 
ILC-CNR 
Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56124 
elisabetta.guazzini@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Nicoletta CALZOLARI 
ILC-CNR 
Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56124 
glottolo@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes the Italian all-words 
sense disambiguation task for Senseval-3. The 
annotation procedure and criteria together with 
the encoding of multiwords are presented. 
1 Introduction 
This paper describes the Italian all-words sense 
disambiguation task for Senseval-3: about 5000 
words were manually disambiguated according to 
the ItalWordNet (IWN) word senses. The first 
section briefly describes of the corpus and the 
lexical reference resource. The second section 
contains some general criteria adopted for the 
annotation of the corpus and illustrated by a series 
of examples. Issues connected to the treatment of 
phenomena typically found in corpora, e.g. 
abbreviations, foreign words, jargon, locutions are 
discussed. Furthermore, the encoding of 
compounds, metaphorical usages, and multiword 
units is described. Problems connected with i) the 
high granularity of sense distinctions in the lexical 
resource and ii) unsolvable ambiguities of the 
contexts are dealt with. Finally, it is evidenced how 
the annotation exercise can be of help in updating 
or tuning IWN, by adding missing senses and/or 
entries. 
2 The Corpus and the Lexical Resource 
The Italian all-words corpus consists of about 
13600 word tokens, extracted from the SI-TAL 1, 
Italian Syntactic Semantic Treebank (ISST). The 
                                                     
1 SI-TAL (Integrated System for the Automatic 
treatment of Language)  was a National Project devoted 
to the creation of large linguistic resources and software 
tools for Italian written and spoken language processing. 
ISST (Montemagni et al 2003) consists of i) a 
generic corpus of about 215,000 tokens, extracted 
from different periodicals and newspaper articles 
(La Repubblica, Il Corriere della Sera) and ii) a 
specialised corpus of about 90,000 tokens, with 
texts belonging to the financial domain (Il Sole-
24Ore). The annotated corpus consists of about 
5000 words and comprises a selection of Italian 
newspaper articles about various topics: politics, 
sport, news, etc. The common data format is XML. 
The reference lexical resource used for the 
Senseval-3 sense tagging task is the lexical-
semantic database IWN, developed within the 
framework of two different research projects: 
EuroWordNet (Vossen 1999) and SI-TAL, during 
which IWN was extended by the insertion of 
adjectives, adverbs and a subset of proper nouns. 
The IWN database contains about 64,000 word 
senses corresponding to about 50,000 synsets. It 
has inherited the EWN linguistic model (Alonge et 
al., 1998) which provides a rich set of semantic 
relations, and the first nucleus of verbs and nouns. 
IWN was structured around the notion of synset, a 
set of synonymous word meanings, and the 
information is encoded in the form of lexical-
semantic relations between pairs of synsets. The 
IWN database comprises also an Interlingual Index 
(ILI), based on the Princeton WordNet 1.5 used to 
link wordnets of different languages so that it is 
possible to go from the Italian words to similar 
words in English language. IWN has also inherited 
from EWN the Top Ontology (TO), a hierarchical 
structure of language-independent concepts, 
reflecting fundamental semantic distinctions. Via 
the ILI, all the concepts in the wordnet are linked 
to the Top Ontology. 
                                             Association for Computational Linguistics
                        for the Semantic Analysis of Text, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004
                 SENSEVAL-3: Third International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems
3 Annotation Procedure and Criteria 
For the Italian all-words task , the annotation 
was carried out manually, word by word following 
the text. For each word, annotators were supplied 
with information about The tagging operation 
consisted in the assignment of a sense number to 
each full word or sequence of words corresponding 
to a single unit of sense, such as compounds, 
idioms, metaphorical usages, etc. The sense 
number which refers to a specific synset was 
assigned by the annotators according to the lexical 
resource IWN. The assignment of a sense number 
allows tagged words to inherit a series of semantic 
information ranging from meronymy, synonymy, 
hyperonymy, etc. up to the fundamental semantic 
distinctions of the Top Ontology. 
The annotation of the corpus was restricted to 
nouns (2583), verbs (1858), adjectives (748), a 
group of multiword expressions (97 ? verb phrases, 
adjectival phrases and noun phrases) and a set of 
general proper nouns (163). Two linguists 
disambiguated the texts. The annotators made 
every effort to match a text word to a IWN sense, 
but sometimes this could not be done, since the 
required sense was not present in the reference 
resource. Cases of difficult sense attribution and of 
disagreement between annotators were marked and 
left to further discussion and refinement. 
Frequently, a tight interaction between the IWN 
developers and the annotators was needed. By the 
way, this collaboration produced a double-sided 
effect: on the one side, the lexical resource gained 
in coverage, being enlarged through the addition of 
missing entries and/or senses and, on the other 
side, the corpus encoding has been made possible. 
3.1 Non-annotated cases 
Notwithstanding this, some cases have been left 
?empty?. They are in particular terms with not 
standard meaning, often absent from dictionaries2 
as, for example: i) abbreviations (C.T. 
Commissario Tecnico, Technical Officer); ii) 
foreign words (e.g. off limits); iii) jargon (e.g. 
fumantino adj. una persona fumantina, an irascible 
person); iv) terms semantically modified through 
evaluative suffixation (e.g. vetturetta, small car); 
v) locutions (e.g. per carit?!, for goodness? sake!; 
ci mancherebbe, that?s all we need); vi) words, or 
sequences of words, indicating human association 
groups (Caschi blu, the Blue Berets, Croce Rossa, 
Red Cross, etc.), vii) nicknames (Scarpa d'oro, lit. 
Gold Shoe ? to say a good football player, Primula 
                                                     
2 Some of them are very technical-specialistic terms 
or expressions extracted, in particular, from the soccer 
domain, e.g. andare in percussione/in sovrapposizione 
(lit. to go in percussion/in overlapping). 
Rossa, the Scarlet Pimpernel, a mafioso boss, etc.); 
viii) neologisms (e.g. komeinista berlusconiano, 
concerning Khomeini, Berlusconi). 
This type of specific neologisms or idiomatic 
expressions have a high frequency in corpora. 
Corpus texts are extracted from newspaper articles 
about politics, sports, news, etc. in which a high 
number of words currently used in the everyday 
language of media appear. Rarely a lexical 
resource contains this new-born expressions hence 
not completely meeting the requirements of 
semantic annotation. 
3.2 Fully-compositional Expressions 
It may be the case that annotators had to deal 
with complex expressions where the meaning is 
compositional, e.g. Ministero della Difesa 
(Department of Defence). Even if this sequence of 
words could be perceived by native speakers as a 
single multiword expression, the reference lexical 
resource did not present it as an independent entry. 
This is a case of fully compositional expression, 
whose interpretation depends functionally on the 
interpretation of its constituents. They were, 
therefore, decomposed and annotated according to 
their parts. 
3.3 Metaphorical Usages 
Figurative and metaphorical usages were hard to 
map to the correct sense: sometimes, it has been 
necessary to accept for them, at least, a 
compromise solution. Consider the following 
context (where bold marks the figurative usage): 
 
due lavoratori su tre sono a casa = essere 
disoccupato 
 
out of three workers, two are at home = to be 
unemployed) 
 
The interpretation of the context presupposes an 
extra-linguistic knowledge, which cannot be 
encoded at the lexical-semantic level of 
description, even if the collocation with lavoratori 
(workers) allows to correctly disambiguate. In this 
case a (at home) represents an instance of a non 
lexicalised metaphor, therefore it was not possible 
to assign the appropriate figurative sense. A 
compromise solution was adopted and the 
individual components of the phrase were 
annotated, even if the correct semantic contribution 
of the multiword expression was lost. 
Another interesting case is provided by the 
occurrences of some metaphoric uses of verbs. 
Consider these examples: 
 
? ? andata male in Spagna e non si ? 
qualificata alle ?, lit. in Spain it went badly and 
did not qualify for the 
 
? il rapporto and? avanti fino alle nozze, lit. 
the relationship went ahead until wedding 
In the first example, even if the verb is 
frequently used with this meaning, it was not 
possible to attribute a correct sense number, since 
it was not accounted for in the lexical resource. 
In the second case, the verbal locution andare 
avanti was not present in IWN. In this context, 
andare has been annotated with andare11, ?to 
progress?, which incorporates the meaning 
provided by andare plus the adverb avanti (to go 
ahead). 
All the above mentioned cases of non-annotation 
or compromise annotation evidence the 
divergences between lexicon encoding, on the one 
hand, in which senses are by necessity 
?decontextualised? to be able to capture 
generalizations (Calzolari et al 2002) and corpus 
annotation, on the other, where ?contextualization? 
plays a predominant role and, consequently, 
figurative senses, idioms, metaphorical usages, 
multiwords, are highly frequent. 
3.4 High granularity of sense distinctions 
One of the main reasons for disagreement 
between annotators could arise from the high IWN 
granularity in sense distinction. Often, when 
deciding a sense, too subtle distinctions could turn 
out to be a disadvantage for the annotators. 
Consider the verb sentire (to hear): IWN makes a 
very fine-grained distinction, where exactly 17 
senses are available. Some of them overlap or are 
so close each other to be undistinguishable for 
human annotators and may be problematic for 
systems. In the following example: 
Passano pochissimi secondi e qualcuno sente un 
urlo= ? and someone hears a cry 
 
In IWN, two senses of the verb are overlapping: 
 
sentire 1 ? percepire con l'orecchio (to hear) 
 
sentire 2 ? essere in grado di percepire suoni con 
l'orecchio (to be able to hear sounds) 
 
These distinctions are too subtle to be used in 
corpus annotation. The annotator has chosen 
sense1, but (in order to allow for the coarse-
grained scoring of automatic annotation) a 
sensemap of words, a table where the overlapping 
senses are accounted for, was provided. 
3.5 Context Ambiguity 
Corpus annotation strategy allowed to handle 
cases where synsets are numerous and present fine-
grained distinctions, not easily mappable to the 
corpus contexts or cases in which the context could 
raise a double interpretation. Annotators were not 
forced to make a totally subjective choice and 
could assign multiple senses (?and? operator). 
Lo Zaire ? uno dei paesi pi? pericolosi di tutta 
l'Africa = The Zaire is one of the most dangerous 
countries of Africa 
 
In IWN, sense distinctions are as follows: 
 
Paese1?  territorio con un governo sovrano e una 
propria organizzazione politica e amministrativa, 
(territory with its own political and administrative 
organization) 
 
Paese3? insieme di individui legati da stesse 
tradizioni storiche, lingua, costumi, (group of 
people with same historical traditions, languages 
and customs) 
 
Since annotators could not achieve a satisfactory 
disambiguation, they take into account both senses, 
sense1 and sense3. It was not clear, indeed, if the 
dangerousness refers to the country (sense1) or to 
the people (sense3). During the annotation, 
multiple senses have been assigned to about 90 
lemmas, that appeared arbitrary or impossible to 
disambiguate. 
3.6 Multiwords annotation 
The main difference between Senseval-3 and 
Senseval-2 is that in the all-words annotation task 
annotators are faced with complex lexical items 
coined, generally, with many technical terms, 
collocations, idioms, compounds, frozen 
expressions or multiwords, which were not present 
in the lexical-sample task. With the term 
multiwords we refer to all sequences of words 
whose meaning cannot be built compositionally 
from the meanings of its component words. The 
semantic contribution of individual components if 
annotated separately does not give reason of the 
final meaning of the expression which can be 
considered a sort of ?new concept?, e.g. farla 
franca (to get away with it), prendere parte (to 
take part), muro a secco (dry-stone wall). 
In IWN a set of lexicalised expressions were 
already included and the correct sense to assign 
was, hence, available: perdere i sensi (to faint), 
fare fuoco (to fire), passare in rivista (to review) 
etc. Many multiword expressions found in the 
corpus were added to IWN as semantically 
complex units, e.g. vedersela brutta (to have a 
narrow escape), essere in corso (to be in progress) 
etc. The annotation task has given, hence, the 
opportunity to establish a strong interaction 
between annotators and lexicographers in deciding 
what kind of sequences were real multiword 
expressions and, above all, which were worthwhile 
from a linguistic point of view to introduce in the 
lexical resource. 
The multiword expressions (about 60) were 
annotated with the following information: 
multiword ID; Part_of_Speech lemma; function of 
the components words: head, satellite. 
The individuation of the headword of the 
sequence has been made on the basis of a lexical 
criterion: for noun-phrases, the head of the 
sequence was considered the noun, the adjective 
for adjectival?phrases, the verb for verb-phrases. 
Once recognized the head, the other constituents 
play the role of satellites and the whole sequence 
receives the part-of-speech of the head. 
Here is an example encoded in XML: 
 
<head id="cs.morph074.mw_704" 
sats="cs.morph074.mw_706 
cs.morph074.mw_707"> 
uscita</head>clamorosamente 
<sat id="cs.morph074.mw_706">di</sat> 
<sat id="cs.morph074.mw_707">scena</sat> 
<answer head="cs.morph074.mw_704" 
senseid="uscire di scena.V.1"/> 
 
Our intention was only to provide an 
examplification of the methodology we adopted 
when trying to handle multiword expressions. 
Even if the recognition and treatment of poly- 
lexical units is obviously one of the most important 
issues emerging in the process of context 
interpretation, in this paper we did not address 
theoretical issues concerning their exact 
identification. 
References  
Alonge Antonietta, Nicoletta Calzolari, Piek 
Vossen, Laura Bloksma, Irene Castellon, Maria 
Antonia Marti and Wim Peters. 1998. The 
Linguistic Design of the EuroWordNet Database. 
Special Issue on EuroWordNet. Computers and 
the Humanities, Vol.32, N. 2-3: pag.91-115. 
Calzolari Nicoletta, Claudia Soria, Francesca 
Bertagna and Francesco Barsotti. 2002. 
Evaluating Lexical Resources Using Senseval. 
Journal of Natural Language Engineering, 
Special Issue of Senseval-2, vol.VIII(4), pag. 
375-390. 
Kilgarriff Adam, Rosenzweig Joseph. 2000. 
English Senseval: Report and Results. Proc. 
Second Conf on Language Resources and 
Evaluation Athens,  pag. 1239-1244. 
Montemagni Simonetta, Barsotti Francesco, 
Battista Marco Calzolari Nicoletta, Corazzari 
Ornella, Lenci Alessandro, Pirrelli Vito, 
Zampolli Antonio, Fanciulli Francesca; 
Massetani Maria, Raffaelli Remo, Basili 
Roberto, Pazienza Maria Teresa, Saracino Dario, 
Zanzotto Fabio, Mana Nadia, Pianesi Fabio, 
Delmonte Rodolfo. 2003. The syntactic-semantic 
Treebank of Italian. An Overview. Linguistica 
Computazionale a Pisa vol. I, pag.461-492. 
Vossen Piek (ed.) 1999. EuroWordNet General 
Document. The EWN CD-ROM (see also: 
http://www.hum.uva.nl/ ). 
 
