Proceedings of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 125?131,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Building Chinese Sense Annotated Corpus  
with the Help of Software Tools 
Yunfang Wu 
School of Electronic Engineering and 
Computer Science, Peking University, 
Beijing 100871 
wuyf@pku.edu.cn 
Peng Jin 
School of Electronic Engineering and 
Computer Science, Peking University, 
Beijing 100871 
jandp@pku.edu.cn 
Tao Guo 
School of Electronic Engineering and 
Computer Science, Peking University, 
Beijing 100871 
gtwcq@pku.edu.cn 
Shiwen Yu 
School of Electronic Engineering and 
Computer Science, Peking University, 
Beijing 100871 
yusw@pku.edu.cn 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents the building procedure 
of a Chinese sense annotated corpus. A set 
of software tools is designed to help hu-
man annotator to accelerate the annotation 
speed and keep the consistency. The soft-
ware tools include 1) a tagger for word 
segmentation and POS tagging, 2) an an-
notating interface responsible for the sense 
describing in the lexicon and sense anno-
tating in the corpus, 3) a checker for con-
sistency keeping, 4) a transformer respon-
sible for the transforming from text file to 
XML format, and 5) a counter for sense 
frequency distribution calculating. 
1 Introduction 
There is a strong need for a large-scale Chinese 
corpus annotated with word senses both for word 
sense disambiguation (WSD) and linguistic re-
search. Although much research has been carried 
out, there is still a long way to go for WSD tech-
niques to meet the requirements of practical NLP 
programs such as machine translation and infor-
mation retrieval. It was argued that no fundamen-
tal progress in WSD could be made until large-
scale lexical resources were built (Veronis, 2003). 
In English a word sense annotated corpus SEM-
COR (Semantic Concordances) (Landes et al, 
1999) has been built, which was later trained and 
tested by many WSD systems and stimulated large 
amounts of WSD work. In Japanese the Hinoki 
Sensebank is constructed (Tanaka et al, 2006). In 
the field of Chinese corpus construction, plenty of 
attention has been paid to POS tagging and syn-
tactic structures bracketing, for instance the Penn 
Chinese Treebank (Xue et al, 2002) and Sinica 
Corpus (Huang et al, 1992), but very limited 
work has been done with semantic knowledge 
annotation. Huang et al (2004) introduced the 
Sinica sense-based lexical knowledge base, but as 
is well known, Chinese pervasive in Taiwan is not 
the same as mandarin Chinese. SENSEVAL-3 
provides a Chinese word sense annotated corpus, 
which contains 20 words and 15 sentences per 
meaning for most words, but obviously the data is 
too limited to achieve wide coverage, high accu-
racy WSD systems. 
This paper is devoted to building a large-scale 
Chinese corpus annotated with word senses. A 
small part of the Chinese sense annotated corpus 
has been adopted as one of the SemEval-2007 
tasks namely ?Multilingual Chinese-English Lexi-
cal Sample Task? This paper concentrates on the 
description of the manually annotating schemes 
125
with the help of software tools. The software tools 
will help human annotators mainly in the two as-
pects: 1) Reduce the labor time and accelerate the 
speed; 2) Keep the inter-annotator agreement. The 
overall procedure along with the software tools is 
illustrated in figure 1.
.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            Preprocessing                                                                                 
Tagger: word segmentation and POS tagging
 
 
Annotating interface: word sense annotating
 
 
 
 
Checker: consistency checking 
 
 
 
 
Word sense annotated corpus
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                      Postprocessing
Transformer: XML format transforming Counter: sense frequency distribution calculating
 
This paper is so organized as follows. In section 
2 the preprocessing stage (word segmentation and 
POS tagging) is discussed. Then in section 3 the 
annotating scheme and the annotating interface 
are demonstrated in detail. The strategy to keep 
consistency is addressed in section 4. And then in 
section 5 and 6 the two postprocessing stages are 
respectively presented. Finally in section 7 con-
clusions are drawn and future works are presented. 
2 Word segmentation and POS tagging 
The input data for word sense annotating is firstly 
word segmented and POS tagged using Peking 
University?s POS tagger (Yu et al, 2003). The 
POS tagging precision is up to 97.5%, which lays 
a sound foundation for researches on sense anno-
tating. This is actually to make use of the full-
fledged syntactic processing techniques to deal 
with the semantic annotation problems. Different 
senses of one ambiguous word sometimes behave 
so differently that they bear different POS tags. 
Take ???/hold? in sentence (1) as an example. 
The noun of ???/hold? means ?confidence?, but 
the verb means ?grasp?.  
(1) a ?(have)  ??/n(confidence)  
b ??/v(grasp)  ?(ZHU)  ??(chance) 
Due to the unique characteristic of Chinese lan-
guage that lacks word inflection, the ambiguous 
words with different POSs are very common. Ac-
cording to the research of Li (1999), after POS 
tagging the ratio of ambiguous word occurrences 
in the text of People?s Daily is reduced from 42% 
to 26%. Therefore the emphasis of manually sense 
annotating in this paper falls on the ambiguous 
words with the same part of speech. This will in 
turn save 16% of the annotation effort compared 
with the sense annotating before the preprocessing 
of POS tagging. 
Fig.1.The overall procedure along with the software tools 
3 Word sense annotating 
The resulting lexical knowledge base in this pro-
ject will contain three major components: 1) a 
corpus annotated with Chinese word senses 
namely Chinese Senses Pool (CSP); 2) a lexicon 
containing sense distinction and description 
namely Chinese Semantic Dictionary (CSD); 3) 
the linking between the CSD and the Chinese 
Concept Dictionary (CCD) (Liu et al, 2002). The 
corpus CSP, the lexicon CSD and CCD constitute 
a highly relational and tightly integrated system: 1) 
In CSD the sense distinctions are described rely-
ing on the corpus; 2) In CSP the word occurrences 
are assigned sense tags according to the sense en-
126
try specified in CSD; 3) The linking between the 
sense entry in CSD and CCD synsets are estab-
lished. The dynamic model is shown in figure 2. A 
software tool is developed in Java to be used as 
the word sense annotating interface (figure 3), 
which embodies the spirit of the dynamic model 
properly.
  
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1 Sense describing in the lexicon and sense 
annotating in the corpus 
In this project the lexicon CSD containing sense 
descriptions and the corpus CSP annotated with 
senses are built interactively, simultaneously and 
dynamically. On one hand, the sense distinctions in 
the lexicon are made relying heavily on the corpus 
usage. On the other hand, using the sense informa-
tion specified in the lexicon the human annotators 
assign semantic tags to all the instances of the 
word in a corpus.  
In the word sense annotating interface, the sen-
tences from CSP containing the target ambiguous 
words are displayed in the upper section, and the 
word senses with feature-based description from 
CSD are displayed in the bottom section. 
Through reading the context in the corpus, the 
human annotator decides to add or delete or edit a 
sense entry in the lexicon. The default value of the 
range of the context is within a sentence, and the 
surrounding characters in the left and right of the 
target word can be specified by the annotator. An-
notators can do four kinds of operations in CSD: 1) 
Add a sense entry and then fill in all the features; 2) 
Delete a sense entry along with all its feature de-
scription; 3) Edit a sense entry and change any of 
the features; 4) Select a sample sentence form the 
CSP and add it to the lexicon in the corresponding 
sense entry. 
        
 
interactive construction 
 
linking 
 
indirect relation  
Corpus 
CSP 
CCD Lexicon 
CSD 
Fig 2. The dynamic model between the CSP, CSD and CCD 
Fig3. The word sense annotating interface 
127
According to the sense specification in CSD the 
human annotator assigns semantic tags to the word 
occurrences in CSP. The operation is quite easy. 
When the annotator double clicks the appropriate 
sense entry in CSD the sense tag is automatically 
added to the target word.  
The notable feature in this word sense annotat-
ing interface is that it provides flexible searching 
schemes. 1) Search sequentially (forward or back-
ward) all the instances of an ambiguous words re-
gardless of the annotating state; 2) Search sequen-
tially (forward or backward) the already annotated 
instances; 3) Search sequentially (forward or back-
ward) the yet un-annotated instances and 4) Search 
the instances of a specific ambiguous word (the 
window named Find/Replace in figure3, and again 
is shown in figure 4 for clearness). 
The tool of Find/Replace is widely used in this 
project and has proven to be effective in annotating 
word senses. It allows the annotator to search for a 
specific word to finish tagging all its occurrences 
in the same period of time rather than move se-
quentially through the text. The consistency is 
more easily kept when the annotator manages 
many different instances of the same word than 
handle a few occurrences of many different words 
in a specific time frame, because the former 
method enables the annotator to establish an inte-
grative knowledge system about a specific word 
and its sense distinction. Also the tool of 
Find/Replace provides flexible searching schemes 
for a specific ambiguous word. For instance, 
search in the corpus with different directions (for-
ward/backward) and search with different annotat-
ing states (annotated/un-annotated/both). Using the 
tool the annotator can also replace some specific 
word occurrences in the corpus (often with special 
POS tags) with a sense tag, thus can finish annotat-
ing the corpus quickly and with a batch method. 
For instance the POS tag of ?vq? (means verb 
complement) often uniquely corresponds to a spe-
cific verb sense such as ??/vq??/vq!8?. 
There is the status bar in the bottom line of the 
word sense annotating interface, and there clearly 
show the annotating status: the total word occur-
rences, the serial number of the current processing 
instance and the number of the already annotated 
instances.  
 
 
Fig.4  The tool of Find/Replace 
 
3.2 Linking between CSD and CCD 
The feature-based description of word meanings in 
CSD describes mainly the syntagmatic information, 
such as the subcategory frames of verbs, the se-
mantic categories of the head noun of adjectives, 
but cannot include the paradigmatic relations. 
WordNet is a popular open resource and has been 
widely experimented in WSD researches. Chinese 
Concept Dictionary (CCD) is a WordNet-like Chi-
nese lexicon (Liu et al, 2002), which carries the 
main relations defined in WordNet and can be seen 
as a bilingual concept lexicon with the parallel 
Chinese-English concepts to be simultaneously 
included. So the linking between the sense entries 
in CSD and the synsets in CCD is tried to establish 
in this project. After the linking has been estab-
lished, the paradigmatic relations (such as hy-
pernym / hyponym, meronym / holonym) ex-
pressed in CCD can map automatically to the sense 
entry in CSD. What?s more, the many existing 
WSD approaches based on WordNet can be trained 
and tested on the Chinese sense tagged corpus. 
In the right section of the word sense annotating 
interface there displays the synset information 
from CCD. When coping with a specific ambigu-
ous word (such as ??/open?) in CSD, the linking 
between CSD and CCD is automatically estab-
lished with the word itself (??/open?) as the pri-
mary key. And then all the synsets of the word 
(??/open?) in CCD, along with the hypernyms of 
each sense (expressed by the first word in a synset), 
are displayed in the right section. A synset selec-
tion window (namely Set synsets) containing the 
offset numbers of the synsets then appears in the 
right section. The annotator clicks on the appropri-
ate box(es) before the corresponding offset number 
and then the offset number is automatically added 
128
to the feature ?CCD? in the currently selected 
sense entry in CSD. 
The linking is now done manually. Unfortu-
nately some of the ambiguous words existing in 
CSD are not included in CCD. This also provides a 
good way to improve the coverage and quality of 
CCD.  
4 Consistency Checking 
Consistency is always an important concern for 
hand-annotated corpus, and is even critical for the 
sense tagged corpus due to the subtle meanings to 
handle. A software tool namely Sense Consistency 
Checker is developed in the checking procedure. 
The checker extracts all the instances of a specific 
ambiguous word into a checking file with the for-
mat of the sense concordances (as shown in figure 
5 ). The checking file enables the checker to have a 
closer examination of how the senses are used and 
distributed, and to form a general view of how the 
sense distinctions are made. The inter-annotator in-
agreement thus can be reached quickly and cor-
rectly. As illustrated in figure 5, it is obviously an 
error to assign the same semantic tag to ??/drive 
??/car? and ???/meeting ?/held?. Simply as 
it is the checker greatly accelerates the checking 
speed and improve the consistency. 
 
 
Fig. 5. Some example sentences in the checking file of ??/open? 
 
Together five researchers took part in the anno-
tation, of which three are majored in linguistics 
and two are majored in computational linguistics. 
In this project the annotators are also checkers, 
who check other annotators? work. A text gener-
ally is first tagged by one annotator and then veri-
fied by two checkers. 
After the preprocessing of word segmentation 
and Pos tagging, the word sense annotating and 
the consistency checking, the Chinese word sense 
annotated corpus is constructed. And then other 
software tools are needed to do further processing 
in the sense annotated corpus. 
5 XML format transforming 
The original format of the Chinese sense anno-
tated corpus is in text file as shown in figure 6. In 
the text file the sign following ?/? denotes the 
POS tag, and the number following ?!? indicates 
the sense ID. The text file complies with the other 
language resources at the Institute of Computa-
tional Linguistics, Peking University, which pro-
vides a quite easy way to make full use of the ex-
isting resources and techniques at ICL/PKU when 
constructing the sense annotated corpus.  
At the same time in order to exchange and 
share information easily with other language re-
sources in the world, a software tool namely Text-
to-XML Transformer is developed to change the 
text to XML format (as shown in figure 7). In the 
XML file, the item ?pos? denotes the POS tag of 
the word, and the item ?senseid? denotes sense ID 
of the ambiguous word. 
Thus there are two kinds of format for the Chi-
nese sense annotated corpus, each of which has its 
advantages and can be adopted to meet different 
requirements in different situations. 
 
129
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6. The sense annotated corpus in text file 
??/a  ?/u  ??/vn  ?/vt!2  ??/b  ??/n  ?/p  ?/m  ?/q!1  ?/r2  ??/n  ??/n  ??/vi  ?/u  ??/d  ??/a  
?/u  ??/n  ?/w  ??/vn  ??/n  ??/d  ??/vt  ?/w  ??/t  ???/n  ?/r  ?/q  ??/vn  ??/n  ?/d  ?/vt!3  ?
/v  9000/m  ?/m  ?/q ?/w 
 
<head date="20000201" page="01" articleno="003" passageno="019"> 
<passage> 
????????????????????????????????????????????????? 
??? 9000?? 
</passage> 
<postagging> 
<word id="0" pos="a" senseid=""> 
<token>??</token> 
</word> 
<word id="1" pos="u" senseid=""> 
<token>?</token> 
</word> 
<word id="2" pos="vn" senseid=""> 
<token>??</token> 
</word> 
<word id="3" pos="vt" senseid="2"> 
<token>?</token> 
</word> 
??   ?? 
 
Fig. 7. The sense annotated corpus in XML format 
 
6 Sense frequency calculating 
Word sense frequency distribution in the real texts 
is a vital kind of information both for the algo-
rithms of word sense disambiguation and for the 
research on lexical semantics. In the postprocess-
ing stage a software tool namely Sense Frequency 
Counter is developed to make statistics on the 
sense frequency distribution. Quite valuable in-
formation can be acquired through the counter 
based on the sense annotated corpus: 1) The 
amount of all the instances of an ambiguous word; 
2) The number of the already annotated instances; 
3) The occurrence of each sense of an ambiguous 
word and 4) The sense frequency. Table 1 illus-
trates the sense frequency distribution of ambigu-
ous verb ??/open? in 10 day?s People?s Daily. 
7 Conclusions 
This paper describes the overall building proce-
dure of a Chinese sense annotated corpus. The 
corpus is firstly word segmented and POS tagging 
using Peking University?s tagger in the preproc-
essing stage. Then the lexicon Chinese Semantic 
Dictionary (CSD) containing sense descriptions 
and the corpus Chinese Senses Pool (CSP) anno-
tated with senses are built interactively, simulta-
neously and dynamically using the word sense 
annotating interface. At the same time the linking 
between the sense entries in CSD and the synsets 
in Chinese Concept Dictionary (CCD) are manu-
ally established. And then the Sense Consistency 
Checker is used to keep the inter-annotator 
agreement. Finally two software tools are devel-
oped to do further processing based on the sense 
annotated corpus. A software tool namely Text-to-
XML Transformer is developed to change the text 
to XML format, and the Sense Frequency Counter 
is developed to make statistics on the sense fre-
quency distribution. The annotation schemes and 
all the software tools have been experimented in 
building the SemEval-2007 task 5 ?Multilingual 
Chinese-English Lexical Sample Task?, and have 
proven to be effective. 
 
 
130
Table 1 the sense frequency distribution of ambiguous verb ??/open? 
Ambiguous verbs Sense ID Occurrences Frequency(%) 
? 8 30 32.26
? 4 13 13.98
? 6 12 12.90
? 7 8 8.60
? 0 6 6.45
? 1 6 6.45
? 9 4 4.30
? 12 4 4.30
? 11 3 3.23
? 2 3 3.23
? 10 3 3.23
? 14 1 1.08
? 15 0 0.00
? 3 0 0.00
? 5 0 0.00
? 13 0 0.00
Acknowledgments. This research is supported by 
Humanity and Social Science Research Project of 
China State Education Ministry (No. 06JC740001) 
and National Basic Research Program of China 
(No. 2004CB318102). 
References 
Huang, Ch. R and Chen, K. J. 1992. A Chinese Corpus 
for Linguistics Research. In Proceedings of COL-
ING-1992. 
Huang, Ch. R., Chen, Ch. L., Weng C. X. and Chen. K. 
J. 2004. The Sinica Sense Management System: De-
sign and Implementation. In Recent advancement in 
Chinese lexical semantics. 
Landes, S., Leacock, C. and Tengi, R. 1999. Building 
Semantic Concordances. In Christiane Fellbaum 
(Ed.) WordNet: an Electronic Lexical Database. 
MIT Press, Cambridge. 
Li, J. 1999. The research on Chinese word sense dis-
ambiguation. Doctoral dissertation in computer sci-
ence department of Tsinghua University. 
Liu, Y., Yu, S. W. and Yu, J.S. 2002. Building a Bilin-
gual WordNet-like Lexicon: the New Approach and 
Algorithms. In Proceedings of COLING 2002.  
Tanaka, T., Bond F. and Fujita, S. 2006. The Hinoki 
Sensebank----A large-scale word sense tagged cor-
pus of Japanese. In Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Frontiers in Linguistically Annotated Corpora 2006. 
Veronis, J. 2003. Sense Tagging: Does It Make Sense? 
In Wilson et al (Eds). Corpus Linguistics by the 
Rule: a Festschrift for Geoffrey Leech.  
Xue, N., Chiou, F. D. and Palmer, M. 2002. Building a 
Large-Scale Annotated Chinese Corpus. In Proceed-
ings of COLING 2002. 
Yu, S. W., Duan, H. M., Zhu, X. F., Swen, B. and 
Chang, B. B. 2003. Specification for Corpus Proc-
essing at Peking University: Word Segmentation, 
POS tagging and Phonetic Notation. Journal of Chi-
nese Language and Computing. 
 
131
