A word-grammar based morl)hoh)gieal nalyzer 
for agglutinative languages 
Aduriz 1.+, Agirre E., Aldezabal I., Alegria I., Arregi X., Arriohl J. M., Artola X., Gojenola K., 
Marilxalar A., Sarasola K., Urkia M.+ 
l)ept, of Colllptiier 1Aulgtlages and Systems, University of lhe Basqtlo Cotlnlry, 64.9 P. K., 
E-20080 1)onostia, Basque Counh'y 
tUZEI, Aldapeta 20, E-20009 1)onostia, Basque Country 
+Universidad de Barcelona, Grin Vfii de Isis Cortes CalaiallaS, 585, E-08007 Flarcelona 
j ipgogak @ si.elm, es. 
Abst rac l  
Agglutinative languages presenl rich 
morphology and for sonic applications 
they lleed deep analysis at word level. 
Tile work here presenled proposes a 
model for designing a full nlorpho- 
logical analyzer. 
The model integrates lhe two-level 
fornlalisnl alld a ullificalion-I)asod 
fornialisni. In contrast to other works, 
we propose to separate the treatment of 
sequential and non-sequetTtial mou)ho- 
lactic constraints. Sequential constraints 
are applied in lhe seglllenlalion phase, 
and non-seqtlontial OlleS ill the filial 
feature-combination phase. Early appli- 
cation of sequential nlorpholactic 
coilsli'aiills during tile segnloillaiioi/ 
process nlakes feasible :,ill officienl 
iinplenleilialion of tile full morpho- 
logical analyzer. 
The result of lhis research has been tile 
design and imi)len~entation of a full 
nlorphosynlactic analysis procedure for 
each word in unrestricted Basque texts. 
I n t roduct ion  
Morphological analysis of woMs is a basic 
tool for automatic language processing, and 
indispensable when dealing willl highly 
agglutinative languages like Basque (Aduriz el 
al., 98b). In lhis conlext, some applications, 
like spelling corfeclion, do ilOI need illOl'e lhan 
the seglllOlltation of each word inlo its 
different COlllponenl nlorphellles alollg with 
their morphological information, ltowever, 
there are oiher applications such as lemnializa- 
tion, lagging, phrase recognition, and 
delernlinaiion of clause boundaries (Aduriz el 
al., 95), which need an additional global 
morphological i)arsing j of the whole word. 
Such a complete nlorphological analyzer has 
lo consider three main aspects (l~,ilchie et al, 
92; Sproal, 92): 
1 Morl)hographenfics (also called morpho- 
phonology). This ternl covers orthographic 
variations that occur when linking 
I l lOfphellleS. 
2) morpholactics. Specil'ication of which 
nlorphenles can or cannot combine with 
each other lo form wflid words. 
3) Feature-combination. Specification of how 
these lnorphemes can be grouped and how 
their nlorphosyntactic features can be 
comlfined. 
The system here presented adopts, oil the one 
hand, tile lwo-level fornlalisnl to deal with 
morphogralfilemics and sequential morl)ho- 
lactics (Alegria el al., 96) and, on the other 
hand, a unification-based woM-grammar 2 to 
combine the grammatical information defined 
in nlorphemes and to  tackle complex 
nlorphotactics. This design allowed us to 
develop a full coverage analyzer that processes 
efl'iciently unrestricted texts in Basque. 
The remainder of tills paper is organized sis 
follows. After a brief' description of Basque 
nlorphology, section 2 describes tile 
architecture for morphological processing, 
where the morphosynlactic omponent is 
included. Section 3 specifies tile plaenomena 
covered by the analyzer, explains its desigi~ 
criteria, alld presents implementation and 
ewthialion details. Section d compares file 
I This has also been called mo*7)hOSh,ntactic 
parsitlg. When we use lhc \[(fill #11017~\]lOSyltl~/X WC 
will always refer to il~c lficrarchical structure at 
woM level, conlbining morphology and synlax. 
2 '\]'\]lt3 \[IDl'll\] WOl'd-gF(lllllllUl" should not be confused 
with the synlaclic lilcory presented in (Hudson, 84). 
system with previous works. Finally, the paper 
ends with some concluding renmrks. 
1 Brief description of Basque 
morphology 
These are the most important features of 
Basque morphology (Alegria et al, 96): 
? As prepositional functions are realized by 
case suffixes inside word-fornls, Basque 
presents a relatively high power to generate 
inflected word-forms. For instance, froth a 
single noun a minimum of 135 inflected 
forms can be generated. Therefore, the 
number of simple word-forms covered by 
the current 70,000 dictionary entries woukl 
not be less than 10 million. 
? 77 of the inflected forms are simple 
combinations of number, determination, 
and case marks, not capable of further 
inflection, but the other 58 word-forms 
ending in one of the two possible genitives 
(possessive and locative) can be further 
inflected with the 135 morphemes. This 
kind of recursive construction reveals a 
noun ellipsis inside a noun phrase and 
could be theoretically exteuded ad 
infinitum; however, in practice it is not 
usual to fiud more than two levels of this 
kind of recursion in a word-form. Taking 
into account a single level of noun ellipsis, 
the number of word-forum coukl be 
estimated over half a billion. 
? Verbs offer a lot of grammatical 
information. A verb tbrln conveys informa- 
tion about the subject, the two objects, as 
well as the tense and aspect. For example: 
diotsut (Eng.: 1 am telling you something). 
o Word-formation is very productive in 
Basque. It is very usual to create new 
compounds as well as derivatives. 
As a result of this wealth of infornmtion 
contained within word-forms, complex struc- 
tures have to be built to represent complete 
morphological information at word level. 
2 An architecture for the full 
morphological ana lyzer  
The framework we propose for the 
morphological treatment is shown in Figure 1. 
The morphological nalyzer is the fiont-end to 
all present applications for the processing of 
Basque texts. It is composed of two modules: 
the segmentation module and the 
morphosyntactic analyzer. 
conformant .................. ~ U~atabas N TEZ-conf~ 
\[Segmentation module 
____~| HorphograDhemics 
Morphotactics I 
TEI-FS .............. ~ ~ ~ ~  ~ - p ~  
conformant Cegmented TexN 
Morphosyntactic 
analyzer 
Feature- combination 
Morphotactics II 
TEI-FS \] .............. ~ actically 
Lermnatization, linguistic Analysis tagging tools 
Figure 1. Architecture 1"o1" morphological processing. 
The segmentation ,nodule was previously 
implemented in (Alegria et al, 96). This 
system applies two-level morphology 
(Koskenniemi, 83) for the morphological 
description and obtains, for each word, its 
possible segmentations (one or many) into 
component morphemes. The two-level system 
has the following components: 
? A set of 24 morphograf~hemic rules, 
compiled into transducers (Karttunen, 94). 
? A lexicon made up of around 70,000 items, 
grouped into 120 sublexicons and stored in 
a general lexical database (Aduriz et al, 
98a). 
This module has full coverage of free-running 
texts in Basque, giving an average number of 
2.63 different analyses per word. The result is 
the set of possible morphological segmenta- 
tions of a word, where each morpheme is 
associated with its corresponding features in 
the lexicon: part of speech (POS), 
subcategory, declension case, number, 
definiteness, as well as syntactic function and 
some semantic features. Therefore, the output 
of the segmeutation phase is very rich, as 
shown in Figure 2 with the word amarengan 
(Eng.: on the mother). 
grammar 
mother) 
POS noun) 
subc~t common 
:count: +) 
(an imate  +) 
(nleasurable "-) 
aren 
(of life) 
(POS decl-suffix) 
(definite +) 
(number sing) 
(case genitive) 
(synt-f @nouncomp) 
J gan \] 
(o.1 / 
(POS decl-suf fix) I 
(case inossivo) \] 
(synt-f @adverbial)I 
=> 
amarengan 
(o. the mother) 
POS noun) 
subcat common) 
number sing) 
definite +) 
case inessive) 
count +) 
animate +) 
measurable -) 
synt-f @adverbial) 
iq:e, ure 2. Morphosynlactic analysis eof (unureugun (l{ng.: (m 
The architecture is a modular envhoument that 
allows different ypes of output depending on 
the desired level of analysis. The foundation of 
the architecture lies in the fact lhat TEI- 
confommnt SGML has been adopted for the 
comnmnication allloIlg modules (Ide and 
VCFOIIiS, 95). l~'eature shucluleS coded 
accoMing TIU are used to represent linguistic 
information, illcluding tile input mM outl)ut of 
the morplaological analyzer. This reprcscnta- 
tion rambles the use of SGML-aware parsers 
and tools, and Call he easily filtered into 
different formats (Artola et ill., 00). 
3 Word level morl)hosyntactic analysis 
This section Hrst presents the l~henomena lhat 
must be covered by the morphosyntactic 
analyzer, then explains ils design criteria, and 
finally shows implementation and ewfluation 
details. 
3.1 Phenomena covered by the analyzer 
There are several features that emphasized the 
need of morphosyntactic almlysis in order to 
build up word level information: 
I) Multiplicity of values for the same feature 
in successive morphemes. In the analysis 
of Figure 2 there are two different values 
for the POS (noun and declension suffix), 
two for the case (genitive and inessive), 
and two for the syntactic function 
(@nouncomp and @adverbial). Multiple 
values at moq~hemc-level will have to be 
merged to obtain the word level infer 
mation. 
2) Words with phrase structure. Although the 
segmentation is done for isolated words, 
independently of context, in several cases 
3 l?calurc wtlues starling with the "@" character 
correspond to syntactic functions, like @noullcomp 
(norm complement) or @adverbial. 
the mother) 
tile resulting structure is oquiwflent o the 
aualysis of a phrase, as can be seen i, 
Figure 2. 111 this case, although there are 
two different cases (genitive and inessive), 
lhe case of the full word-form is simply 
inessive. 
3) Noun ellipsis inside word-lbrms. A noun 
ellipsis can occur withi, the word 
(oceasi(mally more than once). This 
information must be made explicit in the 
resulting analysis. For example, Figure 3 
shows the analysis of a single word-forln 
like diotsudumtrel&z (Eng.: with what I am 
lelling you). The first line shows its 
segmentation into four morphemes 
(die tsut+en+ 0 +arekin). The feature 
compl ill tile final analysis conveys the 
information for the verb (l um lelliHg you), 
that carries information about pc'rson, 
number and case o1' subject, object and 
indirect object. The feature comp2 
represents an elided noun and its 
declension stfffix (with). 
4) l)erivation and composition are productive 
in Basque. There arc more than 80 deri- 
w/tion morphemes (especially suffixes) 
intensively used in word-fornlatioll. 
3.2 Design of the word-grammar 
The need to impose hierarchical structure upon 
sequences of morphemes and to build complex 
constructions from them forced us to choose a 
unil'ication mechanism. This task is currently 
unsolwlble using finite-state techniques, clue to 
the growth in size of the resulting network 
(Beesley, 98). We have developed a unifica- 
tion based word-grammar, where each rule 
combines information flom different 
mot+lJlemes giving as a result a feature 
structure for each interpretation of a word- 
fol'nl, treating the previously mentioned cases. 
3 
diotsut 
I am tellh,g you) 
POS verb) 
(tense present) 
(pers-ergative is)\[ 
(pets-dative 2s) 
(pers-absol 3s) 
en 
(what) 
(POS relation) 
(subcat subord) 
(relator relative 
(synt-f @rel-clause 
0 
() 
(POS ellipsis) 
arekin 
(wire) 
(POS declension-suffix)) 
(case sociative) 
(number sing) 
(definite +) 
(synt-f @adverbial) 
=> diotsudanarekin (wi~ what lamtel l ingyou) 
(POS verb-noun_ellipsis) 
(case sociative) 
(number sing) 
(definite +) 
(synt-f @adverbial) 
(compl (POS verb) 
(subcat subord) 
(relator relative) 
(synt-f @tel-clause) 
(tense present) 
(pers-ergative is) 
(pets-dative 2s) 
(pers-absol 3s)) 
(comp2 (POS noun) 
(subcat common) 
(number sing) 
(definite+) 
(synt-f @adverbial)) 
Figure 3. Morphosyntactic analysis of diotxudanarekin (Eng.: with what I am tellittg you) 
As a consequence of the rich naorphology of 
Basque we decided to control morphotactic 
phenomena, as much as possible, in the 
morphological segmentation phase. Alterna- 
tively, a model with minimal morphotactic 
treatment (Ritchie et al, 92) would produce 
too many possible analyses after segmentation, 
which should be reiected in a second phase. 
Therefore, we propose to separate sequential 
morphotactics (i.e., which sequences of 
morphemes can or cannot combine with each 
other to form valid words), which will be 
recognized by the two-level system by means 
of continuation classes, and non-sequential 
morphotactics like long-distance dependencies 
that will be controlled by the word-gmnunar. 
The general linguistic principles used to define 
unification equations in the word-grannnar 
rules are the following: 
1) Information risen from the lemma. The 
POS and semantic features are risen flom 
the lemnm. This principle is applied to 
common nouns, adjectives and adverbs. 
The lemma also gives the mnnber in 
proper nouns, pronouns and determiners 
(see Figure 2). 
2) lnfornmtion risen from case suffixes. 
Simple case suffixes provide information 
on declension case, number and syntactic 
function. For example, tile singular 
genitive case is given by the suffix -tell in 
ama+ren (Eng.: of the mother). For 
compound case suffixes the number and 
determination are taken from the first 
suffix and the case from the second one. 
First, both suffixes are joined and after 
that they are attached to the lemma. 
3) Noun ellipsis. When an ellipsis occurs, the 
POS of the whole word-form is expressed 
by a compound, which indicates both the 
presence of the ellipsis (always a noun) 
and the main POS of the word. 
For instance, the resulting POS is 
verb-noun_e l l ips is  when a noun- 
ellipsis occurs after a verb. All the 
information corresponding to both units, 
the explicit lemma and the elided one, is 
stored (see Figure 3). 
4) Subordination morl~hemes. When a 
subordination morpheme is attached to a 
verb, the verb POS and its featm'es are 
risen as well as the subordhmte relation 
and the syntactic fnnction conveyed by the 
naorpheme. 
5) Degree morphemes attached to adjectives, 
past participles and adverbs. The POS and 
diotsudan 
(diotsut + en) 
(POS verb) 
(tense present) 
(relator relative) 
/ \ / 
diotsut 
(POS verb) 
(tense present 
diotsudanarekin 
(diotsut + en -I 0 + arekin) 
(POS verb-noun_ell ipsis) 
(case sociative) 
arekin 
(0 + arekin) 
(POS noun ellipsis) 
(case sociative) 
en 
(pos 
? . . 
o 
(POS e l l ips i s  re la t ion)  
arekin 
(case sociative) 
Figure 4. Parse tree for diotmuhmarekitl (Eng.: with what I am lellittg yott) 
main features arc taken from the lemma 
and the features corresponding to the 
degrees of comparison (comparative, 
supcrhttive) aft taken from the degree 
morphemes. 
6) l)efiwttion. 1)miwttion suffixes select tile 
POS of the base-form to create the deriw> 
tive anti in most cases to change its POS. 
For instance, the suffix -garri (Eng.: -able) 
is applied to verbs and the derived word is 
an adjective. When the derived form is 
obtained by means o1' a prefix, it does not 
change the POS of the base-form. In both 
cases the morphosyntactic rules add a new 
feature representing the structure of tile 
word as a derivative (root and affixes). 
7) Composition. At the moment, we only 
treat the most freqttent kind of 
composition (noun-noun). Since Basque is 
syntactically characterized as a right-head 
hmguage, the main information of the 
compound is taken from the second 
element. 
8) Order of application of the mofphosyn- 
tactic phenomena. When several morpho- 
syntactic phenomena are applied to the 
same leml l la ,  so as to eliminate 
nonsensical readings, the natural order to 
consider them in Basque is the following: 
lemmas, derbation prefixes, deriwltion 
suffixes, composition and inflection (see 
Figure 4). 
9) Morl)hotactic constraints. Elimination of 
illegal sequences of morphemes, such as 
those due to long-distance dependencies, 
which are difficult to restrict by means of 
conti.uation classes. 
The first and second principles are defined lo 
combine information of previously recognized 
mOrl~hemcs, but all the other principles arc 
related to both feature-combination a d non- 
sequential moq~hotactics. 
3.3 Implementation 
We have chosen the PATR formalism 
(Shiebcr, 86) for the definition of the moqflm- 
syntactic rules. There were two main reasons 
for this choice: 
? The formalism is based o.  unification. 
Unification is adequate for the treatment of 
complex phenomena (e.g., agreement of 
conslituents in case, tmmber and definite- 
hess) and complex linguistic structures. 
? Simplicity. The grammar is not linked to a 
linguistic theory, e.g. GPSG in (Ritchie et 
al., 92)? The fact that PATR is simpler than 
more sophisticated formalisms will allow 
that in @e future the grammar could be 
adapted to any of them. 
25 rules have been defined, distributed in the 
following way: 
? 11 rules for the merging of declension 
morphemes and their combination with the 
main categories, 
? 9 rules for the description of verbal 
subordination morphenles, 
? 2 general fulcs for derivation, 
? 1 rule for each of the following 
phenomeml: ellipsis, degree of COlnpavison 
of adjectives (comparative and SUl)erlative) 
and noun composition. 
3.4 Evaluat ion 
As a cousequence of the size of the lexical 
database and tile extensive treatment of 
nlorphosyntax, the resulting analyzer offers 
full coverage when applied to real texts, 
capable of treating unknown words and non- 
standard forms (dialectal wtriants and typical 
errors). 
We performed four experilnents to ewtluate 
tile efficiency of the implemented analyzer 
(see Table 1). A 10,832-word text was 
randomly selected from newspapers. We 
measured tile number of words per second 
analyzed by the morphosyntactic analyzer and 
also by the whole morphological analyzer 
(results taken on a Sun Ultra 10). Ill the first 
experiment all tile word-t'ornls were analyzed 
one-by-one; while ill tile other three experi- 
ments words with more than one occurrence 
were analyzed only once. Ill the last two 
experimeuts a memory with the analysis of tile 
most frequent word-forms (MFW) in Basque 
was used, so that only word-forms not found 
in the MFW were analyzed. 
Test 
description 
All 
word forms 
Diffcrent 
word forms 
MFW 
10,000 words 
(I 5 Mb) 
MFW 
50,000 words 
(75 mb) 
# words/scc 
analyzed Morphosynt. 
words analyzer 
10,832 
3,692 
1,483 
533 
15,13 
44 40 
111 95 
308 270 
words/see 
Full 
morphological 
analyzer 
13,5 
Table 1. Evaluation results. 
Even when our language is agglutinative, and 
its morphological phenomena need more 
computational resources to build complex and 
deep structures, the results prove tile feasibility 
of implementiug efficiently a fifll 
morphological analyzer, although efficiency 
was not the main concern of our 
implementation. The system is currently being 
applied to unrestricted texts in real-time 
applications. 
4 Related work 
(Koskeniemmi, 83) defined the formalism 
named two-level morphology. Its main 
contributiou was the treatment of 
morl)hographemics and morphotactics. The 
formalisnl has been stmcessfully applied to a 
wide wlriety ot' languages. 
(Karttunen, 94) speeds the two-level model 
compiling two-level rules into lexical 
transducers, also increasing the expressiveness 
of the model 
The morphological analyzer created by 
(Ritchie et al, 92) does not adopt finite state 
mechanisms to control morphotactic 
phenomena. Their two-level implementation 
incorporates a straightforward morphotactics, 
reducing tile number of sublexicons to the 
indispensable (prefixes, lemmas and suffixes). 
This approximation would be highly 
inefficient for agglutinative languages, as it 
would create lnany nonsensical interpretatiolas 
that should be rejected by tile unification 
phase. They use the word-grammar for both 
morphotactics and feature-conlbination. 
ill a similar way, (Trost, 90) make a proposal 
to combine two-level morphology and non- 
sequential morphotactics. 
The PC-Kimmo-V2 system (Antworth, 94) 
presents an architecture similar to ours applied 
to English, using a finite-state segmentation 
phase before applying a unification-based 
grammar. 
(Pr6szdky and Kis, 99) describe a morpho- 
syntactic analyzer for Hungarian, an agglu- 
tinative language. The system clots not use the 
two-level model for segmentation, precom- 
piling suffix-sequences to improve efficiency. 
They claim the need of a word-grammar, 
giving a first outline of its design, although 
they do not describe it in detail. 
(Oflazer, 99) presents a different approach for 
the treatment of Turkish, an agglutinative 
language, applying directly a dependency 
parsing scheme to morpheme groups, that is, 
merging morphosyntax and syntax. Although 
we are currently using a similar model to 
Basque, there are several applications that are 
word-based and need full morphological 
parsing of each word-t'orm, like the word- 
oriented Constraint Graminar formalism for 
disambiguation (Karlsson et aI., 95). 
Conc lus ion  
We propose a model for fllll morphological 
analysis iutegrating two different components. 
On tile one hand, the two-level formalism 
deals with morphographenfics and sequential 
morphotactics and, on the other hand, a 
unil\]cation-based word-grammar combines lhe 
granlll-iatical in\['ornlatioli defined in illoi'- 
phelllOS alld also handles COlllplcx illori)ho- 
tactics. 
Early application of sCqtloniial I/lOrl)hotactic 
conslraints dtu-ing the segmentation process 
avoids all excessive laUlllber of nleaningless 
segmentation possibilities before the 
coulputationally lllOlO expensive unification 
process. Unification permits lhe resohition of a 
wide variety of morl)hological phenonlena, 
like ellipsis, thal force the definition of: 
complex and deep structures Io roprosenl the 
output of the analyzer. 
This design allowed us io develop a full 
coverage allalyzor that processes efficiently 
unrestricted loxis in Basque, a strongly 
agglulinafive langttage. 
The anaiyzcl" has bccll integrated ill a gCllOl'al 
franlework for the l)lOCessing of l~asquc, with 
all the linguistic inodulos communicating by 
l l leallS O\[: foattll'C stltlClll l 'eS ill accord  {o the 
principles of ihe Text Encoding Initiative. 
Acknowledgements  
This research was partially supported by the 
Basque Government, the University of the 
\]71aS(lUe Cotlntry {/lid the CICYq' (Cotllisidn 
lntcrministorial de Ciencia y Tecnologfil). 
References 
Aduriz 1., Aldczabal I., Ansa ()., Arlola X., I)faz de 
Ilarraza A., Insau.~li .I.M. (1998a) EI)BL: a 
Mttlli-l~ttrposed Lexica/ Sttl)l)c;rl .lot the 
Treatment of Ba,s'que. Proceedings of the l;irst 
Inlernational Confcncncc on l Auiguagc Resources 
and Ewduation, Granada. 
Aduriz I., Agirre E., Aldczabal 1., Alegria 1., Ansa 
O., Arrcgi X., Arriola J.M., ArtolaX., I)faz de 
lhu'raza A., Ezciza N., Gqicnola K., Maritxahu" 
A., Maritxalar M., Oronoz M., Sarasola K., 
Soroa A., Urizar R., Urkia M. (1998b) A 
Framework .for the Automatic Pmce.vsi#~g (if" 
Basqtte. Proceedings o1 the First Ii~ternational 
Con \[elel i te on Lall.gtlagc Resources turf 
Evaluation, Granada. 
Aduriz I., Alcgria I., Arriohl J.M., Artola X., l)faz 
do Ilarraza A., Ecciza N., Gojcnola K., 
Maritxalar M. (1995) Di\[.ferelt! Issues in the 
Design qf a lemmatizer/Tagger fo Ba,s'qtte. From 
Tcxls to Tags: Issues in Mullilingual Language 
Analysis. ACL SIGI)AT Workshop, l)ublin. 
Alcgria 1., Art(Ha X., Sarasoht K., Urkia M. (1996) 
Automatic moqdzological analysis of Basque. 
IAtcrary and IAnguistic Computing, 11 (4): 193- 
203. Oxford University. 
Aniworlh E. I.. (1994) Morphological Par, ffng with 
a lhl(fication-ba,s'ed Word Grcmmutr. Norlh 
Te, xas Natural l~anguage Processing Workshop, 
Texas. 
Arlola X., Dfaz de \]larraza A., Ezciza N., Oo.icnohi 
K., Marilxahu' A., Soma A. (2000) A proposal 
for the integration of NLP tools using SGML- 
lagged documeHls. Proceedings of ll~e Second 
Cotfforence or1 Language Resources and 
Evaltmfion (IA~,EC 2000). Athens, Greece 2000. 
Bcesl%, K. (1998)AraDic Morphological Analysis 
(m the lnlernet, l'rocccdings of the International 
Conference on Mulii-IAngual Computing (Arabic 
& lhlglish), Cambridge. 
Hudson R. (1990) English Word Grammmar. 
Oxford: Basil Blackwcll. 
ldc N., Vcronis J. K. (1995) Text-Ettcoding hHtia- 
tire, Bac:kgmtmd and Context. Kluwcr Academic 
Publishers. 
Karlsson F., Voulilaincn A., Heikkiht J., Anltila A. 
(1995) Constrai, t Gnmmmr: A lxm,?tmge- 
i#ldcpcndent System Jor Pm:ffng Um'estricled 
Text, Mouton do Gruyicr ed.. 
Kartmnen 1,. (1994) Con,s'tructin~ l,e.vical 
7)'ansdttcers. Proc. of CO13NG'94, 406-411. 
Koskcnniemi, K, (1983) Two-level Mc;qdlo\[ogy: A 
ge,eral Comptttational Model ./br Word-Form 
Recognition and Pmduclioth University of 
Ilclsinki, l)clmrtmcnt of General IAnguisiics. 
l~ublications " 11. 
()flazcr K (1999) l)epetMe/t O' Parsing, with a, 
E.rtended I:inite State Approac\]t. ACL'99, 
Maryland. 
Pr6sz6ky G., Kis B (1999)A Unificati(m-hascd 
Apl~roach to Moqdto-syntactic I'arsitl<~ of 
Agghttinative and Other (Highly) lnjlectional 
Languages. ACtd99, Ma,yhmd. 
Ritchie G., Pulhnan S. G., FJlack A. W., Russcl G. 
J. (1992) Comlmtational Moudu)logy: Practical 
Mechanism,s'.fi)r the l#lglish l,exico,. ACL-MIT 
Series on Natural Language Processing, MIT 
Press. 
Shicbcr S. M. (1986) At/ lntroductiotz to 
Unification-Based Approaches to Grammar. 
CSLI, Slanford. 
Sproat R. (1992) Morphology anU Computcaion. 
ACL-MIT Press series in Natural Language 
Processing. 
Trost It. (1990) The application of two-level 
morldzo/ogy to rzon-concatenative German 
moqgtology. COIANG'90, Hclsinki. 
7 
Proceedings of the IJCNLP-08 Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged Languages, pages 59?64,
Hyderabad, India, January 2008. c?2008 Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing
Strategies for sustainable MT for Basque:  
incremental design, reusability, standardization and open-source 
 I. Alegria, X. Arregi, X. Artola, A. Diaz de Ilarraza, G. Labaka,  
M. Lersundi, A. Mayor, K. Sarasola 
Ixa taldea.  
University of the Basque Country. 
i.alegria@ehu.es 
 
 
 
Abstract 
We present some Language Technology 
applications that have proven to be effec-
tive tools to promote the use of Basque, a 
European less privileged language. We also 
present the strategy we have followed for 
almost twenty years to develop those appli-
cations as the top of an integrated environ-
ment of language resources, language 
foundations, language tools and other ap-
plications. When we have faced a difficult 
task such as Machine Translation to 
Basque, our strategy has worked well. We 
have had good results in a short time just 
reusing previous works for Basque, reusing 
other open-source tools, and developing 
just a few new modules in collaboration 
with other groups. In addition, new reus-
able tools and formats have been produced.  
1 Introduction and Basque Language 
Basque is a highly inflected minority language 
with free order of sentence constituents. Machine 
Translation for Basque is thus both, a real need and 
a test bed for our strategy to develop NLP tools for 
Basque.          
Basque is an isolate language, and little is 
known of its origins. It is likely that an early form 
of the Basque language was already present in 
Western Europe before the arrival of the Indo-
European languages. 
Basque is an agglutinative language, with a rich 
flexional morphology. In fact for nouns, for 
example, at least 360 word forms are possible for 
each lemma. Each of the declension cases such as 
absolutive, dative, associative? has four different 
suffixes to be added to the last word of the noun 
phrase. These four suffix variants correspond to 
undetermined, determined singular, determined 
plural and ?close? determined plural.  
Basque is also an ergative-absolutive language. 
The subject of an intransitive verb is in the 
absolutive case (which is unmarked), and the same 
case is used for the direct object of a transitive 
verb. The subject of the transitive verb (that is, the 
agent) is marked differently, with the ergative case 
(shown by the suffix -k). This also triggers main 
and auxiliary verbal agreement. 
The auxiliary verb, which accompanies most 
main verbs, agrees not only with the subject, but 
with the direct object and the indirect object, if 
present. Among European languages, this 
polypersonal system (multiple verb agreement) is 
only found in Basque, some Caucasian languages, 
and Hungarian. The ergative-absolutive alignment 
is rare among European languages, but not 
worldwide. 
Although in last centuries Basque suffered 
continuous regression it still remains alive. The 
region in which Basque is spoken is smaller than 
what is known as the Basque Country, and the 
distribution of Basque speakers is not 
homogeneous there. The main reasons of this 
regression (Amorrortu, 2002) are that Basque was 
not an official language, and that it was out of 
educational system, out of media and out of 
industrial environments. Besides, the fact of being 
six different dialects made the wide development 
of written Basque difficult.  
However, after 1980, some of those features 
changed and many citizens and some local 
59
governments promote recovering of Basque 
Language.  
Today, Basque holds co-official language status 
in the Basque regions of Spain: the whole 
autonomous community of the Basque Country 
and some parts of Navarre. Basque has no official 
standing in the Northern Basque Country.   
In the past, Basque was associated with lack of 
education, stigmatized as uneducated, rural, or 
holding low economic and power resources. There 
is not such an association today; Basque speakers 
do not differ from Spanish or French monolinguals 
in any of these characteristics.  
Standard Basque, called Batua (unified) in 
Basque, was defined by the Academy of Basque 
Language (Euskaltzaindia) in 1968. At present, its 
morphology is completely standardized, but the 
lexical standardization process is still underway. 
Now this is the language model taught in most 
schools and used on some media and official 
papers published in Basque.  
Basque speakers are about 700,000, about 25% 
of the total population of the Basque Country, but 
they are not evenly distributed. Still the use of 
Basque in industry and specially in Information 
and Communication Technology is not 
widespread. A language that seeks to survive in the 
modern information society has to be present also 
in such field and this requires language technology 
products. Basque, as other minority languages, has 
to make a great effort to face this challenge (Petek, 
2000; Williams et al, 2001).  
2 Strategy to develop Human Language 
Technology (HLT) in Basque 
IXA group is a research Group created in 1986 by 
5 university lecturers in the computer science fac-
ulty of the University of the Basque Country with 
the aim of laying foundations for research and de-
velopment of NLP software mainly for Basque. 
We wanted to face the challenge of adapting 
Basque to language technology. 
Twenty one years later, now IXA is a group 
composed of 28 computer scientists, 13 linguists 
and 2 research assistants. It works in cooperation 
with more than 7 companies from Basque Country 
and 5 from abroad; it has been involved in the birth 
of two new spin-off companies; and it has devel-
oped more than seven language technology prod-
ucts. 
In recent years, several private companies and 
technology centers in the Basque Country have 
begun to get interested and to invest in this area. At 
the same time, more agents have come to be aware 
of the fact that collaboration is essential to the de-
velopment of language technologies for minority 
languages. One of the fruits of this collaboration 
are HIZKING21 (2002-2005) and ANHITZ (2006-
2008) projects. Both projects were accepted by the 
Government of the Basque Country in a new 
strategical research line called ?Language Infoen-
gineering?. 
At the very beginning, twenty years ago, our 
first goal was just to create a Spanish-Basque 
translation system, but after some preliminary 
work we realized that instead of wasting our time 
in creating an ad hoc MT system with small accu-
racy, we had to invest our effort in creating basic 
tools such as a morphological analyzer/generator 
for Basque, that could later be used to build not 
only a more robust MT system but also other ap-
plications. 
This thought was the seed to design our strategy 
to make progress in the adaptation of Basque to 
Language Technology. Basque language had to 
face up scarcity of resources and tools that could 
make possible its development in Language Tech-
nology at a reasonable and competitive rate. 
We presented an open proposal for making pro-
gress in Human Language Technology (Aduriz et 
al., 1998). Anyway, the steps proposed did not cor-
respond exactly with those observed in the history 
of the processing of English, because the high ca-
pacity and computational power of new computers 
allowed facing problems in a different way.  
Our strategy may be described in two points: 
1) The need for standardization of resources to 
be useful in different researches, tools and applica-
tions 
2) The need for incremental design and devel-
opment of language foundations, tools, and appli-
cations in a parallel and coordinated way in order 
to get the best benefit from them. Language foun-
dations and research are essential to create any tool 
or application; but in the same way tools and ap-
plications will be very helpful in the research and 
improvement of language foundations. 
Following this strategy, our steps on standardi-
zation of resources led us to adopt TEI and XML 
standards and also to define a methodology for 
60
stand-off corpus tagging based on TEI, feature 
structures and XML (Artola et al, 2005). 
In the same way, taking as reference our experi-
ence in incremental design and development we 
proposed four phases as a general strategy for lan-
guage processing. These are the phases defined 
with the products to be developed in each of them. 
1. Initial phase: Foundations. Corpus I (collection 
of raw text with no tagging mark). Lexical da-
tabase I (the first version could be a list of 
lemmas and affixes). Machine-readable dic-
tionaries. Morphological description.  
2. Second phase: Basic tools and applications. 
Statistical tools for the treatment of corpora. 
Morphological analyzer/generator. Lemma-
tizer/tagger. Spelling checker and corrector (al-
though in morphologically simple languages a 
word list could be enough). Speech processing 
at word level. Corpus II (word-forms are 
tagged with their part of speech and lemma). 
Lexical database II (lexical support for the con-
struction of general applications, including part 
of speech and morphological information). 
3. Third phase: Advanced tools and applications. 
An environment for tool integration. Web 
search engine.  A traditional search machine 
that integrates lemmatization and language 
identification. Surface syntax. Corpus III (syn-
tactically tagged text). Grammar and style 
checkers. Structured versions of dictionaries 
(they allow enhanced functionality not avail-
able for printed or raw electronic versions). 
Lexical database III (the previous version is en-
riched with multiword lexical units. Integration 
of dictionaries in text editors). Lexical-
semantic knowledge base. Creation of a con-
cept taxonomy (e.g.: Wordnet). Word-sense 
disambiguation. Speech processing at sentence 
level. Basic Computer Aided Language Learn-
ing (CALL) systems 
4. Fourth phase: Multilingualism and general 
applications. Information extraction. Transla-
tion aids (integrated use of multiple on-line 
dictionaries, translation of noun phrases and 
simple sentences). Corpus IV (semantically 
tagged text after word-sense disambiguation). 
Dialog systems. Knowledge base on multilin-
gual lexico-semantic relations and its applica-
tions.  
We will complete this strategy with some sug-
gestions about what shouldn?t be done when work-
ing on the treatment of minority languages. a) Do 
not start developing applications if linguistic foun-
dations are not defined previously; we recommend 
following the above given sequence: foundations, 
tools and applications. b) When a new system has 
to be planned, do not create ad hoc lexical or syn-
tactic resources; you should design those resources 
in a way that they could be easily extended to full 
coverage and reusable by any other tool or applica-
tion. c) If you complete a new resource or tool, do 
not keep it to yourself; there are many researchers 
working on English, but only a few on each minor-
ity language; thus, the few results should be public 
and shared for research purposes, for it is desirable 
to avoid needless and costly repetition of work. 
3 Machine Translation for Basque 
After years working on basic resources and tools 
we decided it was time to face  the MT task (Hut-
chins and Somers, 1992). Our general strategy was 
more specifically for Machine Translation defined 
bearing in mind the following concepts:  
? reusability of previous resources, specially 
lexical resources and morphology of Basque 
? standardization and collaboration: using a 
more general framework in collaboration 
with other groups working in NLP 
? open-source: this means that anyone having 
the necessary computational and linguistic 
skills will be able to adapt or enhance it to 
produce a new MT system,  
Due to the real necessity for translation in our 
environment the involved languages would be 
Basque, Spanish and English. 
From the beginning we wanted to combine the 
two basic approaches for MT (rule-based and cor-
pus-based) in order to build a hybrid system, be-
cause it is generally agreed that there are not 
enough corpora for a good corpus-based system in 
minority languages like Basque.  
Data-driven Machine Translation (example-
based or statistical) is nowadays the most prevalent 
trend in Machine Translation research. Translation 
results obtained with this approach have already 
reached a high level of accuracy, especially when 
the target language is English. But these Data-
driven MT systems base their knowledge on 
aligned bilingual corpora, and the accuracy of their 
61
output depends heavily on the quality and the size 
of these corpora. Large and reliable bilingual cor-
pora are unavailable for many language pairs. 
3.1 The rule-based approach 
First, we present the main architecture and the pro-
posed standards of an open source MT engine, the 
first implementation of which translates from 
Spanish into Basque using the traditional transfer 
model and based on shallow and dependency pars-
ing. 
The design and the programs are independent 
from the languages, so the software can be used for 
other projects in MT. Depending on the languages 
included in the adaptation, it will be necessary to 
add, reorder and change some modules, but this 
will not be difficult because a unique XML format 
is used for the communication among all the mod-
ules. 
The project has been integrated in the OpenTrad 
initiative (www.opentrad.com), a government-
funded project shared among different universities 
and small companies, which also include MT en-
gines for translation among the main languages in 
Spain. The main objective of this initiative is the 
construction of an open, reusable and interoperable 
framework. 
In the OpenTrad project, two different but coor-
dinated designs have been carried out: 
? A shallow-transfer machine translation en-
gine for similar languages (Spanish, Catalan 
and Galician by the the time being). The 
MT architecture uses finite-state transducers 
for lexical processing, hidden Markov mod-
els for part-of-speech tagging, and chunking 
based on finite-state for structural transfer. 
It is named Apertium and it can be 
downloaded from apertium.sourceforge.net. 
(Armentano-Oller et al, 2004) 
? A deeper-transfer engine for the Spanish-
Basque pair. It is named Matxin (Alegria et 
al., 2007) and it is stored in 
matxin.sourceforge.net. It is an extension of 
previous work in our group. In order to re-
use resources in this Spanish-Basque system 
the analysis module for similar languages 
was not included in Matxin; another open 
source engine, FreeLing (Carreras et al, 
2004), was used here, of course, and its out-
put had to be converted to the proposed in-
terchange format. 
Some of the components (modules, data formats 
and compilers) from the first architecture in Open-
Trad were used in the second one. Indeed, an im-
portant additional goal of this work was testing 
which modules from the first architecture could be 
integrated in deeper-transfer architectures for more 
difficult language pairs. 
The transfer module is also based on three main 
objects in the translation process: words or nodes, 
chunks or phrases, and sentences.  
? First, lexical transfer is carried out using a 
bilingual dictionary compiled into a finite-
state transducer. We use the XML specifica-
tion of Apertium engine.  
? Then, structural transfer at the sentence 
level is applied, and some information is 
transferred from some chunks to others, and 
some chunks may disappear. Grammars 
based on regular expressions are used to 
specify these changes. For example, in the 
Spanish-Basque transfer, the person and 
number information of the object and the 
type of subordination are imported from 
other chunks to the chunk corresponding to 
the verb chain. 
? Finally the structural transfer at the chunk 
level is carried out. This process can be 
quite simple (e.g. noun chains between 
Spanish and Basque) or more complex (e.g. 
verb chains between these same languages). 
The XML file coming from the transfer module 
is passed on the generation module. 
? In the first step, syntactic generation is per-
formed in order to decide the order of 
chunks in the sentence and the order of 
words in the chunks. Several grammars are 
used for this purpose.  
? Morphological generation is carried out in 
the last step. In the generation of Basque, 
the main inflection is added to the last word 
in the phrase (in Basque: the declension 
case, the article and other features are added 
to the whole noun phrase at the end of the 
last word), but in verb chains other words 
need morphological generation. A previous 
morphological analyzer/generator for 
Basque (Alegria et al, 1996) has been 
adapted and transformed to the format used 
in Apertium. 
The results for the Spanish/Basque system using 
FreeLing and Matxin are promising. The quantita-
62
tive evaluation uses the open source evaluation 
tool IQMT and figures are given using Bleu and 
NIST measures (Gim?nez et al, 2005). An user 
based evaluation has been carried out too. 
3.2 The corpus-based approach 
The corpus-based approach has been carried out in 
collaboration with the National Center for Lan-
guage Technology in Dublin.  
The system exploits both EBMT and SMT tech-
niques to extract a dataset of aligned chunks. We 
conducted Basque to English and Spanish to 
Basque translation experiments, evaluated on a 
large corpus (270, 000 sentence pairs).  
Some tools have been reused for this purpose: 
? GIZA++: for word/morpheme alignment we 
used the GIZA++ statistical word alignment 
toolkit, and following the ?refined? method 
of (Och and Ney, 2003), extracted a set of 
high-quality word/ morpheme alignments 
from the original unidirectional alignment 
sets. These along with the extracted chunk 
alignments were passed to the translation 
decoder.                                         
? Pharaoh/Moses decoder: the decoder is also 
a hybrid system which integrates EBMT 
and SMT. It is capable of retrieving already 
translated sentences and also provides a 
wrapper around the PHARAOH SMT de-
coder (Koehn, 2004). 
? MaTrEx: the MATREX (Machine Transla-
tion using Examples) system used in our 
experiments is a data-driven MT engine, 
built following an extremely modular de-
sign. It consists of a number of extensible 
and re-implementable modules (Way and 
Gough, 2005). 
   For this engine, we reuse a toolkit to chunk the 
Basque sentences. After this processing stage, a 
sentence is treated as a sequence of morphemes, in 
which chunk boundaries are clearly visible. Mor-
phemes denoting morphosyntactic features are re-
placed by conventional symbolic strings. After 
some adaptation, the chunks obtained in this man-
ner are actually very comparable to the English 
chunks obtained with the marker-based chunker. 
The experimental results have shown that our 
system significantly outperforms state-of-the-art 
approaches according to several common auto-
matic evaluation metrics: WER, Bleu and PER 
(Stroppa et al, 2006; Labaka et al, 2007). 
4 Conclusions 
A language that seeks to survive in the modern 
information society requires language technology 
products. "Minority" languages have to do a great 
effort to face this challenge. The Ixa group has 
been working since 1986 on adapting Basque to 
language technology, having developed several 
applications that are effective tools to promote the 
use of Basque. Now we are planning to define the 
BLARK for Basque (Krauwer, 2003).  
From our experience, we defend that research 
and development for a minority language should to 
be faced following these points: high standardiza-
tion,  reusing language foundations, tools, and ap-
plications, and their incremental design and devel-
opment. We know that any HLT project related to 
a less privileged language should follow those 
guidelines, but from our experience we know that 
in most cases they do not. We think that if Basque 
is now in an good position in HLT is because those 
guidelines have been applied even  when it was 
easier to define "toy" resources and tools useful to 
get good short term academic results, but not reus-
able in future developments.  
This strategy has been completely useful when 
we have created MT systems for Basque. Reusing 
previous works for Basque (that were defined fol-
lowing XML and TEI standards) and reusing other 
open-source tools have been the key to get satisfac-
tory results in a short time.  
Two results produced in the MT track are pub-
licly available:  
? matxin.sourceforge.net for the free code for 
the Spanish-Basque RBMT system 
? www.opentrad.org for the on-line demo  
Acknowledgments 
This work has been partially funded by the Spanish 
Ministry of Education and Science (OpenMT: 
Open Source Machine Translation using hybrid 
methods,TIN2006-15307-C03-01) and the Local 
Government of the Basque Country (AnHITZ 
2006: Language Technologies for Multingual In-
teraction in Intelligent Environments., IE06-185). 
Andy Way, Declan Groves and Nicolas Stroppa 
from National Centre for Language Technology in 
Dublin are kindly acknowledged for providing 
their expertise on the Matrex system and the 
evaluation of the output. 
63
References 
I. Aduriz, E. Agirre, I. Aldezabal, I. Alegria, O. Ansa, 
X. Arregi, J. Arriola, X. Artola, A. D?az de Ilarraza, 
N. Ezeiza, K.Gojenola, M. Maritxalar, M. Oronoz, K. 
Sarasola, A. Soroa, R. Urizar. 1998. A framework for 
the automatic processing of Basque. Proceedings of 
Workshop on Lexical Resources for Minority Lan-
guages.  
I. Alegria, X. Artola, K. Sarasola. 1996.Automatic mor-
phological analysis of Basque. Literary & Linguistic 
Computing Vol. 11, No. 4, 193-203. Oxford Univer-
sity Press. Oxford. 1996. 
I. Alegria, A. D?az de Ilarraza, G. Labaka, M Lersundi, 
A. Mayor, K. Sarasola.  2007. Transfer-based MT 
from Spanish into Basque: reusability, standardiza-
tion and open source. LNCS 4394. 374-384. Cicling 
2007.  
E. Amorrortu. 2002. Bilingual Education in the Basque 
Country: Achievements and Challenges after Four 
Decades of Acquisition Planning. Journal of Iberian 
and Latin American Literary and Cultural Stud-
ies.Volume 2 Number 2 (2002) 
C. Armentano-Oller, A. Corb?-Bellot, M. L. Forcada, 
M. Ginest?-Rosell, B. Bonev, S. Ortiz-Rojas, J. A. 
P?rez-Ortiz, G. Ram?rez-S?nchez, F. S?nchez-
Mart?nez, 2005. An open-source shallow-transfer 
machine translation toolbox: consequences of its re-
lease and availability. Proceedings of OSMaTran: 
Open-Source Machine Translation workshop, MT 
Summit X. 
X. Artola, A. D?az de Ilarraza, N. Ezeiza, K. Gojenola, 
G. Labaka, A. Sologaistoa, A. Soroa.  2005. A 
framework for representing and managing linguistic 
annotations based on typed feature structures. Proc. 
of RANLP 2005. 
X. Carreras,, I. Chao, L. Padr? and M. Padr?. 2004. 
FreeLing: An open source Suite of Language Ana-
lyzers, in  Proceedings of the 4th International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation 
(LREC'04).  
J. Gim?nez, E. Amig?, C. Hori. 2005. Machine 
Translation Evaluation Inside QARLA. In Proceed-
ings of the International Workshop on Spoken Lan-
guage Technology (IWSLT'05) 
W. Hutchins and H. Somers. 1992. An Introduction to 
Machine Translation. Academic Press. 
P. Koehn. 2004. Pharaoh: A Beam Search Decoder for 
Phrase-Based Statistical Machine Translation Mod-
els.  In Proceedings of AMTA-04, pages 115?124, 
Washington, District of Columbia. 
S. Krauwer. 2003. The Basic Language Resource Kit 
(BLARK) as the First Milestone for the Language 
Resources Roadmap. Proc. of the International 
Workshop  Speech and Computer. Moscow, Russia. 
G. Labaka, N. Stroppa, A. Way, K. Sarasola  2007 
Comparing Rule-Based and Data-Driven Approaches 
to Spanish-to-Basque Machine Translation Proc. of 
MT-Summit XI, Copenhagen 
F. Och and H. Ney. 2003. A Systematic Comparison of 
Various Statistical Alignment Models. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 29(1): 19?51. 
B. Petek. 2000. Funding for research into human lan-
guage technologies for less prevalent languages, Sec-
ond International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2000). Athens, 
Greece. 
N. Stroppa, D. Groves, A. Way, K. Sarasola K. 2006. 
Example-Based Machine Translation of the Basque 
Language. AMTA. 7th conference of the Association 
for Machine Translation in the Americas.. 
A. Way and N. Gough. 2005. Comparing Example-
Based and Statistical Machine Translation. Natural 
Language Engineering, 11(3):295?309. 
B. Williams, K. Sarasola, D. ??Cr?inin, B. Petek. 2001. 
Speech and Language Technology for Minority Lan-
guages. Proceedings of Eurospeech 2001 
 
 
64
Representation and Treatment of Multiword Expressions in Basque 
I?aki Alegria, Olatz Ansa, Xabier Artola 
Nerea Ezeiza, Koldo Gojenola and Ruben Urizar 
Ixa Group 
University of the Basque Country 
649 pk E-20.080 
Donostia. Basque Country 
rubenu@sc.ehu.es 
Abstract 
This paper describes the representation of 
Basque Multiword Lexical Units and the 
automatic processing of Multiword 
Expressions. After discussing and stating 
which kind of multiword expressions we 
consider to be processed at the current 
stage of the work, we present the 
representation schema of the 
corresponding lexical units in a general-
purpose lexical database. Due to its 
expressive power, the schema can deal 
not only with fixed expressions but also 
with morphosyntactically flexible 
constructions. It also allows us to 
lemmatize word combinations as a unit 
and yet to parse the components 
individually if necessary. Moreover, we 
describe HABIL, a tool for the automatic 
processing of these expressions, and we 
give some evaluation results. This work 
must be placed in a general framework of 
written Basque processing tools, which 
currently ranges from the tokenization 
and segmentation of single words up to 
the syntactic tagging of general texts. 
1 Introduction 
2 
Most texts are rich in multiword expressions, 
which must be necessarily processed if we want 
any NLP tool to perform accurately. Jackendoff 
(1997) estimates that their number in the speakers' 
lexicon ?is of the same order of magnitude as the 
number of single words?. 
There is no agreement among authors about the 
definition of the term Multiword Expression. 
However, in this article, Multiword Expressions 
(hereafter MWE) refer to any word combinations 
ranging from idioms, over proper names, 
compounds, lexical and grammatical 
collocations? to institutionalized phrases. MWEs 
comprise both semantically compositional and 
non-compositional combinations, and both 
syntactically regular and idiosyncratic phrases, 
including complex named entities such as proper 
nouns, dates and number expressions (see section 
2). 
In contrast, Multiword Lexical Units (hereafter 
MWLU) comprise lexicalized phrases ?
semantically non-compositional or syntactically 
idiosyncratic word combinations? which are 
represented and stored in the lexical database of 
Basque (EDBL). 
The remaining sections are organized as 
follows. Section 2 presents the main features of 
MWEs in Basque, and defines which are currently 
considered for automatic processing. Section 3 
describes the representation of MWLUs in the 
lexical database. Section 4 is devoted to the 
description and evaluation of the automatic 
treatment of MWEs by means of HABIL. Section 
5 summarizes future work. And, finally, section 6 
outlines some conclusions. 
Multiword Expressions in the 
processing of real texts in Basque 
The definition of the term Multiword Expression 
and the types of such MWEs to be treated in NLP 
may vary considerably depending on the purposes 
or "the depth of processing being undertaken" 
(Copestake et al, 2002). Multiword itself is a 
Second ACL Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Integrating Processing, July 2004, pp. 48-55
vague term. At text level, a word could be defined 
as "any string of characters between two blanks" 
(Fontenelle et al, 1994). This is not applicable to 
languages as Japanese, which are typically written 
without spaces. Besides, a great number of MWEs 
that in uninflected languages would be multiword, 
constitute a single typographic unit in agglutinative 
languages such as Basque (ziurrenik 'most 
probably', aurrerantzean 'from now on', aurretiaz 
'in advance'). Therefore, we consider them single 
words and they are included in the lexical database 
as such (or recognized by means of morphological 
analysis). 
In our case, when deciding which Basque 
MWEs to include in the database, we mostly rely 
on lexicographers' expertise since we consider 
lexicalized phrases have a top priority for both 
lemmatizing and syntactic purposes. So, the 
MWEs dealt with in the database comprise fixed 
expressions, which admit no morphosyntactic or 
internal modification ?including foreign 
expressions such as in situ, a priori, strictu sensu, 
etc.?, idioms, both decomposable and non-
decomposable, and lexicalized compounds. We 
also consider light verb constructions when they 
are syntactically idiosyncratic.  
However, currently we do not treat open 
collocations, proverbs, catch phrases and similes. 
Mostly, we don't include proper names in the 
database either, since complex named entities are 
given a separate treatment. Apart from proper 
nouns, also dates and number expressions are 
treated separately (see 4.1). 
So far we have described 2,270 MWLUs in our 
database. This work has been carried out in two 
phases. For the first phase, we made use of the 
Statistical Corpus of 20th Century Basque 
(http://www.euskaracorpusa.net) that contains 
about 4.7 million words. As a starting point, we 
chose the MWLUs that occurred more than 10 
times in this manually lemmatized corpus. This 
amounted to about 1,300 expressions. For the 
second phase, this list has been enlarged using the 
Hiztegi Batua, a dictionary of standard Basque that 
the Basque Language Academy updates regularly 
(http://www2.euskaltzaindia.net/hiztegibatua). 
2.1 
3 
Main features of lexicalized phrases 
Many of the lexicalized phrases are semantically 
non-compositional (or partially compositional), i.e. 
they can hardly be interpreted in terms of the 
meaning of their constituents (adarra jo 'to pull 
someone's leg', literally 'to play the horn'). 
Often, a component of these sequences hardly 
occurs in any other context and it is difficult to 
assign it a part of speech. For example, the word 
noizik is an archaism of modern noiztik 'from 
when', which occurs just in the expressions noizik 
behin, noizik behinean, noizik noizera, and noizik 
behinka all meaning 'once in a while'. Besides, it is 
not clear which is the part of speech of the words 
laprast in laprast egin 'to slip' or dir-dir in dir-dir 
egin 'to shine'. 
From a syntactic point of view, many of these 
MWEs present an unusual structure. For example, 
many complex verbs in Basque are light verb 
constructions, being the meaning of the compound 
quite compositional, e.g. lo egin 'to sleep' literally 
'to make (a) sleep' or lan egin 'to work' literally 'to 
make (a) work'. However, lo egin and lan egin can 
be considered 'syntactically idiomatic' since the 
nouns in these expressions, lo and lan, take no 
determiner, which would be completely 
ungrammatical for a noun functioning as a regular 
direct object (*arroz jan nuen 'I ate rice'). 
Morphosyntactic flexibility, being significant in 
this type of constructions in Basque, may vary 
considerably. For example in lo egin 'to sleep' the 
noun lo admits modification (lo asko egin zuen 'he 
slept very much') and may take the partitive 
assignment (ez dut lorik egin 'I haven't slept') while 
the verb egin can be subject to focalization (egin 
duzu lorik bart? 'did you sleep at all last night?'); 
besides, the components of the construction may 
change positions and some elements and phrases 
may be placed between them (mendian egin omen 
zuen lasai lo 'it is said that he slept peacefully in 
the mountain'). In contrast, alde egin 'to escape' is 
morphosyntactically quite rigid. In all the cases, 
the verb egin can take any inflection. 
For our database, we have worked out a single 
representation that covers all MWLUs ranging 
from fixed expressions to these of highest 
morphosyntactic flexibility. 
Representation of MWLUs in the lexical 
database 
In this section we explain how MWLUs are 
represented in EDBL (Aldezabal et al, 2001), a 
lexical database oriented to language processing 
that currently contains more than 80,000 entries, 
out of which 2,270 are MWLUs. Among these: 
? ~69% are always unambiguous. The average 
number of Surface Realization Schemas 
(SRS, see section 3.2) is 1.02. 
? ~23% are sometimes unambiguous and have 
3.6 SRSs in average, half of them 
ambiguous. 
? ~8% are always ambiguous and have 1.2 
SRSs in average. 
We want to point out that almost all of the 
unambiguous MWLUs have only one SRS, their 
components appearing in contiguous positions and 
always in the same order. About half of them are 
inflected, so, even if we discard the interpretations 
of the components, there is still some 
morphosyntactic ambiguity left. However, the 
identification of these MWLUs helps in 
disambiguation, as the input of tagging is more 
precise. 
 
The description of MWLUs within a general-
purpose lexical database must include, at least, two 
aspects (see Figure 1): (1) their composition, i.e. 
which the components of the MWLU are, whether 
each of them can be inflected or not, and according 
to which one-word lexical unit (OWLU 1 ) it 
inflects; and (2), what we call the surface 
realization, that is, the order in which the 
components may occur in the text, the mandatory 
or optional contiguousness of components, and the 
inflectional restrictions applicable to each one of 
the components. 
3.1 
                                                          
Composition 
As it has just been said, the description of the 
composition of MWLUs in EDBL gathers two 
aspects: on the one side, it depicts which the 
individual components of a MWLU are; on the 
other side, it links the inflectable components of a 
MWLU to the corresponding OWLU according to 
which each of them inflects. 
In Figure 1, we can see that the composed of 
relationship links every MWLU to up to 9 
individual components (MWLU_Components). 
Each component is characterized by the following 
attributes: 
1 We consider OWLUs lexical units with no spaces within its 
orthographical form; so, we also take hyphenated compounds 
as OWLUs. 
? Component_Position: this indicates 
the position of the component word-form in 
the canonical form of the MWLU. 
? Component_Form: i.e. the word-form 
itself as it appears in the canonical form of 
the MWLU. 
? Conveys_Morph_Info?: this is a 
Boolean value, indicating whether the 
component inflection conveys the 
morphological information corresponding to 
the whole MWLU or not2. 
(0,n)
(1,1)
(1,1)
(1,n)
(2,9)
(1,1)
 
MWLUs
Surface_Realization_Schemas
Order_Contiguousness
Sureness
Inflection_Restrictions
MWLU_Components
Component_Position
Component_Form
Conveys_Morph_Info?
OWLUs
corresp.
SR schemas
inflects
according to
composed of
Figure 1. Composition and surface realization of 
MWLUs. 
Moreover, the components of a MWLU are 
linked to its corresponding OWLU (according to 
which it inflects). This is represented by means of 
the inflects according to relationship 
(see Figure 1). 
                                                          
2 The morphological information that the attribute refers to is 
the set of morphological features the inflection takes in the 
current component instance. 
These two aspects concerning the composition 
of a MWLU are physically stored in a single table 
of the relational database in which EDBL resides.  
The columns of the table are the following: 
Entry, Homograph_Id, Component_ 
Position, Component_Form, Conveys_ 
Morph_Info?, OWLU_Entry, and OWLU_ 
Homograph_Id. In the example below, the 
composition of the MWLU begi bistan egon 'to be 
evident' is described. Note that one row is used per 
component: 
<begi bistan egon, 0, 1, begi, -, begi, 2> 
<begi bistan egon, 0, 2, bistan, -, bista, 1> 
<begi bistan egon, 0, 3, egon, +, egon, 1> 
This expression allows different realizations 
such as begi bistan dago 'it is evident' (literally 'it 
is at reach of the eyes'), begi bistan daude 'they are 
evident', begien bistan egon, 'to be evident', etc. In 
the table rows above, it can be seen that the last 
component egon 1 'to be' conveys the 
morphological information for the whole MWLU 
(+ in the corresponding column). 
3.2 Surface realization 
As for surface realization, we have already 
mentioned that the components of a MWLU can 
occur in a text either contiguously or dispersed. 
Besides, the order of the constituents may be fixed 
or not, and they may either inflect or occur in an 
invariable form. In the case of inflected 
components, some of them may accept any 
inflection according to its corresponding OWLU, 
whilst others may only inflect in a restricted way. 
Moreover, some MWLUs are unambiguous and 
some are not, since it cannot be certainly assured 
that the very same sequence of words in a text 
corresponds undoubtedly to a multiword entry in 
every context. For example, in the sentence Emilek 
buruaz baiezko keinu bat egin zuen 'Emile nodded 
his head' the words bat and egin do not correspond 
to the complex verb bat egin 'to unite' but to two 
separate phrases. 
According to these features, we use a formal 
description where different realization patterns 
may be defined for each MWLU. The corresp. 
SR schemas relationship in Figure 1 links every 
MWLU to one or more Surface_Realiza-
tion_Schemas. Each SRS is characterized by 
the following attributes: 
? Order_Contiguousness: an expression 
that indicates both the order in which the 
components may appear in the different 
instances of the MWLU and the 
contiguousness of these components. In 
these expressions the position of the digits 
indicate the position each component takes 
in a particular SRS, * indicates that 0 or 
more words may occur between two 
components, and ? indicates that at most 
one single word may appear between two 
given components of the MWLU. 
? Unambiguousness: a Boolean value, 
indicating whether the particular SRS 
corresponds to an unambiguous MWLU or 
not. It expresses whether the sequence of 
words matching this SRS must be 
unambiguously analyzed as an instance of 
the MWLU or, on the contrary, may be 
analyzed as separate OWLUs in some 
contexts. 
? Inflection_Restrictions: an 
expression that indicates the inflection 
paradigm according to which the MWLU 
may inflect in this specific SRS. In these 
expressions each component of the MWLU 
is represented by one list component (in the 
same order as the components of the 
MWLU appear in its canonical form): % 
indicates that the whole inflection paradigm 
of the corresponding inflectable component 
may occur; the minus sign (-) is used for 
non-inflectable components (no inflection at 
all may occur); finally, a logical expression 
(and, or, and not are allowed) composed 
of attribute-value pairs is used to express the 
inflectional restrictions and the 
morphotactics the component undergoes in 
this particular SRS of the MWLU (in 
brackets in the examples below). 
In the examples below, it can be seen that one 
row is used per SRS. The columns of the table are 
the following: Entry, Homograph_Id, Or-
der_Contiguousness, Unambiguousness, 
and Inflection_Restrictions: 
<begi bistan egon, 0, 123, +, 
 (((CAS=ABS) and (DEF=-)) or 
  ((CAS=GEN) and (NUM=PL)), -, %)> 
<begi bistan egon, 0, 312, +, 
 (((CAS=ABS) and (DEF=-)) or 
  ((CAS=GEN) and (NUM=PL)), -, %)> 
<begi bistan egon, 0, 3?12, +, 
 (((CAS=ABS) and (DEF=-)), -, %)> 
 
The first SRS matches occurrences such as begi 
bistan dago hau ez dela aski 'it is evident that it is 
not enough' or begien bistan zegoen honela 
bukatuko genuela 'it was evident that we would 
end up this way', where the components are 
contiguous and the analysis as an instance of the 
MWLU would be unambiguous. This SRS allows 
the inflection of the first component as absolutive 
case (non-definite) or as genitive (plural), and the 
whole set of inflection morphemes of the third one. 
The third SRS matches occurrences such as ez 
dago horren begi bistan 'it is not so evident', where 
the components are not contiguous (at most one 
word is allowed between the ?third? component 
and the ?first one?) and they occur in a non-
canonical order: 3?12. In this case, the 
interpretation as an instance of the MWLU would 
also be unambiguous. However, this SRS only 
allows the inflection of the first component as 
absolutive case (non-definite). 
3.3 
4 
Different information requirements in 
lemmatization and syntax processing 
The first prototype for the treatment of MWEs in 
Basque HABIL (Ezeiza et al, 1998; Ezeiza, 2003) 
was built for lemmatization purposes. However, 
we are nowadays involved in the construction of a 
deep syntactic parser (Aduriz et al, 2004) and the 
MWEs seem to need a different treatment. The fact 
that many MWEs may be syntactically regular but, 
above all, that an external element may have a 
dependency relation with one of the constituents, 
forces us to analyze the elements independently. 
For example, in the verb beldur izan 'to be afraid 
(of)' an external noun phrase may have a modifier-
noun dependency relation with beldur 'fear' as in 
sugeen beldur naiz 'I'm afraid of snakes'. In loak 
hartu 'to fall asleep' there is a subject-verb relation 
as in loak hartu nau 'I have fallen asleep', literally 
'sleep has caught me'; therefore subject-auxiliary 
verb agreement would fade if both components 
were analyzed as one. 
The MWLU representation we have adopted 
allows us to lemmatize the word combination as a 
unit and yet to parse the components individually 
whenever necessary. In order to do so, when 
describing each MWLU, we specify whether the 
elements in the MWLU must be analyzed 
separately or not3. 
Treatment of multiword expressions 
MWEs could be treated at different stages of the 
language process. Some approaches treat them at 
tokenization stage, identifying fixed phrases, such 
as prepositional phrases or compounds, included in 
a list (Carmona et al, 1998; Karlsson et al, 1995). 
Other approaches rely on morphological analysis 
to better identify the features of the MWE using 
finite state technology (Breidt et al, 1996). 
Finally, there is another approach that identifies 
them after the tagging process, allowing the 
correction of some tagging errors (Leech et al, 
1994). 
All of these approaches are based on the use of 
a closed set of MWLUs that could be included in a 
list or a database. However, some groups of MWEs 
are not subject to be included in a database, 
because they comprise an open class of 
expressions. That is the case of collocations, 
compounds or named entities. The group of 
collocations and compounds should be delimited 
using statistical approaches, such as Xtract 
(Smadja, 1993) or LocalMax (Silva et al, 1999), 
so that only the most relevant?those of higher 
frequency? are included in the database.  
Named entity recognition task has been solved 
for a large set of languages. Most of these works 
are linked to the Message Understanding 
Conference (Chinchor, 1997). There is a variety of 
methods that have been used in NE recognition, 
such as HMM, Maximum Entropy Models, 
Decision Trees, Boosting and Voted Perceptron 
(Collins, 2002), Syntactic Structure based 
approaches and WordNet-based approaches 
(Magnini et al, 2002; Ar?valo, 2002). Most 
references on NE task might be accessed at 
http://www.muc.saic.com. 
4.1 
                                                          
Processing MWEs with HABIL 
We have implemented HABIL, a tool for the 
treatment of multiword expressions (MWE), based 
3  Currently we are studying the MWLUs in the lexical 
database in order to determine which of them deserve to be 
parsed as separate elements. We have not defined yet how this 
will be formally represented in the database. 
on the features described in the lexical database. 
The most important features of HABIL are the 
following: 
? It deals with both contiguous and split 
MWEs. 
? It takes into account all the possible orders 
of the components (SRS). 
? It checks that inflectional restrictions are 
complied with. 
? It generates morphosyntactic interpretations 
for the MWE. 
This tool has two different components: on the 
one hand, there is a searching engine that identifies 
MWEs along the text, and, on the other hand, there 
is a morphosyntactic processor that assigns the 
corresponding interpretations to the components of 
the MWE. 
The morphosyntactic processor generates the 
interpretations for MWEs using category and 
subcategory information in the lexical database. 
When one of the components adds information to 
the MWE, the processor applies pattern-matching 
techniques to extract the corresponding 
morphological features of the analyses of that 
component, and these features are included in the 
interpretation of the MWE. Then, it replaces all the 
morphosyntactic interpretations of the components 
of unambiguous MWEs with the MWE 
interpretations. When MWEs are ambiguous, the 
new interpretations are added to the existing ones. 
HABIL also identifies and treats dates and 
numerical expressions. As they make up an open 
class, they are not obviously included in the lexical 
database. Furthermore, their components are 
always contiguous, have a very strict structure, and 
use a closed lexicon. Thus, it is quite easy to 
identify them using simple finite state transducers. 
For the morphosyntactic treatment of dates and 
numerical expressions, we use the morphosyntactic 
component of HABIL. These expressions may 
appear inflected and, in this case, the last 
component adds morphosyntactic features to the 
MWE. Finally, as they are unambiguous 
expressions, the processor discards the 
interpretations of the components and assigns them 
all the interpretations of the whole expression. 
4.2 Evaluation 
We performed several experiments using 650 
unambiguous, contiguous and ordered MWEs. We 
treated a reference corpus of around 36,000 tokens 
and there were 386 instances of 149 different 
MWEs. We also applied this process to a small test 
corpus of around 7,100 tokens in which there were 
87 instances of 45 MWEs. Taking both corpora 
into account, there were 473 instances of 167 
different MWEs, which amounted to 25% of the 
expressions considered, and 50% of the instances 
were ambiguous. Besides, only 14 dates and 12 
numerical expressions were found in the reference 
corpus, and 18 dates and 9 numerical expressions 
in the test corpus. 
 
  Ambiguity 
Rate 
Interpretations 
per Token 
Recall
word-
forms: 
before
after 
81.78% 
79.83% 
3.37 
3.30 
99.31%
99.31%
all 
tokens: 
before
after 
67.47% 
65.86% 
2.96 
2.89 
99.43%
99.43%
Table 1. Results of HABIL. 
The ambiguity measures of the test corpus are 
shown in Table 1. The ambiguity rate of word-
forms decreases by 2% and the average ambiguity 
rate by 1.5% after the processing of MWEs. It is 
important to point out that no error is made along 
the process. Furthermore, some important MWEs, 
more specifically, some complex sentence 
connectors that have highly ambiguous 
components, are correctly disambiguated. 
Bearing in mind the proportion of words treated 
by HABIL, these results help significantly in 
improving precision results of tagging and 
avoiding almost 10% of the errors, as shown in 
Table 2.  
 
 Precision Error 
before MWE processing 94.96% 5.04% 
after MWE processing 95.42% 4.58% 
Table 2. Tagging results. 
5 Future work 
After confirming the viability of the system and the 
good results in POS tagging, our main goal is to 
increase the number of MWLUs in the database, 
which will improve the identification of MWEs in 
corpora. 
A remaining difficulty that we are facing is the 
problem of ambiguous split MWEs. At present, we 
are creating a disambiguation grammar that will 
discard or select the multiword interpretations in 
ambiguous MWLUs. We are developing similar 
rules using both the Constraint Grammar 
formalism and finite state transducers (XFST tools, 
Kartunnen et al 1997). The very first rules seem to 
be quite effective. Soon, we will be assessing the 
first results, and then we will be able to choose the 
method that performs best with a lesser effort. 
Once we have chosen the best formalism, we 
intend to develop a comprehensive grammar that 
will disambiguate as many ambiguous MWLUs as 
possible. 
In addition, we are developing new processes 
after POS tagging in order to identify complex 
named entities and terminological units. These 
units constitute an open class and so their 
exhaustive inclusion in a database would not be 
viable. 
6 Conclusion 
7 
In this paper we have described a whole 
framework for the representation and treatment of 
MWEs, which is being currently used at the IXA 
Research Group to process this kind of expressions 
in general texts. Although it has been conceived 
and so far used for Basque, a highly inflected 
language, we think that it is general enough to be 
applied to other languages. 
A general representation schema for MWLUs at 
the lexical level has been proposed. This schema 
allows us to state which components a MWLU has 
and to formally encode all the different surface 
realizations it can adopt in the text. 
The problems that diverse information require-
ments in lemmatization and syntactic processing 
can eventually pose have been explained, and a 
possible solution for the representation of these 
phenomena has also been outlined. 
As for the processing aspects, we have 
described HABIL, the tool for the treatment of 
MWEs. HABIL processes MWEs based on their 
description in the lexical database, dealing also 
with some types of open class MWEs. 
One of the remaining problems when split and 
ambiguous MWEs are to be tagged is related with 
disambiguation procedures using Hidden Markov 
Models, which are not able to manage different 
paths with variable lengths. This problem can be 
solved using rule-based methods or lattice 
structures for tagging. 
Acknowledgements 
This research is being partially funded by the 
European Commission (MEANING project, IST-
2001-34460) and the Basque Government 
(Etortek-Hizking, Saiotek-Ihardetsi). 
References 
Aduriz I., Aranzabe M., Arriola J., D?az de Ilarraza A., 
Gojenola K., Oronoz M., Uria L. 2004. A cascaded 
syntactic analyser for Basque. Fifth International 
Conference on Intelligence Text Processing and 
Computational Linguistics (CICLing2004). Seoul, 
Korea. 
Aldezabal I., Ansa O., Arrieta B., Artola X., Ezeiza N., 
Hern?ndez G., Lersundi M. 2001. EDBL: a General 
Lexical Basis for the Automatic Processing of 
Basque. IRCS Workshop on Linguistic Databases. 
Philadelphia. 
Ar?valo M. 2002. MICE, un recurso para la resoluci?n 
de la an?fora. International Workshop on 
Computational Linguistics. http://www.lsi.upc.es/ 
~nlp/iwcl02. 
Breidt E., Segond F., Valetto G. 1996. Local grammars 
for the description of multi-word lexemes and their 
automatic recognition in texts. Proceedings of 
COMPLEX'96, 19-28. Budapest. 
Carmona J., Cervell S., M?rquez L., Mart? M.A., Padr? 
L., Placer R., Rodr?guez H., Taul? M., Turmo J. 
1998. An environment for morphosyntactic 
processing of unrestricted Spanish text. Proceedings 
of LREC'98. 915-922. 
Chinchor N. 1997. MUC-7 Named Entity Task 
Definition. Version 3.5. http://www.itl.nist.gov/iaui/ 
894.02/related_projects/muc/  
Collins M. 2002. Ranking Algorithms for Named-Entity 
Extraction: Boosting and the Voted Percetron. 
Proceedings of ACL-2002. 
Collins M., Singer Y. 1999. Unsupervised Models for 
Named Entity Classification. Proceedings of the 
Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing and Workshop on Very Large 
Corpora (EMNLP-VLC-99). 
Copestake A., Lambean F., Villavicencio A., Bond F., 
Baldwin T., Sag I., Flickinger D. 2002. Multiword 
Expressions: linguistic precision and reusability. 
Proceedings of the Third International Conference 
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 
2002), Las Palmas, pp. 1941-7. 
Ezeiza N. 2003. Corpusak ustiatzeko tresna 
linguistikoak. Euskararen etiketatzaile sintaktiko 
sendo eta malgua. PhD thesis, University of the 
Basque Country. 
Ezeiza N., Aduriz I., Alegria I., Arriola J.M., Urizar R.  
1998. Combining Stochastic and Rule-Based 
Methods for Disambiguation in Agglutinative 
Languages. COLING-ACL'98, Montreal (Canada). 
Fontenelle T., Adriaens G., De Braekeleer G. 1994. The 
Lexical Unit in the Metal? MT System, MT. The 
Netherlands. v9. 1-19. 
Jackendoff R. 1997. The Architecture of the Language 
Faculty. Cambridge, MA MIT Press. 
Karlsson F., Voutilainen A., Heikkila J,. Anttila A. 
1995. Constraint Grammar: A Language-
independent System for Parsing Unrestricted Text. 
Mouton de Gruyter. 
Karttunen L., Chanod J-P., Grefenstette G., Schiller A. 
1997. Regular expressions for language engineering. 
Natural Language Engineering, Cambridge 
University Press. 
Leech G., Garside R., Bryan M. 1994. CLAWS4: The 
tagging of the British National Corpus. Proceedings 
of COLING-94, 622-628. 
Magnini B., Negri M., Prevete R., Tanev H. 2002. A 
WordNet Approach to Named Entities Recognition. 
Proceeding of the Workshop SemaNet'02: Binding 
and Using Semantic Networks. 
Silva J., Dias G., Guillor? S., Lopes G. 1999. Using 
localmaxs algorithm for the extraction of contiguous 
and non-contiguous multiword lexical units. 
Proceedings of 9th Portuguese Conference in 
Artificial Inteligence, 21-24. 
Smadja F. 1993. Retrieving Collocations from Text: 
Xtract. Computational Linguistics, 19(1), 143-177. 
