Extracting Information on Pneumonia in Infants Using Natural
Language Processing of Radiology Reports
Eneida A
Mendonca
Biomedical
Informatics
Columbia
University
New York, NY,
USA
em264@
columbia.edu
Janet Haas
Infection Control
New-York
Presbyterian
Hospital
New York, NY,
USA
jah9012@
nyp.org
Lyudmila
Shagina
Biomedical
Informatics
Columbia
University
New York, NY,
USA
ls303@
columbia.edu
Elaine Larson
Pharmaceutical
andTherapeutical
Research
Columbia
University
New York, NY
USA
el123@
columbia.edu
Carol Friedman
Biomedical
Informatics
Columbia
University
New York, NY
USA
cf9@
columbia.edu
Abstract
Natural language processing (NLP) is
critical for improvement of the healthcare
process because it has the potential to en-
code the vast amount of clinical data in
textual patient reports. Many clinical ap-
plications require coded data to function
appropriately, such as decision support
and quality assurance applications. How-
ever, in order to be applicable in the clini-
cal domain, performance of the NLP
systems must be adequate. A valuable
clinical application is the detection of in-
fectious diseases, such as surveillance of
healthcare-associated pneumonia in new-
borns (e.g. neonates) because it produces
significant rates of morbidity and mortal-
ity, and manual surveillance of respiratory
infection in these patients is a challenge.
Studies have already demonstrated that
automated surveillance using NLP tools is
a useful adjunct to manual clinical man-
agement, and is an effective tool for in-
fection control practitioners. This paper
presents a study aimed at evaluating the
feasibility of an NLP-based electronic
clinical monitoring system to identify
healthcare-associated pneumonia in neo-
nates. We estimated sensitivity, specific-
ity, and positive predictive value by
comparing the detection with clinicians?
judgments and our results demonstrated
that the automated method was indeed
feasible. Sensitivity (recall) was 87.5%,
and specificity (true negative rates) was
94.1%.
1 Introduction
Several studies have demonstrated the value of
natural language processing (NLP) technology for
a variety of healthcare applications. For example,
NLP techniques have been used to analyze and
structure narrative patient reports in order to pro-
vide data for applications, such as automated en-
coding, decision support, patient management,
quality assurance, outcomes analysis, and clinical
research (Baud et al, 1995; Fiszman et al, 2000;
Friedman et al, 1994; Friedman et al, 1999b;
Gundersen et al, 1996; Haug, Ranum, and Fre-
derick, 1990; Sager et al, 1995). Additionally, data
mining and knowledge discovery techniques have
been used to automate the development of rules
that detect clinical conditions by interpreting data
generated from the natural language processing
output of narrative reports (Wilcox and Hripcsak,
2000). NLP is potentially an invaluable tool for
healthcare because it enables access to a rich and
varied source of clinical data. However, adequate
performance is critical for practical clinical appli-
cations as well as timeliness.
One type of infectious disease that is important
to monitor is healthcare-associated pneumonia in
preterm and full-term neonates because it remains
a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in
that population (Whitsett et al, 1999). The inci-
dence of pneumonia in Neonatal Intensive Care
Units can be high as 10% in the United States
(Gaynes et al, 1996), with mortality varying from
5-20% in cases of acquired pneumonia (Gaynes et
al., 1996; Zangwill, Schuchat, and Wenger, 1920).
Healthcare-associated pneumonia is an infection
that is acquired during hospitalization, or in emer-
gency departments and outpatient clinics, and it is
neither present nor incubated at the time of admis-
sion.
The diagnosis of healthcare-associated pneu-
monia in neonates is extremely challenging, since
neonates often do not exhibit ?typical? signs and
symptoms of this infection (Bonten, 1999; Cordero
et al, 2002; Cordero et al, 2000; Craven and Ste-
ger, 1998; Flanagan, 1999). In most cases, the final
diagnosis is confirmed only by microbiologic cul-
ture, but it is difficult to obtain adequate specimens
in neonates because of the invasive nature of this
procedure (Heyland et al, 1999). Additionally,
culture results are not timely (Cordero et al, 2002)
because results are produced after 2 days, whereas
results of radiology reports are usually obtained
within 2 hours.
Surveillance require routine collection and
analysis of relevant data, which must be promptly
distributed to the appropriate health care providers,
who then must use the data to take action and fur-
ther prevent morbidity and mortality (Thacker, et
al., 1986). Data provided by surveillance tools can
be used for several purposes: (a) to identify the
natural incidence of particular events, (b) to detect
situations that require epidemiologic control meas-
ures, (c) to guide actions, allocation of resources,
and interventions (Gaynes et al, 1996). Surveil-
lance tools provide baseline information on trends
and geographic distribution of conditions. An im-
portant aspect is the ability to detect an outbreak at
the stage when intervention may affect the ex-
pected course of events (AHRQ, 2002). In order to
facilitate infectious disease surveillance, several
measures have been developed at the national
level. The Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention (CDC), for example, has implemented
measures to improve data collection and sharing
for surveillance purposes. The National Nosoco-
mial Infectious Surveillance System (NNISS)
(Richards et al, 2001) is concerned with data stan-
dards and sharing on healthcare associated infec-
tions. The National Electronic Disease
Surveillance System (NEDSS) focuses on stan-
dards and the response to biothreats.
2 Background
At the New York Presbyterian Hospital, a gen-
eral NLP system in the clinical domain, called
MedLEE (Medical Language Extraction and En-
coding System) (Friedman et al, 1994), is rou-
tinely used to parse and encode clinical reports. It
has been satisfactorily evaluated for clinical appli-
cations that require encoded data that is found in
discharge summaries and radiology reports
(Friedman et al, 1999b) (Friedman and Hripcsak,
1998; Friedman et al, 1999a). Hripcsak et al
showed that, for particular clinical conditions
found in chest radiographs, which included pneu-
monia, the performance of MedLEE was the same
as that of physicians, and was significantly supe-
rior to that of lay persons and alternative auto-
mated methods (Hripcsak et al, 1995). In another
study to evaluate a clinical guideline and an auto-
mated computer protocol for detection and isola-
tion of patients with tuberculosis, Knirsch et al
(Knirsch et al, 1998) demonstrated that automated
surveillance is a useful adjunct to clinical man-
agement and an effective tool for infection control
practitioners. That detection system monitored ra-
diology reports encoded by MedLEE for evidence
of radiographic abnormalities suggestive of tuber-
culosis along with other data in the patient reposi-
tory that was already coded, such as the patient?s
hospital location (for isolation status), laboratory
and pharmacy data for immunological compro-
mised status. Most importantly, the system de-
tected patients who should be isolated that were
not detected using the normal protocol (i.e. manual
detection). MedLEE has also been extended to
process pathology reports, echocardiograms, and
electrocardiograms, but evaluations of perform-
ance in these areas have not yet been undertaken
because evaluation is very costly in terms of time
and personnel.
3 Methods
3.1 Overview of NLP System
MedLEE is composed of several different modules
where each module processes and transforms the
text in accordance with a particular aspect of lan-
guage until a final structured output form is ob-
tained. The structured output consists of primary
units of clinical information (i.e. findings, proce-
dures, and medications), along with corresponding
modifiers (e.g. body locations, degree, certainty).
Figure 1 shows an example of a simplified version
of structured output that is generated as a result of
processing the sentence there is evidence of severe
pulmonary congestion with question mild consoli-
dation changes.
The output that is generated represents two
primary clinical findings, congestion and changes.
The first finding has a body location modifier
lung, stemming from pulmonary, a certainty modi-
fier high, stemming from evidence of, and a de-
gree modifier high, stemming from severe. In the
second finding, the certainty modifier moderate,
corresponds to question, the degree modifier low
corresponds to mild, and the descriptor corre-
sponds to consolidation. Values for degree and
certainty modifiers were automatically mapped to
a small set of values in order to facilitate subse-
quent retrieval. The actual form of output gener-
ated by MedLEE is XML, but Figure 1 shows a
compatible and more readable form.
Below is a brief overview of the system. More
detailed descriptions were previously published
(Friedman et al, 1994). When MedLEE was origi-
nally developed, it was intended to be used in
conjunction with decision support applications,
where high precision was critical. Therefore, it was
initially designed to maximize precision and re-
quired a complete parse. However, subsequent
clinical applications required high recall, and we
discovered that flexibility was critical. Currently,
MedLEE attempts to find a complete parse and
only resorts to partial parsing when a full parse
cannot be obtained. When generating the struc-
tured output, the method that was used to obtain
the parse is saved along with the structured output
so that the user can filter in or out findings ac-
cordingly.
Preprocessor - The preprocessor recognizes sen-
tence boundaries, and also performs lexical lookup
in order to recognize and categorize words,
phrases, and abbreviations, and to specify their
target forms. The lexicon was manually developed
using clinical experts because of the need for high
precision. In a study we used the UMLS (Unified
Medical Language System) (Lindberg, Hum-
phreys, and McCray, 1993), a controlled vocabu-
lary developed and maintained by the National
Library of Medicine, to automatically generate a
lexicon. This lexicon was subsequently used by
MedLEE instead of the MedLEE lexicon to proc-
ess a set of reports. Results showed a significant
loss of precision (from 93% to 86%) and recall
(from 81% to 60%) when using the UMLS lexicon
(Friedman, et al, 2001). Terms with ambiguous
senses may be disambiguated in this stage based on
contextual information. The preprocessor can also
handle tagged text so that lexical definitions can be
specified in the text, bypassing the need for lexical
lookup for cases where the text is already tagged.
This feature is particularly useful for handling lo-
cal terminology (such as the names of local facili-
ties), as well as for resolving domain specific
ambiguities.
Parser - The parser uses a grammar and lexicon to
identify and interpret the structure of the sentence,
and to generate an intermediate structure based on
grammar specifications. The grammar is a set of
rules based on semantic and syntactic co-
occurrence patterns. Development of manual rules
finding: congestion
body_location: lung
certainty: high
degree: high
finding: changes
certainty: moderate
degree: low
descriptor: consolidation
Figure 1 ? Sample output in simplified
form for the sentence there is evidence
of severe pulmonary congestion with
question mild consolidation changes.
are costly, and we are currently investigating sto-
chastic methods to help extend the grammar auto-
matically.
Composer - The composer is needed to compose
multi-word phrases that appear separately in the
input sentence to facilitate retrieval later on. For
example, the discontiguous words spleen and en-
la rged  in spleen appears enlarged would be
mapped to a phrase enlarged spleen so that a sub-
sequent retrieval could look for that phrase rather
than the individual components.
Encoder - The encoder maps the target terms in
the intermediate structure to a standard clinical
vocabulary (i.e. enlarged spleen is mapped to the
preferred vocabulary concept splenomegaly) in the
UMLS.
Chunker - The chunker increases sensitivity by
using alternative strategies to break up and struc-
ture the text if the initial parsing effort fails.
3.2 Design of Feasibility Study
A two-year crossover design study was conducted
independently of this NLP effort (03/01/2001-
01/31/2002, 03/01/2002-01/31/2003) in two neo-
natal intensive care units (NICU) in New York
City to study the impact of hand hygiene products
on healthcare acquired infection:
? NICU-A: a 40-bed care unit, which cares
for acutely ill neonates, including those re-
quiring surgery for complex congenital
anomalies and extra corporeal membrane
oxygenation
? NICU-B: a 50-bed unit associated with a
large infertility treatment practice
A trained infection control practitioner (ICP),
using the CDC National Nosocomial Infection
Surveillance System (NNIS) definitions, per-
formed the surveillance for infections in both units.
Cases were reviewed manually, including analysis
of computerized radiology, pathology and micro-
biology reports as well as chart reviews and inter-
views with patient care providers. The diagnosis of
infection was validated with the physician co-
investigator from each unit.
 As part of this study, we evaluated the feasi-
bility of using the NLP system (MedLEE) to auto-
matically identify potential cases of healthcare-
associated pneumonia in neonates. The NLP sys-
tem was not changed, but medical logic rules that
accessed the NLP output had to be developed. The
rules were developed by a medical expert based on
modifications to a previous rule to detect pneumo-
nia in adults (Hripcsak et al, 1995). Modifications
were made in accordance with the CDC NNIS
definition of healthcare-associated pneumonia in
neonates. The final rule was then adapted to func-
tion properly with the output generated by
MedLEE. For example, the rule looks for 38 dif-
ferent findings or modifier-finding combinations,
such as pneumatocele and persistent opacity, and
then filters out findings that are not applicable be-
cause they occur with certain modifiers (e.g. no,
rule out, cannot evaluate, resolved, a total of 62
modifier). Therefore the automated monitoring
system consists of two components: a) the
MedLEE NLP system, and b) medical rules that
access the output generated by MedLEE. In this
first phase, the medical expert defined the rules
broadly, to identify reports consistent with pneu-
monia (and not only healthcare-associated pneu-
monia) with the intention of continuing the effort if
performance in identifying all forms of pneumonia
was satisfactory. This means that the automated
system could not differentiate between pneumonia
and healthcare-associated pneumonia at this point.
There were no probabilities associated with find-
ings or combination of findings. The second phase
of the study will use the results present in this work
to refine the rules in order to differentiate between
healthcare-associated and other types of pneumo-
nia.
All chest radiograph reports of neonates admit-
ted to NICU-A were processed using the auto-
mated monitoring system. To better assess true
performance, no corrections were made to the re-
ports despite misspellings and even the inclusion
of other types of reports in the same electronic files
as the chest radiograph reports. For instance, it is
not uncommon to have a combined chest-abdomen
radiograph in a neonate.
4 Results
During the 2 years of the study, from the total of
1,688 neonates admitted to the NICU-A, 1,277
neonates had 7,928 chest radiographs. Based on
the experts? evaluation, only 7 neonates had
healthcare-associated pneumonia at least one point
during the hospital stay. Cases were definitively
confirmed by cultures. These patients had a total of
168 chest radiographs, but only 13, which were
associated with the 7 patients, were positive be-
cause they contracted pneumonia at some point
after their admission.
The automated system found the presence of
pneumonia in 125 chest radiographs that were as-
sociated with 82 patients, including 6 of the 7 pa-
tients identified by the experts. The missed case
was a neonate with cardiac problems, and the chest
radiograph did not show findings of healthcare-
associated pneumonia. A pulmonary biopsy per-
formed subsequently showed findings which were
consistent with healthcare-associated pneumonia.
For healthcare-associated pneumonia, the sen-
sitivity (recall) of the automated system was
85.7%, while specificity (false positive rate) was
94.1%, and the positive predictive value (preci-
sion) was only 7.32%.
One of the authors (EAM), who is a board certi-
fied pediatric intensive care physician, manually
analyzed the false positive cases (e.g. errors in pre-
cision), and found that several of the false positive
cases actually had radiographic findings corre-
sponding to pneumonia. Other errors require expert
review of the entire patient charts to determine
whether or not healthcare-associated pneumonia
was present.
The expert reviewer (EAM) also encountered
several occurrences of a missed abbreviation
(?BPD?). Another common error was the mis-
spelling of terms.
5 Discussion
Natural language processing has the potential to
extract valuable data from narrative reports. The
significance is that a vast amount of NLP struc-
tured data could then be exploited by automated
tools, such as decision support systems. Automated
alerts (Dexter et al, 2001; Hripcsak et al, 1990;
Kuperman et al, 1999; Rind et al, 1994) require
coded clinical data to do an intelligent analysis of
patient status or condition.  An automated tool,
which notifies appropriate personnel about patients
with a particular condition or infection facilitates
timely and adequate response, including treatment,
medication prophylaxis, and isolation.
Conditions such as healthcare-associated
pneumonia carry significant rates of morbidity and
mortality. Surveillance of respiratory infection in
these patients is a challenge, and especially in neo-
nates admitted to neonatal intensive care units.
Isolated positive cultures alone do not distinguish
between bacterial colonization and respiratory in-
fection. Surveillance based on radiology and labo-
ratory findings can be valuable as a complement to
daily manual chart review and clinical rounds.
An NLP system cannot be used in a clinical en-
vironment without an infrastructure to support its
use. At the NYPH, a clinical event monitor
(Hripcsak et al, 1996) based on Arden Syntax for
Medical Logic Modules ? MLM (Hripcsak et al,
1990; Hripcsak et al, 1994)  provides clinical deci-
sion support.  When a clinical event occurs (such
as uploading of a radiograph reports), appropriate
medical logic modules are triggered based on the
type of event. However, in order to be used by the
monitoring system, narrative data must be coded.
We envision the integration and use of this auto-
mated NLP system to facilitate surveillance of
healthcare-associated pneumonia in a real clinical
environment. An additional issue is that the data
from the NLP system has to be represented in a
way that can be manipulated by the clinical infor-
mation system, and easily retrieved by the medical
rules. Therefore it is not enough to evaluate an
NLP system in isolation of a clinical application.
The NLP system may perform very well in isola-
tion, but the rules that access the data may be very
complex. They may involve complex inferencing,
or may be difficult to write because of the repre-
sentation generated by the NLP system.
 For healthcare-associated pneumonia, sensitiv-
ity (recall) and specificity (rate of true negatives)
were appropriate for the clinical application
(87.7% and 94.1% respectively), but the positive
predictive value (precision) was low (7.32%), as
expected in this phase. Low precision was primar-
ily due to the broad rule that was used to detect
pneumonia, and was not due to the NLP system
itself. This rule now needs to be refined to detect
only healthcare-associated pneumonia, and distin-
guish among radiograph findings moderately or
highly suggestive of healthcare-associated pneu-
monia. That would require substantial effort in-
volving manual chart review by an expert.
Additional data from other sources, such as labo-
ratory results, should also be combined with radio-
graph findings to add precision to the automated
system. This will be done in the future as well as
an evaluation. The data from NICU-B was re-
served as a test set for this purpose.
The MedLEE system was not adapted in any
way for this effort. Additionally, the rules were
based on expert knowledge but there was no train-
ing of the rules because of the sparseness of the
data. One type of NLP error was caused by a
missed abbreviation BPD. A straightforward solu-
tion would be to include the abbreviation in the
lexicon, but, this will create problems because of
the ambiguous nature of the abbreviation. BPD has
multiple meanings, including broncopulmonary
dysplasia, borderline personality disorder, bipa-
rietal diameter, bipolar disorder, and bilio-
pancreatic diversion, among others.  This is not
surprising since abbreviations are known to be
highly ambiguous (Aronson and Rindfleshch,
1994; Nadkarni, Chen, and Brandt, 2001), and are
widespread in clinical text. In chest radiographs of
neonates, BPD generally denotes broncopulmon-
ary dysplasia, a condition that predisposes the pa-
tient to respiratory infection. In other types of
radiology reports, for instance abdominal echogra-
phy, BPD generally means biparietal diameter, a
measure of the gestation age. Word sense disam-
biguation is a difficult problem, which is widely
discussed in the computational linguistics litera-
ture. A review of methods for word sense disam-
biguation is presented by Ide and colleagues (Ide
and Veronis, 1998). In the clinical setting, an im-
portant part of the solution will involve identifying
the particular domain and use of special purpose
domain-specific disambiguators that tag ambigu-
ous abbreviations and specify their appropriate
sense prior to parsing, based on the domain and
other contextual information. Defining the appro-
priate domain granularity will be important, but
may be a difficult task because the granularity may
vary with the abbreviation. For example, in the
case of radiographic reports, possibly the domain
should involve all chest x-rays or only chest x-rays
of neonates, or the specific type of reports.
In this study, we wanted to first evaluate the
feasibility of automated surveillance based on NLP
in a real clinical situation. The situation that pre-
sented itself was important but only involved a
small population of positive cases. The results that
were obtained are not meant to be definitive but to
expose the issues associated with the use of an
automated system that uses NLP in a real environ-
ment,. This study established a relationship with
clinicians who need this technology. It is this col-
laboration, which is critical for furthering use of
and validation of NLP in the clinical domain. In
this study, for instance, upon reviewing our results,
the infection control practitioner felt she may have
missed some cases when following her typical
manual surveillance, and would welcome the as-
sistance of an automated system, even if it gener-
ated a manageable amount of false positives (false
alerts). We do not know what that amount should
be, but estimate that an amount in the range of a
few false positives per week would be acceptable.
In that case, the 82 false positives, accounting for 2
years of cases, would be very acceptable. This
would need further studying.
Routine surveillance of infectious diseases in
hospitals is generally accomplished by manual re-
view of charts and clinical rounds by the ICPs. In
case of suspected infection, the data are collected
using surveillance protocols that target inpatients at
high risk of infection. The CDC NNIS definition
for healthcare-associated pneumonia is a 2-page
written protocol with two different criteria. It is
well known that interpretation of guidelines and
protocols vary among health care providers, even
within the same institution.  A recent study on sur-
veillance of ventilator-associated pneumonia
(VAP) in very-low-weight infants retrospectively
compare VAP surveillance diagnoses made by the
hospital ICPs with those made by a panel of ex-
perts with the same clinical, laboratory, and radi-
ologic data corroborates the variation among
experts (Cordero, et al, 2000).  An accurate NLP
system, which codes reports consistently, should
improve data collection for surveillance.
6 Conclusion
Surveillance of infectious disease is critical for
health care but manual methods are costly, incon-
sistent, and error prone. An automated system us-
ing natural language processing would be an
invaluable tool that could be used to improve sur-
veillance, including emerging infectious diseases
and biothreats. We performed a feasibility study in
conjunction with an infectious disease control
study to detect the presence of healthcare-
associated pneumonia in neonates. The results
showed that an automated system consisting of
NLP and clinical rules could be used for automated
surveillance. Further work will include refinement
of the rules, further evaluation, integration with the
clinical environment, and identification of other
surveillance applications.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported in part by grants
LM06274 from the National Library of Medicine,
1 R01 NR05197-01A1 from the National Institute
of Nursing Research, and by a gift from the
Sulzberger Foundation.
References
AHRQ. Bioterrorism preparedness and response: use of
information technologies and decision support sys-
tems. Evid Rep Technol Assess (Summ) 2002;
(59):1-8.
Aronson AR, Rindfleshch TBA. Exploting a large the-
saurus for information retrieval. Proc. RIAO 1994;
197-216.
Baud RH, Rassinoux AM, Wagner JC et al Represent-
ing clinical narratives using conceptual graphs.
Methods Inf Med 1995; 34(1-2):176-86.
Bonten MJ. Controversies on diagnosis and prevention
of ventilator-associated pneumonia. Diagn Microbiol
Infect Dis 1999; 34(3):199-204.
Cordero L, Ayers LW, Miller RR, Seguin JH, Coley
BD. Surveillance of ventilator-associated pneumonia
in very-low-birth-weight infants. Am J Infect Control
2002; 30(1):32-9.
Cordero L, Sananes M, Coley B, Hogan M, Gelman M,
Ayers LW. Ventilator-associated pneumonia in very
low-birth-weight infants at the time of nosocomial
bloodstream infection and during airway colonization
with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Am J Infect Control
2000; 28(5):333-9.
Craven DE, Steger KA. Ventilator-associated bacterial
pneumonia: challenges in diagnosis, treatment, and
prevention. New Horiz 1998; 6(2 Suppl):S30-45.
Dexter PR, Perkins S, Overhage JM, Maharry K, Kohler
RB, McDonald CJ. A computerized reminder system
to increase the use of preventive care for hospitalized
patients. N Engl J Med 2001; 345(13):965-70.
Fiszman M, Chapman WW, Aronsky D, Evans RS,
Haug PJ. Automatic detection of acute bacterial
pneumonia from chest X-ray reports. J Am Med In-
form Assoc 2000; 7(6):593-604.
Flanagan PG. Diagnosis of ventilator-associated pneu-
monia. J Hosp Infect 1999; 41(2):87-99.
Friedman C, Alderson PO, Austin JH, Cimino JJ, John-
son SB. A general natural-language text processor for
clinical radiology. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association 1994; 1(2):161-74.
Friedman C, Hripcsak G. Evaluating natural language
processors in the clinical domain. Methods of Infor-
mation in Medicine 1998; 37:311-575.
Friedman C, Hripcsak G, Shagina L, Liu H. Represent-
ing information in patient reports using natural lan-
guage processing and the extensible markup
language. J Am Med Inform Assoc 1999a; 6(1):76-
87.
Friedman C, Knirsch C, Shagina L, Hripcsak G. Auto-
mating a severity score guideline for community-
acquired pneumonia employing medical language
processing of discharge summaries. Proc AMIA
Symp 1999b; 256-60.
Friedman C, Liu H, Shagina L, Johnson S, Hripcsak G.
Evaluating the UMLS as a source of lexical knowl-
edge for medical language processing. Proc AMIA
Symp 2001; 189-93.
Gaynes RP, Edwards JR, Jarvis WR, Culver DH, Tolson
JS, Martone WJ. Nosocomial infections among neo-
nates in high-risk nurseries in the United States. Na-
tional Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System.
Pediatrics 1996; 98(3 Pt 1):357-61.
Gundersen ML, Haug PJ, Pryor  TA et al Development
and evaluation of a computerized admission diagno-
ses encoding system. Computers and Biomedical Re-
search 1996; 29(5):351-72.
Haug PJ, Ranum DL, Frederick PR. Computerized ex-
traction of coded findings from free-text radiologic
reports. Work in progress. Radiology 1990;
174(2):543-8.
Heyland DK, Cook DJ, Griffith L, Keenan SP, Brun-
Buisson C. The attributable morbidity and mortality
of ventilator-associated pneumonia in the critically ill
patient. The Canadian Critical Trials Group. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 1999; 159(4 Pt 1):1249-56.
Hripcsak G, Clayton PD, Jenders RA, Cimino JJ, John-
son SB. Design of a clinical event monitor. Comput
Biomed Res 1996; 29(3):194-221.
 Hripcsak G, Clayton PD, Pryor TA, Haug PJ,  Wigertz
O, van der Lei J . The Arden Syntax for medical
logic modules. Miller RA. Proceedings of the Four-
teenth Annual Symposium on Computer Applications
in Medical Care. Washington, D.C.: IEEE Computer
Press, 1990: 200-4.
Hripcsak G, Friedman C, Alderson PO, DuMouchel W,
Johnson SB, Clayton PD. Unlocking clinical data
from narrative reports: a study of natural language
processing. Annals of Internal Medicine 1995;
122(9):681-8.
Hripcsak G, Ludemann P, Pryor TA, Wigertz OB,
Clayton PD. Rationale for the Arden Syntax. Comput
Biomed Res 1994; 27(4):291-324.
Ide N, Veronis J. Introduction to the special issue on
word sense disambiguation: the state of the art. Com-
putational Linguistics 1998; 24:1-40.
Knirsch CA, Jain NL, Pablos-Mendez A, Friedman C,
Hripcsak G. Respiratory isolation of tuberculosis pa-
tients using clinical guidelines and an automated
clinical decision support system. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1998; 19(2):94-100.
Kuperman GJ, Teich JM, Tanasijevic MJ et al Im-
proving response to critical laboratory results with
automation: results of a randomized controlled trial. J
Am Med Inform Assoc 1999; 6(6):512-22.
Lindberg DAB, Humphreys BL, McCray AT. The Uni-
fied Medical Language System. Methods of Infor-
mation in Medicine 1993; 32(4):281-91.
Nadkarni P, Chen R, Brandt C. UMLS concept indexing
for production databases: a feasibility study. J Am
Med Inform Assoc 2001; 8(1):80-91.
Richards C, Emori TG, Edwards J, Fridkin S, Tolson J,
Gaynes R. Characteristics of hospitals and infection
control professionals participating in the National
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System 1999.
Am J Infect Control 2001; 29(6):400-3.
Rind DM, Safran C, Phillips RS et al Effect of com-
puter-based alerts on the treatment and outcomes of
hospitalized patients. Arch Intern Med 1994;
154(13):1511-7.
Sager N, Lyman M, Nhan NT, Tick LJ. Medical lan-
guage processing: applications to patient data repre-
sentation and automatic encoding. Methods Inf Med
1995; 34(1-2):140-6.
Thacker SB, Redmond S, Rothenberg RB, Spitz SB,
Choi K, White MC. A controlled trial of disease sur-
veillance strategies. Am J Prev Med 1986; 2(6):345-
50.
Whitsett JA, Pryhuber GS, Rice WR, Warner BB, Wert
SE. Acute respiratory disorders. Avery GB, Fletcher
MA, MacDonald MG5th edition. New York: Lippin-
cott Williams & Wilkins, 1999: 485-508.
Wilcox A, Hripcsak G. Medical text representations for
inductive learning. Proc AMIA Symp 2000; 923-7.
Zangwill KM, Schuchat A, Wenger JD. Group B strep-
tococcal disease in the United States, 1990: report
from a multistate active surveillance system. MMWR
CDC Surveill Summ 1920; 41(6):25-32.
