Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Important Unresolved Matters, pages 41?48,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Adapting a Medical Speech to Speech Translation System (MedSLT) to 
Arabic 
Pierrette Bouillon 
University of Geneva, TIM/ISSCO, ETI 
40, Bd. Du Pont d'Arve 
CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland 
Pierrette.Bouillon@issco.unige.ch 
 
Manny Rayner 
Powerset Inc 
475 Brannan Str. 
San Francisco 
CA 94107, USA 
manny@powerset.com 
 
Sonia Halimi 
University of Geneva, TIM/ISSCO, ETI 
40, Bd. Du Pont d'Arve 
CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland 
Sonia.Halimi@eti.unige.ch 
 
Beth Ann Hockey 
Mail Stop 19-26, UCSC UARC, NASA 
Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, 
CA 94035-1000 
bahockey@ucsc.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract 
We describe the adaptation for Arabic of 
the grammar-based MedSLT medical 
speech system. The system supports simple 
medical diagnosis questions about head-
aches using vocabulary of 322 words. We 
show that the MedSLT architecture based 
on motivated general grammars produces 
very good results, with a limited effort. 
Based on the grammars for other languages 
covered by the system, it is in fact very 
easy to develop an Arabic grammar and to 
specialize it efficiently for the different 
system tasks. In this paper, we focus on 
generation. 
1 Introduction 
MedSLT is a medical speech translation system. It 
allows a doctor to ask diagnosis questions in medi-
cal subdomains, such as headaches, abdominal 
pain, etc, covering a wide range of questions that 
doctors generally ask their patients. The grammar-
based architecture, built using specialization from 
reusable general grammars, is designed to allow a 
rapid development of different domains and lan-
guages. Presently, it supports English, French, 
Japanese, Spanish and Catalan. This article focuses 
on the system development for Arabic.  
In general, translation in this context raises two 
specific questions: 1) how to achieve recognition 
quality that is good enough for translation, and 2) 
how to get translations to be as idiomatic as possi-
ble so they can be understood by the patient. For 
close languages and domains where accuracy is not 
very important (e.g. information requests), it may 
be possible to combine a statistical recognizer with 
a commercial translation system as it is often done 
in commercial tools such as SpokenTranslation 
(Seligman and Dillinger, 2006). However, for this 
specific application in a multilingual context, this 
solution is not applicable at all: even if perfect rec-
ognition were possible (which is far from being the 
case), current commercial tools for translating to 
Arabic do not guarantee good quality. The domain 
dealt with here contains, in fact, many structures 
specific to this type of oral dialogue that can not be 
handled by these systems. For example, all the 
doctor?s interactions with the MedSLT system 
consist of questions whose structures differ from 
one language to another, with each language hav-
ing its own constraints. Consequently, two types of 
errors occur in Arabic translation systems. Either 
they do not recognize the interrogative structure as 
in example (1), or they produce ungrammatical 
sentences by copying the original structure as in 
example (2): 
 
 
41
(1) was the pain severe?  
 ? ? ?
?  (Google) 
(kana al alam chadid)  
 ?have-past-3 the pain severe? 
 
is the pain aggravated by exertion? 
 
 ? (Systran) 
(al alam yufaqim bi juhd)  
?the pain escalate-3 with effort? 
 
(2) is the headache aggravated by bright light? 
  ? 
 Coling 2008: Proceedings of the workshop on Speech Processing for Safety Critical Translation and Pervasive Applications, pages 32?35
Manchester, August 2008
The 2008 MedSLT System
Manny Rayner1, Pierrette Bouillon1, Jane Brotanek2, Glenn Flores2
Sonia Halimi1, Beth Ann Hockey3, Hitoshi Isahara4, Kyoko Kanzaki4
Elisabeth Kron5, Yukie Nakao6, Marianne Santaholma1
Marianne Starlander1, Nikos Tsourakis1
1 University of Geneva, TIM/ISSCO, 40 bvd du Pont-d?Arve, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
{Emmanuel.Rayner,Pierrette.Bouillon,Nikolaos.Tsourakis}@issco.unige.ch
{Sonia.Halimi,Marianne.Santaholma,Marianne.Starlander}@eti.unige.ch
2 UT Southwestern Medical Center, Children?s Medical Center of Dallas
{Glenn.Flores,Jane.Brotanek}@utsouthwestern.edu
3 Mail Stop 19-26, UCSC UARC, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035?1000
bahockey@ucsc.edu
4 NICT, 3-5 Hikaridai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto, Japan 619-0289
{isahara,kanzaki}@nict.go.jp
5 3 St Margarets Road, Cambridge CB3 0LT, England
elisabethkron@yahoo.co.uk
6 University of Nantes, LINA, 2, rue de la Houssinie`re, BP 92208 44322 Nantes Cedex 03
yukie.nakao@univ-nantes.fr
Abstract
MedSLT is a grammar-based medical
speech translation system intended for
use in doctor-patient diagnosis dialogues,
which provides coverage of several dif-
ferent subdomains and multiple language
pairs. Vocabulary ranges from about 350 to
1000 surface words, depending on the lan-
guage and subdomain. We will demo three
different versions of the system: an any-
to-any multilingual version involving the
languages Japanese, English, French and
Arabic, a bidirectional English ? Span-
ish version, and a mobile version run-
ning on a hand-held PDA. We will also
demo the Regulus development environ-
ment, focussing on features which sup-
port rapid prototyping of grammar-based
speech translation systems.
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
1 Introduction
MedSLT is a medium-vocabulary grammar-based
medical speech translation system built on top of
the Regulus platform (Rayner et al, 2006). It is
intended for use in doctor-patient diagnosis dia-
logues, and provides coverage of several subdo-
mains and a large number of different language-
pairs. Coverage is based on standard examina-
tion questions obtained from physicians, and fo-
cusses primarily on yes/no questions, though there
is also support for WH-questions and elliptical ut-
terances.
Detailed descriptions of MedSLT can be found
in earlier papers (Bouillon et al, 2005; Bouil-
lon et al, 2008)1. In the rest of this note, we
will briefly sketch several versions of the system
that we intend to demo at the workshop, each of
which displays new features developed over the
last year. Section 2 describes an any-language-to-
any-language multilingual version of the system;
Section 3, a bidirectional English ? Spanish ver-
sion; Section 4, a version running on a mobile PDA
1All MedSLT publications are available on-line
at http://www.issco.unige.ch/projects/
medslt/publications.shtml.
32
platform; and Section 5, the Regulus development
environment.
2 A multilingual version
During the last few months, we have reorganised
the MedSLT translation model in several ways2. In
particular, we give a much more central role to the
interlingua; we now treat this as a language in its
own right, defined by a normal Regulus grammar,
and using a syntax which essentially amounts to
a greatly simplified form of English. Making the
interlingua into another language has made it easy
to enforce tight constraints on well-formedness of
interlingual semantic expressions, since checking
well-formedness now just amounts to performing
generation using the interlingua grammar.
Another major advantage of the scheme is that
it is also possible to systematise multilingual de-
velopment, and only work with translation from
source language to interlingua, and from interlin-
gua to target language; here, the important point
is that the human-readable interlingua surface syn-
tax makes it feasible in practice to evaluate transla-
tion between normal languages and the interlingua.
Development of rules for translation to interlingua
is based on appropriate corpora for each source
language. Development of rules for translating
from interlingua uses a corpus which is formed by
merging together the results of translating each of
the individual source-language corpora into inter-
lingua.
We will demonstrate our new capabilities in
interlingua-based translation, using a version of
the system which translates doctor questions in the
headache domain from any language to any lan-
guage in the set {English, French, Japanese, Ara-
bic}. Table 1 gives examples of the coverage of the
English-input headache-domain version, and Ta-
ble 2 summarises recognition performance in this
domain for the three input languages where we
have so far performed serious evaluations. Differ-
ences in the sizes of the recognition vocabularies
are primarily due to differences in use of inflec-
tion.
3 A bidirectional version
The system from the preceding section is unidi-
rectional; all communication is in the doctor-to-
patient direction, the expectation being that the pa-
2The ideas in the section are described at greater length in
(Bouillon et al, 2008).
Language Vocab WER SemER
English 447 6% 11%
French 1025 8% 10%
Japanese 422 3% 4%
Table 2: Recognition performance for English,
French and Japanese headache-domain recognis-
ers. ?Vocab? = number of surface words in source
language recogniser vocabulary; ?WER? = Word
Error Rate for source language recogniser, on in-
coverage material; ?SemER? = semantic error rate
for source language recogniser, on in-coverage
material.
tient will respond non-verbally. Our second demo,
an early version of which is described in (Bouillon
et al, 2007), supports bidirectional translation for
the sore throat domain, in the English ? Spanish
pair. Here, the English-speaking doctor typically
asks WH-questions, and the Spanish-speaking pa-
tient responds with elliptical utterances, which are
translated as full sentence responses. A short ex-
ample dialogue is shown in Table 3.
Doctor: Where is the pain?
?Do?nde le duele?
Patient: En la garganta.
I experience the pain in my throat.
Doctor: How long have you had a pain
in your throat?
?Desde cua?ndo le duele la garganta?
Patient: Ma?s de tres d??as.
I have experienced the pain in my
throat for more than three days.
Table 3: Short dialogue with bidirectional English
? Spanish version. System translations are in ital-
ics.
4 A mobile platform version
When we have shown MedSLT to medical profes-
sionals, one of the most common complaints has
been that a laptop is not an ideal platform for use
in emergency medical situations. Our third demo
shows an experimental version of the system us-
ing a client/server architecture. The client, which
contains the user interface, runs on a Nokia Linux
N800 Internet Tablet; most of the heavy process-
ing, including in particular speech recognition, is
hosted on the remote server, with the nodes com-
municating over a wireless network. A picture of
33
Where? Is the pain above your eye?
When? Have you had the pain for more than a month?
How long? Does the pain typically last a few minutes?
How often? Do you get headaches several times a week?
How? Is it a stabbing pain?
Associated symptoms? Do you vomit when you get the headaches?
Why? Does bright light make the pain worse?
What helps? Does sleep make the pain better?
Background? Do you have a history of sinus disease?
Table 1: Examples of English MedSLT coverage
the tablet, showing the user interface, is presented
in Figure 1. The sentences appearing under the
back-translation at the top are produced by an on-
line help component, and are intended to guide the
user into the grammar?s coverage (Chatzichrisafis
et al, 2006).
The architecture is described further in
(Tsourakis et al, 2008), which also gives perfor-
mance results for another Regulus applications.
These strongly suggest that recognition perfor-
mance in the client/server environment is no
worse than on a laptop, as long as a comparable
microphone is used.
5 The development environment
Our final demo highlights the new Regulus devel-
opment environment (Kron et al, 2007), which has
over the last few months acquired a large amount
of new functionality designed to facilitate rapid
prototyping of spoken language applications3 . The
developer initially constructs and debugs her com-
ponents (grammar, translation rules etc) in a text
view. As soon as they are consistent, she is able
to compile the source-language grammar into a
recogniser, and combine this with other compo-
nents to run a complete speech translation system
within the development environment. Connections
between components are defined by a simple con-
fig file. Figure 2 shows an example.
References
Bouillon, P., M. Rayner, N. Chatzichrisafis, B.A.
Hockey, M. Santaholma, M. Starlander, Y. Nakao,
K. Kanzaki, and H. Isahara. 2005. A generic multi-
lingual open source platform for limited-domain
medical speech translation. In Proceedings of the
10th Conference of the European Association for
3This work is presented in a paper currently under review.
Machine Translation (EAMT), pages 50?58, Bu-
dapest, Hungary.
Bouillon, P., G. Flores, M. Starlander,
N. Chatzichrisafis, M. Santaholma, N. Tsourakis,
M. Rayner, and B.A. Hockey. 2007. A bidirectional
grammar-based medical speech translator. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL Workshop on Grammar-based
Approaches to Spoken Language Processing, pages
41?48, Prague, Czech Republic.
Bouillon, P., S. Halimi, Y. Nakao, K. Kanzaki, H. Isa-
hara, N. Tsourakis, M. Starlander, B.A. Hockey, and
M. Rayner. 2008. Developing non-european trans-
lation pairs in a medium-vocabulary medical speech
translation system. In Proceedings of LREC 2008,
Marrakesh, Morocco.
Chatzichrisafis, N., P. Bouillon, M. Rayner, M. Santa-
holma, M. Starlander, and B.A. Hockey. 2006. Eval-
uating task performance for a unidirectional con-
trolled language medical speech translation system.
In Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL International
Workshop on Medical Speech Translation, pages 9?
16, New York.
Kron, E., M. Rayner, P. Bouillon, and M. Santa-
holma. 2007. A development environment for build-
ing grammar-based speech-enabled applications. In
Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Grammar-
based Approaches to Spoken Language Processing,
pages 49?52, Prague, Czech Republic.
Rayner, M., B.A. Hockey, and P. Bouillon. 2006.
Putting Linguistics into Speech Recognition: The
Regulus Grammar Compiler. CSLI Press, Chicago.
Tsourakis, N., M. Georghescul, P. Bouillon, and
M. Rayner. 2008. Building mobile spoken dialogue
applications using regulus. In Proceedings of LREC
2008, Marrakesh, Morocco.
34
Figure 1: Mobile version of the MedSLT system, running on a Nokia tablet.
Figure 2: Speech to speech translation from the development environment, using a Japanese to Arabic
translator built from MedSLT components. The user presses the Recognise button (top right), speaks in
Japanese, and receives a spoken translation in Arabic together with screen display of various processing
results. The application is defined by a config file which combines a Japanese recogniser and analy-
sis grammar, Japanese to Interlingua and Interlingua to Arabic translation rules, an Arabic generation
grammar, and recorded Arabic wavfiles used to construct a spoken result.
35
