Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 337?344,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Local constraints on sentence markers and focus in Somali
Katherine Hargreaves
School of Informatics
University of Manchester
Manchester M60 1QD, UK
kat@evilution.co.uk
Allan Ramsay
School of Informatics
University of Manchester
Manchester M60 1QD, UK
Allan.Ramsay@manchester.ac.uk
Abstract
We present a computationally tractable ac-
count of the interactions between sentence
markers and focus marking in Somali. So-
mali, as a Cushitic language, has a ba-
sic pattern wherein a small ?core? clause
is preceded, and in some cases followed
by, a set of ?topics?, which provide scene-
seting information against which the core
is interpreted. Some topics appear to carry
a ?focus marker?, indicating that they are
particularly salient. We will outline a com-
putationally tractable grammar for Somali
in which focus marking emerges naturally
from a consideration of the use of a range
of sentence markers.
1 Introduction
This paper presents a computationally tractable
account of a number of phenomena in Somali. So-
mali displays a number of properties which dis-
tinguish it from most languages for which com-
putational treatments are available, and which are
potentially problematic. We therefore start with
a brief introduction to the major properties of the
language, together with a description of how we
cover the key phenomena within a general purpose
NLP framework.
2 Morphology
Somali has a fairly standard set of inflectional af-
fixes for nouns and verbs, as outlined below. In
addition, there are a substantial set of ?spelling
rules? which insert and delete graphemes at the
boundaries between roots and suffixes (and cli-
tics). There is not that much to be said about the
spelling rules ? Fig. 1 shows the format of a typi-
cal rule, which we compile into an FST to be used
during the process of lexical lookup.
[q/x/c/h,?,v0] ==> [+, k, v0]
Figure 1: Insert ?k? and a morpheme boundary be-
tween ?q/x/c/h? and a following vowel
The rule in Fig. 1 would, for instance, say
that the surface form ?saca? might correspond to
the underlying form ?sac+ka?, with a morpheme
boundary and a ?k? inserted after the ?c?. These
rules, of which we currently employ about 30, can
be efficiently implemented using the standard ma-
chinery of cascaded FSTs (Koskiennemi, 1985)
interwoven with the general lookup process.
2.1 Noun morphology
In general, a noun consists of a root and a single
affix, which provides a combination of gender and
number marking. The main complication is that
there are several declension classes, with specific
singular and plural suffixes for groups of classes
(e.g. the plural ending for declensions 1 and 3 is
?o?) (Saeed, 1999; Lecarme, 2002). Some plural
forms involve reduplication of some part of the
word ending, e.g. declension 4 nouns form their
plural by adding ?aC? where ?C? is the final conso-
nant of the root, but this can easily be handled by
using spelling rules.
2.2 Verb morphology
Verb morphology is slightly more complex.
Again, a typical verb consists of a root plus a num-
ber of affixes. These include derivational affixes
(Somali includes a passivising form which can
only be applied to verbs which have a ?causative?
argument, and a causative affix which adds such
337
an argument) and a set of inflectional affixes which
mark aspect, tense and agreement (Andrzejewski,
1968).
The forms of the tense and agreement mark-
ers vary depending on whether the clause con-
taining the verb is the main clause or is a sub-
ordinate clause (either a relative clause or a sen-
tential complement), marked by ?main and on
whether it is in a context where the subject is re-
quired to be a zero item, marked by?fullForm.
Note that the situation here is fairly complicated:
-fullForm versions are required in situations
where the subject is forced by local syntactic con-
straints to be a zero. There are also situations
where the subject is omitted for discourse rea-
sons, and here the +fullForm version is used
((Lecarme, 1995) uses the terms ?restrictive? and
?extensive? for -fullForm and +fullForm re-
spectively).
2.3 Cliticisation
There are a number of Somali morphemes which
can appear either bound to an adjacent word (usu-
ally the preceding word) or as free-standing lexi-
cal items. The sentence marker ?waa? and the pro-
noun ?uu?, for instance, combine to produce the
form ?wuu? when they are adjacent to one another.
In several cases, there are quite dramatic morpho-
phonemic alterations at the boundary, so that it is
extremely important to ensure that the processes of
applying spelling rules and inspecting the lexicon
are appropriately interwoven. The definite articles,
in particular, require considerable care. There are
a number of forms of the definite article, as in
Fig. 2:
masculine feminine
the-acc ka ta
the-nom ku tu
?remote? (nom or acc) kii tii
this-acc tan kan
this-nom tanu kanu
that-acc taas kaas
that-nom taasu kaasu
Figure 2: Definite articles
We deal with this by assuming that determiners
have the form gender-root-case, where the gender
markers are ?k-? (masculine) and ?t-? (feminine),
and the case markers are ?-? (accusative) and ?-
u? (nominative), with spelling rules that collapse
?kau? to ?ku? and ?kiiu? to ?kii?.
The definite articles, however, cliticise onto
the preceding word, with consequential spelling
changes. It is again important to ensure that the
spelling changes are applied at the right time to
ensure that we can recognise ?barahu? as ?bare?
plus ?k+a+u?, with appropriate changes to the ?e?
at the end of the root ?bare? and the ?k? at the start
of the determiner ?ku?.
3 Syntax
3.1 Framework
The syntactic description is couched in a frame-
work which provides a skeletal version of the
HPSG schemas, supplemented by a variant on the
well-known distinction between internal and ex-
ternal syntax.
3.1.1 Lexical heads and their arguments
We assume that lexical items specify a (pos-
sibly empty) list of required arguments, together
with a description of whether these arguments are
normally expected to appear to the left or right.
The direction in which the arguments are expected
is language dependent, as shown in Fig. 3. Note
that the description of where the arguments are to
be found specifies the order of combination, very
much like categorial descriptions. The descrip-
tion of an English transitive verb, for instance,
is like the categorial description (S\NP)/NP,
which corresponds to an SVO surface order.
English transitive verb(SOV)
{syn(nonfoot(head(cat(xbar(+v, -n)))),
subcat(args([????????NP?(obj), ?????????NP?(subj)])))}
Persian transitive verb (SOV)
{syn(nonfoot(head(cat(xbar(+v, -n)))),
subcat(args([????????NP?(obj), ?????????NP?(subj)])))}
Arabic transitive verb (VSO)
{syn(nonfoot(head(cat(xbar(+v, -n)))),
subcat(args([?????????NP?(subj), ????????NP?(obj)])))}
Figure 3: Subcat frames
3.1.2 Adjuncts and modifiers
Items such as adjectival phrases, PPs and rela-
tive clauses which add information about some tar-
get item combine via a principle captured in Fig. 4
R =? {syntax(target=??T , result=R)}, T
R =? T, {syntax(target=??T , result=R)}
Figure 4: Modifiers and targets
338
Then if we said that an English adjec-
tive was of type {syntax(target=????NN?,
result="NN") the first rule in Fig. 4 would
allow it to combine with an NN to its right
to form an NN, and likewise saying that a
PP was of type {syntax(target=????VP?,
result="VP")would allow it to combine with
a VP to its left to form a VP.
3.1.3 Non-canonical order
The patterns and principles outlined in ?3.1.1
and ?3.1.2 specify the unmarked orders for the rel-
evant phenomena. Other orders are often permit-
ted, sometimes for discourse reasons (particularly
in free word order languages such as Arabic and
Persian) and sometimes for structural reasons (e.g.
the left shifting of the WH-pronoun in ?I distrust
the man whoi she wants to marry ?i.?).
We take the view that rather than introducing
explicit rules to allow for various non-canonical
orders, we will simply allow all possible or-
ders subject to the application of penalties. This
approach has affinities with optimality theory
(Grimshaw, 1997), save that our penalties are
treated cumulatively rather than being applied
once and for all to competing local analyses. The
algorithm we use for parsing withing this frame-
work is very similar to the algorithm described by
(Foth et al, 2005), though we use the scores asso-
ciated with partial analyses to guide the search for
a complete analysis, whereas Foth et al use them
to choose a complete but flawed analysis to be re-
constructed. We have described the application of
this algorithm to a variety of languages (includ-
ing Greek, Spanish, German, Persian and Arabic)
elsewhere (Ramsay and Scha?ler, 1997; Ramsay
and Mansour, 2003; Ramsay et al, 2005): space
precludes a detailed discussion here.
3.1.4 Internal:external syntax
In certain circumstances a phrase that looks as
though it belongs to category A is used in circum-
stances where you would normally expect an item
belonging to category B. The phrase ?eating the
owl? in ?He concluded the banquet by eating the
owl.?, for instance, has the internal structure of a
VP, but is being used as the complement of the
preposition ?by? where you would normally expect
an NP. This notion has been around for too long
for its origin to be easily traced, but has been used
more recently in (Malouf, 1996)?s addition of ?lex-
ical rules? to HPSG for treating English nominal
gerunds, and in (Sadler, 1996)?s description of the
possibility of allowing a single c-structure to map
to multiple f-structures in LFG. We write ?equiva-
lence rules? of the kind given in Fig. 5 to deal with
such phenomena:
{syn(head(cat(xbar(-v, +n))),
+specified)}
<==>{syn(head(cat(xbar(+v, -n)),
vform(participle,present)),
subcat(args([{struct(B)}])))}
Figure 5: External and internal views of English
verbal gerund
The rule in Fig. 5 says that if you have a
present participle VP (something of type +v, -n
which has vform participle, present and
which needs one more argument) then you can use
whereever you need an NP (type -v, +n with a
specifier +specified).
3.2 Somali syntax
As noted earlier, the framework outlined in ?3.1
has been used to provide accounts of a number of
languages. In the current section we will sketch
some of the major properties of Somali syntax and
show how they can be captured within this frame-
work.
3.2.1 The ?core & topic? structure
Every Somali sentence has a ?core?, or ?verbal
complex? (Svolacchia et al, 1995), consisting of
the verb and a number of pronominal elements.
The structure of the core can be fairly easily de-
scribed by the rule in Fig. 6:
CORE ==> SUBJ,(OBJ1),(ADP*),(OBJ2),VERB
Figure 6: The structure of the core
The situation is not, in fact, quite as simple as
suggested by Fig. 6. The major complications are
outlined below:
1. the third person object pronouns are never ac-
tually written, so that in many cases what you
see has the form SUBJ, VERB, as in (1a),
rather than the full form given in (1b) (we will
write ?(him)? to denote zero pronouns):
(1) a. uu sugayhe (him) waited for
b. uu i sugayhe me waited for
2. The second complication arises with ditran-
sitive verbs. The distinction between OBJ1
339
and OBJ2 in Fig. 6 simply corresponds to
the surface order of the two pronouns, and
has very little connection with their semantic
roles (Saeed, 1999). Thus each of the sen-
tences in (2a) could mean ?He gave me to
you?, and neither of the sentences in (2b) is
grammatical.
(2) a. i. uu i kaa siiyeyhe me1 you2 gave
ii. uu ku kay siiyeyhe you1 me2 gave
b. i. uu kay ku siiyeyhe me2 you1 gave
ii. uu kaa i siiyeyhe you2 me1 gave
3. The next problem is that subject pronouns are
also sometimes omitted. There are two cases:
(i) in certain circumstances, the subject pro-
noun must be omitted, and when this happens
the verb takes a form which indicates that
this has happened. (ii) in situations where the
subject is normally present, and hence where
the verb has its standard form, the subject
may nonetheless be omitted (usually for dis-
course reasons) (Gebert, 1986).
4. There are a small number of preposition-like
items, referred to as adpositions in Fig. 6,
which can occur between the two objects, and
which cliticise onto the preceding pronoun if
there is one. The major complication here
is that just like prepositions, these require an
NP as a complement: but unlike prepositions,
they can combine either with the preceding
pronoun or the following one, or with a zero
pronoun. Thus a core like (3) has two analy-
ses, as shown in Fig. 7:
(3)
uu ika sugaa
uu i ka sugaa
he me at (it) waits-for
sug++++aa
uu
agent
i
object
ka
mod
0
sug++++aa
uu
agent
0
object
ka
mod
i
Figure 7: Analyses for (3) (0.010 secs)
The second analysis in Fig. 7, ?he waits for
it at me?, doesn?t make much sense, but it is
nonetheless perfectly grammatical.
5. Finally, there are a number of other minor el-
ements that can occur in the core. We do not
have space to discuss these here, and their
presence or absence does not affect the dis-
cussion in ?3.3 and ?3.4.
To capture these phenomena within the frame-
work outlined in ?3.1, we assign Somali transitive
verbs a subcat frame like the one in Fig. 8 (the pat-
terns for intransitive and ditransitive verbs differ
from this in the obvious ways).
{syn(nonfoot(head(cat(xbar(+v, -n)))),
subcat(args([????????????????NP?(obj, +clitic),?????????????????NP?(subj, +clitic)])),
foot(...))}
Figure 8: Somali transitive verb
Fig. 8 says that the core of a Somali sentence
is a clause of the form S-O-V, where S and O are
both clitic pronouns.
The canonical position of S and O is as given.
They can appear further to the left than that to al-
low for clitic modifiers: exactly where they can
go is specified by requiring the clitic modifiers to
appear adjacent to the verb (subject to further lo-
cal constraints on their positions relative to one
another), and requiring S and O to fall inside the
scope of the ?sentence markers?.
3.3 Sentence markers
A core by itself cannot be uttered as a free standing
sentence. At the very least, it has to include a ?sen-
tence marker?. The simplest of these is the word
?waa?. (4), for instance, is a well-formed sentence,
with the structure shown in Fig. 9.
(4)
wuu sugaa.
waa uu sugaa.
s-marker he (it) waits-for
sug++ay++aa
waa
comp(waa)
uu
agent
0
object
Figure 9: Analysis for (4) (0.01 secs)
Note that the pronoun ?uu? cliticises onto the
end of the sentence marker ?waa?, producing the
written form ?wuu?, as discussed above.
In general, however, the situation is not quite
as simple as in (4). Most sentences contain NPs
other than the pronouns in the core. The first such
examples involve introducing ?topics? in front of
the sentence marker.
Topics are normally definite NPs or PPs which
set the scene for the interpretation of the core. A
typical example is given in (5):
340
(5)
ninka wuu sugaa.
nim ka waa uu sugaa.
man the S-marker he (him) waits-for
0
baabuur+
predication
k+a
det
0
topic
waa
comp(waa)
somaliTopic
wax+
k+a
det
Figure 10: Sentence with topic
The analysis in Fig. 10 was obtained by exploit-
ing an equivalence rule which says that an item
which has the internal properties of a -clitic
NP can be used as a ?topic?, which we take to be a
sentence modifier.
Topics set the scene for the interpretation of
the core by providing potential referents for the
pronominal elements in the core. There are no
very strong syntactic links between the topics and
the clitic pronouns ? if a topic is +nom then it will
provide the referent for the subject, but in some
(focused) contexts subject referents are not explic-
itly marked as +nom. The situation is rather like
saying ?You know that man we were talking about,
and you know the girl we were talking about. Well,
she?s waiting for him.?.
topical(ref(?B(NIM(B))))
&claim(?C : {aspect(now, simple,C)}
?(C, agent, ref(?Dfemale(D)))
&?(C, object, ref(?Fthing(F )))
&SUG(C))
Figure 11: Interpretation of (5)
The logical form given in Fig. 11, which
was constructed using using standard compo-
sitional techniques (Dowty et al, 1981), says
the speaker is marking some known man
ref(?B(NIM(B))) as being topical, and is then
making a claim about the existence of a waiting
event SUG(C) involving some known female as
its agent and some other known entity as its object.
Note that we include discourse related information
? that the speaker is first marking something as be-
ing topical and then making a claim ? in the log-
ical form. This seems like a sensible thing to do,
since this information is encoded by lexical and
syntactic choices in the same way as the proposi-
tional content itself, and hence it makes sense to
extract it compositionally at the same time and in
the same way as we do the propositional content.
Somali provides a number of such sentence
markers. ?in? is used for marking sentential com-
plements, in much the same way as the English
complementiser ?that? is used to mark the start
of a sentential clause in ?I know that she like
strawberry icecream.? (Lecarme, 1984). There
is, however, an alternative form for main clauses,
where one of the topics is marked as being par-
ticularly interesting by the sentence markers ?baa?
or ?ayaa? (?baa? and ?ayaa? seem to be virtually
equivalent, with the choice between them being
driven by stylistic/phonological considerations):
(6) baraha baa ninka sugaa.
?baa?/?ayaa? and ?waa? are in complementary
distribution: every main clause has to have a sen-
tence marker, which is nearly always one of these
two, and they never occur in the same sentence.
The key difference is that ?baa? marks the item
to its left as being particularly significant. Ordi-
nary topics introduce an item into the context, to
be picked up by one of the core pronouns, with-
out marking any of them as being more prominent
than the others. The item to the left of ?baa? is
indeed available as an anchor for a core pronoun,
but it is also marked as being more important than
the other topics.
We deal with this by assuming that ?baa? sub-
categorises for an NP to its left, and then forms a
sentence marker looking to modify a sentence to
its right. The resulting parse tree for (6) is given
in Fig. 12, with the interpretation that arises from
this tree in Fig. 13.
sug++++aa
0
object
0
agent
somaliTopic
nim+
k+a
det
baa
comp(baa)
somaliTopic
focus
bare+
k+a
det
Figure 12: Parse tree for (6)
topical(ref(?C(NIM(C))))
&focus(ref(?D(BARE(D))))
&claim(?B : {aspect(now, simple, B)}
?(B, object, ref(?Ething(E)))
&?(B, agent, ref(?Gspeaker(G)))
&SUG(B))
Figure 13: Interpretation for (6)
Treating ?baa? as an item which looks first to its
left for an NP and then acts as a sentence modi-
fier gives us a fairly simple analysis of (6), ensur-
ing that when we have ?baa? we do indeed have a
341
focused item, and also accounting for its comple-
mentary distribution with ?waa?. The fact that the
combination of ?baa? and the focussed NP can be
either preceded or followed by other topics means
that we have to put very careful constraints on
where it can appear. This is made more complex
by the fact that the subject of the core sentence can
cliticise onto ?baa?, despite the fact that there may
be a subsequent topic, as in (7).
(7) baraha buu ninku sugaa.
sug++++aa
0
object
uu
agent
baa
comp(baa)
somaliTopic
bare+
k+a
det
somaliTopic
nim+
k+a
det
i
caseMarker
Figure 14: Parse tree for (7)
To ensure that we get the right analyses, we
have to put the following constraints on ?baa? and
?waa?:
1. if the subject of the core is realised as an ex-
plicit short pronoun, it cliticises onto the sen-
tence marker
2. the sentence marker attaches to the sentence
before any topics (note that this is a con-
straint on the order of combination, not on the
left?right surface order: the tree in Fig. 14
shows that ?baraha baa? was attached to
the tree before ?ninka?, despite the fact that
?ninka? is nearer to the core than ?baraha
baa?.
Between them, these two ensure that we get
unique analyses for sentences involving a sentence
marker and a number of topics, despite the wide
range of potential surface orders.
3.4 Relative clauses & ?waxa?-clefts
We noted above that in general Somali clauses
contain a sentence marker ? generally one of
?waa?, ?baa? and ?ayaa? for main clauses, or one
of ?in? for subordinate clauses. There are two
linked exceptions to this rule: relative clauses, and
?waxa?-clefts.
Somali does not possess distinct WH-pronouns
(Saeed, 1999). Instead, the clitic pronouns (in-
cluding the zero third-person pronoun) can act as
WH-markers.
This is a bit awkward for any parsing algo-
rithm which depends propagating the WH-marker
up the parse tree until a complete clause has been
analysed, and then using it to decide whether that
clause is a relative clause or not. We do not want
to introduce two versions of each pronoun, one
with a WH-marker and the other without, and then
produce alternative analyses for each. Doing this
would produce very large numbers of alternative
analyses, since each core item is can be viewed ei-
ther way, so that a simple clause involving a transi-
tive clause would produce three analyses (one with
the subject WH-marked, one with the object WH-
marked, and one with neither).
We therefore leave the WH-marking on the
clitic pronouns open until we have an analysis of
the clause containing them. If we need to con-
sider using this clause in a context where a relative
clause is required, we inspect the clitic pronouns
and decide which ones, if any are suitable for use
as the pivot (i.e. the WH-pronoun which links to
the modified analysis).
Relative clauses do not require a sentence
marker. We thus get analyses of relative clauses
as shown in Fig. 15 for (8).
(8)
ninka wadaya wuu shaqeeyayaa
nim ka wadaya waa uu shaqeeyaa
man the is-driving s-marker he is-working
The man who is driving it: he?s working
shaqee++ay++aa
uu
agent
waa
comp(waa)
somaliTopic
nim+
k+a
det
headless
whmod
wad++ay++a
0
object
0
agent
Figure 15: Parse tree for (8)
Note the reduced form of ?wadaya? in (8). The
key here is that the subject of ?wadaya? is the
?pivot? of the relative clause (the item linking the
clause to the modified nominal). When the subject
plays this role it is forced to be a zero item, and it
is this that makes the verb take the -fullForm
versions of the agreement and tense markers.
Apart from the fact that you can?t tell whether
a clitic pronoun is acting as a WH-marker or not
until you see the context, and the requirement for
342
reduced form verbs with zero subjects, Somali rel-
ative clauses are not all that different from relative
clauses in other languages. They are, however, re-
lated to a phenomenon which is rather less com-
mon.
We start by considering nominal sentences. So-
mali allows for scarenominal sentences consisting
of just a pair of NPs. This is a fairly common
phenomenon, where the overall semantic effect is
as though there were an invisible copula linking
them (see Arabic, malay, English ?small clauses?,
. . . ). We deal with this by assuming that any ac-
cusative NP could be the predication in a zero sen-
tence. The only complication is that in ordinary
Somali sentences the only items which follow the
sentence marker are clitic pronouns and modifiers.
For nominal sentences, the predicative NP, and
nothing else, follows the sentence marker.
For uniformity we assume that there is in fact a
zero subject, with the +nom NP that appears be-
fore the sentence marker acting as a topic.
(9)
waxu waa baabuurka.
wax ka I waa baabuur ka
thing the +NOM s-marker truck the
Any normal NP can appear as the topic of such
a sentence. In particular, the noun ?wax?, which
means ?thing?, can appear in this position:
0
baabuur+
predication
k+a
det
0
topic
waa
comp(waa)
somaliTopic
wax
k+a
det
i
caseMarker
Figure 16: ?the thing: it?s the truck?
The analysis in Fig. 16 corresponds to an inter-
pretation something like ?The thing we were talk-
ing about, well it?s the truck?. Note the analysis of
?waxu? here as the noun ?wax? followed by the def-
inite article ?ka? and the nominative case marker
?I?.
There is no reason why the topic in such a sen-
tence should not contain a relative clause. In (10),
for instance, the topic is ?waxaan doonayo I? ? ?the
thing which I want?.
(10)
waxaan doonayaa waa lacag.
wax ka aan doonayo I waa lacag
thing the I want +NOM s-marker money
Note that ?doonayaa? here is being read as
the {+fullForm,-main} version of the verb
?doonayo? followed by a cliticised nominative
marker ?I?. The choice of +fullForm this time
arises because the subject pronoun is not WH-
marked, which means that it is not forced to be
zero: remember that -fullForm is used if the
local constraints require the subject to be zero, not
just if it happens to be omitted for discourse or
stylistic reasons. Then in the analysis in Fig. 17
?wax ka aan doonayo I? is a +nom NP functioning
as the topic of a nominal sentence.
0
lacag+
predication
0
topic
waa
comp(waa)
somaliTopic
wax
k+a
det
headless
whmod
doon++ay++o
0
patient
aan
agent
I
caseMarker
Figure 17: (10) the thing I want: it?s some money
So far so simple. ?waxa?, however, also takes
part in a rather more complex construction.
In general, the items that occur as topics in So-
mali are definite NPs (Saeed, 1984). In all the
examples above, we have used definite NPs in
the topic positions, because that it is what nor-
mally happens. If you want to introduce some-
thing into the conversation it is more usual to use a
?waxa-cleft?, or ?heralding sentence? (Andrzejew-
ski, 1975).
The typical surface form of such a construction
is shown in (11):
(11)
waxaan doonayaa lacag.
waxa aan doonayaa lacag
waxa I want money
The key things to note about (11) are as follow:
? There is no sentence marker. Or at any
rate, the standard sentence markers ?waa? and
?baa? are missing.
? The subject pronoun ?aan? has cliticised onto
the word ?waxa? to form ?waxaan?.
? The verb ?doonayaa? is +fullForm
? The noun ?lacag? follows the verb. This is
unusual, since generally NPs are used as top-
ics preceding the core and, generally, the sen-
tence marker.
343
These facts are very suggestive: (i) the lack
of any other item acting as sentence marker sug-
gests that ?waxa? is playing this role. (ii) the fact
that ?uu? has cliticised onto this item supports this
claim, since subject pronouns typically cliticise
onto sentence markers rather than onto topic NPs.
We therefore suggest that ?waxa? here is func-
tioning as sentence marker. Like ?baa?, it focuses
attention on some particular NP, but in this case
the NP follows the core.
doon++ay++aa
0
patient
aan
agent
waxa
comp(waxa)
lacag+
focus
Figure 18: Parse tree for (11)
Thus ?waxa?, as a sentence marker, is just like
?baa? except that ?baa? expects its focused NP to
follow it immediately, with the core following that,
whereas the order is reversed for ?waxa? (Andrze-
jewski, 1975).
It seems extremely likely that ?waxa?-clefts are
historically related to sentences like (10). The sub-
tle differences in the surface forms (presence or
absence of ?waa? and form of the verb), however,
lead to radically different analyses. How simple
nominal sentences with topics including ?waxa?
and a relative clause turned into ?waxa?-clefts is
beyond the scope of this paper. The key obser-
vation here is that ?waxa?-clefts can be given a
straightforward analysis by assuming that ?waxa?
can function as a sentence-marker that focuses at-
tention on a topical NP that ?follows? the core of
the sentence.
4 Conclusions
We have outlined a computational treatment of
Somali that runs right through from morphology
and morphographemics to logical forms. The con-
struction of logical forms is a fairly routine activ-
ity, given that we have carried out this work within
a framework that has already been used for a num-
ber of other languages, and hence the machinery
for deriving logical forms from semantically an-
notated parse trees is already available. The most
notable point about Somali semantics within this
framework is the inclusion of the basic illocution-
ary force within the logic form, which allows us to
also treat topic and focus as discourse phenomena
within the logical form.
References
B W Andrzejewski. 1968. Inflectional characteristics
of the so-called weak verbs in Somali. African Lan-
guage Studies, 9:1?51.
B W Andrzejewski. 1975. The role of indicator par-
ticles in Somali. Afroasiatic Linguistics, 1(6):123?
191.
D R Dowty, R E Wall, and S Peters. 1981. Introduction
to Montague Semantics. D. Reidel, Dordrecht.
Killian Foth, Wolfgang Menzel, and Ingo Schro?der.
2005. Robust parsing with weighted constraints.
Natural Language Engineering, 11(1):1?25.
L Gebert. 1986. Focus and word order in Somali.
Afrikanistische Arbeitspapiere, 5:43?69.
J Grimshaw. 1997. Projection, heads, and optimality.
Linguistic Inquiry, 28:373?422.
K Koskiennemi. 1985. A general two-level computa-
tional model for word-form recognition and produc-
tion. In COLING-84, pages 178?181.
J Lecarme. 1984. On Somali complement construc-
tions. In T Labahn, editor, Proceedings of the Sec-
ond International Congress of Somali Studies, 1:
Linguistics and Literature, pages 37?54, Hamburg.
Helmut Buske.
J Lecarme. 1995. L?accord restrictif en Somali.
Langues Orientals Anciennes Philologie et Linguis-
tique, 5-6:133?152.
J Lecarme. 2002. Gender polarity: Theoreti-
cal aspects of Somali nominal morphology. In
P Boucher, editor, Many Morphologies, pages 109?
141, Somerville. Cascadilla Press.
Robert Malouf. 1996. A constructional approach
to english verbal gerunds. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-second Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Lin-
guistics Society, Marseille.
A M Ramsay and H Mansour. 2003. Arabic morpho-
syntax for text-to-speech. In Recent advance in nat-
ural language processing, Sofia.
A M Ramsay and R Scha?ler. 1997. Case and word or-
der in English and German. In R Mitkov and N Ni-
colo, editors, Recent Advances in Natural Language
Processing. John Benjamin.
A M Ramsay, Najmeh Ahmed, and Vahid Mirzaiean.
2005. Persian word-order is free but not (quite)
discontinuous. In 5th International Conference on
Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing
(RANLP-05), pages 412?418, Borovets, Bulgaria.
Louisa Sadler. 1996. New developments in LFG. In
Keith Brown and Jim Miller, editors, Concise En-
cyclopedia of Syntactic Theories. Elsevier Science,
Oxford.
J I Saeed. 1984. The Syntax of Focus and Topic in
Somali. Helmut Buske Verlag, Hamburg.
J I Saeed. 1999. Somali. John Benjamins Publishing
Co, Amsterdam.
M Svolacchia, L Mereu, and A. Puglielli. 1995. As-
pects of discourse configurationality in Somali. In
K E Kiss, editor, Discourse Configurational Lan-
guages, pages 65?98, New York. Oxford University
Press.
344
