WHY NLP SHOULD MOVE INTO IAS 
 
Victor RASKIN 
CERIAS and NLP Lab, Purdue University  
1356 Heavilon Hall 324 
W. Lafayette, IN 47907-1356 USA  
vraskin@purdue.edu 
Sergei NIRENBURG 
CRL, New Mexico State University 
286 New Science Building 
Las Cruces, NM 88003 USA 
sergei@crl.nmsu.edu
 
Mikhail J. ATALLAH 
CERIAS and Department 
of Computer Science 
Purdue University 
1315 Recitation Hall 215 
W. Lafayette, IN 47907-
1315 USA 
mja@cs.purdue.edu 
Christian F. 
HEMPELMANN 
CERIAS and NLP Lab, 
Purdue University  
1356 Heavilon Hall 324 
W. Lafayette, IN 47907-
1356 USA  
hempelma@purdue.edu 
Katrina E. 
TRIEZENBERG 
CERIAS and NLP Lab, 
Purdue University  
1356 Heavilon Hall 324 
W. Lafayette, IN 47907-
1356 USA  
kattriez@purdue.edu
 
Abstract 
The paper introduces the ways in which 
methods and resources of natural language 
processing (NLP) can be fruitfully employed 
in the domain of information assurance and 
security (IAS). IAS may soon claim a very 
prominent status both conceptually and in 
terms of future funding for NLP, alongside 
or even instead of established applications, 
such as machine translation (MT). After a 
brief summary of theoretical premises of 
NLP in general and of ontological semantics 
as a specific approach to NLP developed 
and/or practiced by the authors, the paper 
reports on the interaction between NLP and 
IAS through brief discussions of some 
implemented and planned NLP-enhanced 
IAS systems at the Center for Education and 
Research in Information Assurance and 
Security (CERIAS). The rest of the paper 
deals with the milestones and challenges in 
the future interaction between NLP and IAS 
as well as the role of a representational, 
meaning-based NLP approach in that future. 
 
1 Introduction 
With new applications, NLP sees new 
challenges and has to develop additional 
functionalities. For a few decades, it was driven 
predominantly, if not exclusively, by MT. This 
application, while emphasizing certain 
functionalities, has a limited use for a reasoning 
functionality. Increasingly, the current 
applications, such as data mining and question 
answering bring reasoning to the front of NLP. 
Applications come, for the most part, from real 
life, and in real life, computer systems keep 
getting attacked by hackers and industrial or 
political adversaries and need to be protected 
with the help of automatic systems. Information 
security provides this protection by preventing 
unauthorized use and detecting intrusions. 
Information assurance guarantees the 
authenticity of transmitted and stored 
information. In the last five years, since the 
inception of CERIAS with the help of a massive 
grant from the Eli Lilly Foundation, two of the 
co-authors have led a pioneering effort in 
exploring the possibility of applying the 
methods and resources of NLP to IAS. Another 
co-author has led a decade-long effort in 
developing the resources of ontological 
semantics and testing them in various 
implementations of NLP applications. This 
paper is the result of all these efforts as well as 
of the excellent work of the participating and 
actively contributing graduate and 
undergraduate research assistants. 
 
2 Basic Premises 
Nirenburg and Raskin (2002) views NLP as an 
application of both linguistics and cognitive 
science. This application is a theory of itself, 
which defines the format of its descriptions, e.g., 
meaning representations for texts (TMRs). The 
theory is associated with methodologies to 
produce these descriptions. Applications tend to 
dictate the content of the descriptions they need 
in order to be successfully implemented and 
thus, to a large extent, the methodology of 
implementation, which is, thus, arrived at 
systematically and not by just trial and error and 
guesswork, as Chomskian linguistics would 
have us believe. 
 
In general, one of the choices in NLP is the 
method-driven vs. the problem-driven approach. 
The former espouses the use of a particular 
method in as many applications as possible. The 
danger here is that both the applications and the 
level of results that is declared satisfactory are 
molded to what is allowed by the method: ?To a 
hammer, everything looks like a nail.? 
 
Problem-oriented NLP chains back from the 
needs of an application and happily accepts 
eclectic or pipelined approaches if this 
arrangement promises better results.  
 
We approach IAS from the problem-oriented 
point of view. It is a growing family of 
applications that society needs to protect its 
computer systems and databases from 
unauthorized use and destructive attacks. It is 
the goal of NLP to serve the existing IAS needs 
as well as helping the IAS community to 
discover new ways to adapt the existing NLP 
resources and to order the development of new 
resources. 
 
3 NLP Applications to IAS 
 
3.1 IAS Needs 
Most generally, IAS develops software to: 
 
? encrypt  and decrypt data; 
? preclude unauthorized use of 
computer systems and data with a vast 
array of protective measures; 
? detect  intrusion, including virus 
recognition and anti-virus protection. 
 
Much of IAS deals with signals and information 
other than texts in natural language (NL) but 
there are enough applications for textual data, 
and this is where the methods and resources of 
NLP come into the picture. 
 
3.2 NLP/IAS Interface 
CERIAS has taken a leading role in 
investigating how NLP can be utilized for IAS, 
and the initial efforts, as early as 1998, were 
devoted to identifying the text-based subtasks in 
IAS. To date, the following applications have 
been recognized and addressed, in chronological 
order: 
 
? using machine translation for an 
additional layer of encryption; 
? generating mnemonics for random-
generated passwords; 
? declassification or downgrading of 
classified information; 
? NL watermarking; 
? preventing theft of intellectual 
property; 
? forensic IAS, specifically, tracing 
leaks in divulging protected 
information; 
? tamperproofing textual data; 
? enhancing the acceptance of IAS 
products by the users with the help of 
computational humor. 
 
In the rest of the section, we will characterize 
these tasks briefly, with an emphasis on the NLP 
contribution to their solution, a contribution 
which is largely constitutive in nature in the 
sense that they would probably not exist if NLP 
could not offer the know-how to implement 
them. 
 
3.2.1 MT for Encryption 
Inspired by the most obvious connection 
between encryption and NL, the largely 
apocryphal World War II episode, when instead 
of an elaborate code, the American and British 
General Headquarters in Europe used the native 
speakers of Navajo (Shawnee, in another 
version, involving the Pacific theater) to 
communicate in open, uncoded language and 
were never ?decoded,? the idea was to use a 
family of existing or rapidly deployable MT 
systems (see Nirenburg and Raskin 1998) to add 
a level of encryption in an ?exotic? language. 
Raskin et al?Page 2 
Once proposed (Raskin et al 2001), the idea 
failed to catch and has never been implemented, 
partially because there was no research 
challenge in that, but also because it would 
involve the ?security by obscurity? principle 
disdained by IAS: one should assume that the 
adversary is at least as smart and knowledgeable 
as we, the good guys, are. Also, an MT system, 
even if publicly available, is too long and messy 
a ?key,? another IAS no-no. 
 
3.2.2 Mnemonics for Random-Generated 
Passwords 
Passwords are sometimes dismissed in IAS as 
too weak and ineffective a protection measure. 
Reality is, however, that for an absolute majority 
of computer users, this remains the only 
protection against unauthorized use and abuse 
and the loss of data, and the users weaken it 
considerably by changing the passwords 
randomly generated for them by the computer at 
the time the accounts are created to something 
that is easy for them to remember. The weakness 
of such passwords is that they can be vulnerable 
to a brute-force attack because the space of 
possible passwords to be tried by the attacker 
becomes much smaller than that for random-
generated ones. Here and elsewhere, IAS 
measures hardly ever exclude the possibility of a 
successful attack (e.g., using a random generator 
to try every possible alphanumeric combination 
to access the account) but rather ?raising the 
ante? for the adversary, making the attack 
costlier and more complicated. 
 
We implemented Versions 1 and 2 of the 
automatic mnemonic text (jingle) generator 
(AMTG). Both versions take a randomly 
generated alphanumeric password as input and 
generate a funny and memorable two-line text 
(jingle). AMTG-1 implemented after the first 6 
months of research limited the input to 8-letter 
(no digits) case-insensitive passwords and 
generated a rigidly formatted, uniform-meter, 
single-tune jingles, whose funniness depended 
on the verb antonymy between the first and 
second lines (here and throughout this section, 
see Raskin et al 2001 for examples and further 
discussion). AMTG-2 removes the rigid 
limitation on the password format and accepts 3-
8-symbol alphanumeric, case-sensitive input 
while generating two lines of purported political 
satire (see McDonough 2000). The proof-of-
concept software was implemented by 
McDonough and is in preparation for patenting.  
 
3.2.3 Natural Language Downgrading 
Increasingly, in interagency exchanges in the 
government, international coalition 
communication, and exchanges among business 
partners, there has been a need to develop an 
intricate architecture for combining a ?high? 
network and a ?low? network. Authorized users, 
with access to the high network, where sensitive 
data is stored and exchanged, must have access 
to the low network, but not the other way 
around. If this is all there is to it, the 
communication between the two networks is 
assured with the help of a variety of switches 
and one-way filters: the low-network 
information can propagate up but the high-
network information must not leak down. There 
are enough technical and conceptual problems 
with such one-way filters, but they are 
multiplied manifold if there is also a need to 
share some high-network information with the 
low-network users in a way that removes all the 
sensitive data. In this context the essentially 
semantic ability to recognize a sensitive message 
comes into play. We are focusing only on 
sanitizing textual information. In other words, 
for each classified text T there must be generated 
a sanitized, downgraded text T?, from which all 
sensitive data are removed according to a certain 
list of criteria. We are doing this by utilizing the 
NLP resources developed by the ontological-
semantic approach (Nirenburg and Raskin 
2002), which allows deep-meaning penetration 
and, as a result, much enhanced sensitive 
information detection and removal (see 
Mohamed 2001) than that allowed by any 
keyword-based approach, straightforward or 
statistical. 
 
3.2.4 Intellectual Property Protection 
Essentially the same methods of detection and 
seamless replacement developed for 
downgrading can be used to intercept and 
prevent deliberate or inadvertent divulging of 
proprietary and/or classified information. This is 
much easier to do offline, of course, but there is 
also an increasing need in inconspicuous 
Raskin et al?Page 3 
interception and sanitizing of e-mail online. 
Here, somewhat less than in straightforward 
downgrading, which can all be done offline, a 
half-way solution may be best: instead of letting 
the system detect the sensitive information and 
replace it, all fully automatically, a simpler and 
coarser-grain-sized system can only flag 
possible violations to a human, who makes the 
final determination. 
 
3.2.5 Natural Language Watermarking 
We have developed software capable of 
embedding a hidden textual watermark in a 
textual message without changing the meaning 
of the text at all and the wording only slightly if 
necessary. Let T be a NL text, and let W be a 
string that is much shorter than T. We wish to 
generate NL text T? such that:  T? has essentially 
the same meaning as T; T' contains W as a secret 
watermark, and the presence of W would hold up 
in court if revealed (e.g., W could say, ?This is 
the Property of X, and was licensed to Y on date 
Z?); the watermark W is not readable from T' 
without knowledge of the secret key that was 
used to introduce W; for someone who knows 
the secret key, W can be obtained from T' 
without knowledge of T (so there is no need to 
permanently store the original, non-watermarked 
copy of copyrighted material);  unless someone 
knows the secret key, W is difficult to remove 
from T' without drastically changing the 
meaning of T'; the process by which W is 
introduced into T to obtain T' is not secret, 
rather, it is the secret key that gives the scheme 
its security. We developed a technique (Atallah 
et al 2001, 2002) which embeds portions of W?s 
bitstring in the underlying syntactic and 
semantic (TMR) structures, respectively, of a 
selection of sentences in a text by manipulating 
those sentences slightly with the help of 
meaning-preserving syntactic and semantic 
information. The semantic technique is much 
more complex and allows for a much wider 
bandwidth, i.e., the use of much fewer 
watermark bearing sentences, thus making the 
later technique usable for such short sentences as 
wire agency releases. It also furthers that 
advantage by making it unnecessary to double 
the number of engaged and manipulated 
sentences and disposing of the marker-bearing 
sentences that precede each watermark-bearing 
sentence in the earlier, syntactic approach. 
 
3.2.6 Tracing the Leaks 
By embedding different, personalized 
watermarks in different copies of the same 
document, we can trace a leak to a particular 
recipient of classified or proprietary information. 
Thus, the watermark may state something like, 
?Copy #47 issued to Jane Smith.? An additional 
research problem that needs to be addressed in 
such a system is the adversary collusion: the 
watermark should be such that the comparison 
of two differently watermarked copies of the 
same document not lead to the discovery and 
removal of the watermarks. 
 
 3.2.7 Tamperproofing as Extensions of 
Watermarking 
The watermarking technique can be interestingly 
reversed from the search for the most robust, 
indestructible watermark to that for the most 
brittle one, so that any tampering with a 
document would invariably lead to the removal 
of the watermark (see Atallah, Raskin et al 
2002) and thus signal the tampering. The initial 
research in this area demonstrates, interestingly 
and not quite unexpectedly, that designing the 
most brittle watermark is as challenging as 
designing the most robust and resilient one. 
 
3.2.8. Enhancing Customer Acceptance of IAS 
Products with Computational Humor. 
One of the biggest issues in IAS has been the 
refusal to deploy the acquired IAS products 
because of the reluctance to learn, install, and 
debug the developed systems. One approach to 
resolving this very real problem is to reward the 
system administrators (sysadmins) for making 
the effort by entertaining them throughout the 
process of installing and maintaining the product 
with the help of humor-generating intelligent 
embodied agents (see Nijholt 2002, Stock and 
Strapparava 2002). The current state of the art in 
computational humor is rapidly making it 
increasingly feasible. The idea does have a 
shock value to it, both for the better and for the 
worse: some hard-core techies in IAS, and, as a 
matter of fact, in NLP, think that computational 
humor is a hoax. Usually, a little homework 
Raskin et al?Page 4 
changes this attitude (see Raskin 1996, 2002; 
Raskin and Attardo 1994). 
 
4 Perspectives, Challenges, Milestones 
NLP deals with texts in NL, and in Section 3.2.1 
above, we clearly stated that the applicability of 
NLP to IAS depends on the use of textual data in 
IAS systems. This statement was, actually, a 
considerable simplification. 
 
For lower end, non-semantic NLP methods, 
those dependent on Boolean keywords, syntax, 
and/or statistics, the presence of textual data is 
indeed essential. For ontological semantics, 
which is a system of text meaning 
representation, the ?text? itself may be in any 
non-natural-language format, including any 
scientific or logical formalism, as long as it has 
conceptual content. That content is directly 
representable with the help of the ontology, 
bypassing any NL lexicon if necessary. In other 
words, the ontology is equally applicable to a 
formal language as it is to a NL if a lexicon for 
the former is accessible. 
 
Nevertheless, what applications of ontological 
semantics can contribute most obviously and  on 
a broader scale, is extending research and 
application paradigms in IAS by including NL 
data sources and adapting the appropriate NLP 
applications, their goals and results to them. 
These include: 
? inclusion of NL data sources as an 
integral part of the overall data 
sources in information security 
applications, and 
? formal specification of the 
information security community 
know-how for the support of routine 
and time-efficient measures to prevent 
and counteract computer attacks 
Where does NL data play a role in IAS? The 
applications listed in Section 3.2 provide the 
obvious examples. In addition, system 
administrator (sysadmin) logs, the standard 
object of data-mining efforts in IAS with the 
purpose of intrusion detection, are written in a 
sublanguage of a NL and can be allowed to 
contain more complex language if the 
processing systems are capable of treating it; 
however, all the pre-NLP studies ignore the NL 
clues in the logs and thus miss out on a great 
deal of important content. Similarly, to use 
another example, if an InfoSec task involves 
human alongside software agents, NLP is the 
most efficient way of handling interagent 
communication (see Nirenburg and Raskin 
2002, Ch. 1, and references there). 
In the past, all the above tasks, if at all 
attempted, were supported by either keyword-
based search technology or through stochastic 
mechanisms of matching and determination of 
differences between two documents. These 
approaches have approached the ceiling of their 
capabilities. 
An ontology provides a new, content-oriented, 
knowledge- and meaning-based approach to 
form the basis of the NLP component of the 
information security research paradigm. The 
difference between this knowledge-based 
approach and the old ?expert system? approach 
is that the former concentrates on feasibility, for 
example, by using a gradual automation 
approach to various application tasks. The 
ontological approach also deals, albeit at a much 
more sophisticated level, with encoding and 
using the community know-how for automatic 
training and decision support systems. The 
cumulative knowledge of the information 
security community about the classification of 
threats, their prevention and about defense 
against computer attacks should be formalized, 
and this knowledge must be brought to bear in 
developing an industry-wide, constantly 
upgradeable manual for computer security 
personnel that may involve a number of delivery 
vehicles, including an online question-answer 
environment and a knowledge-based decision 
support system with dynamic replanning 
capabilities for use by computer security 
personnel. The underlying knowledge for both 
of these avenues of information security 
paradigm extension can, as it happens, be 
formulated in a single standard format. The 
knowledge content will readily enjoy dual use in 
both NL data inclusion and decision support, 
and it is made possible through the use of 
ontologies. Fig. 1 below shows a generic scheme 
of interaction of the ontological resources 
applied to a conceptual domain, such as 
Raskin et al?Page 5 
information security. The language-independent 
single ontology defines the content of most 
lexical entries in the lexicon and in the 
onomasticon (proper noun lexicon) of each NL. 
The fact database contains all the remembered 
event instances, and text meaning 
representations (TMR) are automatically 
generated for each text by the analyzer part of 
the processing system. The output, whether in 
NL or any other knowledge representation 
system, is produced by the generator from the 
TMRs. Some other static and dynamic resources 
are left out of the figure for simplification. 
 
Figure 1. Application of the Ontological 
Paradigm to a Domain (e.g., IAS) 
 
The attraction of using ontology, a conceptual 
structure for a domain of inquiry, is penetrating 
the IAS community only slightly more slowly 
than other disciplines. Since Raskin et al 2001 
and, especially, Raskin et al 2002, the prospect 
of having a tangled hierarchy, or a lattice, 
bringing together all the main concepts in IAS, 
with a convenient public Web interface has 
found considerable support. The most practical 
interest has so far been along the lines of 
standardizing the IAS terminology. Research-
wise, this is not the most challenging ontology-
related issue among the ones listed above but, as 
many IAS gatherings amply demonstrate, 
different terminological dialects confuse and 
slow down many professional discussions. Much 
more practically and damagingly, the non-
standard use of terms makes rapid responses to 
infections by CERT much more difficult 
because additional exchanges with the authors of 
reports are necessary to establish what is 
actually being reported. 
 
Ontological semantics can develop as many 
useful tools to support the common language 
project, the standardization initiative in the IAS 
community (see Howard and Meunier 2002), 
with Web-interfaced, public-access ontological-
semantic tools, as the implemented resources 
and their enhancements in this project will allow 
(e.g., dictionaries, both standard and dialectal; 
terminological ambiguity checker and corrector; 
mini-machine-translator from non-standard to 
standard usage). 
 
Starting with such more or less obvious 
overlapping points, NLP can be used to enhance 
and enrich the IAS agenda by making many less 
obvious applications work in the domain. At the 
same time, the ever-changing and increasingly 
complex real-life and contentful needs of IAS 
will place demands on NLP, stimulating and 
guiding its development. We believe that 
content-, not formalism-oriented NLP 
approaches, such as ontological semantics, 
rather than non-meaning-based and/or non-
representational approaches will be of most use 
to IAS. As in most fields populated by people 
trained in formalisms (and that includes both 
NLP and theoretical linguistics), there is a 
temptation to engage in a battle of formalisms to 
achieve maximum elegance, regardless of the 
formalized content?and, to add insult to injury, 
to be blissfully unaware of being not content-
oriented. In linguistics, the practical task that 
used to provide a check against pure formalism-
based approaches, the need to describe natural 
languages, has largely disappeared from the 
agenda. In NLP, there is more incentive to pay 
attention to content in contemporary 
applications, such as intelligent searches or 
question answering, than there was in MT, so 
the balance is changing in favor of content. In 
IAS, the practical task of preventing and 
countermanding hostile actions is fully 
dependent on understanding the content and 
goals of the actions, so the representation of 
meaning is a sine qua non of success, and this 
makes ontological semantics well suited for IAS 
applications. An ontological semanticist has the 
responsibility of identifying and sometimes 
discovering an IAS application of NLP 
Raskin et al?Page 6 
resources and of convincing the IAS community 
of the validity and importance of the application.  
 
5 Conclusion 
 
More and more interesting applications of NLP 
to IAS are being discovered, and the partial list 
above will be obsolete by the time this paper is 
presented. It is clear, therefore, that IAS is an 
important, enduring, and extremely well-funded 
field, whose needs NLP has every interest to 
serve and which will, therefore, determine, to an 
important extent, the development of NLP in the 
future. NLP, go for IAS! 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
The authors are grateful to CERIAS, with its 
pioneering multidisciplinary environment, and, 
especially, to its director, Eugene H. ?Spaf? 
Spafford, for his vision in continuing to 
encourage and to support  their work 
 
References 
 
Atallah, M., Raskin, V., Crogan, M., Hempelmann, 
C., Kerschbaum, F., Mohamed, D., and Naik, S. 
(2001). Natural language watermarking: Design, 
analysis, and a proof-of-concept implementation. 
In I. S. Moskowitz (ed.), ?Information Hiding: 4th 
International Workshop, IH 2001, Pittsburgh, PA, 
USA, April 2001 Proceedings?, I. S. Moskowitz, 
ed., Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 185-199. 
Atallah, M., Raskin, V., Hempelmann, C., Karahan, 
M., Sion, R., Topkara, U., and Triezenberg, K. E. 
(2002). Natural language watermarking and 
tamperproofing. Submitted to ih2002: Information 
Hiding Workshop 2002. 
Howard, J. D., and Meunier, P. C. (2002). Using a 
?common language? for computer security 
incident information. In ?Computer Security 
Handbook, 4th ed.?, M. Kabay and S. Bosworth, 
eds.,  New York: Wiley. 
McDonough, C. J. (2000). Complex Events in an 
Ontological-Semantic Natural Language 
Processing System. An unpublished Ph.D. thesis, 
Purdue University, W. Lafayette, IN. 
Mohamed, D. (2001). Ontological Semantics 
Methods for Automatic Downgrading. An 
unpublished M. A. thesis, Purdue University, W. 
Lafayette, IN. 
Nijholt, A. (2002). Embodied agents: A new impetus 
to humor research. In: Stock et al, pp. 101-111. 
Nirenburg, S., and Raskin, V. (1998). Universal 
grammar and lexis for quick ramp-up of MT 
systems. In ?Proceedings of ACL/COLING ?98. 
Vol. 2?, Montreal: University of Montreal, pp. 
975-979 
Nirenburg, S., and Raskin, V. (2002). Ontological 
Semantics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press 
(forthcoming). 
Raskin, V. (1996). Computer implementation of the 
general theory of verbal humor. In: ?Automatic 
Interpretation and Generation of Verbal Humor. 
International Workshop on Computational 
Humor, IWCH ?96. Twente Workshop on 
Language Technology, TWLT 12?, J. Hulstijn and 
A. Nijholt, eds., Enschede, NL: University of 
Twente, pp. 9-19. 
Raskin, V. (2002). Quo vadis computational humor. 
In: Stock et al 2002, pp. 31-46. 
Raskin, V., Atallah, M. J., McDonough, C. J., and 
Nirenburg, S. (2001). Natural language 
processing for information assurance and 
security: An overview and implementations. In 
?NSPW '00: Proceedings of  Workshop on New 
Paradigms in Information Security, Cork, Ireland, 
September 2000?, M. Shaeffer, ed., New York: 
ACM Press, pp. 51-65. 
Raskin, V., and Attardo, S. (1994). Non-literalness 
and non-bona-fide in Language: An approach to 
formal and computational treatments of humor. 
Pragmatics and Cognition 2/1, pp. 31-69. 
Raskin, V., Hempelmann, C. F., Triezenberg, K. E., 
and Nirenburg, S. (2002). Ontology in information 
security: A useful theoretical foundation and 
methodological tool. In ?Proceedings. New 
Security Paradigms Workshop 2001. September 
10th-13th, Cloudcroft, NM, USA?, V Raskin and 
C. F. Hempelmann, eds., New York: ACM Press, 
pp. 53-59. 
Stock, O., Strapparava, C., and Nijholt A., eds. 
(2002), Proceedings of The April Fools' Day 
Workshop on Computational Humour April 2002, 
Twente Workshop on Language Technology-
TWLT 20, An Initiative of HAHAcronym, 
European Project IST-2000-30039, Trento, Italy: 
ITC-irst. 
Stock, O., and Strapparava, C. (2002). Humorous 
agent for humorous acronyms: The HAHAcronym 
Project. In: Stock et al 2002, pp. 125-135. 
 
 
Raskin et al?Page 7 
