Building a Large-scale Commercial NLG System for an EMR 
 
 
Mary Dee Harris 
Catalis, Inc. 
7801 N. Capital of Texas Hwy., Ste. 260 
Austin, TX 78731 
mdharris@thecatalis.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Natural language generation technology is 
mature enough for implementing an NLG sys-
tem in a commercial environment, but the cir-
cumstances differ significantly from building 
a research system.  This paper describes the 
challenges and rewards of building a commer-
cial NLG component for an electronic medical 
records system.  While the resulting NLG sys-
tem has been successfully completed, the path 
to that success could have been somewhat 
smoother knowing the issues in advance.    
1 Introduction 
In 2002 I was hired by a small start-up company to 
add narrative generation to their electronic medical 
records (EMR) system under development.  After 
six months, we had a first-cut system producing 
narrative based on a doctor's selection of items 
from the graphical interface during an encounter 
with a patient.  This paper describes the rewards 
and challenges of building such a system in a 
commercial environment, in hopes the lessons I 
learned can contribute to successful future com-
mercial systems for natural language generation.   
 
The company has always been funded by invest-
ment money with some recent revenue income.  
The founders were both medical doctors, with little 
corporate experience and even less knowledge of 
technology.  They had the vision; the rest of us did 
the work.   The company's product is a general-
purpose EMR system on a tablet PC with hand-
writing recognition and extensive graphical repre-
sentation of human anatomy.  Its foundation is an 
elaborate database of medical content, outlining 
specific requirements for information collection.   
Much of this medical information is arranged in 
templates, one for each complaint.  When a patient 
comes into the doctor's office complaining of chest 
pains, the template for Chest Pain provides the ap-
propriate selections for the doctor to record perti-
nent information related to that condition.   Other 
parts of the system deal with physical examina-
tions, procedures, prescription of medication, or-
ders for lab tests and procedures, and so on.  
 
My mission was to implement a narrative genera-
tion system to record the doctor/patient encounter, 
following the traditional narrative created by the 
doctor's dictation, which is then transcribed into a 
narrative.  These narratives serve as a legal record 
of the encounter and are used in court in malprac-
tice suits.  Thus the narrative is an extremely im-
portant part of the patient record and must be 
complete and accurate.  Otherwise the doctor ? and 
our company ? could be liable for malpractice.   
 
2 Challenges  
The challenges of designing the narrative system 
were many.   The narrative must be completely 
accurate to avoid liability.  While the initial targets 
were small practices and clinics, the system would 
expand into larger clinics and hospitals.  So the 
system had to be scalable.  The scope of the project 
also had to be scalable.  Beginning with hundreds 
of medical templates often with multiple names, 
157
there are now thousands for many specialties with 
different requirements for format and style.   
 
Another challenge was the na?vet? of the company 
and its staff.  The CEO had a grand vision, but lit-
tle concept of the technology for language genera-
tion.  He believed the automated narrative was 
possible, but there was little understanding of the 
extent of commitment of staff, time, and money for 
building such a system.   
 
One less obvious challenge is the difference be-
tween research and commercial applications.  Our 
limited finances allowed us few available commer-
cial products.  However, the freely available re-
sources that academics rely on were usually 
available only for research.  In our field of health 
care technology, the UMLS was the primary re-
source available to us.   The Unified Medical Li-
brary System1 developed at the National Library of 
Medicine has resources which include a medically-
oriented dictionary of English called SPECIALIST 
and  tools to access it, a semantic network related 
to health care, and a Metathesaurus -- "a very 
large, multi-purpose, and multi-lingual vocabulary 
database that contains information about biomedi-
cal and health related concepts, their various 
names, and the relationships among them."  This 
lack of resources was a mixed blessing:  all our 
tools and program components belong to the com-
pany with no financial or licensing strings at-
tached.   
 
One usual way to start any NLP project is to ac-
quire a large sample of the texts to be processed.  
However because of privacy issues, we had no 
"live" data representing medical narratives.   The 
two doctors wrote some imaginary scenarios to 
serve as samples and provided feedback on our 
guesses of what the medical language should be.   
So the project started with no outside resources, 
little support, no samples, but a lot of enthusiasm.    
 
3 Plan of Attack  
Despite the challenges, I knew NLG technology 
would be able to fulfill the requirements for this 
application so the planning began.  The original 
idea was to follow a standard development model:  
                                                          
1  http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/
proof-of-concept (POC) system, prototype, and 
production system.  The POC would have simple 
sentences and a restricted vocabulary, but enough 
to convince the company that the technology could 
provide a feasible solution.  The prototype would 
extend the capability, adding a  grammar and a 
more extensive vocabulary as well as being robust 
enough to handle more data.  The POC was built in 
about six months with a Java developer assisting 
me with the design ? it sounded like a second 
grader had written the narrative, but it was accurate 
and proved that we could do it.    
 
The prototype never got built due to management 
decisions and some bad luck.  We had no internal 
staff to devote to the task.  To make matters more 
complicated, Steve Shipman, the original Java de-
veloper who knew some computational linguistics, 
was replaced by a developer with no real knack for 
linguistics whose  English was a second language.  
I had to teach him the linguistic terminology and 
the language structures before he could write the 
code to handle them.   
 
The next problem arose when the management saw 
the narrative output -- simple as it was -- and im-
mediately started adding templates for us to han-
dle.   Despite my protests that it wasn't ready for 
deployment, we had to add additional features such 
as aggregation and negation to this simple-minded 
version.  It took several years before we got the go-
ahead to write the full-blown system, by which 
time we had several thousand templates in the sys-
tem.  We finally spent six months on the new sys-
tem, followed by nearly a year of testing.  Because 
the POC had been put into production, we had to 
establish a dual model that ran both old and new 
versions.   We are still trying to get al the original 
parts converted to work on the full-blown produc-
tion system so we can eliminate the POC section.  
 
4 System Architecture 
The architecture of the Narrative Engine followed 
the basic design described in Reiter and Dale 
(2000) for an NLG system, with adaptations to fit 
our data model.  Because the narrative output had 
to be so accurate and the style so sophisticated to 
satisfy the physician client base, I doubted that 
completely automated generation would be suffi-
158
cient.  So following the lead of machine transla-
tion, I chose to implement human-assisted com-
puter generation.  That seemed the only 
appropriate approach, used similarly by CoGenTex 
in their Exemplars method (White and Caldwell, 
1998).  We considered using Exemplars, but they 
are Java-based which was not appropriate for our 
situation.   Most of our NLG staff didn't know Java 
since we hired liberal arts and linguistics majors.   
 
We developed a plan language called Linguo, after 
Lisa Simpson's robot by that name.   Linguo helps 
us write plans to describe the translation from 
medical findings for a particular patient into ap-
propriate medical language for an encounter.  The 
plan writers select the predicate best suited for 
each finding in a template.  That predicate then 
determines the semantic structure, following 
Jackendoff (1990; 1991).  These plans are general-
ized to handle many similar findings, rather than 
being a one-to-one translation.  The basic design 
for the Narrative Engine held up well through the 
various implementations, with only minor adjust-
ments required. 2
  
  
 
Figure 1  Architecture of Narrative Engine 
 
5  Proof of Concept 
The initial POC was string-based, for speed of de-
velopment ? a decision I would come to regret, but 
probably necessary to get the project underway.  
The POC system had no separate grammar, but 
handled syntactic and morphological issues in the 
                                                          
2 This paper does not detail the technology specifically as it is 
proprietary.  The company has patent applications pending for 
much of the design.  This is another important contrast with 
the research community where sharing ideas is the norm.   
code.  We created two XML files for the transla-
tion into English:  predicate templates and clause 
templates.  The predicate templates define the se-
mantic roles for each predicate in our restricted 
vocabulary, while the clause templates match the 
semantic forms to syntactic structures.   The final 
stage of processing was the Sentence Realizer that 
converted the syntactic structures into English.  
The Narrative Engine was a separate module in the 
application that received medical findings (the in-
dividual items that the doctor selected) and that 
output English text to the application for the note.  
 
5 Commercial Development 
The commercial version of the Narrative Engine 
was called Component-Based Processing (CBP) to 
distinguish it from the string-based POC.  We now 
had two lexicons:  a semantic one containing the 
finding names for all the medical templates and the 
UMLS SPECIALIST syntactic lexicon.  We added 
bracketed forms to specify language structures for 
each finding name, to go with the basic syntactic 
information.   For example, the phrase "the right 
shoulder" would be represented as  [np [det the][adj 
right][n shoulder]].  We hired a computational lexi-
cographer, Ken Litkowski, to help produce the 
bracketed forms for the 60,000 plus entries.  Creat-
ing these forms was not trivial since the finding 
phrases vary from a single word to a complex noun 
phrase to a complete clause.   
 
Using the bracketed forms allowed us to extend 
our aggregation capability to a linguistically solid 
method of analyzing the component structure to 
identify corresponding parts to coordinate.  We 
also added a means for asymmetric aggregation, 
known as hypotactic aggregation (Shaw, 2002).   
Besides being able to coordinate similar items, as  
 
The patient described the pain as sharp and throbbing, 
 
we can now combine dissimilar findings, as in  
 
The skin was closed with 14  2-0 monofilament sutures 
using continuous stitch.     
 
One major addition to the Narrative Engine was 
the syntactic grammar set up as a properties file 
allowing modification of the grammar without 
code changes.  We can test new features easily and 
159
try extensions to the language with no impact on 
the overall system.  The clause templates used in 
the POC were replaced with verb templates since 
much of that work was now handled by the gram-
mar.  Verb templates describe the alternation pat-
terns (Levin, 1993) and include the irregular forms.    
 
Another change was the integration of the narrative 
process into the application more completely.  This 
integration was not simply a code change, but a 
change in perception of the project as a whole.  
The company came to understand that adding the 
narrative capability had increased the value of the 
EMR in the marketplace.   At this time, ours is the 
only EMR with real natural language generation, 
not handled by templates or canned text.   
 
6 Recommendations 
Many of the choices made during development of 
this system would be changed, if I had the luxury 
of starting over.  I would like to offer up some 
suggestions for others to avoid the difficulties I 
faced.  Consider these ideas before you start.     
 
? Educate your clients.   Your clients are mostly 
in your own company.   Not everyone is going 
to understand the importance of the work and 
the need for resources or have the basic lin-
guistic knowledge to comprehend the require-
ments.   I gave many tutorials to help our staff 
understand what we were doing.    
? Be clear about the costs of building the NLG 
system.  Your estimates will be wrong, almost 
by definition, but you have to start somewhere.  
Since the uninitiated cannot imagine the poten-
tial until they see it, they will have many more 
ideas of how to apply the technology once they 
see it, thus extending the requirements.   Here 
again, educate the company regarding the staff 
requirements (developers, linguists, quality as-
surance, marketing) and the training needed to 
make them productive.   Consider the data de-
velopment requirements as well as the coding.    
? Be careful how you plan out the development 
stages.   A proof-of-concept system is a great 
idea to demonstrate that the technology is fea-
sible, but it is tempting to take it and run with 
it.   You need to build the system in stages, but 
make sure the staging is spelled out in advance 
with an understanding from management of 
the process.    
? Deployment and customer acceptance is the 
goal, not completion of the code.  We found 
that the customers were gratified by the ability 
to eliminate the dictation and transcription 
process, but they do have opinions about the 
wording sometimes.  We work with specialists 
to develop the medical templates and the narra-
tive before we implement.   
? Remember that a commercial system is not 
cutting-edge technology, no matter what man-
agement thinks.  A commercial system should 
use time-proven, reliable methods robust 
enough for inevitable modifications.  Some 
features will be untested, but the basic founda-
tion of the system must be reliable.  
? Make sure you have the funding to complete 
the project.  A champion within the company 
can help fight your battles.   
 
None of these recommendations should preclude 
anyone from trying to build a large-scale commer-
cial product, but knowing in advance where the 
pitfalls lie can ease the process.  It takes more than 
a good idea and a knowledge of the technology to 
make it work, but the effort can be worthwhile in 
the end.  The language component of our EMR 
system has helped doctors increase their ability to 
see more patients by reducing the time required to 
take notes, dictate them, and pay for their tran-
scription.  So the doctors appreciate the automated 
narrative capability even though they have no idea 
how it is accomplished.   
References  
Ray Jackendoff.  1990. Semantic Structures. MIT Press. 
Ray Jackendoff.  1991. Parts and Boundaries. Lexical 
and Conceptual Structures.  Blackwell. 
Beth Levin.  1993.  English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tions:  A Preliminary Investigation.  University of 
Chicago Press.    
Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale.  2000. Building Natural 
Language Generation Systems. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.   
James C. Shaw.  Clause Aggregation.  Dissertation, 
Columbia University.  2002.   
Michael White and Ted Caldwell. 1998. Exemplars:  
Practical, Extensible Framework for Dynamic Text 
Generation.  Proceedings of the Ninth International 
Workshop on Natural Language Generation. 
 
160
