Abstract 
Post-editing is commonly performed on computer-
generated texts, whether from Machine Translation 
(MT) or NLG systems, to make the texts accept-
able to end users. MT systems are often evaluated 
using post-edit data.  In this paper we describe our 
experience of using post-edit data to evaluate 
SUMTIME-MOUSAM, an NLG system that pro-
duces marine weather forecasts. 
1 Introduction 
Natural Language Generation (NLG) systems must of 
course be evaluated, like all NLP systems. Previous work on 
NLG evaluation has focused on either experiments con-
ducted with users who read the generated texts, or on com-
parisons of generated texts to corpora of human-written 
texts.  In this paper we describe an evaluation technique, 
which looks at how much humans need to post-edit gener-
ated texts before they are released to users.  Post-edit 
evaluations are common in machine translation, but we be-
lieve that ours is the first large-scale post-edit evaluation of 
an NLG system.  
The system being evaluated is SUMTIME-MOUSAM [Sri-
pada et al 2003], an NLG system, which generates marine 
weather forecasts from Numerical Weather Prediction 
(NWP) data. SUMTIME-MOUSAM is operational and is used 
by Weathernews (UK) Ltd to generate 150 draft forecasts 
per day, which are post-edited by Weathernews forecasters 
before being released to clients. 
2 Background 
2.1 Evaluating NLG Systems  
Common evaluation techniques for NLG systems [Mellish 
and Dale, 1998] include:  
? Showing generated texts to users, and measuring how 
effective they are at achieving their goal, compared to 
some control text (for example, [Young, 1999]) 
? Asking experts to rate computer-generated texts in 
various ways, and comparing this to their rating of 
manually authored texts (for example, [Lester and 
Porter, 1997]) 
? Automatically comparing generated texts to a corpus of 
human authored texts (for example, [Bangalore et al 
2000]). 
Each of these techniques is effective under different ap-
plication contexts in which NLG systems operate. For in-
stance, a corpus based technique is effective when a high 
quality corpus is available. The appeal of post-edit evalua-
tion as done with SUMTIME-MOUSAM is that (A) the edits 
should indicate actual mistakes instead of just differences in 
how things can be said and (B) the amount of post-editing 
required is a very important practical measure of how useful 
the system is to real users (forecasters in our case). 
Post-edit evaluations are a standard technique in Machine 
Translation [Hutchins and Somers, 1992]. The only previ-
ous use of post-edit evaluation in NLG that we are aware of 
is Mitkov and An Ha [2003], but their evaluation is rela-
tively small, and they give little information about it. 
2.2 SUMTIME-MOUSAM 
SUMTIME-MOUSAM [Sripada et al 2003] is an NLG system 
that generates textual weather forecasts from numerical 
weather prediction (NWP) data.  The forecasts are marine 
forecasts for offshore oilrigs.  Table 1 shows a small extract 
from the NWP data for 12-06-2002, and Table 2 shows part 
of the textual forecast that SUMTIME-MOUSAM generates 
from the NWP data.  The Wind statements in Table 2 are 
mostly based on the NWP data in Table 1.  
 
Time Wind 
Dir 
Wind Spd 
10m 
Wind Spd 
50m 
Gust 
10m 
Gust 
50m 
06:00 W 10.0 12.0 12.0 16.0 
09:00 W 11.0 14.0 14.0 17.0 
12:00 WSW 10.0 12.0 12.0 16.0 
15:00 SW 7.0 9.0 9.0 11.0 
18:00 SSW 8.0 10.0 10.0 12.0 
21:00 S 9.0 11.0 11.0 14.0 
00:00 S 12.0 15.0 15.0 19.0 
 
Table 1. Weather Data produced by an NWP model for 12-
Jun 2002 
 
Evaluation of an NLG System using Post-Edit Data: Lessons Learnt 
Somayajulu G. Sripada and Ehud Reiter and Lezan Hawizy 
Department of Computing Science 
University of Aberdeen 
Aberdeen, AB24 3UE, UK 
{ssripada,ereiter,lhawizy}@csd.abdn.ac.uk 
 SUMTIME-MOUSAM generates texts in three stages 
[Reiter and Dale, 2000]. 
Document Planning: Text structure is specified by 
Weathernews, via a control file.  The key content-
determination task is selecting ?important? or ?significant? 
data points from the underlying weather data to be included 
in the forecast text. SUMTIME-MOUSAM uses a bottom-up 
segmentation algorithm for this task [Sripada et al 2002].  
Micro-planning: The key decisions here are lexical selec-
tion, aggregation, and ellipsis. SUMTIME-MOUSAM uses 
rules for this that are derived from corpus analysis and other 
knowledge acquisition activities [Reiter et al 2003; Sripada 
et al 2003]. 
Realization: SUMTIME-MOUSAM uses a simple realiser 
that is tuned to the Weathernews weather sublanguage. 
SUMTIME-MOUSAM is partially controlled by a control 
data file that Weathernews can edit.  For example, this file 
specifies error function data that controls the segmentation 
process for content determination. The error function data 
decides the level of abstraction achieved by the segmenta-
tion process ? the larger the error function value the higher 
the level of abstraction achieved by segmentation. 
2.3 SUMTIME-MOUSAM at Weathernews 
Weathernews (UK) Ltd, a private sector weather services 
company, uses SUMTIME-MOUSAM to generate draft fore-
casts.  The process is illustrated in Figure 1.  Forecasters 
load the NWP data for the forecast into Marfors, which is 
Weathernews? forecasting tool. Using Marfors, forecasters 
edit the NWP data, using their meteorological expertise and 
additional information such as satellite weather maps. They 
then invoke SUMTIME-MOUSAM to generate an initial draft 
of the forecast. This initial draft helps the forecaster under-
stand the NWP data, and often suggests further edits to the 
NWP data.  The generate-and-edit-data process may be re-
peated.  When the forecaster is satisfied with the NWP data, 
he invokes SUMTIME-MOUSAM again to generate a final 
draft textual forecast, marked ?Pre-edited Text? in Figure 1. 
The forecaster then uses Marfors to post-edit the textual 
forecast.  When the forecaster is done, Marfors assembles 
the complete forecast from the individual fields, and sends it 
to the customer. 
 
Section 2. FORECAST 6 - 24 GMT, Wed 12-Jun 2002 
Field Text 
WIND(KTS) 10M W 8-13 backing SW by mid after-
noon and S 10-15 by midnight. 
WIND(KTS) 50M W 10-15 backing SW by mid after-
noon and S 13-18 by midnight. 
WAVES(M) 
SIG HT 
0.5-1.0 mainly SW swell. 
WAVES(M) 
MAX HT 
1.0-1.5 mainly SW swell falling 1.0 
or less mainly SSW swell by after-
noon, then rising 1.0-1.5 by mid-
night. 
WAVE PERIOD 
(SEC) 
Wind wave 2-4 mainly 6 second 
SW swell. 
WINDWAVE 
PERIOD (SEC) 
2-4. 
SWELL PERIOD 
(SEC) 
5-7. 
WEATHER Mainly cloudy with light rain 
showers becoming overcast around 
midnight. 
VISIBILITY 
(NM) 
Greater than 10. 
AIR TEMP(C) 8-10 rising 9-11 around midnight. 
CLOUD 
(OKTAS/FT) 
4-6 ST/SC 400-600 lifting 6-8 
ST/SC 700-900 around midnight. 
 
Table 2. Extract from SUMTIME-MOUSAM Forecast Pro-
duced for 12-Jun 2002 (AM). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic Showing SUMTIME-MOUSAM Used at Weathernews 
Post-
edited 
Text  
Marfors 
Data Editor 
Marfors Text Editor 
SUMTIME-
MOUSAM 
Marfors 
Data Editor 
Pre-edited 
Text SUMTIME-
MOUSAM 
Text 1 Data 1 
Edited Data 
NWP Data 
 Note that SUMTIME-MOUSAM is used for two purposes 
by Weathernews; to help forecasters understand and there-
fore edit the NWP data, and to help generate texts for cus-
tomers.  In this paper we focus on evaluating the second 
usage of the system (generating texts for customers). 
When a forecast is complete, Marfors saves the final ed-
ited NWP data, marked ?Edited data? in Figure 1 and the 
final edited forecast marked ?Post-edited Text? into a data-
base.  This data is forwarded to us for 150 sites per day; this 
is the basis of our post-edit evaluation.  Marfors does not 
directly save the SUMTIME-MOUSAM text that forecasters 
edit (?Pre-edited Text? in Figure 1), but we can reconstruct 
this text by running the system on the final edited NWP 
data. 
3 Post-Edit Evaluation 
3.1 Data 
The evaluation was carried out on 2728 forecasts, collected 
during period June to August 2003.  Each forecast was 
roughly of 400 words, so there are about 1 million words in 
all in the corpus. 
For each forecast, we have the following data 
 
? Data: The final edited NWP data 
? Pre-edit text: The final draft forecast produced by 
SUMTIME-MOUSAM, which we reconstruct as de-
scribed in Section 2.3. 
? Post-edit text: The manually post-edited forecast, 
which was sent to the client. 
? Background information: includes date, location, and 
forecaster 
 We do not currently use the NWP data (other than for 
reconstructing SUMTIME-MOUSAM texts), although we 
hope in the future to include it in our analyses, in a manner 
roughly analogous to Reiter and Sripada [2003]. This data 
set continues to grow, we receive approximately 150 new 
forecasts per day. 
3.2 Analysis Procedure 
The following procedure is performed automatically by a 
software tool. First, we perform some data transformation 
and cleaning.  This includes breaking sentences up into 
phrases, where each phrase describes the weather at one 
point in time. 
For example, the pre-edit text in Figure 2 would be bro-
ken up into three phrases: 
 
A1 SW 20-25 
A2 backing SSW 28-33 by midday 
A3 then gradually increasing 34-39 by midnight 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Example pre-edit and post-edit texts from the post-
edit corpus 
 
The Figure 2 post-edit text is divided into two phrases: 
 
B1 SW 22-27 
B2 gradually increasing SSW 34-39 
 
The second step is to align phrases from these two tables 
as a preparation for comparison in the next step. Alignment 
is a complex activity and is described in detail next. To start 
with we generate an exhaustive list of all the possible com-
binations of phase alignments. 
For example, consider the texts in Figure 2. Here we gen-
erate the following list of possible alignments: 
 
{(A1, B1), (A1, B2), (A2, B1), (A2, B2), (A3, B1), (A3, 
B2)} 
 
  Next, we compute match scores for each of these possi-
ble alignments and use them for selecting the right align-
ments. For each unedited phrase Ai, the alignment with the 
highest matching score is selected. For the purpose of com-
puting the match scores, phrases are parsed using ?parts of 
speech? designed for weather sublanguage such as direction, 
speed and time. The total match score of a pair of phrases is 
computed as the sum of the match scores for their constitu-
ents. Match score (MS) for a pair of constituents depends 
upon their part of speech and also their degree of match. MS 
is defined as a product of two terms as explained below: 
? Match score due to degree of match: we assign a match 
score of 2 for exact matches, 1 for partial matches and 
0 for mismatches. 
? Weight factor denoting importance of constituents for 
alignment: Constituents belonging to certain parts of 
speech (POS) are more significant for alignment than 
others. For example, times are more significant for 
alignment than verbs. Also weights are varied for the 
same POS based on its context in the phrase. For ex-
ample, direction receives higher weight if it occurs in 
a phrase without a time or speed. This is because in 
such phrases direction is the only means for align-
ment. 
Continuing with our example sentences in Figure 2, we 
show below how we find an alignment for A3. As described 
earlier, A3 can be aligned to either B1 or B2. The MS for 
(A3, B1) is zero as shown in Table 3. 
 
A. Pre-edit Text: SW 20-25 backing SSW 28-33 by 
midday, then gradually increasing 34-39 by midnight. 
 
B. Post-edit Text: SW 22-27 gradually increasing 
SSW 34-39. 
 
POS A3 B1 MS 
conjunction Then <none> 0 
Adverb Gradually <none> 0 
Verb Increasing <none> 0 
Direction <none> SW 0 
Speed range 34-39 22-27 0 
Time By midnight <none> 0 
 
Table 3 Match Score for A3 and B1 
 
The MS for (A3, B2) is 2*(2*w1+w2) where w1 is the 
weight for Adverb/verb and w2 (>w1) for speed as shown in 
Table 4. Based on the match scores computed above A3 is 
aligned with B2. Similarly A1 is aligned with B1. A2 is 
unaligned, and treated as a deleted phrase. 
 
POS A3 B2 MS 
conjunction Then <none> 0 
Adverb Gradually Gradually w1*2 
Verb Increasing Increasing w1*2 
Direction <none> SSW 0 
Speed range 34-39 34-39 w2*2 
Time By midnight <none> 0 
 
Table 4. Match Score for A3 and B2 
 
The third step is to compare aligned phrases, such as A1 
and B1.  One evaluation metric is based on comparing 
aligned phrases as a whole. Here we simply record ?match? 
or ?mismatch?.  For example, both (A1, B1) and (A3, B2) 
are mismatches. We then compare constituents in the 
phrases to determine more details about the mismatches.  
For this detailed comparison we use the domain-specific 
part-of-speech tags described earlier. Each part-of-speech 
should occur at most once in a phrase (in our weather sub-
language), so we simply align on the basis of the tag. After 
constituents are aligned, we label each pre-edit/post-edit 
pair as match, replace, add, or delete. For example, A and B 
are analysed as in Table 5. 
 
POS A B label 
Direction SW SW match 
Speed 20-25 22-27 replace 
    
Conjunction then <none> delete 
Adverb gradually gradually match 
Verb increasing increasing match 
Direction <none> SSW add 
Speed 34-39 34-39 match 
Time by midnight <none> delete 
 
Table 5. Detailed Edit Analysis 
3.3 Analysis of Results 
We processed 2728 forecast pairs (pre-edited and post-
edited). These were divided into 73041 phrases. Out of 
these, the alignment procedure failed to align 7608 (10%) 
phrases. For instance, in the example of Section 3.2, phrase 
A2 was not aligned with any B phrase.  Alignment failure 
generally indicates that the forecaster is unhappy with 
SUMTIME-MOUSAM?s segmentation that is with the sys-
tem?s content determination. We have manually analysed 
some of these cases, and in general it seems the forecasters 
are performing more sophisticated data analysis than 
SUMTIME-MOUSAM, and are also more sensitive to which 
changes are significant enough to be reported to the user.  
We have manually inspected alignment quality of 100 
random phrase pairs to determine cases where our alignment 
procedure erroneously aligned phrases. We found one case 
of improper alignment. The pre-edited phrase ?soon becom-
ing variable? has not been aligned to its corresponding iden-
tical post-edited phrase. Inspection of the rest of the corpus 
showed that this error repeated 54 times in the whole cor-
pus. These cases have been classified as alignment failures 
and therefore do not affect the post-edit analysis. 
 
Time (Hours) Direction Speed 
00 ESE 12 
03 ESE 12 
06 ESE 11 
09 ESE 11 
12 ESE 10 
15 ESE 8 
18 ESE 9 
21 ESE 11 
24 ESE 13 
 
Table 6. Wind 10m data for 14 Jul 2003 
 
For example, consider the Wind 10m data shown in Table 
6. Our content determination algorithm first segments the 
data in table 6 (see Sripada et al[2002] for more details). 
Segmentation is the process of fitting straight lines to a data 
set in such a way that a minimum error is introduced by the 
lines. Since the direction data is constant at ESE, there is 
only one segment for this data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Segmentation of Wind speed data shown in Ta-
ble 6. 
Wind speed data however is segmented by two lines as 
shown in Figure 3, one line joining the point (0,12) with 
(15,8) and the second joining the point (15,8) with (24,13). 
Our content selection algorithm therefore selects data points 
Segmentation of Wind 10m data
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24
Time
W
in
d 
Sp
e
e
d
(0,12), (15,8) and (24,13) to be included in the forecast. In 
this case our system produced: 
 
?ESE 10-15 gradually easing 10 or less by mid afternoon 
then increasing 11-16 by midnight? 
However, forecasters view this data as a special case and 
don?t segment it the way we do. Here the wind speed is al-
ways in the range of ?10-15? except at 1500 and 1800 hours. 
Therefore they mention the change as an additional informa-
tion to an otherwise constant wind speed. In this case, the 
forecaster edited text is: 
 
?ESE 10-15 decreasing 10 or less for a time later?. 
Talking about the segmentation differences, one of the 
forecasters at Weathernews told us that another factor af-
fecting segmentation is related to the end user. End users of 
the marine forecasts are oil company staff who schedule 
activities on the oilrigs in the North Sea. Over the years 
forecasters at Weathernews have acquired a good under-
standing of the informational needs of the oil company staff. 
So they use the forecast statements as messages to the end 
users about the weather and know what kind of messages 
will be useful to the end users. In the example texts shown 
in Figure 2 the forecaster could have thought that the impor-
tant message to communicate about wind is that it is in-
creasing monotonically and is likely to be in the range be-
tween 22 (the actual initial wind speed) and 39. Everything 
else distracts this primary message and therefore needs to be 
avoided. Once again there is post segmentation reasoning 
used by the forecasters. We are investigating better pattern 
matching techniques and better user models to improve our 
content selection. 
 
S. No. Mismatch Type Freq. % 
1. Ellipses (word additions 
and deletions) 
35874 65 
2. Data Related Replacements 
(range and direction re-
placements) 
10781 20 
3. Lexical Replacements 8264 15 
 Total 54919  
 
Table 7. Results of the Evaluation showing summary cate-
gories and their frequencies 
Going back to the successfully aligned phrases, 43914 
(60%) are perfect matches, and the remaining 21519 (30%) 
are mismatches.  Table 7 summarises the mismatches.  
Here, each mismatch is classified as 
? Ellipses: additions and deletions.  For example, delet-
ing the time phrase by midnight in the (A3, B2) pair.  
These generally indicate problems with SUMTIME-
MOUSAM?s aggregation and ellipsis. 
? Data replacements: changes (replaces) to constituents 
that directly convey NWP data, such as wind speed 
and direction.  For example, changing 20-25 to 22-27 
in the (A1, B1) pair.  These can indicate content prob-
lems.  They also occur when forecasters believe the 
NWP data is incorrect but decide to just correct the 
forecast text and not the data (eg, skip generate-and-
edit step described in section 2.3). 
? Lexical replacements: All other changes (replaces). For 
example, if the conjunction ?then? was replaced by 
?and?.  This generally indicates a problem in 
SUMTIME-MOUSAM?s lexicalisation strategy. 
For each pair of phrases compared in the evaluation, we 
have counted the number of times each edit operation such 
as add, delete and replace is performed by forecasters. For 
example consider the two phrase pairs shown in Table 5. 
For the first phrase pair of ?SW 20-25? and ?SW 22-27? fore-
casters performed zero add, zero delete and one replace 
operation (?20-25? is replaced by ?22-27?). For the second 
phrase pair of ?then gradually increasing 34-39 by mid-
night? and ?gradually increasing SSW 34-39? forecasters 
performed one add (added ?SSW?), two delete (deleted 
?then? and ?by midnight?) and zero replace operations. We 
hypothesized that forecasters were making significantly 
more add and delete operations than replace operations. For 
verifying this, we have performed a pairwise t-test. Vari-
able1 for the t-test represents the sum of the counts of add 
and delete operations for each pair of phrases. Variable2 
represents the count of replace operations. For example, for 
the two phrase pairs shown in Table 5, variable1 has values 
of zero and three where as variable2 has values of one and 
zero. This test showed (with a p value less than 10-20) that 
forecasters were performing more additions and deletions 
than replacements. In other words, ellipsis is the main prob-
lem in our system. Most (25235 out of 35874, 70%) of these 
errors are deletions, where the forecaster deletes words from 
SUMTIME-MOUSAM?s texts. 
A manual analysis of some ellipsis cases has highlighted 
some general phenomena.  First of all, many ellipsis cases 
are ?downstream? consequences of earlier changes. For ex-
ample, if we look at the (A3, B2) pair above, this contains 
three ellipsis changes: then was deleted, SSW was added, 
and by midnight was deleted.  The first two of these changes 
are a direct consequence of the deletion of phrase A2.  If 
SUMTIME-MOUSAM?s content determination system was 
changed so that it did not generate A2, then the micro plan-
ner would have expressed A3 as gradually increasing SSW 
34-39 by midnight, which is identical to B2 except for by 
midnight. 
The deletion of by midnight is an example of another 
common phenomenon, which is disagreement among indi-
viduals as to how text should be written.  As described in 
[Reiter et al 2003], some forecasters elide the last time 
phrase in simple sentences such as this one, and some do 
not.  An earlier version of SUMTIME-MOUSAM in fact 
would have elided this time phrase, but we changed the be-
havior of the system in this regard after consultation.  Ellip-
sis errors are inevitable in cases where the different fore-
casters disagree about when to elide.  However, since post-
editors can delete words more quickly than they can add 
words, it probably makes sense from a practical perspective 
to be conservative about elision, and only elide in unambi-
guous cases. We will not further discuss data replacement 
errors, since they reflect either content problems or cases 
where NWP data was not corrected at the input time but 
edited directly in the final text. 
We have discussed lexical replacement errors in detail 
elsewhere [Reiter and Sripada, 2002].  In general terms, 
some errors reflect problems with SUMTIME-MOUSAM; for 
example, the system overuses then as a connective, so fore-
casters often replaced then by alternative connectives such 
as and.  However, many lexical replacement errors simply 
reflected the lexical preferences of individual forecasters 
[Reiter and Sripada, 2002].  For example, SUMTIME-
MOUSAM always uses the verb easing to indicate a reduc-
tion in wind speed.  Most forecasters were happy with this, 
but 3 individuals usually changed this to decreasing. 
A general observation is that some forecasters post-edited 
texts much more than others.  For example, while overall 
28% of phrases were edited, edit rates by individual fore-
casters varied from 4% to 93%.  We do not know why edit 
rates vary so much, although it may be significant the indi-
vidual with the highest (93%) edit rate is one of the most 
experienced forecasters, who takes well-justified pride in 
producing well-crafted forecasts. 
Summarizing the results of our evaluation: 
1. SUMTIME-MOUSAM?s content determination can defi-
nitely be improved, by using more sophisticated segmenta-
tion techniques. 
2. SUMTIME-MOUSAM?s micro-planner can certainly be 
improved in places, for example by varying connectives.  
However, many post-edits are due to individual differences, 
which we cannot do anything about. 
We are currently carrying out another evaluation of SUM-
TIME-MOUSAM by the end users, oilrig staff and other ma-
rine staff who regularly read weather forecasts. In this study 
we compare user?s comprehension of weather information 
from human written and computer generated forecast texts. 
We also measure user ratings (preference) of human written 
and computer generated texts. Preliminary results from our 
study indicate that users make fewer mistakes on compre-
hension questions when they are shown texts that use com-
puter generated words with human selected content. Gener-
ally users seem to prefer computer generated texts to human 
written texts given the same underlying weather data. 
4 Lessons from our Post-Edit Evaluation 
As stated in Section 2.1, we were attracted to post-edit 
evaluation because we believed that (A) people would only 
edit things that were clearly wrong; and (B) post-editing was 
an important usefulness metric from the perspective of our 
users (forecasters). 
Looking back, (B) was certainly true.  The amount of 
post-editing that generated texts require is a crucial compo-
nent of the cost of using SUMTIME-MOUSAM, and hence of 
the attractiveness of the system to users (forecasters). Al-
though we have not measured the time required for perform-
ing post-edits, we have used edit-distance measures used in 
MT evaluations as an approximate cost metric. We have 
computed our cost metric by setting different cost (weight) 
values to different edit operations. Cost of add and replace 
operations is set to 5 and cost of delete is set to 1 as used in 
Su et al[1992]. The ratio of the cost of edits and the cost of 
writing the entire forecast manually (adding all the words) is 
computed to be 0.15.  (A) however was perhaps less true 
than we had hoped. Wagner [1998] also described post-
edited texts in MT as at times noisy. Our analysis of manu-
ally written forecasts [Reiter and Sripada, 2002] had high-
lighted a number of ?noise? elements that made it more dif-
ficult to extract information from such corpora. Basically 
there are many ways of communicating information in text, 
and the fact that a generated text doesn?t match a corpus text 
does not mean that the generated text is wrong.  We as-
sumed that people would only post-edit mistakes, where the 
generated text was wrong or sub-optimal, and hence post-
edit data would be better for evaluation purposes than cor-
pus comparisons. 
In fact, however, there were many justifications for post-
edits: 
1. Fixing problems in the generated texts (such as 
overuse of then);  
2. Refining/optimizing the texts (such as using for 
a time);  
3. Individual preferences (such as easing vs de-
creasing); and  
4. Downstream consequences of earlier changes 
(such as introducing SSW in B2, in the example 
of Section 3.2).  
We wanted to use our post-edit data to improve the sys-
tem, not just to quantify its performance, and we discovered 
that we could not do this without attempting to analyze why 
post-edits were made.  Probably the best way of doing this 
was to discuss post-edits with the forecasters.  Alternatively, 
we could have asked forecasters to fill in problem sheets to 
capture their explanation of post-edits. Such feedback from 
the forecasters would have allowed us to reason with post-
edit data to improve our system. In [Reiter et al 2003] we 
explained that we found that analysis of human-written cor-
pora was more useful if it was combined with directly work-
ing with domain experts; and essentially this (perhaps not 
surprisingly) is our conclusion about post-edit data as well.  
One of the lessons we learnt from this exercise has been 
that post-edit evaluations are useful to compute a cost metric 
to quantify the usefulness of a system. For example, as de-
scribed earlier, we have computed a cost metric, 0.15 signi-
fying the post-editing effort. Post-edit evaluations are also 
useful in revealing general problem areas in a system. For 
example, as described in section 3.3, our evaluation showed 
that ellipsis related problems are more serious in our system 
than others. However, post-edit evaluations are not affective 
in discovering specific problems in a system. The main rea-
son for this is that many post-edits, as stated earlier, do not 
actually fix problems in the generated text at all. The real 
post-edits that fixed problems in the generated text were 
buried among the other noisy post-edits. 
This lesson of course is the result of our method of post-
edit evaluation. Post-editing was not supported by 
SUMTIME-MOUSAM and forecasters used Marfors (see sec-
tion 2.3) to perform post-editing. Therefore, we had to ac-
cept the post-edit data with all the noise. In MT, post-editors 
often work under predefined guidelines on post-editing and 
also use post-editing tools.  For example, post-editing tools 
automatically revise texts to fix ?down-stream? conse-
quences of human edits. If post-edit tools are similarly inte-
grated into NLG systems, there is going to be a significant 
reduction in the number of noisy post-edits allowing us to 
focus on real post-edits. 
Because post-editing is subjective varying from individ-
ual to individual, we need to understand the post-editing 
behaviour of individuals to analyze the noisy post-edit data. 
Although we have data on forecaster variations in our post-
edit corpus, these variations have not been observed from 
different forecasters post-editing the same text. This we 
could have achieved by performing a pilot before the actual 
evaluation. For the pilot all the forecasters post-edit the 
same set of forecasts, thus revealing their individual prefer-
ences. Post-edit data from the pilot would have enabled us 
to factor out the effects of forecaster variation from the real 
evaluation data. As described above noise in the post-edit 
data can be reduced by using post-edit tools and by perform-
ing a pilot before the real evaluation. This means that post-
edit evaluations need preparation in the form of developing 
post-edit tools and carrying out pilot studies. This is another 
lesson we learnt from our current evaluation. 
Although analyzing the post-edit data was a major en-
deavour for us, the overall cost of post-edit evaluation was 
not much compared to the effort that would have been re-
quired to conduct end user experiments on 2728 texts.  Of 
course, this was only true because SUMTIME-MOUSAM 
texts were being post-edited in any case by Weathernews.  
The cost-effectiveness of post-edit evaluation is less clear if 
the evaluators must organize and pay for the post-editing, as 
Mitkov and An Ha [2003] did. In this context we should 
speculate that when more and more NLG systems are de-
ployed in the real world, post-editing will be accepted as a 
component in the process of automatic text generation much 
in the same way post-editing is now a part of MT. 
5 Conclusion 
Evaluation is a key aspect of NLG; we need to know how 
well theories and systems work.  We have used analysis of 
post-edits, a popular evaluation technique in machine trans-
lation, to evaluate SUMTIME-MOUSAM, an NLG system 
that generates marine weather forecasts.  We encountered 
some problems, such as the need to identify why post-edits 
were made which make post-edit data hard to discover spe-
cific clues for system improvement. However, post-edit 
evaluation can reveal problem areas in the system and also 
quantify system utility for real users. 
References 
[Bangalore et al, 2000] Srinivas Bangalore, Owen Ram-
bow, and Steve Whittaker. 2000. Evaluation metrics for 
generation. In Proc. of the First International Natural 
Language Generation Conference (INLG2000), Israel. 
[Hutchins and Somers, 1992] John Hutchins and Harold L. 
Somers, 1992. An Introduction to Machine Translation, 
Academic Press. 
[Lester and Porter, 1997] James Lester and Bruce Porter. 
1997. Developing and empirically evaluating robust 
explanation generators: The KNIGHT experiments. 
Computational Linguistics, 23-1:65-103. 
[Mellish and Dale, 1998] Chris Mellish and Robert Dale, 
1998. Evaluation in the context of natural language gen-
eration, Computer Speech and Language 12:349-373. 
[Mitkov and An Ha, 2003] Ruslan Mitkov and Le An Ha, 
2003. Computer-Aided Generation of Multiple-Choice 
Tests, In Proc. of the HLT-NAACL03 Workshop on 
Building Educational Applications Using NLP, Edmon-
ton, Canada, pp. 17-22. 
 [Reiter and Dale, 2000] Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale, 2000. 
Building Natural Language Generation Systems. Cam-
bridge University Press. 
[Reiter and Sripada, 2002] Ehud Reiter and Somayajulu G. 
Sripada, 2002. Human Variation and Lexical Choice. 
Computational Linguistics 28:545-553. 
[Reiter et al, 2003] Ehud Reiter, Somayajulu G. Sripada, 
and Roma Robertson, 2003. Acquiring Correct Knowl-
edge for Natural Language Generation. Journal of Artifi-
cial Intelligence Research, 18: 491-516, 2003. 
[Reiter and Sripada, 2003] Ehud Reiter and Somayajulu G. 
Sripada, 2003. Learning the Meaning and Usage of Time 
Phrases from a Parallel Text-Data Corpus. In Proc. of the 
HLT-NAACL03 Workshop on Learning Word Meaning 
from Non-Linguistic Data, pp 78-85. 
[Sripada et al, 2002] Somayajulu, G. Sripada, Ehud Reiter, 
Jim Hunter and Jin Yu. 2002 Segmenting Time Series 
for Weather Forecasting. In: Macintosh, A., Ellis, R. and 
Coenen, F. (ed) Proc. of ES2002, pp. 193-206. 
[Sripada et al, 2003] Somayajulu G. Sripada, Ehud Reiter, 
and Ian Davy, 2003. SUMTIME-MOUSAM: Configur-
able Marine Weather Forecast Generator. Expert Update, 
6(3):4-10. 
[Su et al, 1992] Keh-Yih Su, Ming-Wen Wu and Jing-Shin 
Chang, 1992, A new quantitative quality measure for 
machine translation systems. In Proceedings of 
COLING-92, Nantes, pp 433-439.  
[Wagner, 1998] Simone Wagner, 1998. Small Scale Evalua-
tion Methods In: Rita N?bel; Uta Seewald-Heeg (eds.): 
Evaluation of the Linguistic Performance of Machine 
Translation Systems. Proc. of the Workshop at the 
KONVENS-98. Bonn, pp 93-105. 
[Young, 1999] Michael Young, 1999. Using Grice?s maxim 
of quantity to select the content of plan description, Arti-
ficial Intelligence 115:215-256. 
