Text Mining - Next Steps for Drug Discovery 
 
William S Hayes, PhD, Discovery IS/IX, AstraZeneca R&D 
35 Gatehouse Dr, Waltham, MA, 02451 USA 
William.S.Hayes@astrazeneca.com 
 
The text mining community has shown significant impact for use of text mining in 
drug discovery and basic research.  So far, there have been a lot of point 
solutions that have solved a particular problem or augmented a valuable 
database.  The next step is integrating text mining as part of the entire literature 
analytic solution and delivering it effectively and comprehensively to support 
research in academia, biotechs and pharmaceuticals. 
 
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                      Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases, pg. 49.
                                                HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Biolink 2004,
Panel Discussion 
 
Publisher Perspective on Broad Full-text Literature Access for Text 
Mining in Academic and Corporate Endeavors 
 
Moderator: William Hayes, AstraZeneca R&D 
 
There is a great deal of interest in obtaining access to the vast stores of full-text literature held by 
the various publishers.  The need to balance a reduction of the restrictions on access with the 
protection of the revenue streams of the publishers is critical.  Without the publishers, the content 
would not be available and support for several scientific societies would also disappear.  On the 
other hand, the value of the literature holdings, while it appears to be quite high, is not currently 
adequately exploited.  Text mining and more effective information retrieval is necessary to take 
full advantage of the information captured by the millions of electronic journal articles currently 
available. 
 
The panel will discuss the issues involved in opening access to the literature holdings of the 
publishers to both academic and corporate entities; it will also initiate conversations on effective 
compromises. 
 
Sample Questions: 
 
1.  How does loosening access restrictions on the full-text content endanger the publishing 
revenue stream? 
 
2.  Why aren't the abstracting services sufficient to take advantage of the content? 
 
3.  In your opinion, does text mining extract all of the value from the content, obviating the need 
for the content thereafter? 
 
4.  Can text mining help market journal content? 
 
 
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                      Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases, pg. 52.
                                                HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Biolink 2004,
