Desparately Seeking Cebuano
Douglas W. Oard, David Doermann, Bonnie Dorr, Daqing He, Philip Resnik, and Amy Weinberg
UMIACS, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742
(oard,doermann,bonnie,resnik,weinberg)@umiacs.umd.edu
William Byrne, Sanjeev Khudanpur and David Yarowsky
CLSP, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 North Charles Street, Barton Hall, Baltimore, MD 21218
(byrne,khudanpur,yarowsky)@jhu.edu
Anton Leuski, Philipp Koehn and Kevin Knight
USC Information Sciences Institute, 4676 Admiralty Way, Marina Del Rey, CA 90292
(leuski,koehn,knight)@isi.edu
Abstract
This paper describes an effort to rapidly de-
velop language resources and component tech-
nology to support searching Cebuano news sto-
ries using English queries. Results from the
first 60 hours of the exercise are presented.
1 Introduction
The Los Angeles Times reported that at about 5:20 P.M.
on Tuesday March 4, 2003, a bomb concealed in a back-
pack exploded at the airport in Davao City, the second
largest city in the Philippines. At least 23 people were
reported dead, with more than 140 injured, and Pres-
ident Arroyo of the Philippines characterized the blast
as a terrorist act. With the 13 hour time difference, it
was then 4:20 A.M on the same date in Washington, DC.
Twenty-four hours later, at 4:13 A.M. on March 5, partic-
ipants in the Translingual Information Detection, Extrac-
tion and Summarization (TIDES) program were notified
that Cebuano had been chosen as the language of interest
for a ?surprise language? practice exercise that had been
planned quite independently to begin on that date. The
notification observed that Cebuano is spoken by 24% of
the population of the Philippines, and that it is the lingua
franca in the south Philippines, where the event occurred.
One goal of the TIDES program is to develop the abil-
ity to rapidly deploy a broad array of language technolo-
gies for previously unforeseen languages in response to
unexpected events. That capability will be formally ex-
ercised for the first time during June 2003, in a month-
long ?Surprise Language Experiment.? To prepare for
that event, the Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC) orga-
nized a ?dry run? for March 5-14 in order to refine pro-
cedures for rapidly developing language resources of the
type that the TIDES community will need during the July
evaluation.
Development of interactive Cross-Language Informa-
tion Retrieval (CLIR) systems that can be rapidly adapted
to accommodate new languages has been the focus of
extensive collaboration between the University of Mary-
land and The Johns Hopkins University, and more re-
cently with the University of Southern California. The
capability for rapid development of necessary language
resources is an essential part of that process, so we had
been planning to participate in the surprise language dry
run to refine our procedures for sharing those resources
with other members of the TIDES community. Naturally,
we chose CLIR as a driving application to focus our ef-
fort. Our goal, therefore, was to build an interactive sys-
tem that would allow a searcher posing English queries
to find relevant Cebuano news articles from the period
immediately following the bombing.
2 Obtaining Language Resources
Our basic approach to development of an agile system for
interactive CLIR relies on three strategies: (1) create an
infrastructure in advance for English as a query language
that makes only minimal assumptions about the docu-
ment language; (2) leverage the asymmetry inherent in
the problem by assembling strong resources for English
in advance; and (3) develop a robust suite of capabilities
to exploit any language resources that can be found for
the ?surprise language.? We defer the first two topics to
the next section, and focus here on the third. We know of
five possible sources of translation expertise:
People. People who know the language are an excellent
source of insight, and universities are an excellent
place to find such people. We were able to locate
a speaker of Cebuano within 50 feet of one of our
offices, and to schedule an interview with a second
Cebuano speaker within 36 hours of the announce-
ment of the language.
Scholarly literature. Major research universities are
also an excellent place to find written materials de-
scribing a broad array of languages. Within 12 hours
of the announcement, reference librarians at the Uni-
versity of Maryland had identified a textbook on
?Beginning Cebuano,? and we had located a copy
at the University of Southern California. Together
with the excellent electronic resources located by the
LDC, this allowed us to develop a rudimentary stem-
mer within 36 hours.
Translation lexicons. Simple bilingual term lists are
available for many language pairs. Using links pro-
vided by the LDC and our own Web searches, we
were able to construct an English-Cebuano term list
with over 14,000 translation pairs within 12 hours of
the announcement. This largely duplicated a simul-
taneous effort at the LDC, and we later merged our
term list with theirs.
Parallel text. Translation-equivalent documents, when
aligned at the word level, provide an excellent
source of information about not just possible trans-
lations, but their relative predominance. Within 24
hours of the announcement, we had aligned Ce-
buano and English versions of the Holy Bible at
the word level using Giza++. An evaluation by a
native Cebuano speaker of a stratified random sam-
ple of 88 translation pairs showed remarkably high
precision. On a 4-point scale with 1=correct and
4=incorrect the most frequent 100 words averaged
1.3, the next 400 most frequent terms averaged 1.6,
and the 500 next most frequent terms after that aver-
aged 1.7. The Bible?s vocabulary covers only about
half of the words found in typical English news text
(counted by-token), so it is useful to have additional
sources of parallel text. For this reason, we have ex-
tended our previously developed STRAND system
to locate likely translations in the Internet Archive.
Those runs were not yet complete when this paper
was submitted.
Printed Dictionaries. People learning a new language
make extensive use of bilingual dictionaries, so we
have developed a system that mimics that process
to some extent. Within 12 hours of the announce-
ment we had zoned page images from a Cebuano-
English dictionary that was available commercially
in Adobe Page Description Format (PDF) to iden-
tify each dictionary entry, performed optical charac-
ter recognition, and parsed the entries to construct a
bilingual term list. We were aided in this process by
the fact that Cebuano is written in a Roman script.
Again, we achieved good precision, with a sampled
word error rate for OCR of 6.9% and a precision for
a random sample of translation pairs of 87%. Part of
speech tags were also extracted, although they are
not used in our process.
As this description illustrates, these five sources pro-
vide complementary information. Since there is some
uncertainty at the outset about how long it will be before
each delivers useful results, we chose a strategy based
on concurrency, balancing our investment over each the
five sources. This allowed us to use whatever resources
became available first to get an initial system running,
with refinements subsequently being made as additional
resources became available. Because Cebuano and En-
glish are written in the same script, we did not need char-
acter set conversion or phonetic cognate matching in this
case. The CLIR system described in the next section
was therefore constructed using only English resources
that were (or could have been) pre-assembled, plus a
Cebuano-English bilingual term list, a rule-based stem-
mer, and the Cebuano Bible.
3 Building a Cross-Language Retrieval
System
Ideally, we would like to build a system that would find
whatever documents the searcher would wish to read in a
fully automatic mode. In practice, fully automatic search
systems are imperfect even in monolingual applications.
We therefore have developed an interactive approach that
functions something like a typical Web search engine: (1)
the searcher poses their query in English, (2) the sys-
tem ranks the Cebuano documents in decreasing order
of likely relevance to the query, (3) the searcher exam-
ines a list of document titles in something approximat-
ing English, and (4) the searcher may optionally exam-
ine the full text of any document in something approx-
imating English. The intent is to support an iterative
process in which searchers learn to better express their
query through experience. We are only able to provide
very rough translations, so we expect that such a sys-
tem would be used in an environment where searchers
could send documents that appear promising off for pro-
fessional translation when necessary.
At the core of our system is the capability to au-
tomatically rank Cebuano documents based on an En-
glish query. We chose a query translation architecture
using backoff translation and Pirkola?s structured query
method, implemented using Inquery version 3.1p1. The
key idea in backoff translation is to first try to find con-
secutive sequences of query words on the English side
of the bilingual term list, where that fails to try to find
the surface form of each remaining English term, to fall
back to stem matching when necessary, and ultimately to
fall back to retaining the English term unchanged in the
hope that it might be a proper name or some other form
of cognate with Cebuano. Accents are stripped from the
documents and all language resources to facilitate match-
ing at that final step.
Although we have chosen techniques that are relatively
robust and therefore require relatively little domain-
specific tuning, stemmer design is an area of uncertainty
that could adversely affect retrieval effectiveness. We
therefore needed a test collection on which we could try
out variants of the Cebuano stemmer. We built this test
collection using 34,000 Cebuano Bible verses and 50 En-
glish questions that we found on the Web for which ap-
propriate Bible verses were known. Each question was
posed as a query using the batch mode of Inquery, and
the rank of the known relevant verse was taken as a mea-
sure of effectiveness. We took the mean reciprocal rank
(the inverse of the harmonic mean) as a figure of merit
for each configuration, and used a paired two-tailed   -
test (with p  0.05) to assess the statistical significance of
observed differences. Our initial configuration, without
stemming, obtained a mean inverse rank of 0.14, which
is a statistically significant improvement over no transla-
tion at all (mean inverse rank 0.02 from felicitous cognate
and loan word matches). The addition of Cebuano stem-
ming resulted in a reduction in mean inverse rank to 0.09.
Although the reduction is not statistically significant in
that case, the result suggests that our initial stemmer is
not yet useful for information retrieval tasks.
The other key capability that is needed is title and doc-
ument translation. We can accomplish this in one of two
ways. The simplest approach is to reverse the bilingual
term list, and to reverse the role of Cebuano and En-
glish in the process described above for query transla-
tion. Our user interface is capable of displaying multi-
ple translations for a single term (arranged horizontally
for compact depiction or vertically for clearer depiction),
but searchers can choose to display only the single most
likely translation. When reliable translation probability
statistics (from parallel text) are not available, we use the
relative word unigram frequency of each translation of a
Cebuano term in a representative English collection as a
substitute for that probability. A more sophisticated way
is to build a statistical machine translation system using
parallel text. We built our first statistical machine trans-
lation system within 40 hours of the announcement, and
one sentence of the resulting translation using each tech-
nique is shown below:
Cebuano: ?ang rebeldeng milf, kinsa
lakip sa nangamatay, nagdala og
backpack nga dunay explosives nga
niguba sa waiting lounge sa airport,
matod sa mga defense official.?
Term-by-term translation:
?(carelessness, circumference,
conveyence) rebeldeng milf, who lakip
(at in of) nangamatay, nagdala og
backpack nga valid explosives nga
niguba (at, in of) waiting lounge
(at, in, of) airport, matod (at, in,
of) mga defense official?
Statistical translation: ?who was
accused of rank, ehud og niguba
waiting lounge defense of those dumah
milf rebeldeng explosives backpack
airport matod official.?
At this point, term-by-term translation is clearly the bet-
ter choice. But as more parallel text becomes available,
we expect the situation to reverse. The LDC is prepar-
ing a set of human reference translations that will allow
us to detect that changeover point automatically using the
NIST variant of the BLEU measure for machine transla-
tion effectiveness.
4 Conclusion
The results reported in this paper were accomplished by
a team of 20 people with expertise in various facets of te
task that invested about 250 person-hours over two and
a half days. As additional Cebuano-specific evaluation
resources are developed, we expect to gain additional in-
sight into the quality of these early resources. Moreover,
once we see what works best for Cebuano by the end of
the process, we plan to revisit our process design with
an eye towards better optimizing our initial time invest-
ments. We expect to be able to address both of those
points in detail by the time of the conference.
This exercise was originally envisioned as a dry run to
work out the kinks in our process, and indeed we have
already learned a lot on that score. First, we learned that
our basic approach seems sound; we built the key com-
ponents of an interactive CLIR system in about 40 hours,
and by the 60-hour point we had some basis for believing
that each of those components could at least minimally
fulfill their role in a fully integrated system. Some of our
time was, however, spent on things that could have been
done in advance. Perhaps the most important of these
was the development of an information retrieval test col-
lection using the Bible. That job, and numerous smaller
ones, are now done, so we expect that we will be able to
obtain similar results with about half the effort next time
around.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Clara Cabezas, Tim Hackman, Margie Hi-
nonangan, Burcu Karagol-Ayan, Okan Kolak, Huanfeng
Ma, Grazia Russo-Lassner, Michael Subotin, Jianqiang
Wang and the LDC! This work has been supported in part
by DARPA contract N660010028910.
