Robust Sub-Sentential Alignment of Phrase-Structure Trees
Declan Groves
School of Computing
Dublin City University
Dublin 9, Ireland
dgroves@computing.dcu.ie
Mary Hearne
School of Computing
Dublin City University
Dublin 9, Ireland
mhearne@computing.dcu.ie
Andy Way
School of Computing
Dublin City University
Dublin 9, Ireland
away@computing.dcu.ie
Abstract
Data-Oriented Translation (DOT), based on Data-
Oriented Parsing (DOP), is a language-independent
MT engine which exploits parsed, aligned bitexts
to produce very high quality translations. How-
ever, data acquisition constitutes a serious bottleneck
as DOT requires parsed sentences aligned at both
sentential and sub-structural levels. Manual sub-
structural alignment is time-consuming, error-prone
and requires considerable knowledge of both source
and target languages and how they are related. Au-
tomating this process is essential in order to carry out
the large-scale translation experiments necessary to
assess the full potential of DOT.
We present a novel algorithm which automatically in-
duces sub-structural alignments between context-free
phrase structure trees in a fast and consistent fash-
ion requiring little or no knowledge of the language
pair. We present results from a number of experi-
ments which indicate that our method provides a se-
rious alternative to manual alignment.
1 Introduction
Approaches to Machine Translation (MT) using
Data-Oriented Parsing (DOP: (Bod, 1998; Bod et
al., 2003)) require ?source,target? tree fragments
aligned at sentential and sub-sentential levels. In
previous approaches to Data-Oriented Translation
(DOT: (Poutsma, 2000; Hearne and Way, 2003)),
such fragments were produced manually. This is
time-consuming, error-prone, and requires consid-
erable expertise of both source and target languages
as well as how they are related. The obvious solu-
tion, therefore, is to automate the process of sub-
sentential alignment. However, while there are
many approaches to sentential alignment e.g. (Kay
and Ro?scheisen, 1993; Gale & Church, 1993), no
methods exist for aligning non-isomorphic phrase-
structure (PS) tree fragments at sub-sentential level
for use in MT. (Matsumoto et al, 1993) align
?source,target? dependency trees, with a view to re-
solve parsing ambiguities, but their approach can-
not deal with complex or compound sentences.
Other researchers (Imamura, 2001) also use phrase-
alignment in parsing but in DOT the translation
fragments are already in the form of parse-trees.
(Eisner, 2003) outlines a computationally expensive
structural manipulation tool which he has used for
intra-lingual translation but has yet to apply to inter-
lingual translation. (Gildea, 2003) performs tree-to-
tree alignment, but treats it as part of a generative
statistical translation model, rather than a seperate
task. The method of (Ding et al, 2003) can cope
with a limited amount of non-isomorphism, but the
algorithm is only suitable for use with dependency
trees.
We develop a novel algorithm which automati-
cally aligns translationally equivalent tree fragments
in a fast and consistent fashion, and which requires
little or no knowledge of the language pair. Our ap-
proach is similar to that of (Menezes and Richard-
son, 2003), who use a best-first approach to align
dependency-type tree structures.
We conduct a number of experiments on the
English-French section of the Xerox HomeCentre
corpus. Using the manual alignment of (Hearne
and Way, 2003) as a ?gold standard?, we show that
our algorithm identifies sub-structural translational
equivalences with 73.7% precision and 67.84% re-
call. Furthermore, we replicate previous DOT ex-
periments performed using manually aligned data.
However, we use data aligned by our novel al-
gorithm and evaluate the output translations. We
demonstrate that while coverage decreases by 10%,
the translations output are of comparable quality.
These results indicate that our automatic alignment
algorithm provides a serious alternative to manual
alignment.
The remainder of this paper is organised as fol-
lows: in section 2, we discuss related research in
more detail, while in section 3, we provide an over-
iew of DOT. We present our algorithm in section 4,
and in section 5 describe the experiments conducted
together with the results obtained. Finally, we con-
clude and provide avenues for further research.
2 Related Research
Several approaches to sub-structural alignment of
tree representations have been proposed.
(Matsumoto et al, 1993) and (Imamura, 2001)
focus on using alignments to help resolve pars-
ing ambiguities. As we wish to develop an align-
ment process for use in MT rather than parsing, this
makes their approaches unsuitable for our use.
(Eisner, 2003) presents a tree-mapping method
for use on dependency trees which he claims can be
adapted for use with PS trees. He uses dynamic pro-
gramming to break tree pairs into pairs of aligned
elementary trees, similar to DOT. However, he aims
to estimate a translation model from unaligned data,
whereas we wish to align our data off-line. Cur-
rently, he has used his algorithm to perform intra-
lingual translation but has yet to develop and apply
real models to inter-lingual MT.
(Gildea, 2003) outlines an algorithm for use in
syntax-based statistical models of MT, applying a
statistical TSG with probabilities parameterized to
generate the target tree conditioned on the structure
of the source tree. His approach is unsuitable for
DOT as it involves altering the shape of trees in or-
der to impose isomorphism and the algorithm does
not always generate a complete target tree structure.
However, unlike (Gildea, 2003), we treat the prob-
lem of alignment as a seperate task rather than as
part of a generative translation model.
(Ding et al, 2003) and (Menezes and Richard-
son, 2003) also present approaches to the alignment
of tree structures. Both deal with dependency struc-
tures rather than PS trees. (Ding et al, 2003) out-
line an algorithm to extract word-level alignments
using structural information taken from parallel de-
pendency trees. They fix the nodes of tree pairs
based on word alignments deduced statistically and
then proceed by partitioning the tree into treelet
pairs with the fixed nodes as their roots. Their al-
gorithm relies on the fact that, in dependency trees,
subtrees are headed by words rather than syntactic
labels, making it unsuitable for our use.
(Menezes and Richardson, 2003) employ a best-
first strategy and use a small alignment grammar
to extract transfer mappings from bilingual corpora
for use in translation. They use a bilingual dictio-
nary and statistical techniques to supply translation
pair candidates and to identify multi-word terms.
Lexical correspondences are established using the
lexicon of 98,000 translation pairs and a deriva-
tional morphology component to match other lexi-
cal items. Nodes are then aligned using these lexical
correspondences along with structural information.
Our algorithm uses a similar methodology. How-
ever, (Menezes and Richardson, 2003) use logical
forms, which constitute a variation of dependency
trees that normalize both the lexical and syntactic
form of examples, whereas we align PS trees.
Although the methods outlined above have
achieved promising results, only the approach of
(Menezes and Richardson, 2003) seems relevant
to our goal, even though they deal with abstract
dependency-type structures rather than PS trees.
3 Data-Oriented Translation
Data-Oriented Translation (DOT) (Poutsma, 2000;
Hearne and Way, 2003), which is based on Data-
Oriented Parsing (DOP) (Bod, 1998; Bod et al,
2003), comprises a context-rich, experience-based
approach to translation, where new translations
are derived with reference to grammatical analy-
ses of previous translations. DOT exploits bilin-
gual treebanks comprising linguistic representations
of previously seen translation pairs, as well as ex-
plicit links which map the translational equivalences
present within these pairs at sub-sentential level ?
an example of such a linked translation pair can be
seen in Figure 1(a). Analyses and translations of
the input are produced simultaneously by combin-
ing source and target language fragment pairs de-
rived from the treebank trees.
3.1 Fragmentation
The tree fragment pairs used in Tree-DOT are
called subtree pairs and are extracted from bilingual
aligned treebank trees. The two decomposition op-
erators, which are similar to those used in Tree-DOP
but are refined to take the translational links into ac-
count, are as follows:
? the root operator which takes any pair of linked
nodes in a tree pair to be the roots of a subtree pair
and deletes all nodes except these new roots and all
nodes dominated by them;
? the frontier operator which selects a (possibly
empty) set of linked node pairs in the newly cre-
ated subtree pairs, excluding the roots, and deletes
all subtree pairs dominated by these nodes.
Allowing the root operator to select the root nodes
of the original treebank tree pair and then the fron-
tier operator to select an empty set of node pairs
ensures that the original treebank tree pair is al-
ways included in the fragment base ? in Figure 1,
fragment (a) exactly matches the original treebank
tree pair from which fragments (a) ? (f) were de-
rived. Fragments (b) and (f) were also derived by
allowing the frontier operator to select the empty
set; the root operation selected node pairs <A,N>
and <NPadj,NPdet> respectively. Fragments (c),
(d) and (e) were derived by selecting all further pos-
sible combinations of node pairs by root and fron-
tier.
(a) (b)
VPv
V NPadj
clearing A N
paper jams
NPpp
N PP
resolution P NPdet
de D NPap
les N N
incidents papier
A
paper
N
papier
(c) (d)
VPv
V NPadj
clearing A N
jams
NPpp
N PP
resolution P NPdet
de D NPap
les N N
incidents
NPadj
A N
jams
NPdet
D NPap
les N N
incidents
(e) (f)
VPv
V NPadj
clearing
NPpp
N PP
resolution P NPdet
de
NPadj
A N
paper jams
NPdet
D NPap
les N N
incidents papier
Figure 1: DOT fragments generated via root and frontier
3.2 Translation
The DOT composition operator is defined as fol-
lows. The composition of tree pairs <s1,t1> and
<s2,t2> (<s1,t1> ? <s2,t2>) is only possible if
? the leftmost non-terminal frontier node of s1 is of
the same syntactic category (e.g. S, NP, VP) as the
root node of s2, and
? the leftmost non-terminal frontier node of s1?s
linked counterpart in t1 is of the same syntactic cat-
egory as the root node of t2.
The resulting tree pair consists of a copy of s1 where
s2 has been inserted at the leftmost frontier node and
a copy of t1 where t2 has been inserted at the node
linked to s1?s leftmost frontier node, as illustrated in
Figure 2.
The DOT probability of a translation derivation is
the joint probability of choosing each of the subtree
pairs involved in that derivation. The probability of
selecting a subtree pair is its number of occurrences
in the corpus divided by the number of pairs in the
corpus with the same root nodes as it:
P (< es, et >) =
|<es,et>|
?
<us,ut>:r(<us,ut>)=r(<es,et>) |<us,ut>|
The probability of a derivation in DOT is the prod-
uct of the probabilities of the subtree pairs involved
ROOT
VPv PERIOD
V N .
click
LISTITEM
VPverb PERIOD
V PP .
cliquez P N
sur
?
N
Save
N
Enregistrer
=
ROOT
VPv PERIOD
V N .
click Save
LISTITEM
VPverb PERIOD
V PP .
cliquez P N
sur Enregistrer
Figure 2: The DOT composition operation
in building that derivation. Thus, the probability of
derivation <s1,t1> ? ... ? <sn,tn> is given by
P (< s1, t1 > ?...? < sn, tn >) =
?
i
P (< si, ti >)
Again, a translation can be generated by many dif-
ferent derivations, so the probability of a transla-
tion ws ??wt is the sum of the probabilities of its
derivations:
P (< ws, wt >) =
?
<tsi ,tti> yields <ws,wt>
P (< tsi , tti >)
Selection of the most probable translation via Monte
Carlo sampling involves taking a random sample of
derivations and outputting the most frequently oc-
curring translation in the sample.
4 Our Algorithm
The operation of a DOT system is dependent on the
availability of bilingual treebanks aligned at senten-
tial and sub-sentential level. Our novel algorithm
attempts to fully automate sub-sentential alignment
using an approach inspired by that of (Menezes and
Richardson, 2003). The algorithm takes as input a
pair of ?source,target? PS trees and outputs a map-
ping between the nodes of the tree pair.
As with the majority of previous approaches, the
algorithm starts by finding lexical correspondences
between the source and target trees. Our lexicon
is built automatically using a previously developed
word aligner based on the k-vec aligner as outlined
by (Fung & Church, 1994). This lexical aligner uses
a combination of automatically extracted cognate
information, mutual information and probabilistic
measures to obtain one-to-one lexical correspon-
dences between the source and target strings. Dur-
ing lexical alignment, function words are excluded
because, as they are the most common words in a
language, they tend to co-occur frequently with the
content words they precede. This can lead to the
incorrect alignment of content words with function
words.
The algorithm then proceeds from the aligned
lexical terminal nodes in a bottom-up fashion, us-
ing a mixture of node label matching and structural
information to perform language-independent link-
ing between all ?source,target? node pairs within the
trees. As with (Menezes and Richardson, 2003),
it uses a best-first approach. After each step, new
linked node pairs are added to the current list of
linked nodes. The links made between the nodes
are fixed, thus restricting the freedom of alignment
for the remaining unaligned nodes in the tree pair.
The methods of the algorithm are applied to each
new linked node pair in turn until no new node pairs
can be added. The algorithm consists of five main
methods which are performed on each linked node
pair in the list:
Verb + Object Align (Figure 3): We have a linked source-
target node pair ?s,t?. s and t are both verbs, are the
leftmost children in their respective trees, both have VP
parent nodes and they have the same number of siblings
which have similar syntactic labels. We align the corre-
sponding siblings of s and t. This aligns the objects of
the source verb with the equivalent objects of the target
verb. We also align the parents of s and t.
S
PRON VPaux
you MODAL VPv
can V NPadj
scan A N
entire pages
S[dec]
PRON VPverb
vous MODAL VPverb[main]
pouvez V NPdet
nume?riser D NPap
des N A
pages entie`res
Figure 3: Verb + Object Align: the dashed lines represent
the links made by Verb + Object Align when the current linked
node pair is ?MODAL,MODAL?.
Parent Align (Figure 4): We have a current linked source-
target node pair ?s,t? with unlinked parents pars and part
respectively. All the sister nodes of s are aligned with
sister nodes of t. We link pars and part. If s and t each
have one unlinked sister, but the remaining sisters of s are
aligned with sister nodes of t, link the unlinked sisters and
link pars with part.
NP/VP Align (Figure 5): We have a linked source-target
node pair ?s,t? and s and t are both nouns. Traverse up
the source tree to find the topmost NP node nps dominat-
ing s and traverse up the target tree to find the topmost
Nmod
A NP
color print head
NPap
NP N
te?te d?impression couleur
Figure 4: Parent Align: The dashed lines are the links made
by Parent Align, when ?color,couleur? is the current linked node
pair.
target NP node npt dominating t. We link nps and npt.
We then traverse down from nps and npt to the leftmost
leaf nodes ( ls and lt) in the source and target subtrees
rooted at nps and npt. If ls and lt have similar labels,
we link them. This helps to preserve the scope of noun-
phrase modifiers. If s and t are both verbs, we perform a
similar method, this time linking the topmost VP nodes
in the source and target trees.
NP
D NPadj
a A N
pending document
NPdet
D NPpp
un N PP
document P NPpp
en N PP
attenteP N
de impression
Figure 5: NP Align: the dashed lines represent the links made
by NP Align when the current linked node pair is ?N,N?.
Child Align (Figure 6): This method is similar to that of Par-
ent Align. We have a current linked source-target node
pair ?s,t?. Each node has the same number of children
and these children have similar node labels. We link their
corresponding children.
S
NP VPcop
PRON N Vcop NP
is PRON NPadj
your imagination your A N
only limitation
S
NPdet VPcop
D N Vcop NPdet
est D NPap
votre imagination votre A N
seule limite
Figure 6: Child Align: the dashed lines represent the links
made by Child Align when the current linked node pair is ?S,S?.
Subtree Align: We have a linked source-target node pair ?s,t?.
If the subtrees rooted at s and at t are fully isomorphic, we
link the corresponding nodes within the subtrees. This
accounts for the fact that trees may not be completely
isomorphic from their roots but may be isomorphic at
subtree level.1
1Originally we used a method isomophic which checked for
Once lexical correspondences have been estab-
lished, the methods outlined above use structural in-
formation to align the ?source,target? nodes. The
comparison of ?source,target? node labels during
alignment ensures that sub-structures with corre-
sponding syntactic categories are aligned. If the
algorithm fails to find any alignments between the
source and target tree pairs, due to the absence
of initial lexical correspondences, we align the
?source,target? root nodes.
5 Experiments and results
Previous DOT experiments (Hearne and Way, 2003)
were carried out on a subset of the HomeCentre
corpus consisting of 605 English-French sentence
pairs from Xerox documentation parsed into LFG
c(onstituent)- and f(unctional)-structure representa-
tions and aligned at sentence level. This bilingual
treebank constitutes a linguistically complex frag-
ment base containing many ?hard? translation ex-
amples, including cases of nominalisations, pas-
sivisation, complex coordination and combinations
thereof. Accordingly, the corpus would appear to
present a challenge to any MT system.
The insertion of the links denoting translational
equivalence for the set of tree pairs used in the pre-
vious experiments was performed manually. We
have applied our automatic sub-structural alignment
algorithm to this same set of 605 tree pairs and
evaluated performance using two distinct methods.
Firstly, we used the manual alignments as a ?gold
standard? against which we evaluated the output of
the alignment algorithm in terms of precision, recall
and f-score. The results of this evaluation are pre-
sented in Section 5.1. Secondly, we repeated the
DOT experiments described in (Hearne and Way,
2003) using the automatically generated alignments
in place of those determined manually. We evalu-
ated the output translations in terms of IBM Bleu
scores, precision, recall and f-score and present
these results in Section 5.2.
5.1 Evaluation of alignment quality
Using the manually aligned tree pairs as a ?gold
standard?, we evaluated the performance of each
of the five methods which constitute the alignment
algorithm both individually and in combination.
These evaluations are summarised in Figures 7 and
8 respectively.
The alignment process is always initialised by
finding word correspondences between the source
isomorphism from the roots downwards, assuming a root-root
correspondence. However, this significantly decreased the per-
formance of the aligner.
PRECISION RECALL F-SCORE
Lex 0.6800 0.3057 0.4212
Par 0.7471 0.4983 0.5978
NP/VP 0.7206 0.4879 0.5819
Child 0.7045 0.3856 0.4984
Verb + Object 0.6843 0.3191 0.4352
Figure 7: Individual evaluation of alignment methods
PRECISION RECALL F-SCORE
Par + Child 0.7525 0.5588 0.6414
Par + NP/VP 0.7373 0.6106 0.6680
Par + Child + NP/VP 0.7411 0.6587 0.6974
All 0.7430 0.6686 0.7039
All + Subtree 0.7370 0.6784 0.7064
Figure 8: Evaluation of combined alignment methods
and target trees, meaning that lexical alignment is
carried out regardless of which other method or
combination of methods is included. The low rate of
recall achieved by the lexical alignment process of
0.3057, shown in Figure 7, can be largely attributed
to the fact that it does not align function words. We
achieve high precision relative to recall ? as is gen-
erally preferred for automatic procedures ? indicat-
ing that the alignments induced are more likely to
be ?partial? than incorrect.
When evaluated individually, the Parent Align
method performs best, achieving an f-score of
0.5978. Overall, the highest f-score of 0.7064 is
achieved by using all methods, including the addi-
tional subtree method, in combination.
5.2 Evaluation of translation quality
In order to evaluate the impact of using automat-
ically generated alignments on translation quality,
we repeated the DOT experiments described in
(Hearne and Way, 2003) using these alignments in
place of manually determined translational equiva-
lences.
In order to ensure that differences in the results
achieved could be attributed solely to the differ-
ent sub-structural alignments imposed, we used pre-
cisely the same 8 training/test set splits as before,
where each training set contained 545 parsed sen-
tence pairs, each test set 60 sentences, and all words
occurring in the source side of the test set alo oc-
curred in the source side of the training set (but not
necessarily with the same lexical category). As be-
fore, all translations carried out were from English
into French and the number of samples taken during
the disambiguation process was limited to 5000.
Due to constraints on time and memory, data-
oriented language processing applications gener-
ally limit the size of the fragment base by exclud-
Bleu/Auto Bleu/Man F-Score/Aut. F-Score/Man
LD1 0.0605 0.2627 0.3558 0.5506
LD2 0.1902 0.3018 0.4867 0.5870
LD3 0.1983 0.3235 0.4957 0.6045
LD4 0.214 0.3235 0.5042 0.6069
Figure 9: Evaluation over all translations
ing larger fragments. In these experiments, we in-
creased the size of the fragment base incrementally
by initially allowing only fragments of link depth
(LD) 1 and then including those of LD 2, 3 and 4. 2
We evaluated the output translations in terms of
IBM Bleu scores using the NIST MT Evaluation
Toolkit3 and in terms of precision, recall and f-score
using the NYU General Text Matcher.4 We sum-
marise our results and reproduce and extend those
of (Hearne and Way, 2003)5 in Figures 9, 10 and
11.
Results over the full set of output translations,
summarised in Figure 9, show that using the man-
ually linked fragment base results in significantly
better overall performance at all link depths (LD1
- LD4) than using the automatic alignments. How-
ever, both metrics used assign score 0 in all in-
stances where no translation was output by the sys-
tem. The comparatively poor scores achieved us-
ing the automatically induced alignments reflect the
fact that these alignments give poorer coverage at all
depths than those determined manually (47.71% vs.
66.46% at depth 1, 56.39% vs. 67.92% at depths 2
- 4).
The results in Figure 10 include scores only
where a translation was produced. Here, transla-
tions produced using manual alignments score bet-
ter only at LD 1; better performance is achieved at
LD 2 - 4 using the automatically linked fragment
base. Again, this may ? at least in part ? be an issue
of coverage: many of the sentences for which only
the manually aligned fragment base produces trans-
lations are translationally complex and, therefore,
more likely to be only partially correct and achieve
poor scores.
Finally, we determined the subset of sentences
for which translations were produced both when
the manually aligned fragment bases were used and
2The link depth of a fragment pair is defined as greatest
number of steps taken which depart from a linked node to get
from the root node to any frontier nodes (Hearne and Way,
2003).
3http://www.nist.gov/speech/tests/mt/mt2001/resource/
4http://nlp.cs.nyu.edu/GTM/
5The Bleu scores shown here differ from those published in
(Hearne and Way, 2003) as a result of recent modifications to
the NIST MT Evaluation Kit.
Bleu/Auto Bleu/Man F-Score/Auto F-Score/Man
LD1 0.6118 0.6591 0.7900 0.8090
LD2 0.7519 0.7144 0.8751 0.8446
LD3 0.7790 0.7610 0.8887 0.8688
LD4 0.7940 0.7611 0.8930 0.8736
Figure 10: Evaluation over translations produced
Bleu/Auto Bleu/Man F-Score/Auto F-Score/Man
LD1 0.5945 0.6363 0.7918 0.7989
LD2 0.7293 0.7382 0.8823 0.8629
LD3 0.7700 0.7930 0.8938 0.8913
LD4 0.7815 0.7940 0.8964 0.8933
Figure 11: Evaluation of sentences translated by both
alignment methods
when the automatically linked ones were used. Fig-
ure 11 summarises the results achieved when eval-
uating only these translations. In terms of Bleu
scores, translations produced using manual align-
ments score slightly better at all depths. However,
as link depth increases the gap narrows consistently
and at depth 4 the difference in scores is reduced
to just 0.0125. In terms of f-scores, the translations
produced using automatic alignments actually score
better than those produced using manual alignments
at depths 2 - 4.
5.3 Discussion
Our first evaluation method (Section 5.1) is, per-
haps, the obvious one to use when evaluating align-
ment performance. However, the results of this
evaluation, which show best f-scores of 70%, pro-
vide no insight into the effect using these align-
ments has on translation accuracy. Evaluating these
alignments in context ? by using them in the DOT
system for which they were intended ? gives us a
true picture of their worth. Crucially, in Section 5.2
we showed that using automatic rather than manual
alignments results in translations of extremely high
quality, comparable to those produced using manual
alignments.
In many cases, translations produced using au-
tomatic alignments contain fewer errors involving
local syntactic phenomena than those produced us-
ing manual alignment. This suggests that, as links
between function words are infrequent in the au-
tomatic alignments, we achieve better modelling
of phenomena such as determiner-noun agreement
because the determiner fragments do not gener-
ally occur without context. For example, there are
relatively few instances of ?D?the? aligned with
?D?le/la/l?/les? in the automatic alignment com-
pared to the manual alignment.
On the other hand, we achieve 10% less coverage
when translating using the automatic alignments.
The automatic alignments are less likely to identify
non-local phenomena such as long-distance depen-
dencies. Consequently, the sentences only trans-
lated when using manual alignments are generally
longer and more complex than those translated by
both. While a degree of trade-off between coverage
and accuracy is to be expected, we would like to
increase coverage while maintaining or improving
translation quality. Improvements to lexical align-
ment should prove valuable in this regard. While
we expect translation quality to improve as depth
increases, experiments using the automatical align-
ment show disproportionately poor performance at
depth 1. The majority of links in the depth 1 frag-
ment base are inserted using the lexical aligner, in-
dicating that these are less than satisfactory. We ex-
pect improvements to the lexical aligner to signifi-
cantly improve the overall performance of the align-
ment algorithm and, consequently, the quality of the
translations produced. Lexical alignment is crucial
in identifying complex phenomena such as long dis-
tance dependencies. Using machine-readable bilin-
gual dictionaries or, alternatively, manually estab-
lished word-alignments to intiate the automatic sub-
structural alignment algorithm may provide more
accurate results.
6 Conclusions and future work
We have presented an automatic algorithm which
aligns bilingual context-free phrase-structure trees
at sub-structural level and applied this algorithm to
a subset of the English-French section of the Home-
Centre corpus. We have outlined detailed eval-
uations of our algorithm. They show that while
translation coverage was 10% lower using the au-
tomatically aligned data, the quality of the trans-
lations produced is comparable to the quality of
those produced using manual alignments. While
DOT systems produce very high quality transla-
tions in reasonable time, resource acquisition re-
mains an issue. Manual sub-structural alignment is
time-consuming, error-prone and requires consider-
able linguistic expertise. Our alignment method, on
the other hand, is efficient, consistent and language-
independent, constituting a viable alternative to
manual sub-structural alignment; thus solving the
data acquisition problem.
We intend to apply our automatic alignment
methodology to the full English-French section of
the HomeCentre corpus, as well as the English-
German and French-German sections, and perform
experiments to further validate the the language-
independent nature of both our alignment algorithm
and the data-oriented approach to translation. We
also plan to automatically parse existing bitexts,
thus creating further resources for use with our
DOT system and, together with our aligner, en-
abling much larger-scale DOT-based translation ex-
periments than have been performed to date.
7 Aknowledgements
The work presented in this paper is partly supported
by an IRCSET 6 PhD Fellowship Award.
References
Rens Bod. 1998. Beyond Grammar: An Experience-
Based Theory of Language. CSLI, Stanford, CA.
Rens Bod, Remko Scha and Khalil Sima?an. (eds.) 2003.
Data-Oriented Parsing. CSLI, Stanford CA.
Yuan Ding, Dan Gildea and Martha Palmer. 2003. An
Algorithm for Word-Level Alignment of Parallel De-
pendency Trees. MT Summit IX. New Orleans, LO.,
pp.95?101.
Jason Eisner. 2003. Learning Non-Isomorphic Tree
Mappings for Machine Translation. In Proceedings of
the 41st COLING, Sapporo, Japan.
Pascale Fung & Ken W. Church. 1994. K-vec: A New
Approach for Aligning Parallel Texts. In Proceedings
of COLING 94, Kyoto, Japan, pp.1096-1102.
William A. Gale & Ken W. Church. 1993. A program
for aligning sentences in bilingual corpora. Computa-
tional Linguistics 19(1):75?102.
Daniel Gildea. 2003. Loosely Tree-Based Alignment for
Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 41st ACL.
Sapporo, Japan, pp.80?87.
Mary Hearne and Andy Way. 2003. Seeing the Wood
for the Trees: Data-Oriented Translation. MT Summit
IX. New Orleans, LO., pp.165?172.
Kenji Imamura. 2001. Hierarchical Phrase Alignment
Harmonized With Parsing. In Proceedings of the
Sixth Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim Sym-
posium. Tokyo, Japan, pp.377?384.
Martin Kay and Martin Ro?scheisen. 1993. Text-
translation alignment. Computational Linguistics
19(1):121?142.
Yuji Matsumoto, Ishimoto Hiroyuki and Takehito Ut-
suro. 1993. Structural Matching of Parallel Texts. In
Proceedings of the 31st ACL. Columbus, OH., pp.23?
30.
Arul Menezes and Stephen D. Richardson. 2003. A
Best-First Alignment Algorithm for Automatic Ex-
traction of Transfer Mappings from Bilingual Cor-
pora. In M. Carl & A. Way (eds.) Recent Advances
in Example-Based Machine Translation. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,
pp.421?442.
Arjen Poutsma. 2000. Data-Oriented Translation. In
18th COLING, Saarbru?cken, Germany, pp.635?641.
6http://www.ircset.ie
