Interlingual Annotation of Multilingual Text Corpora 
 
Stephen Helmreich 
David Farwell 
Computing Research Laboratory 
New Mexico State University 
david@crl.nmsu.edu
shelmrei@crl.nmsu.edu
Florence Reeder 
Keith Miller 
Information Discovery & Understanding 
MITRE Corporation 
freeder@mitre.org
keith@mitre.org   
Bonnie Dorr 
Nizar Habash 
Institute for Advanced Computer Studies 
University of Maryland 
bonnie@umiacs.umd.edu
habash@umiacs.umd.edu
 
Eduard Hovy 
Information Sciences Institute 
University of Southern California 
hovy@isi.edu 
Lori Levin 
Teruko Mitamura 
Language Technologies Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University 
lsl@cs.cmu.edu
teruko@cs.cmu.edu 
Owen Rambow 
Advaith Siddharthan 
Department of Computer Science 
Columbia University 
rambow@cs.columbia.edu
as372@cs.columbia.edu  
 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes a multi-site project to 
annotate six sizable bilingual parallel corpora 
for interlingual content. After presenting the 
background and objectives of the effort, we 
describe the data set that is being annotated, 
the interlingua representation language used, 
an interface environment that supports the an-
notation task and the annotation process itself. 
We will then present a preliminary version of 
our evaluation methodology and conclude 
with a summary of the current status of the 
project along with a number of issues which 
have arisen.  
1 Introduction 
This paper describes a multi-site National Science 
Foundation project focusing on the annotation of six 
sizable bilingual parallel corpora for interlingual content 
with the goal of providing a significant data set for im-
proving knowledge-based approaches to machine trans-
lation (MT) and a range of other Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) applications. The project participants 
include the Computing Research Laboratory at NMSU, 
the Language Technologies Institute at CMU, the In-
formation Science Institute at USC, UMIACS at the 
University of Maryland, the MITRE Corporation and 
Columbia University. In the remainder of the paper, we 
first present the background and objectives of the pro-
ject. We then describe the data set that is being anno-
tated, the interlingual representation language being 
used, an interface environment that is designed to sup-
port the annotation task, and the process of annotation 
itself. We will then outline a preliminary version of our 
evaluation methodology and conclude with a summary 
of the current status of the project along with a set of 
issues that have arisen since the project began.  
2 Project Goals and Expected Outcomes 
The central goals of the project are: 
? to produce a practical, commonly-shared system 
for representing the information conveyed by a 
text, or ?interlingua?, 
? to develop a methodology for accurately and 
consistently assigning such representations to 
texts across languages and across annotators, 
? to annotate a sizable multilingual parallel corpus 
of source language texts and translations for IL 
content. 
This corpus is expected to serve as a basis for improving 
meaning-based approaches to MT and a range of other 
natural language technologies.  The tools and annotation 
standards will serve to facilitate more rapid annotation 
of texts in the future. 
3 Corpus 
The target data set is modeled on and an extension of 
the DARPA MT Evaluation data set (White and 
O?Connell 1994) and includes data from the Linguistic 
Data Consortium (LDC) Multiple Translation Arabic, 
Part 1 (Walker et al, 2003). The data set consists of 6 
bilingual parallel corpora. Each corpus is made up of 
125 source language news articles along with three 
translations into English, each produced independently 
by different human translators. However, the source 
news articles for each individual language corpus are 
different from the source articles in the other language 
corpora.  Thus, the 6 corpora themselves are comparable 
to each other rather than parallel. The source languages 
are Japanese, Korean, Hindi, Arabic, French and Span-
ish.  Typically, each article is between 300 and 400 
words long (or the equivalent) and thus each corpus has 
between 150,00 and 200,000 words. Consequently, the 
size of the entire data set is around 1,000,000 words. 
Thus, for any given corpus, the annotation effort is 
to assign interlingual content to a set of 4 parallel texts, 
3 of which are in the same language, English, and all of 
which theoretically communicate the same information. 
The following is an example set from the Spanish cor-
pus: 
S: Atribuy? esto en gran parte a
una pol?tica que durante muchos a?os
tuvo un "sesgo concentrador" y repre-
sent? desventajas para las clases me-
nos favorecidas.
T1: He attributed this in great
part to a type of politics that
throughout many years possessed a
"concentrated bias" and represented
disadvantages for the less favored
classes.
T2: To a large extent, he attrib-
uted that fact to a policy which had
for many years had a "bias toward
concentration" and represented disad-
vantages for the less favored
classes.
T3: He attributed this in great
part to a policy that had a "centrist
slant" for many years and represented
disadvantages for the less-favored
classes.
 
The annotation process involves identifying the 
variations between the translations and then assessing 
whether these differences are significant. In this case, 
the translations are, for the most part, the same although 
there are a few interesting variations.  
For instance, where this appears as the translation 
of esto in the first and third translations, that fact 
appears in the second. The translator choice potentially 
represents an elaboration of the semantic content of the 
source expression and the question arises as to whether 
the annotation of the variation in expressions should be 
different or the same.  
More striking perhaps is the variation between 
concentrated bias, bias toward concen-
tration and centrist slant as the translation 
for sesgo concentrador. Here, the third transla-
tion offers a clear interpretation of the source text au-
thor?s intent. The first two attempt to carry over the 
vagueness of the source expression assuming that the 
target text reader will be able to figure it out. But even 
here, the two translators appear to differ as to what the 
source language text author?s intent actually was, the 
former referring to bias of a certain degree of strength 
and the second to a bias  in a certain direction. Seem-
ingly, then, the annotation of each of these expressions 
should differ. 
Furthermore, each source language has different 
methods of encoding meaning linguistically. The resul-
tant differing types of translation mismatch with English 
should provide insight into the appropriate structure and 
content for an interlingual representation. 
The point is that a multilingual parallel data set of 
source language texts and English translations offers a 
unique perspective and unique problem for annotating 
texts for meaning. 
4 Interlingua 
Due to the complexity of an interlingual annotation as 
indicated by the differences described in the previous 
section, the representation has developed through three 
levels and incorporates knowledge from sources such as 
the Omega ontology and theta grids.  Since this is an 
evolving standard, the three levels will be presented in 
order as building on one another. Then the additional 
data components will be described.  
4.1 Three Levels of Representation 
We now describe three levels of representation, referred 
to as IL0, IL1 and IL2. The aim is to perform the annota-
tion process incrementally, with each level of represen-
tation incorporating additional semantic features and 
removing existing syntactic ones. IL2 is intended as the 
interlingua, that abstracts away from (most) syntactic 
idiosyncrasies of the source language. IL0 and IL1 are 
intermediate representations that are useful starting 
points for annotating at the next level. 
4.1.1 IL0 
IL0 is a deep syntactic dependency representation. It 
includes part-of-speech tags for words and a parse tree 
that makes explicit the syntactic predicate-argument 
structure of verbs. The parse tree is labeled with syntac-
tic categories such as Subject or Object , which refer to 
deep-syntactic grammatical function (normalized for 
voice alternations).  IL0 does not contain function words 
(determiners, auxiliaries, and the like): their contribu-
tion is represented as features.  Furthermore, semanti-
cally void punctuation has been removed.  While this 
representation is purely syntactic, many disambiguation 
decisions, relative clause and PP attachment for exam-
ple, have been made, and the presentation abstracts as 
much as possible from surface-syntactic phenomena.  
Thus, our IL0 is intermediate between the analytical and 
tectogrammatical levels of the Prague School (Haji? et 
al 2001). IL0 is constructed by hand-correcting the out-
put of a dependency parser (details in section 6) and is a 
useful starting point for semantic annotation at  IL1, 
since it allows annotators to see how textual units relate 
syntactically when making semantic judgments.  
4.1.2 IL1 
IL1 is an intermediate semantic representation. It asso-
ciates semantic concepts with lexical units like nouns, 
adjectives,  adverbs and verbs (details of the ontology in 
section 4.2). It also replaces the syntactic relations in 
IL0, like subject and object, with thematic roles, like 
agent, theme and goal (details in section 4.3). Thus, like 
PropBank (Kingsbury et al2002), IL1 neutralizes dif-
ferent alternations for argument realization.  However, 
IL1 is not an interlingua; it does not normalize over all 
linguistic realizations of the same semantics. In particu-
lar, it does not address how the meanings of individual 
lexical units combine to form the meaning of a phrase or 
clause. It also does not address idioms, metaphors and 
other non-literal uses of language.  Further, IL1 does not 
assign semantic features to prepositions; these continue 
to be encoded as syntactic heads of their phrases, al-
though these might have been annotated with thematic 
roles such as location or time. 
4.1.3 IL2 
IL2 is intended to be an interlingua, a representation of 
meaning that is reasonably independent of language. IL2 
is intended to capture similarities in meaning across 
languages and across different lexical/syntactic realiza-
tions within a language. For example, IL2 is expected to 
normalize over conversives (e.g. X bought a book from 
Y vs. Y sold a book to X)  (as does FrameNet (Baker et 
al 1998)) and non-literal language usage (e.g. X started 
its business vs. X opened its doors to customers).  The 
exact definition of IL2 will be the major research con-
tribution of this project. 
4.2 The Omega Ontology 
In progressing from IL0 to IL1, annotators have to se-
lect semantic terms (concepts) to represent the nouns, 
verbs, adjectives, and adverbs present in each sentence.  
These terms are represented in the 110,000-node ontol-
ogy Omega (Philpot et al, 2003), under construction at 
ISI.  Omega has been built semi-automatically from a 
variety of sources, including Princeton's WordNet (Fell-
baum, 1998), NMSU?s Mikrokosmos (Mahesh and Ni-
renburg, 1995), ISI's Upper Model (Bateman et al, 
1989) and ISI's SENSUS (Knight and Luk, 1994).  After 
the uppermost region of Omega was created by hand, 
these various resources? contents were incorporated and, 
to some extent, reconciled.  After that, several million 
instances of people, locations, and other facts were 
added (Fleischman et al, 2003).  The ontology, which 
has been used in several projects in recent years (Hovy 
et al, 2001), can be browsed using the DINO browser at 
http://blombos.isi.edu:8000/dino; this browser forms a 
part of the annotation environment.  Omega remains 
under continued development and extension.  
4.3 The Theta Grids 
Each verb in Omega is assigned one or more theta grids 
specifying the arguments associated with a verb and 
their theta roles (or thematic role).  Theta roles are ab-
stractions of deep semantic relations that generalize 
over verb classes.  They are by far the most common 
approach in the field to represent predicate-argument 
structure.  However, there are numerous variations with 
little agreement even on terminology (Fillmore, 1968; 
Stowell, 1981; Jackendoff, 1972; Levin and Rappaport-
Hovav, 1998). 
The theta grids used in our project were extracted 
from the Lexical Conceptual Structure Verb Database 
(LVD) (Dorr, 2001).  The WordNet senses assigned to 
each entry in the LVD were then used to link the theta 
grids to the verbs in the Omega ontology.  In addition to 
the theta roles, the theta grids specify the mapping be-
tween theta roles and their syntactic realization in argu-
ments, such as Subject, Object or Prepositional Phrase, 
and the Obligatory/Optional nature of the argument, 
thus facilitating IL1 annotation.  For example, one of the 
theta grids for the verb ?load? is listed in Table 1 (at the 
end of the paper). 
Although based on research in LCS-based MT 
(Dorr, 1993; Habash et al 2002), the set of theta roles 
used has been simplified for this project.  This list (see 
Table 2 at the end of the paper), was used in the Inter-
lingua Annotation Experiment 2002 (Habash and 
Dorr).1  
4.4 Incremental Annotation 
As described earlier, the development and annota-
tion of the interlingual notation is incremental in nature.  
This necessitates constraining the types and categories 
of attributes included in the annotation during the be-
ginning phases.  Other topics not addressed here, but 
considered for future work include time, aspect, loca-
tion, modality, type of reference, types of speech act, 
causality, etc.  
Thus, IL2 itself is not a final interlingual representa-
tion, but one step along the way. IL0 and IL1 are also 
intermediate representations, and as such are an occa-
sionally awkward mixture of syntactic and semantic 
information. The decisions as to what to annotate, what 
to normalize, what to represent as features at each level 
are semantically and syntactically principled, but also 
governed by expectations about reasonable annotator 
tasks. What is important is that at each stage of trans-
formation, no information is lost, and the original lan-
guage recoverable in principle from the representation. 
5 Annotation Tool 
We have assembled a suite of tools to be used in the 
annotation process.  Some of these tools are previously 
existing resources that were gathered for use in the pro-
ject, and others have been developed specifically with 
the annotation goals of this project in mind.  Since we 
are gathering our corpora from disparate sources, we 
need to standardize the text before presenting it to 
automated procedures.  For English, this involves sen-
tence boundary detection, but for other languages, it 
may involve segmentation, chunking of text, or other 
?text ecology? operations.  The text is then processed 
with a dependency parser, the output of which is viewed 
and corrected in TrED (Haji?, et al, 2001), a graphi-
cally-based tree editing program, written in Perl/Tk2.  
The revised deep dependency structure produced by this 
process is the IL0 representation for that sentence. 
In order to derive IL1 from the IL0 representation, 
annotators use Tiamat, a tool developed specifically for 
                                                           
1 Other contributors to this list are Dan Gildea and Karin 
Kipper Schuler. 
2 http://quest.ms.mff.cuni.cz/pdt/Tools/Tree_Editors/Tre
d/ 
this project.  This tool enables viewing of the IL0 tree 
with easy reference to all of the IL resources described 
in section 4 (the current IL representation, the ontology, 
and the theta grids).  This tool provides the ability to 
annotate text via simple point-and-click selections of 
words, concepts, and theta-roles.  The IL0 is displayed 
in the top left pane, ontological concepts and their asso-
ciated theta grids, if applicable, are located in the top 
right, and the sentence itself is located in the bottom 
right pane.  An annotator may select a lexical item (leaf 
node) to be annotated in the sentence view; this word is 
highlighted, and the relevant portion of the Omega on-
tology is displayed in the pane on the left.  In addition, 
if this word has dependents, they are automatically un-
derlined in red in the sentence view.  Annotators can 
view all information pertinent to the process of deciding 
on appropriate ontological concepts in this view.  Fol-
lowing the procedures described in section 6, selection 
of concepts, theta grids and roles appropriate to that 
lexical item can then be made in the appropriate panes. 
Evaluation of the annotators? output would be daunt-
ing based solely on a visual inspection of the annotated 
IL1 files.  Thus, a tool was also developed to compare 
the output and to generate the evaluation measures that 
are described in section 7.  The reports generated by the 
evaluation tool allow the researchers to look at both 
gross-level phenomena, such as inter-annotator agree-
ment, and at more detailed points of interest, such as 
lexical items on which agreement was particularly low, 
possibly indicating gaps or other inconsistencies in the 
ontology being used. 
6 Annotation Task 
To describe the annotation task, we first present the 
annotation process and tools used with it as well as the 
annotation manuals.  Finally, setup issues relating to 
negotiating multi-site annotations are discussed. 
6.1 Annotation process 
The annotation process was identical for each text. For 
the initial testing period, only English texts were anno-
tated, and the process described here is for English text. 
The process for non-English texts will be, mutatis mu-
tandis, the same. 
Each sentence of the text is parsed into a depend-
ency tree structure. For English texts, these trees were 
first provided by the Connexor parser at UMIACS 
(Tapanainen and Jarvinen, 1997), and then corrected by 
one of the team PIs. For the initial testing period, anno-
tators were not permitted to alter these structures. Al-
ready at this stage, some of the lexical items are 
replaced by features (e.g., tense), morphological forms 
are replaced by features on the citation form, and certain 
constructions are regularized (e.g., passive) and empty 
arguments inserted.  It is this dependency structure that 
is loaded into the annotation tool and which each anno-
tator then marks up. 
The annotator was instructed to annotate all nouns, 
verbs, adjectives, and adverbs. This involves annotating 
each word twice ? once with a concept from Wordnet 
SYNSET and once with a Mikrokosmos concept; these 
two units of information are merged, or at least inter-
twined in Omega. One of the goals and results of this 
annotation process will be a simultaneous coding of 
concepts in both ontologies, facilitating a closer union 
between them.  
In addition, users were instructed to provide a se-
mantic case role for each dependent of a verb. In many 
cases this was ?NONE? since adverbs and conjunctions 
were dependents of verbs in the dependency tree. LCS 
verbs were identified with Wordnet classes and the LCS 
case frames supplied where possible. The user, how-
ever, was often required to determine the set of roles or 
alter them to suit the text. In both cases, the revised or 
new set of case roles was noted and sent to a guru for 
evaluation and possible permanent inclusion. Thus the 
set of event concepts in the ontology supplied with roles 
will grow through the course of the project. 
6.2 The annotation manuals 
Markup instructions are contained in three manuals: a 
users guide for Tiamat (including procedural instruc-
tions), a definitional guide to semantic roles, and a 
manual for creating a dependency structure (IL0). To-
gether these manuals allow the annotator to (1) under-
stand the intention behind aspects of the dependency 
structure; (2) how to use Tiamat to mark up texts; and 
(3) how to determine appropriate semantic roles and 
ontological concepts. In choosing a set of appropriate 
ontological concepts, annotators were encouraged to 
look at the name of the concept and its definition, the 
name and definition of the parent node, example sen-
tences, lexical synonyms attached to the same node, and 
sub- and super-classes of the node. All these manuals 
are available on the IAMTC website3. 
6.3 The multi-site set up 
For the initial testing phase of the project, all annotators 
at all sites worked on the same texts. Two texts were 
provided by each site as were two translations of the 
same source language (non-English) text. To test for the 
effects of coding two texts that are semantically close, 
since they are both translations of the same source 
document, the order in which the texts were annotated 
differed from site to site, with half the sites marking one 
translation first, and the other half of the sites marking 
the second translation first. Another variant tested was 
                                                           
3 http://sparky.umiacs.umd.edu:8000/IAMTC/annotation
_manual.wiki?cmd=get&anchor=Annotation+Manual 
to interleave the two translations, so that two similar 
sentences were coded consecutively. 
During the later production phase, a more complex 
schedule will be followed, making sure that many texts 
are annotated by two annotators, often from different 
sites, and that regularly all annotators will mark the 
same text. This will help ensure continued inter-coder 
reliability. 
In the period leading up to the initial test phase, 
weekly conversations were held at each site by the an-
notators, going over the texts coded. This was followed 
by a weekly conference call among all the annotators. 
During the test phase, no discussion was permitted. 
One of the issues that arose in discussion was how 
certain constructions should be displayed and whether 
each word should have a separate node or whether cer-
tain words should be combined into a single node. In 
view of the fact that the goal was not to tag individual 
words, but entities and relations, in many cases words 
were combined into single nodes to facilitate this proc-
ess. For instance, verb-particle constructions were com-
bined into a single node. In a sentence like ?He threw it 
up?, ?throw? and ?up? were combined into a single 
node ?throw up? since one action is described by the 
combined words. Similarly, proper nouns, compound 
nouns and copular constructions required specialized 
handling.    In addition, issues arose about whether an-
notators should change dependency trees; and in in-
structing the annotators on how best to determine an 
appropriate ontology node.    
7 Evaluation 
The evaluation criteria and metrics continue to evolve 
and are in the early stages of formation and implementa-
tion.  Several possible courses for evaluating the annota-
tions and resulting structures exist.  In the first of these, 
the annotations are measured according to inter-
annotator agreement.  For this purpose, data is collected 
reflecting the annotations selected, the Omega nodes 
selected and the theta roles assigned.  Then, inter-coder 
agreement is measured by a straightforward match, with 
agreement calculated by a Kappa measure (Carletta, 
1993) and a Wood standard similarity (Habash and 
Dorr, 2002).  This is done for three agreement points:  
annotations, Omega selection and theta role selection.  
At this time, the Kappa statistic?s expected agreement is 
defined as 1/(N+1) where N is the number of choices at 
a given data point.  In the case of Omega nodes, this 
means the number of matched Omega nodes (by string 
match) plus one for the possibility of the annotator trav-
ersing up or down the hierarchy. Multiple measures are 
used because it is important to have a mechanism for 
evaluating inter-coder consistency in the use of the IL 
representation language which does not depend on the 
assumption that there is a single correct annotation of a 
given text.  The tools for evaluation have been modified 
from pervious use (Habash and Dorr, 2002). 
Second, the accuracy of the annotation is measured.  
Here accuracy is defined as correspondence to a prede-
fined baseline.  In the initial development phase, all 
sites annotated the same texts and many of the varia-
tions were discussed at that time, permitting the devel-
opment of a baseline annotation.  While not a useful 
long-term strategy, this produced a consensus baseline 
for the purpose of measuring the annotators? task and 
the solidity of the annotation standard.  
The final measurement technique derives from the 
ultimate goal of using the IL representation for MT, 
therefore, we are measuring the ability to generate accu-
rate surface texts from the IL representation as anno-
tated.  At this stage, we are using an available generator, 
Halogen (Knight and Langkilde, 2000).  A tool to con-
vert the representation to meet Halogen requirements is 
being built.  Following the conversion, surface forms 
will be generated and then compared with the originals 
through a variety of standard MT metrics (ISLE, 2003).   
8 Accomplishments and Issues 
In a short amount of time, we have identified languages 
and collected corpora with translations.  We have se-
lected representation elements, from parser outputs to 
ontologies, and have developed an understanding of 
how their component elements fit together.  A core 
markup vocabulary (e.g., entity-types, event-types and 
participant relations) was selected.  An initial version of 
the annotator?s toolkit (Tiamat) has been developed and 
has gone through alpha testing.  The multi-layered ap-
proach to annotation  decided upon reduces the burden 
on the annotators for any given text as annotations build 
upon one another.  In addition to developing individual 
tools, an infrastructure exists for carrying out a multi-
site annotation project.   
In the coming months we will be fleshing out the 
current procedures for evaluating the accuracy of an 
annotation and measuring inter-coder consistency.  
From this, a multi-site evaluation will be produced and  
results reported.  Regression testing, from the interme-
diate stages and representations will be able to be car-
ried out.  Finally, a growing corpus of annotated texts 
will become available.   
In addition to the issues discussed throughout the 
paper, a few others have not yet been identified.  From a 
content standpoint, looking at IL systems for time and 
location should utilize work in personal name, temporal 
and spatial annotation (e.g., Ferro et al, 2001).  Also, an 
ideal IL representation would also account for causality, 
co-reference, aspectual content, modality, speech acts, 
etc.  At the same time, while incorporating these items, 
vagueness and redundancy must be eliminated from the 
annotation language.  Many inter-event relations would 
need to be captured such as entity reference, time refer-
ence, place reference, causal relationships, associative 
relationships, etc.  Finally, to incorporate these, cross-
sentence phenomena remain a challenge.     
From an MT perspective, issues include evaluating 
the consistency in the use of an annotation language 
given that any source text can result in multiple, differ-
ent, legitimate translations (see Farwell and Helmreich, 
2003) for discussion of evaluation in this light.  Along 
these lines, there is the problem of annotating texts for 
translation without including in the annotations infer-
ences from the source text.   
9 Conclusions  
This is a radically different annotation project from 
those that have focused on morphology, syntax or even 
certain types of semantic content (e.g., for word sense 
disambiguation competitions). It is most similar to 
PropBank (Kingsbury et al2002) and FrameNet (Baker 
et al1998).  However, it is novel in its emphasis on:  (1) 
a more abstract level of mark-up (interpretation); (2) the 
assignment of a well-defined meaning representation to 
concrete texts; and (3) issues of a community-wide con-
sistent and accurate annotation of meaning. 
By providing an essential, and heretofore non-
existent, data set for training and evaluating natural lan-
guage processing systems, the resultant annotated multi-
lingual corpus of translations is expected to lead to 
significant research and development opportunities for 
Machine Translation and a host of other Natural Lan-
guage Processing technologies including Question-
Answering and Information Extraction.  
References 
Baker, C., J. Fillmore and J B. Lowe, 1998.  The Berke-
ley FrameNet Project.  Proceedings of ACL. 
Bateman, J.A., R. Kasper, J. Moore, and R. Whitney. 
1989. A General Organization of Knowledge for 
Natural Language Processing: The Penman Upper 
Model. Unpublished research report, USC / Informa-
tion Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey, CA.  
Carletta, J. C. 1996. Assessing agreement on classifica-
tion tasks: the kappa statistic. Computational Lin-
guistics, 22(2), 249-254 
Conceptual Structures and Documentation, UMCP. 
http://www.umiacs.umd.edu/~bonnie/LCS_Database
_Documentation.html  
Dorr, B. J. 2001.  LCS Verb Database, Online Software 
Database of Lexical  
Dorr, B. J., 1993. Machine Translation: A View from the 
Lexicon, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Farwell, D., and S. Helmreich.  2003.  Pragmatics-based 
Translation and MT Evaluation.  In Proceedings of 
Towards Systematizing MT Evaluation.  MT-Summit 
Workshop, New Orleans, LA. 
Fellbaum, C. (ed.). 1998. WordNet: An On-line Lexical 
Database and Some of its Applications. MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA. 
Ferro, L., I. Mani, B. Sundheim and G. Wilson.  2001. 
TIDES Temporal Annotation Guidelines. Version 
1.0.2 MITRE Technical Report, MTR 01W0000041 
Fillmore, C..  1968. The Case for Case. In E. Bach and 
R. Harms, editors, Universals in Linguistic Theory, 
pages 1--88. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.  
Fleischman, M., A. Echihabi, and E.H. Hovy. 2003. 
Offline Strategies for Online Question Answering: 
Answering Questions Before They Are Asked.  Pro-
ceedings of the ACL Conference. Sapporo, Japan. 
Habash, N. and B. Dorr. 2002. Interlingua Annotation 
Experiment Results. AMTA-2002 Interlingua Reli-
ability Workshop. Tiburon, California, USA. 
Habash, N., B. J. Dorr, and D. Traum, 2002. "Efficient 
Language Independent Generation from Lexical 
Conceptual Structures," Machine Translation, 17:4. 
Haji?, J.; B. Vidov?-Hladk?; P. Pajas.  2001: The Pra-
gue Dependency Treebank: Annotation Structure and 
Support. In Proceeding of the IRCS Workshop on 
Linguistic Databases, pp. . University of Pennsyl-
vania, Philadelphia, USA, pp. 105-114. 
Hovy, E., A. Philpot, J. Ambite, Y. Arens, J. Klavans, 
W. Bourne, and D. Saroz.  2001. Data Acquisition 
and Integration in the DGRC's Energy Data Collec-
tion Project, in Proceedings of the NSF's dg.o 2001. 
Los Angeles, CA. 
ISLE 2003.  Framework for Evaluation of Machine 
Translation in ISLE.  
http://www.issco.unige.ch/projects/isle/femti/ 
Jackendoff, R. 1972. Grammatical Relations and Func-
tional Structure. Semantic Interpretation in Genera-
tive Grammar. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Kingsbury, P and M Palmer and M Marcus , 2002.  
Adding Semantic Annotation to the Penn TreeBank. 
Proceedings of the Human Language Technology 
Conference (HLT 2002).  
Knight, K., and I. Langkilde. 2000.  Preserving Ambi-
guities in Generation via Automata Intersection. 
American Association for Artificial Intelligence con-
ference (AAAI). 
Knight, K, and S. K. Luk.  1994. Building a Large-Scale 
Knowledge Base for Machine Translation.  Proceed-
ings of AAAI. Seattle, WA. 
Levin, B. and M. Rappaport-Hovav. 1998. From Lexical 
Semantics to Argument Realization. Borer, H. (ed.) 
Handbook of Morphosyntax and Argument Structure. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Mahesh, K., and Nirenberg, S.  1995. A Situated Ontol-
ogy for Practical NLP, in Proceedings on the Work-
shop on Basic Ontological Issues in Knowledge 
Sharing at IJCAI-95. Montreal, Canada. 
Philpot, A., M. Fleischman, E.H. Hovy. 2003. Semi-
Automatic Construction of a General Purpose Ontol-
ogy.  Proceedings of the International Lisp Confer-
ence.  New York, NY. Invited. 
Stowell, T. 1981. Origins of Phrase Structure. PhD the-
sis, MIT, Cambridge, MA.  
Tapanainen, P. and T Jarvinen.  1997.  A non-projective 
dependency parser.  In the 5th Conference on Applied 
Natural Language Processing / Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Washington, DC. 
White, J., and T. O?Connell.  1994.  The ARPA MT 
evaluation methodologies: evolution, lessons, and fu-
ture approaches.  Proceedings of the 1994 Confer-
ence, Association for Machine Translation in the 
Americas 
Walker, K., M. Bamba, D. Miller, X. Ma, C. Cieri, and 
G. Doddington 2003.  Multiple-Translation Arabic 
Corpus, Part 1. Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC) 
catalog num. LDC2003T18 & ISBN 1-58563-276-7. 
 
 
Role Description Grid Syntax Type 
Agent The entity that does the action Agent:  load 
Theme  with possessed 
SUBJ OBLIGATORY 
Theme The entity that is worked on Agent:  load 
Theme with possessed 
OBJ OBLIGATORY 
Possessed The entity controlled or owned Agent:  load 
Theme  with possessed 
PP OPTIONAL 
Table 1 :  A theta grid for the verb "load" 
 
 
Role and Definition Examples 
Agent:  Agents have the features of volition, sentience, causation and 
independent exist 
? Henry pushed/broke the vase. 
Instrument: An instrument should have causation but no volition. Its 
sentience and existence are not relevant. 
? The Hammer broke the vase. 
? She hit him with a baseball bat 
Experiencer: An experiencer has no causation but is sentient and 
exists independently. Typically an experiencer is the subject of verbs 
like feel, hear, see, sense, smell, notice, detect, etc. 
? John heard the vase shatter.   
? John shivered. 
Theme: The theme is typically causally affected or experiences a 
movement and/or change in state. The theme can appear as the infor-
mation in verbs like acquire, learn, memorize, read, study, etc. It can 
also be a thing, event or state (clausal complement). 
? John went to school.  
? John broke the vase.   
? John memorized his lines.  
? She buttered the bread with marga-
rine.   
Perceived: Refers to a perceived entity that isn't required by the verb 
but further characterizes the situation. The perceived is neither caus-
ally affected nor causative. It doesn't experience a movement or 
change in state. Its volition and sentience are irrelevant. Its existence 
is independent of an experiencer. 
? He saw the play.   
? He looked into the room.  
? The cat's fur feels good to John.   
? She imagined the movie to be loud.    
Predicate: Indicates new modifying information about other thematic 
roles. 
? We considered him a fool.   
? She acted happy.   
Source: Indicates where/when the theme started in its motion, or 
what its original state was, or where its original (possibly abstract) 
location/time was. 
? John left the house. 
Goal: Indicates where the theme ends up in its motion, or what its 
final state is, or where/when its final (possibly abstract) location/time 
is. It also can indicate the thing/event resulting from the verb's occur-
rence (the result). 
? John ran home.   
? John ran to the store.  
? John gave a book to Mary.   
? John gave Mary a book. 
Location: Indicates static locations---as opposed to a source or goal, 
i.e., the (possibly abstract) location of the theme or event. 
? He lived in France.   
? The water fills the box.   
? This cabin sleeps five people 
Time Indicates time. ? John sleeps for five hours.   
? Mary ate during the meeting. 
Beneficiary: Indicates the thing that receives the benefit/result of the 
event/state. 
? John baked the cake for Mary.   
? John baked Mary a cake.  
? An accident happened to him.   
Purpose: Indicates the purpose/reason behind an event/state ? He studied for the exam.  
? He searched for rabbits.  
Possessed: Indicates the possessed entity in verbs such as own, have, 
possess, fit, buy, and carry. 
? John has five bucks.  
? He loaded the cart with hay.   
? He bought it for five dollars 
Proposition: Indicates the secondary event/state ? He wanted to study for the exam. 
Modifier: Indicates a property of a thing such as color, taste, size, 
etc. 
? The red book sitting on the table is 
old.  
Null Indicates no thematic contribution. Typical examples are imper-
sonal it and there. 
? It was raining all morning in Miami. 
 
TABLE 2:  List of Theta Roles 
