Pronomina l i za t ion  rev is i ted*  
Renate  Hensche l  and Hua Cheng ~md Mass imo Poes io  
HCRC,  University of Edinburgh, UK 
{henschel,huac,poesio}@cogsci .ed.ac.uk 
Abst rac t  
Pronolninalization has been related to tile idea 
of a local focus - a set of discourse entities in 
the speaker's centre of attention, for exmnple ill 
Gundel et al (1993)'s givenness hierarchy or 
in centering theory. Both accounts ay that the 
determination of tile tbcus depends on syntac- 
tic as well as pragmatic factors, but have not 
been able to pin those factors down. In this 
paper, we uncover the major factors which de- 
termine the focus set in descriptive texts. This 
new tbcus definition has been ew, luated with re- 
spect to two corporm museum exhibit labels, 
mid newspaper mtieles. It provides an opera- 
tionalizable basis for pronoun production, and 
has been implemented as the reusable module 
gnome-np. The algorithm l)ehind gnome-np is 
conlpared with the most recent pronoun gener- 
ation algorithm of McCoy and Strube (1999). 
1 In t roduct ion  
Besides the well established problem of ln'onoun 
resolution, pronoun generation is now attract- 
ing renewed attention. In the past, generation 
systelns generated pronouns without attaching 
much importance to the problem, one notable 
exception being the classical algorithm of Dale 
(1990), loosely based on centering theory. With 
the emergence of corpus based studies in comtm- 
rational linguistics, the question arises whether 
it is possible to refine known standard algo- 
rithms, or whether an improvement is only to 
be achieved with the hell) of world knowledge 
reasoning - a matter too complex to be dealt 
with reliably at this time. Tile Ibrlner direction 
is represented by tile pioneering work of McCoy 
and Strube (1999). They propose a refined algo- 
rithm for tile choice between definite description 
on the one hand and pronoun on the other for 
* The work reported in this paper has been calmed out 
with the tinancial support of UK ESPllC grant L51126. 
animate referents I , which is based on distancG 
time structure mid ambiguity constraints. 
Here we introduce a more general algoritlnn 
for the pronominalization decision that is valid 
not only for animate but for inanimate referents 
as well. In conformity with McCoy and Strube, 
we group noun phrases with definite determiner 
and proper nalnes together under tile term "det'- 
inite description". The algorithm proposes a 
new pronominalization strategy, which beyond 
McCoy and Strube (1999)'s criteria makes use 
of the discom'se status of the antecedent and 
parallelism effects. 
The algorithm has been implemented as the 
reusable module gnome-np. It has been re-used 
in tile web hypertext generation system ILEX 
(see Oberlander el; al. (1998)). It shows ml 
accuracy over 87% with respect o two corpora 
(each 5000 words) of difl'erent genres. 
2 Accounts  of  p ronomina l i za t ion  
In previous ace(rants pronominalization has 
been related to the idea of a local focus of ~d;- 
tention: a set of discourse referents who/wlfich 
is in the center of attention of the speaker (e.g. 
Sidner (1979), givenness hierarchy (Gun(lel et 
al., 1993), centering theory (Grosz et al, 1995), 
RAFT/RAPId. (Suri, 1993)). Whereas (Gundel 
el; al., 1993) do not atteml)t to make their fo- 
cus notion operationalizable, this has been at- 
tempted by fllrther develolmlents of centering. 
However these have mostly been applied to the 
pronoun resolution problem. In the following 
we discuss three versions of centering and show 
that their application to the pronoun generation 
problem is nevertheless linfited. 
Center ing .  Centering was developed to ex- 
plain local discourse coherence; the extent to 
which it benefits pronoun generation is how- 
ever not immediately clear, hi centering, 
1We llSO the terms "discourse ntity" and "refc'rent" 
synonymously in this paper. 
306 
the discour.~e ntiti(:s (:vok(:d in a (',(n'l;ain ui:- 
terall(;e 'tt i ga'e c~dle(t fi)rward-looldng centers 
(Cfs). It is assumed i;lmt they are 1)ari;ially or- 
der(:d. As a major dei;erminant of the ordering, 
the gramma.tical fun(:t;ion hierarchy (roughly: 
SUI/.I~>OIM>OTIII~;IIS) has 1)een 1)r,')t)o,~ed. 13e- 
CallSe other fa.cl;ors afl'e(:ting th(: ord(:r have no(; 
1)een (',lld)or;~ted in de(;ail, this ranking (as tit(' 
only Ol)erai, ionaliza/)le ha.n(lle) has 1)(:(x)m(: the 
si;:m(lard ra.nking in several comt)utational i)- 
1)\]ic~(,ions of (:entering. The 1)ackward-tooking 
center (hencefl)rth C1)) is a distinguished 1nero- 
bet of (;lie CI:~, which is defined as the most 
highly ranked member of the Ct5 of th(' previous 
lltterallee 'u , i_  \] which is realized in v, i .  The Cb is 
consid(:red as (;h(: \]o('al focus of ai;i;(:ntion. Cen- 
tering sta,t('s two rules. Only the first; rule makes 
~t (:brim at)()u(; l)ronominaliz~tion: ll!any (;lemen(; 
of the uti;eran(:e ui--1 is realiz(,,d in v,i as l)ro- 
nomh th(m l;he C\]) must l)e l)r()l~()minalized in 'it i 
as well. As lloted tw McCoy mid Struhe (\]999), 
this rule apl)lies only in (,h(; ease that (:we sul)se- 
qllent lltterallCeS share Hl()r('~ (;}l~tll o11(~ ref('A'ellt~ 
m:td (;hal; l;h(: non-el) ref(.'r(,.nt is 1)ronominalized 
in (,he se(xmd ui:termme. \]}ut why (;\]fis non-el) 
referent is realized as a, l)ronomt is not given t)y 
(~h(' (:heory. 
Itowev(:r, f()lk)wing mot(: (;he sl>irit of (xuli;er- 
ing tha.n the actual definition, ()he (:au under- 
stand (;he el) as (;he refin'ent which is prefer?d)lv 
l)ronominalize(t. General t)r(mominalizai;ion ()f 
the backward-looking center was in fact a claim 
of (mrly c(mtering, lmi; h~d 1;o l)e al)andone(1 be- 
cause of (:olmter-evidenee from r(,'al discourse. 
Bnt the id(::r (,ha.t t)l'on()nfinaliztti;ion of the Ct) 
could 1)e a, m(:ans of establishing lo(:td discourse 
(x)herence is still 1)revalenl;. \]t has accordingly 
})een use(t l)y seine generation systems to (:on- 
trol 1)ronominalization e.g. in the IIA,;X sys- 
l~em (O1)erlm~dcr et al, 1998), the el) is always 
realized as a pronomL 
Semant ic  center ing .  Centering is a.lso found 
in Dale (1990) as the method of t)ronominaliza- 
tion control. However, Dale's center detinii;ion 
differs from standard centering theory in i;hat it 
is defined semantically and not on the basis of 
a syni;aetie ranking. 2 This apl)roaeh has some 
appeal, espc.cially for generation, ix;cause it sup- 
l)ori, s the natural mo(hfla.rity bel;ween strate- 
2In 1)ari;icular, \])al(: adol)l;s (;he l'estll(; o1' I;he aci;ion 
(Ienol:ed 1)3' ihe previous claus(; of a recil)(: as (;he center. 
~i(: generation -wlfi(:h would determine t;he se- 
mantk: c(:nter for each uttera.llce and tactical 
g(:neration which dec.ides about granmmt:.ical 
fimetions. 
Funct iona l  center ing.  Finally, the cent;ering 
version suggest;ed \])y Stl'ul)e and Hahn (\]!)99) 
al>l)ears to r(:veal an underlying discourse mech- 
anism resl)onsil)le for centering: the information 
si;rH(:ture of  an u t terance  (roughly the given- 
new i)ai;t(:rn) is (;he de('l)er reason for the rank- 
ing ()\[ the %rward-h)oking (:eni:(:rs. This l)er- 
mii;s a generalization of sl;andar(l centering into 
a language-indel)ell(leld; l;heory eovering 1)oth 
trex: and fixed word-order languages. It is how- 
ever then surprising that this result is not made 
maximld use of in the Sltb.sc,,(lttent generaISon- 
orient, cA work of McCoy an(1 Strube (1999). 
Beyond center ing.  The questions wlfi(:h re- 
main ol)en with all (;hree al)l)roat:hes - stan- 
dard (;(;nterillg, S(:lll;~ll(;ic entering and fun(:-- 
tional eentering- are: 
\ ] .~ .~ \~?\]ly are ill real texts  a. lat%e nunl\])(:r of 
C1)'s not t)rononfinalized? 
_P21 \~q~y are non-C1)r(:ferents 1)ronominalized? 
or (:x1)ressc(l indel)(,.1Mently of centering: 
IP~I  \~qty are in real texl;s a large nunfl)(,r of 
(tis(:our,s(: entities with an ani;ecedent in i;h(', 
previous utteran(:e not l)ronomina\]ized? 
FI?2~ \NqW can more tlmn one entity 1)e t)ronom- 
inalize(l in one ui;t(,rance? 
\].h'on~ a corlms-driven view, question \ [~  is the 
larger prol)lem. 
~/\[(;C()y all(t Stl'lt\])e (19,()9) were the first to 
sng;~est all al~ol;il~llln for ~ellel'~ttioll which solves 
t;h(,se problems. It was motivated by the ol)- 
servation that ~t la.rge percentage of NPs which 
would have been realized by 1)ronouns using 
known algorithms, are in fact not, realized as 
pronomls in real text. They suggest that such 
NPs serve to mark ~time changes' in the dis- 
course. Their algorithm aecordingly makes use 
of distance, context ambiguity mid telnl)ora\] 
discourse structure to decide about 1)ronolni- 
nalization. In our work, we have considered a 
corpus of a ditl'erent genre in which I, emt)oral 
cha.nge does nol, 1)bW a determining role: de- 
script, ive (;exts. \?e 1)repose a new algorithm 
307 
that significantly simplifies the problem of pro- 
noun choice. It is based on a new definition of 
the local focus, which views the discourse status 
of the antecedent as the major motivation be- 
hind focusing. The algorithm performs equally 
well when applied to McCoy and Strube's cor- 
pus of newspaper articles. 
3 Corpus  ana lys is  
The algorithm we will present below has been 
developed in close relation to the MUSE corpus -
a corpus of museum exhibit labels a. The corpus 
is a collection of web pages of the Paul Getty 
Museum, pages from an exhibition catalogue, 
and pages froln a jewellery book. Typical char- 
acteristics are tile central role of inanimate ref- 
erents in these texts, and the lack of temporal 
change thus providing an interesting counter- 
t)art to the newst)aper genre investigated by Mc- 
Coy and Strube. 
With an overall set of around 5000 words, tile 
cortms contains 1450 NPs. Each NP has been 
annotated with respect o, among others, gram- 
matical function, discourse status, gender, num- 
ber, countability, and antecedent relationships. 
23% of the NPs form reference chains (i.e. at 
least two mentions of one and the same referent 
in one text), the other 77% are only mentioned 
once. We have 101 different reference chains; 
the chain-fbrming NPs fall into 10\] discourse- 
new and 213 anaphoric NPs. In the following, 
we will only discuss the anaphoric NPs. 50% of 
the anaphoric NPs are realized as definite de- 
scriptions, 50% as pronouns. We distinguish be- 
tween locally bound pronouns, which are deter- 
mined syntactically (Binding Theory, (Chore- 
sky, 1981)), and which we expect the tacti- 
cal generator to handle correctly, and pronouns 
which are not locally bound so-called dis- 
course pronouns. We investigated possible co l  
relations between the discourse 1)ronouns and 
semantic/pragmatic features of their context. 
The basic notions that we found were dis- 
tance, discourse status of the antecedent, and 
grammatical function of the antecedent. All 
three notions need a precise definition. 
D is tance .  ~lb be able to determine the dis- 
tance between a discourse entity and its an- 
tecedent, a precise determination f what counts 
3UI{L: h t tp  ://www. hcrc.  ed. ac. uk/ 'gnome/corpora 
as utterance unit is necessary. Following 
Kameyama (1998), we take as u t te rance  unit 
the finite clause, l{elative clauses and con> 
plenmnt clauses are not counted as utterances 
on their own. This means that we count 
clauses containing complement clauses or rel- 
ative clauses as single utterances. 4,a The pre- 
v ious u t te rance  is the preceding utterance at 
the same level of embedding. 
Note that we allow the treatment of clauses 
with VP coordination (subject ellipsis) as com- 
plex coordinated clauses as done in Kameyalna 
(1998), thus handling subject ellipsis as a dis- 
course pronoun; our algorithm does not; insist 
on this view however. 
The following correlation between pronoun 
use and distance was tbund in our corpus: 97% 
of the pronouns have an antecedent in the same 
or the previous utterance. 
D iscourse s tatus .  The information status of 
a discourse ntity in an utterance is either given 
or new. We use these terms with an identi- 
cal Lneaning as g~vn'nd and focus in Vallduvi 
(1993). Discourse status, as introduced by 
Prince (1992), is a similar but different notion: 
A discourse ntity is d iscourse-o ld,  if it has 
been mentioned before in the same discourse; 
it is d i scourse -new otherwise. All cases of 
givenness by indirect means like part-whole, 
set-member relationships, other bridging rela- 
tions, inferences (Prince's inferrables, anchored 
and situationally evoked entities) are judged as 
discourse-new, thus taking into account only 
tile identity antecedent relationship. We share 
Prince's opinion that pronominalization has to 
do with discourse status, whereas definiteness 
has to do with information status. 
66% of all short-distance discourse pronouns 
in the MUSE corpus refer to an antecedent which 
is in itself discourse-old. 
Sub jec thood .  The third strong correlation is
the relation between pronoun use and the grmn- 
matical function of the antecedent. 63% of dis- 
course pronouns have a subject as antecedent. 
The following table shows the overall distribu- 
tion of antecedent properties for short-distance 
4This deviates from Kameyama, who analyzes re- 
ported speech as separate utterance. 
'SComplement and relative clauses consisting of inore 
than one tinite clause create their own internal evel of 
focusing. 
308 
discourse 1}ronouns and (shown ill 1}rackets) h),' 
short-distance definite descriptions. 
old new 
,~,t)io{:{; a8% (22%) 25% (12%) 
~ot s,,1,.i 28% (18%) .(}% (48%) 
4 Algor i thm 
\] ~ased on these corpus  s{,ndy resnl|;s, we {lefhle a 
new notion of the local focus -- the set of refer- 
ents which arc awfilal)le for prononfilmlization. 
The local focus is ut}dated at each utterance 
boundary, and is defined as the set of referents 
of the 1)revious utterance which are: 
(a) d iscourse-o ld ,  or 
(b) rea l ized as sub jec t .  
This set {:all theoretically {:ontain \]11{}re thnu one 
\ ] . l t  ill \]HOSt cas,, s, O0 a.(1 (\])) are o,,o 
and the same singlel;on sol;, which coul{l be seen 
as the well-known Cb. Thus sta\]ldar(l cent{~r- 
ing app{,,a\]'s as ~t spe{'ial case of {}m a\])l}roa{:h. 
This account means that newly introduced r(;t L 
{;l'C\]l|,S arc ll(}l; immediately l)ron{}mina\]ized i\]1 
the following utterance, Ulfless they have bc{,.n 
introduced as subject- -ml ol)servation made l}y 
Brenlmn (19!}8) and now confirlile(t with respect 
to our data also. 
The l}rOl}osed efinition of the lo{:al focus ~,,ou-.. 
eralizes the t2){:using mechanisms assm~led i\]1 
{x211i,el'\]llg all(t intro(hlces the discourse status ()f 
the antecedent as (}he lnain {:rii;eriol~ })ehi\]\]d th{~ 
l}\]onomi\]laliza.ti{}n decision. It is i\]\]t{;\]'{>ting iT() 
lIOl,e I;ll:tl; \]X/i{:Coy all{1 Sl;rul}{; (1.9991 also nmke 
use of the discourse status of the ant(x:{,Aent; 
without mentioning it exl)lh:itly. For a. certah\] 
sul)sel; of' intrasentealtial nat)horic relal, ions ill 
amMguous cont(,xts they I)rOl}OSe \])ro\]\]on\]ina.1- 
ization in case the antec(;dent would 1)c the 1)re- 
ferred one in Stl'ut)e (1998)'s pr{}lloun resohl- 
lion algoritlnn. Because the set {}i' a.ntecedents 
is l'mlkcd there with resl)eCt to infbrm~tion sta- 
tus, this is identical with {mr proposal. Why 
tlmy do not use the discourse status as a gen- 
eral criBerion is not clear. We believe that the 
discourse status of the antecedent as pr{momi- 
nalization trigger is a general rule, in discourse 
Sell-l&ii/;,ies. 
The central role of discourse sLat;us and sub- 
jecthoo{1 are in our opinion 1101; accidental. The 
Bwo nol;ions retlecl; tw{\] tyt)ical stra{,egies 1;o 
introduce a new referenl; inBo l;he (liscourse. 
Wc will assume here the mnm~rked inf(}rnmt;ion 
structure of an utterance: g iven  - new. The 
subject usually is part of (or identical to) the 
9i'uen. Let X i)e a certain referent; which is newly 
intl'oduced in utterance (ul), and referred to 
again in t;lle following ui~tera.nce 0121. In the 
first strategy, X is introduced in the new non- 
subject )arl; of (u\].). And ill this l)ati;el'n the sec- 
ond lnention of X in (u2) is not pronominalized. 
In exalnple (1) given in Figure 1 tile local focus 
for ,,t ;el'a,,ce one el m0,1  : {t,.4; 
'm..,in 'morns" is new in (\]1\].) and \]1ol; pronominal -  
ized in (112). The other typical strategy is where 
the referent is tirst mentioned ill a subject posi- 
tion. This is typical for a segment onset, or the 
beginning of ~ text,. Ofl;en this referent is given 
})y other lneans -- for example, l)y refhrence to a 
1)icture., or to a r(;lated object. In example (2) 
of Figure \]., the second mention is i)rononfinal - 
ized. ~\]'\]ms 1;11(} sul)jecI; position seems to time- 
lion as creating a givemless allocation for the 
denotexl rcfercnl;. These two strategies roughly 
correspond with two types of thcnlatic develop- 
nlent identified in l)mm,q (197d). 
Para l le l i sm.  Our definition of l;he local tS- 
cus licenses 91% (62 of 68 pronouns) of all 
short-distance discourse pronouns in ore" corpus. 
Looking at tile pronomls violating the prol)osed 
accounl;, we nm.de ,,11 interesting observal;ion: 
n}osl; el l;heln occtlr ill conl;exts of strong t)ar- 
allelism. \'Vc call an anphoric NP ~/~,1~2 paral le l  
if it has ml a.ntccedenl; ' ~q)l in the previous utter- 
~Ill(;{;~ alld 'll,l) I alld '**,i12 \]rove Lhe 5alllC graummt i -  
cal funct ion.  1,k)l" work  wi th  real I;ex{;, il; is useful  
to inchlde cases whel'(~' 7L\]) 2 is a 1)osscssive or gen- 
itive NP inside a certain 'npa, and  'np\] and  'np:~ 
have the same gralnmatical flmction. Depend- 
ing on the concrel;e function, we distinguish sub- 
.ic{:t and object 1)arallelisln. Strong parallelism 
is a simulta.neous subject mid object para.lMism 
in two consecutive clauses. Strong i)arallelism 
always overrides the local focus criterion, mid 
allows tbr pronominalization of referents with 
discourse-new antecedents in nonsut)ject posi- 
tion. 
The local focus definition refilled by the par- 
allelism eff'ect is ml explanation for question P~ 
and a small portion of \ [~\ ] ,  but most cases of 
problem \ [~ r(nnain open.  q_'wo reasons for not  
prononfinalizing a reh~rent which is a nwanber 
of the local focus need to be considered: 
~ alnbiguous context, 
309 
(1) (\[11.) Shortly after irzh, eriti~,.q the building in 1752, he commissioned th, e areh, iteet Pierre Conta, nt 
d'Ivry to renovate the main  rooms. 
(u2) The engravings for these rooms , showing the wall lights in place, were reproduced in Dide~vt's 
Encyclopaedic, one of the principal works of the Age of E'nlightenment. 
(2) (ul) Scottish born, Canadian based jeweller, A l i son  Ba i ley -Smi th ,  constructs elaborate and cer- 
emoniaI jewellers} from irtd,ustrial wire. 
(u2) Her  materials are often gathered from so'arces such as abandoned television .sets ... 
(3) ~ i~ With attachments s'ach as an omtlav micvometer~ the microscope irtcovporates the latest sei- 
entitle technology of the mid-17OOs. 
(u2) The design of its era'ring gilt b~vnze stand was the heigh, t of the Rococo stifle ... 
(4) (u0) the table probably came from, the Tr ianon de Porcela ine , a small house built for th, e King's 
mistress, Madame de }l/\[ontespar~,, on the 9ro'unds of the Palace of Vet.sallies. 
(ul) This table's marquetry of ivory and horn, painted blue underneath, would have followed the 
house's  blue-and-white color sehcrne, imitating blue-and-white Chinese porcelain, a fashionable aTI.d 
highly prized material. 
(u2) Blue-arM-white cevarnie tiles decorated the house, ... 
Figure t: Corlms examples 
discourse structure signalling. 
Ambigu i ty .  Along with McCoy and Strube 
we argue that ambiguity with respect to gen- 
der/number influences the pronominalization 
decision: members of the local fbcus which have 
a competing referent (refbrent with similar gen- 
der/number) in some span to the left of the ref- 
erent to be generated should not be realized as 
t)ronouns o as to minimize the inference load 
for the reader. However, not to allow pronom- 
inalization in all ambiguous context situations 
does not ~I)t)ear to be consistent with real texts 
(McCoy and Strube, 1999). In the MUSE cortms 
one third of all focal NPs occur in ambiguous 
contexts, one half of them is pronominalized, 
the other half is not. Two questions require a 
precise answer to use the ambiguity constraint 
in a generation algorithm: 
? Which set of 1)reviously mentioned refer- 
ents or text st)an is taken into account br 
referents to be in competition? 
? Which referents are pronominalizcd despite 
an alnbiguous context? 
The answer is surprisingly simple: I/.eferents 
of the previous utterance which are not in the lo- 
cal fbcus do not disturb pronominalization, even 
if they have the stone gender/nmnber. Only if 
the actual referent has a competitor in the local 
fbcus, is pronominalization blocked. This is il- 
lustrated in Figure 1 with exmnples (3) and (4), 
respectively. In (3) the microscope is discourse- 
old and the only member in the local focus for 
(u2); the competing referents ocular micrvmc- 
tcr" mid technology are new and hence not local 
fbr utterance (u2). In (4), the local focus for 
(u2) is {the  at, th,  tl, e l,.o'asc} 
A slight improvement of the performance of 
the algorithm can be achieved by regarding 
the role of "heavy" nonrestrictive modification. 
hm\]uding the referents of discom'se-new NPs 
which are amplified by appositions or nonre- 
strictive relative clauses into the set; of' possible 
competitors improves accuracy slightly. 
D iscourse  s t ructure  signall ing. It is now 
known that detinite descriptions (or more gen- 
eral overspecified NPs) signal the start of a new 
discourse segment (Passommau, 1996; Vonk et 
al., 1992). For most generation systems gener- 
ate from an I/ST-like text; plan, discourse seg- 
ments are naturally given. The only question 
fl'om the generation perspective is the degree of 
detail provided by the segmentation. 
Our algorithm gnome-up assumes that the 
discourse segmentation has already been speci- 
fied. At each segment boundary, the local focus 
is set to n i l ,  thereby disallowing pronominal- 
ization for all discourse ntities of the first ut- 
terance in the segment onset. 
It is also well known that plmmed discourse 
with repeated phrases at the begimfing of a 
clause are seen as 'bad style'. Identical repeated 
pronouns at the clause onset are rarely found 
in expository and descriptive texts (2.6% of all 
discourse pronouns in our corpus). Hmnan writ- 
ers usually avoid possibly dull lack of variation 
by employing various aggregation techniques. 
310 
Let X 1)e a refl,'renl; I o 1)e generated in Ill;l;erailCO (112), and focu,.s 1)e the' scl; of rc'h;reni;s of the 1)rcvious 
ul;l;eran(:(; ul) which are 
(a) discoursc-okl, or 
(b) realized as subject. 
(1) X has an antecedent beyond a segment boundary def description 
(2) X has an antecedent two or more ul;i;cranccs distant def (lescril)tion 
(:~) X hits ~Ul alll;(X'(xl(,ll(; i l l  ( l l \ ] ) :  ~lll(l 
(3a) X occurs in strong 1)aralM contc'xt 1)ronoun 
(31)) X ? focu,.s (lcf dcscril)tion 
(3(:) X C .foc~z.s and 
? X has a coral)cling relbrcnt Y c focus dc'f description 
? X has a comp(~ting retba'cnt Y in (ul) amplitic(1 with appo- (lef dcscril)tion 
sition or nonrestrictive r lative clause 
? o lso  pro l lOl l l l  
The repeti|;ion 1)locking rul(; overri(lcs the 1)ronominalization suggesl;ed in (3c) to a definite description. 
Figme 2: The algoritlnn 
rl'hlls pronoun rel)etition 1)hwking seems 1.o Jw~ 
an aggregation trigger rather than ~ motivation 
for definite description generation. We hyl)ot\]> 
(;size l;hat t;he at)l)ar(mt Kcquen(:y of (lelinite (le- 
scriptions ill t)lmnm(l discourse has much to do 
with repetit ion blocking, but is used with re- 
specl; to a very line-grained, 1)tel)ably genre- 
specific discourse, si;rtlCl;lll'e. Olle candidate for 
this is the, t(,mt)oral structure in newst)at)er ar- 
i;ieles proposed by McCoy and Sta'ul)e. 
When evahutting Ollr algorM m l, w(' only used 
tile pa.l'agr~I)h seglnenl;~ti;ion given in the corpus. 
\]{lit for g;etlel'al;ioll systel l ls,  which usually sir(' 
not equil)l)Cd wit.h develol)ed a.ggrcgal.i(m eal- 
tries, we have also made avai\]ablc a t)ronoun rci> 
et,itioli blocking rule: If a discourse ntity in the 
local focus has a nont)ossessiv(~ l)ronomilml an- 
|;ecedelit, in'onolninalizal;ioli will 1)e J)loel?cd at 
this l/line. Figure 2 SUll:lnlarizcs the algorithm. 
The presented pronominalization algorithm 
has been implelnented ill the reusable module 
gnome-np, gnome-np consists of a colnponent 
for discom'se model lnanagement and one for 
NP form determination, it is designed to 1)e 
plugged ill ~~:\['1;(;1' text 1)lanning, coneeI)tualiza- 
ti(m, and sentence plalming, trot 1)etbre tactical 
generation. 
5 Eva luat ion  
A comparison of the t)erforlnance of our algo- 
r ithln with 1,he annotated MUS1.; corlms and Mc- 
Coy and Strube's newspatmr corlms is given in 
Table 1. The e, valuation has been carried out 
for the algorithm gnome-np without cm\])loying 
the rel)etith)n blocking rule and without; a line- 
grained discourse segmentation. Layout scg- 
lllell{;s Wel'e llse(l for the MUSE COl'l)llS. Beeal lse 
l/he munl)er of annotal;e(l seglnent OllSe\[;s Jill' the 
newsl)aper corpus is not easy to r('-estat)lish, wc 
giv(; here two figures fol" this eori)us: tirst with- 
out any segment, ons('t signalling (lower 1)ound), 
and second with the assulnt)l;ion that 15 short- 
distance definite (tcscriptions mark segment on- 
s<%s. The tigures include locally-herald l/re - 
nouns to yield J)(;tter cOlnl)arability wil;h McCoy 
and Sl;rul)e. '.\[lic, figur(,'s in l,hc, (:ohmms 'gnome- 
nil' represc, nl; I;\]lose NPs whose form is l)re(li(',led 
correctly 1)y 1;hi; new algoril;hm when evaluatc(l 
against l;h('~ a\]moi;at,(~(l corpora. 
The figures in T~d)le 1 show that  our al- 
gorithm performs very well in both domains, 
even without using a tiner discourse Seglnen- 
ration such as telnt)ol'al structure. Moreover, 
it; pertBrms better on McCoy and Stl'ul)e's cor- 
pus than their own algorithm, which success- 
fldly predicted the choice between realization by 
pronoml and realization by detinite description 
in 84.7% of all eases. The disagreements oc- 
('ur tirsl; tbr long distance t)rol~ouns (in our ter- 
lilino\]ogy: prollOtll lS lIlore than one clause dis- 
tanI;) and, second, ill hmger tel'trent chains with 
well established focus. For the latter, whereas 
gnome-np wouhl always suggest a tn'OlmUn, the 
real discourse swaps betweeli pronoun mid deft- 
nile description. Thus a finer segmentat ion or a 
repetit ion blocking rule could still improve the 
result fllrther. 
311 
MUSE gnome-r ip agreement  newspaper  gnome-np  agreement  
pronouus 112 101 90.2% 302 267 88.d% 
def descril)tions 101 86 85.1% 225 187 202 83.1% 89.70{o 
tota l  213 t87 87.8% 527 454 469 86.1% 89.0% 
'Dtble 1: Per formance compar ison 
6 Conc lus ions  
This  paper  has presented a new a lgor i thm tbr 
the pronomina l izat ion of third person discourse 
entit ies. The  Mgorithm, first, is imp lemented  
as a reusable module tbr generat ion systenls 
and, second, provides a theoret ical  account of 
pronomina l i zat ion  i general. 
The  proposed a lgor i thm provides a solution 
for quest ion \ [~  above by widening the defini- 
t ion of local Ibcus to be a set with possibly more 
than  one referent. The Mgor i thm also oilers a 
new solution fbr prob lem \ [ ~  above, aml)igu- 
ous pronoun generat ion.  Discom'se s t ructur ing 
(~\ ] )  is assumed as given. A sufficiently fine- 
grained discourse structur ing has been explored, 
for example,  by McCoy and Strube fbr their  do- 
n lmn of newspaper  articles, but  remMns an issue 
fbr future research fbr other domains.  We have 
shown that  next to 1)roxilnity, the discourse sta- 
tus of the mltecedcnt is a main cr iter ion for trig- 
gering pronomilml izat ion.  
The  suggested a lgor i thm general izes known 
fbcusing accounts. Gundel  et al (1993)'s cog- 
nit ive slat, us of being "in fbcus" is now approxi-  
mated  by the set of all discourse-old entit ies and 
the subject  of the previous utterance.  The  new 
focus determinat ion  is also a general izat ion of 
center ing's  Cb. The  focus so defined serves two 
funct ions s imultaneously:  to tr igger 1)ronomi- 
nMization, and to provide the set; of compet i tors  
for pronoun generat ion in ambiguous  contexts.  
A l though our t ra in ing corpus is too small  to jus- 
t i fy general  clMms, the ewduat ion with respect 
to tile newspaper  genre provides evidence that  
this f inding is valid for p lanned discourse ill gen- 
erM, independent  of the concrete genre. 
References 
Susan Brennan. 1998. Centering as a, psychological re- 
source for achieving joint reference in spontaneous 
discourse. In Marilyn A.  Walker, Aravind K..loshi, 
and Ellen F. Prince, editors, Centering Theory in Dis- 
course, pages 227 - 250. Clarendon Press, Oxtbrd. 
Noam Chomsky. 1981. Lectures on government and 
binding. Foris, l)ordrecht. 
Robert Dale. 1990. Generating referring cxpression.s. 
The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Fl'anti~ek Dane~. 1974. \]hmctional sentence perspective 
mid the orga.nisa.tion of the text. In Frantigek Dane~, 
editor, Papers on Functional Sentence Perspective, 
pages 106 128. Academia, Prague. 
Barbara J. Grosz, Aravind K. Joshi, and Scott Wein- 
stein. 1995. Centering: A fl:amework for modelling 
the local coherence of discourse. Computational Lin- 
guistics, 21 (2):203 16d.  
Jeanette K. Gundel, Nancy Iledberg, and Ron Zaeharski. 
1993. Cognitive status aim the tbrm of rethr,:ing ex- 
pressions ill discourse. Lang'uagc , 69:27d 3(}7. 
Megulni Kameyama. 19.(t8. lntrasentcntial centering: A 
case study. In Marilyn A. Walker, Aravind K..Joshi, 
and Ellen F. Prince, editors, Centering 7'hcory in Dis- 
course, pages 89 -- 114. Clarendon Press, Oxtbrd. 
Ka.thlcen McCoy a,nd Michael Strube. 1999. Generating 
anaphorie xpressions: Pronoun or delinite descrip- 
tion? In Proceedings of ACL '99 Workshop: Refer- 
ence and discourse structure, pages 63 -- 71. 
J. Obcrlander, M. O'Donnell, A. Knott, and C. Mellish. 
1998. Conversation in the museuln: experiments in
dynamic hypermedia with the intelligent labelling ex- 
I)Iorcr. New l~,(:view of Multimedia and Hypermedia, 
pages 11 32. 
l/,ebecca Passonlmau. 1996. Using centering to re- 
lax gricean constraints on discourse anaphorie noun 
phrases. L(tngu, age wn, d ,qp('.ech, 39(2):229-- 264. 
Ellen F. Prince. 1992. The ZPC letter: Subjects, deli- 
niteness aim inforina.tion status. In W. C. Mam~ and 
S. A. Thompson, editors, Discourse desciption: Di- 
verse linguistic anab.lSCS of a flmd-raisi.ng text..lohn 
Benjamins, Amsterdam. 
Cmldace L. Sidner. 1979. 7bwards a computationally 
theory of definite anaphora comprehension i  English 
disourse. PhD thesis. 
Michael Strube and Udo ItMm. 1999. Functional cen- 
tering - grounding referential coherence in int'orma- 
tion structure. Computational Linguistics, 25(3):309 
- 344 .  
Michael Strube. 1998. Never look back: An alternative 
to centering. In Proceedings of Coling-ACL '98, pages 
1251 - 1257. 
Linda Z. Suri. 1993. Extending focussing frameworks to 
process complex sentences and to correct the written 
English of proficient signers of American Sign Lan- 
guage. PhD thesis. 
Enrico VMlduvi. 1993. lMbrmation packaging- a survey. 
Technical rel)ort, HCRC research Pal)er RP-d4. 
W. Vonk, G. Hustinx, and W. Simons. 1992. The use of 
referential expressions in structuring discourse. Lan- 
guage and Cognitive P~vcesses, 7(3 /4) :301  -333 .  
312 
Specifying the Parameters of Centering Theory: a Corpus-Based
Evaluation using Text from Application-Oriented Domains
M. Poesio, H. Cheng, R. Henschel, J. Hitzeman,y R. Kibble,x and R. Stevenson
University of Edinburgh, ICCS and HCRC,
fpoesio,huac,henschelg@cogsci.ed.ac.uk
y The MITRE Corporation, hitz@linus.mitre.org
xUniversity of Brighton, ITRI, Rodger.Kibble@itri.bton.ac.uk
University of Durham, Psychology and HCRC, Rosemary.Stevenson@durham.ac.uk
Abstract
The definitions of the basic concepts,
rules, and constraints of centering the-
ory involve underspecified notions such
as ?previous utterance?, ?realization?,
and ?ranking?. We attempted to find the
best way of defining each such notion
among those that can be annotated reli-
ably, and using a corpus of texts in two
domains of practical interest. Our main
result is that trying to reduce the num-
ber of utterances without a backward-
looking center (CB) results in an in-
creased number of cases in which some
discourse entity, but not the CB, gets
pronominalized, and viceversa.
1 MOTIVATION
Centering Theory (Grosz et al, 1995; Walker et
al., 1998b) is best characterized as a ?parametric?
theory: its key definitions and claims involve no-
tions such as ?utterance?, ?realization?, and ?rank-
ing? which are not completely specified; their pre-
cise definition is left as a matter for empirical re-
search, and may vary from language to language.
A first goal of the work presented in this paper
was to find which way of specifying these param-
eters, among the many proposed in the literature,
would make the claims of centering theory most
accurate as predictors of coherence and pronomi-
nalization for English. We did this by annotating
a corpus of English texts with the sort of informa-
tion required to implement some of the most pop-
ular variants of centering theory, and using this
corpus to automatically check two central claims
of the theory, the claim that all utterances have a
backward looking center (CB) (Constraint 1), and
the claim that if any discourse entity is pronomi-
nalized, the CB is (Rule 1). In doing this, we tried
to make sure we would only use information that
could be annotated reliably.
Our second goal was to evaluate the predic-
tions of the theory in domains of interest for real
applications?natural language generation, in our
case. For this reason, we used texts in two gen-
res not yet studied, but of interest to developers of
NLG systems: instructional texts and descriptions
of museum objects to be displayed on Web pages.
The paper is organized as follows. We first re-
view the basic notions of the theory. We then dis-
cuss the methods we used: our annotation method
and how the annotation was used. In Section 4 we
present the results of the study. A discussion of
these results follows.
2 FUNDAMENTALS OF CENTERING
THEORY
Centering theory (Grosz et al, 1995; Walker et
al., 1998b) is an ?object-centered? theory of text
coherence: it attempts to characterize the texts
that can be considered coherent on the basis of
the way discourse entities are introduced and dis-
cussed.1 At the same time, it is also meant to
be a theory of salience: i.e., it attempts to pre-
dict which entities will be most salient at any
given time (which should be useful for a natural
language generator, since it is these entities that
are most typically pronominalized (Gundel et al,
1993)).
According to the theory, every UTTERANCE in
a spoken dialogue or written text introduces into
the discourse a number of FORWARD-LOOKING
CENTERS (CFs). CFs correspond more or less
1For a discussion of ?object-centered? vs. ?relation-
centered? notions of coherence, see (Stevenson et al, 2000).
to discourse entities in the sense of (Karttunen,
1976; Webber, 1978; Heim, 1982), and can be
linked to CFs introduced by previous or suc-
cessive utterances. Forward-looking centers are
RANKED, and because of this ranking, some CFs
acquire particular prominence. Among them, the
so-called BACKWARD-LOOKING CENTER (CB),
defined as follows:
Backward Looking Center (CB) CB(U
i+1
), the
BACKWARD-LOOKING CENTER of utter-
ance U
i+1
, is the highest ranked element of
CF(U
i
) that is realized in U
i+1
.
Utterance U
i+1
is classified as a CONTINUE if
CB(U
i+1
) = CB(U
i
) and CB(U
i+1
) is the most
highly ranked CF of U
i+1
; as a RETAIN if the CB
remains the same, but it?s not any longer the most
highly-ranked CF; and as a SHIFT if CB(U
i+1
) 6=
CB(U
i
).
The main claims of the theory are articulated in
terms of constraints and rules on CFs and CB.
Constraint 1: All utterances of a segment except
for the 1st have exactly one CB.
Rule 1: if any CF is pronominalized, the CB is.
Rule 2: (sequences of) continuations are pre-
ferred over (sequences of) retains, which are
preferred over (sequences of) shifts
Constraint 1 and Rule 2 express a preference for
utterances in a text to talk about the same ob-
jects; Rule 1 is the main claim of the theory about
pronominalization. In this paper we concentrate
on Constraint 1 and Rule 1.
One of the most unusual features of centering
theory is that the notions of utterance, previous
utterance, ranking, and realization used in the def-
initions above are left unspecified, to be appropri-
ately defined on the basis of empirical evidence,
and possibly in a different way for each language.
As a result, centering theory is best viewed as a
cluster of theories, each of which specifies the
parameters in a different ways: e.g., ranking has
been claimed to depend on grammatical function
(Kameyama, 1985; Brennan et al, 1987), on the-
matic roles (Cote, 1998), and on the discourse sta-
tus of the CFs (Strube and Hahn, 1999); there are
at least two definitions of what counts as ?previ-
ous utterance? (Kameyama, 1998; Suri and Mc-
Coy, 1994); and ?realization? can be interpreted
either in a strict sense, i.e., by taking a CF to be
realized in an utterance only if an NP in that utter-
ance denotes that CF, or in a looser sense, by also
counting a CF as ?realized? if it is referred to in-
directly by means of a bridging reference (Clark,
1977), i.e., an anaphoric expression that refers to
an object which wasn?t mentioned before but is
somehow related to an object that already has, as
in the vase . . . the handle (see, e.g., the discussion
in (Grosz et al, 1995; Walker et al, 1998b)).
3 METHODS
The fact that so many basic notions of centering
theory do not have a completely specified def-
inition makes empirical verification of the the-
ory rather difficult. Because any attempt at di-
rectly annotating a corpus for ?utterances? and
their CBs is bound to force the annotators to adopt
some specification of the basic notions of the the-
ory, previous studies have tended to study a par-
ticular variant of the theory (Di Eugenio, 1998;
Kameyama, 1998; Passonneau, 1993; Strube and
Hahn, 1999; Walker, 1989). A notable exception
is (Tetreault, 1999), which used an annotated cor-
pus to compare the performance of two variants
of centering theory.
The work discussed here, like Tetreault?s, is an
attempt at using corpora to compare different ver-
sions of centering theory, but considering also pa-
rameters of centering theory not studied in this
earlier work. In particular, we looked at different
ways of defining the notion of utterance, we stud-
ied the definition of realization, and more gener-
ally the role of semantic information. We did this
by annotating a corpus with information that has
been claimed by one or the other version of cen-
tering theory to play a role in the definitions of
its basic notions - e.g., the grammatical function
of an NP, anaphoric relations (including infor-
mation about bridging references) and how sen-
tences break up into clauses and subclausal units?
and then tried to find out the best way of specify-
ing these notions automatically, by trying out dif-
ferent configurations of parameters, and counting
the number of violations of the constraints and
rules that would result by adopting a particular
parameter configuration.
The Data
The aim of our project, which is called
GNOME and whose home page is at
http://www.hcrc.ed.ac.uk/ ~ gnome,
is to develop NP generation algorithms whose
generality is to be verified by incorporating
them in two distinct systems: the ILEX system
developed at the University of Edinburgh, that
generates Web pages describing museum objects
on the basis of the perceived status of its user?s
knowledge and of the objects she previously
looked at (Oberlander et al, 1998); and the
ICONOCLAST system, developed at the Univer-
sity of Brighton, that supports the creation of
patient information leaflets (Scott et al, 1998).
The corpus we collected includes texts from
both the domains we are studying. The texts
in the museum domain consist of descriptions
of museum objects and brief texts about the
artists that produced them; the texts in the
pharmaceutical domain are leaflets providing the
patients with the legally mandatory information
about their medicine. The total size of the corpus
is of about 6,000 NPs. For this study we used
about half of each subset, for a total number of
about 3,000 NPs, of which 103 are third person
pronouns (72 in the museum domain, 31 in the
pharmaceutical domain) and 61 are third-person
possessive pronouns (58 in the museum domain,
3 in the pharmaceutical domain).
Annotation
Previous empirical studies of centering theory
typically involved a single annotator annotat-
ing her corpus according to her own subjective
judgment (Passonneau, 1993; Kameyama, 1998;
Strube and Hahn, 1999). One of our goals was
to use for our study only information that could
be annotated reliably (Passonneau and Litman,
1993; Carletta, 1996), as we believe this will
make our results easier to replicate. The price
we paid to achieve replicability is that we could-
n?t test all hypotheses proposed in the literature,
especially about segmentation and about ranking.
We discuss some of the problems in what follows.
(The latest version of the annotation manual is
available from the GNOME project?s home page.)
We used eight annotators for the reliability study
and the annotation.
Utterances Kameyama (1998) noted that iden-
tifying utterances with sentences is problematic
in the case of multiclausal sentences: e.g., gram-
matical function ranking becomes difficult to
measure, as there may be more than one sub-
ject. She proposed to use all and only tensed
clauses instead of sentences as utterance units,
and then classified finite clauses into (i) utter-
ance units that constitute a ?permanent? update
of the local focus: these include coordinated
clauses and adjuncts) and (ii) utterance units that
result in updates that are then erased, much as
in the way the information provided by subor-
dinated discourse segments is erased when they
are popped. Kameyama called these EMBED-
DED utterance units, and proposed that clauses
that serve as verbal complements behave this way.
Suri and McCoy (1994) did a study that led them
to propose that some types of adjuncts?in particu-
lar, clauses headed by after and before?should be
treated as ?embedded? rather than as ?permanent
updates? as suggested by Kameyama; these re-
sults were subsequently confirmed by more con-
trolled experiments Pearson et al (2000). Nei-
ther Kameyama nor Suri and McCoy discuss par-
entheticals; Kameyama only briefly mentions rel-
ative clauses, but doesn?t analyze them in detail.
In order to evaluate these definitions of ut-
terance (sentences versus finite clauses), as well
as the different ways of defining ?previous utter-
ance?, we marked up in our corpus what we called
(DISCOURSE) UNITS. These include clauses, as
well as other sentence subconstituents which may
be treated as separate utterances, including paren-
theticals, preposed PPs, and (the second element
of) coordinated VPs. The instructions for mark-
ing up units were in part derived from (Marcu,
1999); for each unit, the following attributes were
marked:
 utype: whether the unit is a main clause,
a relative clause, appositive, a parenthetical,
etc.
 verbed: whether the unit contains a verb or
not.
 finite: for verbed units, whether the verb is
finite or not.
 subject: for verbed units, whether they have
a full subject, an empty subject (expletive,
as in there sentences), or no subject (e.g., for
infinitival clauses).
The agreement on identifying the boundaries of
units, using the  statistic discussed in (Carletta,
1996), was  = :9 (for two annotators and 500
units); the agreement on features(2 annotators
and at least 200 units) was follows:
Attribute  Value
utype .76
verbed .9
finite .81
subject .86
NPs Our instructions for identifying NP mark-
ables derive from those proposed in the MATE
project scheme for annotating anaphoric relations
(Poesio et al, 1999). We annotated attributes of
NPs which could be used to define their ranking,
including:
 The NP type, cat (pronoun, proper name,
etc.)
 A few other ?basic? syntactic features, num,
per, and gen, that could be used to identify
contexts in which the antecedent of a pro-
noun could be identified unambiguously;
 The grammatical function, gf;
 ani: whether the object denoted is animate
or inanimate
 deix: whether the object is a deictic refer-
ence or not
The agreement values for these attributes are as
follows:
Attribute  Value
ani .81
cat .9
deix .81
gen .89
gf .85
num .84
per .9
one of the features of NPs claimed to affect rank-
ing (Sidner, 1979; Cote, 1998) that we haven?t
so far been able to annotate because of failure
to reach acceptable agreement is thematic roles
( = :35).
Anaphoric information Finally, in order to
compute whether a CF from an utterance was re-
alized directly or indirectly in the following ut-
terance, we marked up anaphoric relations be-
tween NPs, again using a variant of the MATE
scheme. Theories of focusing such as (Sidner,
1979; Strube and Hahn, 1999), as well as our own
early experiments with centering, suggested that
indirect realization can play quite a crucial role in
maintaining the CB; however, previous work, par-
ticularly in the context of the MUC initiative, sug-
gested that while it?s fairly easy to achieve agree-
ment on identity relations, marking up bridging
references is quite hard; this was confirmed by,
e.g., Poesio and Vieira (1998). As a result we did
annotate this type of relations, but to achieve a
reasonable agreement, and to contain somehow
the annotators? work, we limited the types of re-
lations annotators were supposed to mark up, and
we specified priorities. Thus, besides identity
(IDENT) we only marked up three non-identity
(?bridging? (Clark, 1977)) relations, and only re-
lations between objects. The relations we mark
up are a subset of those proposed in the ?extended
relations? version of the MATE scheme (Poesio et
al., 1999) and include set membership (ELE-
MENT), subset (SUBSET), and ?generalized pos-
session? (POSS), which includes part-of relations
as well as more traditional ownership relations.
As expected, we achieved a rather good agree-
ment on identity relations. In our most recent
analysis (two annotators looking at the anaphoric
relations between 200 NPs) we observed no real
disagreements; 79.4% of these relations were
marked up by both annotators; 12.8% by only
one of them; and in 7.7% of the cases, one of
the annotators marked up a closer antecedent than
the other. Concerning bridges, limiting the re-
lations did limit the disagreements among an-
notators (only 4.8% of the relations are actually
marked differently) but only 22% of bridging ref-
erences were marked in the same way by both an-
notators; 73.17% of relations are marked by only
one or the other annotator. So reaching agreement
on this information involved several discussions
between annotators and more than one pass over
the corpus.
Segmentation Segmenting text in a reliable
fashion is still an open problem, and in addition
the relation between centering (i.e., local focus
shifts) and segmentation (i.e., global focus shifts)
is still not clear: some see them as independent
aspects of attentional structure, whereas other re-
searchers define centering transitions with respect
to segments (see, e.g., the discussion in the intro-
duction to (Walker et al, 1998b)). Our prelim-
inary experiments at annotating discourse struc-
ture didn?t give good results, either. Therefore,
we only used the layout structure of the texts
as a rough indication of discourse structure. In
the museum domain, each object description was
treated as a separate segment; in the pharmaceu-
tical domain, each subsection of a leaflet was
treated as a separate segment. We then identified
by hand those violations of Constraint 1 that ap-
peared to be motivated by too broad a segmenta-
tion of the text.2
Automatic computation of centering
information
The annotation thus produced was used to au-
tomatically compute utterances according to the
particular configuration of parameters chosen,
and then to compute the CFs and the CB (if any)
of each utterance on the basis of the anaphoric
information and according to the notion of rank-
ing specified. This information was the used to
find violations of Constraint 1 and Rule 1. The
behavior of the script that computes this informa-
tion depends on the following parameters:
utterance: whether sentences, finite clauses, or
verbed clauses should be treated as utter-
ances.
previous utterance: whether adjunct clauses
should be treated Kameyama-style or
Suri-style.
rank: whether CFs should be ranked according
to grammatical function or discourse status
in Strube and Hahn?s sense
2(Cristea et al, 2000) showed that it is indeed possible
to achieve good agreement on discourse segmentation, but
that it requires intensive training and repeated iterations; we
intend to take advantage of a corpus already annotated in this
way in future work.
realization: whether only direct realization
should be counted, or also indirect realiza-
tion via bridging references.
4 MAIN RESULTS
The principle we used to evaluate the different
configurations of the theory was that the best def-
inition of the parameters was the one that would
lead to the fewest violations of Constraint 1 and
Rule 1. We discuss the results for each principle.
Constraint 1: All utterances of a segment
except for the 1st have precisely one CB
Our first set of figures concerns Constraint 1:
how many utterances have a CB. This con-
straint can be used to evaluate how well cen-
tering theory predicts coherence, in the follow-
ing sense: assuming that all our texts are co-
herent, if centering were the only factor behind
coherence, all utterances should verify this con-
straint. The first table shows the results obtained
by choosing the configuration that comes clos-
est to the one suggested by Kameyama (1998):
utterance=finite, prev=kameyama, rank=gf, real-
ization=direct. The first column lists the number
of utterances that satisfy Constraint 1; the second
those that do not satisfy it, but are segment-initial;
the third those that do not satisfy it and are not
segment-initial.
CB Segment Initial NO CB Total Number
Museum 132 35 245 412
Pharmacy 158 13 198 369
Total 290 48 443 791
The previous table shows that with this config-
uration of parameters, most utterances do not sat-
isfy Constraint 1 in the strict sense even if we take
into account text segmentation (admittedly, a very
rough one). If we take sentences as utterances,
instead of finite clauses, we get fewer violations,
although about 25% of the total number of utter-
ances are violations:
CB Segment Initial NO CB Total Number
Museum 120 22 85 227
Pharmacy 152 8 51 211
Total 272 30 136 438
Using Suri and McCoy?s definition of previous
utterance, instead of Kameyama?s (i.e., treating
adjuncts as embedded utterances) leads to a slight
improvement over Kameyama?s proposal but still
not as good as using sentences:
CB Segment Initial NO CB Total Number
Museum 140 35 237 412
Pharmacy 167 14 188 369
Total 307 49 425 791
What about the finite clause types not consid-
ered by Kameyama or Suri and McCoy? It turns
out that we get better results if we do not treat as
utterances relative clauses (which anyway always
have a CB, under standard syntactic assumptions
about the presence of traces referring to the modi-
fied noun phrase), parentheticals, clauses that oc-
cur in subject position; and if we treat as a single
utterance matrix clauses with empty subjects and
their complements (as in it is possible that John
will arrive tomorrow).
CB Segment Initial NO CB Total Number
Museum 143 35 153 331
Pharmacy 161 14 159 334
Total 304 49 312 665
But by far the most significant improvement to the
percentage of utterances that satisfy Constraint 1
comes by adopting a looser definition of ?real-
izes?, i.e., by allowing a discourse entity to serve
as CB of an utterance even if it?s only referred to
indirectly in that utterance by means of a bridg-
ing reference, as originally proposed by Sidner
(1979) for her discourse focus. The following se-
quence of utterances explains why this could lead
to fewer violations of Constraint 1:
(1) (u1) These ?egg vases? are of exceptional
quality: (u2) basketwork bases support
egg-shaped bodies (u3) and bundles of straw
form the handles, (u4) while small eggs resting
in straw nests serve as the finial for each lid. (u5)
Each vase is decorated with inlaid decoration:
. . .
In (1), u1 is followed by four utterances. Only
the last of these directly refers to the set of egg
vases introduced in u1, while they all contain im-
plicit references to these objects. If we adopt this
looser notion of realization, the figures improve
dramatically, even with the rather restricted set of
relations on which our annotators agree. Now the
majority of utterances satisfy Constraint 1:
CB Segment Initial NO CB Total Number
Museum 225 35 71 331
Pharmacy 174 14 146 334
Total 399 49 217 665
And of course we get even better results by treat-
ing sentences as utterances:
CB Segment Initial NO CB Total Number
Museum 171 17 39 227
Pharmacy 168 7 36 211
Total 339 24 75 438
It is important, however, to notice that even un-
der the best configuration, at least 17% of utter-
ances violate the constraint. The (possibly, obvi-
ous) explanation is that although coherence is of-
ten achieved by means of links between objects,
this is not the only way to make texts coherent.
So, in the museum domain, we find utterances
that do not refer to any of the previous CFs be-
cause they express generic statements about the
class of objects of which the object under discus-
sion is an instance, or viceversa utterances that
make a generic point that will then be illustrated
by a specific object. In the following example,
the second utterance gives some background con-
cerning the decoration of a particular object.
(2) (u1) On the drawer above the door, gilt-bronze
military trophies flank a medallion portrait of
Louis XIV. (u2) In the Dutch Wars of 1672 -
1678, France fought simultaneously against the
Dutch, Spanish, and Imperial armies, defeating
them all. (u3) This cabinet celebrates the Treaty
of Nijmegen, which concluded the war.
Coherence can also be achieved by explicit
coherence relations, such as EXEMPLIFICA-
TION in the following example:
(3) (u1) Jewelry is often worn to signal membership
of a particular social group. (u2) The Beatles
brooch shown previously is another case in point:
Rule 1: if any NP is pronominalized, the CB is
In the previous section we saw that allowing
bridging references to maintain the CB leads to
fewer violations of Constraint 1. One should
not, however, immediately conclude that it would
be a good idea to replace the strict definition
of ?realizes? with a looser one, because there
is, unfortunately, a side effect: adopting an in-
direct notion of realizes leads to more viola-
tions of Rule 1. Figures are as follows. Us-
ing utterance=s, rank=gf, realizes=direct 22 pro-
nouns violating Rule 1 (9 museum, 13 pharmacy)
(13.4%), whereas with realizes=indirect we have
38 violations (25, 13) (23%); if we choose utter-
ance=finite, prev=suri, we have 23 violations of
rule 1 with realizes=direct (13 + 10) (14%), 32
with realizes=indirect (21 + 11) (19.5%). Using
functional centering (Strube and Hahn, 1999) to
rank the CFs led to no improvements, because of
the almost perfect correlation in our domain be-
tween subjecthood and being discourse-old. One
reason for these problems is illustrated by (4).
(4) (u1) A great refinement among armorial signets
was to reproduce not only the coat-of-arms but
the correct tinctures; (u2) they were repeated in
colour on the reverse side (u3) and the crystal
would then be set in the gold bezel.
They in u2 refers back to the correct tinctures (or,
possibly, the coat-of-arms), which however only
occurs in object position in a (non-finite) com-
plement clause in (u1), and therefore has lower
ranking than armorial signets, which is realized
in (u2) by the bridge the reverse side and there-
fore becomes the CB having higher rank in (u1),
but is not pronominalized.
In the pharmaceutical leaflets we found a num-
ber of violations of Rule 1 towards the end of
texts, when the product is referred to. A possi-
ble explanation is that after the product has been
mentioned sentence after sentence in the text, by
the end of the text it is salient enough that there
is no need to put it again in the local focus by
mentioning it explicitly. E.g., it in the following
example refers to the cream, not mentioned in any
of the previous two utterances.
(5) (u1) A child of 4 years needs about a third of
the adult amount. (u2) A course of treatment for
a child should not normally last more than five
days (u3) unless your doctor has told you to use
it for longer.
5 DISCUSSION
Our main result is that there seems to be a trade-
off between Constraint 1 and Rule 1. Allowing
for a definition of ?realizes? that makes the CB be-
have more like Sidner?s Discourse Focus (Sidner,
1979) leads to a very significant reduction in the
number of violations of Constraint 1.3 We also
noted, however, that interpreting ?realizes? in this
way results in more violations of Rule 1. (No
differences were found when functional center-
ing was used to rank CFs instead of grammati-
3Footnote 2, page 3 of the intro to (Walker et al, 1998b)
suggests a weaker interpretation for the Constraint: ?there is
no more than one CB for utterance?. This weaker form of
the Constraint does hold for most utterances, but it?s almost
vacuous, especially for grammatical function ranking, given
that utterances have at most one subject.
cal function.) The problem raised by these re-
sults is that whereas centering is intended as an
account of both coherence and local salience, dif-
ferent concepts may have to be used in Constraint
1 and Rule 1, as in Sidner?s theory. E.g., we might
have a ?Center of Coherence?, analogous to Sid-
ner?s discourse focus, and that can be realized in-
directly; and a ?Center of Salience?, similar to her
actor focus, and that can only be realized directly.
Constraint 1 would be about the Center of Coher-
ence, whereas Rule 1 would be about the Center
of Salience. Indeed, many versions of centering
theory have elevated the CP to the rank of a sec-
ond center.4
We also saw that texts can be coherent even
when Constraint 1 is violated, as coherence can
be ensured by other means (e.g., by rhetorical re-
lations). This, again, suggests possible revisions
to Constraint 1, requiring every utterance either
to have a center of coherence, or to be linked by a
rhetorical relation to the previous utterance.
Finally, we saw that we get fewer violations of
Constraint 1 by adopting sentences as our notion
of utterance; however, again, this results in more
violations of Rule 1. If finite clauses are used as
utterances, we found that certain types of finite
clauses not previously discussed, including rela-
tive clauses and matrix clauses with empty sub-
jects, are best not treated as utterances. We didn?t
find significant differences between Kameyama
and Suri and McCoy?s definition of ?previous ut-
terance?. We believe however more work is still
needed to identify a completely satisfactory way
of breaking up sentences in utterance units.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank Kees van Deemter, Barbara di
Eugenio, Nikiforos Karamanis and Donia Scott
for comments and suggestions. Massimo Poesio
is supported by an EPSRC Advanced Fellowship.
Hua Cheng, Renate Henschel and Rodger Kib-
ble were in part supported by the EPSRC project
GNOME, GR/L51126/01. Janet Hitzeman was in
part supported by the EPSRC project SOLE.
4This separation among a ?center of coherence? and a
?center of salience? is independently motivated by consid-
erations about the division of labor between the text planner
and the sentence planner in a generation system; see, e.g.,
(Kibble, 1999).
References
S.E. Brennan, M.W. Friedman, and C.J. Pollard. 1987.
A centering approach to pronouns. In Proc. of the
25th ACL, pages 155?162, June.
J. Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classifica-
tion tasks: the kappa statistic. Computational Lin-
guistics, 22(2):249?254.
H. H. Clark. 1977. Inferences in comprehension. In
D. Laberge and S. J. Samuels, editors, Basic Pro-
cess in Reading: Perception and Comprehension.
Lawrence Erlbaum.
S. Cote. 1998. Ranking forward-looking centers. In
M. A. Walker, A. K. Joshi, and E. F. Prince, editors,
Centering Theory in Discourse, chapter 4, pages
55?70. Oxford.
D. Cristea, N. Ide, D. Marcu, and V. Tablan. 2000.
Discourse structure and co-reference: An empirical
study. In Proc. of COLING.
B. Di Eugenio. 1998. Centering in italian. In M. A.
Walker, A. K. Joshi, and E. F. Prince, editors, Cen-
tering Theory in Discourse, chapter 7, pages 115?
138. Oxford.
B. J. Grosz, A. K. Joshi, and S. Weinstein. 1995.
Centering: A framework for modeling the local co-
herence of discourse. Computational Linguistics,
21(2):202?225.
J. K. Gundel, N. Hedberg, and R. Zacharski. 1993.
Cognitive status and the form of referring expres-
sions in discourse. Language, 69(2):274?307.
I. Heim. 1982. The Semantics of Definite and In-
definite Noun Phrases. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Massachusetts at Amherst.
M. Kameyama. 1985. Zero Anaphora: The case of
Japanese. Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University.
M. Kameyama. 1998. Intra-sentential centering: A
case study. In M. A. Walker, A. K. Joshi, and
E. F. Prince, editors, Centering Theory in Dis-
course, chapter 6, pages 89?112. Oxford.
L. Karttunen. 1976. Discourse referents. In J. Mc-
Cawley, editor, Syntax and Semantics 7 - Notes from
the Linguistic Underground. Academic Press.
R. Kibble. 1999. Cb or not Cb? centering applied to
NLG. In Proc. of the ACL Workshop on discourse
and reference.
D. Marcu. 1999. Instructions for manually annotat-
ing the discourse structures of texts. Unpublished
manuscript, USC/ISI, May.
J. Oberlander, M. O?Donnell, A. Knott, and C. Mel-
lish. 1998. Conversation in the museum: Exper-
iments in dynamic hypermedia with the intelligent
labelling explorer. New Review of Hypermedia and
Multimedia, 4:11?32.
R. Passonneau and D. Litman. 1993. Feasibility of
automated discourse segmentation. In Proceedings
of 31st Annual Meeting of the ACL.
R. J. Passonneau. 1993. Getting and keeping the cen-
ter of attention. In M. Bates and R. M. Weischedel,
editors, Challenges in Natural Language Process-
ing, chapter 7, pages 179?227. Cambridge.
J. Pearson, R. Stevenson, and M. Poesio. 2000. Pro-
noun resolution in complex sentences. In Proc. of
AMLAP, Leiden.
M. Poesio and R. Vieira. 1998. A corpus-based inves-
tigation of definite description use. Computational
Linguistics, 24(2):183?216, June.
M. Poesio, F. Bruneseaux, and L. Romary. 1999. The
MATE meta-scheme for coreference in dialogues in
multiple languages. In M. Walker, editor, Proc. of
the ACL Workshop on Standards and Tools for Dis-
course Tagging, pages 65?74.
D. Scott, R. Power, and R. Evans. 1998. Generation
as a solution to its own problem. In Proc. of the
9th International Workshop on Natural Language
Generation, Niagara-on-the-Lake, CA.
C. L. Sidner. 1979. Towards a computational theory
of definite anaphora comprehension in English dis-
course. Ph.D. thesis, MIT.
R. Stevenson, A. Knott, J. Oberlander, and S McDon-
ald. 2000. Interpreting pronouns and connectives.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 15.
M. Strube and U. Hahn. 1999. Functional centering?
grounding referential coherence in information
structure. Computational Linguistics, 25(3):309?
344.
L. Z. Suri and K. F. McCoy. 1994. RAFT/RAPR
and centering: A comparison and discussion of
problems related to processing complex sentences.
Computational Linguistics, 20(2):301?317.
J. R. Tetreault. 1999. Analysis of syntax-based pro-
noun resolution methods. In Proc. of the 37th ACL,
pages 602?605, University of Marylan, June. ACL.
M. A. Walker, A. K. Joshi, and E. F. Prince, editors.
1998b. Centering Theory in Discourse. Oxford.
M. A. Walker. 1989. Evaluating discourse process-
ing algorithms. In Proc. ACL-89, pages 251?261,
Vancouver, CA, June.
B. L. Webber. 1978. A formal approach to discourse
anaphora. Report 3761, BBN, Cambridge, MA.
 
	
	A brief introduction to the GeM annotation schema for complex
document layout
John Bateman
University of Bremen
Bremen, Germany
bateman@uni-bremen.de
Renate Henschel
University of Stirling
Stirling, Scotland
rhenschel@uni-bremen.de
Judy Delin
University of Stirling and
Enterprise IDU
Newport Pagnell, England
judy.delin@enterpriseidu.com
Abstract
In this paper we sketch the design, motivation
and use of the GeM annotation scheme: an
XML-based annotation framework for prepar-
ing corpora involving documents with complex
layout of text, graphics, diagrams, layout and
other navigational elements. We set out the
basic organizational layers, contrast the techni-
cal approach with some other schemes for com-
plex markup in the XML tradition, and indicate
some of the applications we are pursuing.
1 Introduction
In the GeM project (?Genre and Multimodal-
ity?: http://www.purl.org/net/gem)
1
we are
investigating the relationship between different
document genres and their potential realiza-
tional forms in combinations of text, layout,
graphics, pictures and diagrams. The central fo-
cus of the project is to develop a theory of visual
and textual page layout in electronic and paper
documents that includes adequate attention to
local and expert knowledge in information de-
sign. By analysing resources across visual and
verbal modes, we aim to reveal the purpose of
each in contributing to the message and struc-
ture of the communicative artefact as a whole.
We see it as crucial, however, that research of
this nature be placed on as solid an empirical
basis as has become common in other areas of
linguistic inquiry. The data basis for many of
the claims made in this area hitherto has been
far too narrow: the provision of suitable corpus
materials is therefore fundamental.
For such an enterprise to succeed, it is es-
sential to obtain or construct a structured set
1
The GeM project is funded by the British Economic
and Social Research Council, whose support we grate-
fully acknowledge. We also thank the anonymous review-
ers for this workshop for some very useful comments.
of data on which to base the analysis; that
is, in the words of Gunther Kress, a leading
researcher in the area of multimodal meaning
(cf., e.g., Kress and Van Leeuwen (2001)): we
need ?to turn stuff into data?. In our case,
the ?stuff? consists of raw paged-based infor-
mation presentations, such as illustrated books,
newspapers (print and online versions), instruc-
tional texts, manuals, and so on; the ?data?
is then highly structured re-representations of
these documents that bring out parallel but in-
terrelated dimensions of organization crucial for
the total effect, or meaning, of the ?page?.
Although it is (a) widely accepted that data
for designing and improving natural language
processing can best be made available in the
form of structured, standardized annotated cor-
pora and (b) increasingly accepted that such
data should stretch to include more than the
traditional concerns of linguistics?i.e., speech
and plain text data?and take in more visu-
ally challenging presentations, movements in
this direction have to date been very limited.
The GeM annotation scheme is being devel-
oped in order to support analyses of the broader
range of layout-text-graphical interactions that
is commonplace in professionally designed doc-
uments. We are currently annotating an ex-
ploratory corpus in order to bring out the com-
plex interrelationships that can be observed
within page-based information delivery.
2 Annotation content
The starting basis for our annotation draws
on some detailed non-computational ac-
counts of the organization of multimodal
pages/documents?most specifically, the seminal
account of constraints on document design
by Waller (1987)?and exploratory computa-
tional accounts?such as the layout structures
introduced by Bateman et al (2001). This
organization reflects both artefact-internal
considerations such as the layout, text and
graphics, as well as artefact-external consid-
erations such as design decisions, production
constraints (e.g., cost), and artefact constraints
(i.e., the limited size of a piece of paper
contrasted with the theoretically unbounded
scrollable window on a computer screen). These
external considerations are often connected.
The ?ideal? layout of information on a page
might as a consequence never occur: it must
be ?folded in? to the structures afforded by the
artefact, and labelled and arranged according
to the structures required for access.
In order to pick apart and explicitly repre-
sent the strands of meaning that we believe play
a crucial role in multimodal page-based docu-
ment design, we require several orthogonal lay-
ers of annotation. We claim that these levels are
the minimum necessary for revealing accounts
of the operation of the kinds of visual artifacts
being gathered in our corpus?we expect further
layers to be added. Indeed, we consider it a
crucial design feature that the annotation lay-
ers adopted be additive and open rather than
excluding and closed. The layers at the focus of
attention within the current phase of the GeM
enterprise are:
? Rhetorical structure: the rhetorical rela-
tionships between content elements; how
the content is ?argued?;
? Layout structure: the nature, appearance
and position of communicative elements on
the page;
? Navigation structure: the ways in which
the intended mode(s) of consumption of the
document is/are supported.
We then need in addition to these layers, ex-
plicit representation of constraints that range
freely over the layers and which relate design
decisions to document types, or genres. Further
constraints that are known to determine docu-
ment design include: canvas constraints, arising
out of the physical nature of the object being
produced (e.g., page or screen, fold-geometry in
leaflets, and so on), production constraints, aris-
ing out of the production technology, and con-
sumption constraints, arising out of the time,
place, and manner of acquiring and consuming
the document. Further details and background
for our approach to document design and de-
scription are given in Delin et al (2002).
Our corpus needs to contain information
about each of these contributing sources of con-
straint in a way that supports empirical in-
vestigation. Our hypothesis, following Waller
(1987), is that not only is it possible to find
systematic correspondences between these lay-
ers, but also that those correspondences them-
selves will depend on specifiable aspects of their
context of use. But to verify (or otherwise) this
hypothesis, the data gathering and annotation
must come first. And this leads directly to some
important technical issues, since the structures
induced by these layers of constraint can be
highly divergent and need to be mapped onto
one another with extreme flexibility. The well-
known corpus annotation problem of intersect-
ing hierarchies therefore arises here with consid-
erable force.
3 Technical approach
Our approach to implementing the required
multiple layer annotation scheme is to adopt
multiple level ?stand-off? or ?remote? annota-
tions similar to those suggested by Thompson
and McKelvie (1997) or the Corpus Encoding
Standard (e.g., CES, 1999: Annex 10). For
each document to be included in the corpus,
therefore, we create a ?base level? document
whose purpose is provide a common set of units
to which all subsequent stand-off levels refer.
These base level units range over textual, graph-
ical and layout elements and give a comprehen-
sive account of the material on the page, i.e.
they comprise everything which can be seen on
the page/pages of the document, including: or-
thographic sentences, sentence fragments initi-
ating a list, headings, titles, headlines, photos,
drawings, diagrams, figures (without caption),
captions of photos, drawings, diagrams, tables,
text in photos, drawings, diagrams, icons, tables
cells, list headers, list items, list labels (itemiz-
ers), items in a menu, page numbers, footnotes
(without footnote label), footnote labels, run-
ning heads, emphasized text, horizontal or ver-
tical lines which function as delimiters between
columns or rows, lines, arrows, and polylines
which connect other base units. Each such el-
ement is marked as a base unit and receives a
unique base unit identifier.
The more abstract annotation levels may
then group base units as required; these group-
ings must again be very flexible?for exam-
ple, it is quite possible that non-consecutive
basic units need to be grouped (and that
differing non-consecutive basic units will be
grouped within differing annotation layers).
Each of the more abstract layers is repre-
sented formally as a further structured XML
specification whose precise informational con-
tent and form is in turn defined by an ap-
propriate Document Type Definition (DTD).
2
Each layer defines a particular structural view
of the original document. The markup
for a single document then consists mini-
mally of the following four inter-related layers:
Name content
GeM base base units
RST base rhetorical structure
Layout base layout properties and
structure
Navigation base navigation elements
and structure
All information apart from that of the base
level is expressed in terms of pointers to the rel-
evant units of the base level. This stand-off ap-
proach to annotation readily supports the nec-
essary range of intersecting, overlapping hierar-
chical structures commonly found in even the
simplest documents.
The relationships of the differing annotation
levels to the base level units is depicted graph-
ically in Figure 1. This shows that base units
(the central column) provide the basic vocabu-
lary for all other kinds of units and can, further,
be cross-classified.
Space precludes a detailed account of the or-
ganization of all the levels of the annotation
scheme. Instead we select some examples of an
annotated document at each layer of annotation
to give an indication of the annotation scheme in
action. For further technical details and spec-
ifications of the annotation scheme, the inter-
ested reader is referred to the technical manual
(Henschel, 2002). For ease of exposition, we will
draw most of our examples from the annotation
of the page shown in Figure 2. This page has
2
For the DTDs themselves, as well as further infor-
mation and examples, see the GeM corpus webpages.
base unitsLayout
Semantic
Content
RST
segments
navigational
elements
layout units
Figure 1: The distribution of base elements to
layout, rhetorical and navigational elements
Figure 2: Example page: Flegg, J. (1999)
Collins Gem Birds. Italy: Harper Collins. p21.
Used by kind permission of the publisher.
the advantage that it is relatively straightfor-
ward; more complex examples can be found on
the corpus webpages.
The base unit annotation (GemBase) for an
extract from the centre of the page is as follows:
<unit id="u-21.5">---------------</unit>
<unit id="u-21.6"
src="gannet.jpg" alt="gannet-photo"/>
<unit id="u-21.7">
Huge (90cm) unmistakable seabird.
</unit>
<unit id="u-21.8">
Watch for white, cigar-shaped body and
long straight, slender, black-tipped wings.
</unit>
<unit id="u-21.9">
In summer, yellow head of
adult inconspicuous. </unit>
<unit id="u-21.10">
Plunges spectacularly for fish.</unit>
<unit id="u-21.11">Sexes similar.</unit>
Although the base annotation generally has a
flat structure, in certain cases, we diverge from
this and allow nested markup, i.e., base units
inside base units. This is used in the following
situations: emphasized text portions in a sen-
tence/heading, icons or similar pictorial signs in
a sentence, text pieces in a diagram or picture,
arrows and other graphical signs in a diagram
or picture, and document deictic expressions oc-
curring in a sentence.
The layout base then consists of three main
parts: (a) layout segmentation?identification of
the minimal layout units, (b) realization infor-
mation ? typographical and other layout prop-
erties of the basic layout units, and (c) the lay-
out structure information?the grouping of the
layout units into more complex layout entities.
Whereas in typography, the minimal layout el-
ement (in text) is the glyph, here we are con-
cerned with groupings of base units that have
a visual coherence and unity with respect to
the organisation of the page: these groupings
are termed layout units and, unlike the base
units, are organized into a non-trivial hierarchi-
cal structure as required to describe the page.
Again, each layout-unit has an id attribute,
which carries an identifying symbol; in addition,
however, the stand-off annotation is achieved
via an attribute xref which points to the base
units which belong to that layout unit. It is
possible, but not necessary, to store the corre-
sponding text portions of the original text file
between the start and end tag of a layout-unit
for mnemonic purposes; this text information is
not used in any further processing. The follow-
ing extract shows the layout unit corresponding
to the main block of text underneath the gannet
photo.
<layout-unit id="lay-flegg-text"
xref="u-21.7 u-21.8 u-21.9
u-21.10 u-21.11">
Huge (90cm) unmistakable seabird.
Watch for white, cigar-shaped body
and long straight, slender,
black-tipped wings. In summer, yellow
head of adult inconspicuous. Plunges
spectacularly for fish. Sexes similar.
</layout-unit>
The second part of the layout base is the re-
alization. Each layout unit specified in the lay-
out segmentation has a visual realization. The
most apparent difference is which mode has
been used ? the verbal or the visual mode. Fol-
lowing this distinction, the layout base differen-
tiates between two kinds of elements: textual
elements and graphical elements marked with
the tags <text> and <graphics> respectively.
These two elements have a differing sets of at-
tributes describing their layout properties. The
attributes are generally consistent with the lay-
out attributes defined for XSL formatting ob-
ject and CSS layout models. The id of each
layout unit of the segmentation part of the lay-
out base has to occur exactly once under xref
in the realization part: either in a <text> or
a <graphics> element. In the following cod-
ing example, we have five layout units which
share typographical characteristics. These cor-
respond to the five table cells in the first column
of the table on the page shown in Figure 2.
<text xref="lay-21.12 lay-21.14 lay-21.16
lay-21.18 lay-21.20"
font-family="sans-serif"
font-size="10" font-style="normal"
font-weight="bold"
case="mixed" justification="right"
color="black"/>
The third part of the layout base then serves
to represent the hierarchical layout structure.
Generally we assume that the layout structure
of a document is tree-like with the entire docu-
ment being the root; this will certainly be prob-
lematic for some document types but also has
sufficient applicability to enable us to make con-
siderable headway. Each layout chunk is a node
in the tree, and the basic layout units, which
have been identified in the segmentation part of
the layout base, are the terminal nodes of that
tree. In our annotation, we use several different
tags for the nodes in the layout tree. The three
most common are: <layout-root>, the ele-
ment describing the entire document, <layout-
chunk>, all non-terminal nodes in the layout
tree except for the root, and <layout-leaf>,
the terminal nodes. A slightly simplified (i.e.,
some further substructure is ommitted) extract
of the layout structure for our example page is
depicted graphically in Figure 3; it is described
by the following XML annotation:
page-21
header-21 body-21 page-no-21
lay-21.2 lay-21.3
Figure 3: Example page layout structure shown
graphically
<layout-root id="page-21">
<layout-leaf xref="header-21"/>
<layout-chunk id="body-21">
<layout-leaf xref="lay-21.2"/>
<layout-leaf xref="lay-21.3"/>
</layout-chunk>
<layout-leaf xref="page-no-21"/>
</layout-root>
Whereas the annotations so far specify the
hierarchical structuring of a page into visually
distinguishable and groupable layout units, we
need also to record specific information about
how layout units are placed on their pages: the
page or page segment layout is not fully deter-
mined by grouping layout units into a tree struc-
ture since further information is required about
the actual position of each unit in the docu-
ment (on or within its page). For this, we in-
troduce an area model, which serves to deter-
mine the position of each layout-chunk/layout-
leaf in an abstract, but fully explicit, way. The
area model is a generalization of common no-
tions of ?page models?. Each page usually par-
titions its space into sub-areas and these can be
used for positioning or aligning layout units or
subtrees of the layout structure. For instance,
a page is often designed in three rows ? the
area for the running head (row-1), the area for
the page body (row-2), and the area for the
page number (row-3) ? which are arranged ver-
tically. The page body space can itself consist
of two columns arranged horizontally. These
rows/columns need not to be of equal size. For
the present, we restrict ourselves to rectangular
areas and sub-areas, and allow recursive area
subdivision. The partitioning of the space of
the entire document is defined in the area-root,
which structures the document (page) into rect-
angular sub-areas in a table-like fashion.
The tag to represent the area root is <area-
root>. The tag to represent the division of
a sub-area into smaller rectangles is <sub-
area>, this shares the attributes of the root
but adds a location attribute so that subareas
are positioned relative to their parent. Loca-
tions are indicated with respect to a logical grid
defining rows and columns. The area model for
our example page therefore contains a single col-
umn with 5 rows (the header, the photograph,
the text block, the table, and the footer), in
which the fourth row, the table, is itself made
up of a subarea corresponding to the rows and
columns of a virtual table. This is captured by
the following annotation:
<area-root id="page-frame" cols="1" rows="5"
hspacing="100" vspacing="5 40 15 45 5"
height="16cm" width="14cm">
<sub-area id="table-frame" location="row-4"
cols="2" rows="5" hspacing="10 90"
vspacing="100"/>
</area-root>
The attribute vspacing=??5 40 15 45 5??
means that the area for the running head takes
5% of the entire page height, the area for the
next row 40%, etc. The area model then pro-
vides logical names for the precise positioning
of the layout units identified in the hierarchi-
cal layout structure. This makes it straightfor-
ward to indicate, for example, that collections
of siblings in the layout structure share (or fail
to share) some particular alignment properties
within the page.
The RST base presents the rhetorical struc-
ture of the document. The rhetorical structure
is annotated following the Rhetorical Structure
Theory (RST) of Mann and Thompson (1988).
The relation between rhetorical structure and
layout is currently an important area of study
in multimodal document description and so its
inclusion in the GeM annotation scheme is es-
sential. Several annotation schemes for RST
have been proposed in the literature (cf. Daniel
Marcu and Mick O?Donnell?s proposals, e.g.,
www.sil.org/?mannb/rst/toolnote.htm and the
RAGS rhetorical level: Cahill et al (2001)).
The precise GeM notation differs from these
in certain respects, but the main principles of
representation remain similar. Since many of
the details of the rhetorical annotation presume
some familiarity with the decomposition of texts
according to RST, we will note here simply that
this annotation layer again represents a hierar-
chical decomposition in which the leaves of the
tree can correspond to both textual and graph-
ical base units.
Finally, the navigation base captures those
parts of the document/page which tell the
reader where the current text, or ?document
thread?, is continued or which point to an al-
ternative continuation or continuations. These
make up the navigation layer of annotation.
The addresses used by such pointers are either
names of RST spans or names of layout chunks.
For long-distance navigation, typical nodes in
the RST structure and in the layout structure
have been established for use in pointers; in
particular, chapter/section headings are names
for RST spans and page numbers are names
for page-sized layout-chunks. This structure
imposed by the navigational elements is thus
quite different from the preceding layers and
can freely cross-cut the hierarchicies expressed
there. Again, for further details, the reader is
refered to the documentation manual.
4 Comparison with other
XML-based approaches
It is useful to consider other approaches to
representing ?overlapping hierarchies? that have
been proposed in the XML literature; since
these are early days in the construction of such
annotation schemes, it is likely that the expe-
rience gained with differing schemes will prove
highly beneficial for further development.
The first examples of extensive overlapping
hierarchies within markup for NLP are proba-
bly to be found in speech corpora. It is clear
that intonational phenomena, for example, may
or may not respect grammatical or other kinds
of structure and so need to be maintained sep-
arately. Speech-oriented corpora generally use
the time line as a basic reference method since
speech events are necessarily strictly ordered
in time. This is quite different in the GeM
case where we have found the non-linearity and
the non-consecutive nature of the units grouped
within our annotation scheme as presenting a
major problem for annotation models that have
been developed in the speech processing tradi-
tion where contiguity of units is the expected
case. Whereas the speech signal can be encoded
by means of time-stamps, in the GeM model we
need to use the layout structure (or even the
area model within the layout structure) instead
for placing elements within the physical docu-
ment.
One of the most detailed general considera-
tions of the range of XML-based solutions to
the multiple, overlapping hierarchies problem,
as well as an extensive listing of further litera-
ture, is given by Durusau and O?Donnell (sub-
mitted). After reviewing several requirements
and approaches to the problem, Durusau and
O?Donnell propose a Bottom-Up Virtual Hier-
archy approach which (i) creates multiple in-
stances of the source document, each with its
own consistent XML-defined hierarchy and (ii)
creates one further document instance called the
?base file?, in which each basic element of the
document is linked via XPath expressions to its
position in each of the separately defined hier-
archy documents. The position in each separate
hierarchy is captured as the value of a distinct
attribute to a base element tag. This means
that the base file becomes extremely complex,
although Durusau and O?Donnell envisage that
this file could in future be automatically con-
structed and maintained.
The similarity of this approach to the inde-
pendently developed GeM approach argues to
a certain extent for the necessity of proceeding
in this direction. The differences between the
approaches arise from the different tasks that
are being considered and the corresponding dif-
ferences in emphasis. Durusau and O?Donnell
are considering the task from the perspective of
differing ?interpretations? of a text in the sense
more commonly pursued in text corpus markup:
it is, therefore, natural to consider each hier-
archy as an autonomous marked-up document.
We are concerned with linguistic analyses of
documents, where the structure of the analy-
ses themselves is itself a major focus of atten-
tion. It is then no longer so important that
each level of analysis transparently represents
a ?view of the text?. When querying the cor-
pus for structural and realizational regularities,
we are free to do this across any set of the an-
notation layers present, using the full power of
properly parsed XPath expressions, and with-
out the need to always decompose such queries
into the terms of the elements of the base file.
This is the XML reflex of the linguistic strategy
of stratification of linguistic information across
the linguistic system.
Single structured text views can, of course,
be created out of the GeM markup by following
the indirection links present in any individual
GeM annotation layer. This requires that that
layer be interpreted with respect to the corre-
sponding base level document and is not then
?locally? complete. This (formally slight) com-
plexity is, we feel, more than balanced by the
fact that we need neither any additional com-
plexity in our base level markup nor the double
coding of the position of nodes in hierarchies
and base elements. It is also straightforward
to introduce intermediate levels of structural
analysis?as, for example, already done in our se-
lection of base units as units relevant to layout
rather than ?words? or other more straightfor-
ward formal units. Indeed, when the more tra-
ditional linguistic levels of annotation (syntax,
semantics) are added into the complete scheme,
many of the GeM annotation layers will con-
tinue not to access the leaves of these structures
at all, and will continue to work with the base
units illustrated here; this variable granularity
may prove to be a general requirement for lin-
guistically complex analyses. And, finally, we
also need not recompile our base level document
whenever an additional layer of annotation is
added to the scheme, thereby simplifying main-
tenance. Further comparison of the approaches
will, however, require more detailed evaluation
in use.
Finally, we can consider the GeM approach
as contrasted with directions within the XML
community itself since there, too, there are pro-
posals for capturing distinctions of content, lay-
out (e.g., in terms of formatting objects: XSL-
FO) and navigational elements (e.g., in terms of
Xlink). Whereas we are attempting to make the
GeM description as compatible with these con-
structs as possible?for example, as noted above
with respect to the realizational possibilities for
the layout units?it is important to understand
the very different aims involved. The purpose
of the GeM project is to analyse the multimodal
decisions made in a wide range of document
types and it is not yet clear which theoretical
levels and which theoretical constructs within
those levels will prove appropriate. The format-
ting object description is only suited to a certain
class of layout types (which excludes, for exam-
ple, newspapers) and so is in many respects too
specific for our more exploratory purposes. We
are also searching for effective levels of abstrac-
tion at which to characterize our data: effective
here meaning that these will be the constructs
over which canvas constraints, production con-
straints and consumption constraints are most
appropriately expressed. Perhaps, to offer an
NLP analogy: whereas the XML modelling de-
cisions correspond to a fine-scaled phonetic de-
scription of a language event, we are in the
GeM project searching for the higher levels of
abstraction corresponding to the grammar, se-
mantics and pragmatics of the language events.
We expect this to give us a substantially better
theoretical grasp of the meaning-making poten-
tial of layout decisions and their control by ex-
ternal constraints.
5 Applications of the annotated
corpus
A number of uses are currently being made of
the annotated GeM corpus. While our empiri-
cal study will need considerably more data to be
encoded before we can make reliable statements
concerning the patterning of various constraints
with document decisions, we have already been
struck by the rather wide variation that exists
within single documents between selected lay-
out structures on the one hand and rhetorical
organization on the other. In surprisingly many
cases, this variation goes beyond what might
be considered ?good? design: in fact, we would
argue that most such designs are flawed and
would be improved by a more explicit attention
to the rhetorical force communicated by partic-
ular layout decisions. This represents the use of
the corpus for document critique and improve-
ment (cf. Delin and Bateman (2002)).
We are also using the data gathered so far to
inform the design of a prototype automatic doc-
ument generation system capable of producing
the kinds of variation and layout forms seen in
our corpus. In this work, the annotation scheme
provides skeletal data structures that define tar-
get formats of various stages of the generation
process. Thus, for example, layout planning
needs to produce a structure that is an instan-
tiated version of a layout structure as we have
defined it above. Some first results are reported
in Henschel et al (to appear) which describes a
prototype implemented as a set of XSLT trans-
formations that convert a content representa-
tion into an XSL-FO document. The transfor-
mations are conditionalized so as to respond to
various features of the content, the modes of the
available material, and the rhetorical structure;
so far pages generated include further examples
of the kind used as an example in this paper as
well as pages from instructional texts such as
telephone user guides.
Conditionalization is expressed in terms of
XPath specifications that check the presence or
absence of particular configurations within any
of the GeM annotation layers as required. Such
specifications are, however, somewhat cumber-
some for more complex queries. Whether fur-
ther developments such as XQL or XQuery will
bring benefits is not yet clear. Somewhat dis-
appointing was the unsuitability of the previous
generation of linguistic-oriented corpus tools,
which, despite considerable investment, seem to
have been outstripped by the very rapid devel-
opments seen in the mainstream XML commu-
nity. Most of our current work is done directly
with XMLSpy and XLST tools such as Xalan.
The final goal of our corpus collection work
and the prototype document generation systems
is to place the commonly quoted aim of using
XML markup for document ?repurposing? on a
solid theoretical foundation. Thus, for example,
the ability automatically to generate very dif-
ferent presentational forms for the instructional
texts or bird pages mentioned above is an in-
herent feature of the GeM model. More impor-
tant for us is to uncover as precisely as possi-
ble the conditions which make certain presen-
tational selections more appropriate than oth-
ers. In general, we relate the need for present-
ing information in different forms to the kinds
of constraints we introduced above: very differ-
ent canvas constraints are imposed, for exam-
ple, depending on whether the delivery medium
is across the telephone, on a palmtop, or as a
display on a big screen. However, it is not sim-
ply a matter of the differing affordances of the
display device. The selection of particular infor-
mation and information display modes is also a
matter of established document types. These
document types change over time, due both to
changing production constraints and to the es-
tablishment of new genres. It is not possible to
deploy inappropriate realizations for established
genres; a newspaper that changed its presenta-
tion style to that of birdbooks would quickly be
out of business?and vice versa. Mapping out
these possibilities and showing what larger pat-
terns hold is then our eventual goal. And for
this, extensive and detailed empirical studies of
the kind we hope the GeM corpus and annota-
tion scheme will support are crucial.
References
John A. Bateman, Thomas Kamps, Jo?rg Kleinz, and
Klaus Reichenberger. 2001. Constructive text, di-
agram and layout generation for information pre-
sentation: the DArt
bio
system. Computational
Linguistics, 27(3):409?449.
Lynne Cahill, Roger Evans, Chris Mellis, Daniel
Paiva, Mike Reape, and Donia Scott. 2001. Intro-
duction to the RAGS architecture . Available at
http://www.itri.brighton.ac.uk/projects/rags.
Corpus Encoding Standard. 2000. Corpus En-
coding Standard. Version 1.5. Available at:
http://www.cs.vassar.edu/CES.
Judy L. Delin and John A. Bateman. 2002. Describ-
ing and critiquing multimodal documents. Docu-
ment Design, 3(2). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Judy Delin, John Bateman, and Patrick Allen. 2002.
A model of genre in document layout. Informa-
tion Design Journal.
Patrick Durusau and Matthew Brook O?Donnell.
submitted. Implementing concurrent markup in
XML. Markup Languages: Theory and Practice.
Renate Henschel, John Bateman, and Judy Delin.
to appear. Automatic genre-driven layout gener-
ation. In Proceedings of the 6. Konferenz zur Ver-
arbeitung natu?rlicher Sprache (KONVENS 2002),
University of the Saarland, Saarbru?cken.
Renate Henschel. 2002. GeM annotation manual.
Gem project report, University of Bremen and
University of Stirling, Bremen and Stirling. Avail-
able at http://purl.org/net/gem.
Gunther Kress and Theo Van Leeuwen. 2001. Mul-
timodal discourse: the modes and media of con-
temporary communication. Arnold, London.
William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional
theory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243?281.
Henry S. Thompson and D. McKelvie. 1997. Hyper-
link semantics for standoff markup of read-only
documents. In Proceedings of SGML Europe ?97.
Robert Waller. 1987. The typographical contribution
to language: towards a model of typographic gen-
res and their underlying structures. Ph.D. thesis,
Department of Typography and Graphic Commu-
nication, University of Reading, Reading, U.K.
