Proceedings of the Workshop on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing, pages 89?94,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Experiments of UNED at the Third
Recognising Textual Entailment Challenge
A?lvaro Rodrigo, Anselmo Pen?as, Jesu?s Herrera, Felisa Verdejo
Departmento de Lenguajes y Sistemas Informa?ticos
Universidad Nacional de Educacio?n a Distancia
Madrid, Spain
{alvarory, anselmo, jesus.herrera, felisa}@lsi.uned.es
Abstract
This paper describes the experiments devel-
oped and the results obtained in the partic-
ipation of UNED in the Third Recognising
Textual Entailment (RTE) Challenge. The
experiments are focused on the study of the
effect of named entities in the recognition
of textual entailment. While Named Entity
Recognition (NER) provides remarkable re-
sults (accuracy over 70%) for RTE on QA
task, IE task requires more sophisticated
treatment of named entities such as the iden-
tification of relations between them.
1 Introduction
The systems presented to the Third Recognizing
Textual Entailment Challenge are based on the one
presented to the Second RTE Challenge (Herrera
et al, 2006b) and the ones presented to the An-
swer Validation Exercise (AVE) 2006 (Rodrigo et
al., 2007).
Since a high quantity of pairs of RTE-3 collec-
tions contain named entities (82.6% of the hypothe-
ses in the test collection contain at least one named
entity), the objective of this work is to study the ef-
fect of named entity recognition on textual entail-
ment in the framework of the Third RTE Challenge.
In short, the techniques involved in the experi-
ments in order to reach these objectives are:
? Lexical overlapping between ngrams of text
and hypothesis.
? Entailment between named entities.
? Branch overlapping between dependency trees
of text and hypothesis.
In section 2, the main components of the systems
are described in detail. Section 3 describes the infor-
mation our systems use for the entailment decision.
The description of the two runs submitted are given
in Section 4. The results obtained and its analysis are
described in Section 5. Section 6 shows a discussion
of the results. Finally, some conclusions and future
work are given.
2 Systems Description
The proposed systems are based on surface tech-
niques of lexical and syntactic analysis considering
each task (Information Extraction, Information Re-
trieval, Question Answering and Text Summariza-
tion) of the RTE Challenge independently.
The systems accept pairs of text snippets (text and
hypothesis) at the input and give a boolean value at
the output: YES if the text entails the hypothesis and
NO otherwise. This value is obtained by the appli-
cation of the learned model by a SVM classifier.
The main components of the systems are the fol-
lowing:
2.1 Linguistic processing
Firstly, each text-hypothesis pair is preprocessed in
order to obtain the following information for the en-
tailment decision:
? POS: a Part of Speech Tagging is performed in
order to obtain lemmas for both text and hy-
pothesis using the Freeling POS tagger (Car-
reras et al, 2004).
89
<t>...Iraq invaded Kuwait on <TIMEX>August 2 1990</TIMEX>...</t>
<h>Iraq invaded Kuwait in <NUMEX>1990</NUMEX></h>
Figure 1: Example of an error when disambiguating the named entity type.
<t>...Chernobyl accident began on
<ENTITY>Saturday April 26 1986</ENTITY>...</t>
<h>The Chernobyl disaster was in <ENTITY>1986</ENTITY></h>
Figure 2: Example of a pair that justifies the process of entailment.
<pair id=??5?? entailment=??NO?? task=??IE?? length=??short??>
<t>The Communist Party USA was a small Maoist political party
which was founded in 1965 by members of the Communist Party around
Michael Laski who took the side of China in the Sino-Soviet split.
</t>
<h>Michael Laski was an opponent of China.</h>
</pair>
<pair id=??7?? entailment=??NO?? task=??IE?? length=??short??>
<t>Sandra Goudie was first elected to Parliament in the 2002
elections, narrowly winning the seat of Coromandel by defeating
Labour candidate Max Purnell and pushing incumbent Green MP
Jeanette Fitzsimons into third place.</t>
<h>Sandra Goudie was defeated by Max Purnell.</h>
</pair>
<pair id=??8?? entailment=??NO?? task=??IE?? length=??short??>
<t>Ms. Minton left Australia in 1961 to pursue her studies in
London.</t>
<h>Ms. Minton was born in Australia.</h>
</pair>
Figure 3: IE pairs with entailment between named entities but not between named entities relations.
90
? NER: the Freeling Named Entity Recogniser is
also applied to recover the information needed
by the named entity entailment module that is
described in the following section. Numeric ex-
pressions, proper nouns and temporal expres-
sions of each text and hypothesis are tagged.
? Dependency analysis: a dependency tree of
each text and hypothesis is obtained using Lin?s
Minipar (Lin, 1998).
2.2 Entailment between named entities
Once the named entities of the hypothesis and the
text are detected, the next step is to determine the
entailment relations between the named entities in
the text and the named entities in the hypothesis. In
(Rodrigo et al, 2007) the following entailment rela-
tions between named entities were defined:
1. A Proper Noun E1 entails a Proper Noun E2 if
the text string of E1 contains the text string of
E2.
2. A Time Expression T1 entails a Time Expres-
sion T2 if the time range of T1 is included in
the time range of T2.
3. A numeric expression N1 entails a numeric ex-
pression N2 if the range associated to N2 en-
closes the range of N1.
Some characters change in different expressions
of the same named entity as, for example, in a proper
noun with different wordings (e.g. Yasser, Yaser,
Yasir). To detect the entailment in these situations,
when the previous process fails, we implemented a
modified entailment decision process taking into ac-
count the edit distance of Levenshtein (Levensthein,
1966). Thus, if two named entities differ in less than
20%, then we assume that exists an entailment rela-
tion between these named entities.
However, this definition of named entities entail-
ment does not support errors due to wrong named
entities classification as we can see in Figure 1. The
expression 1990 represents a year but it is recog-
nised as a numeric expression in the hypothesis.
However the same expression is recognised as a tem-
poral expression in the text and, therefore, the ex-
pression in the hypothesis cannot be entailed by it
according to the named entities entailment definition
above.
We quantified the effect of these errors in recog-
nising textual entailment. For this purpose, we de-
veloped the following two settings:
1. A system based in dependency analysis and
WordNet (Herrera et al, 2006b) that uses the
categorization given by the NER tool, where
the entailment relations between named entities
are the previously ones defined.
2. The same system based on dependency analysis
and WordNet but not using the categorization
given by the NER tool. All named entities de-
tected receive the same tag and a named entity
E1 entails a named entity E2 if the text string
of E1 contains the text string of E2 (see Figure
2).
We checked the performance of these two settings
over the test corpus set of the Second RTE Chal-
lenge. The results obtained, using the accuracy mea-
sure that is the fraction of correct responses accord-
ing to (Dagan et al, 2006), are shown in table 1. The
table shows that with an easier and a more robust
processing (NER without classification) the perfor-
mance is not only maintained, but it is even slightly
higher.
This fact led us to ignore the named entity catego-
rization given by the tool and assume that text and
hypothesis are related and close texts where same
expressions must receive same categories, without
the need of classification. Thus, all detected named
entities receive the same tag and we consider that a
named entity E1 entails a named entity E2 if the text
string of E1 contains the text string of E2.
Table 1: Entailment between numeric expressions.
Accuracy
Setting 1 0.610
Setting 2 0.614
2.3 Sentence level matching
A tree matching module, which searches for match-
ing branches into the hypotheses? dependency trees,
is used. There is a potential matching branch per
leaf. A branch from the hypothesis is considered
91
a ?matching branch? only if all its nodes from the
root to the leaf are involved in a lexical entailment
(Herrera et al, 2006a). In this way, the subtree con-
formed by all the matching branches from a hypoth-
esis? dependency tree is included in the respective
text?s dependency tree, giving an idea of tree inclu-
sion.
We assumed that the larger is the included sub-
tree of the hypothesis? dependency tree, the more
semantically similar are the text and the hypothesis.
Thus, the existence or absence of an entailment rela-
tion from a text to its respective hypothesis considers
the portion of the hypothesis? tree that is included in
the text?s tree.
3 Entailment decision
A SVM classifier was applied in order to train a
model from the development corpus. The model was
trained with a set of features obtained from the pro-
cessing described above. The features we have used
and the training strategies were the following:
3.1 Features
We prepared the following features to feed the SVM
model:
1. Percentage of nodes of the hypothesis? de-
pendency tree pertaining to matching branches
according to section 2.3 considering, respec-
tively:
? Lexical entailment between the words of
the snippets involved.
? Lexical entailment between the lemmas of
the snippets involved.
2. Percentage of words of the hypothesis in the
text (treated as bags of words).
3. Percentage of unigrams (lemmas) of the hy-
pothesis in the text (treated as bags of lemmas).
4. Percentage of bigrams (lemmas) of the hypoth-
esis in the text (treated as bags of lemmas).
5. Percentage of trigrams (lemmas) of the hypoth-
esis in the text (treated as bags of lemmas).
6. A boolean value indicating if there is or not any
named entity in the hypothesis that is not en-
tailed by one or more named entities in the text
according to the named entity entailment deci-
sion described in section 2.2.
Table 2: Experiments with separate training over the
development corpus using cross validation.
Accuracy with Accuracy with
the same model a different model
for all tasks for each task
Setting 1 0.64 0.67
Setting 2 0.62 0.66
Table 3: Experiments with separate training over the
test corpus.
Accuracy with Accuracy with
the same model a different model
for all tasks for each task
Setting 1 0.59 0.62
Setting 2 0.60 0.64
Table 4: Results for run 1 and run 2.
Accuracy
run 1 run 2
IE 52.50% 53.50%
IR 67% 67%
QA 72% 72%
SUM 58% 60%
Overall 62.38% 63.12%
3.2 Training
About the decision of how to perform the training
in our SVM models, we wanted to study the effect
of training a unique model compared to training one
different model per task.
For this purpose we used the following two set-
tings:
1. A SVM model that uses features 2, 3, 4 and 5
from section 3.1.
2. A SVM model that uses features 2, 3, 4, 5 and
6 from section 3.1.
Each setting was training using cross validation
over the development set of the Third RTE Chal-
lenge in two different ways:
1. Training a unique model for all pairs.
92
2. Training one model for each task. Each model
is trained with only pairs from the same task
that the model will predict.
The results obtained in the experiments are shown
in table 2. As we can see in the table, with the train-
ing of one model for each task results are slightly
better, increasing performance of both settings. Tak-
ing into account these results, we took the decision
of using a different training for each task in the runs
submitted.
Our decision was confirmed after the runs submis-
sion to RTE-3 Challenge with new experiments over
the RTE-3 test corpus, using the RTE-3 development
corpus as training (see table 3 for results).
4 Runs Submitted
Two different runs were submitted to the Third RTE
Challenge. Each run was trained using the method
described in section 3.2 with the following subset of
the features described in section 3.1:
? Run 1 was obtained using the features 2, 3,
4 and 5 from section 3.1. These features ob-
tained good results for pairs from the QA task,
as we can see in (Rodrigo et al, 2007), and
we wanted to check their performance in other
tasks.
? Run 2 was obtained using the following fea-
tures for each task:
? IE: features 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 from section
3.1. These ones were the features that ob-
tained the best results for IE pairs in our
experiments over the development set.
? IR: features 2, 3, 4 and 5 from section 3.1.
These ones were the features that obtained
best results for IR pairs in our experiments
over the development set.
? QA: feature 6 from section 3.1. We chose
this feature, which had obtained an ac-
curacy over 70% in previous experiments
over the development set in QA pairs, to
study the effect of named entities in QA
pairs.
? SUM: features 1, 2 and 3 from section 3.1.
We selected these features to show the im-
portance of dependency analysis in SUM
pairs as it is shown in section 6.
5 Results
Accuracy was applied as the main measure to the
participating systems.
The results obtained over the test corpus for the
two runs submitted are shown in table 4.
As we can see in both runs, different accuracy val-
ues are obtained depending on the task. The best re-
sult is obtained in pairs from QA with a 72% accu-
racy in the two runs, although two different systems
are applied. This result pushes us to use this system
for Answer Validation (Pen?as et al, 2007). Results
in run 2, which uses a different setting for each task,
are slightly better than results in run 1, but only in
IE and SUM. However, results are too close to ac-
cept a confirmation of our initial intuition that pairs
from different tasks could need not only a different
training, but also the use of different approaches for
the entailment decision.
6 Discussion
In run 2 we used NER for IE and QA, the two tasks
with the higher percentage of pairs with at least one
named entity in the hypothesis (98.5% in IE and
97% in QA).
Our previous work about the use of named enti-
ties in textual entailment (Rodrigo et al, 2007) sug-
gested that NER permitted to obtain good results.
However, after the RTE-3 experience, we found that
the use of NER does not improve results in all tasks,
but only in QA in a solid way with the previous
work.
We performed a qualitative study over the IE pairs
showing that, as it can be expected, in pairs from IE
the relations between named entities are more im-
portant that named entities themselves.
Figure 3 shows some examples where all named
entities are entailed but not the relation between
them. In pair 5 both Michael Laski and China are
entailed but the relation between them is took the
side of in the text, and was an opponent of in the
hypothesis. The same problem appears in the other
pairs with the relation left instead was born in (pair
8) or passive voice instead active voice (pair 7).
Comparing run 1 and run 2, dependency analysis
shows its usefulness in SUM pairs, where texts and
hypotheses have a higher syntactic parallelism than
in pairs from other tasks. This statement is shown
93
Table 5: Percentage of hypothesis nodes in matching
branches.
Percentage
SUM 75,505%
IE 7,353%
IR 6,422%
QA 8,496%
in table 5 where the percentage of hypothesis nodes
pertaining to matching branches in the dependency
tree is much higher in SUM pairs than in the rest of
tasks.
This syntactic parallelism seems to be the respon-
sible for the 2% increasing between the first and the
second run in SUM pairs.
7 Conclusions and future work
The experiments have been focused on the study of
the importance of considering entailment between
named entities in the recognition of textual entail-
ment, and the use of a separate training for each task.
As we have seen, both approaches increase slightly
the accuracy of the proposed systems. As we have
also shown, different approaches for each task could
also increase the system performance.
Future work is focused on improving the perfor-
mance in IE pairs taking into account relations be-
tween named entities.
Acknowledgments
This work has been partially supported by the Span-
ish Ministry of Science and Technology within the
project R2D2-SyEMBRA (TIC-2003-07158-C04-
02), the Regional Government of Madrid under the
Research Network MAVIR (S-0505/TIC-0267), the
Education Council of the Regional Government of
Madrid and the European Social Fund.
References
X. Carreras, I. Chao, L. Padro?, and M. Padro?. 2004.
FreeLing: An Open-Source Suite of Language An-
alyzers.. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC04). Lisbon, Portugal, 2004.
I. Dagan, O. Glickman and B. Magnini. 2006. The
PASCAL Recognising Textual Entailment Challenge.
In Quin?onero-Candela et al, editors, MLCW 2005,
LNAI Volume 3944, Jan 2006, Pages 177 - 190.
J. Herrera, A. Pen?as and F. Verdejo. 2006a. Textual En-
tailment Recognition Based on Dependency Analysis
and WordNet. In Quin?onero-Candela et al, editors,
MLCW 2005, LNAI Volume 3944, Jan 2006, Pages
231-239.
J. Herrera, A. Pen?as, A?. Rodrigo and F. Verdejo. 2006b.
UNED at PASCAL RTE-2 Challenge. In Proceed-
ings of the Second PASCAL Challenges Workshop on
Recognising Textual Entailment, Venice, Italy.
V. I. Levensthein. 1966. Binary Codes Capable of Cor-
recting Deletions, Insertions and Reversals. In Soviet
Physics - Doklady, volume 10, pages 707710, 1966.
D. Lin. 1998. Dependency-based Evaluation of MINI-
PAR. Workshop on the Evaluation of Parsing Systems,
Granada, Spain, May, 1998.
A. Pen?as, A?. Rodrigo, V. Sama and F. Verdejo. 2007.
Overview of the Answer Validation Exercise 2006. In
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. In press.
A?. Rodrigo, A. Pen?as, J. Herrera and F. Verdejo. 2007.
The Effect of Entity Recognition on Answer Validation.
In Lecture Notes in Computer Science. In press.
94
