Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP 2005 Demonstration Abstracts, pages 2?3,
Vancouver, October 2005.
Bridging the Gap between Technology and Users: Leveraging Machine 
Translation in a Visual Data Triage Tool 
Thomas Hoeft Nick Cramer M. L. Gregory Elizabeth Hetzler
Pacific Northwest  
National Laboratory 
Pacific Northwest  
National Laboratory 
Pacific Northwest  
National Laboratory 
Pacific Northwest  
National Laboratory 
902 Battelle Blvd. 902 Battelle Blvd. 902 Battelle Blvd. 902 Battelle Blvd. 
Richland, WA 99354 Richland, WA 99354 Richland, WA 99354 Richland, WA 99354 
{thomas.hoeft;nick.cramer;michelle.gregory;beth.hetzler}@pnl.gov 
 
  
1 Introduction 
While one of the oldest pursuits in computational 
linguistics (see Bar-Hillel, 1951), machine transla-
tion (MT) remains an unsolved problem. While 
current research has progressed a great deal, tech-
nology transfer to end users is limited. In this 
demo, we present a visualization tool for manipu-
lating foreign language data. Using software de-
veloped for the exploration and understanding of 
large amounts of text data, IN-SPIRE (Hetzler & 
Turner 2004), we have developed a novel approach 
to mining and triaging large amounts of foreign 
language texts. By clustering documents in their 
native language and only using translations in the 
data triage phase, our system avoids the major pit-
falls that plague modern machine translation. More 
generally, the visualization environment we have 
developed allows users to take advantage of cur-
rent NLP technologies, including MT. We will 
demonstrate use of this tool to triage a corpus of 
foreign text. 
2 IN-SPIRE 
IN-SPIRE (Hetzler et al, 2004) is a visual ana-
lytics tool developed by Pacific Northwest Na-
tional Laboratory to facilitate the collection and 
rapid understanding of large textual corpora. IN-
SPIRE generates a compiled document set from 
mathematical signatures for each document in a 
set. Document signatures are clustered according 
to common themes to enable information retrieval 
and visualizations.  Information is presented to the 
user using several visual metaphors to expose dif-
ferent facets of the textual data. The central visual 
metaphor is a galaxy view of the corpus that allows 
users to intuitively interact with thousands of 
documents, examining them by theme. 
 Context vectors for documents such as LSA 
(Deerwester  et al, 1990) provide a powerful foun-
dation for information retrieval and natural lan-
guage processing techniques.  IN-SPIRE leverages 
such representations for clustering, projection and 
queries-by-example (QBE). In addition to standard 
Boolean word queries, QBE is a process in which a 
user document query is converted into a mathe-
matical signature and compared to the multi-
dimensional mathematical representation of the 
document corpus.  A spherical distance threshold 
adjustable by the end user controls a query result 
set.  Using IN-SPIRE?s group functionality, sub-
sets of the corpus are identified for more detailed 
analyses.  Information analysts can isolate mean-
ingful document subsets into groups for hypothesis 
testing and the identification of trends.  Depending 
on the corpus, one or more clusters may be less 
interesting to users. Removal of these documents, 
called ?outliers?, enables the investigator to more 
clearly understand the relationships between re-
maining documents.  These tools expose various 
facets of document text and document inter-
relationships. 
3 Foreign Language Triage Capabilities  
Information analysts need to sift through large 
datasets quickly and efficiently to identify relevant 
information for knowledge discovery. The need to 
sift through foreign language data complicates the 
task immensely. The addition of foreign language 
capabilities to IN-SPIRE addresses this need.  We 
have integrated third party translators for over 40 
languages and  third party software for language 
identification. Datasets compiled with language 
detection allow IN-SPIRE to automatically select 
the most appropriate translator for each document.  
To triage a foreign language dataset, the sys-
tem clusters the documents in their native language 
2
(with no pre-translation required). A user can then 
view the cluster labels, or peak terms, in the native 
language, or have them translated via Systran 
(Senellart et al, 2003) or CyberTrans (not publicly 
available). The user can then explore the clusters to 
get a general sense of the thematic coverage of the 
dataset. They identify clusters relevant to their in-
terests and the tool reclusters to show more subtle 
themes differentiating the remaining documents. If 
they search for particular words, the clusters and 
translated labels help them distinguish the various 
contexts in which those words appear. Finding a 
cluster of document of interest, a particular docu-
ment or set of documents can be viewed and trans-
lated on demand. This avoids the need to translate 
the entire document set, so that only the documents 
of interest are translated. The native text is dis-
played alongside the translation at all stages.   
4 Evaluation 
Since this is a prototype visualization tool we 
have yet to conduct formal user evaluations. We 
have begun field testing this tool with users who 
report successful data triage in foreign languages 
with which they are not familiar. We have also 
begun evaluations involving parallel corpora.  Us-
ing Arabic English Parallel News Text (LDC 
2004), which contains over 8,000 human translated 
documents from various Arabic new sources, we 
processed the English version in IN-SPIRE to view 
the document clusters and their labels. We also 
processed the Arabic version in Arabic according 
to the description above. The two screenshots be-
low demonstrate that the documents clustered in 
similar manners (note that cluster labels have been 
translated in the Arabic data). 
 
    
Figure 1: Galaxy view of the Arabic and English 
clusters and labels  
 
To demonstrate that our clustering algorithm on 
the native language is an efficient and reliable 
method for data triage on foreign language data, 
we also pre-translated the data with CyberTrans 
and clustered on the output. Figure 3, demonstrates 
that similar clusters arise out of this methodology. 
However, the processing time was increase
 
d 15-
ld with no clear advantage for data triage. 
 
fo
 
Figure 3: Galaxy view of the pre-translated Ara-
bic to English clusters and labels 
lue from 
existing machine translation capabilities.  
nslation. American Documenta-
n 2 (4),  pp.229-237. 
 
omputer Graphics and Applications, 24(5):22-26. 
f the Society for Information 
cience, 41(6):391-407. 
.edu/Catalog/catalogEntry.jsp?cata
gId=LDC2004T18 
chnology. MT Summit 
IX. New Orleans, Louisianna.  
 
Initial user reports and comparisons with a par-
allel corpus demonstrate that our visualization en-
vironment enables users to search through and 
cluster massive amounts of data without native 
speaker competence or dependence on a machine 
translation system. Users can identify clusters of 
potential interest with this tool and translate (by 
human or machine) only those documents of rele-
vance. We have demonstrated that this visualiza-
tion tool allows users to derive high va
References  
Bar-Hillel, Yehoshua, 1951. The present state of re-
search on mechanical tra
tio
  
Hetzler, Elizabeth and Alan Turner. 2004. ?Analysis 
Experiences Using Information Visualization,? IEEE
C
 
Deerwester, S., S.T. Dumais, T.K. Landauer, G.W. 
Furnas, R.A. Harshman. 1990. Indexing by Latent Se-
mantic Analysis. Journal o
S
 
Linquistic Data Consortium. 2004. 
http://www.ldc.upenn
lo
 
Senellart, Jean; Jin Yang, and Anabel Rebollo. 2003. 
SYSTRAN Intuitive Coding Te
3
Proceedings of the Workshop on Sentiment and Subjectivity in Text, pages 23?30,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
User-directed Sentiment Analysis: Visualizing the Affective Content of 
Documents  
Michelle L. Gregory 
PNNL 
902 Battelle Blvd.  
Richland Wa. 99354 
michelle.gregory@pnl.gov 
Nancy Chinchor 
Consultant 
chinchor@earthlink.net 
Paul Whitney 
PNNL 
902 Battelle Blvd.  
Richland Wa. 99354 
paul.whitney@pnl.gov 
Richard Carter 
PNNL 
902 Battelle Blvd.  
Richland Wa. 99354 
richard.carter@pnl.gov 
 
Elizabeth Hetzler 
PNNL 
902 Battelle Blvd.  
Richland Wa. 99354 
beth.hetzler@pnl.gov 
Alan Turner 
PNNL 
902 Battelle Blvd.  
Richland Wa. 99354 
alan.turner@pnl.gov 
 
Abstract 
Recent advances in text analysis have led 
to finer-grained semantic analysis, in-
cluding automatic sentiment analysis?
the task of measuring documents, or 
chunks of text, based on emotive catego-
ries, such as positive or negative. How-
ever, considerably less progress has been 
made on efficient ways of exploring 
these measurements. This paper discusses 
approaches for visualizing the affective 
content of documents and describes an 
interactive capability for exploring emo-
tion in a large document collection. 
1 Introduction 
Recent advances in text analysis have led to 
finer-grained semantic classification, which en-
ables the automatic exploration of subtle areas of 
meaning.  One area that has received a lot of at-
tention is automatic sentiment analysis?the task 
of classifying documents, or chunks of text, into 
emotive categories, such as positive or negative. 
Sentiment analysis is generally used for tracking 
people?s attitudes about particular individuals or 
items. For example, corporations use sentiment 
analysis to determine employee attitude and cus-
tomer satisfaction with their products. Given the 
plethora of data in digital form, the ability to ac-
curately and efficiently measure the emotional 
content of documents is paramount.  
The focus of much of the automatic sentiment 
analysis research is on identifying the affect 
bearing words (words with emotional content) 
and on measurement approaches for sentiment 
(Turney & Littman, 2003; Pang & Lee, 2004; 
Wilson et al, 2005). While identifying related 
content is an essential component for automatic 
sentiment analysis, it only provides half the 
story. A useful area of research that has received 
much less attention is how these measurements 
might be presented to the users for exploration 
and added value.  
This paper discusses approaches for visualiz-
ing affect and describes an interactive capability 
for exploring emotion in a large document col-
lection. In Section 2 we review current ap-
proaches to identifying the affective content of 
documents, as well as possible ways of visualiz-
ing it. In Section 3 we describe our approach: 
The combination of a lexical scoring method to 
determine the affective content of documents and 
a visual analytics tool for visualizing it. We pro-
vide a detailed case study in Section 4, followed 
by a discussion of possible evaluations.  
2 Background  
At the AAAI Symposium on Attitude and Affect 
held at Stanford in 2004 (Qu et al, 2005), it was 
clear that the lexical approach to capturing affect 
was adequate for broad brush results, but there 
were no production quality visualizations for 
presenting those results analytically. Thus, we 
began exploring methods and tools for the visu-
alization of lexically-based approaches for meas-
uring affect which could facilitate the exploration 
of affect within a text collection. 
 
2.1 Affect Extraction 
Following the general methodology of informa-
tional retrieval, there are two pre-dominant 
methods for identifying sentiment in text: Text 
classification models and lexical approaches. 
Classification models require that a set of docu-
ments are hand labeled for affect, and a system is 
23
trained on the feature vectors associated with 
labels. New text is automatically classified by 
comparing the feature vectors with the training 
set. (Pang & Lee, 2004; Aue & Gamon, 2005). 
This methodology generally requires a large 
amount of training data and is domain dependent.  
In the lexical approach, documents (Turney & 
Littman, 2003), phrases (see Wilson et al, 2005), 
or sentences (Weibe & Riloff, 2005) are catego-
rized as positive or negative, for example, based 
on the number of words in them that match a 
lexicon of sentiment bearing terms. Major draw-
backs of this approach include the contextual 
variability of sentiment (what is positive in one 
domain may not be in another) and incomplete 
coverage of the lexicon. This latter drawback is 
often circumvented by employing bootstrapping 
(Turney & Littman, 2003; Weibe & Riloff, 2005) 
which allows one to create a larger lexicon from 
a small number of seed words, and potentially 
one specific to a particular domain. 
2.2 Affect Visualization 
The uses of automatic sentiment classification 
are clear (public opinion, customer reviews, 
product analysis, etc.). However, there has not 
been a great deal of research into ways of visual-
izing affective content in ways that might aid 
data exploration and the analytic process.   
There are a number of visualizations designed 
to reveal the emotional content of text, in par-
ticular, text that is thought to be highly emotively 
charged such as conversational transcripts and 
chat room transcripts (see DiMicco et al, 2002; 
Tat & Carpendale, 2002; Lieberman et al, 2004;  
Wang et al, 2004, for example).  Aside from 
using color and emoticons to explore individual 
documents (Liu et al, 2003) or email inboxes 
(Mandic & Kerne, 2004), there are very few 
visualizations suitable for exploring the affect of 
large collections of text. One exception is the 
work of Liu et al (2005) in which they provide a 
visualization tool to compare reviews of prod-
ucts,using a bar graph metaphor. Their system 
automatically extracts product features (with as-
sociated affect) through parsing and pos tagging, 
having to handle exceptional cases individually. 
Their Opinion Observer is a powerful tool de-
signed for a single purpose: comparing customer 
reviews.  
In this paper, we introduce a visual analytic 
tool designed to explore the emotional content of 
large collections of open domain documents. The 
tools described here work with document collec-
tions of all sizes, structures (html, xml, .doc, 
email, etc), sources (private collections, web, 
etc.), and types of document collections. The 
visualization tool is a mature tool that supports 
the analytical process by enabling users to ex-
plore the thematic content of the collection, use 
natural language to query the collection, make 
groups, view documents by time, etc. The ability 
to explore the emotional content of an entire col-
lection of documents not only enables users to 
compare the range of affect in documents within 
the collection, but also allows them to relate af-
fect to other dimensions in the collection, such as 
major topics and themes, time, and source.   
3 The Approach 
Our methodology combines a traditional lexical 
approach to scoring documents for affect with a 
mature visualization tool. We first automatically 
identify affect by comparing each document 
against a lexicon of affect-bearing words and 
obtain an affect score for each document. We 
provide a number of visual metaphors to repre-
sent the affect in the collection and a number of 
tools that can be used to interactively explore the 
affective content of the data. 
3.1 Lexicon and Measurement 
We use a lexicon of affect-bearing words to iden-
tify the distribution of affect in the documents. 
Our lexicon authoring system allows affect-
bearing terms, and their associated strengths, to 
be bulk loaded, declared manually, or algo-
rithmically suggested. In this paper, we use a 
lexicon derived from the General Inquirer (GI) 
and supplemented with lexical items derived 
from a semi-supervised bootstrapping task. The 
GI tool is a computer-assisted approach for con-
tent analyses of textual data (Stone, 1977). It in-
cludes an extensive lexicon of over 11,000 hand-
coded word stems and 182 categories.  
We used this lexicon, specifically the positive 
and negative axes, to create a larger lexicon by 
bootstrapping. Lexical bootstrapping is a method 
used to help expand dictionaries of semantic 
categories (Riloff & Jones, 1999) in the context 
of a document set of interest. The approach we 
have adopted begins with a lexicon of affect 
bearing words (POS and NEG) and a corpus. 
Each document in the corpus receives an affect 
score by counting the number of words from the 
seed lexicon that occur in the document; a sepa-
rate score is given for each affect axis. Words in 
the corpus are scored for affect potential by 
comparing their distribution (using an L1 Distri-
24
bution metric) of occurrence over the set if 
documents to the distribution of affect bearing 
words. Words that compare favorably with affect 
are hypothesized as affect bearing words. Results 
are then manually culled to determine if in fact 
they should be included in the lexicon. 
Here we report on results using a lexicon built 
from 8 affect categories, comprising 4 concept 
pairs:   
? Positive (n=2236)-Negative (n=2708) 
? Virtue (n=638)-Vice (n=649) 
? Pleasure (n=151)-Pain (n=220) 
? Power Cooperative (n=103)-Power Con-
flict (n=194)   
 
Each document in the collection is compared 
against all 8 affect categories and receives a 
score for each. Scores are based on the summa-
tion of each affect axis in the document, normal-
ized by the number of words in the documents. 
This provides an overall proportion of positive 
words, for example, per document. Scores can 
also be calculated as the summation of each axis, 
normalized by the total number of affect words 
for all axes. This allows one to quickly estimate 
the balance of affect in the documents. For ex-
ample, using this measurement, one could see 
that a particular document contains as many 
positive as negative terms, or if it is heavily 
skewed towards one or the other. 
While the results reported here are based on a 
predefined lexicon, our system does include a 
Lexicon Editor in which a user can manually en-
ter their own lexicon or add strengths to lexical 
items. Included in the editor is a Lexicon Boot-
strapping Utility which the user can use to help 
create a specialized lexicon of their own. This 
utility runs as described above. Note that while 
we enable the capability of strength, we have not 
experimented with that variable here. All words 
for all axes have a default strength of .5.  
3.2 Visualization 
To visualize the affective content of a collection 
of documents, we combined a variety of visual 
metaphors with a tool designed for visual ana-
lytics of documents, IN-SPIRE. 
3.2.1 The IN-SPIRE System 
IN-SPIRE (Hetzler and Turner, 2004) is a visual 
analytics tool designed to facilitate rapid under-
standing of large textual corpora. IN-SPIRE gen-
erates a compiled document set from mathemati-
cal signatures for each document in a set. 
Document signatures are clustered according to 
common themes to enable information explora-
tion and visualizations. Information is presented 
to the user using several visual metaphors to ex-
pose different facets of the textual data. The cen-
tral visual metaphor is a Galaxy view of the cor-
pus that allows users to intuitively interact with 
thousands of documents, examining them by 
theme (see Figure 4, below). IN-SPIRE leverages 
the use of context vectors such as LSA (Deer-
wester et al, 1990) for document clustering and 
projection. Additional analytic tools allow explo-
ration of temporal trends, thematic distribution 
by source or other metadata, and query relation-
ships and overlaps. IN-SPIRE was recently en-
hanced to support visual analysis of sentiment.  
3.2.2 Visual Metaphors 
In selecting metaphors to represent the affect 
scores of documents, we started by identifying 
the kinds of questions that users would want to 
explore. Consider, as a guiding example, a set of 
customer reviews for several commercial prod-
ucts (Hu & Liu, 2004). A user reviewing this 
data might be interested in a number of ques-
tions, such as: 
 
? What is the range of affect overall?   
? Which products are viewed most posi-
tively? Most negatively? 
? What is the range of affect for a particular 
product? 
? How does the affect in the reviews deviate 
from the norm? Which are more negative 
or positive than would be expected from 
the averages? 
? How does the feedback of one product 
compare to that of another? 
? Can we isolate the affect as it pertains to 
different features of the products? 
 
In selecting a base metaphor for affect, we 
wanted to be able to address these kinds of ques-
tions. We wanted a metaphor that would support 
viewing affect axes individually as well as in 
pairs. In addition to representing the most com-
mon axes, negative and positive, we wanted to 
provide more flexibility by incorporating the 
ability to portray multiple pairs because we sus-
pect that additional axes will help the user ex-
plore nuances of emotion in the data. For our 
current metaphor, we drew inspiration from the 
Rose plot used by Florence Nightingale (Wainer, 
1997). This metaphor is appealing in that it is 
easily interpreted, that larger scores draw more 
25
attention, and that measures are shown in consis-
tent relative location, making it easier to compare 
measures across document groups. We use a 
modified version of this metaphor in which each 
axis is represented individually but is also paired 
with its opposite to aid in direct comparisons. To 
this end, we vary the spacing between the rose 
petals to reinforce the pairing. We also use color; 
each pair has a common hue, with the more posi-
tive of the pair shown in a lighter shade and the 
more negative one in a darker shade (see Figure 
1). 
To address how much the range of affect var-
ies across a set of documents, we adapted the 
concept of a box plot to the rose petal. For each 
axis, we show the median and quartile values as 
shown in the figure below. The dark line indi-
cates the median value and the color band por-
trays the quartiles. In the plot in Figure 1, for 
example, the scores vary quite a bit. 
  
 
Figure 1. Rose plot adapted to show median and 
quartile variation. 
 
Another variation we made on the base meta-
phor was to address a more subtle set of ques-
tions. It may happen that the affect scores within 
a dataset are largely driven by document mem-
bership in particular groups. For example, in our 
customer data, it may be that all documents 
about Product A are relatively positive while 
those about Product B are relatively negative. A 
user wanting to understand customer complaints 
may have a subtle need. It is not sufficient to just 
look at the most negative documents in the data-
set, because none of the Product A documents 
may pass this threshold. What may also help is to 
look at all documents that are more negative than 
one would expect, given the product they dis-
cuss. To carry out this calculation, we use a sta-
tistical technique to calculate the Main (or ex-
pected) affect value for each group and the Re-
sidual (or deviation) affect value for each docu-
ment with respect to its group (Scheffe, 1999).  
To convey the Residual concept, we needed a 
representation of deviation from expected value. 
We also wanted this portrayal to be similar to the 
base metaphor. We use a unit circle to portray 
the expected value and show deviation by draw-
ing the appropriate rose petals either outside 
(larger than expected) or inside (smaller than 
expected) the unit circle, with the color amount 
showing the amount of deviation from expected. 
In the figures below, the dotted circle represents 
expected value. The glyph on the left shows a 
cluster with scores slightly higher than expected 
for Positive and for Cooperation affect. The 
glyph on the right shows a cluster with scores 
slightly higher than expected for the Negative 
and Vice affect axes (Figure 2).    
 
Figure 2. Rose plot adapted to show deviation 
from expected values. 
3.2.3 Visual Interaction 
IN-SPIRE includes a variety of analytic tools 
that allow exploration of temporal trends, the-
matic distribution by source or other metadata, 
and query relationships and overlaps. We have 
incorporated several interaction capabilities for 
further exploration of the affect. Our analysis 
system allows users to group documents in nu-
merous ways, such as by query results, by meta-
data (such as the product), by time frame, and by 
similarity in themes. A user can select one or 
more of these groups and see a summary of af-
fect and its variation in those groups. In addition, 
the group members are clustered by their affect 
scores and glyphs of the residual, or variation 
from expected value, are shown for each of these 
sub-group clusters.   
Below each rose we display a small histogram 
showing the number of documents represented 
by that glyph (see Figure 3). These allow com-
parison of affect to cluster or group size. For ex-
ample, we find that extreme affect scores are 
typically found in the smaller clusters, while lar-
ger ones often show more mid-range scores. As 
the user selects document groups or clusters, we 
show the proportion of documents selected.  
 
26
 
Figure 3. Clusters by affect score, with one rose 
plot per cluster. 
 
The interaction may also be driven from the 
affect size. If a given clustering of affect charac-
teristics is selected, the user can see the themes 
they represent, how they correlate to metadata, or 
the time distribution. We illustrate how the affect 
visualization and interaction fit into a larger 
analysis with a brief case study. 
4 Case study 
The IN-SPIRE visualization tool is a non-data 
specific tool, designed to explore large amounts 
of textual data for a variety of genres and docu-
ment types (doc, xml,  etc). Many users of the 
system have their own data sets they wish to ex-
plore (company internal documents), or data can 
be harvested directly from the web, either in a 
single web harvest, or dynamically. The case 
study and dataset presented here is intended as an 
example only, it does not represent the full range 
of exploration capabilities of the affective con-
tent of datasets.  
We explore a set of customer reviews, com-
prising a collection of Amazon reviews for five 
products (Hu & Liu, 2004). While a customer 
may not want to explore reviews for 5 different 
product types at once, the dataset is realistic in 
that a web harvest of one review site will contain 
reviews of multiple products. This allows us to 
demonstrate how the tool enables users to focus 
on the data and comparisons that they are inter-
ested in exploring. The 5 products in this dataset 
are: 
? Canon G3; digital camera 
? Nikon coolpix 4300; digital camera 
? Nokia 6610; cell phone 
? Creative Labs Nomad Jukebox Zen Xtra 
40GB; mp3 player 
? Apex AD2600 Progressive-scan DVD 
player 
 
We begin by clustering the reviews, based on 
overall thematic content. The labels are auto-
matically generated and indicate some of the 
stronger theme combinations in this dataset. 
These clusters are driven largely by product vo-
cabulary. The two cameras cluster in the lower 
portion; the Zen shows up in the upper right clus-
ters, with the phone in the middle and the Apex 
DVD player in the upper left and upper middle. 
In this image, the pink dots are the Apex DVD 
reviews. 
 
 
Figure 4. Thematic clustering of product review 
 
The affect measurements on these documents 
generate five clusters in our system, each of 
which is summarized with a rose plot showing 
affect variation. This gives us information on the 
range and distribution of affect overall in this 
data. We can select one of these plots, either to 
review the documents or to interact further. Se-
lection is indicated with a green border, as shown 
in the upper middle plot of Figure 5.  
 
 
Figure 5. Clusters by affect, with one cluster 
glyph selected. 
 
 
The selected documents are relatively positive; 
they have higher scores in the Positive and Vir-
tue axes and lower scores in the Negative axis. 
We may want to see how the documents in this 
27
affect cluster distribute over the five products. 
This question is answered by the correlation tool, 
shown in Figure 6; the positive affect cluster 
contains more reviews on the Zen MP3 player 
than any of the other products. 
 
 
Figure 6. Products represented in one of the posi-
tive affect clusters. 
 
Alternatively we could get a summary of af-
fect per product.  Figure 7 shows the affect for 
the Apex DVD player and the Nokia cell phone. 
While both are positive, the Apex has stronger 
negative ratings than the Nokia. 
 
 
Figure 7. Comparison of Affect Scores of Nokia 
to Apex 
 
More detail is apparent by looking at the clus-
ters within one or more groups and examining 
the deviations. Figure 8 shows the sub-clusters 
within the Apex group. We include the summary 
for the group as a whole (directly beneath the 
Apex label), and then show the four sub-clusters 
by illustrating how they deviate from expected 
value. We see that two of these tend to be more 
positive than expected and two are more negative 
than expected. 
 
 
Figure 8. Summary of Apex products with sub-
clusters showing deviations. 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Thematic distribution of reviews for 
one product (Apex). 
 
Looking at the thematic distribution among 
the Apex documents shows topics that dominate 
its reviews (Figure 9). 
We can examine the affect across these vari-
ous clusters. Figure 10 shows the comparison of 
the ?service? cluster to the ?dvd player picture? 
cluster. This graphic demonstrates that docu-
ments with ?service? as a main theme tend to be 
much more negative, while documents with ?pic-
ture? as a main theme are much more positive.  
 
28
 
Figure 10. Affect summary and variation for 
?service? cluster and ?picture? cluster. 
 
The visualization tool includes a document 
viewer so that any selection of documents can be 
reviewed. For example, a user may be interested 
in why the ?service? documents tend to be nega-
tive, in which case they can review the original 
reviews. The doc viewer, shown in Figure 11, 
can be used at any stage in the process with any 
number of documents selected. Individual docu-
ments can be viewed by clicking on a document 
title in the upper portion of the doc viewer.  
 
Figure 11: The Doc Viewer. 
 
In this case study, we have illustrated the use-
fulness of visualizing the emotional content of a 
document collection. Using the tools presented 
here, we can summarize the dataset by saying 
that in general, the customer reviews are positive 
(Figure 5), but reviews for some products are 
more positive than others (Figures 6 and 7). In 
addition to the general content of the reviews, we 
can narrow our focus to the features contained in 
the reviews. We saw that while reviews for Apex 
are generally positive (Figure 8), reviews about 
Apex ?service? tend to be much more negative 
than reviews about Apex ?picture? (Figure 10).  
5 Evaluation 
IN-SPIRE is a document visualization tool that is 
designed to explore the thematic content of a 
large collection of documents. In this paper, we 
have described the added functionality of explor-
ing affect as one of the possible dimensions. As 
an exploratory system, it is difficult to define 
appropriate evaluation metric. Because the goal 
of our system is not to discretely bin the docu-
ments into affect categories, traditional metrics 
such as precision are not applicable. However, to 
get a sense of the coverage of our lexicon, we did 
compare our measurements to the hand annota-
tions provided for the customer review dataset.  
The dataset had hand scores (-3-3) for each 
feature contained in each review. We summed 
these scores to discretely bin them into positive 
(>0) or negative (<0). We did this both at the 
feature level and the review level (by looking at 
the cumulative score for all the features in the 
review). We compared these categorizations to 
the scores output by our measurement tool. If a 
document had a higher proportion of positive 
words than negative, we classified it as positive, 
and negative if it had a higher proportion of 
negative words. Using a chi-square, we found 
that the categorizations from our system were 
related with the hand annotations for both the 
whole reviews (chi-square=33.02, df=4, 
p<0.0001) and the individual features (chi-
square=150.6, df=4, p<0.0001), with actual 
agreement around 71% for both datasets. While 
this number is not in itself impressive, recall that 
our lexicon was built independently of the data 
for which is was applied. W also expect some 
agreement to be lost by conflating all scores into 
discrete bins, we expect that if we compared the 
numeric values of the hand annotations and our 
scores, we would have stronger correlations. 
These scores only provide an indication that 
the lexicon we used correlates with the hand an-
notations for the same data. As an exploratory 
system, however, a better evaluation metric 
would be a user study in which we get feedback 
on the usefulness of this capability in accom-
plishing a variety of analytical tasks. IN-SPIRE 
is currently deployed in a number of settings, 
both commercial and government. The added 
capabilities for interactively exploring affect 
have recently been deployed. We plan to conduct 
a variety of user evaluations in-situ that focus on 
its utility in a number of different tasks. Results 
of these studies will help steer the further devel-
opment of this methodology. 
29
6 Conclusion 
We have developed a measurement and visuali-
zation approach to affect that we expect to be 
useful in the context of the IN-SPIRE text analy-
sis toolkit. Our innovations include the flexibility 
of the lexicons used, the measurement options, 
the bootstrapping method and utility for lexicon 
development, and the visualization of affect us-
ing rose plots and interactive exploration in the 
context of an established text analysis toolkit. 
While the case study presented here was con-
ducted in English, all tools described are lan-
guage independent and we have begun exploring 
and creating lexicons of affect bearing words in 
multiple languages.  
 
References 
A. Aue.  & M. Gamon. 2005. Customizing Senti-
ment Classifiers to New Domains: a Case Study. 
Submitted  RANLP.  
S. Deerwester, S.T. Dumais, T.K. Landauer, G.W. 
Furnas, and R.A. Harshman. 1990. Indexing by La-
tent Semantic Analysis. Journal of the Society for 
Information Science, 41(6):391?407.  
 J. M. DiMicco, V. Lakshmipathy, A. T. Fiore. 2002. 
Conductive Chat: Instant Messaging With a Skin 
Conductivity Channel. In Proceedings of Confer-
ence on  Computer Supported Cooperative Work. 
D. G. Feitelson. 2003. Comparing Partitions with Spie 
Charts. Technical Report 2003-87, School of Com-
puter Science and Engineering, The Hebrew Uni-
versity of Jerusalem.  
E. Hetzler and A. Turner. 2004. Analysis Experiences 
Using Information Visualization. IEEE Computer 
Graphics and Applications, 24(5):22-26, 2004. 
M. Hu and B. Liu. 2004. Mining Opinion Features in 
Customer Reviews. In Proceedings of Nineteenth 
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
(AAAI-2004). 
H. Lieberman, H. Liu, P. Singh and B. Barry. 2004. 
Beating Common Sense into Interactive Applica-
tions. AI Magazine 25(4): Winter 2004, 63-76. 
B. Liu, M. Hu and J. Cheng. 2005. Opinion Observer: 
Analyzing and Comparing Opinions on the Web. 
Proceedings of the 14th international World Wide 
Web conference (WWW-2005), May 10-14, 2005: 
Chiba, Japan. 
H. Liu, T. Selker, H. Lieberman. 2003. Visualizing 
the Affective Structure of a Text Document. Com-
puter Human Interaction, April 5-10, 2003: Fort 
Lauderdale. 
M. Mandic and A. Kerne. 2004. faMailiar?Intimacy-
based Email Visualization. In Proceedings of IEEE 
Information Visualization 2004, Austin Texas, 31-
32. 
B. Pang and L. Lee. 2004. A Sentimental Education: 
Sentiment Analysis Using Subjectivity Summariza-
tion Based on Minimum Cuts. In Proceedings of 
the 42nd ACL, pp. 271-278, 2004.  
Y. Qu,, J. Shanahan, and J. Weibe. 2004. Exploring 
Attitude and Affect in Text: Theories and Applica-
tions. Technical Report SS-04-07.  
E. Riloff and R. Jones. 1999.  Learning Dictionaries 
for Information Extraction by Multi-Level Boot-
strapping. Proceedings of the Sixteenth National 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-99) 
pp. 474-479. 
H. Scheff?. 1999. The Analysis of Variance, Wiley-
Interscience. 
P. Stone. 1977. Thematic Text Analysis: New Agen-
das for Analyzing Text Content. In Text Analysis 
for the Social Sciences, ed. Carl Roberts, Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates. 
A. Tat and S. Carpendale. 2002. Visualizing Human 
Dialog. In Proceedings of IEEE Conference on In-
formation Visualization, IV'02, p.16-24, London, 
UK.  
P. Turney and M. Littman. 2003. Measuring Praise 
and Criticism: Inference of Semantic Orientation 
from Association. ACM Transactions on Informa-
tion Systems (TOIS) 21:315-346. 
H. Wainer. 1997. A Rose by Another Name.? Visual 
Revelations, Copernicus Books, New York. 
H. Wang, H. Prendinger, and T. Igarashi. 2004. Com-
municating Emotions in Online Chat Using Physio-
logical Sensors and Animated Text.? In Proceed-
ings of ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Fac-
tors in Computing Systems (CHI'04), Vienna, Aus-
tria, April 24-29. 
J. Wiebe and Ellen Riloff. 2005. Creating Subjective 
and Objective Sentence Classifiers from Unanno-
tated Texts.? In Proceedings of Sixth International 
Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and 
Computational Linguistics. 
T. Wilson, J. Wiebe, and P. Hoffmann. 2005. Recog-
nizing Contextual Polarity in Phrase-Level Senti-
ment Analysis.?  In Proceeding of HLT-EMNLP-
2005.  
 
 
30
