Answering Definition Questions Using Multiple Knowledge Sources
Wesley Hildebrandt, Boris Katz, and Jimmy Lin
MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
32 Vassar Street, Cambridge, MA 02139
{wes,boris,jimmylin}@csail.mit.edu
Abstract
Definition questions represent a largely unex-
plored area of question answering?they are
different from factoid questions in that the
goal is to return as many relevant ?nuggets?
of information about a concept as possible.
We describe a multi-strategy approach to an-
swering such questions using a database con-
structed offline with surface patterns, a Web-
based dictionary, and an off-the-shelf docu-
ment retriever. Results are presented from
component-level evaluation and from an end-
to-end evaluation of our implemented system
at the TREC 2003 Question Answering Track.
1 Introduction
To date, research in question answering has concentrated
on factoid questions such as ?Who was Abraham Lincoln
married to?? The standard strategy for answering these
questions using a textual corpus involves a combination
of information retrieval and named-entity extraction tech-
nology; see (Voorhees, 2002) for an overview. Factoid
questions, however, represent but one facet of question
answering, whose broader goal is to provide humans with
intuitive information access using natural language.
In contrast to factoid questions, the objective for ?defi-
nition? questions is to produce as many useful ?nuggets?
of information as possible. For example, the answer to
?Who is Aaron Copland?? might include the following:
American composer
wrote ballets and symphonies
born in Brooklyn, New York, in 1900
son of a Jewish immigrant
American communist
civil rights advocate
Until recently, definition questions remained a largely
unexplored area of question answering. Standard factoid
question answering technology, designed to extract sin-
gle answers, cannot be directly applied to this task. The
solution to this interesting research challenge will draw
from related fields such as information extraction, multi-
document summarization, and answer fusion.
In this paper, we present an approach to answering
definition questions that combines knowledge from three
sources. We present results from our own component
analysis and the TREC 2003 Question Answering Track.
2 Answering Definition Questions
Our first step in answering a definition question is to ex-
tract the concept for which information is being sought?
called the target term, or simply, the target. Once the tar-
get term has been found, three techniques are employed
to retrieve relevant nuggets: lookup in a database created
from the AQUAINT corpus1, lookup in a Web dictionary
followed by answer projection, and lookup directly in the
AQUAINT corpus with an IR engine. Answers from the
three different sources are then merged to produce the fi-
nal system output. The following subsections describe
each of these modules in greater detail.
2.1 Target Extraction
We have developed a simple pattern-based parser to ex-
tract the target term using regular expressions. If the nat-
ural language question does not fit any of our patterns,
the parser heuristically extracts the last sequence of capi-
talized words in the question as the target.
Our simple target extractor was tested on all definition
questions from the TREC-9 and TREC-10 QA Track test-
sets and performed with one hundred percent accuracy on
those questions. However, there were several instances
where the target term was not correctly extracted from
1official corpus used for the TREC QA Track, available from
the Linguistic Data Consortium
Name Pattern Bindings
Copular1 (e1 is) NP1 be NP2 [NP1 = t, NP2 = n]
Become2 (e1 beca) NP1 become NP2 [NP1 = t, NP2 = n]
Verb3 (e1 verb): NP1 v NP2 [where v ? biography-verb; NP1 = t, NP2 = n]
Appositive4 (e1/2 appo) NP1, NP2 [NP1 = t ? n, NP2 = t ? n]
Occupation5 (e2 occu) NP1 NP2 [where head(NP1) ? occupation; NP1 = n, NP2 = t]
Parenthesis6 (e1 pare) NP1 (NP2) [NP1 = t, NP2 = n]
Also-known-as7 (e1/2 aka) NP1, (also) known as NP2 [NP1 = t ? n, NP2 = t ? n]
Also-called8 (e2 also) NP1, (also) called NP2 [NP1 = n, NP2 = t]
Or9 (e1 or) NP1, or NP2 [NP1 = t, NP2 = n]
Like10 (e2 like) NP1 (such as|like) NP2 [NP1 = n, NP2 = t]
Relative clause11 (e1 wdt) NP (which|that) VP [NP = t, VP = n]
1In order to filter out spurious nuggets (e.g., progressive tense), our system discards nuggets that do not begin with a determiner.
2The verb become, like be, often yields good nuggets that define a target.
3By statistically analyzing a corpus of biographies of famous people, we compiled a list of verbs commonly used to describe people
and their accomplishments, such as write, invent, and make.
4Either NP1 or NP2 can be the target; thus, we index both NPs as the target term.
5NPs preceding proper nouns provide information such as occupation or affiliation. To boost precision, our system discards nuggets
that do not contain an occupation (e.g., actor, spokesman, leader). We mined this list from WordNet and the Web.
6Parenthetical expressions usually contain interesting nuggets; for persons, they often include a lifespan or job description.
7Either NP1 or NP2 can be the target; thus, we index both NPs as the target term.
8This and the previous pattern frequently identify hyponymy relations; typically, NP1 is the hypernym of NP2.
9This pattern often identifies the discourse function of elaboration.
10This pattern typically identifies an exemplification relationship, where NP2 is an instance of NP1.
11Relative clauses often provide useful nuggets.
Table 1: Description of the surface patterns used in constructing our database. (t is short for target, n for nugget)
the definition questions in TREC 2003, which made it
difficult for downstream modules to find relevant nuggets
(see Section 3.2 for a discussion).
2.2 Database Lookup
The use of surface patterns for answer extraction has
proven to be an effective strategy for factoid question
answering (Soubbotin and Soubbotin, 2001; Brill et al,
2001; Hermjakob et al, 2002). Typically, surface patterns
are applied to a candidate set of documents returned by
a document or passage retriever. Although this strategy
often suffers from low recall, it is generally not a prob-
lem for factoid questions, where only a single instance
of the answer is required. Definition questions, however,
require a system to find as many relevant nuggets as pos-
sible, making recall very important.
To boost recall, we employed an alternative strategy:
by applying the set of surface patterns offline, we were
able to ?precompile? from the AQUAINT corpus a list
of nuggets about every entity mentioned within it. In
essence, we have automatically constructed an immense
relational database containing nuggets distilled from ev-
ery article in the corpus. The task of answering defini-
tion questions then becomes a simple lookup for the rel-
evant term. This approach is similar in spirit to the work
reported by Fleischman et al (2003) and Mann (2002),
except that our system benefits from a greater variety of
patterns and answers a broader range of questions.
Our surface patterns operated both at the word and
part-of-speech level. Rudimentary chunking, such as
marking the boundaries of noun phrases, was performed
by grouping words based on their part-of-speech tags. In
total, we applied eleven surface patterns over the entire
corpus?these are detailed in Table 1, with examples in
Table 2.
Typically, surface patterns identify nuggets on the or-
der of a few words. In answering definition questions,
however, we decided to return responses that include ad-
ditional context?there is evidence that contextual in-
formation results in higher-quality answers (Lin et al,
2003). To accomplish this, all nuggets were expanded
around their center point to encompass one hundred char-
acters. We found that this technique enhances the read-
ability of the responses, because many nuggets seem odd
and out of place without context.
The results of applying our surface patterns to the en-
tire AQUAINT corpus?the target, pattern type, nugget,
and source sentence?are stored in a relational database.
To answer a definition question, the target is used to query
for all relevant nuggets in the database.
2.3 Dictionary Lookup
Another component of our system for answering
definition questions utilizes an existing Web-based
dictionary?dictionary definitions often supply knowl-
edge that can be directly exploited. Previous factoid ques-
Copular A fractal is a pattern that is irregular, but self-similar at all size scales
Become Althea Gibson became the first black tennis player to win a Wimbledon singles title
Verb Francis Scott Key wrote ?The Star-Spangled Banner?
Appositive The Aga Khan, Spiritual Leader of the Ismaili Muslims
Occupation steel magnate Andrew Carnegie
Parenthesis Alice Rivlin (director of the Office of Management and Budget)
Also-known-as special proteins, known as enzymes // amitriptyline, also known as Elavil
Also-called amino acid called phenylalanine
Or caldera, or cauldron-like cavity on the summit
Like prominent human rights leaders like Desmond Tutu
Relative clause Solar cells which currently produce less than one percent of global power supplies
Table 2: Example nuggets for each pattern. (target term in bold, textual landmark in italics, and nugget underlined)
tion answering systems have already demonstrated the
value of semistructured resources on the Web (Lin and
Katz, 2003); we believe that some of these resources can
be similarly employed to answer definition questions.
The setup of the TREC evaluations requires every an-
swer to be paired with a supporting document; therefore,
a system cannot simply return the dictionary definition
of a term as its response. To address this issue, we de-
veloped answer projection techniques to ?map? dictio-
nary definitions back onto AQUAINT documents. Simi-
lar techniques have been employed for factoid questions,
for example, in (Brill et al, 2001).
We have constructed a wrapper around the Merriam-
Webster online dictionary. To answer a question using
this technique, keywords from the target term?s dictio-
nary definition and the target itself are used as the query
to Lucene, a freely-available open-source IR engine. Our
system retrieves the top one hundred documents returned
by Lucene and tokenizes them into individual sentences,
discarding candidate sentences that do not contain the tar-
get term. The remaining sentences are scored by their
keyword overlap with the dictionary definition, weighted
by the inverse document frequency of each keyword. All
sentences with a non-zero score are retained and short-
ened to one hundred characters centered around the target
term, if necessary.
The following are two examples of results from our
dictionary lookup component:
What is the vagus nerve?
Dictionary definition: either of the 10th pair of
cranial nerves that arise from the medulla and
supply chiefly the viscera especially with auto-
nomic sensory and motor fibers
Projected answer: The vagus nerve is some-
times called the 10th cranial nerve. It runs from
the brain . . .
What is feng shui?
Dictionary definition: a Chinese geomantic
practice in which a structure or site is chosen
or configured so as to harmonize with the spir-
itual forces that inhabit it
Projected answer: In case you?ve missed the
feng shui bandwagon, it is, according to Web-
ster?s, ?a Chinese geomantic practice . . .
This strategy was inspired by query expansion
techniques often employed in document retrieval?
essentially, the dictionary definition of a term is used as
the source of expansion terms. Creative use of Web-
based resources combined with proven information re-
trieval techniques enables this component to provide high
quality responses to definition questions.
2.4 Document Lookup
If no answers are found by the previous two techniques,
as a last resort our system employs traditional document
retrieval to extract relevant nuggets. The target term is
used as a Lucene query to gather a set of one hundred can-
didate documents. These documents are tokenized into
individual sentences, and all sentences containing the tar-
get term are retained as responses (ranked by the Lucene-
generated score of the document from which they came).
These sentences are also shortened if necessary.
2.5 Answer Merging
The answer merging component of our system is re-
sponsible for integrating results from all three sources:
database lookup, dictionary lookup, and document
lookup. As previously mentioned, responses extracted
using document lookup are used only if the other two
methods returned no answers.
Redundancy presents a major challenge for integrating
knowledge from multiple sources. This problem is espe-
cially severe for nuggets stored in our database. Since
we precompiled knowledge about every entity instance
in the entire AQUAINT corpus, common nuggets are of-
ten repeated. In order to deal with this problem, we ap-
plied a simple heuristic to remove duplicate information:
if two responses share more than sixty percent of their
keywords, one of them is randomly discarded.
After duplicate removal, all responses are ordered by
the expected accuracy of the technique used to extract
the nugget. To determine this expected accuracy, we per-
formed a fine-grained evaluation for each surface pattern
as well as the dictionary lookup strategy; we discuss these
results further in Section 3.1.
Finally, the answer merging component decides how
many responses to return. Given n total responses, we
calculate the final number of responses to return as:
n if n ? 10
n +
?
n? 10 if n > 10
Having described the architecture of our system, we
proceed to present evaluation results.
3 Evaluation
In this section we present two separate evaluations of
our system. The first is a component analysis of our
database and dictionary techniques, and the second in-
volves our participation in the TREC 2003 Question An-
swering Track.
3.1 Component Evaluation
We evaluated the performance of each individual surface
pattern and the dictionary lookup technique on 160 def-
inition questions selected from the TREC-9 and TREC-
10 QA Track testsets. Since we primarily generated our
patterns by directly analyzing the corpus, these questions
can be considered a blind testset. The performance of our
surface patterns and our dictionary lookup technique is
shown in Table 3.
Overall, database lookup retrieved approximately eight
nuggets per question at an accuracy nearing 40%; dictio-
nary lookup retrieved about 1.5 nuggets per question at
an accuracy of 45%. Obviously, recall of our techniques
is extremely hard to measure directly; instead, we use the
prevalence of each pattern as a poor substitute. As shown
in Table 3, some patterns occur frequently (e.g., e1 is and
e1 appo), but others are relatively rare, such as the rela-
tive clause pattern, which yielded only six nuggets for the
entire testset.
These results represent a baseline for the performance
of each technique. Our focus was not on perfecting each
individual pattern and the dictionary matching algorithm,
but on building a complete working system. We will dis-
cuss future improvements and refinements in Section 5.
3.2 TREC 2003 Results
Our system for answering definition questions was in-
dependently and formally evaluated at the TREC 2003
Question Answering Track. For the first time, TREC
evaluated definition questions in addition to factoid and
list questions. Although our entry handled all three types
Pattern accuracy nuggets
e2 also 85.71 7
e2 aka 80.00 5
e2 occu 69.35 62
e1 or 67.74 31
e1 wdt 66.67 6
e2 like 64.60 113
e2 appo 60.00 20
e1 aka 50.00 2
e1 is 35.37 246
e1 pare 34.91 106
e1 appo 30.40 579
e1 verb 26.09 92
e1 beca 25.00 8
average 38.37 98.2
total 1277
dictionary 45.23 241
Table 3: Performance of each surface pattern and the dic-
tionary lookup technique for all 160 test questions.
Group Run F-measure
MITCSAIL03a 0.309
MIT MITCSAIL03b 0.282
MITCSAIL03c 0.282
best 0.555
Overall baseline IR 0.493
median 0.192
Table 4: Official TREC 2003 results.
of questions, we only report the results of the definition
questions here; see (Katz et al, 2003) for description of
the other components.
Overall, our system performed well, ranking eighth out
of twenty-five groups that participated (Voorhees, 2003).
Our official results for the definition sub-task are shown
in Table 4, along with overall statistics for all groups. The
formula used to calculate the F-measure is given in Fig-
ure 1. The ? value of five indicates that recall is consid-
ered five times more important than precision, an arbi-
trary value set for the purposes of the evaluation.
Nugget precision is computed based on a length al-
lowance of one hundred non-whitespace characters per
relevant response, because a pilot study demonstrated that
it was impossible for assessors to consistently enumer-
ate the total set of ?concepts? contained in a system re-
sponse (Voorhees, 2003). The assessors? nugget list (i.e.,
the ground truth) was created by considering the union
of all responses returned by all participants. All rele-
vant nuggets are divided into ?vital? and ?non-vital? cat-
egories, where vital nuggets are items of information that
Let r # of vital nuggets returned in a response
a # of non-vital nuggets returned in a response
R total # of vital nuggets in the assessors? list
l # of non-whitespace characters in the entire
answer string
Then
recall (R) = r/R
allowance (?) = 100? (r + a)
precision (P) =
{
1 if l < ?
1? l??l otherwise
Finally, the F (? = 5) = (?
2 + 1)? P ?R
?2 ? P +R
Figure 1: Official definition of F-measure.
must be in a definition for it to be considered ?good?.
Non-vital nuggets may also provide relevant information,
but a ?good? definition does not need to include them.
Nugget recall is thus only a function of vital nuggets.
The best run, with an F-measure of 0.555, was submit-
ted by BBN (Xu et al, 2003). The system used many of
the same techniques we described here, with one impor-
tant exception?they did not precompile nuggets into a
database. In their own error analysis, they cited recall as
a major cause of bad performance; this is an issue specif-
ically addressed by our approach.
Interestingly, Xu et al also reported an IR baseline
which essentially retrieved the top 1000 sentences in the
corpus that mentioned the target term (subjected to sim-
ple heuristics to remove redundant answers). This base-
line technique achieved an F-measure of 0.493, which
beat all other runs (expect for BBN?s own runs). Because
the F-measure heavily favored recall over precision, sim-
ple IR techniques worked extremely well. This issue is
discussed in Section 4.1.
To identify areas for improvement, we analyzed the
questions on which we did poorly and found that many
of the errors can be traced back to problems with target
extraction. If the target term is not correctly identified,
then all subsequent modules have little chance of provid-
ing relevant nuggets. For eight questions, our system did
not identify the correct target. The presence of stopwords
and special characters in names was not anticipated:
What is Bausch & Lomb?
Who is Vlad the Impaler?
Who is Akbar the Great?
Our naive pattern-based parser extracted Lomb, Im-
paler, and Great as the target terms for the above ques-
tions. Fortunately, because Lomb and Impaler were
rare terms, our system did manage to return relevant
nuggets. However, since Great is a very common word,
our nuggets for Akbar the Great were meaningless.
The system?s inability to parse certain names is related
to our simple assumption that the final consecutive se-
quence of capitalized words in a question is likely to be
the target. This simply turned out to be an incorrect as-
sumption, as seen in the following questions:
Who was Abraham in the Old Testament?
What is ETA in Spain?
What is Friends of the Earth?
Our parser extracted Old Testament, Spain, and Earth
as the targets for these questions, which directly resulted
in the system?s failure to return relevant nuggets.
Our target extractor also had difficulty with apposi-
tion. Given the question ?What is the medical condition
shingles??, the extractor incorrectly identified the entire
phrase medical condition shingles as the target term. Fi-
nally, our policy of ignoring articles before the target term
caused problems with the question ?What is the Hague??
Since we extracted Hague as the target term, we returned
answers about a British politician as well as the city in
Holland. Our experiences show that while target extrac-
tion seems relatively straightforward, there are instances
where a deeper linguistic understanding is necessary.
Overall, our database and dictionary lookup techniques
worked well. For six questions (out of fifty), however,
neither technique found any nuggets, and therefore our
system resorted to document lookup.
4 Evaluation Reconsidered
This section takes a closer look at the setup of the defini-
tion question evaluation at TREC 2003. In particular, we
examine three issues: the scoring metric, error inherent in
the evaluation process, and variations in judgments.
4.1 The Scoring Metric
As defined, nugget recall is only a function of the nuggets
considered ?vital?. This, however, leads to a counter-
intuitive situation where a system that returned every
non-vital nugget but no vital nuggets would receive a
score of zero. This certainly does not reflect the informa-
tion needs of a real user?even in the absence of ?vital?
information, related knowledge might still be useful to a
user. One solution might be to assign a relative weight to
distinguish vital and non-vital nuggets.
The distinction between vital and non-vital nuggets
is itself somewhat arbitrary. Consider some relevant
nuggets for the question ?What is Bausch & Lomb??:
world?s largest eye care company
about 12000 employees
in 50 countries
Run Total Relevant Recall
Nuggets Returned
official 407 118 28.99%
fixed 407 120 29.48%
Table 5: Nugget recall, disregarding the distinction be-
tween vital and non-vital nuggets.
Figure 2: F-measure as a function of ?.
approx. $1.8 billion annual revenue
based in Rochester, New York
According to the official assessment, the first four
nuggets are vital and the fifth is not. This means that
the location of Bausch & Lomb?s headquarters is consid-
ered less important than employee count and revenue. We
disagree and also believe that ?based in Rochester, New
York? is more important than ?in 50 countries?. Since
it appears that the difference between vital and non-vital
cannot be easily operationalized, there is little hope for
systems to learn and exploit this distinction.
As a reference, we decided to reevaluate our sys-
tem, ignoring the distinction between vital and non-vital
nuggets. The overall nugget recall is reported in Table 5.
We also report the nugget recall of our system after fixing
our target extractor to handle the variety of target terms
in the testset (the ?fixed? run). Unfortunately, our perfor-
mance for the fixed run did not significantly increase be-
cause the problem associated with unanticipated targets
extended beyond the target extractor. Since our surface
patterns did not handle these special entities, the database
did not contain relevant entries for those targets.
Another important issue in the evaluation concerns the
value of ?, the relative importance between precision
and recall in calculating the F-measure. The top entry
achieved an F-measure of 0.555, but the response length
averaged 2059 non-whitespace characters per question.
In contrast, our run with an F-measure of 0.309 averaged
only 620 non-whitespace characters per answer (only two
other runs in the top ten had average response lengths
lower than ours; the lowest was 338). Figure 2 shows F-
measure of our system, the top run, and the IR baseline
plotted against the value of ?. As can be seen, if precision
and recall are considered equally important (i.e., ? = 1),
the difference in performance between our system and
that of the top system is virtually indistinguishable (and
our system performs significantly better than the IR base-
line). At the level of ? = 5, it is obvious that standard IR
technology works very well. The advantages of surface
patterns, linguistic processing, answer fusion, and other
techniques become more obvious if the F-measure is not
as heavily biased towards recall.
What is the proper value of ?? As this was the first for-
mal evaluation of definition questions, the value was set
arbitrarily. However, we believe that there is no ?correct?
value of ?. Instead, the relative importance of precision
and recall varies dramatically from application to applica-
tion, depending on the user information need. A college
student writing a term paper, for example, would most
likely value recall highly, whereas the opposite would be
true for a user asking questions on a PDA. We believe that
these tradeoffs are worthy of further research.
4.2 Evaluation Error
In the TREC 2003 evaluation, we submitted three iden-
tical runs, but nevertheless received different scores for
each of the runs. This situation can be viewed as a probe
into the error margin of the evaluation?assessors are hu-
man and naturally make mistakes, and to ensure the qual-
ity of the evaluation we need to quantify this variation.
Voorhees? analysis (2003) revealed that scores for pairs of
identical runs differed by as much as 0.043 in F-measure.
For the three identical runs we submitted, there was
one nugget missed in our first run that was found in the
other two runs, ten nuggets from six questions missed
for our second run that were found in the other runs, and
ten nuggets from five questions missed in our third run.
There were also nine nuggets from seven questions that
were missed for all three runs, even though they were
clearly present in our answers.
Together over our three runs, there were 48 nuggets
from 13 questions that were clearly present in our re-
sponses but were not consistently recognized by the as-
sessors. The question affected most by these discrepan-
cies was ?Who is Alger Hiss??, for which we received an
F-measure of 0.671 in our first run, while for the second
and third runs we received a score of zero.
If the 48 missed nuggets had been recognized by the
assessors, our F-measure would be 0.327, 0.045 higher
than the score we actually received for runs b and c. This
single-point investigation is not meant to contest the rel-
ative rankings of submitted runs, but simply to demon-
strate the magnitude of the human error currently present
in the evaluation of definition questions (presumably, all
groups suffered equally from these variations).
4.3 Variations in Judgment
The answers to definition questions were judged by hu-
mans, and humans naturally have differing opinions as to
the quality of a response. These differences of opinion are
not mistakes (unlike the issues discussed in the previous
section), but legitimate variations in what assessors con-
sider to be acceptable. These variations are compounded
by the small size of the testset?only fifty questions. In
a post-evaluation analysis, Voorhees (2003) determined
that a score difference of at least 0.1 in F-measure is re-
quired in order for two evaluation results to be consid-
ered statistically different (at 95% confidence). A range
of ?0.1 around our F-measure of 0.309 could either push
our results up to fifth place or down to eleventh place.
A major source of variation is whether or not a pas-
sage matches a particular nugget in the assessor?s list (the
ground truth). Obviously, the assessors are not merely
doing a string comparison, but are instead performing a
?semantic match? of the relevant concepts involved. The
following passages were rejected as matches to the asses-
sors? nuggets:
Who is Al Sharpton?
Nugget: Harlem civil rights leader
Our answer: New York civil rights activist
Who is Ari Fleischer?
Nugget: Elizabeth Dole?s Press Secretary
Our answer: Ari Fleischer, spokesman for . . .
Elizabeth Dole
What is the medical condition shingles?
Nugget: tropical [sic] capsaicin relieves pain of
shingles
Our answer: Epilepsy drug relieves pain from
. . . shingles
Consider the nugget for Al Sharpton: although an ?ac-
tivist? may not be a ?leader?, and someone from New
York may not necessarily be from Harlem, one might ar-
gue that the two nuggets are ?close enough? to warrant a
semantic match. The same situation is true of the other
two questions. The important point here is that different
assessors may judge these nuggets differently, contribut-
ing to detectable variations in score.
Another important issue is the composition of the as-
sessors? nugget list, which serves as ?ground truth?. To
insure proper assessment, each nugget should ideally rep-
resent an ?atomic? concept?which in many cases, it
does not. Again consider the nugget for Al Sharpton; ?a
Harlem civil rights leader? includes the concepts that he
was an important civil rights figure and that he did much
of his work in Harlem. It is entirely conceivable that a
response would provide one fact but not the other. How
then should this situation be scored? As another example,
one of the nuggets for Alexander Pope is ?English poet?,
which is clearly two separate facts.
Another desirable characteristic of the assessor?s
nugget list is uniqueness?nuggets should be unique, not
only in their text but also in their meaning. In the TREC
2003 testset, three questions had exact duplicate nuggets.
Furthermore, there were also several questions for which
multiple nuggets are nearly synonymous (or are implied
by other nuggets), such as the following:
What is TB?
highly infectious lung disease
contagious respiratory disease
common communicable disease
Who is Allen Iverson?
professional basketball player
philadelphia 76 er
What is El Shaddai?
catholic charismatic group
christian organization
catholic sect
religious group
Because the nuggets overlap greatly with each other
in the concepts they denote, consistent and reproducible
evaluation results are difficult.
Another desirable property of the ground truth is com-
pleteness, or coverage of the nuggets?which we also
found to be lacking. There were many relevant items of
information returned by our runs that did not make it onto
the assessors? nugget list (even as non-vital nuggets). For
the question ?Who is Alberto Tomba??, the fact that he
is Italian was not judged to be relevant. For ?What are
fractals??, the ground truth does not contain the idea that
they can be described by simple formulas, which is one
of their most important characteristics. Some more ex-
amples are shown below:
Aga Khan is the founder and principal share-
holder of the Nation Media Group.
The vagus nerve is the sometimes known as the
10th cranial nerve.
Alexander Hamilton was an author, a general,
and a founding father.
Andrew Carnegie established a library system
in Canada.
Angela Davis taught at UC Berkeley.
This coverage issue also points to a deeper method-
ological problem with evaluating definition questions by
pooling the results of all participants. Vital nuggets may
be excluded simply because no system returned them.
Unfortunately, there is no easy way to quantify this phe-
nomenon.
Clearly, evaluating answers to definition questions is
a challenging task. Nevertheless, consistent, repeatable,
and meaningful scoring guidelines are critical to driving
the development of the field. We believe that lessons
learned from our analysis can lead to a more refined eval-
uation in the coming years.
5 Future Work
The results of our work highlight several areas for future
improvement. As mentioned earlier, target extraction is a
key, non-trivial capability critical to the success of a sys-
tem. Similarly, database lookup works only if the relevant
target terms are identified and indexed while preprocess-
ing the corpus. Both of these issues point to the need for a
more robust named-entity extractor, capable of handling
specialized names (e.g., ?Bausch & Lomb?, ?Destiny?s
Child?, ?Akbar the Great?). At the same time, the named-
entity extractor must not be confused by sentences such
as ?Raytheon & Boeing are defense contractors? or ?She
gave John the Honda for Christmas?.
Another area for improvement is the accuracy of the
surface patterns. In general, our patterns only used lo-
cal information; we expect that expanding the context on
which these patterns operate will reduce the number of
false matches. As an example, consider our e1 is pattern;
in one test, over 60% of irrelevant nuggets were cases
where the target is the object of a preposition and not
the subject of the copular verb immediately following it.
For example, this pattern matched the question ?What is
mold?? to the sentence ?tools you need to look for mold
are . . .?. If we endow our patterns with better linguis-
tic notions of constituency, we can dramatically improve
their precision. Another direction we are pursuing is the
use of machine learning techniques to learn predictors
of good nuggets, much like the work of Fleischman et
al. (2003). Separating ?good? from ?bad? nuggets fits
very naturally into a binary classification task.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we have described a novel set of strategies
for answering definition questions from multiple sources:
a database of nuggets precompiled offline using surface
patterns, a Web-based electronic dictionary, and doc-
uments retrieved using traditional information retrieval
technology. We have also demonstrated how answers
derived using multiple strategies can be smoothly inte-
grated to produce a final set of answers. In addition, our
analyses have shown the difficulty of evaluating defini-
tion questions and inability of present metrics to accu-
rately capture the information needs of real-world users.
We believe that our research makes significant contribu-
tions toward the understanding of definition questions, a
largely unexplored area of question answering.
7 Acknowledgement
This work was supported in part by the ARDA?s Ad-
vanced Question Answering for Intelligence (AQUAINT)
Program.
References
Eric Brill, Jimmy Lin, Michele Banko, Susan Dumais,
and Andrew Ng. 2001. Data-intensive question an-
swering. In Proceedings of the Tenth Text REtrieval
Conference (TREC 2001).
Michael Fleischman, Eduard Hovy, and Abdessamad
Echihabi. 2003. Offline strategies for online ques-
tion answering: Answering questions before they are
asked. In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL
2003).
Ulf Hermjakob, Abdessamad Echihabi, and Daniel
Marcu. 2002. Natural language based reformulation
resource and Web exploitation for question answering.
In Proceedings of the Eleventh Text REtrieval Confer-
ence (TREC 2002).
Boris Katz, Jimmy Lin, Daniel Loreto, Wesley Hilde-
brandt, Matthew Bilotti, Sue Felshin, Aaron Fernan-
des, Gregory Marton, and Federico Mora. 2003. In-
tegrating Web-based and corpus-based techniques for
question answering. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Text
REtrieval Conference (TREC 2003).
Jimmy Lin and Boris Katz. 2003. Question answering
from the Web using knowledge annotation and knowl-
edge mining techniques. In Proceedings of the Twelfth
International Conference on Information and Knowl-
edge Management (CIKM 2003).
Jimmy Lin, Dennis Quan, Vineet Sinha, Karun Bakshi,
David Huynh, Boris Katz, and David R. Karger. 2003.
What makes a good answer? The role of context in
question answering. In Proceedings of the Ninth IFIP
TC13 International Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction (INTERACT 2003).
Gideon Mann. 2002. Fine-grained proper noun ontolo-
gies for question answering. In Proceedings of the Se-
maNet?02 Workshop at COLING 2002 on Building and
Using Semantic Networks.
Martin M. Soubbotin and Sergei M. Soubbotin. 2001.
Patterns of potential answer expressions as clues to the
right answers. In Proceedings of the Tenth Text RE-
trieval Conference (TREC 2001).
Ellen M. Voorhees. 2002. Overview of the TREC
2002 question answering track. In Proceedings of the
Eleventh Text REtrieval Conference (TREC 2002).
Ellen M. Voorhees. 2003. Overview of the TREC
2003 question answering track. In Proceedings of the
Twelfth Text REtrieval Conference (TREC 2003).
Jinxi Xu, Ana Licuanan, and Ralph Weischedel. 2003.
TREC2003 QA at BBN: Answering definitional ques-
tions. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Text REtrieval
Conference (TREC 2003).
