Balto-Slavonic Natural Language Processing 2007, June 29, 2007, pages 75?81,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Derivational Relations in Czech WordNet
Karel Pala
Faculty of Informatics
Masaryk University Brno 
Czech Republic
               pala@fi.muni.cz
Dana Hlav??kov?
Faculty of Informatics
Masaryk University Brno
Czech Republic
ydana@aurora.fi.muni.cz
Abstract
In the paper we describe enriching Czech 
WordNet  with  the  derivational  relations 
that  in  highly  inflectional  languages  like 
Czech  form  typical  derivational  nests  (or 
subnets). Derivational relations are mostly 
of  semantic  nature  and their  regularity in 
Czech allows us to add them to the Word-
Net alost automatically. For this purpose 
we  have  used  the  derivational  version  of 
morphological analyzer Ajka that is able to 
handle  the  basic  and  most  productive 
derivational  relations  in  Czech.  Using  a 
special derivational interface developed in 
our NLP Lab we have explored the seman-
tic nature of the selected noun derivational 
suffixes and established a set of the seman-
tically  labeled  derivational  relations  ? 
presently 14. We have added them to the 
Czech WordNet and in this way enriched it 
with approx. 30 000 new Czech synsets. A 
similar enrichment for Princeton WordNet 
has  been  reported  in  its  recently released 
version 3.0, we will comment on the partial 
similarities and differences.  
1 Introduction
WordNets  as  such  represent  huge  semantic  net-
works  in  which  the  basic  units  ?  synsets  ?  are 
linked with the ?main? semantic relations like syn-
onymy, near_synony my, antonymy, hypero/hy-
ponymy, meronymy and others. In the EuroWord-
Net project (cf.  Vossen, 2003) Internal Language 
Relations  (ILR)  have  been  introduced  such  as 
Role_Agent, Agent_Involved or Role_Patient, Pa-
tient_Involved etc., as well as the relation Deriva-
tive  capturing  derivational  relations  between 
synsets.  The semantic nature  of  the derivational 
relations,  however,  was  not  systematically  ana-
lyzed and labeled in EuroWordNet project.
If we try to label the derivational relations se-
mantically and include them in WordNet as a re-
sult we get two level network where on the higher 
level  we have the ?main? semantic  relations  be-
tween  synsets  such  as  synonymy,  near_syn-
onymy, antonymy, hypero/hyponymy,  meronymy 
and others and on the lower level there are rela-
tions like the derivational ones that hold rather be-
tween literals than between synsets.
In the highly inflectional languages the deriva-
tional relations represent a system of semantic re-
lations that definitely reflects cognitive structures 
that may be related to a language ontology. Such 
ontology undoubtedly exists but according to our 
knowledge it has not been written down yet. How-
ever, for language users derivational affixes (mor-
phemes) function as formal means by which they 
express  semantic  relations  necessary  for  using 
language as a vehicle  of  communication.  In our 
view, the derivational relations should be consid-
ered as having semantic nature though a question 
may be asked what kind of semantics we are deal-
ing with (see Sect. 3). It has to be remarked that 
grammatical categories such as gender or number 
display a clear semantic nature. 
2 Derivational Morphology in Czech
In Czech words are regularly inflected (declined, 
conjugated) as they express different grammatical 
categories  (gender,  number,  case,  person,  tense, 
aspect  etc.)  using affixes.  This is what is  called 
75
formal morphology in Czech grammars and its de-
scription mostly deals  with the system of the in-
flectional paradigms. Then there is a  derivational  
morphology which deals with deriving words from 
other  words,  e.g.  nouns  from  verbs,  adjectives 
from nouns or verbs etc. using affixes again. The 
derivations  are  closely related  to  the  inflectional 
paradigms in a specific way:  we can speak about 
derivational paradigms as well (cf. Pala, Sedl??ek, 
Veber,  2003). 
For Czech inflectional morphology there are au-
tomatic tools ? morphological analyzers exploiting 
the formal description of the inflection paradigms 
?  we  work  with  the  analyzer  called  Ajka  (cf. 
Sedl??ek, Smr?, 2003) and developed in our NLP 
Lab.  Its  list  of  stems  contains  approx.  400  000 
items, up to 1600 inflectional paradigms and it is 
able to generate approx. 6 mil. Czech word forms.
We are using it for lemmatization and tagging, 
as a module for syntactic  analyzer,  etc.  We have 
also developed a derivational version of Ajka (D-
Ajka) that is  able to work with the main  regular 
derivational  relations  in  Czech  ?  it  can  generate 
new word forms derived from the stems. Together 
with D-Ajka an MWE preprocessing module with 
the  database  containing  approx.  100 000 colloca-
tions is exploited as well.
2.1 Derivational relations in Czech
The  derivational  relations  (D-relations)  in  Czech 
cover a large part of the word stock (up to 70 %). 
Thus we are interested in describing derivational 
processes (see examples) by which new words are 
formed from the corresponding word bases (roots, 
stems).  In  Czech  grammars  (Mluvnice  ?e?tiny, 
1986) we can find at least the following main types 
(presently 14) of the derivational processes:
1.  mutation:   noun  ->  noun derivation,  e.g. 
ryba -ryb-n?k  (fish -> pond), semantic relation 
expresses location ? between an object and its 
typical location, 
2.  transposition  (existing  between  different 
POS):  noun -> adjective  derivation,  e.g. den 
-> den-n? (day ->daily), semantically the rela-
tion expresses property,
3. agentive relation (existing between different 
POS): verb -> noun  e.g. u?it -> u?i-tel (teach 
-> teacher), semantically the relation  exists 
between action and its agent,
4. patient relation: verb -> noun, e.g.  trestat  
-> trestanec (punish ->convict), semantically 
it expresses a relation between an action and 
the object (person) impacted by it,
5. instrument (means) relation: verb -> noun, 
e.g.  dr?et  ->  dr??k (hold ->holder), 
semantically it expresses a tool (means) used 
when performing an action,  
6.  action relation  (existing between different 
POS):  verb  ->  noun, e.g.  u?it  ->  u?e-n-? 
(teach -> teaching), usually the derived nouns 
are charaterized as deverbatives, semantically 
both  members  of  the  relation  denote  action 
(process),  
7.  property-va  relation  (existing  between 
different  POS):  verb  ->  adjective,  e.g. 
vypracovat  ->  vypracova-n?  (work  out  -> 
worked out),   usually the derived adjectives 
are labelled as de-adjectives, semantically it is 
a relation between action and its property,
8.  property-aad  relation  (existing  between 
different  POS):  adjective  ->  adverb,  e.g. 
rychl?  ->  rychl-e (quick  ->  quickly), 
semantically we can speak about property, 
9.  property-an  (existing  between  different 
POS): adjective -> noun, e.g. rychl? -> rychl-
ost (fast -> speed), semantically the relation 
expresses property in both cases,   
10. gender change relation: noun -> noun,   
e.g. in?en?r -> in?en?r-ka   (engineer -> she 
engineer), semantically the only difference is 
in sex of the persons denoted by these nouns, 
11.  diminutive  relation:  noun   ->  noun  -> 
noun,  e.g.  d?m  ->  dom-ek  ->  dom-e?ek 
(house -> small house -> very little house or 
a house to which a speaker has an emotional  
attitude), in Czech the diminutive relation can 
be binary or ternary,
12. augmentative relation: noun -> noun, e.g. 
b?ba  ->  bab-izna (beldame  ->  hag), 
semantically it  expresses different  emotional 
attitudes to a person,  
13.  prefixation: verb -> verb,  e.g myslet  -> 
vy-myslet (think  ->  invent),  semantically 
prefixes  in  Czech  denote  a  number  of 
76
different  relations  such  as  distributive, 
location,  time, measure and some others.  We 
will not be dealing with this topic here, it calls 
for a separate examination (project), 
14.  possessive  relation  (existing  between 
different  POS):  noun   ->  adjective  otec  -> 
otc?v (father  -> father?s), semantically it is a 
relation  between  an  object  (person)  and  its 
possession.
We should mention two more relations that are 
sometimes  regarded  inflectional  but  in  our  view 
they belong here as well: gerund relation - verb  -> 
adjective: (bojovat   ->bojuj?c?, fight  -> fighting) 
and passive relation ? verb   -> adjective (passive 
participle): (u?it  -> u?en, teach  -> taught). 
These  14  (+2)  relations  have  been  taken  as  a 
starting point for including derivational relations in 
Czech Wordnet.  The main condition for their  in-
cluding is  whether  they can be generated by the 
derivational  version of the analyzer  Ajka.  In this 
way we have been able to obtain automatically a 
precise  specification  what  literals  are  linked  to-
gether. It was also necessary to introduce the labels 
for  the  individual  relations  in  a  more systematic 
way.  As a result  we have obtained the following 
list of 10 derivational relations with their semantic 
labels that are given in the brackets and hold be-
tween the indicated POS: 
          1. deriv-na: noun -> adjective (property)
2. deriv-ger: verb ->  adjective (property)
3. deriv-dvrb: verb -> noun (activity as a noun)
          4. deriv-pos: noun -> adjective (possessive  
              relation)
5. deriv-pas: verb -> adjective (passive relation)
          6. deriv-aad: adjective -> adverb (property of 
              property)
7. deriv-an: adjective -> noun (property)
8. deriv-g: noun -> noun (gender relation)
9. deriv-ag: verb -> noun (agentive relation)
   10. deriv-dem: noun -> noun (diminutive relation)
The location and patient relation will be included 
in CzWn when the D-Ajka will be able to handle 
them (in the near future). 
2.2 Derivational nests ? subnets
If  we have a look at  the data,  i.e.  at  the list  of 
Czech stems and affixes and try to see how the 
just described relations work we obtain the typical 
derivational clusters ? we will prefer to call them 
derivational  nests  (subnets).  To  illustrate  their 
regularity we adduce an example of such nest for 
the Czech roots ? pr?c/prac- (work). The main re-
lations holding between these roots and the corre-
sponding suffixes are: 
roots: -pr?c-/-prac-e- 
         deriv-act - prac-ova-t (to work)
         deriv-loc1- prac-ov-i?t? (workplace)
         deriv-loc2 - prac-ov-na (study) 
         deriv-ag1- prac-ov-n?k (worker), 
         deriv-g - prac-ovn-ice (she-worker), 
         deriv-ag2 - prac-ant (plodder)
         deriv-ger - prac-uj-?c? (working - person)
         deriv-pro - prac-ov-n? (professional,  working)
         deriv-pro - prac-ov-i-t-? (diligent,  hardworking) 
          deriv-pro - prac-ov-i-t-ost (diligence)
The proposed labels are not final yet ? the num-
ber  of  the  productive  derivational  relations  that 
have to be examined in Czech is larger, certainly 
up to 15. Number of the derivational suffixes in 
Czech is higher ? more than 80.
At the moment the derivational Ajka is not able 
to  generate  the  full  nests  automatically  but  we 
continue processing the remaining Czech deriva-
tional suffixes for this purpose.
2.3 Processing derivational suffixes
So far we have not said much about the affixes, 
i.e.  prefixes,  stem-forming  infixes  and  suffixes 
used in derivations. In this analysis we pay atten-
tion  mainly  to  the  suffixes,  prefixes  are  related 
mostly to verbs and in this sense they represent a 
separate and rather complicated derivational sys-
tem.  Infixes  or  intersegments  are  basically cov-
ered by the list of stems ? instead writing rules for 
changes in stems we just use  more variants of one 
77
stem. But the root analysis  is possible and if we 
want  to  describe  the  derivational  processes  in 
Czech as completely as possible we have to return 
to them. 
As  starting  data  we  have  used  a  list  of  noun 
stems taken from the stem dictionary of the D-Ajka 
analyzer  ?  their  number is  approx.  126 000.  The 
derivations  have been analyzed  by means  of  the 
web  interface  developed  just  for  this  purpose. 
Noun derivations are performed in the three basic 
steps: 
1. a set of words is defined by means of the (pre-
fix), suffix and morphological tag;
2. defining a derivational rule ? typically a substi-
tution of morphemes  (suffixes)  at  the end of the 
word;  
3. manual modification of the results ? usually cor-
recting or deleting cases that cannot be regarded as 
properly derived forms though they may follow the 
given rule. 
An  example  of  the  derivational  analysis  for 
Czech sufix ??k: it occurs with the nouns denoting 
agent or instrument (means), e.g. zed-n-?k (brick-
layer) or  kapes-n?k (hankerchief).
First we want to derive agentive nouns: so we 
enter the suffix ??k and tag k1gM (noun, masculine 
animate) and generate the list of all words ending 
with -?k. The output is a list of 1210 nouns includ-
ing proper names (from the original list of 126 000 
Czech nouns). To obtain instrument nouns we in-
put the tag k1gI (noun, masculine inanimate).  As 
an output result we get a list of 715 nouns includ-
ing proper names. The number of all words ending 
with suffix  -?k (disregarding the grammatical  tag) 
in stem dictionary of Ajka is 1830. The difference 
in the given numbers follows from the homonymy, 
for  instance,  some nouns can  be  both  masculine 
animate  and  masculine  inanimate (e.g.  n??eln?k 
can denote ? chief  as well as ?elenka ? headband. 
Such cases have been checked manually.
In a similar way we have processed 22 Czech 
derivational  suffixes and as a result  we have ob-
tained  a  detailed  classification  of  the  indicated 
derivations capturing agentive, instrumental, loca-
tion  and  also  resultative  relations,  for  instance 
sp?lit  -> sp?lenina  (to burn ->  a burn) which has 
not been mentioned before. At the same time the 
complete lists of all stems with the indicated suf-
fixes together with labeling their semantic relations 
between the stems and respective suffixes was ob-
tained as well. For the processed suffixes the cov-
erage  is  complete  (with  regard  to  the  list  of 
126 000 of the Czech noun stems).
Thus using the described procedure we are try-
ing to find pairs of the word forms in which the 
first one is considered basic and the second one 
derived. The direction of the derivations is not al-
ways  unambiguous  but  the  most  important 
goal is to establish the relation itself not its direc-
tion. The cases when changes in stem take place 
have to be checked and added manually. 
2.4 D-relations in Czech and English WordNet
In Figure 1 we show how the D. relations are im-
plemented in Czech Wordnet. As an example we 
show
 Figure1:  D-relations in Czech WordNet
  
verbal  synset  {u?it:1,  vyu?ovat:  prob?rat:1, 
br?t:2}and the similar English one  {teach:1, in-
struct:1}). It can be seen that there is a derivation-
al  subnet  with  five  D-relations  associated  to 
78
{u?it:1, ...} (in fact 14 but they are repeating with 
other literals in the synset as well). Each D-relation 
is labeled semantically so we have here the follow-
ing  D-relations:  agentive,  location,  deverbative, 
gerund, passive ? the last two may be characterized 
as more morphological (surface, see Sect. 2.1) than 
the first three.  
In Princeton WordNet 3.0 we can observe the 
following  three  D-relations  associated  with  the 
synset {teach:1, learn:5, instruct:1} 
S: (v) teach, learn, instruct (impart skills or knowl-
edge to)  "I taught  them French";  "He instructed  
me in building a boat"
derivationally related form 
? W:   (adj) teachable [Related to: teach] 
(ready and willing to be taught) "docile  
pupils eager for instruction"; "teachable 
youngsters"
? W:   (n) teacher [Related to: teach] (a per-
son whose occupation is teaching) 
? W:   (n) teacher [Related to: teach] (a per-
sonified abstraction that teaches) "books 
were his teachers"; "experience is a de-
manding teacher"
? W:   (n) teaching [Related to: teach] (the ac-
tivities of educating or instructing; activi-
ties that impart knowledge or skill) "he re-
ceived no formal education"; "our instruc-
tion was carefully programmed"; "good 
classroom teaching is seldom rewarded"
? W:   (adj) instructive [Related to: instruct] 
(serving to instruct or enlighten or inform) 
? W:   (n) instruction [Related to: instruct] 
(the activities of educating or instructing; 
activities that impart knowledge or skill) 
"he received no formal education"; "our 
instruction was carefully programmed";  
"good classroom teaching is seldom re-
warded"
? W:   (n) instructor [Related to: instruct] (a 
person whose occupation is teaching) 
It is not surprising that the full agreement between 
Czech  and English  D-relations  includes  only the 
agentive relation (teach -> teacher) and gerund re-
lation  (teach  ->  teaching).  The relation  teach  -> 
teachable is not included among Czech relations at 
the moment but it will be easy to add it. The loca-
tion relation is missing in English and also some 
others characterized usually as morphological. We 
included them in Czech WordNet ? they belong to 
the set of the Czech derivational relations.
If we compare semantic labeling of the D-rela-
tions in both Wordnets we observe that they are 
more  explicitly  formulated  in  Czech  Wordnet. 
The question that remains to be answered is how 
the different senses may be or are reflected in the 
individual derivations. In PWN 3.0 the derivation 
teach ? teacher is given twice because there are 
two different senses of  teach in PWN 3.0. In our 
view, it is enough to give this derivational relation 
just once because it is agentive in both cases. Of 
course,  in  Czech  there  are  frequent  cases  like 
dr?et -> dr??k (hold -> holder) and dr?et -> dr?i-
tel  (hold  -> holder) where the first one is instru-
ment  relation  and  the  second  agentive  but  in 
Czech the different suffixes have to be used (-?k 
vs.  -tel) indicating a difference in gender as well 
(masculine inanimate vs. masculine animate).
3 What is the nature of the D-relations?
In the previous sections we have introduced the 
labeling  of  the  Czech D-relations.  The  question 
may be asked what is the real  nature of D-rela-
tions, whether it is semantic or rather morphologi-
cal (formal). The D-relations exist between mor-
phemes, typically between stems and correspond-
ing suffixes. This formal feature makes them dif-
ferent  from the  relations  between sentence  con-
stituents,  as  e.g.  between  verbs  and  their  argu-
ments.  However,  the  main  criterion  for  us  is 
whether the particular relation affects meaning ir-
respective of its formal realization.                
If we apply this criterion to the D-relations dis-
cussed above, such as deriv-ag, deriv-loc, deriv-
instr, deriv-g, deriv-dem, deriv-pos, deriv-pro, we 
definitely come to the conclusion that their nature 
is semantic. 
Then there are relations like deriv-an, deriv-na, 
deriv-dvrb, deriv-ger, deriv-aad, deriv-pas that are 
sometimes  characterized  as  morphological  only 
and their semantics is left aside. The first two re-
lations  hold  between  nouns  and  adjectives  and 
both  denote  properties  (e.g.  deriv-an:  nov?  -> 
novost  (new -> newness)),  but  we have to  take 
into account that there is something that may be 
called semantics of the parts of speech, i.e. in one 
case  property is  expressed  by the  adjective  and 
then by the noun which is derived from the adjec-
79
tive. Deriv-na denotes property as well but here the 
adjective  is  derived  from noun as  in  boj  -> bo-
jovn?    (fight  -> combative). The relation deriv-
dvrb exists between a verb and noun, e.g. u?it  -> 
u?en?  (teach  -> teaching),  and it  denotes action 
which is first expressed by the verb and then by the 
deverbative noun. We can say that in these cases 
the only difference lies in the optics of the individ-
ual  parts  of  speech but  this  difference should be 
understood as semantic as well. However, it should 
be remarked once more that quite often the differ-
ences in the semantics of the parts of speech are 
not treated as truly semantic.
If we have  look what standard Czech grammars 
(see e.g. Karl?k et al 1995) say about the semantics 
of  the  parts  of  speech  we  find  the  formulations 
such as:   nouns  denote independent entities,  i.e. 
persons, animals and things and also properties and 
actions. Verbs then denote states and their changes 
and processes (actions) and their mutations. These 
descriptions certainly refer to the semantics of the 
nouns and verbs. They are usually followed by the 
explanations  about  morphological  processes,  i.  e. 
usually derivations by which some parts of speech 
are formed from the others, as we have described 
them above. What is relevant and what is missing 
in the standard grammars are more detailed and ex-
tensive semantic classifications of nouns, verbs, as 
well as adjectives and numerals. They are begin-
ning to appear only recently and have the form of 
ontologies ? the standard grammars do not use this 
term at all.
Until we have such semantic classifications de-
scribing semantic relations between the individual 
parts of speech we can hardly have a full picture 
that  is  necessary for  automatic processing of the 
derivational relations.
This issue certainly calls for a more detailed ex-
amination, which would be a topic for another pa-
per.   
          
4 The  implementation  of  D-relations  in 
Czech WordNet
The existing software tools (e.g.Visdic, cf. Hor?k, 
Smr?, 2004 ) used for building Wordnet databases 
standardly work  with  semantic  relations  between 
synsets and they treat them as atomic units. In fact, 
the synsets are not atomic as such and they consist 
of the smaller units called literals, i.e. for instance 
the synset {teach:1, instruct:1} contains two liter-
als (lemmas).    
If  we want to deal  with the D-relations auto-
matically  we  immediately  face  a  problem:  be-
cause of their  nature they typically hold not be-
tween synsets  but between literals that as a rule 
belong to  the  different  synsets,  e.g.  teach:1  and 
teacher:1. Therefore we need a tool that is able to 
define  and create  derivational  links  between the 
literals. According to our knowledge the only tool 
that can do this is DEBVisdic editor and browser 
developed at our NLP Lab at FI MU (cf. Hor?k, 
Pala, 2006, it can be downloaded from: http://nlp.-
fi.muni.cz/projekty/deb2/clients/).       
We have used it for the implementation of the 
D-relations  in  Czech  WordNet  (the  result  is 
shown in Sect. 2.4). The DEBVisdic tool is now 
used for representing and storing all the semantic 
relations including the D-relations. It  is  also ex-
ploited for building Wordnets in other languages 
such as Polish, Slovenian, Hungarian and others.  
              In our view, the way in which the D-relations 
(and  other  relations  as  well)  are  represented 
relevantly  depends  on  the  software  tools  used. 
This  can  be  demonstrated  if  we  compare  the 
representation  of  the  Czech  D-relations  in 
DEBVisdic with the one in PWN 3.0 (see Sect. 
2.4) which appears to be less explicit and rather 
verbose. This  also means  that the representation 
used in PWN 3.0 will be probably less suitable for 
possible applications.  
          
5 The results
As we said above after processing all D-relations 
by the derivational Ajka we have added the de-
rived  literals  (lemmas)  to  the  Czech  WordNet. 
The final result ? the number of the literals gener-
ated from the individual D-relations is given be-
low together with their semantic labels:
deriv-na ???? 641 (property, noun -> adj)
deriv-ger ???..1951 (property, verb -> adj)
deriv-dvrb ???5041 (action, verb -> noun)
deriv-pos ???.4073 (possessive, noun -> adj)
deriv-pas ???.9801 (passive, verb -> adj)
deriv-aad ............1416  (property, adj -> adverb)
80
deriv-an ???...1930 (property, adj -> noun)
deriv-g ????.2695 (gender, noun -> noun)
deriv-ag ????.186 (agentive, verb -> noun)
deriv-dem ???3695 (diminutive, noun -> noun)
Total ????  31429 literals 
These numbers also tell us how productive the 
particular relations are. Note that the most frequent 
is passive relation which is followed by the dever-
bative (action) relation. The third most frequent re-
lation is a possessive one. It would be interesting to 
examine what these facts can tell us about semantic 
structure of texts. 
6    Conclusions
In the paper we present the first results of compu-
tational analysis of the basic and most regular D-
relations in Czech using derivational version of the 
morphological analyzer Ajka.
Though the analysis is far from complete at the 
moment the number of the generated items has led 
us to the decision to include them in Czech Word-
Net and enrich it considerably with the derivational 
nests  (subnets).  In our view,  this  kind of enrich-
ment  makes  Czech  WordNet  more  suitable  for 
some applications, namely for searching. 
    The second and even more important reason for 
doing all this is a belief that the derivational rela-
tions and derivational subnets created by them re-
flect basic cognitive structures existing in natural 
language. More effort is needed for exploring them 
from the point of view of now so popular ontolo-
gies ? they certainly offer a formal  ground (they 
are  expressed  by  the  individual  morphemes)  for 
natural language based ontologies.   
     We have also included a brief comparison with 
the recently released Princeton WordNet 3.0 which 
now contains derivational links for English as well. 
As  we  expected  the  comparison  confirms  the 
known fact that English as an analytic language is 
much poorer with regard to the derivational rela-
tions than the inflectional ones. 
From the technical point of view PWN 3.0 is still 
not  using  the  representation  in  XML format  (as 
DebVisdic does) and this, we think, in certain de-
gree limits the possibilities to express some of the 
links in a standard way. The present web interface 
where  Princeton  WordNet  3.0  can  be  browsed: 
http://wordnet.princeton.edu/perl/webwn)   does 
not seem to be able to work directly with the links 
between literals. 
On  the  other  hand,  we  are  well  aware  that 
adding D-relations to PWN 3.0 is very stimulating 
and useful  though it will  be quite demanding to 
establish  the  derivational  links  between  English 
and other languages (through Interlingual Index). 
This  makes  it  a  new  challenge  for  the  whole 
WordNet community. 
Acknowledgements
The research was supported by the grant projects 
GA  201/05/2871,  1ET100300419  and  NPVII 
2C06009.
References 
Hor?k  A.,  Pala  K.,  Rambousek  A.,  and Povoln? M. 
2006.  First  version  of  new  client-server  wordnet 
browsing  and  editing  tool.  In  Proceedings  of  the 
Third  International  WordNet  Conference  ?  GWC 
2006, p. 325-328, Jeju, South Korea, Masaryk Uni-
versity, Brno.
Hor?k A.,  Smr?  P.  2004.  Visdic  ?  WordNet  Editing 
and Browsing Tool,  Proceedings of the 2nd GWC, 
Brno, Masaryk University.
Karl?k P. et al 1995, P??ru?n? mluvnice ?e?tiny (Every 
day Czech Grammar),  Nakladatelstv?  Lidov? Nov-
iny,  Prague, pp. 229, 310.
Pala  K.,  Sedl??ek  R.,  Veber  M.  2003.  Relations 
between  Inflectional  and  Derivation  Patterns, 
Proceedings of EACL, Budapest.
Petr  J.  et  al.  1986.  Mluvnice  ?e?tiny  1, Praha: 
Academia. 
Sedl??ek R., Smr? P. 2001.  A New Czech Morpholo-
gical Analyser Ajka. Proceedings of the 4th Interna-
tional  Conference  on  Text,  Speech  and  Dialogue, 
Springer Verlag, Berlin, s.100-107.
Vossen  P.  2003.  EuroWordNet  General  Document, 
Version 3, University of Amsterdam.
Web address of the Princeton WordNet 3.0: 
http://wordnet.princeton.edu/perl/webwn.
81
