A Flexible Framework for Developing  
Mixed-Initiative Dialog Systems 
 
Judith HOCHBERG, Nanda KAMBHATLA, Salim ROUKOS 
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center 
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA 
{judyhoch, nanda, roukos}@us.ibm.com 
 
Abstract  
We present a new framework for rapid 
development of mixed-initiative dialog 
systems. Using this framework, a developer 
can author sophisticated dialog systems for 
multiple channels of interaction by 
specifying an interaction modality, a rich 
task hierarchy and task parameters, and 
domain-specific modules.  The framework 
includes a dialog history that tracks input, 
output, and results. We present the 
framework and preliminary results in two 
application domains. 
1 Introduction 
Developing a mixed-initiative dialog system is a 
complex task.  The developer must model the 
user?s goals, the ?results? (domain objects) 
retrieved, and the state of the dialog, and 
generate the system response at each turn of the 
dialog. In mixed-initiative systems, as opposed 
to directed dialog systems, users can influence 
the dialog flow, and are not restricted to 
answering system questions in a prescribed 
format (e.g. Walker 1990, Chu-Carroll 2000). 
Compounding these challenges, dialog 
applications have evolved from simple look-up 
tasks to complex transactional systems like 
telephony banking and stock trading (Zadrozny 
et al 1998), and air travel information systems. 
These systems increasingly cater to multiple 
channels of user interaction (telephone, PDA, 
web, etc.), each with its own set of modalities. 
To simplify the development of such systems, 
researchers have created frameworks that 
embody core dialog functionalities. 
In MIT?s framework, a developer creates a 
dialog system by specifying a dialog control 
table comprising actions and their triggering 
events. The developer has great freedom in 
designing this table, but must specify basic 
actions such as prompting for missing 
information.  As a result, these tables can 
become quite complex ? the travel system 
control table contains over 200 ordered rules.  
MIT has applied this framework to both weather 
and travel (Zue et al 2000, Seneff and Polifroni 
2000). 
In IBM?s form-based dialog manager, or 
FDM (Papineni et al 1998), a developer defines 
a set of forms that correspond to separate tasks 
in the application, such as finding a flight leg.  
The forms have powerful built-in capabilities, 
including mechanisms that trigger various types 
of prompts, and allow the user to specify 
inheritance and other relationships between 
tasks. Just as in the MIT framework, domain-
specific modules perform database queries and 
other backend processes; the forms call 
additional developer-defined modules that affect 
the dialog state and flow. FDM has supported 
dialog systems for air travel (Papineni et al 
1999, Axelrod 2000) and financial services 
(IBM 2001, IBM 2002). The University of 
Colorado framework also has a form-based 
architecture (Pellom et al 2001), while CMU 
and Bell Labs? frameworks allow the 
specification of deep task hierarchies (Wei and 
Rudnicky 2000, Potamianos et al 2000). 
Our goal is to design a framework that is 
both powerful, embodying much dialog 
functionality, and flexible, accommodating a 
variety of dialog domains, modalities, and styles.  
Our new framework goes beyond FDM in 
building more core functionality into its task 
model, yet provides a variety of software tools, 
such as API calls and overwritable functions, for 
customizing tasks.  The framework allows 
developers to specify a wide range of 
relationships among tasks, and provides a focus 
model that respects these relationships.  To 
support the task framework we introduce a 
       Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 60-63.  Association for Computational Linguistics.
                  Proceedings of the Third SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue,
dialog history component that remembers input, 
output, and cumulative task results.  Section 2 of 
this paper describes the framework, and section 
3 some applications.  In section 4 we discuss 
future plans and implications. 
2 The HOT framework 
Our framework? s moniker is HOT, which stands 
for its three components: dialog History, domain 
Objects, and Task hierarchy.  It is implemented 
as a Java library. In this section, we describe the 
HOT framework. We assume the existence of an 
application specific natural language parser that 
brackets and labels chunks of text corresponding 
to domain specific attributes, and a natural 
language generation module for generating 
prompts from abstract specifications. 
2.1 Task hierarchy 
A task defines a unit of work for a dialog 
system. The HOT framework enables the 
specification of tasks that are organized as a 
hierarchy (e.g. Fig. 1).  The terminal tasks in the 
hierarchy  (UserID, Fund, and Shares) derive 
canonical values of domain attributes (such as 
fund symbol) from parsed portions of user input. 
The RootTask specifies methods for managing 
the dialog, e.g. for disambiguating among 
different sub-tasks in case of ambiguous user 
input. All other tasks perform scripted actions 
using the output produced by other non-terminal 
or terminal tasks: generate a user profile, a share 
transaction, or a price quote. 
The task hierarchy constitutes a plan for the 
dialog.  It remains to be seen whether it can also 
be used for planning domains in which task 
input can come either from a user or from an 
external process such as an environmental 
monitor, as in [Allen at al. 2001]. 
The framework allows developers to easily 
specify five different relationships among tasks 
in a hierarchy.  Many of these will be 
exemplified in Section 3. 
1. Subtasking: UserID is a subtask of Login 
because Login needs the user? s ID to log the 
user in. 
2. Ordering: Login precedes all other tasks, but 
Buy, Sell, and Price are unordered. 
3. Cardinality: Login is executed only once per 
session, and UserId, Fund, and Shares are 
executed only once per parent task. 
However, Buy, Sell, and Price can be 
executed multiple times. 
4. Inheritance: Buy and Sell can potentially 
inherit a fund name from Price and vice 
versa. 
5. Subdialog: The user can carry out certain 
subdialogs, such as a Price query within a 
Buy task. 
2.2 Focus model 
At each turn of the dialog, we automatically 
score the user? s input to infer the task that the 
user wants to work on.  Only a non-terminal task 
can receive focus.  As in FDM, scoring is 
primarily based on the number of matches 
between attributes in the parsed user input, 
different task attributes, and the last system 
prompt.  The developer can specify the 
appropriate system behavior if the inferred user 
focus conflicts with task relationships, e.g. if a 
user wants to Buy but has not yet Logged in.  In 
the absence of such conflicts, the framework 
triggers execution of the inferred task.  If the 
task completes without ending a turn, the focus 
model returns focus to a previously started task 
if possible, or else defaults to the developer? s 
preference for what to do next. 
2.3 Task functionality 
Within RootTask, a developer can specify the 
modalities of interaction and the specific 
backends used, create an initial task layout, and 
set some dialog parameters. Developers must 
specify how they want RootTask to respond to 
various focus situations.  For example, if no 
tasks are eligible for focus, this may represent an 
error condition in one application, but the 
expected end of a dialog in another application. 
For all other tasks, task functionality can be 
divided into operations that happen before and 
after the task calls its backend process 
Root
UserID Fund Name
Login
Number 
of Shares
Buy PriceSell
Fund 
Name
Number 
of Shares
Fund 
Name
 
Figure 1: A task hierarchy for a simple 
mutual fund application. 
(accessing a database, the Internet, or other 
information channel) to create a result.  Pre-
backend functionality involves assessing, and 
possibly confirming with the user, the 
parameters to be sent to the backend.  Post-
backend functionality acts on different backend 
outcomes: for example, informing the user of a 
result, confirming a result, or requesting further 
constraints.  Because the framework already 
defines these functionalites, the developer? s role 
is to define the backend and its result, and to 
choose the pre-defined functionalities that apply. 
As tasks execute, they post communicative 
intentions ? dialog acts (e.g., ?Inform?, 
?Confirm?) and the domain objects they concern 
(e.g., flights) ? to the dialog history.  A separate 
NLG module generates the text of the system 
response based on these communicative 
intentions and the specific modalities in use. 
2.4 Dialog History 
The dialog history provides developers with an 
organized way to store system data regardless of 
the application domain. We store the user input 
(attribute-value pairs), the system response 
(communicative intentions), and the cumulative 
results for each dialog turn.  The developer can 
additionally store the user input at various stages 
of processing. Results can be generic objects 
(e.g., a String representing a fund name) or 
complex, domain-specific objects.  The results 
are tagged with a core set of status indicators 
that developers can add to. The dialog history 
also serves as a task stack, since the current 
result from each task indicates the task? s status. 
The dialog history is reminiscent of BBN? s 
state manager (Stallard 2000), but the latter also 
includes many dialog management 
responsibilities that we reserve to tasks. 
3 Applications 
We are currently implementing the HOT 
framework described above. In this section, we 
describe two sample applications built using this 
framework as implemented so far. 
3.1 Mutual Funds 
We built a mutual funds application, using the  
framework to create a task hierarchy and to add 
task relationships such as ordering and 
inheritance, as described in section 2.1.  We 
customized the tasks by writing backend 
methods and specifying confirmation strategies, 
the domain attributes of interest to each task, and 
domain-specific result objects (UserProfile and 
ShareTransaction).  Figure 2 shows an actual 
dialog with this application. 
The dialog flows through a combination of 
developer specifications and the HOT 
framework, with the framework doing most of 
the work.  In turn 1, only Login is specified as 
active, so the framework generates an initial 
prompt for it.  In turn 2, the framework scores 
the input and executes both UserID and Signin.  
It informs the user of Login? s success (as 
specified), then issues a general prompt because 
Login enabled all other tasks when it finished 
(as specified).  In turn 3, the framework issues 
an error message because of the conflict between 
Login? s cardinality of 1 and the user? s input.  In 
turn 4, the fund name lookup finds an 
ambiguous result; the framework looks to the 
developer to specify what type of prompt to 
issue in response.  In turn 5, the framework 
correctly interprets the user? s selection, and 
requests fund name confirmation (as specified).  
In turn 6, Sell runs its Number of Shares 
subtask.  In turn 7, the user performs an 
authorized Price subdialog from within Sell.  
Price inherits the fund name from Sell, executes 
the task, and returns focus to Sell.  In turn 8, the 
framework requests confirmation prior to 
 User System 
1  Welcome to HOT-DM. 
User ID? 
2 1677 Greetings Judy Hochberg! 
How may I help you? 
3 I want to sign 
in again. 
Sorry, you can only sign in once. 
How may I help you? 
4 I want to sell 
Watson fund 
Watson Yorktown fund or 
Watson Hawthorne fund? 
5 the first one Is Watson Yorktown the fund 
you want to sell? 
6 yes How many shares? 
7 can you tell 
me what the 
price is 
The price of Watson Yorktown 
is $100.2 per share 
How many shares? 
8 I want to sell 
30 shares 
Do you want to sell 30 shares of 
Watson Yorktown fund? 
9 yes i do Transaction #1: sold 30 shares of 
Watson Yorktown fund at 
$100.2 per share on 2/18/2002 
How may I help you? 
Figure 2: A dialog with a mutual funds application 
built using the HOT framework. 
executing the sale (as specified).  In turn 9, note 
that the Sell backend accesses the dialog history 
to determine the correct transaction number. 
3.2 Travel 
We have developed a travel information dialog 
system using the HOT framework. For this 
application, we reused several components of 
the IBM DARPA Communicator system. The 
system accepts either standard text input or text 
from instant messaging from a mobile platform.  
Figure 3 shows a screen shot of a dialog on a 
? Palm?  (PDA) interface to the travel system. 
4 Discussion 
We have presented a new framework for 
developing mixed-initiative dialog systems. This 
framework, dubbed HOT, enables developers to 
rapidly develop dialog systems by specifying 
tasks, their relationships, and relevant domain 
objects. We are currently implementing this 
framework as a toolkit and have developed two 
sample applications in two different modalities. 
The new framework departs from other 
frameworks in the range of functionality that it 
covers.  Its task model triggers not only 
informational prompts and confirmations, but 
also customizable responses to task problems of 
different sorts, such as underspecification.  The 
task relationships modeled are likewise quite 
rich, including subdialog and inheritance.  
Finally, the dialog history provides a generic 
specification of output semantics, a way to track 
task status, and uniform access to dialog results 
of varying complexity.  Our future goal is 
continue to build functionality, especially in 
NLG, without sacrificing flexibility. 
References  
J. Allen, G Ferguson, and Amanda Stent (2001) An 
architecture for more realistic conversational 
systems.  Proc. Intelligent User Interfaces. 
S. Axelrod, (2000) Natural Language Generation in 
the IBM Flight Information System.  Proc. ANLP-
NAACL Workshop on Conversational Systems. 
J. Chu-Carroll (2000) MIMIC: An Adaptive Mixed 
Initiative Spoken Dialogue System for Information 
Queries.  Proc ANLP. 
IBM (2001) http://www-3.ibm.com/software/speech/ 
news/20010609trp.html 
IBM (2002) http://www-3.ibm.com/software/speech/ 
enterprise/dcenter/demo_2.html 
K. Papineni, S. Roukos, and T. Ward (1999) Free-
Flow Dialog Management Using Forms.  Proc. 
Eurospeech, pp. 1411-1414. 
B. Pellom, W. Ward, J. Hansen, K. Hacioglu, J. 
Zhang, X. Yu, and S. Pradhan (2001) University of 
Colorado Dialog Systems for Travel and 
Navigation.  Proc. HLT. 
A. Potamianos, E. Ammicht, and H-K. Kuo (2000) 
Dialogue Management in the Bell Labs 
Communicator System.  Proc. ICSLP. 
S. Seneff and J. Polifroni (2000) Dialogue 
Management in the Mercury Flight Reservation 
System.  Proc. Satellite Dialogue Workshop, 
ANLP-NAACL. 
D. Stallard (2000) Talk?N?Travel: A Conversational 
System for Air Travel Planning.  Proc ANLP. 
M. Walker (1990)  Mixed Initiative in Dialogue: An 
Investigation into Discourse Segmentation. Proc. 
ACL90, pp. 70-78. 
X. Wei and A. Rudnicky (2000) Task-based dialog 
management using an agenda.  Proc 
ANLP/NAACL Workshop on Conversational 
Systems, pp. 42-47. 
V. Zue, S. Seneff, J. Glass, J. Polifroni, C. Pao, T. 
Hazen, and L. Hetherington (2000) JUPITER: A 
Telephone-Based conversational Interface for 
Weather Information.  IEEE Trans. Speech and 
Audio Proc., 20/Y, pp. 100-112.  
W. Zadrozny, C. Wolf, N. Kambhatla, and Y. Ye,  
1998. Conversation Machines for Transaction 
Processing. PROC AAAI/IAAI, pp. 1160-1166. Figure 3: A dialog in a ? Palm?  interface to 
an air travel dialog system. 
