Acknowledgme
are ubiquitous
rarer in huma
interface factors
ence? Using a
face that respon
compared subje
when the interf
that seen when
speech. Contrar
drop in the num
edgments: subj
recorded-voice
limited interface
for both Mex
English versions
1 Introduction
In previous studie
acknowledgments an
with a simple spoke
the interface does no
and Heeman, 2000;
ment interviews con
the subjects (11 in t
the Spanish) had tho
to use acknowledgm
human-like voice. In
sis: we examined th
prompts from synthe
The term ?ack
Schaefer (1989), wh
by which one con
contribution has bee
the conversation to
appear in English as
Acknowledgments, a
AcknowAbstract
nts, e.g., ?yeah? and ?uh-huh,?
in human conversation but are
n-computer interaction. What
might contribute to this differ-
simple spoken-language inter-
ded to acknowledgments, we
cts? use of acknowledgments
ace used recorded speech with
the interface used synthesized
y to our hypothesis, we saw a
bers of subjects using acknowl-
ects appeared to interpret the
interface as signalling a more
. These results were consistent
ican Spanish and American
 of the interface.
s, we showed that subjects use
d politeness words when interacting
n-language application even when
t offer such behaviors itself (Ward
Ward et al, 2003). In post-experi-
ducted as part of that study, 50% of
he English-language condition, 9 in
ught that they might be more likely
ents if the interface had a more
researchers (e.g., Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1997), are one
of several meta-dialogue behaviors that people use to
control the flow of conversation.
Meta-dialogue behaviors such as acknowledgment
are of interest because of their role in managing turn-tak-
ing: although acknowledgments may preface a new con-
tribution by the same speaker (Novick and Sutton,
1994), often they occur alone as a single-phrase turn that
appears to serve the purpose of explicitly declining an
opportunity to take a turn (Sacks et al, 1974). If
acknowledgment behavior is incorporated in spoken-lan-
guage systems, it may offer a more fluid and adaptable
means of managing turn-taking and pacing in human-
computer interaction.
Although some research systems incorporate
acknowledgments (e.g., Aist, 1998; Iwase and Ward,
1998; Okato et al, 1998), real-world spoken-language
interfaces generally don?t allow acknowledgments to
serve their turn-taking purpose. Turn-taking is com-
pletely controlled by one conversant, usually the system.
To reduce errors, designers of spoken-language systems
create prompts that guide the user toward short, focused,
in-vocabulary responses (e.g., Basson et al, 1996; Cole
et al, 1997). In many systems, the use of barge-in
defeats the common interpretation of an acknowledg-
ment: if the user speaks, the system quits speaking and
begins interpreting the user utterance. If the user
intended to signal that the system should continue, the
effect is exactly the opposite of the one intended. Thus,
current design practices both discourage and render
meaningless the standard uses of acknowledgments.
ledgment Use with Synthesized and Recorded Prompts
Karen Ward, Tasha Hollingsed, Javier A. Aldaz Salmon
The University of Texas at El Paso
El Paso, Texas USA 79968
{kward,tasha,jaldaz}@cs.utep.eduthis study, we tested that hypothe-
e effect of changing the interface
sized speech to recorded speech.
nowledgment? is from Clark and
o describe a hierarchy of methods
versant may signal that another?s
n understood well enough to allow
proceed. Acknowledgments often
?uh-huh? and in Spanish as ?aj?.?
lso called ?back-channels? by some
2 Experiment
The study design, described below, is identical to that
used in our baseline study (Ward et al, 2003) except that
the interface prompts and messages were delivered using
recorded human voices instead of synthesized voice.
These studies were conducted in both American English
and Mexican Spanish.
2.1 Method
We did not want to e
to use acknowledgm
nothing about their
create a situation in
to use acknowledgm
tage from doing so
optional. Conversan
ments and repetition
mation is being tran
making an error may
context may serve a
standing and of con
Furthermore, there
ments offered durin
during face-to-face
1993). We therefore
is asked to make wr
verbally over the tele
We selected the
E-mail. Subjects we
would read E-mail m
and that their task w
items of informatio
?How do you get to
included both ?inter
copied and ?unintere
that subjects would
esting? material mor
motivate subjects to
information was pres
The E-mail was
responding to a long
by a pause of about
response time, unco
tion, so we hoped th
age the subjects to t
pace of the interacti
system would contin
segment. Subjects c
edging the contributi
the system to continu
system signalled the
by asking the subjec
on? or ?Estas listo
pause. This prompt
pause in which the s
hoped to suggest to
the wait time withou
On the surface,
system behavior bet
to move the system
tinue?) and the usexplicitly instruct or require subjects
ent behavior, as that would tell us
preferences. Instead, we wanted to
which subjects would have a reason
ents, perhaps even gain an advan-
, while still keeping the behavior
ts are likely to offer acknowledg-
s when complex or important infor-
scribed, especially when the cost of
be high. Acknowledgments in this
dual purpose of conveying under-
trolling the pace of the interaction.
may be more verbal acknowledg-
g telephone-based interaction than
interaction (Cohen and Oviatt,
designed a task in which the subject
itten notes of information presented
phone.
domain of a telephone interface to
re told that the computer system
essages to them over the telephone
as to locate and transcribe particular
n contained in the messages, e.g.,
the coffee house?? The messages
esting? information that was to be
sting? information that was not, so
want to move through the ?uninter-
e quickly. In this way we hoped to
try to control the pace at which
ented.
presented in segments roughly cor-
phrase, with each segment followed
five seconds. Five seconds is a long
mfortably so for human conversa-
at this lengthy pause would encour-
ake the initiative in controlling the
on. If the subject said nothing, the
ue by presenting the next message
ould reduce this delay by acknowl-
on, e.g., ?okay,? or by commanding
e, e.g., ?go on? or ?continuar.? The
possibility of controlling the delay
t the question ?Are you ready to go
(a) para continuar? after the first
ing was repeated for every third
ubject said nothing. In this way we
the subjects that they could control
t explicitly telling them to do so.
there is no functional difference in
ween a subject?s use of a command
onward (e.g., ?go on,? ?next,? ?con-
of an acknowledgment. In either
case, the system responds by presenting the next mes-
sage segment, and in fact it eventually presents the next
segment even if the subject says nothing at all. Thus, the
design allows the subject to choose freely between
accepting the system?s pace, or commanding the system
to continue, or acknowledging the presentations in a
fashion more typical of human conversation. In this way,
we hoped to understand how the subject preferred to
interact with the computer.
Subjects were told that the study?s purpose was to
assess the understandability and usability of the inter-
face, and that their task was to find the answers to a list
of questions. They were given no instructions in the use
of the program beyond the information that they were to
talk to it using normal, everyday speech.
We tested a total of 40 subjects, balanced for gender
and language. Subjects were solicited from the Univer-
sity of Texas at El Paso campus. They ranged in age
from 18 to 65, with most being between 20 and 25. Each
subject was paid $10.00 for participating in the study.
We used a Wizard of Oz protocol as a way to allow
the system to respond to acknowledgments and to pro-
vide robustness in handling repetitions. The wizard?s
interface was constructed using the Rapid Application
Developer in the Center for Spoken Language Under-
standing Toolkit (Sutton et al, 1998). A simple button
panel allowed the wizard to select the appropriate
response from the actions supported by the application.
The application functionality was limited to suggest real-
istic abilities for a current spoken-language interface.
The subject could request a message by message num-
ber, for example, but not by content or sender.
The interface prompts and messages were presented
using recorded human voices. The message texts were
presented in a male voice, and the control portions of the
interface were in a female voice. It was hoped that the
two voices would help the subjects determine the state of
the interface: delivering message text vs. controlling the
interface functions.
2.2 Measures
In comparing the strategies used to control the length of
the pauses (acknowledgment or command use or none),
the dependent variable was the number of times each
strategy was used to control the pacing of the interface.
The total number of turns varied between subjects
because some subjects listened to each message only
once while others went through messages multiple
times. We therefore normalized the counts by dividing
the number of times each strategy was used by the num-
ber of turns where the subject had had an choice of strat-
egies. We considered the possibility that subjects who
completed the task in only one pass though the messages
might show a preference for a different strategy than
those who required
sages, thus creating
preliminary analysis
we did not consider 
The determinati
ance constituted an a
based primarily on
this approach is con
edgment, e.g., (Chu-
ately following a
segment of an E-ma
?uh-huh,? ?aj?,? and
of the system inform
Phrases such as ?go
or ?siguiente? follo
commands. The inte
post-experiment inte
about their word ch
tions of the subject u
person for accuracy.
Some subjects (
tion and eight in the
bined acknowledgm
utterance, e.g., ?okay
the first part of the
analysis as an ackno
the first part, then it
subjects did this on
Spanish-language co
English-language co
produced as many as
A post-experim
determine each subje
eral of the questions
model (Walker et
explained the true
answered subjects? q
and the experimenter
had realized that th
instead of a com
excluded from the st
dency for people to
that they are speakin
puter (e.g., Brennan,
3 Results
We hypothesized t
edgment behaviors t
of the interface than
version. We expecte
Spanish and English
and male speakers.
expectations.multiple passes through the mes-
a bias in the normalized statistic. A
showed no significant difference, so
this possibility further.
on as to whether a particular utter-
cknowledgment or a command was
word choice and dialogue context;
sistent with definitions of acknowl-
Carroll and Brown, 1997). Immedi-
system inform (presentation of a
il message), the words ?yes,? ?s?,?
?okay? or a repetition of part or all
were considered acknowledgments.
on,? ?continue,? ?next,? ?continuar,?
wing an inform were considered
rpretation was confirmed during the
rview by questioning the subjects
oice.Transcriptions and categoriza-
tterances were checked by a second
one in the Spanish-language condi-
English-language condition) com-
ents and commands in a single
, go on.? If an acknowledgment was
phrase, then it was included in the
wledgment and if a command was
was included as a command. Most
ly once (the single subject in the
ndition and three of the eight in the
ndition), and one speaker (English)
 six combined-type responses.
ent interview was conducted to
ct?s impression of the system. Sev-
were drawn from the PARADISE
al. 2000). The experimenter also
purpose of the experiment and
uestions. This interview was taped
took notes. Data from subjects who
ey were interacting with a human
pletely-automated system were
udy because of the well-verified ten-
speak differently when they believe
g with a human instead of a com-
 1991).
hat subjects would use acknowl-
o control the recorded-voice version
they did with the synthesized-voice
d this increase to be seen in both
conditions and across both female
The results were contrary to our
When interacting with the recorded-voice interface,
commands and acknowledgments were preferred as a
strategy by 15% and 17.5%, respectively, of all subjects.
This result was not significantly different than that seen
in the synthesized-voice study, as confirmed by the Wil-
coxen-Mann-Whitney test (z = -0.5041, p= 0.0139 for
commands, z = 1.686, p= 0.0465 for acknowledgments).
Contrary to our expectations, the numbers of sub-
jects using either acknowledgments and commands actu-
ally dropped. This was due to the fact that the numbers
of subjects who used waiting as their sole strategy rose
sharply, from 9 subjects in the synthesized-voice study
to 19 in the recorded-voice study ( , p<0.001).
Forty percent of the subjects used a command at
least once, and 45% used an acknowledgement at least
once. Seven subjects seemed comfortable with both
commands and acknowledgments, using at least five
examples of each. When acknowledgments were used,
the most common word choice was ?okay? (both lan-
guages). When commands were used, the most common
word choices were ?go on? in English, and ?continuar?
in Spanish.
We found no significant difference between the
recorded and synthesized-voice conditions when com-
paring male and female speakers nor when comparing
English and Spanish speakers.
Politeness behaviors were common. These included
the use of the phrases ?thank you? or ?gracias? and
?please? or ?por favor? as well as a responding ?good-
bye? or ?adi?s? to the system. Many subjects (7 Spanish-
language and 8 English-language, 37.5% total) used a
politeness behavior at least once and a few subjects (1
Spanish-language and 5 English-language, 15% total)
used them more than once. One English-speaking female
used politeness behaviors with almost half of her interac-
tions with the system. One subject, when asked in the
post-experiment interview why he chose to use this
behavior, responded ?I don?t know, it?s just habit I
guess.? Three other subjects made similar statements.
We believe, and some subjects confirmed, that some
subjects in the recorded version assumed that they were
listening to recordings similar to voice-mail messages on
their telephones. They believed that the pauses were part
of the message and so did not realize that the system was
awaiting their response.
4 Conclusions
We compared subjects? use of various strategies for con-
trolling the pacing of information presentation in a sim-
ple spoken-language interface using synthetic speech
with one using recorded speech. We had hypothesized
that subjects would offer more acknowledgments in the
recorded-voice condition. In fact, we saw no differences
?2 14.34=
in the numbers of s
preferred strategy. W
the number of subje
the pacing of inform
clude that, in this cas
face misled subjec
capability based on t
ing technology. In f
richer domain that w
tion, one in which th
ties to signal its inter
Acknowledgmen
This work was pa
Microsoft Corporat
Foundation?s Model
EEC 9550502. The a
tian Servin, Tyler S
their assistance with
mous reviewers for
tions.
References
Gregory Aist. 1998.
versational Arch
Content-Driven
ICSLP 98 Fifth
Language Proce
Sara Basson, Steph
Leung, Ed Man
vir Singh, and S
and Compliance
nications Applic
Fourth Internat
guage Processin
Susan E. Brennan
Through Comp
Adapted Interac
Jennifer Chu-Carro
?Tracking Initia
actions,? in Proc
of the Associat
262-270.
Herbert H. Clark an
tributing to Disc
294.
Ron A. Cole, Dav
Stephen Sutton
Jacques de Villieubjects using acknowledgment as a
e also saw a significant increase in
cts who made no attempt to control
ation presentation at all. We con-
e, use of a human voice in the inter-
ts into assuming a more limited
heir previous experience with exist-
uture work, we plan to move to a
ill support a more complex interac-
e system will have more opportuni-
active capabilities to the user.
ts
rtially supported by a gift from
ion and by the National Science
Institutions for Excellence Initiative
uthors thank David Herrera, Chris-
mith, and Pauline Williamson for
the study. We also thank the anony-
their helpful comments and sugges-
?Expanding a Time-Sensitive Con-
itecture for Turn-Taking to Handle
Interruption,? in Proceedings of
International Conference on Spoken
ssing, 413-417.
en Springer, Cynthia Fong, Hong
, Michele Olson, John Pitrelli, Ran-
uk Wong. 1996. ?User Participation
in Speech Automated Telecommu-
ations,? in Proceedings of ICSLP 96
ional Conference on Spoken Lan-
g, 1676-1679.
. 1991. ?Conversation With and
uters,? User Modeling and User-
tion, 1:67-86.
ll and Michael K. Brown. 1997.
tive in Collaborative Dialogue Inter-
eedings of the 35th Annual Meeting
ion for Computational Linguistics,
d Edward F. Schaefer. 1989. ?Con-
ourse,? Cognitive Science, 13:259-
id G. Novick, P.J.E. Vermeulen,
, Mark Fanty, L.F.A. Wessels,
rs, J. Schalkwyk, Brian Hansen and
D. Burnett. 1997. ?Experiments with a Spoken Dia-
logue System for Taking the U.S. Census,? Speech
Communications, Vol. 23.
Phillip Cohen and Sharon Oviatt. 1994. ?The role of
voice in human-machine communication,? Voice
Communication between Humans and Machines
(ed. by D. Roe and J. Wilpon), National Academy of
Sciences Press, Washington, D. C., Ch. 3, 34-75.
Tatsuya Iwase and Nigel Ward. 1998. ?Pacing Spoken
Directions to Suit the Listener,? in Proceedings of
ICSLP 98 Fifth International Conference on Spoken
Language Processing, Vol. 4, 1203-1207.
David G. Novick and Stephen Sutton. 1994. ?An Empiri-
cal Model of Acknowledgment for Spoken-Lan-
guage Systems,? in Proceedings of the 32nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, 96-101.
Y. Okato, K. Kato, M. Yamamoto and S. Itahashi. 1998.
?System-User Interaction and Response Strategy in
Spoken Dialogue System,? in Proceedings of ICSLP
98 Fifth International Conference on Spoken Lan-
guage Processing, Vol. 2, 495-498.
H. Sacks, E. Schegloff and G. Jefferson. 1974. ?A Sim-
plest Systematics for the Organization of Turn-Tak-
ing in Conversation,? Language, 50:696-735.
Stephen Sutton, Ron Cole, Jacques de Villiers, J. Schalk-
wyk, P. Vermeulen, M. Macon, Y. Yan, E.Kaiser, B.
Rundle, K. Shobaki, P. Hosom, A. Kain, J. Wouters,
D. Massaro and M. Cohen. 1998.?Universal Speech
Tools: the CSLU Toolkit,? in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Spoken Language
Processing, 3221-3224.
Marilyn A. Walker, Candace A. Kamm and Diane J. Lit-
man. 2000. ?Towards Developing General Models
of Usability with PARADISE,? Natural Language
Engineering.
Karen Ward and Peter A. Heeman. 2000. ?Acknowledg-
ments in Human-Computer Interaction,? in Pro-
ceedings of the 1st Meeting of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (NAACL 2000), April 29-May 4, 280-287.
Karen Ward, Tasha Hollingsed, and Javier A. Aldaz
Salmon. 2003. ?Toward Building Conversational
Spoken-Language Interfaces: Acknowledgment Use
in American English and Mexican Spanish,? Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth Mexican International Con-
ference on Computer Science, September 10-12, 10-
17.
