A Conversational Interface for Online Shopping
Joyce Chai, Veronika Horvath, Nanda Kambhatla, Nicolas Nicolov & Margo Stys-Budzikowska
Conversational Dialog Systems
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
30 Saw Mill River Rd, Hawthorne, NY 10532, USA
{jchai, veronika, nanda, nicolas, sm1}@us.ibm.com
ABSTRACT
We present a deployed, conversational dialog system that assists
users in finding computers based on their usage patterns and
constraints on specifications. We discuss findings from a market
survey and two user studies. We compared our system to a directed
dialog system and a menu driven navigation system. We found that
the conversational interface reduced the average number of clicks by
63% and the average interaction time by 33% over a menu driven
search system. The focus of our continuing work includes
developing a dynamic, adaptive dialog management strategy,
robustly handling user input and improving the user interface.
1. INTRODUCTION
Conversational interfaces allow users to interact with automated
systems using speech or typed in text via "conversational dialog".
For the purposes of this paper, a conversational dialog consists of a
sequence of interactions between a user and a system. The user
input is interpreted in the context of previous user inputs in the
current session and from previous sessions.
Conversational interfaces offer greater flexibility to users than
menu-driven (i.e., directed-dialog) interfaces, where users navigate
menus that have a rigid structure [5,4]. Conversational interfaces
permit users to ask queries directly in their own words. Thus, users
do not have to understand the terminology used by system designers
to label hyperlinks on a website or internalize the hierarchical
menus of a telephone system [3] or websites.
Recently, conversational interfaces for executing simple transactions
and for finding information are proliferating [7,6]. In this paper, we
present a conversational dialog system, Natural Language Assistant
(or NLA), that helps users shop for notebook computers and discuss
the results of user studies that we conducted with this system.
2. NATURAL LANGUAGE ASSISTANT
NLA assists users in finding notebooks that satisfy their needs by
engaging them in a dialog. At each turn of the dialog, NLA provides
incremental feedback about its understanding of the user's
constraints and shows products that match these constraints. By
encouraging iterative refinement of the user's query, the system
finds more user constraints and, ultimately, recommends a product
that best matches the user's criteria.
The system consists of three major modules (cf. Figure 1):
Presentation Manager, Dialog Manager, and Action Manager. The
Presentation Manager interprets user input and generates system
responses. It embodies the user interface and contains a shallow
semantic parser and a response generator. The semantic parser
identifies concepts (e.g., MULTIMEDIA) and constraints on
product attributes (e.g., hard disk size more than 20GB) from the
textual user input. The concepts mediate the mapping between user
input and available products through product specifications. They
implement the business logic.
The Dialog Manager uses the current requirements and formulates
action plans for the Action Manager to perform back-end operations
(e.g., database access1). The Dialog Manager constructs a response
to the user based on the results from the Action Manager and the
discourse history and sends the system response to the Presentation
Manager that displays it to the user. The system prompts for features
relevant in the current context. In our mixed initiative dialog
system, the user can always answer the specific question put to
him/her or provide any constraints.
The system has been recently deployed on an external website.
Figure 2 shows the start of a dialog.2
1 See [1] for a survey of natural language interfaces to databases.
2 We are demonstrating the system at HLT?2001 [2].
ManagerPresentation
Manager
telephone
PDA
web
Conversational
Dialog Manager
USER
APIs
speech,
text,..
NLP
Services
History
Action
Manager
Application
Action
Templates
etc...
APIs
Discourse
History
Figure 1. Architecture of the NLA conversational system.
3. USER STUDIES
We conducted a preliminary market survey and two user studies
described in subsections 3.1 and 3.2 respectively.
3.1 Market Survey
For understanding specific user needs and user vocabulary, we
conducted a user survey. Users were given three sets of questions.
The first set, in turn, contained three questions: "What kind of
notebook computer are you looking for?", "What features are
important to you?", and "What do you plan to use this notebook
computer for?". By applying statistical n-gram models and a
shallow noun phrase grammar to the user responses, we extracted
keywords and phrases expressing user's needs and interests. In the
second set of questions, users were asked to rank 10 randomly
selected terms from 90 notebook related terms in order of
familiarity to them. The third set of questions asked for
demographical information about users such as their gender, years
of experience with notebook computers, native language, etc. We
computed correlations between vocabulary/terms and user
demographic information. Over a 30-day period, we received 705
survey responses. From these responses, we learned 195 keywords
and phrases that were included in NLA.
3.2 Usability Testing
3.2.1 Experimental Setup
We conducted two user studies to evaluate usability of the system,
focusing on: dialog flow, ease of use, system responses, and user
vocabulary. The first user study focused on the functionality of
NLA and the second user study compared the functionality of
NLA with that of a directed dialog system and a menu driven
navigation system.
The moderators interviewed 52 users in the user studies: 18 and
34 in the two studies, respectively. All participants were
consumers or small business users with "beginner" or
"intermediate" computer skills. Each participant was asked to find
laptops for a variety of scenarios using three different systems (the
NLA, a directed dialog system and a menu driven navigation
system). Participants were asked to rate each system for each task
on a 1 to 10 scale (10 ? easiest) with respect to the ease of
navigation, clarity of terminology and their confidence in the
system responses. The test subjects were also asked whether the
system had found relevant products and were prompted to share
their impressions as to how well the system understood them and
responded to their requests.
Figure 2. The start of the dialog.
3.2.2 Results
In both studies, participants were very receptive to using natural
language dialog-based search. The users clearly preferred dialog-
based searches to non-dialog based searches3 (79% to 21% users).
Furthermore, they liked the narrowing down of a product list
based on identified constraints as the interaction proceeded. In the
first user study, comparing NLA with a menu driven system, we
found that using NLA reduced the average number of clicks by
63% and the average interaction time by 33%.
In the second user study, we compared NLA with a directed
dialog system and a menu driven search system for finding
computers. One goal of the comparative study was to find out if
there were any statistical differences in confidence, terminology
and navigation ratings across the three systems and whether they
were correlated with different categories of users. The ANOVA
analysis reveals statistical differences in terminology ratings
among the three systems for the category of beginner users only.
There were no statistical differences found in the other ratings of
navigation and confidence across the three sites for different
categories of users. Sandler's A test confirmed that the
terminology rating was significantly different for the categories of
consumers, small business owners, beginners and intermediates.
These comparative results suggest that asking questions relative to
the right level of end user experience is crucial. Asking users
questions about their lifestyle and how they were going to use a
computer accounted for a slight preference of the directed dialog
system over the NLA that uses questions presented on the basis of
understanding features and functions of computer terms.
3.2.3 Lessons from the user studies
Both user studies revealed several dimensions along which NLA
can be improved. The first user study highlighted a definite need
for system acknowledgement and feedback. The users wanted to
know whether the system had understood them. User comments
also revealed that a comparison of features across the whole pool
of products was important for them.
The focus of the second study, incorporating 34 subjects, was to
compare systems of similar functionality and to draw conclusions
about the functionality of NLA. Both the ANOVA and the
Sandler's test point out that terminology was a statistically
significant factor differentiating among the systems. We believe
that using terminology that is not overly technical would
contribute to the success of the dialog search. While the questions
asked by NLA were based on features and functionality of
notebook computers, the users preferred describing usage patterns
and life style issues rather than technical details of computers.
We also found that users' confidence in NLA decreased when the
system responses were inconsistent i.e., were not relevant to their
input. Lack of consistent visual focus on the dialog box was also a
serious drawback since it forced users to scroll in search of the
dialog box on each interaction page.
3 We define a dialog-based search as one comprising of a
sequence of interactions with a system where the system keeps
track of contextual (discourse) information.
3.2.4 Future work
Based on the results of the user studies, we are currently focused
on: developing a dynamic and adaptive dialog management
strategy, improving the robustness of the natural language
processing (NLP), and improving the user interface. Some of
issues mentioned here have been implemented in the next version
of NLA.
We are currently re-designing the questions that NLA asks users
to be simpler, and to focus on usage patterns rather than technical
features. We are also implementing a new dialog management
strategy in NLA that is more adaptive to the user's input, and
implements a mapping from high-level usage patterns to
constraints on low-level technical features.
We are integrating a statistical parser with NLA to more robustly
handle varied user input. The statistical parser should enable NLA
to scale to multiple languages and multiple domains in a more
robust and reliable fashion. We are aiming at an architecture that
separates the NLP processing from the business logic that will
make maintenance of the system easier.4
Improvements to the GUI include better acknowledgement and
feedback mechanisms as well as graphical UI issues. We now
reiterate the user's last query at the beginning of each interaction
page and also convey to the user an explanation of features
incrementally accumulated in the course of the interaction. We
have designed a more uniform, more compact and consistent UI.
In the welcome page, we have abandoned a three-step initiation
(typed input, experience level and preferences for major
specifications) keeping the emphasis on the dialog box. The user
preferences contributed to creating confusion as to the main
means of interaction (many users just clicked on the radial buttons
and did not use the full dialog functionality). We now infer the
technical specifications based the user's stated needs and usage
patterns. Our UI now has a no scrolling policy and we allow for
larger matching set of products to be visualized over a number of
pages.
4. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we have presented a conversational dialog system
for helping users shop for notebook computers. User studies
comparing our conversational dialog system with a menu driven
system have found that the conversational interface reduced the
average number of clicks by 63% and the average interaction time
by 33%. Based on our findings, it appears that for conversational
systems like ours, the sophistication of dialog management and
the actual human computer interface are more important than the
complexity of the natural language processing technique used.
This is especially true for web-based systems where user queries
are often brief and shallow linguistic processing seems to be
adequate. For web-based systems, integrating the conversational
interface with other interfaces (like menu-driven and search-
driven interfaces) for providing a complete and consistent user
experience assumes greater importance.
4 Many systems' fate has been decided not because they cannot
handle complex linguistic constructions but because of the
difficulties in porting such systems out of the research
environments.
The user studies we conducted have highlighted several directions
for further improvements for our system. We plan to modify our
interface to integrate different styles of interaction (e.g., menus,
search, browsing, etc.). We also intend to dynamically classify
each user as belonging to one or more categories of computer
shoppers (e.g., gamers, student users, home business users, etc.)
based on all the user interactions so far. We can then tailor the
whole interface to the perceived category including but not
limited to the actual questions asked, the technical knowledge
assumed by the system and the whole style of interaction.
Another area of potential improvement for the NLA is its inability
to handle any meta-level queries about itself or any deeper
questions about its domain (e.g., NLA currently can not properly
handle the queries, "How can I add memory to this model?" or
"What is DVD?"). Our long-term goal is to integrate different
sources of back-end information (databases, text documents, etc.)
and present users with an integrated, consistent conversational
interface to it.
We believe that conversational interfaces offer the ultimate kind
of personalization. Personalization can be defined as the process
of presenting each user of an automated system with an interface
uniquely tailored to his/her preference of content and style of
interaction. Thus, mixed initiative conversational interfaces are
highly personalized since they allow users to interact with systems
using the words they want, to fetch the content they want in the
style they want. Users can converse with such systems by phrasing
their initial queries at a right level of comfort to them (e.g., "I am
looking for a gift for my wife" or "I am looking for a fast
computer with DVD under 1500 dollars").
5. CONCLUSIONS
Based on our results, we conclude that conversational natural
language dialog interfaces offer powerful personalized alternatives
to traditional menu-driven or search-based interfaces to websites.
For such systems, it is especially important to present users with a
consistent interface integrating different styles of interaction and
to have robust dialog management strategies. The system feedback
and the follow up questions should strike a delicate balance
between exposing the system limitations to users, and making
users aware of the flexibility of the system. In current work we are
focusing on developing dynamic, adaptive dialog management,
robust multi-lingual NLP and improving the user interface.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Androutsopoulos, Ion, and Ritchie, Graeme. Natural
Language Interfaces to Databases ? An Introduction, Natural
Language Engineering 1.1:29-81, 1995.
[2] Budzikowska, M., Chai, J., Govindappa, S., Horvath, V.,
Kambhatla, N., Nicolov, N., and Zadrozny, W.
Conversational Sales Assistant for Online Shopping,
Demonstration at Human Language Technologies
Conference (HLT'2001), San Diego, Calif., 2001.
[3] Carpenter, Bob, and Chu-Carroll, J. Natural Language Call
Routing: A Robust, Self-organizing Approach, Proceedings
of the 5th Int. Conf. on Spoken Language Processing. 1998
[4] Chai, J., Lin, J., Zadrozny, W., Ye, Y., Budzikowska, M.,
Horvath, V., Kambhatla, N., and Wolf, C. Comparative
Evaluation of a Natural Language Dialog Based System and
a Menu-Driven System for Information Access: A Case
Study, Proceedings of RIAO 2000, Paris.
[5] Saito, M., and Ohmura, K. A Cognitive Model for Searching
for Ill-defined Targets on the Web - The Relationship
between Search Strategies and User Satisfaction, 21st Int.
Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, Australia, 1998.
[6] Walker, M., Fromer, J., and Narayanan, S. Learning Optimal
Dialogue Strategies: A Case Study of a Spoken Dialogue
Agent for Email, 36th Annual Meeting of the ACL, Montreal,
Canada, 1998.
[7] Zadrozny, W., Wolf, C., Kambhatla, N. & Ye, Y.
Conversation Machines for Transaction Processing,
Proceedings of AAAI / IAAI - 1998, Madison, Wisconsin,
U.S.A. 1998.
Conversational Sales Assistant for Online Shopping
Margo Budzikowska, Joyce Chai, Sunil Govindappa, Veronika Horvath, Nanda Kambhatla,
Nicolas Nicolov & Wlodek Zadrozny
Conversational Machines Group
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
30 Saw Mill River Rd, Hawthorne, NY 10532, U.S.A.
{sm1, jchai, govindap, veronika, nanda, nicolas, wlodz}@us.ibm.com
ABSTRACT
Websites of businesses should accommodate both customer
needs and business requirements. Traditional menu-driven
navigation and key word search do not allow users to describe
their intentions precisely. We have developed a conversational
interface to online shopping that provides convenient,
personalized access to information using natural language
dialog. User studies show significantly reduced length of
interactions in terms of time and number of clicks in finding
products. The core dialog engine is easily adaptable to other
domains.
1. INTRODUCTION
Natural language dialog has been used in many areas, such as
for call-center/routing application (Carpenter & Chu-Carroll
1998), email routing (Walker, Fromer & Narayanan 1998),
information retrieval and database access (Androutsopoulos &
Ritchie 1995), and for telephony banking (Zadrozny et al 1998).
In this demonstration, we present a natural language dialog
interface to online shopping. Our user studies show natural
language dialog to be a very effective means for negotiating
user's requests and intentions in this domain.
2. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
In our system, a presentation manager captures queries from
users, employs a parser to transform the user's query into a
logical form, and sends the logical form to a dialog manager.
The presentation manager is also responsible for obtaining the
system's response from the dialog manager and presenting it to
the user using template-based generation. The dialog manager
formulates action plans for an action manager to perform back-
end tasks such as database access, business transactions, etc. The
dialog manager applies information state-based dialog strategies
to formulate responses depending on the current state, discourse
history and the action results from the action manager.
The Data Management Subsystem maintains a ?concept?
repository with common sense ?concepts? and a phrasal lexicon
that lists possible ways for referring to the concepts. Business
Rules map concepts to business specifications by defining
concepts using a propositional logic formula of constraints over
product specifications. Thus, the Business Rules reflect business
goals and decisions. The Extended Database combines product
specifications and precompiled evaluations of the concept
definitions for each product to provide a representation that
guides the natural language dialog. We are investigating
automated tools for helping developers and maintainers extract
relevant concepts and terms on the basis of user descriptions and
queries about products.
3. EVALUATION
We conducted several user studies to evaluate the usability of
NLA (Chai et al 2000). In one study, seventeen test subjects
preferred the dialog-driven navigation of NLA two to one over
menu-driven navigation. Moreover, with NLA, the average
number of clicks was reduced by 63.2% and the average time
was reduced by 33.3%. Analysis of the user queries (average
length = 5.31 words long; standard deviation = 2.62; 85% of
inputs are noun phrases) revealed the brevity and relative
linguistic simplicity of user input. Hence, shallow parsing
techniques were adequate for processing user input. In general,
sophisticated dialog management appears to be more important
than the ability to handle complex natural language sentences.
The user studies also highlighted the need to combine multiple
modalities and styles of interaction.
4. REFERENCES
[1] Androutsopoulos, Ion & Ritchie, Graeme. Natural
Language Interfaces to Databases ? An Introduction,
Natural Language Engineering 1.1:29-81, 1995.
[2] Carpenter, Bob & Chu-Carroll, Jeniffer. Natural Language
Call Routing: A Robust, Self-organizing Approach,
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Spoken
Language Processing, 1998.
[3] Chai, J., Lin, J., Zadrozny, W., Ye, Y., Budzikowska, M.,
Horvath, V., Kambhatla, N. & Wolf, C. Comparative
Evaluation of a Natural Language Dialog Based System
and a Menu-Driven System for Information Access: A Case
Study, Proceedings of RIAO 2000, Paris, 2000.
[4] Saito, M. & Ohmura, K. A Cognitive Model for Searching
for Ill-defined Targets on the Web ? The Relationship
between Search Strategies and User Satisfaction. 21st Int.
Conf. on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, Australia, 1998.
[5] Walker, M., Fromer, J. & Narayanan, S. Learning Optimal
Dialogue Strategies: A Case Study of a Spoken Dialogue
Agent for Email, 36th Annual Meeting of the ACL,
Montreal, Canada, 1998.
[6] Zadrozny, W., Wolf, C., Kambhatla, N. & Ye, Y.
Conversation Machines for Transaction Processing,
Proceedings of AAAI / IAAI - 1998, Madison, Wisconsin,
U.S.A., 1998.
HTML
Application
Server
Client
HTTP
Server
HTML
Servlet
Web Server
Network
(HTTP)
Presentation
Manager
Dialog
Manager
Action
Manager
Quick
Parser
Response
Generator Vector Space Engine
Product
Database
Business Rules
Concepts
Data Management
(Off line)
User Interface
Concept
Interpreter
Explanation
ModelPresentationStrategies
Dialog
Strategies
Action
Strategies
input
output
Communication
Acts
Communication
Acts
Action Specs
Online
Interaction Discourse
Analyzer
Extended
PD
Database
Query
Discourse
History
ActionResults
State
Interpreter
