Machine Translation of Very Close Languages 
Jan HAJI(~ 
Computer Science Dept. 
Johns Hopkins University 
3400 N. Charles St., Baltimore, 
MD 21218, USA 
hajic@cs.jhu.edu 
Jan HRIC 
KTI MFF UK 
Malostransk6 nfim.25 
Praha 1, Czech Republic, 11800 
hric@barbora.m ff.cuni.cz 
Vladislav KUBON 
OFAL MFF UK 
Malostransk6 mim.25 
Praha 1, Czech Republic, 11800 
vk@ufal.mff.cuni.cz 
Abstract 
Using examples of the transfer-based MT 
system between Czech and Russian 
RUSLAN and the word-for-word MT system 
with morphological disambiguation between 
Czech and Slovak (~ESILKO we argue that 
for really close languages it is possible to 
obtain better translation quality by means of 
simpler methods. The problem of translation 
to a group of typologically similar languages 
using a pivot language is also discussed here. 
Introduction 
Although the field of machine translation has a 
very long history, the number of really successful 
systems is not very impressive. Most of the funds 
invested into the development of various MT 
systems have been wasted and have not 
stimulated a development of techniques which 
would allow to translate at least technical texts 
from a certain limited domain. There were, of 
course, exceptions, which demonstrated that 
under certain conditions it is possible to develop 
a system which will save money and efforts 
invested into human translation. The main reason 
why the field of MT has not met the expectations 
of sci-fi literature, but also the expectations of 
scientific community, is the complexity of the 
task itself. A successful automatic translation 
system requires an application of techniques from 
several areas of computational inguistics 
(morphology, syntax, semantics, discourse 
analysis etc.) as a necessary, but not a sufficient 
condition. The general opinion is that it is easier 
to create an MT system for a pair of related 
languages. In our contribution we would like to 
demonstrate hat this assumption holds only for 
really very closely related languages. 
1. Czech-to-Russian MT system RUSLAN 
1.1 History 
The first attempt o verify the hypothesis that 
related languages are easier to translate started in 
mid 80s at Charles University in Prague. The 
project was called RUSLAN and aimed at the 
translation of documentation i the domain of 
operating systems for mainframe computers. It 
was developed in cooperation with the Research 
Institute of Mathematical Machines in Prague. At 
that time in former COMECON countries it was 
obligatory to translate any kind of documentation 
to such systems into Russian. The work on the 
Czech-to-Russian MT system RUSLAN (cf. Oliva 
(1989)) started in 1985. It was terminated in 1990 
(with COMECON gone) for the lack of funding. 
1.2 System description 
The system was rule-based, implemented in 
Colmerauer's Q-systems. It contained a full- 
fledged morphological and syntactic analysis of 
Czech, a transfer and a syntactic and 
morphological generation of Russian. There was 
almost no transfer at the beginning of the project 
due to the assumption that both languages are 
similar to the extent that does not require any 
transfer phase at all. This assumption turned to be 
wrong and several phenomena were covered by 
the transfer in the later stage of the project (for 
example the translation of the Czech verb "b~" 
\[to be\] into one of the three possible Russian 
equivalents: empty form, the form "byt6" in future 
7 
tense and the verb "javljat6sja"; or the translation 
of verbal negation). 
At the time when the work was terminated in 
1990, the system had a main translation 
dictionary of about 8000 words, accompanied by 
so called transducing dictionary covering another 
2000 words. The transducing dictionary was 
based on the original idea described in Kirschner 
(1987). It aimed at the exploitation of the fact 
that technical terms are based (in a majority of 
European languages) on Greek or Latin stems, 
adopted according to the particular derivational 
rules of the given languages. This fact allows for 
the "translation" of technical terms by means of a 
direct transcription of productive ndings and a 
slight (regular) adjustment of the spelling of the 
stem. For example, the English words 
localization and discrimination can be 
transcribed into Czech as "lokalizace" and 
"diskriminace" with a productive nding -ation 
being transcribed to -ace. It was generally 
assumed that for the pair Czech/Russian the 
transducing dictionary would be able to profit 
from a substantially greater number of productive 
rules. This hypothesis proved to be wrong, too 
(see B6mov~, Kubofi (1990)). The set of 
productive ndings for both pairs (English/Czech, 
as developed for an earlier MT system from 
English to Czech, and Czech/Russian) was very 
similar. 
The evaluation of results of RUSLAN showed 
that roughly 40% of input sentences were 
translated correctly, about 40% with minor errors 
correctable by a human post-editor and about 
20% of the input required substantial editing or 
re-translation. There were two main factors that 
caused a deterioration of the translation. The first 
factor was the incompleteness of the main 
dictionary of the system. Even though the system 
contained a set of so-called fail-soft rules, whose 
task was to handle such situations, an unknown 
word typically caused a failure of the module of  
syntactic analysis, because the dictionary entries 
contained - besides the translation equivalents 
and morphological information - very important 
syntactic information. 
The second factor was the module of syntactic 
analysis of Czech. There were several reasons of 
parsing failures. Apart from the common inability 
of most rule-based formal grammars to cover a 
particular natural anguage to the finest detail of 
its syntax there were other problems. One of  them 
was the existence of non-projective constructions, 
which are quite common in Czech even in 
relatively short sentences. Even though they 
account only for 1.7?/'o f syntactic dependencies, 
every third Czech sentence contains at least one, 
and in a news corpus, we discovered as much as 
15 non-projective dependencies; see also Haji6 et 
al. (1998). An example of a non-projective 
construction is "Soubor se nepodafilo otev~it." 
\[lit.: File Refl. was_not._possible to_open. - It was 
not possible to open the file\]. The formalism used 
for the implementation (Q-systems) was not meant 
to handle non-projective constructions. Another 
source of trouble was the use of so-called 
semantic features. These features were based on 
lexical semantics of individual words. Their main 
task was to support a semantically plausible 
analysis and to block the implausible ones. It 
turned out that the question of implausible 
combinations of  semantic features is also more 
complex than it was supposed to be. The practical 
outcome of the use of semantic features was a 
higher atio of parsing failures - semantic features 
often blocked a plausible analysis. For example, 
human lexicographers a signed the verb 'to run' a 
semantic feature stating that only a noun with 
semantic features of a human or other living being 
may be assigned the role of subject of this verb. 
The input text was however full of sentences with 
'programs' or 'systems' running etc. It was of 
course very easy to correct he semantic feature in 
the dictionary, but the problem was that there 
were far too many corrections required. 
On the other hand, the fact that both languages 
allow a high degree of word-order freedom 
accounted for a certain simplification of  the 
translation process. The grammar elied on the 
fact that there are only minor word-order 
differences between Czech and Russian. 
1.3 Lessons learned  f rom RUSLAN 
We have learned several lessons regarding the MT 
of closely related languages: 
? The transfer-based approach provides a 
similar quality of translation both for closely 
related and typologically different languages 
? Two main bottlenecks of full-fledged 
transfer-based systems are: 
8 
- complexity of the syntactic dictionary 
- relative unreliability of the syntactic 
analysis of the source language 
Even a relatively simple component 
(transducing dictionary) was equally complex 
for English-to-Czech and Czech-to-Russian 
translation 
Limited text domains do not exist in real life, 
it is necessary to work with a high coverage 
dictionary at least for the source language. 
2. Translation and localization 
2.1 A pivot language 
Localization of products and their documentation 
is a great problem for any company, which wants 
to strengthen its position on foreign language 
market, especially for companies producing 
various kinds of  software. The amounts of texts 
being localized are huge and the localization 
costs are huge as well. 
It is quite clear that the localization from one 
source language to several target languages, 
which are typologically similar, but different 
from the source language, is a waste of money 
and effort. It is of course much easier to translate 
texts from Czech to Polish or from Russian to 
Bulgarian than from English or German to any of 
these languages. There are several reasons, why 
localization and translation is not being 
performed through some pivot language, 
representing a certain group of closely related 
languages. Apart from political reasons the 
translation through a pivot language has several 
drawbacks. The most important one is the 
problem of the loss of translation quality. Each 
translation may to a certain extent shift the 
meaning of the translated text and thus each 
subsequent translation provides results more and 
more different from the original. The second 
most important reason is the lack of translators 
from the pivot to the target language, while this is 
usually no problem for the translation from the 
source directly to the target language. 
2.2 Translation memory is the key 
The main goal of this paper is to suggest how to 
overcome these obstacles by means of a 
combination of an MT system with commercial 
MAHT (Machine-aided human translation) 
systems. We have chosen the TRADOS 
Translator's Workbench as a representative 
system of a class of these products, which can be 
characterized as an example-based translation 
tools. IBM's Translation Manager and other 
products also belong to this class. Such systems 
uses so-called translation memory, which contains 
pairs of previously translated sentences from a 
source to a target language. When a human 
translator starts translating a new sentence, the 
system tries to match the source with sentences 
already stored in the translation memory. If it is 
successful, it suggests the translation and the 
human translator decides whether to use it, to 
modify it or to reject it. 
The segmentation f a translation memory is a key 
feature for our system. The translation memory 
may be exported into a text file and thus allows 
easy manipulation with its content. Let us suppose 
that we have at our disposal two translation 
memories - one human made for the source/pivot 
language pair and the other created by an MT 
system for the pivot/target language pair. The 
substitution of segments of a pivot language by 
the segments of a target language is then only a 
routine procedure. The human translator 
translating from the source language to the target 
language then gets a translation memory for the 
required pair (source/target). The system of 
penalties applied in TRADOS Translator's 
Workbench (or a similar system) guarantees that if 
there is already a human-made translation present, 
then it gets higher priority than the translation 
obtained as a result of the automatic MT. This 
system solves both problems mentioned above - 
the human translators from the pivot to the target 
language are not needed at all and the machine- 
made translation memory serves only as a 
resource supporting the direct human translation 
from the source to the target language. 
3. Mach ine  t rans lat ion of  (very) closely 
related Slavic languages 
In the group of Slavic languages, there are more 
closely related languages than Czech and Russian. 
Apart from the pair of Serbian and Croatian 
languages, which are almost identical and were 
9 
considered one language just a few years ago, the 
most closely related languages in this group are 
Czech and Slovak. 
This fact has led us to an experiment with 
automatic translation between Czech and Slovak. 
It was clear that application of a similar method 
to that one used in the system RUSLAN would 
lead to similar results. Due to the closeness of 
both languages we have decided to apply a 
simpler method. Our new system, (~ESILKO, 
aims at a maximal exploitation of the similarity 
of both languages. The system uses the method of 
direct word-for-word translation, justified by the 
similarity of syntactic constructions of both 
languages. 
Although the system is currently being tested on 
texts from the domain of documentation to 
corporate information systems, it is not limited to 
any specific domain. Its primary task is, however, 
to provide support for translation and localization 
of various technical texts. 
3.1 System (~ESiLKO 
The greatest problem of the word-for-word 
translation approach (for languages with very 
similar syntax and word order, but different 
morphological system) is the problem of 
morphological ambiguity of individual word 
forms. The type of ambiguity is slightly different 
in languages with a rich inflection (majority of 
Slavic languages) and in languages which do not 
have such a wide variety of forms derived from a 
single lemma. For example, in Czech there are 
only rare cases of part-of-speech ambiguities ( t~t 
\[to stay/the state\], zena \[woman/chasing\] or tri 
\[three/rub(imperative)\]), much more frequent is 
the ambiguity of gender, number and case (for 
example, the form of the adjective jam\[ \[spring\] 
is 27-times ambiguous). The main problem is that 
even though several Slavic languages have the 
same property as Czech, the ambiguity is not 
preserved. It is distributed in a different manner 
and the "form-for-form" translation is not 
applicable. 
Without he analysis of at least nominal groups it 
is often very difficult to solve this problem, 
because for example the actual morphemic 
categories of adjectives are in Czech 
distinguishable only on the basis of gender, 
number and case agreement between an adjective 
and its governing noun. An alternative way to the 
solution of this problem was the application of a 
stochastically based morphological disambiguator 
(morphological tagger) for Czech whose success 
rate is close to 92?/'0. Our system therefore consists 
of the following modules: 
1. Import of the input from so-called 'empty' 
translation memory 
2. Morphological analysis of Czech 
3. Morphological disambiguation 
4. Domain-related bilingual glossaries (incl. 
single- and multiword terminology) 
5. General bilingual dictionary 
6. Morphological synthesis of Slovak 
7. Export of the output o the original translation 
memory 
Letus now look in a more detail at the individual 
modules of the system: 
ad 1. The input text is extracted out of a 
translation memory previously exported into an 
ASCII file. The exported translation memory (of 
TRADOS) has a SGML-Iike notation with a 
relatively simple structure (cf. the following 
example): 
Example 1. - A sample of the exported translation 
memory 
<RTF Preamble>...</RTF Preamble> 
<TrU> 
<CrD>23051999 
<CrU>VK 
<Seg L=CS_01>Pomoci v~kazu ad-hoc m65ete 
rychle a jednoduge vytv~i~et regerge. 
<Seg L=SK_01 >n/a 
</TrU> 
Our system uses only the segments marked by 
<Seg L=CS_01>, which contain one source 
language sentence ach, and <Seg L=SK_01>, 
which is empty and which will later contain the 
same sentence translated into the target language 
by CESiLKO. 
ad 2. The morphological analysis of Czech is 
based on the morphological dictionary developed 
by Jan Haji6 and Hana Skoumalov~i in 1988-99 
(for latest description, see Haji~ (1998)). The 
dictionary contains over 700 000 dictionary 
entries and its typical coverage varies between 
10 
99% (novels) to 95% (technical texts). The 
morphological analysis uses the system of 
positional tags with 15 positions (each 
morphological .category, such as Part-of-speech, 
Number, Gender, Case, etc. has a fixed, single- 
symbol place in the tag). 
Example 2 - tags assigned to the word-form 
"pomoci" (help/by means of) 
pomoci: 
NFP2 .... . .  A .... \]NFS7 ...... A .... I R--2 . . . . . . . . . . .  
where : 
N - noun; R - preposition 
F - feminine gender 
S - singular, P - plural 
7, 2 - case (7 - instrumental, 2 - genitive) 
A - affirmative (non negative) 
ad 3. The module of morphological 
disambiguation is a key to the success of  the 
translation. It gets an average number of 3.58 
tags per token (word form in text) as an input. 
The tagging system is purely statistical, and it 
uses a log-linear model of probability distribution 
- see Haji~, Hladkfi (1998). The learning is based 
on a manually tagged corpus of Czech texts 
(mostly from the general newspaper domain). 
The system learns contextual rules (features) 
automatically and also automatically determines 
feature weights. The average accuracy of tagging 
is between 91 and 93% and remains the same 
even for technical texts (if we disregard the 
unknown names and foreign-language t rms that 
are not ambiguous anyway). 
The lemmatization immediately follows tagging; 
it chooses the first lemma with a possible tag 
corresponding to the tag selected. Despite this 
simple lemmatization method, and also thanks to 
the fact that Czech words are rarely ambiguous in 
their Part-of-speech, it works with an accuracy 
exceeding 98%. 
ad 4. The domain-related bilingual glossaries 
contain pairs of individual words and pairs of 
multiple-word terms. The glossaries are 
organized into a hierarchy specified by the user; 
typically, the glossaries for the most specific 
domain are applied first. There is one general 
matching rule for all levels of glossaries - the 
longest match wins. 
The multiple-word terms are sequences of lemmas 
(not word forms). This structure has several 
advantages, among others it allows to minimize 
the size of the dictionary and also, due to the 
simplicity of the structure, it allows modifications 
of the glossaries by the linguistically naive user. 
The necessary morphological information is 
introduced into the domain-related glossary in an 
off-line preprocessing stage, which does not 
require user intervention. This makes a big 
difference when compared to the RUSLAN 
Czech-to-Russian MT system, when each 
multiword dictionary entry cost about 30 minutes 
of linguistic expert's time on average. 
ad 5. The main bilingual dictionary contains data 
necessary for the translation of  both lemmas and 
tags. The translation of tags (from the Czech into 
the Slovak morphological system) is necessary, 
because due to the morphological differences both 
systems use close, but slightly different tagsets. 
Currently the system handles the 1:1 translation of 
tags (and 2:2, 3:3, etc.). Different ratio of 
translation is very rare between Czech and Siovak, 
but nevertheless an advanced system of dictionary 
items is under construction (for the translation 1:2, 
2:1 etc.). It is quite interesting that the lexically 
homonymous words often preserve their 
homonymy even after the translation, so no 
special treatment of homonyms is deemed 
necessary. 
ad 6. The morphological synthesis of Slovak is 
based on a monolingual dictionary of SIovak, 
developed by J.Hric (1991-99), covering more 
than \]00,000 dictionary entries. The coverage of 
the dictionary is not as high as of  the Czech one, 
but it is still growing. It aims at a similar coverage 
of Slovak as we enjoy for Czech. 
ad 7. The export of  the output of the system 
(~ESILKO into the translation memory (of 
TRADOS Translator's Workbench) amounts 
mainly to cleaning of all irrelevant SGML 
markers. The whole resulting Slovak sentence is 
inserted into the appropriate location in the 
original translation memory file. The following 
example also shows that the marker <CrU> 
contains an information that the target language 
sentence was created by an MT system. 
11 
Example 3. -A  sample of the translation memory 
containing the results of MT 
<RTF Preamble>...</RTF Preamble> 
<TrU> 
<CRD>23051999 
<CrU>MT! 
<Seg L=CS_01>Pomoci v~kazu ad-hoc mfi~ete 
rychle a jednodu~e vytv~i~et re,erie. 
<Seg L=SK_01>Pomoci v~kazov ad-hoc m6~ete 
r~chio a jednoducho vytvhrat' re,erie. 
</TrU> 
3.2 Evaluation of results 
The problem how to evaluate results of automatic 
translation is very difficult. For the evaluation of 
our system we have exploited the close 
connection between our system and the 
TRADOS Translator's Workbench. The method 
is simple - the human translator eceives the 
translation memory created by our system and 
translates the text using this memory. The 
translator is free to make any changes to the text 
proposed by the translation memory. The target 
text created by a human translator is then 
compared with the text created by the mechanical 
application of translation memory to the source 
text. TRADOS then evaluates the percentage of 
matching in the same manner as it normally 
evaluates the percentage of matching of source 
text with sentences in translation memory. Our 
system achieved about 90% match (as defined by 
the TRADOS match module) with the results of 
human translation, based on a relatively large 
(more than 10,000 words) test sample. 
4. Conclusions 
The accuracy of the translation achieved by our 
system justifies the hypothesis that word-for- 
word translation might be a solution for MT of 
really closely related languages. The remaining 
problems to be solved are problems with the one- 
to many or many-to-many translation, where the 
lack of information in glossaries and dictionaries 
sometimes causes an unnecessary translation 
error. 
The success of the system CESILKO has 
encouraged the investigation of the possibility to 
use the same method for other pairs of Slavic 
languages, namely for Czech-to-Polish translation. 
Although these languages are not so similar as 
Czech and Slovak, we hope that an addition of a 
simple partial noun phrase parsing might provide 
results with the quality comparable to the full- 
fledged syntactic analysis based system RUSLAN 
(this is of course true also for the Czechoto-Slovak 
translation). The first results of Czech-to Polish 
translation are quite encouraging in this respect, 
even though we could not perform as rigorous 
testing as we did for Slovak. 
Acknowledgements 
This project was supported by the grant GAt~R 
405/96/K214 and partially by the grant GA(~R 
201/99/0236 and project of the Ministry of 
Education No. VS96151. 
References 
B6movfi, Alevtina and Kubofi, Vladislav (1990). Czech- 
to-Russian Transducing Dictionary; In: Proceedings 
of the Xlllth COLING conference, Helsinki 1990 
Haji~, Jan (1998). Building and Using a Syntactially 
Annotated Coprus: The Prague Dependency 
Treebank. In: Festschrifi for Jarmila Panevov~i, 
Karolinum Press, Charles Universitz, Prague. pp. 
106---132. 
Haji~, Jan and Barbora Hladk~t (1998). Tagging 
Inflective Languages. Prediction of Morphological 
Categories for a Rich, Structured Tagset. ACL- 
Coling'98, Montreal, Canada, August 1998, pp. 483- 
490. 
Haji~, Jan; Brill, Eric; Collins, Michael; Hladk~t 
Barbora; Jones, Douglas; Kuo, Cynthia; Ramshaw, 
Lance; Schwartz, Oren; Tillman, Christoph; and 
Zeman, Daniel: Core Natural Language Processing 
Technology Applicable to Multiple Languages. The 
Workshop'98 Final Report. CLSP JHU. Also at: 
http:llwww.clsp.jhu.edulws981projectslnlplreport. 
Kirschner, Zden~k (1987). APAC3-2: An English-to- 
Czech Machine Translation System; Explizite 
Beschreibung der Sprache und automatische 
Textbearbeitung XII1, MFF UK Prague 
Oliva, Karel (1989). A Parser for Czech Implemented 
in Systems Q; Explizite Beschreibung der Sprache 
und automatische Textbearbeitung XVI, MFF UK 
Prague 
12 
