Proceedings of the 7th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 1?8,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Adaptive Help for Speech Dialogue Systems Based on Learning and
Forgetting of Speech Commands
Alexander Hof, Eli Hagen and Alexander Huber
Forschungs- und Innovationszentrum
BMW Group, Munich
alexander.hof,eli.hagen,alexander.hc.huber@bmw.de
Abstract
In this paper we deal with learning and for-
getting of speech commands in speech di-
alogue systems. We discuss two mathe-
matical models for learning and four mod-
els for forgetting. Furthermore, we de-
scribe the experiments used to determine
the learning and forgetting curve in our
environment. Our findings are compared
to the theoretical models and based on
this we deduce which models best describe
learning and forgetting in our automotive
environment. The resulting models are
used to develop an adaptive help system
for a speech dialogue system. The system
provides only relevant context specific in-
formation.
1 Introduction
Modern premium class vehicles contain a large
number of driver information and driving assis-
tance systems. Therefore the need for enhanced
display and control concepts arose. BMW?s iDrive
is one of these concepts, allowing the driver to
choose functions by a visual-haptic interface (see
Fig. 1) (Haller, 2003). In Addition to the visual-
haptic interface, iDrive includes a speech dialogue
system (SDS) as well. The SDS allows the driver
to use a large number of functions via speech com-
mands (Hagen et al, 2004). The system offers
a context specific help function that can be ac-
tivated by uttering the keyword ?options?. The
options provide help in the form of a list, con-
taining speech commands available in the current
context (see dialogue 1). Currently neither the
driver?s preferences nor his knowledge is taken
into consideration. We present a strategy to op-
Figure 1: iDrive controller and Central Informa-
tion Display (CID)
timize the options by adaption that takes prefer-
ences and knowledge into account.
Our basic concern was to reduce the driver?s
memory load by reducing irrelevant information.
An adaptive help system based upon an individual
user model could overcome this disadvantage. In
(Komatani et al, 2003) and (Libuda and Kraiss,
2003), several adaptive components can be in-
cluded to improve dialogue systems, e.g. user and
content adaption, situation adaption and task adap-
tion. Hassel (2006) uses adaption to apply differ-
ent dialogue strategies according to the user?s ex-
perience with the SDS. In our system we concen-
trate on user modeling and content adaption.
In this paper, we present studies concerning
learning and forgetting of speech commands in au-
tomotive environments. The results are used to de-
velop a model describing the driver?s knowledge
in our SDS domain. This model is used to adapt
the content of the options lists.
1
Dialogue 1
User: ?Phone.?
System: ?Phone. Say dial name, dial number or name a list.?
User: ?Options.?
System: ?Options. Say dial followed by a name, for example ?dial Alex?, or say dial name,
dial number, save number, phone book, speed dialing list, top eight, last eight, ac-
cepted calls, missed calls, active calls and or or off.?
2 Learning of Commands
In this section, we determine which function most
adequately describes learning in our environment.
In the literature, two mathematically functions can
be found. These functions help to predict the
time necessary to achieve a task after several trials.
One model was suggested by (Newell and Rosen-
bloom, 1981) and describes learning with a power
law. Heathcote et. al. (2002) instead suggest to
use an exponential law.
T = B ?N?? (power law) (1)
T = B ? e???N (exponential law) (2)
In both equations T represents the time to solve
a task, B is the time needed for the first trial of
a task, N stands for the number of trials and ? is
the learning rate parameter that is a measure for
the learning speed. The parameter ? has to be de-
termined empirically. We conducted memory tests
to determine, which of the the two functions best
describes the learning curve for our specific envi-
ronment.
2.1 Test Design for Learning Experiments
The test group consisted of seven persons. The
subjects? age ranged from 26 to 43 years. Five of
the subjects had no experience with an SDS, two
had very little. Novice users were needed, because
we wanted to observe only novice learning behav-
iour. The tests lasted about one hour and were con-
ducted in a BMW, driving a predefined route with
moderate traffic.
Each subject had to learn a given set of ten tasks
with differing levels of complexity (see table 1).
Complexity is measured by the minimal necessary
dialogue steps to solve a task. The tasks were not
directly named, but explained in order not to men-
tion the actual command and thus avoid any influ-
ence on the learning process. There was no help
allowed except the options function. The subjects
received the tasks one by one and had to search
for the corresponding speech command in the op-
tions. After completion of a task in the testset the
next task was presented. The procedure was re-
peated until all commands had been memorized.
For each trial, we measured the time span from
SDS activation until the correct speech command
was spoken. The time spans were standardized by
dividing them through the number of the minimal
necessary steps that had to be taken to solve a task.
2.2 Results
In general, we can say that learning takes place
very fast in the beginning and with an increas-
ing amount of trials the learning curve flattens
and approximates an asymptote. The asymptote
at Tmin = 2s defines the maximum expert level,
that means that a certain task can not be completed
faster.
The resulting learning curve is shown in Fig. 3.
In order to determine whether equation (1) or (2)
describes this curve more exactly, we used a chi-
squared goodness-of-fit test (Rasch et al, 2004).
The more ?2 tends to zero, the less the observed
values (fo) differ from the estimated values (fe).
?2 =
k
?
i=1
(fo ? fe)2
fe
(3)
According to Fig. 2, the power law has a mini-
mum (?2min = 0.42) with a learning rate parame-
ter of ? = 1.31. The exponential law has its min-
imum (?2min = 2.72) with ? = 0.41. This means
that the values of the exponential law differ more
from the actual value than the power law?s values.
Therefore, we use the power law (see Fig. 3(a)) to
describe learning in our environment.
3 Forgetting of Commands
The second factor influencing our algorithm for
the calculation of options is forgetting. If a com-
mand was not in use for a long period of time,
we can assume that this command will be forgot-
ten. In this section, we determine how long com-
mands are being remembered and deduce a func-
tion most adequately describing the process of for-
2
Task 1 Listen to a radio station with a specific frequency
Task 2 Summary of already used destinations
Task 3 Enter a new destination
Task 4 Start navigation
Task 5 Turn off speech hints
Task 6 3D map
Task 7 Change map scale
Task 8 Avoid highways for route calculation
Task 9 Turn on CD
Task 10 Display the car?s fuel consumption
Table 1: Tasks for learning curve experiments
(a) ?2 for the Power Law
(b) ?2 for the Exponential Law
Figure 2: Local ?2 Minima
getting in our environment. In (Rubin and Wen-
zel, 1996) 105 mathematical models on forgetting
were compared to several previously published re-
tention studies. The results showed that there is no
generally appliable mathematical model, but a few
models fit to a large number of studies. The most
adequate models based on a logarithmic function,
an exponential function, a power function and a
square root function.
?new = ?old ? ln(t + e)?? (logarithmic)(4)
?new = ?old ? e???t (exponential) (5)
?new = ?old ? (t + ?)?? (power) (6)
?new = ?old ? e???
?
t (square root) (7)
The variable ? represents the initial amount of
learned items. The period of time is represented
through t while ? defines the decline parameter
of the forgetting curve. In order to determine the
best forgetting curve for SDS interactions, we con-
ducted tests in which the participants? memory
skills were monitored.
3.1 Test design for forgetting experiments
The second experiment consisted of two phases,
learning and forgetting. In a first step ten subjects
learned a set of two function blocks, each consist-
ing of ten speech commands (see table (2)). The
learning phase took place in a BMW. The tasks
and the corresponding commands were noted on
3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Tmin = 2s
Number of trials N
T
im
e
(s
)
(a) Observed learning curve and power law (dashed) with ? =
1.31
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Tmin = 2s
Number of trials N
T
im
e
(s
)
(b) Observed learning curve and exponential law (dotted) with
? = 0.42
Figure 3: Learning curves
Function block 1 Function block 2
Task 1 Start CD player Task 11 Turn on TV
Task 2 Listen to CD, track 5 Task 12 Watch TV station ?ARD?
Task 3 Listen to tadio Task 13 Regulate blowers
Task 4 Listen to radio station ?Antenne Bay-
ern?
Task 14 Change time settings
Task 5 Listen to radio on frequency 103,0 Task 15 Change date settings
Task 6 Change sound options Task 16 Change CID brightness
Task 7 Start navigation system Task 17 Connect with BMW Online
Task 8 Change map scale to 1km Task 18 Use phone
Task 9 Avoid highways for route calculation Task 19 Assistance window
Task 10 Avoid ferries for route calculation Task 20 Turn off the CID
Table 2: Tasks for forgetting curve experiments
a handout. The participants had to read the tasks
and uttered the speech commands. When all 20
tasks were completed, this step was repeated as
long as all SDS commands could be freely repro-
duced. These 20 commands built the basis for our
retention tests.
Our aim was to determine how fast forgetting
took place, so we conducted several memory tests
over a time span of 50 days. The tests were con-
ducted in a laboratory environment and should im-
itate the situation in a car if the driver wants to per-
form a task (e.g. listen to the radio) via SDS. Be-
cause we wanted to avoid any influence on the par-
ticipant?s verbal memory, the intentions were not
presented verbally or in written form but as iconic
representations (see Fig. 4). Each icon represented
an intention and the corresponding speech com-
mand had to be spoken.
Intention ?? Task ?? Command ?? Success
Icon ?? Task ?? Command ?? Success
Figure 4: Iconic representation of the functions:
phone, avoid highways and radio
This method guarantees that each function was
Figure 5: Test procedure for retention tests
only used once and relearning effects could not in-
fluence the results. As a measure for forgetting, we
used the number of commands recalled correctly
after a certain period of time.
4
0 10 20 30 40 50
0
2
4
6
8
10
Time (days)
R
ec
al
le
d
co
m
m
an
ds
(a) Empirical determinded forgetting curve
0 10 20 30 40 50
0
2
4
6
8
10
Time (days)
R
ec
al
le
d
co
m
m
an
ds
(b) Exponential forgetting curve (dashed) with ? = 0.027
Figure 6: Forgetting curves
3.2 Results
The observed forgetting curve can be seen in Fig.
6(a). In order to determine whether equation (4),
(5), (6) or (7) fits best to our findings, we used the
chi-squared goodness-of-fit test (cf. section 2.2).
The minima ?2 for the functions are shown in ta-
ble (3). Because the exponential function (see Fig.
Function ?2 Corresponding ?
logarithmic 2.11 0.58
exponential 0.12 0.027
power 1.77 0.22
square root 0.98 0.15
Table 3: ?2 values
6(b)) delivers the smallest ?2, we use equation (5)
for our further studies.
Concerning forgetting in general we can deduce
that once the speech commands have been learned,
forgetting takes place faster in the beginning. With
increasing time, the forgetting curve flattens and
at any time tends to zero. Our findings show that
after 50 days about 75% of the original number
of speech commands have been forgotten. Based
on the exponential function, we estimate that com-
plete forgetting will take place after approximately
100 days.
4 Providing Adaptive Help
As discussed in previous works, several adaptive
components can be included in dialogue systems,
e.g. user adaption (Hassel and Hagen, 2005), con-
tent adaption, situation adaption and task adaption
(Libuda and Kraiss, 2003). We concentrate on user
and content adaption and build a user model.
According to Fischer (2001), the user?s knowl-
edge about complex systems can be divided into
several parts (see Fig. 7): well known and regu-
larly used concepts (F1), vaguely and occasionally
used concepts (F2) and concepts the user believes
to exist in the system (F3). F represents the com-
plete functionality of the system. The basic idea
behind the adaptive help system is to use infor-
mation about the driver?s behaviour with the SDS
to provide only help on topics he is not so famil-
iar with. Thus the help system focuses on F2, F3
within F and finally the complete functionality F.
For every driver an individual profile is gen-
5
Figure 7: Model about the user?s knowledge on
complex systems
erated, containing information about usage fre-
quency and counters for every function. Several
methods can be used to identify the driver, e.g.
a personal ID card, a fingerprint system or face
recognition (Heckner, 2005). We do not further
focus on driver identification in our prototype.
4.1 Defining an Expert User
In section 2 we observed that in our environ-
ment, the time to learn speech commands follows
a power law, depending on the number of trials
(N ), the duration of the first interaction (B) and
the learning rate parameter (?). If we transform
equation (1), we are able to determine the number
of trials that are needed to execute a function in a
given time T .
N = ??
?
T
B (8)
If we substitute T with the minimal time Tmin an
expert needs to execute a function (Tmin = 2s, cf.
section 2.2), we can estimate the number of trials
which are necessary for a novice user to become
an expert. The only variable is the duration B,
which has to be measured for every function at its
first usage.
Additionally, we use two stereotypes (novice
and expert) to classify a user concerning his gen-
eral experience with the SDS. According to Has-
sel (2006), we can deduce a user?s experience by
monitoring his behaviour while using the SDS.
The following parameters are used to calculate an
additional user model: help requests h (user asked
for general information about the system), options
requests o (user asked for the currently available
speech commands), timeouts t (the ASR did not
get any acoustic signal), onset time ot (user needed
more than 3 sec to start answering) and barge-
in b (user starts speech input during the system?s
speech output). The parameters are noted in a vec-
tor
?
UM .
The parameters are differently weighted by a
weight vector
?
UMw, because each parameter is a
different indicator for the user?s experience.
?
UMw=
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
h = 0.11
o = 0.33
t = 0.45
ot = 0.22
b = ?0.11
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
(9)
The final user model is calculated by the scalar
product of
?
UM ?
?
UMw. If the resulting value is
over a predefined threshold, the user is categorized
as novice and a more explicit dialogue strategy is
applied, e.g. the dialogues contain more expam-
ples. If the user model delivers a value under the
threshold, the user is categorized as expert and an
implicit dialogue strategy is applied.
4.2 Knowledge Modeling Algorithm
Our findings from the learning experiments can be
used to create an algorithm for the presentation of
the context specific SDS help. Therefore, the op-
tion commands of every context are split into sev-
eral help layers (see Fig. 8). Each layer contains a
Figure 8: Exemplary illustration of twelve help
items divided into three help layers
maximum of four option commands in order to re-
duce the driver?s mental load (Wirth, 2002). Each
item has a counter, marking the position within the
layers. The initial order is based on our experience
with the usage frequency by novice users. The first
layer contains simple and frequently used com-
mands, e.g. dial number or choose radio station.
Complex or infrequent commands are put into the
lower layers. Every usage of a function is logged
by the system and a counter i is increased by 1 (see
equation 10).
Besides the direct usage of commands, we also
take transfer knowledge into account. There are
6
several similar commands, e.g. the selection of en-
tries in different lists like phonebook, adressbook
or in the cd changer playlists. Additionally, there
are several commands with the same parameters,
e.g. radio on/off, traffic program on/off etc. All
similar speech commands were clustered in func-
tional families. If a user is familiar with one com-
mand in the family, we assume that the other func-
tions can be used or learned faster. Thus, we in-
troduced a value, ?, that increases the indices of
all cammnds within the functional families. The
value of ? depends on the experience level of the
user.
inew =
{
iold + 1 direct usage
iold + ? similar command
(10)
In order to determine the value of ?, we conducted
a small test series where six novice users were told
to learn ten SDS commands from different func-
tional families. Once they were familiar with the
set of commands, they had to perform ten tasks re-
quiring similar commands. The subjects were not
allowed to use any help and should derive the nec-
essary speech command from their prior knowl-
edge about the SDS. Results showed that approxi-
mately 90% of the tasks could be completed by de-
ducing the necessary speech commands from the
previously learned commands. Transferring these
results to our algorithm, we assume that once a
user is an expert on a speech command of a func-
tional family, the other commands can be derived
very well. Thus we set ?expert = 0.9 for expert
users and estimate that for novice users the value
should be ?novice = 0.6. These values have to be
validated in further studies.
Every usage of a speech command increases its
counter and the counters of the similar commands.
These values can be compared to the value of N
resulting from equation (8). N defines a threshold
that marks a command as known or unknown. If
a driver uses a command more often than the cor-
responding threshold (i > N ), our assumption is
that the user has learned it and thus does not need
help on this command. It can be shifted into the
lowest layer and the other commands move over
to the upper layers (see Fig. 9).
If a command is not in use for a long period of
time (cf. section 3.2), the counter of this command
steadily declines until the item?s initial counter
value is reached. The decline itself is based on the
results of our forgetting experiments (cf. section
Figure 9: Item A had an initial counter of i = 1
and was presented in layer 1; after it has been used
15 times (i > N), it is shifted into layer 3 and the
counter has a new value i = 16
3.2) and the behaviour of the counter is described
by equation (5).
5 Summary and Future Work
In this paper we presented studies dealing with
learning and forgetting of speech commands in an
in-car environment. In terms of learning, we com-
pared the power law of learning and the exponen-
tial law of learning as models that are used to de-
scribe learning curves. We conducted tests under
driving conditions and showed that learning in this
case follows the power law of learning. This im-
plies that learning is most effective in the begin-
ning and requires more effort the more it tends to-
wards an expert level.
Concerning forgetting we compared four possi-
ble mathematical functions: a power function, an
exponential function, a logarithmic function and a
square root function. Our retention tests showed
that the forgetting curve was described most ad-
equately by the exponential function. Within the
observed time span of 50 days about 75% of the
initial amount of speech commands have been for-
gotten.
The test results have been transferred into an
algorithm specifying the driver?s knowledge of
commands within the SDS. Based on the learn-
ing experiments we are able to deduce a thresh-
old that defines the minimal number of trials that
are needed to learn a speech command. The for-
getting experiments allow us to draw conclusions
on how long this specific knowledge will be re-
mebered. With this information, we developed an
algorithm for an adaptive options list. It provides
help on unfamiliar speech commands.
Future work focuses on usability tests of the
prototype system, e.g. using the PARADISE eval-
uation framework to evaluate the general usabil-
7
ity of the system (Walker et al, 1997). One main
question that arises in the context of an adaptive
help system is if the adaption will be judged use-
ful on the one hand and be accepted by the user
on the other hand. Depending on user behaviour
the help system could shift its contents very fast,
which may cause some irritation. The test results
will show whether people get irritated and whether
the general approach for the options lists appears
to be useful.
References
Gerhard Fischer. 2001. User modeling in human-
computer interaction. User Modeling and User-
Adapted Interaction, 11:65?86.
Eli Hagen, Tarek Said, and Jochen Eckert. 2004.
Spracheingabe im neuen BMW 6er. ATZ.
Rudolf Haller. 2003. The Display and Control Con-
cept iDrive - Quick Access to All Driving and Com-
fort Functions. ATZ/MTZ Extra (The New BMW 5-
Series), pages 51?53.
Liza Hassel and Eli Hagen. 2005. Evaluation of a
dialogue system in an automotive environment. In
6th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue,
pages 155?165, September.
Liza Hassel and Eli Hagen. 2006. Adaptation of an
Automotive Dialogue System to Users Expertise and
Evaluation of the System.
Andrew Heathcote, Scott Brown, and D. J. K. Me-
whort. 2002. The Power Law Repealed: The case
for an Exponential Law of Practice. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 7:185?207.
Markus Heckner. 2005. Videobasierte Personeniden-
tifikation im Fahrzeug ? Design, Entwicklung und
Evaluierung eines prototypischen Mensch Maschine
Interfaces. Master?s thesis, Universita?t Regensburg.
Kazunori Komatani, Fumihiro Adachi, Shinichi Ueno,
Tatsuya Kawahara, and Hiroshi Okuno. 2003. Flex-
ible Spoken Dialogue System based on User Models
and Dynamic Generation of VoiceXML Scripts. In
4th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue.
Lars Libuda and Karl-Friedrich Kraiss. 2003.
Dialogassistenz im Kraftfahrzeug. In 45.
Fachausschusssitzung Anthropotechnik der DGLR:
Entscheidungsunterstu?tzung fu?r die Fahrzeug- und
Prozessfu?hrung, pages 255?270, Oktober.
Allen Newell and Paul Rosenbloom. 1981. Mecha-
nisms of skill acquisition and the law of practice. In
J. R. Anderson, editor, Cognitive skills and their ac-
quisition. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Bjo?rn Rasch, Malte Friese, Wilhelm Hofmann, and
Ewald Naumann. 2004. Quantitative Methoden.
Springer.
David Rubin and Amy Wenzel. 1996. One hundred
years of forgetting: A quantitative description of re-
tention. Psychological Review, 103(4):734?760.
Marilyn Walker, Diane Litman, Candace Kamm, and
Alicia Abella. 1997. Paradise: A framework for
evaluating spoken dialogue agents. In Proceedings
of the eighth conference on European chapter of
the Associationfor Computational Linguistics, pages
271?280, Morristown, New Jersey. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Thomas Wirth. 2002. Die magische Zahl 7 und die
Geda?chtnisspanne.
8
