A resource-based Korean morphological annotation system 
Hyun-gue Huh ?ric Laporte 
Laboratoire d?informatique de l?Institut Gaspard-Monge 
Universit? de Marne-la-Vall?e/CNRS (UMR 8049) 
5, bd Descartes ? F77454 Marne-la-Vall?e CEDEX 2 ? France 
hhuh@univ-mlv.fr eric.laporte@univ-mlv.fr 
 
 
Abstract 
We describe a resource-based method 
of morphological annotation of written 
Korean text. Korean is an agglutinative 
language. The output of our system is a 
graph of morphemes annotated with 
accurate linguistic information. The 
language resources used by the system 
can be easily updated, which allows us-
ers to control the evolution of the per-
formances of the system. We show that 
morphological annotation of Korean 
text can be performed directly with a 
lexicon of words and without morpho-
logical rules. 
1 Introduction 
In the first phase of the processing of a written 
text, words are annotated with basic informa-
tion, such as part of speech (POS). Two of the 
criteria of quality of a system performing this 
task are particularly relevant: the output of this 
process must be accurate and informative; the 
language resources used by the system must be 
able to undergo an evolution in a controlled 
way. The objective of the work reported here 
was to explore a method likely to enhance the 
performances of state-of-the-art systems of Ko-
rean morphological annotation in both regards. 
We decided to make language resources the cen-
tral point of the problem. 
Korean is one of the most studied agglutina-
tive languages in the world. Korean words (eo-
jeol) are delimited by spaces or other symbols, 
but a word usually consists of an undelimited 
concatenation of several morphemes: one or 
several stems, followed by zero, one or several 
functional morphemes. We will call stems all 
lexical morphemes, as opposed to functional or 
grammatical ones. The surface form of a mor-
pheme occurring in a text may depend on 
neighbouring morphemes. Thus, it may differ 
from its base form or lexical form. These varia-
tions are termed as phonotactic, and the surface 
variants are called allomorphs. The objective of 
morphological annotation is to identify mor-
phemes and assign relevant information to them. 
The basic units of the Korean alphabet (han-
gul) are graphical syllables. These syllables can 
be decomposed over the Korean alphabet of 
simple and complex letters (jamo): each ?letter? 
is either a cluster of 1 or 2 consonants, or a se-
quence of 1, 2 or 3 vowels. In addition, Chinese 
ideograms are sometimes employed also to write 
Korean stems. 
It has been claimed that morphological anno-
tation of Korean text could only be performed 
by a morphological analysis module accessing a 
lexicon of morphemes and using a set of rules. 
We show that it can also be performed directly 
with a lexicon of words. We describe an imple-
mented system of morphological annotation that 
uses an actual lexicon of words. Our approach 
resorts to classical techniques of lexicon com-
pression and lookup, but the application to an 
agglutinative language involved implementing 
new software components, which have received 
an open-source status. 
In Section 2, we outline the state-of-the-art 
approach to Korean morphological annotation. 
Section 3 describes the alphabets and tag set 
used by our system. In Section 4, we explain our 
model of morpheme combinatorics. Section 5 
reports the construction and use of the word 
37
lexicon. A conclusion and perspectives are pre-
sented in Section 6. 
2 
                                                          
State of the art 
Several morphological annotators of Korean text 
are available. The Hangul Analysis Module 
(HAM1) is one of the best Korean morphologi-
cal analysers. Other fairly representative exam-
ples are described in (Shin et al, 1995; Park et 
al., 1998) and in (Lee et al, 1997a; Cha et al, 
1998; Lee et al, 2002). The output for each 
morpheme is presented in two parts: the mor-
pheme itself, and a grammatical tag. Morphemes 
are usually presented in their base form if they 
are stems, and in they surface form if they are 
functional morphemes. Tags are represented by 
symbols; they give the POS of stems, and 
grammatical information about functional mor-
phemes. In output, 95% to 97% of mor-
pheme/tag pairs are considered correct. 
Morphological annotation of Korean text is 
usually performed in two steps (Sproat, 1992). 
In the first step, morpheme segmentation is per-
formed with the aid of a lexicon of morphemes. 
This generates all possible ways of segmenting 
the input word. The second step makes a selec-
tion among the segmentations obtained and 
among the tags attached to the morphemes. The 
second step involves frequency-based learning 
from a tagged corpus with statistical models 
such as hidden Markov models, and sometimes 
also with error-driven learning of symbolic 
transformation rules (Brill, 1995; Lee et al, 
1997a; Lee et al, 2002). Morphemes not found 
in the lexicon undergo a special treatment that 
guesses at their properties. A recent variant of 
this approach (Han and Palmer, 2005) swaps the 
main two steps: first, a sequence of tags is as-
signed to each word on the basis of a statistical 
model; then, morphological segmentation is per-
formed with a lexicon of morphemes. The other 
approaches are less popular among searchers 
and language engineering companies. Some sys-
tems are based on two-level models, such as 
(Kim et al, 1994) and the Klex system of Han 
Na-rae 2 . (Choi, 1999) combines a lexicon of 
stems with a lexicon of endings with the aid of a 
connectivity table. 
1 http://nlp.kookmin.ac.kr/HAM/kor/ham-intr.html 
2 http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~nrh/klex.html 
The delimitation of morphemes is provided, 
but some morpheme boundaries are usually 
modified so that they coincide with syllable 
boundaries. For example, if two suffixes make 
up a single syllable, like -?:-sy?ss- which is a 
contraction of -??:-eusi- (honorification to-
wards sentence subject) and -?:-?ss- (past), 
they are usually considered as one morpheme. 
Such simplifications make it possible to encode 
morphemes on the Korean syllable-based alpha-
bet, and are compatible with syllable-based 
models (Kang and Kim, 1994). However, they 
are an approximation. 
We opted for the resource-based approach to 
obtain more accurate and more informative out-
put. 
The language resources used in annotators 
are corpora, rules and lexicons. 
Corpus-based systems have an inherent lack 
of flexibility. A morphological annotator is not 
static infrastructure, it has to evolve with time. 
Due to the evolution of language across time, 
and especially of technical language, regular 
updates are necessary; a new application may 
involve the selection of a domain-specific 
vocabulary. The flexibility of a resource can be 
defined as the ability to control its evolution. In 
order to adapt a corpus-based system, one feeds 
a new corpus into the training process, since the 
operation of the system is dependent on the na-
ture of the training corpus. A training process 
with a tagged corpus gives much better perform-
ance than unsupervised training (Merialdo, 
1994). The extension of a system to input texts 
of new types or of a new period of time involves 
the costly task of tagging a corpus of new texts. 
Another type of evolution of a corpus-based sys-
tem, a refinement of the tag set, such as the ad-
dition of new features, involves a re-tagging of 
existing tagged corpora, a task which is seldom 
achieved. 
The situation is different with rules or lexi-
cons. The flexibility of a manually constructed 
and updated rule set or lexicon depends on its 
level of readability and of non-redundancy (see 
section 4). 
In current practice, words are segmented by a 
morphological analysis module that accesses a 
lexicon of morphemes and uses a set of rules. It 
has been claimed that morphological annotation 
of Korean text could only be performed this 
way, because a lexicon of words would be too 
38
large (e.g. Lee et al, 2002; Han and Palmer, 
2005). We show that it can be performed di-
rectly with a lexicon of words; this solution dis-
penses with rules, thus simplifying and speeding 
up morphological annotation. The evidence 
given by Han and Palmer (2005) in support of 
their claim is the fact that the number of differ-
ent words in Korean is very large, which is un-
disputed. In fact, they implicitly assume that the 
lexicon would be obtained by sequentially gen-
erating all words and associated information. 
Such a naive procedure would surely be imprac-
tical. Our system constructs a lexicon of words 
without generating any list of words at any of 
the phases of its construction or maintenance. 
In our design, all morphological rules are ap-
plied to all possible configurations during the 
compilation of the resources and stored in a 
lexicon of words, which is searched during text 
annotation. No morphological rules are applied 
then. The lexicon of words occupies less than 
600 Kb, and specifies 138,000,000 surface 
forms of words obtained from 39,130 base-form 
stems. The size of the lexicon does not grow 
with the number of words, due to our adaptation 
to Korean of state-of-the-art technology for lexi-
con management (Appel and Jacobson, 1988; 
Silberztein, 1991; Revuz, 1992; Lucchesi and 
Kowaltowski, 1993). Our approach could even 
be adapted further to allow for constructing a 
lexicon with infinitely many words. 
3 Alphabets and tag set 
Our system uses three Unicode character sets: 
the Korean syllabic alphabet, the Korean alpha-
bet of letters, and the Chinese ideograms. The 
lexicon of words is constructed from a set of 
language resources that has been manually con-
structed and is manually updated by Korean lin-
guists (Nam, 1996). In order to ensure that these 
resources are readable, they are encoded in the 
Korean syllabic alphabet. The only situation 
when this is impossible is when a morpheme 
boundary does not coincide with a syllable 
boundary. In that case, the morpheme boundary 
divides the syllable into two parts; one of these 
parts has no vowel and cannot be encoded in the 
syllabic alphabet: it is then encoded in the Ko-
rean alphabet of letters, which is another zone of 
the Unicode character set. This convention al-
lows for an accurate delimitation of surface 
forms and base forms of all morphemes, includ-
ing irregular ones. Chinese ideograms are pro-
vided in the information on Sino-Korean stems, 
which are sometimes spelled in Chinese ideo-
grams in texts. 
In the lexicon of words itself, words are en-
coded over the Korean alphabet of letters, for 
more efficient lexicon search. During text anno-
tation, words in the text are converted into let-
ters before the lexicon is searched. 
Our tag set is more fine-grained than state-
of-the-art: it comprises 173 tags for stems [to be 
compared to 18 in Lee et al (2002) and 14 in 
Han and Palmer (2005)], and 84 tags for func-
tional morphemes [15 in Lee et al (2002) and in 
Han and Palmer (2005)]. Tags are more infor-
mative. 
In addition, the tags are structured. They 
combine a general tag taken in a list of 16 gen-
eral tags, and 0 to 4 features specifying subcate-
gories. The list of general tags is displayed in 
Table 1. There are 91 features with a total of 152 
values. 
A adjective Sfx derivational suffix 
ADV adverb Morph pre-final verb/adj. end-
ing 
DET determiner Post postposition 
N noun Sc conjunctive suffix 
NI bound 
noun 
Sd determinative suffix 
PRO pronoun Sncomp nominalization suffix 
V verb St final ending 
INT interjection Suf pre-final nominal end-
ing 
Table 1.  General tags 
This structure is in conformity with emerging 
international standards in representation of lexi-
cal tags (Lee et al, 2004). Tag sets in previous 
Korean morphological analysers were unstruc-
tured or hierarchical (Lee et al, 2002), not fea-
ture-based. 
4 Morphotactics and connectivity 
The final part of some verbal and adjectival 
stems undergoes phonotactic variations when a 
suffix is appended to them. For example, the 
stem ?:keu- ?big? becomes ?:k- before the 
suffix -?:-?ss- (past). In order to reduce the 
level of redundancy of manually updated re-
sources, lexicons of base-form stems were con-
39
structed. Each stem was assigned a structured 
tag. Stem allomorphs are generated from base-
form stems with 71 transducers of the same type 
as those used to inflect words in inflectional 
languages (Silberztein, 2000). The input part of 
the transducer specifies letters to remove or to 
add in order to obtain the allomorph from the 
base form. The output part specifies the tag and 
compatibility symbol (see below) to be assigned 
to the allomorph. These transducers are viewed 
and edited in graphical form with the open-
source Unitex system3 (Paumier, 2002). 
The combination of a stem with a sequence 
of suffixes obeys a number of constraints. 
Checking these constraints is necessary to dis-
card wrong segmentations. We distinguish two 
types of suffixes: derivational and inflectional. 
Derivational suffixes are markers of verbali-
zation, adjectivalization and adverbialization. 
They are appended by applying transducers of 
the same type as above. In our current version, 8 
transducers append derivational suffixes. These 
transducers invoke 5 subgraphs, thus constitut-
ing recursive transition networks (RTN). 
Inflectional suffixes comprise all other types 
of suffixes. A single (possibly derived) stem can 
be combined with up to 5,500 different se-
quences of inflectional suffixes. Compatibility 
between stems and inflectional suffixes is repre-
sented by a set of 59 compatibility symbols 
(CS). Each stem and stem allomorph is assigned 
a CS, which defines the set of suffix sequences 
that can be appended to it. The CSs take into 
account two types of constraints: grammatical 
and phonotactic constraints. CSs are comparable 
with adjacency symbols, except that they in-
clude the constraints between all the morphemes 
in a word, not only between adjacent mor-
phemes. They convey more information than 
adjacency symbols, but they are less numerous: 
59 to be compared to 300 (Lee et al, 2002). The 
lexicon of stems assigns CSs to base stems. CSs 
are automatically assigned to stem allomorphs 
during the generation of allomorphs. 
Connectivity between suffixes obeys phono-
tactic and grammatical constraints. Phonotactic 
constraints affect surface forms, whereas gram-
matical constraints affect base form/tag pairs. 
The standard model for representing both types 
of constraints is the finite-state model. For ex-
                                                          
5 
3 http://www-igm.univ-mlv.fr/~unitex/manuelunitex.pdf 
ample, Lee et al (2002) use a table that encodes 
connectivity between morphemes with the aid of 
morpheme tags and adjacency symbols. Such a 
table can be viewed as a finite-state automaton 
in which the states are the adjacency symbols 
and the transitions are labelled by the morpheme 
tags. In Kim et al (1994) and in the Klex system 
of Han Na-rae, these constraints are represented 
in the two-level formalism, which is equivalent 
to regular expressions, which are in turn equiva-
lent to finite-state automata. All these forms are 
computationally relevant, but they are little 
readable: the inclusion of a new item or the cor-
rection of an error is error-prone. Two-level 
rules have a very low level of redundancy, but 
they are complex to read because they combine 
a morphological part and a logical part (the 
symbols <=>, <=, =>). 
In our system, connectivity constraints be-
tween suffixes are represented in finite-state 
transducers, i.e. finite-state automata with in-
put/output labels. These transducers describe 
sequences of suffixes. Their input represents 
surface forms and their output represents base 
forms and tags. We introduced two innovations 
in order to enhance their readability. Firstly, 
they are edited and viewed graphically. Sec-
ondly, since most of the transducers are large 
and would not display conveniently on a single 
screen or page, they take the form of RTNs: 
transitions can be labelled by a call to a sub-
transducer instead of an input/output pair. The 
59 CSs correspond to 59 transducers. Most of 
the sub-transducers that they call are shared, 
which reduces the level of redundancy of the 
system. The total number of simple graphs mak-
ing up the RTNs is 230. 
In the case of several of the RTNs, the graph 
of calls to sub-transducers admits cycles. Due to 
these cycles, these RTNs generate an infinite set 
of endings. The lexicon compiler allows for 
keeping the set of generated endings finite by 
breaking all cycles. 
Word lexicon 
The various readable resources described above 
are compiled into an operational lexicon of 
words whenever one of them is updated. The 
lexicon of words has an index for fast matching. 
This index is a finite-state transducer over the 
Korean alphabet of letters. This is a transposi-
40
tion of the state-of-the-art technology of repre-
sentation of lexicons of forms in inflectional 
languages (Appel and Jacobson, 1988; Silberz-
tein, 1991; Revuz, 1992; Lucchesi and Kowal-
towski, 1993). Another index structure, the trie, 
has been tested with the same lexicon. The size 
of the trie (930 Kb) is slightly larger than the 
size of the transducer (560 Kb), due to the repre-
sentation of endings which is repeated many 
times in the trie. 
The compilation of the lexicon of words 
from the readable resources follows several se-
quential steps. First, all resources are converted 
from the Korean syllabic alphabet to the Korean 
alphabet of letters. In a second step, lexicons of 
stem allomorphs and of derived stems are gener-
ated from the base-form stem lexicons by apply-
ing the transducers with Unitex. In a third step, 
the resulting lexicons of stems are compiled by 
the Unitex lexicon compiler. Each compiled 
lexicon has an index, which is a finite-state 
automaton. The final states of the automaton 
give access to the lexical information, and in 
particular to the CSs of the stems. In a fourth 
step, each transducer of sequences of suffixes is 
converted into a list by a path enumerator, and 
each of these lists is processed by the lexicon 
compiler. The names of the compiled ending 
lexicons contain the corresponding CSs. In the 
final step, the stem lexicons and the ending lexi-
cons are merged into a word lexicon. This op-
eration links the final states of the stem lexicons 
to the initial states of the corresponding ending 
lexicons. The path enumerator and the lexicon 
link editor have been implemented for this ex-
periment and will receive an open-source status. 
The path enumerator allows for breaking cycles 
in the graph of calls to sub-transducers, so that 
the enumeration remains finite. 
The current version of this compilation proc-
ess generates a lexicon of one-stem words only. 
Multi-stem words will be represented in later 
versions. 
These operations are independent of the text 
to be annotated; they are performed beforehand. 
They need to be repeated whenever one of the 
language resources is updated. 
The operation of the morphological annotator 
is simple. The text is pre-processed for sentence 
segmentation, and tokenised (words are tokens). 
In each word, Korean syllables are converted 
into Korean letters; then, the lexicon of words is 
searched for the word. Lexicon search is effi-
cient: it processes 41,222 words per second on a 
P4-400 Windows PC. When Chinese ideograms 
occur in a stem, the lexicon search module 
searches directly the lexical information at-
tached to stem entries. We did not include any 
modules for processing words not found in the 
lexicon. 
All analyses that are conform to phonotactic 
and grammatical in-word constraints are re-
tained. However, checking these constraints 
does not suffice to remove all ambiguity from 
Korean words. A thorough removal of ambigu-
ity requires a syntactic process (Voutilainen, 
1995; Laporte, 2001). Our system presents its 
output in an acyclic finite-state automaton (also 
called a graph or a lattice) of morphemes, as in 
Lee et al (1997b), but displayed graphically. 
The output for each morpheme is presented in 
three parts: surface form, base form, and a struc-
tured tag providing the general tag of Table 1 
and syntactic features. Word separators such as 
spaces are also present in this automaton. 
The annotation of an evaluation sample by 
the system presented 67 % recall and 46 % pre-
cision. The annotation of a morpheme was con-
sidered wrong when any of the features was 
wrong. Among these errors, 78 % are resource 
errors that can be corrected by updating the re-
sources, whereas the correction of the remaining 
22 % would involve enhancing the compilation 
procedure. 
6 Conclusion 
We experimented with a method likely to en-
hance the performances of state-of-the-art sys-
tems of Korean morphological annotation. We 
made language resources the central point of the 
problem. All complex operations were inte-
grated among resource management operations. 
The output of our system is accurate and infor-
mative; the language resources used by the sys-
tem can be easily updated, which allows users to 
control the evolution of the performances of the 
system. Morphological annotation of Korean 
text is performed directly with a lexicon of 
words and without morphological rules, which 
simplifies and speeds up the process. 
This work opens several perspectives. The 
resources will be extended by running the anno-
tator and analysing output. Existing approaches 
41
to the analysis of unrecognised morphemes 
could be combined to our system: such ap-
proaches are complementary to our resource-
based approach, and would take advantage of 
the rich information provided on the neighbour-
ing words. Ambiguity resolution techniques can 
be applied to the output of our annotator: the 
syntactic approach would take advantage of the 
rich linguistic information provided in output; 
classical statistical approaches and priority rules 
(Kang, 1999) are applicable as well. Finally, a 
parallel system is under construction for Finnish, 
another agglutinative language with undelimited 
morphemes. 
References 
Appel, A.W., Jacobson, G.J.: The world's fastest 
Scrabble program, Comm. ACM 31:5 (1988) 572-
578 & 585 
Brill, E.: Transformation-based error-driven learning 
and natural language processing: a case study in 
part-of-speech tagging, Computational Linguistics 
21:4 (1995) 543-565 
Cha J.W., Lee G.B, Lee J.H.: Generalized Unknown 
Morpheme Guessing for Hybrid POS Tagging in 
Korean, Proc. of Workshop on Very Large Cor-
pora, Montr?al (1998) 85-93 
Choi S.W.: Implantation de dictionnaires ?lectroni-
ques du cor?en par automates finis, PhD thesis, 
University of Marne-la-Vall?e, France (1999) 
Han Ch. H., Palmer, M.: A Morphological Tagger for 
Korean: Statistical Tagging Combined with Cor-
pus-based Morphological Rule Application. MT 
journal, to appear (2005) 
Kang S.Sh.: A Rule-Based Method for Morphologi-
cal Disambiguation, 5th Natural Language Proc-
essing Pacific Rim Symposium (NLPRS) (1999) 
Kang S.Sh., Kim Y.T.: Syllable-Based Model For 
The Korean Morphology, COLING (1994) 221-
226 
Kim D.B., Lee S.J., Choi K.S., Kim G.Ch.:  A Two-
Level Morphological Analysis of Korean, 
COLING,  vol. 1 (1994) 
Laporte, ?.: Reduction of lexical ambiguity. Lingvis-
ticae Investigationes 24:1 (2001) 67-103 
Lee G.B., Cha J.W., Lee J.H.: Hybrid POS tagging 
with generalized unknown-word han-dling. Inter-
national workshop on information retrieval with 
Asian languages (IRAL), Tsukuba-City, Japan 
(1997a) 43-50 
Lee G.B., Cha J.W., Lee J.H.: Syllable pattern-based 
unknown morpheme estimation for hybrid part-of-
speech tagging of Korean. Computational Linguis-
tics 28:1 (2002) 53-70 
Lee G.B., Lee J.H., Kim B.Ch., Lee Y.J.: A Viterbi-
based morphological anlaysis for speech and natu-
ral language integration. Proceedings of the 17th 
international conference on computer processing 
of Oriental languages (ICCPOL), Hong-Kong 
(1997b) 133-138 
Lee K.Y., Bunt, H., Bauman, S., Burnard L., Cl?-
ment, L., Clergerie, ?. de la, Declerck, Th., 
Romary, L. , Roussanaly, A., Roux, C.: Towards 
an international standard on feature struc-ture rep-
resentation. Proc. of LREC (2004) 373-376 
Lucchesi, C., Kowaltowski, T.: Applications of finite 
automata representing large vocabularies. Soft-
ware - Practice and Experience 23:1, Wiley & 
Sons (1993) 15-30 
Merialdo, B.: Tagging English text with a probabilis-
tic model. Computational linguistics 20:2 (1994) 
155-171 
Nam J.S.: "Construction of Korean electronic lexical 
system DECO, in Papers in Computational Lexi-
cography (COMPLEX), F. Kiefer, G. Kiss, and 
J.Pajzs (eds), Budapest, Research Institute for 
Linguistics, Hungarian Academy of Sciences 
(1996) 
Park J.S., Kang J.G., Hur W., Choi K.S.: Machine 
Aided Error-Correction Environment for Korean 
Morphological Analysis and Part-of-Speech Tag-
ging, COLING-ACL (1998) 1015-1019 
Paumier, S.: 2002. Unitex - manuel d'utilisation, re-
search report, University of Marne-la-Vall?e 
Revuz, D.: Minimization of acyclic deterministic 
automata in linear time. Theoretical Computer 
Science 92:1, Elsevier (1992) 181-189 
Shin J.H., Han Y.S., Park Y.C., Choi K.S.: A HMM 
Part-of-Speech Tagger for Korean with Word-
phrasal Relations, Recent Advances in Natural 
Language Processing, Sofia (1995) 
Silberztein, M.: A new approach to tagging: the use 
of a large-coverage electronic dictionary, Applied 
Computer Translation 1:4  (1991) 
Silberztein, M.: Intex: an FST toolbox. Theoretical 
Computer Science 231(1), Elsevier (2000) 33-46 
Sproat, R.: Morphology and Computation, MIT Press 
(1992) 
Voutilainen, A.: A Syntax-based part-of-speech ana-
lyser, EACL (1995) 157-164 
42
