Project Note 
A Corpus-based Lexical resource of German Idioms 
G. Neumann, C. Fellbaum, A. Geyken, A. Herold, C. 
H?mmer, F. K?rner, U. Kramer, K. Krell, A. Sokirko, D. 
Stantcheva, E. Stathi 
 
Project: ?Collocations in the German Language?, 
Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities 
J?gerstra?e 22/23 
Germany, 10117 Berlin 
gneumann@bbaw.de 
 
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we present the design of a 
lexical resource focusing on German verb 
phrase idioms. The entry for a given idiom 
combines appropriate corpus examples with 
rich linguistic and lexicographic annotations, 
giving the user access to linguistic information 
coupled with the appropriate attested data and 
laying the groundwork for empirical, 
reproducible research. 
1 Introduction 
The project "Collocations in the German 
Language", located at the Berlin-Brandenburg 
Academy of Sciences, studies the properties of 
verb phrase idioms such as jmdm. einen B?ren 
aufbinden (lit. ?tie a bear onto sb.'s back,? i.e. ?tell 
a big lie?) and einen Bock schiessen (lit. ?shoot a 
buck,? i.e. ?commit a grave error?). 
Idioms are sometimes referred to informally as 
"long words" and are treated as fixed strings with 
no internal structure. While some idioms (like the 
much-discussed English example kick the bucket) 
have semantically opaque components and do not 
undergo syntactic or lexical alternations, others 
(like bury the hatchet) behave more like freely 
composed VP. 
Nunberg, Sag, and Wasow (1994) and 
Dobrovolskij (1999) are among the linguists who 
have observed a correlation between an idiom's 
fixedness and its semantic opacity: The more fixed 
an idiom, the more semantically opaque it can be. 
But this correlation is not always straightforward, 
and to understand the way speakers represent 
idioms in their internal grammars we must 
investigate the full range of behavior. For example, 
the German equivalent of kick the bucket is lit. 
?bite into the grass? (ins Gras beissen). While Gras 
(just like ?bucket?) does not seem to be mappable 
onto the concept, it can be modified with an 
adjective, as our corpus example ?bit the Texan 
grass? shows. In fact, the adjective must be 
interpreted as having scope over the entire VP, not 
just the NP, as the phrase refers to someone dying 
in Texas. 
Lexical substitution and variability of the 
idiom?s components in general can show that an 
element is assigned a particular interpretation, as in 
the (diachronically differentiated) variants sich auf 
die Str?mpfe machen and sich auf die Socken 
machen (lit. ?make oneself on the stockings/socks?, 
i.e. ?to get going or get moving?). Here, the 
substitution of a near-synonym indicates that 
speakers assign some meaning to the noun, most 
likely the footwear that is associated with travel on 
foot. But speakers make substitutions without 
necessarily assigning a meaning to the constituents 
of the idiom. 
Current lexicographic and linguistic treatment of 
VP idioms does not attempt to reflect the full range 
of the idioms' properties or classify them 
accordingly. Our goal is to give a data-oriented, 
comprehensive linguistic account of a broad 
spectrum of German idioms. 
The empirical basis for our work is the corpus of 
the Digitales W?rterbuch der deutschen Sprache 
(DWDS), a corpus of almost 1 billion words from 
texts drawn from a variety of genres and covering 
the entire 20th century. 
We are creating a resource that combines 
features of a dictionary, a grammar of idioms, and 
a corpus. Central to our methodology are two main 
components: an electronic knowledge base created 
via structured annotations, and a corresponding 
sub-corpus of examples (example corpora) for each 
entry. 
 2 The Example Corpora 
Our lexicon combines subtle linguistic 
annotations with specific corpus data. 
For each target idiom, a sub-corpus, containing 
appropriate examples drawn from the 1-billion-
word-corpus, is created. Following the 
identification of a target idiom, corpus queries are 
written to generate the candidate set of relevant 
corpus data, taking advantage of a search engine 
developed in-house. The queries include specific 
lexical and morphological elements as well as 
Boolean operators. The resultant candidate 
example corpus, in XML/TEI format, is manually 
inspected for false positives, i.e. strings which are 
not instances of the idiom but rather accidental 
products of the query. 
The number of true positives gives an idea of the 
frequency of idioms in the language ? information 
that was not easy to gather until now. For example, 
the idiom jmdn. zur Minna machen (lit. ?make sb. a 
Minna,?, i.e. ?to publicly reprimand sb.?) is attested 
only 41 times, while ein Auge auf etw. haben (lit. 
?to keep an eye on sth.?) yields 560 examples. 
To ensure reproducibility of result sets, 
examples are marked with tags identifying their 
corpus query and the particular corpus version. 
Thus we have the possibility of comparison 
between the manually inspected example corpora 
and the dynamically increasing DWDS-Corpus. 
3 The Annotation Template 
We created a template for linguistic and 
lexicographic annotation, a kind of digital 
questionnaire. It serves as both input and output 
interface and links the annotated example corpora 
with the idiom knowledge base. The data entry 
interface supports a structured entry created by the 
linguists/lexicographers, who record various 
properties of the idioms as evidenced by the 
examples. 
The template design reflects the information 
which is considered relevant in the discussion of 
idioms from a lexicographic and linguistic point of 
view, focusing on the interplay between normal 
usage and flexibility. The template consists of the 
following major parts: 
The first part contains information which is 
typically found in dictionaries. This includes the 
citation form of the idiom, together with a 
definition. A difference from standard dictionaries 
is the link to the data. We record the first and last 
occurrence in the corpus and in this way we 
indicate the time span of corpus examples of the 
idiom during the 20th century. The citation form is 
derived on the basis of the corpus evidence 
according to statistical significance (cf. example 
below). The typical usages lead to the formulation 
of the citation form, which is linked to some of 
them. In addition, there is information on alternate 
forms (e.g. different aspectual varieties of an 
idiom, transitive vs. intransitive uses, etc.) with a 
reference to the corresponding entry. 
The second part is the syntactic structure of the 
idiom, in particular the structure of the VP 
including the subject. We show dependencies 
between constituents on three levels (two phrase 
levels and a terminal level), using the category 
variables of a German tag set1. At the terminal 
level we fill in the lexical material which 
corresponds to the citation form. Finally, we note 
the status of each component in the idiom 
according to degree of fixedness (external 
argument, core component, obligatory, optional, 
etc.). 
This ?tree? structure automatically creates a table 
which records the morphosyntactic properties of 
idiom components. Since idioms are considered as 
typically restricted according to morphosyntactic 
properties (e.g., noun complements may occur only 
in the singular or only in the plural), we explore to 
which extent this is supported by the data. 
On the basis of these morphosyntactic 
regularities, we derive the citation form. This is 
considered to be the normal (or typical) form, 
according to frequency of usage. We are also 
interested in non-typical or ?deviant? usages. The 
term should be understood not in the sense of 
?abnormal? or ?ungrammatical?, but as infrequent 
or not statistically significant (sometimes 
idiosyncratic, sometimes more widespread), yet 
important for insight into the linguistic properties 
of an idiom. 
Idioms are also subject to restrictions concerning 
the passivization of the nominal components, their 
pronominalization, relativization, and other 
syntactic processes sometimes called 
?transformations?. If we take the example 
mentioned earlier, one would not expect to 
encounter *das Gras, in das er gebissen hat 
(relativization), *das Gras wurde gebissen 
(passivization), etc. In reality, these 
transformations can be observed in most cases. We 
record them in a separate table and link every 
transformation type to the corresponding 
occurrences in the example corpora. 
The template also offers the possibility to 
include semantic as well as historical information, 
if diachronic changes or noteworthy developments 
can be observed in the corpus data. 
By way of illustration, let us consider an 
example, focusing attention on variability. In 
                                                     
1 STTS (Stuttgart-T?bingen Tagset) 
 Modern German the noun Bockshorn2 is 
considered to be a phraseologically bound word, 
i.e. it does not occur in isolation, but only in a 
fixed expression3. Idioms with phraseologically 
bound words are said to display the highest degree 
of fixedness and absence of flexibility. We want to 
test this hypothesis against corpus data. 
The phraseological dictionary ?Duden (Vol. 11)? 
gives s.v. Bockshorn the citation form jmd. l?sst 
sich nicht ins Bockshorn jagen, which is roughly 
equivalent to English ?refuse to allow oneself to be 
intimidated?. The ?W?rterbuch der deutschen 
Gegenwartssprache? (WDG) records also the 
transitive alternation jmdn. ins Bockshorn jagen, 
which might be translated as ?to put the wind up 
sb.? 
The following table shows the results which 
were given by three different queries to the corpus 
for this idiom: 
 
Query Number of hits 
in the corpus 
Bockshorn 285 
*horn && jagen && 
!@Bockshorn 
27 
((Bockshorn* && !@Bockshorn) 
|| *bockshorn) 
35 
Total 347 
Table 1: Queries and hits for Bockshorn in the 
DWDS-Corpus 
 
As the table shows, the queries leave open the 
possibility of finding variation at every slot: The 
position of the verb is left unspecified in the first 
query. In the second query we try to find instances 
where the first component of the noun (Bock-) 
might be substituted by another noun4, while the 
third query should deliver instances of compounds 
with Bockshorn (cf. the form Bockshornklee in 
Table 2 below). 
                                                     
2 The etymology of the word is obscure. R?hrich 
(2001) offers nine etymologies for the idiom according 
to different possible sources of the noun. He reaches no 
conclusion. Synchronically, the word is identical to the 
name of a low-growing plant (fenugreek) with tough 
wiry stems, also called Bockshornklee. But it can also 
literally denote the horn of a goat (Bock ?male goat? and 
Horn ?horn?). 
3 Moon (1998) terms these ?cranberry? collocations. 
Actually, this particular word (Bockshorn) occurs 
outside a fixed expression, but it occurs only in highly 
technical contexts (cf. footnote 5 below). 
4 The opposite case, i.e. looking for cases with the 
component stable (-horn), gave no results. 
Linguistic analysis of the data led to the 
formulation of two alternate citation forms and 
consequently two entries for the idiom: 
1) jmd. l?sst sich nicht ins Bockshorn jagen 
(192 hits) 
2) jmd. jagt jmdn. ins Bockshorn (44 hits).5 
The first is a form with the so-called ?lassen-
passive?. It is much more frequent than the 
transitive form; actually it is the typical form 
associated with Bockshorn. The results show a 
remarkable uniformity of the idiom components, as 
the following table shows: 
 
Total  192
Bockshorn 182
Boxhorn 8 
Bockshornklee 1 
Noun 
Hasenhorn 1 
ins 191Preposition
in6 1 
jagen 191Infinitive 
jache7 1 
Verb lassen 192
Overt negation (different 
possibilities) 
141
Irrealis 15 
Negation 
Affirmation 36 
Table 2: Distribution of components for the ?lassen-
passive? alternant 
 
The forms which are mentioned first in Table 2 
(bold face) are seen as the ?normal? components in 
the sense of statistical significance, the other forms 
are considered as ?deviations? from the norm. 
These include the substitution of components. Cf. 
the noun: The form Boxhorn is phonologically 
identically to Bockshorn; perhaps its usage 
represents the need to motivate the original noun.8 
The substitution of Bockshornklee can be 
explained with reference to the context: This noun 
appears earlier in the text and triggers the use of 
the idiom, a not unusual phenomenon in journalese 
texts. Finally, Hasenhorn shows the typical pattern 
of noun substitution in idioms in German, i.e. the 
substitution of one part of a compound noun 
typically by a synonym or a word belonging to the 
same lexical field (Hase- ?rabbit? for Bock- 
?buck?). Again, this substitution is triggered by the 
topic of the text. Note that this substitution occurs 
                                                     
5 111 hits were non-idiomatic uses of the noun, 
especially in popular medicine and compounds. 
6 Typing error 
7 Dialectal form for jagen. 
8 An alternative interpretation relates the form 
Boxhorn to 15th century words relating to God (cf. 
R?hrich 2001). 
 even though the speaker cannot assign a meaning 
to the lexeme Bockshorn (cf. Introduction). 
Now consider the figures for the transitive 
alternant jmd. jagt jmdn. ins Bockshorn: 
 
Total  44
Bockshorn 41
Boxhorn 1 
Bockhorn 1 
Noun 
Gruselhorn 1 
ins 43Preposition 
in?s 1 
jagen 42
einjagen 1 
Verb 
f?hren 1 
Table 3: Distribution of components for the transitive 
alternant 
 
The citation form given is derived on the basis of 
these quantities, which distinguish normal usage 
from ?deviant? usages. Beside the form Boxhorn 
(cf. above) Bockhorn occurs once.9 Gruselhorn 
(Grusel- ?scary?) is a nonce creation for the 
expression of emphasis since it combines the 
meaning of the idiom and the meaning of ?to scare 
sb.? 
As for the verb, it is substituted twice. The verb 
f?hren ?to lead? fulfils the same semantic function 
as jagen in this idiom, i.e. the expression of 
causativity. The difference is that f?hren is 
unmarked: In German it is often used as a function 
verb to express causativity (to cause a change of 
state for sb.). The substitution of einjagen on the 
other hand may be due to its occurrence in the 
near-synonymous expression (jmdm.) 
Angst/Schrecken einjagen ?to scare sb.? 
To sum up, if variability correlates with 
flexibility (or fixedness) of an idiom, then these 
figures lead to the conclusion that idioms with 
phraseologically bound forms are typically fixed. 
But contrary to claims in the literature that there is 
no variability at all, corpus evidence shows that 
there is some patterned variability. The interesting 
question is whether it is also predictable. 
Finally, it should be noted that the postulation of 
two entries (the lassen-Passive and the transitive/ 
causative) are necessary for two reasons. Firstly, 
the two entries differ in syntactic structure 
(argument structure, negation, etc.). This 
difference automatically forces us to establish 
separate entries, because the whole design of the 
template is based on syntactic structure. This 
means that the subsequent sections (morpho-
                                                     
9 It could be an error or just omission of the 
connecting -s-. 
syntactic properties and variations or deviations 
from the citation form) are created automatically 
on the basis of the syntactic structure of the idiom. 
Of course, they have to be filled in manually, but 
their design is uniform for all idioms which 
ensures comparability. 
Secondly, the lassen-Passive (plus negation and 
reflexivity) as a typical instance of this idiom is not 
a regular (or necessary) correlate of the transitive 
form, as a pure passive form would be. Moreover, 
the two entries differ pragmatically. 
4  The Knowledge Base 
The information recorded in the template is 
stored in a MySQL database, which constitutes the 
actual knowledge base for German idioms. This 
knowledge base can be queried in various different 
ways. In particular, it is possible to query for 
syntactical structures of idioms and for all kinds of 
variation from the citation form found in the 
example corpus. 
We developed a label language that permits a 
precise, automatic assignment of examples to most 
of the properties recorded in the template. Thus the 
lexicographers? decisions preserve a high degree of 
transparency. 
5 Use of Resource 
The contents of the knowledge base will be 
made available via the Internet. The template, in its 
function as a user interface, is browser-based and 
directly accesses the database. 
Users can search for specific idioms (or 
substrings thereof), examine their linguistic 
properties, and find the appropriate corpus 
examples. 
This automatic linking of examples to the 
corpora makes the analysis transparent in a way 
that is not possible in conventional dictionaries. 
6  Conclusion 
In sum, our resource combines properties of a 
dictionary and a grammar with a corpus. A learner 
or general user can look up a specific idiom and 
study its properties. A linguist can search for 
specific linguistic structures (passives, clefts, etc.) 
and find those idioms that show the features in 
question. Other users will no doubt find other 
modes of application. 
7 Acknowledgements 
This work is supported by the Alexander von 
Humboldt Foundation?s Zukunftsinvestitions-
programm through the Wolfgang Paul-Preis. 
 
 5
References  
Dobrovol'skij, Dmitrij. 1999. ?Haben 
transformationelle Defekte der Idiomstruktur 
semantische Ursachen?? In: Fernandez-Bravo, 
Nicole, Irmtraud Behr und Claire Rozier (eds.) 
1999: Phraseme und typisierte Rede 
(=Eurogermanistik 14). T?bingen: Stauffenburg, 
25-37. 
Dobrovol'skij, Dmitrij. 2002. ?Zum syntaktischen 
Verhalten deutscher Idiome (am Beispiel der 
Passivtransformation)? In: Wiesinger, Peter (ed.) 
2002: Akten des X. Internationalen 
Germanistenkongresses Wien 2000. "Zeitenwende 
- Die Germanistik auf dem Weg vom 20. ins 21. 
Jahrhundert". Jahrbuch f?r Internationale 
Germanistik. Reihe A, Kongressberichte Bd. 54, 
Band 2, Entwicklungstendenzen der deutschen 
Gegenwartssprache; Lexikologie und 
Lexikographie. Bern et al: Peter Lang, 379-384. 
Duden, Redewendungen: W?rterbuch der 
deutschen Idiomatik. 2002. Hrsg. von der 
Dudenredaktion. [Red. Bearb.: Brigitte Alsleben; 
Werner Scholze-Stubenrecht]. - 2., neu bearb. und 
aktualisierte Aufl.. Mannheim et al: Dudenverlag. 
Fellbaum, Christiane, Undine Kramer und Diana 
Stantcheva. 2004. ?Eins, einen, eine und etwas in 
deutschen VP-Idiomen? In: Steyer, Kathrin (ed.) 
2004: Wortverbindungen - mehr oder weniger fest. 
Jahrbuch des Instituts f?r Deutsche Sprache 2003. 
Berlin, New York: Walter de Gruyter, 167-193. 
Fleischer, Wolfgang. 1997. Phraseologie der 
deutschen Gegenwartssprache. 2., durchgesehene 
und erg?nzte Auflage. T?bingen: Max Niemeyer. 
Moon, Rosamund. 1998. ?Frequencies and Forms 
of Phrasal Lexemes in English?. In: Cowie, A. P. 
(ed.) 1998. Phraseology: Theory, Analysis, 
Applications. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 79-
100. 
Nunberg, Geoffrey; Ivan A. Sag und Thomas 
Wasow. 1994. ?Idioms? Language 70/3, 491-538. 
R?hrich, Lutz. 2001. Das gro?e Lexikon der 
sprichw?rtlichen Redensarten [Elektronische 
Ressource]. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche 
Buchgesellschaft. 
W?rterbuch der deutschen Gegenwartssprache. 
1967-1977. Akademie der Wissenschaften der 
DDR, Zentralinstitut f?r Sprachwissenschaft. Hrsg. 
von Ruth Klappenbach und Wolfgang Steinitz. 
Berlin: Akademie-Verlag. 
Relevant web pages: 
http://www.dwds.de 
http://www.bbaw.de/forschung/kollokationen/ 
