Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2008), pages 353?360
Manchester, August 2008
Non-Compositional Language Model and Pattern Dictionary
Development for Japanese Compound and Complex Sentences
Satoru Ikehara, Masato Tokuhisa, Jin?ichi Murakami
Tottori University,
Koyama-Minami Tottori, 680-8552, Japan
{ikehara, tokuhisa, murakami}@ike.tottori-u.ac.jp
Abstract
To realize high quality machine transla-
tion, we proposed a Non-Compositional
Language Model, and developed a sen-
tence pattern dictionary of 226,800 pat-
tern pairs for Japanese compound and
complex sentences consisting of 2 or 3
clauses. In pattern generation from a par-
allel corpus, Compositional Constituents
that could be generalized were 74% of
independent words, 24% of phrases and
only 15% of clauses. This means that
in Japanese-to-English MT, most of the
translation results as shown in the parallel
corpus could not be obtained by methods
based on Compositional Semantics. This
dictionary achieved a syntactic coverage of
98% and a semantic coverage of 78%. It
will substantially improve translation qual-
ity.
1 Introduction
A wide variety of machine translation (MT) meth-
ods are being studied(Nagao, 1996; Brown et al,
1990; Vogel et al, 2003), but to obtain high-quality
translations between languages belonging to dif-
ferent families that are alien each other is diffi-
cult. Most practical systems still employ a trans-
fer method based on compositional semantics. A
problem with this method is that it produces trans-
lations by separating the syntactic structure from
meaning, and is thus liable to lose the meaning of
the source text.
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
Better translation quality can be expected from
pattern-based MT and example-based MT where
the syntactic structure and semantics are handled
together. However, pattern-based MT require im-
mense pattern dictionaries that are difficult to de-
velop(Jung et al, 1999; Uchino et al, 2001).
Meanwhile, example-based MT(Nagao, 1984;
Sato, 1992; Brown, 1999) obtains translation re-
sults by substituting semantically similar elements
in structurally matching translation examples, so
a pre-prepared pattern dictionary is not needed.
However, the capability to substitute a constituent
in an example changes from one example to the
next, and to automate this judgement is impossi-
ble. This problem could be addressed by manually
tagging each example beforehand to specify which
constituents can be substituted, but the resulting
method would be just another pattern-based trans-
lation method.
Attention has been focused on the use of cog-
nitive grammar(Langacker, 1987) and construc-
tion grammar(Fillmore, 1988) in the search to find
methods that might help to resolve this problem.
However, the standards for determining the struc-
tural meaning units and the granularity needed for
meaning analysis have not been clarified.
As a method in which the syntactic structure and
meaning are dealt with as an integral whole, a sen-
tence pattern (SP)-dictionary called A-Japanese
Lexicon has already been developed for Japanese
simple sentences(Ikehara et al, 1997). This dictio-
nary includes 14,800 valency patterns. The trans-
lation quality of Japanese simple sentences into
English was 90% and this could be improved up to
97% by additional pattern pairs(Kanadechi et al,
2003).
Therefore in this study we developed an SP-
dictionary for translating compound and complex
353
sentences. First we proposed a Non-compositional
Language model (NL-model) and a method for cre-
ating sentence patterns. Based on these, we built
a large scale SP-dictionary from a parallel corpus
through the generalization of compositional con-
stituents.
2 Language Model
Conventional MT methods are based on the con-
cept of compositional semantics. However, real
languages have many expressions to which this
concept cannot be applied. Solving this problem
requires finding a mechanism acquiring the mean-
ing of entire expressions before their constituents
are analyzed.
2.1 Expressions and Constituents
Arita(1987) has pointed out that humans employ a
framework of expressions (semantic structure) in
their mother tongue in the process of conceptualiz-
ing objects. In the semantic structure that come to
mind during the process when a speaker is forming
a concept, two types of constituents to be consid-
ered those that cause the overall meaning to be lost
when other constituents are substituted for them,
and those that do not cause the overall meaning to
be lost when an alternative constituent is substi-
tuted for them. Based on this idea, we derived the
following definitions.
Definition 1: Types of constituents:
A compositional constituent (C-constituent) is de-
fined as the constituent for which there are one
or more alternative constituents and for which the
meaning of a semantic structure does not change
when this constituent is substituted. Any other
constituent is defined as non-compositional con-
stituent (N-constituent).
Definition 2: Types of expressions:
A compositional expression (C-expression) is de-
fined as an expression that consists entirely of C-
constituents, and a non-compositional expression
(N-expression) is defined as an expression that has
one or more N-constituents.
Before we applying these definitions to actual
linguistic expressions, we need to clarify what we
mean by ?the meaning of a semantic structure.?
This is very important problem for semantic anal-
ysis, because the guranularity needed for semantic
analysis is determined by the way of the meaning
defiition.
In this study, considering applications to
Japanese-to-English MT, the meaning of Japanese
semantic structures defined in terms of English se-
mantic structures.1
Figure 1 shows an example. The source text
is a Japanese expression expressing a relation-
ship between two events: ?directly after some
event happened, somebody performed some ac-
tion,? and this meaning is defined by the English
expression. For individual constituents such as
?she? and ?college,? there are domains of substi-
tutable constituents with which they can be substi-
tuted without changing the English semantic struc-
ture, so these constituents are classified into C-
constituents.
2.2 Characteristics of C-constituents
From the above definitions, we can see that a C-
constituent possesses the following characteristics.
From these characteristics, possible guidelines for
pattern-forming can be obtained.
#1: The number and the scope of C-constituents
depends on the language used for defining the
meanings of expressions.
#2: C-constituents need to be independent of each
other.
#3: The domain of alternatives for a C-constituent
is syntactically and semantically limited.
#4: Whether a constituent is compositional de-
pends on the way it is articulated.
#5: C-constituents are defined in relation to the
entire expression. Many times these expres-
sions consist of plural words, and some of
them are N-expressions.
2.3 Non-compositional Language Model
According to definition 1, any linguistic expres-
sion consists of zero or more C-constituents and
one or more N-constituents. The scope of these
constituents can be arbitrarily selected. Then, we
assume that C-constituents are extracted from ex-
pressions with a meaningful range (e.g., a word,
phrase or clause). The C-constituent extracted in
1In this way, when the meaning of a linguistic expression
is defined in another natural language, semantic ambiguity oc-
curs in the language used in the definition. However, in the
case of MT, the meaning of the translation results is under-
stood by a speaker of the target language, so it is not thought
to constitute a problem.
354
Japanese
kanojo
 
she
ha daigaku
college
wo sotsugyosuruto	

graduate
sugu

soon
jimotono
local
chiisanakaisha