Comparing, Integrating Lexical Definitional Knowledge  
From Multiple Sources  
Lucja M. Iwanska  
 
School of Computer & Information Science   
 Georgia Southwestern State University  
800 Wheatley Street, Americus, Georgia 31709 
 liwanska@gsw.edu  
 
Abstract 
We discuss a computational mechanism for comparing 
and integrating lexical definitional knowledge, 
meanings and concept definitions of English words and 
phrases available from different sources such as 
dictionaries, encyclopedias, corpora of texts, and 
personal beliefs. Such a mechanism is needed in order 
to automate comparison and reconciliation of the 
definitional differences because completeness and 
correctness of definitional knowledge seriously affect 
the results of text processing, particularly 
classification, question answering, and summarization. 
1 Problem Statement, Motivation  
1.1 Same Word, Many Different Definitions 
 
What is the meaning of words and phrases? What 
concepts do they denote? Different sources of  
definitional knowledge, including dictionaries, 
encyclopedias, various texts, and people sharing their 
personal beliefs, define common words such as 
"document" and less common such as "virus" quite 
differently. Their definitions differ significantly in 
terms of length, properties (dimensions of 
information), their significance, levels of specificity, 
the number of different senses; see Tables 1-5.  
 
Table 1.   DOCUMENT   according to different sources  
SourceD1 1. a piece of paper, booklet, etc., providing information, 
esp. of an official or legal nature.  
2. qual Archaic. evidence; proof.  
SourceD2 1. anything printed, written, etc., relied upon to record or 
prove something  
2. anything serving as proof  
SourceD7 1. writing that provides information (especially     
information of an official nature)  
2. anything serving as a representation of a person's 
thinking by means of symbolic marks  
3. a written account of ownership or obligation  
4. (computer science) a computer file that contains text 
(and possibly formatting instructions) using 7-bit ASCII 
characters  
SourceP1  1. something validating a claim or establishing a fact  
SourceP2  1. an official-looking paper with writing and maybe a seal 
 
 
Table 2.   MURDER   according to different sources  
SourceD2 1. The unlawful and malicious or premeditated killing of 
one human being by another. Also, any killing done 
while committing some other felony, as rape or robbery. 
2. Collloq. Something very hard, unsafe or disagreeable 
to do or to deal with.  
SourceD3 1. the crime of intentionally killing a person  
SourceD4 1. the crime of unlawfully killing a person especially with 
malice aforethought   a something very difficult or 
dangerous   b something outrageous or blameworthy  
SourceD5 1. The unlawful killing of one human by another, 
especially with premeditated malice.  
2. Slang Something that is very uncomfortable, difficult, 
or hazardous:  
3. A flock of crows.  
SourceD6 1. The offense of killing a human being with malice 
prepense or aforethought, express or implied; intentional 
and unlawful homicide.  
SourceD7 1. unlawful premeditated killing of a human being by a 
human being  
SourceP3 1. Killing someone without justifications defined by 
society.  
SourceP4 1. The act of killing a living being is called murder. This 
is a crime and is against the ethics of human life.  
SourceP5 1. Killing a human.  
SourceA1 1. The willful (nonnegligent) killing of one human being 
by another.  
 
With any information and knowledge, the reasons for 
differences include incompleteness and lack of 
knowledge, errors, lies, and misinformation, 
subjectivity, specific processing needs that deem 
certain characteristics and details as relevant and 
important.  
Additionally, such big differences exist because it 
appears that natural languages are inherently 
ambiguous and context-dependent. Roughly, different 
sources give different definitions because they  
consider different contexts. Further complication is 
that words and phrases of natural language change 
their meanings with time. There are also regional 
differences.  
Table 3.   STUDENT   according to different sources  
SourceD1 1. a person following a course of study, as in a school, 
college, university, etc.  
2. a person who makes a thorough study of a subject  
3. a person who likes to study  
SourceD2 1. a person who studies or investigates  
2. a person who is enrolled for study at a school, college, 
etc.  
SourceD5 1. One who is enrolled or attends classes at a school, 
college, or university.  
2. a. One who studies something.   b. An attentive 
observer.  
SourceD7 1. a learner who is enrolled in an educational institution 
2. a learned person (especially in the humanities); 
someone who by long study has gained mastery in one or 
more disciplines  
 
1.2 Important to Know Right Definitions  
This situation creates a major difficulty for designers 
of general-purpose natural language processing (NLP) 
systems. An in-depth interpretation of natural 
language requires a component providing lexical 
knowledge, a dictionary or knowledge base kind of 
resource. Text processing applications involving 
classification, summarization, or question answering 
may produce very different results depending on 
which definition will be used.  
 
 
Table 4.   VIRUS   according to different sources  
SourceD1 1. any of a group of submicroscopic entities consisting of 
a single nucleic acid surrounded by a protein coat and 
capable of replication only within the cells of animals and 
plants; many are pathogenic.  
2. a disease caused by a virus.  
3. any corrupting or infecting influence  
SourceD2 1. orig., venom, as of a snake  
2. a. same as FILTERABLE VIRUS; specif., any of a 
group of ultramicroscopic or submicroscopic infective 
agents that cause various diseases in animals, as measles, 
mumps, etc., or in plants, as mosaic diseases; viruses are 
capable of multiplying only in connection with living 
cells and are regarded both as living organisms and as 
complex proteins sometimes involving nucleic acid, 
enzymes, etc.   b. a disease caused by a virus  
3. anything that corrupts or poisons the mind or character; 
evil or harmful influence  
4. something that poisons the mind or soul  
5. a computer program usually hidden within another 
seemingly innocuous program that produces copies of 
itself and inserts them into other programs and that 
usually performs a malicious action (as destroying data)  
SourceD3 1. a very small organism, smaller than a bacterium, which 
causes disease in humans, animals and plants  
2. Virus also means a disease caused by a virus.  
3. a hidden instruction in a computer program which is 
intended to introduce faults into a computer system and 
in so doing destroy information stored in it  
SourceC2 1. Viruses are extremely small infectious substances 
(much smaller than bacteria).  
 
For example, the property of ?liking to study? and the 
property of ?being enrolled at school? have a potential 
to classify individuals as "students" completely 
differently; see definitions of "student" according to 
SourceD1 and SourceD5 in Table 3.  
 
A person who understands "murder" as ?killing a 
human?, see SourceP5 in Table 2, may develop a false 
sense of security when reading FBI statistics compiled 
with a different, more restrictive definition of  
"murder" which excludes certain types of killing a 
human from being classified as "murder"; FBI is 
SourceA1 in Table 2.  
 
1.3 Many Competing Sources  
The question arises as to which of these many 
definitions is the right one, the most correct and 
complete, and which of the many available sources 
should be used for building a lexical knowledge 
component of a NLP system, be it a dictionary or a 
knowledge base. 
 
Many NLP researchers and practitioners have built 
and continue to build their own 
dictionaries/knowledge bases, which tends to be a 
very long and costly effort requiring serious resources. 
Another problem is that self-developed resources are 
virtually always geared toward specific applications 
and type of textual data processed, which contributes 
to the nonscalability of NLP systems.  
 
 
Table 5.   Sources of Information and Knowledge  
SourceD1 Collins English Language Dictionary, 1979  
SourceD2 Webster's NewWorld Dictionary,   2nd College Edition, 1982  
SourceD3 Cambridge International Dictionary of English  
SourceD4 Merriam Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, 10th Edition  
SourceD5 American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, 4th Edition, 2000  
SourceD6 
Online Plain Text English Dictionary   Kyoto Notre 
Dame University, Project Gutenberg Etext of Webster's 
Unabridged Dictionary  
SourceD7 WordNet 1.7   Princeton University, Cognitive Science  
SourceE1 Encyclopedia.com   updated Columbia Encyclopedia, 6th Edition  
SourceP  Personal beliefs, knowledge of different individuals  
SourceC1 Knowledge automatically acquired by our NLP system from a corpora of texts  
SourceA1 FBI   Uniform Crime Reporting: Data Collection Guidelines  
 
 
Many researchers utilize existing sources. WordNet 
(Fellbaum, 1998) is a wonderful and free-of-charge 
resource designed specifically for the needs of 
computational linguistics (CL) community and the 
dictionary of choice for many NLP systems (Voorhees 
and Buckland, 2002). It is not, however, the only, the 
best, or the most comprehensive source. There are 
hundreds of other sources of lexical definitional 
knowledge available at, among others,  OneLook.com 
and  YourDictionary.com Dictionary Search websites. 
 
A promising recent approach pursued by a number of 
NLP and CL researchers is developing knowledge 
acquisition and learning methods to automatically 
create dictionaries and knowledge bases or augment 
the existing ones with system-acquired knowledge 
from corpora of texts  (Iwanska et al, 1999, 2000a), 
(Harabagiu and Moldovan, 2000), (Rapaport and 
Kibby, 2002), (Reiter and Robertson,2003), 
(Thompson and Mooney, 2003). 
 
1.4 Need for Comparison, Integration  
Given the variety of sources and definitions for 
virtually all words and phrases, a comparison 
mechanism is needed in order to address the question 
as to which of the sources is the best, the most 
complete and correct, which definition(s) to use, and, 
if multiple definitions are valid, in order to identify 
their similarities and differences.  
 
We developed a computational mechanism to 
automatically compare and, in some cases, integrate 
knowledge from multiple sources. Given two 
definitions of a word or phrase, our system computes 
quantitative measure of distance between them based 
on qualitative relations between these definitions:   
PARTIAL-OVERLAP,    MORE-SPECIFIC /  MORE-GENERAL,  
DISJOINT.  It highlights similarities and differences. 
Computed comparison is used to reach the integrate-
or-not decision. If integration is deemed appropriate, 
the system computes integrated definitions.  
 
In our NLP system, we address incompleteness and 
changes in meaning through integration of our hand-
crafted, modest size dictionary with definitions from 
reliable sources. Our primary sources include existing 
"respectable" dictionaries, see Table 5, and knowledge 
acquired automatically by our system from corpora of 
"respectable" texts.  
 
Automatic knowledge acquisition methods are 
particularly useful for acquiring and updating phrasal 
definitional knowledge. For example, none of the 
above mentioned hundreds dictionaries define phrases 
such as "safe environment" or "very fast actions", both 
of which were learned by our system  (Iwanska et al, 
1999, 2000a).  
 
Additionally, knowledge acquired from recent texts 
allows our system to update definitions that changed 
with time. For example, the fourth definition of 
"document" given by SourceD7 (WordNet), probably 
about ten years ago, is now too restrictive. Currently, 
any character, not just 7-bit ASCII character, can be 
used in a document. Knowledge acquired by our 
system allowed us to correctly generalize this 
definition to account for this change.  
 
The capability of comparing and integrating lexical 
knowledge results in improved performance of our 
NLP system. For example. In question answering, new 
questions can be answered, correctness of some 
answers is improved, and some questions can be 
answered more completely. In tasks involving 
classification, groupings arrived via different 
definitions may be compared and predicted.  
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 
provides a high-level discussion of our meaning and 
knowledge-level representation of text; Sect. 3 gives 
algorithmic details of our comparison and integration 
approach; it also provides a number of examples; Sect. 
4 and 5 discuss reliable and unreliable sources and 
more details about our integration mechanism. 
 
2  NL-Motivated  Representation of Text 
We discuss briefly our natural language-motivated 
representation of text. Further details, including 
question answering, representation and reasoning with 
text conveying spatio-temporal and probabilistic 
information and knowledge can be found in (Iwanska, 
1993), (Iwanska, 1996), (Iwanska, 2000b). 
2.1 Text as Sets of Type Equations  
We represent text by natural language-motivated type 
equations with Boolean, set and interval-theoretic 
semantics of the following form  
 
P   ==   P1,   P2,   ...,   PN .  
 
where P's are properties corresponding to text 
fragments such as noun phrases and verb phrases. 
Each property is a term, a record-like, graph-like, 
underspecified structure that consist of two elements  
1. head, a type symbol, and  
2. body, a possibly empty list of attribute-value 
pairs  
attribute => value  where attributes are symbols 
and values are single terms or sets of terms.  
For example, the sentence "Viruses are extremely 
small infectious substances" is represented by the 
equation  
 
virus ==   
substance(size   => small(degree => extremely),  
                  infect => infectious) . 
 
whose right handside contains one property, a term 
with "substance" as its head and two attributes:  
1. the attribute "size" with the value  
small(degree => extremely)   which itself is a term 
with the type "small" as its head, and one 
attribute "degree" with the value "extremely".  
2. the attribute "infect" with the value 
"infectious" which is a basic type.  
2.2 Boolean, Set and Interval-Theoretic 
Semantics Motivated by Natural Language 
Semantically, terms are subtypes of their head types. 
For example, the above term represents this subset of 
things of the type "substance" for which the attribute 
"size" has the value "extremely small" and for which 
the function "infect" yields the value "infectious".  
 
The Boolean operations of MEET, JOIN, and 
COMPLEMENT simulate conjunction, disjunction and 
negation in natural language. They take terms as 
arguments and compute conjunctive, disjunctive, and 
complementary terms with the set-intersection, set-
union, and set-complement semantics.  
 
Efficient computation of arbitrary Boolean 
expressions allows the system to compute a number of 
semantics relations among terms, including EQUAL 
reflecting set identity, ENTAILMENT (and 
SUBSUMPTION, its dual) reflecting set-inclusion, 
PARTIAL-OVERLAP, reflecting non-empty set-
intersection, DISJOINT reflecting empty set-
intersection. These relations allow the system to 
compute consequences of knowledge expressed by 
text, and therefore compute answers to questions of 
the knowledge base created as the result of processing 
input texts, and to update system's knowledge base.  
Knowledge bases with such type equations are used 
bi-directionally: for answering questions about the 
properties of entities and concepts in the left 
handsides, and  for matching particular properties 
against the right handside properties of entities and 
concepts that the system knows about. We use these 
capabilities to compute comparison as well as 
integration of properties in different concept 
definitions. 
3 Algorithmic Details  
3.1 Input  
1. Concept C, a word or phrase. For example, we may 
be concerned with the meaning (concept definition) of 
the word "virus" or the phrase "very fast actions".  
2. Two knowledge sources Source1 and Source2. Our 
sources of definitional knowledge include dictionaries, 
encyclopedias, personal beliefs obtained via 
knowledge engineering methods, and knowledge 
automatically acquired by our NLP system from 
corpora of texts; see Table 5.  
3. Concept definitions according to both sources       
    Source1: {T1,1, T1,2, ..., T1,N}    
    Source2:        {T2,1,         T2,2,        ...,        T2,M}   
where each definition Ti,j is text, some number of 
sentences or phrases such as noun phrases or verb 
phrases. For example, if the word is "virus" and we 
consider SourceD1 as Source1, and SourceD2 as 
Source2, then N=3 and M=6, i.e., we have three 
definitions of "virus" from Source1   { T1,1, T1,2, T1,3}   
and competing six definitions of "virus" from Source2 
  { T2,1, T2,2, T2,3, T2,4, T2,5, T2,6 }. These definitions 
correspond to different senses; note that SourceD2 
distinguishes two senses 2a., 2b.; see Tables 4 and 5.  
3.2 Steps  
Step 1   Compute representations of word or phrase C 
and of each of its textual definitions Ti,j.  
 
Step 2   For each pair (T1,k , T2,n) of definitions from 
both sources, compute qualitative relation R between 
each pair of properties   ( Pi1,k,   Pj2,n )   in the right 
handside of the definitions;  
 
R can be one and only one of the following:   EQUAL, 
SMALLER (MORE-SPECIFIC), LARGER (MORE GENERAL), 
PARTIAL-OVERLAP, or DISJOINT.  
 
Step 3   For each pair (T1,k , T2,n) of definitions from 
both sources, compute numeric measure of closeness 
D between two definitions.  
 
This measure whose motivation is similar to (Resnik 
1999) is a number between 0 and 1 computed based 
on qualitative relations R among the properties in both 
definitions and on proportion of relations indicating 
closeness; EQUAL corresponds to 1, the smallest 
distance, SMALLER and LARGER to 0.8, PARTIAL-
OVERLAP to 0.6, and DISJOINT to 0, the largest 
distance.  
 
Step 4   Compute alignment of definitions based on 
metric D computed for each pair. This alignment 
shows which definitions from both sources resemble 
each other most closely. For the definitions of "virus" 
according to SourceD1 and SourceD2, see Table 4, 
this alignment is    
 
    ((1, 2a),   (2, 2b),   (3, 3),   (-, 1),   (-, 4),   (-, 5)).  
 
Step 5   For each pair of aligned definitions, decide if 
integrate and choose integration mode based on the 
reliability of sources and on the value of D.  
 
Step 5a   Compute integrated definition. This 
integration, illustrated by examples in Sections 4 and 
5, involves computing the Boolean operations of meet 
(conjunction), join (disjunction), and complement 
(negation) on the properties in the right handside of 
the definitions.  
 
Step 5b   Generate English text for the 
integrateddefinition.  
 
Step 5c   Update system dictionary/knowledgebase 
with the integrated definition.  
 
3.3 Output  
    1. Updated system dictionary/knowledgebase        
incorporating knowledge from both sources.  
 
    2. Alignment of definitions  
 
    3. Highlights of similarities and differences between 
pairs of definitions. 
 
4 Reliable and Unreliable Sources  
 
Depending whether sources are reliable or not (in 
general or in terms of specific piece of information or 
knowledge), we use different integration operations. If 
both are reliable, we integrate most aggressively and 
the resulting integrated piece reflects fully all that both 
sources provided. If one source may not be reliable, a 
conservative integration is performed. Finally, if a 
source is known or suspected to be unreliable, we first 
negate its information and then fully combine it with 
all provided by the reliable source.  
 
Consider temporal information about the occurence of 
an event provided by two sources, different people 
recalling the same event.  
 
Source1:   "It took place in 1992, April or May"  
Source2:   "It did not happen in early May"  
Depending whether these sources are considered 
reliable or not, we combine their information 
differently, which results in three possible integrated 
information about the time when the event took place. 
Information provided by the sources is translated into 
the following terms  
 
D  = date(month => [ April, May ], 1
                   year  => 1992) 
 
D  = date(month => not May(part => early) ) = 2
        date(month => [ not May,  May(part => not early) ]) 
 
4.1 Both Sources Reliable  
If both sources are considered reliable, we use the 
meet operation to compute integrated piece of 
information or knowledge. This operation, a 
conjunction with inheritance, incorporates fully all 
information provided by both sources. For the above 
dates, an integrated term is computed 
 
D1 MEET D2 = D
1 = 
 
date(month => [ April, May(part => not early) ], 
          year  => 1992)  
 
which gets automatically translated into an English 
phrase   "April or May, but not early May, 1992".  
 
4.2 One Source Possibly Unreliable  
If one source may not be reliable, but it is not known 
which one, we use the join operation to integrate. This 
operation, a disjunction, incorporates conservatively 
information provided by both sources. For the above 
dates, the integrated term cannot be simplified, its two 
elements are partially overlapping because both 
sources provide different aspects of the temporal 
information.  
 
D1 JOIN D2 = D
2 =  
 
[ date(month => [ April, May ], 
            year  => 1992), 
  date(month => not May(part => early)) ]   
 
which  gets automatically translated into a disjunctive 
English phrase   "April or May, 1992, or not early 
May".  
 
4.3 One Source Reliable, One Unreliable  
If one source is considered unreliable, eg. it is known 
or suspected to have lied or to be ignorant, we use the 
complement operation to negate its information. The 
rationale is that if information or piece of knowledge 
is incorrect, then the actual correct information and 
knowledge, whatever it may be, is consistent with the 
negation of what the source provided. The 
complement operation allows us to capture this. We 
then integrate both terms via the meet operation. For 
the above dates, the system computes an integrated 
term  
 
D2
neg = not D2 = [ not date,  date(month => May(part => early)) ] 
 
D  MEET  D1 2
date(month => May(part => early), 
neg = D3 = 
          year  => 1992) 
 
5 Reliable Sources  
5.1 Partially Overlapping Concepts  
Definitions from different sources frequently denote 
partially overlapping concepts. Overlap exists because 
properties are described at different levels of 
specificity and because some properties are stated only 
by one source. If both sources are reliable, we mostly 
use the most aggressive mode of integration, which 
combines all knowledge provided by both sources. In 
the integrated definition, some properties become 
more specialized (more informative) and some other 
new properties are added.  
 
An example is a dictionary definition which we update 
with knowledge acquired from texts. As shown in 
Table 4, SourceD3 defines "virus" as "a very small 
organism, smaller than a bacterium, which causes 
disease in humans, animals and plants", and SourceC1 
as "extremely small infectious substances (much 
smaller than bacteria)".  
 
The integration of the first definition with the second 
produces an integrated definition "an extremely small, 
infectious organism (substance), much smaller than a 
bacterium, which causes disease in humans, animals 
and plants". Two size-related properties get more 
specialized: "very small" becomes "extremely small", 
and "smaller" becomes "much smaller". These 
integrated properties contain strictly more information 
than (entail) the corresponding properties in the old 
definition. The new property added is "infectious". 
This is accomplished as follows.  
 
First, the representation of definitions is computed  
 
virus( 1 2
virus
SourceD1) == P
1,1,   P 1,1,    P3
1,1 . 
(SourceC1) == P1
2,1,   P2
2,1 . 
 
P1
1,1 = organism(size => small(degree => very))  
 
P2
1,1 = smaller(arg2 => bacterium)  
 
P3
1,1 = causes(np => disease(pp => in(np => [ humans, animals, plants ])))  
 
P1
                            infect => infectious) 
2,1 = substance(size  => small(degree => extremely), 
P2
                         arg2     => bacterium) . 
2,1 = smaller(quantity => much, 
Then, relations R for each pair of properties in the 
right handside of the equations are computed via the 
meet operation.  
 
R(P1 1 1
organism(size   => small(degree => extremely), 
1,1,   P 2,1) = PARTIAL-OVERLAP because P  = P1
1,1  MEET P1
2,1 =  
                infect => infectious) 
 
P1 LESS-THAN P1
1,1  and   P1 LESS-THAN P1
2,1
 
R(P2
1,1,   P2
2,1) = MORE-GENERAL (LARGER) because P2 = P2
1,1  MEET P2
2,1 
=  
smaller(quantity => much, 
              arg2     => bacterium)   
 
P2 LESS-THAN P2
1,1,  P2 = P2
2,1 
 
The relations R for the other pairs of properties are 
DISJOINT because the meet operation yields terms 
corresponding to empty set. D = 2/3 and in the 
COMBINE-ALL integration mode, the integrated type 
equation has three properties: the integrated properties 
P1 and P2, and the unchanged property P31,1. The 
integrated  equation is  
 
virus ==    
 
organism(size   => small(degree => extremely), 
                infect => infectious) , 
                 
smaller(quantity => much, 
              arg2     => bacterium) , 
 
 causes(np => disease(pp => in(np => [ humans, animals, plants ]))) . 
 
This equation then gets translated into English phrase 
"an extremely small, infectious organism (substance), 
much smaller than a bacterium, which causes disease 
in humans, animals and plants", in which the order of 
properties mentioned follows the order in the original 
definition.  
 
5.2 Concepts in  MORE-GENERAL  Relation  
Definitions from different sources may denote 
concepts in MORE-GENERAL (LARGER) relation. For 
example, as the following equations reveal, SourceP3 
definition is strictly more general, i.e., denotes larger 
set, than definitions from SourceD3 and SourceA1.  
 
murderSourceD3 ==  killing(intent => intentionally, 
                                      object => person) . 
 
murderSourceP3 ==  killing(object => human) . 
 
murder  ==  killing(intent => wilful, SourceA1
                                      agent  => human, 
                                      object => human) . 
 
Such a relation may indicate that one source has a 
definition that is too general due to, for example, 
ignorance. It can also indicate that a source has a 
definition that is overly specific, i.e., not generalized 
enough. We do not have means to automatically 
decide which is the case. In certain cases, we make 
somewhat arbitrary assumptions.  
 
For example, if two dictionary definitions are in 
MORE-GENERAL relation, we integrate by keeping the 
most specific. Then, if context requires certain 
properties at given level of specificity, we generate 
shorter, more general definitions via our 
summarization/generalization mechanism. In case of 
personal beliefs, unless a person is known to be an 
expert, we assume that sources such as dictionaries 
and texts are more correct and integrate accordingly.  
 
5.3 Clashes Signal Need to Generalize, Correct  
Clashes between information and knowledge from 
different sources indicate inconsistencies that need to 
be resolved. In our representation, inconsistencies are 
automatically detected when the meet operation 
generates a term corresponding to empty set.  
 
Some clashes indicate the need to generalize, others 
reflect errors or deliberate misrepresentations that 
need to be corrected. We have a mechansim to identify 
clashes, but we do not have automatic way to decide 
what to do about them. Each time the system generates 
a clash, a human has to make the decision what to do 
about the clash.  
 
This situation is reminiscent of expert systems and 
knowledge-based systems in that the decision which 
piece of knowledge or which expert is correct does not 
appear to have a general solution and involves rather 
arbitrary assumptions and trust. 
 
5.4 Integrating Two Word Senses Into One  
 
The same source, eg. dictionary, can be used as if two 
sources, which allows us to investigate similarities and 
differences between different senses of the same word 
or phrase. In some cases, similarities lead to 
integrating two senses into one, thus reducing the 
number of word senses. 
 
For example, similarity between partially overlapping 
senses of ?virus? , see Table 4 for definitions 3 and 4 
from SourceD2, led to one combined sense. The 
original two senses  ?anything that corrupts or poisons 
the mind or character? and ?something that poisons 
the mind or soul? are represented as follows 
 
virus ==   [ corrupt, poison ](object   => [ mind, character ]) . 
 
virus ==   poison ](object   => [ mind, soul ]) . 
 
                 
The conservative, join operation integration combined 
with a machine learning-style inductive leap (add or 
skip some aspect in order to simplify and/or shorten 
the utterance) results in one combined word sense 
which corresponds to the first original sense. 
 
6 Discussion, Ongoing and Future Efforts  
6.1 Short versus LongTexts  
Our integration mechanism appears to work well when 
textual definitions are short texts with not very long 
sentences and phrases. This is the case with standard 
dictionaries and our system acquired knowledge 
which, by design, acquires knowledge in small 
portions, short, few sentence-long texts.  We can 
accomplish this because for short texts, parsing and 
computing meaning-level representation is possible 
and can be done with high levels of precision.  
 
Full integration of larger texts such as many page 
encyclopedic entries or complete newspaper articles is 
currently not really possible because parsing long 
sentences and computing meaning-level representation 
of large texts with high levels of precision remains an 
open research problem.  
 
6.2 Integrate or Not 
A really hard part is the integrate-or-not decision. In 
general, it is hard both for humans and systems to 
decide who is right and which piece of knowledge is 
correct. So despite having a system capable of fully 
automatic integration, we involve a human in the loop. 
We look at the system's recommendation, the 
alignment of different definitions, similarity metrics 
etc. and then make this decision by hand.  
 
The only alternative appears to make an arbitrary 
assumption that particular sources are (always) right 
or more right than some others.  
 
We have a mechanism that, in principle, allows us to 
integrate definitions from all existing sources. In 
practise, we consider a safer road of choosing two 
existing sources and updating them only with 
knowledeg acquired automatically by our system from 
corpora of  ?respectable? texts. 
 
6.3 Dictionary Entries as Summaries, 
Generalizations  
Our investigation leads us to believe that dictionary 
entries may be summaries and generalizations of 
words' uses over certain contexts. As such, they would 
constitute derived, and not primary, resource in people 
and machines. We plan to continue developing 
knowledge acquisition and learning methods to 
automatically create dictionaries/knowledge bases 
from corpora of texts. Our approach is to let the 
system acquire as much as possible and as specific as 
possible pieces of information and knowledge. We 
then generate dictionary-like, short, context-relevant 
definitions via our summarization/generalization 
mechanism.  
 
6.4 Text Generation  
Even with shorter text, we encounter many problems 
with generating naturally-sounding English text from 
our representation. One problem is that integration 
results in increasingly heavier phrases. Breaking long 
phrases into separate sentences with shorter phrases 
sometimes produces akward texts. 
 
Another problem is naturalness, which may mean 
different things in different contexts. In case of 
synonymous relations, we use two criteria. The first is 
frequency, commonality-based  with preference given 
to the more commonly used, relative to a corpus, 
subject matter, or overall. For example, the word 
?infectious? will be preferred to ?pathogenic?, and the 
phrase ?extremely small? to ?submicroscopic?. The 
second criterion is based on simplicity and size of 
utterance. For example, the word ?submicroscopic? 
will be preferred to ?extremely small?. 
 
It is clear that with progress on processing larger texts, 
the text generation problems will intensify.  
 
 
References  
Fellbaum, C., ed 1998. WordNet An electronic lexical 
database , The MIT Press.  
 
Harabagiu, S. and Moldovan, D. 2000. Enriching the 
WordNet Taxonomy with Contextual Knowledge Acquired 
from Text. in Iwanska, L.M., and Shapiro, S.C. eds 2000. 
Natural Language Processing and Knowledge 
Representation: Language for Knowledge and Knowledge 
for Language The MIT Press. 301-334.  
 
Iwanska, L. 1993. Logical Reasoning in Natural Language: 
It Is All About Knowledge. International Journal of Minds 
and Machines, 3(4): 475-510. 
 
Iwanska, L. 1996. Natural (Language) Temporal Logic: 
Reasoning about Absolute and Relative Time". International 
Journal of Expert Systems, 9(1): 113-149. 
 
Iwanska, L., Mata, N. and Kruger, K. 1999, 2000a. Fully 
Automatic Acquisition of Taxonomic Knowledge from 
Large Corpora of Texts: Limited-Syntax Knowledge 
Representation System based on Natural Language. 
Proceedings of the Eleventh International Symposium on 
Methodologies for Intelligent Information Systems 
(ISMIS99), Springer-Verlag, pp. 691-697, Warsaw, Poland, 
1999.  Reprinted in Iwanska, L.M., and Shapiro, S.C. eds 
2000. Natural Language Processing and Knowledge 
Representation: Language for Knowledge and Knowledge 
for Language The MIT Press. 335-346.  
 
Iwanska, L. 2000b. Natural Language is a Powerful 
Knowledge Representation System: The UNO Model. In 
Iwanska, L.M., and Shapiro, S.C. eds 2000. Natural 
Language Processing and Knowledge Representation: 
Language for Knowledge and Knowledge for Language The 
MIT Press, 7-64.  
  
Liu, H. 2003. Unpacking Meaning from Words: A Context-
Centered Approach to Computational Lexicon Design in 
Blackburn, P. et al eds 2003 Modeling and Using Context , 
Proceedings of the 4th International and Interdisciplinary 
Conference, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence 2680, 
Berlin, Springer, 218-232.  
 
Muresan and Klavans, 2002. Muresan, S. and Klavans, J. A 
method for automatically building and evaluating dictionary 
resources. Proceedings of the Language Resources and 
Evaluation Conference (LREC 2002). 
 
OneLook.com   Dictionary Search 
 
Rapaport, W.J. and Kibby, M.W. 2002. Contextual 
Vocabulary Acquisition: A Computational Theory and 
Educational Curriculum. in Proceedings of the 6th World 
Multiconference on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics 
(SCI 2002), Orlando, FL, 2002.  
 
Reiter, E. and Robertson. R. 2003 Acquiring Correct 
Knowledge for Natural Language Generation Journal of 
Artificial Intelligence Research 18:491-516.  
 
Resnik, P. 1999. Semantic Similarity in a Taxonomy: An 
Information-Based Measure and its Application to Problems 
of Ambiguity in Natural Language. Journal of Artificial 
Intelligence Research 11:95-130.  
 
Thompson, C.A. and Mooney, R.J. 2003. Acquiring Word-
Meaning Mappings for Natural Language Interfaces Journal 
of Artificial Intelligence Research 18:1-44.  
 
Voorhees, E.M. and Buckland, L.P. eds 2002. Proceedings 
of the Eleventh Text REtrieval Conference (TREC 2002). 
Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards 
and Technology.  
 
YourDictionary.com   Dictionary Search 
 
 
