Paraphrastic Grammars
Claire Gardent
CNRS-LORIA, Nancy
France
Claire.Gardent@loria.fr
Marilisa Amoia
Computational Linguistics
University of Saarbruecken
Germany
amoia@coli.uni-sb.de
Evelyne Jacquey
CNRS-ATILF, Nancy
France
Evelyne.Jacquey@atilf.fr
Abstract
Arguably, grammars which associate natural lan-
guage expressions not only with a syntactic but
also with a semantic representation, should do so in
a way that capture paraphrasing relations between
sentences whose core semantics are equivalent. Yet
existing semantic grammars fail to do so. In this pa-
per, we describe an ongoing project whose aim is
the production of a ?paraphrastic grammar? that is,
a grammar which associates paraphrases with iden-
tical semantic representations. We begin by propos-
ing a typology of paraphrases. We then show how
this typology can be used to simultaneously guide
the development of a grammar and of a testsuite de-
signed to support the evaluation of this grammar.
1 Introduction
A salient feature of natural language is that it allows
paraphrases that is, it allows different verbalisations
of the same content. Thus although the various ver-
balisations in (1) may have different pragmatic or
communicative values (with respect for instance to
topicalisation, presuppositions or focus/ground par-
titioning), they all share a core semantic content, the
content approximated by a traditional montagovian
compositional semantics.
(1) a. La croisie`re cou?te cher.
Lit. the cruse is expensive
b. Le cou?t de la croisie`re est e?leve?.
Lit. the cost of the cruse is high
c. La croisie`re a un cou?t e?leve?
Lit. the cruse has a high cost
Linguists have long noticed the pervasiveness of
paraphrases in natural language and attempted to
caracterise it. Thus for instance Chomsky?s ?trans-
formations? capture the relation between one core
meaning (a deep structure in Chomsky?s terms) and
several surface realisations (for instance, between
the passive and the active form of the same sen-
tence) while (Mel?c?uk, 1988) presents sixty para-
phrastic rules designed to account for paraphrastic
relations between sentences.
More recently, work in information extraction
(IE) and question answering (QA) has triggered a
renewed research interest in paraphrases as IE and
QA systems typically need to be able to recognise
various verbalisations of the content. Because of the
large, open domain corpora these systems deal with,
coverage and robustness are key issues and much on
the work on paraphrases in that domain is based on
automatic learning techniques. For instance, (Lin
and Pantel, 2001) acquire two-argument templates
(inference rules) from corpora using an extended
version of the distributional analysis in which paths
in dependency trees that have similar arguments are
taken to be close in meaning. Similarly, (Barzi-
lay and Lee, 2003) and (Shinyanma et al, 2002)
learn sentence level paraphrase templates from a
corpus of news articles stemming from different
news source. And (Glickman and Dagan, 2003) use
clustering and similarity measures to identify sim-
ilar contexts in a single corpus and extract verbal
paraphrases from these contexts.
Such machine learning approaches have known
pros and cons. On the one hand, they produce large
scale resources at little man labour cost. On the
other hand, the degree of descriptive abstraction of-
fered by the list of inference or paraphrase rules they
output is low.
We chose to investigate an alternative research di-
rection by aiming to develop a ?paraphrastic gram-
mar? that is, a grammar which captures the para-
phrastic relations between linguistic structures1 .
Based on a computational grammar that associates
natural language expressions with both a syntactic
and a semantic representation, a paraphrastic gram-
1As we shall briefly discuss in section 4, the grammar is de-
veloped with the help of a meta-grammar (Candito, 1999) thus
ensuring an additional level of abstraction. The metagrammar
is an abstract specification of the linguistic properties (phrase
structure, valency, realisation of grammatical functions etc.)
encoded in the grammar basic units. This specification is then
compiled to automatically produce a specific grammar.
mar is a grammar that moreover associates para-
phrases with the same semantic representation. That
is, contrary to machine learning based approaches
which relate paraphrases via sentence patterns, the
paraphrastic grammar approach relates paraphrases
via a common semantic representation. In this way,
the paraphrastic approach provides an interesting al-
ternative basis for generation from conceptual rep-
resentations and for the inference-based, deep se-
mantic processing of the kind that is ultimately
needed for high quality question answering.
Specifically, we aim at developing a paraphras-
tic grammar for French, based on the Tree Adjoin-
ing Grammar (TAG) developed for this language by
Anne Abeille? (Abeille?, 2002).
The paper is structured as follows. We start
by proposing a typology of the paraphrastic means
made available by natural language. We then show
how this typology can be used to develop a testsuite
for developing and evaluating a paraphrastic gram-
mar. Finally, we highlight some of the issues arising
when developing a paraphrastic grammar.
2 Classifying paraphrases
A paraphrastic grammar should capture the vari-
ous means made available by natural language to
support paraphrasing. But what are those means?
We distinguish here between three main classes
namely, parallel, shuffling and definitional para-
phrastic means.
Parallel paraphrastic means. A parallel para-
phrase can hold either between two non predica-
tive lexical units (words or multi word expressions)
modulo negation or between two predicative units
of identical arity. If it holds between predicative
units, the mapping linking grammatical functions
(subject, objects, etc.) and thematic roles (agent,
theme, etc.) must be the same. Depending on
whether or not negation is involved, semantic equiv-
alence will futhermore obtain either through syn-
onymy or through antonymy.
As illustrated in Figure 1, synonymy can be fur-
ther divided in a number of cases depending on var-
ious morphological and syntactic criteria. The clas-
sification criteria used involve :
? Syntactic category: Do the synonyms have the
same syntactic category?
? Morphological relatedness: Do the synonyms
contain words that are morphologically re-
lated?
? Form: Are the synonyms simple lexical units
or multi word expressions?
As for antonymy, we distinguish between trans
and intracategorial antonymy:
(2) Jean est lent/Jean n?est pas rapide.
Jean is slow/Jean is not fast.
lent/rapide, intracategorial
Jean a cesser de fumer/Jean ne fume plus.
Jean has stopped smoking/Jean smokes no
more.
cesse de/ne . . . plus, transcategorial
Shuffling paraphrastic means. When a seman-
tic equivalence holds between predicative units with
distinct grammatical functions/thematic role link-
ing, we speak of shuffling paraphrases. Such para-
phrases can be realised either by means of argument
preserving alternations (in the sense of Beth Levin,
cf. (4)) or using a converse construction (cf. 3)2.
(3) a Jean donne un livre a` Marie.
Jean gives a book to Marie.
Marie rec?oit un livre de Jean
Jean receives a book from Marie.
b Jean est le parent de Marie.
Jean is the parent of Marie.
Marie est l?enfant de Jean.
Marie is the child of Jean.
(4) a. Cette cle? ouvre le coffre fort
This key opens the safe.
Le coffre fort s?ouvre avec cette cle?
The safe opens with this key.
b. Jean mange une pomme
Jean eats an apple.
une pomme est mange?e par Jean
An apple is eaten by Jean.
Il a e?te? mange? une pomme par Jean.
There has been an apple eaten by Jean.
c. L?eau remplit la cruche
The water fills the jug .
La cruche se remplit d?eau
The jug fills with water.
On remplit la cruche d?eau
One fills the jug with water.
d. Le laboratoire fusionne avec l?entreprise
The laboratory merges with the firm.
le laboratoire et l?entreprise fusionnent
The laboratory and the firm merge.
e. Jean frappe le mur avec un baton
Jean hit the wall with a stick.
2Obviously, the english translations do not reflect the ac-
ceptability of the french equivalent.
Same synt. Same morph. Form Example
categories family
yes no word/word policier, flic
yes yes word/mwe conseiller, donner conseil
yes no word/mwe s?exprimer sur, donner son avis sur
yes no mwe/mwe donner carte blanche a`, laisser tout pouvoir
no yes word/word construire, construction
no no word/word candidature a`, briguer
Figure 1: Synonymy
Jean frappe le baton sur le mur.
Jean hit the stick on the wall.
f. Je fournis des livres a` Jean
I provide books to Jean.
Je fournis Jean en livre
I provide Jean with books.
Definitional paraphrastic means. Third, we call
?definitional paraphrases? semantic equivalences
that hold between a lexical unit and a phrase con-
sisting of more than one lexical unit. The phrase
in this case, defines the meaning of the lexical unit.
Since definitions are notoriously difficult to decide
upon, we restrict ourselves here to such definitions
as can be given by derivational morphology that is,
definitions based on a word that is morphologically
linked to the definiendum (cf. 5).
(5) a. Le conducteur de la BMW est chauve
The driver of the BMW is bald.
La personne qui conduit la BMW est
chauve
The person who drives the BMW is bald.
b. Cet outil est parame?trable
This tool is parameterisable.
Cet outil peut e?tre parame?tre?
This tool can be parameterised.
3 Developing a paraphrase testsuite
Based on the above typology, we can systematically
construct a testsuite for developing and evaluating
a paraphrastic grammar. Indeed, when developing
a grammar, it is necessary to have some means of
assessing both the coverage of the grammar (does
it generate all the sentences of the described lan-
guage?) and its degree of overgeneration (does it
generate only the sentences of the described lan-
guage?) While corpus driven efforts along the PAR-
SEVAL lines (Black et al, 1991) are good at giving
some measure of a grammar coverage, they are not
suitable for finer grained analysis and in particular,
for progress evaluation, regression testing and com-
parative report generation. Another known method
consists in developing and using a test suite that is,
a set of negative and positive items against which
the grammar can be systematically tested. For en-
glish, there is for instance the 15 year old Hewlett-
Packard test suite, a simple text file listing test sen-
tences and grouping them according to linguistics
phenomena (Flickinger et al, 1987); and more re-
cently, the much more sophisticated TSNLP (Test
Suite for Natural Language Processing) which in-
cludes some 9500 test items for English, French and
German, each of them being annotated with syntac-
tic and application related information (Oepen and
Flickinger, 1998).
Yet because they do not take into account the se-
mantic dimension, none of these tools are adequate
for evaluating the paraphrastic power of a gram-
mar. To remedy this, we propose to develop a para-
phrase test suite based on the paraphrase typology
described in the previous section. In such a testsuite,
test items pair a semantic representation with a set
of paraphrases verbalising this semantics. The con-
struction and annotation of the paraphrases reflects
the paraphrase typology. In a first phase, we concen-
trate on simple, non-recursive predicate/argument
structure. Given such a structure, the construction
and annotation of a test item proceeds as follows.
First, a ?canonical verbalisation? is produced in
which the predicate is realised by the ?canonical
verb? for the given concept3 and the arguments by
the canonical nouns.
Next variants are produced by systematically try-
ing to create parallel, shuffling and definitional para-
phrases. Each of the variant is furthermore anno-
tated with labels caracterising the type of paraphras-
ing involved. Here is an example. Suppose the input
semantics is:
apply(e), agent(e,jean), theme(e,job), failure(e)
for which the canonical verbalisation is:
(6) Jean a candidate? sans succe`s sur le poste
Jean has applied in vain for the job.
3Like in a thesaurus, we assume that amongst a set of syn-
onyms, one lexical unit is ?canonical? and the others not. The
canonical unit is sometimes called a descriptor.
The parallel synonyms4 that can be used are the
following:5
candidater candidature +pred-N
poser sa +pred-vsupV
candidature
briguer +pred-V
sans succe`s e?chouer +mod-V
e?tre sans succe`s +mod-beAdv
ne pas e?tre retenu +mod-Vanton
For shuffling synonymy, two alternations are
available: the active/passive alternation for ?poser?
and the active/locative one for ?e?chouer?. There is
no converse construction. Neither is there any defi-
nition given by derivational morphology for any of
the terms occurring in the canonical verbalisation.
Based on these facts, the following variants and an-
notations can be constructed.
(7) a. Jean a brigue? le poste sans succe`s
Jean has asked for the job in vain.
+pred-Vsyn
b. Jean a pose? sa candidature sur le poste sans
succe`s
Jean has submitted his application for the
job in vain.
+pred-vsupN
c. La candidature pose?e par Jean sur le poste
a e?te? sans succe`s
The application submitted by Jean for the
job was in vain.
+pred-partAdj, +mod-beAdv
d. La candidature pose?e par Jean sur le poste
a e?choue?
The application submitted by Jean for the
job failed.
+pred-partAdj, +mod-V
e. La candidature de Jean sur le poste a e?te?
sans succe`s
Jean?s application for the job was in vain.
+pred-N, +mod-beAdv
f. La candidature de Jean sur le poste n?a pas
e?te? retenue
4As has been abundantly argued by linguists, real synonyms
are extremely rare. By synonyms, we in fact refer here to the
notion of quasi-synonyms used for instance in WordNet that is,
words that are interchangeable in a restricted set of contexts.
5The labels are the ones used for annotation. They carac-
terise variations with respect to the canonical realisation. For
instance, +pref-N indicates that the main predicate (realised by
a verb in the canonical verbalisation) is realised as a noun.
Jean?s application for the job was not suc-
cessful.
+pred-N, +mod-Vanton
g. La candidature de Jean sur le poste a
e?choue?
Jean?s application for the job failed.
+pred-N, +mod-V
h. Jean a e?choue? dans sa candidature sur le
poste.
Jean failed in his application for the job.
+pred-N, +mod-V-altLoc
Thus the typology of paraphrastic means help
guide the construction of the various paraphrases
contained in a single item. There remains the ques-
tion of how to choose the particular items of the
testsuite. In other words: which semantic repre-
sentations should we use to populate the test suite
and on the basis of which criteria? The basic aim
here is to cover the various types of possible seman-
tic combinations and the constraints they are sub-
ject to at the syntactic (realisation) level. If, as Beth
Levin argues, syntax is a reflex of semantic proper-
ties, then different semantic contents should be sub-
ject to varying syntactic constraints and the test suite
ought to cover these various types of interactions.
Accordingly test items are constructed whose main
predicate vary along the following dimensions :
(1) WordNet Verb Family; (2) Aspect; (3) Arite?
That is, items are constructed for each word-
Net family (the french WordNet counts roughly 170
such families). Within a given family, we attempt
to find examples with distinct aspectual categories
(state, accomplishment and process). Finally, given
a WN family and an aspectual category, items will
vary with respect to the arity of the main predicate
and the types of their arguments e.g., predicates of
arity one (run, cost, sleep), of arity two with non
propositional arguments (eat, hit, dug), of arity two
with a propositional argument (say, promise etc.),
etc.
4 A paraphrastic grammar
?Semantic grammars? already exist which describe
not only the syntax but also the semantics of nat-
ural language. Thus for instance, (Copestake and
Flickinger, 2000; Copestake et al, 2001) describes
a Head Driven Phrase Structure Grammar (HPSG)
which supports the parallel construction of a phrase
structure (or derived) tree and of a semantic repre-
sentation and (Dalrymple, 1999) show how to equip
Lexical Functional grammar (LFG) with a glue se-
mantics.
These grammars are both efficient and large scale
in that they cover an important fragment of the nat-
ural language they describe and can be processed by
parsers and generators in almost real time. For in-
stance, the LFG grammar parses sentences from the
Wall Street Journal and the ERG HPSG grammar
will produce semantic representations for about 83
per cent of the utterances in a corpus of some 10
000 utterances varying in length between one and
thirty words. Parsing times vary between a few ms
for short sentences and several tens of seconds for
longer ones.
Nonetheless, from a semantics viewpoint, these
grammars fail to yield a clear account of the para-
phrastic relation. Here is a simple example illustrat-
ing this shortcoming. Suppose we parse the follow-
ing paraphrases where a lexical definition (driver ?
person who drives) is involved:
(8) a. The person who drives the car is mad.
b. The driver of the car is mad.
When given these sentences, the LKB system
based on the ERG HPSG grammar returns semantic
representations which can be sketched as follows6:
(9) a. the(x, person(x) ? the(y, car(y) ?
drive(e,x,y) ? mad(x)))
a. the(y, car(y) ? the(x, driver(x,y) ? of(x,y))
? mad(x))
In other words, the grammar associates with
these paraphrases semantic representations which
are very different. It could be argued of course
that although these representations are syntactically
distinct, they can be inferred, given the appropri-
ate knowledge, to be semantically equivalent. But
a solution that avoids placing such extra burden on
the inferencing component is obviously better. In
short, one important shortcoming of existing large
scale semantic grammars is that they do not assign
semantically equivalent sentences, the same seman-
tic representation.
By contrast, we propose to develop a grammar
which whereever possible assigns identical seman-
tic representations to paraphrases and whose devel-
6These semantic representations have been simplified for
better readibility. The real representations output by the LKB
are the following:
prpstn(def(x,person(x)?prpstn(def(y,car(y),
drive(e1,v1,x,y,v2),v3)), mad(e2,x,v4),v5)
prpstn(def(x,person(x)?prpstn(def(y,car(y),
drive(e1,v1,x,y,v2),v3)), mad(e2,x,v4),v5)
prpstn(def(y,car(y)?prpstn(def(x, driver(x,y) ? of(e1,x,y,v1),
mad(e2,x,v2,v3)))))
opment is based both on semantic and syntactic con-
siderations.
4.1 Linguistic framework
Our grammar is couched within the Feature-Based
Tree Adjoining grammar (FTAG) formalism. An
FTAG consists of a set of (auxiliary or initial) ele-
mentary trees and two tree composition operations:
substitution and adjunction. Substitution is the stan-
dard tree operation used in phrase structure gram-
mars while adjunction is an operation which inserts
an auxiliary tree into a derived tree. To account for
the effect of these insertions, two feature structures
(called top and bottom) are associated with each
tree node in FTAG. The top feature structure en-
codes information that needs to be percolated up the
tree should an adjunction take place. In contrast, the
bottom feature structure encodes information that
remains local to the node at which adjunction takes
place.
The language chosen for semantic representa-
tion is a flat semantics along the line of (Bos,
1995; Copestake et al, 1999; Copestake et al,
2001). However because we are here focusing on
paraphrases rather than fine grained semantic dis-
tinctions, the underspecification and the descrip-
tion of the scope relations permitted by these se-
mantics will here be largely ignored and flat se-
mantics will be principally used as a convenient
way of describing predicate/arguments and modi-
fiers/modified relationships. Thus the semantic rep-
resentations we assume are simply set of literals of
the form P n(x1, . . . , xn) where P n is a predicate
of arity n and xi is either a constant or a unifica-
tion variable whose value will be instantiated during
processing.
Semantic construction proceeds from the derived
tree (Gardent and Kallmeyer, 2003) rather than ?
as is more common in TAG ? from the derivation
tree. This is done by associating each elementary
tree with a semantic representation and by deco-
rating relevant tree nodes with unification variables
and constants occuring in associated semantic rep-
resentation. The association between tree nodes and
unification variables encodes the syntax/semantics
interface ? it specifies which node in the tree pro-
vides the value for which variable in the final se-
mantic representation.
As trees combine during derivation, (i) variables
are unified ? both in the tree and in the associated
semantic representation ? and (ii) the semantics of
the derived tree is constructed from the conjunction
of the semantics of the combined trees. A simple
example will illustrate this.
NPj
John
name(j,john)
S
NP?x1 VP
V NP?x2 NPm
loves Mary
love(x1,x2) name(m,mary)
Figure 2: ?John loves Mary?
Suppose the elementary trees for ?John?, ?loves?
and ?Mary? are as given in Fig. 2 where a downar-
row (?) indicates a substitution node and Cx/Cx ab-
breviate a node with category C and a top/bottom
feature structure including the feature-value pair {
index : x}. On substitution, the root node of the tree
being substituted in is unified with the node at which
substitution takes place. Further, when derivation
ends, the top and bottom feature structures of each
node in the derived tree are unified. Thus in this
case, x1 is unified with j and x2 with m. Hence, the
resulting semantics is:
love(j, m), name(j, john), name(m, mary)
4.2 The signature of the semantic
representation language
Let us now come back to the paraphrases given in
example 1. To produce an identical semantic rep-
resentation of these three sentences, we first need to
ensure that synonyms be assigned the same concept.
That is, we need to fix a concept inventory and to
use this inventory in a consistent way in particular,
by assigning synonyms the same concept.
For non predicative units, we use WordNet synset
numbers or when working within a restricted do-
main with a well defined thesaurus, the descriptors
of that thesaurus.
To represent the semantics of predicative units,
we use FrameNet inventory of frames and frame el-
ements (C.Johnson et al, 2002). FrameNet is an on-
line lexical resource for English based on the prin-
ciples of Frame Semantics. In this approach, a word
evokes a frame i.e., a simple or a complex event, and
each frame is associated with a number of frame el-
ements that is, a number of participants fulfilling a
given role in the frame. Finally each frame is as-
sociated with a set of target words, the words that
evoke that frame.
Thus FrameNet associates synonyms with an
identical concept namely, the frame evoked by those
synonyms. We make use of this feature and instead
of choosing our own semantic predicates and re-
lations, draw on FrameNet frames and frame ele-
ments. For instance, the paraphrases in example 1
are taken to evoke the FrameNet COMMERCE frame
and to instantiate two of its frame elements namely,
GOODS and MONEY. The semantic representation
they will be assigned will therefore be the follow-
ing:
commerce(e,g,m), cruise(g), goods(e,g), high(m),
money(e,m)
4.3 Capturing paraphrastic relations
Given the basic signature provided by FrameNet
(and any extension of it that will prove necessary
to account for the data), the grammar must then
specify a compositional semantics which will de-
rive identical representations for the types of para-
phrases captured by our typology. In essence, this
implies assigning the same semantic representations
to synonyms, converses and alternations. Con-
cretely, this involves two different subtasks : first,
a modeling of the synonymic relation between syn-
tactically divergent constructs (e.g., between a pred-
icative noun, a support verb construction and a verb)
and second, the identification of the synonymic sets
(which are the words and multi word expressions
that stand in a parallel, shuffling or definitional para-
phrastic relation?).
Modeling intercategorial synonymic links. A
first investigation of Anne Abeille??s TAG for French
suggests that modeling the synonymic relations
across syntactic constructs is reasonably straightfor-
ward. For instance, as Figures 3, 4 and 5 show, the
FTAG trees assigned on syntactic grounds by Anne
Abeille? FTAG to predicative nouns, support verb
constructions and transitive verbs can be equiped
with a flat semantics in such a way as to assign
the three sentences in 1 a unique semantic rep-
resentation namely the one given above. Gener-
ally, the problem is not so much to state the cor-
respondances between synonymic but syntactically
different constructs as to do this in a general way
while not overgeneralising. To address this prob-
lem, we are currently working on developing a
metagrammar in the sense of (Candito, 1999). This
metagrammar allows us to factorise both syntac-
tic and semantic information. Syntactic informa-
tion is factorised in the usual way. For instance,
there will be a class NOVN1 which groups together
all the initial trees representing the possible syntac-
tic configurations in which a transitive verb with
two nominal arguments can occur. But addition-
nally there will be semantic classes such as, ?bi-
nary predicate of semantic type X? which will be
associated with the relevant syntactic classes for in-
stance, NOVN1 (the class of transitive verbs with
nominal arguments), BINARY NPRED (the class of
binary predicative nouns), NOVSUPNN1 , the class
of support verb constructions taking two nominal
arguments. By further associating semantic units
(e.g., ?cost?) with the appropriate semantic classes
(e.g., ?binary predicate of semantic type X?), we
can in this way capture both intra and intercategorial
paraphrasing links in a general way.
Constructing paraphrastic sets. Depending on
the type of paraphrastic means involved, construct-
ing a paraphrastic set (the set of all lexical items re-
lated by a paraphrastic link be it parallel, shuffling
or definitional) is more or less easy as resources for
that specific means may or may not be readily avail-
able.
Cases of intracategorial synonymy are relatively
straigthtforward as several electronic synonym dic-
tionnaries for french are available (Ploux, 1997).
Multi word expressions however remain a problem
as they are often not or only partially included in
such dictionnaries. For these or for a specific do-
main, basic synonymic dictionaries can be comple-
mented using learning methods based on distribu-
tional similarity (Pereira et al, 1993; Lin, 1998).
techniques.
For intercategorial synonymy involving a deriva-
tional morphology link, some resources are avail-
able which however are only partial in that they only
store morphological families that is, sets of items
that are morphologically related. Lexical semantics
information still need to be included.
Intercategorial synonymy not involving a deriva-
tional morphology link has been little studied and
resources are lacking. However as for other types
of synonymy, distributional analysis and clustering
techniques can be used to develop such resources.
For shuffling paraphrases, french alternations are
partially described in (Saint-Dizier, 1999) and a re-
source is available which describes alternation and
the mapping verbs/alternations for roughly 1 700
verbs. For complementing this database and for
converse constructions, the LADL tables (Gross,
1975) can furthermore be resorted to, which list
detailed syntactico-semantic descriptions for 5 000
verbs and 25 000 verbal expressions. In particu-
lar, (Gross, 1989) lists the converses of some 3 500
predicative nouns.
S
GNG ? V GAdvM ?
coute
GNX S:Commerce GAdvY
D NX ? (S,G):goods cher
la (S,M):money Y:High
NX
croisiere
X:Cruise
Figure 3: La croisie`re cou?te cher
S
GNG ? VSup? GN
a D? NGMGNX
cout
D NX ? D S:Commerce
la un (S,M):money
NX (S,G):goods
croisiere N
X:Cruise ? NY Adj
eleve
Y:High
Figure 4: La croisie`re a un cou?t e?leve?
5 Conclusion
Besides the development and evaluation of a core
paraphrastic testsuite and grammar for French, we
plan to investigate two main issues. First, how pre-
cisely should a metagrammar be structured to best
describe a paraphrastic grammar? And second: is
it possible to extract from the kind of inference
rules automatically derived in machine learning ap-
proach, information that can be used to specify this
metagrammar?
6 Acknowledgments.
This paper is based upon work suppported in part by
the project ?Des connaissances a` leurs re?alisation en
langue? within the CNRS funded TCAN program.
SGNY ? Cop GAdjY ?
GNY est eleve
D NY ? Y:High
le
NM
N GP
cout P? GNG ?
S:Commerce
(S,M):money P GNX
(S,G):goods de D NX
la croisiere
X:Cruise
Figure 5: Le cou?t de la croisie`re est e?leve?
References
A. Abeille?. 2002. Une Grammaire Electronique du
Franais. CNRS Editions.
R. Barzilay and L. Lee. 2003. Learning to
paraphrase: an unsupervised approahc using
mutliple-sequence alignment. In Proceedings of
NAACL-HLT.
A. Black, S. Abney, D. Flickinger, C. Gdaniec,
R. Grishman, P. Harrison, D. Hindel, R. INgria,
F. Jelinek, F. Klaavans, M. Liberman, M. Mar-
cus, S. Roukos, B. Santorini, and T. Strzalkowski.
1991. A procedure for quantitatively comparing
the syntactic coverage of english grammars. In
Proceedings of teh 4th DARPA Speech and Natu-
ral Language Workshop.
J. Bos. 1995. Predicate logic unplugged. In Paul
Dekker and Martin Stokhof, editors, Proceedings
of the 10th Amsterdam Colloquium, pages 133?
142.
M.H Candito. 1999. Un outil multilingue de gener-
ation de ltag : application au francais et a l?italien.
TAL, 40(1).
C.Johnson, C. Fillmore, M. Petruckand C. Baker,
M. Ellsworth, and J. Ruppenhofer. 2002.
Framenet: Theory and practice. Technical report,
Berkeley.
Ann Copestake and Dan Flickinger. 2000. An open
source grammar development environment and
broad-coverage English grammar using HPSG.
In Proceedings of the 2nd International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
Athens, Greece.
A. Copestake, D. Flickinger, I. Sag, and C. Pollard.
1999. Minimal Recursion Semantics. An Intro-
duction. Manuscript, Stanford University.
A. Copestake, A. Lascarides, and D. Flickinger.
2001. An algebra for semantic construction in
constraint-based grammars. In Proceedings of
the 39th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, Toulouse, France.
M. Dalrymple. 1999. Semantics and syntax in lexi-
cal functional grammar. MIT Press.
D. Flickinger, J. Nerbonne, I. Sag, and T. Wasow.
1987. Towards evaluation of nlp systems. Tech-
nical report, Hewlett-Packard Laboratories.
C. Gardent and L. Kallmeyer. 2003. Semantic con-
struction in ftag. In Proceedings of EACL, Bu-
dapest, Hungary.
O. Glickman and I. Dagan. 2003. Identifying lexi-
cal paraphrases from a single corpus: a case study
for verbs. In Proceedings of Recent Advances in
Natural Language Processing.
M. Gross. 1975. Me?thodes en syntase. Masson,
Paris.
G. Gross. 1989. Les constructions converses du
francais. CNRS Editions.
Dekang Lin and Patrick Pantel. 2001. Discovery of
inference rules for question answering. Natural
Language Engineering.
D. Lin. 1998. Automatic retrieval and clustering of
similar words. In Proceedings of ACL/COLING,
pages 768?774.
I. Mel?c?uk. 1988. Paraphrase et lexique dans la
thorie linguistique sens-texte. Lexique, 6:13?54.
S. Oepen and D. Flickinger. 1998. Towards sys-
tematic grammar profiling. test suite technology
10 years after. Computer Speech and Language,
12:411?435.
F. Pereira, N. Tishby, and L. Lee. 1993. Distribu-
tional clustering of english words. In Proceed-
ings of the ACL, pages 183?190.
S. Ploux. 1997. Modlisation et traitement infor-
matique de la synonymi. Linguisticae Investiga-
tiones, XXI(1).
P. Saint-Dizier, 1999. Alternations and Verb Se-
mantic Classes for French: analysis and class
formation, chapter 5. Kluwer.
Y. Shinyanma, S. Sekine, K. Sudo, and R. Grish-
man. 2002. Automatic paraphrase acquisition
from news articles. In Proceedings of HLT.
