Proceedings of Ninth Meeting of the ACL Special Interest Group in Computational Morphology and Phonology, pages 65?74,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Evolution, Optimization, and Language Change:
The Case of Bengali Verb Inflections
Monojit Choudhury1, Vaibhav Jalan2, Sudeshna Sarkar1, Anupam Basu1
1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India
{monojit,sudeshna,anupam}@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in
2 Department of Computer Engineering
Malaviya National Institute of Technology, Jaipur, India
vaibhavjalan.mnit@gmail.com
Abstract
The verb inflections of Bengali underwent
a series of phonological change between
10th and 18th centuries, which gave rise
to several modern dialects of the language.
In this paper, we offer a functional ex-
planation for this change by quantifying
the functional pressures of ease of artic-
ulation, perceptual contrast and learnabil-
ity through objective functions or con-
straints, or both. The multi-objective and
multi-constraint optimization problem has
been solved through genetic algorithm,
whereby we have observed the emergence
of Pareto-optimal dialects in the system
that closely resemble some of the real
ones.
1 Introduction
Numerous theories have been proposed to explain
the phenomenon of linguistic change, which, of late,
are also being supported by allied mathematical or
computational models. See (Steels, 1997; Perfors,
2002) for surveys on computational models of lan-
guage evolution, and (Wang et al, 2005; Niyogi,
2006) for reviews of works on language change.
The aim of these models is to explain why and how
languages change under specific socio-cognitive as-
sumptions. Although computational modeling is a
useful tool in exploring linguistic change (Cangelosi
and Parisi, 2002), due to the inherent complexi-
ties of our linguistic and social structures, modeling
of real language change turns out to be extremely
hard. Consequently, with the exception of a few
(e.g., Hare and Elman (1995); Dras et al (2003);
Ke et al (2003); Choudhury et al (2006b)), all the
mathematical and computational models developed
for explaining language change are built for artifi-
cial toy languages. This has led several researchers
to cast a doubt on the validity of the current compu-
tational models as well as the general applicability
of computational techniques in diachronic explana-
tions (Hauser et al, 2002; Poibeau, 2006).
In this paper, we offer a functional explanation1
of a real world language change ? the morpho-
phonological change affecting the Bengali verb
inflections (BVI). We model the problem as a
multi-objective and multi-constraint optimization
and solve the same using Multi-Objective Genetic
Algorithm2 (MOGA). We show that the different
forms of the BVIs, as found in the several modern
dialects, automatically emerge in the MOGA frame-
work under suitable modeling of the objective and
constraint functions. The model also predicts several
1Functionalist accounts of language change invoke the basic
function of language, i.e. communication, as the driving force
behind linguistic change (Boersma, 1998). Stated differently,
languages change in a way to optimize their function, such that
speakers can communicate maximum information with min-
imum effort (ease of articulation) and ambiguity (perceptual
contrast). Often, ease of learnability is also considered a func-
tional benefit. For an overview of different explanations in di-
achronic linguistics see (Kroch, 2001) and Ch. 3 of (Blevins,
2004).
2Genetic algorithm was initially proposed by Hol-
land (1975) as a self-organizing adaptation process mimicking
the biological evolution. They are also used for optimization
and machine learning purposes, especially when the nature of
the solution space is unknown or there are more than one objec-
tive functions. See Goldberg (1989) for an accessible introduc-
tion to single and multi-objective Genetic algorithms. Note that
in case of a multi-objective optimization problem, MOGA gives
a set of Pareto-optimal solutions rather than a single optimum.
The concept of Pareto-optimality is defined later.
65
other possible dialectal forms of Bengali that seems
linguistically plausible and might exist or have ex-
isted in the past, present or future. Note that the
evolutionary algorithm (i.e., MOGA) has been used
here as a tool for optimization, and has no relevance
to the evolution of the dialects as such.
Previously, Redford et al (2001) has modeled the
emergence of syllable systems in a multi-constraint
and multi-objective framework using Genetic al-
gorithms. Since the model fuses the individual
objectives into a single objective function through
a weighted linear combination, it is not a multi-
objective optimization in its true sense and nei-
ther does it use MOGA for the optimization pro-
cess. Nevertheless, the present work draws heavily
from the quantitative formulation of the objectives
and constraints described in (Redford, 1999; Red-
ford and Diehl, 1999; Redford et al, 2001). Ke et
al. (2003) has demonstrated the applicability and ad-
vantages of MOGA in the context of the vowel and
tonal systems, but the model is not explicit about the
process of change that could give rise to the optimal
vowel systems. As we shall see that the conception
of the genotype, which is arguably the most impor-
tant part of any MOGA model, is a novel and signif-
icant contribution of this work. The present formu-
lation of the genotype not only captures a snapshot
of the linguistic system, but also explicitly models
the course of change that has given rise to the partic-
ular system. Thus, we believe that the current model
is more suitable in explaining a case of linguistic
change.
The paper is organized as follows: Sec. 2 intro-
duces the problem of historical change affecting the
BVIs and presents a mathematical formulation of the
same; Sec. 3 describes the MOGA model; Sec. 4
reports the experiments, observations and their in-
terpretations; Sec. 5 concludes the paper by sum-
marizing the contributions. In this paper, Bengali
graphemes are represented in Roman script follow-
ing the ITRANS notation (Chopde, 2001). Since
Bengali uses a phonemic orthography, the phonemes
are also transcribed using ITRANS within two /s.
2 The Problem
Bengali is an agglutinative language. There are
more than 150 different inflected forms of a single
Attributes Classical (?0) SCB ACB Sylheti
PrS1 kari kori kori kori
PrS2 kara karo kara kara
PrS3 kare kare kare kare
PrSF karen karen karen karoin
PrC1 kariteChi korChi kartAsi koirtAsi
PrC2 kariteCha korCho kartAsa koirtAsae
PrC3 kariteChe korChe kartAse koirtAse
PrCF kariteChen korChen kartAsen kortAsoin
PrP1 kariAChi koreChi korsi koirsi
PrP2 kariACha koreCho karsa koirsae
PrP3 kariAChe koreChe karse koirse
PrPF kariAChen koreChen karsen korsoin
Table 1: The different inflected verb forms of Clas-
sical Bengali and three other modern dialects. All
the forms are in the phonetic forms and for the verb
root kar. Legend: (tense) Pr ? present; (aspects) S
? simple, C ? continuous, P ? perfect, ; (person) 1
? first, 2 ? second normal, 3 ? third, F ? formal in
second and third persons. See (Bhattacharya et al,
2005) for list of all the forms.
verb root in Bengali, which are obtained through af-
fixation of one of the 52 inflectional suffixes, option-
ally followed by the emphasizers. The suffixes mark
for the tense, aspect, modality, person and polarity
information (Bhattacharya et al, 2005). The ori-
gin of modern Bengali can be traced back to Vedic
Sanskrit (circa 1500 BC 600 BC), which during
the middle Indo-Aryan period gave rise to the di-
alects like Ma?gadhi?, and Ardhama?gadhi? (circa
600 BC 200 AD), followed by the Ma?gadhi? ?
apabhramsha, and finally crystallizing to Bengali
(circa 10th century AD) (Chatterji, 1926). The ver-
bal inflections underwent a series of phonological
changes during the middle Bengali period (1200 -
1800 AD), which gave rise to the several dialectal
forms of Bengali, including the standard form ? the
Standard Colloquial Bengali (SCB).
The Bengali literature of the 19th century was
written in the Classical Bengali dialect or the
sa?dhubha?sha? that used the older verb forms and
drew heavily from the Sanskrit vocabulary, even
though the forms had disappeared from the spoken
dialects by 17th century. Here, we shall take the lib-
erty to use the terms ?classical forms? and ?Classi-
cal Bengali? to refer to the dialectal forms of middle
Bengali and not Classical Bengali of the 19th cen-
66
tury literature. Table 1 enlists some of the corre-
sponding verb forms of classical Bengali and SCB.
Table 3 shows the derivation of some of the current
verb inflections of SCB from its classical counter-
parts as reported in (Chatterji, 1926).
2.1 Dialect Data
Presently, there are several dialects of Bengali that
vary mainly in terms of the verb inflections and in-
tonation, but rarely over syntax or semantics. We do
not know of any previous study, during which the
different dialectal forms for BVI were collected and
systematically listed. Therefore, we have collected
dialectal data for the following three modern dialects
of Bengali by enquiring the na?ive informants.
? Standard Colloquial Bengali (SCB) spoken in a
region around Kolkata, the capital of West Ben-
gal,
? Agartala Colloquial Bengali (ACB) spoken in
and around Agartala, the capital of Tripura, and
? Sylheti, the dialect of the Sylhet region of
Bangladesh.
Some of the dialectal forms are listed in Table 1.
The scope of the current study is restricted to 28 in-
flected forms (12 present tense forms + 12 past tense
forms + 4 forms of habitual past) of a single verb
root, i.e., kar.
2.2 Problem Formulation
Choudhury et al (2006a) has shown that a sequence
of simple phonological changes, which we shall
call the Atomic Phonological Operators or APO for
short, when applied to the classical Bengali lexicon,
gives rise to the modern dialects. We conceive of
four basic types of APOs, namely Del or deletion,
Met or metathesis, Asm or assimilation, and Mut
or mutation. The complete specification of an APO
includes specification of its type, the phoneme(s)
that is(are) affected by the operation and the left and
right context of application of the operator specified
as regular expressions on phonemes. The seman-
tics of the basic APOs in terms of rewrite rules are
shown in Table 2.2. Since Bengali features assim-
ilation only with respect to vowel height, here we
shall interpret Asm(p, LC,RC) as the height as-
similation of the vowel p in the context of LC or
APO Semantics
Del(p, LC,RC) p? ?/LC?RC
Met(pipj , LC,RC) pipj ? pjpi/LC?RC
Asm(p, LC,RC) p? p?/LC?RC
Mut(p, p?, LC,RC) p? p?/LC?RC
Table 2: Semantics of the basic APOs in terms of
rewrite rules. LC and RC are regular expressions
specifying the left and right contexts respectively. p,
p?, pi and pj represent phonemes.
Rule APO Example Derivations
No. kar ? iteChe kar ? iten kar ? iAChi
1 Del(e, ?, Ch) kar ? itChe NA NA
2 Del(t, ?, Ch) kar ? iChe NA NA
3 Met(ri, ?, ?) kair ? Che kair ? ten kair ?AChi
5 Mut(A, e, ?, Ch) NA NA kair-eChi
6 Asm(a, i, ?, ?) koir ? Che koir ? ten koir ? eChi
7 Del(i, o, ?) kor ? Che kor ? ten kor ? eChi
Table 3: Derivations of the verb forms of SCB from
classical Bengali using APOs. ?NA? means the rule
is not applicable for the form. See (Choudhury et
al., 2006a) for the complete list of APOs involved in
the derivation of SCB and ACB forms
RC. Also, we do not consider epenthesis or inser-
tion as an APO, because epenthesis is not observed
for the case of the change affecting BVI.
The motivation behind defining APOs rather than
representing the change in terms of rewrite rules is
as follows. Rewrite rules are quite expressive and
therefore, it is possible to represent complex phono-
logical changes using a single rewrite rule. On the
other hand, APOs are simple phonological changes
that can be explained independently in terms of pho-
netic factors (Ohala, 1993). In fact, there are also
computational models satisfactorily accounting for
cases of vowel deletion (Choudhury et al, 2004;
Choudhury et al, 2006b) and assimilation (Dras et
al., 2003).
Table 3 shows the derivation of the SCB verb
forms from classical Bengali in terms of APOs. The
derivations are constructed based on the data pro-
vided in (Chatterji, 1926).
2.3 Functional Explanation for Change of BVI
Let ?0 be the lexicon of classical Bengali verb
forms. Let ? : ?1, ?2, ? ? ? ?r be a sequence of r
APOs. Application of an APO on a lexicon implies
the application of the operator on every word of the
67
lexicon. The sequence of operators ?, thus, repre-
sent a dialect obtained through the process of change
from ?0, which can be represented as follows.
?(?0) = ?r(? ? ? ?2(?1(?0)) ? ? ?) = ?d
The derivation of the dialect ?d from ?0 can be con-
structed by following the APOs in the sequence of
their application.
We propose the following functional explanation
for the change of BVI.
A sequence of APOs, ? is preferred if ?(?0) has
some functional benefit over ?0. Thus, the modern
Bengali dialects are those, which have some func-
tional advantage over the classical dialect.
We would like to emphasize the word ?some? in
the aforementioned statements, because the modern
dialects are not better than the classical one (i.e., the
ancestor language) in an absolute sense. Rather, the
classical dialect is suboptimal compared to the mod-
ern dialects only with respect to ?some? of the func-
tional forces and is better than the them with respect
to ?some other? forces. Stated differently, we expect
both the classical as well as the modern dialects of
Bengali to be Pareto-optimal3 with respect to the set
of functional forces.
In order to validate the aforementioned hypoth-
esis, we carry out a multi-objective and multi-
constraint optimization over the possible dialectal
forms of Bengali, thereby obtaining the Pareto-
optimal set, which has been achieved through
MOGA.
3 The MOGA Model
Specification of a problem within the MOGA frame-
work requires the definition of the genotype, phe-
notype and genotype-to-phenotype mapping plus the
objective functions and constraints. In this section,
we discuss the design choices explored for the prob-
lem of BVI.
3Consider an optimization problem with n objective func-
tions f1 to fn, where we want to minimize all the objectives.
Let S be the solution space, representing the set of all possible
solutions. A soulution sinS is said to be Pareto-optimal with re-
spect to the objective functions f1 to fn, if and only if there does
not exist any other solution s? ? S such that fi(s?) ? fi(s) for
all 1 ? i ? n and fi(s?) < fi(s) for at least one i.
3.1 Phenotype and Genotype
We define the phenotype of a dialect d to be the lex-
icon of the dialect, ?d, consisting of the 28 inflected
forms of the root verb kar. This choice of phenotype
is justified because, at the end of the optimization
process, we would like to obtain the Pareto-optimal
dialects of Bengali and compare them with their real
counterparts.
The genotype of a dialect d could also be defined
as ?d, where the word forms are the genes. How-
ever, for such a choice of genotype, crossover and
mutation lead to counter-intuitive results. For ex-
ample, mutation would affect only a single word in
the lexicon, which is against the regularity principle
of sound change (see Bhat (2001) for explanation).
Similarly, exchanging a set of words between a pair
of lexica, as crossover would lead to, seems insensi-
ble.
Therefore, considering the basic properties of
sound change as well as the genetic operators used
in MOGA, we define a chromosome (and thus the
genotype) as a sequence of APOs. The salient fea-
tures of the genotype are described below.
? Gene: A gene is defined as an APO. Since in
order to implement the MOGA, every gene must be
mapped to a number, we have chosen an 8-bit binary
representation for a gene. This allows us to spec-
ify 256 distinct genes or APOs. However, for rea-
sons described below, we use the first bit of a gene
to denote whether the gene (i.e., the APO) is active
(the bit is set to 1) or not. Thus, we are left with
128 distinct choices for APOs. Since the number of
words in the lexicon is only 28, the APOs for Del,
Asm andMet are limited, even after accounting for
the various contexts in which an APO is applicable.
Nevertheless, there are numerous choices for Mut.
To restrain the possible repertoire of APOs to 128,
we avoided any APO related to the mutation of con-
sonants. This allowed us to design a comprehensive
set of APOs that are applicable on the classical Ben-
gali lexicon and its derivatives.
? Chromosome: A chromosome is a sequence of
15 genes. The number 15 has been arrived through
experimentation, where we have observed that in-
creasing the length of a chromosome beyond 15
does not yield richer results for the current choice
of APOs and ?0. Since the probability of any gene
68
Figure 1: Schematic of genotype, phenotype and
genotype-to-phenotype mapping.
being switched off (i.e., the first bit being 0) is 0.5,
the expected number of active APOs on a chromo-
some with 15 genes is 7.5. It is interesting to note
that this value is almost equal to the number of APOs
required (7 to be precise) for derivation of the SCB
verb forms.
? Genotype to phenotype mapping: Let for a given
chromosome, the set of active APOs (whose first bit
is 1) in sequence be ?1, ?2, ? ? ? , ?r. Then the pheno-
type corresponding to this chromosome is the lex-
icon ?d = ?r(? ? ? ?2(?1(?0)) ? ? ?). In other words,
the phenotype is the lexicon obtained by successive
application of the active APOs on the chromosome
on the lexicon of classical Bengali.
The concepts of gene, chromosome and the map-
ping from genotype to the phenotype are illustrated
in Fig. 3.1. It is easy to see that the regularity hy-
pothesis regarding the sound change holds good for
the aforementioned choice of genotype. Further-
more, crossover in this context can be interpreted as
a shift in the course of language change. Similarly,
mutation of the first bit turns a gene on or off, and of
the other bits changes the APO. Note that according
to this formulation, a chromosome not only models
a dialect, but also the steps of its evolution from the
classical forms.
3.2 Objectives and Constraints
Formulation of the objective functions and con-
straints are crucial to the model, because the linguis-
tic plausibility, computational tractability and the re-
sults of the model are overtly dependent on them.
We shall define here three basic objectives of ease
of articulation, perceptual contrast and learnability,
which can be expressed as functions or constraints.
Several models have been proposed in the past for
estimating the articulatory effort (Boersma (1998),
Ch. 2, 5 and 7) and perceptual distance between
phonemes and/or syllables (Boersma (1998), Ch.
3, 4 and 8). Nevertheless, as we are interested in
modeling the effort and perceptual contrast of the
whole lexicon rather than a syllable, we have cho-
sen to work with simpler formulations of the objec-
tive functions. Due to paucity of space, we are not
able to provide adequate details and justification for
the choices made.
3.2.1 fe: Articulatory Effort
Articulatory effort of a lexicon ? is a positive real
number that gives an estimate of the effort required
to articulate the words in ? in some unit. If fe de-
notes the effort function, then
fe(?) =
1
|?|
?
w??
fe(w) (1)
The term fe(w) depends on three parameters: 1)
the length of w in terms of phonemes, 2) the struc-
ture of the syllables, and 3) the features of adjacent
phonemes, as they control the effort spent in co-
articulation. We define fe(w) to be a weighted sum
of these three.
fe(w) = ?1fe1(w) + ?2fe2(w) + ?3fe3(w) (2)
where, ?1 = 1, ?2 = 1 and ?3 = 0.1 are the relative
weights.
The value of fe1 is simply the length of the word,
that is
fe1(w) = |w| (3)
Suppose ? = ?1?2 ? ? ??k is the usual syllabifica-
tion of w, where the usual or optimal syllabification
for Bengali is defined similar to that of Hindi as de-
scribed in (Choudhury et al, 2004). Then, fe2 is
defined as follows.
fe2(w) =
k?
i=1
hr(?i) (4)
hr(?) measures the hardness of the syllable ? and is
a function of the syllable structure (i.e. the CV pat-
tern) of ?. The values of hr(?) for different syllable
structures are taken from (Choudhury et al, 2004).
69
Since vowel height assimilation is the primary
co-articulation phenomenon observed across the di-
alects of Bengali, we define fe3 so as to model
only the effort required due to the difference in the
heights of the adjacent vowels.
Let there be n vowels in w represented by Vi,
where 1 ? i ? n. Then fe3 is defined by the fol-
lowing equation.
fe3(w) =
n?1?
i=1
|ht(Vi)? ht(Vi+1)| (5)
The function ht(Vi) is the tongue height associ-
ated with the vowel Vi. The value of the function
ht(Vi) for the vowels /A/, /a/, /E/ /o/, /e/, /i/
and /u/ are 0, 1, 1, 2, 2, 3, and 3 respectively. Note
that the values are indicative of the ordering of the
vowels with respect to tongue height, and do not re-
flect the absolute height of the tongue in any sense.
3.2.2 fd and Cd: Acoustic Distinctiveness
We define the acoustic distinctiveness between
two words wi and wj as the edit distance between
them, which is denoted as ed(wi, wj). The cost of
insertion and deletion of any phoneme is assumed to
be 1; the cost of substitution of a vowel (consonant)
for a vowel (consonant) is also 1, whereas that of a
vowel (consonant) for a consonant (vowel) is 2, ir-
respective of the phonemes being compared. Since
languages are expected to increase the acoustic dis-
tinctiveness between the words, we define a mini-
mizing objective function fd over a lexicon ? as the
sum of the inverse of the edit distance between all
pair of words in ?.
fd(?) =
2
|?|(|?| ? 1)
?
ij,i6=j
ed(wi, wj)
?1 (6)
If for any pair of words wi and wj , ed(wi, wj) =
0, we redefine ed(wi, wj)?1 as 20 (a large penalty).
We say that a lexicon ? violates the acoustic dis-
tinctiveness constraintCd, if there are more than two
pairs of words in ?, which are identical.
3.2.3 Cp: Phonotactic constraints
A lexicon ? is said to violate the constraint Cp if
any of the words in ? violates the phonotactic con-
straints of Bengali. As described in (Choudhury et
al., 2004), the PCs are defined at the level of sylla-
ble onsets and codas and therefore, syllabification is
a preprocessing step before evaluation of Cp.
3.2.4 fr and Cr: Regularity
Although learnability is a complex notion, one
can safely equate the learnability of a system to the
regularity of the patterns within the system. In fact,
in the context of morphology, it has been observed
that the so called learning bottleneck has a regular-
izing effect on the morphological structures, thereby
leaving out only the most frequently used roots to
behave irregularly (Hare and Elman, 1995; Kirby,
2001).
In the present context, we define the regularity
of the verb forms in a lexicon as the predictability
of the inflectional suffix on the basis of the mor-
phological attributes. Brighton et al (2005) discuss
the use of Pearson correlation between phonologi-
cal edit distance and semantic/morphological ham-
ming distance measures as a metric for learnabil-
ity. On a similar note, we define the regularity func-
tion fr as follows. For two words wi, wj ? ?, the
(dis)similarity between them is given by ed(wi, wj).
Let ma(wi, wj) be the number of morphological at-
tributes shared by wi and wj . We define the reg-
ularity of ?, fr(?), as the Pearson correlation co-
efficient between ed(wi, wj) and ma(wi, wj) for
all pairs of words in ?. Note that for a regular
lexicon, ed(wi, wj) decreases with an increase in
ma(wi, wj). Therefore, fr(?) is negative for a reg-
ular lexicon and 0 or positive for an irregular one.
In other words, fr(?) is also a minimizing objective
function.
We also define a regularity constraint Cr, such
that a lexicon ? violates Cr if fr(?) > ?0.8.
4 Experiments and Observations
In order to implement the MOGA model, we have
used the Non-dominated Sorting GA-II or NSGA-
II (Deb et al, 2002), which is a multi-objective,
multi-constraint elitist GA. Different MOGA mod-
els have been incrementally constructed by intro-
ducing the different objectives and constraints. The
motivation behind the incorporation of a new ob-
jective or constraint comes from the observations
made on the emergent dialects of the previous mod-
els. For instance, with two objectives fe and fd,
70
and no constraints, we obtain dialects that violate
phonotactic constraints or/and are highly irregular.
One such example of an emergent dialect4 is ? =
{ kor, kara, kar, kore, korea, kore, karA, karAa,
karA, *korAlm, *korl, korla, *koreAlm, korel, ko-
rela, *karAlm, karAl, karAla }. The * marked forms
violate the phonotactic constraints. Also note that
the forms are quite indistinct or close to each other.
These observations led to the formulation of the con-
straints Cp and Cd.
Through a series of similar experiments, finally
we arrived at a model, where we could observe the
emergence of dialects, some of which closely resem-
ble the real dialects and others also seem linguisti-
cally plausible. In this final model, there are two
objectives, fe and fd, and 3 constraints, Cp, Cd and
Cr. Table 4 lists the corresponding forms of some
of the emergent dialects, whose real counterparts are
shown in Table 1.
Fig. 2 shows the Pareto-optimal front obtained
for the aforementioned model after 500 generations,
with a population size of 1000. Since the objectives
are minimizing in nature, the area on the plot below
and left of the Pareto-optimal front represents im-
possible languages, whereas the area to the right and
top of the curve pertains to unstable or suboptimal
languages. It is interesting to note that the four real
dialects lie very close to the Pareto-optimal front. In
fact, ACB and SCB lie on the front, whereas clas-
sical Bengali and Sylheti appears to be slightly sub-
optimal. Nevertheless, one should always be aware
that impossibility and suboptimality are to be inter-
preted in the context of the model and any general-
ization or extrapolation of these concepts for the real
languages is controversial and better avoided.
Several inferences can be drawn from the exper-
iments with the MOGA models. We have observed
that the Pareto-optimal fronts for all the MOGA
Models look like rectangular hyperbola with a hori-
zontal and vertical limb; the specific curve of Fig. 2
satisfies the equation:
fd(?)
0.3(fe(?)? 5.6) = 0.26 (7)
Several interesting facts, can be inferred from the
above equation. First, the minimum value of fe un-
der the constraints Cr and Cd, and for the given
4Due to space constraints, we intentionally omit the corre-
sponding classical forms.
Figure 2: The Pareto-optimal front. The gray trian-
gles (light blue in colored version available online)
show the position of the real dialects: 0 ? Classi-
cal Bengali, 1 ? SCB, 2 ? ACB, 3 ? Sylheti. The
top-most dot in the plot corresponds to the emergent
dialect D0 shown in Table 4.
repertoire of APOs is 5.6. Second, at fe(?) = 6,
the slope of the front, i.e. dfd/dfe, is approximately
?2, and the second derivative d2fd/df2e is around
20. This implies that there is sharp transition be-
tween the vertical and horizontal limbs at around
fe(?) = 6.
Interestingly, all the real dialects studied here lie
on the horizontal limb of the Pareto-optimal front
(i.e., fe(?) ? 6), classical Bengali being placed at
the extreme right. We also note the negative corre-
lation between the value of fe for the real dialects,
and the number of APOs invoked during derivation
of these dialects from classical Bengali. These facts
together imply that the natural direction of language
change in the case of BVIs has been along the hor-
izontal limb of the Pareto-optimal front, leading to
the formation of dialects with higher and higher ar-
ticulatory ease. Among the four dialects, SCB has
the minimum value for fe(?) and it is positioned on
the horizontal limb of the front just before the begin-
ning of the vertical limb.
Therefore, it is natural to ask whether there are
any real dialects of modern Bengali that lie on the
vertical limb of the Pareto-optimal front; and if not,
what may be the possible reasons behind their inex-
istence? In the absence of any comprehensive col-
lection of Bengali dialects, we do not have a clear
answer to the above questions. Nevertheless, it may
71
Attributes D0 D1 D2 D3
PrS1 kar kor kori kori
PrS2 kara kora kora kora
PrS3 kare kore kore korA
PrSF karen koren koren koren
PrC1 kartA karChi karteChi kairteChi
PrC2 kartAa karCha karteCha kairteCha
PrC3 kartAe karChe karteChe kairteChA
PrCF kartAen karChen karteChen kairteChen
PrP1 karA korChi koriChi koriChAi
PrP2 karAa korCha koriCha koriACha
PrP3 karAe korChe koriChe koriAChA
PrPF karAen korChen koriChen koriAChen
Table 4: Examples of emergent dialects in the
MOGA model. Note that the dialects D1, D2 and
D3 resemble SCB, ACB and Sylheti, whereas D0
seems to be linguistically implausible. For legends,
refer to Table 1
be worthwhile to analyze the emergent dialects of
the MOGA models that lie on the vertical limb. We
have observed that the vertical limb consists of di-
alects similar to D0 ? the one shown in the first
column of Table 4. Besides poor distinctiveness,
D0 also features a large number of diphthongs that
might result in poorer perception or higher effort of
articulation of the forms. Thus, in order to eliminate
the emergence of such seemingly implausible cases
in the model, the formulations of the objectives fe
and fd require further refinements.
Similarly, it can also be argued that the structure
of the whole lexicon, which has not been modeled
here, has also a strong effect on the BVIs. This is
because even though we have measured the acous-
tic distinctiveness fd with respect to the 28 inflected
forms of a single verb root kar, ideally fd should be
computed with respect to the entire lexicon. Thus,
change in other lexical items (borrowing or extinc-
tion of words or change in the phonological struc-
tures) can trigger or restrain an event of change in
the BVIs.
Furthermore, merging, extinction or appearence
of morphological attributes can also have significant
effects on the phonological change of inflections. It
is interesting to note that while Vedic Sanskrit had
different morphological markers for three numbers
(singular, dual and plural) and no gender markers
for the verbs, Hindi makes a distinction between the
genders (masculine and feminine) as well as num-
bers (but only singular and plural), and Bengali has
markers for neither gender nor number. Since both
Hindi and Bengali are offshoots of Vedic Sanskrit,
presumably the differences between the phonologi-
cal structure of the verb inflections of these two lan-
guages must have also been affected by the loss or
addition of morphological attributes. It would be in-
teresting to study the precise nature of the interac-
tion between the inflections and attributes within the
current computational framework, which we deem
to be a future extension of this work.
5 Conclusions
In this paper, we have described a MOGA based
model for the morpho-phonological change of BVIs.
The salient contributions of the work include: (1) the
conception of the genotype as a sequence of APOs,
whereby we have been able to capture not only the
emergent dialects, but also the path towards their
emergence, and (2) a plausible functional explana-
tion for the morpho-phonological changes affecting
the BVIs. Nevertheless, the results of the experi-
ments with the MOGA models must be interpreted
with caution. This is because, the results are very
much dependent on the formulation of the fitness
functions and the choice of the constraints. The set
of APOs in the repertoire also play a major role in
shaping the Pareto-optimal front of the model.
Before we conclude, we would like to re-
emphasize that the model proposed here is a func-
tional one, and it does not tell us how the dialects
of Bengali have self-organized themselves to strike
a balance between the functional pressures, if at all
this had been the case. The evolutionary algorithm
(i.e., MOGA) has been used here as a tool for op-
timization, and has no relevance to the evolution of
the dialects as such. Nevertheless, if it is possible
to provide linguistically grounded accounts of the
sources of variation and the process of selection,
then the MOGA model could qualify as an evolu-
tionary explanation of language change as well. Al-
though such models have been proposed in the liter-
ature (Croft, 2000; Baxter et al, 2006), the fact, that
global optimization can be an outcome of local inter-
actions between the speakers (e.g., Kirby (1999), de
72
Boer (2001), Choudhury et al (2006b)), alone pro-
vides sufficient ground to believe that there is also an
underlying self-organizational model for the present
functional explanation.
References
G. J. Baxter, R. A. Blythe, W. Croft, and A. J. McKane.
2006. Utterance selection model of language change.
Physical Review E, 73(046118).
D.N.S. Bhat. 2001. Sound Change. Motilal Banarsidass,
New Delhi.
S. Bhattacharya, M. Choudhury, S. Sarkar, and A. Basu.
2005. Inflectional morphology synthesis for bengali
noun, pronoun and verb systems. In Proc. of NCCPB,
pages 34?43, Dhaka.
Julia Blevins. 2004. Evolutionary Phonology. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, MA.
P. Boersma. 1998. Functional Phonology: Formaliz-
ing the interactions between articulatory and percep-
tual drives. Uitgave van Holland Academic Graphics,
Hague.
Henry Brighton, Kenny Smith, and Simon Kirby. 2005.
Language as an evolutionary system. Physics of Life
Reviews, 2(3):177?226, September.
A. Cangelosi and D. Parisi. 2002. Comuputer simula-
tion: A new scientific approach to the study of lan-
guage evolution. In Simulating the Evolution of Lan-
guage, pages 3?28. Springer Verlag, London.
S. K. Chatterji. 1926. The Origin and Development of
the Bengali Language. Rupa and Co., New Delhi.
A. Chopde. 2001. Itrans version 5.30: A package
for printing text in indian languages using english-
encoded input. http://www.aczoom.com/itrans/.
M. Choudhury, A. Basu, and S. Sarkar. 2004. A di-
achronic approach for schwa deletion in indo-aryan
languages. In Proc. of ACL SIGPHON-04, pages 20?
26, Barcelona.
M. Choudhury, M. Alam, S. Sarkar, and A. Basu.
2006a. A rewrite rule based model of bangla morpho-
phonological change. In Proc. of ICCPB, pages 64?
71, Dhaka.
M. Choudhury, A. Basu, and S. Sarkar. 2006b. Multi-
agent simulation of emergence of the schwa deletion
pattern in hindi. JASSS, 9(2).
W. Croft. 2000. Explaining Language Change: An Evo-
lutionary Approach. Longman Linguistic Library.
B. de Boer. 2001. The Origins of Vowel Systems. Oxford
University Press.
K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan. 2002.
A fast and elitist multi-objective genetic algorithm:
NSGA-II. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Com-
putation, 6:182?197.
M. Dras, D. Harrison, and B. Kapicioglu. 2003. Emer-
gent behavior in phonological pattern change. In Arti-
ficial Life VIII. MIT Press.
David E. Goldberg. 1989. Genetic Algorithms in Search,
Optimization and Machine Learning. Addison-
Wesley.
M. Hare and J. L. Elman. 1995. Learning and morpho-
logical change. Cognition, 56(1):61?98, July.
M. D. Hauser, N. Chomsky, and W. T. Fitch. 2002. The
faculty of language: What is it, who has it, and how
did it evolve? Science, 298:1569?1579, 11.
John H. Holland. 1975. Adaptation in Natural and Arti-
ficial Systems. The University of Michigan Press, Ann
Arbor.
Jinyun Ke, Mieko Ogura, and William S-Y. Wang. 2003.
Modeling evolution of sound systems with genetic al-
gorithm. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):1?18.
S. Kirby. 1999. Function, Selection and Innateness: the
Emergence of Language Universals. Oxford Univer-
sity Press. The full-text is only a sample (chapter 1: A
Puzzle of Fit).
S. Kirby. 2001. Spontaneous evolution of linguistic
structure: an iterated learning model of the emergence
of regularity and irregularity. IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation, 5(2):102?110.
Anthony Kroch. 2001. Syntactic change. In Mark baltin
and Chris Collins, editors, Handbook of Syntax, pages
699?729. Blackwell.
P. Niyogi. 2006. The Computational Nature of Language
Learning and Evolution. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
J. Ohala. 1993. The phonetics of sound change. In
C. Jones, editor, Historical linguistics: Problems and
perspectives, page 237278. Longman, London.
A. Perfors. 2002. Simulated evolution of language: a
review of the field. Journal of Artificial Societies and
Social Simulation, 5(2).
T. Poibeau. 2006. Linguistically grounded models of
language change. In Proc. of CogSci 2006, pages 255?
276.
73
Melissa A. Redford and R. L. Diehl. 1999. The rela-
tive perceptibility of syllable-initial and syllable-final
consonants. Journal of Acoustic Society of America,
106:1555?1565.
Melissa A. Redford, Chun Chi Chen, and Risto Mi-
ikkulainen. 2001. Constrained emergence of univer-
sals and variation in syllable systems. Language and
Speech, 44:27?56.
Melissa A. Redford. 1999. An Articulatory Basis for
the Syllable. Ph.D. thesis, Psychology, University of
Texas, Austin.
L. Steels. 1997. The synthetic modeling of language
origins. Evolution of Communication, 1(1):1?34.
W. S-Y. Wang, J. Ke, and J. W. Minett. 2005. Computa-
tional studies of language evolution. In Computational
Linguistics and Beyond: Perspectives at the beginning
of the 21st Century, Frontiers in Linguistics 1. Lan-
guage and Linguistics.
74
Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of Computational Language Acquisition, pages 51?58,
Athens, Greece, 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Language Diversity across the Consonant Inventories:
A Study in the Framework of Complex Networks
Monojit Choudhury
Microsoft Research India, Bangalore, India ? 560080
Email: monojitc@microsoft.com
Animesh Mukherjee, Anupam Basu and Niloy Ganguly
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India ? 721302
Ashish Garg and Vaibhav Jalan
Malaviya National Institute of Technology, Jaipur, India ? 302017
Abstract
In this paper, we attempt to explain the
emergence of the linguistic diversity that
exists across the consonant inventories of
some of the major language families of the
world through a complex network based
growth model. There is only a single pa-
rameter for this model that is meant to
introduce a small amount of randomness
in the otherwise preferential attachment
based growth process. The experiments
with this model parameter indicates that
the choice of consonants among the lan-
guages within a family are far more pref-
erential than it is across the families. Fur-
thermore, our observations indicate that
this parameter might bear a correlation
with the period of existence of the lan-
guage families under investigation. These
findings lead us to argue that preferential
attachement seems to be an appropriate
high level abstraction for language acqui-
sition and change.
1 Introduction
In one of their seminal papers (Hauser et al,
2002), Noam Chomsky and his co-authors re-
marked that if a Martian ever graced our planet
then it would be awe-struck by the unique abil-
ity of the humans to communicate among them-
selves through the medium of language. How-
ever, if our Martian naturalist were meticulous
then it might also note the surprising co-existence
of 6700 such mutually unintelligible languages
across the world. Till date, the terrestrial scientists
have no definitive answer as to why this linguistic
diversity exists (Pinker, 1994). Previous work in
the area of language evolution has tried to explain
the emergence of this diversity through two differ-
ent background models. The first one assumes that
there is a set of predefined language configurations
and the movement of a particular language on this
landscape is no more than a random walk (Tom-
lin, 1986; Dryer, 1992). The second line of re-
search attempts to relate the ecological, cultural
and demographic parameters with the linguistic
parameters responsible for this diversity (Arita and
Taylor, 1996; Kirby, 1998; Livingstone and Fyfe,
1999; Nettle, 1999). From the above studies, it
turns out that linguistic diversity is an outcome of
the language dynamics in terms of its evolution,
acquisition and change.
In this work, we attempt to investigate the di-
versity that exists across the consonant inventories
of the world?s languages through an evolutionary
framework based on network growth. The use of
a network based model is motivated from the fact
that in the recent years, complex networks have
proved to be an extremely suitable framework for
modeling and studying the structure and dynam-
ics of linguistic systems (Cancho and Sole?, 2001;
Dorogovtsev and Mendes, 2001; Cancho and Sole?,
2004; Sole? et al, 2005).
Along the lines of the study presented
in (Choudhury et al, 2006), we model the struc-
ture of the inventories through a bipartite network,
which has two different sets of nodes, one la-
beled by the languages and the other by the con-
sonants. Edges run in between these two sets
depending on whether a particular consonant is
found in a particular language. This network
is termed the Phoneme?Language Network or
PlaNet in (Choudhury et al, 2006). We construct
five such networks that respectively represent the
consonant inventories belonging to the five ma-
51
jor language families namely, the Indo-European
(IE-PlaNet), the Afro-Asiatic (AA-PlaNet), the
Niger-Congo (NC-PlaNet), the Austronesian (AN-
PlaNet) and the Sino-Tibetan (ST-PlaNet).
The emergence of the distribution of occurrence
of the consonants across the languages of a fam-
ily can be explained through a growth model for
the PlaNet representing the family. We employ the
preferential attachment based growth model intro-
duced in (Choudhury et al, 2006) and later ana-
lytically solved in (Peruani et al, 2007) to explain
this emergence for each of the five families. The
model involves a single parameter that is essen-
tially meant to introduce randomness in the oth-
erwise predominantly preferential growth process.
We observe that if we combine the inventories for
all the families together and then attempt to fit this
new data with our model, the value of the param-
eter is significantly different from that of the in-
dividual families. This indicates that the dynam-
ics within the families is quite different from that
across them. There are possibly two factors that
regulate this dynamics: the innate preference of
the speakers towards acquiring certain linguistic
structures over others and shared ancestry of the
languages within a family.
The prime contribution of this paper lies in the
mathematical model that naturally captures and
quantifies the diversification process of the lan-
guage inventories. This diversification, which is
arguably an effect of language acquisition and
change, can be viewed as a manifestation of the
process of preferential attachment at a higher level
of abstraction.
The rest of the paper is laid out as follows. Sec-
tion 2 states the definition of PlaNet, briefly de-
scribes the data source and outlines the construc-
tion procedure for the five networks. In section 3
we review the growth model for the networks. The
experiments and the results are explained in the
next section. Section 5 concludes the paper by ex-
plaining how preferential attachment could possi-
bly model the phenomena of language acquisition,
change and evolution.
2 Definition and Construction of the
Networks
In this section, we revisit the definition of PlaNet,
discuss briefly about the data source, and explain
how we constructed the networks for each of the
families.
Figure 1: Illustration of the nodes and edges of
PlaNet.
2.1 Definition of PlaNet
PlaNet is a bipartite graph G = ? VL,VC ,Epl ? con-
sisting of two sets of nodes namely, VL (labeled
by the languages) and VC (labeled by the conso-
nants); Epl is the set of edges running between VL
and VC . There is an edge e ? Epl from a node
vl ? VL to a node vc ? VC iff the consonant c is
present in the inventory of the language l. Figure 1
illustrates the nodes and edges of PlaNet.
2.2 Data Source
We use the UCLA Phonological Segment Inven-
tory Database (UPSID) (Maddieson, 1984) as the
source of data for this work. The choice of this
database is motivated by a large number of typo-
logical studies (Lindblom and Maddieson, 1988;
Ladefoged and Maddieson, 1996; de Boer, 2000;
Hinskens and Weijer, 2003) that have been car-
ried out on it by earlier researchers. It is a well
known fact that UPSID suffers from several prob-
lems, especially those involving representational
issues (Vaux and Samuels, 2005). Therefore,
any analysis carried on UPSID and the inferences
drawn from them are subject to questions. How-
ever, the current analysis requires a large amount
of segment inventory data and to the best of our
knowledge UPSID is the biggest database of this
kind. Moreover, we would like to emphasize that
the prime contribution of this work lies in the
mathematical modeling of the data rather than the
results obtained, which, as we shall see shortly, are
not very surprising or novel. The current model
applied to a different database of segment inven-
52
tories may lead to different results, though we be-
lieve that the basic trends will remain similar. In
essence, the results described here should be taken
as indicative and not sacrosanct.
There are 317 languages in the database with
541 consonants found across them. From these
data we manually sort the languages into five
groups representing the five families. Note that we
included a language in any group if and only if we
could find a direct evidence of its presence in the
corresponding family. A brief description of each
of these groups and languages found within them
are listed below (Haspelmath et al, 2005; Gordon,
2005).
Indo-European: This family includes most of the
major languages of Europe and south, central and
south-west Asia. Currently, it has around 3 bil-
lion native speakers, which is largest among all
the recognized families of languages in the world.
The total number of languages appearing in this
family is 449. The earliest evidences of the Indo-
European languages have been found to date 4000
years back.
Languages ? Albanian, Lithuanian, Breton, Irish,
German, Norwegian, Greek, Bengali, Hindi-
Urdu, Kashmiri, Sinhalese, Farsi, Kurdish, Pashto,
French, Romanian, Spanish, Russian, Bulgarian.
Afro-Asiatic: Afro-Asiatic languages have about
200 million native speakers spread over north,
east, west, central and south-west Africa. This
family is divided into five subgroups with a total of
375 languages. The proto-language of this family
began to diverge into separate branches approxi-
mately 6000 years ago.
Languages ? Shilha, Margi, Angas, Dera, Hausa,
Kanakuru, Ngizim, Awiya, Somali, Iraqw, Dizi,
Kefa, Kullo, Hamer, Arabic, Amharic, Socotri.
Niger-Congo: The majority of the languages that
belong to this family are found in the sub-Saharan
parts of Africa. The number of native speakers
is around 300 million and the total number of
languages is 1514. This family descends from a
proto-language, which dates back 5000 years.
Languages ? Diola, Temne, Wolof, Akan, Amo,
Bariba, Beembe, Birom, Cham, Dagbani, Doayo,
Efik, Ga, Gbeya, Igbo, Ik, Koma, Lelemi, Senadi,
Tampulma, Tarok, Teke, Zande, Zulu, Kadugli,
Moro, Bisa, Dan, Bambara, Kpelle.
Austronesian: The languages of the Austronesian
family are widely dispersed throughout the islands
of south-east Asia and the Pacific. There are 1268
Networks |VL| |VC | |Epl|
IE-PlaNet 19 148 534
AA-PlaNet 17 123 453
NC-PlaNet 30 135 692
AN-PlaNet 12 82 221
ST-PlaNet 9 71 201
Table 1: Number of nodes and edges in the five
bipartite networks corresponding to the five fami-
lies.
languages in this family, which are spoken by a
population of 6 million native speakers. Around
4000 years back it separated out from its ancestral
branch.
Languages ? Rukai, Tsou, Hawaiian, Iai, Adz-
era, Kaliai, Roro, Malagasy, Chamorro, Tagalog,
Batak, Javanese.
Sino-Tibetan: Most of the languages in this fam-
ily are distributed over the entire east Asia. With
a population of around 2 billion native speakers it
ranks second after Indo-European. The total num-
ber of languages in this family is 403. Some of the
first evidences of this family can be traced 6000
years back.
Languages ? Hakka, Mandarin, Taishan, Jingpho,
Ao, Karen, Burmese, Lahu, Dafla.
2.3 Construction of the Networks
We use the consonant inventories of the languages
enlisted above to construct the five bipartite net-
works ? IE-PlaNet, AA-PlaNet, NC-PlaNet, AN-
PlaNet and ST-PlaNet. The number of nodes and
edges in each of these networks are noted in Ta-
ble 1.
3 The Growth Model for the Networks
As mentioned earlier, we employ the growth
model introduced in (Choudhury et al, 2006) and
later (approximately) solved in (Peruani et al,
2007) to explain the emergence of the degree dis-
tribution of the consonant nodes for the five bipar-
tite networks. For the purpose of readability, we
briefly summarize the idea below.
Degree Distribution: The degree of a node v, de-
noted by k, is the number of edges incident on
v. The degree distribution is the fraction of nodes
pk that have a degree equal to k (Newman, 2003).
The cumulative degree distribution Pk is the frac-
tion of nodes having degree greater than or equal
to k. Therefore, if there are N nodes in a network
53
then,
Pk =
N?
k=k?
pk? (1)
Model Description: The model assumes that the
size of the consonant inventories (i.e., the degree
of the language nodes in PlaNet) are known a pri-
ori.
Let the degree of a language node Li ? VL
be denoted by di (i.e., di refers to the inventory
size of the language Li in UPSID). The conso-
nant nodes in VC are assumed to be unlabeled, i.e,
they are not marked by the articulatory/acoustic
features (see (Trubetzkoy, 1931) for further refer-
ence) that characterize them. In other words, the
model does not take into account the phonetic sim-
ilarity among the segments. The nodes L1 through
L317 are sorted in the ascending order of their de-
grees. At each time step a node Lj , chosen in
order, preferentially gets connected to dj distinct
nodes (call each such node C) of the set VC . The
probability Pr(C) with which the node Lj gets
connected to the node C is given by,
Pr(C) = k + ??
?C? (k? + ?)
(2)
where k is the current degree of the node C, C ?
represents the nodes in VC that are not already
connected to Lj and ? is the model parameter that
is meant to introduce a small amount of random-
ness into the growth process. The above steps are
repeated until all the language nodes Lj ? VL get
connected to dj consonant nodes.
Intuitively, the model works as follows: If a
consonant is very frequently found in the invento-
ries of the languages, then there is a higher chance
of that consonant being included in the inventory
of a ?new language?. Here the term ?new lan-
guage? can be interpreted either as a new and hith-
erto unseen sample from the universal set of lan-
guages, or the formation of a new language due
to some form of language change. The param-
eter ? on the other hand ensures that the conso-
nants which are found in none of the languages
from the current sample also have a chance of be-
ing included in the new language. It is similar to
the add-? smoothing used to avoid zero probabil-
ities while estimating probability distributions. It
is easy to see that for very large values of ? the fre-
quency factor will play a very minor role and the
consonants will be chosen randomly by the new
language, irrespective of its present prevalence. It
is natural to ask why and how this particular pro-
cess would model the growth of the language in-
ventories. We defer this question until the last sec-
tion of the paper, and instead focus on some empir-
ical studies to see if the model can really explain
the observed data.
Peruani et al (2007) analytically derived an ap-
proximate expression for the degree distribution of
the consonant nodes for this model. Let the aver-
age consonant inventory size be denoted by ? and
the number of consonant nodes be N. The solu-
tion obtained in (Peruani et al, 2007) is based on
the assumption that at each time step t, a language
node gets attached to ? consonant nodes, follow-
ing the distribution Pr(C). Under the above as-
sumptions, the degree distribution pk,t for the con-
sonant nodes, obtained by solving the model, is a
?-distribution as follows
pk,t ' A
(k
t
)??1 (
1? kt
)N?
? ???1 (3)
where A is a constant term. Using equations 1
and 3 one can easily compute the value of Pk,t.
There is a subtle point that needs a mention
here. The concept of a time step is very crucial
for a growing network. It might refer to the addi-
tion of an edge or a node to the network. While
these two concepts coincide when every new node
has exactly one edge, there are obvious differences
when the new node has degree greater than one.
The analysis presented in Peruani et al (2007)
holds good for the case when only one edge is
added per time step. However, if the degree of the
new node being introduced to the system is much
less than N , then Eq. 3 is a good approximation of
the emergent degree distribution for the case when
a node with more than one edge is added per time
step. Therefore, the experiments presented in the
next section attempt to fit the degree distribution
of the real networks with Eq. 3 by tuning the pa-
rameter ?.
4 Experiments and Results
In this section, we attempt to fit the degree dis-
tribution of the five empirical networks with the
expression for Pk,t described in the previous sec-
tion. For all the experiments we set N = 541, t =
number of languages in the family under investi-
gation and ? = average degree of the language
nodes of the PlaNet representing the family under
investigation, that is, the average inventory size for
54
Network ? for least LSE Value of LSE
IE-PlaNet 0.055 0.16AA-PlaNet 0.040 0.24NC-PlaNet 0.035 0.19AN-PlaNet 0.030 0.17ST-PlaNet 0.035 0.03Combined-PlaNet 0.070 1.47
Table 2: The values of ? and the least LSE for the
different networks. Combined-PlaNet refers to the
network constructed after mixing all the languages
from all the families. For all the experiments
the family. Therefore, given the value of k we
can compute pk,t using Eq. 3 if ? is known, and
from pk,t we can further compute Pk,t. In order to
find the best fitting theoretical degree distribution,
we vary the value of ? in steps of 0.005 within the
range of 0 to 1 and choose that ? for which the log-
arithmic standard error1 (LSE) between the the-
oretical degree distribution and the epirically ob-
served degree distribution of the real network and
the equation is least. LSE is defined as the sum of
the square of the difference between the logarithm
of the ordinate pairs (say y and y?) for which the
abscissas are equal. The best fits obtained for each
of the five networks are shown in Figure 2. The
values of ? and the corresponding least LSE for
each of them are noted in Table 2. We make the
following significant and interesting observations.
Observation I: The very low value of the parame-
ter ? indicates that the choice of consonants within
the languages of a family is strongly preferential.
In this context, ? may be thought of as modeling
the (accidental) errors or drifts that can occur dur-
ing language transmission. The fact that the val-
ues of ? across the four major language families,
namely Afro-Asiatic,Niger-Congo, Sino-Tibetan
and Austronesian, are comparable indicates that
the rate of error propagation is a universal factor
that is largely constant across the families. The
value of ? for IE-PlaNet is slightly higher than
the other four families, which might be an effect
of higher diversification within the family due to
geographical or socio-political factors. Neverthe-
less, it is still smaller than the ? of the Combined-
1LSE = (log y ? log y?)2. We use LSE as the good-
ness of the fit because the degree distributions of PlaNets are
highly skewed. There are very few high degree nodes and a
large number of low degree nodes. The logarithmic error en-
sures that even very small errors made while fitting the high
degrees are penalized equally as compared to that of the low
degrees. Standard error would not capture this fact and de-
clare a fit as good if it is able to replicate the distribution for
low degrees, but fits the high degrees poorly .
PlaNet.
The optimal ? obtained for Combined-PlaNet is
higher than that of all the families (see Table 2),
though it is comparable to the Indo-European
PlaNet. This points to the fact that the choice
of consonants within the languages of a family is
far more preferential than it is across the families;
this fact is possibly an outcome of shared ances-
try. In other words, the inventories of genetically
related languages are similar (i.e., they share a lot
of consonants) because they have evolved from the
same parent language through a series of linguis-
tic changes, and the chances that they use a large
number of consonants used by the parent language
is naturally high.
Observation II: We observe a very interesting
relationship between the approximate age of the
language family and the values of ? obtained in
each case (see Table 3). The only anomaly is the
Indo-European branch, which possibly indicates
that this might be much older than it is believed
to be. In fact, a recent study (Balter, 2003) has
shown that the age of this family dates back to
8000 years. If this last argument is assumed to
be true then the values of ? have a one-to-one cor-
respondence with the approximate period of ex-
istence of the language families. As a matter of
fact, this correlation can be intuitively justified ?
the higher is the period of existence of a family, the
higher are the chances of transmission errors lead-
ing to its diversification into smaller subgroups,
and hence, the values of ? comes out to be more
for the older families. It should be noted that the
difference between the values of ? for the language
families are not significant2. Therefore, the afore-
mentioned observation should be interpreted only
as an interesting possibility; more experimentation
is required for making any stronger claim.
4.1 Control Experiment
How could one be sure that the aforementioned
observations are not an obvious outcome of the
construction of the PlaNet or some spurious cor-
relations? To this end, we conduct a control ex-
periment where a set of inventories is randomly
selected from UPSID to represent a family. The
2Note that in order to obtain the best fit for the cumulative
distribution, ? has been varied in steps of 0.005. Therefore,
the values of ? in Table 2 cannot be more accurate than ? ?
0.005. However, in many cases the difference between the
best-fit ? for two language families is exactly 0.005, which
indicates that the difference is not significant.
55
Figure 2: The degree distribution of the different real networks (black dots) along with the fits obtained
from the equation for the optimal values of ? (grey lines).
Families Age (in years) ?
Austronasean 4000 0.030
Niger-Congo 5000 0.035
Sino-Tibetan 6000 0.035
Afro-Asiatic 6000 0.040
Indo-European 4000 (or 8000) 0.055
Table 3: Table showing the relationship between
the age of a family and the value of ?.
number of languages chosen is the same as that of
the PlaNets of the various language families. We
observe that the average value of ? for these ran-
domly constructed PlaNets is 0.068, which, as one
would expect, is close to that of the Combined-
PlaNet. This reinforces the fact that the inherent
proximity among the languages of a real family is
not due to chance.
4.2 Correlation between Families
It can be shown theoretically that if we merge two
PlaNets (say PlaNet1 and PlaNet2) synthesized us-
ing the growth model described here using param-
eters ?1 and ?2, then the ? of the combined PlaNet
can be much greater than both ?1 and ?2 when
there is a low correlation between the degrees of
the consonant nodes between the two PlaNets.
This can be understood as follows. Suppose that
the consonant /k/ is very frequent (i.e., has a high
degree) in PlaNet1, but the consonant /m/ is not.
On the other hand suppose that /m/ is very fre-
quenct in PlaNeT2, but /k/ is not. In the combined
PlaNet the degrees of /m/ and /k/ will even out and
the degree distribution will therefore, be much less
skewed than the original degree distributions of
PlaNet1 and PlaNet2. This is equivalent to the fact
that while ?1 and ?2 were very small, the ? of the
combined PlaNet is quite high. By the same logic
it follows that if the degrees of the consonants are
highly correlated in PlaNet1 and PlaNet2, then the
combined PlaNet will have an ? that is compara-
ble in magnitude to ?1 and ?2. The fact that the
? for the Combined-PlaNet is higher than that of
family-specific PlaNets, therefore, implies that the
correlation between the frequencies of the conso-
nants across language families is not very high.
In order to verify the above observation we esti-
mate the correlation between the frequency of oc-
currence of the consonants for the different lan-
guage family pairs (i.e., how the frequencies of
the consonants /p/, /t/, /k/, /m/, /n/ . . . are corre-
lated across the different families). Table 4 notes
the value of this correlation among the five fami-
lies. The values in Table 4 indicate that, in general,
the families are somewhat weakly correlated with
each other, the average correlation being ? 0.47.
Note that, the correlation between the Afro-
Asiatic and the Niger-Congo families is high not
only because they share the same African origin,
but also due to higher chances of language con-
tacts among their groups of speakers. On the other
hand, the Indo-European and the Sino-Tibetan
families show least correlation because it is usu-
56
Families IE AA NC AN ST
IE ? 0.49 0.48 0.42 0.25
AA 0.49 ? 0.66 0.53 0.43
NC 0.48 0.66 ? 0.55 0.37
AN 0.42 0.53 0.55 ? 0.50
ST 0.25 0.43 0.37 0.50 ?
Table 4: The Pearson?s correlation between the
frequency distributions obtained for the family
pairs. IE: Indo-European, AA: Afro-Asiatic,
NC: Niger-Congo, AN: Austronesian, ST: Sino-
Tibetan.
ally believed that they share absolutely no genetic
connections. Interestingly, similar trends are ob-
served for the values of the parameter ?. If we
combine the languages of the Afro-Asiatic and the
Niger-Congo families and try to fit the new data
then ? turns out to be 0.035 while if we do the same
for the Indo-European and the Sino-Tibetan fam-
ilies then ? is 0.058. For many of the other com-
binations the value of ? and the correlation coeffi-
cient have a one-to-one correspondence. However,
there are clear exceptions also. For instance, if we
combine the Afro-Asiatic and the Indo-European
families then the value of ? is very low (close to
0.04) although the correlation between them is not
very high. The reasons for these exceptions should
be interesting and we plan to further explore this
issue in future.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a method of network
evolution to capture the emergence of linguistic
diversity that manifests in the five major language
families of the world. How does the growth model,
if at all, captures the process of language dynam-
ics? We argue that preferential attachment is a
high level abstraction of language acquisition as
well as language change. We sketch out two pos-
sible explanations for this fact, both of which are
merely speculations at this point and call for de-
tailed experimentation.
It is a well known fact that the process of lan-
guage acquisition by an individual largely gov-
erns the course of language change in a linguis-
tic community. In the initial years of language
development every child passes through a stage
called babbling during which he/she learns to pro-
duce non-meaningful sequences of consonants and
vowels, some of which are not even used in the
language to which they are exposed (Jakobson,
1968; Locke, 1983). Clear preferences can be
observed for learning certain sounds such as plo-
sives and nasals, whereas fricatives and liquids are
avoided. In fact, this hierarchy of preference dur-
ing the babbling stage follows the cross-linguistic
frequency distribution of the consonants. This in-
nate frequency dependent preference towards cer-
tain phonemes might be because of phonetic rea-
sons (i.e., for articulatory/perceptual benefits). It
can be argued that in the current model, this in-
nate preference gets captured through the process
of preferential attachment.
An alternative explanation could be conceived
of based on the phenomenon of language trans-
mission. Let there be a community of N speak-
ers communicating among themselves by means
of only two consonants say /k/ and /g/. Let the
number of /k/ speakers be m and that of /g/ speak-
ers be n. If we assume that each speaker has l de-
scendants and that language inventories are trans-
mitted with high fidelity then after i generations,
the number of /k/ speakers should be mli and that
of /g/ speakers should be nli. Now if m > n
and l > 1 then for sufficiently large values of i
we have mli ? nli. Stated differently, the /k/
speakers by far outnumbers the /g/ speakers after a
few generations even though the initial difference
between them is quite small. This phenomenon
is similar to that of preferential attachment where
language communities get attached to, i.e., select
consonants that are already highly preferred. In
this context ? can be thought to model the acciden-
tal errors during transmission. Since these errors
accumulate over time, this can intuitively explain
why older language families have a higher value
of ? than the younger ones.
In fact, preferential attachment (PA) is a uni-
versally observed evolutionary mechanism that
is known to shape several physical, biological
and socio-economic systems (Newman, 2003).
This phenomenon has also been called for to ex-
plain various linguistic phenomena (Choudhury
and Mukherjee, to appear). We believe that PA
also provides a suitable abstraction for the mech-
anism of language acquisition. Acquisition of vo-
cabulary and growth of the mental lexicon are few
examples of PA in language acquisition. This
work illustrates another variant of PA applied to
explain the structure of consonant inventories and
their diversification across the language families.
57
References
T. Arita and C. E. Taylor. 1996. A simple model
for the evolution of communication. In L. J. Fo-
gel, P. J. Angeline and T. Ba?ck, editors, The Fifth
Annual Conference On Evolutionary Programming,
405?410. MIT Press.
M. Balter. 2003. Early date for the birth of Indo-
European languages. Science 302(5650), 1490.
A.-L. Baraba?si and R. Albert. 1999. Emergence of
scaling in random networks. Science 286, 509-512.
D. Bickerton. 1990. Language and Species, The Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, Chicago.
B. de Boer. 2000. Self-organization in vowel systems.
Journal of Phonetics, 28(4), 441?465.
R. Ferrer i Cancho and R. V. Sole?. 2001. The small-
world of human language. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London, Series B, Biological Sciences,
268(1482), 1228?1235.
R. Ferrer i Cancho and R. V. Sole?. 2004. Patterns
in syntactic dependency networks. Phys. Rev. E,
69(051915).
R. G. Gordon (ed.) 2005. Ethnologue: Languages of
the World, Fifteenth edition, SIL International.
M. Haspelmath, M. S. Dryer, D. Gil and B. Comrie
(ed.) 2005. World Atlas of Language Structures,
Oxford University Press.
M. Choudhury, A. Mukherjee, A. Basu and N. Gan-
guly. 2006. Analysis and synthesis of the distri-
bution of consonants over languages: A complex
network approach. Proceedings of the 21st Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics and
44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Main Conference Poster Ses-
sions, 128?135.
M. Choudhury and A. Mukherjee. to appear. The
structure and dynamics of linguistic networks. In N.
Ganguly, A. Deutsch and A. Mukherjee, editors, Dy-
namics on and of Complex Networks: Applications
to Biology, Computer Science, Economics, and the
Social Sciences, Birkhauser, Springer, Boston.
S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes. 2001. Lan-
guage as an evolving word web. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London, Series B, Biological Sci-
ences, 268(1485), 2603?2606.
M. S. Dryer. 1992. The Greenbergian word order cor-
relations. Language, 68, 81?138.
M. D. Hauser, N. Chomsky and W. T. Fitch. 2002. The
faculty of language: What is it, who has it, and how
did it evolve? Science, 298, 1569?1579.
F. Hinskens and J. Weijer. 2003. Patterns of segmen-
tal modification in consonant inventories: a cross-
linguistic study. Linguistics, 41(6), 1041?1084.
R. Jakobson. 1968. Child Language, Aphasia and
Phonological Universals. The Hague: Mouton.
H. Jeong, B. Tombor, R. Albert, Z. N. Oltvai and A.
L. Baraba?si. 2000. The large-scale organization of
metabolic networks. Nature, 406, 651-654.
S. Kirby. 1998. Fitness and the selective adaptation
of language. In J. R. Hurford, M. Studdert-Kennedy
and C. Knight, editors, Approaches to the Evolution
of Language: Social and Cognitive Bases, 359?383.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
P. Ladefoged and I. Maddieson. 1996. Sounds of the
Worlds Languages, Oxford: Blackwell.
B. Lindblom and I. Maddieson. 1988. Phonetic univer-
sals in consonant systems. In L.M. Hyman and C.N.
Li, eds., Language, Speech, and Mind, Routledge,
London, 62?78.
D. Livingstone and C. Fyfe. 1999. Modelling the
evolution of linguistic diversity. In D. Floreano, J.
Nicoud and F. Mondada, editors, ECAL 99, 704?
708, Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
J. L. Locke. 1983. Phonological Acquisition and
Change. Academic Press New York.
I. Maddieson. 1984. Patterns of Sounds, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
D. Nettle. 1999. Is the rate of linguistic change con-
stant? Lingua, 108(2):119?136.
M. E. J. Newman. 2001. Scientific collaboration net-
works. Physical Review E 64, 016131.
M. E. J. Newman. 2003. The structure and function of
complex networks. SIAM Review 45, 167?256.
F. Peruani, M. Choudhury, A. Mukherjee and N. Gan-
guly. 2007. Emergence of a non-scaling degree dis-
tribution in bipartite networks: a numerical and ana-
lytical study. Euro. Phys. Letters 76, 28001 (p1?p6).
S. Pinker. 1994. The Language Instinct, New York:
William Morrow.
E. Pulleyblank. 1993. The typology of Indo-European.
Journal of Indo-European Studies, p. 109.
Jose? J. Ramasco, S. N. Dorogovtsev, and Romualdo
Pastor-Satorras. 2004. Self-organization of collabo-
ration networks. Physical Review E, 70, 036106.
R. V. Sole? , B. C. Murtra, S. Valverde and L. Steels.
2005. Language networks: Their structure, function
and evolution. Santa Fe working paper, 05-12-042.
R. Tomlin. 1986. Basic Word Order: Functional Prin-
ciples, Croom Helm, London.
N. Trubetzkoy. 1931. Die phonologischen systeme.
TCLP 4, 96?116.
B. Vaux and B. Samuel. 2005. Laryngeal markedness
and aspiration Phonology 22(3), 96?116.
58
