Improved-Edit-Distance Kernel for Chinese Relation Extraction
Wanxiang Che
School of Computer Sci. and Tech.
Harbin Institute of Technology
Harbin China, 150001
tliu@ir.hit.edu.cn
Jianmin Jiang, Zhong Su, Yue Pan
IBM CRL
Beijing China, 100085
{jiangjm, suzhong,
panyue}@cn.ibm.com
Ting Liu
School of Computer Sci. and Tech.
Harbin Institute of Technology
Harbin China, 150001
tliu@ir.hit.edu.cn
Abstract
In this paper, a novel kernel-based
method is presented for the problem
of relation extraction between named
entities from Chinese texts. The ker-
nel is defined over the original Chi-
nese string representations around par-
ticular entities. As a kernel func-
tion, the Improved-Edit-Distance (IED)
is used to calculate the similarity be-
tween two Chinese strings. By em-
ploying the Voted Perceptron and Sup-
port Vector Machine (SVM) kernel ma-
chines with the IED kernel as the clas-
sifiers, we tested the method by extract-
ing person-affiliation relation from Chi-
nese texts. By comparing with tradi-
tional feature-based learning methods,
we conclude that our method needs less
manual efforts in feature transformation
and achieves a better performance.
1 Introduction
Relation extraction (RE) is a basic and impor-
tant problem in information extraction field. It
extracts the relations among the named enti-
ties. Examples of relations are person-affiliation,
organization-location, and so on. For example, in
the Chinese sentence ?????IBM????
??? (Gerstner is the chairman of IBM Corpora-
tion.), the named entities are??? (people) and
IBM?? (organization). The relation between
them is person-affiliation.
Usually, we can regard RE as a classification
problem. All particular entity pairs are found
from a text and then decided whether they are a
relation which we need or not.
At the beginning, a number of manually en-
gineered systems were developed for RE prob-
lem (Aone and Ramos-Santacruz, 2000). The
automatic learning methods (Miller et al, 1998;
Soderland, 1999) are not necessary to have some-
one on hand with detailed knowledge of how the
RE system works, or how to write rules for it.
Usually, the machine learning method repre-
sents the NLP objects as feature vectors in the
feature extraction step. The methods are named
feature-based learning methods. But in many
cases, data cannot be easily represented explicitly
via feature vectors. For example, in most NLP
problems, the feature-based representations pro-
duce inherently local representations of objects,
for it is computationally infeasible to generate
features involving long-range dependencies. On
the other hand, finding the suitable features of a
particular problem is a heuristic work. Their ac-
quisition may waste a lot of time.
Different from the feature-based learning
methods, the kernel-based methods do not need
to extract the features from the original text, but
retain the original representation of objects and
use the objects in algorithms only via comput-
ing a kernel (similarity) function between a pair
of objects. Then the kernel-based methods use
existing learning algorithms with dual form, e.g.
the Voted Perceptron (Freund and Schapire, 1998)
or SVM (Cristianini and Shawe-Taylor, 2000), as
kernel machine to do the classification task.
132
Haussler (1999) and Watkins (1999) proposed
a new kernel method based on discrete structures
respectively. Lodhi et al (2002) used string ker-
nels to solve the text classification problem. Ze-
lenko et al (2003) used the kernel methods
for extracting relations from text. They defined
the kernel function over shallow parse represen-
tation of text. And the kernel method is used in
conjunction with the SVM and the Voted Percep-
tron learning algorithms for the task of extracting
person-affiliation and organization-location rela-
tions from text.
As mentioned above, the discrete structure ker-
nel methods are more suitable to RE problems
than the feature-based methods. But the string-
based kernel methods only consider the word
forms without their semantics. Shallow parser
based kernel methods need shallow parser sys-
tems. Because the performance of shallow parser
systems is not high enough until now, especially
for Chinese text, we cannot depend on it com-
pletely.
To cope with these problems, we propose the
Improved-Edit-Distance (IED) algorithm to cal-
culate the kernel (similarity) function. We con-
sider the semantic similarity between two words
in two strings and some structure information of
strings.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we introduce the kernel-based machine
learning algorithms and their application in nat-
ural language processing problems. In Section 3,
we formalize the relation extraction problem as
a machine learning problem. In Section 4, we
give a novel kernel method, named the IED kernel
method. Section 5 describes the experiments and
results on a particular relation extraction problem.
In Section 6, we discuss the reason why the IED
based kernel method yields a better result than
other methods. Finally, in Section 7, we give the
conclusions and comments on the future work.
2 Kernel-based Machine Learning
Most machine learning methods represent an ob-
ject as a feature vector. They are well-known
feature-based learning methods.
Kernel methods (Cristianini and Shawe-Taylor,
2000) are an attractive alternative to feature-based
methods. The kernel methods retain the original
representation of objects and use the object only
via computing a kernel function between a pair
of objects. As we know, a kernel function is a
similarity function satisfying certain properties.
There are a number of learning algorithms that
can operate using only the dot product of exam-
ples. We call them kernel machines. For in-
stance, the Perceptron learning algorithm (Cris-
tianini and Shawe-Taylor, 2000), Support Vector
Machine (SVM) (Vapnik, 1998) and so on.
3 Relation Extraction Problem
We regard the RE problem as a classification
learning problem. We only consider the relation
between two entities in a sentence and no rela-
tions across sentences. For example, the sen-
tence ????????IBM??????
??? (President Bush met Gerstner, the chair-
man of IBM Corporation.) contains three enti-
ties,?? (people), ??? (people) and IBM?
? (organization). The three entities form two
candidate person-affiliation relation pairs: ??-
IBM?? and ???-IBM?? . The con-
texts of the entities pairs produce the examples
for the binary classification problem. Then, from
the context examples, a classifier can decide ??
?-IBM?? is a real person-affiliation relation
but ??-IBM?? is not.
3.1 Feature-based Methods
The feature-based methods have to transform the
context into features. Expert knowledge is re-
quired for deciding which elements or their com-
binations thereof are good features. Usually these
features? values are binary (0 or 1).
The feature-based methods will cost lots of la-
bor to find suitable features for a particular appli-
cation field. Another problem is that we can either
select only the local features with a small win-
dow or we will have to spend much more training
and test time. At the same time, the feature-based
methods will not use the combination of these fea-
tures.
3.2 Kernel-based Methods
Different from the feature-based methods, kernel-
based methods do not require much labor on ex-
tracting the suitable features. As explained in the
introduction to Section 2, we retain the original
133
string form of objects and consider the similarity
function between two objects. For the problem of
the person-affiliation relation extraction, the ob-
jects are the context around people and organiza-
tion with a fixed window size w. It means that
we get w words around each entity as the samples
in the classification problem. Again considering
the example ????????IBM?????
????, with w = 2, the object for the pair ?
?? (people) and IBM?? (organization) can
be written as ??? ? ORG ?? PEO ??
Through the objects transformed from the origi-
nal texts, we can calculate the similarity between
any two objects by using the kernel (similarity)
function.
For the Chinese relation extraction problem,
we must consider the semantic similarity between
words and the structure of strings while comput-
ing similarity. Therefore we must consider the
kernel function which has a good similarity mea-
sure. The methods for computing the similarity
between two strings are: the same-word based
method (Nirenburg et al, 1993), the thesaurus
based method (Qin et al, 2003), the Edit-Distance
method (Ristad and Yianilos, 1998) and the statis-
tical method (Chatterjee, 2001). We know that the
same-word based method cannot solve the prob-
lem of synonyms. The thesaurus based method
can overcome this difficulty but does not con-
sider the structure of the text. Although the Edit-
Distance method uses the structure of the text, it
also has the same problem of the replacement of
synonyms. As for the statistical method, it needs
large corpora of similarity text and thus is difficult
to use for realistic applications.
For the reasons described above, we propose a
novel Improved-Edit-Distance (IED) method for
calculating the similarity between two Chinese
strings.
4 IED Kernel Method
Like normal kernel methods, the new IED ker-
nel method includes two components: the ker-
nel function and the kernel machine. We use the
IED method to calculate the semantic similarity
between two Chinese strings as the kernel func-
tion. As for the kernel machine, we tested the
Voted Perceptron with dual form and SVM with a
customized kernel. In the following subsections,
(a) Edit-Distance (b) Improved-Edit-Distance
Figure 1: The comparison between the Edit-
Distance and the Improved-Edit-Distance
we will introduce the kernel function, the IED
method, and kernel machines.
4.1 Improved-Edit-Distance
Before the introduction to IED, we will give
a brief review of the classical Edit-Distance
method (Ristad and Yianilos, 1998).
The edit distance between two strings is de-
fined as: The minimum number of edit operations
necessary to transform one string into another.
There are three edit operations, Insert, Delete, and
Replace. For example, in Figure 1(a), the edit dis-
tance between ?????(like apples)? and ??
????(like bananas)? is 4, as indicated by the
four dotted lines.
As we see, the method of computing the edit
distance between two Chinese strings cannot re-
flect the actual situation. First, the Edit-Distance
method computes the similarity measured in Chi-
nese character. But in Chinese, most of the char-
acters have no concrete meanings, such as ???,
??? and so on. The single character cannot ex-
press the meanings of words. Second, the cost
of the Replace operation is different for different
words. For example, the operation of ??(love)?
being replace by ???(like)? should have a small
cost, because they are synonyms. At last, if there
are a few words being inserted into a string, the
meaning of it should not be changed too much.
Such as ?????(like apples)? and ?????
?(like sweet apples)? are very similar.
Based on the above idea, we provide the IED
method for computing the similarity between two
Chinese strings. It means that we will use Chinese
words as the basis of our measurement (instead of
characters). By using a thesaurus, the similarity
between two Chinese words can be computed. At
the same time, the cost of the Insert operation is
reduced.
Here, we use the CiLin (Mei et al, 1996) as
134
the thesaurus resource to compute the similarity
between two Chinese words. In CiLin, the se-
mantics of words are divided into High, Middle,
and Low classes to describe a semantic system
from general to special semantic. For example:
???(apple)? is Bh07, ???(banana)? is Bh07,
????(tomato)? is Bh06, and so on.
The semantic distance between word A and
word B can be defined as:
Dist(A, B) = min
a?A,b?B
dist(a, b)
where A and B are the semantic sets of word
A and word B respectively. The distance be-
tween semantic a and b is: dist(a, b) = 2 ?
(3 ? d), where d means that the semantic code
is different from the dth class. If the seman-
tic code is same, then the semantic distance is
0. Therefore, Dist(?????) = 0 and
Dist(??????) = 2.
Table 1 defines the variations of the edit dis-
tance on string ?AB? after doing various edit op-
erations. Where, ??? denotes one to four words,
?A? and ?B? are two words which user inputs. X?
denotes the synonyms of X.
Table 1: The Variations of Edit-Distance with AB
Rank Pattern
1 AB
2 A?B
3 AB?; A?B
4 A?B?; A??B
5 A?; B?
According to Table 1, we can define the cost of
various edit operations in IED. See Table 2, where
??? denotes the delete operation.
Table 2: The Cost of Edit Operation in IED
Edit Operation Cost
A?A 0
Insert 0.1
A?A? Dist(A, A?)/10 + 0.5
Others 1
By the redefinition of the cost of edit opera-
tions, the computation of IED between ????
?? and ??????? is as shown Figure 1(b),
where the Replace cost of ???????? is 0.5
and ????????? is 0.7. Thus the cost of IED
is 1.2. Compared with the cost of classical Edit-
Distance, the cost of IED is much more appropri-
ate in the actual situation.
We use dynamic programming to compute the
IED similar with the computing of edit distance.
In order to compute the similarity between two
strings, we should convert the distance value into
a similarity. Empirically, the maximal similarity
is set to be 10. The similarity is 10 minus the
improved edit distance of two Chinese strings.
4.2 Kernel Machines
We use the Voted Perceptron and SVM algorithms
as the kernel machines here.
The Voted Perceptron algorithm was described
in (Freund and Schapire, 1998). We used
SVMlight (Joachims, 1998) with custom kernel as
the implementation of the SVM method. In our
experiments, we just replaced the custom kernel
with the IED kernel function.
5 Experiments and Results
In this section, we show how to extract the
person-affiliation relation from text and give
some experimental results. It is relatively
straightforward to extend the IED kernel method
to other RE problems.
The corpus for our experiments comes from
Bejing Youth Daily1. We annotated about 500
news with named entities of PEO and ORG. We
selected 4,200 sentences (examples) with both
PEO and ORG pairs as described in Section 3.
There are about 1,200 positive examples and
3,000 negative examples. We took about 2,500
random examples as training data and the rest of
about 1,700 examples as test data.
5.1 Infection of Window Size in Kernel
Methods
The change of the performance of the IED kernel
method varying while the window size w is shown
in Table 3. Here the Voted Perceptron is used as
the kernel machine.
Our experimental results show that the IED
kernel method got the best performance with the
highest F -Score when the window size w =
1http://www.bjyouth.com/
135
2. As w grows, the Precision becomes higher.
With smaller w?s, the Recall becomes higher.
5.2 Comparison between Feature and
Kernel Methods
For the feature-based methods implementation,
we use the words which are around the PEO and
the ORG entities and their POS. The window size
is w (See Section 3). All examples can be trans-
formed into feature vectors. We used the regular-
ized winnow learning algorithm (Zhang, 2001) to
train on the training data and predict the test data.
From the experimental results, we find that when
w = 2, the performance of feature-based method
is highest.
The comparison of the performance between
the feature-based and the kernel-base methods is
shown in Table 4.
Figure 2 displays the change of F -Score for
different methods varying with the training data
size.
Figure 2: The learning curve (of F -Score) for the
person-affiliation relation, comparing IED kernel
with feature-based algorithms
Table 3: The Performance Effected by w
w Precision Recall F -Score
1 66.67% 92.68% 77.55%
2 93.55% 87.80% 90.85%
3 94.23% 74.36% 83.12%
Table 4: The Performance Comparison
Precision Recall F -Score
Regularized Winnow 75.90% 96.92% 85.14%
Voted Perceptron 93.55% 87.80% 90.85%
SVM 94.15% 88.38% 91.17%
From Table 4 and Figure 2, we can see
that the IED kernel methods perform better for
the person-affiliation relation extraction problem
than for the feature-based methods.
Figure 2 shows that the Voted Perceptron
method gets close to, but not as good as, the per-
formance to the SVM method on the RE problem.
But when using the method, we can save signifi-
cantly on computation time and programming ef-
fort.
6 Discussion
Our experimental results show that the kernel-
based and the feature-based methods can get the
best performance with the highest F -Score when
the window size w = 2. This shows that for re-
lation extraction problem, the two words around
entities are the most significant ones. On the other
hand, with w becoming bigger, the Precision be-
comes higher. And with w becoming smaller, the
Recall becomes higher.
From Table 4 and Figure 2, we can see that
the IED kernel methods perform very well for
the person-affiliation relation extraction. Further-
more, it does not need an expensive feature selec-
tion stage like feature-based methods. Because
the IED kernel method uses the semantic similar-
ity between words, it can get a better extension.
We can conclude that the IED kernel method re-
quires much fewer examples than feature-based
methods for achieving the same performance.
For example, there is a test sentence ???
? ?? ?? ? IBM?? ?? ? (Chairman
Hu Jintao met the CEO of IBM Corporation). The
feature-based method judges the ???-IBM?
? as a person-affiliation relation, because the
context around??? and IBM?? is similar
with the context of the person-affiliation relation.
However, the IED kernel method does the correct
judgment based on the structure information. For
this case the IED kernel method gets a higher pre-
cision. At the same time, because the IED kernel
method considers the extension of synonyms, its
recall does not decrease very much.
The speed is a practical problem in apply-
ing kernel-based methods. Kernel-based clas-
sifiers are relatively slow compared to feature-
based classifiers. The main reason is that the com-
puting of kernel (similarity) function takes much
136
time. Therefore, it becomes a key problem to im-
prove the efficiency of the computing of the ker-
nel function.
7 Conclusions
We presented a new approach for using kernel-
based machine learning methods for extracting re-
lations between named entities from Chinese text
sources. We define kernels over the original rep-
resentations of Chinese strings around the partic-
ular entities and use the IED method for comput-
ing the kernel function. The kernel-based meth-
ods need not transform the original expression of
objects into feature vectors, so the methods need
less manual efforts than the feature-based meth-
ods. We applied the Voted Perceptron and the
SVM learning method with custom kernels to ex-
tract the person-affiliation relations. The method
can be extended to extract other relations between
entities, such as organization-location, etc. We
also compared the performance of kernel-based
methods with that of feature-based methods, and
the experimental results show that kernel-based
methods are better than feature-based methods.
Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by National
Natural Science Foundation of China via grant
60435020 and IBM-HIT 2005 joint project.
References
Chinatsu Aone and Mila Ramos-Santacruz. 2000.
Rees: A large-scale relation and event extraction
system. In Proceedings of the 6th Applied Natural
Language Processing Conference, pages 76?83.
Niladri Chatterjee. 2001. A statistical approach
for similarity measurement between sentences for
EBMT. In Proceedings of Symposium on Transla-
tion Support Systems STRANS-2001, Indian Insti-
tute of Technology, Kanpur.
N. Cristianini and J. Shawe-Taylor. 2000. An Intro-
duction to Support Vector Machines. Cambridge
University Press, Cambirdge University.
Yoav Freund and Robert E. Schapire. 1998. Large
margin classification using the perceptron algo-
rithm. In Computational Learning Theory, pages
209?217.
David Haussler. 1999. Convolution kernels on dis-
crete structures. Technical Report UCSC-CRL-99-
10, 7,.
Thorsten Joachims. 1998. Text categorization with
support vector machines: learning with many rele-
vant features. In Proceedings of ECML-98, number
1398, pages 137?142, Chemnitz, DE.
Huma Lodhi, Craig Saunders, John Shawe-Taylor,
Nello Cristianini, and Chris Watkins. 2002. Text
classification using string kernels. J. Mach. Learn.
Res., 2:419?444.
Jiaju Mei, Yiming Lan, Yunqi Gao, and Hongxiang
Yin. 1996. Chinese Thesaurus Tongyici Cilin (2nd
Edtion). Shanghai Thesaurus Press, Shanghai.
Scott Miller, Michael Crystal, Heidi Fox, Lance
Ramshaw, Richard Schwartz, Rebecca Stone,
Ralph Weischedel, and the Annotation Group.
1998. Algorithms that learn to extract information?
BBN: Description of the SIFT system as used for
MUC. In Proceedings of the Seventh Message Un-
derstanding Conference (MUC-7).
S. Nirenburg, C. Domashnev, and D.J. Grannes. 1993.
Two approaches to matching in example-based ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the Fifth In-
ternational Conference on Theoretical and Method-
ological Issues in Machine Translation, pages 47?
57, Kyoto, Japan.
Bing Qin, Ting Liu, Yang Wang, Shifu Zheng, and
Sheng Li. 2003. Chinese question answering sys-
tem based on frequently asked questions. Jour-
nal of Harbin Institute of Technology, 10(35):1179?
1182.
Eric Sven Ristad and Peter N. Yianilos. 1998. Learn-
ing string-edit distance. IEEE Transactions on Pat-
tern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 20(5):522?
532.
Stephen Soderland. 1999. Learning information ex-
traction rules for semi-structured and free text. Ma-
chine Learning, 34(1-3):233?272.
Vladimir N. Vapnik. 1998. Statistical Learning The-
ory. Wiley.
Chris Watkins. 1999. Dynamic alignment kernels.
Technical Report CSD-TR-98-11, 1,.
Dmitry Zelenko, Chinatsu Aone, and Anthony
Richardella. 2003. Kernel methods for relation ex-
traction. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 3:1083?1106.
Tong Zhang. 2001. Regularized winnow methods.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 13, pages 703?709.
137
