Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2006), pages 138?145,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semantic Role Labeling of NomBank: A Maximum Entropy Approach
Zheng Ping Jiang and Hwee Tou Ng
Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
3 Science Drive 2, Singapore 117543
{jiangzp, nght}@comp.nus.edu.sg
Abstract
This paper describes our attempt at
NomBank-based automatic Semantic Role
Labeling (SRL). NomBank is a project at
New York University to annotate the ar-
gument structures for common nouns in
the Penn Treebank II corpus. We treat
the NomBank SRL task as a classifica-
tion problem and explore the possibility
of adapting features previously shown use-
ful in PropBank-based SRL systems. Var-
ious NomBank-specific features are ex-
plored. On test section 23, our best sys-
tem achieves F1 score of 72.73 (69.14)
when correct (automatic) syntactic parse
trees are used. To our knowledge, this
is the first reported automatic NomBank
SRL system.
1 Introduction
Automatic Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) sys-
tems, made possible by the availability of Prop-
Bank (Kingsbury and Palmer, 2003; Palmer et
al., 2005), and encouraged by evaluation ef-
forts in (Carreras and Marquez, 2005; Litkowski,
2004), have been shown to accurately determine
the argument structure of verb predicates.
A successful PropBank-based SRL system
would correctly determine that ?Ben Bernanke?
is the subject (labeled as ARG0 in PropBank) of
predicate ?replace?, and ?Greenspan? is the object
(labeled as ARG1):
? Ben Bernanke replaced Greenspan as Fed
chair.
? Greenspan was replaced by Ben Bernanke as
Fed chair.
The recent release of NomBank (Meyers et al,
2004c; Meyers et al, 2004b), a databank that an-
notates argument structure for instances of com-
mon nouns in the Penn Treebank II corpus, made
it possible to develop automatic SRL systems that
analyze the argument structures of noun predi-
cates.
Given the following two noun phrases and one
sentence, a successful NomBank-based SRL sys-
tem should label ?Ben Bernanke? as the subject
(ARG0) and ?Greenspan? as the object (ARG1)
of the noun predicate ?replacement?.
? Greenspan?s replacement Ben Bernanke
? Ben Bernanke?s replacement of Greenspan
? Ben Bernanke was nominated as Greenspan?s
replacement.
The ability to automatically analyze the argu-
ment structures of verb and noun predicates would
greatly facilitate NLP tasks like question answer-
ing, information extraction, etc.
This paper focuses on our efforts at building
an accurate automatic NomBank-based SRL sys-
tem. We study how techniques used in building
PropBank SRL system can be transferred to de-
veloping NomBank SRL system. We also make
NomBank-specific enhancements to our baseline
system. Our implemented SRL system and exper-
iments are based on the September 2005 release of
NomBank (NomBank.0.8).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 gives an overview of NomBank, Sec-
tion 3 introduces the Maximum Entropy classifica-
tion model, Section 4 introduces our features and
feature selection strategy, Section 5 explains the
experimental setup and presents the experimen-
tal results, Section 6 compares NomBank SRL to
138
S


HH
HH
HH
NP
(ARG0)
 HHNNP
Ben
NNP
Bernanke
VP


HH
HHH
VBD
was
VP


HH
HH
VBN
(Support)
nominated
PP


HH
HH
IN
as
NP


HH
HH
NP
(ARG1)
 PPPGreenspan ?s
NN
predicate
replacement
Figure 1: A sample sentence and its parse tree la-
beled in the style of NomBank
PropBank SRL and discusses possible future re-
search directions.
2 Overview of NomBank
The NomBank (Meyers et al, 2004c; Meyers
et al, 2004b) annotation project originated from
the NOMLEX (Macleod et al, 1997; Macleod et
al., 1998) nominalization lexicon developed under
the New York University Proteus Project. NOM-
LEX lists 1,000 nominalizations and the corre-
spondences between their arguments and the ar-
guments of their verb counterparts. NomBank
frames combine various lexical resources (Meyers
et al, 2004a), including an extended NOMLEX
and PropBank frames, and form the basis for anno-
tating the argument structures of common nouns.
Similar to PropBank, NomBank annotation is
made on the Penn TreeBank II (PTB II) corpus.
For each common noun in PTB II that takes argu-
ments, its core arguments are labeled with ARG0,
ARG1, etc, and modifying arguments are labeled
with ARGM-LOC to denote location, ARGM-
MNR to denote manner, etc. Annotations are
made on PTB II parse tree nodes, and argument
boundaries align with the span of parse tree nodes.
A sample sentence and its parse tree labeled
in the style of NomBank is shown in Figure 1.
For the nominal predicate ?replacement?, ?Ben
Bernanke? is labeled as ARG0 and ?Greenspan
?s? is labeled as ARG1. There is also the special
label ?Support? on ?nominated? which introduces
?Ben Bernanke? as an argument of ?replacement?.
The support construct will be explained in detail in
Section 4.2.3.
We are not aware of any NomBank-based auto-
matic SRL systems. The work in (Pradhan et al,
2004) experimented with an automatic SRL sys-
tem developed using a relatively small set of man-
ually selected nominalizations from FrameNet and
Penn Chinese TreeBank. The SRL accuracy of
their system is not directly comparable to ours.
3 Model training and testing
We treat the NomBank-based SRL task as a clas-
sification problem and divide it into two phases:
argument identification and argument classifica-
tion. During the argument identification phase,
each parse tree node is marked as either argument
or non-argument. Each node marked as argument
is then labeled with a specific class during the
argument classification phase. The identification
model is a binary classifier , while the classifica-
tion model is a multi-class classifier.
Opennlp maxent1, an implementation of Maxi-
mum Entropy (ME) modeling, is used as the clas-
sification tool. Since its introduction to the Natural
Language Processing (NLP) community (Berger
et al, 1996), ME-based classifiers have been
shown to be effective in various NLP tasks. ME
modeling is based on the insight that the best
model is consistent with the set of constraints im-
posed and otherwise as uniform as possible. ME
models the probability of label l given input x as
in Equation 1. fi(l, x) is a feature function that
maps label l and input x to either 0 or 1, while the
summation is over all n feature functions and with
?i as the weight parameter for each feature func-
tion fi(l, x). Zx is a normalization factor. In the
identification model, label l corresponds to either
?argument? or ?non-argument?, and in the classi-
fication model, label l corresponds to one of the
specific NomBank argument classes. The classifi-
cation output is the label l with the highest condi-
tional probability p(l|x).
p(l|x) = exp(
?n
i=1 ?ifi(l, x))
Zx (1)
To train the ME-based identification model,
training data is gathered by treating each parse tree
node that is an argument as a positive example and
the rest as negative examples. Classification train-
ing data is generated from argument nodes only.
During testing, the algorithm of enforcing non-
overlapping arguments by (Toutanova et al, 2005)
is used. The algorithm maximizes the log-
probability of the entire NomBank labeled parse
1http://maxent.sourceforge.net/
139
tree. Specifically, assuming we only have two
classes ?ARG? and ?NONE?, the log-probability
of a NomBank labeled parse tree is defined by
Equation 2.
Max(T ) = max
{
NONE(T ) +?(Max(child))
ARG(T ) +?(NONETree(child))
(2)
Max(T ) is the maximum log-probability of a
tree T , NONE(T ) and ARG(T ) are respectively
the log-probability of assigning label ?NONE?
and ?ARG? by our argument identification model
to tree node T , child ranges through each of
T ?s children, and NONETree(child) is the log-
probability of each node that is dominated by node
child being labeled as ?NONE?. Details are pre-
sented in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Maximizing the probability of an
SRL tree
Input p{syntactic parse tree}
Input m{argument identification model, assigns each con-
stituent in the parse tree log likelihood of being a semantic
argument}
Output score{maximum log likelihood of the parse tree p
with arguments identified using model m}
MLParse(p, m)
if parse p is a leaf node then
return max(Score(p,m,ARG), Score(p,m,NONE))
else
MLscore = 0
for each node ci in Children(p) do
MLscore += MLParse(ci,m)
end for
NONEscore = 0
for each node ci in Children(p) do
NONEscore += NONETree(ci,m)
end for
return max(Score(p,m,NONE)+MLscore,
Score(p,m,ARG)+NONEscore)
end if
NONETree(p,m)
NONEscore = Score(p,m,NONE)
if parse p is a leaf node then
return NONEscore
else
for each node ci in Children(p) do
NONEscore += NONETree(ci,m)
end for
return NONEscore
end if
Subroutine:
Children(p) returns the list of children nodes of p.
Score(p,m, state) returns the log likelihood assigned by
model m, for parse p with state. state is either ARG or
NONE.
NomBank sections 02-21 are used as training
data, section 24 and 23 are used as development
and test data, respectively.
3.1 Training data preprocessing
Unlike PropBank annotation which does not con-
tain overlapping arguments (in the form of parse
tree nodes domination) and does not allow pred-
icates to be dominated by arguments, NomBank
annotation in the September 2005 release contains
such cases. In NomBank sections 02-21, about
0.6% of the argument nodes dominate some other
argument nodes or the predicate. To simplify our
task, during training example generation, we ig-
nore arguments that dominate the predicate. We
also ignore arguments that are dominated by other
arguments, so that when argument domination oc-
curs, only the argument with the largest word span
is kept. We do not perform similar pruning on the
test data.
4 Features and feature selection
4.1 Baseline NomBank SRL features
Table 1 lists the baseline features we adapted from
previous PropBank-based SRL systems (Pradhan
et al, 2005; Xue and Palmer, 2004). For ease
of description, related features are grouped, with
a specific individual feature given individual ref-
erence name. For example, feature b11FW in
the group b11 denotes the first word spanned by
the constituent and b13LH denotes the left sis-
ter?s head word. We also experimented with vari-
ous feature combinations, inspired by the features
used in (Xue and Palmer, 2004). These are listed
as features b31 to b34 in Table 1.
Suppose the current constituent under identifi-
cation or classification is ?NP-Ben Bernanke? in
Figure 1. The instantiations of the baseline fea-
tures in Table 1 for this example are presented in
Table 2. The symbol ?NULL? is used to denote
features that fail to instantiate.
4.2 NomBank-specific features
4.2.1 NomBank predicate morphology and
class
The ?NomBank-morph? dictionary provided by
the current NomBank release maps the base form
of a noun to various morphological forms. Be-
sides singular-plural noun form mapping, it also
maps base nouns to hyphenated and compound
nouns. For example, ?healthcare? and ?medical-
care? both map to ?care?. For NomBank SRL fea-
140
Baseline Features (Pradhan et al, 2005)
b1 predicate: stemmed noun
b2 subcat: grammar rule that expands the predicate?s
parent
b3 phrase type: syntactic category of the constituent
b4 head word: syntactic head of the constituent
b5 path: syntactic path from the constituent to the
predicate
b6 position: to the left or right of the predicate
b11 first or last word/POS spanned by the constituent
(b11FW, b11LW, b11FP, b11LP)
b12 phrase type of the left or right sister (b12L, b12R)
b13 left or right sister?s head word/POS (b13LH,
b13LP, b13RH, b13RP)
b14 phrase type of parent
b15 parent?s head word or its POS (b15H, b15P)
b16 head word of the constituent if its parent has phrase
type PP
b17 head word or POS tag of the rightmost NP node, if
the constituent is PP (b17H, b17P)
b18 phrase type appended with the length of path
b19 temporal keyword, e.g., ?Monday?
b20 partial path from the constituent to the lowest com-
mon ancestor with the predicate
b21 projected path from the constituent to the highest
NP dominating the predicate
Baseline Combined Features (Xue and Palmer, 2004)
b31 b1 & b3
b32 b1 & b4
b33 b1 & b5
b34 b1 & b6
Table 1: Baseline features for NomBank SRL
tures, we use this set of more specific mappings
to replace the morphological mappings based on
WordNet. Specifically, we replace feature b1 in
Table 1 with feature a1 in Table 3.
The current NomBank release also contains
the ?NOMLEX-PLUS? dictionary, which con-
tains the class of nominal predicates according to
their origin and the roles they play. For exam-
ple, ?employment? originates from the verb ?em-
ploy? and is classified as ?VERB-NOM?, while
the nouns ?employer? and ?employee? are classi-
fied as ?SUBJECT? and ?OBJECT? respectively.
Other classes include ?ADJ-NOM? for nominal-
ization of adjectives and ?NOM-REL? for rela-
tional nouns. The class of a nominal predicate is
very indicative of the role of its arguments. We
would expect a ?VERB-NOM? predicate to take
both ARG0 and ARG1, while an ?OBJECT? pred-
icate to take only ARG0. We incorporated the
class of nominal predicates as additional features
in our NomBank SRL system. We add feature a2
in Table 3 to use this information.
Baseline Features (Pradhan et al, 2005)
b1 replacement
b2 NP ? NP NN
b3 NP
b4 Bernanke
b5 NP?S?VP?VP?PP?NP?NN
b6 left
b11 Ben, Bernanke, NNP, NNP
b12 NULL, VP
b13 NULL, NULL, was, VBD
b14 S
b15 was, VBD
b16 NULL
b17 NULL, NULL
b18 NP-7
b19 NULL
b20 NP?S
b21 NP?S?VP?VP?PP?NP
Baseline Combined Features (Xue and Palmer, 2004)
b31 replacement & NP
b32 replacement & Bernanke
b33 replacement & NP?S?VP?VP?PP?NP?NN
b34 replacement & left
Table 2: Baseline feature instantiations, assuming
the current constituent is ?NP-Ben Bernanke? in
Figure 1.
Additional Features Based on NomBank
a1 Nombank morphed noun stem
a2 Nombank nominal class
a3 identical to predicate?
a4 a DEFREL noun?
a5 whether under the noun phrase headed by the pred-
icate
a6 whether the noun phrase headed by the predicate
is dominated by a VP node or has neighboring VP
nodes
a7 whether there is a verb between the constituent and
the predicate
Additional Combined Features
a11 a1 & a2
a12 a1 & a3
a13 a1 & a5
a14 a3 & a4
a15 a1 & a6
a16 a1 & a7
Additional Features of Neighboring Arguments
n1 for each argument already classified, b3-b4-b5-b6-
r, where r is the argument class, otherwise b3-b4-
b5-b6
n2 backoff version of n1, b3-b6-r or b3-b6
Table 3: Additional NomBank-specific features
for NomBank SRL
4.2.2 DEFREL relational noun predicate
About 14% of the argument node instances in
NomBank sections 02-21 are identical to their
nominal predicate nodes. Most of these nominal
predicates are DEFREL relational nouns (Mey-
ers et al, 2004c). Examples of DEFREL rela-
tional nouns include ?employee?, ?participant?,
141
and ?husband?, where the nominal predicate itself
takes part as an implied argument.
We include in our classification features an indi-
cator of whether the argument coincides with the
nominal predicate. We also include a feature test-
ing if the argument is one of the DEFREL nouns
we extracted from NomBank training sections 02-
21. These two features correspond to a3 and a4 in
Table 3.
4.2.3 Support verb
Statistics show that almost 60% of the argu-
ments of nominal predicates occur locally inside
the noun phrase headed by the nominal pred-
icate. For the cases where an argument ap-
pears outside the local noun phrase, over half of
these arguments are introduced by support verbs.
Consider our example ?Ben Bernanke was nomi-
nated as Greenspan?s replacement.?, the argument
?Ben Bernanke? is introduced by the support verb
?nominate?. The arguments introduced by sup-
port verbs can appear syntactically distant from
the nominal predicate.
To capture the location of arguments and the
existence of support verbs, we add features in-
dicating whether the argument is under the noun
phrase headed by the predicate, whether the noun
phrase headed by the predicate is dominated by
a VP phrase or has neighboring VP phrases, and
whether there is a verb between the argument and
the predicate. These are represented as features
a5, a6, and a7 in Table 3. Feature a7 was also pro-
posed by the system in (Pradhan et al, 2004).
We also experimented with various feature
combinations, inspired by the features used
in (Xue and Palmer, 2004). These are listed as
features a11 to a16 in Table 3.
4.2.4 Neighboring arguments
The research of (Jiang et al, 2005; Toutanova et
al., 2005) has shown the importance of capturing
information of the global argument frame in order
to correctly classify the local argument.
We make use of the features {b3,b4,b5,b6} of
the neighboring arguments as defined in Table 1.
Arguments are classified from left to right in the
textual order they appear. For arguments that are
already labeled, we also add their argument class
r. Specifically, for each argument to the left of the
current argument, we have a feature b3-b4-b5-b6-
r. For each argument to the right of the current
argument, the feature is defined as b3-b4-b5-b6.
We extract features in a window of size 7, centered
at the current argument. We also add a backoff
version (b3-b6-r or b3-b6) of this specific feature.
These additional features are shown as n1 and n2
in Table 3.
Suppose the current constituent under identi-
fication or classification is ?NP-Ben Bernanke?.
The instantiations of the additional features in Ta-
ble 3 are listed in Table 4.
Additional Features based on NomBank
a1 replacement
a2 VERB-NOM
a3 no
a4 no
a5 no
a6 yes
a7 yes
Additional Combined Features
a11 replacement & VERB-NOM
a12 replacement & no
a13 replacement & no
a14 no & no
a15 replacement & yes
a16 replacement & yes
Additional Features of Neighboring Arguments
n1 NP-Greenspan-NP?NP?NN-left
n2 NP-left
Table 4: Additional feature instantiations, assum-
ing the current constituent is ?NP-Ben Bernanke?
in Figure 1.
4.3 Feature selection
Features used by our SRL system are automati-
cally extracted from PTB II parse trees manually
labeled in NomBank. Features from Table 1 and
Table 3 are selected empirically and incremen-
tally according to their contribution to test accu-
racy on the development section 24. The feature
selection process stops when adding any of the
remaining features fails to improve the SRL ac-
curacy on development section 24. We start the
selection process with the basic set of features
{b1,b2,b3,b4,b5,b6}. The detailed feature selec-
tion algorithm is presented in Algorithm 2.
Features for argument identification and argu-
ment classification are independently selected. To
select the features for argument classification, we
assume that all arguments have been correctly
identified.
After performing greedy feature selection, the
baseline set of features selected for identification
is {b1-b6, b11FW, b11LW, b12L, b13RH, b13RP,
b14, b15H, b18, b20, b32-b34}, and the baseline
142
Algorithm 2 Greedy feature selection
Input Fcandidate{set of all candidate features}
Output Fselect{set of selected features}
Output Mselect{selected model}
Initialize:
Fselect = {b1, b2, b3, b4, b5, b6}
Fcandidate = AllFeatures? Fselect
Mselect = Train(Fselect)
Eselect = Evaluate(Mselect, DevData)
loop
for each feature fi in Fcandidate do
Fi = Fselect
? fi
Mi = Train(Fi)
Ei = Evaluate(Mi, DevData)
end for
Emax = Max(Ei)
if Emax > Eselect then
Fselect = Fselect
? fmax
Mselect = Mmax
Eselect = Emax
Fcandidate = Fcandidate ? fmax
end if
if Fcandidate == ? or Emax ? Eselect then
return Fselect,Mselect
end if
end loop
Subroutine:
Evaluate(Model,Data) returns the accuracy score by
evaluating Model on Data.
Train(FeatureSet) returns maxent model trained on the
given feature set.
set of features selected for classification is {b1-b6,
b11, b12, b13LH, b13LP, b13RP, b14, b15, b16,
b17P, b20, b31-b34}. Note that features in {b19,
b21} are not selected. For the additional features
in Table 3, greedy feature selection chose {a1, a5,
a6, a11, a12, a14} for the identification model and
{a1, a3, a6, a11, a14, a16, n1, n2} for the classifi-
cation model.
5 Experimental results
5.1 Scores on development section 24
After applying the feature selection algorithm in
Section 4.3, the SRL F1 scores on development
section 24 are presented in Table 5. We sepa-
rately present the F1 score for identification-only
and classification-only model. We also apply the
classification model on the output of the identifica-
tion phase (which may contain erroneously identi-
fied arguments in general) to obtain the combined
accuracy. During the identification-only and com-
bined identification and classification testing, the
tree log-probability maximization algorithm based
on Equation 2 (and its extension to multi-classes)
is used. During the classification-only testing, we
identification classification combined
baseline 80.32 84.86 69.70
additional 80.55 87.31 70.12
Table 5: NomBank SRL F1 scores on develop-
ment section 24, based on correct parse trees
identification classification combined
baseline 82.33 85.85 72.20
additional 82.50 87.80 72.73
Table 6: NomBank SRL F1 scores on test section
23, based on correct parse trees
classify each correctly identified argument using
the classification ME model. The ?baseline? row
lists the F1 scores when only the baseline fea-
tures are used, and the ?additional? row lists the
F1 scores when additional features are added to
the baseline features.
5.2 Testing on section 23
The identification and classification models based
on the chosen features in Section 4.3 are then ap-
plied to test section 23. The resulting F1 scores
are listed in Table 6. Using additional features, the
identification-only, classification-only, and com-
bined F1 scores are 82.50, 87.80, and 72.73, re-
spectively.
Performing chi-square test at the level of sig-
nificance 0.05, we found that the improvement of
the classification model using additional features
compared to using just the baseline features is sta-
tistically significant, while the corresponding im-
provements due to additional features for the iden-
tification model and the combined model are not
statistically significant.
The improved classification accuracy due to the
use of additional features does not contribute any
significant improvement to the combined identifi-
cation and classification SRL accuracy. This is due
to the noisy arguments identified by the inadequate
identification model, since the accurate determi-
nation of the additional features (such as those of
neighboring arguments) depends critically on an
accurate identification model.
5.3 Using automatic syntactic parse trees
So far we have assumed the availability of cor-
rect syntactic parse trees during model training
and testing. We relax this assumption by using
the re-ranking parser presented in (Charniak and
143
Johnson, 2005) to automatically generate the syn-
tactic parse trees for both training and test data.
The F1 scores of our best NomBank SRL sys-
tem, when applied to automatic syntactic parse
trees, are 66.77 for development section 24 and
69.14 for test section 23. These F1 scores are for
combined identification and classification, with
the use of additional features. Comparing these
scores with those in Table 5 and Table 6, the usage
of automatic parse trees lowers the F1 accuracy by
more than 3%. The decrease in accuracy is ex-
pected, due to the noise introduced by automatic
syntactic parsing.
6 Discussion and future work
6.1 Comparison of the composition of
PropBank and NomBank
Counting the number of annotated predicates, the
size of the September 2005 release of NomBank
(NomBank.0.8) is about 83% of PropBank release
1. Preliminary consistency tests reported in (Mey-
ers et al, 2004c) shows that NomBank?s inter-
annotator agreement rate is about 85% for core
arguments and lower for adjunct arguments. The
inter-annotator agreement for PropBank reported
in (Palmer et al, 2005) is above 0.9 in terms of the
Kappa statistic (Sidney and Castellan Jr., 1988).
While the two agreement measures are not di-
rectly comparable, the current NomBank.0.8 re-
lease documentation indicates that only 32 of the
most frequently occurring nouns in PTB II have
been adjudicated.
We believe the smaller size of NomBank.0.8
and the potential noise contained in the current re-
lease of the NomBank data may partly explain our
lower SRL accuracy on NomBank, especially in
the argument identification phase, as compared to
the published accuracies of PropBank-based SRL
systems.
6.2 Difficulties in NomBank SRL
The argument structure of nominalization phrases
is less fixed (i.e., more flexible) than the argument
structure of verbs. Consider again the example
given in the introduction, we find the following
flexibility in forming grammatical NomBank ar-
gument structures for ?replacement?:
? The positions of the arguments are flexi-
ble, so that ?Greenspan?s replacement Ben
Bernanke?, ?Ben Bernanke?s replacement of
Greenspan? are both grammatical.
? Arguments can be optional, so that
?Greenspan?s replacement will assume
the post soon?, ?The replacement Ben
Bernanke will assume the post soon?, and
?The replacement will assume the post soon?
are all grammatical.
With the verb predicate ?replace?, except for
?Greenspan was replaced?, there is no freedom of
forming phrases like ?Ben Bernanke replaces? or
simply ?replaces? without supplying the necessary
arguments to complete the grammatical structure.
We believe the flexible argument structure of
NomBank noun predicates contributes to the lower
automatic SRL accuracy as compared to that of the
PropBank SRL task.
6.3 Integrating PropBank and NomBank
SRL
Work in (Pustejovsky et al, 2005) discussed the
possibility of merging various Treebank annota-
tion efforts including PropBank, NomBank, and
others. Future work involves studying ways
of concurrently producing automatic PropBank
and NomBank SRL, and improving the accuracy
by exploiting the inter-relationship between verb
predicate-argument and noun predicate-argument
structures.
Besides the obvious correspondence between a
verb and its nominalizations, e.g., ?replace? and
?replacement?, there is also correspondence be-
tween verb predicates in PropBank and support
verbs in NomBank. Statistics from NomBank sec-
tions 02-21 show that 86% of the support verbs in
NomBank are also predicate verbs in PropBank.
When they coincide, they share 18,250 arguments
of which 63% have the same argument class in
PropBank and NomBank.
Possible integration approaches include:
? Using PropBank data as augmentation to
NomBank training data.
? Using re-ranking techniques (Collins, 2000)
to jointly improve PropBank and NomBank
SRL accuracy.
7 Conclusion
We have successfully developed a statistical
NomBank-based SRL system. Features that were
previously shown to be effective in PropBank SRL
are carefully selected and adapted for NomBank
SRL. We also proposed new features to address
144
the special predicate-argument structure in Nom-
Bank data. To our knowledge, we presented the
first result in statistical NomBank SRL.
References
Adam Berger, Stephen Della Pietra, and Vincent Della
Pietra. 1996. A Maximum Entropy Approach to
Natural Language Processing. Computational Lin-
guistics.
Xavier Carreras and Lluis Marquez. 2005. Intro-
duction to the CoNLL-2005 Shared Task: Semantic
Role Labeling. In Proceedings of CoNLL-2005.
Eugene Charniak and Mark Johnson. 2005. Coarse-
to-fine n-Best Parsing and MaxEnt Discriminative
Reranking. In Proceedings of ACL-2005.
Michael Collins. 2000. Discriminative Reranking for
Natural Language Parsing. In Proceedings of ICML
2000.
Zheng Ping Jiang, Jia Li, and Hwee Tou Ng. 2005.
Semantic Argument Classification Exploiting Argu-
ment Interdependence. In Proceedings of IJCAI
2005.
Paul Kingsbury and Martha Palmer. 2003. PropBank:
the Next Level of TreeBank. In Proceedings of Tree-
banks and Lexical Theories.
Kenneth C. Litkowski. 2004. SENSEVAL-3 Task: Au-
tomatic Labeling of Semantic Roles. In Proceedings
of Senseval-3: The Third International Workshop on
the Evaluation of Systems for the Semantic Analysis
of Text.
Catherine Macleod, Adam Meyers, Ralph Grishman,
Leslie Barrett, and Ruth Reeves. 1997. Designing a
Dictionary of Derived Nominals. In Proceedings of
Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing.
Catherine Macleod, Ralph Grishman, Adam Meyers,
Leslie Barrett, and Ruth Reeves. 1998. NOMLEX:
A Lexicon of Nominalizations. In Proceedings of
EURALEX?98.
Adam Meyers, Ruth Reeves, Catherine Macleod,
Rachel Szekely, Veronika Zielinska, and Brian
Young. 2004a. The Cross-Breeding of Dictionar-
ies. In Proceedings of LREC-2004.
Adam Meyers, Ruth Reeves, Catherine Macleod,
Rachel Szekely, Veronika Zielinska, Brian Young,
and Ralph Grishman. 2004b. Annotating Noun Ar-
gument Structure for NomBank. In Proceedings of
LREC-2004.
Adam Meyers, Ruth Reeves, Catherine Macleod,
Rachel Szekely, Veronika Zielinska, Brian Young,
and Ralph Grishman. 2004c. The NomBank
Project: An Interim Report. In Proceedings of HLT-
NAACL 2004 Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus An-
notation.
Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The Proposition Bank: An Annotated Corpus
of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics.
Sameer S. Pradhan, Honglin Sun, Wayne Ward,
James H. Martin, and Dan Jurafsky. 2004. Parsing
Arguments of Nominalizations in English and Chi-
nese. In Proceedings of HLT/NAACL 2004.
Sameer Pradhan, Kadri Hacioglu, Valerie Krugler,
Wayne Ward, James H. Martin, and Daniel Juraf-
sky. 2005. Support Vector Learning for Semantic
Argument Classification. Machine Learning.
James Pustejovsky, Adam Meyers, Martha Palmer, and
Massimo Poesio. 2005. Merging PropBank, Nom-
Bank, TimeBank, Penn Discourse Treebank and
Coreference. In ACL 2005 Workshop on Frontiers
in Corpus Annotations II: Pie in the Sky.
Siegel Sidney and N. John Castellan Jr. 1988. Non-
parametric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences.
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Kristina Toutanova, Aria Haghighi, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2005. Joint Learning Improves Semantic
Role Labeling. In Proceedings of ACL 2005.
Nianwen Xue and Martha Palmer. 2004. Calibrating
Features for Semantic Role Labeling. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP-2004.
145
