In: Proceedings of CoNLL-2000 and LLL-2000, pages 136-138, Lisbon, Portugal, 2000. 
A Context Sensitive Maximum Likelihood Approach to Chunking 
Chr i s te r  Johansson  
Electrotechnical Laboratories Machine Understanding Division 
1-1-4 Umezono, Tsukuba. 305 Ibaraki, JAPAN 
1 In t roduct ion  
In Brill's (1994) groundbreaking work on parts- 
of-speech tagging, the starting point was to as- 
sign each word its most common tag. An ex- 
tension to this first step is to utilize the lexical 
context (i.e., words and punctuation) surround- 
ing the word. This approach could obviously be 
used for ordering tags into higher order units 
(referred to as chunks) using chunk :labels. 
This paper will investigate the performance 
of simply picking the most likely tag for a given 
context, under the condition that a larger con- 
text is allowed to override the most likely la- 
bel of a smaller context. The results could be 
extended by secondary error correction as in 
Brill's tagger, but this exercise is left to the 
reader to allow us to concentrate on the perfor- 
mance based on storing and retrieving the most 
likely examples only. 
More sophisticated methods may' use more 
than one stored context to determine the la- 
bel that best fits the current context (Van den 
Bosch and Daelemans, 1998; Zavrel and Daele- 
mans, 1997; Skousen, 1989, inter al.). The 
method of this paper uses only one context o 
determine the best label, but may decrease the 
size of the context until a full match is found. 
2 Out l ine  o f  the  procedure  
2.1 "Training" 
The training of this mechanism is to determine 
which patterns in the training set are the most 
likely. Only tag information is used. A filter to 
convert a tag with a context into a chunk-label 
is constructed as follows: 
0) Construct symmetric n-contexts from the 
training corpus. A 1-context is simply the most 
common chunk-label for each tag. A 3-context 
is the tag followed by the tag before and after 
it, i.e., \[to t-1 t+l\]:label. Similarly, a 5-context, 
(i.e., \[t-2 \[t-1 \[to \] t+l\] t+2\]: label (of to)), is 
represented \[to t-1 t+l t-2 t+2\]:label. Finally, a 
7-context is represented as \[to t-1 t+l t-2 t+2 
t-3 t+3\]:label. It was verified that results do not 
significantly improve using larger contexts than 
5-contexts. 
1) For each set of n-contexts, determine 
the most frequent label for each occurring n- 
context. For example, the tag CC most fre- 
quently has the label B-NP if the context is 
PRP CC RP. The most frequent label for CC 
without extra context is "0". 
2) To save some storage space, the most fre- 
quent label in an n-context is only added if it 
is different from its nearest lower order context. 
For example, the label B-NP can be added for 
a 3-context since PRP CC RP gives a different 
result from CC alone. 
2.2 Test ing  
Testing is done by constructing the maximum 
context for each tag, and look it up in the 
database of the most likely patterns. If the 
largest context cannot be found the context is 
diminished step-by-step. 
3) In the test phase we need to form the 
longest contexts used in training (e.g., 7- 
contexts). The first word to get a chunk label 
is 'Rockwell' (Rockwell International Corp. 's) 
and its corresponding 7-context (without its la- 
bel) is NNP = NNP = NNP = POS, where '=' 
is a tag for a blank line (i.e., no text tag) since 
this is the very first few words. 
4) The only rule for chunk-labeling is to look 
up the closest surviving n-context and output 
its label. Simply look up \[to t-1 t+l t-2 t+2 t-3 
t+3\] ... \[to\] in that order until the context is 
found. The \[to\] context alone produces a F~=i 
of 77. 
136 
3 Resu l ts  
The evaluation program shows that this simple 
procedure reaches its best result for 5-contexts 
(table 1) with 92.46% label accuracy and phrase 
correctness measured by FZ=i = 87.23. How- 
ever, the improvement from 3-contexts to 5- 
contexts is insignificant, as 3-contexts reached 
92.41% accuracy and F~=1=87.09. The results 
for 7-contexts is almost identical to 5-contexts 
(92.44% and FZ=1=87.21). This is taken as the 
limit performance due to the size of the training 
corpus. 
In a larger training corpus, the most common 
longer contexts are likely to be useful but in a 
small set the longer contexts may occur with 
very low frequencies making it hard to deter- 
mine if the label of such contexts is the best 
guess for unseen samples. 
These results are the best that could be ex- 
pected without generalization. In order to do 
better, the method has to generalize to unseen 
contexts, e.g., by using some notion of close 
matching contexts (instances), to be able to use 
longer context even when some of that context 
has not been previously recorded. In addition, 
the tag-structure could be productively utilized. 
The presented method has treated all labels as 
arbitrary, atomic and independent symbols. 
3.1 Computat iona l  complex i ty  
Using rule 2 from section 2.1, 45 patterns 'sur- 
vived' for 1-contexts, and 3225, 71022, 38541 
for 3-,5- and 7-contexts respectively, i.e., a total 
of 45, 3270, 74292, 109563 using all contexts up 
to and including 1-, 3-, 5- and 7-contexts. Each 
unique context can be retrieved in one logical 
step (i.e., a hash-table lookup). There are obvi- 
ously many patterns in the database - but the 
complexity of the task is limited to the number 
of look-ups necessary. 
There is a maximum of four hash-table look- 
ups for each tag (i.e., when the 7-, 5-, and 3- 
contexts does not exist in the database the most 
likely label of the current tag will be used). 
Good performance can be obtained within a 
maximum of 2 look-ups for each label (i.e., us- 
ing only 1- and 3-contexts) and the best results 
were obtained with a maximum of 3 look-ups 
per label. 
4 D iscuss ion  
The memory-based approach seemingly postu- 
lates innate tags in the processing machinery. 
The author has found very little discussion on 
how the tags are thought o correspond to real- 
ity, a fact that was also pointed out, not so long 
ago, by Palmeri (1998). However, a few papers 
aiming towards automatic 'label', 'feature' or 
'tag' creation are available (Miikkulainen and 
Dyer, 1991; Johansson, 1999). 
It is undeniable that, from a practical per- 
spective, it is possible to reach very high perfor- 
mance on tasks, such as tagging, that demand 
a choice from a known set of alternatives by 
estimating statistical properties (e.g., the most 
likely label) from a large enough training set. 
This makes the method extremely useful for 
quick development of tools, which can be used 
in practical applications uch as text retrieval 
and machine translation; but also in linguis- 
tic research; e.g., finding examples of specific 
grammatical constructions in large collections 
of data. 
A challenge for future research is how tags 
could be constructed automatically, and what 
kind of information would be necessary to de- 
tect the relevant ag dimensions for some lin- 
guistically motivated task. 
5 Conc lus ion  
It was shown that using context made it possible 
to improve performance of maximum likelihood 
prediction. It was suggested that the limit of 
performance for this method is implicitly given 
by the size of the training set, as this determines 
the significance of larger contexts, and increases 
the chance of finding a matching longer con- 
text. In smaller collections, large patterns are 
a) likely to occur at a low frequency with few 
competing labels and b) likely to not exist in 
the test set. A larger collection will increase 
the number of different contexts, as well as the 
significance of picking the best, most frequent, 
prediction from a set of (identical) competitors 
with different labels. 
The presented method oes not generalize be- 
yond what is recorded in the training set as the 
most likely alternative. However, it is expected 
to ? improve with the size of the training set, as 
this makes it feasible to use longer contexts, and 
? have a low computational complexity, as the 
137 
process is always limited to use a low' number of 
hash table look-ups (determined by the largest 
size of context). Training is limited to detecting 
the most likely outcome of each context (i.e., a 
sorting operation). 
References  
Antal van den Bosch and Walter Daelemans. 1998. 
Do not forget: Full memory in memory-based 
learning of word pronunciation. In D.M.W. Pow- 
ers, editor, proceedings of NeMLap3/CoNLL98, 
pages 195-204, Sydney, Australia. 
Eric Brill. 1994. Some advances in rule-based part 
of speech tagging. In proceedings ofAAAI. 
Christer Johansson. 1999. Noise resistance in pro- 
cessing center-embedded clauses: A question of 
representation? I  proceedings ofICCS'99, pages 
253-258, Tokyo. Waseda University. 
Risto Miikkulainen and Michael G. Dyer. 1991. 
Natural anguage processing with modular PDP 
networks and distributed lexicon. Cognitive Sci- 
ence, 15(3):343-399. 
Thomas J. Palmeri. 1998. Formal models and fea- 
ture creation. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 
21:33-34. 
Royal Skousen. 1989. Analogical Modeling of Lan- 
guage. Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, he Nether- 
lands. 
Jakub Zavrel and Walter Daelemans. 1997. Memory 
based learning: using similarity for smoothing. 
In proceedings of the 35th annual meeting of the 
Association of Computational Lingui.stics (ACL) 
and the 8th conference of the European Chapter 
of the ACL, pages 436-443, Madrid, Spain. 
test data 
ADJP 
ADVP 
CONJP 
INTJ 
LST 
NP 
PP 
PRT 
SBAR 
VP 
precision 
58.33% 
67.98% 
0.00% 
33.33% 
0.00% 
88.09% 
88.18% 
36.14% 
54.97% 
88.27% 
all 86.24% 88.25% 
recall FZ=i 
52.74% 55.40 
71.59% 69.74 
0.00% 0.00 
50.00% 40.00 
0.00% 0.00 
90.53% 89.30 
93.39% 90.71 
28.30% 31.75 
33.08% 41.31 
91.28% 89.75 
87.23 
Table 1: Results using at most 5-contexts 
138 
Coling 2008: Proceedings of 3rd Textgraphs workshop on Graph-Based Algorithms in Natural Language Processing, pages 49?52
Manchester, August 2008
Semantic structure from Correspondence Analysis
Barbara McGillivray
Dipartimento di Linguistica
Universit`a di Pisa
Pisa, Italy
barbara.mcgillivray@aksis.uib.no
Christer Johansson
Dept. of Linguistics
University of Bergen
Bergen, Norway
christer.johansson@uib.no
Daniel Apollon
Text Technology Lab.
Aksis, UNIFOB
Bergen, Norway
daniel.apollon@aksis.uib.no
Abstract
A common problem for clustering tech-
niques is that clusters overlap, which
makes graphing the statistical structure in
the data difficult. A related problem is
that we often want to see the distribution
of factors (variables) as well as classes
(objects). Correspondence Analysis (CA)
offers a solution to both these problems.
The structure that CA discovers may be an
important step in representing similarity.
We have performed an analysis for Italian
verbs and nouns, and confirmed that simi-
lar structures are found for English.
1 Introduction
Over the past years, distributional methods have
been used to explore the semantic behaviour of
verbs, looking at their contexts in corpora (Lan-
dauer and Laham, 1998; Redington and Finch,
1998; Biemann, 2006, inter al.). We follow a gen-
eral approach suggested already by Firth (1957),
to associate distributional similarity with semantic
similarity.
One question concerns the syntax-semantics in-
terface. Results using distributions of verbs in con-
text had an impact on verb classification (Levin,
1993), automatic verb clustering (Schulte im
Walde, 2003), and selectional preference acquisi-
tion (Resnik, 1993; Li and Abe, 1995; McCarthy,
2001; Agirre and Martinez, 2001, inter al.).
In automatic verb clustering, verbs are repre-
sented by vectors of a multidimensional space
whose dimensions (variables) are identified by
some linguistic features, ranging, for example,
from subcategorization frames to participation in
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
diathesis alternations and lexical selectional pref-
erences. The verbs cluster on co-occurrence with
the features chosen, and such information provide
a generalisation over the verbs with respect to the
variables.
In the case of selectional preference acquisition,
a verb (or a verb class) is associated to a class of
nouns that can be the lexical fillers of a case frame
slot for the verb. This allows us to calculate the
association strength between the verb and its filler
nouns. The generalisation step is performed for the
case frame instances (observations) and produces
more abstract noun classes that can be applied to
unseen cases. This often utilizes hierarchies of ex-
isting thesauri or wordnets.
We propose a method that uses Correspondence
Analysis (CA) to study the distribution (and asso-
ciated semantic behaviour) of a list of verbs with
nouns occurring in a particular syntactic relation,
for example their subjects. This is collected from
a corpus, and reflects usage in that corpus. Un-
like clustering methods, this technique does not
imply an exclusive choice between a) classifying
verbs on the basis of the noun fillers in their syn-
tactic frame, or b) associating noun classes to verbs
(sometimes mediated by a semantic hierarchy). In-
stead, this approach yields a geometric representa-
tion of the relationships between the nouns and the
verbs in a common dual space (biplot). CA aims
to find an overall structure (if any) of the data. The
method emphasizes unusual observations, as de-
viance from the expected is what creates the axes
of the analysis. CA generalizes over the actual oc-
currences of verb-noun pairs in the corpus, and vi-
sualizes the shape of the correspondence space.
When associating verbs with nouns, CA takes as
input a contingency table (here rows correspond to
the verbs, and columns correspond to their subject
fillers). Each verb is a row point in the multidimen-
sional noun space, and each noun is a column point
in the multidimensional verb space. The CA goals
49
are to reduce the dimension of the dual original
space, and to find an optimal subspace that is the
closest to this cloud of points in the ?
2
-metric. The
best subspace is determined by finding the smallest
number of orthogonal axes that describe the most
variance from the original cloud.
Finally the coordinates of both row and col-
umn points of the ?
2
contingency table are pro-
jected onto this optimal subspace, simultaneously
displaying row and column points. If we consider
those points that are well represented, the closer
they are in this geometric representation, the more
similar their original distributions are. In this way,
we can detect not only that there is a relationship
between the verb (e.g. explode) and the noun (e.g.
bomb), but also how each word relates to each
other word.
2 Correspondence Analysis
CA is a data analytic technique developed by
Benz?ecri in the 1960s, which has been widely used
in describing large contingency tables and binary
data. At the heart of CA is Singular Value Decom-
position (SVD), from which many other methods
were derived (Biplot, Classical Principal Compo-
nent Analysis, PCA and more).
Compared to usual clustering methods, CA
gives a more fine-grained view of the spread of
the input points. Benz?ecri (1973) points out that
CA is more efficient than clustering in terms of de-
composition of variance. Secondly, CA represents
possible regions in space with varying density, and
produces a flexible ?compound clustering? on both
objects and variables. Verb-nouns association pro-
files may not cluster in distinct space regions, but
may be evenly distributed, follow a gradient-like
distribution, or show overlapping clusters. In such
difficult cases for clustering, CA is able to offer
a representation of the geometry of the input pro-
files. Finally, CA offers the possibility of recon-
structing the original space from the output sub-
space.
Let us consider a data matrix M whose size is
(r, c), the (i, j)
th
entry of M containing the num-
ber of occurrences of verb j with noun i as its sub-
ject in a corpus. We calculate the relative frequen-
cies by dividing each entry M(i, j) by the sum of
row i, i. e. the frequency of noun i, to get the ma-
trix of row profiles R(i, j). Therefore, the more
similar two row profiles i
1
and i
2
are, the more
these two nouns can be considered as distributional
synonyms.
The next step implies comparing the row pro-
files with the average distribution where each entry
(i, j) is the product of the frequency of noun i by
the frequency of verb j divided by the grand total
N of the table. This comparison is calculated us-
ing the ?
2
-distance (i.e. a weighted Euclidean dis-
tance), which eliminates effects of high frequency
alone. The next formula shows calculations for
rows. Calculations for columns are analogous.
?
2
(i
1
, i
2
) =
c
?
j=1
(R(i
1
, j) ?R(i
2
, j))
2
?
r
i=1
M(i, j)
The ?
2
-distance between a profile point and the av-
erage profile (barycentre) is called inertia of the
profile point and the total inertia measures how
the individual profiles p
i
are spread around the
barycentre:
Inertia =
1
N
r
?
i=1
c
?
j=1
M(i, j)?
2
(p
i
, p?)
CA then searches for the optimal subspace S that
minimises the distance from the profile points.
Once specified its dimension k ? min(r ? 1, c ?
1), S is found by applying the Singular Value De-
composition (SVD) to matrix R ? 1p? , which de-
composes it as the product N ?D ?M : where D is
a diagonal matrix with positive coefficients ?
1
?
?
2
? . . . ? ?
k
(singular values) and N and M are
orthonormal matrices (N
T
N = M
T
M = I). The
rows of M are the orthonormal basis vectors that
define S (called principal axes of inertia) and the
rows of matrix F = N ? D are the projections of
the row profiles onto S. For k = 2, this allows us
to plot the new coordinates in a two-dimensional
space and get the correspondence analysis of the
row profiles.
The total inertia is decomposed into the direc-
tion of the principal axes of inertia. The first axis
represents the direction where the inertia of the
cloud is the maximum; the second axis maximises
the inertia among all the directions orthogonal to
the first axis, and so on.
The geometry of column profiles can be anal-
ysed similarly, because the two problems are di-
rectly linked and two transition formulae can be
used to pass from one coordinate system to the
other, explaining the French name ?analyse des
correspondances?.
As a result, both analyses decompose the same
inertia into the same system of principal axes. This
allows us to merge the two representations in one
single geometric display showing at the same time
50
the projections of row and column points in the
subspace.
In addition to this dual space representation, CA
gives a system of diagnostic measures for each of
the two dual spaces:
? contributions of the rows (and columns) to the
axes, i. e. the inertia of the points projected onto
the axes, which contributes to the principal inertia;
? contributions of the axes to the row (and col-
umn) points;
? quality of representation (cumulative sum of
contributions of the axes for each point); this high-
lights well represented points.
3 Explorations
We performed a CA using the Matlab Analytica
Toolbox developed by Daniel Apollon. We tested
this technique first on the Italian newspaper corpus
LA REPUBBLICA, which consists of 450 million
word tokens. This corpus was syntactically parsed
using the MALT dependency parser (Nivre, 2006).
A list of 196 verbs was compiled following the list
of German verbs contained in (Schulte im Walde,
2003) and adapting it to Italian. Looking at the
syntactic analyses of the corpus where the verbs of
the list showed a subcategorization frame contain-
ing a subject slot, their lexical subject fillers were
automatically extracted. The matrix M , whose
2553 row entries correspond to the nouns extracted
as subject fillers, was then used as input for the CA
(|M | = 196? 2553 = 500388).
Starting from the quality of representation
scores of this analysis, we isolated a set of points
with increasingly good representation, ending with
an extremely faithful and low dimensional rep-
resentation. We called this method ?incremental
pruning?. Figure 1 shows the dual display of the
analysis for the Italian data in a two dimensional
space, after filtering out those points showing a
quality of representation below a threshold of 30%.
We can conceptualize the data set C after a CA
as the cumulative effect of three different underly-
ing phenomena: K, R and E.
K can be seen as a reduction of the latent struc-
ture of C; it contains its core structure as it has
been underlined by the analysis and left after prun-
ing.
R refers to the residual variance, not included in
the core analysis. It contains the most predictable
points
1
, which are plotted near to origin (barycen-
1
In our data: pronouns she, I, he, every-, no-, some-body,
Figure 1: Correspondence graph for Italian
tre of the data cloud). These points give a small
contribution to the inertia of the principal axes.
E contains the error in the representation, as
well as badly represented points.
Points far from the origin display strong struc-
ture; they may correspond to rare words used in
special contexts. Figure 1 shows that words related
to destruction
2
are aligned in the same direction,
whereas the second vector is mainly constituted by
nouns and verbs that have to do with the political
and legal area
3
. The first principal axis accounts
for nearly 16% of the total inertia, whereas the
second axis accounts for 12%. The first six axes
accounts for over 70% of variation. Many words
were not well represented, but contribute to vari-
ance.
We confirmed our method on English, using the
British National Corpus
4
. A similar structure was
found. We restrict ourselves to reproduce the graph
for Italian.
who, nouns with partly pronominal qualities husband, wife,
friend, sir, son, father, mother, fact, event.
2
Along the y-axis from top down to the middle, we find the
nouns flame, extend, stick of dynamite, excavator, chemother-
apy, effusion, blaze, seism, demon, dynamite, fire, aviation,
earthquake, artificer, explosive device, insect, gas, landslide,
virus, rain, bulldozer, hurricane, wave, speculation, artillery,
remorse, bomb, missile, violence, revolution, etc.
3
Along the x-axis we find, from left to the middle,
the nouns order, regulations, norm, code, legislation, rules,
treaty, constitution, circular letter, system, directive, law, de-
cree, article, judgement, amendment, court, etc.
4
via sketchengine http://www.sketchengine.co.uk
51
4 Conclusion
CA detects a structure for Italian verb-noun cor-
respondences in LA REPUBBLICA (? 450 mil-
lion words). A similar structure was confirmed us-
ing BNC for English. Both global and local struc-
tures are found, which gives possibilities to rep-
resent lexical units with reference to both princi-
pal axes and word similarity. The main dimen-
sions of the Italian corpus are topical (crime re-
lated vs. natural catastrophes, and laws vs. po-
litical institutions). Semantic relatedness were ob-
served in closely mapped words. Both global and
local structure is found, and we can speculate that
this helps representing lexical units in semantic la-
beling (Giuglea and Moschitti, 2006) for machine
learning tasks. We can conceptualize text graphs in
two distinct usages: knowledge re-presenting (e.g.
FrameNet) and visualizing relations in a data set.
Our method belongs in the second category.
Acknowledgements
The first author is a MULTILINGUA fellow at
Uni. Bergen, financially supported by a Marie
Curie action (European Commission). We wish to
thank the anonymous reviewers who gave impor-
tant leads to future research.
References
Agirre, Eneko and David Martinez. 2001. Learning
class-to-class selectional preferences. In Proc. of
the ACL/EACL Workshop on Computational Natural
Language Learning, pages 1?8, Toulouse, France.
Benz?ecri, Jean-Paul. 1973. L?Analyse des Donn?ees,
volume 1. Dunod.
Biemann, Chris. 2006. Chinese Whispers ? an
Efficient Graph Clustering Algorithm and its Ap-
plication to Natural Language Processing Prob-
lems. In Proc. of the HLT-NAACL-06 Workshop on
Textgraphs-06, pages 73?80, New York, USA.
Firth, John R., 1957. Studies in Linguistic Analysis,
chapter A synopsis of linguistic theory 1930-1955.
Philological Society.
Giuglea, Ana-Maria and Alessandro Moschitti. 2006.
Semantic Role Labeling via FrameNet, VerbNet and
PropBank. In Proc. of the 21st Int. Conf. on Com-
putational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
929?936, Sydney, Australia.
Landauer, Thomas K., Peter W. Foltz and Darrell La-
ham. 1998. Introduction to Latent Semantic Analy-
sis. Discourse Processes, 25:259?284.
Levin, Beth. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tions. The University of Chicago Press.
Li, Hang and Naoki Abe. 1995. Generalizing case
frames using a thesaurus and the MDL principle. In
Proc. of Recent Advances in Natural Language Tech-
nology, pages 239?248.
McCarthy, Diana. 2001. Lexical Acquisition at the
Syntax-Semantics Interface: Diathesis Alternations,
Subcategorization Frames and Selectional Prefer-
ences. Ph.D. thesis, University of Sussex.
Nivre, Joakim. 2006. Inductive Dependency Parsing.
Springer.
Redington, Martin, Nick Chater and Steven Finch.
1998. Distributional information: A powerful cue
for acquiring syntactic categories. Cognitive Sci-
ence, 22:425?469.
Resnik, Philip. 1993. Selection and Information:
A Class-Based Approach to Lexical Relationships.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania.
Schulte im Walde, Sabine. 2003. Experiments on
the Automatic Induction of German Semantic Verb
Classes. Ph.D. thesis, Institut f?ur Maschinelle
Sprachverarbeitung, Universit?at Stuttgart.
52
