Abstract
We introduce a method for using images for
word sense disambiguation, either alone, or in
conjunction with traditional text based
methods. The approach is based in recent work
on a method for predicting words for images
which can be learned from image datasets with
associated text. When word prediction is
constrained to a narrow set of choices such as
possible senses, it can be quite reliable, and we
use these predictions either by themselves or
to reinforce standard methods. We provide
preliminary results on a subset of the Corel
image database which has three to five
keywords per image. The subset was
automatically selected to have a greater
portion of keywords with sense ambiguity and
the word senses were hand labeled to provide
ground truth for testing. Results on this data
strongly suggest that images can help with
word sense disambiguation.
1 Introduction
In this paper we investigate using words and pictures to
disambiguate each other. Word sense disambiguation
has long been studied as an important problem in
natural language processing (Agirre and Rigau, 1995;
Gale et al, 1992; Manning and Sch?tze, 1999; Mihalcea
and Moldovan., 1998; Traupman and Wilensky, 2003;
Yarowsky, 1995). It is illustrated in Figure 1 with the
arguably overused ?bank? example. A priori, the word
?bank? has a number of meanings including financial
institution and a step or edge as in ?snow bank? or
?river bank?. Words which are spelt the same but have
different meanings are very common, and clearly can
confuse attempts to automatically deduce meaning from
language. Furthermore, they cannot simply be identified
as ambiguous and then ignored, as there are too many
such words and they do constrain the possible meanings
of a body of text.
Since the words are spelt the same, resolving what
they mean requires considering context. A purely
natural language based approach considers words near
the one in question. Thus in the bank example, words
like ?financial? or ?money? are strong hints that the
financial institution sense is meant. Interestingly,
despite much work, and a number of innovative ideas,
doing significantly better than choosing the most
common sense is difficult (Traupman and Wilensky,
2003).
In this work we present preliminary work on whether
an associated images can help in word sense
disambiguation. In the simplest application, text and
images might be analyzed in conjunction; for example,
a news photograph with a caption, or a larger document
with illustrations.
Word Sense Disambiguation with Pictures
Kobus Barnard, Matthew Johnson
Department of Computing Science,
721 Gould-Simpson, University of Arizona,
Tucson, Arizona, 85721-0077
{kobus, mjohnson}@cs.arizona.edu
David Forsyth
Computer Science Division,
University of California at Berkeley,
387 Soda Hall #1776
Berkeley California, 94720-1776
daf@cs.berkeley.edu
piggy bank coins currency
money
water grass trees banks
bank buildings trees city
bank machine money
currency bills
snow banks hills winter
Figure 1. Word sense ambiguity in the Corel dataset.
2 Predicting Words from Images
To integrate image information with text data we exploit
our previous work on linking images and words
(Barnard et al, 2001; Barnard et al, 2003; Barnard and
Forsyth, 2001; Duygulu et al, 2002). We have
developed a variety of methods which can be used to
predict words for image regions (region-labeling), and
entire images (auto-annotation). This is achieved in
practice by exploiting large image data sets with
associated text. Critically, we do not require that the text
be associated with the image regions, as such data is
rare. Region labeling is illustrated in Figure 2. It is
important to understand that we compute a posterior
over the complete vocabulary for each region (and/or
image), but for illustration we show the word for each
region which has maximal probability.
For the results reported in this paper we use a special
case of one of the models in (Barnard et al, 2003).
Specifically, we model the joint probability of words
and images regions as being generated by a collection of
nodes, each of which has a probability distribution over
both words and regions. The word probabilities are
provided by simple frequency tables, and the region
probability distribution are Gaussians over feature
vectors. We restrict the Gaussians to have diagonal
covariance (features are modeled as being independent).
Given an image region, its features imply a
probability of being generated from each node. These
probabilities are then used to weight the nodes for word
emission. Thus words are emitted conditioned on image
regions. In order to emit words for an entire image
(auto-annotation), as needed for our word sense
disambiguation method, we simply sum the
distributions for the N largest regions. Thus each region
is given equal weight, and the image words are forced to
be generated through region labeling.
To be consistent with the more general models
referenced above, we index the nodes by ?levels?, l.
Given a region (?blob?), b, and a word w, we have
? 
P(w | b) = P(w | l)P(b | l)P(l ) P(b)
l
? (1)
where P(l) is the level prior, P(w|l) is a frequency table,
and P(b|l) is a Gaussian over features. To estimate the
conditional density of words given blobs for the entire
image these probabilities are summed over the N largest
blobs. Parameters for the conditional probabilities
linking words and blobs are estimated from the word-
blob co-occurrence data using Expectation
Maximization (Dempster et al, 1977). For all
experiments reported in this paper we use 100 nodes.
3 Constrained Word Prediction
In most of our applications we have studied word
prediction from images in the case where prediction is
applied to a completely new image with no associated
words. However, if the new image has associated
words, our infrastructure for image/language
understanding can be exploited further. Here the main
task is not word prediction, but understanding the
relationship between the supplied words and the image
components, and hence the meaning of both. Since the
set of words of interest is known, the rest of the
vocabulary can be ignored in computation. Constraining
the vocabulary in this way makes a number of tasks
simpler. As much noise has been removed, the
relationship between the words and the image
components can be established more accurately. The
system is now chiefly determining the correspondence
relationships between known text and image regions.
One application is automatic labeling of images for
searching and browsing based on the semantics of the
image parts. As shown in Figure 3, the labeling
performance is much improved when we can constrain
the vocabulary to largely relevant words. The presence
of the words has removed ambiguity from the
interpretation of the image.
The second application is, of course, the
reverse?using the image to help reduce the ambiguity
of the words. We assume that the system has been
trained on a set of senses, S, for the vocabulary W. To
clarify the notation, we may have 
? 
bank ? W and
? 
bank _1,  bank _ 2 ? S
. Each element of S is the sense
of exactly one word in W. If we have posterior
probabilities over S based on the image, then for each
observed word, w, we can look at the corresponding
senses for w in S, and provide the sense which has the
highest posterior among the senses. More formally,
Figure 2. Illustration of labeling. Each region is
labeled with the maximally probable word, but a
probability distribution over all words is available for
each region.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3. Illustration of the observation that our ability to predict word-region correspondences increases
significantly when the words are constrained to a small set known to be relevant. We show two groups of
images which have a high probability of having a region associated with the word tiger, as computed by two
different processes. The region in the images with the highest posterior probability of ?tiger? is labeled as such.
In both cases the images shown were not used for training. In the top group (a) only image region features were
used to predict words. In the bottom group (b), words associated with the images were also available to the
program, and thus their the main task is to supply the correspondence between words and regions.
? 
P(s | w,I ) ? P(s | I)P(s | w)
(2)
where
? 
P(s | w) ?
1 if  s  is  a  sense  of  w
0  otherwise
? 
? 
? 
? 
? 
? 
(3)
4 Word Sense from Images and Text
To integrate the above with traditional word sense
disambiguation, we assume that we have a text only
method which provides a better value for
? 
P(s | w)
 in (2)
than the trivial one defined in (3). This strategy assumes
that the image provides information which is
independent of the text only method, allowing the
simplification from the factorization used in (2).
For this work, we do not compute a true probability
for 
? 
P(s | w)
, but rather a score which we use as a
surrogate. As it is the goal of this work to show that
improvement in word sense disambiguation is possible,
we use a simple word sense disambiguation method
based on the work in (Barnard et al, 2001) which itself
takes ideas from (Agirre and Rigau, 1995; Mihalcea and
Moldovan., 1998). Specifically we use the WordNet
semantic hierarchy (Miller et al, 1990) to define senses,
and give higher weight to senses more closely aligned
(lower in the tree) with the neighboring words. In the
experiments described below, the words are part of
keyword sets, and all keywords for an image are
considered neighbours.
For example, if we had the keywords [lion, pride,
rock] for a picture of a group of lions on a rock, the
word pride presents a problem to the disambiguator.  By
far, pride's most common meaning is that regarding it as
a deadly sin, however in this case we wish it to be
disambiguated as a group of lions. Even so, one can
look at the different WordNet sense hierarchies for pride
and find that one, namely:
pride
=> animal group
=> biological group
               => group, grouping
contains the words animal and biological, making it a
better fit for the hierarchy of lion.
With this structure in mind, our algorithm takes the
set of keywords and, for each keyword in the set,
performs a query such as the one shown above.  Then,
for each sense of the keyword, we perform the queries
for the other keywords, and for each of their senses we
examine the similarities between their hypernym trees.
We total up these similarities (shared nodes in the tree)
and for each sense of the keyword produce a subtotal for
that sense.  After we have performed this operation for
all senses we divide the subtotal by the complete total
for all senses to receive a score for that sense as the true
definition of the keyword.
5 Experiments
For our initial test, we studied word sense
disambiguation on the Corel image dataset which we
have used extensively for studying word prediction
from images. Each Corel image has 3-5 keywords
associated with it. Unfortunately, these keywords are
unusual in that they do not have much sense conflict
over the data set. Put differently, although a keyword
like ?head? has many senses, one sense predominates in
this data set.
To use the data despite this problem, we computed
all the senses from WordNet  (Miller et al, 1990) of all
the words for an initial set of 16,000 images, together
with the score for each sense using the method
described above. We then applied some heuristics to
create a subset of 1,800 images which had candidate
sense problems. Each word was then hand labeled with
the correct sense. The resulting dataset had only a
handful of words with ambiguous senses present in
sufficient quantity, but fortunately these were common
enough such that about 1/6 of the documents had true
word sense problems. The results reported below were
restricted to documents that had at least one word sense
ambiguity.
The data set prepared as above thus consists of a
vocabulary of word-sense combinations, together with a
human labeling of whether the sense was valid or not.
We restrict the vocabulary to word-sense pairs which
occur in at least 5 images. We represent the observed
senses for a word occurring in a document as a vector
over the senses for that word from the vocabulary. We
give all relevant senses of the word a score of one, and
incorrect senses a score of zero. We normalize this
vector so that its sum is one. Although potentially a
word could be ambiguous to a human examiner,
typically the word sense vector would simply contain a
single value of one, with the other values being zero.
We evaluate word-sense disambiguation strategies by
comparing the vector of observed word-senses
described above (the truth) to the vector containing
estimates of the relevance of each word-sense pair
corresponding to each occurring word. For example,
suppose an image has the word ?bank?, which maps to
bank_1 with hand labeling, and suppose that bank_1
and bank_3 are in the vocabulary, but no other senses of
bank. Then the vector
{?,bank_1(0.7),bank_3(0.3),?}
should be ranked better than
 {?,bank_1(0.3),bank_3(0.7),?}
when compared to the observed vector
{?,bank_1(1.0),bank_3(0.0),?} (hand-labeled)
To compare the vectors we simply normalize them and
take the dot-product.
For the experiments we divided the data into  training
data (75%), and test data (25%). We averaged results
for 10 separate runs using different samples for the test
and training sets. We restricted the computation of
results to those documents where there was clear sense
ambiguity. Because each such document typically had
only one sense problem amid 3 or 4 words without
sense problems, the baseline score using the measure
above is greater than 0.80 because any strategy will get
about 3 out or 4 correct for free. To clarify this further,
we include the results of randomly chosen among senses
when there is more than one available.
The results are shown in Table 1 strongly suggest
that images can help disambiguate senses. The na?ve
method of text based disambiguation is comparable to
chance, whereas adding image information substantially
increased the performance.
6 Conclusion
These preliminary studies strongly suggest that it is
worthwhile to explore combining image information
with more sophisticated text based words sense
disambiguation approaches.  However, while the
preliminary results are encouraging, it is critical that we
take the next step and apply the method to a data set
where there is more sense ambiguity. Possible
candidates which we are actively investigating include
the museum data used in (Barnard et al, 2001) and
news photos with captions available on the web.
In general we have found that it is fruitful to study
how image and text information can both compliment
each other and disambiguate one another. Different
representations of the same thing can help learn co-
constructed meaning. Properties which may be implicit
in one representation may be more explicit and thus
more amenable for automatic extraction in another.
Furthermore, relationships between the representations,
which can be learnt from large corpora, can be brought
to bear on the problem. In particular, in the case of
disambiguating words, we have shown that images can
provide a non-negligible amount of information which
can be exploited by more traditional approaches.
References
Agirre, E. and Rigau, G., 1995. A proposal for word
sense disambiguation using conceptual distance, 1st
International Conference on Recent Advances in
Natural Language Processing, Velingrad.
Barnard, K., Duygulu, P. and Forsyth, D., 2001.
Clustering Art, IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, Hawaii, pp. II:434-
441.
Barnard, K. et al, 2003. Matching Words and Pictures.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3: 1107-
1135.
Barnard, K. and Forsyth, D., 2001. Learning the
Semantics of Words and Pictures, International
Conference on Computer Vision, pp. II:408-415.
Dempster, A.P., Laird, N.M. and Rubin, D.B., 1977.
Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the
EM algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society. Series B (Methodological), 39(1): 1-38.
Duygulu, P., Barnard, K., de Freitas, J.F.G. and Forsyth,
D.A., 2002. Object recognition as machine
translation: Learning a lexicon for a fixed image
vocabulary, The Seventh European Conference on
Computer Vision, Copenhagen, Denmark, pp. IV:97-
112.
Gale, W., Church, K. and Yarowsky, D., 1992. One
Sense Per Discourse, DARPA Workshop on Speech
and Natural Language, New York, pp. 233-237.
Manning, C. and Sch?tze, H., 1999. Foundations of
Statistical Natural Language Processing. MIT Press.
Cambridge, MA.
Mihalcea, R. and Moldovan., D., 1998. Word sense
disambiguation based on semantic density,
COLING/ACL Workshop on Usage of WordNet in
Natural Language Processing Systems, Montreal.
Miller, G.A., Beckwith, R., Fellbaum, C., Gross, D. and
Miller, K.J., 1990. Introduction to WordNet: an on-
line lexical database. International Journal of
Lexicography, 3(4): 235 - 244.
Traupman, J. and Wilensky, R., 2003. Experiments in
Improving Unsupervised  Word Sense
Disambiguation. CSD-03-1227, Computer Science
Division, University of California Berkeley.
Yarowsky, D., 1995. Unsupervised Word Sense
Disambiguation Rivaling Supervised Methods, 33rd
Conference on Applied Natural Language
Processing. ACL, Cambridge.
Word sense disambiguation strategy Score
Na?ve text based method 0.858 (0.008)
Random sense choice 0.875 (0.012)
Image and text method 0.948 (0.015)
Table 1. Word sense disambiguation results on data
held out from training. The results are the average over
10 runs where a different 75% of the data was used for
training and the other 25% was held out for testing.
Results were computed only on images with at least
one ambiguous term. Because typically only one out of
four or five words was ambiguous, the baseline score is
quite high as reinforced by the random result. The
scoring is explained in ?5. Error estimates are in
parentheses.
