Exploiting OWL Ontologies in the Multilingual Generation of Object Descriptions
Ion Androutsopoulos?, Spyros Kallonis?+ and Vangelis Karkaletsis+
?Department of Informatics
Athens University of Economics and Business
Patission 76, GR-104 34 Athens, Greece
+Institute of Informatics and Telecommunications
National Centre for Scientific Research ?Demokritos?
P.O. Box 60228, GR-153 10 Aghia Paraskevi, Greece
Abstract
We present three ways in which a natural language
generator that produces textual descriptions of ob-
jects from symbolic information can exploit OWL
ontologies, using M-PIRO?s multilingual generation
system as a concrete example.
1 Introduction
A strand of work in Natural Language Generation (NLG) has
been devoted to the generation of textual descriptions of ob-
jects from symbolic information in ontologies and databases.
An example of such work is ILEX [O?Donnell et al, 2001],
which was demonstrated mostly in the museums domain,
where it could produce personalised English descriptions of
exhibits; the Power system [Dale et al, 1998] is another ex-
ample from the same domain. More recently, the M-PIRO
project [Isard et al, 2003] developed a multilingual exten-
sion of ILEX, which has been tested in a variety of domains,
including museum exhibits and items for sale.1 A major prob-
lem in this and many other NLG subareas is the difficulty of
obtaining source symbolic information in forms compatible
with the requirements of the language generators. This issue
has mainly been addressed so far by extracting source infor-
mation from structured and semi-structured data [Dale et al,
1998], and by developing authoring tools that help in the cre-
ation of source information and domain-dependent linguistic
resources. Such tools were developed, for example, in GIST
[Power and Cavallotto, 1996], DRAFTER [Hartley and Paris,
1997], ITRI?s WYSIWYM systems [Van Deemter and Power,
2003], and M-PIRO [Androutsopoulos et al, 2002].
In recent years, considerable effort has been invested in the
Semantic Web, which can be seen as an attempt to develop
mechanisms that will allow computer applications to reason
more easily about the semantics of the resources (documents,
services, etc.) of the Web. A major target is the development
of standard representation formalisms, that will allow ontolo-
gies to be published on the Web and be shared by different
1M-PIRO was an IST project of the European Union. It ran from
2000 to 2003. Its partners were: the University of Edinburgh, ITC-
irst, NCSR ?Demokritos?, the National and Kapodistrian University
of Athens, the Foundation of the Hellenic World, and System Simu-
lation. This paper includes additional work, carried out at the Athens
University of Economics and Business and NCSR ?Demokritos?.
computer applications. The emerging standard for specifying
ontologies is OWL, an extension of RDF.2 In NLG systems
that describe objects, pre-existing OWL ontologies can pro-
vide much of the required source information, reducing the
authoring effort and providing a common standard represen-
tation to generate from.3 We discuss the role that OWL on-
tologies can play in M-PIRO?s authoring process, and report
on progress we made towards extending M-PIRO?s authoring
tool to support OWL. We argue that the benefit from using
OWL would be greater, if the ontologies included the domain-
dependent linguistic resources and user modelling informa-
tion that NLG systems need. This would allow content to be
published on the Sematic Web in the form of OWL ontologies,
with different NLG engines acting as browsers responsible for
rendering the content in different natural languages and tai-
loring it to the interests and interaction history of the users.
A challenge for the NLG community, then, is to agree upon
standards on how linguistic resources and user modelling in-
formation should be embedded in OWL ontologies.
Section 2 below introduces briefly M-PIRO and its author-
ing tool. Section 3 then shows how M-PIRO?s ontologies can
be expressed in OWL, and presents facilities we have added
to the authoring tool to export ontologies in OWL. Among
other benefits, this allows machine-generated texts to be pub-
lished on the Web along with the ontology they were gen-
erated from, and to be annotated with OWL entries that ex-
press their semantics in terms of the ontology, making the
semantics accessible to computer applications. Section 4 sub-
sequently discusses how existing OWL ontologies can be im-
ported into the authoring tool, and the benefits that this brings.
Our import facilities currently support only a subset of OWL;
part of section 4 is devoted to problems that remain to be
solved. Section 5 focuses on the need to establish standards
to embed linguistic resources and user modelling information
in OWL ontologies, and how this would allow NLG engines
to become the browsers of the Semantic Web. Section 6 con-
cludes and summarises directions for future research.
2 M-PIRO?s authoring tool
M-PIRO?s authoring tool allows authors, i.e., persons respon-
sible for porting M-PIRO?s technology to new application do-
2Consult http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-guide/.
3See also [Wilcock, 2003], [Bontcheva and Wilks, 2004].
Figure 1: An M-PIRO ontology and a clause plan.
mains, to modify the domain-dependent resources: the ontol-
ogy, some language resources, and the end-user stereotypes.
M-PIRO generates texts from an ontology that provides in-
formation on the entities of a domain (e.g., the statues and
artists in a museum), the relationships between the entities
(e.g., the association of statues with their artists), and the enti-
ties? attributes (e.g., their names or dimensions). Entities are
not necessarily physical objects; they may be abstract con-
cepts (e.g, historical periods). They are organized in a tax-
onomy of entity types, as illustrated in Figure 1, where ?ex-
hibit? and ?historical-period? are basic entity types, i.e., they
have no super-types. The ?exhibit? type is further subdivided
into ?coin?, ?statue?, and ?vessel?. The latter has the sub-types
?amphora?, ?kylix?, and ?lekythos?. Each entity belongs to a
particular type; e.g., ?exhibit22? belongs to ?kylix?, and is,
therefore, also a ?vessel? and an ?exhibit?. For simplicity, M-
PIRO adopts single inheritance, i.e., a type may not have more
than one parents, and an entity may not belong to more than
one types.4 This introduces some problems when importing
OWL ontologies; related discussion follows.
Relationships are expressed using fields. It is possible
to introduce new fields at any entity type, which then be-
come available at all the entities of that type and its subtypes.
In Figure 1, the fields ?painting-technique-used?, ?painted-
by?, and ?potter-is? are introduced at the type ?vessel?. (The
top right panel shows the fields of the type selected in the
left panel.) Hence, all entities of type ?vessel? and its sub-
types, i.e., ?amphora?, ?kylix?, and ?lekythos?, carry these
fields. Furthermore, entities of type ?vessel? inherit the fields
?creation-period?, ?current-location?, etc., up to ?references?,
which are introduced at the ?exhibit? type. (The ?images? field
is used to associate images with entities.) The fillers of each
field, i.e., the possible values, must be entities of a particular
type. In Figure 1, the fillers of ?potter-is? are of type ?potter?;
hence, the entities ?sotades? and ?aristos? are the only possible
values. To represent that a particular ?vessel? entity was cre-
4M-PIRO?s core language generator actually supports some forms
of multiple inheritance, but the authoring tool does not.
Figure 2: Source information and the resulting English text.
ated during the classical period by ?aristos?, one would fill in
that entity?s ?creation-period? with ?classical-period?, and its
?potter-is? with ?aristos?. Figure 2 shows the fields of entity
?exhibit22?, and the resulting English description. M-PIRO
supports English, Greek, and Italian; descriptions can be gen-
erated in all three languages from the same ontology.
The ?Many? column in Figure 1 is used to mark fields
whose values are sets of fillers of the specified type. In the
?made-of? field, this allows the value to be a set of materials
(e.g., gold and silver). It is, thus, possible to represent many-
to-one (e.g., only one material per exhibit) and many-to-many
relationships (many materials per exhibit), but not one-to-one
relationships (e.g., a unique social security code per person).
OWL, in contrast, supports one-to-one relationships.
Fields are also used to represent attributes of entities (e.g.,
their names or dimensions). Several built-in data-types are
available (?string?, ?number?, ?date?, etc.), and they are used
to specify the possible values of attribute-denoting fields. The
?Many? column also applies to attributes. In Figure 1, the
values of ?references? and ?exhibit-purpose? are strings. The
two fields are intended to hold canned texts containing bibli-
ographic references and descriptions of what a particular ex-
hibit was used for; e.g., ?This statue honours the memory of
Kroissos, a young man who died in battle?. Information can
be stored as canned text in string-valued fields when it is dif-
ficult to represent in symbolic form. The drawback is that
canned texts have to be entered in all three languages.
The authoring tool also allows the authors to specify user
types, i.e., types of end-users the texts are intended for (e.g.,
?average-adult?, ?child?), and stereotypes. The latter assign,
for each user type, values to parameters that control, for ex-
ample, the length of the texts, or the extent to which aggregat-
ing clauses to form longer sentences is allowed. The stereo-
types also specify how interesting each field is for each user
type; this allows the system to tailor the content of the de-
scriptions to the users? interests. M-PIRO employs additional
personal user models, where it stores the interaction history
of each particular end-user, allowing, for example, the system
to generate comparisons to previously seen objects.
M-PIRO uses systemic grammars, one for each language, to
convert sentence specifications to surface text. The grammars
can be used in a variety of object description applications
without modifications, and, hence, can be treated as domain-
independent for M-PIRO?s purposes. However, a part of the
lexicon that the grammars employ, known as the domain-
dependent lexicon, has to be filled in by the authors when the
system is ported to a new application. The domain-dependent
lexicon contains entries for nouns and verbs; when moving to
a new application, it is initially empty. The authors enter the
base forms of the nouns and verbs they wish the system to
use, and there are facilities to generate the other forms au-
tomatically. Noun entries are linked to entity types, to allow,
for example, the system to generate referring noun phrases; in
Figure 1, the entity type ?vessel? is associated with the lexicon
entry ?vessel-noun? (see the area next to ?Edit nouns?). The
entries are trilingual; e.g., ?vessel-noun? contains the nouns
?vessel?, ??????o?, and ?vaso? of the three languages.
For each field and each language, the authors have to pro-
vide at least one micro-plan, that specifies how the field
can be expressed as a clause in that language. Follow-
ing ILEX, M-PIRO?s primary form of micro-plans are clause
plans, where the author specifies the clause to be generated
in abstract terms, by selecting the verb to be used (from the
domain-dependent lexicon), the voice and tense of the result-
ing clause, etc. As with nouns, verb-entries are trilingual;
e.g., the ?paint-verb? entry of the clause plan of Figure 1 con-
tains the base verb forms ?paint?, ????????????, and ?dipin-
gere?. By default, the entity that carries the field becomes the
subject of the resulting clause, and the filler of the field the
object. The clause plan of Figure 1 leads to clauses like ?This
vessel was painted by Eucharides?. Appropriate referring ex-
pressions, e.g., ?Eucharides?, ?a painter?, ?him?, are gener-
ated automatically. Alternatively, micro-plans can be speci-
fied as simplistic templates, i.e., sequences of canned strings
and automatically generated referring expressions; see [An-
droutsopoulos et al, 2002] for details.
Unlike ILEX, M-PIRO allows multiple micro-plans to be
specified per field, and this allows greater variety in the gen-
erated texts. Furthermore, the user stereotypes can be used
to indicate that particular micro-plans are more appropriate
to particular user types, and this allows the system to tailor
the expressions it produces. When planning the text, M-PIRO
attempts to place clauses that convey more interesting fields
towards the beginning of the text. It is also possible for the
authors to specify particular orderings; otherwise, M-PIRO?s
text planner is domain-independent.
3 Exporting M-PIRO ontologies to OWL
M-PIRO?s ontological assumptions are very similar to those
of OWL. As with M-PIRO, OWL assumes there are entity
types, called classes, and entities, called individuals. M-
PIRO?s fields correspond to OWL?s properties. Relationships
between entities are expressed by defining object properties,
that map entities to other entities, while attributes of entities
are expressed via datatype properties, that map entities to lit-
erals of specific datatypes. It is, thus, relatively straightfor-
ward to export an M-PIRO ontology to OWL, as sketched be-
low. There are actually three different versions of OWL, called
OWL LITE, OWL DL, and OWL FULL, with increasing sophis-
tication. The mapping from M-PIRO?s ontologies to OWL pro-
duces ontologies in OWL LITE, which can be thought of as a
subset of OWL DL and OWL FULL.
When exporting M-PIRO ontologies to OWL, entity types
give rise to class definitions; e.g., the ?vessel? entity type of
Figure 1 leads to the following OWL class:
<owl:Class rdf:ID="Vessel">
<rdfs:subClassOf>
<owl:Class rdf:about="#Exhibit" />
</rdfs:subClassOf>
</owl:Class>
Fields are exported as OWL properties; e.g., the ?painted-
by? field of Figure 1 leads to the following object property
that associates vessels with painters:
<owl:ObjectProperty rdf:ID="painted-by">
<rdfs:domain rdf:resource="#Vessel" />
<rdfs:range rdf:resource="#Painter" />
</owl:ObjectProperty>
The ?exhibit-purpose? field of Figure 1 leads to the following
datatype property, that associates exhibits with strings:
<owl:DatatypeProperty rdf:ID="exhibit-purpose">
<rdfs:domain rdf:resource="#Exhibit" />
<rdfs:range rdf:resource=
"http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#string" />
</owl:DatatypeProperty>
Entities map to OWL individuals, as with statue ?exhibit42?
below. String-valued fields, like ?exhibit-purpose?, lead to
properties with separate values per language.
<Statue rdf:ID="exhibit42">
<current-location rdf:resource="#acropolis-museum" />
<creation-period rdf:resource="#archaic-period" />
<exhibit-purpose xml:lang="EN">This statue honours the
memory of Kroissos, a... </exhibit-purpose>
<exhibit-purpose xml:lang="IT">Questa...</exhibit-purpose>
<exhibit-purpose xml:lang="GRC">...</exhibit-purpose>
...
</Statue>
One problem we have encountered is that OWL provides
no mechanism to specify default values of properties. In M-
PIRO, it is possible to introduce a generic entity per entity
type, and the values of its fields are used as default values of
all the entities in that type. For example, one could specify
that kouroi, a kind of statue, were made in the archaic pe-
riod, by introducing a ?generic-kouros? entity, similar to the
?generic-kylix? of Figure 1, and filling its ?creation-period?
with ?archaic-period?. This would save us from having to
specify the creation period of each individual kouros; their
?creation-period? fields would be left empty. It is also possi-
ble to override default information: to specify that a particular
kouros was created during the classical period, perhaps the art
of an eccentric classical sculptor, one would fill its ?creation-
period? with ?classical-period?, and this would licence texts
like ?Kouroi were created during the archaic period. How-
ever, this kouros was created during the classical period?. We
export generic entities as ordinary OWL individuals, but use
a special prefix in their identifiers, which allows M-PIRO?s
system to assign them special status when reloading the on-
tology. Another system, however, that relies only on OWL?s
official semantics would have no way to realize that such in-
dividuals should be assigned special status.
A second problem is that some of M-PIRO?s datatypes
(e.g., dates) do not correspond exactly to OWL?s recom-
mended datatypes. We have defined new datatypes in OWL,
using XML SCHEMA, that correspond exactly to M-PIRO?s
datatypes, and we currently use those in the exported ontolo-
gies instead of the recommended OWL datatypes. We hope
to modify M-PIRO?s datatypes to correspond exactly to the
recommended ones in future versions of M-PIRO?s system.
The mapping from M-PIRO ontologies to OWL that we
sketched above has been fully implemented, and it now al-
lows the authoring tool to export its ontologies in OWL. Apart
from allowing other systems to reuse M-PIRO?s ontologies,
the mapping also opens up the possibility of generating object
descriptions in both human-readable and machine readable
forms. Every natural language description that M-PIRO pro-
duces can in principle also be rendered in a machine-readable
form consisting of OWL individuals, this time using the map-
ping to translate into OWL the parts of the ontology that the
system has decided to convey. For example, the English de-
scription of Figure 2 can be rendered in OWL as:
<Kylix rdf:ID="exhibit22">
<creation-period rdf:resource="#archaic-period />
<painting-technique-used
rdf:resource="#red-figure-technique />
<painted-by rdf:resource="#eucharides />
...
</Kylix>
M-PIRO?s generator might have also included in the resulting
text information deriving from the fields of the painter, e.g.,
the city the painter was born in, or other entities mentioned in
the text. In that case, the OWL rendering of the description?s
content would include additional individuals, such as:
<Painter rdf:ID="eucharides">
<painter-city rdf:resource="#athens" />
...
</Painter>
In the machine-readable forms of the descriptions, the OWL
individuals would include only properties corresponding to
fields the generator has decided to convey, unlike when ex-
porting the full ontology. That is, the OWL individuals may
not include properties corresponding to fields deemed unin-
teresting for the particular end-user, or fields that have already
been conveyed; e.g., the painter?s city may have already been
conveyed when describing another work of the same artist.
It is thus possible to annotate the generated texts with OWL
individuals representing their semantics. This would allow
computer applications (e.g., Web agents visiting the site of
a retailer that generates product descriptions using M-PIRO?s
technology) to reason about the semantics of the texts (e.g,
locate items of interest). Alternatively, it is possible to de-
fine user types for both human users (e.g., ?expert?, ?average-
adult?) and artificial agents acting for users of different in-
terests and expertise (e.g., ?agent-expert?, ?agent-average-
adult?), and produce human-readable or machine-readable
descriptions depending on the user type (in M-PIRO?s demon-
strators, there is a login stage where visitors select their
types). The OWL ontology without its individuals (classes
and properties only) can also be published on the Web to help
the agents? developers figure out the structure and semantics
of the OWL individuals their agents may encounter.
4 Importing OWL ontologies
When porting M-PIRO?s system to a new domain, much of
the authoring effort is devoted to defining entity types, and
the fields that express attributes and relationships. This is a
time-consuming process, partly because the ontology often
has to be reshaped as more experience about the domain is
gained. If a well-thought OWL ontology about the domain al-
ready exists, as will be the case with the gradual expansion
of the Semantic Web, the authoring can be accelerated by im-
porting the existing ontology into the authoring tool. There-
after, the authors can focus on adding the necessary domain-
dependent linguistic resources (micro-plans, lexicon entries,
etc.), setting up the user stereotypes, and populating the on-
tology with entities that were not already present in the im-
ported one. For the latter, we have developed software that
allows the authoring tool to construct entities automatically
from data in relational databases via ODBC; the authors only
need to establish a mapping between the fields of the entity
types and the attributes of the database?s relations.
As already mentioned, there are three versions of OWL
(OWL LITE, OWL DL, OWL FULL) with increasing sophisti-
cation. The mapping from M-PIRO?s ontologies to OWL of
the previous section uses only a subset of OWL LITE. Hence,
importing an arbitrary OWL ontology, as opposed to an OWL
ontology exported by the authoring tool, is not simply a mat-
ter of following the inverse mapping of the previous section.
Below we highlight the problems that arise when importing
arbitrary OWL LITE ontologies, to offer a taste of the work
that remains to be carried out to make M-PIRO?s system fully
compatible with OWL LITE. We also point to some additional
problems that arise when one moves on to OWL DL and OWL
FULL. The discussion is based on experiments we conducted
with more than a dozen of existing OWL ontologies.5
One of the main difficulties is that OWL (all versions) al-
lows multiple inheritance, while M-PIRO does not (section
2). Importing an ontology with multiple inheritance currently
causes the process to fail. The need for multiple inheritance
has also been noted by authors, who often encounter cases
where, for example, a person has to be categorized as both
painter and potter. We hope to support multiple inheritance
in future versions; this requires, among others, modifications
in how the ontology is presented in the authoring tool.
Another problem is that OWL (all versions) supports prop-
erty inheritance. For example, there may be a property ?is-
player-of?, used to represent the relationship between soccer
players and their teams, and another property ?is-goalkeeper-
of?, that associates goalkeepers with their teams. The latter
is a subproperty of the former, in the sense that if X is the
goalkeeper of Y , then X is also a player of Y . The import
facilities of the authoring tool currently ignore subproperty
inheritance, because there is no corresponding notion in M-
PIRO?s ontologies; i.e., the two properties would be treated
as unrelated. Subproperty inheritance, however, could help
the generator avoid expressing information that follows from
other information it has already conveyed; e.g., if a user has
been told that X is the goalkeeper of Y , avoid saying that X
is also a player of Y . We hope to extend M-PIRO?s model
5See http://protege.stanford.edu/plugins/owl/ontologies.html.
with subproperty inheritance in future work.
A further complication is that OWL LITE allows the range
of possible values of a property to be the intersection of sev-
eral classes, while in M-PIRO?s model the values of each field
must come from a single, named entity type. A possible solu-
tion is to create automatically a new entity type in M-PIRO?s
ontology for each intersection in the OWL ontology, but this
leads back to the single inheritance problem, because the in-
tersection has to inherit from all the intersected types. This
problem is more acute in OWL DL and OWL FULL, where sev-
eral set operations (e.g., union, complement) between classes
are allowed when specifying the ranges of properties.
In OWL it is also possible to refine a property?s range.
For example, an ontology may specify that individuals of
the class ?product? have a property ?made-by?, which asso-
ciates them with individuals of the class ?manufacturer?; there
would be an rdfs:range in the definition of ?product? set-
ting the range of ?made-by? to ?manufacturer?. We may then
wish to specify that individuals of ?automobile?, a subclass
of ?product?, accept as values of ?made-by? only individu-
als of ?automobile-manufacturer?, a subclass of ?manufac-
turer?. There are mechanisms in OWL (all versions) to state
this (allValuesFrom tag), but there is no equivalent mech-
anism in M-PIRO?s ontological model. We currently ignore
range refinements when importing OWL ontologies, but this
has the risk that authors may violate refinements (e.g., when
adding individuals), creating ontologies that are no longer
compatible with the imported ones.6 Additional work is
needed to support OWL?s (all versions) someValuesFrom,
which allows stating that in set-valued properties (cf. M-
PIRO?s ?Many? column) at least one of the elements of each
set-value should belong to a particular class. A further mech-
anism in OWL DL and OWL FULL (hasValue tag) allows
specifying that all the individuals of a class have a particu-
lar value at some of their properties; e.g., that all wines of
class ?burgundy? have ?dry? taste. Such information can be
imported into M-PIRO?s generic entities (Section 3), though
the correspondence is not exact, as generic entities carry de-
fault information that may be overridden.
As already pointed out (Section 1), M-PIRO does not al-
low relationships or attributes to be declared as one-to-one.
In contrast, OWL (all versions) provides appropriate facili-
ties, as well as facilities to declare properties (relationships
or attributes) as transitive, symmetric, or the inverse of an-
other one. All such declarations are currently ignored when
importing OWL ontologies; again, this has the risk that the
authors may modify the ontologies in ways that are incom-
patible with the ignored declarations. An additional problem
in OWL FULL is that classes can be used as individuals, allow-
ing the use of relationships to associate classes, as opposed to
individuals; this violates M-PIRO?s current ontological model.
It should be clear, then, that there are still issues to be re-
solved in M-PIRO?s ontological assumptions to make M-PIRO
fully compatible with OWL LITE, and there are additional dif-
ficulties with OWL DL and OWL FULL. As discussed above,
however, most of the necessary improvements appear to be
6 ILEX and M-PIRO?s core generation engine provide some sup-
port for such refinements, but M-PIRO?s authoring tool does not.
within reach, at least for OWL LITE. Overall, it appears rea-
sonable to conclude that future versions of NLG systems like
M-PIRO?s will be able to exploit fully OWL ontologies.
5 Towards semantic browsers
We have so far proposed two ways in which OWL ontologies
can be exploited in systems like M-PIRO?s: first, the gener-
ated texts can be accompanied by OWL specifications of their
semantics, with an OWL ontology establishing the semantic
vocabulary; and, second, existing OWL ontologies can be im-
ported, to accelerate the authoring. In both cases, the on-
tologies are linked to domain-dependent language resources
(micro-plans, lexicon entries, etc.) and user stereotypes (the
interest of each field per user type, etc.), but these additional
resources are not parts of the OWL ontologies: when export-
ing M-PIRO ontologies to OWL, the authoring tool produces
additional proprietary XML files that contain the domain-
dependent language resources and stereotypes; and when im-
porting OWL ontologies developed by others, the additional
resources have to be filled in by the authors. We argue below
that agreeing upon standards on how the additional resources
could be embedded in OWL ontologies would allow NLG sys-
tems like M-PIRO to play a central role in the Semantic Web.
Note, first, that it is possible to represent in OWL M-PIRO?s
domain-dependent linguistic resources and user stereotypes.
For example, micro-plans could be treated as individuals of
a class ?Microplan? with subclasses ?ClausePlan? and ?Tem-
plate?. In a similar manner, there would be a class ?Voice?
with individuals ?active? and ?passive?, and similarly for
tenses, genders, supported languages, etc. There would also
be a class ?LexiconEntry? with subclasses ?VerbEntry? and
?NounEntry?, and individuals corresponding to the entries
of the domain-dependent lexicon. (Classes corresponding to
language resources could be grouped under a ?LinguisticRe-
source? super-class.) Then, for example, the English micro-
plan of Figure 1 would roughly be represented in OWL as:
<ClausePlan rdf:ID="painted-by-mp1-en">
<for-property rdf:resource="#painted-by" />
<for-language rdf:resource="#english" />
<use-verb rdf:resource="#paint-verb" />
<use-voice rdf:resource="#passive" />
<use-tense rdf:resource="#past" />
<use-preposition>by</use-preposition>
</ClausePlan>
Similarly, the English part of the trilingual lexicon entry
?vessel-noun? could roughly be represented in OWL as:
<NounEntry rdf:ID="vessel-noun-en">
<lexicon-entry-id>vessel-noun</lexicon-entry>
<for-language rdf:resource="#english" />
<refers-to-class rdf:resource="#vessel" />
<base-form>vase</base-form />
<has-gender rdf:resource="#neuter" />
...
</NounEntry>
One complication is that we need to establish mappings
from micro-plans to the properties (fields) they can express,
and this requires using property names as values of other
properties. This can be seen in the micro-plan above, where
we used the property (field) name ?painted-by? as the value of
property ?for-property? to signal that the micro-plan can ex-
press ?painted-by?. Using property names as values of proper-
ties, however, requires OWL FULL. There is a similar problem
with noun entries, which have to be associated with classes
(entity types) they can refer to: in the noun entry above, we
used the class name ?vessel? as the value of property ?refers-
to-class?. Using class names as values of properties again
requires OWL FULL. Similar problems arise with stereotypes.
We are currently exploring how M-PIRO?s domain-
dependent language resources and stereotypes can be best
embedded in OWL ontologies. This embedding will lead to
?language-enabled? ontologies, that will include all the re-
sources a system like M-PIRO needs to render the ontologies
in several natural languages. This opens up another possibil-
ity for publishing content on the Semantic Web: a site could
publish only its language-enabled ontology (including the in-
dividuals that correspond, for example, to the items it sells),
and the NLG technology to render the ontology in natural
language could take the form of a browser plug-in. When
visiting a site of this kind, a human user would be initially
presented with an inventory of objects that can be described
(e.g., product thumbnails). Selecting an object would trans-
mit to the browser the ontology or its relevant parts, and it
would be the responsibility of the NLG plug-in to produce
an appropriate description in the user?s language and tailor it
to the user?s type and interaction history. If the NLG com-
munity could establish standards for language-enabled on-
tologies, there could be different NLG plug-ins by different
makers, perhaps each specialising in particular languages and
user types, in the same way that there are different browsers
for HTML. There could also be a market for developers of
language-enabled ontologies for particular sectors (e.g., mu-
seums, retailers of computer equipment), who would sell
their ontologies to organisations wishing to publish content
in those sectors. The client organisations would only need to
populate the ontologies with their own individuals (e.g., ex-
hibits, products), possibly by reusing databases, and publish
them at their sites. Artificial agents would interact directly
with the ontologies of the various sites, invoking their own
NLG plug-ins to report their findings in natural language.
Establishing standards is, of course, far from trivial. For
example, different NLG systems may require very different
domain-dependent language resources, or make different as-
sumptions on which resources are domain-dependent or inde-
pendent. Nevertheless, we believe it is worth trying to move
towards this direction, as there are large potential gains for
both the NLG community and the users of the emerging Se-
mantic Web. Furthermore, the effort to establish standards
should proceed in cooperation with other fields that could ex-
ploit language-enabled ontologies. For example, the associ-
ation between entity types and noun entries can be used for
query expansion in information retrieval; and the association
between micro-plans and ontology fields can be useful in in-
formation extraction systems that populate ontologies.
6 Conclusions and future work
We have presented three ways in which an NLG system that
generates object descriptions from symbolic information can
exploit OWL ontologies, using M-PIRO?s system as an exam-
ple. First, the NLG system?s source symbolic information can
be exported in the form of an OWL ontology. Apart from
enabling other OWL-aware systems to reuse the source infor-
mation, this allows the generated texts to be accompanied by
OWL descriptions of their semantics, with the OWL ontology
establishing the semantic vocabulary. Thus, the semantics of
the generated texts become fully accessible to computer ap-
plications, such as Web agents. Second, when porting the
NLG system to a new domain, it is possible to import a pre-
existing OWL ontology, saving a significant amount of ef-
fort. Third, it is possible to embed in OWL ontologies all the
domain-dependent language resources and user modelling in-
formation that NLG systems like M-PIRO?s need. This would
allow Web sites that carry information about objects to pub-
lish their content solely in the form of OWL ontologies, pass-
ing the responsibility of generating natural language descrip-
tions to NLG browser plug-ins. The latter requires the NLG
community to develop appropriate standards.
We hope that future work will address the remaining in-
compatibilities between M-PIRO?s technology and OWL. We
also plan to explore more fully how NLG engines could be-
come central components of the Semantic Web?s browsers,
and release prototypes that will demonstrate these ideas.
References
[Androutsopoulos et al, 2002] I. Androutsopoulos, D. Spi-
liotopoulos, K. Stamatakis, A. Dimitromanolaki, V. Karkaletsis,
and C.D. Spyropoulos. Symbolic authoring for multilingual
natural language generation. In Methods and Applications of
Artificial Intelligence, number 2308 in Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence, pages 131?142. Springer, 2002.
[Bontcheva and Wilks, 2004] K. Bontcheva and Y. Wilks. Auto-
matic report generation from ontologies: the MIAKT approach.
In Proc. of the 9th International Conference on Applications
of Natural Language to Information Systems, pages 324?335,
Manchester, U.K., 2004.
[Dale et al, 1998] R. Dale, S.J. Green, M. Milosavljevic, C. Paris,
C. Verspoor, and S. Williams. Dynamic document delivery: gen-
erating natural language texts on demand. In Proc. of the 9th
International Conference and Workshop on Database and Expert
Systems Applications, pages 131?136, Vienna, Austria, 1998.
[Hartley and Paris, 1997] A. Hartley and C. Paris. Multilingual
document production ? from support for translating to support
for authoring. Machine Translation, 12(1?2):109?129, 1997.
[Isard et al, 2003] A. Isard, J. Oberlander, I. Androutsopoulos, and
C. Matheson. Speaking the users? languages. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 18(1):40?45, 2003.
[O?Donnell et al, 2001] M. O?Donnell, C. Mellish, J. Oberlander,
and A. Knott. ILEX: an architecture for a dynamic hypertext
generation system. Natural Language Engineering, 7(3):225?
250, 2001.
[Power and Cavallotto, 1996] R. Power and N. Cavallotto. Multi-
lingual generation of administrative forms. In Proc. of the 8th
International Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages
17?19, Herstmonceux Castle, U.K., 1996.
[Van Deemter and Power, 2003] K. Van Deemter and R. Power.
High-level authoring of illustrated documents. Natural Language
Engineering, 9(2):101?126, 2003.
[Wilcock, 2003] G. Wilcock. Talking OWLs: towards an ontology
verbalizer. In Proc. of the workshop ?Human Language Technol-
ogy for the Semantic Web?, 2nd International Semantic Web Con-
ference, pages 109?112, Sanibel Island, Florida, U.S.A., 2003.
