An Investigation of Various Information Sources for Classifying Biological
Names
Manabu Torii, Sachin Kamboj and K. Vijay-Shanker
Department of Computer and Information Sciences
University of Delaware
Newark, DE 19716
ftorii,kamboj,vijayg@mail.eecis.udel.edu
Abstract
The classification task is an integral part of
named entity extraction. This task has not
received much attention in the biomedi-
cal setting, partly due to the fact that pro-
tein name recognition has been the focus
of the majority of the work in this field.
We study this problem and focus on dif-
ferent sources of information that can be
utilized for the classification task and in-
vestigate the extent of their contributions
for classification in this domain. However,
while developing a specific algorithm for
the classification of the names is not our
main focus, we make use of some simple
techniques to investigate different sources
of information and verify our intuitions
about their usefulness.
1 Introduction
In this paper, we investigate the extent to which
different sources of information contribute towards
the task of classifying the type of biological en-
tity a phrase might refer to. The classification task
is an integral part of named entity extraction. For
this reason, name classification has been studied in
solving the named entity extraction task in the NLP
and information extraction communities (see, for
example, (Collins and Singer, 1999; Cucerzan and
Yarowsky, 1999) and various approaches reported in
the MUC conferences (MUC-6, 1995)). However,
many of these approaches do not distinguish the de-
tection of the names (i.e., identifying a sequence of
characters and words in text as a name) from that of
its classification as separate phases. Yet, we believe
that we will gain from examining the two as sepa-
rate tasks as the classification task, the focus of this
work, is sufficiently distinct from the name identifi-
cation task. More importantly, from the perspective
of the current work, we hope to show that the sources
of information that help in solving the two tasks are
quite distinct.
Similar to the approaches of name classifica-
tion of (Collins and Singer, 1999; Cucerzan and
Yarowsky, 1999), we investigate both name internal
and external clues. However, we believe that the sit-
uation in the specialized domain of biomedicine is
sufficiently distinct, that the clues for this domain
need further investigation and that the classification
task has not received the similar attention deserved.
A large number of name extraction methods pro-
posed in this specialized domain have focused on
extracting protein names only (Fukuda et al, 1998;
Franzen et al, 2002; Tanabe et al, 2002). Since only
one class is recognized, the only task these methods
directly address is that of identifying a string of char-
acters and/or words that constitute a protein name.
These methods do not, at least in an explicit manner,
have to consider the classification task.
There are some important reasons to consider the
detection of names of other types of entities of bio-
logical relevance. Information extraction need not
be limited to protein-protein interactions, and ex-
tracting names of other types of entities will be re-
quired for other types of interactions. Secondly,
classification of names can help improve the preci-
sion of the methods. For example, KEX (Fukuda
et al, 1998) is a protein name recognizer and hence
labels each name it detects as a protein. However,
names of different types of entities share similar sur-
face characteristics (including use of digits, special
characters, and capitalizations). Due to this reason,
KEX and other protein name recognizers can pick
names of entities other than proteins (and label them
as proteins). (Narayanaswamy et al, 2003) reports
that by recognizing that some of these names as not
those of proteins allows their method to improve the
precision of protein name detection. Thirdly detect-
ing names of different classes will help in corefer-
ence resolution, the importance of which is well rec-
ognized in the IE domain. In such specialized do-
mains, the sortal/class information will play an im-
portant role for this task. In fact, the coreference res-
olution method described in (Castan?o et al, 2002)
seeks to use such information by using the UMLS
system1 and by applying type coercion. Finally,
many information extraction methods are based on
identifying or inducing patterns by which informa-
tion (of the kind being extracted) is expressed in nat-
ural language text. If we can tag the text with occur-
rences of various types of names (or phrases that re-
fer to biological entities) then better generalizations
of patterns can be induced.
There are at least two efforts (Narayanaswamy et
al., 2003; Kazama et al, 2002) that consider the
recognition of names of different classes of biomed-
ical relevance. Work reported in (Pustejovsky et al,
2002; Castan?o et al, 2002) also seeks to classify or
find the sortal information of phrases that refer to
biological entities. However, classification was not
the primary focus of these papers and hence the de-
tails and accuracy of the classification methods are
not described in much detail. Other related works
include those of (Hatzivassiloglou et al, 2001; Liu
et al, 2001) that use external or contextual clues to
disambiguate ambiguous expressions. While these
works maybe viewed as similar to word sense dis-
ambiguation (WSD), the one reported in (Hatzivas-
siloglou et al, 2001) in particular is close to classifi-
cation as well. In this work, using context of individ-
ual occurrences, names are disambiguated between
gene, protein and RNA senses.
1The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) was de-
veloped at National Library of Medicine, a National Institutes
of Health at Bethesda, USA.
While our interest is in classification of phrases
that refer to entities of biomedical significance, in
this work we limit ourselves to name classification.
In our investigations, we wish to use an annotated
corpus for both inducing and evaluating features.
We are unaware of any large corpus where phrases
are annotated with their classes. However, large cor-
pora for named entity extraction in this domain are
being developed, and fortunately, corpora such as
GENIA being developed at University of Tokyo are
freely available. We make use of this corpus and
hence investigate the classification of names only.
However, we believe that the conclusions we draw
in this regard will apply equally to classification of
phrases other than names as well.
2 Sources of Information for Name
Classification
To classify a name we consider both the words
within the name (i.e., name internal) as well as the
nearby words, the context of occurrences.
2.1 Using Name Internal Information
Methods for learning to identify names try to in-
duce patterns of words and special characters that
might constitute names. Hence the entire sequence
of words in a name is important and necessary for
name identification purposes. In contrast, for classi-
fication purposes, some parts of the names are more
important than the others and some may play no role
at all. For example, in the name cyclic AMP re-
sponse element-binding protein, the last word, pro-
tein, is sufficient for its classification. Similarly,
Adherence-isolated monocytes, can be classified on
the basis of its last word, monocytes.
The fact that the last word of a name often bears
the most information about the class of the name is
not surprising. In English, often the type of object
referred by a noun phrase is given by the head noun.
Viewing a name as a noun phrase, the head noun is
likely to determine its class. And in English noun
phrases, the head noun is often the rightmost word
because of the right-branching structure of English
noun phrases. Quite often the nouns correspond to
concepts (or classes) in an ontology. In such cases,
we call these nouns functional terms or f-terms, fol-
lowing the terminology used in some name recog-
nizers proposed for the biomedical domain.
2.1.1 F-terms
The notion of f-terms, was first introduced in the
design of KEX (Fukuda et al, 1998). In this work,
a set of words such as proteins and receptors, were
manually selected as f-terms. In this protein name
recognition system, as well as in Yapex (Franzen et
al., 2002), f-terms are only used for locating names
in text. On the other hand, the system reported
in (Narayanaswamy et al, 2003), which identifies
the names of other classes as well, generalizes them
to also classify names as well. Thus, f-terms are
identified with types/classes.
The existing methods that use f-terms rely on a
manually selected list of f-terms. However, manual
selection methods are usually susceptible to errors of
omission. In Section 4.1, we consider a method that
tries to automatically select a list of f-terms and the
resultant word classes based on the GENIA corpus.
We then use this generated list to test our intuitions
about f-terms.
We also consider f-terms extended to consist of
two consecutive words. We refer to these as bigram
f-terms to differentiate them from single word only
(unigram) f-terms. The use of bigrams will help us
to classify names when the last word is not an f-term,
but the last two words together can uniquely clas-
sify the name. For example, Allergen -specific T cell
clones cannot be classified using the last word alone.
However, a name ending with cell clones as the last
bigram is likely to be a ?Source?.
2.1.2 Suffixes
Often the information about the class designated
by a noun can be found in its suffix, particularly
in a scientific domain. If f-terms can be viewed
as words that designate a class of entities then note
that suffixes also play the same role. For example,
words ending with the suffix -amine are nitrogen
compounds and those ending with -cytes are cells.
Thus using suffixes results in a generalization at the
word level. A method of selecting a list of suffixes
and associating classes with them is described in
Section 4.1.
2.1.3 Example-based Classification
Of course, not all names can be classified on the
basis of f-terms and suffixes only. Sometimes names
are chosen on a more ad hoc manner and do not re-
flect any underlying meaning. In such cases, match-
ing with names found in a dictionary would be the
only name-internal method possible.
We cannot simply use an ?exact matching? algo-
rithm since such a method would only work if the
name was already present in our dictionary. As it is
not reasonable at this time to have a dictionary that
contains all possible names, we can attempt to use
approximate matches to find similar names in the
dictionary and use them for classification purposes.
Such a method then can be thought of finding a way
to generalize from the names in a dictionary, instead
of relying on simple memorization.
However, assuming a large dictionary is not feasi-
ble at this time especially for all the classes. So our
alternate is to look at examples from GENIA corpus.
The candidate examples that we will use for classi-
fication would be the ones that most closely match
a given name that needs to be classified. Hence, the
method we are following here essentially becomes
an example-based classification method such as k-
nearest neighbor method. One approach to this task
is described in Section 4.3.
2.2 Using Context
We now turn our attention to looking at clues that
are outside the name being classified. Using context
has been widely used for WSD and has also been ap-
plied to name classification (for example, in (Collins
and Singer, 1999; Cucerzan and Yarowsky, 1999)).
This approach has also been adopted for the biomed-
ical domain as illustrated in the work of (Hatzivas-
siloglou et al, 2001; Narayanaswamy et al, 2003;
Castan?o et al, 2002)2.
In the WSD work involving the use of context, we
can find two approaches: one that uses few strong
contextual evidences for disambiguation purposes,
as exemplified by (Yarowsky, 1995); and the other
that uses weaker evidences but considers a combi-
nation of a number of them, as exemplified by (Gale
et al, 1992). We explore both the methods. In Sec-
tion 4.4, we discuss our formulation and present a
simple way of extracting contextual clues.
2(Castan?o et al, 2002) can be seen as using context in its
type coercion rules.
3 Experimental Setup
3.1 Division of the corpus
We divided the name-annotated GENIA corpus
(consisting of 2000 abstracts) into two parts?1500
abstracts were used to derive all the clues: f-terms,
suffixes, examples (for matching) and finally contex-
tual features. These derived sources of information
were then used to classify the names found in the re-
maining 500 abstracts. The keys from the annotated
corpus were then used to compute the precision and
recall figures. We will call these two parts the train-
ing and test sections.
Since we pick the names from the test section
and classify them, we are entirely avoiding the name
identification task. Of course, this means that we do
not account for errors in classification that might re-
sult from errors in identifying names. However, we
believe that this is appropriate for two reasons. Our
investigation focuses on how useful the above men-
tioned features are for classification and we felt that
this might be slanted based on the name identifier
we use and its characteristics. Secondly, most of the
errors are due to not finding the correct extent of the
name, either because additional neighboring words
are included or because some words/characters are
not included. In our experience, most of these errors
happen at the beginning part of the name and, hence,
should not unduly affect the classification.
3.2 Classes of Names
In our method, we classify names into one of the
five classes that we call Protein, Protein Part, Chem-
ical, Source and Others. We don?t have any partic-
ularly strong reasons for this set of classes although
we wish to point out that the first four in this choice
corresponds to the classes used by the name recog-
nizer of (Narayanaswamy et al, 2003). It must be
noted that the class proteins not only include pro-
teins but also protein families, and genes; all of
which are recognized by many protein name recog-
nizers. The GENIA class names were then mapped
onto our class names.
3.3 Tokenization
After the assignment of classes, all the extracted
names were tokenized. Noting that changing a digit
by another, a Greek character by another, a Ro-
man numeral by another rarely ever results in ob-
taining another name of a different class, our name
tokenization marks these occurrences accordingly.
To remove variability in naming, hyphens and ex-
tra spaces were removed. Also, as acronyms are not
useful for detecting types, their presence is identi-
fied (in our case we use a simplistic heuristic that
acronyms are words with 2 or more consecutive up-
per case characters).
3.4 Evaluation Methodology
We used an n-fold cross-validation to verify that the
results and conclusions we draw are not slanted by a
particular division of the 2000 abstracts. The corpus
was divided into sets of 500 abstracts - the composi-
tion of each set being random - thus obtaining 4 dif-
ferent partitions. In the first partition, the first three
sets were combined to form the Training Set and the
last was used as the Test Set. In the second partition,
the second, third and fourth sets formed the Training
Set and the first was used as the Test Set and so on.
The overall results that we report in Section 5
were the average of results on the four partitions.
However, the first partition was used for more de-
tailed investigation.
4 Classification Method
Given an unclassified name, we first tried to clas-
sify it on the basis of the f-terms and the suffixes. If
that failed, we applied our string matcher to try to
find a match and assign a category to the unknown
name. Finally, we used context to assign classes to
the names that were still left unclassified.
4.1 F-Term and Suffix Extraction
Since we consider f-terms to be nouns that appear
at the end of a name and denote a type of entity,
their presence in the name suffices for its classifi-
cation. Hence, we use the last words of names
found in the training set to see if they can uniquely
identify the class. To generate a list of f-terms and
their respective classes, we count each word or pair
of words that is found at the end of any name. A
unigram or bigram, w, was selected as an f-term if it
appeared at least 5 times and if the conditional prob-
ability P(classj w) for any class exceeds a threshold
which we set at 0.95.
In the counting to estimate this conditional prob-
ability we ignore the presence of digits, Greek char-
acters and Roman numerals as discussed in the Sec-
tion 3.3. For example, in latent membrane protein
1 the ?1? at the end is ignored and ?protein? will be
selected as the unigram for the count.
The number of f-terms selected for chemicals was
the lowest. This is not surprising considering chem-
ical names have few words defining subtypes of
chemicals. acetate was an example chosen for this
class. Some other examples of extracted f-terms and
their associated classes are: cell, tissue, virus (for
Source); kinase, plasmid and protein (for Proteins);
subunit, site and chain (for Protein Parts) and bind-
ings and defects (for Others). A couple of surprising
words were selected. Due to the limitations of our
method, we do not check if a last name indeed de-
notes a class of entities but merely note that the name
is strongly associated with a class. Hence, protein
names like Ras and Tax were also selected.
For suffix extraction, we considered suffixes of
length three, four and five. Since we argued ear-
lier that the suffixes that we are considering play
the same role as f-terms, we only consider the suf-
fixes of the last word. This prevents the classifica-
tion of cortisol- dependent BA patients (a ?Source?)
as a ?Chemical? on the basis of the suffix -isol. Also,
like in the case of f-terms, digits, Greek characters
etc at the end of a name were ignored. However,
unlike f-terms, if the last word is an acronym the
whole name is dropped, as taking the suffix of an
acronym wouldn?t result in any generalization. The
probability of a class given a suffix is then calculated
and only those suffixes which had a probability of
greater than the probability threshold were selected.
When generating the list of suffixes, we have two
possibilities. We could choose to consider names
which ended with an f-term that was selected or not
consider these names under the assumption that f-
terms would be sufficient to classify such names. We
found that considering the suffixes of the f-terms re-
sults in a significant increase in the recall with lit-
tle or no change in precision. This rather surprising
result can be understood if we consider the kinds
of names that show up in the class Others. A suf-
fix such as ation was selected because a number of
names ending with selected f-terms like transplan-
tation, transformation, and association. This suffix
allows us to classify AP-1 translocation on the basis
of the suffix despite the fact that translocation was
not chosen as an f-term.
4.2 Classification based on f-terms and suffixes
Given a set of f-terms and suffixes, along with their
associated classes, selected from the training part,
names in the test portion were classified by looking
at the words that end the names. If a name ended
with a selected f-term, then the name was tagged as
belonging to the corresponding class. If a match was
not found, the suffix of the last word of the name was
extracted and a match was attempted with the known
list of suffixes. If no match was found, the name was
left unclassified.
4.3 Classifying Names using Similar Examples
We had discussed earlier the use of similar examples
to classify a new occurrence of a name. To find sim-
ilar examples, standard string matching algorithms
are often used which produce a similarity score that
varies inversely with the number of edit operations
needed to match two strings identically. However,
we abandoned the use of standard string matching
programs as their performance for classification pur-
poses was rather poor. Primarily this was due to
the fact that these algorithms do not distinguish be-
tween matches at the beginning and at the end of the
name strings. As discussed before, for classification
purposes the position of words is important and we
noticed that matches at the beginning of the strings
were hardly ever relevant unlike the case with those
at the end. For this reason, we developed our own
matching algorithm.
Given a name in the test corpus, we try to find
how similar it is to candidate examples taken from
the training portion. For each pair of names, we first
try to pair together the individual words that make
up the names allowing for some partial matching.
These partial matches allow for certain kinds of sub-
stitutions that we do not believe will affect the classi-
fication. These include dropping a plural ?s?, substi-
tuting one Greek character by another, changing an
uppercase character by the same character in lower
case, changing an Arabic/Roman single digit by an-
other, changing a Roman numeral by an Arabic one,
and dropping digits. Each substitution draws a small
penalty (although dropping digits incurs a slightly
greater penalty) and only a perfect match receives a
score of 1 for matching of individual words. Com-
plete mismatches receive a score of 0.
We then try to assign a score to the whole pair of
names. We begin by assigning position numbers to
each pair of words (including matches, mismatches
and drops) starting from the rightmost match which
is assigned a position of zero. Mismatches to the
right of the first match, if any, are assigned negative
positions. We then use a weight table that gives more
weightage to lower position numbers (i.e., towards
the end of the strings rather than the beginning) to
assign a weight to each pair of words depending on
the position. Then the score of the entire match is
given by a weighted sum of the match scores, nor-
malized for length of the string. Assigning a score
of 0 for a mismatch is tantamount to saying that a
mismatch does not contribute towards the similarity
score. A negative score for a mismatch would result
in assigning a penalty.
We only consider those strings as candidate exam-
ples if their similarity score is greater than a thresh-
old . To assign a class to a name instance, we look
at the k nearest neighbors, as determined by their
similarity scores to the name being classified. To
assign a class to the name, we weight the voting of
each of the k (or fewer) candidates by their similarity
score. A class is assigned only if the the ratio of the
scores of the top two candidates exceeds a thresh-
old, . The precision should tend to increase with
this ratio. 3
4.4 Classifying Based on Context
To identify the best sources of contextual informa-
tion for classifying names, we considered two pos-
sibilities ? the use of a single strong piece of ev-
idence and the use of a combination of weak evi-
dences. For the former we made use Decision Lists
similar to Yarowsky?s method for Word Sense Dis-
ambiguation (WSD) (Yarowsky, 1995). However,
we found that this method had a poor recall.4
3As always, the reason for using a threshold is that it allows
us to find the appropriate level of compromise between preci-
sion and recall. Given that there are different sources of infor-
mation, there is no need to insist that particular method assign a
class tag if we are not comfortable with the level of confidence
that we have in such an assignment.
4Due to space limitations, we don?t discuss why we might
have obtained the poor recall that we got for the decision list
Hence, we decided to use a combination of weak
evidences and employ the Naive-Bayes assumption
of independence between evidences, similar to the
method described in (Gale et al, 1992). To do
this, the words that occurred within a window and
that matched some template pattern were selected
as features if their scores 5 exceeded some thresh-
old (which we name a). Also, unlike Decision Lists,
all the features presented in the context of a name
instance were involved in its classification and the
probability that a name instance has a certain class
was calculated by multiplying probabilities associ-
ated with all the features. As some of the evi-
dences might be fairly weak, we wanted to classify
only those cases where the combination of features
strongly indicated a particular class. This is done
by comparing the two probabilities associated with
the best two classes for an instance. A class was
assigned to a particular name instance only when
the ratio of the two probabilities was beyond a cer-
tain threshold (which will call b). Together with
the threshold, a for the feature selection, choice of
this threshold could allow trade-off between preci-
sion and recall for classification accuracies.
5 Results and Evaluation
5.1 F-Terms and Suffixes
Table 1 gives the precision and recall values for the
first partition for both f-terms and suffixes.6 As
can be seen, the recall for ?Chemical? is very low
as compared to the other classes. This is due to
two reasons?firstly most chemical names consist of
only one word and secondly we found that chemical
names do not end with an indicative word.
The number of f-terms and suffixes extracted by
our program was considerably less for Chemicals
and Protein Parts as compared to Proteins and Oth-
ers. While this is consistent with the the explana-
tion of poor recall for chemicals, it can be noted that
the low number of f-terms and suffixes extracted for
protein parts did not affect its recall in the same man-
ner. As expected the precision remains high for all
classes.
method.
5The scores were simply the conditional probability of a
class given a word
6The suffix list includes f-terms.
F-Term and suffix String Matching Context
F-Term Suffix Alone After Suffix a = 5, b = 2 a = 2, b = 5
Class Prec. Rec. Prec. Rec. Prec. Rec. Prec. Rec. Prec. Rec. Prec. Rec.
Chemical 0.97 0.05 0.98 0.19 0.89 0.54 0.90 0.59 0.85 0.06 0.55 0.10
Protein 0.97 0.35 0.98 0.55 0.92 0.81 0.93 0.81 0.70 0.31 0.53 0.76
Protein Part 0.98 0.40 0.98 0.33 0.86 0.75 0.85 0.76 0.75 0.05 0.37 0.12
Source 0.98 0.61 0.97 0.62 0.95 0.87 0.94 0.89 0.83 0.10 0.78 0.10
Others 0.99 0.69 0.97 0.71 0.96 0.87 0.96 0.91 0.80 0.05 0.74 0.03
Total 0.98 0.49 0.98 0.57 0.93 0.81 0.93 0.84 0.72 0.17 0.53 0.36
Table 1: Results for the various stages of our method.
Figure 1: Precision-Recall Tradeoff
5.2 Using Examples
For the string matching, we tried three different set
of values for the parameters ,  and k,that is (0.3,
2, 3), (0.7, 2, 1) and (0.7, 2, 5). We found that the
results were marginally better for the set (0.3,2,3)
and, hence, show the results for this set only. Table
1 shows the results of applying the string matching
to the first partition ? all by itself and on names not
classified after the suffix stage. As can be seen, the
recall is higher than the previous stages but with a
slight reduction in precision.
5.3 Results for Context
We ran the context classifier for different values of
the parameters f, a and b but finally chose a value of
5 for f because choosing a higher frequency thresh-
old does not improve the precision but hurts the re-
call. Figure 1 shows the precision plotted against the
recall for different choice of a and b.
The values of the precision and recall on the first
Class Precision Recall
Chemical 0.87 0.62
Protein 0.84 0.90
Protein Part 0.86 0.79
Source 0.94 0.87
Others 0.96 0.90
Total 0.90 0.87
Table 2: Overall Results
partition for each individual class and the two sets
of thresholds are shown in Table 1. The first set,
that considers stronger evidences (since a is higher),
achieves higher precision but recall is not satisfac-
tory. Most of the word evidences chosen tended to
indicate a classification of proteins and hence the
higher recall for this class. Allowing weaker evi-
dences (because a = 2) means more contextual ev-
idences were selected and hence a higher recall was
obtained (particularly for protein). But precision is
lowered except for Source and Others (which inci-
dentally don?t show an increase in recall).
5.4 Overall Results
Table 2 shows the precision and recall for all the dif-
ferent classes, averaging it out for the 4 different par-
titions. We observed very little variance between the
results for the different partitions.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
We have considered a few name internal and exter-
nal sources of information that help in the classifica-
tion of names. Despite using fairly simple methods
to classify the names, we have obtained encourag-
ing results which we take to suggest that that our
intuitions about them are on the right track. We
feel that the effectiveness of f-terms and suffixes that
generalize the idea of f-terms, the matching algo-
rithm that places more emphasis on partial matches
of words to the right vindicates our stance that the
classification of names is a task sufficiently distinct
from the name identification process and warrants
an independent investigation. Even the use of con-
text is different for the two tasks as in the latter task
only the immediately neighboring words are used
and that too for purpose of demarking the extrem-
ities of the name string.
While the high precision of f-terms and suffix
based classification was expected, the recall of these
methods was higher than expected. It is also clear
that these methods do not help much with the chem-
icals class. We believe that in addition to suffix,
the knowledge of other chemical root forms (such as
?meth?), e.g., used in (Narayanaswamy et al, 2003),
would be useful.
We would like to focus more on the matching part
of the work. In particular, rather than hand-coding
our intuitions in terms of weights for the different
parameters, we would like to automatically, e.g., us-
ing a held-out validation set, have these set and see
to what extent the automated choice of parameters
show the bias for the rightmost words in the match-
ing. We would also like to generalize our work fur-
ther by not limiting the classes to the ones chosen
here but allow a wider range of classes. To do this,
we would like to consider the GENIA classes and
collapse classes at various levels of their ontology
and try to see at what level of fine-grained distinc-
tions can classification still be done satisfactorily. In
regards to the use of the contextual method, while
we have some preliminary ideas, we need to inves-
tigate further why the use of a single strong clue,
as exemplified by the decision list method, does not
work as well as it seems to for the WSD task.
References
J. Castan?o, M. Zhang, and J. Pustejovsky. 2002.
Anaphora Resolution in Biomedical Literature. In
Proc. of International Symposium on Reference Res-
olution.
M. Collins and Y. Singer. 1999. Unsupervised Models
for Named Entity Classification. In Proc. of EMNLP
1999.
S. Cucerzan and D. Yarowsky 1999. Language Inde-
pendent Named Entity Recognition Combining Mor-
phological and Contextual Evidence. In Proc. of Joint
SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods in NLP
and Very Large Corpora, 90?99.
W. Gale, K. W. Church, and D. Yarowsky. 1992. A
method for disambiguating word senses in a large cor-
pus. Computers and the Humanities, 26:415?439.
K. Fukuda, T. Tsunoda, A. Tamura, and T. Takagi. 1998.
Toward information extraction: identifying protein
names from biological papers. Proc. of ISMB 1998,
707?18.
K. Franze?n, G. Eriksson, F. Olsson, L. Asker, P. Lide?n,
and J. Co?ster. 2002. Protein names and how to
find them. International Journal of Medical Informat-
ics special issue on Natural Language Processing in
Biomedical Applications, 67:49?61.
V. Hatzivassiloglou, P. A. Duboue, and A. Rzhetsky.
2001. Disambiguating proteins, genes, and RNA in
text: a machine learning approach. Bioinformatics, 17
Suppl 1: S97?S106.
J. Kazama, T. Makino, Y. Ota, and J. Tsujii. 2002. Tun-
ing Support Vector Machines for Biomedical Named
Entity Recognition. In Proc. of the ACL-02 Workshop
on Natural Language Processing in the Biomedical
Domain, 1?8.
H. Liu, Y. Lussier, and C. Friedman. 2001. Disambigut-
ing Biomedical Terms in Biomedical Narrative Text:
an Unsupervised. Journal of Biomedical Informatics,
34 (4): 249-61.
Proc. of the Sixth Message Understanding Conference
(MUC-6). 1995. Morgan Kaufmann.
M. Narayanaswamy, K. E. Ravikumar, and K. Vijay-
Shanker. 2003. A Biological Named Entity Recog-
nizer. In Proc. of PSB 2003. 8.
J. Pustejovsky, J. Castan?o, J. Zhang, M. Kotecki, and
B. Cochran. 2002. Robust Relational Parsing Over
Biomedical Literature: Extracting Inhibit Relations.
In Proc. of PSB 2002, 7:362?373.
L. Tanabe and W. J. Wilbur 2002. Tagging gene and
protein names in full text articles. In Proc. of the ACL-
02 Workshop on Natural Language Processing in the
Biomedical Domain, 9?13.
D. Yarowsky. 1995. Unsupervised Word Sense Disam-
biguation Rivaling Supervised Methods. In Proc. of
ACL 1995, 189?196.
