A Comprehensive NLP System for Modern Standard Arabic and 
Modern Hebrew 
Morphological analysis, lemmatization, vocalization, disambiguation and text-to-speech 
 
Dror Kamir 
Melingo Ltd. 
16 Totseret Haaretz st. 
Tel-Aviv, Israel 
drork@melingo.com
Naama Soreq 
Melingo Ltd. 
16 Totseret Haaretz st. 
Tel-Aviv, Israel 
naamas@melingo.com
Yoni Neeman 
Melingo Ltd. 
16 Totseret Haaretz st. 
Tel-Aviv, Israel 
yonin@melingo.com
 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a comprehensive NLP sys-
tem by Melingo that has been recently developed 
for Arabic, based on MorfixTM ? an operational 
formerly developed highly successful comprehen-
sive Hebrew NLP system. 
The system discussed includes modules for 
morphological analysis, context sensitive lemmati-
zation, vocalization, text-to-phoneme conversion, 
and syntactic-analysis-based prosody (intonation) 
model. It is employed in applications such as full 
text search, information retrieval, text categoriza-
tion, textual data mining, online contextual dic-
tionaries, filtering, and text-to-speech applications 
in the fields of telephony and accessibility and 
could serve as a handy accessory for non-fluent 
Arabic or Hebrew speakers. 
Modern Hebrew and Modern Standard Arabic 
share some unique Semitic linguistic characteris-
tics. Yet up to now, the two languages have been 
handled separately in Natural Language Processing 
circles, both on the academic and on the applica-
tive levels. This paper reviews the major similari-
ties and the minor dissimilarities between Modern 
Hebrew and Modern Standard Arabic from the 
NLP standpoint, and emphasizes the benefit of de-
veloping and maintaining a unified system for both 
languages. 
1 Introduction 
1.1 The common Semitic basis from an NLP 
standpoint 
Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) and Modern 
Hebrew (MH) share the basic Semitic traits: rich 
morphology, based on consonantal roots (Ji?r / 
?ore?)1, which depends on vowel changes and in 
some cases consonantal insertions and deletions to 
create inflections and derivations.2 
For example, in MSA: the consonantal root 
/ktb/ combined with the vocalic pattern CaCaCa 
derives the verb kataba ?to write?. This derivation 
is further inflected into forms that indicate seman-
tic features, such as number, gender, tense etc.: 
katab-tu ?I wrote?, katab-ta ?you (sing. masc.) 
wrote?, katab-ti ?you (sing. fem.) wrote, ?a-ktubu 
?I write/will write?, etc. 
Similarly in MH: the consonantal root /ktv/ 
combined with the vocalic pattern CaCaC derives 
the verb katav ?to write?, and its inflections are: 
katav-ti ?I wrote?, katav-ta ?you (sing. masc.) 
                                                     
1 A remark about the notation: Phonetic transcriptions always 
appear in Italics, and follow the IPA convention, except the 
following: ? ? glottal stop, ? ? voiced pharyngeal fricative 
(?Ayn), ? ? velarized d, ? ? velarized s. Orthographic 
transliterations appear in curly brackets. Bound morphemes 
(affixes, clitics, consonantal roots) are written between two 
slashes. Arabic and Hebrew linguistic terms are written in 
phonetic spelling beginning with a capital letter. The Arabic 
term comes first. 
2 For a review on the different approaches to Semitic inflec-
tions see Beesley (2001), p. 2. 
wrote?, katav-t ?you (sing. fem.) wrote?, e-xtov ?I 
will write? etc. 
In fact, morphological similarity extends much 
further than this general observation, and includes 
very specific similarities in terms of the NLP sys-
tems, such as usage of nominal forms to mark 
tenses and moods of verbs; usage of pronominal 
enclitics to convey direct objects, and usage of 
proclitics to convey some prepositions. Moreover, 
the inflectional patterns and clitics are quite similar 
in form in most cases. Both languages exhibit con-
struct formation (I?a:fa / Smixut), which is similar 
in its structure and in its role. The suffix marking 
feminine gender is also similar, and similarity goes 
as far as peculiarities in the numbering system, 
where the female gender suffix marks the mascu-
line. Some of these phenomena will be demon-
strated below. 
1.2 Lemmatization of Semitic Languages 
A consistent definition of lemma is crucial for 
a data retrieval system. A lemma can be said to be 
the equivalent to a lexical entry: the basic gram-
matical unit of natural language that is semanti-
cally closed. In applications such as search 
engines, usually it is the lemma that is sought, 
while additional information including tense, num-
ber, and person are dispensable. 
In MSA and MH a lemma is actually the 
common denominator of a set of forms (hundreds 
or thousands of forms in each set) that share the 
same meaning and some morphological and syn-
tactic features. Thus, in MSA, the forms: ?awla:d, 
walada:ni, despite their remarkable difference in 
appearance, share the same lemma WALAD ?a boy?. 
This is even more noticeable in verbs, where forms 
like kataba, yaktubu, kutiba, yuktabu, kita:ba and 
many more are all part of the same lemma: 
KATABA ?to write?. 
The rather large number of inflections and 
complex forms (forms that include clitics, see be-
low 1.5) possible for each lemma results in a high 
total number of forms, which, in fact, is estimated 
to be the same for both languages: around 70 mil-
lion3. The mapping of these forms into lemmas is 
inconclusive (See Dichy (2001), p. 24). Hence the 
question rises: what should be defined as lemma in 
MSA and MH. 
                                                     
3 For Arabic - see Beesley (2001), p. 7 For Hebrew - our own 
sources. 
The fact that MSA and MH morphology is 
root-based might promote the notion of identifying 
the lemma with the root. But this solution is not 
satisfactory: in most cases there is indeed a dia-
chronic relation in meaning among words and 
forms of the same consonantal root. However, se-
mantic shifts which occur over the years rule out 
this method in synchronic analysis. Moreover, 
some diachronic processes result in totally coinci-
dental ?sharing? of a root by two or more com-
pletely different semantic domains. For example, 
in MSA, the words fajr ?dawn? and infija:r ?explo-
sion? share the same root /fjr/ (the latter might have 
originally been a metaphor). Similarly, in MH the 
verbs pasal ?to ban, disqualify? and pisel ?to sculp-
ture? share the same root /psl/ (the former is an old 
loan from Aramaic). 
In Morfix, as described below (2.1), a lemma 
is defined not as the root, but as the manifestation 
of this root, most commonly as the lesser marked 
form of a noun, adjective or verb. There is no es-
cape from some arbitrariness in the implementation 
of this definition, due to the fine line between in-
flectional morphology and derivational morphol-
ogy. However, Morfix generally follows the 
tradition set by dictionaries, especially bilingual 
dictionaries. Thus, for example, difference in part 
of speech entails different lemmas, even if the 
morphological process is partially predictable. 
Similarly each verb pattern (Wazn / Binyan) is 
treated as a different lemma.  
Even so, the roots should not be overlooked, as 
they are a good basis for forming groups of lem-
mas; in other words, the root can often serve as a 
?super-lemma?, joining together several lemmas, 
provided they all share a semantic field. 
1.3 The Issue of Nominal Inflections of Verbs 
The inconclusive selection of lemmas in MSA 
and MH can be demonstrated by looking into an 
interesting phenomenon: the nominal inflections of 
verbs (roughly parallel to the Latin participle, see 
below). Since this issue is a good example both for 
a characteristic of Semitic NLP and for the simi-
larities between MSA and MH, it is worthwhile to 
further elaborate on it. 
Both MSA and MH use the nominal inflections 
of verbs to convey tenses, moods and aspects. 
These inflections are derived directly from the verb 
according to strict rules, and their forms are pre-
dictable in most cases. Nonetheless, grammati-
cally, these forms behave as nouns or adjectives. 
This means that they bear case marking in MSA, 
nominal marking for number and gender (in both 
languages) and they can be definite or indefinite 
(in both languages). Moreover, these inflections 
often serve as nouns or adjectives in their own 
right. This, in fact, causes the crucial problem for 
data retrieval, since the system has to determine 
whether the user refers to the noun/adjective or 
rather to the verb for which it serves as inflection. 
Nominal inflections of verbs exist in non-
Semitic languages as well; in most European lan-
guages participles and infinitives have nominal 
features. However, two Semitic traits make this 
phenomenon more challenging in our case ? the 
rich morphology which creates a large set of in-
flections for each base form (i.e. the verb is in-
flected to create nominal forms and then each form 
is inflected again for case, gender and number). 
Furthermore, Semitic languages allow nominal 
clauses, namely verbless sentences, which increase 
ambiguity. For example, in English it is easy to 
recognize the form ?drunk? in ?he has drunk? as 
related to the lemma DRINK (V) (and not as an ad-
jective). This is done by spotting the auxiliary ?has? 
which precedes this form. However in MH, the 
clause axi ?omer could mean ?my brother is a 
guard? or ?my brother guards/is guarding?. The 
syntactical cues for the final decision are subtle 
and elusive. Similarly in MSA: axi ka:tibun could 
mean ?my brother is writing? or ?my brother is a 
writer?.  
1.4 Orthography 
From the viewpoint of NLP, especially com-
mercially applicable NLP, it is important to note 
that the writing systems of both MSA and MH fol-
low the same conventions, in which most vowels 
are not marked. Therefore, in MSA the form yak-
tubu ?he writes/will write? is written {yktb}. Simi-
larly in MH, the form yilmad ?he will learn? is 
written {ylmd}. Both languages have a supplemen-
tary marking system for vocalization (written 
above, under and beside the text), but it is not used 
in the overwhelming majority of texts. In both lan-
guages, when vowels do appear as letters, letters of 
consonantal origin are used, consequently turning 
these letters ambiguous (between their consonantal 
and vocalic readings). 
It is easy to see the additional difficulty that 
this writing convention presents for NLP. The 
string {yktb} in MSA can be interpreted as yak-
tubu (future tense), yaktuba (subjunctive), yaktub 
(jussive), yuktabu (future tense passive) and even 
yuktibu ?he dictates/will dictate? a form that is con-
sidered by Morfix to be a different lemma alto-
gether (see above 1.2). Furthermore, ambiguity can 
occur between totally unrelated words, as will be 
shown in section 1.7. A trained MSA reader can 
distinguish between these forms by using contex-
tual cues (both syntactic and semantic). A similar 
contextual sensitivity must be programmed into the 
NLP system in order to meet this challenge. 
Each language also has some orthographic pe-
culiarities of its own. The most striking in MH is 
the multiple spelling conventions that are used si-
multaneously. The classical convention has been 
replaced in most texts with some kind of spelling 
system that partially indicates vowels, and thus 
reduces ambiguities. An NLP system has to take 
into account the various spelling systems and the 
fact that the classic convention is still occasionally 
used. Thus, each word often has more than one 
spelling. For example: the word shi?ur ?a lesson? 
can be written {??wr} or {?y?wr}. The word kiven 
?to direct? can be written {kwn} or {kywwn}, the 
former is the classical spelling (Ktiv Xaser) while 
the later is the standard semi-vocalized system 
(Ktiv Male), but a some non-standard spellings can 
also appear: {kywn}, {kwwn}. 
MSA spelling is much more standardized and 
follows classic conventions. Nonetheless, some of 
these conventions may seem confusing at first 
sight. The Hamza sign, which represents the glottal 
stop phoneme, can be written in 5 different ways, 
depending on its phonological environment. There-
fore, any change in vowels (very regular a phe-
nomenon in MSA inflectional paradigms) results in 
a different shape of Hamza. This occurs even when 
the vowels themselves are not marked. Moreover ? 
there is often more than one shape possible per 
form, without any mandatory convention. One 
could argue that all Hamza shapes should be en-
coded as one for our purposes. This may solve 
some problems, but then again it would deny us of 
crucial information about the vowels in the word. 
Since the Hamza changes according to vowels 
around it, it is a good cue for retrieving the vocali-
zation of the word, and to reduce ambiguity. 
1.5 Clitics and Complex Forms 
The phenomenon which will be described in 
this section is related both to the morphological 
structure of MSA and MH, and to the orthographi-
cal conventions shared by these languages. Both 
languages use a diverse system of clitics4 that are 
appended to the inflectional forms, creating com-
plex forms and further complications in proper 
lemmatization and data retrieval. 
For example, in MSA, the form: ?awla:dun 
?boys (nom.)?, a part of the lemma WALAD ?boy?, 
can take the genitive pronominal enclitic /-ha/ ?her? 
and create the complex form: ?awla:d-u-ha ?boys-
nom.-her (=her boys)?. This complex form is 
orthographically represented as follows: 
{?wladha}. Similarly in Hebrew, the form yeladim 
?children? (of the lemma YELED ?child?), combined 
with the genitive pronominal enclitic /-ha/ ?her?, 
yields the complex form yelade-ha ?children-her 
(=her children)?. The orthographical representation 
is: {yldyh}. 
Enclitics usually denote genitive pronouns for 
nouns (as demonstrated above) and accusative pro-
nouns for verbs. For example, in MSA, ?akaltu-hu 
?I ate it? {?klth}, or in MH axalti-v ?I ate it? 
{?kltyw}. It is easy to see how this phenomenon, 
especially the orthographic convention which con-
joins these enclitics to the basic form, may create 
confusion in lemmatizing and data retrieval. How-
ever, the nature of clitics which limits their posi-
tion and possible combinations helps to locate 
them and trace the basic form from which the 
complex one was created. 
There are also several proclitics denoting 
prepositions and other particles, attached to the 
preceding form by orthographic convention. The 
most common are the conjunctions /w, f/, the 
prepositions /b, l, k/ and the definite article /al/ in 
MSA, and the conjunction /w/, the prepositions /b, 
k, l, m/ (often referred to as Otiyot Baxlam), the 
relative pronoun /?/ and the definite article /h/ in 
MH. Therefore, in MSA, the phrase: wa-li-l-
?wla:di ?and to the boys? will have the following 
orthographical representation: {wll?wlad}. In MH 
the phrase ve-la-yeladim ?and to the children? will 
be represented orthographically as: {wlyldym}. 
Once again, when scanning a written text, these 
                                                     
4 The term ?clitics? is employed here as the closest term which 
can describe this phenomenon without committing to any 
linguistic theory. 
proclitics must be taken into account in the lemma-
tization process. 
1.6 Syntax 
The syntactic structure of MSA and MH is 
very similar. In fact, the list of major syntactic 
rules is almost identical, though the actual applica-
tion of these rules may differ between the lan-
guages. 
A good demonstration of that is the agreement 
rule. Both languages demand a strict noun-
adjective-verb agreement. The agreement includes 
features such as number, gender, definiteness and 
in MSA also case marking (in noun-adjective 
agreement). The MH agreement rule is more 
straightforward than the MSA one. For example: 
ha-yeladim ha-gdolim halxu ?the-child-pl. the-big-
pl. go-past-pl. (=The big children went). Note that 
all elements in the sentence are marked as plural, 
and the noun and the adjective also agree in defi-
niteness. 
The case of MSA is slightly different. MSA 
has incomplete agreement in verb-subject sen-
tences, which are the vast majority. In this case the 
agreement of the verb will only be in gender but 
not in number, e.g. ?ahaba l-?awla:du ?go-past-
masc.-sing. boy-pl. (=The boys went)?. MSA also 
distinguishes between human plural forms and 
non-human plural forms, i.e. if the plural form 
does not have a human referent, the verb or the 
adjective will be marked as feminine rather than 
plural, e.g. ?ahabat el-kila:bu l-kabi:ratu ?go-past-
fem.-sing. the-dog-masc.-pl. the-big-fem.-sing. 
(=The big dogs went)?. 
The example of the agreement rule demon-
strates both the similarities and the differences be-
tween MSA and MH. Furthermore, it demonstrates 
how minor are the differences as far as our pur-
poses go. As long as the agreement rule is taken 
into account, its actual implementation has hardly 
any consequences in the level of the system. This 
example also demonstrates a very useful cue to 
reduce ambiguity among forms. This cue is proba-
blyused intuitively by trained readers of MSA and 
MH, and encoding it into the Morfix NLP system 
turns out quite useful. 
1.7 Ambiguity 
Perhaps the major challenge for NLP analysis 
in MSA and MH is overcoming the ambiguity of 
forms. In this respect, Morfix has to imitate the 
rather sophisticated reading of a trained MSA or 
MH speaker, who continuously disambiguates 
word tokens while reading. 
The reason for ambiguity can be depicted in 
three main factors: 
i. The large amount of morphological forms, 
which are sometimes homographic. 
For example, both in MSA and MH the verbial 
inflection of the imperfect for the singular is 
the same for 2nd person masculine and 3rd per-
son feminine: MSA ? taktubu, MH ? tixtov. 
ii. The possibility of creating complex forms by 
conjoining clitics, which raises the possibility 
of coincidental identity. 
For example, in MSA: ka-ma:l ?as money?, 
kama:l ?perfection, Kamal (proper name)? ! 
{kmal}. Similarly in MH: ha-naxa ?the-
resting-fem.?, hanaxa ?an assumption, a dis-
count? ! {hn?h}. 
iii. The orthographical conventions, such as the 
lack of vowel marking and various spelling al-
ternatives. 
For example, in MSA: muda:fi? ?defender?, 
mada:fi? ?cannons? ! {mdaf?}, and in MH 
baneha ?her sons? bniya ?building? ! {bnyh}. 
In many cases ambiguity is the result of the 
combination of two factors or even all three. This 
makes ambiguity rate rather high, and its resolution 
such a major component of NLP mechanism. 
Disambiguation is based on syntactical struc-
tures and semantic cues that can be retrieved from 
the text, which might resemble the way a human 
reader copes with these problems. It is the objec-
tive of NLP systems dealing with MSA an MH to 
formalize these cues. 
2 A Description of the Morfix Architec-
ture and its Application 
2.1 Architecture 
On one hand, as can be expected in the light of 
the similarities described above, a single NLP sys-
tem is applicable for both MSA and MH, including 
code infrastructure, database structures, and meth-
odology. On the other hand, in adapting a previ-
ously existing MH system to MSA some minor 
adaptations are nonetheless needed. 
Morfix is comprised of two lexical databases: a 
lemma database and an idiom/collocation informa-
tion database, and two rule databases: a morpho-
logical rule database and a syntactical rule 
database. 
The lemma database contains all crucial in-
formation about each lemma, including lexical fea-
tures such as part of speech, gender, number, 
meaning, root, verb pattern (Wazn / Binyan) etc. 
Most of these features are common to MH and 
MSA, and have the same morphological implica-
tions. All inflectional forms of a lemma are gener-
ated by applying algorithms that process these 
features. These algorithms make use of the mor-
phological rule database. These rules generate 
forms by superimposing verb patterns and morpho-
phonemic principles. Exceptions are allowed, i.e. 
the lexicographer may edit a specific form. The 
exception mechanism is much less used in MSA 
than in MH, due to the higher consistency of MSA 
inflections (but see below 2.2 for the treatment of 
the MSA ?Broken Plural? in Morfix). By the con-
clusion of this inflection procedure, the entire 70 
million forms inventory is accessible. 
The information for the lemma and collocation 
databases is gathered by two techniques. In the 
first phase words are extracted from several dic-
tionaries5, while the second phase involves 
analyzing text corpora, mainly through Internet 
sources, using the dictionary based lexicon. Any 
unanalyzed word (usually new loan words, 
neologisms and new conventions of usage), as well 
as collocations found in the corpora, are the basis 
for enriching the lexicon. The information for the 
morphological and syntactical databases is re-
trieved both from conventional grammar text-
books6 and from additional linguistic analysis of 
the corpora. 
By contrast, derivational morphology is by and 
large not algorithmic or rule derived. That is, 
nouns, adjectives and verbs of different patterns 
that share the same root are each entered as sepa-
rate lemmas. As mentioned above (1.2), there is a 
fine line between inflectional morphology and 
derivational morphological. For example, the deci-
sion whether to create a new lemma for a nominal 
                                                     
5 For MSA: Wehr (1973), Al-Munjid (1992), Ayalon and Shi-
nar (1947) and others; for MH: Even Shoshan (1991), Al-
calay (1990) and others. 
6 For MSA: Wright (1896), Holes (1995); for MH: Glinert 
(1989).  
inflection of verb is left to the lexicographer. Crite-
ria are usually morphological, since semantic crite-
ria are often too vague. For example, the fact that 
the form ka:tib has two possible plural form: 
ka:tibuna ?writing masc. pl.? and kutta:b ?writers? 
indicates that the form should have a lemma of its 
own, on top of being associated with the verb 
lemma. 
While the lemma in Morfix is defined as an in-
flectional lemma, derivational morphology is also 
accounted for in the database in a mechanism 
called word families, namely the root-based 
lemma grouping described above (1.2), whose 
members also share a semantic field. For example, 
infija:r ?explosion? and mufajjira:t ?explosives? 
would be members of the same family, whereas 
fajr ?dawn? would not belong to this family.  
The idiom/collocation database stores informa-
tion about co-occurrence of words. Idioms are 
lexicalized word combinations (e.g. in MSA bunya 
ta?tia ?infrastructure?, or in MH bet sefer ?a 
school?), while collocations are combinations of 
words that do not have specific meanings when 
combined, yet often appear together in texts (e.g. 
in MSA waqqa?a {wq?} ?ala l-ittifa:q ?to sign the 
agreement? as opposed to waqa?a {wq?} fi tta:ri:x 
?occured on the date? or in MH hamtana {hmtnh} 
ba-tor ?to wait on line? as opposed to kabalat ha-
matana {hmtnh}?accepting the gift?). 
Finally, the syntactical rule database is com-
prised of rules such as agreement rules and con-
struct formation rules (I?a:fa / Smixut). Some rules 
are not absolute, but rather reflect statistical infor-
mation about distribution of syntactical structures 
in the language. These rules play a major role in 
the context analysis module.  
Each morphological analysis has a vocalization 
pattern (Ta?ki:l / Nikud). When analyzing word 
tokens in context, Morfix produces a best bet for 
the vocalized text. 
Finally, for text-to-speech purposes, a string of 
phonemes is created, based on the vocalization 
patterns. Stress markings are added per word, and a 
prosody pattern is applied, based on syntactical 
analysis at the clause level. Prosody patterns are 
expressed as duration and pitch values per pho-
neme. 
2.2 Adaptation of the technology to Arabic 
Most of the elements of Morfix are common to 
MSA and MH. However, some features had to be 
specifically supplemented for MSA database. For 
example, MH plural markers are few and are usu-
ally suffixes. MSA on the other hand, often uses 
?Broken Plural? (a plural formed by changing the 
vocalic pattern of the singular, as opposed to af-
fixation marking, e.g. ka:tib (sing.) ! k:atibu:na 
(pl.) ?writing?; ka:tib (sing.) ! kutta:b (pl.) 
?writer?), which is only partially predictable, and 
therefore must be included in the lemma records. 
Coding this feature did not require major change in 
the database, since the MH database had optional 
coding for exceptional plural forms. 
By contrast, a field in MH lemma records re-
dundant in MSA is stress location, which, as ap-
posed to MH, is always predictable in MSA given 
the phonemic structure of the form. 
Case inflection in MSA (?i?ra:b) is entirely 
predictable, hence depicted by rules in the morpho-
logical rule database. However, a field for case had 
to be created in the database especially for MSA, 
as case does not occur in MH. 
Dual inflection exists in MH, though usually 
unproductive. This means that the ?number? cate-
gory throughout the Morfix database could have 
one of three values: singular, dual, or plural, so that 
MSA handling, again, demanded no general 
change, but only a more widespread application of 
an existing option in the Hebrew Morfix. 
The number of inflectional forms of a verb en-
try is larger in MSA than it is in MH, most notably 
due to the additional mood paradigms (Al-
Mu?a:re? Al-Majzu:m and Al-Mu?a:re? Al-
Man?u:b). This, however, is of no major conse-
quence to Morfix, apart from the fact that another 
field had to be added to the morphological analysis 
structure, namely ?mood?.  
The higher number of inflections per verb, 
along with the generality of the dual inflection, 
would have resulted in a larger overall number of 
tokens in MSA, had it not been for the Ktiv Male 
orthographical system in MH that results in a 25% 
increment to the overall number of MH tokens (see 
also above 1.4). 
The phenomenon of incomplete agreement 
(see also above 1.6) does not require an actual 
change in the code of Morfix, since the term 
AGREEMENT (e.g. between noun and adjective) 
has an external definition, independent for each 
language. Syntactical rules in the system refer to 
the term AGREEMENT, hence, rules that make use 
of the term AGREEMENT will apply, in many 
cases, to both languages. In general, while some of 
the syntactical rules in the system are similar in 
both languages, other rules are defined specifically 
for each of the two languages. All rules for both 
languages are specified using the same mechanism. 
In the MH database there are supplementary 
placeholders for the semi-vocalized spelling alter-
natives, which are often redundant for MSA, 
though they do become useful especially in recent 
loan words. 
In MSA the verb predicate usually precedes its 
subject (VSO), while in MH the subject tends to 
appear first (SVO), though in both languages word 
order is not fixed. This difference is handled in the 
contextual analysis for disambiguation purposes. 
MSA is used in various countries, each having 
its own linguistic idiosyncrasies. This entails lexi-
cal differences and a few phonetic variations, as 
well as some minor writing convention differences. 
This is handled by the MSA lemma database by 
assigning an additional field, where the relevant 
areas are specified.   
2.3 Software modules 
? Morphological analyzer: 
This is the basic building block of our system. 
It analyzes an input string, and returns an array of 
records containing detailed information regarding 
each analysis: the lemma, part of speech, clitic de-
tails, as well as gender, number; person, tense, 
mood, case, clitics and the like. 
? Lemmatizer 
This is a version of the morphological ana-
lyzer, the difference being that its output is lem-
mas, not full morphological descriptions. This 
means that when several morphological analyses 
share a single lemma, these analyses are united 
into a single answer record, each includes just the 
lemma and its part of speech. 
For example, the string {waldy} has several 
morphological analyses (dual construct form: ?the 
two parents of?, dual form with genitive pronomi-
nal enclitic: ?my two parents?, or singular form 
with genitive pronominal enclitic: ?my father?); 
however, the lemmatizer produces just one lemma 
for all the above analyses: wa:lid ?a parent?. 
? Context analyzer 
The input for the context analyzer is a text 
buffer. It returns a set of morphological analysis 
record arrays, an array for each token found in the 
buffer. In the records there is one extra field as 
compared to the basic morphological analyzer: the 
score field, which reflects the effect of the context 
analysis. The answer arrays are sorted according to 
the declining order of the score.  
? Vocalizer  
Given a word and a morphological analysis re-
cord as input, this module outputs the input word 
with its vocalization. 
? Text to phoneme 
Given a vocalized word, and a morphological 
analysis record as input, this module produces its 
phonemic representation, including stress marking.  
? Text to speech  
A module on top of the text-to-phoneme mod-
ule, whose inputs are a text buffer and a morpho-
logical analysis per word. The text to phoneme 
module is called upon to produce the phonemic 
representation of the buffer. Then a prosody func-
tion is called upon to assign duration values and 
pitch contours to each phoneme, and the output of 
this function is sent to a diphone based synthesis 
engine.  
2.4 Results and performance 
The Hebrew version of Morfix has achieved the 
following results: 
Morfix generates exceptionally accurate lem-
matization. When indexing for full text search, the 
matching rate of the lemma receiving the highest 
score to the correct lemma stands at above 98%. In 
typical Internet texts, between 1% and 2% of 
words remain unanalyzed (by and large, these are 
proper names not included in lexicon; in search 
engine application, these undergo a morphological 
soundex algorithm designed to enable the retrieval 
of proper names with prepositional proclitics).  
Performance depends on hardware and system 
environments. On a typical (as of date of publica-
tion) Intel III 800 MHz CPU, with 256 MB RAM 
running Windows 2000, Morfix analyzes c. 10,000 
words per second.  
In text-to-speech (TTS) applications, the de-
gree of words read correctly (fully correct phonetic 
transcription and stress location) is also 98%. This 
number is no different than the number for lemma-
tization, but is derived differently: on one hand, 
sometimes an error in lemmatization does not yield 
an error in phonetization (in case of homonymic 
tokens); on the other hand, TTS has to deal with 
phonetization of proper names not in the lexicon, 
which it carries out according to algorithms. The 
Hebrew TTS system is successfully implemented 
in systems for reading e-mail and Internet texts. 
Performance of the TTS system is around 20% 
slower than lemmatization, due to extra processing 
that computes the phonetic transcription given the 
morphological analysis.  
The final equivalent numbers for Arabic are 
still not available as of date of publication. None-
theless, because the system is similar, and MSA is 
quite close to MH in terms of total number of in-
flections and in degree of ambiguity, it is expected 
to reach similar results.  
2.5 Applications 
Various modules of the system are used by 
various applications. Main application beneficiar-
ies include full text search, categorization and 
textual data mining (where context sensitive 
morphological analysis and lemmatization are cru-
cial for Semitic languages), screen readers and e-
mail-to-voice converters in telephony usage (es-
pecially the text-to-speech module), automatic 
vocalizers for schools and book publishers (espe-
cially the vocalization module), and online dic-
tionaries (especially context sensitive 
lemmatization, to enable the retrieval of the correct 
entry when clicking on a word in context). 
A special thought was given in order to assist 
the non-fluent speaker of MSA and MH. Besides 
the fact that all applications trace the basic forms 
of words, sparing the process usually done by the 
speaker himself, additional assistance is given, 
such as transliteration into Latin script. 
3 Conclusion 
When designing the adaptation of the MH sys-
tem to MSA, the similarity between the languages 
on the structural level became even more apparent 
than was anticipated. 
It became clear to us that unified studies and 
applications for both languages can benefit both 
commercial and theoretical academic fields, and 
we hope that this report can be a starting point for 
further incorporating NLP works in MH and MSA, 
namely, works that deal with the Semitic language 
phenomena, rather than with a specific language 
from this linguistic family. This work can be im-
plemented in other NLP systems, mainly of other 
Semitic languages such as colloquial dialects of 
Arabic (e.g. Egyptian or Syrian which are more 
and more used in writing) and Maltese, but also 
languages that share some of the Semitic traits, 
mainly rich and complex morphology, or that use 
alternative writing conventions. This work lays the 
infrastructure for further adaptation, though creat-
ing special databases for each languages remains to 
be done. 
References 
 
Alcalay R. (1990). The Complete Hebrew-English 
Dictionary, Massada and Yediot Aharonot 
Pub., Tel-Aviv. 
 
Al-Munjid fi l-Lugha wa-l-I?lam (1992), Dar El-
Mashriq Pub., Beirut. 
 
Ayalon D. and P. Shinar (1947). Arabic-Hebrew 
Dictionary for the Modern Arabic Language, 
Hebrew University, Jerusalem. 
 
Beesley, K.R. (2001). ?Finite-State Morphological 
Analysis and Generation of Arabic at XeroxRe-
search: Status and Plans in 2001?, in Arabic 
Language Processing: Status and Prospects - 
39th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, pp. 1-8. 
 
Dichy, J. (2001), ?On Lemmatization of the Arabic 
Entries of Multilingual Lexical Databases?, in 
Arabic Language Processing: Status and Pros-
pects - 39th Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, pp. 23-30. 
 
Even-Shoshan, A. (1992). Ha-Milon He-?adash, 
Kiryat Sefer, Jerusalem. 
 
Glinert, L. (1989). The Grammar of Modern He-
brew, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
 
Holes, C. (1995). Modern Arabic: Structures, 
Functions and Varieties, Longman Linguistics 
Library, London. 
  
Wehr, H. (1976). A Dictionary of Modern Written 
Arabic, Ithaca, NY. 
 
Wright, W. (1896). A Grammar of the Arabic Lan-
guage, Cambridge: University Press. 
