Proceedings of the 7th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 9?17,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Multi-Domain Spoken Dialogue System
with Extensibility and Robustness against Speech Recognition Errors
Kazunori Komatani Naoyuki Kanda Mikio Nakano?
Kazuhiro Nakadai? Hiroshi Tsujino? Tetsuya Ogata Hiroshi G. Okuno
Kyoto University, Yoshida-Hommachi, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan
{komatani,ogata,okuno}@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
? Honda Research Institute Japan Co., Ltd., 8-1 Honcho, Wako, Saitama 351-0188, Japan
{nakano,nakadai,tsujino}@jp.honda-ri.com
Abstract
We developed a multi-domain spoken dia-
logue system that can handle user requests
across multiple domains. Such systems
need to satisfy two requirements: extensi-
bility and robustness against speech recog-
nition errors. Extensibility is required to
allow for the modification and addition
of domains independent of other domains.
Robustness against speech recognition er-
rors is required because such errors are
inevitable in speech recognition. How-
ever, the systems should still behave ap-
propriately, even when their inputs are er-
roneous. Our system was constructed on
an extensible architecture and is equipped
with a robust and extensible domain selec-
tion method. Domain selection was based
on three choices: (I) the previous domain,
(II) the domain in which the speech recog-
nition result can be accepted with the high-
est recognition score, and (III) other do-
mains. With the third choice we newly
introduced, our system can prevent dia-
logues from continuously being stuck in
an erroneous domain. Our experimental
results, obtained with 10 subjects, showed
that our method reduced the domain selec-
tion errors by 18.3%, compared to a con-
ventional method.
1 Introduction
Many spoken dialogue systems have been devel-
oped for various domains, including: flight reser-
vations (Levin et al, 2000; Potamianos and Kuo,
2000; San-Segundo et al, 2000), train travel in-
formation (Lamel et al, 1999), and bus informa-
tion (Komatani et al, 2005b; Raux and Eskenazi,
2004). Since these systems only handle a sin-
gle domain, users must be aware of the limita-
tions of these domains, which were defined by
the system developer. To handle various domains
through a single interface, we have developed a
multi-domain spoken dialogue system, which is
composed of several single-domain systems. The
system can handle complicated tasks that contain
requests across several domains.
Multi-domain spoken dialogue systems need to
satisfy the following two requirements: (1) exten-
sibility and (2) robustness against speech recog-
nition errors. Many such systems have been de-
veloped on the basis of a master-slave architec-
ture, which is composed of a single master module
and several domain experts handling each domain.
This architecture has the advantage that each do-
main expert can be independently developed, by
modifying existing experts or adding new experts
into the system. In this architecture, the master
module needs to select a domain expert to which
response generation and dialogue management for
the user?s utterance are committed. Hereafter, we
will refer to this selecting process domain selec-
tion.
The second requirement is robustness against
speech recognition errors, which are inevitable in
systems that use speech recognition. Therefore,
these systems must robustly select domains even
when the input may be incorrect due to speech
recognition errors.
We present an architecture for a multi-domain
spoken dialogue system that incorporates a new
domain selection method that is both extensi-
ble and robust against speech recognition errors.
Since our system is based on extensible architec-
ture similar to that developed by O?Neill (O?Neill
et al, 2004), we can add and modify the domain
9
Speech recognition
Domain selection
Utterance generation
Speech synthesis
User
utterance
System
response
User System
Central module Expert for domain A
method
Language understanding
Dialogue state update
Dialogue management
Dialogue statesvariable
Expert for domain B
method
variable
Expert for domain B
method
variable
Expert for domain B
method
Language understanding
Dialogue state update
Dialogue management
Dialogue statesvariable
Figure 1: Distributed-type architecture for multi-domain spoken dialogue systems
experts easily. In order to maintain robustness,
domain selection takes into consideration vari-
ous features concerning context and situations of
the dialogues. We also designed a new selection
framework that satisfies the extensibility issue by
abstracting the transitions between the current and
next domains. Specifically, our system selects the
next domain based on: (I) the previous domain,
(II) the domain in which the speech recognition
result can be accepted with the highest recognition
score, and (III) other domains. Conventional meth-
ods cannot select the correct domain when neither
the previous domain nor the speech recognition re-
sults for a current utterance are correct. To over-
come this drawback, we defined another choice as
(III) that enables the system to detect an erroneous
situation and thus prevent the dialogue from con-
tinuing to be incorrect. We modeled this frame-
work as a classification problem using machine
learning, and showed it is effective by perform-
ing an experimental evaluation of 2,205 utterances
collected from 10 subjects.
2 Architecture used for Multi-Domain
Spoken Dialogue Systems
In multi-domain spoken dialogue systems, the sys-
tem design is more complicated than in single do-
main systems. When the designed systems are
closely related to each other, a modification in a
certain domain may affect the whole system. This
type of a design makes it difficult to modify ex-
isting domains or to add new domains. Therefore,
a distributed-type architecture has been previously
proposed (Lin et al, 2001), which enables system
developers to design each domain independently.
In this architecture, the system is composed of
two kinds of components: a part that can be de-
signed independently of all other domains, and a
part in which relations among domains should be
considered. By minimizing the latter component,
a system developer can design each domain semi-
independently, which enables domains to be eas-
ily added or modified. Many existing systems are
based on this architecture (Lin et al, 2001; O?Neill
et al, 2004; Pakucs, 2003; Nakano et al, 2005).
Thus, we adopted the distributed-type architec-
ture (Nakano et al, 2005). Our system is roughly
composed of two parts, as shown in Figure 1: sev-
eral experts that control dialogues in each domain,
and a central module that controls each expert.
When a user speaks to the system, the central mod-
ule drives a speech recognizer, and then passes
the result to each domain expert. Each expert,
which controls its own domains, executes a lan-
guage understanding module, updates its dialogue
states based on the speech recognition result, and
returns the information required for domain selec-
tion1. Based on the information obtained from
the experts, the central module selects an appro-
priate domain for giving the response. An expert
then takes charge of the selected domain and deter-
mines the next dialogue act based on its dialogue
state. The central module generates a response
based on the dialogue act obtained from the expert,
and outputs the synthesized speech to the user.
Communications between the central module and
each expert are realized using method-calls in the
central module. Each expert is required to have
several methods, such as utterance understanding
or response selection, to be considered an expert
1Dialogue states in a domain that are not selected during
domain selection are returned to their previous states.
10
in this architecture.
As was previously described, the central mod-
ule is not concerned with processing the speech
recognition results; instead, the central module
leaves this task to each expert. Therefore, it is
important that the central module selects an ex-
pert that is committed to the process of the speech
recognition result. Furthermore, information used
during domain selection should also be domain
independent, because this allows easier domain
modification and addition, which is, after all, the
main advantage of distributed-type architecture.
3 Extensible and Robust Domain
Selection
Domain selection in the central module should
also be performedwithin an extensible framework,
and also should be robust against speech recogni-
tion errors.
In many conventional methods, domain selec-
tion is based on estimating the most likely do-
mains based on the speech recognition results.
Since these methods are heavily dependent on
the performance of the speech recognizers, they
are not robust because the systems will fail when
a speech recognizer fails. To behave robustly
against speech recognition errors, the success of
speech recognition and of domain selection should
be treated separately. Furthermore, in some con-
ventional methods, accurate language models are
required to construct the domain selection parts
before new domains are added to a multi-domain
system. This means that they are not extensible.
When selecting a domain, other studies have
used the information on the domain in which a pre-
vious response was made. Lin et al (2001) gave
preference to the domain selected in the previous
turn by adding a certain score as an award when
comparing the N-best candidates of the speech
recognition for each domain. Lane and Kawa-
hara (2005) also assigned a similar preference in
the classification with Support Vector Machine
(SVM). A system described in (O?Neill et al,
2004) does not change its domain until its sub-task
is completed, which is a constraint similar to keep-
ing dialogue in one domain. Since these methods
assume that the previous domain is most likely the
correct domain, it is expected that these methods
keep a system in the domain despite errors due
to speech recognition problems. Thus, should do-
main selection be erroneous, the damage due to the
Same domain as
previous response
Domain having 
the highest score in
speech recognizer
User utterancePrevious turn Current turn
(I)
(II)
(III)
?????
????
?
???
Other domains
except (I), (II)
Selected
domain
Figure 2: Overview of domain selection
error is compounded, as the system assumes that
the previous domain is always correct. Therefore,
we solve this problem by considering features that
represent the confidence of the previously selected
domain.
We define domain selection as being based on
the following 3-class categorization: (I) the previ-
ous domain, (II) the domain in which the speech
recognition results can be accepted with the high-
est recognition score, which is different from the
previous domain, and (III) other domains. Figure
2 depicts the three choices. This framework in-
cludes the conventional methods as choices (I) and
(II). Furthermore, it considers the possibility that
the current interpretations may be wrong, which
is represented as choice (III). This framework also
has extensibility for adding new domains, since it
treats domain selection not by detecting each do-
main directly, but by defining only a relative re-
lationship between the previous and current do-
mains.
Since our framework separates speech recogni-
tion results and domain selection, it can keep di-
alogues in the correct domain even when speech
recognition results are wrong. This situation is
represented as choice (I). An example is shown
in Figure 3. Here, the user?s first utterance (U1)
is about the restaurant domain. Although the sec-
ond utterance (U2) is also about the restaurant do-
main, an incorrect interpretation for the restaurant
domain is obtained because the utterance contains
an out-of-vocabulary word and is incorrectly rec-
ognized. Although a response for utterance U2
should ideally be in the restaurant domain, the sys-
tem control shifts to the temple sightseeing infor-
mation domain, in which an interpretation is ob-
tained based on the speech recognition result. This
11
? ?
U1: Tell me bars in Kawaramachi area.
(domain: restaurant)
S1: Searching for bars in Kawaramachi area.
30 items found.
U2: I want Tamanohikari (name of liquor).
(domain: restaurant)
Tamanohikari is out-of-vocabulary word, and
misrecognized as Tamba-bashi (name of place).
(domain: temple)
S2 (bad): Searching spots near Tamba-bashi. 10 items
found. (domain: temple)
S2 (good): I do not understand what you said. Do you
have any other preferences? (domain: restaurant)
? ?
Figure 3: Example in which choice (I) is appropri-
ate in spite of speech recognition error
is shown as utterance S2 (bad). In such cases, our
framework is capable of behaving appropriately.
This is shown as S2 (good), which is made by
selecting choice (I). Accepting erroneous recogni-
tion results is more harmful than rejecting correct
ones for the following reasons: 1) a user needs to
solve the misunderstanding as a result of the false
acceptance, and 2) an erroneous utterance affects
the interpretation of the utterances following it.
Furthermore, we define choice (III), which de-
tects the cases where normal dialogue manage-
ment is not suitable, in which case the central
module selects an expert based on either the pre-
vious domain or the domain based on the speech
recognition results. The situation corresponds to
a succession of recognition errors. However, this
problem is more difficult to solve than merely de-
tecting a simple succession of the errors because
the system needs to distinguish between speech
recognition errors and domain selection errors in
order to generate appropriate next utterances. Fig-
ure 4 shows an example of such a situation. Here,
the user?s utterances U1 and U2 are about the tem-
ple domain, but a speech recognition error oc-
curred in U2, and system control shifts to the hotel
domain. The user again says (U3), but this results
in the same recognition error. In this case, a do-
main that should ideally be selected is neither the
domain in the previous turn nor the domain deter-
mined based on the speech recognition results. If
this situation can be detected, the system should be
able to generate an appropriate response, like S3
(good), and prevent inappropriate responses based
? ?
U1: Tell me the address of Horin-ji (temple name).
(domain: temple)
S1: The address of Horin-ji is ...
U2: Then, what is the fee for Horin-ji?
(domain: temple)
misrecognized as ?the fee of Holiday Inn?.
(domain: hotel)
S2: The fee of Holiday Inn is ...
U3: The fee of Horin-ji. (domain: temple)
again misrecognized as ?the fee of Holiday Inn?.
(domain: hotel)
S3 (bad): The fee of Holiday Inn is ...
S3 (good): Are you asking about hotel information?
U4: No.
S4: Would you like to return to the temple information
service?
? ?
Figure 4: Example in which choice (III) should be
selected
on an incorrect domain determination. It is pos-
sible for the system to restart from two utterances
before (U1), after asking a confirmatory question
(S4) about whether to return to it or not. After that,
repetition of similar errors can also be avoided if
the system prohibits transition to the hotel domain.
4 Domain Selection using Dialogue
History
We constructed a classifier that selects the appro-
priate domains using various features, including
dialogue histories. The selected domain candi-
dates are based on: (I) the previous domain, (II)
the domain in which the speech recognition results
can be accepted with the highest recognition score,
or (III) other domains. Here, we describe the fea-
tures present in our domain selection method.
In order to not spoil the system?s extensibility,
an advantage of the distributed-type architecture,
the features used in the domain selection should
not depend on the specific domains. We categorize
the features used into three categories listed below:
? Features representing the confidence with
which the previous domain can be considered
correct (Table 1)
? Features about a user?s speech recognition re-
sult (Table 2)
12
Table 1: Features representing confidence in pre-
vious domain
P1: number of affirmatives after entering the domain
P2: number of negations after entering the domain
P3: whether tasks have been completed in the domain
(whether to enter ?requesting detailed information?
in database search task)
P4: whether the domain appeared before
P5: number of changed slots after entering the domain
P6: number of turns after entering the domain
P7: ratio of changed slots (= P5/P6)
P8: ratio of user?s negative answers (= P2/(P1 + P2))
P9: ratio of user?s negative answers in the domain (=
P2/P6)
P10: states in tasks
Table 2: Features of speech recognition results
R1: best posteriori probability of the N-best candidates
interpreted in the previous domain
R2: best posteriori probability for the speech recogni-
tion result interpreted in the domain, that is the do-
main with the highest score
R3: average of word?s confidence scores for the best
candidate of speech recognition results in the do-
main, that is, the domain with the highest score
R4: difference of acoustic scores between candidates
selected as (I) and (II)
R5: ratio of averages of words? confidence scores be-
tween candidates selected as (I) and (II)
? Features representing the situation after do-
main selection (Table 3)
We can take into account the possibility that a
current estimated domain might be erroneous, by
using features representing the confidence in the
previous domain. Each feature from P1 to P9 is
defined to represent the determination of whether
an estimated domain is reliable or not. Specifi-
cally, if there are many affirmative responses from
a user or many changes of slot values during in-
teractions in the domain, we regard the current do-
main as reliable. Conversely, the domain is not
reliable if there are many negative answers from a
user after entering the domain.
We also adopted the feature P10 to represent
the state of the task, because the likelihood that
a domain is changed depends on the state of the
task. We classified the tasks that we treat into two
categories using the following classifications first
made by Araki et al (1999). For a task catego-
rized as a ?slot-filling type?, we defined the di-
alogue states as one of the following two types:
?not completed?, if not all of the requisite slots
have been filled; and ?completed?, if all of the
Table 3: Features representing situations after do-
main selection
C1: dialogue state after the domain selection after se-
lecting previous domain
C2: whether the interpretation of the user?s utterance is
negative in previous domain
C3: number of changed slots after selecting previous
domain
C4: dialogue state after selecting the domain with the
highest speech recognition score
C5: whether the interpretation of the user?s utterance
is negative in the domain with the highest speech
recognition score
C6: number of changed slots after selecting the domain
with the highest speech recognition score
C7: number of common slots (name of place, here)
changed after selecting the domain with the high-
est speech recognition score
C8: whether the domain with the highest speech recog-
nition score has appeared before
requisite slots have been filled. For a task catego-
rized as a ?database search type?, we defined the
dialogue states as one of the following two types:
?specifying query conditions? and ?requesting de-
tailed information?, which were defined in (Ko-
matani et al, 2005a).
The features which represent the user?s speech
recognition result are listed in Table 2 and corre-
spond to those used in conventional studies. R1
considers the N-best candidates of speech recogni-
tion results that can be interpreted in the previous
domain. R2 and R3 represent information about a
domain with the highest speech recognition score.
R4 and R5 represent the comparisons between the
above-mentioned two groups.
The features that characterize the situations af-
ter domain selection correspond to the information
each expert returns to the central module after un-
derstanding the speech recognition results. These
are listed in Table 3. Features listed from C1 to
C3 represent a situation in which the previous do-
main (choice (I)) is selected. Those listed from
C4 to C8 represent a situation in which a domain
with the highest recognition score (choice (II)) is
selected.
Note that these features listed here have sur-
vived after feature selection. A feature survives
if the performance in the domain classification is
degradedwhen it is removed from a feature set one
by one. We had prepared 32 features for the initial
set.
13
Table 4: Specifications of each domain
Name of Class of # of vocab. # of
domain task in ASR slots
restaurant database search 1,562 10
hotel database search 741 9
temple database search 1,573 4
weather slot filling 87 3
bus slot filling 1,621 3
total - 7,373 -
5 Experimental Evaluation
5.1 Implementation
We implemented a Japanese multi-domain spoken
dialogue system with five domain experts: restau-
rant, hotel, temple, weather, and bus. Specifica-
tions of each expert are listed in Table 4. If there
is any overlapping slot between the vocabularies
of the domains, our architecture can treat it as a
common slot, whose value is shared among the
domains when interacting with the user. In our
system, place names are treated as a common slot.
We adopted Julian as the grammar-based
speech recognizer (Kawahara et al, 2004). The
grammar rules for the speech recognizer can be
automatically generated from those used in the
language understanding modules in each domain.
As a phonetic model, we adopted a 3000-states
PTM triphone model (Kawahara et al, 2004).
5.2 Collecting Dialogue Data
We collected dialogue data using a baseline sys-
tem from 10 subjects. First, the subjects used the
system by following a sample scenario, to get ac-
customed to the timing to speak. They, then, used
the system by following three scenarios, where at
least three domains were mentioned, but neither
an actual temple name nor domain was explicitly
mentioned. One of the scenarios is shown in Fig-
ure 5. Domain selection in the baseline system
was performed on the basis of the baseline method
that will be mentioned in Section 5.4, in which ?
was set to 40 after preliminary experiments.
In the experiments, we obtained 2,205 utter-
ances (221 per subject, 74 per dialogue). The
accuracy of the speech recognition was 63.3%,
which was rather low. This was because the sub-
jects tended to repeat similar utterances even after
misrecognition occurred due to out-of-grammar or
out-of-vocabulary utterances. Another reason was
that the dialogues for subjects with worse speech
recognition results got longer, which resulted in an
increase in the total number of misrecognition.
? ?
Tomorrow or the day after, you are planning a sightsee-
ing tour of Kyoto. Please find a shrine you want to visit
in the Arashiyama area, and determine, after consider-
ing the weather, on which day you will visit the shrine.
Please, ask for a temperature on the day of travel. Also
find out how to go to the shrine, whether you can take a
bus from the Kyoto station to there, when the shrine is
closing, and what the entrance fee is.
? ?
Figure 5: Example of scenarios
5.3 Construction of the Domain Classifier
We used the data containing 2,205 utterances col-
lected using the baseline system, to construct a do-
main classifier. We used C5.0 (Quinlan, 1993) as
a classifier. The features used were described in
Section 4. Reference labels were given by hand
for each utterance based on the domains the sys-
tem had selected and transcriptions of the user?s
utterances, as follows2.
Label (I): When the correct domain for a user?s
utterance is the same as the domain in which
the previous system?s response was made.
Label (II): Except for case (I), when the correct
domain for a user?s utterance is the domain
in which a speech recognition result in the N-
best candidates with the highest score can be
interpreted.
Label (III): Domains other than (I) and (II).
5.4 Evaluation of Domain Selection
We compared the performance of our domain se-
lection with that of the baseline method described
below.
Baseline method: A domain having an interpre-
tation with the highest score in the N-best
candidates of the speech recognition was se-
lected, after adding ? for the acoustic likeli-
hood of the speech recognizer if the domain
was the same as the previous one. We calcu-
lated the accuracies of domain selections for
various ?.
2Although only one of the authors assigned the labels,
they could be easily assigned without ambiguity, since the
labels were automatically defined as previously described.
Thus, the annotator only needs to judge whether a user?s re-
quest was about the same domain as the previous system?s re-
sponse or whether it was about a domain in the speech recog-
nition result.
14
0100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
?
#
 
o
f
 
e
r
r
o
r
s
 
i
n
 
d
o
m
a
i
n
 
s
e
l
e
c
t
i
o
n
 total
 domain in previous utt.
 domain with highest score
 other domain
Figure 6: Accuracy of domain selection in the
baseline method
Our method: A domain was selected based on
our method. The performance was calculated
with a 10-fold cross validation, that is, one
tenth of the 2,205 utterances were used as test
data, and the remainder was used as training
data. The process was repeated 10 times, and
the average of the accuracies was computed.
Accuracies for domain selection were calculated
per utterance. When there were several domains
that had the same score after domain selection, one
domain was randomly selected among them as an
output.
Figure 6 shows the number of errors for do-
main selection in the baseline method, categorized
by their reference labels as ? changed. As ? in-
creases, so does the system desire to keep the pre-
vious domain. A condition where ? = 0 cor-
responds to a method in which domains are se-
lected based only on the speech recognition re-
sults, which implies that there are no constraints
on keeping the current domain. As we can see
in Figure 6, the number of errors whose refer-
ence labels are ?a domain in the previous response
(choice (I))? decreases as ? gets larger. This is be-
cause incorrect domain transitions due to speech
recognition errors were suppressed by the con-
straint to keep the domains. Conversely, we can
see an increase in errors whose labels are ?a do-
main with the highest speech recognition score
(choice (II))?. This is because there is too much
incentive for keeping the previous domain. The
smallest number of errors was 634 when ? = 35,
and the error rate of domain selection was 28.8%
(= 634/2205). There were 371 errors whose refer-
ence labels were neither ?a domain in the previous
response? nor ?a domain with the highest speech
recognition score?, which cannot be detected even
when ? is changed based on conventional frame-
works.
We also calculated the classification accuracy of
our method. Table 5 shows the results as a con-
fusion matrix. The left hand figure denotes the
number of outputs in the baseline method, while
the right hand figure denotes the number of out-
puts in our method. Correct outputs are in the
diagonal cells, while the domain selection errors
are in the off diagonal cells. Total accuracy in-
creased by 5.3%, from 71.2% to 76.5%, and the
number of errors in domain selection was reduced
from 634 to 518, so the error reduction rate was
18.3% (= 116/634). There was no output in the
baseline method for ?other domains (III)?, which is
in the third column, because conventional frame-
works have not taken this choice into considera-
tion. Our method was able to detect this kind of
error in 157 of 371 utterances, which allows us
to prevent further errors from continuing. More-
over, accuracies for (I) and (II) did not get worse.
Precision for (I) improved from 0.77 to 0.83, and
the F-measure for (I) also improved from 0.83 to
0.86. Although recall for (II) got worse, its preci-
sion improved from 0.52 to 0.62, and consequently
the F-measure for (II) improved slightly from 0.61
to 0.62. These results show that our method can
detect choice (III), which was newly introduced,
without degrading the existing classification accu-
racies.
The features that follow played an important
role in the decision tree. The features that repre-
sent confidence in the previous domain appeared
in the upper part of the tree, including ?the num-
ber of affirmatives after entering the domain (P1)?,
?the ratio of user?s negative answers in the do-
main (P9)?, ?the number of turns after entering the
domain (P6)?, and ?the number of changed slots
based on the user?s utterances after entering the
domain (P5)?. These were also ?whether a domain
with the highest score has appeared before (C8)?
and ?whether an interpretation of a current user?s
utterance is negative (C2)?.
6 Conclusion
We constructed a multi-domain spoken dialogue
system using an extensible framework. Domain
selection in conventional studies is based on ei-
ther the domain based on the speech recognition
15
Table 5: Confusion matrix in domain selection (baseline / our method)
reference label \ output in previous response (I) with highest score (II) others (III) # total label (recall)
in previous response (I) 1289 / 1291 162 / 85 0 / 75 1451 (0.89 / 0.89)
with highest score (II) 84 / 99 299? / 256? 0 / 28 383 (0.74 / 0.62)
others (III) 293 / 172 78 / 42 0 / 157 371 ( 0 / 0.42)
total 1666 / 1562 539 / 383 0 / 260 2205
(precision) (0.77) / (0.83) (0.52) / (0.62) ( - ) / (0.60) (0.712 / 0.765)
?: These include 17 errors because of random selection when there were several domains having the same highest scores.
results or the previous domain. However, we no-
ticed that these conventional frameworks cannot
cope with situations where neither of these do-
mains is correct. Detection of such situations
can prevent dialogues from staying in the incor-
rect domain, which allows our domain selection
method to be robust against speech recognition er-
rors. Furthermore, our domain selection method
is also extensible. Our method does not select the
domains directly, but, by categorizing them into
three classes, it can cope with an increase or de-
crease in the number of domains. Based on the re-
sults of an experimental evaluation using 10 sub-
jects, our method was able to reduce domain se-
lection errors by 18.3% compared to a baseline
method. This means our system is robust against
speech recognition errors.
There are still some issues that could make
our system more robust, and this is included in
future work. For example, in this study, we
adopted a grammar-based speech recognizer to
construct each domain expert easily. However,
other speech recognition methods could be used,
such as a statistical language model. As well,
multiple speech recognizers employing different
domain-dependent grammars could be run in par-
allel. Thus, we need to investigate how to integrate
these approaches into our framework, without de-
stroying the extensibility.
References
Masahiro Araki, Kazunori Komatani, Taishi Hirata,
and Shuji Doshita. 1999. A dialogue library for
task-oriented spoken dialogue systems. In Proc.
IJCAI Workshop on Knowledge and Reasoning in
Practical Dialogue Systems, pages 1?7.
Tatsuya Kawahara, Akinobu Lee, Kazuya Takeda, Kat-
sunobu Itou, and Kiyohiro Shikano. 2004. Re-
cent progress of open-source LVCSR engine Julius
and japanese model repository. In Proc. Int?l Conf.
Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP), pages 3069?
3072.
Kazunori Komatani, Naoyuki Kanda, Tetsuya Ogata,
and Hiroshi G. Okuno. 2005a. Contextual
constraints based on dialogue models in database
search task for spoken dialogue systems. In Proc.
European Conf. Speech Commun. & Tech. (EU-
ROSPEECH), pages 877?880, Sep.
Kazunori Komatani, Shinichi Ueno, Tatsuya Kawa-
hara, and Hiroshi G. Okuno. 2005b. User model-
ing in spoken dialogue systems to generate flexible
guidance. User Modeling and User-Adapted Inter-
action, 15(1):169?183.
Lori Lamel, Sophie Rosset, Jean-Luc Gauvain, and
Samir Bennacef. 1999. The LIMSI ARISE sys-
tem for train travel information. In IEEE Int?l Conf.
Acoust., Speech & Signal Processing (ICASSP),
pages 501?504, Phoenix, AZ.
Ian R. Lane and Tatsuya Kawahara. 2005. Utterance
verification incorporating in-domain confidence and
discourse coherence measures. In Proc. European
Conf. Speech Commun. & Tech. (EUROSPEECH),
pages 421?424.
E. Levin, S. Narayanan, R. Pieraccini, K. Biatov,
E. Bocchieri, G. Di Fabbrizio, W. Eckert, S. Lee,
A. Pokrovsky,M. Rahim, P. Ruscitti, andM.Walker.
2000. The AT&T-DARPA communicator mixed-
initiative spoken dialogue system. In Proc. Int?l
Conf. Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP).
Bor-shen Lin, Hsin-min Wang, and Lin-shan Lee.
2001. A distributed agent architecture for intelli-
gent multi-domain spoken dialogue systems. IEICE
Trans. on Information and Systems, E84-D(9):1217?
1230, Sept.
Mikio Nakano, Yuji Hasegawa, Kazuhiro Nakadai,
Takahiro Nakamura, Johane Takeuchi, Toyotaka
Torii, Hiroshi Tsujino, Naoyuki Kanda, and Hi-
roshi G. Okuno. 2005. A two-layer model for be-
havior and dialogue planning in conversational ser-
vice robots. In 2005 IEEE/RSJ International Con-
ference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
pages 1542?1548.
Ian O?Neill, Philip Hanna, Xingkun Liu, and Michael
McTear. 2004. Cross domain dialogue modelling:
An object-based approach. In Proc. Int?l Conf. Spo-
ken Language Processing (ICSLP).
Botond Pakucs. 2003. Towards dynamic multi-
domain dialogue processing. In Proc. European
16
Conf. Speech Commun. & Tech. (EUROSPEECH),
pages 741?744.
Alexandros Potamianos and Hong-Kwang J. Kuo.
2000. Statistical recursive finite state machine pars-
ing for speech understanding. In Proc. Int?l Conf.
Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP), volume 3,
pages 510?513.
J. Ross Quinlan. 1993. C4.5: Programs for Ma-
chine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo,
CA. http://www.rulequest.com/see5-info.html.
Antoine Raux and Maxine Eskenazi. 2004. Non-
native users in the let?s go!! spoken dialogue sys-
tem: Dealing with linguistic mismatch. In Proc. of
HLT/NAACL.
Ruben San-Segundo, Bryan Pellom, Wayne Ward, and
Jose M. Pardo. 2000. Confidence measures for di-
alogue management in the CU communicator sys-
tem. In IEEE Int?l Conf. Acoust., Speech & Signal
Processing (ICASSP).
17
