Construction of Structurally Annotated Spoken Dialogue Corpus
Shingo Kato
Graduate School of Information Science,
Dept. of Information Engineering,
Nagoya University
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya
gotyan@el.itc.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Shigeki Matsubara
Yukiko Yamaguchi
Nobuo Kawaguchi
Information Technology Center,
Nagoya University
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya
Abstract
This paper describes the structural an-
notation of a spoken dialogue corpus.
By statistically dealing with the corpus,
the automatic acquisition of dialogue-
structural rules is achieved. The di-
alogue structure is expressed as a bi-
nary tree and 789 dialogues consist-
ing of 8150 utterances in the CIAIR
speech corpus are annotated. To eval-
uate the scalability of the corpus for
creating dialogue-structural rules, a di-
alogue parsing experiment was con-
ducted.
1 Introduction
With the improvement of speech processing tech-
nologies, spoken dialogue systems that appropri-
ately respond to a user?s spontaneous utterances
and cooperatively execute a dialogue are desired.
It is important for cooperative spoken dialogue
systems to understand the intentions of a user?s
utterances, the purpose of the dialogue, and its
achievement state (Litman, 1990). To solve this
issue, several approaches have been so far pro-
posed. One of them is an approach in which the
system expresses the knowledge of the dialogue
with a frame and executes the dialogue accord-
ing to that frame (Goddeau, 1996; Niimi, 2001;
Oku, 2004). However, it is difficult to make a
frame that totally defines the content of the dia-
logue. Additionally, there is a tendency for the
dialogue style to be greatly affected by the frame.
Figure 1: The data collection vehicle(DCV)
In this paper, we describe the construction of
a structurally annotated spoken dialogue corpus.
By statistically dealing with the corpus, we can
achieve the automatic acquisition of dialogue-
structural rules. We suppose that the system can
figure out the state of the dialogue through the in-
cremental building of the dialogue structure.
We use the CIAIR in-car spoken dialogue cor-
pus (Kawaguchi, 2004; Kawaguchi, 2005), and
describe the dialogue structure as a binary tree.
The tree expresses the purpose of partial dia-
logues and the relations between utterances or
partial dialogues. The speaker?s intention tags
were provided in the transcription of the corpus.
We annotated 789 dialogues consisting of 8150
utterances. Due to the advantages of the dialogue-
40
0022 - 01:37:398-01:41:513 F:D:I:C:
(F ) [FILLER:well] &(F )
	
	 [delicious] &
 [Udon] &
 [restaurant] &
