Global Health Monitor - A Web-based System for Detecting and 
Mapping Infectious Diseases
Son Doan*, QuocHung-Ngo?, Ai Kawazoe*, Nigel Collier*
* National Institute of Informatics,
2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 
Japan
{doan,zoeai,collier}@nii.ac.jp
? University of Information Technology, 
Vietnam National University (HCM), 
Vietnam
hungnq@uit.edu.vn
Abstract
We present the Global Health Monitor, an 
online Web-based system for 
detecting and mapping infectious disease 
outbreaks that appear in news 
stories. The system analyzes English news 
stories from news feed providers, 
classifies them for topical relevance and 
plots them onto a Google map using 
geo-coding information, helping public 
health workers to monitor the spread 
of diseases in a geo-temporal context. The 
background knowledge for the 
system is contained in the BioCaster ontol-
ogy (BCO) (Collier et al, 2007a) 
which includes both information on infec-
tious diseases as well as 
geographical locations with their lati-
tudes/longitudes. The system consists 
of four main stages: topic classification, 
named entity recognition (NER), 
disease/location detection and visualiza-
tion. Evaluation of the system shows 
that it achieved high accuracy on a gold 
standard corpus. The system is now 
in practical use. Running on a cluster-
computer, it monitors more than 1500 
news feeds 24/7, updating the map every 
hour.
1 Introduction
Information concerning disease outbreak events is 
published in various news outlets on the World 
Wide Web, in many different languages.  Identify-
ing early news stories about disease outbreaks
automatically is important for a bio-surveillance 
system that is designed to inform health profes-
sionals. Currently, there are several systems avail-
able for the disease detection and tracking task. For 
example, ProMED-mail (2001) or MedISys (2007)
(Medical Intelligence System). ProMED-mail is an 
Internet-based system that provides reports by pub-
lic health experts concerning outbreak diseases 
(that is, the system is not automatic but rather hu-
man curated). In contrast to ProMED-mail, MedI-
Sys is an automatic system working on multilin-
gual languages, but it mainly focuses on analyzing 
news stories based on the country level. Another 
system which is close to the one we present is 
HealthMap (Brownstein and Freifeld, 
2007). HealthMap automatically collects news 
from the Internet about human and animal health 
and plots the data on a Google Maps mashup. Data 
is aggregated by disease and location. Unlike 
HealthMap, our system takes an ontology-centred 
approach to knowledge understanding and linkage 
to external resources. For annotation of topics and 
entities we also exploit a range of linguistic re-
sources within a machine learning framework.
There are several challenges in geo-coding when 
dealing with news stories. The two main chal-
lenges are disease/location extraction and geo-
disambiguation. The former is concerned with how 
to determine disease and location names for dis-
ease-related news stories. The latter is concerned 
with how to solve geo-disambiguation. For exam-
ple, if there is a news story about equine influenza 
in Camden, the system should detect that the dis-
ease name is ?equine influenza? and the location 
name is ?Camden?. However, there are two loca-
tions named Camden: One in Australia and one in 
951
London, UK. The problem is that only one location 
should be chosen for plotting into a map. In our 
opinion, current systems lack the advanced natural 
language processing and text mining techniques 
that would enable the automatic extraction of such 
disease/location event information.
BioCaster is a project working towards the detec-
tion and tracking of infectious diseases using text 
mining techniques. One of the main components is 
the BioCaster Ontology (BCO), which includes 50
infectious diseases with links to external vocabu-
lary resources, and a geographical ontology of a 
total of 243 countries and 4025 sub-countries 
(province and cities) with their lati-
tudes/longitudes. We also now automatically link 
news on outbreaks to academic sources such as
Stanford university?s Highwire and NCBI?s Pub-
Med using search terms Disease name + Location
name (Country) + ?case?. This is to ensure a focus 
on recent case report relevant to the news items.
The system includes four main stages: topic classi-
fication, named entity recognition (NER), dis-
ease/location detection, and visualization. The cur-
rent version of the system (English only) can be 
found at http://biocaster.nii.ac.jp.
The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 outlines the BioCaster Ontology 
(BCO). Section 3 describes some features of the 
system (modules, functionality and algorithms).  
Section 4 is concerned with system evaluation. 
Finally, Section 5 outlines conclusions and pre-
sents possible future work.
2 Overview of BCO
BCO is one of the main components in the Bio-
Caster project. It includes an ontology of 50 infec-
tious diseases and a geographical ontology (243 
countries and 4,025 sub-countries). The infectious 
disease ontology was built by a team consisting of
a linguist, an epidemiologist, a geneticist, and a 
medical anthropologist. A disease in BCO has a 
root name which is unique identifier and also other 
properties relating to synonyms, symptoms, asso-
ciated syndromes, hosts, etc. The ontology is mul-
tilingual, supporting six languages (English, Japa-
nese, Vietnamese, Thai, Korean, and Chinese); and 
has links to external ontologies (such as MeSH,
SNOMED and ICD9/10) and resources (like 
Wikipedia). The geographical part is built from 
Wikipedia1. The BCO is available on the Web at 
http://biocaster.nii.ac.jp. For a fuller description of 
the BCO, see Collier et al (2007a) and Kawazoe et 
al. (2007).
3 The System
3.1 Overview of the system
The Global Health Monitor system runs on a clus-
ter machine with 16 nodes under the Linux operat-
ing system. The code was written in PHP, Perl, C, 
and Java and the number of input news feeds is 
about 1,500. The system has a crawler that collects 
news every hour. These collected news stories are 
then processed and analyzed step-by-step in four
main phases: topic classification, named entity 
recognition (NER), disease/location detection, and 
visualization. Each of the four phases is managed 
by a distinct module. These components are de-
picted in Figure 1. The first three modules are run 
inside the system and the visualization module ?
the Google Map ? can be seen at the BioCaster 
portal. Figure 2 shows a screenshot of the system. 
                                                
1 http://www.wikipedia.org.
Figure 1. Stages of the system.
952
We will now describe each of the four modules in 
turn: 
* Topic classification.  This module identifies 
news stories with disease-related topics and retains 
relevant ones for later processing. The module uses
ontology-supported text classification with na?ve 
Bayes as the classification algorithm and the Bio-
Caster gold standard corpus as the training data set
(Doan et al, 2007). In this module, we used the 
Rainbow toolkit.2
* NER. Disease-related news stories are automati-
cally analyzed and tagged with NEs like PERSON, 
ORGANIZATION, DISEASE, LOCATION. This 
module is implemented by SVM classification al
                                                
2 Rainbow toolkit, available at 
http://www.cs.umass.edu/~mccallum/bow/rainbow
gorithm3. For a more detailed description of the 
schema and NER module, see Kawazoe et al 
(2006).
* Disease/location detection. This module extracts 
disease and location information. Details are given
in Section 3.2.
* Visualization. The detected locations are plotted 
onto a Google map with ontology links to associ-
ated diseases and news stories.
3.2 Disease/location detection algorithm
The disease/location detection algorithm is based 
on a statistical model of the LOCATION and DIS
EASE Named Entities (NEs). The algorithm can be 
described as follows:
                                                
3 TinySVM, available at 
http://chasen.org/~taku/software/TinySVM.
Figure 2.  The Global Health Monitor system, showing disease events from the last 30 days. The main 
screen is a Google Map. Selected headline reports run along the bottom of the screen and link to biomedi-
cal reference on PubMed, HighWire and Google Scholar.  Symbol    links to disease names in the BCO 
and symbol  stands for disease name not in the BCO. The right of the screen shows various user options 
to filter the news.
953
Input: A set of news stories tagged with NEs.
Output: A set of disease/location pairs.
Step 1: Detect LOCATION-DISEASE pairs in 
each news story by corresponding NEs, and calcu-
late their frequency in a news story.
Step 2: Calculate the frequency of LOCATION-
DISEASE pairs in a corpus.
Step 3: Rank LOCATION ? DISEASE pairs by 
the frequencies calculated in Step 2. Use a thresh-
old to choose top LOCATION - DISEASE names4. 
Step 4: Map disease and location names: If DIS-
EASE matches to a synonym in BCO then DIS-
EASE was assigned to that disease name. This 
process of matching (grounding the terms) allows
us to provide extra information from the ontology
and to remove variant forms of terms from the map
                                                
4 In the current system, we set the threshold value to 40.
? thereby aiding readability. Similarly, if LOCA-
TION matches to a location in BCO then LOCA-
TION was assigned to that location name. 
Step 5: Re-map into news stories: Match detected 
diseases and locations within the first half of each 
news story. If both disease and location are
matched then they are stored; otherwise, skip.
This five step process is repeated every hour, for 
each news article that is less than 1 day (24 hours) 
old.
3.3 Capabilities of the system
The following lists some capabilities of the current 
Global Health Monitor system.
* Date range: The system shows the dis-
ease/location and news stories within a specific
date range. Current implemented date ranges are:
30 days ago, 3 weeks ago, 2 weeks ago, 1 week 
ago, this week and today.
Figure 3.  The Global Health Monitor with the Respiratory Syndrome  selected. The time span selected is 
the current week.
954
* Genre filter: The system can show news stories 
by publication type. There are four genres of news: 
Press news (like Google News, Yahoo News), Of-
ficial news (like ProMED, WHO reports), Business 
news, and Mixed news (like Topix.com).
* Similar stories: The system currently uses a sim-
ple method to remove duplicate news stories. Users 
can use the ?Initial headline only? option to acti-
vate this function.
* Syndrome filter: There are six syndromes in 
BCO: Dermatological, Gastrointestinal, Hemor-
harrgic fever, Musculoskeletal, Neurological, and 
Respiratory. A syndrome can be associated with
several diseases included in BCO. The system can 
show news stories related to these syndromes.
* Agent option: This option allows users to view 
lists of infectious diseases which come from BCO. 
Some diseases though are not in the BCO. Users 
can choose some, all, or no diseases using a check-
box style interface.
Figure 3 shows the interface when users choose 
Syndromes as Respiratory for this week at the cur-
rent view. 
4 Evaluation
To evaluate any bio-surveillance system is very 
challenging (Morse, 2007). Our system is an inte-
gration of several modules, e.g., classification, 
NER and other algorithms. The evaluation proc-
esses for these modules are briefly described be-
low:
4.1 Topic classification
Evaluation of topic classification is presented in 
Doan et al (2007). The system used the BioCaster 
gold standard corpus which includes 1,000 anno-
tated news stories as training data. The classifica-
tion model is na?ve Bayes with features as raw text, 
NEs, and Roles (Doan et al, 2007). The system 
achieved an accuracy score of 88.10%.
4.2 NER evaluation
The evaluation of the NER system module is re-
ported in Kawazoe et al (2006). We used an anno-
tated corpus of 200 corpus news articles as training 
data. The NER system achieved an F-score of 
76.97% for all NE classes. 
4.3 Disease/location detection
For the preliminary evaluation of disease/location 
detection, we used data from a one-month period
(from October 12 to November 11, 2007). 
In our observations, the system detects about 25-30 
locations a day, an average of 40 infectious dis-
eases and 950 detected pairs of diseases/locations 
per month (A news story can contain multiple loca-
tions and diseases). The main news resources
mostly come from Google News (251 pairs, about 
26.4%), Yahoo News (288 pairs, about 30.3%), 
ProMED-mail (180 pairs, about 18.9%), and the 
remaining 24.3% for others. The running time for 
updating disease/location takes about 5 minutes.
In order to evaluate the performance of dis-
ease/location detection, we define the Precision 
and Recall as follows:
pairsRetrieved#
pairsRetrieved#pairsRelevant #
Precision
??
,
pairsRelevant #
pairsRetrieved#pairsRelevant #
Recall
??
Where #Relevant pairs is the number of dis-
ease/location pairs that human found, and #Re-
trieved pairs is the number of disease/location pairs 
that the system detected.
The Precision can be calculated based on our re-
trieved pairs detected by the system, however the 
Recall is under estimated as it does not measure 
pairs missed by  the system in the topic classifica-
tion stage. 
We evaluate the Precision of disease/location de-
tection on 950 pairs of location/disease. The sys-
tem correctly detected 887 pairs, taking 
887/950=93.4% Precision. 
4.4 Limitations of the system
There are some limitations of the system. The first 
limitation is there are several cases of ambiguity. 
For example, news stories about ?A team at Peking 
University in Beijing studied tissue taken from 2 
955
people killed by H5N1 in China? or ?A meeting on 
foot and mouth disease (FMD) was held in Brus-
sels on 17th October, 2007?. The system incorrectly
detects the location as Beijing in the first story, and 
Brussels in the second one. Another hard case is 
location disambiguation, e.g., news about ?Rabies 
in Isle of Wight? in which in the main body does 
not mention anything about country and sub-
country. There are two locations named ?Isle of 
Wight? in our geo-ontology: one in Virginia, USA 
and one in the UK. In the future, we will look at 
the country-level information of new providers (by 
checking domain names) to solve this problem. For 
example, if a news story mentions the Isle of 
Wight, and the news story originates from the UK,
then it will be taken to refer to the Isle of Wight in 
the UK.
The second limitation is the ability to detect new 
diseases or locations that are not in the ontology. In 
the future work, we will augment newly detected 
diseases as well as improve the geographical on-
tology.
5 Conclusion
We presented the Global Health Monitor - a Web-
based system for detecting and mapping infectious 
diseases from Web. The system collects news from 
news feed providers, analyzes news and plots dis-
ease relevant data onto a Google map. Preliminary
evaluations show that our system works efficiently
with real data.
In the future, we will develop more efficient algo-
rithms for detecting diseases/locations based on 
relation identification. Named relation will be de-
scribed in the BCO event taxonomy (Kawazoe et 
al., 2007). Extra capabilities will be added to the 
system like classifying outbreak of disease by 
countries, detecting new diseases that are not in out 
ontology, and showing timeline of news stories.
Evaluation of the timelineness system against hu-
man curated sources like ProMED-mail will be 
implemented. Working versions for other lan-
guages like Vietnamese, Japanese, and Thai are 
also being considered, using the existing BioCaster 
disease ontology.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Mike Conway at the 
National Institute of Informatics for revising the 
manuscript, and both Mika Shigematsu and Kiyosu 
Taniguchi at the National Institute of Infectious 
Diseases for useful discussions. This work was 
supported by Grants-in-Aid from the Japan Society 
for the Promotion of Science (grant no. 18049071).
References
J. Brownstein and C. Freifeld. 2007. HealthMap ?
Global Disease Alert Mapping System.
http://www.healthmap.org. 
N. Collier, A. Kawazoe, L. Jin, M. Shigematsu, D.
Dien, R. Barrero, K. Takeuchi, A. Kawtrakul. 2007a. 
A multilingual ontology for infectious disease out-
break surveillance: rationale, design and challenges.
Journal of Language Resources and Evaluation. DOI: 
10.1007/s10579-007-9019-7.
N. Collier, A.Kawazoe, S. Doan, M. Shigematsu, K. 
Taniguchi, L. Jin, J. McCrae, H. Chanlekha, D. Dien, 
Q. Hung, V.C. Nam, K. Takeuchi, A. Kawtrakul. 
2007b. Detecting Web Rumors with a Multilingual 
Ontology - Supported Text Classification System.
Advances in Disease Surveillance, pp.242, vol.4, 
2007.
S. Doan, A. Kawazoe, and N.Collier. 2007. The Roles of 
Roles in Classifying Annotated Biomedical Text. 
Proc. of BioNLP - Biological, translational, and clini-
cal language processing 2007, pp.17-24, 2007.
A. Kawazoe, L. Jin, M. Shigematsu, R. Barrero, K. Ta-
niguchi and N. Collier. 2006. The development of a 
schema for the annotation of terms in the BioCaster 
disease detection/tracking system. Proc. of the Int?l 
Workshop on Biomedical Ontology in Action (KR-
MED 2006), Baltimore, Maryland, USA, November 
8, pp. 77-85, 2006.
A. Kawazoe, H. Chanlekha, M. Shigematsu and N. Col-
lier. 2007. Structuring an event ontology for disease 
outbreak detection. The 2nd International Sympo-
sium on Languages in Biology and Medicine (LBM) 
(accepted to appear).
MedISys. 2007. Medical Intelligence System.
http://medusa.jrc.it/medisys. 
S. Morse S. 2007. Global Infectious Disease Surveil-
lance And Health
 Intelligence. Health Affairs, 26(4):1069-1077, 2007.
ProMED-mail. 2001. The Program for Monitoring 
Emerging Diseases. http://www.promedmail.org.
956
BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 17?24,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Role of Roles in Classifying Annotated Biomedical Text
Son Doan, Ai Kawazoe, Nigel Collier
National Institute of Informatics
2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan
{doan,zoeai,collier}@nii.ac.jp
Abstract
This paper investigates the roles of named
entities (NE?s) in annotated biomedical text
classification. In the annotation schema of
BioCaster, a text mining system for pub-
lic health protection, important concepts that
reflect information about infectious diseases
were conceptually analyzed with a formal
ontological methodology. Concepts were
classified as Types, while others were iden-
tified as being Roles. Types are specified
as NE classes and Roles are integrated into
NEs as attributes. We focus on the Roles
of NEs by extracting and using them in
different ways as features in the classifier.
Experimental results show that: 1) Roles
for each NE greatly helped improve perfor-
mance of the system, 2) combining informa-
tion about NE classes with their Roles con-
tribute significantly to the improvement of
performance. We discuss in detail the effect
of each Role on the accuracy of text classifi-
cation.
1 Introduction
Today, the Internet is a powerful tool for discov-
ering novel information via news feed providers.
This is becoming increasingly important for the
public health domain because it can help to de-
tect emerging and re-emerging diseases. In infec-
tious disease surveillance systems such as the Global
Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) sys-
tem (Public Health Agency of Canada, 2004) and
ProMed-Mail (International Society for Infectious
Diseases, 2001), the detection and tracking of out-
breaks using the Internet has been proven to be a
key source of information for public health work-
ers, clinicians, and researchers interested in com-
municable diseases. The basis for such systems is
the monitoring of a large number of news articles
simultaneously. The classification of news articles
into disease-related or none disease-related classes
is the first stage in any automated approach to this
task. In practice though there are a large number of
news articles whose main subject is related to dis-
eases but which should not necessarily be notified
to users together with a relatively small number of
high priority articles that experts should be actively
alerted to. Alerting criteria broadly include news re-
lated to newly emerging diseases, the spread of dis-
eases across international borders, the deliberate re-
lease of a human or engineered pathogen, etc. The
use of only raw text in the classification process in-
evitably fails to resolve many subtle ambiguities, for
example semantic class ambiguities in polysemous
words like ?virus?, ?fever?, ?outbreak?, and ?con-
trol? which all exhibit a variety of senses depending
on context. These different senses appear with rela-
tively high frequency in the news especially in head-
lines. A further challenge is that diseases can be de-
noted by many variant forms. Therefore we consider
that the use of advanced natural language process-
ing (NLP) techniques like named entity recognition
(NER) and anaphora resolution are needed in order
to achieve high classification accuracy.
Text classification is defined as the task of as-
signing documents into one or more predefined cat-
17
egories. As shown by (Cohen and Hersh, 2005),
an accurate text classification system can be espe-
cially valuable to database curators. A document in
the biomedical domain can be annotated using NER
techniques with enriched semantic information in
the form of NEs such as the disease, pathogen, loca-
tion, and time. NER and term identification in gen-
eral have been recognized as an important research
topic both in the NLP and biomedical communities
(Krauthammer and Nenadic, 2004). However, an in-
vestigation into the contribution of NEs on the per-
formance of annotated biomedical text classification
has remained an open question until now. There are
two main reasons for this: Firstly there are a small
number of open annotation schema for biomedical
text, and secondly there is no benchmark annotated
data for testing.
The BioCaster project (Collier, 2006) is working
towards the detection and tracking of disease out-
breaks from Internet news articles. Although there
are several schema for biomedical text (Wilbur et al,
2006), little work has been done on developing one
specifically for public health related text. BioCaster
therefore provides an annotation schema that can fill
this gap. Our schema, which is based on discussions
with biologists, computational linguists and public
health experts, helps identify entities related to in-
fectious diseases which are then used to build up a
detailed picture of events in later stages of text min-
ing. One significant aspect of the schema is that it
is based on conceptual analysis with a formal on-
tological methodology. As discussed in (Kawazoe
et al, 2006), by applying meta-properties (Guarino
and Welty, 2000a; Guarino and Welty, 2000b), our
?markable? concepts are classified into ?Type? and
?Role?. Information about Role concepts is inte-
grated into the schema as attributes on NEs. This
work takes the investigation one step forward by
showing empirical evidence for the usefulness of
Role concepts in a practical application.
In this paper, we focus on the task of text classifi-
cation, proceeding under the simplifying assumption
that given enough annotated training data for NEs
and their Roles both can be automatically tagged
with high accuracy. In recent years there have been
many studies on text classification using general
methods (Sebastiani, 2002; Yang and Liu, 1999)
semi-structured texts (Kudo and Matsumoto, 2004),
and XML classification (Zaki and Aggarwal, 2003).
Other research has investigated the contribution of
semantic information in the form of synonyms, syn-
tax, etc. in text representation (Bloehdorn and
Hotho, 2004; Hotho et al, 2003; Fru?rnkranz et al,
1998). Feature selection (Scott and Matwin, 1999)
has also been studied. The contribution of this paper
is to provide an analysis and evaluation on the Roles
of NEs in annotated text classification.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in
Section 2, we outline the BioCaster schema for the
annotation of terms in biomedical text; Section 3
presents a description of the BioCaster gold standard
corpus; Section 4 provides details of the method
and experimental results of classification on the gold
standard corpus. Finally we draw some conclusions
in Section 5.
2 BioCaster Schema for Annotation of
Terms in Biomedical Text
The BioCaster annotation schema is a component of
the BioCaster text mining project. We have iden-
tified several important concepts that reflect infor-
mation about infectious diseases, and created guide-
lines for annotating them as target entity classes
in texts. Based on the conceptual analysis using
meta-properties (rigidity, identity, and dependency)
developed by Guarino and Welty (2000a; 2000b),
categories of important concepts were classified as
Types, i.e., properties which are rigid1 and supply
identity conditions, while others were identified as
being Roles, properties which are anti-rigid2 and
dependent. The 18 categories of Type concepts
are specified as NE classes which we denote here
in upper case. These include PERSON, LOCA-
TION, ORGANIZATION, TIME, DISEASE, CON-
DITION (status of patient such as ?hospitalized?
or ?in stable condition?), OUTBREAK (event of
group infection), VIRUS, ANATOMY (body part),
PRODUCT (biological product such as ?vaccine?),
NONHUMAN (animals), DNA, RNA, PROTEIN,
CONTROL (control measures to contain the dis-
ease), BACTERIA, CHEMICAL and SYMPTOM.
The three Role concepts we explore are case (dis-
1A property is rigid if every instance of that property neces-
sarily has the property, i.e. in every possible world.
2A property is anti-rigid if no instance of that property nec-
essarily has the property.
18
eased person), transmission (source of infection)
and therapeutic (therapeutic agent). These are inte-
grated into the annotation schema as XML attributes
which are associated with some XML elements de-
noting Type concepts. PERSON takes a case at-
tribute, NONHUMAN and ANATOMY take trans-
mission, PRODUCT takes transmission and thera-
peutic and CHEMICAL takes therapeutic. For PER-
SON we added another attribute number (number
of people). Each attribute has only one value, the
value of number is one or many, and the value of
case, transmission, therapeutic is true or false. This
is summarized in Table 1. In the rest of this paper,
we call case, transmission, and therapeutic ?Role at-
tributes? (or ?Role? for short) and number a ?Qual-
ity attributes? (or ?Quality? for short).
A NE in a biomedical text is annotated following
the BioCaster annotation schema in XML format as
follows,
<NAME cl="Named Entity"
attribute1="value1" attribute2="value2"
... </NAME>,
where "Named Entity" is one of the names for the
18 BioCaster NEs and attribute1, attribute2,
... are the names of the NE?s Role/Quality at-
tributes, "value1", "value2", ... are values cor-
responding to Role/Quality attributes. Further de-
tails of the annotation guidelines are discussed in
(Kawazoe et al, 2006).
3 BioCaster Gold Standard Data Corpus
The BioCaster gold standard corpus was collected
from Internet news and manually annotated by two
doctoral students. The annotation of a news article
proceeded as follows. Firstly, NEs are annotated fol-
lowing the BioCaster schema and guidelines. Sec-
ondly, each annotated article is manually assigned
into one of four relevancy categories: alert, publish,
check, and reject. The assignment is based on guide-
lines that we made following discussions with epi-
demiologists and a survey of World Health Organi-
zation (WHO) reports (World Health Organization,
2004). These categories are currently being used op-
erationally by the GPHIN system which is used by
the WHO and other public health agencies. Where
there were major differences of opinion in NE anno-
tation or relevancy assignment between the two an-
notators, we consulted a public health expert in order
to decide the most appropriate assignment. Finally
we had a total of 500 articles that were fully anno-
tated. While this is small compared to other data
sets in text classification, we consider that it is large
enough to obtain a preliminary indication about the
usefulness of Role attributes.
The following is an example of an annotated arti-
cle in the BioCaster gold standard corpus.
Example.
<DOC id="000125" language="en-us"
source="WHO" domain="health"
subdomain="disease"
date published="2005-03-17"
relevancy="alert"> <NAME cl="DISEASE">
Acute fever </NAME> and <NAME
cl="DISEASE"> rash syndrome </NAME> in
<NAME cl="LOCATION">Nigeria</NAME> <NAME
cl="TIME"> 17 March 2005 </NAME><NAME
cl="ORGANIZATION"> WHO</NAME> has received
reports of <NAME cl="PERSON" case="true"
number="many"> 1118 cases </NAME>
including <NAME cl="PERSON" case="true"
number="many">76 deaths</NAME>case
fatality rate, 6.8% reported in 12
Local Government Areas (LGAs) of <NAME
cl="LOCATION">damawa </NAME> state, <NAME
cl="LOCATION"> Nigeria</NAME> as of <NAME
cl="TIME">28 February 2005</NAME>. The
cases have been clinically diagnosed
as <NAME cl="DISEASE"> measles </NAME>
but no laboratory diagnosis has been
made to date. Other states, including
<NAME cl="LOCATION">Gombe</NAME>,
<NAME cl="LOCATION">Jigawa</NAME>,<NAME
cl="LOCATION">Kaduna</NAME>, <NAME
cl="LOCATION">Kano</NAME>, and <NAME
cl="LOCATION">Kebbi</NAME> have all
reported <NAME cl="OUTBREAK"> outbreaks
</NAME> of <NAME cl="DISEASE"> measles
</NAME>... </DOC>
We grouped the 500 articles into 2 categories: re-
ject and relevant. The reject category corresponds
simply to articles with label reject while the relevant
category includes articles with labels alert, pub-
lish, and check. We conflated the alert, publish and
check categories because we hypothesized that dis-
tinguishing between non-reject (relevant) categories
19
Named entity Role/Quality attributes Named entity Role/Quality attributes
PERSON case, number ANATOMY transmission
ORGANIZATION none SYMPTOM none
LOCATION none CONTROL none
TIME none CHEMICAL therapeutic
DISEASE none BACTERIA none
CONDITION none PRODUCT transmission, therapeutic
NONHUMAN transmission DNA none
VIRUS none RNA none
OUTBREAK none PROTEIN none
Table 1: Lists of Named entity classes and their Role/Quality attributes in BioCaster annotation schema.
would require higher level semantic knowledge such
as pathogen infectivity and previous occurrence his-
tory which is the job of the text mining system and
the end user. Finally we had a total of 269 news
articles belong to the reject category and 231 news
articles belong to the relevant category. The statis-
tical information about NEs is shown in Table 2. In
the table, ?+? stands for the frequency of NEs in the
relevant category and ?-? stands for the frequency of
NEs in the reject category.
4 Experiments
4.1 Method
We used the BioCaster gold standard corpus to in-
vestigate the effect of NE classes and their Role at-
tributes on performance of classification. In order
to avoid unnecessary data, we removed the first line
containing DOC tag of all article in the corpus. The
validation is as follows. We randomly divided the
data set into 10 parts. Each of the first 9 parts has 23
articles belonging to the relevant category and 27 ar-
ticles belonging to the reject category; the 10th part
has 24 articles belonging to the relevant and 26 arti-
cles belonging to the reject categories. Then, we im-
plemented 10-fold cross validation: 9 parts for train-
ing and 1 part for testing sets. For the training set we
extracted NEs classes and their Roles as features to
build a classifier. The remaining part was used for
testing.
The classifier we use in this paper is the standard
Na?ive Bayes classifier (Mitchell, 1997). In the pre-
processing we did not use a stop list and no word
stemming. The experiments were implemented in
Linux OS, using the Bow toolkit (McCallum, 1996).
The details of extracting NEs and their Roles
from annotated texts are the followings. For the
sake of convenience, we divided features into 3
groups: Features for each NE, features for NEs with
Role/Quality, and features for combined NEs with
Role/Quality.
1. Features for each NE: Each NE is extracted and
used with raw text as features. We denoted NE1
as features extracted from named entity NE1.
For example, DISEASE1 means features are
raw text and DISEASE class, VIRUS1 means
features are raw text and VIRUS class. An ex-
ample of features for PERSON1 is shown in
Table 3.
2. Features for NEs with Role/Quality: We inves-
tigated the effect of NEs with Roles/Qualities,
i.e., case, number, therapeutic, and transmis-
sion. Features are chosen as follows.
- PERSON+case+number: Raw text and
PERSON class with both Role case and
Quality number are used as features.
- PERSON+case: Raw text and PERSON
class with Role case are used as features.
- PERSON+number: Raw text and PER-
SON class and Quality number are used
as features.
- NONHUMAN+trans: Raw text and
NONHUMAN class and Role transmis-
sion are used as features.
- ANATOMY+trans: Raw text and
ANATOMY class and Role transmission
are used as features.
20
NE class Frequency Total NE class Frequency Total
PERSON +3291/-4978 8269 ANATOMY +263/-224 487
ORGANIZATION +1405/-3460 4865 SYMPTOM +293/-105 398
LOCATION +2432/-2409 4841 CONTROL +282/-87 369
TIME +1159/-1518 2677 CHEMICAL +108/-185 293
DISEASE +1164/-456 1620 BACTERIA +136/-103 239
CONDITION +689/-206 895 PRODUCT +124/-74 198
NONHUMAN +393/-344 737 DNA +8/-55 63
VIRUS +428/-127 555 RNA +0/-55 55
OUTBREAK +460/-75 535 PROTEIN +5/-32 37
Table 2: The frequency of NE classes in the BioCaster gold standard corpus, ?+? denotes the frequency in
the relevant category and ?-? denotes the frequency in the reject category.
Example of <NAME cl="ORGANIZATION"> WHO</NAME> has
annotated text received reports of <NAME cl="PERSON" case="true"
number="many"> 1118 cases </NAME>
Text only ?WHO?, ?has?, ?received?, ?reports?, ?of?, ?1118?, ?cases?
PERSON1 ?WHO?, ?has?, ?received?, ?reports?, ?of?, ?1118?, ?cases?, ?PERSON?
PERSON+case+number ?WHO?, ?has?, ?received?, ?reports?, ?of?, ?1118?, ?cases?, ?PERSON?,
?case?, ?number?
PERSON+case ?WHO?, ?has?, ?received?, ?reports?, ?of?, ?1118?, ?cases?, ?PERSON?,
?case?
PERSON+number ?WHO?, ?has?, ?received?, ?reports?, ?of?, ?1118?, ?cases?, ?PERSON?,
?number?
Table 3: An example of using different features for PERSON class as training data.
- PRODUCT+trans+thera: Raw text and
PRODUCT class and both Roles transmis-
sion and therapeutic are used as features.
- PRODUCT+trans: Raw text and PROD-
UCT class and Role transmission are used
as features.
- PRODUCT+thera: Raw text and PROD-
UCT class and Role therapeutic are used
as features.
- CHEMICAL+thera: Raw text and
CHEMICAL class and Role therapeutic
are used as features.
3. Features for combined NEs with Roles. We
investigate features for disease-related NEs
which include DISEASE, VIRUS, BACTE-
RIA, SYMPTOM, CONDITION, CONTROL,
DNA, PROTEIN, RNA, OUTBREAK, PROD-
UCT, ANATOMY, NONHUMAN, CHEMI-
CAL and features for all NEs with their Roles,
i.e., therapeutic and transmission. We investi-
gated 5 different features as follows:
- Text only: Only raw text is used as fea-
tures.
- Text+DiseaseNEs: Raw text and all 14
NEs disease-related classes are used as
features.
- Text+DiseaseNEs+Roles: Raw text and
all 14 NEs disease-related classes with
Roles are used as features. We note that
there are two Roles therapeutic and trans-
mission in this case.
- Text+AllNEs: Raw text and all NE classes
are used as features.
- Text+AllNEs+Roles: Raw text and all NE
classes with Roles are used as features. In
this case we have all 3 Roles case, thera-
peutic and transmission.
An example of using different features for PER-
21
YES is correct NO is correct
Assigned YES a b
Assigned NO c d
Table 4: A contingency table.
SON class is shown in Table 3.
4.2 Results and Discussions
The details of experimental results are shown in the
following sections. We use two performance mea-
sures, standard Precision/Recall and accuracy. They
are calculated based on the two-way contingency ta-
ble in Table 4. In the table, a counts the assigned
and correct cases, b counts the assigned and incor-
rect cases, c counts the not assigned but incorrect
cases, and d counts the not assigned and correct
cases (Yang, 1999). Then,
Precision = aa + b , and Recall =
a
a + c .
Accuracy is defined as accuracy=(a + d)/(a + b +
c + d).
4.2.1 Effectiveness of Each NE Class
In order to investigate the effect of NEs on per-
formance, we consider the baseline as the method
using text only. In experiment the baseline achieved
a performance of 74.40% accuracy and 64.35% Pre-
cision, 100% Recall. We can see that Recall always
achieves 100% in all cases. This may be due to the
small size of data. However it is interesting that we
can observe the change of Precision measure - an
important measure in our case. Hereafter we discuss
accuracy and Precision only.
The effectiveness of each NE class is shown in Ta-
ble 5. The results show that each NE does not have
the same effect. Compared to the baseline, nearly
half the total NEs (7/18) help improve performance
while the others do not have a significant affect.
Looking at the distribution of NE frequency in Ta-
ble 2, it seems that the higher the frequency of the
NE class, the better the performance it provides. For
example, PERSON achieved the best of all (76.80%
accuracy, 66.57% Precision compared to 74.40% ac-
curacy and 64.35% Precision when using raw text).
However this trend is not always followed, for ex-
ample, the TIME class tends to reduce performance
when compared to raw text. This is natural as there
is no obvious correlation between time and rele-
vancy. From the result tables we can conclude that
the effectiveness of each NE on the performance of
classification in our corpus is decreased in the fol-
lowing order.
PERSON > LOCATION > ORGANIZATION >
DISEASE > CONDITION = VIRUS = OUT-
BREAK > NONHUMAN = ANATOMY = SYMP-
TOM = CONTROL = BACTERIA = PRODUCT =
PROTEIN > CHEMICAL = DNA = RNA > TIME
In particular, 7 NEs, i.e., PERSON, LO-
CATION, ORGANIZATION, DISEASE, CONDI-
TION, VIRUS, OUTBREAK improve performance,
while TIME significantly reduces it. Two NEs DNA
and RNA that have low frequency weakly reduce
performance.
4.2.2 Effectiveness of Roles on Classification
In this Section we investigate the effect of each
Role on performance. The experimental results are
shown in Table 6. We can easily observe that Roles
in NEs improved both the accuracy and Precision
significantly.
We first consider the Role case. This Role is as-
sociated to PERSON which has highest frequency
in the corpus. Role case helped improve the ac-
curacy from 76.8% to 80.60%, and Precision from
66.57% to 74.43% for PERSON. This is significant
when we compare to the baseline with 74.4% ac-
curacy and 64.35% Precision. We note that PER-
SON has another attribute, the Quality number. Role
case helps PERSON with Quality number improve
the accuracy from 78.00% to 81.80% and Precision
from 67.74% to 71.74%. Moreover, we can obvi-
ously draw the relative comparison about effective-
ness between Role case and Quality number from
these results, it yields that case > number.
We proceed to investigate the effect of Roles ther-
apeutic and transmission. Obviously we see that
their effects on performance are positive. Specifi-
cally, transmission help NONHUMAN improve the
accuracy from 74.40% to 74.60%, therapeutic helps
CHEMICAL improve the accuracy from 74.20% to
74.40%. They both have not effects on some mi-
nor NE classes like ANATOMY and PRODUCT. If
we had more training data with more of these mi-
nor NE classes we hope to see a positive effect from
22
Named entity Accuracy Pre/Rec Named entity Accuracy Pre/Rec
PERSON1 76.80 66.57/100 ANATOMY1 74.40 64.35/100
ORGANIZATION1 75.40 65.25/100 SYMPTOM1 74.40 64.35/100
LOCATION1 75.60 65.44/100 CONTROL1 74.40 64.35/100
TIME1 73.00 63.11/100 CHEMICAL1 74.20 64.17/100
DISEASE1 75.00 64.89/100 BACTERIA1 74.40 64.35/100
CONDITION1 74.60 64.53/100 PRODUCT1 74.40 64.35/100
NONHUMAN1 74.40 64.35/100 DNA1 74.20 64.17/100
VIRUS1 74.60 64.53/100 RNA1 74.20 64.17/100
OUTBREAK1 74.60 64.53/100 PROTEIN1 74.40 64.35/100
Table 5: Performance of each NE class in which features of NEs in bold text have Role attributes.
FEATURES Accuracy Pre/Rec
Baseline 74.40 64.35/100
PERSON1 76.80 66.57/100
PERSON+number 78.00 67.74/100
PERSON+case 80.60 74.43/100
PERSON+case+number 81.80 71.74/100
NONHUMAN1 74.40 64.35/100
NONHUMAN+trans 74.60 64.53/100
ANATOMY1 74.40 64.35/100
ANATOMY+trans 74.40 64.35/100
PRODUCT1 74.40 64.35/100
PRODUCT+trans 74.40 64.35/100
PRODUCT+therapeutic 74.40 64.35/100
PRODUCT+trans+thera 74.40 64.35/100
CHEMICAL1 74.20 64.17/100
CHEMICAL+therapeutic 74.40 64.35/100
Table 6: Performance of Role attributes with their
NEs.
Roles on them. Interestingly, while NEs associated
to Roles do not improve the accuracy like NONHU-
MAN and CHEMICAL, their Roles helped improve
the accuracy. Based on the improvements of trans-
mission and therapeutic in Table 6, we can draw
their effectiveness are the same on their NEs, that
is therapeutic = transmission.
When we compare the effect of all Roles on per-
formance, we can see that the improvements of Role
case and also Quality number are much higher than
the improvements of Roles therapeutic and trans-
mission. We think this is because the frequency of
PERSON (NE associated to Role case and Quality
number) is higher than the frequency of NEs which
FEATURES Accuracy Pre/Rec
Baseline 74.40 64.35/100
Text+DiseaseNEs 75.80 65.63/100
Text+DiseaseNEs+Roles 76.20 66.00/100
Text+AllNEs 79.40 69.16/100
Text+AllNEs+Roles 84.40 74.76/100
Table 7: The performance of combined NEs with
their Roles.
are associated to Roles therapeutic and transmis-
sion in the corpus. Then, we can have the effect
of Roles/Qualities is in the order case > number >
therapeutic = transmission.
4.2.3 Effectiveness of Combined NEs with
Roles
We continue to investigate the effectiveness of
Roles for combined NEs. The experimental re-
sults are given in Table 7. We note that there are
two Roles therapeutic and transmission in disease-
related NE classes, and all 3 Roles case, therapeutic
and transmission in all NE classes.
We can easily see that Roles improved perfor-
mance of text classification significantly. In de-
tails, for disease-related NE classes, Roles thera-
peutic and transmission helped to improve the ac-
curacy from 74.40% to 76.20%, and Precision from
64.35% to 66.% compared to the baseline. For all
NE classes, all 3 Roles case, therapeutic, and trans-
mission help to improve the accuracy from 74.40%
to 84.40% and Precision from 64.35% to 74.76%.
We conclude that all 3 Roles achieved the best re-
sults in performance.
23
5 Conclusion
This paper has focused on the contribution of Roles
in biomedical annotated text classification. The ex-
perimental results indicated that:
1. Roles of each NE greatly help improve perfor-
mance of the system.
2. The effect of Role/Quality attributes on classi-
fication was decreased in the order as follows:
case > number > therapeutic = transmission.
3. Combined NE classes with Roles contribute
significantly to the improvement of perfor-
mance.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Mika Shigematsu and
Kiyosu Taniguchi at the National Institute of Infec-
tious Diseases for useful discussions. This work was
supported by Grants-in-Aid from the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science (grant no. 18049071).
References
S. Bloehdorn and A. Hotho. 2004. Boosting for text
classification with semantic features. In Proc. of the
Workshop on Mining for and from the Semantic Web
at the 10th ACM SIGKDD 2004, pages 70?87.
A.M. Cohen and W.R. Hersh. 2005. A survey of current
work in biomedical text mining. Briefing in BioInfor-
matics, 6(3):57?71.
N. Collier. 2006. BioCaster text mining project. http:
//biocaster.nii.ac.jp.
J. Fru?rnkranz, T. Mitchell, and E. Riloff. 1998. A case
study in using linguistic phrases for text categorization
on the WWW. In Working Notes of the AAAI/ICML
Workshop on Learning for Text Categorization, pages
5?13.
N. Guarino and C. Welty. 2000a. A formal ontology of
properties. In Proceedings of the 2000 Conference on
Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management
(EKAW-2000), pages 97?112.
N. Guarino and C. Welty. 2000b. Ontological analysis
of taxonomic relations. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Conceptual Modeling, pages
210?224.
A. Hotho, S. Staab, and G. Stumme. 2003. WordNet im-
proves text document clustering. In Proc. of the SIGIR
2003 Semantic Web Workshop, 2003.
International Society for Infectious Diseases. 2001.
Promed mail. http://www.promedmail.org.
A. Kawazoe, L. Jin, M. Shigematsu, R. Barrero, K.
Taniguchi, and N. Collier. 2006. The development of
a schema for the annotation of terms in the BioCaster
disease detection/tracking system. In Proceedings of
the International Workshop on Biomedical Ontology
in Action (KR-MED 2006), pages 77?85.
M. Krauthammer and G. Nenadic. 2004. Term identifi-
cation in the biomedical literature. Journal of Biomed-
ical Informatics, 37(6):512?526.
T. Kudo and Y. Matsumoto. 2004. A boosting algorithm
for classification of semi-structured text. In Proceed-
ings of the 2004 Conference on Empirical Methods in
NLP, pages 301?308.
A.K. McCallum. 1996. Bow: A toolkit for sta-
tistical language modeling, text retrieval, classifica-
tion and clustering. http://www.cs.cmu.edu/
?mccallum/bow.
T.M. Mitchell. 1997. Machine Learning. McGraw-Hill.
Public Health Agency of Canada. 2004. Global Pub-
lic Heath Intelligence Network (GPHIN). http:
//www.gphin.org.
S. Scott and S. Matwin. 1999. Feature engineering for
text classification. In Proc. of International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning 1999, pages 379?388.
F. Sebastiani. 2002. Machine learning in automated text
categorization. ACM computing survey, 34(1):1?47.
W. J. Wilbur, A. Rzhetsky, and H. Shatkay. 2006. New
directions in biomedical text annotation: definition,
guidelines and corpus construction. BMC Bioinfor-
matics, 7(356):1471?2105.
World Health Organization. 2004. ICD10, Interna-
tional Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related
Health Problems, Tenth Revision.
Y. Yang and X. Liu. 1999. A re-examination of text
categorization methods. In Proc. of 22th ACM Int?l.
Conf. on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, pages 42?49.
Y. Yang. 1999. An evaluation of statistical approaches
to text categorization. Information Retrieval Journal,
1:69?90.
M.J. Zaki and C.C. Aggarwal. 2003. XRules: an effec-
tive structural classifier for XML data. In Proceedings
of the ninth ACM SIGKDD International Conference,
2003, pages 316?325.
24
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 215?222,
Beijing, August 2010
An ontology-driven system for detecting global health events
Nigel Collier
National Inst. Informatics
collier@nii.ac.jp
Reiko Matsuda Goodwin
Fordham University
reikogoodwin@gmail.com
John McCrae
Bielefeld University
johnmccrae@gmail.com
Son Doan
Vanderbilt University
son.doan@vanderbilt.edu
Ai Kawazoe
Tsuda College
zoeai@tsuda.ac.jp
Mike Conway
University of Pittsburgh
conwaym@pitt.edu
Asanee Kawtrakul
Kasetart University
ak@ku.ac.th
Koichi Takeuchi
Okayama University
koichi@cs.okayama-u.ac.jp
Dinh Dien
VietNam National University
ddien66@yahoo.com
Abstract
Text mining for global health surveillance
is an emerging technology that is gaining
increased attention from public health or-
ganisations and governments. The lack
of multilingual resources such as Word-
Nets specifically targeted at this task have
so far been a major bottleneck. This pa-
per reports on a major upgrade to the
BioCaster Web monitoring system and
its freely available multilingual ontology;
improving its original design and extend-
ing its coverage of diseases from 70 to 336
in 12 languages.
1 Introduction
The number of countries who can sustain teams
of experts for global monitoring of human/animal
health is limited by scarce national budgets.
Whilst some countries have advanced sensor net-
works, the world remains at risk from the health
impacts of infectious diseases and environmen-
tal accidents. As seen by the recent A(H5N1),
A(H1N1) and SARS outbreaks, a problem in one
part of the world can be rapidly exported, leading
to global hardship.
The World Health Organization (WHO) esti-
mates that in the future, between 2 to 7.4 mil-
lion people could be at risk worldwide from a
highly contageous avian flu virus that spreads
rapidly through the international air travel net-
work (WHO, 2005). Pandemics of novel
pathogens have the capacity to overwhelm health-
care systems, leading to widespread morbidity,
mortality and socio-economic disruption (Cox
et al, 2003). Furthermore, outbreaks of live-
stock diseases, such as foot-and-mouth disease or
equine influenza can have a devastating impact on
industry, commerce and human health (Blake et
al., 2003). The challenge is to enhance vigilance
and control the emergence of outbreaks. Whilst
human analysis remains essential to spot complex
relationships, automated analysis has a key role
to play in filtering the vast volume of data in real
time and highlighting unusual trends using reli-
able predictor indicators.
BioCaster (http://born.nii.ac.jp) (Collier et al,
2008) is a Web 2.0 monitoring station for the early
detection of infectious disease events. The sys-
tem exploits a high-throughput semantic process-
ing pipeline, converting unstructured news texts
to structured records, alerting events based on
time-series analysis and then sharing this informa-
tion with users via geolocating maps (Fig. 1(a)),
graphs (Fig. 1(b)) and alerts. Underlying the sys-
tem is a publicly available multilingual applica-
tion ontology. Launched in 2006 (Collier et al,
2006) the BioCaster Ontology (BCO) has been
downloaded by over 70 academic and industrial
groups worldwide. This paper reports on a ma-
jor upgrade to the system and the ontology - ex-
panding the number of languages from 6 to 12,
redefining key relations and extending coverage in
the number of diseases from 70 to 336, including
many veterinary diseases.
215
(a) Bio-geographic map (b) Trend graph analyser
(c) BioCaster processes
Figure 1: (a)BioCaster?s bio-geographic map for a suspected foot-and-mouth outbreak on 22nd March,
2010 with links to the multilingual ontology, NCBI, HighWire, GoPubMed and Google Scholar; (b)
The trends analyser showing aggregated document counts for health events in China between 13nd
March and 12th April, 2010; (c) The system?s pipeline of processes with example semantic markup.
216
2 Background
As the world becomes more interconnected and
urbanized and animal production becomes in-
creasingly intensive, the speed with which epi-
demics spread becomes faster, adding to pressure
on biomedical experts and governments to make
quick decisions. Traditional validation methods
such as field investigations or laboratory analysis
are the mainstay of public health but can require
days or weeks to issue reports. The World Wide
Web with its economical and real time delivery of
information represents a new modality in health
surveillance (Wagner and Johnson, 2006) and has
been shown to be an effective source by the World
Health Organization (WHO) when Public Health
Canada?s GPHIN system detected the SARS out-
break in southern China from news reports dur-
ing November 2002. The recent A(H1N1) ?swine
flu? pandemic highlighted the trend towards agen-
cies using unvalidated sources. The technologi-
cal basis for such systems can be found in sta-
tistical classification approaches and light weight
ontological reasoning. For example, Google Flu
Trends (Ginsberg et al, 2009) is a system that de-
pends almost entirely on automatic statistical clas-
sification of user queries; MedISys-PULS (Yan-
garber et al, 2008), HealthMap (Freifeld et al,
2008) and BioCaster use a mixture of statisti-
cal and ontological classification; and GPHIN
(Mawudeku and Blench, 2006) and Argus (Wil-
son, 2007) rely on a mixture of ontological classi-
fication and manual analysis.
Compared to other similar systems BioCaster
is characterized by its richly featured and pub-
licly downloadable ontology and emphasizes crit-
ical evaluation of its text mining modules. Em-
pirical results have included: topic classification,
named entity recognition, formal concept anal-
ysis and event recognition. In the absence of
a community gold standard, task performance
was assessed on the best available ?silver? stan-
dard - the ProMED-mail network (Madoff and
Woodall, 2005), achieving F-score of 0.63 on 14
disease-country pairs over a 365-day period (Col-
lier, 2010).
Despite initial skepticism within the public
health community, health surveillance systems
based on NLP-supported human analysis of me-
dia reports are becoming firmly established in
Europe, North America and Japan as sources of
health information available to governments and
the public (Hartley et al, 2010). Whilst there is no
substitute for trained human analysts, automated
filtering has helped experts save time by allow-
ing them to sift quickly through massive volumes
of media data. It has also enabled them to sup-
plement traditional sources with a broader base of
information.
In comparison with other areas of biomedical
NLP such as the clinical and genetics? domains, a
relative lack of building block resources may have
hindered the wider participation of NLP groups
in public health applications. It is hoped that the
provision of common resources like the BCO can
help encourage further development and bench-
marking.
3 Method
BioCaster performs analysis of over 9000 news ar-
ticles per day using the NPACI Rocks cluster mid-
dleware (http://www.rockcsclusters.org) on a plat-
form of 48 3.0GHz Xeon cores. Data is ingested
24/7 into a semantic processing pipeline in a short
1 hour cycle from over 1700 public domain RSS
feeds such as Google news, the European Media
Monitor and ProMED-mail. Since 2009, news has
also being gathered under contract from a com-
mercial news aggregation company, providing ac-
cess to over 80,000 sources across the world?s lan-
guages.
The new 2010 version of BioCaster uses ma-
chine translation into English (eleven languages)
to source news stories related to currently oc-
curring infectious and environmental disease out-
breaks in humans, animals and plants.
Access to the site is freely available but lo-
gin registration applies to some functions such as
email alerts. Processing is totally automatic, but
we have the potential within the login system to
enable human moderated alerts which broadcast
to Twitter and RSS.
Below we describe in detail two key aspects of
the system that have been significantly upgraded:
the BCO and the event detection system.
217
3.1 Ontology
3.1.1 Aim
The BioCaster Ontology aims:
? To describe the terms and relations necessary
to detect and risk assess public health events
in the grey literature;
? To bridge the gap between (multilingual)
grey literature and existing standards in
biomedicine;
? To mediate integration of content across lan-
guages;
? To be freely available.
The central knowledge source for BioCaster
is the multilingual ontology containing domain
terms such as diseases, agents, symptoms, syn-
dromes and species as well as domain sensitive
relations such as a disease causing symptoms or
an agent affecting particular host species. This al-
lows the text mining system to have a basic un-
derstanding of the key concepts and relationships
within the domain to fill in gaps not mentioned
explicitly in the news reports. To the best of our
knowledge the BCO is unique as an application
ontology, providing freely available multilingual
support to system developers interested in out-
break surveillance in the language of the open me-
dia.
The BCO however has little to say outside of
its application domain, e.g. in disease-gene in-
teraction or for supporting automatic diagnosis.
As discussed in Grey Cowell and Smith (2010),
there are many other resources available that have
the potential to support applications for infec-
tious disease analysis including controlled vocab-
ularies and ontologies such as the the Unified
Medical Language System (UMLS) (Lindberg et
al., 1993), International Classification of Diseases
(ICD-10) (WHO, 2004), SNOMED CT (Stearns
et al, 2001), Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
(Lipscomb, 2000) and the Infectious Disease On-
tology (IDO) (Grey Cowell and Smith, 2010). In
(Collier et al, 2006) we discussed how BCO com-
pared to such ontologies so we will focus from
now on the implication of the extensions.
3.1.2 Scope
The new version of the BCO now covers 12 lan-
guages including all the United Nation?s official
languages: Arabic (968 terms), English (4113),
French (1281), Indonesian (1081), Japanese
(2077), Korean (1176), Malaysian (1001), Rus-
sian (1187), Spanish (1171), Thai (1485), Viet-
namese (1297) and Chinese (1142). The multi-
lingual ontology can be used as a direct knowl-
edge source in language-specific text mining mod-
ules, as an indexing resource for searching across
concepts in various languages and as a dictionary
for future translation modules. Currently news in
all 12 languages is available via the Web portal
but news in additional languages such as German,
Italian and Dutch are being added using machine
translation.
3.1.3 Design
Like EuroWordNet (Vossen, 1998), on which
it is loosely based, the BCO adopts a thesaurus-
like structure with synonym sets linking to-
gether terms across languages with similar mean-
ing. Synonym sets are referred to using root
terms. Root terms themselves are fully defined in-
stances that provide bridges to external classifica-
tion schemes and nomenclatures such as ICD10,
MeSH, SNOMED CT and Wikipedia. The central
backbone taxonomy is deliberately shallow and
taken from the ISO?s Suggested Upper Merged
Ontology (Niles and Pease, 2001). To maintain
consistency and computability we kept a single
inheritance structure throughout. 18 core domain
concepts corresponding to named entities in the
text mining system such as DISEASE and SYMP-
TOM were the results of analysis using a formal
theory (Guarino and Welty, 2000).
We have endeavoured to construct definitions
for root terms along Aristotelean principles by
specifying the difference to the parent. For ex-
ample in the case of Eastern encephalitis virus:
Eastern equine encephalitis virus is a
species of virus that belongs to the
genus Alphavirus of the family Togaviri-
dae (order unassigned) of the group
IV ((+)ssRNA) that possesses a positive
single stranded RNA genome. It is the
218
etiological agent of the eastern equine
encephalitis.
We are conscious though that terms used in
the definitions still require more rigorous control
to be considered useful for machine reasoning.
To aid both human and machine analysis root
terms are linked by a rich relational structure
reflecting domain sensitive relations such as
causes(virus,disease), has symptom(disease,
symptom), has associated syndrome(disease,
syndrome), has reservoir(virus, organism).
In such a large undertaking, the order of work
was critical. We proceeded by collecting a list of
notifiable diseases from national health agencies
and then grouped the diseases according to per-
ceived relevance to the International Health Reg-
ulations 2005 (Lawrence and Gostin, 2004). In
this way we covered approximately 200 diseases,
and then explored freely available resources and
the biomedical literature to find academic and lay-
man?s terminology to describe their agents, af-
fected hosts, vector species, symptoms, etc. We
then expanded the coverage to less well known
human diseases, zoonotic diseases, animal dis-
eases and diseases caused by toxic substances
such as sarin, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide and
ethylene. At regular stages we checked and val-
idated terms against those appearing in the news
media.
As we expanded the number of conditions to in-
clude veterinary diseases we found a major struc-
tural reorganization was needed to support animal
symptoms. For example, a high temperature in
humans would not be the same as one in bovids.
This prompted us in the new version to group dis-
eases and symptoms around major animal familes
and related groups, e.g. high temperature (human)
and high temperature (bovine).
A second issue that we encountered was the
need to restructure the hierarchy under Organi-
cObject which was divided between MicroOrgan-
ism and Animal. The structure of the previous
version meant that the former were doing dou-
ble duty as infecting agents and the later were af-
fected hosts. The MicroOrganism class contained
bacterium, helminth, protozoan, fungus and virus,
which then became the domain in a relation ?x
causes y?. Expansion forced us to accomodate the
fact that some animals such as worms and mites
(e.g. scabies) also infect humans as well as ani-
mals. The result was a restructuring of the organic
classes using the Linnean taxonomy as a guide-
line, although this is probably not free from errors
(e.g. virus is typically not considered to be an or-
ganism).
3.2 Event alerting system
Figure 1(c) shows a schematic of the modular de-
sign used by the BioCaster text mining system.
Following on from machine translation and topic
classification is named entity recognition and tem-
plate recognition which we describe in more detail
below. The final structured event frames include
slot values normalized to ontology root terms for
disease, pathogen (virus or bacterium), country
and province. Additionally we also identify 15 as-
pects of public health events critical to risk assess-
ment such as: spread across international borders,
hospital worker infection, accidental or deliberate
release, food contamination and vaccine contami-
nation.
Latitude and longitude of events down to the
province level are found in two ways: using the
Google API up to a limit of 15000 lookups per
day, and then using lookup on the BCO taxonomy
of 5000 country and province names derived from
open sources such as Wikipedia.
Each hour events are automatically alerted to
a Web portal page by comparing daily aggre-
gated event counts against historical norms (Col-
lier, 2010). Login users can also sign up to receive
emails on specific topics. A topic would normally
specify a disease or syndrome, a country or region
and a specific risk condition.
In order to extract knowledge from docu-
ments, BioCaster maintains a collection of rule
patterns in a regular expression language that
converts surface expressions into structured in-
formation. For example the surface phrase
?man exposes airline passengers to measles?
would be converted into the three templates
?species(human); disease(measles); interna-
tional travel(true)?. Writing patterns to produce
such templates can be very time consuming and
so the BioCaster project has developed its own
219
D3: :- name(disease){ list(@undiagnosed) words(,1) list(@disease) }
S2: :- name(symptom) { list(@severity) list(@symptom)}
CF1: contaminated food(?true?) :- ?caused? ?by? list(@contaminate verbs past)
list(@injested material)
SP4: species(?animal?) :- name(animal,A) words(,3) list(@cull verbs past)
Table 1: Examples of SRL rules for named entity and template recognition. Template rules contain
a label, a head and a body, where the head specifies the template pattern to be output if the body
expression matches. The body can contain word lists, literals, and wild cards. Various conditions can
be placed on each of these such as orthographic matching.
light weight rule language - called the Simple
Rule Language (SRL) and a pattern building inter-
face for maintaining the rule base (McCrae et al,
2009). Both are freely available to the research
community under an open source license. Cur-
rently BioCaster uses approximately 130 rules for
entity recognition, 1000 word lists and 3200 tem-
plate rules (of which half are for location recogni-
tion) to identify events of interest in English. Us-
ing SRL allows us to quickly adapt the system to
newly emerging terminology such as the 11+ des-
ignations given to A(H1N1) during the first stages
of the 2009 pandemic.
The SRL rulebook for BioCaster can recognize
a range of entities related to the task of disease
surveillance such as bacteria, chemicals, diseases,
countries, provinces, cities and major airports.
Many of these classes are recognized using terms
imported from the BCO. The rule book also con-
tains specialised thesauri to recognize subclasses
of entities such as locations of habitation, eater-
ies and medical service centres. Verb lists are
maintained for lexical classes such as detection,
mutation, investigation, causation, contamination,
culling, blaming, and spreading.
Some examples of SRL rules for named entity
recognition are shown in Table 1 and described
below:
Rule D3 in the rulebook tags phrases like ?mys-
tery illness? or ?unknown killer bug? by matching
on strings contained within two wordlists, @un-
diagnosed and @disease, separated by up to one
word.
Rule S2 allows severity indicators such as ?se-
vere? or ?acute? to modify a list of known symp-
toms in order to identify symptom entities.
Rule CF1 is an example of a template rule. If
the body of the rule matches by picking out ex-
pressions such as ?was caused by tainted juice?,
this triggers the head to output an alert for con-
taminated food.
Rule SP4 identifies the victim species as ?ani-
mal? in contexts like ?250 geese were destroyed?.
The rulebook also supports more complex in-
ferences such as the home country of national
public health organizations.
Since BioCaster does not employ systematic
manual checking of its reports, it uses a number of
heuristic filters to increase specificity (the propor-
tion of correctly identified negatives) for reports
that appear on the public Web portal pages. For
example, reports with no identified disease and
country are rejected. Since these heuristics may
reduce sensitivity they are not applied to news that
appears on the user login portal pages.
4 Results and Discussion
Version 3 of the ontology represents a significant
expansion in the coverage of diseases, symptoms
and pathogens on version 2. Table 2 summarizes
the number of root terms for diseases classified by
animal familes.
The thesaurus like structure of the BCO is com-
patible in many respects to the Simple Knowledge
Organization System (SKOS) (Miles et al, 2005).
In order to extend exchange and re-use we have
produced a SKOS version of the BCO which is
available from the BCO site. We have also con-
verted the BCO terms into 12 SRL rule books (1
for each language) for entity tagging. These too
are freely available from the BCO site.
As the ontology expands we will consider
adopting a more detailed typing of diseases such
as hasInfectingPart to indicate the organ affected
220
Species N Example
Avian 22 Fowl pox
Bee 6 Chalk brood
disease
Bovine 24 Bluetongue
Canine 4 Blastomycosis
(Canine)
Caprine 14 Contagious
agalactia
Cervine 2 Chronic wasting
disease
Equine 17 Strangles
Feline 4 Feline AIDS
Fish 2 Viral hemorr
hagic septicemia
Human 216 Scarlet fever
Lagomorph 2 Myxomatosis
Non-human 16 Sylvan
primate yellow fever
Other 2 Crayfish plague
Rodent 8 Colorado tick
fever (Rodent)
Swine 12 Swine erysipelas
Table 2: Major disease groups organized by af-
fected animal family. N represents the number of
root terms.
or hasProtectionMethod to indicate broad classes
of methods used to prevent or treat a condition.
The typology of diseases could also be extended
in a more fine grained manner to logically group
conditions, e.g. West Nile virus encephalitis,
Powassan encephalitis and the Japanese B en-
cephalitis could be connected through a hasType
relation on encephalitis.
5 Conclusion
Multilingual resources specifically targeted at the
task of global health surveillance have so far been
very rare. We hope that the release of version 3
can be used to support a range of applications such
as text classification, cross language search, ma-
chine translation, query expansion and so on.
The BCO has been constructed to provide core
vocabulary and knowledge support to the Bio-
Caster project but it has also been influential
in the construction of other public health ori-
ented application ontologies such as the Syn-
dromic Surveillance Ontology (Okhamatovskaia
et al, 2009). The BCO is freely available from
http://code.google.com/p/biocaster-ontology/ un-
der a Creative Commons license.
Acknowledgements
The authors greatly acknowledge the many co-
workers who have provided comments and feed-
back on BioCaster. Funding support was pro-
vided in part by the Japan Science and Technology
Agency under the PRESTO programme.
References
Blake, A., M. T. Sinclair, and G. Sugiyarto. 2003.
Quantifying the impact of foot and mouth disease on
tourism and the UK economy. Tourism Economics,
9(4):449?465.
Collier, N., A. Kawazoe, L. Jin, M. Shigematsu,
D. Dien, R. Barrero, K. Takeuchi, and A. Kaw-
trakul. 2006. A multilingual ontology for infectious
disease surveillance: rationale, design and chal-
lenges. Language Resources and Evaluation, 40(3?
4). DOI: 10.1007/s10579-007-9019-7.
Collier, N., S. Doan, A. Kawazoe, R. Matsuda Good-
win, M. Conway, Y. Tateno, Q. Ngo, D. Dien,
A. Kawtrakul, K. Takeuchi, M. Shigematsu, and
K. Taniguchi. 2008. BioCaster:detecting public
health rumors with a web-based text mining sys-
tem. Bioinformatics, 24(24):2940?1, December.
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn534.
Collier, N. 2010. What?s unusual in online dis-
ease outbreak news? Biomedical Semantics, 1(1),
March. doi:10.1186/2041-1480-1-2.
Cox, N., S. Temblyn, and T. Tam. 2003. Influenza
pandemic planning. Vaccine, 21(16):1801?1803.
Freifeld, C., K. Mandl, B. Reis, and J. Brownstein.
2008. Healthmap: global infectious disease mon-
itoring through automated classification and visual-
ization of internet media reports. J. American Med-
ical Informatics Association, 15:150?157.
Ginsberg, J., M. Mohebbi, R. Patel, L. Brammer,
M. Smolinski, and L. Brilliant. 2009. Detecting
influenza epidemics using search engine query data.
Nature, 457:1012?1014.
Grey Cowell, L. and B. Smith. 2010. Infectious dis-
ease informatics. In Sintchenko, V., editor, Infec-
tious Disease Informatics, pages 373?395. Springer
New York.
221
Guarino, N. and C. Welty. 2000. A formal ontology
of properties. In Dieng, R. and O. Corby, editors,
EKAW-2000: Proc. 12th Int. Conf. on Knowledge
Engineering and Knowledge Management, pages
97?112.
Hartley, D., N. Nelson, R. Walters, R. Arthur, R. Yan-
garber, L. Madoff, J. Linge, A. Mawudeku, N. Col-
lier, J. Brownstein, G. Thinus, and N. Lightfoot.
2010. The landscape of international biosurveil-
lance. Emerging Health Threats J., 3(e3), January.
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn534.
Lawrence, O. and J. Gostin. 2004. International
infectious disease law - revision of the World
Health Organization?s international health regula-
tions. J. American Medical Informatics Associa-
tion, 291(21):2623?2627.
Lindberg, Donald A.B., L. Humphreys, Betsy, and
T. McCray, Alexa. 1993. The unified medical lan-
guage system. Methods of Information in Medicine,
32:281?291.
Lipscomb, C. 2000. Medical subject headings
(MeSH). Bulletin of the Medical Library Assoca-
tion, 88:256?266.
Madoff, Lawrence C. and John P. Woodall. 2005. The
internet and the global monitoring of emerging dis-
eases: Lessons from the first 10 years of promed-
mail. Archives of Medical Research, 36(6):724 ?
730. Infectious Diseases: Revisiting Past Problems
and Addressing Future Challenges.
Mawudeku, A. and M. Blench. 2006. Global pub-
lic health intelligence network (gphin). In Proc. 7th
Int. Conf. of the Association for Machine Transla-
tion in the Americas, Cambridge, MA, USA, August
8?12.
McCrae, J., M. Conway, and N. Collier. 2009. Simple
rule language editor. Google code project, Septem-
ber. Available from: http://code.google.com/p/srl-
editor/.
Miles, A., B. Matthews, and M. Wilson. 2005. SKOS
Core: Simple knowledge organization for the web.
In Proc. Int. Conf. on Dublin Core and Metadata
Applications, Madrid, Spain, 12?15 September.
Niles, I. and A. Pease. 2001. Towards a standard up-
per ontology. In Welty, C. and B. Smith, editors,
2nd Int. Conf. on Formal Ontology in Information
Systems FOIS-2001, Maine, USA, October 17?19.
Okhamatovskaia, A., W. Chapman, N. Collier, J. Es-
pino, and D. Buckeridge. 2009. SSO: The syn-
dromic surveillance ontology. In Proc. Int. Soc. for
Disease Surveillance, Miami, USA, December 3?4.
Stearns, M. Q., C. Price, K. A. Spackman, and A. Y.
Wang. 2001. SNOMED clinical terms: overview of
the development process and project status. In Proc.
American Medical Informatics Association (AMIA)
Symposium, pages 662?666.
Vossen, P. 1998. Introduction to EuroWordNet. Com-
puters and the Humanities, 32:73?89.
Wagner, M. and H. Johnson. 2006. The internet as
sentinel. In Wagner, M. et al, editor, The Hand-
book of Biosurveillance, pages 375?385. Academic
Press.
WHO. 2004. ICD-10, International Statistical Classi-
fication of Diseases and Related Health Problems,
Tenth Revision. World Health Organization, De-
cember.
WHO. 2005. Avian influenza: assessing the pandemic
threat. Technical Report WHO/CDS/2005.29,
World Health Organization, Geneva, January.
Wilson, J. 2007. Argus: a global detection and track-
ing system for biological events. Advances in Dis-
ease Surveillance, 4.
Yangarber, R., P. von Etter, and R. Steinberger. 2008.
Content collection and analysis in the domain of
epidemiology. In Proc. Int. Workshop on Describ-
ingMedical Web Resources (DRMED 2008), Goten-
burg, Sweden, May 27th.
222
