Arabic Script-based Languages deserve to be studied linguistically 
 
Martin Kay 
Stanford University 
 
Arabic script-based languages are attracting increased attention for reasons that are 
regrettably far from their intrinsic linguistic interest. At the same time, statistical and 
corpus-based approaches to language processing are acquiring such dominance that it is 
becoming difficult for the advocates of other methods even to receive a hearing. I will 
argue that this is an alarming trend against which computational linguists, and especially 
those studying these languages, should resist with great determination. My argument for 
this position rests on the following observations: 
 
1. Unless the role of quantum mechanics and chaos in the workings of ordinary 
language has been grossly underestimated, nothing about the subject is 
probabilistic in any fundamental sense. 
2. The statistics are a surrogate for knowledge of the world and artificial intelligence 
and the performance of any system based on an approach that reduces this to 
numerical annotations on linguistic structures can only hope to reach a very low 
asymptote.  
3. Thanks to Zipf?s law, corpus annotation is subject to a severe law of diminishing 
returns to which the linguist?s search for significant generalizations is not subject. 
4. To the various levels of linguistic analysis and to the indefinite range of subjects 
and propositions that texts may treat, there correspond different notions of 
locality, each requiring its own statistical models. 
5. Most importantly, most of the linguistic properties that must be considered for 
text processing are not emergent properties of the texts at all but crucially depend 
on l?arbitraire du signe, the arbitrary relation between a symbol and what it 
symbolizes. 
Human Language Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 128?136,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Intersecting multilingual data for faster and better statistical translations
Yu Chen1,2, Martin Kay1,3, Andreas Eisele1,2
1: Universita?t des Saarlandes, Saarbru?cken, Germany
2: Deutsches Forschungszentrum fu?r Ku?nstliche Intelligenz GmbH, Saarbru?cken, Germany
3: Stanford University, CA, USA
{yuchen,kay,eisele}@coli.uni-saarland.de
Abstract
In current phrase-based SMT systems, more
training data is generally better than less.
However, a larger data set eventually intro-
duces a larger model that enlarges the search
space for the translation problem, and con-
sequently requires more time and more re-
sources to translate. We argue redundant in-
formation in a SMT system may not only de-
lay the computations but also affect the qual-
ity of the outputs. This paper proposes an ap-
proach to reduce the model size by filtering
out the less probable entries based on com-
patible data in an intermediate language, a
novel use of triangulation, without sacrificing
the translation quality. Comprehensive exper-
iments were conducted on standard data sets.
We achieved significant quality improvements
(up to 2.3 BLEU points) while translating with
reduced models. In addition, we demon-
strate a straightforward combination method
for more progressive filtering. The reduction
of the model size can be up to 94% with the
translation quality being preserved.
1 Introduction
Statistical machine translation (SMT) applies ma-
chine learning techniques to a bilingual corpus to
produce a translation system entirely automatically.
Such a scheme has many potential advantages over
earlier systems which relied on carefully crafted
rules. The most obvious is that it at dramatically
reduces cost in human labor and it is able to reach
many critical translation rules that are easily over-
looked by human being.
SMT systems generally assemble translations by
selecting phrases from a large candidate set. Un-
supervised learning often introduces a considerable
amount of noise into this set as a result of which the
selection process becomes more longer and less ef-
fective. This paper provides one approach to these
problems.
Various filtering techniques, such as (Johnson et
al., 2007) and (Chen et al, 2008), have been ap-
plied to eliminate a large portion of the translation
rules that were judged unlikely to be of value for
the current translation. However, these approaches
were only able to improve the translation quality
slightly. In this paper, we describe a triangulation
approach (Kay, 1997) that incorporates multilingual
data to improve system efficiency and translation
quality at the same time. Most of the previous tri-
angulation approaches (Kumar et al, 2007; Cohn
and Lapata, 2007; Filali and Bilmes, 2005; Simard,
1999; Och and Ney, 2001) add information obtained
from a third language. In other words, they work
with the union of the data from the different lan-
guages. In contrast, we work with the intersection of
information acquired through a third language. The
hope is that the intersection will be more precise and
more compact than the union, so that a better result
will be obtained more efficiently.
2 Noise in a phrase-based SMT system
The phrases in a translation model are extracted
heuristically from a word alignment between the
parallel texts in two languages using machine learn-
ing techniques. The translation model feature values
are stored in the form of a so-called phrase-table,
128
while the distortion model is in the reordering-table.
As we have said models built in this way tend to con-
tain a contains a considerable amount of noise. The
phrase-table entries are far less reliable than the lex-
icons and grammar rules handcrafted for rule-based
systems.
The main source of noise in the phrase table is
errors from the word alignment process. For exam-
ple, many function words occur so frequently that
they are incorrectly mapped to translations of many
function words in the other language to which they
are, in fact, unrelated. On the other hand, many
words remain unaligned on account of their very low
frequency. Another source noise comes from the
phrase extraction algorithm itself. The unaligned
words are usually attached to aligned sequences In
order to achieve longer phrase pairs.
The final selection of entries from the phrase ta-
ble is based not only on the values assigned to them
there, but also to values coming from the language
and reordering models, so that entries that receive an
initially high value may end up not being preferred.
(1) Sie
they
lieben
love
ihre
their
Kinder
children
nicht.
not
They don?t love their children.
The frequently occurring German negative ?nicht?
in (1). is sometimes difficult for SMT systems
to translate into English because it may appear in
many positions of a sentence. For instance, it oc-
curs at the end of the sentence in (1). The phrase
pairs ?ihre kinder nicht ? their children are not?
and ?ihre kinder nicht ? their children? are both
likely also to appear in the phrase table and the for-
mer has greater estimated probability. However, the
language model would preferred the latter in this ex-
ample because the sentence ?They love their children
are not.? is unlikely to be attested. Accordingly,
SMT system may therefore produce the misleading
translation in (2).
(2) They love their children.
The system would not produce translations with the
opposite meanings if the noisy entries like ?ihre
kinder nicht ? their children? were excluded from
the translation candidates. Eliminating the noise
should help to improve the system?s performance,
for both efficiency and translation quality.
3 Triangulated filtering
While direct translation and pivot translation
through a bridge language presumably introduce
noise, in substantially similar amounts, there is no
reason to expect the noise in the two systems to cor-
relate strongly. In fact, the noise from such differ-
ent sources, tends to be quite distinct, whereas the
more useful information is often retained. This en-
courages us to hope that information gathered from
various sources will be more reliable overall.
Our plan is to ameliorate the noise problem by
constructing a smaller phrase-table by taking the
intersection of a number of sources. We reason that a
target phrase is will appear as a candidate translation
of a given source phrase, only if it also appears as a
candidate translation for some word or phrase in the
bridge language mapping to the source phrase. We
refer to this triangulation approach as triangulated
phrase-table filtering.
TargetTextSourceText
ModelFiltered
ParallelCorpus
Extraction
Alignment,Phrase
SMTDecoder
TranslationModel
LanguageModelMonolingualCorpus
CountingSmoothing
Filtering
ModelTarget?Bridge
ModelSource?Bridge
Figure 1: Triangulated filtering in SMT systems
Figure 1 illustrates our triangulation approach.
Two bridge models are first constructed: one from
the source language to the bridge language, and an-
other from the target language to the bridge lan-
guage. Then, we use these two models to filter the
original source-target model. For each phrase pair
in the original table, we try to find a common link
in these bridge models to connect both phrases. If
such links do not exist, we remove the entry from
the table. The probability values in the table remain
129
unchanged. The reduced table can be used in place
of the original one in the SMT system.
There are various forms of links that can be used
as our evidence for the filtering process. One obvi-
ous form is complete phrases in the bridge language,
which means, for each phrase pair in the model to
be filtered, we should look for a third phrase in the
bridge language that can relate the two phrases in the
pair.
This approach to filtering examines each phrase
pair presented in the phrase-table one by one. For
each phrase pair, we collect the corresponding trans-
lations using the models for translation into a third
language. If both phrases can be mapped to some
phrases in the bridge language, but to different ones,
we should remove it from the model. It is also possi-
ble that neither of the phrases appear in correspond-
ing bridge models. In this case, we consider the
bridge models insufficient for making the filtering
decision and prefer to keep the pair in the table.
The way a decoder constructs translation hypothe-
ses is directly related to the weights for different
model features in a SMT system, which are usually
optimized for a given set of models with minimum
error rate training (MERT) (Och, 2003) to achieve
better translation performance. In other words, the
weights obtained for a model do not necessarily ap-
ply to another model. Since the triangulated filter-
ing method removes a part of the model, it is impor-
tant to readjust the feature weights for the reduced
phrase-table.
4 Experimental design
All the text data used in our experiments are
from Release v3 of ?European Parliament Proceed-
ings Parallel Corpus 1996-2006? (Europarl) cor-
pus (Koehn, 2005). We mainly investigated trans-
lations from Spanish to English. There are enough
structural differences in these two language to in-
troduce some noise in the phrase table. French,
Portuguese, Danish, German and Finnish were used
as bridge languages. Portuguese is very similar to
Spanish and French somewhat less so. Finnish is un-
related and fairly different typologically with Danish
and German occupying the middle ground. In addi-
tion, we also present briefly the results on German-
English translations with Dutch, Spanish and Danish
as bridges.
For the Spanish-English pair, three translation
models were constructed over the same parallel cor-
pora. We acquired comparable data sets by draw-
ing several subsets from the same corpus according
to various maximal sentence lengths. The subsets
Tokens
Model Sentences Spanish English
EP-20 410,487 5,220,142 5,181,452
EP-40 964,687 20,820,067 20,229,833
EP-50 1,100,813 26,731,269 25,867,370
Europarl 1,304,116 37,870,751 36,429,274
Table 1: Europarl subsets for building the Spanish-
English SMT system
we used in the experiments are presented by ?EP-
20?, ?EP-40? and ?EP-50?, in which the numbers
indicate the maximal sentence length in respective
Europarl subsets. Table 1 lists the characteristics
of the Spanish-English subsets. Although the max-
imal sentence length in these sets is far less than
that of the whole corpus (880 tokens), EP-50 al-
ready includes nearly 85% of Spanish-English sen-
tence pairs from Europarl.
The translations models, both the models to be
filtered and the bridge models, were generated
from compatible Europarl subsets using the Moses
toolkit (Koehn et al, 2007) with the most basic con-
figurations. The feature weights for the Spanish-
English translation models were optimized over a
development set of 500 sentences using MERT to
maximize BLEU (Papineni et al, 2001).
The triangulated filtering algorithm was applied
to each combination of a translation model and a
third language. The reordering models were also
filtered according to the phrase-table. Only those
phrase pairs that appeared in the phrase-table re-
mained in the reordering table. We rerun the MERT
process solely based on the remaining entries in the
filtered tables. Each table is used to translate a set of
2,000 sentences of test data (from the shared task of
the third Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion, 2008 1). Both the test set and the development
data set have been excluded from the training data.
We evaluated the proposed phrase-table filtering
1For details, see
http://www.statmt.org/wmt08/shared-task.html
130
method mainly from two points of view: the effi-
ciency of systems with filtered tables and the quality
of output translations produced by the systems.
5 Results
5.1 System efficiency
Often the question of machine translation is not only
how to produce a good translation, but also how
to produce it quickly. To evaluate the system ef-
ficiency, we measured both storage space and time
consumption. For recording the computation time,
we run an identical of installation of the decoder
with different models and then measure the average
execution time for the given translation task.
In Table 2, we give the number of entries in each
phrase table (N ), and the physical file size of the
phrase table (SPT ) and the reordering table (SRT )
(without any compression or binarization), Tl, the
time for the program to load phrase tables and Tt the
time to translate the complete test set. We also high-
lighted the largest and the smallest reduction from
each group.
All filtered models showed significant reductions
in size. The greatest reduction of model sizes, taking
both phrase-table and reordering table into account,
is nearly 11 gigabytes for filtering the largest model
(EP-50) with a Finnish bridge, which leads to the
maximal time saving of 939 seconds, or almost 16
minutes, for translating two thousand sentences.
The reduction rates from two larger models are
very close to each other whereas the filtered table
scaled down the most significantly on the smallest
model (EP-20), which was in fact constructed over a
much smaller subset of Europarl corpus, consisting
of less than half of the sentences pairs in the other
two Europarl subsets. Compared to the larger Eu-
roparl subsets, the small data set is expected to pro-
duce more errors through training as there is much
less relevant data for the machine learning algorithm
to correctly extract useful information from. Conse-
quently, there are more noisy entries in this small
model, and therefore more entries to be removed. In
addition, the filtering is done by exact matching of
complete phrases, which presumably happens much
less frequently even for correctly paired phrase pairs
in the very limited data supplied by the smallest
training set. For the same reason, the distinction be-
tween different bridge languages was less clear for
this small model.
Due to hardware limitation, we are not able to
fit the unfiltered phrase tables completely into the
memory. Every table was filtered based on the given
input so only a small portion of each table was
loaded into memory. This may diminish the differ-
ence between the original and the filtered table to a
certain degree. The relative time consumptionnev-
ertheless agrees with the reduction in size: phrase
tables from the smallest model showed the most re-
duction for both loading the models and processing
the translations.
For loading time, we count the time it takes to
start and to load the bilingual phrase-tables plus re-
ordering tables and the monolingual language model
into the memory. The majority of the loading time
for the smallest model, even before filtering, has
been used for loading language models and other
start-up processes, could not be reduced as much as
the reduction on table size.
5.2 Translation quality
Bridge EP-20 EP-40 EP-50
? 26.62 31.43 31.68
pt 28.40 32.90 33.93
fr 28.28 32.69 33.47
da 28.48 32.47 33.88
de 28.05 32.65 33.13
fi 28.02 31.91 33.04
Table 3: BLEU scores of translations using filtered phrase
tables
Efficiency aside, a translation system should be
able to produce useful translation. It is important
to verify that the filtering approach does not affect
the translation quality of the system. Table 3 show
the BLEU scores of each translation acquired in the
experiments.
Between translation models of different sizes,
there are obvious performance gaps. Different
bridge languages can cause different effects on per-
formance. However, the translation qualities from
a single model are fairly close to each other. We
therefore take it that the effect of the triangulation
approach is rather robust across translation models
of different sizes.
131
Time Table Size
Model+Bridge Tl (s) Tt (s) N SPT (byte) SRT (byte)
EP-20+ ? 55 3529 7,599,271 953M 717M
EP-20+ pt 53 2826 1,712,508 (22.54%) 198M 149M
EP-20+ fr 48 2702 1,536,056 (20.21%) 172M 131M
EP-20+ da 52 2786 1,659,067 (21.83%) 186M 141M
EP-20+ de 43 2732 1,260,524 (16.59%) 132M 101M
EP-20+ fi 47 2670 1,331,323 (17.52%) 147M 111M
EP-40+ ? 65 3673 19,199,807 2.5G 1.9G
EP-40+ pt 50 3091 8,378,517 (43.64%) 1.1G 1.8G
EP-40+ fr 46 3129 8,599,708 (44.79%) 1.1G 741M
EP-40+ da 42 3050 6,716,304 (34.98%) 842M 568M
EP-40+ de 46 3069 6,113,769 (31.84%) 725M 492M
EP-40+ fi 40 2889 4,473,483 (23.30%) 533M 353M
EP-50+ ? 140 4130 54,382,715 7.1G 5.4G
EP-50+ pt 78 3410 13,225,654 (24.32%) 1.6G 1.3G
EP-50+ fr 97 3616 24,057,849 (44.24%) 3.0G 2.3G
EP-50+ da 81 3418 12,547,839 (23.07%) 1.5G 1.2G
EP-50+ de 95 3488 15,938,151 (29.31%) 1.9G 1.5G
EP-50+ fi 71 3191 7,691,904 (17.75%) 895M 677M
Table 2: System efficiency: time consumption and phrase-table size
It is obvious that the best systems are usually
NOT from the filtered tables that preserved the most
entries from the original. All the filtered models
showed some improvement in quality with updated
model weights. Mostly around 1.5 BLEU points, the
increases ranged from 0.36 to 2.25. Table 4 gives a
set of translations from the experiments. The unfil-
tered baseline system inserted the negative by mis-
take while all the filtered systems are able to avoid
this. It indicates that there are indeed noisy entries
affecting translation quality in the original table. We
were able to achieve better translations by eliminat-
ing noisy entries.
The filtering methods indeed tend to remove en-
tries composed of long phrases. Table 5 lists the
average length of phrases in several models. Both
source phrases and target phrases are taken into ac-
count. The best models have shortest phrases on av-
erage. Discarding such entries seems to be neces-
sary. This is consistent with the findings in (Koehn,
2003) that phrases longer than three words improve
performance little for training corpora of up to 20
million words.
Quality gains appeared to converge in the results
across different bridge languages while the original
models became larger. Translations generated us-
ing large models filtered with different bridge lan-
Bridge EP-20 EP-40 EP-50
? 3.776 4.242 4.335
pt 3.195 3.943 3.740
fr 3.003 3.809 3.947
da 3.005 3.74 3.453
de 2.535 3.501 3.617
fi 2.893 3.521 3.262
Table 5: Average phrase length
guages are less diverse. Meanwhile, the degradation
is less for a larger model. It is reasonable to expect
improvements for extremely large models with arbi-
trary bridge languages. For relatively small models,
the selection of bridge languages would be critical
for the effect of our approach.
5.3 Language clustering
To further understand how the triangulated filter-
ing approach worked and why it could work as it
did, we examined a randomly selected phrase table
fragment through the experiments. The segment in-
cluded 10 potential English translations of the same
Spanish word ?fabricantes?, the plural form of the
word ?fabricante? (manufacturer).
Table 6 shows the filtering results on a randomly
selected segment from the original ?EP-40? model,
including 10 English translations of the same source
132
source As??, se van modificando poco a poco los principios habituales del Estado de derecho por influencia de una
concepcin extremista de la lucha con tra las discriminaciones..
ref thus , the usual principles of the rule of law are being gradually altered under the influence of an extremist
approach to combating discrimination.
baseline we are not changing the usual principles of the rule of law from the influence of an extremist approach in
the fight against discrimination.
pt so , are gradually changing normal principles of the rule of law by influence of an extremist conception of
the fight against discrimination.
fr so , we are gradually changing the usual principles of the rule of law by influence of an extremist conception
of the fight against discrimination.
da so , are gradually changing the usual principles of the rule of law by influence of an extremist conception
of the fight against discrimination.
de thus , we are gradually altering the usual principles of the rule of law by influence of an extremist concep-
tion of the fight against discrimination.
fi so , are gradually changing normal principles of the rule of law by influence of an extremist conception of
the fight against discrimination.
Table 4: Examples
fabricantes pt fr da de fi
a manufacturer X X X X 4
battalions X X X 3
car manufacturers have 0
car manufacturers X X X X X 5
makers X X X 3
manufacturer X X X X X 5
manufacturers X X X X X 5
producers are X X X 3
producers need 0
producers X X X X X 5
Table 6: Phrase-table entries before and after filtering a
model with different bridges
word ?fabricantes?. X indicates that the corre-
sponding English phrase remained in the table after
triangulated filtering with the corresponding bridge
language. We also counted the number of tables that
included each phrase pair.
Regardless of the bridge language, the triangu-
lated filtering approach had removed those entries
that are clearly noise. Meanwhile, entries which
are surely correct were always preserved in the fil-
tered tables. The results of using different bridge
languages turned out to be consistent on these ex-
treme cases. The 5 filtering processes agreed on six
out of ten pairs.
As for the other 4 pairs, the decisions were differ-
ent using different bridge languages. The remaining
entries were always different when the bridge was
changed. None of the languages led to the identi-
cal eliminations. None of the cases excludes all er-
rors. Apparently, the selection of bridge languages
had immediate effects on the filtering results.
 31
 31.2
 31.4
 31.6
 31.8
 32
 32.2
 32.4
 32.6
 32.8
 33
 4  6  8  10  12  14  16  18  20
BL
EU
 (%
)
Phrase-table Entries (Mil.)
Portugese
French
Danish
German
Finnish
Baseline
Figure 2: Clustering of bridge languages
We compared two factors of these filtered tables:
their sizes and the corresponding BLEU scores. Fig-
ure 2 shows interesting signs of language similar-
ity/dissimilarity. There are apparently two groups
of languages having extremely close performance,
which happen to fall in two language groups: Ger-
manic (German and Danish) and Romance (French
and Portuguese). The Romance group was as-
sociated with larger filtered tables that produced
slightly better translations. The filtered tables cre-
ated with Germanic bridge languages contained ap-
133
proximately 2 million entries less than Romance
groups. The translation quality difference between
these two groups was within 1 point of BLEU.
Observed from this figure, it seems that the trans-
lation quality was connected to the similarity be-
tween the bridge language and the source language.
The closer the bridge is to the source language, the
better translations it may produce. For instance, Por-
tuguese led to a filtered table that produced the best
translations. On the other hand, the more different
the bridge languages compared to the source, the
larger portion of the phrase-table the filtering algo-
rithm will remove. The table filtered with German
was the smallest in the four cases.
Finnish, a language that is unrelated to others, was
associated with distinctive results. The size of the
table filtered with Finnish is only 23% of the orig-
inal, almost half of the table generated with Por-
tuguese. Finnish has extremely rich morphology,
hence a great many word-forms, which would make
exact matching in bridge models less likely to hap-
pen. Many more phrase pairs in the original table
were removed for this reason even though some of
these entries were beneficial for translations. Even
though the improvement on translation quality due
to the Finnish bridge was less significant than the
others, it is clear that triangulated filtering retained
the useful information from the original model.
5.4 Further filtering
The filtering decision with a bridge language on a
particular phrase pair is fixed: either to keep the en-
try or to discard it. It is difficult to adjust the system
to work differently. However, as the triangulated fil-
tering procedure does not consider probability distri-
butions in the models, it is possible to further filter
the tables according to the probabilities.
The phrase pairs are associated with values com-
puted from the given set of feature weights and
sorted, so that we can remove any portions of the
remain entries based on the values. Each generated
table is used to translate the test set again. Fig-
ure 3 shows BLEU scores of the translation out-
puts produced with tables derived from the ?EP-50?
model with respect to their sizes. We also included
the curve of probability-based filtering alone as the
baseline.
The difference between filtered tables at the same
 24
 26
 28
 30
 32
 0  10  20  30  40  50
BL
EU
 (%
)
Phrase-table Entries (Mil.)
BaselinePortugeseFrenchDanishGermanFinnish
Figure 3: Combining probability-based filtering
size can be over 6 BLEU points, which is a re-
markable advantage for the triangulated filtering ap-
proach always producing better translations. The
curves of the triangulated filtered models are clearly
much steeper than that of the naive pruned ones.
Data in these filtered models are more compact than
the original model before any filtering. The triangu-
lated filtered phrase-tables contain more useful in-
formation than a normal phrase-table of the same
size. The curves representing the triangulated filter-
ing performance are always on the left of the original
curves.
We are able to use less than 6% of the original
phrase table (40% of the table filtered with Finnish)
to obtain translations with the same quality as the
original. The extreme case, using only 1.4% of the
original table, leads to a reasonable BLEU score, in-
dicating that most of the output sentences should
still be understandable. In this case, the overall size
of the phrase table and the reordering table was less
than 100 megabytes, potentially feasible for mobile
devices, whereas the original models took nearly
12.5 gigabytes of disk space.
5.5 Different source language
Bridge EP-40 EP-50
? 5.1G 26.92 6.5G 27.23
Dutch 562M 27.11 1.3G 28.14
Spanish 3.0G 27.28 3.6G 28.09
Danish 505M 28.04 780M 28.21
Table 7: Filtered German-English systems (Size and
BLEU)
134
In addition to Spanish-English translation, we
also conducted experiments on German-English
translation. The results, shown in Table 7, appear
consistent with the results of Spanish-English trans-
lation. Translations in most cases have performance
close to the original unfiltered models, whereas the
reduction in phrase-table size ranged from 40% to
85%. Meanwhile, translation speed has been in-
creased up to 17%.
Due to German?s rich morphology, the unfil-
tered German-English models contain many more
entries than the Spanish-English ones constructed
from similar data sets. Unlike the Spanish-English
models, the difference between ?EP-40? and ?EP-
50? was not significant. Neither was the difference
between the impacts of the filtering in terms of trans-
lation quality. In addition, German and English are
so dissimilar that none of the three bridge languages
we chose turned out to be significantly superior.
6 Conclusions
We highlighted one problem of the state-of-the-art
SMT systems that was generally neglected: the
noise in the translation models. Accordingly, we
proposed triangulated filtering methods to deal with
this problem. We used data in a third language as ev-
idence to locate the less probable items in the trans-
lation models so as to obtain the intersection of in-
formation extracted from multilingual data. Only
the occurrences of complete phrases were taken into
account. The probability distributions of the phrases
have not been considered so far.
Although the approach was fairly naive, our ex-
periments showed it to be effective. The approaches
were applied to SMT systems built with the Moses
toolkit. The translation quality was improved at least
1 BLEU for all 15 cases (filtering 3 different models
with 5 bridge languages). The improvement can be
as much as 2.25 BLEU. It is also clear that the best
translations were not linked to the largest translation
models. We also sketched a simple extension to the
triangulated filtering approach to further reduce the
model size, which allows us to generate reasonable
results with only 1.4% of the entries from the origi-
nal table.
The results varied for different bridge languages
as well as different models. For translation from
Spanish to English, Finnish, the most distinctive
bridge language, appeared to be a more effective
intermediate language which could remove more
phrase pair entries while still improving the transla-
tion quality. Portuguese, the most close to the source
language, always leads to a filtered model that pro-
duces the best translations. The selection of bridge
languages has more obvious impact on the perfor-
mance of our approach when the size of the model
to filter was larger.
The work gave one instance of the general ap-
proach described in Section 3. There are several
potential directions for continuing this work. The
most straightforward one is to use our approaches
with more different languages, such as Chinese and
Arabic, and incompatible corpora, for example, dif-
ferent segments of Europarl. The main focus of such
experiments should be verifying the conclusions we
had in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by European Community
through the EuroMatrix project funded under the
Sixth Framework Programme and the EuroMatrix
Plus project funded under the Seventh Framework
Programme for Research and Technological Devel-
opment.
References
Yu Chen, Andreas Eisele, and Martin Kay. 2008. Im-
proving Statistical Machine Translation Efficiency by
Triangulation. In the 6th International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC ?08),
May.
Trevor Cohn and Mirella Lapata. 2007. Machine
Translation by Triangulation: Making Effective Use
of Multi-Parallel Corpora. In the 45th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Prague, Czech, June.
Karim Filali and Jeff Bilmes. 2005. Leveraging Multi-
ple Languages to Improve Statistical MT Word Align-
ments. In IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and
Understanding (ASRU), Cancun, Mexico, November.
J. Howard Johnson, Joel Martin, George Foster, and
Roland Kuhn. 2007. Improving Translation Qual-
ity by Discarding Most of the Phrasetable. In the
2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and Computational Natural
135
Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), Prague, Czech
Republic, June.
Martin Kay. 1997. The proper place of men and ma-
chines in language translation. Machine Translation,
12(1-2):3?23.
Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open Source
Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation. In the 45th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), Prague, Czech Republic, June.
Philipp Koehn. 2003. Noun Phrase Translation. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Southern California.
Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for
Statistical Machine Translation. In MT Summit 2005.
Shankar Kumar, Franz Josef Och, and Wolfgang
Macherey. 2007. Improving word alignment with
bridge languages. In the 2007 Joint Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing and Computational Natural Language Learning
(EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 42?50, Prague, Czech.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2001. Statistical
multi-source translation. In MT Summit VIII, Santiago
de Compostela, Spain.
Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training
in statistical machine translation. In ACL ?03: Pro-
ceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting on Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 160?167, Mor-
ristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2001. BLEU: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In the 40th Annual
Meeting on Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 311?318, Morristown, NJ, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Michel Simard. 1999. Text-translation alignment: Three
languages are better than two. In EMNLP/VLC-99,
College Park, MD, June.
136
Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th International Conference on Computational Linguistics: Technical Papers,
page 2030, Dublin, Ireland, August 23-29 2014.
Does a Computational Linguist have to be a Linguist?
Martin Kay
Stanford University and Universit?at des Saarlandes
Stanford, CA, USA and Saarbr?ucken, Germany
mjkay@stanford.edu and kay@coli.uni-saarland.de
Invited Speaker Abstract
Early computational linguists supplied much of theoretical basis that the ALPAC report said was needed
for research on the practical problem of machine translation. The result of their efforts turned out to be
more fundamental in that it provided a general theoretical basis for the study of language use as a process,
giving rise eventually to constraint-based grammatical formalisms for syntax, finite-state approaches to
morphology and phonology, and a host of models how speakers might assemble sentences, and hearers
take them apart. Recently, an entirely new enterprise, based on machine learning and big data, has sprung
on the scene and challenged the ALPAC committee?s finding that linguistic processing must have a firm
basis in linguistic theory. In this talk, I will show that the long-term development of linguistic processing
requires linguistic theory, sophisticated statistical manipulation of big data, and a third component which
is not linguistic at all.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence. Page numbers and proceedings footer
are added by the organisers. Licence details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
2030
