Proceedings of the 7th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 18?27,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Building Effective Question Answering Characters
Anton Leuski and Ronakkumar Patel and David Traum
Institute for Creative Technologies
University of Southern California
Marina del Rey, CA, 90292, USA
leuski,ronakkup,traum@ict.usc.edu
Brandon Kennedy
Brandon.Kennedy@usma.edu
Abstract
In this paper, we describe methods for
building and evaluation of limited do-
main question-answering characters. Sev-
eral classification techniques are tested, in-
cluding text classification using support
vector machines, language-model based
retrieval, and cross-language information
retrieval techniques, with the latter having
the highest success rate. We also evalu-
ated the effect of speech recognition errors
on performance with users, finding that re-
trieval is robust until recognition reaches
over 50% WER.
1 Introduction
In the recent Hollywood movie ?iRobot? set in
2035 the main character played by Will Smith is
running an investigation into the death of an old
friend. The detective finds a small device that
projects a holographic image of the deceased. The
device delivers a recorded message and responds
to questions by playing back prerecorded answers.
We are developing virtual characters with similar
capabilities.
Our target applications for these virtual charac-
ters are training, education, and entertainment. For
use in education, such a character should be able
to deliver a message to the student on a specific
topic. It also should be able to support a basic spo-
ken dialog on the subject of the message, e.g., an-
swer questions about the message topic and give
additional explanations. For example, consider a
student learning about an event in a virtual world.
Lets say there is a small circus in a small town and
someone has released all the animals from circus.
A young student plays a role of a reporter to find
out who caused this local havoc. She is out to in-
terrogate a number of witnesses represented by the
virtual characters. It is reasonable to expect that
each conversation is going to be focused solely on
the event of interest and the characters may refuse
to talk about anything else. Each witness may have
a particular and very narrow view into an aspect of
the event, and the student?s success would depend
on what sort of questions she asks and to which
character she addresses them.
Automatic question answering (QA) has been
studied extensively in recent years. For example,
there is a significant body of research done in the
context of the QA track at the Text REtrieval Con-
ference (TREC) (Voorhees, 2003). In contrast to
the TREC scenario where both questions and an-
swers are based on facts and the goal is to provide
the most relevant answer, we focus the answer?s
appropriateness. In our example about an inves-
tigation, an evasive, misleading, or an ?honestly?
wrong answer from a witness character would be
appropriate but might not be relevant. We try
to highlight that distinction by talking about QA
characters as opposed to QA systems or agents.
We expect that a typical simulation would con-
tain quite a few QA characters. We also expect
those characters to have a natural spoken language
interaction with the student. Our technical require-
ments for such a QA character is that it should be
able to understand spoken language. It should be
robust to disfluencies in conversational English. It
should be relatively fast, easy, and inexpensive to
construct without the need for extensive domain
knowledge and dialog management design exper-
tise.
In this paper we describe a QA character by the
name of SGT Blackwell who was originally de-
signed to serve as an information kiosk at an army
18
conference (see Appendix C for a photograph of
the system) (?). We have used SGT Blackwell to
develop our technology for automatic answer se-
lection, conversation management, and system in-
tegration. We are presently using this technology
to create other QA characters.
In the next section we outline the SGT Black-
well system setup. In Section 3 we discuss the
answer selection problem and consider three dif-
ferent algorithms: Support Vector Machines clas-
sifier (SVM), Language Model retrieval (LM), and
Cross-lingual Language Model (CLM) retrieval.
We present the results of off-line experiments
showing that the CLM method performs signifi-
cantly better than the other two techniques in Sec-
tion 4. Section 5 describes a user study of the sys-
tem that uses the CLM approach for answer selec-
tion. Our results show that the approach is very
robust to deviations in wording from expected an-
swers, and speech recognition errors. Finally, we
summarize our results and outline some directions
for future work in Section 6.
2 SGT Blackwell
A user talks to SGT Blackwell using a head-
mounted close capture USB microphone. The
user?s speech is converted into text using an au-
tomatic speech recognition (ASR) system. We
used the Sonic statistical speech recognition en-
gine from the University of Colorado (Pellom,
2001) with acoustic and language models pro-
vided to us by our colleagues at the University of
Southern California (Sethy et al, 2005). The an-
swer selection module analyzes the speech recog-
nition output and selects the appropriate response.
The character can deliver 83 spoken lines rang-
ing from one word to a couple paragraphs long
monologues. There are three kinds of lines SGT
Blackwell can deliver: content, off-topic, and
prompts. The 57 content-focused lines cover the
identity of the character, its origin, its language
and animation technology, its design goals, our
university, the conference setup, and some mis-
cellaneous topics, such as ?what time is it?? and
?where can I get my coffee??
When SGT Blackwell detects a question that
cannot be answered with one of the content-
focused lines, it selects one out of 13 off-topic re-
sponses, (e.g., ?I am not authorized to comment
on that,?) indicating that the user has ventured out
of the allowed conversation domain. In the event
that the user persists in asking the questions for
which the character has no informative response,
the system tries to nudge the user back into the
conversation domain by suggesting a question for
the user to ask: ?You should ask me instead about
my technology.? There are 7 different prompts in
the system.
One topic can be covered by multiple answers,
so asking the same question again often results in
a different response, introducing variety into the
conversation. The user can specifically request
alternative answers by asking something along
the lines of ?do you have anything to add?? or
?anything else?? This is the first of two types
command-like expressions SGT Blackwell under-
stands. The second type is a direct request to re-
peat the previous response, e.g., ?come again?? or
?what was that??
If the user persists on asking the same question
over and over, the character might be forced to re-
peat its answer. It indicates that by preceding the
answer with one of the four ?pre-repeat? lines in-
dicating that incoming response has been heard re-
cently, e.g., ?Let me say this again...?
3 Answer Selection
The main problem with answer selection is uncer-
tainty. There are two sources of uncertainty in
a spoken dialog system: the first is the complex
nature of natural language (including ambigu-
ity, vagueness, underspecification, indirect speech
acts, etc.), making it difficult to compactly char-
acterize the mapping from the text surface form to
the meaning; and the second is the error-prone out-
put from the speech recognition module. One pos-
sible approach to creating a language understand-
ing system is to design a set of rules that select a
response given an input text string (Weizenbaum,
1966). Because of uncertainty this approach can
quickly become intractable for anything more than
the most trivial tasks. An alternative is to cre-
ate an automatic system that uses a set of train-
ing question-answer pairs to learn the appropriate
question-answer matching algorithm (Chu-Carroll
and Carpenter, 1999). We have tried three differ-
ent methods for the latter approach, described in
the rest of this section.
3.1 Text Classification
The answer selection problem can be viewed as a
text classification task. We have a question text
19
as input and a finite set of answers, ? classes, ?
we build a system that selects the most appropriate
class or set of classes for the question. Text classi-
fication has been studied in Information Retrieval
(IR) for several decades (Lewis et al, 1996). The
distinct properties of our setup are (1) a very small
size of the text, ? the questions are very short, and
(2) the large number of classes, e.g, 60 responses
for SGT Blackwell.
An answer defines a class. The questions corre-
sponding to the answer are represented as vectors
of term features. We tokenized the questions and
stemmed using the KStem algorithm (Krovetz,
1993). We used a tf ? idf weighting scheme to
assign values to the individual term features (Al-
lan et al, 1998). Finally, we trained a multi-class
Support Vector Machines (SVM struct) classifier
with an exponential kernel (Tsochantaridis et al,
2004). We have also experimented with linear
kernel function, various parameter values for the
exponential kernel, and different term weighting
schemes. The reported combination of the ker-
nel and weighting scheme showed the best clas-
sification performance. Such an approach is well-
known in the community and has been shown to
work very well in numerous applications (Leuski,
2004). In fact, SVM is generally considered to be
one of the best performing methods for text clas-
sification. We believe it provides us with a very
strong baseline.
3.2 Answer Retrieval
The answer selection problem can also be viewed
as an information retrieval problem. We have a
set of answers which we can call documents in ac-
cordance with the information retrieval terminol-
ogy. Let the question be the query, we compare
the query to each document in the collection and
return the most appropriate set of documents.
Presently the best performing IR techniques
are based on the concept of Language Model-
ing (Ponte and Croft, 1997). The main strategy
is to view both a query and a document as samples
from some probability distributions over the words
in the vocabulary (i.e., language models) and com-
pare those distributions. These probability distri-
butions rarely can be computed directly. The ?art?
of the field is to estimate the language models as
accurately as possible given observed queries and
documents.
Let Q = q1...qm be the question that is re-
ceived by the system, RQ is the set of all the an-
swers appropriate to that question, and P (w|RQ)
is the probability that a word randomly sampled
from an appropriate answer would be the word w.
The language model of Q is the set of probabili-
ties P (w|RQ) for every word in the vocabulary. If
we knew the answer set for that question, we can
easily estimate the model. Unfortunately, we only
know the question and not the answer set RQ. We
approximate the language model with the condi-
tional distribution:
P (w|RQ) ? P (w|Q) =
P (w, q1, ..., qm)
P (q1, ..., qm)
(1)
The next step is to calculate the joint probabil-
ity of observing a string: P (W ) = P (w1, ..., wn).
Different methods for estimating P (W ) have been
suggested starting with simple unigram approach
where the occurrences of individual words are as-
sumed independent from each other: P (W ) =
?n
i=1 P (wi). Other approaches include Proba-
bilistic Latent Semantic Indexing (PLSI) (Hoff-
man, 1999) and Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA) (Blei et al, 2003). The main goal of these
different estimations is to model the interdepen-
dencies that exist in the text and make the esti-
mation feasible given the finite amount of training
data.
In this paper we adapt an approach suggested
by Lavrenko (Lavrenko, 2004). He assumed that
all the word dependencies are defined by a vector
of possibly unknown parameters on the language
model. Using the de Finetti?s representation the-
orem and kernel-based probability estimations, he
derived the following estimate for the query lan-
guage model:
P (w|Q) =
?
s?S pis(w)
?m
i=1 pis(qi)
?
s
?m
i=1 pis(qi)
(2)
Here we sum over all training strings s ? S,
where S is the set of training strings. pis(w) is the
probability of observing word w in the string s,
which can be estimated directly from the training
data. Generally the unigram maximum likelihood
estimator is used with some smoothing factor:
pis(w) = ?pi ?
#(w, s)
|s|
+ (1? ?pi) ?
?
s #(w, s)
?
s |s| (3)
20
where #(w, s) is the number of times word w ap-
pears in string s, |s| is the length of the string s,
we sum over all training strings s ? S, and the
constant ?pi is the tunable parameter that can be
determined from training data.
We know all the possible answers, so the answer
language model P (w|A) can be estimated from
the data:
P (w|A) = piA(w) (4)
3.3 Ranking criteria
To compare two language models we use the
Kullback-Leibler divergence D(pq||pa) defined as
D(pq||pa) =
?
w?V
P (w|Q) log
P (w|Q)
P (w|A)
(5)
which can be interpreted as the relative entropy be-
tween two distributions. Note that the Kullback-
Leibler divergence is a dissimilarity measure, we
use ?D(pq||pa) to rank the answers.
So far we have assumed that both questions
and answers use the same vocabulary and have
the same a priori language models. Clearly, it is
not the case. For example, consider the follow-
ing exchange: ?what happened here?? ? ?well,
maam, someone released the animals this morn-
ing.? While the answer is likely to be very appro-
priate to the question, there is no word overlap be-
tween these sentences. This is an example of what
is known in information retrieval as vocabulary
mismatch between the query and the documents.
In a typical retrieval scenario a query is assumed
to look like a part of a document. We cannot make
the same assumption about the questions because
of the language rules: e.g., ?what?, ?where?, and
?why? are likely to appear much more often in
questions than in answers. Additionally, a typi-
cal document is much larger than any of our an-
swers and has a higher probability to have words
in common with the query. Finally, a typical re-
trieval scenario is totally context-free and a user is
encouraged to specify her information need as ac-
curately as possible. In a dialog, a portion of the
information is assumed to be well-known to the
participants and remains un-verbalized leading to
sometimes brief questions and answers.
We believe this vocabulary mismatch to be so
significant that we view the participants as speak-
ing two different ?languages?: a language of ques-
tions and a language of answers. We will model
the problem as a cross-lingual information task,
where one has a query in one language and wishes
to retrieve documents in another language. There
are two ways we can solve it: we can translate the
answers into the question language by building a
representation for each answer using the question
vocabulary or we can build question representa-
tions in the answer language.
3.4 Question domain
We create an answer representation in the ques-
tion vocabulary by merging together all the train-
ing questions that are associated with the answer
into one string: a pseudo-answer. We use equa-
tions 5, 2, 3, and 4 to compare and rank the
pseudo-answers. Note that in equation 2 s iterates
over the set of all pseudo-answers.
3.5 Answer domain
Let us look at the question language model
P (w|Q) again, but now we will take into account
that w and Q are from different vocabularies and
have potentially different distributions:
P (w|Q) =
?
s ?As(w)
?m
i=1 piQs(qi)
?
s
?m
i=1 piQs(qi)
(6)
Here s iterates over the training set of question-
answer pairs {Qs, As} and ?x(w) is the experi-
mental probability distribution on the answer vo-
cabulary given by the expression similar to equa-
tion 3:
?x(w) = ??
#(w, x)
|x|
+ (1? ??)
?
s #(w, x)
?
s |x|
and the answer language model P (w|A) can be
estimated from the data as
P (w|A) = ?A(w)
4 Algorithm comparison
We have a collection of questions for SGT Black-
well each linked to a set of appropriate responses.
Our script writer defined the first question or two
for each answer. We expanded the set by a) para-
phrasing the initial questions and b) collecting
questions from users by simulating the final sys-
tem in a Wizard of Oz study (WOZ). There are
1,261 questions in the collection linked to 72 an-
swers (57 content answers, 13 off-topic responses,
and 2 command classes, see Section 2). For this
21
study we considered all our off-topic responses
equally appropriate to an off-topic question and
we collapsed all the corresponding responses into
one class. Thus we have 60 response classes.
We divided our collection of questions into
training and testing subsets following the 10-fold
cross-validation schema. The SVM system was
trained to classify test questions into one of the 60
classes.
Both retrieval techniques produce a ranked list
of candidate answers ordered by the ?D(pq||pa)
score. We only select the answers with scores that
exceed a given threshold ?D(pq||pa) > ? . If the
resulting answer set is empty we classify the ques-
tion as off-topic, i.e., set the candidate answer set
contains to an off-topic response. We determine
the language model smoothing parameters ?s and
the threshold ? on the training data.
We consider two statistics when measuring the
performance of the classification. First, we mea-
sure its accuracy. For each test question the first
response returned by the system, ? the class from
the SVM system or the top ranked candidate an-
swer returned by either LM or CLM methods, ?
is considered to be correct if there is link between
the question and the response. The accuracy is the
proportion of correctly answered questions among
all test questions.
The second statistic is precision. Both LM and
CLM methods may return several candidate an-
swers ranked by their scores. That way a user will
get a different response if she repeats the question.
For example, consider a scenario where the first
response is incorrect. The user repeats her ques-
tion and the system returns a correct response cre-
ating the impression that the QA character simply
did not hear the user correctly the first time. We
want to measure the quality of the ranked list of
candidate answers or the proportion of appropri-
ate answers among all the candidate answers, but
we should also prefer the candidate sets that list all
the correct answers before all the incorrect ones.
A well-known IR technique is to compute aver-
age precision ? for each position in the ranked list
compute the proportion of correct answers among
all preceding answers and average those values.
Table 1 shows the accuracy and average preci-
sion numbers for three answer selection methods
on the SGT Blackwell data set. We observe a sig-
nificant improvement in accuracy in the retrieval
methods over the SVM technique. The differences
shown are statistical significant by t-test with the
cutoff set to 5% (p < 0.05).
We repeated out experiments on QA charac-
ters we are developing for another project. There
we have 7 different characters with various num-
ber of responses. The primary difference with
the SGT Blackwell data is that in the new sce-
nario each question is assigned to one and only
one answer. Table 2 shows the accuracy numbers
for the answer selection techniques on those data
sets. These performance numbers are generally
lower than the corresponding numbers on the SGT
Blackwell collection. We have not yet collected
as many training questions as for SGT Blackwell.
We observe that the retrieval approaches are more
successful for problems with more answer classes
and more training data. The table shows the per-
cent improvement in classification accuracy for
each LM-based approach over the SVM baseline.
The asterisks indicate statistical significance using
a t-test with the cutoff set to 5% (p < 0.05).
5 Effect of ASR
In the second set of experiments for this paper
we studied the question of how robust the CLM
answer selection technique in the SGT Blackwell
system is to the disfluencies of normal conversa-
tional speech and errors of the speech recogni-
tion. We conducted a user study with people in-
terviewing SGT Blackwell and analyzed the re-
sults. Because the original system was meant for
one of three demo ?reporters? to ask SGT Black-
well questions, specialized acoustic models were
used to ensure the highest accuracy for these three
(male) speakers. Consequently, for other speak-
ers (especially female speakers), the error rate was
much higher than for a standard recognizer. This
allowed us to calculate the role of a variety of
speech error rates on classifier performance.
For this experiment, we recruited 20 partici-
pants (14 male, 6 female, ages from 20 to 62)
from our organization who were not members of
this project. All participants spoke English flu-
ently, however the range of their birth languages
included English, Hindi, and Chinese.
After filling out a consent form, participants
were ?introduced? to SGT Blackwell, and demon-
strated the proper technique for asking him ques-
tions (i.e., when and how to activate the micro-
phone and how to adjust the microphone posi-
tion.) Next, the participants were given a scenario
22
SVM LM CLM
accuracy accuracy impr. SVM avg. prec. accuracy impr. SVM avg. prec.
53.13 57.80 8.78 63.88 61.99 16.67 65.24
Table 1: Comparison of three different algorithms for answer selection on SGT Blackwell data. Each
performance number is given in percentages.
number of number of SVM LM CLM
questions answers accuracy accuracy impr. SVM accuracy impr. SVM
1 238 22 44.12 47.06 6.67* 47.90 8.57*
2 120 15 63.33 62.50 -1.32 64.17 1.32
3 150 23 42.67 44.00 3.12* 50.00 17.19*
4 108 18 42.59 44.44 4.35* 50.00 17.39*
5 149 33 32.21 41.35 28.37* 42.86 33.04*
6 39 8 69.23 58.97 -14.81* 66.67 -3.70
7 135 31 42.96 44.19 2.85 50.39 17.28*
average 134 21 48.16 48.93 1.60* 53.14 10.34*
Table 2: Comparison of three different algorithms for answer selection on 7 additional QA characters.
The table shows the number of answers and the number of questions collected for each character. The
accuracy and the improvement over the baseline numbers are given in percentages.
wherein the participant would act as a reporter
about to interview SGT Blackwell. The partici-
pants were then given a list of 10 pre-designated
questions to ask of SGT Blackwell. These ques-
tions were selected from the training data. They
were then instructed to take a few minutes to
write down an additional five questions to ask SGT
Blackwell. Finally they were informed that af-
ter asking the fifteen written down questions, they
would have to spontaneously generate and ask five
additional questions for a total of 20 questions
asked all together. Once the participants had writ-
ten down their fifteen questions, they began the
interview with SGT Blackwell. Upon the com-
pletion of the interview the participants were then
asked a short series of survey questions by the
experimenter about SGT Blackwell and the inter-
view. Finally, participants were given an explana-
tion of the study and then released. Voice record-
ings were made for each interview, as well as the
raw data collected from the answer selection mod-
ule and ASR. This is our first set of question an-
swer pairs, we call it the ASR-QA set.
The voice recordings were later transcribed. We
ran the transcriptions through the CLM answer se-
lection module to generate answers for each ques-
tion. This generated question and answer pairs
based on how the system would have responded
to the participant questions if the speech recogni-
tion was perfect. This is our second set of ques-
tion answer pairs ? the TRS-QA set. Appendix B
shows a sample dialog between a participant and
SGT Blackwell.
Next we used three human raters to judge the
appropriateness of both sets. Using a scale of
1-6 (see Appendix A) each rater judged the ap-
propriateness of SGT Blackwell?s answers to the
questions posed by the participants. We evaluated
the agreement between raters by computing Cron-
bach?s alpha score, which measures consistency in
the data. The alpha score is 0.929 for TRS-QA
and 0.916 for ASR-QA, which indicate high con-
sistency among the raters.
The average appropriateness score for TRS-QA
is 4.83 and 4.56 for ASR-QA. The difference in
the scores is statistically significant according to t-
test with the cutoff set to 5%. It may indicate that
ASR quality has a significant impact on answer
selection.
We computed the Word Error Rate (WER) be-
tween the transcribed question text and the ASR
output. Thus each question-answer pair in the
ASR-QA and TRS-QA data set has a WER score
assigned to it. The average WER score is 37.33%.
We analyzed sensitivity of the appropriateness
score to input errors. Figure 1a and 1b show
plots of the cumulative average appropriateness
score (CAA) as function of WER: for each WER
value t we average appropriateness scores for all
questions-answer pairs with WER score less than
23
(a) pre-designated (b) user-designated
Figure 1: Shows the cumulative average appropriateness score (CAA) of (a) pre-designated and (b)
user-designated question-answer pairs as function of the ASR?s output word error rate. We show the
scores for TRS-QA (dotted black line) and ASR-QA (solid black line). We also show the percentage of
the question-answer pairs with the WER score below a given value (?# ofQA?) as a gray line with the
corresponding values on the right Y axis.
or equal to t.
CAA(t) =
1
|S|
?
p?S
A(p), S = {p|WER(p) ? t}
where p is a question-answer pair, A(p) is the
appropriateness score for p, and WER(p) is the
WER score for p. It is the expected value of the ap-
propriateness score if the ASR WER was at most
t.
Both figures show the CAA values for TRS-
QA (dotted black line) and ASR-QA (solid black
line). Both figures also show the percentage of
the question-answer pairs with the WER score be-
low a given value, i.e., the cumulative distribution
function (CDF) for the WER as a gray line with
the corresponding values depicted on the right Y
axis.
Figure 1a shows these plots for the pre-
designated questions. The values of CAA for
TRS-QA and ASR-QA are approximately the
same between 0 and 60% WER. CAA for ASR-
QA decreases for WER above 60% ? as the input
becomes more and more garbled, it becomes more
difficult for the CLM module to select an appropri-
ate answer. We confirmed this observation by cal-
culating t-test scores at each WER value: the dif-
ferences between CAA(t) scores are statistically
significant for t > 60%. It indicates that until
WER exceeds 60% there is no noticeable effect on
the quality of answer selection, which means that
our answer selection technique is robust relative to
the quality of the input.
Figure 1b shows the same plots for the user-
designated questions. Here the system has to deal
with questions it has never seen before. CAA val-
ues decrease for both TRS-QA and ASR-QA as
WER increases. Both ASR and CLM were trained
on the same data set and out of vocabulary words
that affect ASR performance, affect CLM perfor-
mance as well.
6 Conclusions and future work
In this paper we presented a method for efficient
construction of conversational virtual characters.
These characters accept spoken input from a user,
convert it to text, and select the appropriate re-
sponse using statistical language modeling tech-
niques from cross-lingual information retrieval.
We showed that in this domain the performance
of our answer selection approach significantly ex-
ceeds the performance of a state of the art text clas-
sification method. We also showed that our tech-
nique is very robust to the quality of the input and
can be effectively used with existing speech recog-
nition technology.
Preliminary failure analysis indicates a few di-
rections for improving the system?s quality. First,
we should continue collecting more training data
and extending the question sets.
Second, we could have the system generate a
confidence score for its classification decisions.
Then the answers with a low confidence score can
be replaced with an answer that prompts the user
to rephrase her question. The system would then
24
use the original and the rephrased version to repeat
the answer selection process.
Finally, we observed that a notable percent of
misclassifications results from the user asking a
question that has a strong context dependency on
the previous answer or question. We are presently
looking into incorporating this context informa-
tion into the answer selection process.
Acknowledgments
The project or effort described here has been spon-
sored by the U.S. Army Research, Development,
and Engineering Command (RDECOM). State-
ments and opinions expressed do not necessarily
reflect the position or the policy of the United
States Government, and no official endorsement
should be inferred.
References
James Allan, Jamie Callan, W. Bruce Croft, Lisa
Ballesteros, Donald Byrd, Russell Swan, and Jinxi
Xu. 1998. Inquery does battle with TREC-6. In
Sixth Text REtrieval Conference (TREC-6), pages
169?206, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.
D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. 2003. Latent
dirichlet alocation. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 3:993?1022.
Jennifer Chu-Carroll and Bob Carpenter. 1999.
Vector-based natural language call routing. Journal
of Computational Linguistics, 25(30):361?388.
Sudeep Gandhe, Andrew S. Gordon, and David Traum.
2006. Improving question-answering with linking
dialogues. In Proceedings of the 11th international
conference on Intelligent user interfaces (IUI?06),
pages 369?371, New York, NY, USA. ACM Press.
T. Hoffman. 1999. Probabilistic latent semantic index-
ing. In Proceedings of the 22nd International ACM
SIGIR Conference, pages 50?57.
Robert Krovetz. 1993. Viewing morphology as an in-
ference process. In Proceedings of the 16th Inter-
national ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, pages 191?
202.
Victor Lavrenko. 2004. A Generative Theory of Rele-
vance. Ph.D. thesis, University of Massachusetts at
Amherst.
Anton Leuski. 2004. Email is a stage: discover-
ing people roles from email archives. In Proceed-
ings of 27th annual international ACM SIGIR Con-
ference on Research and Development in Informa-
tion Retrieval (SIGIR?04), pages 502?503, Sheffield,
United Kingdom. ACM Press. NY, USA.
David D. Lewis, Robert E. Schapire, James P. Callan,
and Ron Papka. 1996. Training algorithms for lin-
ear text classifiers. In Proceedings of the 19th Inter-
national ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, pages 298?
306, Zurich, Switzerland.
Bryan Pellom. 2001. Sonic: The university of col-
orado continuous speech recognizer. Technical Re-
port TR-CSLR-2001-01, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO.
Jay M. Ponte and W. Bruce Croft. 1997. Text segmen-
tation by topic. In Proceedings of the First European
Conference on Research and Advanced Technology
for Digital Libraries, pages 120?129.
Abhinav Sethy, Panayiotis Georgiou, and Shrikanth
Narayanan. 2005. Building topic specific language
models from webdata using competitive models. In
Proceedings of EUROSPEECH, Lisbon, Portugal.
Ioannis Tsochantaridis, Thomas Hofmann, Thorsten
Joachims, and Yasemin Altun. 2004. Support vector
machine learning for interdependent and structured
output spaces. In Proceedings of the Twenty-first in-
ternational conference on Machine learning, Banff,
Alberta, Canada.
Ellen M. Voorhees. 2003. Overview of the trec 2003
question answering track. In Proceedings of The
Twelfth Text Retrieval Conference, pages 54?69.
Joseph Weizenbaum. 1966. Eliza?a computer program
for the study of natural language communication be-
tween man and machine. Communications of the
ACM, 9(1):36?45.
25
A Appropriateness grading
Gandhe and his colleagues (Gandhe et al, 2006)
suggested the following grading scheme that we
used in our user evaluation.
Grade Description
1 Response is not related in any way the
question
2 Response contains some discussion
of people or objects mentioned in the
question, but does not really address
the question itself.
3 Response partially addresses the
question, but little or no coherence
between the question and response.
4 Response does mostly address the
question, but with major problems in
the coherence between question and
response; seems like the response is
really addressing a different question
than the one asked.
5 Response does address the question,
but the transition is somewhat awk-
ward.
6 Response answers the question in a
perfectly fluent manner.
Table 3: The question-answer appropriateness
scale.
B Sample dialog
This section presents an example of a participant?s
dialog with SGT Blackwell. We only show spon-
taneous questions asked by the participant. Each
of the participant?s questions (called ?Reporter? in
this transcript) is followed by the ASR output of
that line in brackets. That is what the answer se-
lection module ?heard.? Note that ASR does make
an occasional mistake and the answer selection is
able to recover gracefully until the next to the last
question, where the input was so garbled that only
one correct word got through.
Reporter: Who created you (Who created you)
Blackwell: Tell you the truth, I have spent a lot
of time with the smart folks at ICT, testing
and tweaking. I am about ready to get out
there and train with real soldiers. I am think-
ing first stop is going to be Fort Sill. But my
ultimate goal is to get forward deployed...
Reporter: Why should we spend money on you
(What should we spend money on you)
Blackwell: Why do you need me?! What you
should be saying is ?How did you get alng
without me?? I will show you how to be a
leader, how to make critical decisions under
stress... And I am glad to be here, because I
can help. I know I can. Look... I have one
mission: to make better soldiers, make bet-
ter warfighters. And if I can ... can save one
life... bring one loved one back to his fam-
ily... Well, then, I am definitely worth it. You
be the judge.
Reporter: What?s your value (What?s the value
in)
Blackwell: I can do ?Virtually? anything. I do
mission rehearsals, Urban Combat training,
language training - I speak Farsi, Pashtun and
Arabic. ?Mar Haba shabab! That means how
are you in Arabic.
Reporter: Do you really work or is this just a
demo (G. really worker is this just a demo)
Blackwell: Sorry. That?s outside my AO.
Reporter: How could you be better (How could
you be better)
Blackwell: Stop mumbling. Just kidding. I
didn?t get that.
Reporter: What do you wish you could do
(When you wish you could do)
Blackwell: Career Army. That is what I am
thinking. Just call me a lifer.
Reporter: What kind of people have you trained
(What other people in the turn in)
Blackwell: I teach cultural awareness, function
as a training mentor and can call in the full
range of Joint fires and effects.
Reporter: What?s the hardest part of your job
(He was the hardest are you job)
Blackwell: I am not authorized to comment on
that
Reporter: You have any virtual friends (The uni-
versal friends)
26
Blackwell: Sorry, I can?t hear you
Reporter: Are you hard of hearing (Are you had
a hearing)
Blackwell: I can?t understand you.
C SGT Blackwell
Figure 2: A photograph of the SGT Blackwell sys-
tem setup.
27
