Extraction and Verification of KO-OU Expressions from Large Corpora 
Atsuko kida?,  Eiko Yamamoto?,  Kyoko Kanzaki?,  and  Hitoshi Isahara? 
?The Institute of Behavioral Sciences                       ?Communications Research Laboratory 
2-9 Honmura-cho, Ichigaya, Shinjuku-ku,                 3-5 Hikari-dai, Seika-cho, Souraku-gun, 
Tokyo, 162-0845, Japan                                              Kyoto, 619-0289, Japan 
akida@ibs.or.jp {eiko,kanzaki,isahara}@crl.go.jp
 
 
 
Abstract 
In the Japanese language, as a predicate is 
placed at the end of a sentence, the con-
tent of a sentence cannot be inferred until 
reaching the end. However, when the con-
tent is complicated and the sentence is 
long, people want to know at an earlier 
stage in the sentence whether the content 
is negative, affirmative, or interrogative. 
In Japanese, the grammatical form called 
the KO-OU relation exists. The KO-OU 
relation is a kind of concord. If a KO ele-
ment appears, then an OU element ap-
pears in the latter part of a sentence. It is 
being pointed out that the KO-OU relation 
gives advance notice to the element that 
appears in the latter part of a sentence. In 
this paper, we present the method of ex-
tracting automatically the KO-OU expres-
sion data from large-scale electronic 
corpus and verify the usefulness of the 
KO-OU expression data. 
1 Introduction 
The Japanese language has a grammatical form 
called the KO-OU relation. The KO-OU relation is 
a kind of concord, also referring to a sort of bound 
relation that a KO element appearing in a sentence 
is followed by an OU element in the latter part of 
the same sentence. On the contrary, the cooccur-
rence relation refers to two words appearing in the 
same sentence. 
Because Japanese predicates are usually located 
at the end of sentences, the contents of Japanese 
sentences cannot be decided until reaching the end. 
Furthermore, in Japanese, it is hard to comprehend 
the meaning of the sentence without reading 
through the entire sentence. The KO-OU relation is 
the grammatical form which can be helpful for un-
derstanding the sentence meaning at the early stage. 
While in archaic Japanese, KAKARI-MUSUBI, 
which had morphemic KO-OU relation between 
KAKARI-JOSI1 and the conjugation at the end of a 
sentence, had been used. KAKARI-MUSUBI gave 
advance notice to the elements that would appear 
toward the end of a sentence due to KAKARI-JOSI. 
Today, KAKARI-MUSUBI has dropped out of use. 
However, the KO-OU relation such as "sika-nai 
(only)" or "kessite-nai (never)" is present. In this 
research, we have attempted to collect such ele-
ments to extract KO-OU expression data. In this 
paper, the main points of argument are as follows: 
(1) Method of extracting automatically the KO-OU 
expression data. 
(2) What the KO-OU expression data can be used 
for. 
2 The Previous Works and How to Posi-
tion this Study 
(Ohno, 1993) pointed out that there were expres-
sions that try to give advance notice to whether a 
sentence is affirmative, negative, or interrogative at 
the early stage of a language expression which 
continues timewise. It suggested that there were 
certain adverbs that have replaced KAKARI-JOSI 
in the archaic Japanese words. 
(Masuoka, 1991) described the KO-OU relation 
of sentence elements. According to Masuoka, some 
sentences have the KO-OU expressions as shown 
in Table 1.  
However, this has the following weaknesses. 
The KO and OU elements in a KO-OU relation are 
placed together in the same category, and there is 
                                                          
1 A Japanese particle. 
no description as to the OU element. Furthermore, 
only a limited number of elements are listed. And 
the objectivity of the KO and OU elements is not 
guaranteed. 
The KO-OU expression data is useful as basic 
data to dissolve ambiguity in parsing and to decide 
on the modification relation. However, first of all, 
it is necessary for the data to have a certain length 
for being useful basic data. Secondly, it also needs 
to be objective. Therefore, we have attempted to 
extract KO-OU relations automatically from large-
scale corpus. 
 
Table 1 Masuoka?s KO-OU expression data 
3 Assumed Usage of KO-OU Expression 
Data 
3.1 To Dissolve Ambiguity 
The KO-OU expression data is useful for dissolv-
ing ambiguity of parsing. Furthermore, it is useful 
for deciding the modification relation (Figure 1). 
3.2 Gradual Understanding 
Using the KO-OU expression data will enable the 
reader to guess the end expression midway through 
a sentence. This is because as the KO elements 
appear it is possible to predict the appearance of 
the OU elements (Figure 2). It can be used as a 
basic data for understanding sentences. In addition, 
this technology can be used to guess the point in 
the minutes of a meeting at which the speakers 
change. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 To Dissolve Ambiguity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Gradual Understanding 
 
KO element OU element 
Nee,  oi te-kudasai,  naa 
tabun,  doumo daro-u,  rasii,  you-da 
kessite,  kanarazu-si-mo nai 
conviction  
(If you chew it, you will certainly taste salmon.) 
                                                                          ??? 
 
??????????  ?? ?  ?  ?  ??     ?????  ? 
kamisimereba        kitto    sake  no  aji  ga   suru    ni-chiga-inai 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
??????????  ?? ?  ?  ?  ??     ?????  ? 
kamisimereba        kitto    sake  no  aji  ga   suru    ni-chiga-inai 
 
To Dissolve 
Ambiguity  refer
KO element  OU element    Similarity score   Distance        Meaning 
 
kitto               ni-chigai-nai    0.004726           6.062697       conviction 
kitto               koto-daro-u      0.00418           11.297666       guess 
kitto hazu 0.003722 12.702345 conviction
KO-OU relation data (image) 
(Works that you see at the open seaside should look attractive.) 
 
???  ?? ? ?? ?? ?  ??? ???  ? ?? ?? ?? 
koudaina umibe de miru sakuhin wa   kitto  miryokuteki ni utsuru hazu  da 
 
 
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  ? ?  Gradual Understanding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KO element  OU element    Similarity score   Distance        Meaning 
 
kitto               ni-chigai-nai    0.004726           6.062697       conviction
kitto               koto-daro-u      0.00418           11.297666       guess 
kitto               hazu               0.003722         12.702345     conviction
refer guess ? conviction ? 
 KO-OU relation data (image) 
4 Extraction of KO-OU Expression Data 
4.1 Method 
(Yamamoto and Umemura, 2002) considered the 
estimation of the one-to-many relation between 
entities in corpus. They carried out experiments 
on extracting one-to-many relation of phenomena 
from corpus using complementary similarity 
measure (CSM) which can cope very well with 
inclusion relation of appearance patterns. The KO-
OU relation in this research can be regarded as a 
type of one-to-many relation.  
4.2 Data Used 
In this paper, we dealt with what is called FUKU-
JOSI2, KAKARI-JOSI, and some adverbs shown 
below. We proceeded on the assumption that these 
are the KO elements in the KO-OU relation. For 
our research, we used newspaper articles from the 
Mainichi Shimbun, Nihon Keizai Shimbun, and 
Yomiuri Shimbun issued between 1991 and 2000. 
 
[Target words] 
koso, sika, sae, ha, mo, bakari, nomi, sura, nara, 
kurai, dake, nannte, kessite, osoraku, tabun, zehi, 
marude, mosi, kitto 
 
Figure 3 Process flow 
4.3 Process Flow 
Process flow is shown in Figure 3. 
(1) We calculated the similarity measure using 
CSM for newspaper articles data that had been 
morphologically analyzed with ChaSen3. 
(2) We extracted pairs containing the target words 
from the results of similarity measure calculation. 
                                                          
2 A Japanese particle. 
3 Morphological Analyzer ChaSen. See http://chasen.aist-
nara.ac.jp/. 
(3) Out of the pairs in (2), we extracted words that 
appeared in the order of KO and OU elements. 
(We judge the pairs based on this word order.) 
(4) We carried out judgment based on reliability. 
As a result of this process, we obtained 14 pairs 
of data which had "kesshite" as KO element, 16 
which had "sae," and 23 which had "wa." Data of 
approximately 20 pairs was obtained per target 
word.  
5 Verification of KO-OU Expression 
Data 
5.1 Necessity to Give Meaning/Information 
If the KO-OU expression data is used for gradual 
understanding of sentences, it was necessary for 
the data to be given meaning/information. When 
the KO element appears, it will be possible to suf-
ficiently grasp or guess the contents of a sentence 
by referring the KO-OU expression data (Figure2). 
However it is difficult to give mean-
ing/information using the data obtained from the 
process in Chapter 4 because the data is broken 
down into each morpheme by the morphological 
analysis, and each element is too short.  
In Japanese sentences, there are many cases in 
which continuation of a particle and an auxiliary 
verb builds a predicate. This continuation plays an 
important role in determining the event of the sen-
tence. Particles and auxiliary verbs are functional 
words. Therefore, it is not possible to determine 
the meaning of some of the particles and auxiliary 
verbs when they appeared independently. Fur-
thermore, there are some cases in which they 
change their meaning when paired with another 
word.  
Table 2 shows the OU elements obtained pursu-
ant to the procedure in Chapter 4 for KO element 
"kitto". "Da" listed in Table 2 has an assertive 
meaning when used in a sentence like "kyou wa 
ame da . (It is raining today.)" On the other hand, it 
has an inferential meaning in the context of "asu 
wa hareru daro-u . (It should be fine tomorrow.)" In 
addition, although "nai" is a negative auxiliary 
verb, when it is paired as in "ka-mo-shire-nai (may 
be)" and "chigai-nai (must be)," the negative mean-
ing disappears. And the overall pairing stands for 
guess and conviction. 
 
 
morphologically  
analyzed data
(1) Calculate similarity 
KO-OU expression data
(2) Extract pairs 
(3) Judgment based on word
(4) Judgment based on reliability. 
Table 2  KO-OU expression data 
KO element OU element KO element OU element 
Kitto u (auxiliary) kitto yo (particle) 
kitto da (auxiliary) kitto chigai (noun) 
kitto to (particle) kitto ka (particle) 
kitto omou (verb) kitto Ne (particle) 
kitto nai (auxiliary) kitto you (noun) 
kitto hazu (noun) : : 
5.2 Verification of OU Element Using 
"Kitto" 
In this section, we carry out an analytical example 
using OU element for KO element "kitto (cer-
tainly)." We can classify the OU elements obtained 
from the procedure in Chapter 4, as follows: 
(a) It can be an OU element by itself,  
(b) It can become an OU element when paired 
with others,  
(c) It does not have the possibility of becoming an 
OU element. 
Words of (c) were not found in the OU ele-
ments obtained for KO element "kitto." In the fol-
lowing, we will describe the details on (a) and (b). 
 (a) OU element by itself 
Out of the OU elements for KO element "kitto" in 
Table 2, "hazu" can be an OU element by itself. 
 
[1] koudaina umibe de miru sakuhin wa kitto miryokuteki 
ni utsuru hazu da . 
(Works that you see at the open seaside should look attractive.) 
 
This is the only sentence with an independent 
OU element for "kitto" in the data obtained from 
the process in Chapter 4. The same can be said of 
data for KO elements other than "kitto." Because 
of morphological analysis, the row of letters has 
been shortened. As a result, there are few ele-
ments that can be regarded as an OU element by 
itself. And just looking at this element does not 
determine the meaning. 
 (b) OU element when paired with others 
When "chigai" is paired with "ni" and "nai" to 
make "ni-chigai-nai (must be)," it becomes an OU 
element. Similarly, pairing "da" with "u" results in 
an OU element "daro-u (perhaps)." "Da" is the 
original form of "daro" and becomes "daro-u" 
when paired with "u." 
 
[2] kitto kintyou suru daro-u . 
(It is certain that one will be nervous.) 
[3] kamisimereba , kitto sake no aji ga suru ni-chiga-inai . 
(If you chew it, you will certainly taste salmon.) 
 
If we look over the entire pairing shown above, 
we can give meaning to such guess and conviction. 
6 Questions for the Future 
As we described in Chapter 5, it is necessary to 
pair multiple elements before giving mean-
ing/information. We currently persuade the issue 
of automatic generation of pairing multiple ele-
ments. Now, we are carrying out experiments on 
calculating the similarity measure of pairing of 
elements. These will give us pairing of automati-
cally generated elements and the similarity meas-
ure of the pairings. This should be useful data for 
resolving ambiguity (Figure 1).  
7 Conclusion 
This paper presented the process of extracting 
KO-OU expression data using CSM and the use-
fulness of the extracted KO-OU expression data. 
We are planning to report on the findings of ex-
periments on automatic generation of OU ele-
ments pairings.  
 
Acknowledgments To compile this paper, we used 
newspaper articles from The Mainichi Newspapers, 
The Yomiuri Shimbun, and Nihon Keizai Shimbun.  
We would like to sincerely thank Dr. M. Utiyama 
of the Communications Research Laboratory for allow-
ing us to use a KWIC tool "tea4." 
References 
A.Kida, E.Yamamoto and H.Isahara. 2002. Analysis of 
expression which projects the following elements 
beforehand. IPSJ SIG Notes NL-152, pp.137-143. 
A.Kida, E.Yamamoto, K.Kanzaki and H.Isahara. 2003. 
The key on the syntax which brings forth a concord 
relation. Proceedings of the 9th Annual Meeting of 
the Association for NLP. pp.23-26.  
T.Masuoka. 1991. Grammar of modality. Kurosio-
syuppan. 
S.Ohno. 1993. Research of a KAKARI-MUSUBI. Iwa-
nami-Shoten. 
E.Yamamoto and K.Umemura. 2002. A similarity 
Measure for Estimation of One-to-Many Relation-
ship in Corpus. Jourmal of Natural Lamguage Proc-
essing. Vol.9 No.2. pp.45-75. 
                                                          
4 See http://www2.crl.go.jp/jt/a132/members/mutiyama/ 
software.html. 
