POS-Tagger for English-Vietnamese Bilingual Corpus 
 
Dinh Dien 
Information Technology Faculty of  
Vietnam National University of HCMC, 
20/C2 Hoang Hoa Tham, Ward 12, 
Tan Binh Dist., HCM City, Vietnam 
ddien@saigonnet.vn 
Hoang Kiem 
Center of Information Technology 
Development of 
Vietnam National University of HCMC,  
227 Nguyen Van Cu, District 5, HCM City, 
hkiem@citd.edu.vn 
 
 
Abstract 
Corpus-based Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
tasks for such popular languages as English, French, 
etc. have been well studied with satisfactory 
achievements. In contrast, corpus-based NLP tasks for 
unpopular languages (e.g. Vietnamese) are at a 
deadlock due to absence of annotated training data for 
these languages. Furthermore, hand-annotation of even 
reasonably well-determined features such as part-of-
speech (POS) tags has proved to be labor intensive and 
costly. In this paper, we suggest a solution to partially 
overcome the annotated resource shortage in 
Vietnamese by building a POS-tagger for an 
automatically word-aligned English-Vietnamese 
parallel Corpus (named EVC). This POS-tagger made 
use of the Transformation-Based Learning (or TBL) 
method to bootstrap the POS-annotation results of the 
English POS-tagger by exploiting the POS-information 
of the corresponding Vietnamese words via their word-
alignments in EVC. Then, we directly project POS-
annotations from English side to Vietnamese via 
available word alignments. This POS-annotated 
Vietnamese corpus will be manually corrected to 
become an annotated training data for Vietnamese NLP 
tasks such as POS-tagger, Phrase-Chunker, Parser, 
Word-Sense Disambiguator, etc. 
1 Introduction 
POS-tagging is assigning to each word of a text the 
proper POS tag in its context of appearance. Although, 
each word can be classified into various POS-tags, in a 
defined context,  it can only be attributed with a definite 
POS. As an example, in this sentence: ?I can can a 
can?, the POS-tagger must be able to perform the 
following: ?IPRO canAUX canV aDET canN?. 
In order to proceed with POS-tagging, such various 
methods as  Hidden Markov Models (HMM); Memory-
based models (Daelemans, 1996); Transformation-
based Learning (TBL) (Brill, 1995); Maximum 
Entropy; decision trees (Schmid, 1994a);  Neural 
network (Schmid, 1994b); and so on can be used. In 
which, the methods based on machine learning in 
general and TBL in particular prove effective with 
much popularity at present.  
To achieve good results, the abovementioned 
methods must be equipped with exactly annotated 
training corpora. Such training corpora for popular 
languages (e.g. English, French, etc.) are available (e.g. 
Penn Tree Bank, SUSANNE, etc.). Unfortunately, so 
far, there has been no such annotated training data 
available for Vietnamese POS-taggers. Furthermore, 
building manually annotated training data is very 
expensive (for example, Penn Tree Bank was invested 
over 1 million dollars and many person-years). To 
overcome this drawback, this paper will present a 
solution to indirectly build such an annotated training 
corpus for Vietnamese by taking advantages of 
available English-Vietnamese bilingual corpus named 
EVC (Dinh Dien, 2001b). This EVC has been 
automatically word-aligned (Dinh Dien et al, 2002a). 
Our approach in this work is to use a bootstrapped 
POS tagger for English  to annotate the English side of 
a word-aligned parallel corpus, then directly project the 
tag annotations to the second language (Vietnamese) 
via existing word-alignments (Yarowsky and Ngai, 
2001). In this work, we made use of the TBL method 
and SUSANNE training corpus to train our English 
POS-tagger. The remains of this paper is as follows: 
? POS-Tagging by TBL method:  introducing to 
original TBL, improved fTBL, traditional English 
POS-Tagger by TBL.  
? English-Vietnamese bilingual Corpus (EVC): 
resources of EVC, word-alignment of EVC. 
? Bootstrapping English-POS-Tagger: bootstrapping 
English POS-Tagger by the POS-tag of 
corresponding Vietnamese words. Its evaluation 
? Projecting English POS-tag annotations to 
Vietnamese side. Its evaluation. 
? Conclusion:  conclusions, limitations and future 
developments. 
2 POS-Tagging by TBL method 
The Transformation-Based Learning (or TBL)  was 
proposed by Eric Brill in 1993 in his doctoral 
dissertation (Brill, 1993) on the foundation of structural 
linguistics of Z.S.Harris. TBL has been applied with 
success in various natural language processing (mainly 
the tasks of classification). In 2001, Radu Florian and 
Grace Ngai proposed the fast Transformation-Based 
Learning (or fTBL) (Florian and Ngai, 2001a) to 
improve the learning speed of TBL without affecting 
the accuracy of the original algorithm.  
The central idea of TBL is to start with some 
simple (or sophisticated) solution to the problem (called 
baseline tagging), and step-by-step apply optimal 
transformation rules (which are extracted from a 
annotated training corpus at each step) to improve 
(change from incorrect tags into correct ones) the 
problem. The algorithm stops when no more optimal 
transformation rule is selected or data is exhausted. The 
optimal transformation rule is the one which results in 
the largest benefit (repairs incorrect tags into correct 
tags as much as possible). 
A striking particularity of TBL in comparison with 
other learning methods is perceptive and symbolic: the 
linguists are able to observe, intervene in all the 
learning, implementing processes as well as the 
intermediary and final results. Besides, TBL allows the 
inheritance of the tagging results of another system 
(considered as the baseline or initial tagging) with the 
correction on that result based on the transformation 
rules learned through the training period. 
TBL is active in conformity with the 
transformational rules in order to change wrong tags 
into right ones. All these rules obey the templates 
specified by human. In these templates, we need to 
regulate the factors affecting the tagging. In order to 
evaluate the optimal transformation rules, TBL needs 
the annotated training corpus (the corpus to which the 
correct tag has been attached, usually referred to as the 
golden corpus) to compare the result of current tagging 
to the correct tag in the training corpus. In the executing 
period, these optimal rules will be used for tagging new 
corpora (in conformity with the sorting order) and these 
new corpora must also be assigned with the baseline 
tags similar to that of the training period. These 
linguistic annotation tags can be morphological ones 
(sentence boundary, word boundary), POS tags, 
syntactical tags (phrase chunker), sense tags, 
grammatical relation tags, etc. 
POS-tagging was the first application of TBL and 
the most popular and extended to various languages 
(e.g. Korean, Spanish, German, etc.) (Curran, 1999). 
The approach of TBL POS-tagger is simple but 
effective and it reaches the accuracy competitive with 
other powerful POS-taggers. The TBL algorithm for 
POS-tagger can be briefly described under two periods 
as follows: 
* The training period: 
? Starting with the annotated training corpus (or 
called golden corpus, which has been assigned 
with correct POS tag annotations), TBL copies this 
golden corpus into a new unannotated corpus 
(called current corpus, which is removed POS tag 
annotations). 
? TBL assigns an inital POS-tag to each word in 
corpus. This initial tag is the most likely tag for a 
word if the word is known and is guessed based 
upon properties of the word if the word is not 
known.  
? TBL applies each instance of each candidate rule 
(following the format of templates designed by 
human beings) in the current corpus. These rules 
change the POS tags of words based upon the 
contexts they appear in. TBL evaluates the result of 
applying that candidate rule by comparing the 
current result of POS-tag annotations with that of 
the golden corpus in order to choose the best one 
which has highest mark. These best rules are 
repeatedly extracted until there is no more optimal 
rule (its mark isn?t higher than a preset threshold). 
These optimal rules create an ordered sequence. 
* The executing period: 
? Starting with the new unannotated text, TBL 
assigns an inital POS-tag to each word in text in a 
way similar to that of the training period. 
? The sequence of optimal rules (extracted from 
training period) are applied, which change the POS 
tag annotations based upon the contexts they 
appear in. These rules are applied deterministically 
in the order they appear in the sequence. 
In addition to the above-mentioned TBL algorithm 
that is applied in the supervised POS-tagger, Brill 
(1997) also presented an unsupervised POS-tagger that 
is trained on unannotated corpora. The accuracy of 
unsupervised POS-tagger was reported lower than that 
of supervised POS-tagger. 
Because the goal of our work is to build a POS-tag 
annotated training data for Vietnamese, we need an 
annotated corpus with as high as possible accuracy. So, 
we will concentrate on the supervised POS-tagger only. 
For full details of TBL and FTBL, please refer to 
Eric Brill (1993, 1995) and Radu Florian and Grace 
Ngai (2001a). 
 
3 English ? Vietnamese Bilingual Corpus 
The bilingual corpus that needs POS-tagging in this 
paper is named EVC (English ? Vietnamese Corpus). 
This corpus is collected from many different resources 
of bilingual texts (such as books, dictionaries, corpora, 
etc.) in selected fields such as Science, Technology, 
daily conversation (see table 1). After collecting 
bilingual texts from different resources, this parallel 
corpus has been normalized their form (text-only), tone 
marks (diacritics), character code of Vietnam (TCVN-
3), character font (VN-Times), etc. Next, this corpus 
has been sentence aligned and checked spell semi-
automatically. An example of unannotated EVC as the 
following: 
*D02:01323: Jet planes fly about nine miles high. 
+D02:01323: C?c phi c? ph?n l?c bay cao kho?ng 
ch?n d?m. 
Where, the codes at the beginning of each line refer 
to the corresponding sentence in the EVC corpus. For 
full details of building this EVC corpus (e.g. collecting, 
normalizing, sentence alignment, spelling checker, 
etc.), please refer to Dinh Dien (2001b). 
Next, this bilingual corpus has been automatically 
word aligned by a hybrid model combining the 
semantic class-based model with the GIZA++ model. 
An example of the word-alignment result is as in figure 
1 below. The accuracy of word-alignment of this 
parallel corpus has been reported approximately 87% in 
(Dinh Dien et al, 2002b). For full details of word 
alignment of this EVC corpus (precision, recall, 
coverage, etc.), please refer to (Dinh Dien et al, 
2002a). 
The result of this word-aligned parallel corpus has 
been used in various Vietnamese NLP tasks, such as in 
training the Vietnamese word segmenter (Dinh Dien et 
al., 2001a), word sense disambiguation (Dinh Dien, 
2002b), etc. 
Remarkably, this EVC includes the  SUSANNE 
corpus (Sampson, 1995) ? a  golden corpus has been 
manually annotated such necessary English linguistic  
annotations as lemma, POS tags, chunking tags, 
syntactic trees, etc.  This English corpus has been 
translated into Vietnamese by English teachers of 
Foreign Language Department of Vietnam University 
of HCM City. In this paper, we will make use of this 
valuable annotated corpus as the training corpus for our 
bootstrapped English POS-tagger. 
 
No. Resources The number 
of pairs of 
sentences  
Number of 
English 
words 
Number of  
Vietnamese 
morpho-words 
Length 
(English 
words) 
Percent 
(words/
EVC) 
1. Computer books 9,475 165,042 239,984 17.42 7.67
2. LLOCE dictionary 33,078 312,655 410,760 9.45 14.53
3. EV bilingual dictionaries 174,906 1,110,003 1,460,010 6.35 51.58
4. SUSANNE corpus 6,269 131,500 181,781 20.98 6.11
5. Electronics books 12,120 226,953 297,920      18.73 10.55
6. Children?s Encyclopedia 4,953 79,927 101,023 16.14 3.71
7. Other books 9,210 126,060 160,585 13.69 5.86
 Total 250,011 2,152,140 2,852,063 8.59 100%
Table 1. Resources of EVC corpus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. An example of a word-aligned pair of sentences in EVC corpus
Jet planes fly about nine miles high 
Ca?c phi c? pha?n l??c bay cao khoa?ng ch?n da?m
4 Our Bootstrapped English POS-Tagger 
So far, existing POS-taggers for  (mono-lingual) 
English have been well developed with satisfactory 
achievements and it is very difficult (it is nearly 
impossible for us) to improve their results. Actually, 
those existing advanced POS-taggers have exhaustively 
exploited all linguistic information in English texts and 
there is no way for us to improve English POS-tagger in 
case of such a monolingual English texts. By contrast, 
in the bilingual texts, we are able to make use of the 
second language?s linguistic information in order to 
improve the POS-tag annotations of the first language. 
Our solution is motivated by I.Dagan, I.Alon and 
S.Ulrike (1991); W.Gale, K.Church and D.Yarowsky 
(1992). They proposed the use of bilingual corpora to 
avoid hand-tagging of training data. Their premise is 
that ?different senses of a given word often translate 
differently in another language (for example, pen in 
English is stylo in French for its writing implement 
sense, and enclos for its enclosure sense). By using a 
parallel aligned corpus, the translation of each 
occurrence of a word such as pen can be used to 
automatically determine its sense?. This remark is not 
only true for word sense but also for POS-tag and it is 
more exact in such typologically different languages as 
English vs. Vietnamese.  
In fact, POS-tag annotations of English words as 
well as Vietnamese words are often ambiguous but they 
are not often exactly the same (table 4). For example, 
?can? in English may be ?Aux? for ability sense, ?V? 
for to make a container sense, and ?N? for a container 
sense and there is hardly existing POS-tagger which can 
tag POS for that word ?can? exactly in all different 
contexts. Nevertheless, if that ?can? in English is 
already word-aligned with a corresponding Vietnamese 
word, it will be POS-disambiguated easily by 
Vietnamese word? s POS-tags. For example, if ?can? is 
aligned with ?c? th??, it must be Auxiliary ; if it is 
aligned with ???ng h?p? then it must be a Verb, and if 
it is aligned with ?c?i h?p? then it must be a Noun.  
However, not that all Vietnamese POS-tag 
information is useful and deterministic. The big 
question here is when and how we make use of the 
Vietnamese POS-tag information? Our answer is to 
have this English POS-tagger trained by TBL method 
(section 2) with the SUSANNE training corpus (section 
3). After training, we will extract an ordered sequence 
of optimal transformation rules. We will use these rules 
to improve an existing English POS-tagger (as baseline 
tagger)  for tagging words of the English side in the 
word-aligned EVC corpus. This English POS-tagging 
result will be projected to Vietnamese side via word-
alignments in order to form a new Vietnamese training 
corpus annotated with POS-tags. 
4.1 The English POS-Tagger by TBL method 
To make the presentation clearer, we re-use notations in 
the introduction to fnTBL-toolkit of Radu Florian and 
Grace Ngai (2001b) as follows:  
? ? : denotes the space of samples: the set of words 
which need POS-tagging. In English, it is simple to 
recognize the word boundary, but in Vietnamese 
(an isolate language), it is rather complicated. 
Therefore, it has been presented in another work 
(Dinh Dien, 2001a). 
? C : set of possible POS-classifications c (or tagset). 
For example: noun (N), verb (V), adjective (A), ... 
For English, we made use of the Penn TreeBank 
tagset and for Vietnamese tagset, we use the POS-
tagset mapping table (see appendix A). 
? S = ?xC: the space of states: the cross-product 
between the sample space (word) and the 
classification space (tagset), where each point is a 
couple (word, tag). 
? ? : predicate defined on S+ space, which is on a 
sequence of states. Predicate ? follows the 
specified templates of transformation rules. In the 
POS-tagger for English, this predicate only 
consists of English factors which affect the POS-
tagging process, for example U
],[ nmi
iWord
+???
  or  
U
],[ nmi
iTag
+???
 or U
],[ nmi
ji TagWord
+???
? .   
Where, Wordi  is the morphology of the ith word from 
the current word. Positive values of i mean 
preceding (its left side), and negative ones mean 
following (its right side). i ranges within the 
window from ?m to +n. In this English-
Vietnamese bilingual POS-tagger, we add new 
elements including 0VTag  and 0VTag? to those 
predicates. VTag0 is the Vietnamese POS-tag 
corresponding to the current English word via its 
word-alignment. These Vietnamese POS-tags are 
determined by the most frequent tag according to 
the Vietnamese dictionary. 
? A rule r defined as a couple (?, c) which consists 
of predicate ? and tag c. Rule r is written in the 
form ? ? c. This means that the rule r = (?, c) will 
be applied on the sample x if the predicate ? is 
satisfied on it, whereat, x will be changed into a 
new tag c. 
? Giving a state s = (x,c) and rule r = (?, c), then the 
result state r(s), which is gained by applying rule r 
on s, is defined as:   
  
    s if ?(s)=False 
(x, c?) if ?(s)=True r(s) = 
? T : set of training samples, which were assigned 
correct tag. Here we made use of the SUSANNE 
golden corpus (Sampson, 1995) whose POS-tagset 
was converted into the PTB tagset. 
? The score associated with a rule r = (?, c) is usually 
the difference in performance (on the training data) 
that results from applying the rule, as follows: 
? ?
? ?
?=
Ts Ts
sscoresrscorerScore )())(()(  
 
4.2 The TBL algorithm for POS-Tagging 
The TBL algorithm for POS-tagging can be briefly 
described as follows (see the flowchart in figure 2): 
Step 1: Baseline tagging: To initiatize for each sample x 
in SUSANNE training data with its most likely POS-tag 
c. For English, we made use of the available English 
tagger (and parser) of Eugene Charniak (1997) at 
Brown University (version 2001). For Vietnamese, it is 
the set of possible parts-of-speech tags (follow the 
appearance probability order of that part-of-speech in 
dictionary). We call the starting training data as T0. 
Step 2: Considering all the transformations (rules) r to 
the training data Tk in time kth, choose the one with the 
highest Score(r)  and applying  it to the training data to 
obtain new corpus Tk+1. We have: Tk+1 = r(Tk) = { r(s) | 
s?Tk}. If there are no more possible transformation 
rules which satisfies: Score(r) > ?, the algorithm is 
stopped. ? is the threshold, which is preset and adjusted 
according to reality situations. 
Step 3: k = k+1. 
Step 4: Repeat from step 2. 
Step 5: Applying every rule r which is drawn in order 
for new corpus EVC after this corpus has been POS-
tagged with baseline tags similar to those of the training 
period. 
 
* Convergence ability of the algorithm: call ek the 
number of error (the difference between the tagging 
result in conformity with rule r and the correct tag in 
the golden corpus in time kth), we have: ek+1 = ek ? 
Score(r), since Score(r) > 0, so ek+1 < ek with all k, and 
ek?N, so the algorithm will be converged after limited 
steps. 
* Complexity of the algorithm: O(n*t*c) where n: size 
of training set (number of words); t: size of possible 
transformation rule set (number of candidate rules); c: 
size of corpus satisfied rule applying condition (number 
of order satisfied predicate ?). 
4.3 Experiment and Results of Bootstrapped 
English POS-Tagger 
After the training period, this system will extract an 
ordered sequence of optimal transformation rules under 
following format, for examples: 
VBtagNNtagTOtag ??=?=? 001 ))()((
MDtagVBtagMDVTagcanWord ??=?=?= 0000 ))()()""((
VBtagVPBtagMDTagi i ??=?=???? 00 ))()|]1,3[((  
These are intuitive rules and easy to understand by 
human beings. For examples: the 2nd rule will be 
understood as follows: ?if the POS-tag of current word 
is VB (Verb) and  its word-form  is ?can? and its 
corresponding Vietnamese word-tag is MD (Modal), 
then the POS-tag of current word will be changed into 
MD?. 
We have experimented this method on EVC corps 
with the training SUSANNE corpus. To evaluate this 
method, we held-back 6,000-word part of the training 
corpus (which have not been used in the training 
period) and we achieved the POS-tagging results as 
follows: 
Step Correct 
tags 
Incorrect 
Tags 
Precision
Baseline tagging 
(Brown POS-tagger) 
5724 276 95.4% 
TBL-POS-tagger 
(bootstrapping by 
corresponding 
Vietnamese POS-tag) 
5850 150 97.5% 
Table 2. The result of Bootstrapped POS-
tagger for English side in EVC. 
It is thanks to exploiting the information of the 
corresponding Vietnamese POS that the English POS-
tagging results are improved. If we use only available 
English information, it is very difficult for us to 
improve the output of Brown POS-tagger. Despite the 
POS-tagging improvement, the results can hardly said 
to be fully satisfactory due to the following reasons: 
* The result of automatic word-alignment is only 
87% (Dinh Dien et al, 2002a). 
* It is not always true that the use of Vietnamese 
POS-information is effective enough to disambiguate 
the POS of English words (please refer to table 3). 
Through the statistical table 3 below, the 
information of Vietnamese POS-tags can be seen as 
follows:   
- Case 1,2,3,4: no need for any disambiguation of 
English POS-tags. 
- Case 5, 7: Full disambiguation of English POS-tags 
(majority). 
- Case 6, 8, 9: Partial disambiguation of English 
POS-tags by TBL-method. 
 
    1 if c = True(x) 
    0 if c ? True(x) score((x,c)) =  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Flowchart of TBL-algorithm in POS-tagger for EVC corpus 
 
No. English POS-tags  Vietnamese POS-tags Contrast English vs. Vietnamese 
POS-tags 
Percent % 
1. One POS-tag only  One POS-tag only  Two POS-tags are identical 25.2 
2. One POS-tag only One POS-tag only  Two POS-tags are different 1.2 
3. One POS-tag only More than 1 POS-tag One common POS-tag only 5.3 
4. One POS-tag only More than 1 POS-tag No common POS-tag 3.5 
5. More than 1 POS-tag One POS-tag only  One common POS-tag only 50.5 
6. More than 1 POS-tag One POS-tag only  No common POS-tag 2.8 
7. More than 1 POS-tag More than 1 POS-tag One common POS-tag only 6.1 
8. More than 1 POS-tag More than 1 POS-tag More than 1 common POS-tag 4.1 
9. More than 1 POS-tag More than 1 POS-tag No common POS-tag 1.3 
Table 3. Contrast POS-tag of English and Vietnamese in the word-aligned EVC 
word-aligned bilingual 
SUSANNE corpus 
remove POS-tags 
Unannotated corpus 
Brown POS-tagger 
(baseline tagger) 
current annotated  
corpus 
Templates 
candidate  
transformation rules 
Corpus annotated by 
candidate rules 
Compare 
& EvaluateOptimal Rules mark 
>? 
End 
Y
N
Sequence of 
optimal rules
Vietnamese 
corresponding POS-tags
5 Projecting English POS-Tags to 
Vietnamese 
After having English-POS-tag annotations with high 
precision, we proceed to directly project those POS-
tag annotations from English side into Vietnamese 
side. Our solution is motivated by a similar work of 
David Yarowsky and Grace Ngai (2001). This 
projection is based on available word-alignments in 
the automatically word-aligned English-Vietnamese 
parallel corpus.  
Nevertheless, due to typological difference 
between English (an inflected typology) vs. 
Vietnamese (an isolated typology),  direct projection 
is not a simple 1-1 map but it may be a complex m-n 
map:   
? Regarding grammatical meanings, English  
usually makes use of inflectional facilities, such 
as suffixes to express grammatical meanings. For 
example: -s ?plural, -ed ?past, -
ing?continuous, ?s ? possesive case, etc. 
Whilst Vietnamese  often makes use of function 
words, word order facilities. For example: 
?ca?c?? ?nh??ng? ? plural, ??a?? ? past, ??ang? 
? continuous, ?cu?a? ? possessive cases, etc. 
? Regarding lexicalization, some words in English 
must be represented by a phrase in Vietnamese 
and vice-versa. For example: ?cow? and ?ox? in 
English will be rephrased into two words ?bo? 
ca?i? (female one) and ?bo? ???c? (male one) in 
Vietnamese; or ?nghe?? in Vietnamese will be 
rephrased into two words ?buffalo calf? in 
English. 
The result of projecting is as table 4 below. 
In addition, tagsets of two languages are 
different. Due characteristics of each language, we 
must use two different tagset for POS-tagging. 
Regarding English, we made use of available POS-
tagset of PennTreeBank. While in Vietnamese, we 
made use of POS-tagset in the standard Vietnamese 
dictionary of Hoang Phe (1998) and other new tags. 
So, we must have an English-Vietnamese consensus 
tagset map (please refer to Appendix A). 
Eng-
lish 
Jet planes fly about nine miles high
E-tag NN NNS VBP IN CD NNS RB 
VN-
ese 
pha?n 
l??c 
(ca?c) 
phi c? 
bay khoa?ng ch?n da?m cao 
V-tag N N V IN CD N R 
Table 4. An example of English POS-
tagging in parallel corpus EVC 
Regarding evaluation of POS-tag projections, 
because so far, there has been no POS-annotated 
corpus available for Vietnamese, we had to manually 
build a small golden corpus for Vietnamese POS-
tagging with approximately 1000 words for 
evaluating.  The results of Vietnamese POS-tagging 
is as table 5 below: 
Method Correct 
tags 
Incorrect 
Tags 
Precision
Baseline tagging 
(use information 
of POS-tag  in 
dictionary) 
823 177 82.3% 
Projecting from 
English side in 
EVC 
946 54 94.6% 
Table 5. The result of projecting POS-tags 
from English side to Vietnamese in EVC. 
6 Conclusion 
We have just presented the POS-tagging for an 
automatically word-aligned English-Vietnamese 
parallel corpus by POS-tagging English words first 
and then projecting them to Vietnamese side later. 
The English POS-tagging is done in 2 steps: The 
basic tagging step is achieved through the available 
POS-tagger (Brown) and the correction step is 
achieved through the TBL learning method in which 
the information on the corresponding Vietnamese is 
used through available word-alignment in the EVC. 
The result of POS-tagging of Vietnamese in the 
English-Vietnamese bilingual corpus plays a 
meaningful role in the building of the automatic 
training corpus for the Vietnamese processors in need 
of parts of speech (such as Vietnamese POS-taggers, 
Vietnamese parser, etc.). By making use of the 
language typology? s differences and the word-
alignments in bilingual corpus for the mutual 
disambiguation, we are still able to improve the result 
of the English POS-tagging of the currently powerful 
English POS-taggers. 
Currently, we are improving the speed of 
training period by using Fast TBL algorithm instead 
of TBL one.  
In the future, we will improve this serial POS-
tagging to the parallel POS-tagging for both English 
and Vietnamese simultaneously after we obtain the 
exact Vietnamese POS-tags in the parallel corpus of 
SUSANNE. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Prof. Eduard Hovy 
(ISI/USC, USA) for his guidance as external advisor 
on this research. 
References 
E. Brill. 1993. A Corpus-based approach to Language 
Learning, PhD-thesis, Pennsylvania Uni., USA. 
E. Brill. 1995. Transformation-Based Error-Driven 
Learning and Natural Language Processing: A Case 
Study in Part of Speech Tagging. Computational 
Linguistics, 21(4), pp. 543-565. 
E. Brill. 1997. Unsupervised Learning of Disambiguation 
Rules for Part of Speech Tagging. In Natural 
Language Processing Using Very Large Corpora. 
Kluwer Academic Press. 
J. Curran. 1999. Transformation-Based Learning in 
Shallow Natural Language Processing, Honours 
Thesis, Basser Department of Computer Science, 
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. 
E. Charniak. 1997. Statistical parsing with a context-free 
grammar and word statistics, in Proceedings of the 
Fourteenth National Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, AAAI Press/MIT Press, Menlo Park.  
I. Dagan, I.Alon, and S.Ulrike. 1991. Two languages are 
more informative than one. In Proceedings of the 29th 
Annual ACL, Berkeley, CA, pp.130-137. 
W. Daelemans, J. Zavrel,  P. Berck, S. Gillis. 1996. MTB: 
A Memory-Based Part-of-Speech Tagger Generator. 
In Proceedings of 4th Workshop on Very Large 
Corpora, Copenhagen. 
D. Dien, H. Kiem, and N.V. Toan. 2001a. Vietnamese 
Word Segmentation, Proceedings of NLPRS?01 (The 
6th Natural Language Processing  Pacific  Rim 
Symposium), Tokyo, Japan, 11/2001, pp. 749-756. 
D. Dien. 2001b. Building an English-Vietnamese bilingual 
corpus, Master thesis in Comparative Linguistics, 
University of Social Sciences and Humanity of HCM 
City, Vietnam. 
D. Dien, H.Kiem, T.Ngan, X.Quang, Q.Hung, P.Hoi, 
V.Toan.  2002a. Word alignment in English ? 
Vietnamese bilingual corpus, Proceedings of 
EALPIIT?02, Hanoi, Vietnam, 1/2002, pp. 3-11. 
D.Dien, H.Kiem. 2002b. Building a training corpus for 
word sense disambiguation in the English-to-
Vietnamese Machine Translation, Proceedings of 
Workshop on Machine Translation in Asia, COLING-
02, Taiwan, 9/2002, pp. 26-32. 
R. Florian, and G. Ngai. 2001a. Transformation-Based 
Learning in the fast lane, Proceedings of North 
America ACL-2001. 
R. Florian, and G. Ngai. 2001b. Fast Transformation-Based 
Learning Toolkit. Technical Report. 
W. Gale, K.W.Church, and D. Yarowsky. 1992. Using 
bilingual materials to develop word sense 
disambiguation methods. In Proceedings of the Int. 
Conf. on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in 
MT, pp.101-112. 
H. Phe. 1998. T?? ?ie?n tie?ng Vie?t (Vietnamese Dictionary). 
Center of Lexicography.  Da Nang Publisher. 
G. Sampson. 1995.  English for the Computer: The 
SUSANNE Corpus and Analytic Scheme, Clarendon 
Press (Oxford University Press). 
H. Schmid. 1994a. Probabilistic POS Tagging using 
Decision Trees, Proceedings of International 
Conference on New methods in Language Processing, 
Manchester, UK. 
H. Schmid. 1994b. POS Tagging with Neural Networks, 
Proceedings of International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics, Kyoto, Japan, pp.172-176. 
D. Yarowsky and G. Ngai. 2001. Induce, Multilingual POS 
Tagger and NP bracketer via projection on aligned 
corpora, Proceedings of NAACL-01. 
Appendix A. English-Vietnamese consensus 
POS-tagset mapping table 
English POS  Vietnamese 
POS  
CC (Coordinating conjunction) CC 
CD (Cardinal number) CD 
DT (Determiner) DT 
EX (Existential) V 
FW (Foreign word) FW 
IN (Preposition) IN 
JJ (Adjective) A 
JJR (Adjective, comparative) A 
JJS (Adjective, superlative) A 
LS (List item marker) LS 
MD (Modal) MD 
NN (Noun, singular or mass) N 
NNS (Noun, plural) N 
NP (Proper noun, singular) N 
NPS (Proper noun, plural) N 
PDT (Predeterminer) DT 
POS (Possessive ending) ?cu?a? 
PP (Personal pronoun) P 
PP$ (Possessive pronoun) ?cu?a? P 
RB (Adverb) R 
RBR (Adverb, comparative) R 
RBS (Adverb, superlative) R 
RP (Particle) RP 
SYM (Symbol) SYM 
TO (''to'') - 
UH (Interjection) UH 
VB (Verb, base form) V 
VBD (Verb, past tense) V 
VBG (Verb, gerund or present 
participle) 
V 
VBN (Verb, past participle) V 
VBP (Verb, non-3rd person 
singular present) 
V 
VBZ (Verb, 3rd person singular 
present) 
V 
WDT (Whdeterminer) P 
WP (Wh-pronoun) P 
WP$ (Possessive wh-pronoun) ?cu?a? P 
WRB (Wh-adverb) R 
