In: Proceedings of CoNLL-2000 and LLL-2000, pages 167-175, Lisbon, Portugal, 2000. 
Extracting a Domain-Specif ic Ontology from a Corporate Intranet 
J S rg -Uwe K ie tz  and Raphae l  Vo lz  
Swiss Life, Corporate Center, IT Research ~z Development, Zfirich, Switzerland 
uwe. kietz@swisslife, ch, ed. raphael@leahpar, de 
Alexander  Maedche  
AIFB, Univ. Karlsruhe, D-76128 Karlsruhe, Germany 
maedche@aifb,  un i -kar l s ruhe ,  de 
Abst rac t  
This paper describes our actual and ongoing 
work in supporting semi-automatic ontology ac- 
quisition from a corporate intranet of an in- 
surance company. A comprehensive architec- 
ture and a system for semi-automatic ontology 
acquisition supports processing semi-structured 
information (e.g. contained in dictionaries) 
and natural language documents and includ- 
ing existing core ontologies (e.g. GermaNet, 
WordNet). We present a method for acquir- 
ing a application-tailored domain ontology from 
given heterogeneous intranet sources. 
1 In t roduct ion  
1.1 Need for focused  access  to 
knowledge  
The amount of information available to corpo- 
rate employees has grown drastically with the 
use of intranets. Unfortunally this growth of 
available information has made the access to 
useful or needed information ot much easier as 
the access is usually based on keyword searching 
or even browsing. The focused access to knowl- 
edge resources like intranet documents plays a 
vital role in knowledge management and sup- 
ports in general the shifting towards a Semantic 
Web. 
Keyword searching results in a lot of irrele- 
vant information as a term can have different 
meanings in distinct contents, e.g. "Ziirich" as 
the name of a town and as the name of an in- 
surance company. Presently it is quite difficult 
to provide this information to the search engine, 
e.g. exclude all the information about the town 
"Ziirich" without losing information about the 
insurance company "Ziirich'. 
The project On-To Knowledge builds an 
ontology-based tool environment to perform 
knowledge management dealing with large num- 
bers of heterogeneous, distributed and semi- 
structured ocuments as found within large in- 
tranets and the World-Wide Web (Fensel et al, 
2000). In this project ontologies play a key 
role by providing a common understanding of
the domain. Semantically annotated documents 
are accessed using the vocabulary provided by 
a domain-specific ontology. 
Providing the user with an access method 
based on ontological terms instead of keywords 
has several advantages. First, the abstraction 
given by the ontology provides that the user 
does not have to deal with document-specific 
representations. Second, by this abstraction ro- 
bustness towards changes in content and format 
of the accessed ocuments i gained. 
1.2 Semi -automat ic  vs .  manua l  
onto logy const ruct ion  
The required omain-specific ontologies for On- 
To-Knowledge are built manually. Ontolo- 
gies are usually built using tools like OntoEdit 
(Staab and Maedche, 2000) or Protege (Grosso 
et al, 1999). Using such tools has simplified on- 
tology construction. However, the wide-spread 
usage of ontologies is still hindered by the time- 
consuming and expensive manual construction 
task. 
Within On-To-Knowledge our work evalu- 
ates semi-automatic ontology construction from 
texts as an alternative approach to ontology en- 
gineering. Based on the assumption that most 
concepts and conceptual structures of the do- 
main as well the company terminology are de- 
scribed in documents, applying knowledge ac- 
quisition from text for ontology design seems 
to be promising. Therefore a number of pro- 
posals have been made to facilitate ontolog- 
ical engineering through automatic discovery 
167 
from domain data, domain-specific natural an- 
guage texts in particular (cf. (Byrd and Ravin, 
1999; Faure and Nedellec, 1999; Hahn and 
Schnattinger, 1998; Morin, 1999; Resnik, 1993; 
Wiemer-Hastings et al, 1998)). 
The extraction of ontologies from text can 
have additional benefits for On-To-.Knowledge 
as the required semantic annotation of docu- 
ments could be provided as a side effect of the 
extraction process. 
1.3 The approach 
Our approach is based on different heteroge- 
neous sources: First, a generic core ontol- 
ogy is used as a top level structure for the 
domain-specific goal ontology. Second, domain- 
specific concepts are acquired using a dictio- 
nary that contains important corporate terms 
described in natural anguage. Third, we use a 
domain-specific and a general corpus of texts to 
remove concepts that were domain-unspecific. 
This task is accomplished using the heuristic 
that domain-specific concepts are more frequent 
in the domain-specific corpus. Eventually we 
learned relations between concepts by analyz- 
ing the aforementioned intranet documents. We 
used a multi-strategy approach in learning to 
level the specific advantages and drawbacks of 
different learning methods. Several methods 
were applied with the possibility to combine 
their results. 
1.4 Organization 
Section 2 describes the overall architecture of 
the system and explains our notion of ontolo- 
gies. Section 3 discusses the methodology ap- 
plied to acquire a domain-specific ontology. Sec- 
tion 4 highlights the applied learning mecha- 
nisms. Section 5 demonstrates some prelimi- 
nary results. Eventually Section 6 points out 
further directions for our work and acknowl- 
edges other contributors to the work. 
2 Arch i tec ture  
A general architecture for the approach of semi- 
automatic ontology learning from natural an- 
guage has been described in (Maedche and 
Staab, 2000b). 
Our not ion of ontologies is closely asso- 
ciated to the notion in OIL (Horrocks et al, 
2000). From the expressive power it is equiva- 
lent to the CLASSIC-A?Af (Borgida and Patel- 
Schneider, 1994) description logic. By that it 
combines three important aspects provided by 
Description Logics (providing formal semantics 
and efficient reasoning support), frame-based 
systems and web standards. XML is used as 
a serial syntax definition language, describing 
knowledge in terms of concepts and role restric- 
tions (i.e. all- and cardinality-restrictions as in 
the DL ,A?.M). Also, relations can be intro- 
duced as an independent entity whose domain 
and range concepts can be restricted. 
The system comprises of components for 
text management,information extraction, ontol- 
ogy learning, ontology storage, ontology visual- 
isation and manual ontology engineering. 
The text  management& processing com- 
ponent  supports efficient handling and pro- 
cessing of input sources. Multiple sources 
are supported like semi-structured information, 
natural language documents and existing on- 
tologies. 
The  in format ion  ext ract ion  is provided by 
the system SMES (Saaxbriicken Message Ex- 
traction System), a shallow text processor for 
German (cf. (Neumann et al, 2000; Neumann 
et al, 1997)). It performs syntactic analysis 
on natural anguage documents. SMES includes 
shallow parsing mechanisms and processes text 
at different layers: The first step tokenizes text 
and recognizes basic compound structures like 
numbers and dates. Next, the morphological 
structure of words is analyzed using a word stem 
lexicon containing 700.000 word stems. Phrasal 
structures are created in the third step using 
final state transducers that combine the mor- 
phological information. On top of these phrasal 
structures a dependency-based parser parser is 
applied. The results of each step axe annotated 
in XML-tagged text and can be used indepen- 
dently. 
Ontology learning operates on the ex- 
tracted information and is used for three tasks. 
One task is the acquisition of new structures, 
the second task is the evaluation of given struc- 
tures. Eventually this evaluation is used for 
pruning of domain-unspecific concepts. Several 
methods were implemented. 
Pat tern -based  approaches The imple- 
mented heuristic methods are based on regular 
expressions, as the output of the information ex- 
168 
semi-structured information, 
eg domain-specific dictionaries 
natural language 
texts 
Select cor 
(XML tagged) text 
&selected algorithms 
Lexical DB 
Figure 1: Architecture of the Ontology Learning Approach 
traction component is regular. Patterns can be 
used to acquire taxonomic as well as conceptual 
relations. Also a very simple heuristic is used 
to acquire concepts from dictionaries, whereas 
dictionary entries are considered concepts. 
Stat ist ical  approaches We implemented 
several statistical methods. One method 
retrieves concept frequencies from text (cf. 
(Salton, 1988)) and is used for the aforemen- 
tioned pruning of concepts. A second method 
is used to acquire conceptual relations based on 
frequent couplings of concepts. 
Combin ing results is enabled by the im- 
plementation of a common result structure for 
all learning methods. The complex task of 
ontology engineering is fitted better as it is 
possible to combine the results from different 
learning methods. (Michalski and Kaufmann, 
1998) describe that multi-strategy learning ar- 
chitectures upport balancing between advan- 
tages and disadvantages of different learning 
methods. 
Ontology Engineer ing In our approach of 
semi-automatic ontology acquisition extensive 
support for ontology engineering is necessary. 
Manual ontology modeling & visualization is 
provided by the system OntoEdit 1. It allows to 
edit and to browse existing as well as discovered 
ontological structures. 
The acquired ontologies are stored in a re- 
lational database. To maximize portability 
only ANSI-SQL statements are used in the sys- 
tem. All data structures can be serialized into 
files, different formats like our internal XML- 
representation OXML, Frame-Logic (Kifer et 
al., 1995), RDF-Schema (W3C, 1999) and OIL 
(Horrocks et.al., 2000) are supported. An F- 
Logic inference ngine described in further de- 
tail in (Decker, 1998) can be accessed from On- 
1A comprehensive description of the ontology engi- 
neering system OntoEdit and the underlying methodol- 
ogy is given in (Staab and Maedche, 2000) 
169 
toEdit. 
3 Methodo logy  
Parallel to the architecture we developed an on- 
tology acquisition methodology that emphasizes 
the semi-automatic manner of ontology con- 
struction. Figure 2 depicts the cyclic acquisition 
process. 
The cycle starts with the selection of a generic 
core ontology (cf. subsection 4.1). Any large 
generic ontology (like CyC or Dahlgren's ontol- 
ogy), lexical-semantic nets (like WordNet, Ger- 
manet or EuroWordNet) or domain-related on- 
tologies (like TOVE) could start the process. 
After choosing the base ontology the user must 
identify the domain-specific texts that ought to 
be used for the extraction of domain-specific en- 
titles. 
The next step is acquire domain-specific con- 
cept from the selected texts since the base ontol- 
ogy is domain-unspecific. The taxonomic em- 
bedding of all newly acquired concepts must 
also be established. 
These steps enriched 
the ontology with domain-specific concepts, but 
still many domain-unspecific concepts remain. 
The given ontology must be focused to the do- 
main. Therefore all unspecific oncepts must be 
removed from the ontology. Now the conceptual 
structure of the target ontology is established. 
But what about conceptual relations ? In ad- 
dition to the relations provided by the base on- 
tology that survived the focusing step (as their 
domain/range-concepts still exist) new concep- 
tual relations are induced in the next step by 
applying multiple learning methods to the se- 
lected texts. 
The resulting domain-specific ontology can be 
further refined and improved by repeating the 
acquisition cycle. This approach acknowledges 
the evolving nature of domain-specific ontolo- 
gies that have adopt to changes in their domain 
or their application such as described in (Erd- 
mann et al, 2000). 
4 Acqu is i t ion  Process  
4.1 Base Ontology 
GermaNet  We decided to choose a lexical- 
semantic net for the German language, called 
GermaNet (cf. (Hamp and Feldweg, 1997)) 
as our base ontology. GermaNet is the Ger- 
man counterpart to the well known WordNet. 
Presently it builds a lexical semantic network 
for 16.000 German words, where three different 
types of word classes are distinguished: nouns, 
verbs and adjectives. Words are grouped into 
sets of synonyms so called synsets. As in Word- 
Net two kinds of relations are recognized: Lex- 
ical relations that hold between words (like 
antonym) and semantic relations that hold be- 
tween synsets (like meronym). 
Conversion to our  onto logy pr imit ive 
Synsets are regarded as concepts. Synsets are 
converted to concepts if they have at least one 
hypernym or hyponym relation. Some semantic 
relations between synsets are converted to con- 
ceptual relations, as some semantic relations do 
not have the property of being inherited to sub- 
concepts if they hold between superconcepts 2. 
The taxonomy is established using the hy- 
ponym relations. If a synset (transitively) 
points to itself through its hyponym relations, 
the hyponym relation that causes the cycle is 
ignored. Unfortunally there were several cycles 
within the verb classes 3.
Every word in a synset is analyzed by the in- 
formation extraction component to acquire its 
stem. The stem is assigned to the correspond- 
ing concept o get a link to the analyzed texts. 
This link must be unique for each stem, thus 
a l:n relation between a concept and stems is 
established. 
Sometimes the same stem is acquired from 
different synsets. The disambiguation can not 
be done without using the context of the word. 
As we do not have any relations to do the dis- 
ambiguation yet, we introduce a new concept 
that gets the ambiguous stem and make all con- 
flicting synsets ubconcepts of the newly intro- 
duced concepts. The newly introduced concept 
is embedded into the taxonomy as a sub con- 
cept of the deepest common super concept of 
all conflicting synsets. The disambiguation will 
be enabled using the relations between concepts 
identified in the user query. 
2This is one of the essential differences to ontologies, 
where relations must hold for all subconcepts 
3The only correct interpretation f a cycle is to regard 
the synsets contained as synonyms, but this would be 
modelled in a different manner (one synset), therefore 
we consider cycles as bugs (and not existent in the final 
version of GermaNet) 
170 
natural language 
texts 
semi-structured information, 
e,g. domain-specific dictionaries 
Figure 2: Semi-Automatic Ontology Acquisition Process 
4.2 Acquis it ion of concepts 
4.2.1 Get t ing  concepts 
As already mentioned we used a dictionary of 
corporate terms to acquire domain specific on- 
cepts. Figure 3 shows an example. 
A.D.T.  
Automat ic  Debit  Transfer  
Electronic service arising from a debit autho- 
rization of the Yellow Account holder for a re- 
cipient o debit bills that fall due direct from 
the account. 
Cf. also direct debit system. 
Figure 3: An example ntry 
This dictionary is multi-lingual to provide 
that all employees use common translations of 
domain terms. We converted the headwords of 
all German entries to concepts. Some entries 
share descriptions, as shown in the example. 
Those entries are joined and the headwords are 
regarded as synonyms. Some entries show ref- 
erences to other entries (e.g. "direct debit sys- 
tem'" is referenced by "A.D.T.'") we converted 
these links to conceptual relations. 
Again, every headword is analyzed by the in- 
formation extraction component (SMES) to ac- 
quire the word stem. This stem is assigned to 
the newly created concept, if not already exis- 
tent in the ontology. If this stem exists, we need 
to do find out whether or not the dictionary en- 
try describes the same concept as contained in 
the ontology. 
4.2.2 Resolving conflicts 
We apply several heuristics to solve this prob- 
lem automatically. Table 1 shows the applied 
heuristics. In general dictionary entries are con- 
sidered domain-specific and thus more impor- 
tant than existing concepts. The algorithm uses 
the information included within the dictionary 
entry and its description to find out whether the 
entry denotes the existing concept or induces a 
new concept. 
First, the algorithm checks whether the 
conflicting dictionary head word denotes an 
acronym (e.g. ALE is an acronym for unem- 
ployment benefits in German. Unfortunally the 
stem reference contained in the ontology points 
to the concept ale, which is a sub concept of al- 
coholic beverage), in this case the stem reference 
is reassigned to the dictionary concept. 
171 
Propery Automatic 
resolution 
Word is acronym Remove stem reference- 
in ontology 
Dictionary entry has Do not import the en- 
no description try and keep concept in 
ontology 
Dictionary entry and Do not import the en- 
ontology entry have a try and keep concept in 
common super concept ontology 
else ask the user to resolve 
the conflict 
Table 1: Dictionary: Resolution for stem con- 
flicts 
If this doesn't help, the algorithm checks 
whether further information is contained in the 
dictionary description by trying to find the 
super concept using the taxonomy acquisition 
method explained in the next section. If the 
found super concept is also a super concept of 
the concept in the ontology, the dictionary entry 
and the concept in the ontology are considered 
equal. 
If no descriptions are contained in the dictio- 
nary entry and the entry is not an acronym , 
the concept in the ontology is kept. Last but 
not least, if no heuristics could be applied, the 
user is asked to resolve the conflict. 
4.2.3 Getting the taxonomy 
We used a pattern matching method to acquire 
the taxonomic embedding for the newly created 
concepts. The entires are aligned into the tax- 
onomy using their descriptions. Based on the 
extracted syntactic information, several heuris- 
tic patterns for extracting taxonomic relations 
are applied. This works quite well, as the infor- 
mation extraction component supplies regular 
output. 
(Hearst, 1992) motivated the acquisition of 
hyponyms by applying pattern matching to 
text. This approach was also applied in (Morin, 
1999). Our patterns acquire stem references 
from the given texts using backward references 
inside the defined patterns. The stem references 
are used to get the concept contained in the on- 
tology. Patterns can also reference the dictio- 
nary headwords, figure 4 depicts a very success- 
ful pattern. 
Since regular expressions are not easy to read 
Pattern 
1. lexicon entry :: (NP1, NP2, NPi, and / or 
NP~) 
2. for all NPi, 1 <= i <= n hypernym(NPi, lex- 
icon entry) 
Result hypernym("electronic service", 
"A.D.T." ) 
Figure 4: Pattern Definition 
and much testing is required until expressions 
work, a pattern definition workbench was im- 
plemented to be able to document, categorize 
and test the defined patterns. 
4.3 Removal  of concepts 
We motivated the removal of generic concepts 
in section 3. In order to prune domainun-  
specific oncepts, concept frequencies are deter- 
mined from the selected omain-specific docu- 
ments (see (Salton, 1988)). Concept frequencies 
are also determined from a second corpus that 
contains generic documents (as found in refer- 
ence corpora like CELEX). We used the publicly 
available archive of a well-known German ews- 
paper (http://http://www.taz.de/) as generic 
corpus. 
All concept frequencies are propagated to su- 
per concepts, by summing the frequencies ofsub 
concepts. The frequencies of both corpora are 
compared. All existing concepts that are more 
frequent within the domain-specific corpus re- 
main in the ontology. Additionally a minimum 
concept frequency can be defined. All remaining 
concepts must satisfy this minimum frequency. 
Eventually the user can specify that concepts 
acquired from the dictionary (as well as their 
super concepts) must remain in the ontology. 
4.4 Acquisit ion of Conceptual 
Relations 
4.4.1 Statistical approach 
This approach is founded on the idea that fre- 
quent couplings of concepts in sentences can be 
regarded as relevant relations between concepts. 
We adopted an algorithm based on association 
rules (see (Skrikant and Agrawal, 1995)) to find 
frequent correlations between concepts. Lin- 
guistically processed texts as input, where cou- 
pling of concepts within sentences axe retrieved, 
are processed by our algorithm. Consult (Volz, 
2000a; Maedche and Staab, 2000a) for a de- 
172 
tailed description of this approach. 
Two measures denote the statistical data de- 
rived by the algorithm: Support measures the 
quota of a specific coupling within the total 
number of couplings. Confidence denotes the 
part of all couplings supporting both domain 
and range concepts within the number of cou- 
plings that support the same domain concept. 
The retrieved measures are propagated to super 
concepts using the background knowledge pro- 
vided by the taxonomy. This strategy is used to 
emphasize the couplings in higher levels of the 
taxonomy. 
For instance, the linguistic processing may 
find that the word "policy" frequently co-occurs 
with each of the words "policy owner" and "in- 
surance salesman". From this statistical lin- 
guistic data our approach derives correlations 
at the conceptual level, viz. between the con- 
cept Policy and the concepts, PolicyOwner and 
InsuranceSalesman. The discovery algorithm 
determines support and confidence measures for 
the relationships between these three pairs, as 
well as for relationships at higher levels of ab- 
straction, such as between Policy and Person. 
In a final step, the algorithm determines the 
level of abstraction most suited to describe 
the conceptual relationships by pruning appear- 
ingly less adequate ones. Here, the relation be- 
tween Policy and Person may be proposed for 
inclusion in the ontology. 
Results are presented to the user, if the mea- 
sures of a coupling satisfy specific minimum val- 
ues provided by the user. Also, the input struc- 
tures can be restricted to a set of certain con- 
cepts (whereas at least one element of every cou- 
pling must be in the given set) to be able to do 
a more focused way of relation acquisition. 
We have to stress that this method can only 
be used to retrieve suggestions that are pre- 
sented to the user. Manual abour is still needed 
to select and name the relations. To simplify 
user access results are conveniently displayed in 
the common result structure. The correctness 
towards the inheritance property of the taxon- 
omy is automatically determined. 
4.4.2 Pat tern  based approach 
We extended the pattern based approach men- 
tioned above towards the acquisition of named, 
non-taxonomic conceptual relations from text. 
We have defined some patterns on top of the 
information extracted by phrase-level process- 
ing of documents. The name of a relation can 
be assigned using the aforementioned backward 
references within a pattern. In contrast o the 
patterns defined to acquire taxonomic relations 
no dictionary headwords can be assigned. 
5 Resul ts  
We can only present partial results at the mo- 
ment, as our work is still ongoing. We con- 
verted only one part of speech class of the Ger- 
maNet lexical-semantic net. Our version con- 
tained 18509 synsets for the noun class. 18056 
synsets have been converted, as all synsets that 
were not embedded in the taxonomy (by having 
neither super nor sub concepts) were skipped. 
3565 new super concepts were introduced due to 
our disambiguation strategy. Therefore 21621 
concepts were created. 
The acquisition of concepts using the dictio- 
nary led to 1054 new concepts. 62 of the con- 
cepts in the dictionary were already included in 
the ontology. Only 518 concepts remain after 
the acquisition of the taxonomic embedding. 
The learning method finds 679 is-a relations, 
but 161 is-a relations were determined to be 
wrong by empiric user evaluation. Thus 76,29 
percent of all discovered relations were regarded 
correct by the user. Notably 49,14 percent of all 
dictionary entries could be imported automati- 
cMly. 
The evaluation of the acquisition of relations, 
as well as the pruning step is not yet done. Re- 
sults regarding the acquisition of relations using 
our statistical approach in a different domain 
(tourism) have been presented in (Maedche and 
Staab, 2000a). Using a minimum support value 
of 0.04 and a minimum confidence of 0.01 best 
results were reached. 98 relations were discov- 
ered using an ontology that contained 284 con- 
cepts and 88 conceptual relations. 11% of the 
discovered relations were already modeled be- 
fore, thus 13% of the hand-modelled relations 
were discovered by the learning algorithm. 
6 Conc lus ions  & Fur ther  Work  
In this paper we have described our recent and 
ongoing work in semi-automatic ontology acqui- 
sition from a corporate intranet. Based on our 
comprehensive architecture a new approach for 
supporting the overall process of engineering on- 
173 
tologies from text is described. It is mainly 
based on a given core ontology, which is ex- 
tended with domain specific concepts. The re- 
sulting ontology is pruned and restricted to a 
specific application using a corpus-based mech- 
anism for ontology pruning. On top of the on- 
tology two approaches upporting the difficult 
task of determining non-taxonomic conceptual 
relationships are applied. 
In the future much work remains to be done. 
First, several techniques for evaluating the ac- 
quired ontology have to be developed. In our 
scenario we will apply ontology cross compar- 
ison techniques uch as described in (Maedche 
and Staab, 2000a). Additionally, applying the 
ontology on top of the intranet documents (e.g. 
a information retrieval scenario, a semantic doc- 
ument annotation scenario such as described 
in (Erdmann et al, 2000)) will allow us an 
application-specific evaluation of the ontology 
using standard measures uch as precision and 
recall. Second, our approach for multi-strategy 
learning is still in an early stage. We; will have 
to elaborate how the results of different learn- 
ing algorithms will have to be assessed and com- 
bined in the multi-strategy learning set. Never- 
theless, an approach combing different resources 
on which different echniques are applied, seems 
promising for supporting the complex task of 
ontology learning from text. 
Acknowledgements :  This work has been par- 
tially found by the European Union and the 
Swiss Government under the contract-no "BBW 
Nr.99.0174" as part of the European commis- 
sion Research Project "IST-1999-10132" (On- 
to-Knowledge). We thank the DFKI:, language 
technology group, in particular Gfinter Neu- 
mann, who generously supported us in using 
their SMES system. 
References  
A. Borgida and P. Patel-Schneider. 1994. A seman- 
tics and complete algorithm for subsumption i
the CLASSIC description logic. Journal of Arti- 
ficial Intelligence Research, 1:277-308. 
Roy J. Byrd and Yael Ravin. 1999. Identifying and 
extracting relations from text. In NLDB'99 --  
4th International Conference on Applications of 
Natural Language to Information Systems. 
S. Decker. 1998. On domain-specific declara- 
tive knowledge representation a d database lan- 
guages. In Proc. of the 5th Knowledge Repre- 
sentation meets Databases Workshop (KRDB98), 
pages 9.1-9.7. 
M. Erdmann, A. Maedche, H.-P. Schnurr, and Stef- 
fen Staab. 2000. From manual to semi-automatic 
semantic annotation: About ontology-based text 
annotation tools. In P. Buitelaar ~4 K. Hasida 
(eds). Proceedings of the COLING 2000 Workshop 
on Semantic Annotation and Intelligent Content, 
Luxembourg, August. 
David Faure and Claire Nedellec. 1999. Knowledge 
acquisition of predicate-argument structures from 
technical texts using machine learning. In Proc. of 
Current Developments in Knowledge Acquisition, 
EKAW-99. 
D. Fensel, F. van Harmelen, H. Akkermans, 
M. Klein, J. Broekstra, C. Fluyt, J. van der 
Meer, H.-P. Schnurr, R. Studer, J. Davies, 
J. Hughes, U. Krohn, R. Engels, B. Bremdahl, 
F. Ygge, U. Reimer, and I. Horrocks. 2000. On- 
toknowledge: Ontology-based tools for knowledge 
management. In Proceedings of the eBusiness 
and e Work 2000 Conference (EMMSEC 2000), 
Madrid, Spain, To appear October. 
E. Grosso, H. Eriksson, R. W. Fergerson, S. W. 
Tu, and M. M. Musen. 1999. Knowledge mod- 
eling at the millennium - -  the design and evolu- 
tion of Protege-2000. In Proc. the 12th Interna- 
tional Workshop on Knowledge Acquisition, Mod- 
eling and Mangement (KAW'99), Banff, Canada, 
October 1999. 
Udo Hahn and Klemens Schnattinger. 1998. To- 
wards text knowledge ngineering. In AAAI  '98 
- Proceedings of the 15th National Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence. Madison, Wisconsin, July 
26-30, 1998, pages 129-144, Cambridge/Menlo 
Park. MIT Press/AAAI Press. 
B. Hamp and H. Feldweg. 1997. Germanet - a 
lexical-semantic net for german. In Proceedings 
of ACL workshop Automatic Information Extrac- 
tion and Building of Lexical Semantic Resources 
for NLP Applications, Madrid. 
M.A. Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hy- 
ponyms from large text corpora. In Proceedings 
of the 14th International Conference on Compu- 
tational Linguistics. Nantes, France. 
I. Horrocks, D. Fensel, J. Broekstra, S. Decker, 
M. Erdmann, C. Goble, F. van Harmelen, 
M. Klein, S. Staab, and R. Studer. 2000. The 
ontology inference layer oil, on-to-knowledge eu- 
ist-10132 project deliverable no. otk-dl. Techni- 
cal report, Free University Amsterdam, Division 
of Mathematics and Computer Science, Amster- 
dam, NL. 
I. Horrocks et.al. 2000. The ontology inter- 
change language oil: The grease between on- 
tologies. Technical report, Dep. of Computer 
Science, Univ. of Manchester, UK/ Vrije Uni- 
174 
versiteit Amsterdam, NL/ AIdministrator, Ned- 
erland B.V./ AIFB, Univ. of Karlsruhe, DE. 
http://www.cs.vu.nl/-dieter/oil/. 
M. Kifer, G. Lausen, and J. Wu. 1995. Logical foun- 
dations of object-oriented and frame-based lan- 
guages. Journal of the A CM, 42. 
A. Maedche and S. Staab. 2000a. Discovering con- 
ceptual relations from text. In Proceedings of 
ECAI-2000. IOS Press, Amsterdam. 
A. Maedche and S. Staab. 2000b. Semi-automatic 
engineering of ontologies from text. In Proceed- 
ings of the 12th Internal Conference on Software 
and Knowledge Engineering. Chicago, USA. KSI. 
R. Michalski and K. Kaufmann. 1998. Data min- 
ing and knowledge discovery: A review of issues 
and multistrategy approach. In Machine Learn- 
ing and Data Mining Methods and Applications. 
John Wiley, England. 
E. Morin. 1999. Automatic acquisition of seman- 
tic relations between terms from technical cor- 
pora. In Proc. of the Fifth International Congress 
on Terminology and Knowledge Engineering -
TKE'99. 
G. Neumann, R. Backofen, J. Baur, M. Becker, and 
C. Braun. 1997. An information extraction core 
system for real world german text processing. In 
ANLP'97 --  Proceedings of the Conference on 
Applied Natural Language Processing, pages 208- 
215, Washington, USA. 
G. Neumann, C. Braun, and J. Piskorski. 2000. A 
divide-and-conquer st ategy for shallow parsing of 
german free texts. In Proceedings of ANLP-2000, 
Seattle, Washington. 
P. Resnik. 1993. Selection and Information: A 
Class-based Approach to Lexical Relationships. 
Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylania. 
G. Salton. 1988. Automatic Text Processing. 
Addison-Wesley. 
R. Skrikant and R. Agrawal. 1995. Mining gener- 
alized association rules. In Proceedings of VLDB 
1995, pages 407-419. 
S. Staab and A. Maedche. 2000. Ontology engineer- 
ing beyond the modeling of concepts and rela- 
tions. In Proceedings of the ECAI'2000 Workshop 
on Application of Ontologies and Problem-Solving 
Methods. 
Raphael Volz. 2000a. Discovering conceptual rela- 
tions from text. Studienarbeit, University of Karl- 
sruhe (TH), Karlsruhe- Germany. in German. 
Raphael Volz. 2000b. From texts to ontologies us- 
ing machine learning and lexical-semantic net- 
works \[working title\]. Diploma thesis, University 
of Karlsruhe (TH), Karlsruhe- Germany. in Ger- 
man. 
W3C. 1999. Rdf schema specification. 
http://www.w3.org/TR/PR-rdf-schema/. 
P. Wiemer-Hastings, A. Graesser, and K. Wiemer- 
Hastings. 1998. Inferring the meaning of verbs 
from context. In Proceedings of the Twentieth An- 
nual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. 
175 
