POSBIOTM-NER in the shared task of BioNLP/NLPBA 2004    
Yu Song, Eunju Kim, Gary Geunbae Lee, Byoung-kee Yi 
Department of CSE, 
Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH)  
Pohang, Korea 790-784 
{songyu, hosuabi, gblee, bkyi} @postech.ac.kr 
 
Abstract 
Two classifiers -- Support Vector Machine 
(SVM) and Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) are 
applied here for the recognition of biomedical 
named entities. According to their different 
characteristics, the results of two classifiers are 
merged to achieve better performance. We propose 
an automatic corpus expansion method for SVM 
and CRF to overcome the shortage of the annotated 
training data. In addition, we incorporate a 
keyword-based post-processing step to deal with 
the remaining problems such as assigning an 
appropriate named entity tag to the word/phrase 
containing parentheses. 
1 Introduction 
Recently, with the rapid growth in the number of 
published papers in biomedical domain, many NLP 
(Natural Language Processing) researchers have 
been interested in a task of automatic extraction of 
facts from biomedical articles. The first and 
fundamental step is to extract the named entities. 
And recently several SVM-based named entity 
recognition models have been proposed. Lee et. al. 
([Lee et. al., 2003]) proposed a two-phrase SVM 
recognition model. Yamamoto et. al. ([Yamamoto 
et. al., 2003]) proposed a SVM-based recognition 
method which uses various morphological 
information and input features such as base noun 
phrase information, stemmed forms of a word, etc. 
However, notable limitation of SVM is its low 
speed both for training and recognition. 
On the other hand, conditional random fields 
(CRFs) ([Lafferty, 2001]) is a probabilistic 
framework for labelling and segmenting sequential 
data, which is much faster  comparing with SVM. 
The conditional probability of the label sequence 
can depend on arbitrary, non-independent features 
of the observation sequence without forcing the 
model to account for the distribution of those 
dependencies. Named entity recognition problem 
can be taken as assigning the named entity class 
tag sequences to the input sentences. We adopt 
CRF to be the complementary scheme of SVM. 
 In natural language processing, supervised 
machine-learning based approach is a kind of 
standard and its efficiency is proven in various task 
fields. However, the most problematic point of 
supervised learning methods is that the size of 
training data is essential to achieve good 
performance, but building a training corpus by 
human labeling is time consuming, labor intensive, 
and expensive. To overcome this problem, various 
attempts have been proposed to acquire a training 
data set in an easy and fast way. Some approaches 
focus on minimally-supervised style learning and 
some approaches try to expand or acquire the 
training data automatically or semi-automatically. 
Using virtual examples, i.e., artificially created 
examples, is a type of method to expand the 
training data in an automatic way ([Niyogi et al 
1998] [Sasano, 2003] [Scholkopf et. al., 1996]. In 
this paper, we propose an automatic corpus 
expansion method both for SVM and CRF based 
biological named entity recognition using virtual 
example idea. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as 
follows: Section 2 introduces named entity 
recognition (NER) part: two machine learning 
approaches with some justification, feature set 
used in NER and virtual examples generation.  In 
section 3, we present some keyword-based post-
processing methods. The experiment results and 
analysis will be presented in section 4. Finally, 
conclusion is provided in section 5.  
2 Named Entity Recognition 
The training corpus is provided in IOB notion. 
The IOB notation is used where named entities are 
not nested and therefore do not overlap. Words 
outside of named entities are tagged with ?O?, 
while the first word in a named entity is tagged 
with B-[entity class], and further named entity 
words receive tag I-[entity class] for inside. We 
define the named entity recognition problem as a 
classification problem, assigning an appropriate 
classification tag for each token in the input 
sentences.  
To simplify the classification problem, we assign 
each token only with I-[entity class]/O. Then we 
convert the tag of the initial token of a consecutive 
100
sequence of predicted named entity tokens to B-
[entity class]. 
2.1 SVM 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a well-known 
machine learning technique showing a good 
performance in several classification problems. 
However, SVM has suffered from low speed and 
unbalanced distributed data.     
Named entity token is a compound token that 
consists of the constituents of some other named 
entities, and all other un-related tokens are 
considered as outside tokens. Due to the 
characteristics of SVM, this unbalanced 
distribution of training data can cause a drop-off in 
classification coverage. 
In order to resolve this low coverage and low 
speed problem together, we filter out possible 
outside tokens in the training data through two 
steps. First, we eliminate tokens that are not 
constituents of a base noun phrase, assuming that 
every named entity token should be inside of a 
base noun phrase boundary. Second, we exclude 
some tokens according to their part-of-speech tags. 
We build a stop-part-of-speech tag list by 
collecting tags which have a small chance of being 
a named entity token, such as predeterminer, 
determiner, etc. 
2.2 CRF 
Conditional random fields (CRFs) ([Wallach, 
2004] is a probabilistic framework for labelling 
and segmenting a sequential data. Let ),( EVG be 
a graph such that VvYvY ?= )( , and there is a 
node Vv? corresponding to each of the random 
variable representing an element Yv of Y . Then 
),( YX  is a conditional random field, and when 
conditioned on X  , the random variables Yv  obey 
the Markov property with respect to the graph: 
),~,,|(),,||( vwYwXYvpvwYwXYvp =?  
where vw ~  means that w and v are neighbours in 
G. 
Let X  and Y  be jointly distributed random 
variables respectively representing observation 
sequences and corresponding label sequences. A 
CRF is an undirected graphical model, globally 
conditioned on X (the observation sequence). 
We try to use this CRF model to our NER as a 
complementary method for both speed and 
coverage. SVM predicts the named entities based 
on feature information of words collected in a 
predefined window size while CRF predicts them 
based on the information of the whole sentence. 
So, CRF can handle the named entities with 
outside tokens which SVM always tags as ?O?. 
2.3 Feature set 
As an input to the classifier, we use a bit-vector 
representation, each dimension of which indicates 
whether the input matches with the corresponding 
feature.  
The followings are the basic input features: 
 
z Surface word - only in the case that the 
previous/current/next words are in the 
surface word dictionary. 
z word feature - orthographical feature of 
the previous/current/next words. 
z prefix/suffix - prefixes/suffixes which are 
contained in the current word among the 
entries in the prefix/suffix dictionary. 
z part-of-speech tag - POS tag of the 
previous/current/next words. 
z Base noun phrase tag - base noun tag of 
the previous/current/next words. 
z previous named entity tag - named entity 
tag which is assigned for previous word. 
This feature is only for SVM. 
 
The surface word dictionary is constructed from 
the words that occur more than one time in the 
training part of the corpus.  
2.4 Automatic Corpus Expansion using 
Virtual Examples  
To achieve good results in machine learning 
based classification, it is important to use training 
data which is sufficient not only in the quality but 
also in the quantity. But making the training data 
by hand requires considerable man-power and 
takes a long time. Expanding the training data 
using virtual examples is an attempt for corpus 
expansion in the biomedical domain. 
We expand the training data by augmenting 
the set of virtual examples generated using some 
prior knowledge on the training data. We use the 
fact that the syntactic role of a named entity is a 
noun and the basic syntactic structure of a sentence 
is preserved if we replace a noun with another 
noun in the sentence. Based on this linguistic 
paradigmatic relation, we can generate a new 
sentence by replacing each named entity by 
another named entity which is in the named entity 
dictionary of the corresponding class. Then we 
augment the sentence into the original training data. 
If we apply this replacement processes n times for 
each sentence in the original corpus, then we can 
obtain a virtual corpus about n+1 times bigger than 
the original one. Since the virtual corpus 
strengthens the right information which may not be 
observed in the original corpus, it is helpful to 
extend the coverage of a recognition model and 
101
also helpful to improve the recognition 
performance. 
3 Keyword based post-processing 
We notice that some words occur more 
frequently in the specific entity class. For example, 
the word ?genes? appears in class DNA 590 times 
while in other entity class appears less than 10 
times. The information provided by these key 
words not only impacts the named entity prediction 
part but also shows great power in post-processing 
part. Once keywords appear at specific position in 
a named entity, we can surely decide the entity 
class of this named entity. 
3.1 Words containing parentheses or ?and? 
 It is difficult but significant to decide whether 
parentheses or ?and? are part of named entity or 
not. Parentheses occur in the named entity more 
than 700 times in the training data. Both SVM and 
CRF cannot work well while dealing with this 
problem. 
Once a specific keyword appears at the right side 
of ?)?, we can tell that the parentheses belong to a 
named entity.  The named entity tag information 
can also be determined by the keyword. For 
example, in Table 1, the left column is the result of 
the NER module. At post-processing stage, the 
word ?genes? is detected on the right side of ?)?, 
then this pair of parentheses and keyword ?genes? 
are included in the current named entity.  
 
Before After 
text tag text tag 
(        O (  I-DNA 
VH      I-DNA VH       I-DNA 
)        O   )         I-DNA 
genes    O genes      I-DNA 
    Table 1: An example for the usage of 
keywords. 
 
A keyword list for parentheses is collected from 
the training corpus, including the named entity 
tag information.  It not only solves the 
parentheses named entity tag problem but also 
helps to correct the wrong named entity assigned 
to the words between parentheses by the previous 
step. The word ?and? can be treated similarly as 
the parenthesis case.  
3.2 Correcting the wrong named entity tag 
Some keywords occur in one specific type of 
named entities with high frequency. We employ 
the information provided by those keywords in 
correcting the wrongly assigned named entity tag. 
First a list of high frequency keywords with 
class information is collected. Once a keyword is 
predicted as another type of named entity, all the 
words in the current named entity boundary will be 
corrected as the corresponding named entity type 
as the keyword. For example, the keywords 
?protein? and ?proteins?, in a very rare case, 
belong to other named entity class rather than the 
class ?PROTEIN?.  
4 Experiment Result and analysis 
4.1 Corpus  
The shared task BioNLP/NLPBA 2004 provides 
2000 MEDLINE abstracts from the GENIA ([Ohta 
et. al., 2002]) bio-named entity corpus version 3.02. 
There are total 5 entity classes: DNA, RNA, 
protein, cell_line and cell_type.  
4.2 Experiment results and analysis 
CLASS Recall/Precision/F-score 
Full R64.80   P67.82   F66.28
Left R69.99   P73.25   F71.58
ALL 
Right R73.25   P76.67   F74.92
Full R65.50   P73.04   F69.07
Left R71.26   P79.46   F75.13
Protein 
Right R72.23   P80.54   F76.16
Full R53.77   P61.40   F57.33
Left R56.39   P64.40   F60.13
Cell_Line 
Right R63.57   P72.60   F67.79
Full R58.60   P61.65   F60.08
Left R64.27   P67.61   F65.90
DNA 
Right R66.79   P70.27   F68.48
Full R65.49   P62.71   F64.07
Left R67.26   P64.41   F65.80
RNA 
Right R75.22   P72.03   F73.59
Full R70.45   P59.45   F64.48
Left R74.46   P62.83   F68.15
Cell_Type
Right R84.52   P71.32   F77.36
 Table 2: Final result of POSBIOTM-NER (with 
no abstract boundary information). 
 
Method Full:   Recall/Precision/F-score
SVM.base R62.01   P65.80   F63.85 
SVM+V R63.91   P66.89   F65.37 
CRF.base R64.90   P61.33   F63.06 
CRF+V R65.78   P61.06   F63.34 
Final R64.80   P67.82   F66.28 
Table 3: Step by step result 
102
From table 3, we can see that after using virtual 
samples, both the precision and recall increased, 
especially for SVM. In CRF, even though the full 
f-score did not increase the full F-score much, but 
for RNA class, after using virtual samples, the f-
score has increased 3%. 
A CRF has different characteristics from SVM, 
and is good at handling different kinds of data. So, 
we simply merge the results of two machine 
learning approaches, by using the CRF results to 
extend the boundaries of named entities predicted 
by SVM. After merging the results of the baseline 
of SVM and CRF (without using virtual samples) 
the f-score reaches to 64.58, while the f-score of 
SVM alone is 63.85. The final score in Table 3 is 
the merged results with the virtual samples. 
Although we have improved our system by 
using virtual samples, CRF and SVM as 
complementary means and post-processing, we 
still have some problems to solve, such as correct 
named entity boundary detection. It is more 
difficult to correctly predict the left boundary of 
named entities than the right boundary. From the 
analysis of the results, we usually predict ?human? 
and ?factor? as the beginning and end of a named 
entity, but, it is even difficult for human to decide 
correctly whether it is a part of a named entity or 
not. 
5 Conclusion and Future Works 
In this paper, we propose a general method for 
named entity recognition in the biomedical domain. 
Various morphological, part-of-speech and base 
noun phrase features are incorporated to recognise 
the named entities. We use two different kinds of 
machine learning techniques, SVM and CRF, with 
merged results. We also developed a virtual sample 
technique to overcome the training data shortage 
problem. Finally, we present a   keyword-based 
heuristic post-processing which increases both 
precision and recall. 
 As shown in the experiment results, more 
correct detection of the named entity boundary is 
required, especially the detection of left boundary. 
6 Acknowledgements 
This research is supported by BIT Fusion project 
(by MOST). 
References  
J.Lafferty, A.McCallum, and F.Pereira. 
Conditional random fields: probabilistic models 
for segmenting and labelling sequence data. In 
International Conference on Machine Learning, 
2001. 
Ki-Joong Lee, Young-Sook Hwang, and Hae-
Chang Rim. Two-phase biomedical NE 
recognition based on SVMs. Proceedings of 
ACL 2003 Workshop on Natural Language 
Processing in Biomedicine,2003. 
P.Niyogi, F.Girosi, and T.Poggio. Incorporating 
prior information in machine learning by 
creating virtual examples. Proceedings of 
IEEE volume 86, pages 2196-2207, 1998 
 
Manabu Sasano. Virtual examples for text 
classification with support vector machines. 
Proceedings of 2003 Conference on 
Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing (EMNLP 2003), 2003. 
Bernhard Scholkopf, Chris Burges, and Vladimir 
Vapnik. Incorporating invariances in support 
vector learning machines.  Artificial Neural 
Networks- ICANN96,1112:47-52,1996. 
Hanna M.Wallach. Conditional Random Fields: 
An Introduction. 2004 
T.Ohta, Y. Tateisi, J.Kim, H. Mima and 
J.Tsujiii.2002. The GENIA corpus: An 
annotated research abstract corpus in 
molecular biology domain. In Proceedings of 
Human Language Technology Conference, 
2002. 
Kaoru Yamamoto, Taku Kudo, Akihiko Konagaya, 
and Yuji Matusmoto. Protein name tagging 
for biomedical annotation in text. Proceedings 
of ACL 2003 Workshop on Natural Language 
Processing in Biomedicine, 2003. 
 
103
