Frozen Sentences of Portuguese: Formal Descriptions for NLP 
Jorge Baptista 
Universidade do Algarve 
Campus de Gambelas 
 P-8005-139 FARO 
jbaptis@ualg.pt 
Anabela Correia 
Universidade do Algarve 
Campus de Gambelas 
 P-8005-139 FARO 
 
Gra?a Fernandes 
Universidade do Algarve 
Campus de Gambelas 
 P-8005-139 FARO 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents on-going research on the build-
ing of an electronic dictionary of frozen sentences 
of European Portuguese. It will focus on the prob-
lems arising from the description of their formal 
variation in view of natural language processing 
1 Introduction 
Defining frozen sentences is not easy, and many 
conceptual and terminological disputes on concur-
rent terms (?idioms?, ?collocations?, ?phras?mes?, 
etc.) can be found in the literature (M. Gross 1988; 
G.Gross 1996; Mejri 1997; Mel?cuk 1993; Mogor-
r?n-Huerta 2002; Gaatone 2000; Jurafsky & Mar-
tin 2000: 571-573; McKeown & Rodev 2000; 
Mutsimoto 2003: 395). As a first approach to a 
(consensual?) definition, frozen sentences are ele-
mentary sentences where the main verb and at least 
one of its argument noun-phrases are distribution-
ally constraint, and usually the global meaning of 
the expression cannot be calculated from the indi-
vidual meaning of its component elements when 
they are used independently (M. Gross 1982, 1989, 
1996; G. Gross 1996; Ranchhod 2003). For that 
reason, the whole expression must be taken as a 
complex, multiword lexical unit. For example, in: 
(1) O Jo?o matou dois coelhos de uma cajadada 
(lit: ?John killed two rabbits with one blow?, John 
killed two birds with one stone) the verb-object 
combination (matar-coelhos) is frozen. One cannot 
replace coelhos (rabbits) for another animal and 
the numeral determinant is necessarily dois (two). 
Also, it is not possible to modify coelhos with any 
free adjective (dois coelhos *gordos/ *grandes, 
two fat/big rabbits). In addition, the adverbial de 
uma cajadada (with one blow) can hardly be ze-
roed, or the meaning of the sentence becomes lit-
eral. On the other hand, frozen sentences usually 
present some, often highly constraint, formal varia-
tion. For the most part, this variation is strictly 
lexical. In this case, in the adverbial, the noun ca-
jadada (lit: a blow with a stick) can be replaced by 
assentada and vez (turn), but the meaning of the 
expression remains unchanged. This variation does 
not happens elsewhere. Furthermore, if we disre-
gard proverbs1, completely frozen sentences are 
rare. Usually, one or more of its argument noun 
phrases are distributionally free. In this case, any 
human noun can adequately occupy the structural 
position of subject. The frozen verb-noun combi-
nation is responsible for this distributional con-
straint, which can be considerably different from 
the constraints imposed by the verb when func-
tioning as an independent lexical unit. For exam-
ple, the verb matar (to kill) admits both human and 
non-human (animate and abstract) nouns for its 
subject when its object is coelhos (rabbits): (2a) O 
Jo?o/a raposa/o tiro/a praga matou dois coelhos 
(John/the fox/ shooting/ plague killed two rabbits). 
Another way frozen sentences often differ from 
free sentences is the fact that they block transfor-
mations that should otherwise be possible, given 
the syntactic properties of the main verb and its ar-
guments. Hence, while it is possible to form from 
(2a) the passive sentence (2b): (2b) Dois coelhos 
foram mortos pelo Jo?o/ a raposa/ o tiro/ a praga 
(Two rabbits were killed by John/ the fox/ shoot-
                                                          
1 Proverbs differ from frozen sentences (a) from not 
having any free elements, (b) in the way they function 
in discourse, which is similar to quotations and (c) for 
their general value as advices or as atemporal truths 
about human life. However, partly because of their be-
ing an oral tradition, even proverbs can show some for-
mal variation (Chacoto 1994). 
Second ACL Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Integrating Processing, July 2004, pp. 72-79
ing/ plague), the same does not happen with (1): 
(1a) ?Dois coelhos foram mortos pelo Jo?o de uma 
cajadada (Two rabbits were killed by John with 
one blow), since the meaning of the sentence be-
comes literal (this is shown by symbol ???). Finally, 
frozen sentences constitute a non-trivial problem 
for many NLP applications. Since they are multi-
word expressions functioning as meaning units, 
they have to be identified as a block. However, 
their elements can appear discontinuously and they 
can also present some formal variation. They are 
often ambiguous, the same sequence having both a 
literal and a figurative meaning ? and in this case, 
only an extended context can disambiguate them. 
They constitute an important part of the lexicon, 
comparable to (but probably much larger than) 
simple verbs. 
2 Classification of Frozen Sentences 
Many frozen sentences, especially those that are 
most usual or most obviously idiomatic, have al-
ready been collected both in general and in spe-
cialized dictionaries of ?idioms?. In these diction-
aries, frozen sentences are usually undistinguished 
from other types of multiword expressions, such as 
compound nouns, adverbs, prepositions, conjunc-
tions, proverbs, and so on. In order to build an 
electronic dictionary of frozen sentences of Euro-
pean Portuguese, several sources where used, in-
cluding specialized dictionaries2, and completed 
with newspapers, magazines, etc. and our knowl-
edge as native speakers of Portuguese. The formal 
framework of M. Gross (1982, 1989, 1996; see Le-
cl?re 2002, for an updated overview) was adopted 
to classify frozen sentences. The classification is 
based on the sentence structure, the number and 
type of noun phrases attached to the main verb, 
their frozen or free nature, as well as the syntactic 
properties of the construction. Table 1 shows some 
formal classes3, their internal structure, an illustra-
                                                          
2 Basically, Mello 1986, Moreira 1996, Neves 2000, 
Santos 1990 and Sim?es 1993. The electronic dictionary 
of frozen sentences of Brazilian Portuguese (Vale 2001) 
was also consulted, but many of those sentences either 
do not exist if European Portuguese or else present sub-
stantial syntactical and lexical differences, so that a de-
tailed comparative study is in order. 
3 Frozen sentences with sentential subjects or objects, or 
with frozen subject noun phrases were not considered in 
this paper. N and C stand for noun phrases; N is a free 
tive example, and the approximate number of sen-
tences collected so far. Compared with figures 
available for other languages ?  French (+20,000; 
M.Gross 1996), Spanish (3,500; Mogorr?n-Huerta 
2002), Greek (4,500; Fotopoulou 1993) and Bra-
zilian Portuguese (3,500; Vale 2001), it is clear 
that these lists are still far from complete and 
should, in fact, be completed, probably using other 
corpus-based methods for lexical acquisition 
(McKeown & Rodev 2000, Mutsimoto 2003). 
 
Table 1- Classification of frozen sentences (extract) 
Class Structure/Example Size 
C1 N0 V C1  
 O Pedro matou a galinha dos ovos de ouro 800  
CAN N0 V (C de N)1 = C1 a N2  
 O Pedro arrefecer os ?nimos de=? Ana 200 
CDN  N0 V (C de N)1  
 O Pedro queria a cabe?a da Ana 100 
CP1  N0 V Prep C1  
 O Pedro bateu com a porta 900 
CPN  N0 V Prep (C de N)1 
 O Pedro foi aos cornos do Jo?o 100 
C1PN  N0 V C1 Prep N2  
 O Pedro arrastou a asa ? Ana 400 
CNP2  N0 V N1 Prep C2  
 O Pedro tirou o rel?gio do prego 350 
C1P2  N0 V C1 Prep C2 
 O Pedro deitou m?os ? obra 400 
CPP  N0 V Prep C1 Prep C2 
 O Pedro foi de cavalo para burro 200 
CPPN  N0 V C1 Prep C2 Prep C3 
 O Pedro deitou o beb? fora com a ?gua do banho 50 
Total 3,500 
3 Format of Dictionary 
The electronic dictionary is composed of several 
matrices, one per formal class. In these matrices, 
each line is a frozen sentence and the columns con-
tain the lexical elements of the sentence and their 
syntactic (distributional and transformational) 
properties. The set of matrices constitute the lexi-
con-grammar of frozen sentences. Table 2 is a 
sample of class CPN. This class is defined by hav-
ing a prepositional phrase where only the head-
noun C is frozen with the verb, while its determi-
native complement de N (of N) is free: N0 V Prep 
(C de N)1. 
 
                                                                                           
and C is frozen noun phrase; N0 is the subject, N1 and N2 
the first and second complement; V is the verb and Prep 
a preposition. 
Table 2 ? Class CPN (extract)  
 
  N
0=
:N
hum
 
  N
0=
:N
-hum
 
V 
  Vse 
  N
egO
brig 
  Prep 
  D
et 
C 
  N
1=
:N
hum
 
  N
1=
:N
-hum
 
  de N
=
a N
 
  de N
=
Poss 
Example 
+ - <acabar> - - com a ra?a + + + + O Pedro acabou com a ra?a da Ana 
+ - <atirar> + - a os p?s + - + + O Pedro atirou-se aos p?s da Ana 
+ - <chegar> - + a os calcanhares + - + + O Pedro n?o chega aos calcanhares da Ana 
+ - <cortar> - - em a casaca + - + - O Predro cortava na casaca da Ana 
+ - <ir> - - a as trombas + - + - O Pedro foi ?s trombas do Jo?o 
+ - <ir> - - em a cantiga + - - + O Pedro foi na cantiga da Ana 
+ - <ir> - - a a cara + - + - A Ana foi ? cara do Pedro 
+ - <pegar> - - em a deixa + - + + O Pedro pegou na deixa da Ana 
+ - <rir> - - em a cara + - + + O Pedro riu na cara da Ana 
+ - <rir> + - em a cara + - + + O Pedro riu-se na cara da Ana 
- + <sair> - - de o pelo + - + - O sal?rio sai-lhe do pelo 
- + <subir> - - a a cabe?a + - + + A fama subiu ? cabe?a do Pedro 
+ - <viver> - - em  a sombra + + - + O Pedro vive na sombra da Ana 
A B C D E F G H I J K L M 
 
 
4 Syntactic Properties 
For lack of space, only some of the most promi-
nent properties will be considered here. For each 
sentence, the distributional constraints (human/ 
non-human noun) on the free noun phrases are 
indicated: ?+? if the sentence admits it, ?-? if it 
does not. In this class, these are the subject and 
the determinative complement of C. Usually, the 
verb can inflect freely, thus its lemma is shown in 
brackets < >.  In some sentences, V presents an 
intrinsically reflexive construction (noted Vse): 
(3) O Pedro atirou-se aos p?s da Ana <e pediu-
lhe para ficar> (Peter threw himself to the feet of 
Ana <and begged her to stay>. The reflex pro-
noun cannot be replaced by a noun phrase of the 
same distributional nature but not coreferent to 
the subject: O Pedro atirou *o Jo?o / ?o livro aos 
p?s da Ana (Peter threw John/the book to the feet 
of Ana). Usually, this reflex pronoun cannot be 
zeroed. However, some verbs allow this zeroing 
of the pronoun: (4) O Pedro riu(-se) na cara da 
Ana (Peter laughs (himself) at the face of Ana). In 
this case, the simplest way is to double the entry. 
Also in some cases, there is an obligatory nega-
tion (NegObrig): (5) O Pedro n?o /nunca /nem 
chega aos calcanhares da Ana (lit: Peter does 
not/never/not even gets to the heels of Ana, Peter 
is not a match for Ana). The half-frozen noun 
phrase can often undergo an operation called da-
tive restructuring (Lecl?re 1995), that splits the 
noun phrase in two and where the determinative 
complement becomes a dative complement a N 
(to N) of the verb: (6) O Pedro foi ?s trombas do 
Jo?o = ao Jo?o (lit: Peter went to the snouts of/to 
John, Peter hit John). This operation depends on 
the metonymical relation between C and the noun 
of its free determinative complement. The new 
dative complement can be reduced to a dative 
clitic pronoun (-lhe): (6a) Pedro foi-lhe (= ao 
Jo?o) ?s trombas do Jo?o. However, dative re-
structuring must be systematically checked for 
each sentence, since some sentences do not admit 
it: (7) O Pedro foi na cantiga do Jo?o/ *ao Jo?o/ 
*-lhe (lit: Peter went in the song of John, Peter 
was persuaded by John?s ill-intended words). In 
some cases, however, the restructured noun 
phrase: (8a) O sal?rio do Pedro sai-lhe do pelo 
(lit: Peter?s salary gets him out from the fur, To 
earn his salary, Peter has to work very hard) is 
much more acceptable than its basic form: ?*O 
sal?rio sai do pelo do Pedro (The salary gets out 
from Peter?s fur) 4. The determinative comple-
ment can also be reduced to an oblique or to a 
possessive pronoun: (7a) O Pedro foi na cantiga 
do Jo?o = na cantiga dele = na sua cantiga, but 
in some cases, the reduction to a possessive is 
blocked: (6b) O Pedro foi ?s trombas do Jo?o = 
??s trombas dele = *??s suas  trombas. Finally, 
there can be some facultative, free insertions be-
                                                          
4 In this case, the pronouncing may blocked by the 
(double) metonymical relation of Pedro with both the 
head noun of both the subject and object noun phrase. 
tween the verb and the prepositional phrase: (9) A 
fama subiu (rapidamente/logo) ? cabe?a do 
Pedro (Fame went up (quickly/soon) to Peter?s 
head). As one can see, these properties may be 
independent from each other and some of them 
can appear in combination in the same sentence. 
For example, obligatory negation can combine 
with the reduction do possessive pronoun: (5a) O 
Pedro n?o chega aos seus calcanhares (lit: Peter 
does not get to the his heels, Peter is not a match 
for him) or with the dative pronoun resulting 
from the noun phrase restructuring: (5b) O Pedro 
n?o te chega aos calcanhares (lit: Peter does not 
get you to the heels, Peter is not a match for you). 
In both cases, the pronouns appear inserted be-
tween the characteristic (and fixed) elements of 
this frozen sentence. 
 
 
Figure 1. Reference graph for class CPN 
 
5 Lexical Finite-State Transducers: 
building a reference graph 
The lexicon-grammar of frozen sentences (i.e. the 
set of matrices) cannot be directly applied to rec-
ognize these expressions in texts. Using INTEX 
linguistic development platform (M. Silberztein 
1993, 2004)5 it is now possible to build lexical 
finite state transducer that can identify and tag 
frozen sentences in the texts where they occur. 
This is done by building a reference graph for 
each matrix. Fig. 1 (above) shows a simplified 
version of the reference graph for class CPN.  
This graph describes the formal sequences of 
the components of the frozen sentences. In this 
graph, variables such as @X refer to the content of 
the matrix (at column X). Furthermore, this graph 
is an enhanced transducer, where it is possible to 
define variables containing strings of elements 
and to reuse these variables in the transduction. 
                                                          
5 http://www.nyu.edu/pages/linguistics/intex/. 
For example, in the top line of the graph, vari-
able V (inside brackets) stores the verb (repre-
sented by @C). This is followed by a facultative 
subgraph, for any eventual insertions (in the 
shadowed box), and it is then followed by vari-
able CP1, containing the frozen prepositional 
phrase. The two variables are then reused in the 
transduction (the output in bold, on the right), 
providing the multiword lexical entry and its ade-
quate tags: $V $PC1,@C @F @G @H 
@I.V+CPN, so that for the frozen sentence: (7c) 
O Pedro foi na cantiga do Jo?o the system would 
produce the tag: O Pedro {foi na can-
tiga,ir em a cantiga.V+CPN} do Jo?o. 
Notice that the inflected form of the verb appear-
ing in the text is lemmatized (after the coma) us-
ing the @X variables to retrieve the lexical ele-
ments in the matrix: in this case, the infinitive ir 
(to go); also in the lemma, the contraction (na) of 
preposition em and the definite article a is split in 
its component elements. Finally, variables @D, 
@E, @K and @L function as switches, reading 
the ?+? or ?-? of the corresponding columns in the 
matrix so that the remaining transitions are either 
activated or collapsed. These variables corre-
spond to the syntactic properties of the entries. In 
this way, it is possible to compile a detailed FST 
that complies with the syntactic restrictions de-
scribed in the matrix. 
After building the reference graph, the system 
is then able to compile the lexical transducer for 
this class, exploring, for each line of the matrix, 
all the paths of the graph, and then determinizing 
and minimizing the resulting transducer. With 
this methodology, the linguistic information 
stored in the lexicon grammar is represented in-
dependently from the lexical transducers and can 
be regularly revised or updated. The reference 
graph can also be seen as describing linguistic in-
formation regarding the surface disposition of the 
lexical elements entering the frozen sentences of 
the matrix. Of course, strict formal coherence in 
needed between the reference graph and the ma-
trix.  
6 Application to texts: some experiences 
In order to evaluate the performance of the elec-
tronic dictionary on real texts, experiences were 
made using INTEX6 on three different texts. Two 
smaller texts, one obtained from the on-line edi-
tion of the Expresso weekly newspaper 7 and the 
other a composite text 8 obtained from several 
sources and used on the MorphOlimpics evalua-
                                                          
6 We also used an electronic dictionary of simple 
words of Portuguese (Ranchhod et al 1999), from the 
public linguistic resources built by LabEL: 
http://label.ist.utl.pt. 
7 http://www.expresso.pt/. This is a 976 Kb text, with 
83,269 (5,764 different) words.  
8 http://acdc.linguateca.pt/aval_conjunta/morfolimpia 
das/ts_ml.txt [29-03-2004] This is a 215 Kb text, with 
35,053 (10,070 different) words. 
tion campaign for Portuguese 9. We also used a 
larger, publicly available, journalistic corpus 
(CETEM-P?blico)10. Tables 3 to 5 show results 
from the application of the modules of the four 
largest classes to these texts: 
 
Table 3 ? Application of dictionary of frozen 
sentences to text from Portuguese MorphOlimpics 
Class DLE ?L M Precision 
C1 6 6 6 100 % 
C1P2 1 1 1 100 % 
C1PN 5 5 6 100 % 
CP1 5 5 5 100 % 
Totals 17 17 18 100 % 
Table 4 ? Application of dictionary of frozen 
sentences to text from Expresso newspaper 
Class DLE ?L M Precision 
C1 15 13 16 75 % 
C1P2 2 2 2 100 % 
C1PN 24 18 33 94 % 
CP1 37 32 39 100 % 
Totals 78 65 90 93 % 
Table 5 ? Application of dictionary of frozen 
sentences to text from CETEMP?blico 
Class DLE ?L M Precision 
C1 541 217 939 78.4 % 
C1P2 104 61 157 99.0 % 
C1PN 434 96 1,357 96.5 % 
CP1 963 309 1,270 88.2 % 
Totals 2,042 638 3,723 89.6 % 
DLE ? number of inflected lexical entries obtained from the 
text; ?L ? number of different lemmas; M ? number of 
matched strings in text. 
 
These preliminary results must take into con-
sideration the different size of the texts (number 
of words) and the number of matched sequences. 
Several comparisons are thus made in Table 6 
(below). The size (in number of simple words - 
W) of Expresso is approximately 2.4 times larger 
than MorphOlimpics, and the size of 
CETEMP?blico is 116 times larger than Expresso:  
W(Exp)=2.4xW(MO);W(Pub)=116xW(Exp). 
Naturally, the number of matches (M) does not 
increase in the same proportion: 
                                                          
9 http://acdc.linguateca.pt/aval_conjunta/morfolimpiad
as/index.html [29-03-2004]. 
10 http://www.linguateca.pt/CETEMPublico/. Only the 
first fragment of this corpus was used. This is a text 
file of approximately 60 Mb, with 9.6 million (177,368 
different) words. 
M(Exp)=5xM(MO);M(Pub)=41.38xM(Exp). 
In fact, in the smaller texts, precision scores are 
not very significant in view of the reduced num-
ber of matches. However, precision does not drop 
abruptly in the larger corpus (CETEM-P?blico), 
even if the size of the text and the number of 
matches increase significantly. 
 
Table 6 ? Size of texts and scores of dictionary of 
frozen sentences (Classes C1, C1P2, C1PN, CP1) 
Text W ?W {S} 
MO 35,053 10,070 527 
Exp 83,269 5,764 8060 
Pub 9,632,623 177,368 447,125 
 
Text DLE  ?L M CM P(%) 
MO 17 17 18 18 100.0 
Exp 78 65 90 84 93.0 
Pub 2,042 638 3,725 3,336 89.6 
 
Text LexDiv LexDiv/P CMDiv CMDiv/P FS/S (?) 
MO 1.000 1.000 1.059 1.059 3.416 
Exp 1.200 1.286 1.292 1.385 1.042 
Pub 3.201 3.574 5.229 5.839 0.746 
 
MO ? MorphOlimpics; Exp ? Expresso; Pub ? CETEM-
P?blico; W ? number of simple words; ?W ? different sim-
ple words; {S} ? sentences; DLE ? lexical entries of frozen 
sentences; ?L ?different lemmas of lexical entries; M ? 
matches; CM ? correct matches;  P ? Precision (%); LexDiv 
? lexical diversity of DLE  (DLE/?L); CMDiv ? lexical di-
versity of correct matches (CM/?L); FS/S ? average number 
of frozen sentences per thousand sentences (?). 
 
Another measure is the ratio between the lexi-
cal diversity (LexDiv) of DLE (number of en-
tries/different lemmas) and precision (P). The 
higher the diversity of the DLE, the lower should 
be the precision. This, however, does not happen: 
even if the larger corpus shows lower DLE diver-
sity, the ratio LexDiv/P is higher than in the two 
smaller texts. Therefore, lower precision in 
CETEMP?blico is not significant. Similarly, one 
could compare ratio between the lexical diversity 
of correct matches (correct matches/different 
lemmas) and precision. In theory, this ratio 
should be smaller if the lexical diversity of cor-
rect matches were higher. Instead, CETEMP?blico 
shows a higher CMDiv/P ratio than the two 
smaller texts, therefore confirming the signifi-
cance of the precision rate obtained with the fro-
zen sentences? dictionary. Finally, we present, as 
an indication of frequency, the average number of 
correctly matched frozen sentences per thousand 
sentences in each text. This varies from 1.042 ? 
(Expresso) to 0.746 ? (CETEMP?blico).  
7 Discussion 
As it was said above, precision of the results is 
relatively high. In fact, most word combinations 
in the dictionary of frozen sentences are unique, 
therefore, unambiguous combinations. The finite-
state approach adopted here is based on matching 
strings that could correspond to the characteristic 
word sequence of each frozen sentence.  How-
ever, going through the concordances manually, 
some incorrect matches were detected and it 
would be impossible to comment on all those 
cases here, so only a few cases (all from 
CETEMP?blico), will be discussed.  
Mostly, mismatches were due to morphologi-
cally (orthographically) ambiguous words. In the 
sentence: O general Ant?nio Ramalho Eanes est? 
de volta ? cena pol?tica (General Ant?nio Rama-
lho Eanes is back to the political scene) volta is 
not verb, but a noun. Still, this noun is a nomi-
nalization of voltar (with a resultative aspectual 
value): voltar ? cena = estar de volta a cena , so 
that the overall meaning is stil the same. Other 
nominalizations of the same kind were also 
founded, e.g. usar da palavra = fazer uso da pa-
lavra (to speak, in a formal situation). Therefore, 
the study of frozen sentences with verbal predi-
cates should be extended to their corresponding 
nominalizations (M. Gross 1986). Another inter-
esting aspect of this example is the fact that the 
noun cena appears with the adjective pol?tica (po-
litical, referring to politics). In the dictionary, the 
entry of the frozen sentence was just voltar ? 
cena. As one can see, it will still be necessary to 
complete the dictionary allowing C to be modi-
fied by this kind of adjectives, with which they 
form compound nouns (G. Gross 1988). 
Sometimes, the matched string is formally am-
biguous with free constructions: Como resultado, 
a Comunidade d? de si uma imagem de paralisia 
(Has a result, the Community gives of itself an 
image of paralysis). The expression dar de si 
(class CP1) usually has a non-human subject 
meaning ?to break?,?to fall apart?. In this case, 
however, we have a construction of the noun im-
agem, with two distributionally free comple-
ments, such as we find in the next example: Isso 
deu uma imagem negativa da comunidade (That 
gave a negative image of the community). If it 
were possible  to identify the noun phrase a Co-
munidade and its head as a human noun, and to 
associate a construction to the noun imagem, the 
ambiguity would not arise, since the distributional 
properties stated in the CP1 matrix for dar de si 
would prevent it from being tagged. However, 
this goes well beyond the mere task of lexical 
analysis and it would require some parsing proce-
dure to avoid the incorrect lexical tag. Ambiguity 
also arises from the syntactic operations under-
went by a free sentence. These transformations 
may produce strings that are superficially identi-
cal to frozen sentences. In the following example: 
[?] e em vez de se dirigir ?s m?quinas, foi para 
a rua que J?lia Pinho teve de caminhar [?] (in-
stead of approaching the machines, it was to the 
street that JP had to walk), we find a cleft sen-
tence with the form foi of verb ser (to be). This 
sentence can be obtained from: JP teve de camin-
har para a rua (JP had to walk to the street). 
Now, foi of verb ser (to be) is ambiguous with foi 
of verb ir (to go/walk) appearing in the frozen 
sentence ir para a rua (lit: to go to the street, ?to 
be fired?). Again, ambiguous strings will not be 
resolved unless some syntactic parsing is done in 
order to recognize transformations (in this case, 
clefting).  
The components of certain frozen sentences 
may, also, be particularly apt to become ambigu-
ous strings. For example, in the expression fazer 
das suas (lit: to do of his-fem.pl., to do mischief) 
the possessive pronoun is a lexical constant, in-
variable in both gender, and number, while agree-
ing in person with the subjet: Fergie tornou  fazer 
das suas (Fergie has done mischief again). How-
ever, the possessive often appears as a mere de-
terminant on a free construction, e.g. Jo?o Hon-
rado nunca fez das suas certezas uma muralha de 
arrog?ncia (JH has never done of his certainties a 
wall of arrogance). One could think that people 
tend avoid this kind of ambiguity, but it is not al-
ways so: 6 out of 14 matched sequences fazer das 
suas do not correspond to the frozen sentence. 
Likewise, with the expression partir do zero/nada 
(to start from scratch) 7 out of 14 matches corre-
spond to the compound adverb a partir do 
zero/nada (from scratch). Notice also that this 
frozen adverb, undoubtedly related with the fro-
zen sentence but appearing with various verbs, 
also composed of a compound preposition a par-
tir de (from), so the expression is three times am-
biguous grammatically. A similar ambiguity be-
tween occurs between frozen sentence N0 dizer 
respeito a N2 (N0 concerns to N1; 299 matches) 
and the related compound adverb no que diz re-
speito a N (concerning N; 215 matches). 
Finally, while most frozen sentences constitute 
unique word combinations and present a clear-
cut, single meaning (however difficult it may be 
to define it precisely), more rarely, some of them 
show multiple meanings. This is the case of en-
trar em campo (to enter the field) or entrar em 
cena (enter the scene) used in some sports or in 
theater jargon and as a general metaphor to ?begin 
some activity?. These multi-meaning frozen sen-
tences can be dealt with in the same way as 
polisemic simple words, by multiplying the num-
ber of entries in the lexicon-grammar. 
8 Final words 
Being an on-going research, it is still too early 
to write ?conclusions?. We believe that with the 
continuation of current work the size of the elec-
tronic dictionary of frozen sentences of European 
Portuguese will still increase in a significant way. 
Present experiments on large corpora will un-
doubtedly contribute to this goal. Statistical 
methods for collecting frozen sentences should be 
combined with our more traditional method of pe-
rusing dictionaries.  
Finite-state techniques prove to be adequately 
for the lexical analysis of frozen sentences. Fro-
zen sentences constitute an important part of mul-
tiword lexical units of any language. Their identi-
fication is an essential part of lexical analysis of 
texts in view of many NLP applications. They 
present several, non-trivial difficulties to this 
task. They may be formed of non-adjacent words 
or allow some lexically constraint variation of 
some of their elements. They allow several syn-
tactic transformations, but those operations are 
lexically determined. They may be ambiguous 
with free sentences, depending on the linear ar-
rangement of their components. Their accurate 
recognition may often depend on the previous 
syntactic parsing of the sentence, which may in-
clude checking the semantic attributes of nearby 
noun phrases. On the other hand, parsing depends 
on the availability of information regarding mul-
tiword lexical units. 
Acknowledgement  
Research for this paper was partially funded by 
FCT-MCES (project grant POSI/PLP/34729/99). 
References 
Ara?jo-Vale, Oto, 2001. Express?es Cristalizadas do 
Portugu?s do Brasil: Uma Proposta de Tipologia 
(Ph.D. Thesis). Araquara (Brazil): UNESP. 
Chacoto, Luc?lia, 1994. Estudo e Formaliza??o das 
Propriedades L?xico-Sint?cticas das Express?es 
Fixas Proverbiais. (M.A. Thesis). Lisbon: FLUL. 
Fotopoulou, Aggeliki, 1993. Une classification des 
phrases ? compl?ments fig?s en grec moderne. 
(PhD Thesis). Paris : Univ. Paris 8. 
Gaatone, David, 2000. A quoi sert la notion 
d? ?expression fig?e? ?, in Buvet, P.-A., D. le 
Pesant, M. Mathieu-Colas (eds.), Lexique, Syntaxe 
et S?mantique, BULAG (hors s?rie), Besan?on : 
Centre Lucien Tesni?re/PUFC, pp. 295-308. 
Gross, Gaston, 1988. Degr?e de figement des noms 
compos?s. Langages 90. Paris : Larousse, pp.57-72. 
Gross, Gaston, 1996. Les Expressions Fig?es en 
Fran?ais. Paris: Ophrys. 
Gross, Maurice 1982. Une classification des phrases 
?fig?es? du fran?ais. Revue Qu?b?coise de 
Linguistique 11-2. Montr?al : UQAM, p. 151-185. 
Gross, Maurice 1986. Les nominalisations 
d?expressions fig?es. Langue Fran?aise 69, Paris: 
Larousse, pp. 64-84. 
Gross, Maurice 1988. Les limites de la phrase fig?e. 
Langages 90. Paris: Larousse, pp.   7-22.  
Gross, Maurice 1989. Les expressions fig?es : une 
description des expressions fran?aises et ses 
cons?quences th?oriques. Rapport T?chnique 8. 
Paris : LADL-Univ. Paris 7 / CERIL. 
Gross, Maurice 1996. Lexicon-Grammar. in K. Brown 
and J. Miller (eds.). Concise Encyclopedia of Syn-
tactic Theories. Cambridge: Pergamon, pp. 
244-259. 
Jurafsky, Daniel and James H. Martin, 2000, Speech 
and Language Processing. New Jersey: Prentice 
Hall. 
Lecl?re, Christian, 1995. Sur une restructuration da-
tive. Language Research 31-1. Seoul: LRI- Seoul 
National Univ, pp. 179-198. 
Lecl?re, Christian, 2002. Organization of the Lexicon-
Grammar of French Verbs, Linguisticae Investiga-
tiones 25-1, Amesterdam: John Benjamins Pub. 
Co., pp. 29-48. 
McKeown, Kathleen R. and Dragomir Rodev, 2000, 
Collocations, in Dale, R., H. Moisl and H. Sommers 
(eds.) Handbook of Natural Language Processing. 
New York: Marcel Dekker Inc., pp. 507-523. 
Mejri, Salah, 1997. Le figment lexical. Description 
linguistique et structuration s?mantique. La Ma-
nouba (Tunis) : Pub. Fac. Lettres. 
Mel?cuk, I, 1993. La phraseologie et son r?le dans 
l?enseignment / apprentissage d?une langue 
?trang?re. ELA, Didier ?rudition, pp. 82-113. 
Mello, Fernando R., 1986. Nova Recolha de Prov?r-
bios Portugueses e Outros Lugares-Comuns (2nd. 
ed.). Lisbon: Ed. Afrodite.  
Mogorr?n-Huerta, Pedro, 2002. La expressividad en 
las locuciones verbales espa?olas y francesas. Ali-
cante: Pub. Univ. Alicante. 
Moreira, Ant?nio, 1996. Prov?rbios Portugueses. Lis-
bon : Ed. Not?cias. 
Mutsimoto, Yuji, 2003. Lexical Knowledge Acquisi-
tion, in Miktov, R. (ed.) The Oxford Handbook of 
Computational Linguistics. Oxford: OUP, pp. 
395-413. 
Neves, Orlando, 2000. Dicion?rio de Express?es Cor-
rentes (2nd. ed.) Lisbon: Ed. Not?cias. 
Ranchhod, Elisabete, Cristina Mota, Jorge Baptista, 
1999. A Computational Lexicon for Automatic Text 
Parsing, Proceedings of SIGLEX?99: ACL/NScF, 
pp. 74-80. 
Ranchhod, Elisabete M., 2003. O lugar das express?es 
?fixas? na gram?tica do Portugu?s. in Castro, I. and 
I. Duarte (eds.), Raz?o e Emo??o, vol. II, Lisbon: 
INCM, pp. 239-254. 
Santos, Ant?nio, 1990. Novos Dicion?rios de Expres-
s?es Idiom?ticas. Lisbon: Jo?o S? da Costa. 
Silberztein, Max, 1993. Dictionnaires ?lectroniques et 
analyse automatiques de textes : le syst?me INTEX. 
Paris : Masson. 
Silberztein, Max, 2004. Intex Manual.  
http://intex.univ-fcomte.fr/downloads/Manual.pdf 
Sim?es, Guilherme A., 1993. Dicion?rio de Expres-
s?es Populares Portuguesas. Lisbon: D. Quixote. 
Proceedings of the Workshop on A Broader Perspective on Multiword Expressions, pages 33?40,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Spanish Adverbial Frozen Expressions
Dolors Catal?
Autonomous University of Barcelona
Campus Sabadell, 08202, Spain
fLEXSEM 
dolors.catala@uab.cat
Jorge Baptista
Univ.Algarve, Campus de Gambelas 
P-8005-139 Faro,  Portugal
L2F ? INESC-ID Lisboa, Portugal
jbaptis@ualg.pt
Abstract
This paper  presents  an electronic  diction-
ary  of  Spanish  adverbial  frozen  expres-
sions. It focuses on their formal description
in view of natural language processing and
presents  an  experiment  on  the  automatic
application of this data to real texts using
finite-state techniques. The paper makes an
assessment  of  the  advantages  and
limitations  of  this  method  for  the
identification  of  these  multiword  units  in
texts.
1 Introduction
We have undertaken the construction of an elec-
tronic dictionary of compound adverbs, or adver-
bial  frozen  expressions  (Catal?  2003).  This
dictionary  completes  the  DELACs,  i.e.,  the
dictionary of compound words of Spanish (Blanco
and Catal? (1998)). 
These adverbial frozen expressions (a tontas  y
a locas = by fits and starts, como anillo al dedo =
like a glove; a ojo de buen cubero = at a guess) 1
have often been considered as exceptions but they
constitute an important part of the lexicon. 
Their formal description highlights many prob-
lems for NLP applications. On the one hand, they
are multiword expressions functioning as meaning
units, so they have to be recognized as a block and
are not to be analyzed as a free sequence of simple
words. On the other hand, they present, sometimes,
some lexical variation that can take complex lexi-
cal syntactical patterns. 
1 Approximate translations of examples do not intend to
be fully acceptable,  but to illustrate syntactic phenom-
ena.
For example, some adverbs show combinatorial
constraints between discontinuous elements:
d?a s?, d?a no /  a?o si, a?o no,*d?a si, a?o no 
?on even days/years?. 
Others yet present long distance dependencies:
[Yo estudio] con todas mis/*sus fuerzas 
?(I study) with all my/his strength?); 
Lexical variation of the compound elements is of-
ten constraint in an unpredictable way:
[Juan  aprob?]  por  los/*todos los/*sus/*unos
pelos
?(John passed the exam) with difficulties?
Some allow for a theoretically infinite paradigm as
in the expression <Card>  veces  seguidas  ?<num-
ber> of times in a row?, where  Card stands for a
numeral,  whose  meaning  is  compositional  but
whose form is fixed:
[Eso sucedi?] Card veces seguidas
?(It happened) <number> of times in a row?
since  the  adjective  does  not  allow  for  any
variation:
*[Eso sucedi?] Card veces continuas
?(It happened) <number> of times in a row?
In some cases, the adjective can not be reduced:
[Juan dijo esto] en voz baja / *en voz
?(John said this) in low voice/in voice?
nor can it be placed before the noun:
[Juan dijo esto] en voz baja / *en baja voz
?(John said this) in voice low /in low voice?
2 The Dictionary
The theoretical  and methodological  framework
adopted  is  the  lexicon-grammar  based  on  the
principles of the transformational grammar of Har-
ris  (1976,  1997)  developed  by  Maurice  Gross
33
(1986). In this perspective, the adverbial frozen ex-
pressions  are  formalized  in  the  frame  of  simple
sentences  and their  network of paraphrastic  rela-
tions.  Adverbs  are  predicates  that  necessarily
apply on other predicates and have a basic influ-
ence in their selection. For example, some adverbs
are  only  associated  with  a  limited  number  of
verbs2:
[Juan duerme/pernocta/pasa la noche] al raso
?(John sleeps) in the open air?
While some others are only used in a negative sen-
tence:
[Juan no aceptar?] por nada del mundo 
?(John will not accept) by no means? 
*[Juan aceptar?] por nada del mundo 
?(John will accept) by no means?
Others impose a specific tense:
[Juan  llegar?] en  breve '(John  will come
shortly?
*[John  lleg?] en  breve ?(John  has  come)
shortly?
2.1 Classification 
We apply the notion of adverbs to syntactically
different structures of traditional terminology such
as  underived  (primary)  adverbs  (bien,  ?well?)  or
derived  forms  (profundamente ?deeply?),
circumstantial  complements  (al  amanecer ?at
dawn?),  and circumstantial  clauses  (hasta  que la
muerte nos separe ?until death do us part?). 
We considered the sequence Prep Det C Modif 3
as the basic structure that formally define and clas-
sify  compound  adverbs,  adopting  the  concept  of
generalized adverb proposed by M. Gross (1986)
for French adverbs. 
Based on this, we defined 15 formal classes for
Spanish  compound  adverbs.  Table  1  (below)
shows the current state of the dictionary, the inter-
nal structure of each class, an illustrative example
and the number of compound adverbs collected so
far. 
Further  than  this  classification  based  on  their
internal  structure,  we  have  proposed  different
types  of  semantic-functional  groups  presented  in
terms  of  Finite  State  Transducers  (FSTs),  as  in
2 In the examples, (argument) simple sentences are given
in brackets.
3 Prep =  preposition;  Det =  determiner;  C =  lexical
constant, usually a noun;  Modif = modifier, such as an
adjective (Adj) or a prepositional phrase.
Fig.1. In this graph, all adverbial expressions have
the  same  general  meaning  (?quickly?).  Similar
graphs can be used, for example, to compare the
distribution  of  semantically  ?equivalent?
expressions and to structure the co-occurrence of
those adverbs with their argument predicates.
Class Structure Example Size
PC Prep C sin ambajes 869
PDETC Prep Det C al contado 585
PAC Prep Adj C sin previo aviso 157
PCA Prep C Adj a brazo partido 291
PCDC Prep C de C  a cuerpo de rey 168
PCPC Prep C Prep C de cabo a rabo 149
PCONJ Prep C Conj C en cuerpo y alma 131
PCDN Prep C de N a condici?n de 233
PCPN Prep C Prep N de espaldas a 51
PV Prep V W sin querer 127
PF frozen sentence que yo sepa 169
PECO (como) Adj que C sordo como una tapia 797
PVCO (V) como C (beber) como una esponja 532
PPCO (V) como Prep C (desaparecer) como
 por ensalmo
46
PJC Conj C y no se hable m?s 91
TOTAL 4396
Table 1. Classification of Spanish compound adverbs.
Fig.1 Finite-State graph (simplified) for semantic
clustering of adverbs
2.2 Microstructure  of Dictionary
The description takes the shape of binary matrices
(see Table 2, for an example), in which each line
corresponds  to  a  lexical  entry,  and  the  columns
represent different information. The set of matrices
constitute the lexicon-grammar of adverbial frozen
expressions.  Next,  we present  a brief  description
of the microstructure of the dictionary. 
34
N0 V
Prep
Det
C
PreMod
Mod
Pr?p D?t C
Pr?p D?t Adj C
Conj
DiaSys English equivalent
hum Vact - - acto - seguido - - + - immediately afterwards
hum llegar a la hora - horada + - - familiar on the nose
hum Vact por - voluntad - propia - + - - with one?s own will
hum comprar a el por - mayor - - - commerce wholesale
hum dormir con los ojos medio abiertos - - - - with one?s eyes half open
Table 2. Class PCA (extract)
The first column concerns the syntactic-seman-
tic  nature  of  the  subject.  We  adopted  G.  Gross
(1995)  and Le  Pesant and Mathieu-Colas  (1989)
basic  typology,  distinguishing  the  following
semantic  classes:  human,  animal,  vegetal,  con-
crete, and abstract.
The  second  column  refers  to  the  verb  most
commonly used with the adverb, for example:
[salir] a cuerpo gentil 
?(to go out) without cloak?; 
[cerrar Nconc] a cal y canto
?(to close something) under lock and key?.
The following columns contain the elements of
the structure: Prep, Det, C, and Modif, e.g.:
[Esta  gente  lleg? en este  pa?s]  con las  manos
vac?as 
?These  people  arrived  in  this  country  with
empty hands?
Naturally,  in Spanish the modifier  can be placed
before C:
[Se peleaban] a la menor ocasi?n 
?(they  were  fighting  each  others)  at  the  least
occasion/opportunity?.
The next columns correspond to their syntactic
(distributional  and  transformational)  properties:
?+?  indicates  that  the  expression  admits  this
property,  and  ?-  ?  that  it  does  not.  Relevant
properties  depend on the class:  some have to do
with permutation of elements of the compound or
their reduction to zero (zeroing); see ?2.3, below.
Diasystem  information  (Hausmann  1989)  is
provided  in  next  field  (DiaSys)  such  as  these
categories  (marked  in  bold,  in  the  examples
below): 
- diatopy: 
[Juan trabaja] al cohete (Uruguay/Argentina)
?(John works) in vain?; 
- diachrony : 
[Juan  convoca  a  los  estudiantes]  a  voz  de
apellido (out of use) 
?(John summons the students) by their family
name?; 
- diafrequency : 
[Juan se sirvi?] a barba regada (unusual) 
?(John served himself) abundantly?
- diastratic:
[Juan  recita] de  carretilla (familiar/
colloquial) 
?(John recites) by heart?; 
- diatechnical : 
[El torero clav? la  banderilla] de sobaquillo
(bullfighting) ?(the  bull  fighter  has  pinched
the bull) on its side; 
- diaintegrative : 
[Juan vino] motu propio (latinism) 
?(John came) voluntarily?. 
Finally,  we  have  included  French  translation
equivalents.  These  equivalence  relations  are  also
currently being extended to other languages, such
as Portuguese (Palma, in prep.).
2.3 Syntactic properties
We will  only  consider  here  the  most  prominent
properties, considering all classes of adverbs under
study.
One of the properties indicates the possibility to
transform  the  initial  structure  in  to  a  more
analytical phrase like de (modo + manera) C-a ?in
a  C-a way/manner?,  where  C-a is  an  adjective,
morphologically  related  to  the  constant  (frozen
element)  C;  naturally  the  meaning  of  the  two
structures is the same:
[La candidatura se aprob?] por unanimidad
=  [La  candidatura  se  aprob?]  de  manera
un?nime
35
?(His application was approved) by unanimity/in
an unanimous way?
[Juan lo ha dicho] con todos los respetos 
= [Juan lo ha dicho] de manera respetuosa 
?(John  has  said  so)  with  all  due  respect/  in  a
respectful manner?.
Another, similar, property shows the possibility
to transform the initial structure in an adverb based
on the same type of  C-a adjective and the suffix
-mente. This  property  concerns  classes  PC  and
PDETC :
[La candidatura se aprob?] por unanimidad
= [La candidatura se aprob?] un?nimemente
?(His application was approved) unanimously?
[Juan lo ha dicho] con todos los respetos 
= [Juan lo ha dicho] respetuosamente
?(John has said so) respectfully?.
Property  Conj concerns  classes  PC,  PDETC,
PAC and PCA. It highlights the eventual anaphoric
effect  of  the  adverb.  We  consider  it  as  a
conjunction-adverb, since in sentences like:
[Juan estudia] en consecuencia 
?(John studies) in consequence?
[Juan se march?] por lo tanto 
?(John went away) for that much?
we need a (trans-)phrastic context such as :
[Juan  quiere  aprobar], en  consecuencia,
[estudia]. 
?(John  wants  to  succeed  in  school),  in
consequence (he studies)?
[Ana se enfad? con Juan], por lo tanto,  [?ste se
march?]
?(Ana get  bored with  John),  for  that  much (he
went away)?
The  next  property  concerns  classes  PCA and
PAC.  It  describes  the  possible  omission  of  the
modifier:
[Los ni?os andan] en fila india 
?(The kids walk) in Indian line?
= [los ni?os andan] en fila 
?(The kids walk) in line?
Other  property indicates  the  possibility of
moving modifier from its basic position to the left
of C; it only concerns class PCA:
[Juan encontr? a Ana] en hora buena 
= [Juan encontr? a Ana] en buena hora
?(John met Ana) in good time/in time?
We have  also  noted  the  possibility  of  zeroing
the second element of the compound, i.e., the free
or frozen prepositional phrase.  It concerns classes
PCDC, PCPC, PCONJ, PCPN, and PCDN:
[Juan estudia] con la mejor voluntad del mundo
= [Juan estudia] con la mejor voluntad
?(John studies) with the best will (of the world)?
[Juan vive] al margen de la sociedad 
= [Juan vive] al margen
?(John lives) at the margin (of society)?
[Juan vive] de espaldas a la calle 
= [Juan vive] de espaldas
?(John lives) with his back (turned to the street)?
Certain  permutations have been noted,  but  not
dealt with in a transformational way:
[Juan se enamor? de Ana] por decirlo as?
= [Juan se enamor? de Ana] por as? decirlo
?(John fall in love with Ana) as it were?
Finally,  we  consider  the  possibility  of
substitution  of  the  second  element  by  a
subordinate  clause  (finite  or  infinitive);  this
property concerns PCDN and PCPN:
[Le consultar?] en caso de duda
= [Le consultar?] en caso de que haya duda
?(He will consult him) in case of doubt/in case
there is any doubt?
[Juan se march?] por miedo al fuego 
= [Juan se march?] por miedo a que haya fuego
?(He went away) for fear of fire/there being fire?
[Juan se sujet?] por miedo a una ca?da
?(John hold tight) by fear of a fall?
= [Juan se sujet?] por miedo a caer
?(John hold tight) by fear of to fall?
A  strictly  statistically,  corpus-based  approach
that only contemplates strings of words in view to
produce  lexicon  entries  (Manning  and  Sch?tze
2003) cannot but fail to put in relation such formal
variants  of  equivalent  expressions.  On  the  other
hand,  many  formal  variations  are  very  much
dependent on the particular  lexical  combinations,
and  cannot  be  generalized,  hence  the  need  to
describe their syntactic properties systematically. 
While  very  time-consuming,  our  method
provides a fine-grained linguistic description, and
is directly exploitable by finite-state methods. 
With  the  aim  of  retrieving  the  adverbial
expressions  from  texts  using  the  information
encoded in the lexicon matrices, it should be noted
36
that most but not all  properties referred to above
can  be  directly  formalized  using  the  finite-state
methods we are currently using. In the following
lines, we present this methodology. 
3 Formalization
In order to apply to texts the set of matrices that
constitute  the  Lexicon-Grammar  and  thus  to
identify  and  tag  compound  adverbs,  we  have
followed the  methodology proposed  by Senellart
(1998)  and  Silberztein  (2000),  and  adapted  by
Paumier (2003, 2004) for the UNITEX system 4. This
method consists  of intersecting linguistic data on
matrices  with  a  finite-state  graph  (called  a
reference graph) in order to generate automatically
a finite-state transducer (FST) that can be applied
to a corpus5. 
Fig.2 Reference graph (simplified) for class PCA
Fig.2 shows a (simplified)  reference graph for
class  PCA.  In the  graph,  variable  @X stands  for
column X in the matrix. For each line in the matrix
the  system builds  a sub-graph by replacing  each
variable for the content of the corresponding col-
umns  in  the  matrix.  If  that  columns  is  a  binary
property, the corresponding variable in the graph
functions as a switch, allowing for the rest of that
graph?s path to be build in case of a ?+? or, else,
collapsing the graph at that point, if a ?-? is found
at  that  property.  It  is  also  possible  to  deny  a
property  (!@X),  which  has  the  opposite  effect.
Another utility of the system is the inclusion of a
variable  @% that outputs the number of each entry
line in the matrix, thus enabling the user to easily
put  in  correspondence  a  given  result  to  the
corresponding lexical entry. The set of sub-graphs
(one per each entry in the matrix) is automatically
gathered  in  a  finite-state  transducer  that  can  be
directly applied to texts. 
In Fig. 2, class PCA reference graph includes:
two  delimiters  of  the  compound  expression,
<ADV_> and  <_ADV> ; the  @% variable; the top-
4 www.univ-mlv.fr/~unitex.
5 See Paumier (2004), for further details.
most  path describe  the full  expression,  while  the
second and third paths, below, depend on proper-
ties described by variables @H and @I; these corre-
spond  to  the  permutation  of  the  adjective  [Ap]
and its reduction to zero [Az], respectively.
Similar graphs have been built to other classes6.
The  set  of  classes  thus  formalized  constitute  an
electronic dictionary of 2,930 entries (67% of all
compound entries collected so far). 
4 An experiment on texts
The  aim  of  this  experiment  is  to  assess  the
advantages  and  limitations  of  the  methodology
described in ?3 in the identification of multiword
units, in this case, compound adverbs, in real texts
in Spanish.
The FSTs were applied to a fragment of a cor-
pus of journalistic text taken from the newspaper
El Mundo,  of  about  2  Mb and  171.5  K (~24  K
different)  words.  The  system  retrieved  2,276
matches, corresponding to 461 different entries. 
Table 3 shows the breakdown of these matches
per  class  and  its  percentage,  followed  by  the
number of different entries (types) matched by the
system and the corresponding percentage of each
class entries. 
class
class
size matches
%
matches
entrie
s
%
entries
PC 869 849 0.37 215 0,47
PCDN 233 489 0.22 12 0,03
PDETC 585 406 0.18 119 0,26
PCPN 51 238 0.10 23 0,05
PCA 291 134 0.06 19 0,04
PF 169 42 0.02 7 0,02
PAC 157 38 0.02 23 0,05
PCONJ 131 22 0.01 9 0,02
PCPC 149 21 0.01 12 0,03
PCDC 168 17 0.01 12 0,03
PV 127 16 0.01 10 0,02
2,930 2,272 461
Table 3. Breakdown of matches per class.
Classes  PC,  PCDN,  PDETC,  PCPN and  PCA
are  the  only  classes  with  over  100  matches;
together  they  constitute  93% of  the  matches,  all
other classes have residual expression. 
6 In this paper, however, we did not deal with classes of
comparative adverbs (PECO, PVCO and PPCO) or class
PJC,  which pose particular  problems to  their  recogni-
tion.
37
On  the  other  hand,  classes  PC  and  PDETC
present  the  larger  number  of  dictionary  entries
matched. Notice that, despite the number of entries
in the matrices, only 461 entries (16%) were found
in the corpus.
Class  PC  alone  represents  47%  of  the  total
entries  matched  by  the  system  (215/461),
immediately followed by class PDETC, with 26%
of  matched  entries  (119/461).  Matches  for  these
two classes together constitute 55% of the total of
strings  matched  by  the  system  (1,255/2,272).
These two figures make PC and PDETC the most
prominent classes for this experiment, in view of
the  assessment  of  the  finite-state  methods  here
used  to  identify  compound  adverbs  in  texts.  For
lack of space, analysis of results will thus focus on
these  classes  and  only  major  phenomena,  i.e.,
those situations with major impact on results, will
be taken in consideration here.
5 Results and discussion
We went  through  the  concordances  manually,
and confirmed a precision of 77.4% (974/1,255) 7.
We discuss these results below.
The  major  reason  for  incorrect  matching  has
been  found  to  correspond  to  cases  where  the
matched  sequence  is  not  the  target  compound
adverb but part of a longer, free word sequence, or
part  of  a  compound  word;  in  the  following
example, the adverb de accidente ?accidentally? is
an  ambiguous  string  since  it  overlaps  with  the
compound  noun  seguros  de  accidente ?accident
insurances? 
Antes de iniciar un rodaje, se prev? cualquier eventualidad.
Se contratan seguros de accidente, enfermedad y muerte para
las personas clave del proyecto [PC_0010]
while in the next  example, the string  de derecho
?by  law/right?  overlaps  a  (free)  prepositional
phrase which includes a compound noun  derecho
de veto ?right of veto?:
Yo creo  que  no  se puede  pretender  ejercer una  especie  de
derecho de veto, porque esto querr?a decir que el Gobierno
es reh?n [PC_0243]
7 Since  we started  with a  previously,  manually  build,
electronic  dictionary,  we can  not  compute  recall.  We
define  precision as  the  number of  correct  matches on
total matches.
In some few cases, incorrect matches were the
result of an inadequate treatment of contractions of
prepositions  and  determiners.  In  classes  PCDN,
PCPN,  the  second  preposition  often  appears
contracted with the determiner of the free NP. In
the next example, contraction of a + el = al has not
been correctly described:
coches ser?n introducidos en el mercado nip?n en el mes de
octubre,  con  ocasi?n  del  Sal?n  de  Tokio.  Con respecto al
Tigra,  que se produce en exclusiva para todo el mundo en
Figuer [PC_0686]
This problem is to be fixed on a next version of the
reference FSTs.
In  some  cases,  especially  when  the  adverb  is
marked  as  a  conjunction-adverb  (Conj),  it  often
appears  between  comas  or  at  the  beginning  of
sentences, followed by coma. 
se  hab?a  montado  su  particular  Guerra  de  los  Mundos  de
tema ferroviario. Tambi?n hay quien piensa, por cierto, que a
este Gobierno se lo van a cargar no sus errores, sino las cos
[PC_0145]
privatizar  el  99,9% de las  empresas y entes  p?blicos  de la
Comunidad  y ya est? trabajando en ello.  Por cierto, le ha
arrebatado el control del Canal de Isabel II a Pedroche y lo
[PC_0145] 
We  have  annotated  these  cases  so  that  this
information can be added to the matrices and used
in disambiguation tasks.
Finally,  many  temporal  adverbs  have  only
partially been identified. 
puede seguir as??- exigi? al Gobierno de Gonz?lez que fije un
calendario  electoral  antes  del  17  de este  mes.  Tras  de  lo
cual,  el  a?n  secretario  general  de  CDC  sostuvo  que,  si
[PDETC_0076] 
zo de Erez, consigui? dos objetivos. En primer lugar, Israel se
comprometi? a iniciar,  a finales de  este mes, la evacuaci?n
gradual  de  tres  ciudades  palestinas:  Jenin,  Kalkilia
[PDETC_0076]
This  occurs  because  matrices  only  included
simple  word combinations.  As others have noted
previously  (Baptista  and  Catal?  2002;  Baptista
2003a,b),  time-related  adverbs  may be  described
by FST methods as those used here.  Those local
grammars could easily be integrated in the system. 
38
6 Conclusion
The taxonomic approach adopted here, the system-
atic  survey  of  the  lexicon  and  its  formal
representation,  resulted  in  a  complex  linguistic
database of Spanish compound adverbs. This may
have many applications, not strictly in Linguistics,
but also in Didactics and in Lexicography.
It can further be used in several applications on
natural  language  processing.  The  relatively  high
precision (77,4%) of the finite state methods used
in  this  paper  are  very encouraging,  and  in  some
cases,  discussed  above,  they  can  and  will  be
improved in a future version both of the reference
graphs and of the lexicon-grammar matrices. 
However,  the  major  difficulty  to  a  better
identification of compound adverbs in texts seems
to  reside  in  the  fact  that  no  syntactic  analysis
(parsing)  has  been  performed  on  the  text.
Therefore,  there  is  no  possibility  of  using
information  regarding  (sub-)phrases  and  other
constituents of the compounds in order to preclude
incorrect matching. 
Another aspect that hinders better results has to
do  with  the  formal  variation  of  compound
adverbial  expressions.  Adverbs  present  more
problems for their recognition as the limit between
free sequence and fixed sequence is more difficult
to  establish  than  in  others  categories  of
compounds. The building of electronic dictionaries
may benefit from a (more) corpus-based approach,
so as to retrieve variants of a given lexical entry,
but  a  careful  and  time-consuming  verification  is
needed  in  order  to  group  variants  as  different
expressions of the same meaning unit.
Finally,  the  relatively  small  portion  of  the
dictionary matched on the corpus imposes that  it
should be tested on texts of a more diverse nature
and of a larger size, thus probably yielding a larger
perspective  of  the  use  of  these  idiomatic
expressions. Still, it is now possible to consider the
study of the distribution of these adverbs, trying to
specify  the  type  of  predicates  (verbs,  nouns,
adjectives, mainly) on which they operate.
Acknowledgement 
This research was supported by the Spanish Ministerio
de Ciencia y Tecnologia in the framework of the project
grant  HP-2004-0098,  and  Conselho  de  Reitores  das
Universidades Portuguesas, project grant E-111/-05.
References
Jorge  Baptista  2003a.  Some  Families  of  Compound
Temporal  Adverbs  in  Portuguese.  Proceedings  of
Workshop  on Finite-State  Methods  for  Natural
Language Processing: 97-104, ACL, Hungary.
Jorge Baptista 2003b. Evaluation of Finite-State Lexical
Transducers  of  Temporal  Adverbs  for  Lexical
Analysis  of  Portuguese  Texts.  Computational
Processing of the Portuguese Language. Proceedings
of  PROPOR?2003.  Lecture  Notes  in  Computer
Science/Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence 2721:
235-242, Springer, Berlin.
Jorge  Baptista  and  Dolors  Catal?  2002.  Compound
Temporal  Adverbs  in  Portuguese  and  in  Spanish.
Advances in Natural Language Processing,  Lecture
Notes  in  Computer  Science/Lecture  Notes  in
Artificial  Intelligence  2389:  133-136,  Springer,
Berlin.
Jorge  Baptista  and  Dolors  Catal?  2006.  Les adverbes
compos?s dans le domaine du travail.  Mots, Termes,
et Contextes:  249-263, AUF/LTT and ?d. Archives
Contemporaines, Paris.
Xavier  Blanco  and  Dolors  Catal?  1998.  Quelques
remarques  sur  un  dictionnaire  ?lectronique
d?adverbes  compos?s  en  espagnol.  Linguisticae
Investigationes  Supplementa 11  (2):  213-232,  John
Benjamins Pub. Co., Amsterdam/Philadelphia.
Gaston Gross  1995.  ? propos de  la  notion d?humain.
Lexiques  Grammaires  Compar?s  en  Fran?ais.
inguisticae  Investigationes  Supplementa 17:  71-80,
John Benjamins Pub. Co., Amsterdam/Philadelphia.
Maurice  Gross  1986.  Grammaire  transformationnelle
du fran?ais: syntaxe de l?adverbe, ASSTRIL, Paris.
Zellig  S.  Harris  1976  Notes  du  cours  de  syntaxe,  Le
Seuil, Paris. 
Zellig  S.  Harris.  A  Theory  of  Language  and
Information.  A  Mathematical  Approach,  Clarendon
Press, Oxford.
Franz  J.  Haussmann  1989.  Die  Markierung  in
allgemeinen  einsprachigen  W?rterbuch:  eine
?bersicht,  W?rterb?cher,  Dictionaries,
Dictionnaires, vol 1: 651, Berlin/ New York, Walter
de Gruyter.
Denis  Le  Pesant  and  Michel  Mathieu-Colas.  1998.
Introduction  aux  classes  d'objets   Langages 131:
6-33, Larousse, Paris.
Ch.  Manning  and  H.  Sch?tze  2003.  Foundations  of
Statistical Natural Language Processing, MIT Press,
London/Cambridge, MA
39
Cristina  Palma  (in  preparation).  Estudo  Contrastivo
Portugu?s-Espanhol de Adv?rbios Compostos, Univ.
Algarve, Faro.
S?bastien Paumier 2004.  Unitex - manuel d'utilisation,
Univ. Marne-la-Vall?e, Paris.
Jean  Senellart  1998.  Reconnaissance  automatique  des
entr?es du lexique-grammaire des phrases fig?es.  Le
Lexique-Grammaire.  Travaux  de  Linguistique 37:
109-125, Duculot, Bruxelles.
Max  Silberztein  2000.  Intex (Manual),  ASSTRIL/LADL,
Paris.
40
Proceedings of the Workshop on Lexical and Grammatical Resources for Language Processing, pages 92?101,
Coling 2014, Dublin, Ireland, August 24 2014.
The fuzzy boundaries of operator verb and support verb constructions
with dar ?give? and ter ?have? in Brazilian Portuguese
Amanda Rassi
1,2,3
, Cristina Santos-Turati
1,2,3
, Jorge Baptista
2,3
, Nuno Mamede
3
, Oto Vale
1
{aprassi,mcturati,jbaptis}@ualg.pt, nuno.mamede@inesc-id.pt, otovale@ufscar.br
1
UFSCar, Rodovia Washington Lu??s, km 235 - SP-310 S?ao Carlos-SP, Brazil
2
UAlg/CECL, Campus de Gambelas, 8005-139 Faro, Portugal
3
INESC-ID Lisboa/L2F, Rua Alves Redol, n.
o
9, 1000-029 Lisboa, Portugal
Abstract
This paper describes the fuzzy boundaries between support verb constructions (SVC) with ter
?have? and dar ?give? and causative operator verb (VopC) constructions involving these same
verbs, in Brazilian Portuguese (BP), which form a complex set of relations: (i) both verbs are
the support verb of the same noun (SVC); (ii) dar is the standard (active-like) SVC while ter
is a converse (passive-like) SVC; and (iii) dar is a VopC, operating on a ter SVC. In this paper
we have systematically studied these complex relations involving SVC and VopC for BP, which
constitute a challenge to Natural Language Processing (NLP) systems, and have been often ig-
nored in related work. The paper proposes a lexically-based strategy to implement SVC in a
fully-fledged, rule-based parsing system, yielding an adequate semantic structure of the events
(predicates) denoted by predicative nouns in SVC.
1 Introduction: basic concepts and a little history
The notion of support verb has been in use for a long time, under many different theoretical perspectives
and various terminologies. In this paper, we adopt the Zellig S. Harris?s (1991) transformational operator
grammar framework. As early as 1964, Harris (1964, p.216-7) proposed the concept and named this
particular type of construction as ?U operator? nominalizations, linking sentences such as He studies
eclipes = He makes studies of eclipses. It was, however, M. Gross (1981) who first provided the definition
of support verb we will rely upon here. The support verb make (in the example above) can be seen as
a sort of an auxiliary of the predicative noun studies, in charge of carrying the grammatical values of
tense and person-number agreement that the noun is morphologically unable to express. In many cases,
support verbs are practically devoid of meaning. For lack of space, we cannot detail further the properties
of SVC, and only the briefest outline is provided here; a good overview can be found in (Gross, 1996;
Gross, 1998; Lamiroy, 1998).
One of the most important theoretical contribution of the notion of support verb came from the fact
that it provides a natural framework to adequately include in the kernel sentences of the language the
large number of ?abstract? nouns, which do not have neither a verbal nor an adjectival counterpart; that
is, they are isolated or autonomous nouns, lacking any nominalizations (in a synchronic perspective,
at least). This phenomenon is particularly evident in Romance languages (French, Italian, Portuguese,
Romanian and Spanish): FR: Jean a fait gr`eve ?Jean did strike?; IT: Giovanni ha fatto sciopero ?id.?;
PT: O Jo?ao fez greve ?id.?; RU: Ioan a f?acut grev?a ?id.?; SP: Joan hizo huelga ?id.?; cp. EN: *John did
strike, John was on strike).
Finally, nominal constructions are unlike any other predicative part-of-speech by the fact that predica-
tive nouns can present more than one construction with different support verbs, while still expressing the
same semantic predicate. Hence, for example, greve ?strike? can have a SVC with both fazer ?to make?
(as above) and estar em ?to be in?: O Jo?ao est?a em greve ?Jo
?ao is on strike? (Ranchhod, 1990). Each
SVC has its own specific properties, e.g. only SVC with fazer can undergo passive, while the general
predicate remains the same.
This work is licenced under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Page numbers and proceedings
footer are added by the organizers. License details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
92
In this paper, we also consider the concept of operator verb (VopC), introduced in the same paper
(Gross, 1981, p. 23-39); two relatively clear situations were distinguished:
? a causative operator verb (VopC), which adds a new element to an elementary sentence; this ele-
ment has an easily identifiable meaning: CAUSE; distributionally, this element suffers very loose
constraints (and we define this as a distributionally non constraint position (Nnr)); if the base sen-
tence under the operator is a support verb construction 1, the VopC may ?absorb? the support verb
and it may also introduce some formal changes in that sentence 1;
(1) Isso d?a # Max tem (fome + medo + sede).
1
?This gives # Max has (hungry + fear + thirst).?
(2) Isso d?a (fome + medo + sede) em Max. ?This gives Max (hungry + fear + thirst).?
In (2), the support verb ter is absorbed under the operator dar and its subject becomes a dative, indirect
complement, though the semantic roles of subject of dar (CAUSE) and of the subject of the predicative
noun (EXPERIENCER), after this restructuring, remain the same.
? a linking operator-verb (VopL), which hardly modifies the meaning of the underlying sentence; it
also adds an argument to the base sentence 1, but this is not a new one since it is bounded linked to
a noun complement of the base sentence 1 (Ranchhod, 1990).
(3) Max tem # Ana est?a sob o controle do Max. ?Max has # Ana is under Max?s control.?
(4) = Max
i
tem Ana sob o (seu
i
+ *meu + *teu) controle. ?Max
i
has Ana under (his
i
+ *my + *your)
control.?
This paper reports an ongoing research to systematically classify the predicative nouns built with the
support verbs dar and ter in Brazilian Portuguese (Rassi and Vale, 2013; Santos-Turati, 2012). Similar
work has already been developed for the European variety (Vaza, 1988; Ranchhod, 1990; Baptista, 1997;
Baptista, 2005). For many languages, including Portuguese, the studies on support verb constructions
and causative constructions use a lexical approach, aiming at building dictionaries or lists of predicative
nouns or at identifying those constructions (semi)automatically, e.g. for Portuguese (Hendrickx et al.,
2010; Duran et al., 2011), for English (Grefenstette and Teufel, 1995), for German (Hanks et al., 2006;
Storrer, 2007) and many other languages. As far as we could ascertain, no implementation of these SVC
constructions has been made yet in NLP systems, particularly in parsers. Most systems considering these
constructions just treat them as multiword expressions, ignoring their internal syntactic structure.
In this paper, we will show the complex set of relations involved in these SVC, where these verbs
can function not only as support but also as operator verbs, thus rendering their description remarkably
complex, particularly in view of Natural Language Processing. We aim at capturing the syntactic de-
pendencies involved in these expressions, not as multiword, fixed strings, but as analyzable syntactic
structures.
The paper is structured as follows: Next, Section 2 presents the current state of the collection and
classification if these SVC in Brazilian Portuguese; Section 3 illustrates the syntactic-semantic relations
between different constructions of ter and dar; Section 4 proposes a strategy for implementing the data in
a rule-based parsing system; and, finally, Section 5 presents some concluding remarks and perspectives
on future work.
2 Support verb constructions with ter ?have? and dar ?give?
The predicative nouns in this paper select the support verbs dar ?give? and ter ?have?, and were retrieved
from previous lists of predicative nouns in European Portuguese (Vaza, 1988; Baptista, 1997) and from
the PLN.BR Full corpus (Bruckschein et al., 2008). This corpus contains 103,080 texts, with 29 million
tokens, consisting of news pieces from Folha de S?ao Paulo, a Brazilian newspaper (from 1994 to 2005).
All these constructions were validated in real data, and in some cases also ressourcing to the web.
1
In the examples, elements between brackets and separated by the ?+? sign can all appear in that given syntactic slot. The
symbol ?#? delimits clauses, while the ?*? mark signals the sentence as unacceptable. Correferent elements are linked by
correference indexes
i
. For clarity, all support verbs will be shown without italics in the examples. An approximate translation
of Portuguese examples is provided, but its acceptability is irrelevant for the paper.
93
2.1 Nominal predicates with support verb ter ?have?
We adopted several criteria that allowed us to constitute lexical-syntactic, relatively homogeneous,
classes. These criteria were inspired in those taken from previous classifications, developed in the
Lexicon-grammar framework of Maurice Gross (1975; 1988; 1996), for both Portuguese and other lan-
guages. The main classification criteria can be summarized as follows: (i) the number of arguments,
considering constructions with a subject and one or two essential complements as arguments; (ii) the
possibility of a noun admitting a sentential construction (in subject or complement position); (iii) the
distributional nature of the arguments: if they are obligatorily human or allow for non-human nouns; (iv)
the property of symmetry
2
between the arguments.
Following these criteria, we have so far classified around 1,000 nominal constructions from a list with
3,000 candidates of predicative nouns censed in the corpus (Santos-Turati, 2012). The already classified
nominal predicates that select the support verb ter ?have? in Brazilian Portuguese were divided into 9
classes (Table 1)
3
.
Class Structure Example/Gloss Count
TH1 Nhum
0
ter Npred Ana tem uma beleza impressionante 465
?Ana has an amazing beauty?
TNH1 N-hum
0
ter Npred A tinta tem um tom escuro 138
?The paint has a dark tone?
TR1 N?hum
0
ter Npred (Ana + a m?usica) tem um ritmo contagiante 139
?(Ana + the music) has a contagious rhythm?
TH2 Nhum
0
ter Npred Prep Nhum
1
Ana tem respeito por Max 111
?Ana has respect for Max?
TNH2 N-hum
0
ter Npred Prep Nhum
1
O bombom tem gosto de avel?a 6
?The bonbon has taste like hazelnut?
TR2 N?hum
0
ter Npred Prep N-hum
1
(O carro + a cidade) tem um alto consumo de ?agua 22
?(The car + the city) has a high consumption of water?
TS2 Nhum
0
ter Npred Prep Nhum
1
O patr?ao tem um acordo com o empregado 38
(Simetry) ?The boss has an agreement with the employee?
TQF1 QueF
0
ter Npred Prep N
1
Esse fato tem uma grande import?ancia para Ana 6
?This fact has a great importance for Ana?
TQF2 N
0
ter Npred Prep QueF
1
Ana tem medo de dirigir na estrada 80
?Ana has fear to drive on the road?
TOTAL 1,005
Table 1: SVC with support verb ter (Santos-Turati, 2012)
2.2 Nominal predicates with support verb dar ?give?
The same criteria were also adopted for SVC with verb dar ?give? (Rassi and Vale, 2013), though
two differences were considered: (i) the constructions with a body-part noun (Npc) as argument were
distinguished as a special class for their particular properties; and (ii), no symmetric constructions were
found. We classified 900 support verb constructions with verb dar ?give? in Brazilian Portuguese into
11 classes (Table 2).
3 Relations between ter ?have? and dar ?give?
First of all, it is necessary to distinguish three different kinds of relations established between verb dar
and verb ter constructions. The first type of relation considers the verbs dar ?give? and ter ?have? as
synonymous and classified as standard support verb constructions. The verb dar can replace the verb ter
without any changes in the meaning of the sentence or in the selection restrictions of the arguments:
2
The notion of symmetry in verbal constructions was initially presented by Borillo (1971) for French verbs - Paul rencontre
son fr`ere ?Paul meets his brother? / Paul et son fr`ere se rencontrent ?Paul and his brother meet?. In the case of the Portuguese
nominal constructions, symmetry was presented in Ranchhod (1990) and Baptista (2005), who described the nominal predicates
with the support verbs estar com and ser de, respectively.
3
In Table 1 and Table 2, the left column shows the conventional codes for designating each class; and the second column
represents its syntactic structure, indicated as follows: Nhum and N-hum for human and non-human noun respectively; N?hum
for both human or non-human noun; Npc for body-part noun; the indexes ?
0
? and ?
1
? indicate the subject and the complement
position, respectively; Npred stand for the predicative noun; Prep for preposition; QueF for completive.
94
Class Structure Example/Gloss Count
DH1 Nhum
0
dar Npred Ana deu uma pirueta 133
?Ana gave a pirouette?
DNH1 N-hum
0
dar Npred O bal?ao deu um estouro 20
?The baloon gave a burst?
DR1 N? hum
0
dar Npred (Max + O clima) deu uma refrescada 51
?(Max +The weather) gave a refreshed?
DH2 Nhum
0
dar Npred Prep Nhum
1
Max deu um castigo para a Ana 217
?Max gave a punishment to Ana?
DNH2 Nhum dar Npred Prep N-hum
1
Ana deu uma cozida nos legumes 137
?Ana gave a cooked in the vegetables?
DPC2 Nhum
0
dar Npred Prep Npc
1
Max deu um tapa na cara da Ana 114
?Max gave a slap in Ana?s face?
DQF2 Nhum
0
dar Npred Prep QueF
1
Max deu um jeito de consertar o carro 52
?Max gave a way to fix the car?
DHR2 Nhum
0
dar Npred Prep N? hum
1
Ana deu destaque ao (Max + problema) 60
?Ana gave emphasis to (Max + the problem)?
DRH2 N? hum
0
dar Npred Prep Nhum
1
(Ana + O telhado) deu protec??ao ao Max 32
?(Ana + The roof) gave protection to Max?
DR2 N? hum
0
dar Npred Prep N-hum
1
(Ana+A lei) deu embasamento `a teoria 25
?(Ana+The law) gave basis to the theory?
D3 N
0
dar Npred Prep N
1
Prep N
2
Ana deu um apelido de macaco ao Max 59
?Ana gave the nickname monkey to Max?
TOTAL 900
Table 2: SVC with support verb dar (Rassi and Vale, 2013)
(5) Ana (deu + teve) um + um(a) (birra + chilique + pirepaque + tremelique + troc?o).
?Ana (gave + had) (a + an) (tantrum + hissy fit + outburst + shiver + thing).?
The second type of relation concerns the transformation named Conversion by G. Gross (1982; 1989),
in which the predicative noun is maintained and their arguments change their relative position, without,
however, changing their semantic roles. In these constructions, the sentence with AGENT subject is
called the standard construction, while its equivalent sentence with the reversed argument order is called
the converse construction. Usually, the support verbs of the standard and the converse construction are
different, as it is also the preposition introducing the converse complement:
(6) Ana deu algum apoio ao Max. ?Ana gave some support to Max.?
[Conv.] = Max teve algum apoio da Ana. ?Max had some support from Ana.?
The third kind of relation linking the sentences with the verb ter and the verb dar is the causative
operator construction (already mentioned in ?1):
(7) Isso deu # Ana tem coragem. ?This gave # Ana has courage.?
= Isso deu coragem `a Ana. ?This gave courage to Ana.?
These three types of relations are presented in the table below, with an example and the respective
number of constructions in each type. From the intersection between the list of predicative nouns con-
structed with verb ter ?have? and those with verb dar ?give?, we found 693 predicative nouns, distributed
as shown in Table 3.
dar ?give? ter ?have? Example/Gloss Count
SVCstandard SVCstandard Ana deu um chilique ?Ana gave a hissy fit?
Ana teve um chilique ?Ana had a hissy fit? 35
SVCstandard SVCconverse O policial deu uma multa ao Max ?The officer gave Max a fine?
Max teve uma multa ?Max had a fine? 72
VopCausative SVCstandard A flor deu alergia a Ana ?The flower gave allergy to Ana?
(VopC) Ana tem alergia `a flor ?Ana has an allergy? 586
Table 3: Comparative table with syntactic relations
95
3.1 Verbs dar and ter in standard SVC
Around 4.8% of the predicative nouns (35 constructions) accept both support verbs dar and ter in stan-
dard constructions, such as:
(8) A empresa (d?a + tem) atenc??ao ao cliente. ?The company (gives + has) attention to the client.?
(9) O rem?edio (d
?a + tem) um efeito positivo no organismo. ?The medicine (gives + has) a positive effect
on human body.?
(10) O resultado (deu + teve) um impacto significativo para o time. ?The result (gave + had) a significant
impact to the team.?
In Brazilian Portuguese, around 35 predicative nouns, such as febre ?fever? and dengue ?dengue?,
besides having both dar and ter as their support verb also allow dar as a causative operator on them
(examples taken from the web):
[VopC]: [Sua lic??ao de casa:] ?agua parada d
?a dengue. ?[...] still water gives (= causes) dengue.?
[CVS dar]: Inclusive, a vizinha tamb?em deu dengue. ?Inclusive, the neighbour gave (= had) dengue.?
[CVS ter]: O meu esposo j?a teve dengue. ?My husband already had dengue.?
A few nouns (around 10), such as amor ?love?, confianc?a ?trust? and respeito ?respect?, besides
admitting the two support verbs in their basic construction, also admit ter in a converse construction:
(11) O filho d?a respeito `a m?ae. ?The son gives respect to the mother.?
= O filho tem respeito pela m?ae. ?The son has respect for the mother.?
[conv.] = A m?ae tem o respeito do filho. ?The mother has respect from her son.?
3.2 Verb dar as standard SVC and ter as converse SVC
Around 10.4% of the predicative nouns (72 constructions) admit the verb dar in the standard construction
and the verb ter in a converse construction, but not ter as a standard support. In Brazilian Portuguese,
predicative nouns constructed with the support verb dar in a standard construction accept other converse
verbs beyond the verb ter ?have?, such as receber ?receive?, ganhar ?gain?, levar ?get? and tomar
?take?
4
.
(12) Ana deu protec??ao ao Max. ?Ana gave protection to Max.?
= Max (teve + recebeu) a protec??ao da Ana. ?Max (had + received) the protection from Ana.?
(13) Ana deu uma ajuda ao Max. ?Ana gave a help to Max.?
= Max (teve + ganhou) uma ajuda da Ana. ?Max (had + gained) a help from Ana.?
(14) Ana deu uma resposta no Max. ?Ana gave an answer to Max.?
= Max (teve + levou) uma resposta da Ana. ?Max (had + got) an answer from Ana.?
(15) O policial deu uma multa ao Max. ?The officer gave a fine to Max.?
= Max (teve + tomou) uma multa do policial. ?Max (had + took) a fine from the officer.?
3.3 Verb dar as VopC and ter as SVC
Around 84.8% (586 predicative nouns) of the elementary constructions with the support verb ter ?have?
also allow the causative operator verb dar ?give?; some of these nouns constitute relatively homogenous
semantic sets, e.g. the predicative nouns that express <feeling>, <sensation>, <emotion> or those that
indicate <disease> (this semantic classification is just approximative):
4
For European Portuguese equivalent converse constructions, see Baptista (1997); for a comparison between the two lan-
guage variants, see Rassi et al. (2014).
96
(16) Ana tem alegria. ?Ana has happiness.?
(Z?e + A vinda do Z?e + O fato de Z?e ter voltado + Isso) deu alegria `a Ana.
?(Z?e + Z?e?s coming + The fact of Z?e has came + That) gave happiness to Ana.?
(17) Ana tem c?olica. ?Ana has colic.?
(O chocolate + O fato de ter comido chocolate + Isso) deu c?olica na Ana.
?(The chocolat + The fact of she has eaten chocolat + That) gave a colic in Ana.?
These predicative nouns allow a particular (impersonal?) construction with dar, in which the argument
in subject position is not explicit, so the CAUSE element is also absent, and the sentence has the same
overall meaning of the SVC with verb ter standard, but with an inchoative aspect; notice that the verb
dar must be in the 3
rd
person singular, and it does not agree with the predicative noun:
(18) (Deu + *Deram) (uma) (alegria + c?olica) na Ana. ?Gives/gave (a) (hapiness + colic) in Ana.?
= Ana teve (uma) (alegria + c?olica). ?Ana had (a) (hapiness + colic).?
(19) (Deu + ?*Deram) umas (palpitac??oes + c?olicas) na Ana. ?Gives/gave some (palpitations + colics) in
Ana.?
= Ana teve umas (palpitac??oes + c?olicas). ?Ana had some (palpitations + colics).?
3.4 Formalization into the Lexicon-Grammar
Because of the complex relations and the different syntactic status that the verbs dar and ter may show,
these constructions are essentially determined by the lexicon, i.e., they depend on the specific predicative
noun. It is only natural that a lexically-based approach be taken in order to describe this properties, partic-
ularly in view of the implementation of such type of expressions in NLP systems. The Lexicon-Grammar
framework constitutes such a methodological setting, as it presupposes the extensive and systematical
survey and formal representation of the lexicon properties.
In the Lexicon-Grammar, a systematic description of linguistic phenomena is usually presented in
the form of binary matrices: the lines contain the lexical entries while the columns represent syntactic-
semantic properties of each entry. For example, for each predicative noun, distributional constraints
on the arguments are represented; the elementary support verb and the main variants of this verb are
encoded; the possibility of accepting conversion and the converse support verbs are explicitly provided;
and all these syntactic-semantic informations are specified for each predicative noun. Besides its intrinsic
linguistic interest, the main purpose for this formalization requirements is the application of the data in
NLP. In the next section, we present a preliminary proposal for the implementation problems of these
type of SVC in a rule-based parsing system of Portuguese.
4 Towards the implementation of SVC in a NLP system
Besides its linguistic interest, one of the goals of the formal representation of the lexical properties of
predicative nouns and SVC into a Lexicon-Grammar such as described above (?3.4) is to allow for the
implementation of these data in NLP systems. In this section an outline of the strategy adopted for
its implementation specifically into a rule-based system, namely STRING (Mamede et al., 2012)
5
, is
presented. This is still an on-going work, so in the next lines we briefly sketch the system?s architecture
(?4.1.) and then (?4.2.) we present the strategy that we intend to implement for the adequate parsing of
SVC with ter and dar, having in mind the complex structures and relations mentioned in ?3.
4.1 STRING architecture
STRING is an NLP chain with a modular structure that executes all the basic processing tasks, namely:
tokenization and text segmentation, part-of-speeh tagging, morphosyntactic disambiguation, shallow
parsing (chuking) and deep parsing (dependency extraction). The parsing stage is performed by the
rule-based parser XIP (Xerox Incremental Parser) (Mokhtar et al., 2002). XIP identifies the elementary
5
http://string.l2f.inesc-id.pt/
97
constituents of a sentence, such as noun phrases (NP) or prepositional phrases (PP), and then these are
structured by binary dependencies between them, corresponding to the syntactic relations, such as sub-
ject (SUBJ), direct complement (CDIR) or modifier (MOD). STRING also extracts Named Entities,
performs time expressions identification and normalization, Anaphora Resolution and some Word-Sense
disambiguation (WSD).
At the final stages of parsing, the system extracts the text events (or predicates) and their participants
(arguments). The system currently extracts the EVENT structure for all full verbs and predicative nouns.
In the case of verbs, it associates the events to their participants and circumstances, identifying their
corresponding semantic roles (Talhadas, 2014), based on the sentence parse and the information available
on the Portuguese full verbs Lexicon-Grammar (Baptista, 2012)
6
. Hence, for a sentence such as (20),
the system parser extracts the event structure by way of the following dependencies:
(20) Max costuma ler o jornal no caf?e `as sextas-feiras. ?Max uses to read the newspaper at the caff
?ee on
Fridays.?
EVENT AGENT(ler,Max)
EVENT OBJECT(ler,jornal)
EVENT LOC-PLACE(ler,caf?e)
EVENT TIME-FREQUENCY(ler,a as sextas-feiras)
4.2 Strategy
In the case of a predicative noun in a SVC, one would want the predicative noun also to be captured as an
EVENT, but not the support verb, since its role is basically that of an auxiliary of the noun. However, since
the support verb conveys several important grammatical information, particularly the standard/converse
orientation of the predicate
7
, a SUPPORT dependency is first extracted, so in sentences such as in (21)
one would get the dependency shown below:
(21) Max deu um beijo na Ana. ?Max gave a kiss in Ana.?
SUPPORT STANDARD(beijo,deu)
To do so, one needs to provide the system with the information that dar is the (basic) standard support
verb of the predicative noun beijo ?kiss?. It is also necessary to know that in this construction, the
predicative noun is the direct complement (CDIR) of the support verb and that the dative complement
can be introduced, in Brazilian Portuguese, by preposition em ?in/on?. The following rules illustrate (in
a simplified way
8
) the functioning of the rule-based system:
if (CDIR(#1[lemma:dar],#2[lemma:beijo]) & ?SUPPORT(#2,#?))
SUPPORT[vsup-standard](#1,#2)
if (SUPPORT(#1,?))
EVENT[OTHER=+](#1).
if (SUPPORT[vsup-standard](#1[lemma:beijo],#2) &
EVENT[other](#1) & SUBJ(#2,#3))
EVENT[agent-generic=+](#1,#3).
if (SUPPORT[vsup-standard](#1[lemma:beijo],#2) & EVENT[other](#1) &
?MOD(#2,#3) & PREPD(#3,?[lemma:em]) )
COMPL(#1,#3),
EVENT[patient=+](#1,#3).
6
This semantic role information is still not available for the predicative nouns, but it is currently being encoded.
7
The support verb can convey aspectual, modal and even stylistic values, which are encoded in the lexicon and remain
available in the system?s output, even if not necessarily visible in the EVENT representation.
8
The rule system should also take into account the distributional constraints on the argument slots, but, for simplicity, we
dismissed it in this paper.
98
if (SUPPORT[vsup-standard](#1[lemma:beijo],#2) & EVENT[other](#1) &
(?MOD[dat](#2,#3) || ?CLITIC(#2,#3[dat]) ) )
CINDIR[dat=?](#1,#3),
EVENT[patient=+](#1,#3).
The rules read as follows: First, a SUPPORT dependency with the feature VSUP-STANDARD is
extracted when the noun beijo ?kiss? is the direct complement of the verb dar ?give? (and no other
support verb was extracted yet for that noun); based on this dependency, an EVENT (unary) dependency
is extracted for the predicative noun; then, the subject of the standard support verb is assigned the
agent semantic role (agent-generic in STRING?s terminology); next, the prepositional phrase
modifying (MOD) the support verb and introduced by preposition em ?in? is converted into a complement
(COMPL) of the predicative noun and assigned a semantic role of patient; a similar procedure is
used for the dative complement, when reduced to a dative pronominal form, but in this case, instead
of COMPL the CINDIR (indirect complement) dependency is used. All these rules are automatically
produced for each predicative noun, from the information in the Lexicon-Grammar. The corresponding
EVENT structure is represented below:
SUPPORT VSUP-STANDARD(beijo,deu)
EVENT AGENT(beijo,Max)
EVENT PATIENT(beijo,Ana)
For the converse construction 4.2, while the EVENT structure remains the same, the SUPPORT depen-
dency is:
(22) Ana ganhou um beijo do Max. ?Ana got a kiss from Max.?
SUPPORT VSUP-CONVERSE(beijo,ganhou)
The converse construction entails the ?swapping? of the arguments? syntactic function, while keeping
their respective semantic roles. The detection of the converse construction triggers a set of rules that
also swap the semantic roles associated to the predicative noun?s syntactic slots. In the case where the
same verb is both the standard and the converse support of a predicative noun, they are both extracted, at
first, and then the presence of prepositional complements or the determiner of the noun can be used for
disambiguation. This will be part of future work as, for the moment, whenever this happens, the converse
construction is discarded. The assigning of semantic roles to the predicative noun?s arguments is then
made only once, and by general rules, both in the standard and in the converse constructions.
The situation is somewhat similar in the case of a causative-operator verb 4.2:
(23) Essa not??cia deu estresse no Max. ?This news gave stress in Max.?
In this case, since the Lexicon-Grammar has encoded that the verb dar can be an operator on ter,
and since the predicative noun estresse ?stress? does not allow for dar to be its support, a general rule
can apply, extracting the CAUSE relation expressed by the VopC, in a similar way as for the SUPPORT
dependency. The EVENT structure is thus construed as shown below:
VOPC(estresse,deu)
EVENT(estresse,other)
EVENT EXPERIENCER(estresse,Max)
EVENT CAUSE(estresse,not??cia)
However, when the same verb can be both a support and an operator verb, in the absence of tell-tale
prepositional complements or other syntactic evidence, the detection of the adequate structure can not be
done at this stage. We found only 35 predicative nouns which can be associated to the verb dar ?give?
with both categories, i.e. as a support and a VopC. It is also possible that both dependencies SUPPORT
and CAUSE be extracted in order to disambiguate them at a later stage.
99
5 Conclusions and future work
In the near future, we intend to use the data encoded in the Lexicon-Grammar of these predicative nouns
and build a SVC identification module for STRING. For the moment, the identification of all the syn-
tactic phenomena, constituting as many different parsing cases as possible, is underway, in order to
fully automatize the processing of converting the Lexicon-Grammar tables into the STRING, with XIP-
compliant rules, in a similar way as it has already been done for the verbs (Baptista, 2012; Travanca,
2013; Talhadas, 2014). After implementing all the data in STRING we also intend to evaluate the system
in order to check the extraction of the dependencies involving the support verbs and predicative nouns.
An important task ahead is the systematic comparison of the structures and properties here described
against those of European Portuguese. First of all, the set of nouns available in each variant is not exactly
the same, even if the concepts are shared; for example, carona in BP corresponds to the EP boleia ?ride?;
in other cases, the choice of the nominalization suffixes differ: in BP one uses the term parada card??aca,
while its equivalent in EP is paragem card??aca ?cardiac arrest?. False-friends are also common: in BP,
chamada ?rebuke? is unrelated to EP chamada ?phone call? (but, in this sense, it is also used in BP);
the set of support verbs for each noun are different: as a synonym of rebuke we find the pair dar-levar
(only in BP), while as equivalent to phone call the basic support verbs are fazer-receber (the same in
BP and EP). Naturally, much in both variants is quite similar, though some patterns begin to emerge:
the different choice of prepositions for the complement, mostly the alternation between em ?in? in BP
and a ?to? in EP (both as dative complements); the choice of support verbs, with some being used for
these predicative noun exclusively in BP (ganhar ?gain? and tomar ?take?) or in EP (pregar ?throw? and
apanhar ?take?).
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial supports from Capes/PDSE under Processes BEX
12751/13-8 and BEX 6561/13-6 and also national funds through FCT ? Fundac??ao para a Ci?encia e a
Tecnologia, under project PEst-OE/EEI/LA0021/2013. We would like to thank the comments of the
anonymous reviewers, which helped to improve this paper.
References
Jorge Baptista. 1997. Serm?ao, tareia e facada. Uma classificac?
?ao das construc??oes conversas dar-levar. In
Semin?arios de Lingu??stica, volume 1, pages 5?37, Faro. Universidade do Algarve.
Jorge Baptista. 2005. Sintaxe dos predicados nominais com SER DE. Fundac??ao Calouste Gulbenkian/Fundac??ao
para a Ci?encia e Tecnologia, Lisboa.
Jorge Baptista. 2012. A Lexicon-grammar of European Portuguese Verbs. In Jan Radimsky, editor, Proceedings of
the 31st International Conference on Lexis and Grammar, volume 31, pages 10?16, Czech Republic, September.
Universit`a degli Studi di Salerno and University of South Bohemia in Nov?e Hrady.
Andr?ee Borillo. 1971. Remarques sur les verbes sym?etriques. Langue Franc?aise, (11):17?31.
M??rian Bruckschein, Fernando Muniz, Jos?e Guilherme Camargo Souza, Juliana Thiesen Fuchs, Kleber Infante,
Marcelo Muniz, Patr??cia Nunes Gonc?alvez, Renata Vieira, and Sandra Maria Aluisio. 2008. Anotac??ao
lingu??stica em XML do corpus PLN-BR. S?erie de relat?orios do NILC, NILC- ICMC - USP.
Magali Sanches Duran, Carlos Ramisch, Sandra Maria Alu??sio, and Aline Villavicencio. 2011. Identifying and
analyzing Brazilian Portuguese complex predicates. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions:
from Parsing and Generation to the Real World, pages 74?82, Portland, USA.
Gregory Grefenstette and Simone Teufel. 1995. Corpus-based Method for Automatic Identification of Support
Verbs for Nominalizations. CoRR, cmp-lg/9503010.
Maurice Gross. 1975. M?ethodes en syntaxe. Hermann, Paris.
Maurice Gross. 1981. Les bases empiriques de la notion de pr?edicat s?emantique. Langages, 63(3):7?52.
Gaston Gross. 1982. Un cas des constructions inverses: donner et recevoir. Lingvisticae Investigationes, 2:1?44.
100
Maurice Gross. 1988. Methods and tactics in the construction of a Lexicon-grammar. In The linguistic Society of
Korea, editor, Linguistics in the Morning Calm 2. Selected papers from SICOL-1986, pages 177?197, Seoul.
Hanshin Publishing Company.
Gaston Gross. 1989. Les constructions converses du franc?ais. Droz, Genebra.
Maurice Gross. 1996. Lexicon grammar. In K. Brown and J. Miller, editors, Concise Encyclopedia of Syntactic
Theories, pages 244?259. Pergamon, Cambridge.
Maurice Gross. 1998. La fonction s?emantique des verbes supports. In B?eatrice Lamiroy, editor, Travaux de
Linguistique, number 37, pages 25?46.
Patrick Hanks, Anne Urbschat, and Elke Gehweiler. 2006. German light verb constructions in corpora and dictio-
naries. International Journal of Lexicography, 19(4):439?457.
Zellig Harris. 1964. The Elementary Transformations. Transformations and Discourse Analysis Papers, (54):211?
235.
Zellig Harris. 1991. A Theory of Language and Information: A Mathematical Approach. Clarendon Press, New
York.
Iris Hendrickx, Am?alia Mendes, S??lvia Pereira, Anabela Gonc?alves, and In?es Duarte. 2010. Complex predicates
annotation in a corpus of Portuguese. in: Proceedings of the 4th ACL. In Proceedings of the 4th ACL Linguistic
Annotation Workshop, pages 100?108, Uppsala, Sweden.
B?eatrice Lamiroy. 1998. Le Lexique-grammaire: Essai de synth`ese. In B?eatrice Lamiroy, editor, Travaux de
Linguistique, volume 37, pages 7?23.
Nuno Mamede, Jorge Baptista, Vera Cabarr?ao, and Cl?audio Diniz. 2012. STRING: An hybrid statistical and
rule-based natural language processing chain for Portuguese. In International Conference on Computational
Processing of Portuguese (Propor 2012), volume Demo Session, Coimbra, Portugal, April.
Salah Ait Mokhtar, Jean-Pierre Chanod, and Claude Roux. 2002. Robustness beyond shalowness: Incremental
dependency parsing. Natural Language Engineering, pages 121?144.
Elisabete Ranchhod. 1990. Sintaxe dos predicados nominais com Estar. INIC - Instituto Nacional de Investigac??ao
Cient??fica, Lisboa.
Amanda Rassi and Oto Vale. 2013. Predicative Nouns Suffixation associated to the verb dar (give) in Brazilian
Portuguese. In Jorge Baptista and Mario Monteleone, editors, Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference
on Lexis and Grammar, volume 32, pages 151?158, Faro, September. UAlg.
Amanda Rassi, Nathalia Perussi, Jorge Baptista, and Oto Vale. 2014. Estudo contrastivo sobre as construc??oes
conversas em PB e PE. In Cristina Fargetti, Odair Silva, Clotilde Murakawa, and Anise Ferreira, editors,
Anais do I CINELI - Congresso Internacional Estudos do L?exico e suas Interfaces, volume 1, page (no prelo),
Araraquara-SP, Maio. Universidade Estadual Paulista - UNESP.
Maria Cristina Andrade Santos-Turati. 2012. Descric??ao da estrutura argumental dos predicados nominais com
o verbo-suporte ter. In Semin?ario do GEL, number 60, pages 20?21, S
?ao Paulo, Brasil. Grupo de Estudos
Lingu??sticos do Estado de S?ao Paulo - GEL.
Angelika Storrer. 2007. Corpus-based investigations on german support verb constructions. In Christiane Fell-
baum, editor, Collocations and Idioms: Linguistic, Lexicographic, and Computational Aspects, pages 164?188.
Continuum Press, London.
Rui Talhadas. 2014. Automatic Semantic Role Labeling for European Portuguese. Master?s thesis, Universidade
do Algarve, Faro.
Tiago Travanca. 2013. Verb Sense Disambiguation. Master?s thesis, Instituto Superior T?ecnico, Universidade de
Lisboa, June.
Aldina Vaza. 1988. Estruturas com nomes predicativos e o verbo-suporte dar. Master?s thesis, Faculdade de
Letras - Universidade de Lisboa.
101
