Opinion Extraction Using a Learning-Based
Anaphora Resolution Technique
Nozomi Kobayashi Ryu Iida Kentaro Inui Yuji Matsumoto
Nara Institute of Science and Technology
Takayama, Ikoma, Nara, 630-0192, Japan
{nozomi-k,ryu-i,inui,matsu}@is.naist.jp
Abstract
This paper addresses the task of extract-
ing opinions from a given document
collection. Assuming that an opinion
can be represented as a tuple ?Subject,
Attribute, Value?, we propose a compu-
tational method to extract such tuples
from texts. In this method, the main
task is decomposed into (a) the pro-
cess of extracting Attribute-Value pairs
from a given text and (b) the process of
judging whether an extracted pair ex-
presses an opinion of the author. We
apply machine-learning techniques to
both subtasks. We also report on the
results of our experiments and discuss
future directions.
1 Introduction
The explosive spread of communication on the
Web has attracted increasing interest in technolo-
gies for automatically mining large numbers of
message boards and blog pages for opinions and
recommendations.
Previous approaches to the task of mining a
large-scale document collection for opinions can
be classified into two groups: the document clas-
sification approach and the information extrac-
tion approach. In the document classification
approach, researchers have been exploring tech-
niques for classifying documents according to se-
mantic/sentiment orientation such as positive vs.
negative (e.g. (Dave et al, 2003; Pang and Lee,
2004; Turney, 2002)). The information extraction
approach, on the other hand, focuses on the task
of extracting elements which constitute opinions
(e.g. (Kanayama and Nasukawa, 2004; Hu and
Liu, 2004; Tateishi et al, 2001)).
The aim of this paper is to extract opinions
that represent an evaluation of a products together
with the evidence. To achieve this, we consider
our task from the information extraction view-
point. We term the above task opinion extraction
in this paper.
While they can be linguistically realized in
many ways, opinions on a product are in fact often
expressed in the form of an attribute-value pair.
An attribute represents one aspect of a subject and
the value is a specific language expression that
qualifies or quantifies the aspect. Given this ob-
servation, we approach our goal by reducing the
task to a general problem of extracting four-tuples
?Product, Attribute, Value, Evaluation? from a
large-scale text collection. Technology for this
opinion extraction task would be useful for col-
lecting and summarizing latent opinions from the
Web. A straightforward application might be gen-
eration of radar charts from collected opinions as
suggested by Tateishi et al (2004).
Consider an example from the automobile do-
main, I am very satisfied with the powerful engine
(of a car). We can extract the four-tuple ?CAR, en-
gine, powerful, satisfied? from this sentence. Note
that the distinction between Value and Evaluation
is not easy. Many expressions used to express a
Value can also be used to express an Evaluation.
For this reason, we do not distinguish value and
evaluation, and therefore consider the task of ex-
tracting triplets ?Product, Attribute, Value?. An-
other problem with opinion extraction is that we
want to get only subjective opinions. Given this
setting, the opinion extraction task can be decom-
posed into two subtasks: extraction of attribute-
value pairs related to a product and determination
of its subjectivity.
As we discuss in section 3, an attribute and its
value may not appear in a fixed expression and
may be separated. In some cases, the attribute
may be missing from a sentence. In this respect,
finding the attribute of a value is similar to finding
the missing antecedent of an anaphoric expres-
sion. In this paper, we discuss the similarities
and differences between opinion extraction and
anaphora resolution. Then, we apply a machine
learning-based method used for anaphora reso-
173
lution to the opinion extraction problem and re-
port on our experiments conducted on a domain-
restricted set of Japanese texts excerpted from re-
view pages on the Web.
2 Related work
In this section, we discuss previous approaches
to the opinion extraction problem. In the pattern-
based approach (Murano and Sato, 2003; Tateishi
et al, 2001), pre-defined extraction patterns and a
list of evaluative expressions are used. These ex-
traction patterns and the list of evaluation expres-
sions need to be manually created. However, as
is the case in information extraction, manual con-
struction of rules may require considerable cost to
provide sufficient coverage and accuracy.
Hu and Liu (2004) attempt to extract the at-
tributes of target products on which customers
have expressed their opinions using association
mining, and to determine whether the opinions
are positive or negative. Their aim is quite sim-
ilar to our aim, however, our work differs from
theirs in that they do not identify the value corre-
sponding to an attribute. Their aim is to extract
the attributes and their semantic orientations.
Taking the semantic parsing-based approach,
Kanayama and Nasukawa (2004) apply the idea
of transfer-based machine translation to the ex-
traction of attribute-value pairs. They regard the
extraction task as translation from a text to a sen-
timent unit which consists of a sentiment value,
a predicate, and its arguments. Their idea is
to replace the translation patterns and bilingual
lexicons with sentiment expression patterns and
a lexicon that specifies the polarity of expres-
sions. Their method first analyzes the predicate-
argument structure of a given input sentence mak-
ing use of the sentence analysis component of an
existing machine translation engine, and then ex-
tracts a sentiment unit from it, if any, using the
transfer component.
One important problem the semantic parsing
approach encounters is that opinion expres-
sions often appear with anaphoric expressions
and ellipses, which need to be resolved to
accomplish the opinion extraction task. Our
investigation of an opinion-tagged Japanese
corpus (described below) showed that 30% of
the attribute-value pairs we found did not have a
direct syntactic dependency relation within the
sentence, mostly due to ellipsis. For example1,
?dezain-wa?a hen-daga watashi-wa ?-ga ?suki-da?v
?design?a weird I [it] ?like?v
(The design is weird, but I like it.)
This type of case accounted for 46 out of 100
pairs that did not have direct dependency rela-
tions. To analyze predicate argument structure
robustly, we have to solve this problem. In the
next section, we discuss the similarity between
the anaphora resolution task and the opinion
extraction task and propose to apply to opinion
extraction a method used for anaphora resolution.
3 Method for opinion extraction
3.1 Analogy with anaphora resolution
We consider the task of extracting opinion tu-
ples ?Product, Attribute, Value? from review sites
and message boards on the Web dedicated to pro-
viding and exchanging information about retail
goods. On these Web pages, products are often
specified clearly and so it is frequently a trivial
job to extract the information for the Product slot.
We therefore in this paper focus on the problem
of extracting ?Attribute, Value? pairs.
In the process of attribute-value pair identifi-
cation for opinion extraction, we need to deal
with the following two cases: (a) both a value
and its corresponding attribute appear in the text,
and (b) a value appears in the text while its at-
tribute is missing since it is inferable form the
value expression and the context. The upper half
of Figure 1 illustrates these two cases in the auto-
mobile domain. In (b), the writer is talking about
the ?size? of the car, but the expression ?size? is
not explicitly mentioned in the text. In addition,
(b) includes the case where the writer evaluates
the product itself. For example, ?I?m very satis-
fied with my car!?: in this case, a value expres-
sion ?satisfied? evaluates the product as a whole,
therefore a corresponding attribute does not ex-
ists.
For the case (a), we first identify a value ex-
pression (like in Figure 1) in a given text and then
look for the corresponding attribute in the text.
Since we also see the case (b), on the other hand,
we additionally need to consider the problem of
whether the corresponding attribute of the identi-
fied value expression appears in the text or not.
The structure of these problems is analogous to
that of anaphora resolution; namely, there are ex-
actly two cases in anaphora resolution that have
a clear correspondence with the above two cases
as illustrated in Figure 1: in (a) the noun phrase
(NP) is anaphoric; namely, the NP?s antecedent
appears in the text, and in (b) the noun phrase is
non-anaphoric. A non-anaphoric NP is either ex-
1
??
a
denotes the word sequence corresponding to the At-
tribute. Likewise, we also use ??
v
for the Value.
174
Taro-wa shisetsu-wo??-ga?shirabe-te
houkokusho-o sakusei-shita
(a) (b)
Dezain-wa     hen-desuga
watashi-wa ??-ga? suki-desu
?????
(?-ga) Ookii-kedo atsukai-yasui
( it )        large   but    easy to handle
(a) (b)
anaphora resolution
opinion extraction
anaphorantecedent
Attribute
Value
(The design is weird, but I like it.)
omitted Attribute
(It is large, but easy to handle)
Tar?-NOM  attendance-ACC                   noted
report-ACC             wrote
(Taro noted the attendance 
and wrote a report.)
design-NOM            weird
I-NOM          ( it )             like
Value
Onaka-ga hetta-node
kaerouto (?-ga) omou
hungry
go home       (I)
exophora
anaphor
(I think I?ll go home  because I?m hungry.)
Figure 1: Similarity between opinion extraction
and anaphora resolution
ophoric (i.e. the NP has an implicit referent) or in-
definite. While the figure shows Japanese exam-
ples, the similarity between anaphora resolution
and opinion extraction is language independent.
This analogy naturally leads us to think of apply-
ing existing techniques for anaphora resolution to
our opinion extraction task since anaphora reso-
lution has been studied for a considerably longer
period in a wider range of disciplines as we briefly
review below.
3.2 Existing techniques for anaphora
resolution
Corpus-based empirical approaches to anaphora
resolution have been reasonably successful. This
approach, as exemplified by (Soon et al, 2001;
Iida et al, 2003; Ng, 2004), is cost effective,
while achieving a better performance than the
best-performing rule-based systems for the test
sets of MUC-6 and MUC-7 2.
As suggested by Figure 1, anaphora resolution
can be decomposed into two subtasks: anaphoric-
ity determination and antecedent identification.
Anaphoricity determination is the task of judg-
ing whether a given NP is anaphoric or non-
anaphoric. Recent research advances have pro-
vided several important findings as follows:
? Learning-based methods for antecedent
identification can also benefit from the use of
linguistic clues inspired by Centering The-
ory (Grosz et al, 1995).
? One useful clue for anaphoricity determina-
tion is the availability of a plausible candi-
date for the antecedent. If an appropriate
candidate for the antecedent is found in the
preceding discourse context, the NP is likely
to be anaphoric.
For these reasons, an anaphora resolution model
performs best if it carries out the following pro-
2The 7th Message Understanding Conference (1998):
www.itl.nist.gov/iaui/894.02/related projects/muc/
??????????????interia ?????seki??
Dezain-wa   hen-desuga   watashi-wa suki-desu ?????
interior                  seat
design-NOM       weird    I-NOM           like
candidates
design like
interior like
seat like
design like
candidate attributes
real attribute
Select the best 
candidate attribute
Decide whether the 
candidate attribute 
stands for the real 
attribute or not
design like
design like
real attribute
pairedness
determination
attribute 
identification
opinionhood
determination
Judge whether the pair 
expresses an opinion or not
opinion
Attribute
dictionary
Value
dictionary
interior
seat
design
like
good
?.
target value
initialization
pair extraction
Figure 2: Process of opinion extraction
cess in the given order (Iida et al, 2005): (1)
Antecedent identification: Given an NP, iden-
tify the best candidate antecedent for it, and (2)
Anaphoricity determination: Judge whether the
candidate really stands for the true antecedent of
the NP.
3.3 An opinion extraction model inspired by
analogy with anaphora resolution
As illustrated in Figure 2, an opinion extraction
model derived from the aforementioned analogy
with anaphora resolution as follows:
1. Initialization: Identify attribute and value
candidates by dictionary lookup
2. Attribute identification: Select a value and
identify the best candidate attribute corre-
sponding to the value
3. Pairedness determination: Decide whether
the candidate attribute stands for the real at-
tribute of the value or not (i.e. the value
has no explicit corresponding attribute in the
text)
4. Opinionhood determination: Judge wheth-
er the obtained attribute-value pair3 ex-
presses an opinion or not
Here, the attribute identification and pairedness
determination processes respectively correspond
to the antecedent identification and anaphoricity
determination processes in anaphora resolution.
Note that our opinion extraction task requires
an additional subtask, opinionhood determination
? an attribute-value pair appearing in a text does
not necessarily constitute an opinion. We elabo-
rate on the notion of opinionhood in section 4.1.
From the above discussion, we can expect that
the findings for anaphora resolution mentioned in
3.2 stated above apply to opinion extraction as
well. In fact, the information about the candidate
3For simplicity, we call a value both with and without an
attribute uniformly by the term attribute-value pair unless
the distinction is important.
175
attribute is likely to be useful for pairedness deter-
mination. We therefore expect that carrying out
attribute identification before pairedness determi-
nation should outperform the counterpart model
which executes the two subtasks in the reversed
order. The same analogy also applies to opinion-
hood determination; namely, we expect that opin-
ion determination is bet performed after attribute
determination. Furthermore, our opinion extrac-
tion model also can be implemented in a totally
machine learning-based fashion.
4 Evaluation
We conducted experiments with Japanese Web
documents to empirically evaluate the perfor-
mance of our opinion extraction model, focus-
ing particularly on the validity of the analogy dis-
cussed in the previous section.
4.1 Opinionhood
In these experiments, we define an opinion as fol-
lows: An opinion is a description that expresses
the writer?s subjective evaluation of a particular
subject or a certain aspect of it.
By this definition, we exclude requests, factual
or counter-factual descriptions and hearsay evi-
dence from our target opinions. For example, The
engine is powerful is an opinion, while a counter-
factual sentence such as If only the engine were
more powerful is not regarded as opinion.
4.2 Opinion-tagged corpus
We created an opinion-tagged Japanese corpus
consisting of 288 review articles in the automo-
bile domain (4,442 sentences). While it is not
easy to judge whether an expression is a value or
an attribute, we asked the annotator to identify at-
tribute and value expressions according to their
subjective judgment.
If some attributes are in a hierarchical rela-
tion with each other, we asked the annotator to
choose the attribute lowest in the hierarchy as the
attribute of the value. For example, in a sound
system with poor sound, only sound is annotated
as the attribute of the value poor.
The corpus contains 2,191 values with an at-
tribute and 420 values without an attribute. Most
of the attributes appear in the same sentence as
their corresponding values or in the immediately
preceding sentence (99% of the total number of
pairs). Therefore, we extract attributes and their
corresponding values from the same sentence or
from the preceding sentence.
4.3 Experimental method
As preprocessing, we analyzed the opinion-
tagged corpus using the Japanese morphological
analyzer ChaSen4 and the Japanese dependency
structure analyzer CaboCha 5.
We used Support Vector Machines to train the
models for attribute identification, pairedness de-
termination and opinionhood determination. We
used the 2nd order polynomial kernel as the ker-
nel function for SVMs. Evaluation was per-
formed by 10-fold cross validation using all the
data.
4.3.1 Dictionaries
We use dictionaries for identification of at-
tribute and value candidates. We constructed a
attribute dictionary and a value dictionary from
review articles about automobiles (230,000 sen-
tences in total) using the semi-automatic method
proposed by Kobayashi et al (2004). The data
used in this process was different from the
opinion-tagged corpus. Furthermore, we added
to the dictionaries expressions which frequently
appearing in the opinion-tagged corpus. The final
size of the dictionaries was 3,777 attribute expres-
sions and 3,950 value expressions.
4.3.2 Order of model application
To examine the effects of appropriately choos-
ing the order of model application we mentioned
in the previous section, we conducted four ex-
periments using different orders (AI indicates at-
tribute identification, PD indicates pairedness de-
termination and OD indicates opinion determina-
tion):
Proc.1: OD?PD?AI, Proc.2: OD?AI?PD
Proc.3: AI?OD?PD, Proc.4: AI?PD?OD
Note that Proc.4 is our proposed ordering.
In addition to these models, we adopted a base-
line model. In this model, if the candidate value
and a candidate attribute are connected via a de-
pendency relation, the candidate value is judged
to have an attribute. When none of the candidate
attributes have a dependency relation, the candi-
date value is judged not to have an attribute.
We adopted the tournament model for attribute
identification (Iida et al, 2003). This model im-
plements a pairwise comparison (i.e. a match)
between two candidates in reference to the given
value treating it as a binary classification prob-
lem, and conducting a tournament which consists
of a series of matches, in which the one that pre-
vails through to the final round is declared the
4http://chasen.naist.jp/
5http://chasen.org/?taku/software/cabocha/
176
winner, namely, it is identified as the most likely
candidate attribute. Each of the matches is con-
ducted as a binary classification task in which one
or other of the candidate wins.
The pairedness determination task and the
opinionhood determination task are also binary
classification tasks. In Proc.1, since pair identifi-
cation is conducted before finding the best candi-
date attribute, we used Soon et al?s model (Soon
et al, 2001) for pairedness determination. This
model picks up each possible candidate attribute
for a value and determines if it is the attribute for
that value. If all the candidates are determined not
to be the attribute, the value is judged not to have
an attribute. In Proc.4, we can use the information
about whether the value has a corresponding at-
tribute or not for opinionhood determination. We
therefore create two separate models for when the
value does and does not have an attribute.
4.3.3 Features
We extracted the following two types of fea-
tures from the candidate attribute and the candi-
date value:
(a) surface spelling and part-of-speech of the
target value expression, as well as those of its
dependent phrase and those in its depended
phrase(s)
(b) relation between the target value and can-
didate attribute (distance between them, ex-
istence of dependency, existence of a co-
occurrence relation)
We extracted (b) if the model could use both the
attribute and the value information. Existence of a
co-occurrence relation is determined by reference
to a predefined co-occurrence list that contains
attribute-value pair information such as ?height
of vehicle ? low?. We created the list from the
230,000 sentences described in section 4.3.1 by
applying the attribute and value dictionary and
extracting attribute-value pairs if there is a de-
pendency relation between the attribute and the
value. The number of pairs we extracted was
about 48,000.
4.4 Results
Table 1 shows the results of opinion extraction.
We evaluated the results by recall R and preci-
sion P defined as follows (For simplicity, we sub-
stitute ?A-V? for attribute-value pair):
R =
correctly extracted A-V opinions
total number of A-V opinions
,
P =
correctly extracted A-V opinions
total number of A-V opinions found by the system
.
In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of
the information about the candidate attribute, we
evaluated the results of pair extraction and opin-
ionhood determination separately. Table 2 shows
the results. In the pair extraction, we assume that
the value is given, and evaluate how successfully
attribute-value pairs are extracted.
4.5 Discussions
As Table 1 shows, our proposed ordering is out-
performed on the recall in Proc.3, however, the
precision is higher than Proc.3 and get the best F-
measure. In what follows, we discuss the results
of pair extraction and opinionhood determination.
Pair extraction From Table 2, we can see that
carrying out attribute identification before paired-
ness determination outperforms the reverse order-
ing by 11% better precision and 3% better recall.
This result supports our expectation that knowl-
edge of attribute information assists attribute-
value pair extraction. Focusing on the rows la-
beled ?(dependency)? and ?(no dependency)? in
Table 2, while 80% of the attribute-value pairs in
a direct dependency relation are successfully ex-
tracted with high precision, the model achieves
only 51.7% recall with 61.7% precision for the
cases where an attribute and value are not in a di-
rect dependency relation.
According to our error analysis, a major source
of errors lies in the attribute identification task. In
this experiment, the precision of attribute identifi-
cation is 78%. A major reason for this problem
was that the true attributes did not exist in our
dictionary. In addition, a major cause of error in
the pair determination stage is cases where an at-
tribute appearing in the preceding sentence causes
a false decision. We need to conduct further in-
vestigations in order to resolve these problems.
Opinionhood determination Table 2 also
shows that carrying out attribute identification
followed by opinionhood determination out-
performs the reverse ordering, which supports
our expectation that knowing the attribute
information aids opinionhood determination.
While it produces better results, our proposed
method still has room for improvement in both
precision and recall. Our current error analysis
has not identified particular error patterns ? the
types of errors are very diverse. However, we
need to at least address the issue of modifying
the feature set to make the model more sensitive
to modality-oriented distinctions such as subjunc-
tive and conditional expressions.
177
Table 1: The precision and the recall for opinion extraction
procedure value with attribute value without attribute attribute-value pairs
baseline precision 60.5% (1130/1869) 10.6% (249/2340) 32.8% (1379/4209)
recall 51.6% (1130/2191) 59.3% (249/420) 52.8% (1379/2611)
F-measure 55.7 21.0 40.5
Proc.1 precision 47.3% (864/1828) 21.6% ( 86/399) 42.7% ( 950/2227)
recall 39.4% (864/2191) 20.5% ( 86/420) 36.4% ( 950/2611)
F-measure 43.0 21.0 39.3
Proc.2 precision 63.0% (1074/1706) 38.0% (198/521) 57.1% (1272/2227)
recall 49.0% (1074/2191) 47.1% (198/420) 48.7% (1272/2611)
F-measure 55.1 42.0 52.6
Proc.3 precision 74.9% (1277/1632) 29.1% (151/519) 63.8% (1373/2151)
recall 55.8% (1222/2191) 36.0% (151/420) 52.6% (1373/2611)
F-measure 64.0 32.2 57.7
Proc.4 precision 80.5% (1175/1460) 30.2% (150/497) 67.7% (1325/1957)
recall 53.6% (1175/2191) 35.7% (150/420) 50.7% (1325/2611)
F-measure 64.4 32.7 58.0
Table 2: The result of pair extraction and opinionhood determination
procedure precision recall
pair extraction
baseline (dependency) 71.1% (1385/1929) 63.2% (1385/2191)
PD?AI 65.3% (1579/2419) 72.1% (1579/2191)
AI?PD 76.6% (1645/2148) 75.1% (1645/2191)
(dependency) 87.7% (1303/1486) 79.6% (1303/1637)
(no dependency) 51.7% ( 342/ 662) 61.7% ( 342/ 554)
opinionhood determination OD 74.0% (1554/2101) 60.2% (1554/2581)AI?OD 82.2% (1709/2078) 66.2% (1709/2581)
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed a machine
learning-based method for the extraction of opin-
ions on consumer products by reducing the prob-
lem to that of extracting attribute-value pairs from
texts. We have pointed out the similarity between
the tasks of anaphora resolution and opinion ex-
traction, and have applied the machine learning-
based method designed for anaphora resolution to
opinion extraction. The experimental results re-
ported in this paper show that identifying the cor-
responding attribute for a given value expression
is effective in both pairedness determination and
opinionhood determination.
References
K. Dave, S. Lawrence, and D. M. Pennock. 2003. Min-
ing the peanut gallery: opinion extraction and semantic
classification of product reviews. In Proc. of the 12th In-
ternational World Wide Web Conference, pages 519?528.
B. J. Grosz, A. K. Joshi, and S. Weinstein. 1995. Center-
ing: A framework for modeling the local coherence of
discourse. Computational Linguistics, 21(2):203?226.
M. Hu and B. Liu. 2004. Mining and summarizing customer
reviews. In Proc. of the Tenth International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 168?
177.
R. Iida, K. Inui, H. Takamura, and Y. Matsumoto. 2003. In-
corporating contextual cues in trainable models for coref-
erence resolution. In Proc. of the EACL Workshop on the
Computational Treatment of Anaphora, pages 23?30.
R. Iida, K. Inui, Y. Matsumoto, and S. Sekine. 2005. Noun
phrase coreference resolution in Japanese base on most
likely antecedant candidates. Journal of Information Pro-
cessing Society of Japan, 46(3). (in Japanese).
H. Kanayama and T. Nasukawa. 2004. Deeper sentiment
analysis using machine translation technology. In Pro-
ceedings of the 20th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 494?500.
N. Kobayashi, K. Inui, Y. Matsumoto, K. Tateishi, and
T. Fukushima. 2004. Collecting evaluative expressions
for opinion extraction. In Proc. of the 1st International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages
584?589.
S. Murano and S. Sato. 2003. Automatic extraction of sub-
jective sentences using syntactic patterns. In Proc. of the
Ninth Annual Meeting of the Association for Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 67?70. (in Japanese).
V. Ng. 2004. Learning noun phrase anaphoricity to improve
coreference resolution: Issues in representation and opti-
mization. In Proc. of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 152?159.
B. Pang and L. Lee. 2004. A sentiment education: Sen-
timent analysis using subjectivity summarization based
on minimum cuts. In Proc. of the 42nd Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
271?278.
W. M. Soon, H. T. Ng, and D. C. Y. Lim. 2001. A ma-
chine learning approach to coreference resolution of noun
phrases. Computational Linguistics, 27(4):521?544.
K. Tateishi, Y. Ishiguro, and T. Fukushima. 2001. Opinion
information retrieval from the Internet. In IPSJ SIGNL
Note 144-11, pages 75?82. (in Japanese).
K. Tateishi, T. Fukushima, N. Kobayashi, T. Takahashi,
A. Fujita, K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto. 2004. Web opin-
ion extraction and summarization based on viewpoints
of products. In IPSJ SIGNL Note 163, pages 1?8. (in
Japanese).
P. D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down? semantic
orientation applied to unsupervised classification of re-
views. In Proc. of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 417?424.
178
Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning, pp. 1065?1074, Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Extracting Aspect-Evaluation and Aspect-of Relations in Opinion Mining
Nozomi Kobayashi ? Kentaro Inui, and Yuji Matsumoto
Graduate School of Information Science,
Nara Institute of Science and Technology
8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara, 630-0192, Japan
{nozomi-k,inui,matsu}@is.naist.jp
Abstract
The technology of opinion extraction allows
users to retrieve and analyze people?s opin-
ions scattered over Web documents. We de-
fine an opinion unit as a quadruple consist-
ing of the opinion holder, the subject being
evaluated, the part or the attribute in which
the subject is evaluated, and the value of the
evaluation that expresses a positive or neg-
ative assessment. We use this definition as
the basis for our opinion extraction task. We
focus on two important subtasks of opinion
extraction: (a) extracting aspect-evaluation
relations, and (b) extracting aspect-of re-
lations, and we approach each task using
methods which combine contextual and sta-
tistical clues. Our experiments on Japanese
weblog posts show that the use of contex-
tual clues improve the performance for both
tasks.
1 Introduction
The explosive increase in Web communication has
attracted increasing interest in technologies for auto-
matically mining personal opinions from Web doc-
uments such as product reviews and weblogs. Such
technologies would benefit users who seek reviews
on certain consumer products of interest.
Previous approaches to the task of mining a large-
scale document collection of customer opinions (or
? Currently, NTT Cyber Space Laboratories,
1-1, Hikarinooka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa, 239-0847 Japan
reviews) can be classified into two approaches: Doc-
ument classification and information extraction. The
former is the task of classifying documents or pas-
sages according to their semantic orientation such as
positive vs. negative. This direction has been form-
ing the mainstream of research on opinion-sensitive
text processing (Pang et al, 2002; Turney, 2002,
etc.). The latter, on the other hand, focuses on the
task of extracting opinions consisting of information
about, for example, ?who feels how about which as-
pect of what product? from unstructured text data.
In this paper, we refer to this information extraction-
oriented task as opinion extraction. In contrast to
sentiment classification, opinion extraction aims at
producing richer information and requires an in-
depth analysis of opinions, which has only recently
been attempted by a growing but still relatively small
research community (Yi et al, 2003; Hu and Liu,
2004; Popescu and Etzioni, 2005, etc.).
Most previous work on customer opinion ex-
traction assumes the source of information to be
customer reviews collected from customer review
sites (Popescu and Etzioni, 2005; Hu and Liu, 2004;
Liu et al, 2005). In contrast, in this paper, we con-
sider the task of extracting customer opinions from
unstructured weblog posts. Compared with extrac-
tion from review articles, extraction from weblogs
is more challenging because weblog posts tend to
exhibit greater diversity in topics, goals, vocabu-
lary, style, etc. and are much more likely to in-
clude descriptions irrelevant to the subject in ques-
tion. In this paper, we first describe our task set-
ting of opinion extraction. We conducted a corpus
study and investigated the feasibility of the task def-
1065
inition by showing the statistics and inter-annotator
agreement of our corpus annotation. Next, we show
that the crucial body of the above opinion extrac-
tion task can be decomposed into two kinds of re-
lation extraction, i.e. aspect-evaluation relation ex-
traction and aspect-of relation extraction. For exam-
ple, the passage ?I went out for lunch at the Deli
and ordered a curry with chicken. It was pretty
good? has an aspect-evaluation relation ?curry with
chicken, was good? and an aspect-of relation ?The
Deli, curry with the chicken?. The former task can
be regarded as a special type of predicate-argument
structure analysis or semantic role labeling. The
latter, on the other hand, can be regarded as bridg-
ing reference resolution (Clark, 1977), which is the
task of identifying relations between definite noun
phrases and discourse-new entities implicitly related
to some previously mentioned entities.
Most of the previous work on customer opinion
extraction, however, does not adopt the state-of-the-
art techniques in those fields, relying only on sim-
ple proximity-based or pattern-based methods. In
this context, this paper empirically shows that incor-
porating machine learning-based techniques devised
for predicate-argument structure analysis and bridg-
ing reference resolution improve the performance
of both aspect-evaluation and aspect-of relation ex-
traction. Furthermore, we also show that combin-
ing contextual clues with a common co-occurrence
statistics-based technique for bridging reference res-
olution makes a significant improvement on aspect-
of relation extraction.
2 Opinion extraction: Task design
Our present goal is to build a computational model
to extract opinions from Web documents in such a
form as: Who feels how on which aspects of which
subjects. Given the passage presented in Figure 1,
for example, the opinion we want to extract is: ?the
writer feels that the colors of pictures taken with
Powershot (product) are beautiful.? As suggested
by this example, we consider it reasonable to start
with an assumption that most evaluative opinions
can be structured as a frame composed of the fol-
lowing constituents:
Opinion holder The person who is making an eval-
uation. An opinion holder is typically the first
  

		Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th International Conference on Computational Linguistics: Technical Papers,
pages 928?939, Dublin, Ireland, August 23-29 2014.
Towards an open-domain conversational system fully based on natural
language processing
Ryuichiro Higashinaka
1
, Kenji Imamura
1
, Toyomi Meguro
2
, Chiaki Miyazaki
1
Nozomi Kobayashi
1
, Hiroaki Sugiyama
2
, Toru Hirano
1
Toshiro Makino
1
, Yoshihiro Matsuo
1
1
NTT Media Intelligence Laboratories
2
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
{higashinaka.ryuichiro, imamura.kenji, meguro.toyomi, miyazaki.chiaki,
kobayashi.nozomi, sugiyama.hiroaki, hirano.tohru,
makino.toshiro, matsuo.yoshihiro}@lab.ntt.co.jp
Abstract
This paper proposes an architecture for an open-domain conversational system and evaluates an
implemented system. The proposed architecture is fully composed of modules based on natu-
ral language processing techniques. Experimental results using human subjects show that our
architecture achieves significantly better naturalness than a retrieval-based baseline and that its
naturalness is close to that of a rule-based system using 149K hand-crafted rules.
1 Introduction
Although task-oriented dialogue systems have been extensively researched over the decades (Walker
et al., 2001; Williams et al., 2013), it is only recently that non-task-oriented dialogue, open-domain
conversation, or chat has been attracting attention for its social and entertainment aspects (Bickmore
and Picard, 2005; Ritter et al., 2011; Bessho et al., 2012). Creating an open-domain conversational
system is a challenging problem. In task-oriented dialogue systems, it is possible to prepare knowledge
for a domain and create understanding and generation modules for that domain (Nakano et al., 2000).
However, for open-domain conversation, such preparation cannot be performed. Since it is difficult to
handle users? open-domain utterances, to create workable systems, conventional approaches have used
hand-crafted rules (Wallace, 2004). Although elaborate rules may work well, the problem with the rule-
based approach is the high cost and the dependence on individual skills of developers, which hinders
systematic development. Another problem with the rule-based approach is its low coverage; that is, the
inability to handle unexpected utterances.
The recent increase of web data has propelled the development of approaches that use data retrieved
from the web for open-domain conversation (Shibata et al., 2009; Ritter et al., 2011). The merit of such
retrieval-based approaches is that, owing to the diversity of the web, systems can retrieve at least some
responses for user input, which solves the coverage problem. However, this comes at the cost of utterance
quality. Since the web, especially Twitter, is inherently noisy, it is, in many cases, difficult to sift out
appropriate sentences from retrieval results.
In this paper, we propose an architecture for an open-domain conversational system. The proposed
architecture is fully composed of modules based on natural language processing (NLP) techniques. Our
stance is not just to hand-craft or to search the web for utterances, but to create a system that can fully
understand and generate utterances. We want to show that it is possible to build an open-domain conver-
sational system by combining NLP modules, which will open the way to a systematic development and
improvement. We describe our open-domain conversational system based on our architecture and present
results of an evaluation of its performance by human subjects. We compare our system with rule-based
and retrieval-based systems, and show that our architecture is a promising direction. In this work, we
regard the term open-domain conversation to be interchangeable with non-task-oriented dialogue, casual
conversation (Eggins and Slade, 2005), chat, or social dialogue (Bickmore and Cassell, 2000). We use
the term to denote that user input is not restricted in any way as in open-domain question answering
This work is licenced under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Page numbers and proceedings footer
are added by the organizers. License details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
928
	
			
	

	
		
	

