Proceedings of the Fourth International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 9?11,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
A generation-oriented workbench for Performance Grammar: Capturing linear order variability in German and Dutch 
Karin Harbusch1, Gerard Kempen2,3, Camiel van Breugel3, Ulrich Koch1 1Universit?t Koblenz- Landau, Koblenz {harbusch, koch} @uni-koblenz.de 
2Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen gerard.kempen@mpi.nl 
3Department of Psychology, Leiden University cvbreuge@liacs.nl 
   
   Abstract We describe a generation-oriented workbench for the Performance Grammar (PG) formalism, highlighting the treatment of certain word order and movement constraints in Dutch and German. PG enables a simple and uni-form treatment of a heterogeneous col-lection of linear order phenomena in the domain of verb constructions (variably known as Cross-serial De-pendencies, Verb Raising, Clause Un-ion, Extraposition, Third Construction, Particle Hopping, etc.). The central data structures enabling this feature are clausal ?topologies?: one-dimensional arrays associated with clauses, whose cells (?slots?) provide landing sites for the constituents of the clause. Move-ment operations are enabled by unifica-tion of lateral slots of topologies at ad-jacent levels of the clause hierarchy. The PGW generator assists the gram-mar developer in testing whether the implemented syntactic knowledge al-lows all and only the well-formed per-mutations of constituents. 1 Introduction Workbenches for natural-language grammar formalisms typically provide a parser to test whether given sentences are treated adequately ? D-PATR for Unification Grammar (Kart-tunen, 1986) or XTAG for Tree-Adjoining Grammars (Paroubek et al, 1992) are early examples. However, a parser is not a conven-ient tool for checking whether the current grammar implementation licenses all and only the strings qualifying as well-formed expres-sions of a given input. Sentence generators that 
try out all possible combinations of grammar rules applicable to the current input, are better suited. Few workbenches in the literature come with such a facility. LinGO (Copestake & Flickinger, 2000), for Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar, provides a generator in addition to a parser. For Tree Adjoining Grammars, several workbenches with genera-tion components have been built: InTeGenInE (Harbusch & Woch, 2004) is a recent example.  Finetuning the grammar such that it neither over- nor undergenerates, is a major problem for semi-free word order languages (e.g., Ger-man; cf. Kallmeyer & Yoon, 2004). Working out a satisfactory solution to this problem is logically prior to designing a generator capable of selecting, from the set of all possible para-phrases, those that sound ?natural,? i.e., the ones human speakers/writers would choose in the situation at hand (cf. Kempen & Harbusch, 2004). Verb constructions in German and Dutch exhibit extremely intricate word order patterns (cf. Seuren & Kempen, 2003). One of the fac-tors contributing to this complexity is the phe-nomenon of clause union, which allows con-stituents of a complement clause to be inter-spersed between those of the dominating clause. The resulting sequences exhibit, among other things, cross-serial dependencies and clause-final verb clusters. Further complica-tions arise from all sorts of ?movement? phe-nomena such as fronting, extraction, disloca-tion, extraposition, scrambling, etc. Given the limited space available, we cannot describe the Performance Grammar (PG) formalism and the linearization algorithm that enables generating a broad range of linear order phenomena in Dutch, German, and English verb construc-tions. Instead, we refer to Harbusch & Kempen (2002), and Kempen & Harbusch (2002, 2003). 
9
Here, we present the generation-oriented PG Workbench (PGW), which assists grammar developers, among other things, in testing whether the implemented syntactic and lexical knowledge allows all and only well-formed permutations. In Section 2, we describe PG?s topology-based linearizer implemented in the PGW gen-erator, whose software design is sketched in Section 3. Section 4 shows the PGW at work and draws some conclusions. 2 Linearization in PG and PGW Performance Grammar (PG) is a fully lexical-ized grammar that belongs to the family of tree substitution grammars and deploys disjunctive feature unification as its main structure build-ing mechanism. It adheres to the ID/LP format (Immediate Dominance vs. Linear Precedence) and includes separate components generating the hierarchical and the linear structure of sen-tences. Here, we focus on the linearization component. PG's hierarchical structures consist of unor-dered trees composed of elementary building blocks called lexical frames. Every word is head of a lexical frame, which specifies the subcategorization constraints of the word. As-sociated with every lexical frame is a topology. Topologies serve to assign a left-to-right order to the branches of lexical frames. In this paper, we will only be concerned with topologies for verb frames (clauses). We assume that clausal topologies of Dutch and German contain ex-actly nine slots ? see (1).  (1) Wat wil je dat ik doe? / what want you that I do /?What do you want me to do??   F1 M1 M2 ? M6 E1 E2   ? wil je    ?   ?       ?  Wat dat ik   doe  The slot labeled F1 makes up the Forefield (from Ger. Vorfeld); slots M1-M6 make up the Midfield (Mittelfeld); slots E1 and E2 define the Endfield (Nachfeld). Every constituent (subject, head, direct object, complement, etc.) has a small number of placement options, i.e. slots in the topology associated with its ?own? clause. How is the Direct Object NP wat ?what? 'extracted' from the complement clause and ?promoted? into the main clause? Movement of phrases between clauses is due to lateral to-
pology sharing. If a sentence contains more than one verb, each of their lexical frames in-stantiates its own topology. This applies to verbs of any type ? main, auxiliary or copula. In such cases, the topologies  are allowed to share identically labeled lateral (i.e. left- and/or right-peripheral) slots, conditionally upon several restrictions (not to be explained here; but see Harbusch & Kempen, 2002)). After two slots have been shared, they are no longer distinguishable; in fact, they are unified and become the same object. In example (1), the embedded topology shares its F1 slot with the F1 slot of the matrix clause. This is indi-cated by the dashed borders of the bottom F1 slot. Sharing the F1 slots effectively causes the embedded Direct Object wat to be preposed into the main clause (black dot in F1 above the single arrow in (1)). The dot in E2 above the double arrow marks the position selected by the finite complement clause. The overt surface order is determined by a read-out module that traverses the hierarchy of topologies in left-to-right, depth first manner. E.g., wat is already seen while the reader scans the higher topology. 3    A sketch of PGW?s software design The PGW is a computational grammar devel-opment tool for PG. Written in Java, it comes with an advanced graphical direct-manipulation user interface. All lexical and grammatical data have been encoded in a rela-tional database schema. This contrasts with the predominance of hierarchical databases in present-day computational linguistics. Rela-tional lexical databases tend to be easier to maintain and update than hierarchical ones, especially for linguists with limited program-ming experience. The software was designed with an eye toward easy cross-language port-ability of the encoded information. For German we developed a lexicon converter that maps the German CELEX database automatically to the PGW format (Koch, 2004). 4 Generating verb constructions in Dutch and German In order to convey an impression of the capa-bilities of the PGW, we show it at work in gen-erating verb constructions that involve rather delicate linearization phenomena: ?Particle Hopping? in Dutch (2), and ?Scrambling? in German (3). 
10
The finite complement clause (2) includes the verb meezingen ?sing along with,? where   mee ?with? is a preposition functioning as sepa-rable particle. The three other verbs are auxilia-ries. According to a topology sharing rule for Dutch, clauses headed by auxiliaries are free to share 4, 5 or 6 left-peripheral slots of their own topology with that of its complement. The most restrictive sharing option is shown in (2).  (2) ...  dat   ze    dit  (lied)  zouden kunnen  hebben  meegezongen          ... that they this (song) would be-able-to have       along-sung  ?... that they might have sung along this (song)?  M1 M2 M3   M4    M6  E1   dat  ze ?   zouden ?       ?      ?        kunnen ?       ?      ?        hebben ?      ?      ?     dit lied mee  gezongen   The Direct Object NP dit (lied) ?this (song)? lands in M3 of the lowest topology. As this slot belongs to the four left-peripheral ones, it is always shared and its content gets promoted all the way up into the highest clause (see single arrows). Particle mee always lands in the fifth slot (M4), i.e. in the optionally shared area. Hence, its surface position depends on the ac-tual number of shared left-peripheral slots. In (2), with minimal slot sharing, mee stays in its standard position immediately preceding the head verb. In case of non-minimal topology sharing, the particle may move leftward until (but no farther than) the direct object, thus yielding exactly the set of grammatical place-ment options. The quality of PGW?s treatment of Scram-bling in German can be assessed in terms of a set of 30 word order variations of sentence (3), discussed by Rambow (1994), who also pro-vides grammaticality ratings for all members of the set. Seuren (2003) presents similar gram-maticality judgments obtained from an inde-pendent group of native speakers. As the rating scores appeared to vary considerably (cf. (3a) and (3b)), we checked which permutations are actually generated by the PGW. It turned out easy to find a set of topology sharing values that generates all and only the paraphrases with high or satisfactory grammaticality scores. In conclusion, although the performance data discussed here are very limited, we be-
lieve they justify positive expectations with respect to the potential of a topology-based linearizer to  approximate closely the gram-maticality judgments of native speakers and thus to avoid over- and undergeneration.  (3)  a.  ? weil niemand das Fahrrad zu reparie-ren zu versuchen verspricht        because  nobody  the   bike    to   repair       to     try          promises     ?? because nobody promises to try to re-pair the bike?   b.  *?weil zu versuchen das Fahrrad nie-mand zu reparieren verspricht References Copestake, A. and Flickinger, D. 2000. An open source grammar development environment and broad-coverage English grammar using HPSG. Procs. of the 2nd Internat. Conf. on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), Athens. Harbusch, K. and Kempen, G. 2002 A quantitative model of word order and movement in English, Dutch and German complement constructions. Procs. of the 19th Internat. Conf. on Computa-tional Linguistics (COLING), Taipei. Harbusch, K. and Woch, J. 2004. Integrated natural language generation with Schema-TAGs. In: Habel, C., Pechmann, T. (eds.) Language Pro-duction. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter. Karttunen, L. 1986. D-PATR: A Development En-vironment for Unification Grammars. Tech. Rep. CSLI-86-61. CSLI, Stanford, CA. Kempen, G. and Harbusch, K. 2002 Performance Grammar: A declarative definition. In Nijholt, A., Theune, M., Hondorp, H. (eds.), Computa-tional Linguistics in the Netherlands 2001. Am-sterdam: Rodopi, 146-162. Kempen, G. and Harbusch, K. 2003.  Dutch and German verb constructions in Performance Grammar. In Seuren & Kempen, 2003. Koch, U.  2004. The Specification of a German Per-formance Grammar from CELEX Data in Preparation for a German Performance Gram-mar Workbench,  Master's Thesis at the Com-puter Science Department, U. Koblenz-Landau. Paroubek, P., Schabes, Y., and Joshi, A.K. 1992.  XTAG ? A Graphical Workbench for Develop-ing Tree-Adjoining Grammars. Procs. of the 3rd Applied Natural Language Processing Confer-ence (ANLP), Trento, 216-223. Rambow, O. 1994. Formal and Computational As-pects of Natural Language Syntax. Ph.D. Thesis, U. Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. Seuren, P.A.M. 2003. Verb clusters and branching directionality in German and Dutch. In (Seuren & Kempen, 2003), 247-296. Seuren, P. and Kempen, G. (eds.). 2003. Verb Con-structions in Dutch and German. Amsterdam: Benjamins. 
11
