Gene/protein/family name recognition in biomedical literature  
 
 
Asako Koike 1,2 
1Central Research Laboratory, Hitatchi, 
Ltd. 
1-280 Higashi-koigakubo Kokubunji, 
Tokyo, 185-8601 
 akoike@hgc.jp 
Toshihisa Takagi2 
2University of Tokyo. Dept. of Comp. 
Biol. Graduate School of Frontier Science 
Kiban-3A1(CB01) 1-5-1 Kashiwanoha Ka-
shiwa-shi Chiba 277-8561, Japan 
tt@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract 
Rapid advances in the biomedical field have 
resulted in the accumulation of numerous ex-
perimental results, mainly in text form. To ex-
tract knowledge from biomedical papers, or 
use the information they contain to interpret 
experimental results, requires improved tech-
niques for retrieving information from the 
biomedical literature. In many cases, since the 
information is required in gene units, recogni-
tion of the named entity is the first step in 
gathering and using knowledge encoded in 
these papers. Dictionary-based searching is 
useful for retrieving biological information in 
gene units. However, since many genes in the 
biomedical literature are written using am-
biguous names, such as family names, we 
need a way of constructing dictionaries. In our 
laboratory, we have developed a gene name 
dictionary:GENA and a family name diction-
ary. The latter contains ambiguous hierarchi-
cal gene names to compensate GENA. In 
addition, to address the problem of trivial 
gene name variations and polysemy, heuristics 
were used to search gene/protein/family 
names in MEDLINE abstracts. Using these 
algorithms to match dictionary and 
gene/protein/family names, about 95, 91, and 
89% of protein/gene/family names in abstracts 
on Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Drosophila 
melanogaster, and Homo sapiens were de-
tected with a precision of 96, 92, and 94%, in 
respective organisms. The effect of our 
gene/protein/family recognition method on 
protein-interaction and protein-function ex-
traction using these dictionaries is also dis-
cussed.  
1 Introduction 
With the increasing number of biomedical papers, 
and their electronic publication in NCBI-PUBMED, 
there is a growing focus on information retrieval from 
texts. In particular, the recent development of proce-
dures for large-scale experiments, such as yeast-two 
hybrid screening, mass spectrometry, and DNA/protein 
microarrays, has brought about many changes in the 
knowledge required by biologists and chemists. Because 
they produce large amounts of data on genes at one time, 
biologists require extensive knowledge of numerous 
genes to analyze the data obtained and these are beyond 
the capability of manual acquisition from the vast bio-
medical literature. Since, in many cases, the main objec-
tive of text processing is extraction of protein-
protein/gene interaction or gene function, the first prob-
lem to solve is gene/protein/compound name recogni-
tion. To date, various methods of protein/gene name 
taggers have been proposed, mainly relating to Homo 
sapiens.  These methods can be roughly divided into 
rule-based approaches (Fukuda et al 1998), statistical 
approaches, including machine learning (Collier et al 
2000, Nobata et al 1999), dictionary/knowledge-based 
approaches Humphreys et al 2000, Jenssen et al 2001, 
Koike et al 2003), or a combination of these approaches 
(Tanabe and Wilbur, 2002). Since merely recognizing 
gene/protein names is insufficient to keep the extracted 
information in gene order, dictionary-based name rec-
ognition appears useful for assigning the locus of the 
extracted gene/protein name. Naming conventions are 
quite different for different organisms. Therefore, an 
appropriate approach is required for each organism.  
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                    Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases, pp. 9-16.
                                                HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Biolink 2004,
There are three main problems in dictionary-based 
searching: (1) the existence of multi-sense words; (2) 
variations in gene names; and (3) the existence of am-
biguous names. The first problem is mainly seen in 
symbol (abbreviated) types. For example, HAC1 is a 
synonym for both ?tripartite motif-containing 3? and 
?hyperpolarization activated cyclic nucleotide-gated 
potassium channel 2? in H. sapiens. Further, some gene 
names, especially in Drosophila melanogaster, have the 
same spelling with verb(lack, ...), adjective(white, yel-
low...), common nouns (spot, twin, ...), and prepositions 
(of, ...). The second problem is trivial variations in gene 
names (orthographical, morphological, syntactic, lexico-
semantic, insertion/deletion, permutation, or pragmatic). 
For example, ?mitogen-activated protein kinase 1? and 
?protein kinase mitogen-activated, 1?, ?NIK ser-
ine/threonine protein kinase?, and ?NIK protein kinase? 
indicate the same gene. The third problem is caused by 
ambiguous expression of the gene name in the text. The 
problems of multi-sense words and the ambiguity are 
well summarized by Tuason et al (2004) 
In many cases, the family name is used instead of 
the gene name. A unique gene locus may not have been 
specified, especially for genes with multiple paralogs, or 
to avoid repeating the same expression, the family name 
may frequently be used. For example, in 1996, the ?14-
3-3? family name was counted 107 times in abstracts 
using mesh terms for human, while ?14-3-3 alpha, beta, 
delta, gamma? gene name expressions did not appear at 
all. Thus, a family name dictionary is also required 
along with a gene name dictionary to specify the gene 
locus or loci. In this study, the above-mentioned prob-
lems were, as far as possible, solved simply using heu-
ristics. 
 
2 Construction of the gene name diction-
ary 
    The gene name dictionary, GENA, was constructed 
using the major databases, GenAtlas 
(http://www.dsi.univ-paris5.fr/genatlas/), HUGO 
(http://www.gene.ucl.ac.uk/hugo/), LocusLink 
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/), GDB 
(http://gdb.weizmann.ac.il/index.shtml), SGD 
(http://www.yeastgenome.org/), MIPS 
(http://mips.gsf.de/genre/proj/yeast/index.jsp), Worm-
base (http://www.wormbase.org/), OMIM 
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/), MGI 
(http://www.informatics.jax.org/), RGD 
(http://rgd.mcw.edu/), FlyBase 
(http://flybase.bio.indiana.edu/), S. pombe geneDB 
(http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Projects/S_pombe/), SWISS-
PROT, TrEMBL (http://us.expasy.org/sprot/), and PIR 
(http://pir.georgetown.edu/) for Schizosaccharomyces  
pombe, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Caenorhabditis ele-
gans, Drosophila melanogaster, Mus musculus, Rattus 
norvegicus, and Homo sapiens, respectively. A merge of 
each database entry was done using the ?official sym-
bol? or ORF name and link data provided by each entry 
and the protein-sequence data entry. The priority of the 
database was given in advance. For example, in H. 
sapiens, HUGO, Locuslink, GDB, and GenAtlas were 
registered in this order, using the merged entry for the 
same ?official symbol?. LocusLink?s ?preferred symbol?, 
which is not yet administered by HUGO, was also used. 
Merging the entries in SWISS-PROT, TrEMBL, and 
these registered data was done using the link data for 
?Genew? provided by SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL. The 
rest of the entries were merged using the protein-IDs for 
LocusLink, SWISS-PROT, and TrEMBL. For example, 
LocusLink provides unique representative mRNA and 
protein sequences, and related sequences belonging to 
the same gene. If the protein-sequence entry for SWISS-
PROT and TrEMBL matched with any of these se-
quence entries for LocusLink, the entries were merged. 
Linking these registered data with the PIR entries was 
also done using protein-ID entries. In principle, for all 
organisms, protein sequences without ?official or pre-
ferred symbols? were not registered. The entries con-
sisted of ?official symbols? and ?official full names?, 
which were provided by representative institutions, such 
as HUGO, for each organism, and ?synonyms? and 
?gene products?. S. cerevisiae and C. elegans do not 
have ?official full names?. The distinction between these 
elements of each ?name? simply depends on the ?item 
headings? for each database. Although gene names and 
their product names are registered separately for one 
locus, and whether the entry?s product is protein or 
RNA is also registered in GENA, we do not distinguish 
between them here. Hereafter, we do not distinguish 
?gene product? from the gene name ?synonym?. Unfor-
tunately, databases contain numerous mistakes or inap-
propriate gene/protein names. The reliability of each 
synonym was judged according to the database source. 
To meet our information extraction purposes, only gene 
names over a certain reliability can be used. Meaning-
less names (ex. hypothetical protein), higher concept 
names (ex. membrane protein) and apparently wrong 
names (ex. OK ) were removed from the data semi-
automatically using word-net vocabularies and term 
frequencies of all abstracts of one year. In an evaluation 
of this study, synonym names entered only in TrEMBL 
or PIR, except for names manually checked in our labo-
ratory, were removed due to their low reliability.  
   In addition to these data, we added synonym names 
using the following methods. (1) Abbreviations of 
synonyms were added using an abbreviation extraction 
algorithm (Schwartz and Hears, 2003). (2) Plausible 
gene names were extracted from the subject and object 
noun of some verbs, which restricted such subjects and 
objects as ?phosphorylate? and ?methylate? (both sub-
jects must be protein/gene/family names). These are by-
products of protein-interaction extraction in our project. 
The corresponding ?official symbol? was searched using 
a partial match of registered names, and finally was 
checked manually.  
Compound names were gathered from the index of 
the biochemical dictionary, KEGG 
(http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/kegg2.html), mesh 
terms, and UMLS 
(http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/)  and were reg-
istered in GENA. Some high-concept terms were re-
moved manually. Compound name searches were not 
evaluated in this study. Currently (January, 2004), it 
contains about 920,000 registered gene/protein names 
and 210,000 compound names. 
 
 GENA was managed using Postgres, which pro-
vides command line searching and Web searching 
(http://www.gena.ontology.ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp). Searches 
can be done considering the word order replacement of 
long gene names using indexing all words consisting 
names. 
3 Construction of family name dictionary 
The construction of the family name dictionary was 
done using SWISS-PROT family names, PIR family 
names, INTERPRO family names 
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/), gene/protein names in 
GENA, and clustering sequence similarities. These have 
hierarchical named entities. For example, ?MAPK1? is 
a member of the ?MAPK family? and the ?MAPK fam-
ily? is a member of the family of the ?Ser/Thr protein 
kinase family?; in turn, this family is a member of ?pro-
tein kinase?, and ?protein kinase? is a type of ?kinase?. 
Although ?family? is usually used to indicate ?similar 
sequence groups that probably have the same origin?, 
sometimes it is also used to mean ?sequence groups that 
have almost the same function?. In this paper, we use 
?family? as ?ambiguous gene/protein names that indi-
cate similar sequences or biological functions?. Plausi-
ble family names based on gene names are the common 
parts of multiple gene names, such as ?MAPK? of 
?MAPK[number]?, ?14-3-3? of ?14-3-3 [Greek alpha-
bet[alpha-delta/alphabet[a-d]]?,  ?protein kinase? of 
?Tyr protein kinase? and ?Ser/Thr protein kinase?, and 
?kinase? of ?Inositol kinase? and ?protein kinase?. The 
backbone of the family hierarchy was constructed based 
on the INTERPRO family hierarchy. As far as possible, 
the remaining hierarchy was manually constructed con-
sidering sequence similarities, using Markov clustering 
(Enright et al 2002) based on all-versus-all blast. The 
hierarchy has a directed acyclic graph structure. The 
family names are across organims and the family name 
dictionary is common to each organism. The family 
database is available from http://marine.ims.u-
tokyo.ac.jp:8080/Dict/family. Currently (January, 2004), 
it contains about 16,000 entries and 70,000 registered 
names. 
4 Gene/protein/family name searches us-
ing a devised trie 
A gene/protein/family name search of texts was car-
ried out using a devised trie for faster gene name search-
ing. The trie was provided for each organism separately. 
The core terms implemented for the trie were generated 
based on GENA. Here, the following main heuristics 
were used.  
(1) Special characters are replaced by a space.  
(2) In principle, both numerical and Roman numer-
als are prepared.  
(3) The space before a numerical number is removed. 
However, if the previous character before the space is a 
number, the space is not removed (e.g., 14-3-3 is ?14 3 
3?).  
(4) With space and without space terms are used for 
?Greek alphabet and alphabet a/A, b/B, c/C, ...?. For 
example, ?14 3 3 alpha, 14 3 3alpha, 14 3 3 a, 14 3 3a?.  
(5) Common words at the end of gene names, such 
as ?protein?, ?gene?, ?sub-family?, ?family?, and 
?group?, are removed. However, if the meaning of 
names is changed with/without these words, they are 
left. For example, ?T-cell surface protein? indicates 
?protein on the T-cell surface?, while ?T-cell surface? 
usually indicates ?the surface of the T-cell?, and remov-
ing ?protein? from ?memory-related protein? causes 
faulty recognition of ?memory-related function? as 
?memory related /gene-name? ?function?. When ?pro-
tein?, ?gene?, ?sub-family?, ?group?, and ?family? ap-
pear within gene names, gene words with and without 
these words are generated.  
(6) For symbol-type names (less than seven charac-
ters), the initial of the organism is added to the spelt-out 
type. For example, in MAPK1 for H. sapiens, hMAPK1 
and h MAPK1 are used. For S. cerevisiae, the protein 
name is generated by adding ?p? at the end of the name. 
For example, the protein of STE7 is STE7p. For muta-
tions of D. melanogaster, + added names are used. For 
example, lt+ for lt. 
 (7) All names are converted into small characters 
and plurals are also generated. Some names are ?case 
sensitive? and some require ?all capital letters?. In prin-
ciple, when the name is the common spelling of a 
?common noun, adverb, or adjective?, ?all capital letter 
names? are adopted in H. sapiens, M. musculus, and R. 
norvegicus (using ?word net vocabularies? with less 
than five characters. Word length is limited to remove 
words that happen to have the same spelling but without 
removing biological names registered in the word net). 
?All capital letters names? were recognized in the trie. 
Case-sensitive words such as cAMP and CAMP were 
selected experientially and checked after the trie search. 
Since many of Drosophila melanogaster genes have the 
same spelling with verb, adjective, common nouns, and 
preposition. These gene names are replaced by ?gene 
name + specified names? using word-net vocabularies 
to decrease false positive. For example, the gene name 
?yellow? is replaced by ?yellow locus?, ?yellow gene?, 
?yellow protein?, ?yellow allele?...  etc. 
The trie search starts from the next characters after a 
?space?, ?-?, ?/?, or ?period? or the head of sentence. 
When multiple gene names are hit in duplicate, the 
longest name ID is outputted. When specific terms, such 
as ?antagonist?, ?receptor?, ?cell?, and ?inhibi-
tor?, ....are next to the gene name, the hit gene name ID 
is not outputted, since these indicate different 
gene/protein names or are not gene/protein names. Also, 
when terms such as ?promoter? and ?mutant? are lo-
cated next to the gene name, they do not show the 
gene/protein/family themselves. However, for our pur-
poses of extracting the genetic interaction, they are 
treated the same as gene/protein/family names. Specific 
terms such as ?number? are located before the gene 
name and the hit gene name ID is not outputted since 
they are multi-sense words and, in most cases, are not 
gene/protein names. Parentheses are also specially 
treated, so ?mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) 
1? --> is recognized as ?mitogen activated protein 
kinase 1 (MAPK1)?. The continuous gene description 
such as ?GATA-4/5/6? is also specially treated as 
shown in Figure 1. If the gene names are synonyms of 
multi-genes, the multiple gene IDs are outputted in this 
stage. 
 
  Figure 1. The schematic drawing of a devised trie. 
5 Resolving multi sense words 
  To resolve the problem of multi-sense words, we 
used information from the whole text. When the hit 
name is shorter than a certain gene name length (seven 
characters for H. sapiens; the length is different for each 
organism), there is a possibility that the hit name is an 
abbreviation of another word (not only gene names, but 
also an experimental method or name of an apparatus). 
To avoid false-positive words as far as possible, we 
used the following heuristics in M. musculus, R. 
norvegicus, and H. sapiens.  
1) If the corresponding full name, or a name longer 
than six characters, is written in the same abstract, 
the hit gene ID is used.  
When the full name and abbreviation pairs are writ-
ten in the abstract as ?plausible full name (the hit 
name)? or ?plausible full name [the hit name]?, the fol-
lowing procedures are carried out.  
2) If the full/long name is a complete match for the 
synonyms or full name of the corresponding ID, the hit 
gene ID is used.  
3) If the full/long name is not a complete match for 
these corresponding IDs using the abbreviation extrac-
tion algorithm (Schwartz and Hearst, 2003), but its 
spelling consists of words used in any name of the cor-
responding ID, the hit ID is adopted. If not, the hit ID is 
discarded (i.e., the full/long name considering the re-
placement of the word order).  
4) If information on full names or long names is not 
found in the abstract, a key-word search of all the ab-
stracts is carried out. If at least one key word is detected, 
the ID is used.  
The summary of these steps were shown in Figure 2. 
(The numbers in Fig.2 correspond to the above head 
numbers.) 
However, treatment (2) is not sufficient in some cases 
because some abbreviations are written only once for 
one family kind.  For example, in PUBMED-ID 
8248212, ...?the recently described TAP (transporter 
associated with antigen processing) genes have been 
mapped approximately midway between DP and DQ. ... 
In addition to the alleles of TAP1 that have been de-
scribed, others were identified during this study.?  
?TAP1? is the synonym for ?transporter 1, ATP-binding 
cassette, sub-family B (MDR/TAP)?, and ?transient 
receptor potential cation channel, subfamily C, member 
4 associated protein.? In most cases, the full name is 
written only once for the same family. In this case, the 
former (?transporter 1, ATP-binding cassette, sub-
family B (MDR/TAP)?) is correct. Accordingly, the full 
name and abbreviation pair ?TAP? without the number 
is also checked. Since all vocabularies (?transporter?, 
?associated?, ?antigen?, ?processing?) are components 
of synonyms of TAP1, the TAP1 is recognized by 
?transporter 1, ATP-binding cassette, and sub-family B 
(MDR/TAP)?. In considering syntactic variations, some 
GATA-4/5/6 expression constructs ...  G 
A 
T 
4 
5 
/ 
/ 
6 
A If next word is not stop word, the ID is 
outputted. 
GHS007219 
GHS007220 
P
GHS007219/GHS007221/GHS007222 
space,  
hyphen, ... 
... 
... 
GHS007221 
prepositions such as ?of? and ?with?, and frequently 
used words such as ?sub-family? and ?family?, are 
skipped in this process. Further regarding the lexico-
semantic pattern, as far as possible, adjectives and 
nouns are provided for each vocabulary using word-net 
vocabularies and UMLS. 
 
   Figure 2. The schematic drawing of each gene names. 
With this treatment, only when pairs of full names, or 
close to the full name, and abbreviations appear, the 
distinctions between some synonyms are completed. In 
some cases, the name belongs to the same family. For 
example, LRE2 is a synonym for ?LINE retrotranspos-
able element 2? and ?LINE retrotransposable element 
3?. In this case, the distinction between them is very 
fine and seems unimportant. In some abstracts, full 
names are not written in the text. To resolve this issue, 
we used key words for each gene, which were selected 
from all words/terms (continuous words) composing 
synonym names and their family names as shown in the 
procedures in (4). When at least one keyword is de-
tected, the ID is accepted. The key words appear less 
than 50 times (only for words extracted from gene 
names, in the case of words from family name, this limi-
tation is not used) in genes and appear less than a cer-
tain frequency in all abstracts and are not common to 
different genes that have synonyms with the same spell-
ing. Even if a key word search is performed, except for 
famous names such as p53 and p38, the locus identifica-
tion for ?# kDa?, meaning a ?#p? expression such as 
p60 and p61, is quite difficult. In relation to famous 
name-Ids, such as cAMP(cyclic AMP), CD2(cluster 
designation 2),  the IDs are used to recover a false nega-
tive even if the full/longer name is not written in the 
abstracts and the keywords are not detected.  
The automatic keyword selection using conventional 
methods such as tf-idf (Salton and Yang, 1973) and 
SMART (Singhal et al 1996) may be applicable. How-
ever, the number of abstracts per gene is too small in 
many cases and the effective keywords selection could 
not be achieved. Therefore, this approach was not ap-
plied, in this study. 
For S. cerevisiae, C. elegans, and D. melanogaster, in 
most cases, the full names of symbols are not written. 
Only when the symbol name has a symbol (abbrevia-
tion)-full name pairs, and the full name is not the corre-
sponding gene name or contains a word that is not a 
component of the synonyms, the hit-ID is discarded.  
Although, as far as possible, we removed what we as-
sumed were wrong or inappropriate gene names, some 
names either do not seem to be synonyms or are rarely 
used ones. These can cause errors. For example, LPS is 
a synonym for ?interferon regulatory factor 6? (for ex-
ample, LocusLink, GenAtlas) and ?lipopolysaccharide? 
in H. sapiens. However, our investigations indicate that 
LPS is not used to indicate ?interferon regulatory factor 
6? in abstracts. 
 
6 Experiment and Results 
To validate the recall and precision of our method 
for gene/protein/family name recognition, we made 
manually pre-tagged 100 abstracts (1996 year) on each 
of the following organisms: S. cerevisiae, D. 
melanogaster, and H. sapiens with mesh terms ?sac-
charomyces cerevisiae?, ?drosophila melanogaster?, 
and ?human?, respectively. Table 1 shows the results. 
In this evaluation, whether each gene/family ID was 
correctly assigned in the abstract or not was investigated. 
(each ID was counted only once per abstract.) When the 
precision and recall of all gene/family name descrip-
tions? recognition were calculated (each ID can be 
counted more than once per abstract), they did not 
change largely and  were within 2-5% error spans of 
Table 1.  
 
Table 1 The summary of precision and recall of 
gene/protein/family name recognition 
Organism* Precision 
=TP/(TP+FP) : 
total(gene/family) 
Recall 
=TP/(TP+FN): 
total(gene/family) 
HS 94.3 
(95.2/93.2)% 
88.6 
(92.0/85.0) % 
DM 92.1 
(90.3/94.5)% 
91.2 
(91.8/90.4)% 
SC 95.5 
(94.6/96.0)% 
94.6 
(96.0/93.7)% 
*HS:H. sapiens, DM:D. melanogaster, SC:S. cerevisiae 
The corpus size and the number of deficient name 
entries in GENA and family name dictionary were 
summarized in Table 2.  
 
Table 2 The corpus size and num. of deficient 
gene/family entries. 
Organism Num of 
gene/family in the 
corpus: 
total (gene/family)  
Num of deficient 
name entries: 
total(gene/family) 
HS 167 (87/80) 10 (1/9) 
DM 547 (317/230) 31 (16/18) 
SC 277 (100/177) 14 (2/11) 
 
In judging family name recognition, slightly soft cri-
teria were used. If a complete matching entry was not 
registered in the family name dictionary, a higher con-
cept ID was assigned. For example, ?lactate dehydro-
genase? was not registered in the family name 
dictionary, so this name was assigned the ID ?dehydro-
genase?. Even if the other organisms are written in the 
same abstracts, their gene names are not extracted in 
principle. However, human, rat, and mouse are not dis-
tinguished in this validation. The family names in other 
organisms are also extracted in this evaluation. 
 
As shown in Table 2, in all organisms, more than 
one-third of the gene names were written as family 
names. This indicates the necessity for hierarchical gene 
names, as in the family dictionary, although conven-
tional methods scarcely mentioned. The recall and pre-
cision of these organisms as shown in Table 1 are 
relatively high roughly compared to previous reports. 
(precision:72-93%, recall:76-94%: The summary is re-
viewed by Hirschman 2002). The details of errors were 
as followings. Only 4 and 1 names, which were regis-
tered in GENA and family name dictionary, were rec-
ognized as gene/family names at once, but they were 
erroneously discarded by the procedures used to con-
firm ambiguous names, in H. sapiens. Many of them are 
caused by the key-word search fails.  Especially, in fam-
ily names, the key-words seem to be insufficient. 
Probably, these will be addressed in some extent by use 
of the key words of the higher/lower concept IDs. In 
some cases, the full-name and abbreviation match failed. 
For example, in ?urokinase-type plasminogen activator 
receptor (uPAR, CD87)?, the full-name and abbrevia-
tion match failed due to the existence of ?two names? in 
the parenthesis. These errors will be recovered by the 
keyword search. However, in the present program, re-
covering step is not used. The recall of family names in 
H. sapiens is slightly low because of varieties of fami-
lies as shown in Table 1. 6, 4 names were false positive 
gene/protein names in S. cerevisiae and H. sapiens, re-
spectively. 7, 5 names were false positive family names 
in S. cerevisiae and H. sapien, respectively. Most of 
them were short names and were not removed due to 
their in-appropriate keywords.  Some of them are 
caused by inappropriate GENA entries.  
In relation to D. melanogaster, 10 gene/protein 
names that were registered in GENA were not recog-
nized as gene/family names. Many of them were general 
nouns/adjective and were not used as the ?gene name + 
specified words? phrase in the abstracts. Rest of them 
were gene/protein names removed in trie implementa-
tion steps due to their confusing spellings such as ?10-
4?. Also mutant gene name recognition was quite diffi-
cult in this method, since the superscript for the muta-
tion was converted in the normal characters in NCBI-
abstracts and newly developed mutant was expressed by 
changing the superscript.  4 family names were recog-
nized once and erroneously discarded in the keyword 
search steps. 31 gene/protein names and 12 family 
names were false positive. Most of them in gene/protein 
names were misleading names such as 19A. These mis-
leading names were removed or replaced by the ?gene 
name + specified words? phrase as far as possible with 
some heuristics and term frequencies in abstracts. How-
ever, some remained. Some false positive were wrongly 
extracted other organisms? gene names. 
 In the strict criteria of family name recognition, 10, 
18, 10 names were recognized as higher concepts in H. 
sapiens, D. melanogaster, and S.cerevisiae, respectively. 
The registration of detailed entries for the family name 
dictionary is required. 
The heuristics of the name detection seem to be suf-
ficient so that no name detections failed due to trivial 
name variations in H. sapiens and S. cerevisiae, and 
only one name in D. melanogaster except mutant varia-
tion failed. There is some room to be improved in ambi-
guity resolution steps using sophisticated keyword 
searching. 
In our laboratory, protein interaction information and 
protein function were automatically extracted and stored 
in PRIME (http://prime.ontology.ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp) and 
in the protein kinase database 
(http://kinasedb.ontology.ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp, Koike et al, 
2003). With this procedure, some false positives were 
not extracted since the phrase patterns did not match the 
extracted protein interaction and protein function. That 
is, some wrongly recognized names were removed as a 
result of considering the local context. In this stage, the 
wrongly recognized false positive names was 0, 4, and 3 
for S. cerevisiae, D. melanogaster, and H. sapiens, re-
spectively. Using the family name dictionary greatly 
increased the recognition of ambiguous names. How-
ever, a new difficulty was found in extracting informa-
tion. Many family names are common to functional 
nouns. Therefore, even if a phrase pattern is used, the 
wrong interaction may be extracted. For example, from 
PUBMED_11279098: ?We also identified key residue 
pairs in the hydrophobic core of the Cet1 protomer that 
support the active site tunnel and stabilize the triphos-
phatase in vivo.? It is difficult to automatically judge 
from this sentence whether ?triphosphatase? means the 
Cet1 function or another protein family name. All the 
interaction information in this abstract indicates that 
?triphosphatase? is the activity of Cet1. Our program 
wrongly extracted ?Cet1/gene-name? stabilize ?triphos-
phatase/family-name?. Additional heuristics are re-
quired to remove these wrongly extracted data. 
 
7 Related Work 
Various protein/gene recognition methods have been 
reported and some successes were gained as briefly re-
viewed in introduction and well reviewed in the refer-
ences (Hirshman et al, 2002). However, most of them 
did not specify the gene locus. Further, they were de-
veloped mainly for H. sapiens. Since the naming con-
vention is different in organisms, their recognition 
performance in other organisms is unknown. 
Hirshman et al (2002) have reported the dictionary-
based name recognition. This report discussed the diffi-
culty of the gene name recognition of D. melanogaster 
and showed the increase of the precision by removing 
the gene names that have meanings as normal English 
words. Tuason et al (2004) have investigated that the 
ambiguity within each organism and among organisms 
(mouse, worm, fly, and yeast) and with general English 
words. Tsuruoka and Tsujii (2003) also reported the 
dictionary-based named recognition and our method is 
similar to them. They resolved the trivial gene variation 
problems using dynamic programming and tries, while 
in our method, by normalizing dictionary names and 
devising the trie structure, the trivial variations were 
addressed without dynamic programming and the re-
quired CPU time is expected to be largely reduced 
without decreasing precision and recall. The protein 
name recognition standard is a little different from them 
and the direct comparison of precision and recall with 
their results seem meaningless. In their methods, they 
focus on protein names (without gene names) and seem 
not to distinguish whether the protein name candidate 
represents the protein itself or not in the context. (ex. 
?IL-1 receptor antagonist? and ?IL-1 receptor expres-
sion?: only the latter description means the IL-1 recep-
tor itself.)  Further, in our method, addressing the 
ambiguity of gene names (common gene names among 
multiple gene names) is tried. Since long protein names 
are usually written with abbreviated names, the name 
variations caused of permutation and insertion/deletion 
of long name words are picked up in the ambiguity reso-
lution process.  
 
8 Conclusions: 
We constructed gene name and family name dic-
tionaries to link each gene name to a gene locus and to 
relate ambiguous names to gene families. Our prelimi-
nary investigations showed that more than one-third to 
one-half of gene/protein names in abstracts are written 
using ambiguous names such as family/super-family 
level names. This indicates that dictionary-based 
gene/protein/family name recognition requires not only 
a gene name dictionary but also a hierarchical family 
name dictionary. Using the gene name dictionary 
GENA and the family name dictionary we constructed 
and our searching method, 95, 91, and 89% of pro-
tein/gene/family names in abstracts on S. cerevisiae, D. 
melanogaster, and H. sapiens were detected with a pre-
cision of 96, 92, and 94%, respectively. The simple heu-
ristics we developed seem to be useful for matching 
gene/family names in texts with dictionary entry names, 
although additional trivial changes are required to ad-
dress ambiguity of gene names. These methods are also 
useful for extracting data on protein interaction and pro-
tein function. However, the gene/protein/family name 
recognition subject is deep. For example, ?NFkappaB? 
represents ?NFKB1? and ?RELA? complex in many 
contexts and sometimes represents ?NFKB1?. Unfortu-
nately, these complicated recognitions were not re-
solved. 
 Although different organisms have different naming 
conventions, the nomenclature for mammals is similar 
to that for H. sapiens, and most bacteria and archaea 
gene/protein/family names are similar to the nomencla-
ture for S. cerevisiae. Problems in gene name recogni-
tion for most organisms will be able to be addressed 
using our method. Dictionary-based name recognition 
cannot search new gene name/synonym names. How-
ever, the whole human/drosophila/yeast genomes have 
already been sequenced and the appearance of new 
synonym names can be expected to decrease or be in-
ferable from the referenced known name. In addition, 
with the introduction of the family name dictionary, 
parts of new genes can be retrieved using the higher 
concept name (family name), even if the new gene name 
itself is not registered in GENA. Accordingly, the dic-
tionary-based name recognition will be expected to be 
sufficient for the information extraction in these organ-
isms. 
 Protein-interaction and protein-function information 
extracted using these procedures for gene/protein/family 
name recognition are available from 
http://prime.ontlogy.ims.u-toky.ac.jp. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
We wish to acknowledge Yo Shidahara and 
Kouichiro Yamada for reading many abstracts and help-
ing us by constructing the family name dictionary. We 
would like to thank Chiharu Kikuchi in Nittetsu Hitachi 
System Engineering for helping us by programming 
GENA. 
This work is supported in part by Grant-in aid for 
scientific research on priority areas (c) genome informa-
tion science from the Ministry of Education, Culture, 
Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan. 
References 
Collier, N., Nobata, C. and Tsujii, J. 2000. Proc. of the 
18th Int. Conf. on Comp. Ling. 201-207. 
Enright, AJ, Van Dongen, S, and Ouzounis, CA. 2002. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 30(7):1575-84.l 
Fukuda, K., Tsunoda, T. Tamura, A. and Takagi, T. 
1998 Proceedings of the Pacific Symposium on Bio-
computing, 705-716.  
Hatzivassiloglou, V., Duboue, P.A. and Rzhetsky, A. 
2001. Bioinformatics, 17S(1), S97-S106. 
Hirschman, L., Morgan, A.A., and Yeh, A.S. 2002 J. 
Biomed. Inform. 35:247-259.  
Humphreys, K., Demetriou, G., and Gaizauskas, R. 
2000 Proc. of the Pacific Symposium on Biocomput-
ing, 5:502-513. 
Jenssen TK, Laegreid A, Komorowski J, Hovig E. 2001. 
Nat Genet. 28(1):21-8. 
Koike, A., Kobayashi, Y., and Takagi, T. 2003. Genome 
Research, 13:1231-1243. 
Nobata, C., Collier, N., and Tsujii, J. 1999. Proc. of Nat. 
Lang. Paci. Rim Symp. 369-374. 
Salton, G. and Yang, C.S. (1973) J. Document. 29(4), 
351-372. 
Schwartz, A.S., Hearst M.A., 2003. Pacific Symposium 
on Biocomputing 8:451-462. 
Singhal, A. Buckley, C., and Cochrane, P.A. 1996. Proc. 
of ACM SIGIR, 26-133. 
Tanabae, L and Wilbur,WJ. 2002. Bioinformatics, 
18(8):1124-1132. 
Tsuruoka, Y. and Tsujii, J. 2004. Proc. of the ACL 2003 
Workshop on Natural Language Processing in Bio-
medicine 41-48. 
Tuason, O. and Chen, L., Liu, H., Blake, J.A., and 
Friedman, C. 2004. Proc. of Pacific Symposium on Bio-
computing, 238-249. 
 
 
