Proceedings of the Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage Data (LaTeCH 2007), pages 1?8,
Prague, 28 June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Naming the Past: Named Entity and Animacy Recognition            
in 19th Century Swedish Literature 
Lars Borin, Dimitrios Kokkinakis, Leif-J?ran Olsson 
Litteraturbanken and Spr?kdata/Spr?kbanken 
Department of Swedish Language, G?teborg University 
Sweden 
{first.last}@svenska.gu.se 
 
Abstract 
This paper provides a description and 
evaluation of a generic named-entity rec-
ognition (NER) system for Swedish applied 
to electronic versions of Swedish literary 
classics from the 19th century. We discuss 
the challenges posed by these texts and the 
necessary adaptations introduced into the 
NER system in order to achieve accurate 
results, useful both for metadata genera-
tion, but also for the enhancement of the 
searching and browsing capabilities of Lit-
teraturbanken, the Swedish Literature 
Bank, an ongoing cultural heritage project 
which aims to digitize significant works of 
Swedish literature. 
1 Introduction 
In this paper we investigate generic named entity 
recognition (NER) technology and the necessary 
adaptation required in order to automatically anno-
tate electronic versions of a number of Swedish 
literary works of fiction from the 19th century. 
Both the genre and language variety are markedly 
different from the text types that our NER system 
was originally developed to annotate. This presents 
a challenge, posing both specific and more generic 
problems that need to be dealt with. 
In section 2 we present briefly the background 
and motivation for the present work, and section 3 
gives some information on related work. In section 
4 we provide a description of the named entity rec-
ognition system used in this work, its entity taxon-
omy, including the animacy recognition compo-
nent and the labeled consistency approach that is 
explored. Problems faced in the literary texts and 
the kinds of adaptations performed in the recogni-
tion system as well as evaluation and error analysis 
are given in section 5. Finally, section 6 summa-
rizes the work and provides some thoughts for fu-
ture work. 
2 Background 
Litteraturbanken <http://litteraturbanken.se/> (the 
Swedish Literature Bank) is a cultural heritage pro-
ject financed by the Swedish Academy1. Littera-
turbanken has as its aim to make available online 
the full text of significant works of Swedish litera-
ture, old and new, in critical editions suitable for 
literary research and for the teaching of literature. 
There is also abundant ancillary material on the 
website, such as author presentations, bibliogra-
phies, thematic essays about authorships, genres or 
periods, written by experts in each field.  
Similarly to many other literature digitization 
initiatives, most of the works in Litteraturbanken 
are such for which copyright has expired (i.e., at 
least 70 years have passed since the death of the 
author); at present the bulk of the texts are from the 
18th, 19th and early 20th century. However, there 
is also an agreement with the organizations repre-
senting authors? intellectual property rights, allow-
ing the inclusion of modern works according to a 
uniform royalty payment scheme. At present, Lit-
teraturbanken holds about 150 works ? mainly 
novels ? by about 50 different authors. The text 
collection is slated to grow by 80?100 novel-length 
works (appr. 4?6 million words) annually. 
                                                 
1 The present permanent version of Litteraturbanken was pre-
ceded by a two-year pilot project by the same name, funded by 
the Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation. 
1
Even at outset of the Litteraturbanken project, it 
was decided to design the technical solutions with 
language technology in mind. The rationale for this 
was that we saw these literary texts not only as rep-
resenting Sweden?s literary heritage, but also as 
high-grade empirical data for linguistic investiga-
tions, i.e. as corpus components. Hence, we wanted 
to build an infrastructure for Litteraturbanken 
which would allow this intended dual purpose of 
the material to be realized to the fullest.2 However, 
we soon started to think about how the kinds of 
annotations that language technology could pro-
vide could be of use to others than linguists, e.g. 
literary scholars, historians and researchers in other 
fields in the humanities and social sciences.  
Here, we will focus on one of these annotation 
types, namely NER and entity annotation. Com-
bined with suitable interfaces for displaying, 
searching, selecting, correlating and browsing 
named entities, we believe that the recognition and 
annotation of named entities in Litteraturbanken 
will facilitate more advanced research on literature 
(particularly in the field of literary onomastics; see 
Dalen-Oskam and Zundert, 2004), but also, e.g., 
historians could find this facility useful, insofar as 
these fictional narratives also contain, e.g. descrip-
tions of real locations, characterizations of real 
contemporary public figures, etc. Flanders et al 
(1998: 285) argue that references to people in his-
torical sources are of intrinsic interest since they 
may reveal ?networks of friendship, enmity, and 
collaboration; familial relationships; and political 
alliances [?] class position, intellectual affilia-
tions, and literary bent of the author?. 
3 Related Work 
The presented work is naturally related to research 
on NER, particularly as applied to dia-
chronic/historical corpora. The technology itself 
has been applied to various domains and genres 
over the last couple of decades such as financial 
news and biomedicine, with performance rates dif-
ficult to compare since the task is usually tied to 
particular domains/genres and applications. For a 
concise overview of the technology see Borthwick, 
                                                 
                                                
2 This precluded the use of ready-made digital library or CMS 
solutions, as we wanted to be compatible with emerging stan-
dards for language resources and tools, e.g. TEI/(X)CES and 
ISO TC37/SC07, which to our knowledge has never been a 
consideration in the design of digital library or CM systems. 
(1999). Even though this technology is widely used 
in a number of domains, studies dealing with his-
torical corpora are mostly comparatively recent 
(see for instance the recent workshop on historical 
text mining; 
<http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/events/htm06/>).  
Shoemaker (2005) reports on how the Old Bai-
ley Proceedings, which contain accounts of trials 
that took place at the Old Bailey, the primary 
criminal court in London, between 1674 and 1834, 
was marked up for a number of semantic catego-
ries, including the crime date and location, the de-
fendant?s gender, the victim?s name etc. Most of 
the work was done manually while support was 
provided for automatic person name3 identification 
(cf. Bontcheva et al, 2002). The author mentions 
future plans to take advantage of the structured 
nature of the Proceedings and to use the lists of 
persons, locations and occupations that have al-
ready been compiled for annotating new texts.  
Crane and Jones (2006) discuss the evaluation of 
the extraction of 10 named entity classes (personal 
names, locations, dates, products, organizations, 
streets, newspapers, ships, regiments and railroads) 
from a 19th century newspaper. The quality of 
their results vary for different entity types, from 
99.3% precision for Streets to 57.5% precision for 
Products. The authors suggest the kinds of knowl-
edge that digital libraries need to assemble as part 
of their machine readable reference collections in 
order to support entity identification as a core ser-
vice, namely, the need for bigger authority lists, 
more refined rule sets and rich knowledge sources 
as training data. 
At least least two projects are also relevant in 
the context of NER and historical text processing, 
namely NORA <http://www.noraproject.org/> and 
ARMADILLO 
<http://www.hrionline.ac.uk/armadillo/>. The goal 
of the first is to produce text mining software for 
discovering, visualizing, and exploring significant 
patterns across large collections of full-text hu-
manities resources in existing digital libraries. The 
goal of the latter is to evaluate the benefits of 
automated mining techniques (including informa-
tion extraction) on a set of online resources in 
eighteenth-century British social history. 
 
3 By using the General Architecture for Text Engineering 
(GATE) platform; <http://gate.ac.uk>. 
2
4 Named Entity Recognition 
Named entity recognition (NER) or entity identifi-
cation/extraction, is an important supporting tech-
nology with numerous applications in a number of 
human language technologies. The system we use 
originates from the work conducted in the Nomen 
Nescio project; for details see Johannessen et al 
(2005). In brief, the Swedish system is a multi-
purpose NER system, comprised by a number of 
modules applied in a pipeline fash-ion. Six major 
components can be distinguished, making a clear 
separation between lexical, gram-matical and proc-
essing resources. The six compo-nents are: 
? lists of multiword names, taken from 
various Internet sites or extracted from vari-
ous corpora, running directly over the to-
kenised text being processed; 
? a rule-based, shallow parsing component 
that uses finite-state grammars, one gram-
mar for each type of entity recognized; 
? a module that uses the annotations pro-
duced by the previous two components, 
which have a high rate in precision, in order 
to make decisions regarding other un-
annotated entities. This module is further 
discussed in Section 4.2; 
? lists of single names (approx. 100,000); 
? name similarity, this module is further 
discussed in Section 4.3; 
? a theory revision and refinement mod-
ule, which makes a final control of an anno-
tated document, in order to detect and re-
solve possible errors and assign new annota-
tions based on existing ones, for instance by 
applying name similarity or by combining 
various annotation fragments. 
4.1 Named-Entity Taxonomy 
The nature and type of named entities vary depend-
ing on the task under investigation or the target 
application. In any case, personal names, location 
and organization names are considered ?generic?. 
Since semantic annotation is not as well under-
stood as grammatical annotation, there is no con-
sensus on a standard tagset and content to be gen-
erally applicable. Recently, however, there have 
been attempts to define and apply richer name hi-
erarchies for various tasks, both specific (Fleisch-
man and Hovy, 2002) and generic (Sekine, 2004). 
Our current system implements a rather fine-
grained named entity taxonomy with 8 main 
named entitiy types as well as 57 subtypes. Details 
can be found in Johannessen et al, 2005, and Kok-
kinakis, 2004. The eight main categories are: 
? Person (PRS): people names (forenames, 
surnames), groups of people, animal/pet 
names, mythological, theonyms; 
? Location (LOC): functional locations, 
geographical, geo-political, astrological; 
? Organization (ORG): political, athletic, 
media, military, etc.; 
? Artifact (OBJ): food/wine products, 
prizes, communic. means (vehicles) etc.; 
? Work&Art (WRK): printed material, 
names of films and novels, sculptures etc.; 
? Event (EVN): religious, athletic, scien-
tific, cultural etc.; 
? Measure/Numerical (MSR): volume, age, 
index, dosage, web-related, speed etc.; 
? Temporal (TME). 
Time expressions are important since they allow 
temporal reasoning about complex events as well 
as time-line visualization of the story developed in 
a text. The temporal expressions recognized in-
clude both relative (n?sta vecka ?next week?) and 
absolute expressions (klockan 8 p? morgonen i dag 
?8 o?clock in the morning today?), and sets or se-
quences of time points or stretches of time (varje 
dag ?every day?). 
4.2 Animacy Recognition 
The rule-based component of the person-name rec-
ognition grammar is based on a large set of desig-
nator words and a group of phrases and verbal 
predicates that most probably require an animate 
subject (e.g. ber?tta ?to tell?, fundera ?to think?, 
tr?ttna ?to become tired?). These are used in con-
junction with orthographic markers in the text, 
such as capitalization, for the recognition of per-
sonal names. In this work, we consider the first 
group (designators) as relevant knowledge to be 
extracted from the person name recognizer, which 
is explored for the annotation of animate instances 
3
in the literary texts. The designators are imple-
mented as a separate module in the current pipe-
line, and constitute a piece of information which is 
considered important for a wide range of tasks (cf. 
Orasan and Evans, 2001). 
The designators are divided into four groups: 
designators that denote the nationality or the eth-
nic/racial group of a person (e.g. tysken ?the Ger-
man [person]?); designators that denote a profes-
sion (e.g. l?karen ?the doctor?); those that denote 
family ties and relationships (e.g. sv?rson ?son in 
law?); and finally a group that indicates a human 
individual but cannot be unambiguously catego-
rized into any of the three other groups (e.g. pa-
tienten ?the patient?). Apart from this grouping, 
inherent qualities, for at least a large group of the 
designators, (internal evidence/morphological 
cues) also indicate referent (natural) gender. In this 
way, the animacy annotation is further specified 
for male, female or unknown gender; unknown in 
this context means unresolved or ambiguous, such 
as barn ?child?.  
Swedish is a compounding language and com-
pound words are written as a single orthographic 
unit (i.e. solid compounds). This fact makes the 
recognition of animacy straightforward with mini-
mal resources and feasible by the use of a set of 
suitable headwords, and by capturing modifiers by 
simple regular expressions. Approximately 25 pat-
terns are enough to identify the vast majority of 
animate entities in a text; patterns such as 
?inna/innan/innor?, ?man/mannen/m?n/m?nnen?, 
?log/logen/loger?, ?kt?r/kt?ren/kt?rer? and 
?iker/ikern/ikerna?. For instance, the pattern in (1) 
consists of a reliable suffix ?inna? which is a typi-
cal designator for female individuals, preceded by 
a set of obligatory strings and an optional regular 
expression which captures a long list of com-
pounds (2). 
(1) [a-z???]*(kv|?lskar|man|grev|?)inna 
(2) taleskvinna, yrkeskvinna, idrotts-
kvinna, ungkvinna, Stockholmskvin-
na, Dalakvinna, sambo?lskarinna, 
lyx?lskarinna, ex-?lskarinna, sam-
largrevinna, ex?lskarinna, markgre-
vinna, majgrevinna, ?nkegrevinna,? 
Examples of animacy annotations are given in (3). 
The attribute value FAM stands for FAmily relation 
and Male; PRM for PRofession and Male; FAF for 
FAmily relation and Female and finally UNF for 
UNknown and Female. 
(3) [?]<ENAMEX TYPE="FAM">riksgrefvin-
nans far</ENAMEX>, <ENAMEX TYPE= 
"PRM">?fveramiralen</ENAMEX> [?] 
hade till <ENAMEX TYPE="FAF">mor 
</ENAMEX> <ENAMEX TYPE="UNF">gre-
fvinnan</ENAMEX> Beata Wrangel fr?n 
[?] 
Table (3) in Section 6.1 presents the results for the 
evaluation of this type of normative information. 
Note also, that in order to make the annotations 
more practical we have included the person name 
designators (e.g. ?herr? ? ?Mr?) in the markup as in 
(4); here PRS stands for PeRSon: 
(4) <ENAMEX TYPE="UNM">Herr</ENAMEX> 
<ENAMEX TYPE="PRS" SBT="HUM">Boman 
</ENAMEX> becomes <ENAMEX TYPE= 
"PRS-UNM" SBT="HUM">Herr Boman 
</ENAMEX> 
4.3 Name Similarity 
We can safely assume that the various system re-
sources will not be able to identify all possible en-
tities in the texts, particularly personal and location 
names. Although there is a large overlap between 
the names in the texts and the gazetteer lists, there 
were cases that could be considered as entity can-
didates but were left unmarked. This is because 
exhaustive lists of names even for limited domains 
are hard to obtain, and, in some domains even dif-
ficult to manage. Therefore, we also calculated the 
orthographic similarity between such words and 
the gazetteer content, according to the following 
criteria: a potential entity starts with a capital let-
ter; it is ? 5 characters long; it is not part of any 
other annotation and it does not stand in the begin-
ning of a sentence. We have empirically observed 
that the length of 5 characters is a reliable thresh-
old, unlikely to exclude many NEs. As a matter of 
fact, only two such cases could be found in the 
evaluation sample, namely ?tten Puff ?the family 
Puff? and ?Yen-? in the context ?Yen- kenberg? 
As measure of orthographic similarity (or rather, 
difference) we used the Levenshtein distance (LD; 
also known as edit distance) between two strings. 
The LD is the number of deletions, insertions or 
substitutions required to transform a string into 
another string. The greater the distance, the more 
different the strings are. We chose to regard 1 and 
2 as trustworthy values and disregarded the rest. 
We chose these two values since empirical obser-
vations suggest that contemporary Swedish and 
4
19th century Swedish entities usually differ in one 
or two characters. In case of more than one match, 
we choose the most frequent alternative, as in the 
case of Wenern below. Table 1 illustrates various 
cases and the obtained results. 
text word # gazeteer LD ann. ?? 
Dalarne 6 Dalarna 1 loc yes 
Asptomten 1 --- --- --- - 
H?rnevi* 1 Arnevi 2 prs no 
Sabbathsberg 1 Sabbatsberg 1 loc yes 
Wenern* 7 Werner,Waern 
V?nern 
2 
2 
prs 
loc 
no 
Kakn?s 1 Valn?s,Ramn?s 2 loc yes 
Kallmar 1 Kalmar 1 loc yes 
Table 1. LD between potential NEs and the ga-
zeteers; ?*?: both are locations;????: correct annot.? 
5 The Document Centered Approach 
There is a known tradeoff between rule-based and 
statistical systems. Handcrafted grammar-based 
systems typically obtain better results, but at the 
cost of considerable manual effort by domain ex-
perts. Statistical NER systems typically require a 
large amount of manually annotated training data, 
but can be ported to other domains or genres more 
rapidly and require less manual work. Although the 
Swedish system is mainly rule-based, using a 
handcrafted grammar for each entity group, it can 
also be considered a hybrid system in the sense 
that it applies a document-centered approach 
(DCA) to entity annotation, which is a different 
paradigm compared to the local context approach, 
called external evidence by McDonald (1996). 
With DCA, information for the disambiguation of 
a name is derived from the entire document.  
DCA as a term originates from the work by 
Mikheev (2000: 138), who claims that: 
 
important words are typically used in a 
document more than once and in different 
contexts. Some of these contexts create 
very ambiguous situations but some don?t. 
Furthermore, ambiguous words and 
phrases are usually unambiguously intro-
duced at least once in the text unless they 
are part of common knowledge presup-
posed to be known by the readers. 
 
This implies a form of online learning from the 
document being processed where unambiguous 
usages are used for assigning annotations to am-
biguous words, and information for disambiguation 
is derived from the entire document.  
Similarly, label consistency, the preference of 
the same annotation for the same word sequence 
everywhere in a particular discourse, is a compara-
ble approach for achieving qualitatively higher re-
call rates with minimal resource overhead (cf. 
Krishnan and Manning, 2006). Such an approach 
has been used, e.g., by Aramaki et al (2006), for 
the identification of personal health information 
(age, id, date, phone, location and doctor?s and pa-
tient?s names). 
Figure 1. Example of label consistency 
 
Figure 1 illustrates this approach with an example 
taken from Almqvist?s Collected Works, Vol. 30. In 
this example, the first occurrence of the female 
person name Micmac, which is not in the gazetteer 
lists, is introduced by the author with the unambi-
guous designator faster ?aunt?. Many of the subse-
quent mentions of the same name are given with-
out any reliable clue for appropriate labelling. 
However, as already discussed, there is strong evi-
dence that subsequent mentions of the same name 
should be annotated with the same label, and since 
the same entity usually appears more than once in 
the same discourse, in our case a book, labelling 
consistency should guarantee better performance. 
There are exceptions for certain NE categories 
which may consist of words that are not proper 
nouns such as in the Work&Art category, and of 
course the temporal and measure groups which are 
blocked from this type of processing; cf. section 
6.2. 
6 Evaluation and Error Analysis 
The system was evaluated twice, while no nor-
malization or other preprocessing was applied to 
the original documents. Problems identified during 
the first evaluation round were taken under consid-
eration and specific changes were suggested to the 
system by incorporating appropriate modifications. 
5
During the first run, no adaptations or enhance-
ments were made to the original NER system. Af-
ter the first evaluation round, four major areas 
were identified in which the system either failed to 
produce an annotation or produced only partial or 
erroneous annotations. These failures were caused 
by: 
? Spelling variation: particularly the use of 
<f/w/e/q> instead of <v/v/?/k> as in modern 
Swedish. Most of the cases could be easily 
solved while other required different means 
such as calculating the LD between the 
name lists and possible name mentions in 
the texts (Section 4.3). One case that could 
be easily tackled was the addition of alter-
nate spelling forms for a handful of key-
words and designators, especially the prepo-
sition av/af common in temporal contexts, 
such as i b?rjan af/av 1790-talet ?in the be-
ginning of the 1790s?; or words such 
begge/b?gge ?both? and qv?ll/kv?ll ?eve-
ning?; 
? A number of definite plural forms of 
nouns, often designating a group of persons, 
with the suffix ?erne? instead the ?erna? as 
in modern Swedish, such as Kine-
serne/Kineserna ?the Chinese [people]? and 
Svenskarne/Svenskarna ?the Swedes?; 
? Unknown names: mentioned once with 
unreliable context; 
? Structure preservation: the document 
structure of the texts in Litteraturbankens is 
designed to create a faithful rendering of the 
visual appearance of the original printed 
books. In extracting the texts from the XML 
format used in Litteraturbanken, we did not 
want to apply any kind of normalization or 
other processing. Such an approach would 
have altered the document structure. This 
implies that for a handful of the entities, for 
which the hyphenation in the original paper 
version has divided a name into two parts, as 
in (5), correct identification cannot be ac-
complished, while in some cases only a par-
tial identification was possible, as in (6). 
(5) [?] Stock- holm 
(6) <ENAMEX TYPE=?PRS? SBT=?HUM?>Bertha 
von Lichten-</ENAMEX> ried 
6.1 Results 
As a baseline for the evaluation we use the result 
of simple dictionary lookup in the single name 
gazetteer. This process is very accurate (w.r.t. pre-
cision). We could identify a number of cases with 
erroneous annotations, due to various circum-
stances: Names in the gazetteer lists may have 
multiple entity tags associated with them, and thus 
an entity may belong to more than one group that 
could not be disambiguated by the surrounding 
context, such as Ekhammar as a city and surname; 
many names are ambiguous with common nouns 
or verbs, such as Stig as a first name and as the 
verb ?step/walk?; the gazetteers contained a num-
ber of words that should not have been in the list in 
the first place, such as Hvem ?Who?, styrman ?first 
mate? and f?nrik ?lieutenant?. A probable cause of 
the latter problem is the fact that the name lists 
have been semi-automatically compiled from vari-
ous sources including corpora and the Internet.  
We performed two evaluations, based on two 
different random samples consisting of 500 seg-
ments (roughly 30,000 tokens) each. A segment 
consists of an integral number of sentences (up to 
10?20). The overall results for all tests are shown 
in table 2. Results for individual entities using the 
whole system during both runs are found in table 3. 
The samples were evaluated according to preci-
sion, recall and f-score using the formulas: 
 
Precision = (Total Correct + Partially Corrtect) /  
All Produced 
Recall = (Total Correct + Partially Correct) /  
All Possible 
F-score =2*P*R/P+R. 
 
 
Table 2. Overall performance of the NER 
6
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3. Performance of the NER on the individual 
named entities including animacy 
 
Partially correct means that an annotation gets par-
tial credit. For instance, if the system produces an 
annotation for the functional location Nya Elemen-
tarskolan as in (7) instead of the correct (8), then 
such annotations are given half a point, instead of a 
perfect score. 
(7) Nya <ENAMEX TYPE=?LOC? SBT=?FNC?> 
Elementarskolan</ENAMEX> 
(8) <ENAMEX TYPE=?LOC? SBT=?FNC?>Nya 
Elementarskolan</ENAMEX> 
If, on the other hand, the type is correct but the 
subtype is wrong, then the annotation is given a 
score of 0.75 points (e.g. a functional location in-
stead of a geopolitical location). 
6.2 Limitations of the Centering Approach 
Labeling consistency and the DCA approach relies 
on the assumption that usage is consistent within 
the same document by the same author. However, 
we have observed that there are problems with en-
tities composed of more than a single word, par-
ticularly within the group Work&Art, which can 
produce conflicting information, if we allow the 
individual words in such content (often nouns or 
adjectives) to be re-applied in the text. 
For instance, the name of the novel Syster och 
bror occurred 32 times in one of the evaluation 
texts (Almqvist?s Collected Works Volume 29). If 
we allow the individual words that constitute the 
title, Syster, och and bror to be re-applied in the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
text as individual words (2 common nouns and a 
conjunction), then we would have degraded the 
precision considerably since we would have al-
lowed Work&Art annotations for irrelevant words. 
However, such cases can be resolved by simply 
letting the system ignore multiword Work&Art 
annotations during the DCA processing. 
 
 
Figure 2. Occurrences of the multi-word entity Sys-
ter och bror; the rule-based system could reliably 
identify and annotate 2/32 occurrences. 
 
Generally speaking, the experimental results have 
shown that any breaking of a multiword entity, 
except personal names, into its individual words 
often has a negative effect on performance. The 
best results are achieved when the DCA approach 
deals with single or bigram entities, particularly 
personal names. 
7
7 Conclusions and Future Prospects 
In this paper we have described the application of a 
generic Swedish named entity recognition system 
to a number of literary texts, novels from the 19th 
century, part of Litteraturbanken, the Swedish Lit-
erature Bank. We evaluated the results of the 
named entity recognition and identified a number 
of error sources which we tried to resolve and then 
introduce changes that would cover for such cases 
in the rule-based component of the system, in order 
to increase its performance (precision and recall) 
during a second evaluation round. 
Entity annotations open up a whole new re-
search spectrum for new kinds of qualitative and 
quantitative exploitations of literary and historical 
texts, allowing more semantically-oriented explo-
ration of the textual content. In the near future, we 
will annotate and evaluate a larger sample and pos-
sibly integrate machine learning techniques in or-
der to improve the results even more. We are also 
working to integrate the handling of named entity 
annotations into Litteraturbanken?s search and 
browsing interfaces and hope to be able to conduct 
our first demonstrations and tests with users later 
this year. 
References 
Eiji Aramaki, Takeshi Imai, Kengo Miyo and Kazuhiko 
Ohe. 2006. Automatic Deidentification by using Sen-
tence Features and Label Consistency. Challenges in 
NLP for Clinical Data Workshop. Washington DC.  
Kalina Bontcheva, Diana Maynard, Hamish Cunning-
ham and Horacio Saggion. 2002. Using Human Lan-
guage Technology for Automatic Annotation and In-
dexing of Digital Library Content. Proceedings of the 
6th European Conference on Research and Advanced 
Technology for Digital Libraries.  
Andrew Borthwick. 1999. A Maximum Entropy Ap-
proach to Named Entity Recognition. PhD Thesis. 
New York University.  
Gregory Crane and Alison Jones. 2006. The Challenge 
of Virginia Banks: an Evaluation of Named Entity 
Analysis in a 19th-century Newspaper Collection. 
ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries, 
JCDL. Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 31?40.  
Karina van Dalen-Oskam and Joris van Zundert. 2004. 
Modelling Features of Characters: Some Digital 
Ways to Look at Names in Literary Texts. Literary 
and Linguistic Computing 19(3): 289?301.  
Julia Flanders, Syd Bauman, Paul Caton and Mavis 
Cournane. 1998. Names Proper and Improper: Ap-
plying the TEI to the Classification of Proper Nouns. 
Computers and the Humanities 31(4): 285?300.  
Michael Fleischman and Eduard Hovy. 2002. Fine 
Grained Classification of Named Entities. Proceed-
ings of the 19th International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics. Taipei, Taiwan. 1?7.  
Janne Bondi Johannessen, Kristin Hagen, ?sne 
Haaland, Andra Bj?rk J?nsdottir, Anders N?klestad, 
Dimitrios Kokkinakis, Paul Meurer, Eckhard Bick 
and Dorte Haltrup. 2005. Named Entity Recognition 
for the Mainland Scandinavian Languages. Literary 
and Linguistic Computing. 20(1): 91?102. 
Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2004. Reducing the Effect of 
Name Explosion. Proceedings of the LREC-
Workshop: Beyond Named Entity Recognition - Se-
mantic Labeling for NLP. Lisbon, Portugal.  
Vijay Krishnan and Christopher D. Manning. 2006. An 
Efficient Two-Stage Model for Exploiting Non-Local 
Dependencies in Named Entity Recognition. Pro-
ceedings of COLING/ ACL 2006. Sydney, Australia. 
1121?1128.  
David D. McDonald. 1996. Internal and External Evi-
dence in the Identification and Semantic Categorisa-
tion of Proper Nouns. Corpus-Processing for Lexical 
Acquisition. James Pustejovsky and Bran Boguraev 
(eds). MIT Press. 21?39.  
Andrei Mikheev. 2000. Document Centered Approach 
to Text Normalization. Proceedings of the 23rd ACM 
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval. Athens, Greece. 136?143.  
Satoshi Sekine. 2004. Definition, Dictionaries and Tag-
ger for Extended  Named Entity Hierarchy. Proceed-
ings of the Language Resources and Evaluation Con-
ference (LREC). Lisbon, Portugal.  
Constantin Orasan and Roger Evans. 2001. Learning to 
Identify Animate References. Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Computational Natural Language 
Learning (CoNLL-2001). ACL-2001. Toulouse, 
France.  
Robert Shoemaker. 2005. Digital London. Creating a 
Searchable Web of Interlinked Sources on Eighteenth 
Century London. Program: Electronic Library & In-
formation Systems 39(4): 297?311. 
 
8
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Second Louhi Workshop on Text and Data Mining of Health Documents, pages 53?60,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Characteristics and Analysis of Finnish and Swedish  Clinical Intensive Care Nursing Narratives   Helen Allvinf, Elin Carlssonf, Hercules Dalianisf, Riitta Danielsson-Ojalaa, Vidas Daudaravi?iusb, Martin Hasself, Dimitrios Kokkinakisc, Helj? Lund-gren-Lainea, Gunnar Nilssonf, ?ystein Nytr?d, Sanna Salanter?a, Maria Skeppstedtf, Hanna Suominene, Sumithra Velupillaif aDepartment of Nursing Science, University of Turku, VSSHP, Turku, Finland, bVytautas Magnus University, Lithuania, cDepartment of Swedish, University of Gothenburg, Sweden, dIDI, The Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway, eNICTA Canberra Research Laboratory and Australian National University, Australia fDepartment of Computer and Systems Sciences/Stockholm University Forum 100 SE-164 40 Kista, Sweden http://www.dsv.su.se/hexanord 
Abstract 
We present a comparative study of Finnish and Swedish free-text nursing narratives from intensive care. Although the two languages are linguistically very dissimilar, our hypothe-sis is that there are similarities that are impor-tant and interesting from a language technology point of view. This may have im-plications when building tools to support pro-ducing and using health care documentation. We perform a comparative qualitative analysis based on structure and content, as well as a comparative quantitative analysis on Finnish and Swedish Intensive Care Unit (ICU) nurs-ing narratives. Our findings are that ICU nurs-ing narratives in Finland and Sweden have many properties in common, but that many of these are challenging when it comes to devel-oping language technology tools. 
1 Introduction The purpose of this study1 is to do content and lexical analysis of nursing narratives written in an                                                            1 Our research on the Stockholm EPR Corpus (Dalianis et al, 2009) has been approved by Etikpr?vningsn?mnden i Stock-holm, (the Regional Vetting Board), reference number 
Intensive Care Unit (ICU). The ultimate goal of our research is to define linguistic similarities and language-specific aspects that differentiate clinical narratives in Finnish and Swedish in order to lay groundwork for developing internationally appli-cable language technology solutions and create a framework for characterising and comparing clini-cal narratives. Free text is handy for information entry but a challenge for information extraction, care handover and other uses of gathered informa-tion. Language technology can alleviate some of these problems in retrospective analysis by offer-ing a more semantically informed interpretation and abstraction. However, the most promising po-tential of language technology is to interactively improve, interpret and code during text entry so that the resulting structured, coded, free text can be validated immediately. The critical bottleneck to-day is namely information handover and reuse, and extensive text is simply not used nor is useful. In-teractively validated, semantically processed text could be more usable and support abstraction, visualization and query tools for the benefit of cli-nicians, patients, researchers and quality adminis-trators.                                                                                               2009/1742-31/5. Our research on the Finnish Corpus (Salan-ter? et al, 2009) has been approved by the Ethical committee of the Hospital District of South West Finland, reference number 2/2009, ?66. 
53
In this paper, we analyze Finnish and Swedish ICU nursing narratives from both qualitative and quantitative perspectives. Our data includes textual nursing documentation of adult patients with a protracted inpatient period. We have chosen ICUs because of their international similarity in decision making (Lauri & Salanter? 2002) and nursing documentation because it covers the entire inpa-tient period. 2 Background 
2.1 Clinical text Clinical text covers the text documents produced for clinical work by clinicians and occurs in clini-cal information systems. It is written by clinicians, that is, professionals (physicians, nurses, therapists and other specialist) responsible for patient care. Its primary purpose is to serve patient care as a summary or hand-over note. However, clinical text is also written for legal requirements, care continu-ity and purposes of reimbursement, management and research. Clinical text covers every care phase and, depending on the purpose, documents differ. Documents that describe the patient?s state, current health problems and socio-medical history are very different from those describing a care plan, its ac-tualization and evaluation of care outcomes. Again, these differ from diagnostic notes, lab results, ra-diography readings, pathology reports and dis-charge documents that plan further care at discharge.  Finally, clinical text may have been entered in ?real time?, in retrospect, or as a sum-mary, by the bedside or elsewhere. The enterer can be a clinician, secretary who transcribes a dictate, speech recognition software or another system that generates or synthesizes text, (McDonald 1997, Thoroddsen et al, 2009.).  2.2 Legal requirements for clinical documen-tation in different countries In several countries clinical documentation is based on law. In Finland, the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health (Statutes of Finland, 298/2009) defines that to ensure good care, all necessary and wide-ranging information has to be registered in patient records. In Sweden, the National Board of Health and Welfare has a similar approach (Pa-tientdatalagen 2008:355). Clinical text should be 
explicit and intelligible, and only generally well-known, accepted concepts and abbreviations are allowed to be used. It should detail adequately the patient?s conditions, care and recovery.  2.3 Special features of ICU and nursing An ICU is an essential component of most large hospitals with high quality care.  ICUs provide care for critically ill patients and focus on condi-tions that are life-threatening and require compre-hensive care and constant monitoring (Webster's 2010). This task is fairly similar universally. It is based on optional, international guidelines focus-ing on triage, admission, discharge and education. This international similarity was evident when nurses? decision making was studied in Canada, Finland, Northern Ireland, Switzerland, Norway and the USA (Lauri & Salanter? 2002); the study showed that decision making of ICU nurses was the most uniform in different countries when com-pared with nurses working in public health care, psychiatric care, and short and long term care. Clinical text written by nurses, that is, nursing narratives, both in Finland and in Sweden is based on the care process which stands for gathering in-formation from the patient, setting goals for care, implementing nursing interventions, and evaluat-ing the results of given care. In Finland, the na-tional standardized documentation model has been implemented with the Finnish care classification (assessment, interventions and outcomes of care) (Tanttu & Ikonen 2007). The Swedish VIPS model provides a structure for the documentation process with key words that reflect the nursing process (Ehrenberg et al, 1996).  ICU nursing narratives can be lengthy, espe-cially when the patient stay in the ICU is pro-longed. As much as 60 A4 pages equivalents of written text may be gathered during one period of care. However, clinicians have somewhat different opinion on how to organize the information they write. For example, headings are often inconsistent and text under headings can cover a lot of other issues than those directly concerning the given heading. (Suominen et al, 2009.)  2.4 Related studies Since most of the available clinical documents are in free-text form, a number of stylistically oriented efforts to characterize the data from various angles 
54
have taken place. This may include various topics, from viewing detailed information about specific items (e.g. readability, Kim et al, 2007) to identi-fying patterns and structures in order to provide better technology to automatically process the sublanguage (Pakhomov et al, 2006). The majority of such efforts investigate different aspects of lin-guistic features at a monolingual level, for in-stance, Hahn & Wermter (2004); Tomanek et al, (2007); Chung (2009); Harkema et al, (2009); while for a thorough review of various related is-sues see Meystre et al, (2008). In the Nordic con-text, Josefsson (1999) discusses Swedish clinical language and shows examples on how verb con-structions in a clinical setting differ from a non clinical setting.  One claim is that the physician unmarks the verb forms for agentivity when writ-ing about the patient and what actions she takes, for example, Patienten hallucinerar [The patient hallucinates] instead of the normal form  Patienten f?r hallucinationer [The patient experiences hallu-cinations].   Helles? (2005) describes nurses' general use of the language function in the nursing discharge notes. She finds that the text in the nursing dis-charge notes is information-dense and character-ized by technical terms, and that the use of standardised templates helped nurses improve the completeness, structure and content of the informa-tion. Comparisons at a monolingual level between written clinical text and lay text has been carried out by Dalianis et al, (2009). A contrastive com-putational linguistics study was carried out be-tween the Stockholm EPR Corpus (SEPR) and a general language corpus, both written Swedish text. The findings showed that SEPR contained longer words and that the vocabulary was highly domain-specific. Other work is described in Ownby, (2005). Comparing clinical text at a crosslingual level has, to our knowledge, only been done by Borin et al, (2007).  3 Analysis of Finnish and Swedish ICU nursing narratives  The analyzed nursing narratives origin from one ICU in a university-affiliated hospital both in Fin-land and Sweden. Our inclusion criterion was an ICU inpatient period of at least 5 days and patient's age of at least 16 years. The Finnish data includes nursing narratives from 514 patient records (496 
unique patients, 18 rebounds, a patient record is defined as each inpatient period of at least 5 days per patient) between January 2005 and August 2006. The Swedish data includes nursing narra-tives from 379 patient records (333 unique pa-tients, 46 rebounds) between January 2006 and May 2008. Since we did not have complete admis-sion and discharge documents from both countries, our analysis is performed on daily nursing narra-tives. These documents are written by ICU nurses during the actual inpatient period from the patient admission to the discharge.    3.1 Qualitative analysis A manual content analysis was performed by four health care professionals (i.e., three native Finnish speakers knowing Swedish, one Swedish native speaker) and one native Swedish speaking lan-guage consultant. Three average-sized patient re-cords each from Finland and Sweden were chosen for our analysis (average size 2,389 words for Fin-land and 5,169 words for Sweden). In the analysis, we considered special features (Table 1) of daily notes both from the structural and content related points of view.  The style and context of both Finnish and Swed-ish text is very similar. For health care profession-als, and especially with an ICU background, all the texts are intelligible and the meaning of a writer becomes evident from the context even in the pres-ence of numerous linguistic and grammatical mis-takes; almost all the sentences are lacking both grammatical subjects and objects. It is evident that in both countries, the narratives are written from a professional to a professional in order to support information transfer, remind about important facts, and supplement numerical data.  A feature common for all the six records is that they rarely contain any subjects or objects when nurses are writing about patients. However, in the Swedish nursing narratives the word patient is used as a subject or object much more often than in the Finnish narratives. The abbreviation pat. is mostly used for this reference and she/he is never used for this purpose. In the whole data, pat. is 40 percent more common than she/he, which is the most common personal pronoun. It seems that the word patient or pat. is used more when the profes-sionals are writing about relatives. In general, pro-nouns are used infrequently in the narratives, and  
55
  Table 1. Special structural and contextual features of Finnish and Swedish daily ICU nursing narratives. The original examples are added in ().  I very rarely. If the reader is not a health care pro-fessional, a risk for confusing the subject (i.e., the patient or nurse) arises. However, the context makes it almost always clear who is referred to.  Approximately half of the narratives do not contain any verb. The most common tense is perfect, but 
without the auxiliary has. When the meaning does not contain a subject it becomes ?unnatural? to use has. Instead, the supine form is used, for example slept, lain, and eaten. Both present and past parti- ciples without be-verb are common, for example, Breathing: Ventilator parameters unchanged. 
Special features of Finnish narratives   Special features of Swedish narratives   Structure Examples Structure Examples 
Headings are used in 2 out of 3 patient records. Headings are typi-cally used as subjects or subjects are partially used.  
Diuresis: occasionally profuse. (Diureesi: ajoittain runsasta.)  Pupils move under eyelids but does not open eyes. (Pupillit liikkuvat luomien alla, mutta ei avaa silmi??n.)  
Headings are used in all daily narra-tives. In Swedish daily narratives, the structure of headings seems to be obligatory. The headings are used typically as subjects.  
Circulation: Stable with ino-trop. (Cirkulation: Stabil med ino-tropi.)  Reacts only for pain stimula-tion during the suction of intu-bation tube. (Reagerar enbart vid sm?rt-stimuli vid sugning i tuben.) 
Present and past participles are typical but verbs of be, is and are are not used.  
Consciousness remained un-changed. (Tajunta pysynyt ennallaan.)  Blood pressure low. (Verenpaine matala.) 
Present and past participles are typical but verbs of be, is and are are not used.  
Breathing: Ventilator parame-ters unchanged. (Andning: Ventilator paramet-rarna of?r?ndrade.) 
Complete sentences are rarely used.  
No spontaneous movements, rigidifies. (Ei spontaania liikett?, j?ykiste-lee.)  Husband and daughter have been staying a long time beside the patient. (Mies ja tyt?r olleet pitk??n potilaan vierell?.) 
Complete sentences are rarely used.  
Light sedation, looks up now and then. (L?tt sederad, tittar upp ibl-and.)  She took the wedding ring and the watch home. (Hon tog med sig vigselring och klocka hem.) 
Misspellings are found but the content or meaning is still clear.  Hemodynamic ? hemodynamic (Hemodynamiikka ? henody-namiikka) Misspellings are found but the content or meaning is still clear.  
The motther is informed. (Mammman ?r informered.)  Magnesium is addded. (Magnesium har tilllsatts.) Content Examples Content  Examples 
The word patient as a subject or object is infrequently mentioned. If this word is mentioned it is not abbreviated.  
Oxidates well or ventilates well. (Happeutuu hyvin tai ventiloituu hyvin.)  
The word patient is used more often than in Finnish narratives as a subject or object. It is also replaced with abbreviations of Pat or Pt.  
Patient got a percutanous tracheostomy today. (Patienten har f?tt en perkutan trakeostomi idag.)  Very worried about patient?s condition. (Mycket oroliga ?ver patien-tens tillst?nd.)  Pt. wakes up for talking and appears to be adequate. (Pt. vakner p? tilltal och up-plevs som adekvat.) 
Signs are typically used: e.g., >, <, -->, +, -.  
The height for the drain raised from 10 --> 20 mmHg. (Dreneerausrajaa nostettu 10  --> 20 mmHg.)  Got medicine --> good response. (Sai l??kett? -->hyv? vaste.) 
Many different abbreviations are used. The origin of entire word is Swedish, English, Latin, professional or ICU typical.  
em. [eftermiddag, afternoon], HR [heart rate], VF [Ven-tricula/Fibrillation, Ventricular Fibrillation]  
56
The use of headings is frequent and good ? most of the time the content matches the headings (Tables 1 and 3). In addition, headings are used similarly in the Swedish and Finnish documents. Most of the time the headings are considered as subjects of the sentence, for example, Consciousness: Unchanged. Liquor brighter than yesterday. However, in the use of headings there are two interesting findings: If the headings are to be cho-sen freely, as in the Finnish narratives, nurses tend to use their own headings and hence many syno-nyms or closely related concepts are used; for ex-ample, hemodynamics versus blood pressure and pulse or breathing versus oxidation. If the headings are obligatory, as in the Swedish narratives, nurses tend to write their observations under the heading which is somehow closest to the subject; for exam-ple, body temperature under circulation or level of sedation under sleep. For both languages the use of different abbrevia-tions is very common. Almost every daily nursing narrative included several abbreviations. Most of the abbreviations are typical for an ICU domain: CVP [central venous pressure], PEEP [Positive End-Expiratory Pressure], EN [Enteral Nutrition], TPN [Total Parenteral Nutrition], pO2 [partial pressure of oxygen], pCO2 [partial pressure of carbon dioxide], MV [Minute Ventilation] and MAP [Mean Arterial Pressure]. From a language technology point of view this means that ICU nurs-ing narratives contain language-independent vo-cabulary. However, nurses in both countries also use many language dependent abbreviations. 
3.2 Quantitative analysis The Finnish data set (n=514) was quantitatively analyzed using the morphological analyser FinT-WOL and the disambiguator FinCG, (Lingsoft 2010), and the Swedish data set (n=379) using the GTA, Granska Text Analyzer (Knutsson et al, 2003). Both data sets are rich in terms of amount of text and vocabulary (Table 2). It is also clear that the amount of text written per day and patient varies a lot in both data sets. More complex words were spelled in numerous ways. For example, the pharmacological substance Noradrenalin had ap-proximately 350 and 60 different spellings in the Finnish and Swedish data sets, respectively. This problem is part of a more general issue of refer-
ence resolution e.g. when mapping different lexical terms referring to the same concept. In our quantitative analysis, we have included punctuation characters. In the Swedish data there was a large amount of html-tags and other format-ting characters, which has a high impact on the total number of tokens (see Table 2). Moreover, as Finnish is highly inflective, FinCG produces alter-native lemmas, hence it is possible to reduce the sparseness of the data by processing the output by choosing only one alternative lemma (see total number of types in Table 2).  To further illustrate the richness of ICU nursing language, the number of unique bigrams (e.g., ?is not?, ?oxidate well? and ?night time? (note: a mis-spelled compound) are the most common ones for Finnish) and trigrams (e.g., ?oxygeneated and ven-tilated?, ?and ventilate well? are among the most common ones for Finnish) were 368,166 (275,205 after FinCG) and 745,407 (356,307 after FinCG) for Finnish patient records. For the Swedish data, the number of unique bigrams was 469,455 (344,127 after GTA) and 1,064,944 (905,539 after GTA). Examples of common Swedish ICU bi-grams and trigrams include ?circulation stabile?, ?during night?, ?in connection with?, and ?with good effect?. Of the content of Finnish nursing narratives, 11% are verbs, 7% nouns and less than 1% pronouns. For Swedish nursing narratives, the respective percentages are 11%, 27% and 2%. One reason for the high numbers for nouns in the Swed-ish data might be due to the large amount of (obligatory) headings relative to the Finnish data (see Table 3).  To support fluent information flow, language technology is needed to strengthen referential con-gruence. Much of this richness of vocabulary is explained by abbreviations and personal differ-ences in professional jargon. In particular, abbre-viations were common. Based on the analysis of the most common words, abbreviations were rela-tively established in Swedish data. For the Finnish data, abbreviations were less standard but RR, SR, CVP, h, ad, ml, ok, vas. [vasen, left] and oik. [oikea, right] were extremely common. Thus, ref-erential congruence can be strengthened by spell-ing out the most common abbreviations automatically. Adding topical content headings is another way to support information flow. Topical content head-ings were mandatory for Swedish data, but no de-
57
fault headings for Finnish existed. However, the headings for Finnish were established in terms of content. In Table 3, we see that the headings for both languages cover similar topics, which indi-cates that the clinical information need is similar for professionals in both countries (and languages). Thus, we recommend forming a standardized set of headings from which the user can voluntarily se-lect the ones to be used. This does not exclude add-ing other headings. Another alternative is to develop language technology for topic segmenta-tion and labeling. We have promising results from this approach (see, e.g., Suominen 2009).  Temporal expressions (e.g., time, evening, night) were often used in both data sets. This poses the question of tense analysis of verbs being unneces-sary and the time-related words being enough to imply the needed temporal information. It is also interesting to note that the negations inte [not, Swe], ingen [none, Swe], ej [not, Swe] and ei [no/not, Fin] are all among the most common types, which is an important property to take into account in information extraction applications. Furthermore, words regarding the oral cavity, such as breathing and mucus, as well as relations, such as daughter, son, wife, and husband are very com-mon in both data sets.  Inspired by the tf?idf-measure from information retrieval, we also analyzed the most common words in terms of a) the number of patients in whose documents the word was used and b) the number of daily nursing narratives in which the word was used. Here, we found, in both data sets, that those words that were used for all patients as well as all daily narratives, were very similar in both data sets, and were related to the most com-mon headings, temporal expressions, negations and monitoring (e.g., increase, continue, begin).  The amount of Protected Health Information (PHI) in form of person names was equal in both of the data sets: 1.5 person names per thousand tokens. This is notable, since this has implications when it comes to integrity issues and reuse of data for research purposes. FinCG did not recognize 36% of the content of Finnish nursing narratives. However, words marked as unrecognized by FinCG also included punctuation marks. In our previous study (see Suominen 2009 and references therein), we tai-lored FinCG by extending approximately 35,000 clinical terms. The extension not only substantially 
improved the applicability of FinCG to the health domain but also initiated piloting of our language technology components in an authentic healthcare environment in the fall 2008. This lead to the re-lease of commercial language technology for Fin-nish health records (Lingsoft 2010).   Data Finnish  Swedish  Total number of patients  514  379  Total number of  tokens,  types (unique tokens) and types after processing 
 1,227,909 63,328 38,649 
 1,959,271 - 41,883 Number of tokens per patient: Minimum Maximum Average Standard deviation 
 540 14,118 2,389 1,635   
 92 36,830 5,169 5,271 Total number of  daily documents and shifts  5,915 17,103  4,700 ? Number of tokens per daily document: Minimum Maximum Average Standard deviation 
  0 915 208 87 
  5 9,389 417 239  Table 2. Comparison of Finnish and Swedish ICU data sets: total amount of text per patient. A daily document, i.e. nursing narrative, contains all text written about a given patient during a calendar day.  Finnish n ? Swedish  n = Hemodynamics  7,800  Respiratory  11,301  Consciousness  6,900  Circulation 10,630  Relatives  5,700  Elimination  10,041  Diuresis  5,400  Nutrition  8,258  Breathing  4,500  Communication  5,880  Oxygenation  3,600  Event Time  5,681  Other  3,200  Pain  4,732  Excretion  590  Psychosocial  4,682  Hemodialysis  370  Sleep  4,438  Pulse  160  Skin  4,402  Skin  160  Activity  3,794   Table 3. Comparison of Finnish and Swedish ICU data sets: the most common headings. For the Finnish data, where default headings were not given, we approxi-mated the amount of heading by using an automated heuristics followed by manual combination of headings with the same meaning. 
58
For Swedish, GTA handles unknown words dif-ferently than FinCG. However, by comparing the ICU words with a Swedish general language cor-pus (PAROLE, Gellerstam et al (2000)), we found that 69% of the types are not included in PAROLE, which indicates a need for tailoring GTA (or simi-lar tools for Swedish) with domain-specific ICU terms.  4 Conclusions The purpose of this study was to do content and lexical analysis of nursing narratives written in an ICU. Our findings are that, even though the Fin-nish and Swedish languages are not linguistically closely related, the way of writing clinical nursing ICU narratives in both countries is very similar. Moreover, the written context made sentences clear for content experts, even though the texts were full of specialized jargon, misspellings, ab-breviations, and missing subjects and objects. However, these characteristics make clinical text challenging for language technology. For example coreference resolution as in the case of noradrena-lin. We have also shown that the content characteris-tics of Finnish and Swedish ICU nursing narratives are very similar. This implies that developing tools for documentation support in ICUs is not country or language dependant in that respect. Developing such tools may improve possibilities for informa-tion extraction and text mining, enabling the possi-bilities to reuse the vast amounts of important practice-based information and evidence captured in clinical narratives. The framework we have in-troduced here could easily be employed in other studies of clinical texts. 6 Future work In the future, we will use the results of this study in developing language technology for Finnish, Swe-dish and other Nordic ICU narratives. We will study how to identify abbreviations, misspellings and normalize and correct them, by using various distance measures and concept management tech-niques. We will also study how to automatically identify important parts of text and highlight them. Furthermore, we are interested in studying text provenance and pragmatics in this particular set-ting. In addition, we will evaluate the influence of 
these technology components in clinical practice. We will also address similarities and differences in clinical text written by various professional groups or at other hospital wards and health care units. Finally, we are eager to seek possibilities to incor-porate laymen's information needs and their inter-action with health care providers into our study. Acknowledgments We would like to thank Nordforsk and the Nordic Council of Ministers for the funding of our research network HEXAnord ? HEalth teXt Analysis network in the Nordic and Baltic countries and NICTA, funded by the Australian Government as represented by the De-partment of Broadband, Communications and the Digi-tal Economy and the Australian Research Council through the ICT Centre of Excellence program. We would also like to thank the Department of Information Technology and TUCS, University of Turku, Finland. References Lars Borin, Natalia Grabar, Catalina Hallett, Davis Hardcastle, Maria Toporowska Gronostaj, Dimitrios Kokkinakis, Sandra Williams and Alistair Willis. 2007. Empowering the patient with language tech-nology. SemanticMining NoE 507505: Deliverable D27.2. <http://gup.ub.gu.se/gup/record/index.xsql?pubid=53590>  Grace Yuet-Chee Chung. 2009. Towards identifying intervention arms in randomized controlled trials: ex-tracting coordinating constructions.  Journal of Bio-medical Informatics. 42(5):790?800  Hercules Dalianis, Martin Hassel and Sumithra Velupil-lai. 2009. The Stockholm EPR Corpus - Characteris-tics and Some Initial Findings. Proceedings of ISHIMR 2009, Evaluation and implementation of e-health and health information initiatives: interna-tional perspectives. 14th International Symposium for Health Information Management Research, Kal-mar, Sweden, 14-16 October, 2009, pp 243-249, pdf. Awarded best paper.  Anna Ehrenberg, Margareta Ehnfors and Ingrid Thorell-Ekstrand. 1996. Nursing documentation in patient re-cords: experience of the use of the VIPS model. Journal of Advanced Nursing 24, 853?867.  Martin Gellerstam, Yvonne Cederholm, and Torgny Rasmark. The bank of Swedish. In: Proceedings of LREC 2000 -- The 2nd International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, pages 329?333, Athens, Greece.  Udo Hahn and Joachim Wermter. 2004. High-performance tagging on medical texts. Proceedings of the 20th international conference on Computa-tional Linguistics. Geneva, Switzerland.  
59
Henk Harkema, Dowling JN, Thornblade T, Chapman WW. 2009. ConText: an algorithm for determining negation, experiencer, and temporal status from clin-ical reports. Journal of Biomedical Informatics 2009;42(5):839?51.  Ragnhild Helles?. 2005. Information handling in the nursing discharge notes, Journal of Clinical Nursing, Volume 15 Issue 1, 11 - 21. Blackwell publishing  Gunl?g Josefsson. 1999. F? feber eller tempa? N?gra tankar om agentivitet i medicinskt fackspr?k, Alla tiders spr?k: en v?nskrift till Gertrud Pettersson. Pages 127. Institutionen f?r nordiska spr?k. Lund. (In Swedish)  Hyeoneui Kim, Sergey Goryachev, Craciela Rosemblat, Allen Browne, Alla Keselman and Qing Zeng-Treitler. 2007. Beyond surface characteristics: a new health text-specific readability measurement. AMIA Annual Symp. 11:418-22.  Ola Knutsson, Johnny Bigert, and Vigg Kann. 2003. A robust shallow parser for Swedish. In Proceedings 14th Nordic Conf. on Comp. Ling. NODALIDA. Sirkka Lauri and Sanna Salanter?;. 2002. Developing an instrument to measure and describe clinical decision making in different nursing fields. Journal of Profes-sional Nursing. Mar-Apr;18(2), 93-100.  Lingsoft. 2010, Lingsoft Oy, http://www.lingsoft.fi/  Clement J. McDonald. 1997. The Barriers to Electronic Medical Record Systems and How to Overcome Them. JAMIA. 1997;4:213?221.   St?phane M. Meystre, Guergana K. Savova, Karin C. Kipper-Schuler and John E. Hurdle. 2008. Extracting Information from Textual Documents in the Elec-tronic Health Record: a Review of Recent Research. Yearbook Med Inform. 2008:128-44.  Raymond L. Ownby 2005. Influence of Vocabulary and Sentence Complexity and Passive Voice on the Readability of Consumer-Oriented Mental Health In-formation on the Internet. AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings. 2005: 585?588. Serguei V. S. Pakhomov, Anni Coden and Christopher G. Chute. 2006. Developing a corpus of clinical notes manually annotated for part-of-speech. International Journal of Medical Informatics. 2006 Jun;75(6):418-29. Epub 2005 Sep 19. Patientdatalagen (2008:355) Svensk f?rfattnings-samling, Socialdepartementet, 2008, Stockholm. (In Swedish)  Hanna Suominen. 2009. Machine Learning and Clinical Text: Supporting Health Information Flow. TUCS Dissertations No 125, Turku Centre for Computer Science, 2009, Turku, Finland.  Hanna Suominen, Helj? Lundgr?n-Laine, Sanna Salan-ter?, Helena Karsten, and Tapio Salakoski. 2009. In-formation flow in intensive care narratives. In Chen J, Chen C, Ely J, Hakkani-Tr D, He J, Hsu H.-H, Liao L, Liu C, Pop  M, Ranganathan S, Reddy C.K, 
Ruan J, Song Y, Tseng V.S, Ungar L, Wu D, Wu Z, Xu K, Yu H, Zelikovsky A, editors. Proceedings IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine Workshops, BIBM 2009, pages 325?330. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi-neers, Los Alamitos, California, USA.  Kaarina Tanttu and Helena Ikonen. 2007. Nationally standardized electronic nursing documentation in Finland by the year 2007. Stud Health Technol In-form.122:540-1.  Asta Thoroddsen, Kaija Saranto, Anna Ehrenberg, Wal-ter Sermeus. 2009. Models, standards and structures of nursing documentation in European countries. Stud Health Technol Inform.146:327-31.  Katrin Tomanek, Joachim Wermter and Udo Hahn. 2007. A Reappraisal of sentence and token splitting for life sciences documents. Stud Health Technol In-form. 129 (Pt 1):524-8. Webster?s 2010. Webster?s New World Medical Dic-tionary. http://www.medterms.com/script/main/hp.asp,last visited February 2, 2010. 
60
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Second Louhi Workshop on Text and Data Mining of Health Documents, pages 68?71,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Linking SweFN++ with Medical Resources,
towards a MedFrameNet for Swedish
Dimitrios Kokkinakis Maria Toporowska Gronostaj
Department of Swedish Language, Spr?kbanken Department of Swedish Language, Spr?kbanken
University of Gothenburg University of Gothenburg
SE-405 30, Gothenburg, Sweden SE-405 30, Gothenburg, Sweden
dimitrios.kokkinakis@svenska.gu.se maria.gronostaj@svenska.gu.se
Abstract
In this pilot study we define and apply a methodol-
ogy for building an event extraction system for the
Swedish scientific medical and clinical language.
Our aim is to find and describe linguistic expres-
sions which refer to medical events, such as events
related to diseases, symptoms and drug effects. In
order to achieve this goal we have initiated actions
that aim to extend and refine parts of the ongoing
compilation of the Swedish FrameNet++ (SFN++).
SFN++, as its English original predecessor, is
grounded in Frame Semantics which provides a
sound theoretical ground for modeling and linking
linguistic structures encountered in general lan-
guage and in specific domains (after specializa-
tion). Using such resource we have started to
manually annotate domain texts for enriching
SFN++ with authentic samples and for providing
training data for automated event extraction tech-
niques.
1 Introduction
In the clinical setting vast amounts of health-
related data are constantly collected, while medical
and biomedical scientific publications, in e.g. mo-
lecular biology, genetics, proteomics and other
types of -omics, increase in a dramatic manner.
These data are undoubtfully a valuable source of
evidence-based research. However, to empower
researchers to make highly efficient use of the re-
sulting volume of literature and the knowledge that
is encoded therein, the material must be better in-
tegrated and linked via effective automated proc-
essing. Tools have to be developed for the
automatic processing of the textual content in a
deeper, more semantically-oriented fashion having
access to multilayered lexical and grammatical
information. The goal is then to enable rapid, ef-
fective and as far as possible accurate extraction of
relationships, facts and events asserted and de-
scribed in the data. Event extraction is understood
here as an activity, that broadly follows the
BioNLP 2009 shared task view (Kim et al, 2009),
in which an event is considered to be an involve-
ment of multiple entities in varying roles. The task
is fundamental to the objective of Language Tech-
nology systems, such as Question-Answering and
Information Extraction (IE), which have as their
higher-level goal to identify instances of a particu-
lar class of events (or relationships) in a text and to
extract their relevant arguments. We argue that
such information has a direct correlation with Fra-
meNet?s semantic frames, since templates in the
context of IE are frame-like structures with slots
representing the event basic information. Our in-
tention is to explore the applicability of SFN++ to
the clinical and scientific medical domain in Swed-
ish. Therefore, relevant domain specific entities are
explicitly annotated by automatic indexing of the
texts by the Swedish and English Medical Subject
Headings thesauri (MeSH); cf. Kokkinakis (2009).
Non-medical entities such as temporal expressions,
locative expressions and personal characteristics
such as gender and age are provided by an ex-
tended named entity recognition process (Kokki-
nakis, 2004). The partial syntactic analysis that
follows is aware of the preprocessing steps and
uses the background knowledge as features en-
coded in XML using the TIGER-XML format
(Brants & Hansen, 2002).
2 Background
Methods employed in the extraction of events have
generally involved two approaches. The first oneis
based on manual annotation of events in domain-
specific text samples in order to create training
68
resources for processes that may learn to recognize
events in new texts (Kim et al, 2008). The second
is based on methods in which events are automati-
cally acquired from unannotated texts; Nobata &
Sekine (1999), in the sense that no manually pre-
encoded training resources are used for producing
the extraction patterns. Both methodologies have
produced rapid advances in the robustness and ap-
plicability of IE. We believe that Frame Semantics
(Fillmore, 1976) is a suitable resource, for the first
type of method, and in our work we started to ex-
plore means for specializing and refining parts of
the ongoing development of the SFN++ (Borin et
al., 2009), on the medical domain. Our goal is to
enrich domain corpora with layers of syntactic and
semantic information providing relevant support
for IE and text mining research in the field.
2.1 FrameNet
FrameNet <http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu> is based
on the principles of Frame Semantics supported by
corpus evidence. A semantic frame is a script-like
structure of concepts, which are linked to the
meanings of linguistic units and associated with a
specific event or state. Each frame identifies a set
of frame elements, which are frame specific se-
mantic roles (e.g. participants or arguments). FN
documents the range of semantic and syntactic
combinatory possibilities of frame evoking lexical
units, phrases and clauses. FN facilitates modeling
the mapping of form and meaning within these
structures in the medical discourse through manual
annotation of example sentences and automatic
summarization of the resulting annotations. A
word can evoke a frame, and its syntactic depend-
ents can fill the frame element slots (Dolbey et al,
2006). Moreover, since a single frame element can
have different grammatical realizations it can en-
hance the investigation of combinatorial possibili-
ties more precisely than other standard lexical
resources such as WordNet (cf. Dolbey, 2009).
2.2 FrameNet and Information Extraction
IE is a technology that has a direct correlation with
frame-like structures; since templates in the con-
text of IE are frame-like structures with slots repre-
senting the event information. IE operates on
specific domains, and the objective of IE systems
is to identify instances of a particular class of
events or relationships in a text and to extract the
relevant arguments of the event or relationship. It
has been stated Kilgarriff (1997) that the task re-
quires the key terms of that domain, the ?fore-
ground lexicon?, to be tightly bound to the domain
vocabularies (e.g. ontology) and having well-
articulated meaning representations. According to
this philosophy the foreground lexicon for a do-
main will generally contain:
? the key predicates for the domain (trigger
words);
? the sets of lexical items which realize the
predicate (lexical units);
? how they and their arguments relate to the
IE system?s output formalism (core ele-
ments and valencies);
? how their complements relate to the predi-
cate?s arguments (non-core elements).
3 Methodology
A subset of the original English FN already con-
tains relevant frames with direct applicability to
the medical domain, such as: Medical conditions,
Experience bodily harm and Cure (see the Appen-
dix for the SFN++ Cure frame; a snapshot from:
<http://spraakbanken.gu.se/swefn/>); in the figure
?saldo? is the name of a freely available modern
Swedish semantic and morphological resource in-
tended for language technology applications; cf.
Borin & Forsberg, 2009). We keep the English
labels for each frame, while the content is manu-
ally adapted to Swedish. We start by identifying
words or phrases that evoke frames and assigning
the correct frame to them interactively using the
SALTO tool (Burchardt et al, 2006). For each in-
stance of a frame that has been found, we label the
parts of the sentence that fill their semantic roles.
Sentences that fulfill these criteria are selected
from a large corpus after preprocessed by a number
of pipelined tools including: multiword and idiom
expression identification, part-of-speech tagging,
lemmatization, named entity and terminology rec-
ognition, shallow parsing, using a cascaded parser
(Abney, 1996) and XML formatting according to
the TIGER-XML. A simplified example (i.e. The
doctor treated her with cortisone) would at the end
of the processing be labeled as:
69
4 Conclusions and Further Research
Our work is a first attempt to get a whole picture of
the requirements and difficulties for specializing
SweFN++ to a domain and gaining experience on
applying it to a sublanguage. Our goal for the near
future is to aid the development of a fully auto-
mated event extraction system for the Swedish
medical domain. This can be accomplished by an-
notating various types of data, in the medical sub-
language, and classifying text segments to the class
type of the event mentioned. Then, by applying
other means (e.g. pattern matching rules) we can
extract the participants of the events and match to
e.g. information extraction templates, depending
on different applications and needs. Of course,
there are several other issues that need to be
worked on, such as devising ways to recognize
negated and/or speculative language usage. Map-
ping medical frame elements onto corresponding
concepts in a thesaurus-based lexicon turns a rela-
tively little lexical resource into a more robust one
and hence more useful for semi-automatic seman-
tic annotation of corpora; cf. Baker et al, 2007.
For annotating the Swedish corpus, we have used
our intern thematically sorted lexicons with medi-
cal vocabulary and the Swedish data from MeSH.
Core FEs in FN MESH thesaurus nodes
Ailment, Affliction Disease
Body_parts Anatomy
Medication Chemicals and Drugs
Treatment Analytical, Diagnostic
and Therapeutic Tech-
niques and Equipment
Patient Person
Table 1. Example of mapping of core frame elements
onto MeSH top nodes
The advantage of the pre-processing stage is very
important and we believe that there is a feasible
way to proceed in order to aid the annotation of
large textual samples. Preliminary quantitative
analysis of the examined instances has shown that
many linguistically optional scheme elements need
to be re-ranked whenever viewed from a medical
pragmatic perspective. For example Time, Measure
and Method provide relevant data for diagnosing
patients? health condition. Another fact that might
need special attention is the issue of tagging pro-
nouns. It seems that these should not be tagged
before anaphoric relations and their functional
roles have been established. This is particularly
important for distinguishing between patients and
health care providers. Use of frame-semantic re-
sources in general for language technology is evi-
dent. However, the effect of adding frame-
semantic information to LT applications has been
rather low, our work intends to change this situa-
tion in the near future, getting insights into the
deeper semantics of the domain events.
References
Abney S. 1996. Partial Parsing via Finite-State
Cascades. J. Nat. Lang. Eng., 2(4): 337-344.
Baker C., Ellsworth M. and Erk. K. 2007. SemEval'07
task 19: frame semantic structure extraction. Pro-
ceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluations. Prague, Czech Republic
Borin L. and Forsberg M. 2009. All in the family: A
comparison of SALDO and WordNet. Nodalida
Workshop: WordNets and other Lexical Semantic
Resources - between Lexical Semantics, Lexicogra-
phy, Terminology and Formal Ontologies. Odense.
Borin L., Dann?lls D., Forsberg M., Toporowska
Gronostaj M. and Kokkinakis D. 2009. Thinking
Green: Toward Swedish FrameNet++. FN Master-
class & Workshop. Milan, Italy.
Brants S. and Hansen S. 2002. Developments in the
TIGER Annotation Scheme and their Realization in
the Corpus. 3rd Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC). Pp. 1643-1649 Las Palmas.
Burchardt A., Erk K., Frank A., Kowalski A. and Pado
S. 2006. SALTO ? A Versatile Multi-Level Annota-
tion Tool. 5th Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC). Genoa.
Dolbey A., Ellsworth M. and Scheffczyk J. 2006.
BioFrameNet: A Domain-specific FrameNet Exten-
sion with Links to Biomedical Ontologies. KR-MED:
Bio. Ontology in Action. Maryland, USA.
Dolbey A. 2009. BioFrameNet, a FrameNet Extension
to the Domain of Molecular Biology. FRAMES AND
CONSTRUCTIONS. A conference in honor of
Charles J. Fillmore. U of California, Berkeley.
Fillmore C. J. 1976. Frame semantics and the nature of
language. NY Academy of Sciences: Conference on
the Origin and Development of Lang. & Speech, Vol.
280: 20-32.
Kilgarriff A. 1997. Foreground and Background Lexi-
cons and Word Sense Disambiguation for Informa-
tion Extraction. Proceedings of the Lexicon Driven
Information Extraction. Frascati, Italy.
70
Kim J-D., Ohta T., Pyysalo S., Kano Y. and Tsujii J.
2009. Overview of BioNLP?09 Shared Task on Event
Extraction. NAACL-HLT BioNLP-workshop. Boul-
der, Colorado.
Kim J-D., Ohta T. and Tsujii J. 2008. Corpus Annota-
tion for Mining Biomedical Events from Literature.
BMC Bioinformatics, 8;9:10.
Appendix
Kokkinakis D. (2004). Reducing the Effect of Name
Explosion. Beyond Named Entity Recognition, Se-
mantic labelling for NLP tasks. Workshop at the 4th
LREC. Lissabon, Portugal.
Kokkinakis D. (2009). Lexical granularity for automatic
indexing and means to achieve it ? the case of Swed-
ish MeSH?. Information Retrieval in Biomedicine:
NLP for Knowledge Integration. Prince V. & Roche
M. (eds). pp. 11-37. IGI Global.
71
Proceedings of the 6th EACL Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 35?44,
Avignon, France, 24 April 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Advanced Visual Analytics Methods for Literature Analysis
Daniela Oelke
University of Konstanz
Data Analysis and Visualization
Konstanz, Germany
oelke@inf.uni-konstanz.de
Dimitrios Kokkinakis
Spra?kbanken
Department of Swedish
University of Gothenburg
Gothenburg, Sweden
dimitrios.kokkinakis@gu.se
Mats Malm
Department of Literature,
History of Ideas and Religion
University of Gothenburg
Gothenburg, Sweden
mats.malm@lit.gu.se
Abstract
The volumes of digitized literary collec-
tions in various languages increase at a
rapid pace, which results also in a growing
demand for computational support to ana-
lyze such linguistic data. This paper com-
bines robust text analysis with advanced
visual analytics and brings a new set of
tools to literature analysis. Visual ana-
lytics techniques can offer new and unex-
pected insights and knowledge to the liter-
ary scholar. We analyzed a small subset of a
large literary collection, the Swedish Liter-
ature Bank, by focusing on the extraction of
persons? names, their gender and their nor-
malized, linked form, including mentions
of theistic beings (e.g., Gods? names and
mythological figures), and examined their
appearance over the course of the novel. A
case study based on 13 novels, from the
aforementioned collection, shows a number
of interesting applications of visual analyt-
ics methods to literature problems, where
named entities can play a prominent role,
demonstrating the advantage of visual liter-
ature analysis. Our work is inspired by the
notion of distant reading or macroanalysis
for the analyses of large literature collec-
tions.
1 Introduction
Literature can be studied in a number of different
ways and from many different perspectives, but
text analysis - in a wide sense - will surely always
make up a central component of literature stud-
ies. If such analysis can be integrated with ad-
vanced visual methods and fed back to the daily
work of the literature researcher, then it is likely
to reveal the presence of useful and nuanced in-
sights into the complex daily lives, ideas and be-
liefs of the main characters found in many of the
literary works. Therefore, the names of all char-
acters appearing in literary texts can be one such
line of enquiry, which is both an important sub-
field of literature studies (literary onomastics) and
at the same time the result obtained by a mature
language technology (named entity recognition)
which can be turned into a tool in aid of text anal-
ysis in this field. (Flanders et al, 1998) discuss
that references to one type of names, namely that
of people, are of intrinsic interest because they re-
veal networks of friendship, enmity, and collab-
oration; familial relationships; and political al-
liances. People?s names can be an appropriate
starting point for research on biographical, his-
torical, or literary issues, as well as being a key
linguistic and textual feature in its permutations
and usage.
We argue that the integration of text analysis
and visualization techniques, which have turned
out to be useful in other scientific fields such as
bioinformatics (Nature Methods, 2010), could be
put to effective use also in literature studies. We
also see an opportunity to devise new ways of ex-
ploring the large volumes of literary texts being
made available through national cultural heritage
digitization projects.
Digitized information and the task of storing,
generating and mining an ever greater volume of
(textual) data becomes simpler and more efficient
with every passing day. Along with this opportu-
nity, however, comes a further challenge: to create
the means whereby one can tap this great poten-
tiality and engage it for the advancement of (sci-
entific) understanding and knowledge mining.
35
We apply a supra-textual perspective to the
analysis of literary texts by encompassing a rather
global visualization of a document. As a case
study, we have analyzed a subset, 13 novels, of the
Swedish Literature Bank1 collection through two
levels of inquiry by focusing on person names,
their gender and their normalized, linked form,
including mentions of theistic beings (e.g. Gods?
names and mythological characters), and examin-
ing their appearance in sentences, paragraphs and
chapters.
Our aim is to explore the usage of alterna-
tive visualization means that provide additional
insight by showing the data at higher resolution
levels or that permit an analysis of the devel-
opment of the story in the course of the text.
The employed visualization techniques are scal-
able enough to display several novels at once and
therefore allow a literature scholar to compare dif-
ferent literary texts to each other. By combining
advanced natural language processing techniques
with visualization techniques, we aim to allow
the user to rapidly focus on key areas of interest
(based on name mentions) and provide the ability
to discover e.g. semantic patterns in large collec-
tions of text. Therefore, our work is based on in-
dividual texts, by looking for certain patterns of
variation based on a particular named entity type.
Our work is also inspired by the notions of distant
reading or macroanalysis applied to the analyses
of literature collections which we find appealing
for the research we describe. However, we do not
1The Swedish Literature Bank (Litteraturbanken,
http://litteraturbanken.se) is a co-operation
between the Swedish Academy, the Royal Library of
Sweden, the Royal Swedish Academy of Letters, History
and Antiquities, the Language Bank of the University of
Gothenburg, the Swedish Society for Belles Lettres, and
the Society of Swedish Literature in Finland. The Swedish
Literature Bank also focuses on neglected authors and
genres, effectively establishing a set of ?minor classics?
alongside the canonical works. So far, mainly texts in
Swedish are available, but over time, selected works will
be offered in translation as well. Currently, the Swedish
Literature Bank offers literary works either as searchable
e-text, as facsimiles of the original edition, as PDF files or
as EPUB files - often in more than one format. The texts
are available free of charge and the software is developed
as open source. The website is directed towards the general
public and students and teachers at every level, as well as
towards scholars. The digital texts are based on printed first
editions or on later scholarly editions. They are carefully
proof-read, thus establishing a basis for scholarly work. For
the common reader, introductions and essays provide fresh
perspectives on the classics.
consider such techniques to be used as a substitu-
tion for reading a book sequentially but as a useful
supplement.
2 Background
Computer-assisted literary criticism is a rather
young field in literature analysis (Juola, 2008).
Typically, researchers in literary studies use com-
puters only to collect data that is afterwards ana-
lyzed conventionally. Yet, there are some cases
in which the computer has already proven use-
ful, e.g., for the analysis of prosody and poetic
phonology or for comparing an author?s revisions
(from version to version). Computer-assisted
studies have also been performed in the context
of sequence analysis in the past, such as assigning
quoted passages to speakers and locating them in
the sequence of the text (Butler, 1992).
2.1 Distant Reading and Macroanalysis
(Moretti, 2005) coined the term ?distant reading?
in which ?the reality of the text undergoes a pro-
cess of deliberate reduction and abstraction?. Ac-
cording to this view, understanding literature is
not accomplished by studying individual texts, but
by aggregating and analyzing massive amounts
of data. This way it becomes possible to detect
possible hidden aspects in plots, the structure and
interactions of characters becomes easier to fol-
low enabling experimentation and exploration of
new uses and development that otherwise would
be impossible to conduct, e.g., quantifying the dif-
ference between prose styles.
Distant reading or its near synonym macroanal-
ysis is a technique to analyze literature, as op-
posed to ?close reading? of a text that is the care-
ful, sustained interpretation of a brief passage of
text where great emphasis is placed on the par-
ticular over the general, paying close attention to
individual words, syntax, and the order in which
sentences and ideas unfold as they are read. The
most fundamental and important difference in the
two approaches/terms is that the macroanalytic
approach reveals details about texts that are for all
intents and purposes unavailable to close-readers
of the texts. Distant reading is in no way meant
to be a replacement for close readings and in tra-
ditional humanities, as Moretti puts it (Schulz,
2011), ?distant reading should supplant, not sup-
plement, close reading?.
36
2.2 Visual Analytics for Literature Analysis
Visual Analytics is ?the science of analytical rea-
soning facilitated by visual interactive interfaces?
(Thomas et al, 2005). The central idea of visual
analytics is that by tightly integrating the human
expert and the machine, the strengths of both can
be leveraged in the analysis process. Visual An-
alytics has been applied successfully to many ap-
plication domains in the past such as text analysis,
geographical data analysis, security applications,
(computational) biology or multimedia data.2
However, visual analytics is not often used in
the context of literature analysis. Commonly, a
text is read sequentially and then analyzed by the
researcher bit by bit. Only during recent years
some literary scholars have started to employ vi-
sualization techniques in their studies.
One of them is Franco Moretti, who advocated
the usage of visual representations such as graphs,
maps, and trees for literature analysis (Moretti,
2005). (Vuillemot et al, 2009) suggested the us-
age of word clouds and self-organizing graphs and
presented a tool that allows to analyze a novel
interactively with respect to several properties.
In (Plaisant et al, 2006) a tabular representation
that is enriched with visual symbols was used to
present the results of an automatic algorithm for
detecting erotic statements. (Rydberg-Cox, 2011)
generated social network graphs of characters in
Greek tragedies, based on information taken from
linguistic dependency treebanks, which permit to
visualize the interactions between characters in
the plays. Furthermore, scatterplot views allowed
the user to search for correlations between sev-
eral variables of the meta data that comes with the
novels. Rohrer et al (1998) experimented with
using implicit surfaces to compare single docu-
ments with respect to the most frequent terms and
to visualize a document collection.
Pixel-based visualizations come with the ad-
vantage that the documents can be analyzed at
a higher resolution level. The Compus system
(Fekete and Dufournaud, 2000) used dense pixel
displays to visualize the structure of richly anno-
tated XML documents of books of the 16th cen-
tury. Keim and Oelke (2007) focused more on the
analysis of documents with respect to certain text
2Cf. proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Vi-
sual Analytics Science and Technology (IEEE VAST),
http://visweek.org/.
properties to compare authors with respect to their
writing style or to learn more about the character-
istics of a literary book. The two techniques also
differ from each other in terms of how structural
information is encoded and how they deal with
the problem of overplotting that occurs if a pixel
encodes several feature values.
3 Named Entity Recognition
Named entity recognition (NER) is an important
supporting technology with many applications in
various human language technologies. It has
emerged in the context of information extraction
(IE) and text mining (TM). The automatic recog-
nition and marking-up of names (in a wide sense)
and some other related kinds of information - e.g.,
time and measure expressions and/or terminology
- has turned out to be a recurring basic require-
ment. Hence, NER has become core language
technology of great significance to numerous ap-
plications and a wide range of techniques (Jack-
son and Moulinier, 2007).
In our study involving 19th century fiction, we
use a slightly adapted NER system to the lan-
guage used in fiction around the turn of the twenti-
eth century (Borin and Kokkinakis, 2010). More-
over, the nature and type of named entities vary,
depending on the task under investigation or the
target application. In any case, person, location
and organization names are considered ?generic?.
The system we applied implements a rather fine-
grained named entity taxonomy with several main
named entity types and subtypes but for our case
study we chose to only use the type person which
usually incorporates people?s names (forenames,
surnames), groups of people, animal/pet names,
mythological names, theonyms and the like. Note
that we haven?t performed any formal evaluation
of the entity or the gender annotation in this work.
In previous studies, based on data from the same
source and applying the same NER-tools (Borin
et al, 2007), we have shown high figures on pre-
cision and recall (96-98%) on, particularly, person
recognition.
3.1 Gender Attribution
Current NER systems are limited to the recog-
nition of a small set of entity types without at-
tempting to make finer distinctions between them.
The system we use goes beyond this in the sense
that it attempts to also automatically determine
37
the referential gender of all person entities. Ref-
erential gender relates linguistic expressions, both
persons and groups of individuals, to ?female?,
?male? or ?gender-indefinite?. This is an impor-
tant constraint which contributes to better perfor-
mance in subsequent language processing appli-
cations based on NER, such as anaphora resolu-
tion, by filtering-out of gender-incompatible can-
didates (Evans and Orasan, 2000). The approach
to gender discrimination is based on applying a
combination of the following heuristics:
? NER has a high accuracy in identifying per-
son names, a large number of which are as-
signed gender. A pre-classified list of 16,000
common first names assigns gender to com-
monly used first names. This way a first dis-
tinction is already being made between enti-
ties that carry gender. The list has been ac-
quired from various internet sites.
? Use of gender-marked pronouns in the vicin-
ity of person entities (a simplistic form of
pronoun resolution where simple decisions
are made by matching a genderless per-
son entity with a gender bearing personal
pronouns, han ?he?, hans ?his?, hon ?she?
and hennes ?her?). Also, various types of
honorifics and designators, manually pre-
categorized into gender groups, provide the
evidence that is explored for the annota-
tion of both animate instances but also their
gender. Inherent characteristics for a large
group of these designators (e.g., morpholog-
ical cues), indicate biological gender. Exam-
ples of gender-bearing male designators are
e.g. the nouns baron and herr ?Mr?, and ad-
jectives with suffix bearing gender, namely
-e, such as starke ?strong?, hygglige ?kind?
and gamle ?old?; while female-bearing des-
ignators are e.g. tant ?aunt? and fru ?wife?.
Gender is also captured using a simplified set
of suffix matching rules, such as -inna/innan,
-erska/erskan (typical suffixes for female)
and -man/mannen, -iker/ikern (typical suf-
fixes for male).
? Labeling consistency is a technique that op-
erates over the whole annotated text. This
module reviews the annotations made so
far, in order to support gender attribution of
unassigned cases based on unambiguous pre-
vious gender assignments. This is a sim-
ple but robust approach that does not rely
on pre-compiled statistics of any kind. In
order to capture such consistency we em-
ploy a two stage labeling approach. Dur-
ing the first stage, we note the instances of
person entities with unknown gender, and
search for a context where the same entity
has been assigned gender (male, female) due
to a gender-indicating context and for which
no other occurrences of the same entity are
found in the document with a different gen-
der. If this is the case, then all occurrences
of that entity are assigned the same gender
throughout the document. During the sec-
ond stage, the system investigates if there
are any conflicting, ambiguous annotations
for gender for which the local context and
the supporting resources (e.g., first names?
gazetteer) cannot decide the gender attribu-
tion. If this is the case and more than one
possible annotation for gender is recorded,
we choose the most frequently assigned gen-
der label for the entity in question, in case of
a tie we mark the gender as unknown.
3.2 Name Linking
Since the same name can be referred to in vari-
ous ways, extracting named entities alone is not
sufficient for many tasks. Therefore, mapping
and linking multiple linguistic variations to a sin-
gle referent is necessary. We apply a simplified
form of co-reference resolution based on salient
features and pattern matching that links (hope-
fully) all mentions that refer to a single per-
son entity. Consider the aggregated occurrences
for the name O?Henny appearing in the novel
?Clownen Jac? [lb904603] (1930). All 92 oc-
currences of the figure O?Henny will be linked
to the same individual since there is sufficient
and reliable evidence which is based on gender
match, no annotation conflicts (i.e. other individ-
ual named Denny or Henny with the same gender)
and orthographic characteristics: O?Henny (58);
Denny (19); Denny O?Henny (7); Henny-Denny
(4); Denny-Henny (3); Henny (1).
4 Material
Prose fiction is just one type of textual material
that has been brought into the electronic ?life? us-
ing large scale digitized efforts. But it must be
38
considered an essential source within many disci-
plines of humanities (history, religion, sociology,
linguistics etc.) and social studies and an invalu-
able source for understanding the movements of
society by its ability to demonstrate what forces
and ideas are at work in the society of its time.
Prose fiction is complex and difficult to use not
only because of interpretational complexity but
also because of its limited availability.
The Swedish Literature Bank, and its sister
project ?the 19th Century Sweden in the Mirror
of Prose Fiction?, aims to change this by devel-
oping a large representative corpus which mir-
rors society at given points in time, chronologi-
cally selected in such a way that historical com-
parisons can be made. A substantial part of the
material is all fiction, written in the original and
published separately for the first time, that ap-
peared in Swedish starting from the year 1800
and collected during consecutive twenty year in-
tervals. The material provides a whole century of
evolution and social, aesthetic, scientific, techni-
cal, cultural, religious and philosophical change.
Out of this data we selected the literary produc-
tion, 13 novels, of a single author, namely Hjal-
mar Bergman (1883-1931). The selected novels
(followed by their id) are:
? Savonarola (1909); id=lb443177
? Amourer (1910); id=lb1611717
? Hans na?ds testamente (1910); id=lb1611719
? Vi Bookar, Krokar och Rothar (1912);
id=lb494265
? Loewenhistorier (1913); id=lb1631349
? Falska papper (1916); id=lb1525006
? Herr von Hancken (1920); id=lb1524996
? Farmor och Va?r Herre (1921); id=lb1187656
? Eros? begravning (1922); id=lb1470072
? Chefen fru Ingeborg (1924); id=lb1524995
? Flickan i frack (1925); id=lb1470073
? Kerrmans i paradiset (1927); id=lb1317426
? Clownen Jac (1930); id=lb904603
5 Visual Exploration of the Data
In this chapter we report on our experiences with
different visualization techniques that can be em-
ployed for analyzing novels with respect to the
characters involved in the plot. Besides net-
work representations two alternative, not as well
known, visualization techniques are tested. Our
goal is to learn about their strengths and weak-
nesses with respect to the task and identify chal-
lenges that are specific for the field. We show how
visualization can be used to gain insight into lit-
erary work that otherwise would be much more
laborious to get.
5.1 Network representation
Traditionally, persons in a novel are analyzed in
terms of the relations that exist between them.
Obviously, graph visualizations are well suited for
representing this kind of information. Figure 1
shows a person network for the novel ?Eros? be-
gravning? (?Eros? funeral?) (1922). Nodes repre-
sent characters of the plot and an edge is inserted
between two persons if they co-occur in at least
one sentence of the novel.3 In such a represen-
tation it is easy to identify protagonists that are
connected to many other characters (e.g., Ludwig
von Battwyhl or Olga Willman-Janselius). Fur-
thermore, it is possible to see clusters of char-
acters. Figure 1 also shows that Casimir Brut is
the person that connects the two main groups of
characters of the novel, in the sense that he in-
troduces one group of characters to another. The
thickness of an edge encodes the number of times
that two names co-occur which could be regarded
as the strength of the relationship. A strong con-
nection seems to exist between Brita Djurling and
Ludwig von Battwyhl but also between Hans Hinz
Faber and Gruber. It is interesting to see that
Gruber is only weakly connected with other char-
acters of the plot but almost exclusively occurs
together with Hans Hinz Faber. Presumably, be-
cause Hans Hinz Faber was the faithful servant of
Gruber.
The example shows that network representa-
tions can provide interesting insight with respect
to the relationship between different persons in
the plot. However, one question that this plot can-
not answer is how these relationships evolve over
the course of the novel.
5.2 Summary Plots
Summary plots are tabular representations in
which each column represents a text unit (here:
3Note that using co-occurrence can be just considered an
approximation. More advanced methods would be needed
to ensure that all and only well-established relationships be-
tween characters are extracted.
39
#Schamil
Judit
Olle
Casimir Brut
Betty Willman
Karolina Willman
Sch?ler
Maturin
Henrik
Gr?del
Hans Hinz Faber
Filemon
Lovisa
Erik Jansson
Baukis
Gruber
Lizzy Willman
Brita Djurling
Karl-Herman
Anna-Lisa Willman
Karl-August
Lotten Brenner
Ludwig von Battwyhl
Jan-Petter Janselius
Olga Willman-Janselius
Lasse
Lisa
Alexander
Katarina
Bolla
Nathan SpeibachMaria
Sara Sch?nthal
Willman
Hieron
Theander
Anna-Lisa Djurling
Joachim Brut
Sven LagerKalle Mager
Figure 1: Network representation based on the co-occurrences of the person names in ?Eros? begravning?
a chapter) and each line corresponds to a person
of the novel. Table cells are colored according
to the frequency of the character in the specific
text unit (normalized with respect to the number
of words in the chapter). The person names are
sorted in descending order according to the over-
all frequency of the person name in the novel.
In such a heatmap-like representation it is easy
to see which characters co-occur in a chapter but
also how this develops in the course of the docu-
ment. Do always the same persons meet? Is there
one main protagonist in the book that is almost
always present or is the story line more complex
in terms of characters? Being able to answer this
kind of questions provides the analyst with insight
about the development of the story that would not
be visible in a person network.
Figure 2 shows the summary plot for the novel
?Eros? begravning? in which some interesting
characteristics become apparent. For example,
some person names are only mentioned in a
specific chapter (see lines of Hans Hinz Faber,
Gra?del, Schmil, Lisbeth etc.). Besides, the chap-
ters differ significantly with respect to the num-
ber of unique person names that are mentioned.
The first and the last chapter are the ones in
which most characters are mentioned whereas in
the third chapter only four characters play a role.
A closer look into the text reveals that the novel
consists of a ?frame text?, where different peo-
ple meet and tell each other stories. The stories
constitute chapters in the novel, and thus become
a bit like short stories. The first chapter, which
does not have a title, introduces a large number of
people. This number of participating people then
decreases during the course of the following sto-
ries (chapters), but towards the end of each chap-
ter the discussion is returned to the overall story
once again, where people are talking with each
other about various things before the next story
starts. Also, in the individual chapters there exist
people who do not participate outside of a single
chapter.
5.3 Literature Fingerprints
Summary plots allow literature scholars to see
which characters co-occur in one chapter. How-
ever, they do not permit to analyze the usage of
the person names within one chapter. In contrast
to this, pixel-based visualizations avoid such ag-
40
lb1470072, red = Olga Willman-Janselius, green = other name 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Literature Fingerprint for the novel ?Eros? begravning?. Red pixels mark mentions of the protagonist
?Olga Willman-Janselius, green pixels highlight the position of other names.
Figure 2: Summary plot for novel ?Eros? begravning?
(?Eros? funeral?).
gregation and enable an inspection of the data on
a much higher resolution level.
We use the literature fingerprinting technique
(Keim and Oelke, 2007) to inspect the novel
?Eros? begravning? in more detail. Each pixel
represents one word. Pixels are arranged from left
to right and top to bottom and are grouped accord-
ing to chapters. The color of a pixel can be used
to encode a value. In this case pixels were colored
in red if they represent the name of the most fre-
quent protagonist, Olga Willman-Janselius, and
in green if another name was mentioned. The
technique is scalable enough to display the whole
book at this high resolution level. However, the
colored pixels are sparse and would likely be lost
in the sea of uncolored pixels. We therefore use
semi-transparent halos around the colored pixels
to increase their visual saliency. (For more vi-
sual boosting techniques for pixel-based visual-
izations see (Oelke et al, 2011)). In this visualiza-
tion it is now possible to see where in the course
of the novel the main protagonist, Olga Willman-
Janselius, plays a role. Furthermore, it becomes
obvious that there are parts in which almost no
person name at all is mentioned. This is in line
with the fact that the book tells several separate
stories that are integrated at the end of each chap-
ter into the overall story (see also explanation in
section 5.2).
Alternatively, we also could have highlighted
the positions of several names using one color per
protagonist to compare their distribution. This
way an analyst can learn about the relations be-
tween different characters. However, the number
of different names that can be highlighted at the
same time is restricted by the human ability to dis-
tinguish different colors easily (cf. (Ware, 2008)).
Figure 4 shows fingerprints for all 13 novels.
Again each pixel represents a word but this time
all words that neither are a name of a person nor
of a theistic being are disregarded. This way a
41
Ma
le 
Fe
ma
le 
Un
kn
ow
n 
Go
ds 
Inc
lud
es 
ne
w 
da
ta 
Vi Bookar, Krokar ? (1912)                 Savonarola (1909)                              Clownen Jac (1930)                              Kerrmans i paradiset (1927)  
Amourer (1910)                                    Hans n?ds testamente (1910)          Chefen fru Ingeborg (1924)                Loewenhistorier (1913)  
Herr von Hancken (1920)                    Eros? begravning (1922)                     Farmor och V? r Herre (1921)            Falska papper (1916)  
Flickan i frack (1925)  
Figure 4: Fingerprints for the 13 novels. Color is used to encode the three categories male, female, gods.
focus is put on the order in which the mentions of
the three categories (male, female, gods) appear.
Words that the algorithm recognized as a name
but could not assign to one of the categories are
marked as unknown and are colored in white.
Some interesting patterns become visible in the
visualization. One book (first one in the second
row) sticks out because of its high number of men-
tions of theistic beings. ?Amourer? [lb1611717]
(1910) is a collection of short stories. The last
story, ?The False Cristoforo?, varies the theme of
Christopher, who carried Jesus Christ across the
river which results in the peak of names of theis-
tic beings that can be observed at the end of the
book.
Another interesting observation is that in the
beginning of the book ?Kerrmans i paradiset?
[lb1317426] (1927) (last one in first row), male
characters are clearly dominant which is almost
reversed in the book?s second part. A closer look
into the book reveals that this is because the book
is divided into two main parts. The first part
is more about prestige and position in society,
i.e., social games with other men, while the sec-
ond part is more personal and relates clearly to
women. The summary plot of the book (Figure
5) reveals that there are not fewer male characters
involved in the second part of the book but overall
they are less frequently mentioned. At the same
time, female characters that had in the first part of
the book only a minor role become more domi-
nant in the plot.
5.4 Discussion
Each of the visualization techniques that we ex-
perimented with has its strengths and weaknesses
if used for the analysis of a novel with respect to
its characters. Person networks come with the ad-
vantage that they can show relationships between
characters. This way clusters of persons that form
a group within the story become visible. In con-
trast to this, summary plots can only show co-
occurrence within a chapter (or smaller text unit).
But their strength is to show the development of
the set of persons involved in the plot. In such a
tabular representation it is easy to compare the in-
42
Male characters 
Female characters 
Figure 5: Summary plot for the novel ?Kerrmans i paradiset?. Lines are grouped according to the two categories
male / female and are sorted within each category according to the overall frequency of the characters.
volvement of different characters across the doc-
ument. Even more details are provided by the
literature fingerprinting technique. Because the
technique is very scalable, every single word can
be visualized. Coloring is used to encode text
properties of interest. Again, the development of
the characters across a document is visible, this
time even within single chapters. However, com-
pared to the summary plot technique, fewer per-
son names can be distinguished.
Obviously, a combination of the three tech-
niques is advisable for analyzing novels with re-
spect to the persons involved. But our comparison
of the three techniques also allows us to identify a
missing type of visualization: One that is able to
show the development of the story in terms of the
characters involved and at the same time is able to
display their relationships.
Furthermore, the techniques lead to interesting in-
sight but these newly generated hypotheses need
to be checked in the text. A tighter integration of
the actual text source into the visualization tools
could therefore be a valuable extension.
6 Conclusions
The combination of robust text analysis with vi-
sual analytics brings a new set of tools to litera-
ture analysis, provides powerful insights on docu-
ment collections, and advances our understanding
of the evolution of human behavior, society, tech-
nological advancement and cultural trends. As
a matter of fact, (Michel, 2010), introduced the
term ?Culturomics?, i.e. the application of high-
throughput data collection, digital book archives
and the like, and analysis to the study of hu-
man culture and we believe that novel insights to-
wards this direction can be gained by combining
such technologies. In this paper we have shown
that quantifiable data such as (person) names can
be identified, extracted, and visualized in novel
ways.
In the future we intend to further extend the ca-
pabilities for visual literature analysis. One re-
search goal is the development of a visualization
technique that allows to investigate the develop-
ment of a story across a novel but at the same
time shows the relationships between the char-
acters. Furthermore, we believe that interactive
visual analysis tools (instead of static visualiza-
tions) open up additional possibilities for litera-
ture scholars to explore the large volumes of dig-
itized literary collections that are nowadays avail-
able.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Zukunftskolleg
of the University of Konstanz and the Centre of
Language Technology in Gothenburg.
43
References
Yevgeni Berzak, Michal Richter, Carsten Ehrler and
Todd Shore. 2011. Information Retrieval and Vi-
sualization for the Historical Domain. Language
Technology for Cultural Heritage - Theory and Ap-
plications of Natural Language Processing. Pp.
197?212. Springer.
Lars Borin and Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2010. Liter-
ary Onomastics and Language Technology. Liter-
ary Education and Digital Learning. Methods and
Technologies for Humanities Studies. Pp. 53?78.
IGI Global.
Lars Borin, Dimitrios Kokkinakis and Leif-Jran Ols-
son. 2007. Naming the past: Named entity and
animacy recognition in 19th century Swedish litera-
ture. Proceedings of the ACL Workshop: Language
Technology for Cultural Heritage Data (LaTeCh).
Prague. Pp. 1?8.
Christopher S. Butler. 1992. Computers and Written
Texts. Basil Blackwell.
Richard Evans and Constantin Orasan. 2000. Im-
proving anaphora resolution by identifying ani-
mate entities in texts. Proceedings of the Dis-
course Anaphora and Anaphor Resolution Collo-
quium (DAARC) 2000. Lancaster, UK. Pp. 154?
162.
Jean-Daniel Fekete and Nicole Dufournaud. 2000.
Compus: visualization and analysis of structured
documents for understanding social life in the 16th
century. Proceedings of the fifth ACM conference
on Digital libraries. San Antonio, Texas, United
States. Pp. 47?55, ACM.
Julia Flanders, Syd Bauman, Paul Caton and Mavis
Cournane. 1998. Names proper and improper: Ap-
plying the TEI to the classification of proper nouns.
Computers and the Humanities. 31(4), pp. 285?
300.
Peter Jackson and Isabelle Moulinier. 2007. Natural
language processing for online applications: Text
retrieval, extraction and categorization. Amster-
dam: John Benjamins.
Patrick Juola. 2008. Killer applications in digital
humanities. Literary and Linguistic Computing.
23(1): 73?83.
Daniel A. Keim and Daniela Oelke. 2007. Literature
Fingerprinting: A New Method for Visual Literary
Analysis. Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on
Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST).
Pp. 115?122.
Jean-Baptiste Michel et al 2010. Quantita-
tive Analysis of Culture Using Millions of
Digitized Books. Science 331 (6014): 176.
?http://www.sciencemag.org/content/early/2010/12/
15/science.1199644?.
Franco Moretti. 2005. Graphs, maps, trees: abstract
models for a literary history. R. R. Donnelley &
Sons.
Nature Methods. 2010. Visualizing biological data.
Supplement to Nature Publishing Group journals.
7 (3s): S1-S68.
Daniela Oelke, Halldor Janetzko, Svenja Simon, Klaus
Neuhaus and Daniel A. Keim. 2011. Visual
Boosting in Pixel-based Visualizations. Computer
Graphics Forum. 30 (3): 871-880.
Catherine Plaisant, James Rose, Bei Yu, Loretta Auvil,
Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, Martha Nell Smith,
Tanya Clement and Greg Lord. 2006. Exploring
erotics in Emily Dickinson?s correspondence with
text mining and visual interfaces. Proceedings of
the 6th ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on Digital
libraries. Pp. 141-150, ACM.
Randall M. Rohrer, David S. Ebert, and John L. Sibert.
1998. The Shape of Shakespeare: Visualizing Text
using Implicit Surfaces. Proceedings of the 1998
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization. Pp.
121-129.
Jeff Rydberg-Cox. 2011. Social Networks and
the Language of Greek Tragedy. Journal of the
Chicago Colloquium on Digital Humanities and
Computer Science. 1(3): 1-11.
Kathryn Schulz. 2011. The Mechanic
Muse - What Is Distant Reading? The
New York Times - Sunday Book Review.
Page BR14. ?http://www.nytimes.com/
2011/06/26/books/review/the-mechanic-muse-
what-is-distant-reading.html?.
James J. Thomas and Kristin A. Cook. 2005. Illu-
minating the Path: The Research and Development
Agenda for Visual Analytics. National Visualization
and Analytics Center.
Romain Vuillemot, Tanya Clement, Catherine Plaisant
and Amit Kumar. 2009. What?s Being Said Near
?Martha?? Exploring Name Entities in Literary
Text Collections. Proceedings of the IEEE Sympo-
sium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
(VAST). Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA. Pp. 107?
114.
Colin Ware. 2008. Visual Thinking for Design. Mor-
gan Kaufmann.
44
Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis (Louhi) @ EACL 2014, pages 2?10,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Graph-Based Analysis of Medical Queries
of a Swedish Health Care Portal
Farnaz Moradi1, Ann-Marie Eklund2, Dimitrios Kokkinakis2,
Tomas Olovsson1, Philippas Tsigas1
1Computer Science and Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden
2Spra?kbanken, Department of Swedish Language, University of Gothenburg, Sweden
{moradi,tomasol,tsigas}@chalmers.se1
{ann-marie.eklund,dimitrios.kokkinakis}@gu.se2
Abstract
Today web portals play an increasingly
important role in health care allowing in-
formation seekers to learn about diseases
and treatments, and to administrate their
care. Therefore, it is important that the
portals are able to support this process
as well as possible. In this paper, we
study the search logs of a public Swedish
health portal to address the questions if
health information seeking differs from
other types of Internet search and if there
is a potential for utilizing network analy-
sis methods in combination with semantic
annotation to gain insights into search be-
haviors. Using a semantic-based method
and a graph-based analysis of word co-
occurrences in queries, we show there is
an overlap among the results indicating a
potential role of these types of methods to
gain insights and facilitate improved infor-
mation search. In addition we show that
samples, windows of a month, of search
logs may be sufficient to obtain similar re-
sults as using larger windows. We also
show that medical queries share the same
structural properties found for other types
of information searches, thereby indicat-
ing an ability to re-use existing analysis
methods for this type of search data.
1 Introduction
Query logs which are obtained from search en-
gines contain a wealth of information about the
language used in the logs and the behavior of
users. Searching for health and medical related
information is quite common, and therefore anal-
ysis of query logs of medical websites can give us
insight into the language being used and the infor-
mation needs of the users in the medical domain.
In this study, we analyze 36 months of query
logs from a Swedish health care portal, which pro-
vides health, disease, and medical information.
On one hand, we perform a semantic enhancement
on the queries to allow analysis of the language
and the vocabulary which has been used in the
queries. On the other hand, we perform a graph-
based analysis of the queries, where a word co-
occurrence graph is generated from the queries.
In a word co-occurrence graph each node corre-
sponds to a word and an edge exists between two
words if they have co-occurred in the same query.
Our study reveals that a word co-occurrence
graph generated from medical query logs has the
same structural and temporal properties, i.e., small
world properties and power law degree distribu-
tion, which has been observed for other types of
networks generated from query logs and differ-
ent types of real-world networks such as word
association graphs. Therefore, the existing algo-
rithms and data mining techniques can be applied
directly for analysis of word co-occurrence graphs
obtained from health search.
One of the widely studied structural properties
of real-world networks is the communities in these
networks. In this study, we apply a state-of-the-art
local community detection algorithm on the word
co-occurrence graph. A community detection al-
gorithm can uncover a graph community which
is a group of words that have co-occurred mostly
with each other but not with the rest of the words in
the network. The community detection algorithm
used in this study is based on random walks on the
graph and can find overlapping communities.
The communities of words, identified from the
graph, are then compared with the communities
of words obtained from a semantic analysis of the
queries. In semantic enhancement, if a word or
term in a query exists in medical oriented seman-
tic resources, it is assigned a label. The words
and terms which have co-occurred with these la-
2
bels are used to create a semantic community. We
have compared the obtained semantic communi-
ties with the graph communities using a well-
known similarity measure and observed that the
communities identified from these two different
approaches overlap. Moreover, we observed that
the graph communities can cover the vast major-
ity of the words in the queries while the semantic
communities do not cover many words. Therefore,
the graph-based analysis can be used to improve
and complement the semantic analysis.
Furthermore, we study the effect of the time
window lengths for analysis of log queries. Our
goal is to investigate whether short snapshots of
log queries also can be useful for this type of anal-
ysis, and how the increase in the size of the log
files over time can affect the results.
The reminder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. In Section 2 we review the related work.
Section 3 presents the Swedish log corpus used for
this study. Section 4 describes the semantic en-
hancement on the query logs. In Section 5 we de-
scribe the graph analysis methods. Section 6 sum-
marizes our experimental results. Finally, Sec-
tion 7 concludes our work.
2 Related Work
In this paper, we study the co-occurrence of words
in medical queries and perform both a semantic
and graph analysis to identify and compare the
communities of related words. In this section, we
briefly present a number of related works which
deal with analysis of query logs.
Query logs have been previously studied for
identifying clusters of similar queries. In (Wen
et al., 2001) a method was described for cluster-
ing similar queries using different notions of query
distance, such as string matching of keywords.
In (Baeza-Yates et al., 2004) clicked Web page in-
formation (terms in URLs) was used in order to
create term-weight vector models for queries, and
cosine similarity was used to calculate the similar-
ity of two queries based on their vector represen-
tations.
Several previous works have also dealt with
graph analysis of query logs. In (Baeza-Yates,
2007) several graph-based relations were de-
scribed among queries based on different sources
of information, such as words in the text of the
query, clicked URL terms, clicks and session in-
formation. In (Herdagdelen et al., 2009) vec-
tor space models were compared, by embedding
them in graphs, and graph random walk mod-
els in order to determine similarity between con-
cepts, and showed that some random walk mod-
els can achieve results as good as or even better
than the vector models. In (Gaillard and Gaume,
2011), it was shown that drawing clusters of syn-
onyms in which pairs of nodes have a strong con-
fluence is a strong indication of aiding two syn-
onymy graphs accommodate each others? conflict-
ing edges. Their work was a step for defining
a similarity measure between graphs that is not
based on edge-to-edge disagreement but rather on
structural agreement.
3 Material - a Swedish Log Corpus
The Stockholm Health Care Guide, http://
www.vardguiden.se/, is the official health
information web site of the County of Stockholm,
sponsored by the Stockholm County Council and
used mostly by people living in the Stockholm
area and provides information on diseases, health
and health care. In January 2013 the Stockholm
County Council reported that vardguiden.se had
two million visitors per month. As of Novem-
ber 2013, vardguiden.se and another similar por-
tal, 1177.se (which was a common web site for
Swedish regions and counties, and the official na-
tional telephone number for health information
and advice), are merged into one called 1177
Va?rdguiden, sharing the same interface and search
engine. The corpus data used in this study con-
sists of the search queries for the period Octo-
ber 2010 to the end of September 2013. The
data is provided by vardguiden.se, through an
agreement with the company Euroling AB which
provides indexing and searching functionality to
vardguiden.se. We obtained 67 million queries in
total, where 27 million are unique before any kind
of normalization, and 2.2 million after case fold-
ing. Figure1 shows an example of a query log.
Information acquisition from query logs can be
useful for several purposes and potential types of
users, such as terminologists, infodemiologists,
epidemiologists, medical data and web analysts,
specialists in NLP technologies such as informa-
tion retrieval and text mining, as well as, public
officials in health and safety organizations. Anal-
ysis of web query logs can provide useful infor-
mation regarding when and how users seek infor-
mation for topics covered by the site (Bar-Ilan et
3
Q   929C0C14C209C3399CAE7AEC6DB92251   1377986505    symptom brist folsyra hidden:meta:region:00     =    13    1    -N    -     sv      =
Q   2E6CD9E0071057E4BEDC0E52B0B0BDAC   1377986578    folsyra hidden:meta:region:00 =    36    1    -N    -     sv    =          
Q   527049C35E3810C45B22461C4CCB2C23    1377986649    kroppens anatomi hidden:meta:region:01    =    25    1    -N    -    sv    =        
Q   F86B6B133154FD247C1525BAF169B387    1377986685    stroke hidden:meta:region:00    =    320    1    -N    -     sv    =        
Q   17CCB738766C545BFE3899C71A22DE3B    1377986807    diabetes typ 2 vad beror p? hidden:meta:region:12 =     61    1    -N    -    sv    =
Figure 1: Example queries. A query consist of (Q)uery, session ID, time stamp, search query, metadata,
number of links returned, the batch ID of the visited link, (N)o spelling suggestions, Swedish search.
al., 2009). Such information can be used both for
a general understanding of public health aware-
ness and the information seeking patterns of users,
and for optimizing search indexing, query comple-
tion and presentation of results for improved pub-
lic health information. For an overview of some
common applications and methods for log analy-
sis see (Oliner et al., 2011).
Deeper mining into queries can reveal more im-
portant information about search engine users and
their language use and also new information from
the search requests; cf. (Medelyan, 2004). The ba-
sis for Search Analytics is made of different kinds
of logs of search terms and presented and chosen
results by web site users (Mat-Hassan and Levene,
2005). At a syntactic level queries may contain
e.g., synonyms and hyponyms, and to be able to
study patterns of search behavior at a more ab-
stract level, we map the syntactic terms to seman-
tic concepts. To our knowledge this is the first of
its kind resource for Swedish and as such it can
be used as a test bed for experimental work in un-
derstanding the breadth and depth of usage pat-
terns, the properties of the resource and the chal-
lenges involved in working with such type of data.
The only study we are aware of using Swedish log
data, in the context of health-related information,
is described by (Hulth et al., 2009). In their study,
three million search logs from vardguiden.se (June
05 to June 07) were used for the purpose of in-
fluenza surveillance in Sweden, and seven symp-
toms, roughly corresponding to cough, sore throat,
shortness of breath, coryza (head cold), fever,
headache, myalgia (muscle pain) were studied.
4 Semantic Enhancement
Description of various corpus analytics that en-
ables us to gain insights into the language used
in the logs; e.g., terminology and general vocab-
ulary provide, to a certain degree, an indication
of the search strategies applied by the users of
the web site service from where the logs are ob-
tained. Findings can serve as background work
that, e.g., can be incorporated in search engines or
other web-based applications to personalize search
results, provide specific site recommendations and
suggest more precise search terms, e.g., by the
automatic identification of laymen/novices or do-
main experts. The logs have been automatically
annotated with two medically-oriented semantic
resources (Kokkinakis, 2011) and a named en-
tity recognizer (Kokkinakis, 2004). The seman-
tic resources are the Systematized Nomenclature
of Medicine - Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT) and
the National Repository for Medicinal Products
(NPL, http://www.lakemedelsverket.
se/)1. We perceive all these resources as highly
complementary for our task since the Swedish
SNOMED CT does not contain drug names and of
course none of the two contain information about
named entities.
4.1 SNOMED CT and NPL
SNOMED CT provides a common language that
enables consistency in capturing, storing, retriev-
ing, sharing and aggregating health data across
specialties and sites of care. SNOMED CT pro-
vides codes and concept definitions for most clin-
ical areas. SNOMED CT concepts are orga-
nized into 18 top-level hierarchies, such as Body
Structure and Clinical Finding, each subdivided
into several sub-hierarchies and contains around
280,000 terms. More detailed information about
SNOMED CT can be found at the International
Health Terminology Standards Development Or-
ganisation?s web site, IHTSDO, at: http://
www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/.
The NPL is the official Swedish product reg-
istry for drugs and contains 11,250 entries. Ev-
ery product in the registry contains metadata about
1Named entities have not been used for this study. How-
ever, we intend to use them in future studies. Neverthe-
less, the named entity annotation includes the ontological
categories location, organization, person, time, and measure
entities. Such entities can capture a wide range of entities
searched by in such logs such as addresses to health care cen-
ters and various health care organizations.
4
its substance(s), names, dosages, producers and
classifications, like prescription and Anatomical
Therapeutic Chemical codes (ATC). For instance,
for the question ?missbruk st go?ranssjukhus?
(?abuse st go?ran hospital?) from the query ?Q \t
C7ED234574EE24 \t 1326104437 \t missbruk st
go?ranssjukhus meta:category:PageType;Article \t
= \t 0 \t ...? (here ?\t? signals a tab separation), we
add three new tab-delimited columns (named en-
tity label, SNOMED-CT, NPL or N/A if no match
can be made) to each query. In this case, the three
added columns for this particular query will get
the labels ?FUNCT-ENT?, ?finding?32709003?
missbruk? and ?N/A? (no annotation), where the
first stands for a FUNCTional-ENTity, the second
for a finding category with concept-id ?32709003?
and ?missbruk? as the recommended term.
4.2 Semantic Communities
We use the semantic labels obtained from the se-
mantic enhancement to group words into commu-
nities. Communities can be used for getting in-
sight into the language and the related words be-
ing used for medical search. The words which are
matched with the same semantic label are clearly
relevant to each other as they belong to the same
semantic hierarchy. For each semantic label, we
create a set of all the words in the queries which
received this label. In other words, the words in
queries that co-occurred with the same label are
assumed to belong to the same community.
We have generated such communities only from
SNOMED CT and NPL labels and refer to them
as semantic communities in the rest of the paper.
As an example, the community {borrelia, serolo-
giska, blodprover, test, serologisk, testning} was
obtained from the queries which received the label
?qualifier value?27377004?serologisk?.
5 Graph Analysis
Query log data can be modeled using different
types of graphs (Baeza-Yates, 2007). In this study,
we have generated a word co-occurrence graph,
in which each node corresponds to a word and
two nodes are connected with an edge if they
have appeared in the same query. The generated
graph is undirected and unweighted and has no
multiedges. To generate the graph we have used
the words as they appeared in the logs, i.e., we
did not replace words with their synonyms, cor-
rect misspellings, or translate non-Swedish words
10^{0}
10^{1}
10^{2}
10^{3}
10^{4}
10^{5}
10^{6}
10^{0} 10^{1} 10^{2} 10^{3} 10^{4} 10^{5}
Co
un
t
Degree
Figure 2: The degree distribution of the co-
occurrence graph.
to Swedish. For example, ?eye?, ?o?ga?, ?o?gat?,
?o?gon?, and ?o?gonen? appear as five different
nodes in the graph but mean the same thing.
The graph G(V,E) generated from the queries
which contained two or more words has |V | =
265,785 nodes and |E| = 1,555,149 edges. The
words in one-word queries which did not co-occur
with any other words could not be considered for
the graph analysis. The generated graph consists
of 6,688 connected components. A connected
component is a group of nodes where a path exists
between any pair of them. The largest connected
component of the graph, also known as giant con-
nected component (GCC), contains around 95% of
the nodes in the graph.
It was shown in (Ferrer i Cancho and Sole?,
2001), that a graph generated from the co-
occurrence of words in sentences in human lan-
guages, exhibit two structural properties that other
types of complex networks have, i.e, the graph is a
small world network and it has a power-law degree
distribution (Baraba?si and Albert, 1999). Later
studies on different types of word graphs have also
been shown to follow the above properties. In this
paper, we also show that a word co-occurrence
graph generated from medical queries exhibits the
same structural properties.
In small world networks, there is a short path
connecting any pair of nodes in the GCC of
the network. This property can be examined
by calculating the effective diameter of the net-
work (Leskovec et al., 2007). Small word net-
works also are highly clustered and therefore have
a high clustering coefficient value. The effective
diameter of our co-occurrence graph is 4.88, and
it has an average clustering coefficient of 0.34.
These values confirm that our word co-occurrence
graph is a small world network.
5
Table 1: Structural properties of the word co-occurrence graph over time.
Time window |V | |E| |V
GCC
| clustering coeff. effective diameter
1 month 16,045 52,403 14,877 0.29 5.47
3 months 30,681 168,045 29,220 0.30 5.42
6 months 48,229 298,331 46,435 0.31 5.38
12 months 69,380 414,643 67,245 0.32 4.97
36 months 265,785 1,555,149 251,597 0.34 4.88
The degree distribution of the co-occurrence
graph is shown in Figure 2. It can be seen that
the degree distribution follows a power law distri-
bution. This observation is similar to the observa-
tions presented by (Baeza-Yates and Tiberi, 2007)
that almost all the measures of a graph generated
from query log files follow power laws. There-
fore, the user behavior in medical search does
not seem different from general search behavior.
In addition to networks of word relations, power
law degree distributions have also been observed
in social, information, and interaction networks
where there are many nodes with low degrees and
a few nodes with very high degrees (Clauset et al.,
2009). The word with the highest degree in our
graph is ?barn? (child/children) which has 17,086
edges. Some other high-degree nodes are ?sjuk-
dom? (disease), ?behandling? (treatment), ?ont?
(pain), ?gravid? (pregnant), and ?feber? (fever).
We have also looked into how the struc-
tural properties of the word co-occurrence graph
change over time as the graph increases in size
with an increasing number of queries. Table 1
summarizes the results. It can be seen that similar
to many other networks, the diameter of the graph
shrinks when more nodes become connected and
its average clustering coefficient does not change
much as the graph becomes larger.
Overall, the structural properties of the word co-
occurrence graph are similar to many other real-
world networks. Although it was shown in (Yang
et al., 2011) that the queries and information needs
of medical practitioners in accessing electronic
health records are different from users of general
search engines, our analysis reveals that there are
similarities between information seeking of gen-
eral users on health data and on general data.
Therefore, the algorithms introduced for analy-
sis of such networks can be directly deployed for
analysis of word co-occurrence graphs.
5.1 Graph Community Detection
One of the widely studied structural properties of
real-world networks is their community structure.
A community, also known as a cluster, is defined
as a group of nodes in a graph which have dense
connections to each other, but have few connec-
tions to the rest of the nodes in the network. There
have been numerous studies on the community
structure of social and information networks and a
variety of algorithms have been proposed for iden-
tifying the communities in these networks. A thor-
ough overview of different types of community
detection algorithms can be found in (Fortunato,
2010; Xie et al., 2013).
Community detection algorithms can be divided
into global and local algorithms. The global al-
gorithms require a global knowledge of the entire
structure of the network to be able to find its com-
munities. Therefore, these types of algorithms do
not scale well for log analysis since query logs
are usually very large and are continuously grow-
ing. The local algorithms, on the other hand,
only require a partial knowledge of the network
and therefore can identify network communities
in parallel. However, the identified communities
might not cover all the nodes in a network.
Moreover, community detection algorithms can
be divided into overlapping and non-overlapping
algorithms. Traditional partitioning and clustering
algorithms typically divide the nodes in a network
into disjoint communities. But in many real net-
works, a node can actually belong to more than
one community. For example, in a social net-
work, a user can belong to a community of fam-
ily members, a community of friends, and a com-
munity of colleagues. In a co-occurrence graph,
a symptom can co-occur with different types of
diseases. Therefore, a community detection algo-
rithm which can identify overlapping communities
is more suitable for analysis of the graphs gener-
ated from search queries.
For the analysis of log queries, we have used a
local overlapping community detection algorithm.
This algorithm is a random walk-based algorithm
which uses an approximation of a personalized
PageRank (Andersen and Lang, 2006; Andersen
6
et al., 2006) and is shown to perform well in de-
tecting real communities in social and interaction
networks (Yang and Leskovec, 2012). The algo-
rithm starts from a seed node and expands the seed
into a community until a scoring function is op-
timized. One of the widely used functions for
community detection is conductance. The con-
ductance of a community C in a graph G(V,E)
is defined as ?(C) = m(C)
min(vol(C),vol(V \C))
, where
m(C) is the number of inter-cluster edges and
vol(C) =
?
v?C
deg(v) is the volume of a com-
munity and corresponds to the sum of the degree
of all the nodes in the community. The lower the
conductance of a community, the better quality the
community has. The complexity of this algorithm
is independent of the size of the network and only
depends on the size of the target communities.
6 Experimental Results
In this section we present our experimental results
and discuss the possible applications for graph-
based analysis of medical data.
6.1 Semantic and Graph Analysis
From the semantic enhancement, we have gener-
ated 16,427 unique semantic communities which
cover less than 11% of the nodes in the network.
This means that, the majority of the queries in
the network did not contain words that match the
medical concepts provided by of SNOMED CT
and NPL. This observation suggests that a seman-
tic enhancement of queries on its own is not ade-
quate for understanding the relations between all
the words used in medical search.
For the graph analysis, we have used the lo-
cal overlapping community detection algorithm
of (Yang and Leskovec, 2012) to identify the com-
munities from the co-occurrence graph generated
from the complete query logs. The algorithm iden-
tified 107,765 unique communities in the GCC of
the graph with average conductance 0.74. This
shows that the communities are not well separated
from each other and that there are many edges be-
tween distinct communities. Moreover, the identi-
fied communities cover 93% of the nodes in the
network which means that the graph analysis is
more suitable for the study of the relations be-
tween the words than the semantic analysis.
The semantic communities and the graph com-
munities are both dependent on the co-occurrence
of words in queries, but identify communities dif-
ferently. The semantic method places the nodes
which belong to the same semantic hierarchy to-
gether with the words that co-occurred with them
in the same community. However, the graph-based
method places the words based on the structure of
the generated network in the communities.
We have compared and calculated the similarity
between the graph communities and the semantic
communities using the jaccard index which is de-
fined as JI(C, S) = |C?S|
|C?S|
. The jaccard index
shows the normalized size of the overlap between
a graph community C and a semantic community
S. Similarity functions, including Jaccard, have
been used before for measuring the distance of two
different queries. In this study we use similarity to
assess the similarity of communities of words ob-
tained from the two distinct methods.
We have compared each semantic community
with all the graph communities and show the sim-
ilarity distribution in Figure 3. It can be seen that
the majority of the communities partially over-
lap. As an example, from the word ?tandsjuk-
dom? (dental disease) as the seed, we identi-
fied the graph community {tandsjukdom, licken,
munha?leproblem, rubev, emalj, ta?ndernaamelin,
hypopla, permanentata?nder, lixhen, hypoplazy,
hipoplasy, hypoplazi, bortno?tt, hipoplazy}. From
the semantic enhancement, ?tandsjukdom? and
?tandsjukdomar? both have received semantic la-
bel ?disorder?234947003?tandsjukdom?. From
the queries which received this label we have
generated the semantic community {tandsjukdom,
emalj, olika, vanligaste, tandsjukdomar, licken,
plack, ovanliga}. The similarity of these commu-
nities is low, i.e., 0.16, however, they both contain
the words which are clearly relevant to teeth and
dental diseases.
As another example, ?osteoklast? and ?osteok-
laster? both receive the semantic label ?cell?
27770000?osteoklast?. From the graph analysis,
we have found {osteoklaster, osteoblster, osteo-
cyter, osteoblaster} as a community with ?osteok-
laster? as the seed. We have also obtained the
semantic community {osteoblaster, osteoklast, os-
teoporos, osteocyter, bensko?rhet, osteoklaster, os-
teoblster}. In this example, the graph community
is a subset of the semantic community, and their
similarity is 0.57. The above examples suggest
that a graph-based analysis of medical queries can
be used to complement the semantic analysis.
7
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 10
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Jaccard Similarity
Co
un
t
(a) one month
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Jaccard Similarity
Co
un
t
(b) 6 months
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Jaccard Similarity
Co
un
t
(c) 12 months
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Jaccard Similarity
Co
un
t
(d) 36 months
Figure 3: The distributions of jaccard similarity of semantic-based and graph-based communities.
6.2 Frequent Co-Occurrence Analysis
In the query logs, we observed that there are many
misspellings, meaningless words, etc. In order to
clear the dataset, it is common in different studies
of log files, to filter out queries which appeared
less frequently. By removing such queries, we can
dramatically reduce the number of such words.
In this study, we have generated another graph
from the words which co-occurred frequently in
different queries. We have only considered words
that co-occurred five times or more, and the graph
contains 32,449 nodes and 217,320 edges, with
average clustering coefficient of 0.29 and effective
diameter of 5.66.
In the GCC of this graph we found 22,890 graph
communities with average conductance of 0.65
and coverage of 95%. Moreover, we have also
used the words which co-occurred at least five
times to generate the semantic communities. The
similarity of these communities with graph com-
munities using jaccard similarity was 0.16 in av-
erage which is slightly lower than when no filter-
ing was used. Overall, our observations suggest
that filtering can be used to reduce the noise in the
datasets and allow us to perform a faster analysis
on a smaller graph.
6.3 Time Window Analysis
Another property which we have empirically stud-
ied in this paper is the effect of time window
length during which the queries are analyzed. We
have observed that, in average, more than 31%
of the nodes and 12% of the edges have re-
appeared in each month compared to their pre-
vious month. This suggests that the search con-
tent changes over time perhaps depending on the
changes in the monthly or seasonal information re-
quirements of the users. It also means that over
time the size of the word co-occurrence graph in-
creases (see Table 1), and since in each month new
co-occurrences shape, the graph becomes more
and more connected. Therefore, when the time
window is long, the analysis requires more time
and the identified communities do not have good
conductance. When the time window is short, the
small size of the graph speeds up the analysis but
might affect the analysis result. In this section we
investigate the effect of time window length on our
analysis.
We started by setting the time window length to
one month. From the queries which were observed
during each month, we generated a co-occurrence
graph and identified the graph communities and
the semantic communities. As presented in Sec-
tion 5, the structural properties of a graph gen-
erated from one month are quite similar to that
of the complete graph. We have also observed
that the average conductance of the communities
identified by the community detection algorithm is
around 0.5 which is lower than when the complete
graph was used. This means that the communities
in the graphs generated from one month of queries
have better quality since they have fewer connec-
tions to the rest of the graph.
8
We observed that the similarities between
graph communities and semantic communities are
higher when a one-month window is used (in av-
erage 0.26). By increasing the length of the time
window from one to three, six, twelve, and thirty-
six months, we observed a reduction in the simi-
larities (in average 0.23, 0.22, 0.21, and 0.19, re-
spectively). The similarity distributions are shown
in Figure 3. It seems that with more queries
over time, more words get connected and it be-
comes more difficult to identify good communi-
ties. Therefore, using short time windows can im-
prove the quality of the analysis. Moreover, anal-
ysis of different time windows can also shed light
on how the word relations and user requirements
are affected by the months or seasons of the year.
6.4 Discussion
Our empirical analysis of a large-scale query log
of medical related search presented in this paper
can be used to improve our knowledge of the ter-
minology and general vocabulary, as well as the
search strategies of the users. In addition to pro-
viding a background for language analysis, a po-
tential application for community detection could
be to provide better spelling suggestions to users.
We have observed that there are communities with
very low conductance which contain a number of
words which seem to correspond to guessing at-
tempts to find a correct spelling, e.g., {shoulder,
froozen, frosen, cholder, sholder, fingers, frozen,
scholder, shulder, schoulder, shoulders}. The low
conductance of the community means that the
community is very isolated and has very few edges
outside it and therefore it can easily be cut from the
graph. Therefore, the community detection can be
used for identifying such cases.
Another potential application of our graph anal-
ysis method is to provide recommendations and
suggest more precise search terms based on the
words that appear in the same community as the
keywords entered by the users. For example, since
the communities can overlap, each word can be-
long to more than one graph community or se-
mantic community. We observed that in average,
in the complete graph (generated from 36 months
of logs), each word belongs to 3.8 unique graph
communities and 3.6 semantic communities. It
means that a word which can be related to mul-
tiple groups of words or have different meanings,
can belong to several communities. This knowl-
edge can potentially be used to provide sugges-
tions to the users and help them to select the in-
tended meaning and therefore reducing the ambi-
guity in the searched queries.
Overall, in this paper, we have presented
a promising approach for analysis of medical
queries using co-occurrence graphs. As a future
work, the following improvements could be of in-
terest for complementing our empirical study:
? Representing different variations of the
words with only a single node in the graph,
e.g., ?o?ga? for ?o?gat?, and ?o?gon?.
? Filtering out the non-medical related words
such as person and location entities from
the queries based on the semantic enhance-
ment with name entities from NER. Overall,
more than 136,000 queries contained a per-
son name entity, and around 127,000 con-
tained a place entity.
? Filtering out high frequency words/terms
which do not have medical significance, e.g.,
?olika? (different).
7 Conclusions
Our analysis of a large-scale medical query log
corpus is the first step towards understanding the
language and the word relations in health/medical
related queries. We have performed a semantic
enhancement of queries based on medically re-
lated semantic resources to find the communities
of words which have co-occurred with a semantic
label. We have also performed a graph-based anal-
ysis of the word co-occurrences and have shown
that since a word co-occurrence graph has similar
structural properties to many types of real-world
networks, existing algorithms for network analysis
can be deployed for our study. We then have used
a random walk-based community detection algo-
rithm in order to identify communities of words
in our graph. Our empirical results show that the
communities identified from the semantic analysis
and the graph analysis overlap, however the graph-
based analysis can identify many more commu-
nities and achieves much higher coverage of the
words in the queries. Therefore, the graph-based
analysis can be used in order to improve and com-
plement the semantic analysis. Our experiments
also show that short time window lengths for anal-
ysis of query logs, such as a month, would suffice
for graph-based analysis of medical queries.
9
8 Acknowledgments
We are thankful to Adam Blomberg, CTO, Eurol-
ing AB for providing the log data. We are also
thankful for the support by the Centre for Lan-
guage Technology (http://clt.gu.se).
References
Reid Andersen and Kevin Lang. 2006. Communities
from seed sets. In Proceedings of the 15th interna-
tional conference on World Wide Web - WWW ?06,
page 223. ACM Press.
Reid Andersen, Fan Chung, and Kevin Lang. 2006.
Local Graph Partitioning using PageRank Vectors.
In 2006 47th Annual IEEE Symposium on Founda-
tions of Computer Science (FOCS?06), pages 475?
486. IEEE.
Ricardo Baeza-Yates and Alessandro Tiberi. 2007.
Extracting semantic relations from query logs. Pro-
ceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data min-
ing - KDD ?07, page 76.
Ricardo Baeza-Yates, Carlos Hurtado, and Marcelo
Mendoza. 2004. Query Clustering for Boosting
Web Page Ranking. In Advances in Web Intelli-
gence, volume 3034, pages 164?175. Springer.
Ricardo Baeza-Yates. 2007. Graphs from Search En-
gine Queries. In Theory and Practice of Computer
Science, volume 4362, pages 1?8. Springer.
Judit Bar-Ilan, Zheng Zhu, and Mark Levene. 2009.
Topic-specific analysis of search queries. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2009 workshop on Web Search Click
Data - WSCD ?09, pages 35?42. ACM Press.
A.L. Baraba?si and R. Albert. 1999. Emer-
gence of Scaling in Random Networks. Science,
286(5439):509.
Aaron Clauset, Cosma Rohilla Shalizi, and M. E. J.
Newman. 2009. Power-Law Distributions in Em-
pirical Data. SIAM Review, 51(4):661?703, Novem-
ber.
R Ferrer i Cancho and R V Sole?. 2001. The small
world of human language. Proceedings. Biologi-
cal sciences / The Royal Society, 268(1482):2261?5,
November.
Santo Fortunato. 2010. Community detection in
graphs. Physics Reports, 486(3-5):75?174, Febru-
ary.
Beno??t Gaillard and Bruno Gaume. 2011. Invariants
and Variability of Synonymy Networks : Self Me-
diated Agreement by Confluence. In Proceedings
of the TextGraphs-6 Workshop (Graph-based Algo-
rithms for Natural Language Processing), pages 15?
23.
Amac? Herdagdelen, Katrin Erk, and Marco Baroni.
2009. Measuring semantic relatedness with vector
space models and random walks. In In Proceedings
of the TextGraphs-4 (Graph-based Methods for Nat-
ural Language Processing), pages 50?53.
Anette Hulth, Gustaf Rydevik, and Annika Linde.
2009. Web queries as a source for syndromic
surveillance. PloS one, 4(2):e4378, January.
Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2004. Reducing the Effect
of Name Explosion. In In Proceedings of the
LREC Workshop: Beyond Named Entity Recog-
nition, Semantic Labelling for NLP tasks. Fourth
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC), pages 1?6.
Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2011. What is the Cover-
age of SNOMED CTon Scientific Medical Corpora?
MIE: XXIII International Conference of the Euro-
pean Federation for Medical Informatics. Studies in
Health Technology and Informatics, 169:814 ? 818.
Jure Leskovec, Jon Kleinberg, and Christos Faloutsos.
2007. Graph Evolution: Densification and Shrink-
ing Diameters. ACM Transactions on Knowledge
Discovery from Data, 1(1):2?es, March.
Mazlita Mat-Hassan and Mark Levene. 2005. Asso-
ciating search and navigation behavior through log
analysis. Journal of the American Society for In-
formation Science and Technology, 56(9):913?934,
July.
Olena Medelyan. 2004. Why Not Use Query Logs
As Corpora? In Proceedings of the Ninth ESSLLI
Student Session, pages 1?10.
Adam Oliner, U C Berkeley, and Archana Ganapathi.
2011. Advances and Challenges in Log Analysis
Logs contain a wealth of information for help in
managing systems . Queue - Log Analysis, pages
1?11.
Ji-rong Wen, Jian-yun Nie, and Hong-Jiang Zhang.
2001. Clustering user queries of a search engine. In
Proceedings of the tenth international conference on
World Wide Web - WWW ?01, pages 162?168. ACM
Press.
Jierui Xie, S Kelley, and BK Szymanski. 2013. Over-
lapping community detection in networks: the state
of the art and comparative study. ACM Computing
Surveys, 45(4).
Jaewon Yang and Jure Leskovec. 2012. Defining and
evaluating network communities based on ground-
truth. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), pages 1?8.
Lei Yang, Qiaozhu Mei, Kai Zheng, and David a
Hanauer. 2011. Query log analysis of an electronic
health record search engine. AMIA ... Annual Sym-
posium proceedings / AMIA Symposium. AMIA Sym-
posium, 2011:915?24, January.
10
