Bilingual concordancers and translation memories: A comparative evaluation 
Lynne BOWKER 
School of Translation and Interpretation, 
University of Ottawa  
70 Laurier Ave E., Rm 401 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1N 6N5 
lynne.bowker@uottawa.ca 
Michael BARLOW 
Department of Applied Language 
Studies and Linguistics, University of 
Auckland 
Auckland 1001, New Zealand 
mi.barlow@auckland.ac.nz 
 
Abstract 
Translators are increasingly turning to 
electronic language resources and tools to help 
them cope with the demand for fast, high-
quality translation. While translation memory 
tools seem to be well known in the translation 
industry at large, bilingual concordancers 
appear to be familiar primarily in academic 
circles. The strengths and weaknesses of these 
two types of tool are analyzed in an effort to 
recommend those circumstances in which each 
could best be applied. 
1 Introduction 
Recent years have witnessed a number of 
significant changes in the translation market. 
Largely as a result of globalization, there has been 
a considerable increase in the volume of text to be 
translated. New types of text, such as Web pages, 
have also appeared and require translation. 
The increased demand for translation has been 
accompanied by another trend: deadlines for 
translation jobs have grown shorter. This is in part 
because companies want to get their products onto 
the shelves in all corners of the world as quickly as 
possible. In addition, electronic documents such as 
Web pages may have content that needs to be 
updated frequently. Companies want to be sure that 
their sites reflect the latest information, so 
translators are under pressure to work very quickly 
to ensure that the up-to-date information is 
reflected in all language versions of the site. 
Furthermore, it has been observed that in today?s 
market, there is currently a shortage of human 
translators (e.g. Sprung 2000:ix; Shadbolt 2002:30-
31; Allen 2003:300). 
The increase in volume coupled with shorter 
turnaround times has resulted in an immense 
pressure on existing translators to work more 
quickly, while still maintaining high quality in 
their work. However, these two demands of high 
quality and fast turnaround are likely to be at odds 
with one another. Therefore, one way that some 
translators are trying to balance the need for high 
quality with the need for increased productivity is 
by turning to electronic resources and tools. 
One type of language resource that has become 
popular is the bilingual parallel corpus, which is 
essentially a collection of texts in one language 
(e.g. English) alongside their translations into 
another language (e.g. French). The two sets of 
texts must be aligned, which means that links are 
made between corresponding sections (e.g. 
sentences, paragraphs) in the two languages.  
Bilingual parallel corpora can contain a wealth 
of useful information for translators, but in order to 
be able to exploit these resources, some type of 
tool is needed. There are two main types of tool 
that can be used to search for and retrieve 
information from a bilingual parallel corpus1: a 
bilingual concordancer (BC) and a translation 
memory (TM). While these two types of tool have 
some common goals and features, they also have a 
number of differences. 
As we will see in the upcoming sections, BCs 
can be considered to be ?old technology? and they 
are not well known in the translation industry 
outside of academic circles. In contrast, TMs have 
garnered a significant amount of attention in the 
translation industry of late; they are very much in 
vogue and are considered to be leading-edge 
technology. Nevertheless, a number of translators 
have expressed frustration and disappointment 
when trying to apply TMs in certain contexts. It is 
possible that some of the frustration experienced 
by translators using TMs in certain situations could 
be alleviated by using BCs instead. The aim of this 
paper is to conduct a comparative analysis of the 
two types of technology in an effort to determine 
the strengths and weaknesses of each in order to 
determine those situations where translators would 
be best served by using a TM and those where they 
may be better off using a BC. 
Following the introduction, the paper will be 
divided into four main parts. Part 2 provides some 
                                                     
1 Note that while the same corpus data can be used 
with both types of tool, it is usually necessary to pre-
process the corpus in a different way in order to render 
it readable by different tools. 
background information, including a general 
description of how the two types of tool work, with 
reference to two specific tools ? ParaConc and 
Trados ? that are representative of the categories of 
BC and TM respectively. Part 3 contains a brief 
assessment of the place occupied by these tools 
within the translation industry today. Part 4 
contains a more detailed comparative analysis of 
the features and associated advantages and 
disadvantages of each type of tool. Finally, Part 5 
concludes with some general recommendations 
about which translation situations warrant the use 
of each type of tool. 
2 General introduction to BCs and TMs 
The general aim of both a BC and a TM is to 
allow a translator to consult, and if appropriate to 
?reuse?, relevant sections of previously translated 
texts. In the following sections, BCs and TMs will 
be described with reference to ParaConc and 
Trados, which are representative examples of these 
respective categories of tool. 
2.1 ParaConc: an example of a BC2 
BCs, such as ParaConc, are fairly 
straightforward tools: they allow translators to 
search through bilingual parallel corpora to find 
information that might help them to complete a 
new translation. For example, if a translator 
encounters a word or expression that he does not 
know how to translate, he can look in the bilingual 
parallel corpus to see if this expression has been 
used before, and if so, how it was dealt with. 
To use ParaConc, the source and target texts 
must first be aligned, which means that 
corresponding text segments are linked together3. 
A semi-automatic alignment utility is included in 
the program to prepare texts that are not already 
pre-aligned. The initial part of the alignment 
process is carried out in three stages: first the texts 
are aligned based on headings, if any are present in 
the texts, then alignment is carried out at the 
paragraph level, and finally at the sentence level. 
The software uses the formatting information in 
files to carry out alignment of headings and 
                                                     
2 In fact, ParaConc could more properly be termed a 
multilingual concordancer, since it is possible to consult 
texts in up to four languages at once. However, in the 
context of this paper, we will refer to it as a BC and 
discuss its use for comparing texts in two languages. 
3 A detailed description of alignment techniques is 
beyond the scope of this paper; however, alignment is a 
non-trivial matter. Problems can arise, for example, if a 
single source text sentence has been translated by 
multiple target language sentences, or vice versa, or if 
information has been omitted from or added to the 
target text (e.g. to handle cultural references). 
paragraphs. Alignment at the sentence level is 
achieved by applying the Gale-Church algorithm 
(Gale and Church 1993). To make adjustments to 
the alignment, the user can examine the aligned 
segments and either merge or split particular 
segments, as necessary. One important thing to 
note is that the aligned units remain situated within 
the larger surrounding text. 
Once the texts are aligned, the translator can 
consult the corpus. By choosing the basic search 
command, the translator can retrieve all examples 
of a word or phrase (or part of a word) from the 
corpus. As shown in Figure 1, the search term 
?head? has been entered and all instances of 
?head? from the English corpus are displayed in 
the upper pane (here in a KWIC format). The 
corresponding text segments from the French 
corpus are shown in the lower pane. 
Figure 1. A ParaConc results window. 
The concordance lines can be sorted in various 
ways (e.g., primarily 1st left and secondarily 1st 
right) in order to group similar phrases together 
and therefore make it easier for a translator to spot 
linguistic patterns. Clicking on a concordance line 
in the upper pane will highlight that line and also 
the corresponding text segment in the lower pane. 
Double-clicking on a line will bring up a window 
containing the segment within a larger context. 
Suggested translations for the English ?head? 
can be highlighted by positioning the cursor in the 
lower French results pane and clicking on the right 
mouse button. A possible translation of ?head? 
such as ?t?te? can be entered. The program then 
simply highlights all instances of ?t?te? in the 
French results window, which can then be 
displayed (and sorted).  
It is also possible to use a utility that presents a 
list of ?hot? words in the French results pane, 
including possible translations. Some or all the 
words listed can be selected and they will then be 
highlighted in the results. 
Finally, more complex search commands can 
also be used if desired. Some of the possible 
advanced search options are: Text search, Regular 
expression search, Tag (part-of-speech) search, 
Batch search, and various heading-sensitive and 
context-sensitive searches. Of particular interest to 
translators is a Parallel search, which allows the 
user to enter both an English and a French search 
word and to retrieve only those occurrences that 
match both (e.g. only instances where ?head? is 
translated by ?t?te? and not by ?chef?). 
2.1.1 Potential limitations of BCs 
There are a number of potential limitations that 
are often associated with BCs: 1) the limited 
degree of automation; 2) the nature of the search 
item; and 3) the nature of the matching process. 
With regard to degree of automation, when using 
a BC, it is up to the translator to decide what word 
or expression to look up, and he then has to 
manually type this into the search engine. 
In terms of the nature of the search item, BCs are 
generally designed to search only for words or very 
short phrases. It is true that, in principle, a BC 
could be used to search for an entire sentence or 
paragraph; however, the fact that the search pattern 
must be manually entered tends to discourage this 
type of use because it would be extremely time-
consuming and error prone (e.g. typos). 
Finally, BCs are sometimes criticized because of 
the nature of the matching process that they use. 
By default, these tools basically search through the 
corpus for occurrences that match the entered 
search pattern precisely. For example, if the 
translator enters the search pattern ?flatbed colour 
scanner? into the concordancer, it will retrieve only 
those occurrences that match that pattern exactly. It 
will not retrieve an example that contains 
differences in punctuation, spelling or morphology 
(e.g. ?flat-bed color scanners?). However, as noted 
in section 2, some BCs, such as ParaConc, have 
added more advanced search features to improve 
the flexibility of searching. 
2.2 Trados: an example of a TM 
Like a BC, a TM is a tool designed to help 
translators identify and retrieve information from a 
bilingual parallel corpus. However, one of the 
motivating factors in developing TMs was to 
overcome some of the seeming limitations of BCs 
as described in section 2.1.1. Consequently, TMs 
are more automated, can search for longer 
segments, and employ fuzzy matching techniques. 
The data contained in a conventional TM, such 
as Trados4, are organized in a very precise way, 
which differs somewhat from the way in which 
data are stored for use with a BC. Trados divides 
each text into small units known as segments, 
which usually correspond to sentences or sentence-
like units (e.g., titles, headings, list items, table 
cells). The source text segments are linked to their 
corresponding target text segments and the 
resulting aligned pair of segments is known as a 
translation unit (TU). Each TU is extracted from 
the larger text and stored individually in a 
database. It is this database of TUs, not the original 
complete text, that is later searched for matches. 
When a TM, such as Trados, is first acquired, its 
database is empty. It is up to the translator to stock 
the database. This can be done interactively by 
having the translator add each newly translated 
segment to the database as he works his way 
through the text, or it can be done by taking 
previously translated texts and aligning them using 
the accompanying automatic alignment program. It 
is important to note, however, that in order to 
ensure that the automatic alignment has been done 
correctly, manual verification may be required. 
When a translator receives a new text to translate 
he begins by opening this new text in the Trados 
environment. Trados proceeds to divide this new 
text into segments. Once this has been 
accomplished, the tool starts at the beginning of 
the new source text and automatically compares 
each segment to the contents of the TM database. 
If it finds a segment that it ?remembers? (i.e., a 
segment that matches one that has been previously 
translated and stored in the TM database), it 
retrieves the corresponding TU from the database 
and shows it to the translator, who can refer to this 
previous translation and adopt or modify it for use 
in the new translation. 
Of course, language is flexible, which means 
that the same idea can be expressed in a number of 
different ways (e.g., ?The filename is invalid? / 
?This file does not have a valid name?). 
Consequently, a translator cannot reasonably 
expect to find many exact matches for complete 
segments in the TM. However, it is highly likely 
that there will be segments in a new source text 
that are similar to, but not exactly the same as, 
segments that are stored in the TM. For this reason, 
Trados also employs a feature known as fuzzy 
matching. As shown in Figure 2, a fuzzy match is 
able to locate segments in the TM that are an 
                                                     
4 Note that Trados is actually a suite of tools that 
includes, among other things, an automatic aligner, a 
terminology manager and a TM. 
approximate or partial match for the segment in the 
new source text. 
 
Segment from 
new source 
text 
The specified operation was 
interrupted by the system. 
Fuzzy match 
retrieved from 
translation 
memory 
EN:  The operation was 
interrupted by the application. 
FR:  L'op?ration a ?t? 
interrompue par l'application. 
Figure 2. Fuzzy match retrieved from the TM. 
If more than one potential match is found for any 
given segement, these are ranked by the system 
according to the degree of similarity between the 
new segment to be translated and the previously 
translated segment found in the database. Note that 
the similarity in question is a superficial similarity 
(e.g., the number/length of character strings that 
the two segments have in common) and not a 
semantic similarity (thus ?gone? and ?went? will 
not count as similar despite the similarity in 
meaning of the two words). The match that the 
system perceives as being most similar to the new 
source segment is automatically pasted into the 
new target text. The translator can accept this 
proposal as is, edit it as necessary, or reject it and 
ask to see other candidates (if any were found). 
Trados also works in conjunction with 
termbases; however, it is important to note that 
these need to be manually pre-stocked by 
translators with specialized terms and their 
equivalents. By searching in the termbase ? if one 
exists ? Trados can locate matches at the term 
level and present them to the translator. 
Nevertheless, there is still a level of linguistic 
repetition that falls between full sentences and 
specialized terms ? repetition at the level of 
expression or phrase. This is in fact the level where 
linguistic repetition will occur most often. 
Until recently, Trados permitted phrase or 
expression searching only though a feature that 
resembled a BC. In other words, a translator could 
manually select an expression, and Trados would 
search through the database of TUs to find 
examples. In the most recent version of Trados 
(v6.5), however, an auto-concordance function has 
been added, which, when activated will 
automatically go on to search for text fragments 
when no segment-level match is found. 
Once the translator is satisfied with the 
translation for a given segment ? which can be 
taken directly from Trados, adapted from a Trados 
match, or created by the translator from scratch ? 
the newly created TU can be added to the TM 
database and the translator can move on to the next 
segment. In this way, the database grows as the 
translator works. Trados can also be networked so 
that multiple translators can search and contribute 
to the same TM. 
3 BCs and TMs in the translation industry 
A literature survey indicates that BCs and TMs 
are both widely used in academic settings for 
translator training. A long list of researchers (e.g. 
Bernardini 2002; Hansen and Teich 2002; Palumbo 
2002; Pearson 2000; Tagnin 2002; Zanettin 1998) 
have shown that using BCs in conjunction with 
parallel bilingual corpora can help students with a 
range of translation-related tasks, such as 
identifying more appropriate target language 
equivalents and collocations; coming to grips with 
difficult grammatical points (e.g. prepositions, verb 
tenses, negative prefixes); identifying the norms, 
stylistic preferences and discourse structures 
associated with different text types; and 
uncovering important conceptual information. 
With regard to TMs, meanwhile, many translator 
trainers (e.g. Austerm?hl 2001; Bowker 2002; 
DeCesaris 1996; Kenny 1999; L?Homme 1999) are 
now using TMs for tasks such as getting students 
to analyze and evaluate different translation 
solutions; helping students to learn more about 
inter- and intra-textual features by examining 
source texts and evaluating their characteristics in 
an effort to determine whether or not they can be 
usefully translated with the help of a TM; and 
conducting longitudinal studies of students? 
progress over the course of their training program. 
In contrast to the academic setting, where both 
BCs and TMs are well known and widely used, the 
situation in the professional setting is somewhat 
different: TMs are very popular, but the existence 
of BCs does not seem to be widely known. 
For example, TMs are discussed frequently in 
the professional association literature. According 
to newsletters/programmes circulated to members, 
translators? associations such as the American 
Translator?s Association or the Association of 
Translators and Interpreters of Ontario have 
provided their members with opportunities (e.g. 
demonstrations, workshops, professional 
development seminars) to learn about TMs. 
In addition, some professional translators? 
associations, such as the Ordre des traducteurs, 
terminologues et interpr?tes agr??s du Qu?bec, 
also publish magazines aimed at language 
professionals, and in recent years, these have 
included a number of discussions on TMs (e.g. 
B?dard 1995, 1998; Arrouart and B?dard 2001; 
Lanct?t 2001). 
In those same publications, however, 
considerably less attention has been paid to BCs: 
only one event focusing on these tools was 
reported (Evans 2002). 
This raises the question as to why BCs appear to 
have received a less enthusiastic welcome in the 
professional world than have TMs. One factor that 
may have led to a difference in uptake of these two 
tools is the ease of access to such tools. 
Firstly, it should be noted that BCs have long 
been known in fields such as language teaching or 
second-language learning (e.g. Johns 1986, Mindt 
1986, Barlow 2000), but it is only more recently 
that their potential as translation aids has been 
recognized. Academics working in the field of 
translation are often involved in, or have 
colleagues who are involved in, language teaching, 
and as such they may have gained exposure to BCs 
in this way. Many of the existing BCs were 
initially developed by academics who work in 
language training5 often as a means of helping their 
own students. This means that while such tools are 
generally very reasonably priced and may be easily 
accessible within the academic community, they 
are sometimes not widely advertised or distributed 
to the professional translation community because 
the people who have created these tools have full-
time teaching jobs. In contrast, tools such as TMs, 
which have typically been developed in the private 
sector by companies that have professional full-
time programmers, technical support staff and 
generous advertising budgets, are more actively 
marketed to working translation professionals. The 
fact that BCs do not seem to be well advertised in 
the professional setting may explain, in part, why 
translators and translators? associations seem to be 
more aware of the existence of TMs than they are 
of BCs. This situation may change in the future, 
however. As noted above, the use of BCs in 
translator training institutes has become firmly 
established since the late 1990s. This means that, at 
present, most of the translators in the workforce 
will have received their education during a time 
when BCs were not part of the translator training 
curriculum. However, over the coming years, the 
number of BC-saavy graduates will increase and 
they will bring to the workforce their knowledge of 
BCs. They will be able to share their experience 
with their colleagues and employers and gradually, 
more and more companies will have translators on 
staff who have an understanding of such tools. 
                                                     
5 For example, ParaConc was developed by Dr. 
Michael Barlow, who works in the Department of 
Applied Language Studies and Linguistics at the 
University of Auckland; MultiConcord was developed 
by a consortium based in the Centre for English 
Language Studies at the University of Birmingham. 
4 Comparative analysis of BCs and TMs 
On the surface, it may seem to be an obvious 
choice for a translator to select a TM over a BC 
since a TM includes the basic functions of a BC, as 
well as a number of additional features (e.g. 
automated searching, segment-level matching, 
fuzzy matching). However, if one looks beneath 
the surface, it seems that while TMs may be 
favourable in some circumstances, there are other 
situations where a BC may be the preferred tool. In 
the following sections, we will examine the 
strengths and weaknesses of BCs and TMs, using 
ParaConc and Trados as representative examples 
of these respective categories of tools. 
4.1 Automation 
Automation is an oft-touted advantage of TMs. 
In principle, automating the search feature should 
speed up the process; however, this may not 
always be the case. As pointed out by B?dard 
(1995:28), it is possible to approach automation in 
one of two ways: 1) an ambitious or high-tech 
approach, using very sophisticated and highly 
automated tools, such as TMs, or 2) a more modest 
or low-tech approach, where the tools (e.g. BCs) 
are simpler and require more user input. 
In the case of the highly-automated approach, 
there can be hidden costs. Because the tools are 
more sophisticated, they may require a greater 
investment of time and effort in learning how to 
use them, which may prompt users to ask ?What 
have I got myself into??. The pre-processing steps 
(e.g. alignment) may also be more demanding 
because an automated system depends more 
heavily on correct alignment. As noted in section 
2.2, in the case of Trados, if a translator wishes to 
ensure that the alignment is absolutely correct in 
order to prevent misaligned TUs being presented, 
he must manually verify, and if necessary correct, 
the alignment ? a process that can be extremely 
labour-intensive if the database is large. In 
contrast, since the data generated by BCs is 
designed for consultation by a human user, not a 
computer, the alignment requirements are 
somewhat less stringent. A certain number of 
alignment errors can be tolerated in a BC because 
the danger of ?automatically? retrieving 
misaligned segments does not exist, and if an error 
does occur, the translator can simply look to the 
preceding or following text to find the 
corresponding segment because a BC does not 
extract the segment from its surrounding text. 
Because BCs can tolerate a certain margin of error, 
the translator need not bother to manually verify 
every alignment segment prior to beginning to use 
the tool, which can represent a significant time 
saving. 
Another potential drawback of automation is that 
the system searches for all matches, even in cases 
where the translator may not need help with a 
particular passage. For example, if the auto-
concordance feature in Trados is activated, it may 
retrieve and display matches for phrases such as 
?because of the? or ?in order to?, for which an 
experienced translator is unlikely to need 
assistance. This can be distracting because the fact 
that information has been retrieved means that the 
translator will probably at least have a brief look at 
what the system has proposed, which takes time 
and is disruptive to the translation process. And the 
return on investment is bound to be low for time 
spent looking at matches for segments for which 
no translation assistance was required in the first 
place. In contrast, when working with a BC, the 
translator initiates the searches and therefore only 
looks for passages for which he requires help. 
In addition, the fact that many TMs, including 
Trados, automatically copy and paste fuzzy 
matches or term matches directly into the target 
text can sometimes be a hindrance. Depending on 
the amount of editing required to produce a 
desirable target segment, it may actually be faster 
for the translator to type the translation from 
scratch rather than editing the proposed segment. 
In contrast, a BC does not automatically paste any 
text directly into the target document, which can be 
a good thing or a bad thing depending on the 
quality of the match retrieved. 
A small point, but one that is worth mentioning 
nonetheless is that TMs often require a great deal 
of user-initiated clicking in order to view or use the 
?automatically? retrieved information. For 
example, in Trados, when working in interactive 
mode, the user must click in order to instruct the 
system to conduct a search for each new segment. 
Once the search has been conducted, only the 
highest-ranked match is automatically presented to 
the user, but depending on the translator?s needs, 
this is not necessarily the match that will be the 
most helpful. There are extra clicks involved in 
pulling up and viewing additional matches. Lastly, 
when the auto-concordance feature is activated, if 
the system does not find any sentence-level 
matches for the current segment, it automatically 
opens the concordance window and displays the 
results; however, in so doing, it makes the 
concordance window the active window, so the 
translator has to make a point of clicking back in 
the target field before starting to type, otherwise 
the text will be inadvertently written to the search 
field of the concordance window. It is true that 
there is also typing and clicking to be done when 
using a BC, but the point we want to make here is 
that BCs such as ParaConc do not profess to use 
automation as a time-saver. Moreover, the lack of 
automation may actually save time in some cases. 
For example, in ParaConc, all the matches are 
displayed at once and the user can peruse them at a 
glance instead of having to click through them. 
Finally, it should be noted that not all features of 
TMs are in fact automated. In Trados, for example, 
the termbase that is used to identify term matches 
must be manually pre-stocked with term records by 
the translator prior to beginning a translation job. 
However, as pointed out by Arrouart and B?dard 
(2001:30), when a translator consults a parallel 
bilingual corpus using a BC, he has at his disposal 
a sort of ?full-text glossary? which, by its very 
nature, contains countless ?term records? that the 
translator has not yet had the time to formalize. 
Arrouart and B?dard go on to observe that one day, 
such resources may well supplant carefully 
managed collections of term records. 
In summary, while less-automated tools such as 
BCs appear to achieve less, they may be quicker to 
provide translators with results they can actually 
use, and they are likely to be more tolerant of 
unexpected situations. Of course, using such tools 
may call for a higher level of inventiveness or 
creativity on the part of the user, but thankfully, 
these are qualities that translators typically possess. 
4.2 Search flexibility 
It was noted in section 2.1.1 that one of the 
perceived limitations of BCs is the nature of the 
searches that can be conducted. Typically, BCs 
search for occurrences in the corpus that precisely 
match the search pattern entered by the user. In 
contrast TMs can make use of a fuzzy matching 
technique that can identify patterns that are similar 
to, but do not precisely match, the source segment. 
However, a fuzzy match is not a panacea. When 
using fuzzy matching techniques, the translator can 
set the sensitivity threshold of the match; in other 
words, the translator can decide how similar the 
two segments must be in order for a TU to be 
retrieved and displayed. Setting the appropriate 
sensitivity threshold can actually be quite tricky: if 
the threshold is set too high (e.g., 95% similarity), 
then potentially useful matches may be overlooked 
and the translator will be forced to do unnecessary 
independent research. But if it is set too low  (e.g., 
30% similarity), then irrelevant segments may be 
erroneously retrieved and the translator will waste 
time weeding through the non-pertinent data. In 
addition, as noted in section 2.2, even if a fuzzy 
match has a high percentage of similarity, it may 
not be that useful to the translator since the 
matching is based on surface structure similarities 
rather than semantic similarities. For instance, the 
following would be retrieved as a good match in a 
TM since the two segments strongly resemble each 
other on the surface, differing by only two 
characters: File the form. / Fill the dorm. 
In contrast, the following pair would not be 
retrieved because they are not superficially similar, 
though they are closely linked semantically: File 
the form. / He is re-filing those forms. 
A translator who is looking for an equivalent of 
a given segment would find the translation of a 
semantically-related segment to be more useful 
than that of a segment which bears only a 
superficial resemblance to the source text segment. 
With a BC, a translator could use his own 
knowledge of semantics to try to formulate more 
relevant queries, but with a TM, the translator has 
no input into the search patterns used. 
Moreover, as mentioned in section 2.1, many 
BCs have developed a number of additional 
flexible searching techniques which, though still 
manually initiated, can approximate to some extent 
the results of a fuzzy match. For example, 
ParaConc offers the possibility of using operators 
such as wildcards as part of a search. If used 
properly, these operators can increase the 
flexibility of a search (e.g. by finding inflected 
forms). However, as was the case with fuzzy 
matching, they can also lead to problems if they 
are not used rigorously. For instance, in an effort to 
retrieve examples of all forms of the verb ?to 
enter?, a translator may input a pattern such as 
?enter*? where the * can be used to represent any 
string of characters. However, this pattern will also 
retrieve occurrences of all other words beginning 
with the string ?enter? (e.g., ?enterprise?, 
?entertain?). As a result, the translator may 
inadvertently be presented with irrelevant data. 
The nice thing about working with a BC, 
however, is that the translator does have control 
over the search pattern that is entered, so by 
learning the proper search syntax and by gaining 
some experience, translators can learn which types 
of patterns are likely to produce valuable 
information and which are likely to waste time. 
When working with a TM, however, the translator 
has no control over the search pattern that is used. 
For example, as mentioned in section 2.1, the 
parallel search offered by ParaConc allows a 
translator to limit a search to a given word sense, 
whereas this cannot be achieved using a TM. 
4.3 Consistency 
Another highly advertised feature of TMs is that 
they promote consistency in translation. The 
question that has been raised by some translators, 
however, is whether this is always desirable. 
Merkel (1998:143) conducted a survey of 13 
translators using TMs to carry out the translation of 
software manuals. One of the questions asked was 
whether they preferred consistent translations of a 
given source segment in two different contexts. 
The choice of answer was either ?yes? or ?no?, 
with space for the respondent to elaborate on the 
motivations for his/her choice. Upon examining 
the completed questionnaires, Merkel noted that ?it 
became apparent that there was a need for a third 
response, in between ?yes? and ?no?, namely a 
response which we can call ?doesn?t matter?. This 
applies when the translator in the justification for 
the choice has indicated that the translation could 
be consistent, but that it would not matter whether 
the source segment was also translated 
differently.? This raises an interesting point: in 
contrast to what many TM vendors would have us 
believe, while consistency may sometimes be 
desirable, it may not always be strictly necessary. 
Furthermore, there may even be cases where 
consistency is not at all appropriate. For instance, 
the translators consulted as part of Merkel?s survey 
warn that there is a need to evaluate a proposed 
match within the new context, and that it may not 
always be automatically acceptable. This is 
particularly true in the case of different structural 
contexts (e.g. sentence vs heading vs table cell), 
where caution should be used in applying 
consistent translations (Merkel 1998:145). 
4.4 Other quality-related issues 
In addition to the question of consistency, other 
quality-related issues have been raised by 
translators working with TMs. One of the most 
significant, which was briefly introduced in section 
2.2, is the fact that TM databases store isolated 
segment pairs, rather than complete texts. In the 
words of Arrouart and B?dard (2001:30), a TM is 
actually a memory of sentences out of context. 
This can be problematic because the sentences in 
a text generally depend on each other in various 
ways. For example, when we read/write the third 
sentence in a text, we can refer back to information 
already presented in the first two sentences, which 
means that it is possible to use pronouns, deictic 
and cataphoric references, etc. However, if we take 
that third sentence in isolation, it may not be clear 
what the antecedents of such references are. 
In addition, because languages do not have a 
one-for-one correspondence or the same stylistic 
requirements, translators who are trying to convey 
the overall message of a text may map the 
information to the sentences in the target text in a 
way that differs from how that information was 
originally dispersed among the source text 
sentences. The result is that even if the two texts 
are considered to be equivalent when taken as a 
whole, the sentences in a translation may not 
depend on each other in precisely the same way in 
which the source text sentences do (B?dard 2000). 
In order to maximize the ?recyclability? of a 
text, a translator working with a TM may choose to 
structure the sentences in the target text to match 
those in the source text, and he may choose to 
avoid using pronouns or other references. 
According to Heyn (1998:135), the result may be a 
text that is inherently less coherent or readable, and 
of a lesser overall quality. B?dard (2000) describes 
this as a ?sentence salad? rather than a text. 
The sentence salad effect is exacerbated when 
the sentences in a TM come from a variety of 
different texts that have been translated by 
different translators. Each text and translator will 
have a different style, and when sentences from 
each are brought together, the resulting text will be 
a stylistic hodgepodge. It is highly unlikely that the 
source text has been created in such a fashion (i.e., 
by asking a variety of authors to contribute 
individual sentences), so it is questionable whether 
this approach should be used to produce a 
translation, which is also a text in and of itself. 
Another quality-related problem is that errors 
contained in TMs may come back to haunt a 
translator if the database is not scrupulously 
maintained in order to correct such errors. Lanct?t 
(2001:30) provides the following account of a 
translator who carefully stores all his translations 
in a TM, but who does not update the contents to 
reflect corrections made by the client to the final 
document. When the client sends a document that 
closely resembles a version of a document 
previously translated the year before, the translator 
uses the TM and blithely reproduces the same 
errors in the new translation. The client is irritated 
because the same passages that were corrected last 
year need to be corrected again. This is not the 
kind of added value the client was looking for. 
It is worth pointing out that a BC will also 
produce less-than-satisfactory results if the 
contents of the corpus are not of high quality. The 
main advantage offered by a BC in this regard is 
that it is much more straightforward to update the 
corpus with a corrected text than it is to fix 
erroneous TUs in a TM. 
4.5 Translators? attitudes and satisfaction 
An important point to consider with regard to 
any tool is whether or not the intended users enjoy 
working with it. In the case of TMs, Merkel 
(1998:140) observes that some translators ?fear 
that translation work will become more tedious and 
boring, and that some of the creative aspects of the 
job will disappear with the increasing use of 
translation memory tools.? Merkel (1998:141) goes 
on to note that there is concern that a translator 
who works with a TM may be reduced to 
somebody who simply has to press the OK button. 
In a similar vein, B?dard (2000) expresses 
concern that translators may lose motivation when 
working with a TM because they risk becoming 
?translators of sentences? rather than ?translators 
of texts?. In order to maximize recyclability when 
working with a TM, translators are encouraged to 
translate one source text sentence by one target text 
sentence. However, as noted in section 4.4, the aim 
of most translators is not to translate sentences, but 
rather to translate a message. To do this 
effectively, translators often need to work outside 
the artificial boundaries of end-of-sentence 
markers, and they may therefore feel constrained 
by the sentence-by-sentence approach imposed by 
TMs. In contrast, Arrouart and B?dard (2001:30) 
have observed that when working with a BC, few 
constraints are imposed by the tool and translators 
are therefore more free to work as they wish. 
Another difficulty that may be faced by 
translators working with TMs is that they may be 
biased by what the system presents. In other words, 
after a translator has seen a suggestion from the 
database, it may be difficult to think of another 
way of expressing that thought, so he may use the 
suggested translation even if it does not fit very 
coherently into the text as a whole. When using a 
BC, however, a translator is more likely to be 
seeking inspiration for handling a shorter term or 
expression, rather than a complete segment match, 
so he is less likely to feel unduly influenced by the 
overall structure of the sentence contained in the 
corpus. He is also more likely to find examples of 
that term used in a variety of ways, so he can pick 
the usage that is most suitable for integration into 
the text as a whole. In this way, a translator feels 
like he is making his own decisions, rather than 
having someone else?s decisions forced upon him. 
The very fact that there are multiple ways to 
render a given passage in another language may 
also be a reason why some translators are unhappy 
about using a TM. Merkel (1998:148) notes that as 
part of his survey, translators were presented with 
several different options as translations of a given 
passage. The choice of ?best translation option? 
varied widely among translators, which leads him 
to believe that it may be difficult to encourage 
translators to accept suggestions from TMs. 
A related problem that has to do with different 
working styles of translators is described by 
Lanct?t (2001:30). When multiple translators are 
sharing a single TM over a network, it may be that 
translator A, for example, works by ploughing 
through a text to complete a full rough draft, and 
he then goes back over the text a second and third 
time to clean up any outstanding problems (e.g. 
terminological, stylistic). In contrast, translator B?s 
approach is to go more slowly, doing 
terminological research and addressing stylistic 
concerns as he goes along. In Lanct?t?s scenario, 
translator B is frustrated by the suggestions 
proposed by the TM ? many of which were 
produced as part of translator A?s first rough draft. 
5 Concluding remarks 
The aim of this paper has been to introduce and 
present an analysis of some of the strengths and 
weaknesses of two categories of tool: BCs and 
TMs. As noted in section 3, although TMs are 
widely promoted in the translation industry, BCs 
are less well known and, in some cases, translators 
who are vaguely aware of them may erroneously 
believe that such tools have been completely 
superseded by TMs and therefore have no interest 
for the translation community. 
It is not our intention to promote one type of tool 
over the other. Instead, we feel that the two 
technologies may be considered complementary, 
rather than competing, in the sense that one may be 
preferred in certain circumstances, while the other 
may be favoured in a different situation. Basically, 
it comes down to a translator being aware of how 
the two types of tool work and the potential 
advantages that each offers. The translator must 
then be able to choose the right tool for the job at 
hand. What follows are some possible 
considerations that a translator might take into 
account when deciding which tool to use. 
One critical factor that comes into play when 
choosing which tool to use is the nature of the job 
itself. Not all translation jobs are equal, and they 
will not necessarily all benefit from the same 
technology. Part of the frustration experienced by 
some translators using translation tools may result 
from them applying the tool in an inappropriate 
situation. Sometimes it may be the client who 
insists that a particular tool be used without really 
understanding that it may not be suitable, whereas 
in other cases, it may be the translator who is not 
aware that another more appropriate tool exists. 
Another consideration might be the size of the 
job. In many cases, a translation job amounts to 
just a few thousand words, which typically comes 
with a short deadline. And since each job is 
different, it may not be possible to use any tool 
without making some adaptation to either the tool 
or the corpus it will be used to process. As pointed 
out by B?dard (1995:28), by the time the tool is 
made operational, the deadline may be fast 
approaching and the cost of getting the tool to 
work may have exceeded the value of the job. As 
noted in section 4.1, TMs typically require more in 
terms of a learning curve and data preparation than 
do BCs, so it may be that while a TM could 
provide a good return on investment for a large 
job, a BC might be a better choice for a small job. 
Text type is also an important factor to consider. 
There are certain types of texts and writing styles 
that are highly conducive to being processed with a 
TM. In particular, texts that are a revision of a 
previous document (e.g. an updated version of a 
user manual, a re-negotiated collective agreement), 
are good candidates for translation with a TM 
because they will contain many repetitions at the 
sentence (or even paragraph) level. Another good 
candidate for use with a TM is a text where the 
repetitive sentences are varied (i.e., many 
sentences with few occurrences of each) and 
scattered throughout the document. However, such 
documents are not the only type that translators 
work with. Many translators are faced with texts 
that contain repetition primarily at the sub-sentence 
level. In such a case, since the manual searches 
initiated by the translator using a BC may be more 
flexible and productive than the auto-concordance 
search in a TM, a BC may be preferable. 
The choice may also be motivated by whether 
the work is being done for a regular client or for a 
new client. If a translator works regularly for a 
particular client and has a corpus consisting 
exclusively or primarily of similar types of texts 
translated for that client, it may be reasonable to 
use a TM since presumably the ?sentence salad? 
effect will be lessened by the fact that the 
documents will all contain similar terminological 
and stylistic preferences. In contrast, if the job is 
for a new client and the corpus does not contain 
previous work done for that client, perhaps a BC 
would be a better choice since the translator could 
consult it merely for inspiration without feeling 
constrained by choices made previously to suit 
other clients or text types. 
The decision of whether to use a TM or a BC 
may also depend on the translator?s preferred 
working style. Just as some drivers prefer driving a 
car with a manual transmission over one with an 
automatic transmission, some translators may 
favour a system that does a greater degree of 
automatic text processing (e.g. TM), while others 
may opt for one that does less (e.g. BC). 
Another relevant issue may be the amount of 
experience the translator has. A translator who is 
very experienced may prefer the flexibility offered 
by a BC, which allows him to look up only those 
expressions for which he needs help. In contrast, a 
translator who is just embarking on his career may 
value the fact that a TM automatically makes 
suggestions for all types of text strings. 
A final factor that may come into play could be 
cost. A single licence for a BC typically costs less 
than $200 (US), whereas a single licence for a 
limited version6 of a TM retails for closer to $1000 
(US). It is true that there are usually additional 
features present with TM software (e.g. a 
termbase), and if these features will be used, then 
the additional cost may be worthwhile. However, if 
a translator intends to use mainly the 
concordancing feature of a tool, then it may be 
preferable to purchase a more modestly priced BC. 
References  
J. Allen. 2003. Post-editing. In ?Computers and 
Translation: a Translator?s Guide?, H. Somers, 
ed., pages 297-317, John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 
C. Arrouart and C. B?dard. 2001. ?loge du bitexte. 
Circuit 73:30. 
F. Austerm?hl. 2001. Electronic Tools for 
Translators. St. Jerome Publishing, Manchester. 
M. Barlow. 2000. Parallel Texts in Language 
Teaching. In ?Multilingual Corpora in Teaching 
and Research?, S. Botley, T. McEnery & A. 
Wilson, ed., pages 106-115, Rodopi, Amsterdam 
C. B?dard. 1995.L?automatisation: faut-il y croire 
? Circuit 48:28. 
C. B?dard. 1998. Ce qu?il faut savoir sur les 
m?moires de traduction. Circuit 60:25. 
C. B?dard. 2000. M?moire de traduction cherche 
traducteur de phrases? Traduire 186. 
S. Bernardini. 2002. Educating Translators for the 
Challenges of the New Millenium: The Potential 
of Parallel Bi-directional Corpora. In ?Training 
the Language Services Provider for the New 
Millenium?, B. Maia, J. Haller & M. Ulrych, ed., 
pages 173-186, Faculdade de Letras da 
Universidade do Porto. 
L. Bowker. 2002. Computer-Assisted Translation 
Technology: A Practical Introduction. 
University of Ottawa Press, Ottawa. 
J. DeCesaris. 1996. Computerized Translation 
Managers as Teaching Aids. In ?Teaching 
Translation and Interpreting 3: New Horizons?, 
C. Dollerup & V. Appel, ed., pages 263-269, 
John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 
O. Evans. 2002. ATIO Offers Members 
Professional Development on Concordancing 
Tools. Newsletter of the Association of 
Translators and Interpreters of Ontario 31(2):7. 
W.A. Gale and K.W. Church. 1993. A program for 
aligning sentences in bilingual corpora. 
Computational Linguistics 19:75-102. 
                                                     
6 ?Freelance? or ?lite? versions may restrict database 
or termbase size or may lack network capabilities. 
?Professional? versions may cost several $1000 (US). 
S. Hansen and E. Teich. 2002. The Creation and 
Exploitation of a Translation Reference Corpus. 
In ?Proceedings of the Workshop on Language 
Resources in Translation Work and Research?, 
E. Yuste-Rodrigo, ed., pages 1-4. European 
Language Resources Association (ELRA), Paris. 
M. Heyn. 1998. Translation Memories: Insights 
and Prospects. In ?Unity in Diversity? Current 
Trends in Translation Studies?, L. Bowker, M. 
Cronin, D. Kenny & J. Pearson, ed., pages 123-
136, St. Jerome Publishing, Manchester. 
T. Johns. 1986. Microconcord: A Language 
Learner?s Research Tool. System 14(2):151-162. 
D. Kenny. 1999. CAT Tools in an Academic 
Environment. Target 11 (1):65-82. 
F. Lanct?t. 2001. Splendeurs et petites mis?res? 
des m?moires de traduction. Circuit 72: 30. 
M.-C. L?Homme. 1999. Initiation ? la traductique. 
Linguatech, Brossard, Quebec. 
M. Merkel. 1998. Consistency and Variation in 
Technical Translation: A Study of Translators? 
Attitudes. In ?Unity in Diversity? Current Trends 
in Translation Studies?, L. Bowker, M. Cronin, 
D. Kenny & J. Pearson, ed., pages 137-149, St. 
Jerome Publishing, Manchester. 
D. Mindt. 1986. Corpus, Grammar and Teaching 
English as a Foreign Language. In ?The English 
Reference Grammar: Language and Linguistics, 
Writers and Readers?, G. Leitner, ed., pages 125-
139, Niemeyer, T?bingen. 
G. Palumbo. 2002. The Use of Phraseology for 
Training and Research in the Translation of LSP 
Texts. In ?Training the Language Services 
Provider for the New Millenium?, B. Maia, J. 
Haller & M. Ulrych, ed., pages 199-212, 
Faculdade de Letras da Universidade do Porto. 
J. Pearson. 2000. Une tentative d?exploitation bi-
directionnelle d?un corpus bilingue. Cahiers de 
Grammaire 25:53-69. 
D. Shadbolt. 2002. The Translation Industry in 
Canada. Multilingual Computing and Technology 
13(2):30-34. 
R.C. Sprung. 2000. Introduction. In ?Translating 
into Success: Cutting-edge strategies for going 
multilingual in a global age?, R.C. Sprung, ed., 
pages ix-xxii, John Benjamins, Amsterdam.  
S.E.O. Tagnin. 2002. Corpora and the Innocent 
Translator: How Can They Help Him? In 
?Translation and Meaning, Part 6?, B. 
Lewandowska-Tomaszczyk & M. Thelen, ed., 
pages 489-496, Hogeschool Zuyd, Maastricht. 
F. Zanettin. 1998. Bilingual Comparable Corpora 
and the Training of Translators. Meta 43(4):616-
630. 
