Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 232?239,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Learning Pronunciation Dictionaries
Language Complexity and Word Selection Strategies
John Kominek Alan W Black
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
{jkominek,awb}@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
The  speed  with  which  pronunciation  dictio-
naries can be bootstrapped depends on the ef-
ficiency of learning algorithms and on the or-
dering of words presented to the user. This pa-
per presents an active-learning word selection
strategy that is mindful of human limitations.
Learning rates approach that of an oracle sys-
tem that knows the final LTS rule set. 
1 Introduction
The  construction  of  speech-to-speech  translation
systems is difficult, complex, and prohibitively ex-
pensive for all but handful of major languages. De-
veloping  systems  for  new  languages  is  a  highly
skilled job requiring considerable effort, as is the
process of training people to acquire the necessary
technical knowledge. 
Ideally, a native speaker of a (minor) language ?
with the right tools ? should be able to develop a
speech  system with  little  or  no technical  knowl-
edge  of  speech  recognition,  machine  translation,
dialog management, or speech synthesis. Rapid de-
velopment of machine translation, for example, is
the goal  of  (Lavie  et  al.,  2003).  Similarly,  com-
bined  development  of  speech  recognition  and
speech synthesis is the stated goal of (Engelbrecht
and Schultz, 2005). 
Here  we  concentrate  on  lexicon  creation  for
synthesis and recognition tasks, with the affiliated
problem  of  letter-to-sound  rule  inference.  Two
central  questions of dictionary  building are: what
letter-to-sound rule representation lends itself well
to incremental learning? ? and which words should
be presented to the user,  in what order? 
In this paper we investigate various approaches
to the word ordering problem, including an active
learning algorithm. An ?active learner? is a class
of machine learning algorithms that choose the or-
der  in  which  it  is  exposed  to  training  examples
(Auer,  2000).  This is valuable when there isn't a
pre-existing set of training data and when the cost
of  acquiring such data is high. When humans are
adding dictionary entries the time and accuracy de-
pends on the selected word (short words are easier
than long; familiar are easier than unfamiliar), and
on how quickly the learner's error rate drops (long
words  are  more  informative  than  short).  Also,
mindful  that  no  answer  key  exists  for  new lan-
guages ? and that humans easily become impatient
? we would like to know when a language's letter
to sound rule system is, say, 90% complete. This
turns out to be surprising elusive to pin down.
The next section outlines our working assump-
tions and issues we seek to address. Section 3 de-
scribes our LTS learning framework, an elabora-
tion  of (Davel and Barnard,  2003).  The learning
behavior on multiple test languages is documented
in Section 4, followed in Section 5 by a compari-
son of several word selection strategies.
2 Assumptions and Issues
In  designing  language  technology  development
tools we find it helpful to envision our target user,
whom may  be  characterized  as  ?non-technical.?
Such a person speaks, reads, and writes the target
language, is able to enumerate the character set of
that  language,  distinguish  punctuation  from
whitespace,  numerals,  and  regular  letters  or
graphemes,  and  specify  if  the  language  distin-
guishes upper and lower casing.  When presented
232
with the pronunciation of a word (as a synthesized
wavefile),  the user can say whether it  is  right or
wrong. In addition, such a person has basic com-
puter fluency, can record sound files, and can navi-
gate the  HTML interface of our software tools. If
these latter requirements present a barrier then we
assume the  availability of a field agent to config-
ure the computer, familiarize the user, plus trans-
late the English instructions, if necessary.
Ideally, our  target  user  need not  have explicit
knowledge of their  own language's phoneme set,
nor even be aware that a word can be transcribed
as a sequence of phonemes (differently from let-
ters).  The ability to reliably discover a workable
phoneme set from an unlabeled corpus of speech
is not yet at hand, however. Instead we elicit a lan-
guage's phoneme set during an initialization stage
by presenting examples  of  IPA wavefiles  (Wells
and House, 1995). 
Currently, pronunciations are spelled out using
a romanized phonetic alphabet. Following the rec-
ommendation of (Davel and Barnard, 2005) a can-
didate pronunciation is accompanied with a wave-
file generated from a phoneme-concatenation syn-
thesizer. Where possible, more than one pronunci-
ation is generated for each word presented, under
that assumption that it is easier for a listener to se-
lect from among a small  number of choices than
correct a wrong prediction.
2.1 Four Questions to Address
1. What  is  our  measure  of  success? Ultimately,
the time to build a lexicon of a certain coverage
and correctness. As a proxy for time we use the
number of characters presented. (Not words, as
is typically the case, since long words contain
more information than short, and yet are harder
for a human to verify.)
2. For  a  given  language,  how many words  (let-
ters) are needed to learn its LTS rule system?
The true,  yet not too useful  answer  is  ?it  de-
pends.?   The  complexity  of  the  relation  be-
tween  graphemic  representation  and  acoustic
realization varies greatly across languages. That
being the case, we seek a useful measure of a
language's degree of  complexity.
3. Can the asymptote  of the LTS system be esti-
mated,  so  that  one  can  determine  when  the
learned rules are 90 or 95% complete? In Sec-
tion 4 we present evidence that this may not be
possible.  The  fall-back position  is  percentage
coverage of the supplied corpus.
4. Which words should be presented to the user,
and  in  what  order? Each  additional  word
should maximize the marginal information gain
to the system. However, short words are easier
for humans to contend with than long. Thus a
length-based weighting needs to be considered.
3 LTS Algorithm Basics 
A wide variety of approaches have been applied to
the problem of letter-to-sound rule induction. Due
to simplicity of representation and ease of manipu-
lation, our LTS rule learner follows the Default &
Refine  algorithm  of  Davel  (Davel  and  Barnard,
2004). In this framework, each letter  c is assigned
a default production p1-p2... denoting the sequence
of zero or  more phonemes most  often associated
with that letter. Any exceptions to a letter's default
rule is explained in terms of the surrounding con-
text  of  letters.  The  default  rules  have  a  context
width of one (the letter itself), while each addition-
al letter increases the width of the context window.
For example, if we are considering the first occur-
rence of  's'  in  the  word  basics, the  context  win-
dows are as listed in Table 1. By convention, the
underscore  character  denotes  the  predicted  posi-
tion, while the hash represents word termination.
width context sets ordered by increasing width
1 {_}
2 {a_ , _i}
3 {ba_ , a_i , _ic}
4 (#ba_ , ba_i , a_ic , _ics}
5 {#ba_i , ba_ic , a_ics , _ics#}
6 {#ba_ic , ba_ics , a_ics#}
7 {#ba_ics , ba_ics#}
8 {#ba_ics#}
Table 1. Letter contexts for the first 's' in basics.
In this position there are 20 possible explanatory
contexts. The order in which they are visited de-
fines an algorithm's search strategy. In the class of
algorithms knows as ?dynamically expanding con-
text (DEC)?, contexts are considered top-down as
depicted in Table 1. Within one row, some algo-
rithms follow a fixed order (e.g. center, left, right).
Another variant tallies the instances of productions
233
associated  with  a  candidate  context  and  chooses
the  one  with  the  largest  count.  For  example,  in
Spanish the letter 'c' may generate K (65%), or TH
when followed by e or i (32%), or CH when fol-
lowed by h (3%). These are organized by frequen-
cy into a ?rule chain.?
Rule rank RHS Context Frequency
1 K _ 65.1%
2 TH _i 23.6%
3 TH _e 8.5%
4 CH _h 2.8%
If desired,  rules  2 and 3 in  this  example  can be
condensed into 'c' ? TH /_{i,e}, but in general are
left separated for sake of simplicity.
In our variant, before adding a new rule all pos-
sible contexts  of all  lengths are considered when
selecting the best one. Thus the rule chains do not
obey a strict order of expanding windows, though
shorter  contexts generally  precede longer ones in
the rule chains.
One  limitation  of  our  representation is  that  it
does not support gaps in the letter context. Consid-
er  the  word  pairs  tom/tome,  top/tope,  tot/tote.  A
CART tree can represent this pattern with the rule:
if (c-1 = 't' and c0='o' and c2='e') then ph=OW. In prac-
tice, the inability to skip letters is not a handicap. 
3.1 Multiple Pronunciation Predictions
Given a word, finding the predicted pronunciation
is easy. Rule chains are indexed by the letter to be
predicted, and possible contexts are scanned start-
ing from the most specific until a match is found.
Continuing  our  example,  the  first  letter  in  the
Spanish word ciento fails rule 4, fails rule 3, then
matches rule 2 to yield TH. For additional pronun-
ciations the search continues until another match is
found: here, the default rule 'c' ? K /_. This proce-
dure  is  akin  to  predicting  from  progressively
smoother models. In a complex language such as
English,  a  ten  letter  word  can  readily  generate
dozens  of  alternate  pronunciations,  necessitating
an ordering policy to keep the total manageable.
4 Language Characterization
English is notorious for having a highly irregular
spelling  system.  Conversely,  Spanish  is  admired
for its simplicity. Most others lie somewhere in be-
tween.  To estimate  how many words  need to  be
seen in order  to acquire 90% coverage of a lan-
guage's LTS rules, it helps to have a quantitative
measure.  In  this  section  we  offer  a  perplexity-
based measure of LTS regularity and present mea-
surements of several  languages with varying cor-
pus  size.  These  measurements  establish,  surpris-
ingly,  that  a  rule  system's  perplexity  increases
without bound as the number of training words in-
creases.  This  holds  true  whether  the  language is
simple  or  complex.  In  response,  we  resort  to  a
heuristic  measure  for  positioning languages  on a
scale of relative difficulty.
4.1 A Test Suite of Seven Languages
Our test suite consists of pronunciation dictionar-
ies from seven languages, with English considered
under two manifestations.
English.  Version  0.6d of  CMU-DICT,  consid-
ered without stress (39 phones) and with two level
stress marking (58 phones).  German. The Celex
dictionary of 321k entries (Burnage, 1990). Dutch.
The  Fonilex  dictionary  of  218k entries  (Mertens
and  Vercammen,  1998).  Fonilex  defines  an  ab-
stract  phonological  level  from which  specific di-
alects  are specified.  We tested on the ?standard?
dialect. Afrikaans. A 37k dictionary developed lo-
cally. Afrikaans is a language of South Africa and
is  a  recent  derivative  of  Dutch.  Italian.  A 410k
dictionary  distributed  as  part  of  a  free  Festival-
based  Italian  synthesizer  (Cosi,  2000).  Spanish.
Generated by applying a set of hand written rules
to a 52k lexicon. The LTS rules are a part of the
standard Festival Spanish distribution. Telugu. An
8k locally  developed dictionary.  In its  native or-
thography, this language of India possess a highly
regular  syllabic  writing system. We've adopted  a
version  of  the  Itrans-3  transliteration  scheme
(Kishore 2003) in which sequences of two to four
English letters map onto Telugu phonemes.
4.2 Perplexity as a Measure of Difficulty
A useful  way of considering letter  to sound pro-
duction is as a Markov process in which the gener-
ator passes through a sequence of  states (letters),
each  probabilistically  emitting  observation  sym-
bols  (phonemes)  before  transitioning  to  the  next
state  (following letter).  For a letter  c,  the unpre-
dictability  of  phoneme  emission  is  its  entropy
H ?c?=?? ? pi log pi? or equivalently its perplexity
P ?c?=eH ?c? . The perplexity can be interpreted as
234
the average number of  output  symbols  generated
by a letter. The production perplexity of the char-
acter set is the sum of each individual letter's per-
plexity weighted by its unigram probability pc.
   (1)
Continuing with our Spanish example, the letter 'c'
emits the observation symbols (K, TH, CH) with a
probability distribution of (.651, .321, .028), for a
perplexity  of  2.105.  This  computation applies
when each letter is assigned a single probabilistic
state. The process of LTS rule discovery effective-
ly splits the state 'c' into four context-defined sub-
states:  (-,c,-),  (-,c,i),  (-,c,e),  (-,c,h).  Each of these
states emits only a single symbol. Rule addition is
therefore an entropy reduction process;  when the
rule set is complete the letter-to-sound system has
a perplexity of 1, i.e. it is perfectly predictable.
The ?price paid? for perfect  predictability is a
complex set of rule chains. To measure rule com-
plexity we again associate a single state with each
letter. But, instead of phonemes, the  rules  are the
emission  symbols.  Thus  the  letter  'c'  emits  the
symbols (K/_, TH/_i, TH/_e, CH/_h) with a distri-
bution of (.651, .236, .085, .028), for a perplexity
of 2.534. Applying equation (1) to the full set of
rules defines the LTS system's average perplexity. 
4.3 Empirical Measurements
In  the  Default  & Refine  representation,  the  rule
chain for each letter is is initialized with its most
probably  production.  Additional  context-depen-
dent rules are appended to cover additional letter
productions, with the rule offering the greatest in-
cremental  coverage  being  added  first.  (Ties  are
broken in an implementation-dependent way.)
Figure 1 uses Spanish to illustrate a characteris-
tic  pattern:  the  increase  in  coverage as  rules  are
added one at  a time. Since the figure of merit  is
letter-based, the upper curve (% letters correct) in-
creases monotonically, while the middle curve (%
words correct) can plateau or decrease briefly. 
In the lower curve of Figure 1 the growth proce-
dure is constrained such that all width 1 rules are
added before width 2 rules, which in turn must be
exhausted  before  width  3  rules  are  considered.
This  constraint  leads  to  its  distinctive  scalloped
shape. The upper limit of the W=1 region shows
the performance of the unaided default rules (68%
words correct).
Figure 1. Coverage of Spanish (52k corpus) as a
function of rule size. For the lower curve, W indi-
cates the rule context window width. The middle
(blue) curve tracks near-optimal performance im-
provement with the introduction of new rules.
For more complex languages the majority of rules
have a context width in the range of 3 to 6. This is
seen in Figure 2 for English, Dutch, Afrikaans, and
Italian. However, a larger rule set does not mean
that the average context width is greater. In Table
2, below, compare Italian to Dutch.
Language Number of Rules Average Width
English 40k  19231 5.06
Dutch 40k  10071 4.35
Afrikaans 37k  5993 4.66
Italian 40k  3385 4.78
Spanish 52k  76 1.66
Table 2.  Number of LTS rules for five language
and their average context width.
Figure  2.  Distribution  of  LTS  rules  by  context
window width for four languages: English, Dutch,
Afrikaans, and Italian.
Perave=?
c
pc e
??
i
pi log pi
Window Width
2 4 6 8 10
Nu
mb
er
 of
 R
ule
s
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000 LTS Rule Count vs Window Width
Legend
English 40k
Dutch 40k
Afrikaans 37k
Italian 40k
Legend
Chars Correct
Words Correct
Words Correct
Number of Rules
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Pe
rce
nt
 C
or
re
ct
0
20
40
60
80
100 Spanish LTS Ruleset Performance
W=3W=2W=1
235
Beyond a window width of 7, rule growth tapers
off  considerably.  In  this  region  most  new  rules
serve  to  identify  particular  words  of  irregular
spelling, as it is uncommon for long rules to gener-
alize beyond a single instance. Thus when training
a  smoothed  LTS rule  system it  is  fair  to  ignore
contexts larger than 7, as is done for example in
the Festival synthesis system (Black, 1998).
Figure 2 contrasts four languages with training
data of around 40k words, but says nothing of how
rule sets grow as the corpus size increases. Figure
3 summarizes measurements taken on eight encod-
ings of seven languages (English twice, with and
without stress marking), tested from a range of 100
words  to  over  100,000.  Words  were  subsampled
from each alphabetized lexicon at equal spacings.
The results are interesting, and for us, unexpected.
Figure 3. Rule system growth as the corpus size is
increased,  for  seven languages.  From top to bot-
tom:  English  (twice),  Dutch,  German,  Afrikaans,
Italian, Telugu, Spanish. The Telugu lexicon uses
an Itrans-3 encoding into roman characters, not the
native  script,  which  is  a  nearly  perfect  syllabic
transcription. The context window has a maximum
width of 9 in these experiments.
Within  this  experimental  range  none  of  the  lan-
guages  reach  an  asymptotic  limit,  though  some
hint  at  slowed  growth  near  the  upper  end.  A
straight line on a log-log graph is characteristic of
geometric growth, to which a power law function
y=axb+c is an appropriate parametric fit. For diffi-
cult  languages the growth rates  (power  exponent
b) vary between 0.5 and 0.9, as summarized in Ta-
ble 3. The language with the fastest growth is En-
glish, followed, not by Dutch, but Italian. Italian is
nonetheless the simpler of these two, as indicated
by the smaller multiplicative factor a.
Language a b
English (stressed) 2.97 0.88
English (plain)  3.27 0.85
Dutch  12.6 0.64
German  39.86 0.49
  Afrikaans  15.34 0.57
Italian  2.16 0.69
Table 3. Parameters a and b for the power law fit
y=axb+c to the growth of LTS system size. 
It would be good if a tight ceiling could be estimat-
ed from partial data in order to know (and report to
the lexicon builder) that  with  n rules defined the
system is m percent complete. However, this trend
of  geometric  growth  suggests  that  asking  ?how
many letter-to-sound rules does a given  language
have?? is an ill-posed question. 
In light of this, two questions are worth asking.
First, is the geometric trend particular to our rule
representation?  And  second,  is  ?total  number  of
rules?  the  right  measure  of  LTS complexity?  To
answer the first  question we repeated the experi-
ments with the  CART tree builder available from
the Festival  speech  synthesis  toolkit.  As it  turns
out  ?  see  Table  4  ?  a  comparison  of  contextual
rules and node counts for Italian  demonstrate that
a CART tree representation also exhibits geometric
growth with respect to lexicon size.
Num Words
in Lexicon
Contextual
LTS Rules
CART Tree
Nodes
100 80 145
250 131 272
500 198 399
1000 283 601
2500 506 1169
5000 821 1888
10,000 1306 2840
20,000 2109 4642
40,000 3385 7582
80,000 5524 13206
Table 4. A comparison of rule system growth for
Italian as the corpus size is increased. CART tree
nodes (i.e. questions) are the element comparable
to LTS rules used in letter context chains. The fit-
ted parameters to the  CART data are  a=2.29 and
b=0.765. This compares to  a=2.16 and b=0.69.
Num Words in Lexicon
100 1000 10000 100000
Nu
m 
LT
S 
Ru
les
100
1000
10000
LTS Rules vs. Lexicon Size
Legend
English (w/stress)
English (no stress)
Dutch 
German 
Afrikaans
Italian
Telugu (itrans-3)
Spanish
236
If geometric growth and lack of an obvious asymp-
tote  is  not  particular  to  expanding  context  rule
chains,  then  what  of  the  measure?  The  measure
proposed in Section 4.2 is average chain perplexi-
ty. The hypothesis is that a system close to satura-
tion will still add new rules, but that the average
perplexity levels off. Instead, the data shows little
sign of saturation (Figure 4). In contrast, the aver-
age  perplexity  of  the  letter-to-phoneme  distribu-
tions remains level with corpus size (Figure 5). 
Figure 4. Growth of average rule perplexity as a
function  of lexicon size.  Except  for  Spanish and
Telugu,  the  average  rule  system  perplexity  not
only grows, but grows at an accelerating rate. 
Figure  5.  Growth  of  average  letter-to-phoneme
production perplexity as a function of lexicon size.
Considering  these  observations  we've resorted  to
the following heuristic to measure language com-
plexity: a) fix the window width to 5, b) measure
the average rule perplexity at lexicon sizes of 10k,
20k,  and  40k,  then  c)  take  the  average  of  these
three  values.  Fixing  the  window  width  to  5  is
somewhat arbitrary, but is intended to prevent the
system from learning an unbounded suite of excep-
tions. Available values are contained in Table 5.
Language Ave Letter
Perplexity
Heuristic
Perplexity
Perplexity
Ratio
English 3.25 50.11 15.42
Dutch  2.73 16.80 6.15
German  2.41 16.70 6.93
Afrikaans  2.32 11.48 8.32
Italian  1.38 3.52 2.55
Spanish  1.16 1.21 1.04
 Table 5.  Perplexity measures  for  six languages.
The  third  (rightmost)  column is  the  ratio  of  the
second divided by the first.  A purely phonetic sys-
tem has a heuristic perplexity of one.
From these measurements we conclude, for exam-
ple, that Dutch and German are equally difficult,
that English is 3 times more complex than either of
these, and that English is 40 times more complex
than Spanish.
5 Word Selection Strategies
A selection strategy is  a method for choosing an
ordered  list  of  words  from a lexicon.  It  may be
based on an estimate of expected maximum return,
or be as simple as random selection. A good strate-
gy should enable rapid learning, avoid repetition,
be robust, and not overtax the human verifier. 
This  section  compares  competing  selection
strategies on a single lexicon. We've chosen a 10k
Italian lexicon as a problem of intermediate diffi-
culty, and focus on early stage learning. To pro-
vide a useful frame of reference, Figure 6 shows
the results of running 5000 experiments in which
the word sequence has been chosen randomly. The
x-axis is number of letters examined.
Figure 6. Random sampling of Italian 10k corpus.
Legend
English (w/stress)
English (no stress)
Dutch 
German 
Afrikaans
Italian
Telugu
Spanish
Num Words in Lexicon
100 1000 10000 100000
LT
S 
Ru
le 
Pe
rp
lex
ity
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0 LTS Rule Perplexity vs Lexicon Size
Legend
English (no stress)
Dutch 
German 
Afrikaans
Italian
Telugu (itrans)
Spanish
37k4k
170k1k
Ave Productions per Letter
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Av
e P
ro
du
cti
on
 Pe
rp
lex
ity
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0 Letter to Phoneme Perplexity
Spanish
Iraqi
Phonetic alphabet
1k 40k
80k
Telugu
Italian
Num Letters Examined
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
Wo
rd
s C
or
re
ct 
(%
)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80 Word Accuracy, Random SelectionItalian, 10k dict, maxwin=5
237
Figure 7 compares average random performance to
four deterministic strategies.  They are:  alphabeti-
cal word ordering, reverse alphabetical, alphabeti-
cal sorted by word length (groups of single charac-
ter  words first,  followed by two character  words,
etc.), and a greedy ngram search. Of the first three,
reverse alphabetical performs best because it intro-
duces  a  greater  variety  of  ngrams  more  quickly
than the others. Yet, all of these three are substan-
tially  worse  than  random.  Notice  that  grouping
words  from short  to  long degrades  performance.
This implies that strategies tuned to the needs of
humans will incur a machine learning penalty.
Figure 7. Comparison of three simple word order-
ings  to  the  average  random  curve,  as  well  as
greedy ngram search. 
It might be expected that selecting words contain-
ing the most popular ngrams first  would out-per-
forms random, but as is seen in Figure 7, greedy
selection  closely  tracks  the  random  curve.  This
leads  us to investigate  active  leaning algorithms,
which we treat as variants of ngram selection. 
5.1 Algorithm Description
Let W = {w1,w2,...} be the lexicon word set, having A =
{'a', 'b',...} as the alphabet of letters. We seek an ordered
list V = (... wi ...) s.t. score(wi) ? score (wi+1). V is initial-
ly empty and is extended one word at a time with wb, the
?best? new word. Let g=c1c2...cn ` A* be an ngram of
length n, and Gw={gi}, gi ` w are all the ngrams found in
word w. Then GW =  5 Gw,  w  `  W, is  the set  of  all
ngrams in the lexicon W, and GV = 5 Gw, w ` Vis the set
of all ngrams in the selected word list V. The number of
occurrences of g in W is score(g), while score(w) =  ?
score(g) st.  g  `  w and g  v GV. The scored ngrams are
segmented  into separately sorted  lists,  forming an  or-
dered list of queues Q = (q1,q2,...qN) where qn contains
ngram of length n and only n. 
Algorithm
for q in Q
g = pop(q)
for L = 1 to |longest word in W|
Wg,L = {wi} s.t. |wi| = L, g ` wi and wi v V
wb = argmax score(Wg,L)
if score (wb) > 0 then
V = V + wb
GV = GV 4 Gwb
return wb
In this search the outer loop orders ngrams by length,
while the inner loop orders words by length. For selec-
tion based on ngram coverage, the queue Q is computed
only once for the given lexicon W. In our active learner,
Q is re-evaluated after each word is selected, based on
the ngrams present in the current LTS rule contexts. Let
GLTS = {gi} s.t. gi ` some letter context in the LTS rules.
Initially GLTS,0 = {}. Then, at any iteration k, GLTS,k are
the ngrams present in the rules, and G'LTS,k+1 is an ex-
panded set of candidate ngrams that constitute the ele-
ments of Q. G' is formed by prepending each letter c of
A to each g in G, plus appending each c to g. That is,
G'LTS,k+1 = A%GLTS,k 4 GLTS,k%A where % is the Cartesian
product. Executing the algorithm returns wb and yields
GLTS,k+1 the set of ngrams covered by the expanded rule
set.  In  this  way knowledge  of  the  current  LTS  rules
guides the search for maximally informative new words.
5.2 Active Learner Performance
Figure  8  displays  the  performance  of  our  active
learner  on  the  Italian  10k corpus,  shown  as  the
blue  curve.  For  the  first  500  characters  encoun-
tered,  the  active  learner's  performance  is  almost
everywhere better  than average random, typically
one half to one standard deviation above this refer-
ence level.
Two  other  references  are  shown.  Immediately
above the active learner curve is ?Oracle? word se-
lection. The Oracle has access to the final LTS sys-
tem  and  selects  words  that  maximally  increases
coverage of the known rules. The topmost curve is
for  a  ?Perfect  Oracle.?  This  represents  an  even
more unrealistic  situation in which each letter  of
each  word  carries  with  it  information  about  the
corresponding production rule.  For example,  that
'g' yields /F/ 10% of the time, when followed by
the letter 'h' (as in ?laugh?) . Carrying complete in-
formation with each letter allows the  LTS system
to be constructed directly and without mistake. In
contrast,  the  non-perfect  oracle  makes  mistakes
sequencing rules  in each  letter's  rule  chain.  This
decreases performance.
Italian, 10k dict, maxwin=5
Num Letters Examined
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
W
or
ds
 C
or
re
ct 
(%
)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80 Word Accuracy, Simple Strategies
Legend
Average random
n-gram coverage
Reverse alphabetic
Alphabetic order
Length, alpha order
238
Figure 8. From top to bottom: a perfect Oracle, a
word selection Oracle, our active learner, and av-
erage random performance. The perfect Oracle de-
marcates  (impossibly  high)  optimal  performance,
while  Oracle  word  selection  suggests  near-opti-
mality.  For  comparison,  standard  deviation  error
bars are added to the random curve. 
Encouragingly, the active learning algorithm strad-
dles  the  range  in  between  average  random  (the
baseline) and Oracle word selection (near-optimal-
ity). Less favorable is the non-monotonicity of the
performance curve; for example, when the number
of  letters  examined  is  135,  and  210.  Analysis
shows that these drops occur when a new letter-to-
sound  production  is  encountered  but  more  than
one  context  offers  an  equally  likely  explanation.
Faced  with  a  tie,  the  LTS  learner  sometimes
chooses incorrectly. Not being aware of this mis-
take  it  does  not  seek  out  correcting  words.  Flat
plateaus occur when  additional words (containing
the next most popular ngrams) do not contain pre-
viously unseen letter-to-sound productions. 
6 Conclusions
While this work does not definitively answer the
question of ?how may words to learn the rules,?
we  have  developed  ways  of  characterizing  lan-
guage  complexity,  which  can  guide  developers.
We've devised a word selection  strategy that  ap-
pears to perform better than the (surprisingly high)
standard  set  by  randomly  selection.  Further  im-
provements  are  possible  by incorporating knowl-
edge of  word  alignment  and rule  sequencing  er-
rors.  By  design,  our  strategy  is  biased  towards
short words over long, thereby being ?nice? to lex-
icon developers ? our original objective. 
Acknowledgments 
This material is in part based upon work supported by
the  National  Science Foundation  under  Grant  No.
0415201. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Science Foundation.
References 
Peter  Auer, 2000.  Using upper confidence bounds for
online learning. Proceedings of the 41st Annual Sym-
posium on Foundations of Computer Science, pp.
Alan W Black, Kevin Lenzo, and Vincent Pagel, 1998.
Issues in Building General Letter to Sound Rules. 3rd
ESCA Workshop on Speech Synthesis, Australia.
Gavin Burnage, 1990. CELEX ? A Guide for Users. Hi-
jmegen: Centre for Lexical Information, University of
Nijmegen.
Piero Cosi,  Roberto Gretter, Fabio Tesser, 2000.  Festi-
val  parla  italiano.  Proceedings of  GFS2000,  Gior-
nate del Gruppo di Fonetica Sperimentale, Padova.
Marelie Davel and Etienne Barnard,  2003.  Bootstrap-
ping in Language Resource Generation. Proceedings
of the 14th Symposium of the Pattern Recognition As-
sociation of South Africa, pp. 97-100.
Marelie Davel and Etienne Barnard,  2004.  A default-
and-refine  approach  to  pronunciation  prediction,
Proceedings of  the 15th  Symposium of the Pattern
Recognition Association of South Africa.
Marelie Davel and Etienne Barnard,  2005.  Bootstrap-
ping  Pronunciation  Dictionaries:  Practical  Issues.
Proceedings  of  the  9th International  Conference  on
Spoken Language Processing, Lisbon, Portugal.
Herman Engelbrecht,  Tanja  Schultz,  2005.  Rapid  De-
velopment of an Afrikaans-English Speech-to-Speech
Translator, International Workshop on  Spoken Lan-
guage Translation, Pittsburgh, PA. pp.169-176.
S P Kishore and Alan W Black, 2003. Unit Size in Unit
Selection Speech Synthesis. Proceedings of the 8th Eu-
ropean Conference on Spoken Language Processing,
Geneva, Switzerland.
Alon Lavie, et al 2003.  Experiments with a Hindi-to-
English Transfer-based MT System under a Miserly
Data  Scenario,  ACM Transactions  on  Asian  Lan-
guage Information Processing, 2(2).
Piet Mertens and Filip Vercammen, 1998. Fonilex Man-
ual, Technical Report, K. U. Leuven CCL.
John Wells  and Jill  House,  1995.  Sounds of  the IPA.
http://www.phon.ucl.ac.uk/shop/soundsipa.php.
Italian, 10k dict, maxwin=5
Legend
Perfect Oracle
Oracle word selection
Active learner
Averge random
Num Letters Examined
0 100 200 300 400 500
Wo
rd
s C
or
re
ct 
(%
)
0
20
40
60
80
100 Word Accuracy, Active Learner
239
Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1325?1336,
Seattle, Washington, USA, 18-21 October 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
This Text Has the Scent of Starbucks:
A Laplacian Structured Sparsity Model for
Computational Branding Analytics
William Yang Wang
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
ww@cmu.edu
Edward Lin and John Kominek
Voci Technologies, Inc.
Pittsburgh, PA 15217
{ed.lin,john.kominek}@vocitec.com
Abstract
We propose a Laplacian structured sparsity
model to study computational branding ana-
lytics. To do this, we collected customer re-
views from Starbucks, Dunkin? Donuts, and
other coffee shops across 38 major cities
in the Midwest and Northeastern regions of
USA. We study the brand related language
use through these reviews, with focuses on
the brand satisfaction and gender factors. In
particular, we perform three tasks: auto-
matic brand identification from raw text, joint
brand-satisfaction prediction, and joint brand-
gender-satisfaction prediction. This work ex-
tends previous studies in text classification by
incorporating the dependency and interaction
among local features in the form of structured
sparsity in a log-linear model. Our quantita-
tive evaluation shows that our approach which
combines the advantages of graphical model-
ing and sparsity modeling techniques signifi-
cantly outperforms various standard and state-
of-the-art text classification algorithms. In ad-
dition, qualitative analysis of our model re-
veals important features of the language uses
associated with the specific brands.
1 Introduction
In marketing science, branding is a modern market-
ing strategy of creating a unique image for a prod-
uct in the customers? mind. Establishing the brand
in the broad social context is just as important as
building a good product (Makens, 1965; Lederer
and Hill, 2001; Kim et al, 2013). In fact, blind
taste test experiments have frequently shown how
branding directly leads to the success of products
and companies. Most notably is a continued study
sponsored by Pepsi, known as the Pepsi Challenge1,
where Pepsi demonstrates how even though people
preferred the taste of Pepsi, Coca-Cola?s branding
has made it more popular. Even now, Microsoft
uses similar blind taste tests2 to compare search en-
gines, Bing and Google, showing that although par-
ticipants prefer Bing?s results, Google?s brand might
have strengthened over the years. These studies all
suggest that brand and its associations play impor-
tant roles in the customers? perceptions and deci-
sions.
To accommodate the market change, companies
frequently adjust branding strategies by analyzing
how their customers receive and respond to brand-
ing messages. So far, such analysis is often done
by using surveys and focus groups (Moon and
Quelch, 2006), which is expensive and not time-
efficient. Recently, with the advance of machine
learning techniques, researchers from the chemistry
and vision communities started to pay attention to
the problem of automatic brand identification from
smell (Luo et al, 2004) and images (Pelisson et al,
2003). In contrast, even though textual data that
contains hidden branding information is abundantly
available in many forms over the Web, automatic
discovery and computational analysis on such data
are not well studied in the past.
Computational branding analytics (CBA) seeks to
extract information, trends, and demographics about
a brand on the basis of free-form text, e.g. from
blogs, Twitter comments, reviews, or forum posts.
As described in Section 3, in this study we use a sub-
1http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pepsi Challenge
2http://www.bingiton.com/
1325
set of online Yelp reviews that discuss coffee shops.
The main reason is that this source has the advan-
tage of providing ground truth of multi-labeled data:
each review has meta-information defining a 5-star
rating, the object of the review, and the reviewer?s
name (from which we infer gender). For the pur-
pose of this paper we decompose CBA into three
sub-problems.
? How well can the brand being discussed be
identified by the raw text?
? How well can the joint value of brand and rat-
ing be predicted?
? How well can the joint value of brand, rating,
and gender be predicted?
There are two reasons why one may want to con-
struct text-based classifiers of brand, rating, and gen-
der, when such information is present in the review
header. The first is that trained classifiers can then be
applied to other data sources, such as blogs, where
what is available is only the review itself. The sec-
ond is that by ?opening the hood? to the classifier
one can examine which words exhibit high affilia-
tion with the predicted variables. This can be done,
for example, to contrast the preferences of males and
females with respect to evaluating the qualities of a
coffee shop. Examples of such insights are provided
in Section 5.5.
In this paper, we propose a Laplacian structured
sparsity model for computational branding analyt-
ics. Our main contributions are two-fold: first, in
the novel task of automatic brand identification from
text, we show that by incorporating the dependency
structure and graphical interactions among local
features, our model significantly outperforms vari-
ous text classification algorithms such as the stan-
dard logistic regression, principle component anal-
ysis (PCA), linear kernel support vector machine
(SVM), sparse, non-sparse, and mixed-penalty log-
linear models. These improvements could also be
seen from a joint brand-satisfaction prediction task
and a gender-specific joint brand-satisfaction predic-
tion task. In addition, our Laplacian augmented L1-
ball projection experiment shows that the advantage
of Laplacian structured sparsity is robust across dif-
ferent parameter settings in a L1-constrained prob-
lem. Secondly, the qualitative analysis of our ma-
chine learning model shows the interesting features
and language use that relate to brand and its associ-
ated pragmatics.
In the next section, we outline related work in
CBA, sparsity, and spectral graph learning. In Sec-
tion 3, we describe the corpus in this study. The
Laplacian structured sparsity model is introduced in
Section 4. The experimental setup and results are
presented in Section 5. A short discussion is fol-
lowed in Section 6 and we conclude in Section 7.
2 Related Work
Early work on statistical brand analysis in the
marketing community dates back to the work of
Kuehn (1962), where he first hypothesizes that
brand choice could be described as a learning pro-
cess. Guadagni and Little (1983) further empiri-
cally tested the hypothesis by building a calibrated
multinomial logistic regression model to predict the
purchase of ground coffee, using the data from the
optical scanning of product code in supermarkets.
Outside the marketing community, statistical brand
analysis is rarely seen. More recently, a study (Luo
et al, 2004) applies neural networks to identify
cigarette brands, with the hope of detecting illegal
cigarettes from smell features. In image process-
ing, researchers have studied the problem of brand
identification from image using histogram compar-
ison (Pelisson et al, 2003). However, to the best
of our knowledge, even though textual data is vastly
available, the problems of automatic brand identi-
fication from raw text and computational branding
analytics, are new.
Although the domain of our data is on branding,
our work also aligns with previous work in text and
language classification. Over the years, logistic re-
gression and linear kernel SVM have shown to be
very successful in various regression and classifi-
cation tasks in NLP (Chahuneau et al, 2012; Bi-
adsy et al, 2011). Recently, sparse discriminative
methods that model the sparse nature of text be-
come attractive, because unlike dense models, they
are less likely to overfit to the training data, easier
to interpret, and often lead to state-of-the-art results.
For example, Eisenstein et al (2011b) use the L1,?
sparsity model to discover sociolinguistic patterns.
Wang et al (2012a) compare lasso, ridge, and elas-
tic net models to predict impoliteness behaviors in
teenager conversations. Martins et al (2011) inves-
tigate the tree-structured overlapping group lasso for
1326
structured prediction problems. Chen et al (2013)
study the use of element-wise, group-wise, and hi-
erarchical sparsity models for dialogue act classif-
cation. Sparse inducing priors are also investigated
and shown to be effective in generative models for
topic modeling (Eisenstein et al, 2011a; Wang et
al., 2012b; Paul and Dredze, 2012).
Besides lacking sparsity, since the traditional dis-
criminative methods in NLP often use interdepen-
dent features such as n-grams tokens, and part-of-
speech tags, they also suffer from the problem of not
explicitly modeling the complex dependency struc-
ture and interaction of local features from a global
perspective. To solve this problem, graph meth-
ods seem to be a good solution, because they are
simple, generalizable, and are often used to model
such complex dependency structures (Cohen, 2012).
However, combining the sparse modeling and spec-
tral graphical modeling approaches in a principled
way is challenging. Belkin et al (2006) and Wein-
berger et al (2007) are among the first to investi-
gate graph Laplacians as a manifold regularization
method for statistical learning. Recently, Gao et
al. (2012) propose a histogram intersection based
kNN method to construct a Laplacian matrix for a
least-square sparse coding problem in image pro-
cessing. Unfortunately, this method might be too
specific to the SIFT-based image coding tasks, thus
might not be applicable to the text classification
problem that utilizes n-gram lexical features.
3 Datasets
We collected Yelp reviews from 1,860 Starbucks,
Dunkin? Donuts3, and other coffee shops all over
the Midwest and Northeast regions in the period of
2009. A detail statistics of our data can be found
in Table 1. The Midwest region includes 12 states4
and 19 major cities, and the Northeast region in-
cludes 9 states5 and 19 major cities. For each region,
we divide the coffee shops into 60% training, 20%
development, and 20% test, and there are no over-
laps of coffee shops among these subsets. There are
three values for the brand label: Starbucks, Dunkin?
Donuts, and all other coffee shop brands. The ma-
3We chose these two brands because they are reported as
the leading coffee shops by WSJ (Ovide, 2011) and Forbes (Di-
Carlo, 2004).
4IL, WI, SD, ND, MN, MO, OH, NE, KS, IA, IN, and MI.
5CT, ME, MA, NH, RI, VT, NJ, NY and PA.
Coffee Shops Reviews
Train Dev. Test Train Dev. Test
1 451 150 150 3,513 1,087 1,424
2 665 222 222 6,982 2,530 2,358
T. 1,116 372 372 10,495 3,617 3,782
Table 1: Dataset statistics. 1: midwest region. 2: north-
east region. T.: total.
jority class is ?all other coffee shop brands?, and
the majority baseline is shown in Table 2. In the
task of joint brand-satisfaction prediction, we utilize
the review scores to approximate user satisfaction:
scores 1-2 as the unsatisfactory label, 3 as moder-
ate, and 4-5 as satisfactory. Since the Yelp reviews
do not reveal the reviewer?s gender, we use a similar
method that U.S. Census Bureau used (OConnell
and Gooding, 2006): we first automatically match
the first name of the reviewer with the prior name-
gender distributions in the census records, then man-
ually examine the no-match cases and a subsample
of the matched cases. For those who we cannot
determine the gender, the review will be dropped
from the gender-specific brand-satisfaction predic-
tion task. After filtering, there are 8,528 documents
for training, 2,928 for development, and, 3,046 for
testing. Since the focus of this paper is not on fea-
ture engineering, we use unigram features to repre-
sent each review. Below is an example of positive
review from a male Starbucks customer from Mid-
west.
My favorite place for my iced vanilla lattes.
They have screwed up my order before: instead
of a grande, I got a venti. Not a fan of their
pastries though. I got a donut once, and ended
up feeding it to a pigeon in city garden. Friendly
and fast service. Not open Sundays.
The coffee shop dataset is freely available6 for re-
search purposes.
4 Our Approach
4.1 Problem Formulation and Predictive Tasks
The automatic brand identification problem could
be considered as a traditional multiclass classifica-
6http://www.cs.cmu.edu/?yww/data/emnlp2013.zip
1327
tion problem where the estimated label Y? could
be drawn from Mult(?), where ? is the parame-
ter for the multinomial distribution. To solve this,
a simple but accurate solution is to decompose the
multiclass problem into multiple binary classifica-
tion problems (Rifkin and Klautau, 2004) by train-
ing k one-vs-all binary classifiers, and then use the
argmax criteria to select the best hypothesis from the
k posteriors. As for a binary classifier, we need to
infer the posterior from a Bernoulli distribution that
is parametrized by ??y. Similarly, we can derive k
binary classifiers:
??(1)y , ??
(2)
y , ..., ??
(k)
y . (1)
So, instead of drawing Y? from a multinomial distri-
bution Mult(?), we can draw the final label Y? that
has the largest posterior across all k classifiers:
Y? = argmax
Y,i=1,2,...,k
Pr(Y |??(i)y , ~Xt) (2)
where ~Xt is the testing vector, and Pr(Y |??
(i)
y , ~Xt) is
the posterior probability given the learned classifiers
and the testing vector.
In this paper, we investigate three multiclass clas-
sification tasks: first, we perform a 3-way classi-
fication task for automatic brand identification. In
the task of brand-satisfaction prediction, we model
the brand and the satisfaction label at the same
time (Chahuneau et al, 2012): we perform the task
of jointly predicting aggregate brand-satisfaction
score for a review using 9-way classification. Sim-
ilarly, we perform 18-way classification for the
gender-specific joint brand-satisfaction prediction
task.
4.2 The Log-Linear Framework and Its
Regularized Variants
If we consider the standard logistic regression model
as the binary classifier in this log-linear framework7,
then each classifier can be written as:
??y =
exp
(
~W> ~Xj
)
1 + exp
(
~W> ~Xj
) (3)
here, ~Xj is the j-th observed feature vector, label
y ? {0, 1}, and ~W is a vector of the coefficients. To
7We thank Jacob Eisenstein for the initial derivation of the
logistic regression model.
estimate the model parameters in equation (3), we
only need to set the weights ~W . We can obtain the
following log likelihood, and its gradient function
by taking the first-order partial derivative of ~W :
` =
?
j
yj log ??yj + (1? yj) log(1? ??yj ) (4)
?`
? ~W
=
?
j
(
???yj
? ~W
)(
yj
??yj
?
1? yj
1? ??yj
)
(5)
???yj
? ~W
=
(
??yj ? (??yj )
2
)
~X, (6)
since the log likelihood objective function (4) is con-
cave, using standard gradient ascent with maximum
likelihood estimation can solve the problem. How-
ever, this model does not penalize the noisy features
and unreliable features that might overfit to the train-
ing data. To address this issue, we introduce the L1
norm from lasso technique (Tibshirani, 1996) to reg-
ularize the above likelihood function. Thus, instead
of maximizing the likelihood, we can minimize the
loss function of the negative log-likelihood with a
linear penalty:
min
(
? `+ ?1|| ~W ||
)
(7)
where ?1 is the regularization coefficient. The bene-
fit of L1 penalty in a discriminative model is sim-
ilar to the double exponential distribution of the
sparse priors in generative models (Eisenstein et al,
2011a): they both push the weights of many noisy
features into zeros, revealing only the important fea-
tures. However, since the L1 penalty can intro-
duce discontinuities to the original convex function,
we can also consider an alternative non-sparse ridge
estimator (Le Cessie and Van Houwelingen, 1992)
with log loss and L2 norm, and has the convex prop-
erty:
min
(
? `+ ?2|| ~W ||
2
)
(8)
Another option that balances the sparsity and
smoothness would be the elastic net model (Zou and
Hastie, 2005) that uses the composite penalty:
min
(
? `+ ?1|| ~W ||+ ?2|| ~W ||
2
)
(9)
4.3 The Laplacian Structured Sparsity Model
So far, none of the above element-wise penalty mod-
els in the previous subsection takes into account the
1328
dependency structure of the local features. Inspired
by Gao et al(2012), we group the local features that
have similar distributions together. The intuition is
that, for features that have very similar empirical dis-
tributions in the training set, their weights should not
be drastically different after the learning process in
the same task. In our new objective function, it is
desirable to introduce a new component that struc-
turally penalize these cases where features that are
very similar to each other, but have learned com-
pletely different weights, probably due to the noise
or the data sparsity issue in the training data.
The Objective Function: To do this, we first define
an inter-feature affinity matrix A, where A(p,q) mea-
sures the similarity between a pair of features p and
q. In the spectral graph theory, this affinity matrix
can be viewed as a weighted undirected graph G =
(V,E), where each node Vp denotes a feature p, and
each edge E(p,q) indicates the closeness among the
features p and q. We also introduce a weighted di-
agonal degree matrix D, of which each element in
the diagonal D(p,p) is the sum of all weighted con-
nections of node Vp: D(p,p) =
?Q
q=1A(p,q). We
propose the following objective function:
min
(
? `+ ?1|| ~W ||+ ?2|| ~W ||
2 (10)
+ ?
?
(p,q)
|| ~Wp ? ~Wq||
2A(p,q)
)
(11)
We then denote a graph Laplacian matrix L = D ?
A (Belkin and Niyogi, 2001), and rewrite the objec-
tive function as:
min
(
? `+ ?1|| ~W ||+ ?2|| ~W ||
2 (12)
+ ?( ~W>L ~W )
)
(13)
where ? is the regularization parameter for the
Laplacian structured sparsity term. Intuitively, the
objective function can be interpreted as the sum of
a negative log loss function, the sparsity-inducing
penalty, the quadratic penalty, and the Laplacian
structured penalty. Or, another view of this new
model could be seen as a Laplacian augmented elas-
tic net model where structured sparsity and feature
interaction are considered.
The Laplacian Matrix: In this model, a key aspect
is to derive the Laplacian matrix L. We propose the
following three steps to learn the Laplacian matrix:
Figure 1: An example of the graph G, the corresponding
affinity matrixA, and the corresponding Laplacian matrix
L.
1. Construct the distance matrix Dist. To con-
struct the distance matrix between each fea-
ture, we first transpose the instance-feature ma-
trix, I =
?
j
~Xj , and assume that each feature
(e.g. unigram in our task) is a random variable
that has a multinomial distribution over the in-
stances in the training set. Then, we compare
each pair of features, and calculate the inter-
feature distance matrix Dist with Euclidean
distance as a measure, and use the k-nearest
neighbors (kNN) method (Beyer et al, 1999)
to select the top neighbors of each feature.
2. Derive the affinity matrix A. To assign the
weight on the edge E(p,q) for each connected
nodes (the kNN of V in Dist), we use the
cosine similarity cosine(Vp, Vq) metric (Wang
and Hirschberg, 2011).
3. Generate the degree matrix D and Lapla-
cian matrix L. As discussed earlier, we sum
up the symmetric affinity matrix by row, and
obtain a diagonal degree matrix D, and we fur-
ther define a Laplacian matrix L = D ?A.
To calculate the above matrices in an efficient man-
ner, we partition the covariate into blocks, and pro-
cess each block in parallel (Chen et al, 2011). An
intuitive example of the graphG, its associated affin-
ity matrix A, and Laplacian matrix L, is shown in
Figure 1.
Parameter Estimation: Regarding the optimiza-
tion of objective function in (12-13), a notable prob-
lem is that the sparsity inducing L1 term is non-
differentiable, whereas this is not the case for the L2
norm and the Laplacian structured sparsity term. If
we first take the derivative of the latter two terms,
1329
and we can derive the following gradient compo-
nents:
?(?2|| ~W ||2 + ?( ~W>L ~W ))
? ~W
(14)
= 2?2 ~W + ?( ~W
>L> + ~W>L) (15)
= 2?2 ~W + ?(L
> + L) ~W (16)
since our Laplacian matrix is symmetric, we can
rewrite (16) as
2(?2 ~W + ?L ~W ) (17)
Then, we combine the gradient of the log loss func-
tion in (5) with (17), and apply a bound-constrained
re-formulation (Schmidt et al, 2007) and the lim-
ited memory BFGS (L-BFGS) method (Liu and No-
cedal, 1989) to solve the L1 regularized problem.
The L-BFGS method has relatively low space com-
plexity, and does not require the calculation of full
Hessian matrix, thus it is often used for L1 optimiza-
tion problems.
Augmented Laplacian for an L1-Constrained
Problem: Instead of formulating the L1-regularized
problem by adding the L1 norm, an alternative so-
lution is to formulate a L1-constrained problem by
fixing the sum of all weights ? in the weight vector
~W . The reason is because adding the L1 norm will
make the objective function not continuously differ-
entiable, where as the L1 constraint could be just a
simple linear constraint (Lee et al, 2006). Thus, the
alternative L1-constrained problem could be defined
as:
min(?`), s.t.
?
p
~Wp ? ? (18)
To test the robustness of Laplacian structured spar-
sity term in the setup of a L1-constrained problem,
we can incorporate the Laplacian penalty term into
the above formula, and derive:
min
(
? `+ ?( ~W>L ~W )
)
, s.t.
?
p
~Wp ? ? (19)
Note that the Laplacian matrix is positive-
semidefinite,
~W>L ~W = ~W>
?
(p,q)
L(p,q) ~W (20)
=
?
(p,q)
~W>L(p,q) ~W (21)
=
?
(p,q)
|| ~Wp ? ~Wq||
2A(p,q) (22)
because this graph Laplacian penalty can be viewed
as a quadratic term, and the objective function
in equation 19 is now convex differentiable and
will produce sparse estimates, so that we are able
to use a limited-memory projected quasi-Newton
method (Schmidt et al, 2009) to solve the dual form
of this problem. The Lagrangian dual form of the
problem in equation 19 can be written as:
L( ~W, ?) = ?`+ ?( ~W>L ~W ) (23)
+ ?
(
?
p
~Wp ? ?
)
? ? ~W (24)
where ? ? R is a Lagrange multiplier, and ? ? Rp+
is a p-dimensional vector of non-negative Lagrange
multipliers. And then we can take first-order partial
derivative with regard to ~W , and set it to zero to de-
rive the optimality:
?L
? ~W
= ?
?
j
(
??yj ? (??yj )
2
)
~X
(
yj
??yj
?
1? yj
1? ??yj
)
(25)
+ 2?L ~W + ? ? ? = 0 (26)
To speed up the training, we use the linear-time L1-
ball projection method from Duchi et al (2008) in
our implementation.
5 Experiments
We first compare our model to various baselines in
the 3-way automatic brand identification task. Be-
sides the logistic regression, lasso, ridge and elas-
tic net model that we introduced in Section 4.2, we
also compare with a PCA-based logistic regression
model where the dimensions of the feature space is
reduced in half before the classification. A state-of-
the-art linear kernel SVM model (Chang and Lin,
2011) is also taken into the comparison. In the
second part, we perform 9-way joint classification
of the brand-satisfaction labels. Similarly, we also
perform a 18-way joint classification of the brand-
gender-satisfaction labels. To test the robustness
of our model, we vary the levels of sparsity of our
Laplacian augmented method in a L1-constrained
problem. Finally, we analyze the identified features
for CBA. Throughout this section, we use classifi-
cation accuracy to report the results. We tune the
regularization parameters of log-linear models and
1330
Method Dev. Test
Majority class 75.67 78.08
Logistic regression 91.98 91.06
Linear SVM 92.45 91.75
PCA 91.67 91.20
Lasso 92.81 91.96
Ridge 92.56 91.67
Elastic net 92.81 91.83
Laplacian structured sparsity 93.17* 92.44*
Table 2: The automatic brand identification (3-way) per-
formances. The best result is highlighted in bold. * indi-
cates p < .001 comparing to the second best result.
the cost parameter of the SVM on the development
set, and report results on both the development set
and the held-out test set. The parameter for kNN
was set to 5 according to previous literature (Gao et
al., 2012). A paired two-tailed t-test is used to test
the statistical differences among various models.
5.1 Automatic Brand Identification from Text
Given any piece of raw text from the Web (e.g.
blogs, tweets, news, or forum posts), the first task
for CBA is to identify which brand this text is re-
lated to. Our customer review data set is useful for
this task, because the ground truth of the brand label
is attached to each review. Table 2 shows the re-
sult of our model in this automatic brand identifica-
tion task. In this 3-way classification task, the over-
all results indicate that it is relatively easy to iden-
tify the related brand from customer reviews. When
evaluating our Laplacian structured sparsity model,
our proposed model obtains the best performances
of 93.17% and 92.44%, which are statistically bet-
ter than the second best results (p < .001) in both
datasets.
5.2 Joint Brand-Satisfaction Prediction
In our training data set, we observe a subtle correla-
tion between the brand and satisfaction labels (r =
0.09, p < .001), which suggests us that it might be
interesting to perform a joint prediction task for the
brand-satisfaction labels. This task is also attractive
from the business perspective, because it would be
very useful for the companies to directly identify
user?s level of satisfaction about their brands. Ta-
ble 3 shows that we achieve 69.56% accuracy on the
Method Dev. Test
Majority class 55.43 55.18
Logistic regression 65.80 65.80
Linear SVM 67.67 65.44
PCA 63.92 62.53
Lasso 68.37 66.84
Ridge 67.79 65.55
Elastic net 68.79 66.82
Laplacian structured sparsity 69.56* 67.32*
Table 3: The joint brand-satisfaction prediction (9-way)
performances. The best result is highlighted in bold. *
indicates p < .001 comparing to the second best result.
Method Dev. Test
Majority class 28.24 27.68
Logistic regression 36.03 35.16
Linear SVM 41.05 39.49
PCA 35.35 34.44
Lasso 40.74 39.53
Ridge 40.98 38.94
Elastic net 41.15 38.96
Laplacian structured sparsity 41.22* 40.22*
Table 4: The joint brand-gender-satisfaction prediction
(18-way) performances. The best result is highlighted in
bold. * indicates p < .001 comparing to the second best
result.
development set, and 67.32% accuracy on the test
set using our proposed Laplacian structured model
(p < .001 comparing to the second best results).
5.3 Joint Brand-Gender-Satisfaction
Prediction
Another big interest in the marketing community is
to predict subgroup preferences of specific brands.
In this direction, we perform a 18-way joint brand-
gender-satisfaction prediction using the gender la-
bels that we described in Section 3. Table 4
shows that our proposed Laplacian structured spar-
sity model obtains a test accuracy of 40.22%, signif-
icantly better than the second best result (p < .001).
1331
Figure 2: Automatic brand identification test perfor-
mance varying the level of sparsity ? in a L1 constrained
problem.
Figure 3: Joint brand-satisfaction prediction test perfor-
mance varying the level of sparsity ? in a L1 constrained
problem.
5.4 Varying the Level of Sparsity in a
L1-Constrained Problem
To test the robustness of the Laplacian structured
sparsity component, we exponentially increase the
sum of weights ? to vary the level of sparsity in a
L1-constrained setup. When ? increases, the non-
zero weights in the model also increases. Figures 2
and 3 show that the Laplacian augmented L1-ball
projection statistically outperform the L1-ball pro-
jection baseline in all levels of sparsity (p < .001).
In Figure 4, Laplacian augmented L1-ball projection
is also statistically better than the L1-ball projection
(p < .001), except when ? = 32 and ? = 64.
5.5 Exploratory Data Analysis
We outline the top 15 keywords from the Laplacian
structured sparsity model that are associated with the
Starbucks and Dunkin? Donuts brands in the auto-
matic brand identification task in the Table 5. First
of all, it is observed that our model has discovered
synonyms for both brands: ?sbux?, ?dd?, ?dds?.
Figure 4: Joint brand-gender-satisfaction prediction test
performance varying the level of sparsity ? in a L1 con-
strained problem.
Also, the results imply that Starbucks? unique cup
size branding strategy, ?venti?, ?grande?, ?tall?, has
resonated with their customers as the words promi-
nently show up as top features in reviews. Aligned
with previous study in marketing science (Moon and
Quelch, 2006), an informative set of features re-
lated to Starbucks store decorations showed up in
our model: ?store?, ?restroom?, ?public?, ?bath-
room?, and ?spacious?. In contrast, these features
stopped to show up on the list of Dunkin? Donuts.
Instead, TV and game (sports), which are indeed
important features of dining at Dunkin? Donut, ap-
peared. Note that Baskin-Robbins, which is a sub-
brand of Dunkin? Brands Group, Inc., also appeared
as informative features to predict Dunkin? Donuts.
To understand the preferences of different gen-
der subgroups towards the two brands, we contrast
in Table 6 and Table 7 the top features that identify
the satisfied female and male customers in the joint
brand-gender-satisfaction prediction task.
Interestingly, it seems that the female customers
identify Starbucks as a place for ?studying?, with
?fireplace? as the top preference of the spots in the
store, and ?winter? is also a high-ranked feature.
Also, the adjective ?super? was frequently men-
tioned by the female Starbucks customers (but not
the males). As for Dunkin? Donuts, the top-ranked
keywords are still mainly associated with its names,
but it seems the snack ?Munchkins? is highly pre-
ferred by the female customers. Not surprisingly,
the cue words that the male customers identify the
Starbucks brand do not always agree with those of
the females. For example, instead of ?fireplace?,
they prefer staying at the ?patio?, and drink the cof-
fee from the ?clover? brewing system. Interestingly,
1332
Starbucks weight Dunkin? weight
starbucks 1.9365 dd 2.4224
sbux 1.0152 dunkin 1.7781
venti 0.8216 donuts 1.6989
corporate 0.7032 dunks 1.6455
store 0.6580 dds 1.4936
particular 0.6512 donut 1.3979
tall 0.5496 dunkins 1.3729
restroom 0.5447 glazed 0.9975
tourists 0.5431 robbins 0.9402
public 0.5260 baskin 0.8578
lines 0.4956 sugar 0.6475
drink 0.4787 d 0.6327
bathroom 0.4721 ice 0.5835
spacious 0.4629 stale 0.5404
location 0.4611 game 0.5049
grande 0.4563 tv 0.5010
Table 5: Top features that identify the Starbucks and
Dunkin? Donuts brands from the best model.
.
on the Dunkin?s side, ?munchkins? also disappeared
and replaced by ?glazed? (donuts). However, both
males and females agreed that ?fast? or ?quick? ser-
vice was an important feature of creating satisfac-
tion, which echoes with the result from self-reported
customer surveys (Moon and Quelch, 2006).
The word ?name? is a prominent indicator for the
female customers of Starbucks: at first we were puz-
zled, but after we digged into the database, we found
reviews such as:
? ?... and the baristas are one of the nicest they
always ask for your name, so you never end up
with coffee meant for the guy behind you.?
? ?... she asked me my name and i told her and
she excidetly proclaimed melissa and wrote my
name on the cup. This place was probably one
of the better starbucks ive been to.?
? ?... all of their employees are really friendly,
and embarrassingly enough most know me by
name and know my typical drink order grande
nonfat misto with a flavor shot of white mocha.
This is actually very helpful.?
The above examples show how our system effec-
tively serves as a salient keyword spotter. And that
as a keyword spotter one can use it to extract sur-
rounding context and feed that through to the next
Starbucks weight Dunkin? weight
starbucks 0.5013 dd 0.6931
chain 0.4268 dds 0.5620
winter 0.3382 dunkin 0.5344
fireplace 0.3089 donuts 0.4270
studying 0.2972 donut 0.3732
particular 0.2967 dunks 0.3687
super 0.2786 morning 0.3077
name 0.2543 quick 0.3012
know 0.2443 how 0.2940
because 0.2263 munchkins 0.2758
Table 6: Top features that jointly identify the satisfied
female customers and the Starbucks and Dunkin? Donuts
brands from the best model.
Starbucks weight Dunkin? weight
starbucks 0.6632 dd 0.7491
throw 0.3514 dunkin 0.6075
know 0.2959 dds 0.5333
store 0.2885 donuts 0.5326
fix 0.2498 donut 0.3215
particular 0.2487 dunks 0.3158
sbux 0.2462 morning 0.3095
patio 0.2349 rush 0.3030
prefer 0.2324 fast 0.2979
clover 0.2215 moving 0.2520
corporate 0.2153 glazed 0.2326
Table 7: Top features that jointly identify the satisfied
male customers and the Starbucks and Dunkin? Donuts
brands from the best model.
stage of analysis, including examination by humans.
This is extremely practical and useful, because it
provides actionable items. For example, analysts
can advise managers to revise their training manual
and tell store employees to remember the names of
your frequent female customers.
6 Discussions
In our preliminary experiments, we have also ex-
perimented with the setup where the two keywords
?starbucks? and ?dunkin? were removed from the
list of features. This change resulted in a uniformed
2% decrease in performances across all the models
in Table 2, which did not affect the comparisons.
1333
However, we kept these two keywords in our final
experiments, because the reviewers sometimes men-
tion ?Dunkin? in Starbucks reviews, and vice versa.
Removing the two keywords could be problematic,
since it changes the natural distribution of the data.
Regarding the alternative problem setups, our pre-
liminary experiments showed that instead of using
one-vs-all binary classifiers, a direct 9-way multi-
class classification of joint brand-satisfaction labels
using logistic regression only resulted an accuracy
of 62%. We also did not adopt the hierarchical clas-
sification pipeline, where instead of performing joint
classification, multiple layers of classifiers could be
trained to classify brand, gender, and satisfaction la-
bels incrementally. This is because the hierarchical
classifiers suffered from the error propagation prob-
lem, and the second/third layer classifier could not
correct the errors from the previous layers (Bennett
and Nguyen, 2009).
Our proposed method to generate inter-feature
affinity matrix captures interesting dependency of
features in this dataset. For example, although the
words ?frappuccino? and ?slurping?, ?furniture? and
?mismatched? are semantically very different, our
method actually group them together due to the sub-
tle interactions of these word pairs in our tasks. The
example in Figure 1 is also very specific to our
dataset. This is very useful, because the word se-
mantic similarity might be context-dependent, and
our method learns and adapts the semantic similar-
ity on the fly, hinges on the particular training set.
On the other end of the spectrum, even though our
method is desirable in our task, one might need to be
cautious when working on very small data sets with
only a handful of samples. This is because small
samples typically have large variances in feature dis-
tributions, and that the generated Laplacian matrix
might not be as reliable as in our study. To alleviate
this potential problem, one might consider building
the Laplacian matrix using external resources such
as WordNet or FrameNet, even though this approach
could also introduce biases due to the mismatched
task domains.
We also observed that the accuracy of the auto-
matic brand identification task was high, indicating
the promising future of CBA for hidden brand infor-
mation from other genres of text over the Web. Al-
though the performances of joint brand-satisfaction
and joint brand-gender-satisfaction predictions are
relatively lower, there is still much room for im-
provements: for example, using the syntactic, se-
mantic, and meta-data features could potentially en-
rich the proposed model. Also, it is possible to con-
sider the higher order n-gram features for better ex-
ploratory data analysis. However, since the focus of
this paper is a proof of concept for Laplacian struc-
tured sparsity models and computational branding
analytics, we have not yet explored various multi-
view representations to augment our model.
Why does Laplacian structured sparsity model
work better in these classication tasks? Similar to
the application in image classifcation (Gao et al,
2010), one advantage of Laplacian regularization in
text classification is that our model can explicitly
model the dependency of local features. Another
reason is the expressiveness of our model: our model
allows one to express the feature interactions in a
structured manner. Thirdly, by embedding the struc-
ture in the regularization term, our model is more
flexible: one can now control the structured penalty
by tuning the regularization parameter on the devel-
opment set.
7 Conclusions
We introduce a Laplacian structured sparsity model
for computational branding analytics (CBA). In the
automatic brand identification, our model achieves
the best result, dominating many competitive base-
lines. We also introduce the tasks of joint brand-
satisfaction and brand-gender-satisfaction predic-
tions, and show that the Laplacian structured spar-
sity do well in these tasks. A closer evaluation that
varying the levels of sparsity in a L1 constrained
problem also indicates that the Laplacian augmented
L1-ball projection model can provide state-of-the-
art results. By examining the weights of the de-
rived Laplacian structured sparsity model, interest-
ing indicators of brands and theirs gender-specific
customer satisfaction associations are also discov-
ered. In the future, we would like to investigate other
methods for generating robust inter-feature Lapla-
cians that include deep syntactic and semantic fea-
tures.
Acknowledgement
The authors would like to thank the anonymous re-
viewers for valuable comments.
1334
References
M. Belkin and P. Niyogi. 2001. Laplacian eigenmaps
and spectral techniques for embedding and cluster-
ing. Advances in neural information processing sys-
tems (NIPS).
M. Belkin, P. Niyogi, and V. Sindhwani. 2006. Mani-
fold regularization: A geometric framework for learn-
ing from labeled and unlabeled examples. The Journal
of Machine Learning Research (JMLR).
P. N. Bennett and N. Nguyen. 2009. Refined experts:
improving classification in large taxonomies. In Pro-
ceedings of the 32nd international ACM SIGIR con-
ference on Research and development in information
retrieval.
K. Beyer, J. Goldstein, R. Ramakrishnan, and U. Shaft.
1999. When is nearest neighbor meaningful? Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Database
Theory (ICDT).
F. Biadsy, W.Y. Wang, A. Rosenberg, and J. Hirschberg.
2011. Intoxication detection using phonetic, phono-
tactic and prosodic cues. In Proceedings of the 12th
Annual Conference of the International Speech Com-
munication Association (Interspeech 2011).
V. Chahuneau, K. Gimpel, B.R. Routledge, L. Scherlis,
and N.A. Smith. 2012. Word salad: Relating food
prices and descriptions.
C.C. Chang and C.J. Lin. 2011. Libsvm: a library for
support vector machines. ACM Transactions on Intel-
ligent Systems and Technology (TIST).
W. Y. Chen, Y. Song, H. Bai, C. J. Lin, and E. Y. Chang.
2011. Parallel spectral clustering in distributed sys-
tems. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma-
chine Intelligence (TPAMI).
Y. N. Chen, W. Y. Wang, and A. I. Rudnicky. 2013.
An empirical investigation of sparse log-linear models
for improved dialogue act classification. In Proceed-
ings of the 38th International Conference on Acous-
tics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP 2013).
W. W. Cohen. 2012. Learning similarity measures based
on random walks. In Procceedings of the 21nd ACM
International Conference on Information and Knowl-
edge Management (CIKM).
L. DiCarlo. 2004. Dunkin? donuts vs. starbucks. In
Forbes.com - Monday Matchup.
J. Duchi, S. Shalev-Shwartz, Y. Singer, and T. Chandra.
2008. Efficient projections onto the l1-ball for learn-
ing in high dimensions. In Proceedings of the 25th in-
ternational conference on Machine learning (ICML).
J. Eisenstein, A. Ahmed, and E. Xing. 2011a. Sparse
additive generative models of text. Proceedings of the
28th International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML 2011).
J. Eisenstein, N. A. Smith, and E. P. Xing. 2011b. Dis-
covering sociolinguistic associations with structured
sparsity. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies (ACL-HLT).
S. Gao, I. W. Tsang, L. T. Chia, and P. Zhao. 2010. Local
features are not lonely?laplacian sparse coding for im-
age classification. In 2010 IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
S. Gao, I. Tsang, and L. Chia. 2012. Laplacian sparse
coding, hypergraph laplacian sparse coding, and ap-
plications. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence (TPAMI).
P. M. Guadagni and J. D. C. Little. 1983. A logit model
of brand choice calibrated on scanner data. Marketing
science.
M. K. Kim, K. Lopetcharat, and M. A. Drake. 2013. In-
fluence of packaging information on consumer liking
of chocolate milk. Journal of dairy science.
A.A. Kuehn. 1962. Consumer brand choice as a learning
process.
S. Le Cessie and JC Van Houwelingen. 1992. Ridge
estimators in logistic regression. Applied statistics.
Chris Lederer and Sam Hill. 2001. See your brands
through your customers eyes. Harvard Business Re-
view, 79(6):125?133.
S.I. Lee, H. Lee, P. Abbeel, and A.Y. Ng. 2006. Effi-
cient l1 regularized logistic regression. In Proceedings
of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI).
D.C. Liu and J. Nocedal. 1989. On the limited memory
bfgs method for large scale optimization. Mathemati-
cal programming.
D. Luo, H.G. Hosseini, and J.R. Stewart. 2004. Appli-
cation of ann with extracted parameters from an elec-
tronic nose in cigarette brand identification. Sensors
and Actuators B: Chemical.
J. C. Makens. 1965. Effect of brand preference upon
consumers perceived taste of turkey meat. Journal of
Applied Psychology.
A. F. T. Martins, N. A. Smith, P. M. Q. Aguiar, and
M. A. T. Figueiredo. 2011. Structured sparsity in
structured prediction. In Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP).
Y. Moon and J. Quelch. 2006. Starbucks: delivering
customer service. Harvard Business School.
M. OConnell and G. Gooding. 2006. The use of first
names to evaluate reports of gender and its effect
on the distribution of married and unmarried couple
households. In Proceedings of the Annual Meetings of
the Population Association of America.
S. Ovide. 2011. Face off! dunkin? donuts vs. starbucks.
In Deal Journal - Wall Street Journal Blogs.
1335
M. Paul and M. Dredze. 2012. Factorial lda: Sparse
multi-dimensional text models. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS).
F. Pelisson, D. Hall, O. Riff, and J. Crowley. 2003. Brand
identification using gaussian derivative histograms.
Computer Vision Systems.
R. Rifkin and A. Klautau. 2004. In defense of one-vs-
all classification. The Journal of Machine Learning
Research (JMLR).
M. Schmidt, G. Fung, and R. Rosales. 2007. Fast opti-
mization methods for l1 regularization: A comparative
study and two new approaches. Machine Learning.
M. Schmidt, E. Van Den Berg, M. Friedlander, and
K. Murphy. 2009. Optimizing costly functions
with simple constraints: A limited-memory projected
quasi-newton algorithm. In Proceedings of Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AIStats).
R. Tibshirani. 1996. Regression shrinkage and selection
via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Series B (Methodological).
W. Y. Wang and J. Hirschberg. 2011. Detecting levels of
interest from spoken dialog with multistream predic-
tion feedback and similarity based hierarchical fusion
learning. In Proceedings of the 12th annual SIGdial
Meeting on Discourse and Dialogue (SIGDIAL 2011).
W. Y. Wang, S. Finkelstein, A. Ogan, A. W. Black, and
J. Cassell. 2012a. ?love ya, jerkface?: using sparse
log-linear models to build positive (and impolite) re-
lationships with teens. In Proceedings of the 13th
annual SIGdial Meeting on Discourse and Dialogue
(SIGDIAL 2012).
W. Y. Wang, E. Mayfield, S. Naidu, and J. Dittmar.
2012b. Historical analysis of legal opinions with a
sparse mixed-effects latent variable model. In Pro-
ceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2012).
K. Q. Weinberger, F. Sha, Q. Zhu, and L. K. Saul. 2007.
Graph laplacian regularization for large-scale semidef-
inite programming. Advances in neural information
processing systems (NIPS).
H. Zou and T. Hastie. 2005. Regularization and vari-
able selection via the elastic net. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology).
1336
