Reasoning in Metaphor Understanding:
The ATT-Meta Approach and System
John Barnden, Sheila Glasbey, Mark Lee, Alan Wallington
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham
Birmingham B15 2TT
{J.A.Barnden, S.R.Glasbey, M.G.Lee, A.M.Wallington}@cs.bham.ac.uk
Abstract
A detailed approach has been developed for
core aspects of the task of understanding a
broad class of metaphorical utterances. The
utterances in question are those that depend
on known metaphorical mappings but that
nevertheless contain elements not mapped
by those mappings. A reasoning system has
been implemented that partially instantiates
the theoretical approach. The system, called
ATT-Meta, will be demonstrated. The paper
briefly indicates how the system works, and
outlines some specific aspects of the system,
approach and the overall project.
Introduction
The sentence In the far reaches of her mind,
Anne believed that Kyle was having an affair1
can be analyzed as depending on metaphorical
views of MIND AS PHYSICAL SPACE and
IDEAS AS PHYSICAL OBJECTS (see Barnden
2001a). These views are, plausibly, familiar to
typical users of English. However, it is
reasonable to assume that typical users do not
already have a mapping into the mental domain
of the physical notion of "far reaches". Our
approach to metaphor is predicated on the notion
that one should, when possible, avoid
constructing source-to-target mappings for such
elements of a metaphorical utterance that
transcend the already known mappings in the
metaphorical views underlying the utterance.
Instead, we advocate the use of metaphor-
pretence "cocoons" (reasoning spaces) where the
utterance is taken as literally true. Within-
                                                     
1
 Slightly adapted from real discourse.
cocoon reasoning will attempt to connect these
"map-transcending" elements to aspects of the
source using a set of specified conversion rules.
The far-reaches qualification in the sentence
implies by source-domain reasoning that Anne
could only to a very low degree physically
manipulate the idea that Kyle was having an
affair. Then, if we can appeal to a conversion
rule, i.e. a known mapping of ability to
physically manipulate an idea to ability to
consciously process it, we can draw the
reasonable conclusion that Anne only had a very
low degree of ability to consciously process the
idea. In our presentation, we shall demonstrate
how the ATT-Meta system deals with this
example.
Note that the rules of reasoning are given a
qualitative certainty level, and that predicates
can be graded, using a scale of qualitative
degrees. For instance, someone can be
represented as understanding a situation to a
"medium" degree.
Our approach also makes heavy use of "view-
neutral mapping adjuncts" (VNMAs). These are
general mapping principles (inspired by the
work of Carbonell 1982) that apply, though only
by default, no matter what metaphorical views
are in play. For instance, the ability to do things
and the degrees with which states of affairs hold
are automatically mapped by VNMAs. In many
examples of metaphor, most of the real mapping
work is done by VNMAs.
Much of the approach has been implemented in
the ATT-Meta system, which is an uncertain
rule-based system operating by backchaining
(see also Barnden 1998, Barnden 2001, Lee &
Barnden, 2001a). ATT-Meta performs
reasoning, but does not yet interface directly to
natural language. Instead, hand-constructed
logical forms couching the source-domain
meaning of metaphorical sentences are passed to
it. In the above example, the source-domain
meaning is that Anne?s believing was literally
physically located in the physical far reaches of
her mind.
The following sections summarize various
abilities of the system, principles of the
approach, and aspects of ongoing theoretical
work aimed at further extensions to the system.
A major item of current implementational work
is a fuller realization of VNMAs.
1 Uncertainty
Although reasoning conflict and uncertainty are
intricately involved in metaphor, very few
approaches attempt to grapple with the issues.
Propositions and reasoning within both the
target and source domains, being largely of
common-sense varieties, are typically uncertain.
It can be uncertain what metaphorical views are
involved; information transferred from the
source domain can conflict with target-domain
information; and transfers can even conflict with
each other. The ATT-Meta system handles all
these types of uncertainty and conflict. Its
uncertainty handling is based on fairly crude
qualitative uncertainty annotations on rules and
propositions, but there is a sophisticated
conflict-resolution mechanism.
The uncertainty-handling and conflict-resolution
are almost entirely orthogonal to the provisions
for metaphor. This leads to clean design and
helps to address long-standing issues about
metaphor. One such issue is the conflict between
information transferred from the source domain
and the target information. ATT-Meta allows
either side to win, depending on standard
specificity principles. This goes against a naive
assumption in most of the literature that target
information should automatically override
transfers. But, this is only convincing when the
target information is certain. Indeed, we claim
that metaphor is often used precisely to describe
an exception to a target-domain default.
2 Mixed Metaphors
Issues such as reasoning about uncertainty are
particularly important in the processing of mixed
metaphors. Mixed metaphors need not feature
obvious cases of conflict but can include
graceful combinations of metaphors, such as the
following sentence to be examined below: One
part of John hotly resented the verdict. This
combines a view of John as made up of sub-
agents and a view of agents? emotional states as
things that can have temperature. It is possible to
distinguish two types of mixed metaphor:
parallel mixes and serial mixes. In a parallel
mixed metaphor, the target (A) is seen partly
through an A-as-B metaphor and partly through
another metaphor, A-as-B?. B and B? are in
general different domains, but may overlap.
Also, different aspects of A may be involved in
the two metaphors. In a serial mixed metaphor
(commonly called a chained metaphor), the
target (A) is seen as a source (B), which is in
turn then seen as a different source (C).
Previous work on the understanding of metaphor
has assumed that mixing is a relatively rare
phenomenon that can be handled once a more
theory of simple metaphor is developed. We
argue that this assumption is detrimental to
progress since mixed metaphors rely on the
same conceptual knowledge as simple
metaphors and can, therefore, provide valuable
insight into the processes and representations
underlying metaphorical reasoning. Moreover,
we claim that the reasoning processes and data
structures involved in understanding mixed
metaphors are identical to those used in
understanding simple metaphors. Therefore, any
current theory of metaphor should (at least in
principle) be extensible to deal with mixing. To
this end, ATT-Meta handles mixed metaphor in
a manner consistent with the way it handles
simple metaphors. The two types of metaphor
are processed in subtly different ways. Parallel
mixed metaphors create separate pretence-
cocoons that are mapped in parallel to the target
domain where their respective contributions are
understood. Serial mixed metaphors create
nested pretence cocoons where the metaphorical
view of B as C is nested within a pretence
cocoon with the view of A as B.
3 Reverse Transfers in Metaphor
The use of metaphor involves a flow of effects
of some kind from the source domain to the
target domain, where effects can include insights
into the target, hypotheses about the target, or
the highlighting of parts of the target. However,
although the overall effect flow is always from
source to target, in many cases, this does not
preclude a reverse flow where a literal
proposition, command, or question is mapped
onto an equivalent within the current
metaphorical domain.
The ATT-Meta system allows conversion rules
to map from propositions in the source domain
to propositions in the target domain and also in
the opposite direction. So a source domain
proposition such as "Socrates was the midwife
for an idea" might be mapped onto the target
domain proposition "Socrates helped in the
production of the idea". However, the rules
would equally allow the proposition "Socrates
helped in the production of the idea" to be
mapped to the source domain proposition
"Socrates was the midwife for an idea". We
argue that there are at least three reasons why
ATT-Meta should have this ability:
(1) Given that metaphors are ultimately used to
have an effect on the target domain, the use of a
metaphorical utterance can be seen as
answering, in some sense, a target domain
query. This sets up a choice between taking the
metaphorical utterance and applying all
conversion rules to it in the hope that one of the
resulting propositions might provide a suitable
answer, or taking the question and converting it
into a question in terms of the current metaphor.
We argue that the latter is often more efficient.
(2) Certain source domain propositions would
allow ATT-Meta to draw a tentative conclusion,
which would, were it more strongly supported,
provide an argument via a chain of reasoning for
some other, target level, proposition or query. A
target-level statement might give the added
support, but for this to be the case it would first
need to be converted into its source-level
equivalent.
(3) The combination of source and target domain
information within a discourse that only
intermittently maintains a metaphorical view of
the target domain may best be done in the source
domain after the target domain information has
been "metaphorized". This would be especially
so if the source domain was information-rich
compared to the target domain, so allowing
much more reasoning to be carried out than
would be possible in the target domain.
4 Non-Declarative Metaphor
Almost all examples of metaphorical language
discussed in the literature are of declarative
utterances rather than questions, commands,
ejaculations, etc. However, these other forms of
utterance can obviously occur. For instance, just
as one can state "John is a steamroller?? one can
ask "Is John a steamroller??? Just as one can state
"The champion knocked the cream-puff out?? one
can issue the command "Knock that cream-puff
out!?? The observation that questions, in
particular, can be metaphorical, plays a
significant role in our theoretical approach. This
is because their processing is contiguous with
that of implicit queries generated within the
metaphorical pretence cocoon (see Introduction)
during ATT-Meta?s goal-directed reasoning.
However, the theoretical significance of non-
declarative metaphorical utterances is even
greater, because such utterances call into
question accounts of metaphor that assume the
task of understanding is to work out what claim
about the target domain the metaphorical
utterance is making.
Compiling such examples is an additional goal
of our corpus work (see section 6).
5 Time and change
Work is ongoing which addresses the temporal,
aspectual and causal facets of metaphor. A
survey of metaphors in the ATT-Meta Databank
reveals, unsurprisingly, that the metaphorical
expressions there involve a wide range of tense
and aspectual constructions in English, including
past, present and future tenses, simple and
progressive aspects, and the full set of aspectual
classes. A wide variety of temporal adverbials is
also present. A key topic under investigation is
the mapping of temporal and aspectual
information between source and target domains.
For example, if an event is telic in the source
domain, to what extent does that telicity carry
over to the target domain? Preliminary
investigations confirm the expectation that such
aspectual information is preserved in the
majority of cases. Exceptions exist, however,
and these merit further study.
The mapping of temporal duration between
domains is also being investigated. In some
cases, a mapping appears to exist whereby an
event of long duration relative to the source
domain maps to an event with long duration
relative to the target domain. This can be
captured by an appropriate VNMA, which maps
relative durations between domains. The logic of
ATT-Meta is episode-based, which means that it
is relatively straightforward to express this kind
of constraint and employ it in reasoning.
Currently underway is a detailed examination of
metaphorical expressions involving both explicit
and implicit temporal durations. This will result
in a set of VNMAs covering a wide range of
tense/aspect/temporal-adverbial constructions.
A second strand of the work on time involves a
detailed study of the metaphors used to describe
times, states and events, including spatial
metaphor for time (Lakoff 1994).
6 Corpus Studies of Metaphor
As an adjunct to the development of the ATT-
Meta approach and system, we have been
conducting corpus studies of metaphor, mainly
using the British National Corpus but also using
the Bank of English and, to a limited extent, web
search engines. We have used both hand-
annotation of small numbers of documents from
the BNC and automated search for particular
types of metaphorical phraseology (mainly
relatively fixed metaphorical phrases concerning
mental states) over the whole of corpora.
Current objectives are (a) to develop large
databanks of examples of various types of
metaphorical utterance, for the benefit of
metaphor researchers in general, (b) to
demonstrate more extensively and objectively
the importance in discourse of "map-
transcending" metaphorical utterances (see
Introduction), (c) relatedly, to reveal the degree
to which relatively conventional metaphor
phraseology can be varied in real discourse (cf.
Moon 1998), and (d) to uncover (in small
numbers of documents) the degree to which
metaphorical utterances relate to context: how
much their understanding depends on context
and how much the understanding of the context
depends in turn on them. We are interested in (d)
because in the ATT-Meta approach the process
of metaphorical understanding is partially
guided by discourse goals set up by context.
This feature goes a long way to side-stepping
problems of apparent indeterminacy of meaning
of metaphorical utterances when taken in
isolation.
We also have the methodological objectives of
developing a good annotation regime for
metaphor and better-automated search
techniques for metaphor. As part of the latter,
we plan to investigate the usefulness of a large
set of morphological, lexical, syntactic and
phraseological clues to the presence of
metaphor, inspired by the clues discussed by
Goatly (1997). These clues are only present in a
minority of metaphorical utterances but could
nevertheless form a useful weapon in the
automated search armoury.
Metaphor detection techniques developed for
corpus study should also help with developing a
means for an understanding system to notice the
presence of metaphor. Such noticing is not
currently performed by ATT-Meta but is an
important topic for future research.
Conclusion
The ATT-Meta project is making headway in
showing how metaphorical utterances can be
computationally processed. It is based on a
distinctive set of principles as to how to
understand metaphor, some of which are original
and some related to those of previous
researchers. In particular, it seeks to avoid
expensive computation of new analogical
mappings between domains as a regular part of
metaphorical understanding. This is inspired
partly by the observation that genuinely novel
pairings of domains are relatively rare in real
discourse. What are more common are novel
extensions of familiar metaphorical views, and
novel mixes of views. This is true even in poetry
(Lakoff and Turner 1989). The project is also
seeking to take full account of the important role
that uncertainty, gradedness and dynamism of
situations plays in metaphor.
The approach and system have been evaluated in
a number of ways. We have applied the
implemented system or the theoretical approach
to (simplified versions of) selected real-
discourse examples from an existing databank
(http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/~jab/
ATT-Meta/Databank): see Barnden (2001a),
Barnden & Lee (2001a) and Barnden & Lee
(2001b). We have applied the implemented
system to examples of all the metaphors of
mental states listed in the Master Metaphor List
(Lakoff 1994, Lee & Barnden 2001a). The
examples here were found by search over the
Bank of English. Finally, we have applied the
theoretical approach to various real-discourse
examples included in Goatly (1997): see
Barnden (2001b).
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by grant GR/M64208
from the Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council of the UK.
References
Barnden, J. A. (1998a)  Combining uncertain belief
reasoning and uncertain metaphor-based
reasoning. In "Procs. Twentieth Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society", Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Hillsdale, N.J, pp.114-119.
Barnden, J.A. (2001a)  Application of the ATT-Meta
Metaphor-Understanding Approach to Various
Examples in the ATT-Meta Project Databank.
Technical Report CSRP-01-02, School of
Computer Science, The University of Birmingham,
U.K.
Barnden, J.A. (2001b)  Application of the ATT-Meta
metaphor-understanding approach to selected
examples from Goatly. Technical Report CSRP-01-
01, School of Computer Science, The University of
Birmingham, U.K.
Barnden, J.A (2001c)  Uncertainty and conflict
handling in the ATT-Meta context-based system for
metaphorical reasoning. In ?Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence?, J.G.Carbonell and
J.Siekmann, eds, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Barnden, J.A. and Lee, M.G. (1999)  An implemented
context system that combines belief reasoning,
metaphor-based reasoning and uncertainty
handling. In " Modelling and Using Context", P.
Bouquet, P. Brezillon, L. Serafini ed., Lecture
Notes in Artificial Intelligence, No. 1688,
Springer-Verlag, pp. 28-41.
Barnden, J.A. and Lee, M.G. (2001a)  Understanding
open-ended usages of familiar conceptual
metaphors: An approach and artificial intelligence
system. Technical Report CSRP-01-05, School of
Computer Science, The University of Birmingham,
U.K.
Barnden, J.A. and Lee, M.G. (2001b)  Application of
the ATT-Meta metaphor-understanding system to
an example of the metaphorical view of MIND
PARTS AS PERSONS. Technical Report CSRP-01-
09, School of Computer Science, The University of
Birmingham, U.K.
Carbonell, J.G. (1982)  Metaphor: an inescapable
phenomenon in natural-language comprehension.
In "Strategies for Natural Language Processing",
W. Lehnert & M. Ringle ed., Lawrence Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, N.J, pp.415-434.
Goatly, A. (1997)  The language of metaphors.
Routledge, London and New York.
Lakoff, G. (1994)  The Master Metaphor List.
http://cogsci.berkeley.edu/, University of
California, Berkeley.
Lakoff, G. and Turner, M. (1989)  More than cool
reason: a field guide to poetic metaphor.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Lee, M. G. and Barnden, J. A. (2001a)  Reasoning
about mixed metaphors within an implemented AI
system. Metaphor and Symbol 16, 1& 2, pp. 29-42.
Lee, M. G. and Barnden, J. A. (2001b)  Mental
Metaphors from the Master Metaphor List:
Empirical Examples and the Application of the
ATT-Meta System Technical Report CSRP-01-03,
School of Computer Science, The University of
Birmingham, U.K.
Moon, R. (1998)  Fixed idioms and expressions in
English. Clarendon Press, Oxford, U.K.
57
58
59
60
61
62
Developments in Affect Detection in E-drama
Li Zhang, John A. Barnden, Robert J. Hendley, and Alan M. Wallington
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham, UK
l.zhang@cs.bham.ac.uk
Abstract
We report work1 in progress on adding
affect-detection to an existing program
for virtual dramatic improvisation, moni-
tored by a human director. To partially
automate the directors? functions, we
have partially implemented the detection
of emotions, etc. in users? text input, by
means of pattern-matching, robust pars-
ing and some semantic analysis. The
work also involves basic research into
how affect is conveyed by metaphor.
1 Introduction
Improvised drama and role-play are widely used
in education, counselling and conflict resolution.
Researchers have explored frameworks for e-
drama, in which virtual characters (avatars) in-
teract under the control of human actors. The
springboard for our research is an existing sys-
tem (edrama) created by Hi8us Midlands Ltd,
used in schools for creative writing and teaching
in various subjects. The experience suggests that
e-drama helps students lose their usual inhibi-
tions, because of anonymity etc. In edrama,
characters are completely human-controlled,
their speeches textual in speech bubbles, and
their visual forms cartoon figures. The actors
(users) are given a loose scenario within which to
improvise, but are at liberty to be creative. There
is also a human director, who constantly moni-
tors the unfolding drama and can intervene by,
1 This work is supported by grant RES-328-25-0009 from
the ESRC under the ESRC/EPSRC/DTI ?PACCIT? pro-
gramme. We are grateful to Hi8us Midlands Ltd, Maverick
Television Ltd, BT, and our colleagues W.H. Edmondson,
S.R. Glasbey, M.G. Lee and Z. Wen. The work is also par-
tially supported by EPSRC grant EP/C538943/1.
for example, sending messages to actors, or by
introducing and controlling a minor ?bit-part?
character to interact with the main characters.
But this places a heavy burden on directors, es-
pecially if they are, for example, teachers and
unpracticed in the directorial role. One research
aim is thus partially to automate the directorial
functions, which importantly involve affect de-
tection. For instance, a director may intervene
when emotions expressed or discussed by char-
acters are not as expected. Hence we have devel-
oped an affect-detection module. It has not yet
actually been used for direction, but instead to
control a simple automated bit-part actor,
EmEliza. The module identifies affect in charac-
ters? speeches, and makes appropriate responses
to help stimulate the improvisation. Within affect
we include: basic and complex emotions such as
anger and embarrassment; meta-emotions such
as desiring to overcome anxiety; moods such as
hostility; and value judgments (of goodness,
etc.). Although merely detecting affect is limited
compared to extracting full meaning, this is often
enough for stimulating improvisation.
Much research has been done on creating affec-
tive virtual characters in interactive systems. Emo-
tion theories, particularly that of Ortony et al
(1988; OCC in the following), have been used
widely. Prendinger & Ishizuka (2001) used OCC
to reason about emotions. Mehdi et al (2004) used
OCC to generate emotional behaviour. Gratch and
Marsella?s (2004) model reasons about emotions.
However, few systems are aimed at detecting af-
fect as broadly as we do and in open-ended utter-
ances. Although Fa?ade (Mateas, 2002) included
processing of open-ended utterances, the broad
detection of emotions, rudeness and value judge-
ments is not covered. Zhe & Boucouvalas (2002)
demonstrated emotion extraction using a tagger
and a chunker to help detect the speaker?s own
emotions. But it focuses only on emotional adjec-
tives, considers only first-person emotions and
203
neglects deep issues such as figurative expression.
Our work is distinctive in several respects. Our
interest is not just in (a) the positive first-person
case: the affective states that a virtual character X
implies that it has (or had or will have, etc.), but
also in (b) affect that X implies it lacks, (c) affect
that X implies that other characters have or lack,
and (d) questions, commands, injunctions, etc.
concerning affect. We aim also for the software to
cope partially with the important case of meta-
phorical conveyance of affect (Fussell & Moss,
1998; K?vecses, 1998).
Our project does not involve using or develop-
ing deep, scientific models of how emotional
states, etc., function in cognition. Instead, the
deep questions investigated are on linguistic mat-
ters such as the metaphorical expression of af-
fect. Also, in studying how people understand
and talk about affect, what is of prime impor-
tance is their common-sense views of how affect
works, irrespective of scientific reality. Metaphor
is strongly involved in such views.
2 A Preliminary Approach
Various characterizations of emotion are used in
emotion theories. The OCC model uses emotion
labels and intensity, while Watson and Tellegen
(1985) use positive and negative affects as the
major dimensions. Currently, we use an evalua-
tion dimension (positive and negative), affect
labels and intensity. Affect labels with intensity
are used when strong text clues signalling affect
are detected, while the evaluation dimension
with intensity is used when only weak text clues
are detected.
2.1 Pre-processing Modules
The language in the speeches created in e-drama
sessions, especially by excited children, severely
challenges existing language-analysis tools if
accurate semantic information is sought. The
language includes misspellings, ungrammatical-
ity, abbreviations (such as in texting), slang, use
of upper case and special punctuation (such as
repeated exclamation marks) for affective em-
phasis, repetition of letters or words for empha-
sis, and open-ended onomatopoeic elements such
as ?grrrr?. The genre is similar to Internet chat.
To deal with the misspellings, abbreviations
and onomatopoeia, several pre-processing mod-
ules are used before the detection of affect starts
using pattern matching, syntactic processing by
means of the Rasp parser (Briscoe & Carroll,
2002), and subsequent semantic processing.
A lookup table has been used to deal with ab-
breviations e.g. ?im (I am)?, ?c u (see you)? and
?l8r (later)?. It includes abbreviations used in
Internet chat rooms and others found in an anly-
sis of previous edrama sessions. We handle am-
biguity (e.g.,?2? (to, too, two) in ?I?m 2 hungry 2
walk?) by considering the POS tags of immedi-
ately surrounding words. Such simple processing
inevitably leads to errors, but in evaluations us-
ing examples in a corpus of 21695 words derived
from previous transcripts we have obtained
85.7% accuracy, which is currently adequate.
The iconic use of word length (corresponding
roughly to imagined sound length) as found both
in ordinary words with repeated letters (e.g.
?seeeee?) and in onomatopoeia and interjections,
(e.g. ?wheee?, ?grr?, ?grrrrrr?, ?agh?, ?aaaggghhh?)
normally implies strong affective states. We have
a small dictionary containing base forms of some
special words (e.g. ?grr?) and some ordinary
words that often have letters repeated in e-drama.
Then the Metaphone spelling-correction algo-
rithm, which is based on pronunciation, works
with the dictionary to locate the base forms of
words with letter repetitions.
Finally, the Levenshtein distance algorithm
with a contemporary English dictionary deals
with misspelling.
2.2 Affect Detection
In the first stage after the pre-processing, our
affect detection is based on textual pattern-
matching rules that look for simple grammatical
patterns or phrasal templates. Thus keywords,
phrases and partial sentence structures are ex-
tracted. The Jess rule-based Java framework is
used to implement the pattern/template-matching
rules. This method has the robustness to deal
with ungrammatical and fragmented sentences
and varied positioning of sought-after phraseol-
ogy, but lacks other types of generality and can
be fooled by suitable syntactic embedding. For
example, if the input is ?I doubt she?s really an-
gry?, rules looking for anger in a simple way will
output incorrect results.
The transcripts analysed to inspire our initial
knowledge base and pattern-matching rules had
independently been produced earlier from edrama
improvisations based on a school bullying sce-
nario. We have also worked on another, distinctly
different scenario concerning a serious disease,
based on a TV programme produced by Maverick
Television Ltd. The rule sets created for one sce-
nario have a useful degree of applicability to an-
other, although some changes in the specific
204
knowledge database will be needed.
As a simple example of our pattern-matching,
when the bully character says ?Lisa, you Pizza
Face! You smell?, the module detects that he is
insulting Lisa. Patterns such as ?you smell? have
been used for rule implementation. The rules work
out the character?s emotions, evaluation dimension
(negative or positive), politeness (rude or polite)
and what response EmEliza might make. Although
the patterns detected are based on English, we
would expect that some of the rules would require
little modification to apply to other languages.
Multiple exclamation marks and capitalisation
of whole words are often used for emphasis in e-
drama. If exclamation marks or capitalisation are
detected, then emotion intensity is deemed to be
comparatively high (and emotion is suggested
even without other clues).
A reasonably good indicator that an inner state
is being described is the use of ?I? (see also Craggs
and Wood (2004)), especially in combination with
the present or future tense. In the school-bullying
scenario, when ?I? is followed by a future-tense
verb, a threat is normally being expressed; and the
utterance is often the shortened version of an im-
plied conditional, e.g., ?I?ll scream [if you stay
here].? When ?I? is followed by a present-tense
verb, other emotional states tend to be expressed,
as in ?I want my mum? and ?I hate you?.
Another useful signal is the imperative mood,
especially when used without softeners such as
?please?: strong emotions and/or rude attitudes are
often being expressed. There are common impera-
tive phrases we deal with explicitly, such as ?shut
up? and ?mind your own business?. But, to go
beyond the limitations of the pattern matching
we have done, we have also used the Rasp parser
and semantic information in the form of the se-
mantic profiles for the 1,000 most frequently
used English words (Heise, 1965).
Although Rasp recognizes many simple im-
peratives directly, it can parse some imperatives
as declaratives or questions. Therefore, further
analysis is applied to Rasp?s syntactic output.
For example, if the subject of an input sen-
tence is ?you? followed by certain special verbs
or verb phrases (e.g. ?shut?, ?calm?, ?get lost?, ?go
away?, etc), and Rasp parses a declarative, then it
will be changed to imperative. If the softener
?please? is followed by a base forms of the verb,
the inputs are also deemed to be imperatives. If a
singular proper noun or ?you? is followed by a
base form of the verb, the sentence is deemed to
be imperative (e.g. ?Dave bring me the menu?).
When ?you? or a singular proper noun is fol-
lowed by a verb whose base form equals its past
tense form, ambiguity arises (e.g. ?Lisa hit me?).
For one special case of this, if the direct object is
?me?, we exploit the evaluation value of the verb
from Heise?s (1965) semantic profiles. Heise
lists values of evaluation (goodness), activation,
potency, distance from neutrality, etc. for each
word covered. If the evaluation value for the
verb is negative, then the sentence is probably
not imperative but a declarative expressing a
complaint (e.g ?Mayid hurt me?). If it has a posi-
tive value, then other factors suggesting impera-
tive are checked in this sentence, such as excla-
mation marks and capitalizations. Previous con-
versation is checked to see if there is any recent
question sentence toward the speaker. If so, then
the sentence is taken to be declarative.
There is another type of sentence: ?don?t you +
(base form of verb)?, which is often a negative
version of an imperative with a ?you? subject (e.g.
?Don?t you call me a dog?). Normally Rasp re-
gards such strings as questions. Further analysis
has also been implemented for such sentence
structure, which implies negative affective state,
to change the sentence type to imperative.
Aside from imperatives, we have also imple-
mented simple types of semantic extraction of
affect using affect dictionaries and WordNet.
3 Metaphorical Expression of Affect
The explicit metaphorical description of emo-
tional states is common and has been extensively
studied (Fussell & Moss, 1998). Examples are
?He nearly exploded?, and ?Joy ran through me.?
Also, affect is often conveyed implicitly via
metaphor, as in ?His room is a cess-pit?, where
affect associated with a source item (cess-pit) is
carried over to the corresponding target item.
Physical size is often metaphorically used to
emphasize evaluations, as in ?you are a big
bully?, ?you?re a big idiot?, and ?you?re just a
little bully?, although the bigness may be literal
as well. ?Big bully? expresses strong disapproval
(Sharoff, 2005) and ?little bully? can express
contempt, although ?little? can also convey sym-
pathy. Such examples are not only practically
important but also theoretically challenging.
We have also encountered quite creative use
of metaphor in e-drama. For example, in a
school-bullying improvisation that occurred,
Mayid had already insulted Lisa by calling her a
?pizza?, developing a previous ?pizza-face? in-
sult. Mayid then said ?I?ll knock your topping
off, Lisa? ? a theoretically intriguing spontane-
205
ous creative elaboration of the ?pizza? metaphor.
Our developing approach to metaphor handling
in the affect detection module is partly to look
for stock metaphorical phraseology and straight-
forward variants of it, and partly to use a simple
version of the more open-ended, reasoning-based
techniques taken from the ATT-Meta project
(Barnden et al, 2002; 2003; 2004). ATT-Meta
includes a general-purpose reasoning engine, and
can potentially be used to reason about emotion
in relation to other factors in a situation. In turn,
the realities of metaphor usage in e-drama ses-
sions are contributing to our basic research on
metaphor processing.
4 Conclusion
We have implemented a limited degree of affect-
detection in an automated actor by means of pat-
tern-matching, robust parsing and some semantic
analysis. Although there is a considerable dis-
tance to go in terms of the practical affect-
detection that we plan to implement, the already
implemented detection is able to cause reasona-
bly appropriate contributions by the automated
character. We have conducted a two-day pilot
user test with 39 secondary school students. We
concealed the involvement of an earlier version
of EmEliza in some sessions, in order to test by
questionnaire whether its involvement affects
user satisfaction, etc. None of the measures re-
vealed a significant effect. Also, judging by the
group debriefing sessions after the e-drama ses-
sions, nobody found out that one bit-part charac-
ter was sometimes computer-controlled. Further
user testing with students at several Birmingham
schools will take place in March 2006.
References
Barnden, J.A., Glasbey, S.R., Lee, M.G. & Walling-
ton, A.M., 2002. Reasoning in metaphor under-
standing: The ATT-Meta approach and system. In
Proceedings of the 19th International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics.
Barnden, J.A., Glasbey, S.R., Lee, M.G. & Walling-
ton, A.M., 2003. Domain-transcending mappings
in a system for metaphorical reasoning. In Pro-
ceedings of the Research Note Sessions of the
10th Conference of EACL.
Barnden, J.A., Glasbey, S.R., Lee, M.G. & Walling-
ton, A.M. 2004. Varieties and Directions of Inter-
domain Influence in Metaphor. Metaphor and
Symbol, 19(1), pp.1-30.
Briscoe, E. & J. Carroll. 2002. Robust Accurate Sta-
tistical Annotation of General Text. In Proceed-
ings of the 3rd International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, Las Pal-
mas, Gran Canaria. pp.1499-1504.
Craggs, R. & Wood. M. 2004. A Two Dimensional
Annotation Scheme for Emotion in Dialogue. In
Proceedings of AAAI Spring Symposium: Ex-
ploring Attitude and Affect in Text.
Fussell, S. & Moss, M. 1998. Figurative Language in
Descriptions of Emotional States. In S. R. Fussell
and R. J. Kreuz (Eds.), Social and cognitive ap-
proaches to interpersonal communication.
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gratch, J. & Marsella, S. 2004. A Domain-
Independent Framework for Modeling Emotion.
Journal of Cognitive Systems Research. Vol 5,
Issue 4, pp.269-306.
Heise, D. R. 1965. Semantic Differential Profiles for
1,000 Most Frequent English Words. Psychologi-
cal Monographs 79, pp.1-31.
K?vecses, Z. 1998. Are There Any Emotion-Specific
Metaphors? In Speaking of Emotions: Concep-
tualization and Expression. Athanasiadou, A.
and Tabakowska, E. (eds.), Berlin and New York:
Mouton de Gruyter, pp.127-151.
Mateas, M. 2002. Ph.D. Thesis. Interactive Drama,
Art and Artificial Intelligence. School of Computer
Science, Carnegie Mellon University.
Mehdi, E.J., Nico P., Julie D. & Bernard P. 2004.
Modeling Character Emotion in an Interactive Vir-
tual Environment. In Proceedings of AISB 2004
Symposium: Motion, Emotion and Cognition.
Leeds, UK.
Ortony, A., Clore, G.L. & Collins, A. 1988. The
Cognitive Structure of Emotions. CUP
Prendinger, H. & Ishizuka, M. 2001. Simulating Af-
fective Communication with Animated Agents. In
Proceedings of Eighth IFIP TC.13 Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction, Tokyo, Japan,
pp.182-189.
Sharoff, S. 2005. How to Handle Lexical Semantics in
SFL: a Corpus Study of Purposes for Using Size
Adjectives. Systemic Linguistics and Corpus.
London: Continuum.
Watson, D. & Tellegen, A. 1985. Toward a Consen-
sual Structure of Mood. Psychological Bulletin,
98, pp.219-235.
Zhe, X. & Boucouvalas, A. C. 2002. Text-to-Emotion
Engine for Real Time Internet Communication. In
Proceedings of International Symposium on
Communication Systems, Networks and DSPs,
Staffordshire University, UK, pp.164-168.
206
Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 37?40,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Don?t worry about metaphor: affect extraction for conversational agents
Catherine Smith, Tim Rumbell, John Barnden, Bob Hendley, Mark Lee & Alan Wallington
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham
Birmingham B15 2TT, UK
J.A.Barnden@cs.bham.ac.uk
Abstract
We demonstrate one aspect of an affect-
extraction system for use in intelligent con-
versational agents. This aspect performs a
degree of affective interpretation of some
types of metaphorical utterance.
1 Introduction
Our demonstration is of one aspect of a system
for extracting affective information from individ-
ual utterances, for use in text-based intelligent con-
versational agents (ICAs). Affect includes emo-
tions/moods (such as embarrassment, hostility) and
evaluations (of goodness, importance, etc.). Our
own particular ICA [Zhang et al 2006] is for use
in an e-drama system, where human users behave as
actors engaged in unscripted role-play. Actors type
in utterances for the on-screen characters they con-
trol to utter (via speech bubbles). Our ICA is an-
other actor, controlling a bit-part character. Through
extracting affect from other characters? utterances it
makes responses that can help keep the conversation
flowing. The same algorithms are also used for in-
fluencing the characters? gesturing (when a 3D ani-
mation mode is used).
The system aspect demonstrated handles one im-
portant way in which affect is expressed in most dis-
course genres: namely metaphor. Only a relatively
small amount of work has been done on computa-
tional processing of metaphorical meaning, for any
purpose, let alne in ICA research. Major work
apart from ours on metaphorical-meaning compu-
tation includes (Fass, 1997; Hobbs, 1990; Mar-
tin, 1990; Mason, 2004; Narayanan, 1999; Veale,
1998). The e-drama genre exhibits a variety of types
of metaphor, with a significant degree of linguistic
open-endedness. Also, note that our overarching re-
search aim is to study metaphor as such, not just how
it arises in e-drama. This increases our need for sys-
tematic, open-ended methods.
2 Metaphor and Affect
Conveying affect is one important role for metaphor,
and metaphor is one important way of conveying
affect. Emotional states and behavior often them-
selves described metaphorically (Ko?vecses, 2000;
Fussell & Moss, 1998), as in ?He was boiling
inside? [feelings of anger]. But another impor-
tant phenomenon is describing something X using
metaphorical source terms that are subject to that
affect, as in ?My son?s room [= X] is a bomb site?
or ?smelly attitude? (an e-drama transcript exam-
ple). Such carry-over of affect in metaphor is well-
recognized, e.g. in the political domain (Musolff,
2004). Our transcript analyses indicate that this type
of affect-laden metaphor is a significant issue in e-
drama: at a conservative estimate, in recent user
studies in secondary schools at least one in every
16 speech-turns has contained such metaphor (each
turn is   100 characters, and rarely more than one
sentence; 33K words across all transcripts).
There are other specific, theoretically interesting
metaphorical phenomena arising in e-drama that are
important also for discourse in general, and plausi-
bly could be handled reasonably successfully in an
ICA using current techniques. Some are:
1) Casting someone as an animal. This often con-
veys affect, from insultingly negative to affection-
ately positive. Terms for young animals (?piglet?,
?wolf cub?, etc.) are often used affectionately, even
37
when the adult form is negative. Animal words can
have a conventional metaphorical sense, often with
specific affect, but in non-conventional cases a sys-
tem may still be able to discern a particular affective
connotation; and even if it cannot, it can still plausi-
bly infer that some affect is expressed, of unknown
polarity (positivity/negativity).
2) Rather similarly, casting someone as a monster
or as a mythical or supernatural being, using words
such as ?monster?, ?dragon,? ?angel,? ?devil.?
3) Casting someone as a special type of human, us-
ing words such as ?baby? (to an adult), ?freak,? ?girl?
(to a boy), ?lunatic.?
4) Metaphorical use of size adjectives (cf. Sharoff,
2006). Particularly, using ?a little X? to convey af-
fective qualities of X such as unimportance and con-
temptibility, but sometimes affection towards X, and
?big X? to convey importance of X (?big event?) or
intensity of X-ness (?big bully?)?and X can itself
be metaphorical (?baby?, ?ape?).
Currently, our system partially addresses (1), (2) and
(4).
3 Metaphor Recognition & Analysis
3.1 The Recognition Component
The basis here is a subset of a list of
metaphoricity signals we have compiled
[http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/?jab/ATT-
Meta/metaphoricity-signals.html], by modify-
ing and expanding a list from Goatly (1997). The
signals include specific syntactic structures, phrase-
ological items and morphological elements. We
currently focus on two special syntactic structures,
X is/are Y and You/you Y, and some lexical strings
such as ?[looks] like?, ?a bit of a? and ?such a?. The
signals are merely uncertain, heuristic indicators.
For instance, in the transcripts mentioned in section
2, we judged X is/are Y as actually indicating the
presence of metaphor in 38% of cases (18 out of
47). Other success rates are: you Y ? 61% (22 out of
36); like (including looks like)? 81% (35 out of 43).
In order to detect signals we use the Grammatical
Relations (GR) output from the RASP robust parser
[Briscoe et al, 2006] This output shows typed word-
pair dependencies between the words in the utter-
ance. E.g., the GR output for ?You are a pig? is:
|ncsubj| |be+_vbr| |you_ppy| |_|
|xcomp| _ |be+_vbr| |pig_nn1|
|det| |pig_nn1| |a_at1|
For an utterance of the type X is/are Y the GRs will
always give a subject relation (ncsubj) between X
and the verb ?to be?, as well as a complement re-
lation (xcomp) between the verb and the noun Y.
The structure is detected by finding these relations.
As for you Y, Rasp also typically delivers an easily
analysable structure, but unfortunately the POS tag-
ger in Rasp seems to favour tagging Y as a verb?
e.g., ?cow? in ?You cow?. In such a case, our system
looks the word up in a list of tagged words that forms
part of the RASP tagger. If the verb can be tagged
as a noun, the tag is changed, and the metaphoricity
signal is deemed detected. Once a signal is detected,
the word(s) in relevant positions (e.g. the Y posi-
tion) position are pulled out to be analysed. This
approach has the advantage that whether or not the
noun in, say, the Y position has adjectival modifiers
the GR between the verb and Y is the same, so the
detection tolerates a large amount of variation. Any
such modifiers are found in modifying relations and
are available for use in the Analysis Component.
3.2 The Analysis Component
We confine attention here to X?is/are?Y and You?Y
cases. The analysis element of the processing takes
the X noun (if any) and Y noun and uses Word-
Net 2.0 to analyse them. First, we try to determine
whether X refers to a person (the only case the sys-
tem currently deals with), partly by using a specified
list of proper names of characters in the drama and
partly by WordNet processing. If so, then the Y and
remaining elements are analysed using WordNet?s
taxonomy. This allows us to see if the Y noun in one
of its senses is a hyponym of animals or supernatural
beings. If this is established, the system sees if an-
other of the senses of the word is a hyponym of the
person synset, as many metaphors are already given
as senses in WordNet. If different senses of the given
word are hyponyms of both animal and person, other
categories in the tree between the noun and the per-
son synset may provide information about the eval-
uative content of the metaphor. For example the
word ?cow? in its metaphorical usage has the ?un-
pleasant person? synset as a lower hypernym, which
heuristically suggests that, when the word is used in
a metaphor, it will be negative about the target.
There is a further complication. Baby animal
names can often be used to give a statement a more
affectionate quality. Some baby animal names such
as ?piglet? do not have a metaphorical sense in Word-
38
Net. In these cases, we check the word?s gloss to see
if it is a young animal and what kind of animal it
is. We then process the adult animal name to seek a
metaphorical meaning but add the quality of affec-
tion to the result. A higher degree of confidence is
attached to the quality of affection than is attached
to the positive/negative result, if any, obtained from
the adult name. Other baby animal names such as
?lamb? do have a metaphorical sense in WordNet in-
dependently of the adult animal, and are therefore
evaluated as in the previous paragraph. They are
also flagged as potentially expressing affection but
with a lesser degree of confidence than that gained
from the metaphorical processing of the word. How-
ever, the youth of an animal is not always encoded
in a single word: e.g., ?cub? may be accompanied
by specification of an animal type, as in ?wolf cub?.
An extension to our processing would be required to
handle this and also cases like ?young wolf? or ?baby
wolf?.
If any adjectival modifiers of the Y noun were rec-
ognized the analyser then goes on to evaluate their
contribution to the metaphor?s affect. If the analyser
finds that ?big? is one of the modifying adjectives
of the noun it has analysed the metaphor is marked
as being more emphatic. If ?little? is found the fol-
lowing is done. If the metaphor has been tagged as
negative and no degree of affection has been added
(from a baby animal name, currently) then ?little? is
taken to be expressing contempt. If the metaphor
has been tagged as positive OR a degree of affection
has been added then ?little? is taken to be expressing
affection.
4 Examples of Course of Processing
?You piglet?:
(1) Detector recognises the you Y signal with Y =
?piglet?.
(2) Analyser finds that ?piglet? is a hyponym of ?an-
imal?.
(3) ?Piglet? does not have ?person? as a WordNet hy-
pernym so analyser retrieves the WordNet gloss.
(4) It finds ?young? in the gloss (?a young pig?) and
retrieves all of the following words (just ?pig? ? the
analysis process is would otherwise be repeated for
each of the words captured from the gloss), and finds
that ?pig? by itself has negative metaphorical affect.
(5) The input is labelled as an animal metaphor
which is negative but affectionate, with the affection
having higher confidence than the negativity.
?Lisa is an angel?:
(1) Detector recognises the X is Y signal with Y =
?angel?, after checking that Lisa is a person.
(2) Analyser finds that ?angel? is a hyponym of ?su-
pernatural being?.
(3) It finds that in another sense ?angel? is a hyponym
of ?person?.
(4) It finds that the tree including the ?person? synset
also passes through ?good person,? expressing posi-
tive affect.
(5) Conclusion: positive supernatural-
being metaphor.
Results from Some Other Examples:
?You cow?, ?they?re such sheep?: negative
metaphor.
?You little rat?: contemptuous metaphor.
?You little piggy?: affectionate metaphor with a neg-
ative base.
?You?re a lamb?: affectionate metaphor.
?You are a monster?: negative metaphor.
?She is such a big fat cow?: negative metaphor, in-
tensified by ?big? (currently ?fat? is not dealt with).
5 Concluding Remarks
The demonstrated processing capabilities make par-
ticular but nevertheless valuable contributions to
metaphor processing and affect-detection for ICAs,
in e-drama at least. Further work is ongoing on the
four specific metaphorical phenomena in section 3
as well as on other phenomena, such as the vari-
ation of conventional metaphorical phraseology by
synonym substitution and addition of modifiers, and
metaphorical descriptions of emotions themselves.
As many extensions are ongoing or envisaged,
it is premature to engage in large-scale evaluation.
Also, there are basic problems facing evaluation.
The language in the e-drama genre is full of mis-
spellings, ?texting? abbreviations, acronyms, gram-
matical errors, etc., so that fully automated evalua-
tion of the metaphorical processing by itself is dif-
ficult; and application of the system to manually
cleaned-up utterances is still dependent on Rasp ex-
tracting structure appropriately. Also, our own ul-
timate concerns are theoretical, to do with the na-
ture of metaphor understanding. We are interested
in covering the qualitative range of possibilities and
complications, with no strong constraint from their
39
frequency in real discourse. Thus, statistical evalua-
tion on corpora is not particularly relevant except for
practical purposes.
However, some proto-evaluative comments that
can be made about animal metaphors are as fol-
lows. The transcripts mentioned in section 2 (33K
words total) contain metaphors with the following
animal words: rhino, bitch, dog, ape, cow, mole,
from 14 metaphorical utterances in all. Seven of
the utterances are recognized by our system, and
these involve rhino, dog, ape, mole. No WordNet-
based metaphorical connotation is found for the
rhino case. Negative affect is concluded for bitch,
dog and cow cases, and affect of undetermined po-
larity is concluded for ape and mole.
The system is currently designed only to do rela-
tively simple, specialized metaphorical processing.
The system currently only deals with a small mi-
nority of our own list of metaphoricity signals (see
section 3.1), and these signals are only present in a
minority of cases of metaphor overall. It does not
do either complex reasoning or analogical structure-
matching as in our own ATT-Meta metaphor sys-
tem (Barnden, 2006) or the cited approaches of Fass,
Hobbs, Martin, Narayanan and Veale. However, we
plan to eventually add simplified versions of ATT-
Meta-style reasoning, and in particular to add the
ATT-Meta view-neutral mapping adjunct feature to
implement the default carry-over of affect (see sec-
tion 2) and certain other information, as well as han-
dling more signals.
Other work on metaphor has exploited WordNet
(see, e.g., Veale, 2003, and panel on Figurative Lan-
guage in WordNets and other Lexical Resources
at GWC?04 (http://www.fi.muni.cz/gwc2004/.
Such work uses WordNet in distinctly different ways
from us and largely for different purposes. Our sys-
tem is also distinctive in, for instance, interpreting
the contribution of size adjectives.
Acknowledgments
The research has been aided by Sheila Glasbey and
Li Zhang, and supported by ESRC/EPSRC/DTI Pac-
cit LINK grant (ESRC RES-328-25-0009) and EP-
SRC grant EP/C538943/1.
References
John Barnden. 2006. Artificial Intelligence, Figurative
Language and Cognitive Linguistics. In G. Kristiansen
et al (Eds), Cognitive Linguistics: Current Applica-
tions and Future Perspectives, 431?459. Berlin: Mou-
ton de Gruyter.
Ted Briscoe, John Carroll and Rebecca Watson. 2006.
The Second Release of the RASP System. In Procs.
COLING/ACL 2006 Interactive Presentation Sessions.
Sydney, Australia.
Dan Fass. 1997. Processing Metaphor and Metonymy.
Greenwich, Connecticut: Ablex.
Susan Fussell & Mallie Moss. 1998. Figurative Lan-
guage in Emotional Communication. Social and Cog-
nitive Approaches to Interpersonal Communication.
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Andrew Goatly. 1997. The Language of Metaphors.
Routledge, London.
Jerry Hobbs. 1990. Literature and Cognition. CSLI Lec-
ture Notes, 21, Stanford University, 1990.
Zolta?n Ko?vecses. 2000. Metaphor and Emotion: Lan-
guage, Culture and Body in Human Feeling. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge.
James Martin. 1990. A Computational Model of
Metaphor Interpretation. Academic Press.
Zachary Mason. 2004. CorMet: A computational,
corpus-based conventional metaphor extraction sys-
tem. Computational Linguistics, 30(1), 23?44.
Andreas Musolff. 2004. Metaphor and political dis-
course: Analogical reasoning in debates about Eu-
rope. Palgrave Macmillan.
Srini Narayanan. 1999. Moving right along: A compu-
tational model of metaphoric reasoning about events.
Procs. National Conference on Art. Int., 121?128.
Serge Sharoff. 2006. How to Handle Lexical Semantics
in SFL: A Corpus Study of Purposes for Using Size
Adjectives. System and Corpus: Exploring Connec-
tions. Equinox, London.
Tony Veale. 1998. ?Just in Time? analogical mapping, an
iterative-deepening approach to structure-mapping. In
Procs. 13th European Conference on Art. Intell.
Tony Veale. 2003. Dynamic Type Creation in Metaphor
Interpretation and Analogical Reasoning: A Case-
Study with WordNet. In Procs. International Confer-
ence on Conceptual Structures (Dresden).
Li Zhang, John Barnden, Bob Hendley & Alan Walling-
ton. 2006. Exploitation in Affect Detection in Impro-
visational E-Drama. In Procs. 6th Int. Conference on
Intelligent Virtual Agents: Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 4133, 68?79. Springer.
40
Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 109?112,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
On the formalization of Invariant Mappings for Metaphor Interpretation
Rodrigo Agerri, John Barnden, Mark Lee and Alan Wallington
School of Computer Science, Univ. of Birmingham
B15 2TT Birmingham, UK
r.agerri@cs.bham.ac.uk
Abstract
In this paper we provide a formalization of
a set of default rules that we claim are re-
quired for the transfer of information such
as causation, event rate and duration in the
interpretation of metaphor. Such rules are
domain-independent and are identified as in-
variant adjuncts to any conceptual metaphor.
We also show a way of embedding the in-
variant mappings in a semantic framework.
1 Introduction
It is generally accepted that much of everyday lan-
guage shows evidence of metaphor. We assume the
general view that metaphor understanding involves
some notion of events, properties, relations, etc. that
are transferred from the source domain into the tar-
get domain. In this view, a metaphorical utterance
conveys information about the target domain. We
are particularly interested in the metaphorical utter-
ances that we call map-transcending. Consider the
following example:
(1) ?McEnroe starved Connors to death.?
We do not address in this paper the issue of
when an utterance is to be considered metaphor-
ical. Instead, we aim to offer an explanation of
how a metaphorical utterance such as (1) can be in-
terpreted. If we infer, using our knowledge about
McEnroe and Connors, that (1) is used to describe
a tennis match, it can be understood as an exam-
ple of the conceptual metaphors (or, in our termi-
nology, ?metaphorical views?) DEFEAT AS DEATH
and NECESSITIES AS FOOD. However, these
metaphorical views would not contain any relation-
ship that maps the specific manner of dying that con-
stitutes being starved to death (we say that ?starv-
ing? is a map-transcending entity). Yet one could
argue that the manner of Connors?s death is a cru-
cial part of the informational contribution of (1).
A possible solution would be to create a new
view-specific mapping that goes from the form of
killing involved in starving to death to some process
in sport, but such enrichment of mappings would be
needed for many other verbs or verbal phrases that
refer to other ways in which death is brought about,
each requiring a specific specific mapping when oc-
curring in a metaphorical utterance. Thus, finding
adequate mappings could become an endless and
computational intensive process. Moreover, there
are even cases in which we may not find a plausi-
ble mapping. Consider the following description of
the progress of a love affair:
(2) ?We?re spinning our wheels.?
It is not very clear what could be a target corre-
spondent for ?wheels?. We have developed an AI
system called ATT-Meta for metaphor interpretation
(Barnden et al, 2002) that employs reasoning within
the terms of the source domain using various sources
of information including world and linguistic knowl-
edge. The reasoning connects unmapped ideas used
by utterances, such as wheels and starving, to other
source-domain ideas for which a mapping is already
known. These known mappings may be constituents
of particular metaphorical view, but previous work
(Barnden et al, 2003; Wallington et al, 2006) has
109
shown evidence that there are metaphorical aspects
(such as causal relations between events) that, sub-
ject to being called, invariantly map from source to
target (we call these mappings View-Neutral Map-
ping Adjuncts or VNMAs) irrespective of whatever
specific metaphorical views are in play. These allow
many mapping effects, which would otherwise have
to be duplicated across all view-specific mappings,
to be factored out into separate mappings. In our
approach, source domain reasoning takes place in a
special, protected computational context that we call
the ?pretence space?. We use the term ?reality? to
refer to the space outside the pretence where propo-
sitions are about reality as the understander sees it.
Currently ATT-Meta implements the VNMAs by
including them in view-specific rules, but we plan to
make the system more modular and its view-specific
mappings more economical by implementing VN-
MAs as separate default rules. The first step to-
wards that goal is to provide a formalization of these
mappings and to show their role in metaphor in-
terpretation. In order to do so, we provide a se-
mantic representation of how these VNMAs work
by adopting Segmented Discourse Representation
Theory (Asher and Lascarides, 2003) to capture the
main aspects of the ATT-Meta approach.
2 Knowledge and Inference
If (1) is being used metaphorically to describe the
result of a tennis match, a plausible target interpre-
tation would be that McEnroe defeated Connors in a
slow manner by performing some actions to deprive
him of his usual playing style. Assuming a com-
monsensical view of the world, a within-pretence
meaning would be that McEnroe starved Connors to
death in the real, biological sense. The inferencing
within the pretence can then conclude that McEnroe
caused Connors?s death by depriving or disabling
him. Leaving some details aside, the partial logical
form (in the pretence) of the metaphorical utterance
(1) may be represented as follows (without taking
into account temporal issues):
(i) ?x, y, e(McEnroe(x) ? Connors(y)
?starve? to? death(e, x, y))
This says that there is an event e of x starving y to
death (we also use the notion of event to describe sit-
uations, processes, states, etc.). It may be suggested
that if we were trying to map the partial expression
(i), its correspondent proposition in the target could
be expressed by this formula:
(ii) ?x, y, e(McEnroe(x) ? Connors(y)?
defeat(e, x, y))
According to this, the event of x defeating y in
the reality would correspond to the event of x starv-
ing y to death in the pretence. However, by say-
ing ?McEnroe starved Connors to death? instead of
simply ?McEnroe killed Connors? the speaker is not
merely intending to convey that McEnroe defeated
Connors, but rather something related to the man-
ner in which Connors was defeated. Following this,
starving may be decomposed into the cause e1 and
its effect, namely, ?being deprived of food?:
(iii) ?x, y, z, e1, e2, e3(McEnroe(x)?
Connors(y) ? food(z) ? starve(e1, x, y) ?
death(e2, y) ? deprived(e3, y, z)?
cause(e1, e3))
Now, by means of lexical information regarding
?starving?, it can be inferred that McEnroe deprived
Connors of a necessity (see, e.g., Wordnet), namely,
of the food required for his normal functioning (the
NECESSITIES AS FOOD metaphorical view would
provide mappings to transfer food to the type of
shots that Connors needs to play his normal game).
In other words, Connors is defeated by the partic-
ular means of depriving him of a necessity (food)
which means that being deprived causes Connors?s
defeat. This fits well with the interpretation of (1)
where McEnroe?s playing deprived Connors of his
usual game. Moreover, linguistic knowledge also
provides the fact that starving someone to death is a
gradual, slow process. The result of within-pretence
inferencing may be represented as follows:
(iv) ?x, y, z, e1, e2, e3(McEnroe(x)?
Connors(y) ? food(z) ? starve(e1, x, y) ?
death(e2, y) ? deprived(e3, y, z)?
cause(e1, e3)?cause(e3, e2)?rate(e1, slow))
?Slow? refers to a commonsensical concept in the
pretence related to the progress rate of starving.
Now, the existing mapping DEFEAT AS DEATH
can be applied to derive, outside the pretence, that
McEnroe defeated Connors, but no correspondences
110
are available to account for the fact that McEnroe
caused the defeat of Connors by depriving him of
his normal play. We appear to have a problem also
to map the slow progress rate of a process like starv-
ing.
3 VNMAs in a Semantic Framework
In the ATT-Meta approach to metaphor interpreta-
tion, the mappings of caused and rate discussed
above are accomplished by a type of default map-
pings that we specify as VNMAs (the Causation
and Rate VNMAs, respectively; see (Wallington and
Barnden, 2006) for an informal but detailed de-
scription of a number of VNMAs). The idea is
that there are relationships and properties (causation,
rate, etc.) between two events or entities that iden-
tically transfer from the pretence to the reality. We
use the 7? symbol to express that this mapping is a
default. The VNMAs involved in the interpretation
of (1) can be represented as follows:
Causation: ?e1, e2(cause(e1, e2)pret 7?
cause(e1, e2)rlt)
The Rate VNMA transfers the qualitative rate of
progress of events in the source domain to the qual-
itative rate of progress of its mappee:
Rate: ?e, r(rate(e, r)pret 7? rate(e, r)rlt)
Embedding the VNMAs in a semantic framework
for metaphor interpretation is useful as a first step
towards their implementation as default rules in the
ATT-Meta system, but it is also interesting in its
own right to show the contribution that the ATT-
Meta approach can make towards the semantics of
metaphor. In the somewhat simplified discussion
on the within-pretence reasoning and mappings nec-
essary to interpret metaphorical utterances such as
(1), we have been using various sources of informa-
tion that interact in the processing of the utterance:
a) View-specific mappings provided by the relevant
metaphorical views (DEFEAT AS DEATH and NE-
CESSITIES AS FOOD); b) Linguistic and contex-
tual information necessary for reasoning in the pre-
tence; c) Relations and properties between events
such as causation and rate that are inferred in the
pretence; d) VNMAs that transfer within-pretence
event relations and properties to reality.
There are two prominent computationally-
oriented semantic approaches (Hobbs, 1996) and
(Asher and Lascarides, 2003) that take into account
contextual and linguistic information and stress the
importance of relations between text segments in
discourse interpretation. In fact, the incorporation
of the above types of information ties in well with
the SDRT (Asher and Lascarides, 2003) view of
language understanding. For example, we can think
of the pretence space as a Segmented Discourse
Representation Structure (SDRS) representing the
result of within-pretence inference which can be
mapped by using various view-specific and invariant
mappings to reality. In other words, we can see the
pretence SDRS as the input for what the ATT-Meta
system does when interpreting metaphor ? it will
reason with it, producing an output of inferred
reality facts which we may also represent by means
of an SDRS. The result of reasoning in the pretence
to interpret (1) would now looks as follows:
PRET:
?, ?, ?
?:
x, y, e1
McEnroe(x)
Connors(y)
starve(e1, x, y)
?:
e2
death(e2, y)
?:
e3 ,z
food(z)
deprived(e3, y, z)
cause(e1, e3)
cause(e3 ,e2)
rate(e1 ,slow)
7??
where ? and ? are labels for DRSs representing
events, PRET for a pretence space and 7?? map-
pings (VNMAs and central mappings) needed in the
interpretation of the metaphorical utterance. Impor-
tantly, the VNMAs would pick upon aspects such
as causation and rate from pretence to transfer them
to reality producing an output which could also be
represented as a SDRS:
RLT:
?, ?, ?
?:
x, y, e1
McEnroe(x)
Connors(y)
tennis-play(e1, x, y)
?:
e2
defeat(e2, y)
?:
e3 ,z
necessity(z)
deprived(e3, y, z)
cause(e1, e3)
cause(e3,e2)
rate(e1 ,slow)
Note that this formal representation integrates the
systematicity of mapping invariantly certain aspects
of metaphorical utterances by formulating them as
relations between events that can be represented as
111
relations and properties of DRSs. For this purpose
we need to modify the construction rules of SDRSs
to be able to infer properties and relations involving
individuals and not only DRSs? labels. In addition
to this, we have shown in the previous section how
ATT-Meta source domain reasoning captures the in-
teraction of the various sources of knowledge used
to infer causation and rate in the pretence. Further-
more, studying the interaction between VNMAs and
discourse relations may allow us to extend the study
of metaphor to discourse.
4 Concluding Remarks
Following the ATT-Meta claim metaphors often con-
vey crucial information via VNMAs, we can re-
analyze example (1) so that the effects of the NE-
CESSITIES AS FOOD mapping are obtained by
VNMAs. In the pretence, the food is something
Connors needs for proper functioning: i.e., it is nec-
essary that Connors have the food in order to func-
tion properly. The necessity here is covered by the
Modality VNMA, which maps relative degrees of
necessity, possibility, obligation, etc., from pretence
to reality. Moreover, the functioning properly would
be covered by the Function and Value-Judgement
(levels of goodness, importance, etc. map identi-
cally to levels of goodness, etc.). So all that is left is
the possession which could be covered by a STATE
AS POSSESSION mapping.
Formal semantic approaches (Asher and Las-
carides, 2003) do not account for metaphorical ut-
terances including map-transcending entities. Other
works (Carbonell, 1982; Hobbs, 1990; Martin,
1990; Narayanan, 1997) have addressed source do-
main reasoning to a limited extent, but its role in
metaphor interpretation has not previously been ad-
equately investigated. Moreover, map-transcending
entities pose a problem for analogy-based ap-
proaches to metaphor interpretation (Falkenhainer
et al, 1989), which require the discovery of an
elaborate structural similarity between the source
and target domains and/or the imposition of un-
mapped source domain structures on the target do-
main, whereas part of our approach is that the un-
mapped source domain structure introduced by the
utterance is by default not carried over.
Acknowledgements Supported by EPSRC
EP/C538943/1 and GR/M64208 grants.
References
Nicholas Asher and Alex Lascarides. 2001. The seman-
tics and pragmatics of metaphor. In P. Bouillon and F.
Busa, editors, The Language of Word Meaning, pages
262?289. Cambridge University Press.
Nicholas Asher and Alex Lascarides. 2003. Logics of
Conversation. Cambridge University Press.
John Barnden, Sheila Glasbey, Mark Lee, and Alan
Wallington. 2002. Reasoning in metaphor under-
standing: The att-meta approach and system. In 19th
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING-
2002).
John Barnden, Sheila Glasbey, Mark Lee, and
Alan Wallington. 2003. Domain-transcending
mappings in a system for metaphorical reasoning.
In Conference Companion to the 10th Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (EACL 2003), pages
57?61.
Jaime Carbonell. 1982. Metaphor: An inescapable
phenomenon in natural-language comprehension. In
W. Lehnert and M. Ringle, editors, Strategies for Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 415?434. Lawrence
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
BrianFalkenhainer, Kenneth Forbus, and Dedre Gentner.
1989. The structure-mapping engine: algorithm and
examples. Artificial Intelligence, 41(1):1?63.
Jerry Hobbs. 1990. Literature and Cognition. CSLI,
Lecture Notes, Stanford.
Jerry Hobbs. 1996. An approach to the structure of dis-
course. In D. Everett, editor, Discourse: Linguistic,
Computational and Philosophical Perspectives.
James Martin. 1990. A computational model of
metaphor interpretation. Academic Press, New York.
Srini Narayanan. 1997. KARMA: Knowledge-based ac-
tion representations for metaphor and aspect. Ph.D.
thesis, Computer Science Division, EECS Depart-
ment, University of California, Berkeley, August.
Alan Wallington and John Barnden. 2006. Similarity as
a basis for metaphor: Invariant transfer and the role
of VNMAs. Technical Report CSRP-06-02, School of
Computer Science, Univ. of Birmingham, December.
Alan Wallington, John Barnden, Sheila Glasbey, and
Mark Lee. 2006. Metaphorical reasoning with an eco-
nomical set of mappings. Delta, 22(1).
112
Proceedings of the Workshop on Sentiment and Subjectivity in Text, pages 47?54,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Exploitation in Affect Detection in Open-Ended Improvisational Text   
 
 
Li Zhang, John A. Barnden, Robert J. Hendley and Alan M. Wallington 
School of Computer Science 
University of Birmingham 
  Birmingham B15 2TT, UK 
l.zhang@cs.bham.ac.uk 
 
  
 
Abstract 
We report progress on adding affect-
detection to a program for virtual dra-
matic improvisation, monitored by a hu-
man director. We have developed an af-
fect-detection module to control an 
automated virtual actor and to contribute 
to the automation of directorial functions. 
The work also involves basic research 
into how affect is conveyed through 
metaphor. The project contributes to the 
application of sentiment and subjectivity 
analysis to the creation of emotionally 
believable synthetic agents for interactive 
narrative environments. 
1 Introduction 
Improvised drama and role-play are widely used 
in education, counselling and conflict resolution. 
Researchers have explored frameworks for e-
drama, in which virtual characters (avatars) 
interact under the control of human actors. The 
springboard for our research is an existing 
system (edrama) created by one of our industrial 
partners, Hi8us Midlands, used in schools for 
creative writing and teaching in various subjects. 
The experience suggests that e-drama helps 
students lose their usual inhibitions, because of 
anonymity etc. In edrama, characters are 
completely human-controlled, their speeches 
textual in speech bubbles, and their visual forms 
cartoon figures. The actors (users) are given a 
loose scenario within which to improvise, but are 
at liberty to be creative. There is also a human 
director, who constantly monitors the unfolding 
drama and can intervene by, for example, 
sending messages to actors, or by introducing 
and controlling a minor ?bit-part? character to 
interact with the main characters. But this places 
a heavy burden on directors, especially if they 
are, for example, teachers and unpracticed in the 
directorial role. One research aim is thus partially 
to automate the directorial functions, which 
importantly involve affect detection. For 
instance, a director may intervene when 
emotions expressed or discussed by characters 
are not as expected. Hence we have developed an 
affect-detection module. It has not yet actually 
been used for direction, but instead to control an 
automated bit-part actor, EMMA (emotion, 
metaphor and affect). The module identifies 
affect in characters? speeches, and makes 
appropriate responses to help stimulate the 
improvisation. Within affect we include: basic 
and complex emotions such as anger and 
embarrassment; meta-emotions such as desiring 
to overcome anxiety; moods such as hostility; 
and value judgments (of goodness, etc.). 
Although merely detecting affect is limited 
compared to extracting full meaning, this is often 
enough for stimulating improvisation. 
Much research has been done on creating af-
fective virtual characters in interactive systems. 
Indeed, Picard?s work (2000) makes great con-
tributions to building affective virtual characters. 
Also, emotion theories, particularly that of Or-
tony, et al (1988) (OCC), have been used widely 
therein. Egges et al (2003) have provided virtual 
characters with conversational emotional respon-
siveness. However, few systems are aimed at 
detecting affect as broadly as we do and in open-
ended utterances. Although Fa?ade (Mateas, 
2002) included processing of open-ended utter-
ances, the broad detection of emotions, rudeness 
and value judgements is not covered. Zhe & 
Boucouvalas (2002) demonstrated emotion ex-
traction using a tagger and a chunker to help de-
tect the speaker?s own emotions. But it focuses 
only on emotional adjectives, considers only 
47
first-person emotions and neglects deep issues 
such as figurative expression. Our work is dis-
tinctive in several respects. Our interest is not 
just in (a) the positive first-person case: the af-
fective states that a virtual character X implies 
that it has (or had or will have, etc.), but also in 
(b) affect that X implies it lacks, (c) affect that X 
implies that other characters have or lack, and (d) 
questions, commands, injunctions, etc. concern-
ing affect. We aim also for the software to cope 
partially with the important case of metaphorical 
conveyance of affect (Fussell & Moss, 1998; 
K?vecses, 1998). 
Our project does not involve using or develop-
ing deep, scientific models of how emotional 
states, etc., function in cognition. Instead, the 
deep questions investigated are on linguistic mat-
ters such as the metaphorical expression of af-
fect. Also, in studying how people understand 
and talk about affect, what is of prime impor-
tance is their common-sense views of how affect 
works, irrespective of scientific reality. Metaphor 
is strongly involved in such views. 
2 Our Current Affect Detection 
Various characterizations of emotion are used in 
emotion theories. The OCC model uses emotion 
labels (anger, etc.) and intensity, while Watson 
and Tellegen (1985) use positivity and negativity 
of affect as the major dimensions. Currently, we 
use an evaluation dimension (negative-positive), 
affect labels, and intensity. Affect labels plus 
intensity are used when strong text clues signal-
ling affect are detected, while the evaluation di-
mension plus intensity is used for weak text 
clues. Moreover, our analysis reported here is 
based on the transcripts of previous e-drama ses-
sions. Since even a person?s interpretations of 
affect can be very unreliable, our approach com-
bines various weak relevant affect indicators into 
a stronger and more reliable source of informa-
tion for affect detection. Now we summarize our 
affect detection based on multiple streams of in-
formation. 
2.1 Pre-processing Modules 
The language in the speeches created in e-drama 
sessions severely challenges existing language-
analysis tools if accurate semantic information is 
sought even for the purposes of restricted affect-
detection. The language includes misspellings, 
ungrammaticality, abbreviations (often as in text 
messaging), slang, use of upper case and special 
punctuation (such as repeated exclamation 
marks) for affective emphasis, repetition of 
letters or words also for affective emphasis, and 
open-ended interjective and onomatopoeic 
elements such as ?hm? and ?grrrr?. In the 
examples we have studied, which so far involve 
teenage children improvising around topics such 
as school bullying, the genre is similar to Internet 
chat.  
To deal with the misspellings, abbreviations, 
letter repetitions, interjections and onomatopoeia, 
several types of pre-processing occur before ac-
tual detection of affect. 
A lookup table has been used to deal with ab-
breviations e.g. ?im (I am)?, ?c u (see you)? and 
?l8r (later)?. It includes abbreviations used in 
Internet chat rooms and others found in an analy-
sis of previous edrama sessions. We handle am-
biguity (e.g.,?2? (to, too, two) in ?I?m 2 hungry 2 
walk?) by considering the POS tags of immedi-
ately surrounding words. Such simple processing 
inevitably leads to errors, but in evaluations us-
ing examples in a corpus of 21695 words derived 
from previous transcripts we have obtained 
85.7% accuracy, which is currently adequate. We 
are also considering dealing with abbreviations, 
etc. in a more general way by including them as 
special lexical items in the lexicon of the robust 
parser we are using (see below). 
The iconic use of word length (corresponding 
roughly to imagined sound length) as found both 
in ordinary words with repeated letters (e.g. 
?seeeee?) and in onomatopoeia and interjections, 
(e.g. ?wheee?, ?grr?, ?grrrrrr?, ?agh?, ?aaaggghhh?) 
normally implies strong affective states. We have 
a small dictionary containing base forms of some 
special words (e.g. ?grr?) and some ordinary 
words that often have letters repeated in e-drama. 
Then the Metaphone spelling-correction algo-
rithm (http://aspell.net/metaphone/), which is 
based on pronunciation, works with the diction-
ary to locate the base forms of words with letter 
repetitions.  
Finally, the Levenshtein distance algorithm 
(http://www.merriampark.com/ld.htm) with a 
contemporary English dictionary deals with 
spelling mistakes in users? input.  
2.2 Processing of Imperative Moods 
One useful pointer to affect is the use of impera-
tive mood, especially when used without soften-
ers such as ?please? or ?would you?. Strong emo-
tions and/or rude attitudes are often expressed in 
this case. There are special, common imperative 
phrases we deal with explicitly, such as ?shut 
up? and ?mind your own business?. They usually 
48
indicate strong negative emotions. But the phe-
nomenon is more general. 
Detecting imperatives accurately in general is 
by itself an example of the non-trivial problems 
we face. We have used the syntactic output from 
the Rasp parser (Briscoe & Carroll, 2002) and 
semantic information in the form of the semantic 
profiles for the 1,000 most frequently used Eng-
lish words (Heise, 1965) to deal with certain 
types of imperatives. 
Rasp recognises some types of imperatives di-
rectly. Unfortunately, the grammar of the 2002 
version of the Rasp parser that we have used 
does not deal properly with certain imperatives 
(John Carroll, p.c), which means that examples 
like ?you shut up?, ?Dave bring me the menu?, 
?Matt don?t be so blunt? and ?please leave me 
alone?, are not recognized as imperatives, but as 
normal declarative sentences. Therefore, further 
analysis is needed to detect imperatives, by addi-
tional processing applied to the possibly-
incorrect syntactic trees produced by Rasp.  
If Rasp outputs a subject, ?you?, followed by 
certain verbs (e.g. ?shut?, ?calm?, etc) or certain 
verb phrases (e.g. ?get lost?, ?go away? etc), the 
sentence type will be changed to imperative. 
(Note: in ?you get out? the ?you? could be a 
vocative rather than the subject of ?get?, espe-
cially as punctuation such as commas is often 
omitted in our genre; however these cases are not 
worth distinguishing and we assume that the 
?you? is a subject.) If a softener ?please? is fol-
lowed by the base forms of a verb, then the input 
is taken to be imperative. If a singular proper 
noun is followed by a base form of the verb, then 
this sentence is taken to be an imperative as well 
(e.g. ?Dave get lost?). However, when a subject 
is followed by a verb for which there is no dif-
ference at all between the base form and the past 
tense form, then ambiguity arises between im-
perative and declarative (e.g. ?Lisa hit me?).  
There is an important special case of this am-
biguity. If the object of the verb is ?me?, then in 
order to solve the ambiguity, we have adopted 
the evaluation value of the verb from Heise?s 
(1965) compilation of semantic differential pro-
files. In these profiles, Heise listed values of 
evaluation, activation, potency, distance from 
neutrality, etc. for the 1,000 most frequently used 
English words. In the evaluation dimension, 
positive values imply goodness. Because nor-
mally people tend to use ?a negative verb + me? 
to complain about an unfair fact to the others, if 
the evaluation value is negative for such a verb, 
then this sentence is probably not imperative but 
declarative (e.g. ?Mayid hurt me?). Otherwise, 
other factors implying imperative are checked in 
this sentence, such as exclamation marks and 
capitalizations. If these factors occur, then the 
input is probably an imperative. Otherwise, the 
conversation logs are checked to see if there is 
any question sentence directed toward this 
speaker recently. If there is, then the input is con-
jectured to be declarative.  
There is another type of sentence: ?don?t you + 
base form of verb? that we have started to address. 
Though such a sentence is often interrogative, it is 
also often a negative version of an imperative with 
a ?you? subject (e.g. ?Don?t you dare call me a 
dog,? ?Don?t you call me a dog?). Normally Rasp 
regards it as a question sentence. Thus, further 
analysis has also been implemented for such a sen-
tence structure to change its sentence type to im-
perative. Although currently this has limited effect, 
as we only infer a (negative) affective quality 
when the verb is ?dare?, we plan to add semantic 
processing in an attempt to glean affect more gen-
erally from ?Don?t you ?? imperatives. 
2.3 Affect Detection by Pattern Matching 
In an initial stage of our work, affect detection 
was based purely on textual pattern-matching 
rules that looked for simple grammatical patterns 
or templates partially involving lists of specific 
alternative words. This continues to be a core 
aspect of our system but we have now added ro-
bust parsing and some semantic analysis. Jess, a 
rule-based Java framework, is used to implement 
the pattern/template-matching rules in EMMA. 
In the textual pattern-matching, particular 
keywords, phrases and fragmented sentences are 
found, but also certain partial sentence structures 
are extracted. This procedure possesses the ro-
bustness and flexibility to accept many ungram-
matical fragmented sentences and to deal with 
the varied positions of sought-after phraseology 
in speeches. However, it lacks other types of 
generality and can be fooled when the phrases 
are suitably embedded as subcomponents of 
other grammatical structures. For example, if the 
input is ?I doubt she?s really angry?, rules look-
ing for anger in a simple way will fail to provide 
the expected results.  
The transcripts analysed to inspire our initial 
knowledge base and pattern-matching rules were 
derived independently from previous edrama 
improvisations based on a school bullying sce-
nario. We have also worked on another, dis-
tinctly different scenario, Crohn?s disease, based 
on a TV programme by another of our industrial 
49
partners (Maverick TV). The rule sets created for 
one scenario have a useful degree of applicability 
to other scenarios, though there will be a few 
changes in the related knowledge database ac-
cording to the nature of specific scenarios.  
The rules, as we mentioned at the beginning of 
this section, conjecture the character?s emotions, 
evaluation dimension (negative or positive), po-
liteness (rude or polite) and what response 
EMMA should make.  
Multiple exclamation marks and capitalisation 
are frequently employed to express emphasis in 
e-drama sessions. If exclamation marks or capi-
talisation are detected in a character?s utterance, 
then the emotion intensity is deemed to be com-
paratively high (and emotion is suggested even 
in the absence of other indicators).  
A reasonably good indicator that an inner state 
is being described is the use of ?I? (see also 
Craggs & Wood (2004)), especially in combina-
tion with the present or future tense. In the 
school-bullying scenario, when ?I? is followed by 
a future-tense verb the affective state ?threaten-
ing? is normally being expressed; and the utter-
ance is usually the shortened version of an im-
plied conditional, e.g., ?I?ll scream [if you stay 
here].? Note that when ?I? is followed by a pre-
sent-tense verb, a variety of other emotional 
states tend to be expressed, e.g. ?I want my 
mum? (fear) and ?I hate you? (dislike), I like you 
(liking). Further analysis of first-person, present-
tense cases is provided in the following section.  
2.4 Going Beyond Pattern Matching 
In order to go beyond the limitations of simple 
pattern matching, sentence type information ob-
tained from the Rasp parser has also been 
adopted in the pattern-matching rules. The gen-
eral sentence structure information not only helps 
EMMA to detect affective states in the user?s 
input (see the above discussion of imperatives), 
and to decide if the detected affective states 
should be counted, but also helps EMMA to 
make appropriate responses. Rasp will inform 
the pattern-matching rule with sentence type in-
formation. If the current input is a conditional or 
question sentence with affective keywords or 
structures in, then the affective states won?t be 
valued. For example, if the input is ?I like the 
place when it is quiet?, Rasp works out its sen-
tence type: a conditional sentence and the rule 
for structures containing ?like? with a normal 
declarative sentence label won?t be activated. 
Instead, the rule for the keyword ?when? with a 
conditional sentence type label will be fired. Thus 
an appropriate response will be obtained. 
Additionally, as we discussed in section 2.2, we 
use Rasp to indicate imperative sentences, such as 
when Mayid (the bully) said ?Lisa, don?t tell Miss 
about it?. The pseudo-code example rule for such 
input is as follows:  
(defrule example_rule 
?fact <- (any string containing negation and the 
sentence type is ?imperative?)  => 
(obtain affect and response from knowledge da-
tabase) 
Thus the declarative input such as ?I won?t tell 
Miss about it? won?t be able to activate the exam-
ple rule due to different sentence type information. 
Especially, we have assigned a special sentence 
type label (?imp+please?) for imperatives with sof-
tener ?please?. Only using this special sentence 
type label itself in the pattern-matching rule helps 
us effortlessly to obtain the user?s linguistic style 
(?polite?) and probably a polite response from 
EMMA as well according to different roles in spe-
cific scenarios.  
Aside from using the Rasp parser, we have also 
worked on implementing simple types of semantic 
extraction of affect using affect dictionaries and 
electronic thesauri, such as WordNet. The way we 
are currently using WordNet is briefly as follows. 
2.5 Using WordNet for a First Person Case 
As we mentioned earlier, use of the first-person 
with a present-tense verb tends to express an affec-
tive state in the speaker, especially in discourse in 
which affect is salient, as is the case in scenarios 
such as School Bullying and Crohn?s Disease. We 
have used the Rasp parser to detect such a sen-
tence. First of all, such user?s input is sent to the 
pattern-matching rules in order to obtain the 
speaker?s current affective state and EMMA?s re-
sponse to the user. If there is no rule fired (i.e. we 
don?t obtain any information of the speaker?s af-
fective state and EMMA?s response from the pat-
tern-matching rules), further processing is applied. 
We use WordNet to track down the rough syno-
nyms of the verb (possibly from different Word-
Net ?synsets?) in the verb phrase of the input sen-
tence, in order to allow a higher degree of general-
ity than would be achieved just with the use of our 
pattern-matching rules. In order to find the closest 
synonyms to the verb in different synsets, the se-
mantic profiles of the 1,000 most frequently used 
English words (Heise, 1965) have been employed, 
especially to find the evaluation values of every 
synonym of the original verb. We transform posi-
tive and negative evaluation values in Heise?s dic-
50
tionary into binary ?positive? and ?negative? only. 
Thus if any synonym has the same evaluation 
value (?positive? or ?negative?) as that of the origi-
nal verb, then it will be selected as a member of 
the set of closest synonyms. Then, we use one 
closest synonym to replace the original verb in the 
user?s input. This newly built sentence will be sent 
to the pattern-matching rules in order to obtain the 
user?s affective state and EMMA?s response. Such 
processing (using a closest synonym to replace the 
original verb and sending the newly built sentence 
to the pattern-matching rules) continues until we 
obtain the speaker?s affective state and appropriate 
response.  
2.6 Responding Regimes 
EMMA normally responds to, on average, every 
Nth speech by another character in the e-drama 
session, where N is a changeable parameter (cur-
rently set to 3). However, it also responds when 
EMMA?s character?s name is mentioned, and 
makes no response if it cannot detect anything 
useful in the utterance it is responding to. The 
one-in-N average is achieved by sampling a ran-
dom variable every time another character says 
something. As a future development, we plan to 
have N dynamically adjustable according to how 
confident EMMA is about what it has discerned 
in the utterance at hand.  
EMMA sometimes makes a random response 
from several stored response candidates that are 
suitable for the affective quality it has discerned 
in an utterance it is responding to. In addition, 
EMMA sometimes reflects back, in modified 
form, part of the user?s input string as a sub-
component of its response. Notice here that, be-
cause the pre-processing module reported in sec-
tion 2.1 expands abbreviations and corrects mis-
spellings, it helps to obscure the fact that part of 
EMMA?s response is only a reflection. E.g.: 
<Character> I?m ur (your) best m8 (mate). 
<EMMA> Why are you my best mate? 
On the other hand, we also, on a random basis, 
purposely put phenomena such as abbreviations 
and Internet-chat features in EMMA?s responses 
in order to make EMMA express itself more like 
a typical school-student user. E.g.: 
<Character> You get lost!  
<EMMA> Hey, coool it folks. (notice the 
lengthening of ?cool?) 
<Character> He didn?t do it.  
<EMMA> No1 believes you, m8. (where 
?no1? stands for ?no one?) 
It should be borne in mind that EMMA?s re-
sponses are not aimed at engaging with the de-
tailed meaning of the utterance, but simply to 
stimulate the improvisation in a way that is 
somewhat sensitive to affect being expressed. 
Furthermore, in order to make the EMMA char-
acter?s responses push the improvisation for-
ward, the character will not only ask scenario 
related questions to the main characters, but also 
introduce new topics closely related to the sce-
nario in the improvisation. In a recent user-
testing debrief session, secondary school students 
mentioned that the human bit-part character did 
not stay in character and said pointless things, 
while in another session one student, who played 
a main character, believed that the EMMA char-
acter was the only one that stuck to scenario re-
lated topics. The directors reported that, even 
when a main character was silent and the director 
did not intervene very much, the EMMA charac-
ter led the improvisation on the right track by 
raising new topics other characters were con-
cerned about.      
3 Affect via Metaphor 
In the introduction we commented on two func-
tions of metaphor. Metaphor is often used to 
convey affect and it also partly underlies folk 
theories of how affect and emotion work. As an 
example of the latter, folk theories of anger often 
talk about, and appear to conceive of, anger as if 
it were a heated fluid possibly exerting a strong 
pressure on its containing body. This motivates a 
wide range of metaphorical expressions both 
conventional such as ?he was boiling with anger 
and about to blow his top? and more creative 
variants such as ?the temperature in the office 
was getting higher and this had nothing to do 
with where the thermostat was set? (modified, 
slightly from a Google? search). Passion, or 
lack of, is also often described in terms of heat 
and the latter example could in certain contexts 
be used in this manner. So far, examples of ac-
tors reflecting or commenting on the nature of 
their or others emotions, which would require an 
appropriate vocabulary, have been infrequent in 
the e-drama transcripts, although we might ex-
pect to find more examples as more students par-
ticipate in the Crohn?s disease scenario. 
However, such metaphorically motivated folk 
models often directly motivate the terminology 
used to convey affect, as in utterances such as 
?you leave me cold?, which conveys lack of in-
terest or disdain. This use of metaphor to moti-
vate folk models of emotions and, as a conse-
quence, certain forms of direct expression of 
51
emotion has been extensively studied, albeit usu-
ally from a theoretical, linguistic, perspective 
(Fussell & Moss, 1998; K?vecses, 1998).  
Less recognised (although see Barnden et al, 
2004; Wallington et al, 2006) is the fact that 
metaphor is also frequently used to convey emo-
tion more indirectly. Here the metaphor does not 
describe some aspect of an emotional state, but 
something else. Crucially, however, it also con-
veys a negative or positive value judgement 
which is carried over to what is being described 
and this attitude hints at the emotion. For exam-
ple to say of someone?s room that ?it is a cess-
pit? allows the negative evaluation of ?cess-pit? 
to be transferred to ?the room? and we might as-
sume an emotion of disgust. In our transcripts we 
find examples such as ?smelly attitude? and ?you 
buy your clothes at the rag market? (which we 
take to be not literally true). Animal insults such 
as ?you pig? frequently take this form, although 
many are now highly conventionalised. Our 
analysis of e-drama transcripts shows that this 
type of metaphor that conveys affect indirectly is 
much more common than the direct use.  
It should be apparent that even though conven-
tional metaphorical phraseology may well be 
listed in specialised lexicons, approaches to 
metaphor and affect which rely upon a form of 
lexical look-up to determine the meaning of ut-
terances are likely to miss both the creative vari-
ants and extensions of standard metaphors and 
also the quite general carrying over of affectual 
evaluations from the literal meaning of an utter-
ance to the intended metaphorical meaning.  
At the time of writing (early June 2006) little 
in the way of metaphor handling has been incor-
porated into the EMMA affect-detection module. 
However, certain aspects of metaphor handling 
will be incorporated shortly, since they involve 
extensions of existing capabilities. Our intended 
approach is partly to look for stock metaphorical 
phraseology and straightforward variants of it, 
which is the most common form of metaphor in 
most forms of discourse, including e-drama. 
However, we also plan to employ a simple ver-
sion of the more open-ended, reasoning-based 
techniques described in the ATT-Meta project on 
metaphor processing (Barnden et al, 2004; Wal-
lington et al, 2006). 
As a first step, it should be noted that insults 
and swear words are often metaphorical. We are 
currently investigating specialised insult diction-
aries and the machine-readable version of the 
OALD, which indicates slang. 
Calling someone an animal of any sort usually 
conveys affect, but it can be either insulting or 
affectionate. We have noted that calling someone 
the young of an animal is often affectionate, and 
the same is true of diminutive (e.g., ?piglet?) and 
nursery forms (e.g., ?moo cow?), even when the 
adult form of the animal is usually used as an 
insult. Thus calling someone ?a cat? or ?catty? is 
different from describing them as kittenish. 
Likewise, ?you young pup? is different from 
?you dog?. We are constructing a dictionary of 
specific animals used in slang and as insults, but, 
more generally, for animals not listed we can use 
WordNet and electronic dictionaries to determine 
whether or not it is the young or mature form of 
the animal that is being used.  
We have already noted that in metaphor the 
affect associated with a source term will carry 
across to the target by default. EMMA already 
consults Heise?s compilation of semantic differ-
ential profiles for the evaluation value of the 
verb. We will extend the determination of the 
evaluation value to all parts of speech.  
Having the means to determine the emotion 
conveyed by a metaphor is most useful when 
metaphor can be reliably spotted. There are a 
number of means of doing this for some meta-
phors. For example, idioms are often metaphori-
cal (Moon 1988). Thus we can use an existing 
idiom dictionary, adding to it as necessary. This 
will work with fixed idioms, but, as is often 
noted, idioms frequently show some degree of 
variation, either by using synonyms of standard 
lexis, e.g., ?constructing castles in the air? in-
stead of ?building castles in the air?, or by adding 
modifiers, e.g., ?shut your big fat mouth?. This 
variability will pose a challenge if one is looking 
for fixed expressions from an idiom dictionary. 
However, if the idiom dictionary is treated as 
providing base forms, with for example the 
nouns being treated as the head nouns of a noun-
phrase, then the Rasp parser can be used to de-
termine the noun phrase and the modifiers of the 
head noun, and likewise with verbs, verb-
phrases, etc. Indeed, this approach can be ex-
tended beyond highly fixed expressions to other 
cases of metaphor, since as Deignan (2005) has 
noted metaphors tend to display a much greater 
degree of fixedness compared to non-metaphors, 
whilst not being as fixed as what are convention-
ally called idioms. 
There are other ways of detecting metaphors 
which we could utilise. Thus, metaphoricity sig-
nals (as in Goatly, 1997; Wallington et al, 2003) 
signal the use of a metaphor in some cases. Such 
52
signals include phrases such as: so to speak, sort 
of, almost, picture as. Furthermore, semantic 
restriction violations (Wilks, 1978; Fass, 1997; 
Mason, 2004), as in ?my car drinks petrol,? of-
ten indicate metaphor, although not all meta-
phors violate semantic restrictions. To determine 
whether semantic restrictions are being violated, 
domain information from ontologies/thesauri 
such as WordNet could be used and/or statistical 
techniques as used by Mason (2004). 
4 User Testing 
We conducted a two-day pilot user test with 39 
secondary school students in May 2005, in order 
to try out and a refine a testing methodology. The 
aim of the testing was primarily to measure the 
extent to which having EMMA as opposed to a 
person play a character affects users? level of 
enjoyment, sense of engagement, etc. We con-
cealed the fact that EMMA was involved in some 
sessions in order to have a fair test of the differ-
ence that is made. We obtained surprisingly good 
results. Having a minor bit-part character called 
?Dave? played by EMMA as opposed to a person 
made no statistically significant difference to 
measures of user engagement and enjoyment, or 
indeed to user perceptions of the worth of the 
contributions made by the character ?Dave?. Us-
ers did comment in debriefing sessions on some 
utterances of Dave?s, so it was not that there was 
a lack of effect simply because users did not no-
tice Dave at all. Also, the frequencies of human 
?Dave? and EMMA ?Dave? being responded to 
during the improvisation (sentences of Dave?s 
causing a response divided by all sentences said 
by ?Dave?) are both roughly around 30%, again 
suggesting that users notice Dave. Additionally, 
the frequencies of other side-characters being 
responded to are roughly the same as the ?Dave? 
character ? ?Matthew?: around 30% and ?Elise?: 
around 35%.  
Furthermore, it surprised us that no user ap-
peared to realize that sometimes Dave was com-
puter-controlled. We stress, however, that it is 
not an aim of our work to ensure that human ac-
tors do not realize this. More extensive, user test-
ing at several Birmingham secondary schools is 
being conducted at the time of writing this paper, 
now that we have tried out and somewhat modi-
fied the methodology.  
The experimental methodology used in the 
testing is as follows, in outline. Subjects are 14-
16 year old students at local Birmingham 
schools. Forty students are chosen by each 
school for the testing. Four two-hour sessions 
take place at the school, each session involving a 
different set of ten students. In a session, the 
main phases are as follows: an introduction to the 
software; a First Improvisation Phase, where five 
students are involved in a School Bullying im-
provisation and the remaining five in a Crohn?s 
Disease improvisation; a Second Improvisation 
Phase in which this assignment is reversed; fill-
ing out of a questionnaire by the students; and 
finally a group discussion acting as a debrief 
phase. For each improvisation, characters are 
pre-assigned to specific students. Each Improvi-
sation Phase involves some preliminaries fol-
lowed by ten minutes of improvisation proper.  
In half of the SB improvisations and half of 
the CD improvisations, the minor character Dave 
is played by one of the students, and by EMMA 
in the remaining. When EMMA plays Dave, the 
student who would otherwise have played him is 
instructed to sit at another student?s terminal and 
thereby to be an audience member. Students are 
told that we are interested in the experiences of 
audience members as well as of actors. Almost 
without exception students have appeared not to 
have suspected that having an audience member 
results from not having Dave played by another 
student. At the end of one exceptional session 
some students asked whether one of the directors 
from Hi8us was playing Dave.  
Of the two improvisations a given student is 
involved in, exactly one involves EMMA play-
ing Dave. This will be the first session or the sec-
ond. This EMMA-involvement order and the 
order in which the student encounters SB and CD 
are independently counterbalanced across stu-
dents.  
The questionnaire is largely composed of 
questions that are explicitly about students? feel-
ings about the experience (notably enjoyment, 
nervousness, and opinions about the worth of the 
dramatic contributions of the various characters), 
with essentially the same set of questions being 
asked separately about the SB and the CD im-
provisations. The other data collected are: for 
each debrief phase, written minutes and an audio 
and video record; notes taken by two observers 
present during each Improvisation Phase; and 
automatically stored transcripts of the sessions 
themselves, allowing analysis of linguistic forms 
used and types of interactivity. To date only the 
non-narrative questionnaire answers have been 
subjected to statistical analysis, with the sole in-
dependent variable being the involvement or oth-
erwise of EMMA in improvisations. 
53
5 Conclusion and Ongoing Work 
We have implemented a limited degree of affect-
detection in an automated bit-part character in an 
e-drama application, and fielded the actor suc-
cessfully in pilot user-testing. Although there is a 
considerable distance to go in terms of the prac-
tical affect-detection that we plan to implement, 
the already implemented detection is able to 
cause reasonably appropriate contributions by 
the automated character. We also intend to use 
the affect-detection in a module for automatically 
generating director messages to human actors. 
In general, our work contributes to the issue of 
how affect/sentiment detection from language 
can contribute to the development of believable 
responsive AI characters, and thus to a user?s 
feeling of involvement in game playing. More-
over, the development of affect detection and 
sentiment & subjectivity analysis provides a 
good test-bed for the accompanying deeper re-
search into how affect is conveyed linguistically.  
Acknowledgement 
The project is supported by grant RES-328-25-
0009 under the ESRC/EPSRC/DTI ?PACCIT? 
programme, and its metaphor aspects also by 
EPSRC grant EP/C538943/1. We thank our part-
ners?Hi8us, Maverick TV and BT?and col-
leagues W.H. Edmondson, S.R. Glasbey, M.G. 
Lee and Z. Wen.  
References 
Barnden, J.A., Glasbey, S.R., Lee, M.G. & Walling-
ton, A.M. 2004. Varieties and Directions of Inter-
domain Influence in Metaphor. Metaphor and 
Symbol, 19(1), pp.1-30. 
Briscoe, E. & J. Carroll. 2002. Robust Accurate Sta-
tistical Annotation of General Text. In Proceedings 
of the 3rd International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation, Las Palmas, Gran Ca-
naria. pp.1499-1504.  
Craggs, R. & Wood. M. 2004. A Two Dimensional 
Annotation Scheme for Emotion in Dialogue. In 
Proceedings of AAAI Spring Symposium: Explor-
ing Attitude and Affect in Text. 
Deignan , A. 2005. Metaphor and corpus Linguistics. 
John Benjamins. 
Egges, A., Kshirsagar, S. & Magnenat-Thalmann, N. 
2003. A Model for Personality and Emotion Simu-
lation, In Proceedings of Knowledge-Based Intelli-
gent Information & Engineering Systems 
(KES2003), Lecture Notes in AI. Springer-Verlag. 
Fussell, S. & Moss, M. 1998. Figurative Language in 
Descriptions of Emotional States. In S. R. Fussell 
and R. J. Kreuz (Eds.), Social and cognitive ap-
proaches to interpersonal communication. Law-
rence Erlbaum.  
Fass, D. 1997. Processing metaphor and metonymy. 
Greenwich, Connecticut: Ablex 
Goatly, A. 1997. The language of metaphors. 
Routledge London and New York:  
Heise, D. R. 1965. Semantic Differential Profiles for 
1,000 Most Frequent English Words. Psychologi-
cal Monographs 79, pp.1-31. 
K?vecses, Z. 1998. Are There Any Emotion-Specific 
Metaphors? In Speaking of Emotions: Conceptuali-
zation and Expression. Athanasiadou, A. and Ta-
bakowska, E. (eds.), Berlin and New York: Mou-
ton de Gruyter, pp.127-151. 
Mason, Z.J. 2004. CorMet: a computational, corpus-
based conventional metaphor extraction system. 
Computational Linguistics 30:1. pp. 23-44. 
Mateas, M. 2002. Ph.D. Thesis. Interactive Drama, 
Art and Artificial Intelligence. School of Computer 
Science, Carnegie Mellon University. 
Moon, R. 1998. Fixed idioms and expressions in Eng-
lish. Clarendon Press: Oxford, U.K 
Ortony, A., Clore, G.L. & Collins, A. 1988. The Cog-
nitive Structure of Emotions. CUP 
Picard, R.W. 2000. Affective Computing. The MIT 
Press. Cambridge MA. 
Sharoff, S. 2005. How to Handle Lexical Semantics in 
SFL: a Corpus Study of Purposes for Using Size 
Adjectives. Systemic Linguistics and Corpus. Lon-
don: Continuum. 
Watson, D. & Tellegen, A. 1985. Toward a Consen-
sual Structure of Mood. Psychological Bulletin, 98, 
pp.219-235.  
Zhe, X. & Boucouvalas, A. C. 2002. Text-to-Emotion 
Engine for Real Time Internet Communication. In 
Proceedings of International Symposium on Com-
munication Systems, Networks and DSPs, Stafford-
shire University, UK, pp.164-168. 
Wallington, A.M., Barnden, J.A., Barnden, M.A., 
Ferguson, F.J. & Glasbey, S.R. 2003. Metaphoric-
ity Signals: A Corpus-Based Investigation. Techni-
cal Report CSRP-03-5, School of Computer Sci-
ence, The University of Birmingham, U.K. 
Wallington, A.M., Barnden, J.A. Glasbey S.R. and 
Lee M. G. 2006. Metaphorical reasoning with an 
economical set of mappings. Delta, 22:1 
Wilks, Y. (1978). Making preferences more active. 
Artificial Intelligence, 10, pp. 75- 97 
54
Considerations on the nature of metaphorical
meaning arising from a computational
treatment of metaphor interpetation
A.M.Wallington, R.Agerri, J.A.Barnden, S.R.Glasbey and M.G.Lee
School of Computer Science,
University of Birmingham, UK)
A. M. Wallington@ cs. bham. ac. uk
Abstract
This paper argues that there need not be a full correspondence between source and
target domains when interpreting metaphors. Instead, inference is performed in
the source domain, and conclusions transferred to the target. A description of a
computer system, ATT-Meta, that partially implements these ideas is provided.
1 Introduction
It is now generally accepted, especially since the work of Lakoff and associates
(e.g. [14,13,15]) that much of everyday discourse shows evidence of metaphor.
Consequently, the question of how metaphor should be interpreted and what
the semantic consequences are of using a metaphor is of major importance in
determining how discourse should be interpreted.
Like Stern [19], we take the position that much of the interpretation of
metaphor is highly context dependent and involves pragmatics. However, we
believe that, for metaphor, pragmatics must be informed by theories of Artifi-
cial Intelligence and psychology. Thus we have some sympathy for Levinson?s
([16] p.161) claim that:
?the interpretation of metaphor must rely on features of our general ability
to reason analogically. ... It could be claimed that linguistic pragmatics alone
should not be expected to provide such a general theory of analogy, without
considerable help from psychological theory 1 .?
We depart from Levinson with respect to analogy, and in this paper, we
shall challenge current theories of analogy (e.g. [7,8,11] and what might
1 Levinson makes it clear that psychological theory includes Artificial Intelligence.
be termed correspondence theories of metaphor (e.g, Lakoff?s Conceptual
Metaphor Theory) in which a source domain is put in correspondence with
a target domain. We shall attempt to show that there is far less parallelism
between source and target than is often assumed and that the process of inter-
preting a metaphor often requires heavy use of inferencing in order to associate
source domain entities for which there is no parallel target equivalent, what
we term ?Map-Transcending Entities? (MTEs), with information that is in-
volved in source to target transfer. Now other AI approaches to metaphor also
emphasise the role of source domain inference, Hobbs [10] and Narayanan [18]
for example. And, Martin?s MIDAS system includes a process of extending
conventional source to target mappings [17]. However, apart from important
technical differences between these systems and our own, we would wish to
stress the implications extensive inferencing has for source-target parallelism
and the repercussions this has for the semantics and pragmatics.
We do not yet have a fully developed semantics and pragmatics of metaphor
(although see [9] for some preliminary suggestions based on Stern). However,
what we do provide is an extensively developed (though informal) inference-
based model of metaphor understanding that employs an event-based formal-
ism similar to that of Hobbs [10], combined with a realization of this approach
in a fully implemented system (ATT-Meta) that effects the type of reasoning
that we claim is at the heart of much metaphor understanding (See [1,4,21]).
2 Correspondence approaches to interpreting metaphor
The work of Lakoff and Johnson e.g. [14,15] not only stressed the ubiquity of
metaphor in everyday discourse, but also noted that many metaphorical utter-
ances could be systematically related to each other, all appealing to different
aspects of the same source domain and being used to describe the same target
domain. In other words, what is involved in metaphor is the mapping of one
cognitive domain into another. For example, Lakoff [13] notes that the follow-
ing metaphors all involve a source domain of journeys being used to describe
a target domain of the progress of a love affair: Look how far we?ve come.
It?s been a long, bumpy road. We can?t turn back now. We?re at a crossroads.
The relationship isn?t going anywhere. We may have to go our separate ways.
We?re spinning our wheels. Our relationship is off the track. The marriage is
on the rocks. We may have to bail out of this relationship. To account for this
generalization, Lakoff assumes a ?LOVE-AS-JOURNEY? mapping, i.e. ?a set
of ontological correspondences that characterize epistemic correspondences by
mapping knowledge about journeys onto knowledge about love? ([13] p207).
Specifically, he assumes the following ontological correspondences:
THE LOVE-AS-JOURNEY MAPPING
i. The lovers correspond to travellers.
ii. The love relationship corresponds to the vehicle.
iii. The lovers? common goals correspond to their common destination.
iv. Difficulties in the relationship correspond to impediments to travel.
Lakoff does not spell out in any detail exactly how the epistemic corre-
spondences function, and how inferences made in the source transfer to the
target. He does however, claim that mappings ?project source domain infer-
ence patterns onto target domain inference patterns? ([13] p245, emphasis
added). However, we might turn to more formal work in analogy for a pos-
sible mechanism. Gentner (e.g. [7]) argues that complex systematic relations
between source domain entities such as causal relations also transfer, whilst
non-systematic relations such as attributes do not.
3 Map Transcending Entities
Let us return to Lakoff?s list above of travel metaphors. Consider the state-
ment that we?re spinning our wheels. How might we infer from this that the
love relationship is not progressing as it might? Plausibly, the following chain
of inferences might be entertained. If wheels are referred to, then, defeasibly 2 ,
a vehicle is involved. The spinning wheels are causing the vehicle not to move
as it should. If the vehicle is not moving as it should then it is not moving
towards its destination.
What can we make of this pattern of inferences? Both the vehicle and
the destination have correspondents in the target domain of the love affair,
namely the love relationship and the lovers? common goals. With these cor-
respondences, we might assume that the source domain conclusion can be
transferred to become a target domain conclusion. But, this is the transfer of
it conclusion. It could never have been reached without the premise that some-
thing -the spinning wheels- was causing the vehicle not to proceed. So what
is the target correspondent of the spinning wheels whose presence is needed
in order to allow the entire inference pattern as opposed to just the conclu-
sion to transfer from source to target? Nothing in the list of four ontological
correspondences would seem to be appropriate.
If we look at the other examples listed, we find similar cases where the
lack of a target domain correspondent would prevent crucial aspects of the
inference pattern mapping from source to target. For example, what is the
target domain correspondent of the rocks in the utterance our marriage is on
the rocks? A similar point can be made about the location off the track in
our relationship is off the track. It is not that these statements are uninter-
pretable. Both would seem to permit the same conclusion that was reached
about the spinning wheels, namely that the relationship/vehicle is not pro-
gressing towards the destination and hence not towards the lovers? goal.
Note that it does not seem quite right to assume that the spinning wheels,
rocks or lack of tracks are ?impediments? in the sense of the third of Lakoff?s
2 We shall henceforth assume that inferences are defeasible unless otherwise stated.
correspondences. There may be an interpretation under which the bumps in
the statement its been a long bumpy road refer to specific, listable, difficulties
in the love relationship, and similarly, the rocks may refer, for some, to a par-
ticular event, but both could be used more generally. Whatever, if anything,
wheels might refer to it is a vague and very unspecific target domain entity.
Let us now consider the utterance: We?re at a crossroads. Stating that we
are at some location on a road might be taken to implicate that we are going
somewhere along the road and hence have a destination. This would map to
a target domain ?common goal? However, there is no specific correspondent
given for crossroads. The source domain inference that if one is at a crossroads,
then there is a choice of possible destinations cannot transfer to the target
domain inference that there is a choice of possible relationship goals, if, as is
stated, inference patterns are mapped from one domain to another.
Now, a lack of target correspondents for source domain entities is not pe-
culiar to the LOVE AS A JOURNEY conceptual metaphor, but is generally
the case. In section 3, we shall give a description of our approach to metaphor-
ical reasoning and our computational system ATT-Meta that performs such
reasoning. A sentence that we shall analyse in some detail is the following:
1 In the far reaches of her mind, Mary believed Kyle was having an affair.
We assume that there is a mapping between ideas such as the idea that
Kyle was having an affair and physical, manipulable, objects. This reification
of ideas has a wide currency. We shall also assume here that the mind is often
viewed as a physical space. However, what does the far reaches refer to?
So what are we to make of these lacunae which prevent the step by step
transfer of inferences about the source becoming inferences about the tar-
get? Note that the absence of target domain correspondents of source domain
entities is not a mere technical problem in determining how source domain
implications transfer and become target domain implications, nor should we
assume that Lakoff?s claim that entire inference patterns as opposed to
certain conclusions transfer is just an imprecise form of words. If there are
no target domain correspondents of source domain entities, then we must as-
sume that there are entities in texts have no reference even indirectly via a
target domain equivalent to anything in the real world. There are entities
that can only be made sense of in terms of their literal meaning in the source
domain; a somewhat similar conclusion to Davidson?s [5] well known claim
that metaphors have only a literal meaning.
One possibility is that the four correspondences given in the LOVE AS A
JOURNEY mapping in section 2 are not intended to be exhaustive and the
mapping would if properly specified include correspondences for the entities we
have discussed. For example, the crossroads example might motivate adding
the following correspondence to the mapping.
v. A choice of goals corresponds to a choice of destinations.
However, a number of objections can be made to this view. Many concep-
tual metaphors are open-ended allowing almost any entity associated with the
source domain to be used when speaking of the target. Now, not all of these
might be conventional. They might make use of what Lakoff and Johnson
([14] p 53) call ?the unused part? of the source domain. For example, Lakoff
[13] gives an example of a creative use of the conceptual metaphor LOVE IS
A JOURNEY, the song lyric we?re riding in the fast lane on the freeway of
love. There is no correspondent listed for fast lane nor for a freeway of love.
It would seem that no finite list of correspondents would ever be enough. This
criticism would also defeat lexically based treatments of metaphor.
The last example contained very little that could plausibly correspond to
target-domain entities; perhaps just the inference that a journey and thus
a destination is involved. However, it might be conceded that whilst many
modifier phrases often do not correspond, overall statement-like constituents
of the source will correspond to statements in the target. However, consider
the following example from real discourse of a particular metaphorical view
running through several consecutive statement-like utterances:
?She was too confused to judge anything. If he?d done nothing else, he?d
at least invaded her thoughts and tossed them around until there was only
chaos in her head.?
We shall assume that the clauses he?d at least invaded her thoughts, [he
had] tossed them around and there was only chaos in her head all rely on
the metaphorical views of IDEAS AS PHYSICAL OBJECTS and MIND AS
PHYSICAL SPACE, and taken together partially convey, in target-domain
terms, that the man, ?he?, had done something that had resulted in the
thoughts of the woman, ?her?, not functioning as they ought. But is
there any need to assume a specific target-domain parallel for tossing physical
objects around? A similar point can be made about the statement he?d ...
invaded her thoughts : the invading is just mentioned as a way of emphasizing
that he had done something that had had a strong effect on her thoughts.
Now, it is possible that the mention of invading may have been used if
the man had introduced thoughts into the woman?s mind by saying things
to her; the invading corresponding to introducing. It is then these thoughts
that caused the tossing of the woman?s pre-existing thoughts. However, it is
possible to imagine the above discourse segment occurring in a context where
it is clear that the man had not communicated anything to her.
In short, even a sentence, the traditional unit of analysis of truth, might
have no meaning other than in terms of the source domain. In the rest of this
paper we shall describe our approach and implemented computational model,
ATT-Meta, for reasoning with metaphorical utterances that contain MTEs.
4 Inferencing and ATT-Meta
Recall that our proposed fifth correspondence in the previous section had a
?choice? in the target corresponding to a ?choice? in the source. If we look at the
fourth correspondence, we find something similar. A target domain ?difficulty?
corresponds to a type of difficulty or ?impediment? in the source. Note also
that Lakoff argues a-propos the ?fast lane? song lyric that driving in the fast
lane is exciting and that the excitement transfers to the target. And we could
give examples in which other emotional states transfer from the source to the
target. In the ?invasion? passage, the conclusion that the woman?s mind was
not functioning properly was likewise transferred. What all these cases have in
common is that they involve essentially ?invariant? transfers from the source
to the target. These are of a very different nature from the cross-domain
correspondences between say journeys and love affairs. We argue that such
transfers are affected by what we term ?View-Neutral Mapping Adjuncts?
and argue that they apply universally, at least by default, regardless of what
cross-domain mappings are in play and our system has made a start both
at investigating what VNMAs are required and at formalising some of them.
(See [2,3,21] for more details.)
In order to sketch our approach let us return to the Anne/Kyle example:
1 In the far reaches of her mind, Anne believed Kyle was having an affair[.]
and compare it to the following variant:
2 Anne had in her mind the belief that Kyle was having an affair.
We assume that both sentences utilize the conceptual metaphors (a term
which we replace with the more neutral ?metaphorical view? in our work):
(A) IDEAS AS PHYSICAL OBJECTS (B) MIND AS PHYSICAL SPACE.
We assume that one correspondence included under view (A) is the fol-
lowing: ?Conscious mental processing corresponds to physical manipulation.?
(See [12] for motivation). We also assume that with activities such as pro-
cessing/manipulating, which one can have the ability to perform to a greater
or lesser degree, DEGREE is a VNMA and maps over from source to target
in an invariant manner. Thus a very low ability to mentally process an idea
corresponds to a very low ability to physically manipulate an object.
We assume that accompanying metaphorical view (B) are two ancillary as-
sumptions. Firstly, that the conscious self of the mind?s possessor is metaphor-
ically cast as a person physically located in (a central part of) the mind-region.
Secondly, that when a cognitive state (such as believing) is cast as located in
a physical sub-region of a mind, then the idea or whatever that is the object
of the state is also to be thought of as physically located in that sub-region.
As we suggested in the previous section, we assume that there is no known
correspondent for the far reaches; it is a map-transcending entity.
So how does the informational contribution of (1) and (2) differ? Plausibly,
what (2) principally conveys to the reader is that Anne has the ability to
operate in a conscious mental way on the idea that Kyle was having an affair.
In brief: Anne is aware of the affair. By contrast, what (1) seems to convey
is that the ability to operate holds only to a very low degree. In brief: Anne
had very little conscious awareness of the affair.
Thus, the situation described by the ?far reaches? utterance is cast as being
one where Anne?s conscious self is a person in a central part of Anne?s mind-
region, and the idea that Kyle was having an affair is in the far reaches of
the mind-region. Now, let us assume that the understander?s common sense
knowledge of physical space and physical objects includes the following:
* things in the far reaches of a region are usually distant from things in a
central part (distance being relative to the scale of the whole region).
* if a person is physically distant from a physical object then the person usually
has only a very low degree of ability to manipulate that object physically.
Thus, the understander can reason, within the terms of the source domains
of the metaphorical views (PHYSICAL SPACE and PHYSICAL OBJECTS),
that, probably, Anne?s conscious self has only 3 a very low degree of ability to
physically manipulate the idea that Kyle was having an affair.
This conclusion can become the target-domain conclusion that Anne has
only a very low degree of ability to operate in a conscious mental way on the
idea that Kyle was having an affair, by virtue of the correspondence between
physical manipulation and conscious mental processing that was assumed as
an aspect of the IDEAS AS PHYSICAL OBJECTS mapping, and by virtue
of the VNMA invariantly mapping the very low degree from source to target.
In our approach source-target correspondences are implicit in transfer
rules. In the case of the correspondences just mentioned, English glosses of
the relevant rules include:
* IF in reality X is a person and K is an idea
* AND K is being viewed as a physical object
* AND person X?s conscious self is being viewed as being able to
operate physically on K to at least degree D
* THEN presumably in reality X can mentally operate consciously
on K to degree at least D.
This rule allows one aspect of the source-domain conclusion to lead to the
target-domain conclusion that Anne can mentally operate consciously on the
Kyle-affair idea to degree at least ?very low?.
In sum, our approach involves the following main types of processing:
* Construction of a representation of the direct, source-domain meaning of
the utterance, i.e. the meaning it has by taking only the source-domain senses
of the metaphorically-used words/phrases in the utterance. This meaning
consists of one or more propositions.
* In some cases, application of ancillary assumptions associated with the rele-
vant metaphorical views to create further propositions in source-domain terms.
* Usually, performance of source-domain reasoning on the basis of the direct
3 A very low degree of ability might implicate that Anne does not have a higher degree,
but does not entail it. Hence our addition of ?only?.
source-domain meaning, the products of ancillary assumptions, and general
knowledge relevant to the source domain meaning.
* Source-to-target transfer acts by application of transfer rules (and VNMAs).
This listing does not imply any particular temporal ordering of the types
of processing. Indeed in ATT-Meta the reasoning actually works backwards
from reasoning queries posed internally within the system and can involve any
intertwining and ordering of instances of the above types of reasoning.
An important feature of our approach that we have not yet mentioned is
that it encapsulates the source-domain reasoning based on the literal meaning
of the utterance within a special computational context we call a pretence
cocoon. Metaphorical transfer acts based on rules such as those above oper-
ate between the inside of the pretence cocoon and the reality-context outside.
Thus, for the Anne/Kyle example, the understander pretends, within the co-
coon, that Anne?s mind really is a physical space and that the believing really
does occur in the far reaches of this space. Consequences of this are inferred
in the pretence cocoon, possibly by substantial amounts of reasoning, using
ancillary assumptions and knowledge about physical objects and space. The
conclusions reached may then be able to be transmuted, via transfer rules
forming part of the relevant metaphorical views, into propositions in the re-
ality environment. However, we ought to stress that many different lines of
reasoning will be explored, many ultimately proving unsuccessful.
We should also stress that when a pretence cocoon is created, it is not
tagged as having to do with any particular metaphorical view. Only by hav-
ing the utterance?s direct source-domain meaning placed within it, such as the
mind having far-reaches, can an inference be made that that the particular
metaphorical view MIND AS PHYSICAL SPACE with its associated corre-
spondences is being used. Thus, even the question of the metaphorical views
involved in an utterance results from a possibly extensive web of inferences.
Finally note that although Anne?s mind is categorized in the pretence
as a physical region, this is in addition to its being categorized there as a
mind. (Thus, a pretence cocoon is reminiscent of a blend space in Blending
Theory: [6].) Given the existence of suitable knowledge rules, such as that
a mind is not a physical region, we can get conflicting propositions arising
within the pretence, because in general it is wrong to prevent rules about the
target domain operating within the pretence. In the present case we would
get both strong support for the mind being a physical region and for its not
being a physical region. The ATT-Meta system implements conflict-resolution
mechanisms that deal with reasoning conflicts in general, and that embody
a small number of general principles about conflict resolution in metaphor
[1,20]. In the present case, the mechanisms ensure that the proposition that
Anne?s mind is a physical region wins over the proposition that it is not.
5 Conclusion
We have provided a brief outline of some of the ideas in our implemented,
inference-based approach to metaphor. Much more detail, including the ap-
plication to other examples, can be found elsewhere [1,2,4].
The main point has been the use of inference to connect source-domain as-
pects that are raised by an utterance but not handled by known metaphorical
mappings to source-domain aspects in mappings that the understander does
know, and particularly to knowledge of what invariant aspects of metaphorical
utterances are likely to transfer. By this means, the approach can deal with
open-ended extensions of metaphorical beyond what can be readily dealt with
by known mappings by themselves, without the need for creating mappings
for the unmapped source-domain aspects.
We thus radically downplay source/target parallelism in metaphor in favour
of inference, and place great weight on the thesis that metaphors often intro-
duce source-domain aspects that do not need any correspondents in the target
domain (let alne already have any): their only purpose is to support useful
lines of source-domain inference that connect to known mappings. One of
the interesting semantic issues raised is that these unmapped aspects do not
by themselves have any meaning in target-domain terms, and it would be a
mistake to try to specify such meaning.
6 acknowledgements
This work has been supported by current and past grants: EP/C538943/1 and
GR/M64208, from the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council.
References
[1] Barnden, J.A. (2001) Uncertainty and conflict handling in the ATT-Meta
context-based system for metaphorical reasoning. In, V. Akman, P. Bouquet,
R. Thomason and R.A. Young (Eds), Procs. Third International Conference on
Modeling and Using Context. Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 2116.
Berlin: Springer, 15-29.
[2] Barnden, J.A. and Lee, M.G., (2001). Understanding open-ended usages of
familiar conceptual metaphors: An approach and artificial intelligence system.
Technical Report CSRP-01-05, School of Computer Science, University of
Birmingham.
[3] Barnden, J.A., Glasbey, S.R., Lee M.G. and Wallington, A.M. (2003). Domain-
transcending mappings in a system for metaphorical reasoning. In Proceedings
of the Research Note Sessions of the 10th Conference of EACL.
[4] Barnden, J.A., Glasbey, S.R., Lee, M.G. and Wallington, A.M. (2004), Varieties
and directions of inter-domain influence in metaphor. Metaphor and Symbol
19(1), 1?30.
[5] Davidson, D. (1979). What metaphors mean. In, S. Sacks (Ed.), On Metaphor.
U. Chicago Press, 29-45.
[6] Fauconnier, G and Turner, M. (2002). The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending
and the Minds Hidden Complexities. NY: Basic Books.
[7] Gentner, G. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy.
Cognitive Science, 7(2), 155?170.
[8] Gentner, D., Falkenhainer, B. and Skorstad, J. (1988). Viewing metaphor as
analogy. In D.H. Helman (Ed.), Analogical reasoning. Dordrecht. Kluwer.
[9] Glasbey, S.R and Barnden, J.A. (submitted). Towards a situation-based
discourse semantics for metaphor. Submitted to the journal Research on
Language and Computation.
[10] Hobbs, J.R. (1990) Literature and Cognition CSLI Lecture Notes, Center for
the Study of Language and Information, Stanford University.
[11] Holyoak, K J. and Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by constraint
satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13(3), 295-355.
[12] Jaekel, O. (1995). The Metaphorical Concept of Mind, in J.R. Taylor and R.E.
MacLaury (eds), Language and the Cognitive Construal of the World. Berlin New
York, Mouton de Gruyter. 197?229.
[13] Lakoff, G. (1993). The contemporary theory of metaphor. In A Ortony (Ed.),
Metaphor and Thought, 2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
[14] Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By. University of
Chicago Press.
[15] Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh. NY: Basic Books.
[16] Levinson, S. (1983). Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[17] Martin, J. H. (1990). A Computational Model of Metaphor Interpretation. NY:
Academic Press.
[18] Narayanan, S. (1999). ?Moving right along: A computational model of
metaphoric reasoning about events,? Procs. National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, pp.121?128. AAAI Press.
[19] Stern, J. (2000). Metaphor in Context. Cambridge, MA and London, UK:
Bradford Books, MIT Press.
[20] Wallington, A.M and Barnden, J.A. (2004). Uncertainty in Metaphorical
Reasoning. In Procs of the Workshop on Computational Models of Natural
Argument (CMNA) at ECAI 2004. August 2004, Valencia, Spain.
[21] Wallington, A.M., Barnden, J.A. Glasbey S.R. and Lee M. G. (2006).
Metaphorical reasoning with an economical set of mappings. Delta, 22:1.
Textual Entailment as an
Evaluation Framework for
Metaphor Resolution:
A Proposal
Rodrigo Agerri
John Barnden
Mark Lee
Alan Wallington
University of Birmingham (UK)
email: r.agerri@cs.bham.ac.uk
Abstract
We aim to address two complementary deficiencies in Natural Language
Processing (NLP) research: (i) Despite the importance and prevalence of
metaphor across many discourse genres, and metaphor?s many functions,
applied NLP has mostly not addressed metaphor understanding. But,
conversely, (ii) difficult issues in metaphor understanding have hindered
large-scale application, extensive empirical evaluation, and the handling
of the true breadth of metaphor types and interactions with other language
phenomena. In this paper, abstracted from a recent grant proposal, a new
avenue for addressing both deficiencies and for inspiring new basic re-
search on metaphor is investigated: namely, placing metaphor research
within the ?Recognizing Textual Entailment? (RTE) task framework for
evaluation of semantic processing systems.
357
358 Agerri, Barnden, Lee, and Wallington
1 Introduction
The RTE task and annual Challenges (Dagan et al, 2007), starting in 2005, have arisen
as an evaluation framework for applied semantics in response to the fact that in NLP
applications ? such as Question Answering (QA), Information Retrieval/Extraction
(IR, IE), etc. ? the development of semantic algorithms and models have been scat-
tered, or tailored to specific applications, making it difficult to compare and evaluate
them within one framework. RTE is interesting because QA, IE, etc. can all be cast
as RTE problems. In RTE, one text fragment, the Text T, is said to entail another one,
the Hypothesis H, when humans considering T and H judge that H follows from T
(perhaps only plausibly/defeasibly). Thus, entailment is a commonsense matter, not a
precise logic-based one. An example of a T/H pair is as follows (metaphor in italics):
(1) T: Lyon is actually the gastronomic capital of France.
H: Lyon is the capital of France.
Metaphor can roughly be characterized as describing something (the target) as if it
were something else (the source) to which it is perceived, or set forth, as being some-
how analogous. Metaphor has long been identified as being ubiquitous in language
(Goatly, 1997), including ordinary conversation, newspaper articles, popular novels,
popular science writing, classroom dialogue, etc. In a study (Tech. Rept. CSRP-03-05
at our School, 2003) we found one metaphorical term per 17.3 words, averaging across
various discourses of different genres. This is in line with other researchers? studies
though counts vary widely because of theory-relativity, researchers? aims, and marked
usage differences between genres. Gedigian et al (2006) note that 90% of uses of a
set of verbs of spatial motion, manipulation, and health in a Wall Street Journal corpus
were metaphorical. Some metaphor examples arising in past RTE datasets are the Ts
in T/H pairs (1?4), with human judgments No, Yes, No and No respectively.
(2) T: The technological triumph known as GPS was incubated in the mind of Ivan
Getting.
H: Ivan Getting invented the GPS.
(3) T: Convinced that pro-American officials are in the ascendancy in Tokyo, they
talk about turning Japan into the Britain of the Far East.
H: Britain is located in the Far East.
(4) T: Even today, within the deepest recesses of our mind, lies a primordial fear
that will not allow us to enter the sea without thinking about the possibility of
being attacked by a shark.
H: A shark attacked a human being.
Importantly, metaphor is often not just a matter of particular terms with particular
metaphorical senses that are entrenched (i.e., that are commonly used, default senses;
and possibly listed in dictionaries). Certainly the metaphorical senses of ?capital? and
?incubate? used in (1) and (2) are at least moderately entrenched. For ?incubate,?
Textual Entailment as an Evaluation Framework for Metaphor Resolution 359
some dictionaries list a slow, protective sense of development (in a general, possibly
non-physical sense), or for ?capital? a sense like ?a city [or place more generally]
preeminent in some special activity? [Merriam-Websters]. But (3) shows one common
type of non-entrenchedmetaphor, of the general form ?the X of Y?, where X and/or Y
are often named entities. The point of such a metaphor is typically only clear with the
help of context. Reference to recesses of a mind as in (4) is common, and a lexicon
could reasonably include a metaphorical sense of ?recess? that was directly applicable
to minds (though WordNet 3.0, e.g, does not), or include ?within the recesses of [X?s]
mind? as a stock phrase with a sense of relative inaccessibility or unmodifiability of
a thought or feeling. But the phraseology can be productively varied: e.g., ?deepest?
can be omitted or replaced by ?dim?, ?darkest?, ?foulest?, ?hidden?, etc. ? by any
compatible qualifier that emphasizes hiddenness or obstacles to accessibility. And the
fact that such access difficulties are being emphasized is a matter for general semantic
reasoning about the qualifier.
2 Why Metaphor in NLP?
Generally, in metaphor understanding research, a specialized system has been fed a
relatively small number of metaphorical inputs, and the correct outputs have been
dictated by the researcher, (e.g. Fass, 1997; Falkenhainer et al, 1989; Martin, 1990;
Barnden et al, 2003). However, metaphor in particular and figurative language in
general suffers a chronic lack of shared resources for proper evaluation of systems
(Markert and Nissim, 2007). In using the RTE evaluation framework, computational
metaphor researchers may for the first time have sizable, shared datasets, and a uni-
form evaluation method based on systematically and transparently collected human
judgments. Also, metaphor researchers will be challenged and inspired to connect
metaphor more than before to other complex linguistic phenomena.
NLP applications that RTE serves have mostly not addressed metaphor, and nei-
ther have RTE systems themselves. Indeed, despite examples (1-4), RTE datasets
have tended to avoid metaphor of more difficult types. Metaphor in general can in-
troduce additional context-sensitivity and indeterminacy in entailment, whereas RTE
Challenges have mainly concentrated on T/H pairs supporting relatively crisp, uncon-
troversial judgments (Zaenen et al (2005); RTE organizers (personal communication);
our own analysis of existing RTE datasets in Tech. Rept. CSRP-08-01, 2008). In fact,
on examples such as (1), a system must interpret ?capital? metaphorically, but as Bos
and Markert (2006) reported, the inability of their system to process metaphor meant
that it was incorrect on this example.
Further evidence is given by results on example (1) of the four RTE-1 systems avail-
able to us (out of 16 systems; the 4 include the 1st, 3rd and 4th best systems in terms of
accuracy over whole dataset). Only one reported system run was correct. The systems
mostly performed worse across (1) together with 10 other metaphor cases than on the
whole dataset, with statistical significance at 0.05 level (Fisher?s independence test);
only one system run gave a better performance. In RTE-2 (23 systems), analysis of
10 system runs shows that, across 9 metaphorical examples in the dataset, the systems
(including the most accurate one over the whole dataset) performed worse than they
did over the rest of the dataset; in 7 of the 10 RTE-2 runs compared the deficit was
statistically significant at < 0.05 level (Fisher?s test, see Tech Rept. CSRP-08-01).
360 Agerri, Barnden, Lee, and Wallington
3 RoadMap: Datasets and Metaphor Processing
Our initiative mainly consists of (A): Create a public, annotated, metaphor-focussed
text dataset suitable for RTE evaluation and testing of metaphor processing systems;
and (B): Develop a prototype RTE system centred on processing (at least) the types
of metaphor arising in (A). We will mainly address point (B) in this paper. As for
A, metaphors vary along several dimensions of interest, such as: the target subject
matter (e.g., Lyon?s food, GPS development, Japanese foreign politics, shark fear in
examples 1?4); the source subject matter; what particular, familiar metaphorical views
(e.g., Idea as Living Being, in (2)) are used; whether the meaning in context is listed
in dictionaries, WordNet, etc; whether the wording is (a variant of) a familiar idiom;
the syntax used. Based on such dimensions, we will analyse the types of metaphor
present in past RTE datasets and in the genres of text (e.g., newspapers) they drew
from. One particular source will be the 242K-word metaphor-orientated corpus that
we derived from the British National Corpus. To find metaphor examples elsewhere,
we will use known metaphorical phrases and lexical/syntactic templates as seeds for
automated search over general corpora or web. We will also investigate the use or
adaptation of other researchers? automated detection/mining techniques (e.g. Birke
and Sarkar, 2006; Gedigian et al, 2006).
4 Metaphor Processing
We will develop metaphor processing algorithms on an integrated spectrum going
from relatively ?shallow? forms of processing to relatively ?deep? forms. The deeper
are for when more inference is necessary and feasible; when less necessary or feasible,
the shallower are appropriate (but they can still involve at least partial parsing, approx-
imate semantic analysis, etc.). A significant research issue will be how to choose the
attempted depth(s) of analysis and how to choose or combine different methods? re-
sults. The deeper and shallower ends of the spectrum will take as starting points our
two previous metaphor-understanding approaches, from our ATT-Meta and E-Drama
projects respectively (Barnden et al, 2003; Wallington et al, 2008).
For detectingmetaphor, we can extendmethods from our E-drama project (Walling-
ton et al, 2008). This involves a mixture of light semantic analysis via tools such as
WordNet and recognition of lexical and syntactic signals of metaphoricity (Goatly,
1997). We aim also to recognize specific idiomatic phrases and systematic variations
of them. We will consider looking for semantic restriction violations, which some-
times accompany metaphor (cf. Fass (1997) and Mason (2004)), and using statistical
techniques borrowed from such work as Gedigian et al (2006).
Example (4) about ?recesses? is similar to metaphor examples studied in the ATT-
Meta project, and ATT-Meta-style reasoning could handle the Text. As for (2), note
that the word ?incubate? may have a directly usable lexicon-listed meaning (e.g., help
to develop much as in WordNet 3.0). However, if the system?s lexicon did not contain
such a sense, ATT-Meta-style processing would apply. ATT-Meta processing would
involve commonsense reasoning in source-domain terms (here, biological and other
physical terms): e.g., to infer that the idea was a living being, Getting?s mind was
a physical region, the idea was kept warm in that region, and the idea consequently
biologically developed there. Hence, there was a relatively protracted, continuous
Textual Entailment as an Evaluation Framework for Metaphor Resolution 361
process; the idea became more functional as a living being; and the idea needed pro-
tection from physical harm (= disenablement of function-inhibiting influences). These
default conclusions can then be translated into reality (target-based) terms: there was
a protracted, (non-physical) continuous process of change; the idea needed protection
during it; and the idea ended up being more functional. The basis for such translation
is View-Neutral Mapping Adjuncts, a special type of mappings that cover the shape
of events and processes, temporal properties and relationships, causation, functioning,
mental states, emotional states, value judgments and various other matters (Agerri
et al, 2007; Barnden et al, 2003).
RTE-2 organisers claimed there has been a trend towards using more deep inference
and that this has been beneficial provided that it is based on enough knowledge. (See
also Bos and Markert (2006) and Clark et al (2007)). The depth and knowledge needs
of ATT-Meta?s processing are like those of deeper parts of existing RTE systems, but
ATT-Meta is currently equipped only with small, hand-constructed knowledge bases.
So, our main focus in deeper processing will actually be on a shallowed, broadened
form of ATT-Meta-style reasoning. In this sense, we aim to look at common-sense
knowledge resources such as ConceptNet 3.0 which contains relationships such as
causation, function, etc. ? the types of information transferred by some of ATT-
Meta?s VNMAs ? or modified WordNets enriched by extra, web-mined knowledge
(Veale and Hao, 2008), where the extra knowledge is especially relevant to metaphor-
ical usages.
ATT-Meta?s reasoning is by backwards chaining from goals derivable from context
surrounding a metaphor. This relevance-based inference-focussingwill be key in other
processing we develop, and is highly RTE-compatible. An RTE Hypothesis can act as
(part of) a reasoning goal, with the metaphor?s within-Text context supplying further
information or goal parts. T?s own original context is of course unavailable, but this
obstacle faces human judges as well.
We will also further extend our E-Drama project?s methods, based there on robust
parsing using the Rasp system and computation over WordNet. The methods are cur-
rently largely confined to metaphors of ?X is Y? form where X is a person and Y
is some type of animal, supernatural being, artefact or natural physical object. We
will generalize to other categories for X and Y, and to cases where the categorization
is only implicit. We will make the syntactic/semantic analysis of WordNet synset-
glosses and the way the system traverses the network more advanced. We will extend
our associated treatment of metaphorically-used size adjectives (as in ?little bully?).
However, the methods are also currently confined to detecting emotional/value
judgments about X (unpleasantness, etc.), and mainly exploit metaphorical informa-
tion that is already implicitly in WordNet, e.g., ?pig? meaning a coarse, obnoxious
person, in one synset. Substantial research is needed to go beyond these limitations.
One avenue will be to apply VNMAs: when a synset gloss couches a metaphorical
sense, we could extract not just affect but other types of information that VNMAs
handle (causation, process shape, etc.); and when a gloss couches a non-metaphorical
sense, we could translate some aspects of it via VNMAs.
362 Agerri, Barnden, Lee, and Wallington
5 Concluding Remarks
This paper aims to provide an avenue for giving metaphor-understanding the promi-
nence it merits in NLP applications and in RTE, and thereby also to engender basic
and applied research advances on metaphor by ourselves and others.
RTE researchers and NLP applications developers will benefit, as systems will gain
added accuracy and coverage by addressing metaphor. Beneficiary application areas
aside from QA, IR, etc., include Knowledge Management, Information Access, and
intelligent conversation agents.
References
Agerri, R., J. Barnden, M. Lee, and A. Wallington (2007). Metaphor, inference and
domain independent mappings. In Proceedings of Research Advances in Natural
Language Processing (RANLP 2007), Borovets, Bulgaria, pp. 17?24.
Barnden, J., S. Glasbey, M. Lee, and A. Wallington (2003). Domain-transcending
mappings in a system for metaphorical reasoning. In Companion Proceedings of
the 10th Conference on the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (EACL-03), pp. 57?61.
Birke, J. and A. Sarkar (2006). A clustering approach for the nearly unsupervised
recognition of nonliteral language. In Proceedings of the 11th Conference on the
European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL 2006),
Trento, Italy, pp. 329?336.
Bos, J. and K. Markert (2006). Recognizing textual entailment with robust logical
inference. In J. Qui?onero-Candela, I. Dagan, B. Magnini, and F. d?Alch? Buc
(Eds.), MLCW 2005, Volume 3944 of LNAI, pp. 404?426. Springer-Verlag.
Clark, P., W. Murray, J. Thompson, P. Harrison, J. Hobbs, and C. Fellbaum (2007). On
the role of lexical and world knowledge in RTE3. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing, Prague, pp. 54?59. ACL 2007.
Dagan, I., O. Glickman, and B. Magnini (2007). The PASCAL Recognising Tex-
tual Entailment challenge. In J. Qui?onero-Candela, I. Dagan, B. Magnini, and
F. d?Alch? Buc (Eds.), MLCW 2005, Volume 3944 of LNAI, pp. 177?190. Springer-
Verlag.
Falkenhainer, B., K. Forbus, and D. Gentner (1989). The structure-mapping engine:
algorithm and examples. Artificial Intelligence 41(1), 1?63.
Fass, D. (1997). Processing metaphor and metonymy. Greenwich, Connecticut:
Ablex.
Gedigian, M., J. Bryant, S. Narayanan, and B. Ciric (2006). Catching metaphors. In
Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Scalable Natural Language Understanding,
New York, pp. 41?48.
Goatly, A. (1997). The Language of Metaphors. Routledge.
Textual Entailment as an Evaluation Framework for Metaphor Resolution 363
Markert, K. and M. Nissim (2007, June). Semeval-2007: Metonymy resolution at
semeval-2007. In International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-
2007), Prague, pp. 36?41. Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-07).
Martin, J. (1990). A computational model of metaphor interpretation. New York:
Academic Press.
Mason, Z. (2004). CorMet: a computational, corpus-based conventional metaphor
extraction system. Computational Linguistics 30(1), 23?44.
Veale, T. and Y. Hao (2008). EnrichingWordNet with folk knowledge and stereotypes.
In Proceedings of the 4th Global WordNet Conference, Szeged, Hungary.
Wallington, A., R. Agerri, J. Barnden, M. Lee, and T. Rumbell (2008, May). Affect
transfer by metaphor for an intelligent conversational agent. In Proceedings of the
LREC 2008 Workshop on Sentiment Analysis: Emotion, Metaphor, Ontology and
Terminology (EMOT 08), Marrakech, Morocco, pp. 102?107.
Zaenen, A., L. Karttunen, and R. Crouch (2005). Local textual inference: Can it be
defined or circumscribed? In Proceedings of the ACL 05 Workshop on Empirical
Modelling of Semantic Equivalence and Entailment, pp. 31?36.
Zock/Rapp/Huang (eds.): Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon, pages 166?173,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23, 2014.
Dimensions of Metaphorical Meaning
Andrew Gargett
?
, Josef Ruppenhofer
?
and John Barnden
?
?
University of Birmingham
United Kingdom
{a.d.gargett|j.a.barnden}@cs.bham.ac.uk
?
Hildesheim University
Germany
ruppenho@uni-hildesheim.de
Abstract
Recent work suggests that concreteness and imageability play an important role in the mean-
ings of figurative expressions. We investigate this idea in several ways. First, we try to define
more precisely the context within which a figurative expression may occur, by parsing a corpus
annotated for metaphor. Next, we add both concreteness and imageability as ?features? to the
parsed metaphor corpus, by marking up words in this corpus using a psycholinguistic database of
scores for concreteness and imageability. Finally, we carry out detailed statistical analyses of the
augmented version of the original metaphor corpus, cross-matching the features of concreteness
and imageability with others in the corpus such as parts of speech and dependency relations, in
order to investigate in detail the use of such features in predicting whether a given expression is
metaphorical or not.
1 Introduction
Figurative language plays an important role in ?grounding? our communication in the world around us.
Being able to talk metaphorically about ?the journey of life?, ?getting into a relationship?, whether there
are ?strings attached? to a contract, or even just ?surfing the internet?, are important and useful aspects of
everyday discourse. Recent work on such phenomena has pursued this kind of grounding in interesting
directions, in particular, treating it as a way of injecting meanings that are somehow more ?concrete?
into daily discourse (Neuman et al., 2013; Turney et al., 2011; Tsvetkov et al., 2013), or else as a way
of expressing abstract ideas in terms of concepts that are more ?imageable?, where imageability can be
defined as how easily a word can evoke mental imagery, (Cacciari and Glucksberg, 1995; Gibbs, 2006;
Urena and Faber, 2010). It should be noted that while it is generally accepted that imageability and
concreteness are highly correlated, recent work has shown they are contrastive, in particular, in their
interaction with additional cognitive dimensions such as affective states, so that they ?can no longer be
considered interchangeable constructs? (Dellantonio et al., 2014).
When someone describes love as a journey, or life as a test, one possible way of thinking about what
they are doing is that they are trying to cast a fairly abstract idea or concept, such as love or life, in
terms of more concrete or imageable experiences or concepts, such as a journey or a test. More formally,
metaphor can be characterized as the mapping of properties from a ?source? domain concept (typically
more concrete) on to a ?target? domain concept (typically more abstract). However, despite the ease
with which people understand both established metaphors such as these, or even more novel ones
1
,
and despite well-established findings about the ubiquity of metaphor in everyday discourse (Lakoff and
Johnson, 1980), explicit and testable proposals for the mechanisms underlying such forms of expression
remain elusive.
When looking for such mechanisms, it seems natural to start with the patterns of language that so
effectively convey metaphorical meanings. Along these lines, Deignan (2006) argues that:
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence. Page numbers and proceedings
footer are added by the organisers. Licence details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
1
Consider how readily one can make sense of a novel, yet metaphorical utterance, such as ?life is a box of chocolates? (from
a recent film), despite never having heard it before.
166
[M]etaphorical uses of words show differences in their grammatical behavior, or even their
word class, when compared to their literal use. In addition, it shows that metaphorical uses of
a word commonly appear in distinctive and relatively fixed syntactic patterns.
Focusing on word class of figurative expressions, so-called content words, such as nouns, adjectives
and verbs, have long been considered to more strongly convey figurative meanings than so-called func-
tion words, such as prepositions (Neuman et al., 2013; Tsvetkov et al., 2013). Yet, Steen et al. (2010)
find prepositions within figurative expressions to be as prevalent as content words such as nouns and
verbs, and indeed, for particular genres (such as academic texts) prepositions are the most frequently
attested part of speech for figurative expressions.
Further, there has been work on the interaction between metaphorical expressions and syntactically
defined contexts (e.g. phrase, clause, sentence). For example, Neuman et al. (2013) investigate how
metaphorical expressions apparently pattern by syntactically definable types, specifically: Type I, where
?a subject noun is associated with an object noun via a form of the copula verb to be? (e.g. ?God is a
king?), Type II having the verb as ?the focus of the metaphorical use representing the act of a subject
noun on an object noun? (e.g. ?The war absorbed his energy?), and Type III ?involve an adjective-
noun phrase? (e.g. ?sweet girl?). While such work yields a useful typology of figurative expressions,
such investigations into the syntactic patterns of figurative forms of expression is far from exhaustive. It
would be useful to take this further somewhat, with a more rigorous, syntactically precise definition of
the context of occurrence of figurative language.
Motivated by the above considerations, we have begun investigating the interaction of concreteness
and imageability with figurative meanings in several ways. This paper reports the initial stages of this
ongoing work into the dimensions of meaning of figurative language such as metaphor. As part of this
work, we have attempted to define more precisely the context within which a figurative expression may
occur, by parsing a corpus annotated for metaphor, the Vrije University Amsterdam Metaphor Corpus
(VUAMC) (Steen et al., 2010), using an off the shelf dependency parser, the Mate parser (Bohnet, 2010).
In addition, we add both concreteness and imageability as ?features? to the dependency parsed metaphor
corpus, by marking up words in this corpus using a psycholinguistic database of scores for concreteness
and imageability, the MRC Psycholinguistic Database (Wilson, 1988). In this paper, we report detailed
statistical analyses we have carried out of the resulting data set, cross-matching the features of concrete-
ness and imageability with others in the corpus such as parts of speech (PsOS) and dependency relations,
in order to investigate in detail the use of such features in determining whether a given expression is
metaphorical or not.
2 Method
2.1 Data
Our data comes from the Vrije University Amsterdam Metaphor Corpus (VUAMC), consisting of ap-
proximately 188,000 words selected from the British National Corpus-Baby (BNC-Baby), and annotated
for metaphor using the Metaphor Identification Procedure (MIP) (Steen et al., 2010). The corpus has four
registers, of between 44,000 and 50,000 words each: academic texts, news texts, fiction, and conversa-
tions. We have chosen this corpus because of its broad coverage and its rich metaphorical annotation.
2.2 Procedure
PRE-PROCESSING. We have enriched the VUAMC in several ways. First, we have parsed the corpus
using the graph-based version of the Mate tools dependency parser (Bohnet, 2010), adding rich syntactic
information.
2
Second, we have incorporated the MRC Psycholinguistic Database
3
(Wilson, 1988), a
dictionary of 150,837 words, with different subsets of these words having been rated by human subjects
in psycholinguistic experiments. Of special note, the database includes 4,295 words rated with degrees of
abstractness, these ratings ranging from 158 (meaning highly abstract) to 670 (meaning highly concrete),
2
https://code.google.com/p/mate-tools/
3
http://ota.oucs.ox.ac.uk/headers/1054.xml
167
and also 9,240 words rated for degrees of imageability, which can be defined as how easily a word can
evoke mental imagery, these ratings also ranging between 100 and 700 (a higher score indicating greater
imageability). It should be noted that it has long been known that the concreteness and imageability
scores are highly correlated (Paivio et al., 1968), however, there are interesting differences between
these sets of scores (Dellantonio et al., 2014), and we are currently investigating these differences in
further studies (see Section (4) below). These scores have been used extensively for work that is similar
to ours, e.g. (Neuman et al., 2013; Turney et al., 2011; Tsvetkov et al., 2013), and while our work is also
largely computational in approach, a significant component of our research is devoted to investigating in
some detail the cognitive aspects of figurative meanings.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN. We carried out five studies, all beginning with pre-processing tasks to pre-
pare the data (additional to those listed immediately above, undertaken to prepare the entire corpus for
these studies). We list the aims, details of pre-processing, and hypotheses below.
Study 1. This study initiated the investigation, and guided the setting up of the computational frame-
work for our broader research activities. The VUAMC was extended with dependency information from
the Mate dependency parser, enabling extraction of both dependency information and metaphorical anno-
tation for each VUAMC word.
4
Hypotheses: H
1
= nouns are more prevalent in metaphorical expressions
than verbs, verbs more than adjectives, adjectives more than prepositions; H
2
= metaphorical expressions
are more likely to occur in sentences in which other metaphorical expressions occur.
Study 2. This study aimed to evaluate claims about syntactically-defined metaphor types (Neuman et
al., 2013), and search for other types. The structure of a sentence revealed by a dependency parse is
based on the relation between a word, known as a head, and its dependents. This extended VUAMC data
provided variables for metaphor types I, II and III, respectively, Noun-BE-Noun, Noun-ActiveVerb-Noun,
and Adjective-Noun, as well as the discovery of additional metaphor types.
Study 3. Going further than Studies 1 and 2, this study extended the VUAMC data with MRC con-
creteness and imageability scores, plus further processing of the VUAMC corpus, assigning MRC scores
to each item in this corpus. Note here that the VUAMC data was examined word-by-word (rather than
sentence-by-sentence, as for Study 2). However, the VUAMC data set is much larger than the MRC
data set, so that many VUAMC words have no MRC scores. To smooth this discrepancy, for this initial
stage of our investigations, we have implemented the fairly rudimentary approach of calculating global
MRC scores by: first, from VUAMC words with MRC scores, a global average MRC score for each part
of speech of the VUAMC data was calculated, and second, those VUAMC words without MRC scores
(i.e. missing from the MRC database) were assigned a global score based on their part of speech. Of
course, a range of possible smoothing strategies are available, and while at this stage we are employing
a rather crude averaging of the score, this is an area we intend to investigate further in follow-up studies,
inspired by the more sophisticated methods that have been implemented by others, e.g. (Feng et al.,
2011; Tsvetkov et al., 2013).
5
For this study, we sought to answer the following two questions: Do
concreteness and imageability scores correlate with metaphoricity of expressions? Do concreteness and
imageability scores correlate with parts of speech of metaphorical expressions?
Study 4. This study replicated Study 3, but also considered the data sentence-by-sentence (cf. Study
2), to integrate syntactic information and MRC score. Examining MRC scores across syntactically fine-
grained contexts, enabled collecting information about heads, their dependent/s, as well as the depen-
dency relation/s, and this information could then be examined to see if it helped to distinguish between
literal and nonliteral items. This approach enables us to investigate in detail the contexts in which con-
creteness and imageability with figurative meanings, a key aim of our work, as pointed out in Section (1).
Hypotheses: H
3
= metaphorical expressions are more likely to occur in sentences where the head is more
4
For more details on the VUAMC categories, see: http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/docs.
5
This work is part of a larger project, http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/
?
gargetad/genmeta-about.html,
which aims to annotate larger web-based corpora of discourse on illness and political conflict.
168
Figure 1: Plots of concreteness vs. imageability scores for literal vs. nonliteral words in the VUAMC
(Conc=concreteness, Imag=imageability, NL=nonliteral, L=literal)
concrete than the dependent/s; H
4
= metaphorical expressions are more likely to occur in sentences where
the head is more imageable than the dependent/s.
Study 5. Finally, this study finished by examining the relative importance of the variables identified
so far, for predicting literal vs. nonliteral expressions, another key aim of our work (as mentioned in
Section (1)). We implemented this study through building and evaluating a series of logistic regression
models.
3 Results
3.1 Study 1
The first hypothesis listed for this study above has not been refuted, with the percentage of all non-
literal sentences in our collection having only one nonliteral item being 27%, while the percentage
of all nonliteral sentences having more than one nonliteral item is 73%: so after finding one nonlit-
eral item in a sentence, we can expect to find more. Regarding the second hypothesis, our data set
had the following proportions of occurrence of nonliteral items according to parts of speech: Adjec-
tives=10.8%, Prepositions=28%, Nouns=22.5%, Verbs=27%, Adverbs=5%, Pronouns=0.2%, Conjunc-
tions=0.5%, Other=6%. Consistent with Steen et al. (2010), that function words can occur more fre-
quently than content words in metaphorical expressions, we found prepositions to be far more prevalent
than adjectives in such expressions, and occur about as frequently as verbs.
3.2 Study 2
We found the following percentages of metaphor types (across all metaphors): Type I = 3.06%, Type
II = 33.53%, Type III = 7.56% (note the reversal for Type II vs. Type III, contrary to (Neuman et al.,
2013)). Such differences may be due to differences in data sets, as well as different syntactic models.
6
Additionally, we found a pattern of expression we have dubbed ?Type IV? metaphors, consisting of
preposition as head, together with noun phrase dependents (e.g. ?at the end of the decade?, ?after the
break-up?): these account for 35.53% of the total occurrence of metaphors.
3.3 Study 3
The boxplots in Figure (1) compare concreteness and imageability scores for nonliteral vs. literal items,
suggesting nonliteral and literal items are indistinguishable from one another with respect to their con-
creteness and imageability scores. Next, we further categorise our data according to parts of speech, the
boxplots in Figure (2) showing results for concreteness, and the boxplots Figure (3) presenting results for
imageability ? these figures suggest literal and nonliteral items can be better distinguished, with respect
to their concreteness and imageability scores, by increasing the granularity of annotation of the context
(e.g. by including parts of speech). Note that imageability scores for prepositions seem to show the
6
Neuman et al. (2013) used the Stanford Dependency Parser (De Marneffe and Manning, 2008).
169
Figure 2: Plots of concreteness scores for literal vs. nonliteral/metaphorical words in the VUAMC,
grouped by parts of speech (L=literal, NL=nonliteral, N=noun, V=verb, P=preposition)
Figure 3: Plots of imageability scores for literal vs. nonliteral/metaphorical words in the VUAMC,
grouped by parts of speech (L=literal, NL=nonliteral, N=noun, V=verb, P=preposition)
clearest distinction between literal vs. nonliteral items. But can we do better? What further categories
in the data should we focus on in order to achieve even clearer distinctions between literal vs. nonliteral
items?
3.4 Study 4
Figures (4) and (5) show the variation that can be achieved by making a more fine-grained distinction
within our data set between heads and their dependents, plus MRC scores of each. Figure (4) shows that
concreteness scores enable distinguishing between literal and nonliteral items for some parts of speech,
such as nouns, where nonliteral heads have higher MRC scores than their dependents, distinct from
literal head nouns (verbs appear to make no such a distinction). While literal and nonliteral head prepo-
sitions both seem indistinguishable from their dependents in terms of concreteness scores, nonliteral
head prepositions seem to have imageability scores quite distinct from their dependents.
3.5 Study 5
Based on our previous studies, we here examine the following 5 independent variables: POS = part
of speech of the head, C Head = concreteness score of the head, I Head = imageability score of the
head, C Dep = average concreteness score of the dependents, I Dep = average imageability score of
the dependents. Table (1) sets out the results for 7 logistic regression models we tested, and formulas
representing these models M1 to M7 are as follows (Nonliteral of course being the dependent variable,
its values being either ?yes, this is nonliteral? or ?no, this is not nonliteral?):
170
Figure 4: Plots of concreteness scores for literal vs. nonliteral/metaphorical heads vs. their dependents,
in the VUAMC, grouped by parts of speech (L=literal, NL=nonliteral, N=noun, V=verb, P=preposition,
h=head, d=dependents)
Figure 5: Plots of imageability scores for literal vs. nonliteral/metaphorical heads vs. their dependents,
in the VUAMC, grouped by parts of speech (L=literal, NL=nonliteral, N=noun, V=verb, P=preposition,
h=head, d=dependents)
M1: Nonliteral ? POS + C Head + I Head + C Dep + I Dep
M2: Nonliteral ? C Head + I Head
M3: Nonliteral ? POS + C Head + I Head
M4: Nonliteral ? POS + C Head + C Dep + I Dep
M5: Nonliteral ? POS + I Head + C Dep + I Dep
M6: Nonliteral ? POS + C Head + C Dep
M7: Nonliteral ? POS + I Head + I Dep
In Table (1), p-values have three categories, p < .0001, p < .001, or p < .01: this value represents a
test of the null hypothesis that the coefficient of the variable being considered is zero, i.e., the variable
has no effect on the model (a lower p-value is stronger evidence for rejecting the null hypothesis). Where
variables have significantly low p-values, Table (1) in effect presents optimal combinations of variables
for specific models, with low p-values indicating variables likely to have a greater effect on the model
and so more directly reflecting changes in the independent variable. For example, Table (1) shows that
models selecting MRC scores for heads (e.g. C Head) with the same kinds of scores for their dependents
(e.g.C Dep) seem most successful, which is perhaps to be expected, in light of studies 3 and 4.
It should be noted that no single variable models are reported here, since (1) while models such as
Nonliteral ? I Head and Nonliteral ? C Head indeed achieve significant p-values, others such
as Nonliteral ? I Dep and Nonliteral ? C Dep do not, (2) single variable models do not explain
Figure (1), nor indeed the variation for multiple variable contexts as exhibited by Figures (4) and (5).
We are currently comparing single vs. multiple variables, and early machine learning results suggest
multiple variable models are superior compared to single variable models as predictive tools.
171
Variables M1 M2 M3 M4 M5 M6 M7
Intercept -7.534*** -2.609* -9.088*** -7.836*** -7.522*** -7.816*** -7.614***
POS 9.265*** 8.884*** 9.330*** 9.163*** 9.316*** 9.082***
C Head 1.555 0.288 1.382 4.844*** 4.876***
I Head 0.459 -1.312 0.513 4.611*** 4.660***
C Dep -1.964 -1.982 -1.919 -3.799***
I Dep 0.682 0.699 0.660 -3.325**
Table 1: Results (t scores) of logistic regression model for predicting non/literal items
from the VUAMC, n=1855 (nb. p-values are shown by asterisks, ***=p<.0001, **=p<.001, *=p<.01)
4 Discussion
This paper reports results from ongoing work we are carrying out toward building a tool for identi-
fying metaphorical expressions in everyday discourse, through fine-grained analysis of the dimensions
of meaning of such expressions. We have presented evidence that detecting metaphor can usefully be
pursued as the problem of modeling how conceptual meanings such as concreteness and imageability,
interact with syntactically definable linguistic contexts. We increase the granularity of our analyses by
incorporating detailed syntactic information about the context in which metaphorical expressions occur.
By increasing the granularity of context, we were able to distinguish between metaphorical expressions
according to different parts of speech, and further, according to heads and their dependents.
We were able to show that for the purpose of determining whether a specific linguistic expression is
metaphorical or not, the most successful approach seems to be to combine information about parts of
speech with either concreteness scores for both heads and their dependents, or else with imageability
scores for both heads and their dependents. Note that this result is in part a direct consequence of the
high correlation between concreteness and imageability, whereby their combination will typically not
result in an optimal regression model. Such high correlation between concreteness and imageability has
been understood for some time (Paivio et al., 1968), yet, of course, there is good reason to think that
concreteness and imageability do not in fact pattern identically, and that they are at some level distinct
phenomena. Indeed, concreteness and imageability are likely related to distinct cognitive systems, and
we are currently undertaking further investigations in this direction.
Finally, we should note that while our results are likely to be language-specific, it is reasonable to
assume the general approach could be replicated across languages. We are currently planning such
cross-linguistic research for future work.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge financial support through a Marie Curie International Incoming Fellowship (project
330569) awarded to two of the authors (Gargett as fellow, Barnden as P.I.). We would also like to
sincerely thank the reviewers for many very useful comments; of course, we assume full responsibility
for the final version.
References
Bernd Bohnet. 2010. Very high accuracy and fast dependency parsing is not a contradiction. In The 23rd Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2010), Beijing, China.
Christina Cacciari and Sam Glucksberg. 1995. Imaging idiomatic expressions: literal or figurative meanings. In
Martin Everaert, Erik-Jan van der Linden, Andr Schenk, and Rober Schreuder, editors, Idioms: Structural and
psychological perspectives, pages 43?56. Lawrence Erlbaum.
Marie-Catherine De Marneffe and Christopher D Manning. 2008. The stanford typed dependencies representation.
In Coling 2008: Proceedings of the workshop on Cross-Framework and Cross-Domain Parser Evaluation, pages
1?8. Association for Computational Linguistics.
172
Alice Deignan. 2006. The grammar of linguistic metaphors. In Anatol Stefanowitsch and Stefan Gries, editors,
Corpus-based approaches to metaphor and metonymy, pages 106?122. Walter de Gruyter.
Sara Dellantonio, Claudio Mulatti, Luigi Pastore, and Remo Job. 2014. Measuring inconsistencies can lead you
forward: The case of imageability and concreteness ratings. Frontiers in Psychology, 5(708).
Shi Feng, Zhiqiang Cai, Scott A Crossley, and Danielle S McNamara. 2011. Simulating human ratings on word
concreteness. In FLAIRS Conference.
Raymond W Gibbs. 2006. Metaphor interpretation as embodied simulation. Mind & Language, 21(3):434?458.
George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors We Live By. University of Chicago.
Yair Neuman, Dan Assaf, Yohai Cohen, Mark Last, Shlomo Argamon, Newton Howard, and Ophir Frieder. 2013.
Metaphor identification in large texts corpora. PloS one, 8(4):e62343.
Allan Paivio, John C Yuille, and Stephen A Madigan. 1968. Concreteness, imagery, and meaningfulness values
for 925 nouns. Journal of experimental psychology, 76(1, pt.2):1?25.
G.J. Steen, A.G. Dorst, J.B. Herrmann, A.A. Kaal, and T. Krennmayr. 2010. A Method for Linguistic Metaphor
Identification: From MIP to MIPVU. Converging Evidence in Language and Communication Research. John
Benjamins Publishing Company.
Yulia Tsvetkov, Elena Mukomel, and Anatole Gershman. 2013. Cross-lingual metaphor detection using common
semantic features. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Metaphor in NLP, pages 45?51, Atlanta, Georgia,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Peter D Turney, Yair Neuman, Dan Assaf, and Yohai Cohen. 2011. Literal and metaphorical sense identification
through concrete and abstract context. In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on the Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 680?690.
Jose Manuel Urena and Pamela Faber. 2010. Reviewing imagery in resemblance and non-resemblance metaphors.
Cognitive Linguistics, 21(1):123?149.
Michael Wilson. 1988. MRC psycholinguistic database: Machine-usable dictionary, version 2.00. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 20(1):6?10.
173
