Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 189?192,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Machine Translation between Turkic Languages
A. Cu?neyd TANTUG?
Istanbul Technical University
Istanbul, Turkey
tantug@itu.edu.tr
Es?ref ADALI
Istanbul Technical University
Istanbul, Turkey
adali@itu.edu.tr
Kemal OFLAZER
Sabanci University
Istanbul, Turkey
oflazer@sabanciuniv.edu
Abstract
We present an approach to MT between Tur-
kic languages and present results from an
implementation of a MT system from Turk-
men to Turkish. Our approach relies on am-
biguous lexical and morphological transfer
augmented with target side rule-based re-
pairs and rescoring with statistical language
models.
1 Introduction
Machine translation is certainly one of the tough-
est problems in natural language processing. It is
generally accepted however that machine transla-
tion between close or related languages is simpler
than full-fledged translation between languages that
differ substantially in morphological and syntactic
structure. In this paper, we present a machine trans-
lation system from Turkmen to Turkish, both of
which belong to the Turkic language family. Tur-
kic languages essentially exhibit the same charac-
teristics at the morphological and syntactic levels.
However, except for a few pairs, the languages are
not mutually intelligible owing to substantial diver-
gences in their lexicons possibly due to different re-
gional and historical influences. Such divergences
at the lexical level along with many but minor diver-
gences at morphological and syntactic levels make
the translation problem rather non-trivial. Our ap-
proach is based on essentially morphological pro-
cessing, and direct lexical and morphological trans-
fer, augmented with substantial multi-word process-
ing on the source language side and statistical pro-
cessing on the target side where data for statistical
language modelling is more readily available.
2 Related Work
Studies on machine translation between close
languages are generally concentrated around
certain Slavic languages (e.g., Czech?Slovak,
Czech?Polish, Czech?Lithuanian (Hajic et al,
2003)) and languages spoken in the Iberian Penin-
sula (e.g., Spanish?Catalan (Canals et al, 2000),
Spanish?Galician (Corbi-Bellot et al, 2003) and
Spanish?Portugese (Garrido-Alenda et al, 2003).
Most of these implementations use similar modules:
a morphological analyzer, a part-of-speech tagger,
a bilingual transfer dictionary and a morphological
generator. Except for the Czech?Lithuanian
system which uses a shallow parser, syntactic
parsing is not necessary in most cases because of
the similarities in word orders. Also, the lexical
semantic ambiguity is usually preserved so, none of
these systems has any module for handling the lex-
ical ambiguity. For Turkic languages, Hamzaog?lu
(1993) has developed a system from Turkish to
Azerbaijani, and Alt?ntas? (2000) has developed a
system from Turkish to Crimean Tatar.
3 Turkic Languages
Turkic languages, spoken by more than 180 million
people, constitutes subfamily of Ural-Altaic lan-
guages and includes languages like Turkish, Azer-
baijani, Turkmen, Uzbek, Kyrghyz, Kazakh, Tatar,
Uyghur and many more. All Turkic languages have
very productive inflectional and derivational agglu-
tinative morphology. For example the Turkish word
evlerimizden has three inflectional morphemes at-
tached to a noun root ev (house), for the plural form
with second person plural possessive agreement and
ablative case:
189
evlerimizden (from our houses)
ev+ler+imiz+den
ev+Noun+A3pl+P1sg+Abl
All Turkic languages exhibit SOV constituent or-
der but depending on discourse requirements, con-
stituents can be in any order without any substan-
tial formal constraints. Syntactic structures between
Turkic languages are more or less parallel though
there are interesting divergences due to mismatches
in multi-word or idiomatic constructions.
4 Approach
Our approach is based on a direct morphological
transfer with some local multi-word processing on
the source language side, and statistical disambigua-
tion on the target language side. The main steps of
our model are:
1. Source Language (SL) Morphological Analysis
2. SL Morphological Disambiguation
3. Multi-Word Unit (MWU) Recognizer
4. Morphological Transfer
5. Root Word Transfer
6. Statistical Disambiguation and Rescoring (SLM)
7. Sentence Level Rules (SLR)
8. Target Language (TL) Morphological Generator
Steps other than 3, 6 and 7 are the minimum
requirements for a direct morphological translation
model (henceforth, the baseline system). The MWU
Recognizer, SLM and SLR modules are additional
modules for the baseline system to improve the
translation quality.
Source language morphological analysis may pro-
duce multiple interpretation of a source word, and
usually, depending on the ambiguities brought about
by multiple possible segmentations into root and
suffixes, there may be different root words of pos-
sibly different parts-of-speech for the same word
form. Furthermore, each root word thus produced
may map to multiple target root words due to word
sense ambiguity. Hence, among all possible sen-
tences that can be generated with these ambigui-
ties, the most probable one is selected by using var-
ious types of SLMs that are trained on target lan-
guage corpora annotated with disambiguated roots
and morphological features.
MWU processing in Turkic languages involves
more than the usual lexicalized collocations and
involves detection of mostly unlexicalized intra-
word morphological patterns (Oflazer et al, 2004).
Source MWUs are recognized and marked during
source analysis and the root word transfer module
maps these either to target MWU patterns, or di-
rectly translates when there is a divergence.
Morphological transfer is implemented by a set of
rules hand-crafted using the contrastive knowledge
between the selected language pair.
Although the syntactic structures are very simi-
lar between Turkic languages, there are quite many
minor situations where target morphological fea-
tures marking features such as subject-verb agree-
ment have to be recovered when such features are
not present in the source. Furthermore, occasion-
ally certain phrases have to be rearranged. Finally, a
morphological generator produces the surface forms
of the lexical forms in the sentence.
5 Turkmen to Turkish MT System
The first implementation of our approach is from
Turkmen to Turkish. A general diagram of our MT
system is presented in Figure 1. The morphologi-
cal analysis on the Turkmen side is performed by
a two-level morphological analyzer developed using
Xerox finite state tools (Tantug? et al, 2006). It takes
a Turkmen word and produces all possible morpho-
logical interpretations of that word. A simple ex-
periment on our test set indicates that the average
Turkmen word gets about 1.55 analyses. The multi-
word recognition module operates on the output of
the morphological analyzer and wherever applica-
ble, combines analyses of multiple tokens into a new
analysis with appropriate morphological features.
One side effect of multi-word processing is a small
reduction in morphological ambiguity, as when such
units are combined, the remaining morphological in-
terpretations for these tokens are deleted.
The actual transfer is carried out by transferring
the morphological structures and word roots from
the source language to the target language maintain-
ing any ambiguity in the process. These are imple-
mented with finite state transducers that are com-
piled from replace rules written in the Xerox regular
expression language.1 A very simple example of this
transfer is shown in Figure 2.2
1The current implementation employs 28 replace rules for
morphological feature transfer and 19 rules for sentence level
processing.
2+Pos:Positive polarity, +A3sg: 3rd person singular agree-
ment, +Inf1,+Inf2: infinitive markers, +P3sg, +Pnon: pos-
sessive agreement markers, +Nom,+Acc: Nominative and ac-
190
Figure 1: Main blocks of the translation system
o?smegi
?
Source Morphological Analysis
?
o?s+Verb+Pos?DB+Noun+Inf1+A3sg+P3sg+Nom
o?s+Verb+Pos?DB+Noun+Inf1+A3sg+Pnon+Acc
?
Source-to-Target Morphological Feature Transfer
?
o?s+Verb+Pos?DB+Noun+Inf2+A3sg+P3sg+Nom
o?s+Verb+Pos?DB+Noun+Inf2+A3sg+Pnon+Acc
?
Source-to-Target Root word Transfer
?
ilerle+Verb+Pos?DB+Noun+Inf2+A3sg+P3sg+Nom
ilerle+Verb+Pos?DB+Noun+Inf2+A3sg+Pnon+Acc
bu?yu?+Verb+Pos?DB+Noun+Inf2+A3sg+P3sg+Nom
bu?yu?+Verb+Pos?DB+Noun+Inf2+A3sg+Pnon+Acc
?
Target Morphological Generation
?
ilerlemesi (the progress of (something))
ilerlemeyi (the progress (as direct object))
bu?yu?mesi (the growth of (something))
bu?yu?meyi (the growth (as direct object))
Figure 2: Word transfer
In this example, once the morphological analy-
sis is produced, first we do a morphological feature
transfer mapping. In this case, the only interesting
mapping is the change of the infinitive marker. The
source root verb is then ambiguously mapped to two
verbs on the Turkish side. Finally, the Turkish sur-
face form is generated by the morphological gen-
erator. Note that all the morphological processing
details such as vowel harmony resolution (a mor-
phographemic process common to all Turkic lan-
guages though not in identical ways) are localized
to morphological generation.
Root word transfer is also based on a large trans-
cusative case markers.
ducer compiled from bilingual dictionaries which
contain many-to-many mappings. During mapping
this transducer takes into account the source root
word POS.3 In some rare cases, mapping the word
root is not sufficient to generate a legal Turkish lex-
ical structure, as sometimes a required feature on
the target side may not be explicitly available on the
source word to generate a proper word. In order to
produce the correct mapping in such cases, some ad-
ditional lexicalized rules look at a wider context and
infer any needed features.
While the output of morphological feature trans-
fer module is usually unambiguous, ambiguity arises
during the root word transfer phase. We attempt to
resolve this ambiguity on the target language side
using statistical language models. This however
presents additional difficulties as any statistical lan-
guage model for Turkish (and possibly other Turkic
languages) which is built by using the surface forms
suffers from data sparsity problems. This is due
to agglutinative morphology whereby a root word
may give rise to too many inflected forms (about a
hundred inflected forms for nouns and much more
for verbs; when productive derivations are consid-
ered these numbers grow substantially!). Therefore,
instead of building statistical language models on
full word forms, we work with morphologically an-
alyzed and disambiguated target language corpora.
For example, we use a language model that is only
based on the (disambiguated) root words to disam-
biguate ambiguous root words that arise from root
3Statistics on the test set indicate that on the average each
source language root word maps to about 2 target language root
words.
191
word transfer. We also employ a language model
which is trained on the last set of inflectional fea-
tures of morphological parses (hence does not in-
volve any root words.)
Although word-by-word translation can produce
reasonably high quality translations, but in many
cases, it is also the source of many translation errors.
To alleviate the shortcomings of the word-by-word
translation approach, we resort to a series of rules
that operate across the whole sentence. Such rules
operate on the lexical and surface representation of
the output sentence. For example, when the source
language is missing a subject agreement marker on
a verb, this feature can not be transferred to the tar-
get language and the target language generator will
fail to generate the appropriate word. We use some
simple heuristics that try to recover the agreement
information from any overt pronominal subject in
nominative case, and that failing, set the agreement
to 3rd person singular. Some sentence level rules
require surface forms because this set of rules usu-
ally make orthographic changes affected by previous
word forms. In the following example, suitable vari-
ants of the clitics de and mi must be selected so that
vowel harmony with the previous token is preserved.
o de go?rdu? mi? ? o da go?rdu? mu??
(did he see too?)
A wide-coverage Turkish morphological analyzer
(Oflazer, 1994) made available to be used in reverse
direction to generate the surface forms of the trans-
lations.
6 Results and Evaluation
We have tracked the progress of our changes to
our system using the BLEU metric (Papineni et al,
2004), though it has serious drawbacks for aggluti-
native and free constituent order languages.
The performance of the baseline system (all steps
above, except 3, 6, and 7) and systems with ad-
ditional modules are given in Table 1 for a set of
254 Turkmen sentences with 2 reference translations
each. As seen in the table, each module contributes
to the performance of the baseline system. Further-
more, a manual investigation of the outputs indicates
that the actual quality of the translations is higher
than the one indicated by the BLEU score.4 The er-
rors mostly stem from the statical language models
4There are many translations which preserve the samemean-
ing with the references but get low BLEU scores.
not doing a good job at selecting the right root words
and/or the right morphological features.
System BLEU Score
Baseline 26.57
Baseline + MWU 28.45
Baseline + MWU + SLM 31.37
Baseline + MWU + SLM + SLR 33.34
Table 1: BLEU Scores
7 Conclusions
We have presented an MT system architecture be-
tween Turkic languages using morphological trans-
fer coupled with target side language modelling and
results from a Turkmen to Turkish system. The re-
sults are quite positive but there is quite some room
for improvement. Our current work involves im-
proving the quality of our current system as well as
expanding this approach to Azerbaijani and Uyghur.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by Project 106E048 funded
by The Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey.
Kemal Oflazer acknowledges the kind support of LTI at
Carnegie Mellon University, where he was a sabbatical visitor
during the academic year 2006 ? 2007.
References
A. Cu?neyd Tantug?, Es?ref Adal?, Kemal Oflazer. 2006. Com-
puter Analysis of the Turkmen Language Morphology. Fin-
TAL, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 4139:186-193.
A. Garrido-Alenda et al 2003. Shallow Parsing for
Portuguese-Spanish Machine Translation. in TASHA 2003:
Workshop on Tagging and Shallow Processing of Por-
tuguese, Lisbon, Portugal.
A. M. Corbi-Bellot et al 2005. An open-source shallow-
transfer machine translation engine for the Romance lan-
guages of Spain. in 10th EAMT conference ?Practical ap-
plications of machine translation?, Budapest, Hungary.
Jan Hajic, Petr Homola, Vladislav Kubon. 2003. A simple
multilingual machine translation system. MT Summit IX.
I?lker Hamzaog?lu. 1993. Machine translation from Turkish to
other Turkic languages and an implementation for the Azeri
language. MSc Thesis, Bogazici University, Istanbul.
Kemal Alt?ntas?. 2000. Turkish to Crimean Tatar Machine
Translation System. MSc Thesis, Bilkent University, Ankara.
Kemal Oflazer. 1994. Two-level description of Turkish mor-
phology. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 9(2).
Kemal Oflazer, O?zlem C?etinog?lu, Bilge Say. 2004. Integrat-
ing Morphology with Multi-word Expression Processing in
Turkish. The ACL 2004 Workshop on Multiword Expres-
sions: Integrating Processing.
Kishore Papineni et al 2002. BLEU : A Method for Automatic
Evaluation of Machine Translation. Association of Compu-
tational Linguistics, ACL?02.
Raul Canals-Marote et al 2000. interNOSTRUM: a Spanish-
Catalan Machine Translation System. Machine Translation
Review, 11:21-25.
192
