Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2007, pages 9?16,
Rochester, NY, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
To Memorize or to Predict: Prominence Labeling in Conversational Speech
A. Nenkova, J. Brenier, A. Kothari, S. Calhoun?, L. Whitton, D. Beaver, D. Jurafsky
Stanford University
{anenkova,jbrenier,anubha,lwhitton,dib,jurafsky}@stanford.edu
?University of Edinburgh
Sasha.Calhoun@ed.ac.uk
Abstract
The immense prosodic variation of natural con-
versational speech makes it challenging to pre-
dict which words are prosodically prominent in
this genre. In this paper, we examine a new fea-
ture, accent ratio, which captures how likely it is
that a word will be realized as prominent or not.
We compare this feature with traditional accent-
prediction features (based on part of speech and
N -grams) as well as with several linguistically mo-
tivated and manually labeled information structure
features, such as whether a word is given, new, or
contrastive. Our results show that the linguistic fea-
tures do not lead to significant improvements, while
accent ratio alone can yield prediction performance
almost as good as the combination of any other sub-
set of features. Moreover, this feature is useful even
across genres; an accent-ratio classifier trained only
on conversational speech predicts prominence with
high accuracy in broadcast news. Our results sug-
gest that carefully chosen lexicalized features can
outperform less fine-grained features.
1 Introduction
Being able to predict the prominence or pitch accent
status of a word in conversational speech is impor-
tant for implementing text-to-speech in dialog sys-
tems, as well as in detection of prosody in conversa-
tional speech recognition.
Previous investigations of prominence prediction
from text have primarily relied on robust surface fea-
tures with some deeper information structure fea-
tures. Surface features like a word?s part-of-speech
(POS) (Hirschberg, 1993) and its unigram and bi-
gram probability (Pan and McKeown, 1999; Pan and
0Thanks to the Edinburgh-Stanford Link and ONR (MURI
award N000140510388) for generous support.
Hirschberg, 2000) are quite useful; content words
are much more likely to be accented than function
words, and words with higher probability are less
likely to be prominent. More sophisticated linguis-
tic features have also been used, generally based on
information-structural notions of contrast, focus, or
given-new. (Hirschberg, 1993).
For example, in the Switchboard utterance be-
low, there is an intrinsic contrast between the words
?women? and ?men?, making both terms more
salient (words in all capital letters represent promi-
nent tokens):
you SEE WOMENc GOING off to WARS as WELL as
MENc.
Similarly the givenness of a word may help deter-
mine its prominence. The speaker needs to focus the
hearer?s attention on new entities in the discourse, so
these are likely to be realized as prominent. Old en-
tities, on the other had, need not be prominent; these
tendencies can be seen in the following example.
theyold have all the WATERnew theyold WANT. theyold
can ACTUALLY PUMP waterold.
While previous models have attempted to cap-
ture global properties of words (via POS or unigram
probability), they have not in general used word
identity as a predictive feature, assuming either that
current supervised training sets would be too small
or that word identity would not be robust across gen-
res (Pan et al, 2002). In this paper, we show a way
to capture word identity in a feature, accent ratio,
that works well with current small supervised train-
ing sets, and is robust to genre differences.
We also use a corpus which has been hand-
labeled for information structure features (including
given/new and contrast information) to investigate
the relative usefulness of both linguistic and shallow
features, as well as how well different features com-
bine with each other.
9
2 Data and features
For our experiments we use 12 Switchboard (God-
frey et al, 1992) conversations, 14,555 tokens in to-
tal. Each word was manually labeled for presence
or absence of pitch accent1 , as well as additional
features including information status (or givenness),
contrast and animacy distinctions, (Nissim et al,
2004; Calhoun et al, 2005; Zaenen et al, 2004), fea-
tures that linguistic literature suggests are predictive
of prominence (Bolinger, 1961; Chafe, 1976).
All of the features described in detail below have
been shown to have statistically significant correla-
tion with prominence (Brenier et al, 2006).
Information status The information status (IS),
or givenness, of discourse entities is important for
choosing appropriate reference form (Prince, 1992;
Gundel et al, 1993) and possibly plays a role in
prominence decisions as well (Brown, 1983). No
previous studies have examined the usefulness of
information status in naturally occurring conversa-
tional speech. The annotation in our corpus is based
on the givenness hierarchy of Prince: first mentions
of entities were marked as new and subsequent men-
tions as old. Entities that are not previously men-
tioned, but that are generally known or semantically
related to other entities in the preceding context are
marked as mediated. Obviously, the givenness an-
notation applies only to referring expressions, i.e.
noun phrases the semantic interpretation of which is
a discourse entity. This restriction inherently limits
the power of the feature for prominence prediction,
which has to be performed for all classes of words.
Complete details of the IS annotation can be found
in (Nissim et al, 2004).
Kontrast One reason speakers make entities in
an utterance prominence is because of information
structure considerations (Rooth, 1992; Vallduv?? and
Vilkuna, 1998). That is, parts of an utterance which
distinguish the information the speaker actually says
from the information they could have said, are made
salient, e.g. because that information answers a
question, or contrasts with a similar entity in the
context. Several possible triggers of this sort of
salience were marked in the corpus, with words that
were not kontrastive (in this sense) being marked as
background:
1Of all tokens, 8,429 (or 58%) were not accented.
? contrastive if the word is directly differentiated
from a previous topical or semantically-related
word;
? subset if it refers to a member of a more general
set mentioned in the surrounding context;
? adverbial if a focus-sensitive adverb such as
?only? or ?even? is associated with the word
being annotated;
? correction if the speaker intended to correct or
clarify a previous word or phrase;
? answer if the word completes a question by the
other speaker;
? nonapplic for filler phrases such as ?in fact?, ?I
mean?, etc.
Note that only content words in full sentences
were marked for kontrast, and filler phrases such
as ?in fact? and ?I mean? were excluded. A com-
plete description of the annotation guidelines can be
found in (Calhoun et al, 2005).
Animacy Each noun and pronoun is labeled for the
animacy of its referent (Zaenen et al, 2004). The
categories include concrete, non-concrete, human,
organizations, place, and time.
Dialog act Specifies the function of the utterance
such as statement, opinion, agree, reject, abandon;
or type of question (yes/no, who, rhetoric)
In addition to the above theoretically motivated
features, we used several automatically derivable
word measures.
Part-of-speech Two such features were used, the
full Penn Treebank tagset (called POS) , and a col-
lapsed tagset (called BroadPOS) with six broad cat-
egories (nouns, verbs, function words, pronouns, ad-
jectives and adverbs).
Unigram and bigram probability These features
are defined as log(pw) and log(pwi |pwi?1) respec-
tively and their values were calculated from the
Fisher corpus (Cieri et al, 2004). High probability
words are less likely to be prominent.
TF.IDF This measure captures how central a word is
for a particular conversation. It is a function of the
frequency of occurrence of the word in the conver-
sation (nw), the number of conversations that con-
tain the word in a background corpus (k) and the
number of all conversations in the background cor-
pus (N ). Formally, TF.IDF1 = nw ? log(Nk ). We
10
also used a variant, TF.IDF2, computed by normal-
izing TF.IDF1 by the number of occurrences of the
most frequent word in the conversation. TF.IDF2 =
TF.IDF1/max(nw?conv). Words with high TF.IDF
values are important in the conversation and are
more likely to be prominent.
Stopword This is a binary feature indicating if the
word appears in a high-frequency stopword list from
the Bow toolkit (McCallum, 1996). The list spans
both function and content word classes, though nu-
merals and some nouns and verbs were removed.
Utterance length The number of words.
Length The number of characters in the words. This
feature is correlated with phonetic features that have
been shown to be useful for the task, such as the
number of vowels or phones in the word.
Position from end/beginning The position of the
word in the utterance divided by the number of
words that precede the current word.
Accent ratio This final (new) feature takes the
?memorization? of previous productions of a given
word to the extreme, measuring how likely it is that
a word belongs to a prominence class or not. Our
feature extends an earlier feature proposed by (Yuan
et al, 2005), which was a direct estimate of how
likely it is for the word to be accented as observed
in some corpus. (Yuan et al, 2005) showed that the
original accent ratio feature was not included in the
best set of features for accent prediction. We believe
the reason for this is the fact that the original ac-
cent ratio feature was computed for all words, even
words in which the value was indistinguishable from
chance (.50). Our new feature incorporates the sig-
nificance of the prominence probability, assuming a
default value of 0.5 for those words for which there
is insufficient evidence in the training data. More
specifically,
AccentRatio(w) =
{
k
n if B(k, n, 0.5) ? 0.05
0.5 otherwise
where k is the number of times word w appeared
accented in the corpus, n is the total number of
times the word w appeared, and B(k, n, 0.5) is
the probability (under a binomial distribution) that
there are k successes in n trials if the probabil-
ity of success and failure is equal. Simply put,
the accent ratio of a word is equal to the esti-
mated probability of the word being accented if this
probability is significantly different from 0.5, and
equal to 0.5 otherwise. For example, AccentRa-
tio(you)=0.3407, AccentRatio(education)=0.8666,
and AccentRatio(probably)=0.5.
Many of our features for accent prediction are
based only on the 12 training conversations. Other
features, such as the unigram, bigram, and TF*IDF
features, are computed from larger data sources. Ac-
cent ratio is also computed over a larger corpus,
since the binomial test requires a minimum of six
occurrences of a word in the corpus in order to get
significance and assign an accent ratio value differ-
ent from 0.5. We thus used 60 Switchboard conver-
sations (Ostendorf et al, 2001), annotated for pitch
accent, to compute k and n for each word.
3 Results
For our experiments we used the J48 decision trees
in WEKA (Witten and Frank, 2005). All the results
that we report are from 10-fold cross-validation on
the 12 Switchboard conversations.
Some previous studies have reported results on
prominence prediction in conversational speech with
the Switchboard corpus. Unfortunately these studies
used different parts of the corpus or different label-
ings (Gregory and Altun, 2004; Yuan et al, 2005),
so our results are not directly comparable. Bear-
ing this difference in mind, the best reported results
to our knowledge are those in (Gregory and Altun,
2004), where conditional random fields were used
with both textual, acoustic, and oracle boundary fea-
tures to yield 76.36% accuracy.
Table 1 shows the performance of decision tree
classifiers using a single feature. The majority class
baseline (not accented) has accuracy of 58%. Accent
ratio is the most predictive feature: the accent ratio
classifier has accuracy of 75.59%, which is two per-
cent net improvement above the previously known
best feature (unigram). The accent ratio classifier
assigns a ?no accent? class to all words with accent
ratio lower than 0.38 and ?accent? to all other words.
In Section 4 we discuss in detail the accent ratio dic-
tionary, but it is worth noting that it does correctly
classify even some high-frequency function words
like ?she?, ?he?, ?do? or ?up? as accented.
11
3.1 Combining features
We would expect that a combination of features
would lead to better prediction when compared to
a classifier based on a single feature. Several past
studies have examined classes of features. In order
to quantify the utility of different specific features,
we ran exhaustive experiments producing classifiers
with all possible combinations of two, three, four
and five features.
As we can see from figure 1 and table 2, the clas-
sifiers using accent ratio as a feature perform best,
for all sizes of feature sets. Moreover, the increase
of performance compared to a single-feature classi-
fier is very slight when accent ratio is used as fea-
ture. Kontrast seems to combine well with accent
ratio and all of the best classifiers with more than
one feature use kontrast in addition to accent ratio.
This indicates that automatic detection of kontrast
can potentially help in prominence prediction. But
the gains are small, the best classifiers without kon-
trast but still including accent ratio perform within
0.2 percent of the classifiers that use both.
On the other hand, classifiers that do not use ac-
cent ratio perform poorly compared to those that do,
and even a classifier using five features (unigram,
broad POS, token length, position from beginning
and bigram) performs about as well as a classifier
using solely accent ratio as a feature. Also, when
accent ratio is not used, the overall improvement of
the classifier grows faster with the addition of new
features. This suggest that accent ratio provides rich
information about words beyond that of POS class
and general informativeness.2
Table 2 gives the specific features in (n + 1)-
feature classifiers that lead to better results than the
best n-classifier. The figures are for the classifiers
performing best overall. Interestingly, none of these
best classifiers for all feature set sizes uses POS or
unigram as a feature. We assume that accent ratio
captures all the relevant information that is present
in the unigram and POS features. The best classifier
with five features uses, in addition to accent ratio,
kontrast, tf.idf, information status and distance from
the beginning of the utterance. All of these features
convey somewhat orthogonal information: seman-
2To verify this we will examine the accent ratio dictionary
in closer detail in the next section.
Accent Ratio (AR) 75.59%
AR + Kontrast 76.15%
AR + END/BEG 75.91%
AR + tf.idf2 75.82%
AR + Info Status 75.82%
AR + Length 75.77%
AR + tf.idf1 75.74%
AR + unigram 75.71%
AR + stopword 75.70%
AR + kontrast + length 76.45%
AR + kontrast + BEG 76.24%
AR + kontrast + unigram 76.24%
AR + kontrast + tf.idf1 76.24%
AR + kontrast + length + tfidf1 76.56%
AR + kontrast + length + stopword 76.54%
AR + kontrast + length +tf.idf2 76.52%
AR + kontrast + Status + BEG 76.47%
AR + kontrast + tf.idf1 + Status + BEG 76.65%
AR + kontrast + tf.idf2 + Status + BEG 76.58%
Table 2: Performance increase augmenting the ac-
cent ratio classifier.
tic, topicality, discourse and phrasing information
respectively. Still, all of them in combination im-
prove the performance over accent ratio as a single
feature only by one percent.
Figure 1 shows the overall improvement of clas-
sifiers with the addition of new features in three sce-
narios: overall best, best when kontrast is not used
as a feature and best with neither kontrast nor ac-
cent ratio. The best classifier with five features that
do not include kontrast has accent ratio, broad POS,
word length, stopword and bigram as features and
has accuracy of 76.28%, or just 0.27% worse than
the overall best classifier that uses kontrast and in-
formation status. This indicates that while there is
some benefit to using the two features, they do not
lead to any substantial boost in performance. Strik-
ingly, the best classifier that uses neither accent ra-
tio nor kontrast performs very similarly to a classi-
fier using accent ratio as the only feature: 75.82%
for the classifier using unigram, POS, tf.idf1, word
length and position from end of the utterance.
3.2 The power of linguistic features
One of the objectives of our study was to assess how
useful gold-standard annotations for complex lin-
guistic features are for the task of prominence pre-
diction. The results in this section indicate that an-
imacy distinctions (concrete/non-concrete, person,
time, etc) and dialog act did not have much power
12
AccentRatio unigram stopword POS tf.idf2 tf.idf1 BroadPos Length Kontrast bigram Info Stat
75.59 73.77 70.77 70.28 70.14 69.50 68.64 67.64 67.57 65.87 64.13
Table 1: Single feature classifier performance. Features not in the table (position from end, animacy, utter-
ance length and dialog act) all achieve lower accuracy of around 60%
1 2 3 4 5
73
74
75
76
77
78
Classifier performance
Number of features
Pr
ed
ict
io
n 
ac
cu
ra
cy
Overall best
Without kontrast
Without accent
+ ratio or kontrast
Figure 1: Performance increase with the addition of
new features.
as individual features (table 1) and were never in-
cluded in a model that was best for a given feature
set size (table 2).
Information status is somewhat useful and ap-
pears in the overall best classifier with five features
(table 2). But when compared with other classifiers
with the same number of features, the benefits from
adding information status to the model are small.
For example, the accent ratio + information status
classifier performs 0.23% better than accent ratio
alone, but so does the classifier using accent ratio
and tf.idf. There are two reasons that can explain
why the givenness of the referent is not as helpful
as we might have hoped. First of all, the informa-
tion status distinction applies only to referring ex-
pressions and has undefined values for words such
as verbs, adjectives or function words. Second, in-
formation status of an entity influences the form of
referring expression that is used, with old items be-
ing more likely to be pronominalized. In the numer-
ous cases where pronominalization of old informa-
tion does occur, features such as POS, unigram or
accent ratio will be sensitive to the change of infor-
mation status simply based on the lexical item.
Kontrast is by far the most useful linguistic fea-
ture. It is used in all of the best classifiers for any
feature set size (table 2). It applies to more words
than givenness does, since salience distinctions can
be made for any part-of-speech class. Still, not all
words were annotated for kontrast either, and more-
over kontrast only captures one kind of semantic
salience. This is particularly true of discourse mark-
ers like ?especially? or ?definitely?: these would ei-
ther be in sentence fragments that weren?t marked
for kontrast, or would probably be marked as ?back-
ground? since they are not salience triggers in a se-
mantic sense. As we can see from figure 1, clas-
sifiers that use kontrast perform only slightly better
than others that use only ?cheaper? features.
4 The accent ratio dictionary
Contrary to our initial expectations, both classes in
the accent ratio dictionary (for both low and high
probability of being prominent) cover the full set of
possible POS categories. Tables 3 and 4 list words in
both classes (with words sorted by increasing accent
ratio in each column). The ?no accent? class is dom-
inated by function words, but also includes nouns
and verbs. One of the drawbacks of POS as a fea-
ture for prominence prediction is that normally aux-
iliary verbs will be tagged as ?VB?, the same class
as other more contentful verbs. The informativeness
(unigram probability) of a word would distinguish
between these types of verbs, but so does the accent
ratio measure as well.
Furthermore, some relatively frequent words such
as ?too?, ?now?, ?both?, ?no?, ?yes?, ?else?, ?wow?
have high accent ratio, that is, a high probability for
accenting. Such distinctions within the class of func-
tion words would not be possible on the basis of in-
13
.00?.08 .09?.16 .17?.24 .25?.32 .33?.42
a could you?d being me
uh in because take i?ve
um minutes oh said we?re
uh-huh and since wanna went
the by says been over
an who us those you
of grew where into thing
to cause they?ve little what
were gonna am until some
as about sort they?re out
than their you?re I had
with but didn?t that make
at on her don?t way
for be going this did
from through i?ll should anything
or which will type i?m
you?ve are our we kind
was we?ll just so go
would during though have stuff
it huh like got then
when is your new she
them bit needs mean he
it?s there?s my much do
if any many i?d up
can has they know
him stayed get doesn?t
these supposed there even
Table 3: Accent ratio entries with low prominence
probability.
formativeness, POS, or even information structure
features. Another class like that is words like ?yes?,
?okay?, ?sure? that are mostly accented by virtue of
being the only word in the phrase.
Some rather common words, ?not? for example,
are not included in the accent ratio dictionary be-
cause they do not exhibit a statistically strong pref-
erence for a prominence class. The accent ratio clas-
sifier would thus assign class ?accented? to the word
?not?, which is indeed the class this word occurs in
more often.
Another fact that becomes apparent with the in-
spection of the accent ratio dictionary is that while
certain words have a statistically significant prefer-
ence for deaccenting, there is also a lot of variation
in their observed realization. For example, personal
pronouns such as ?I? and ?you? have accent ratios
near 0.33. This means that every third such pronoun
was actually realized as prominent by the speaker.
In a conversational setting there is an implicit con-
trast between the two speakers, which could partly
explain the phenomenon, but the situations which
prompt the speaker to realize the distinction in their
.58?.74 .75?.79 .80?.86 .87?1.0
lot both sometimes half
time no change topic
now seems child else
kids life young obviously
old tell Texas themselves
too ready town wow
really easy room gosh
three heard pay anyway
work isn?t interesting Dallas
nice again true outside
yeah first mother mostly
two right problems yes
person children agree great
day married war exactly
working may needed especially
job happen told definitely
talking business finally lately
usually still neat thirty
rather daughter sure higher
places gone house forty
government guess okay hey
ten news seven Iowa
parents major best poor
paper fact also glad
actually five older basic
Table 4: Accent ratio values for words with high
probability for being accented.
speech will be the focus of a future linguistic inves-
tigation.
Kontrast is helpful in predicting ?accented? class
for some generally low ratio words. However, even
with its help, production variation in the conversa-
tions cannot be fully explained. The following ex-
amples from our corpus show low accent ratio words
(that, did, and, have, had) that were produced as
prominent.
so i did THAT. and then i, you know, i DID that for SIX
years. AND then i stayed HOME with my SON.
i HAVE NOT, to be honest, HAD much EXPERIENCE
with CHILDREN in that SITUATION.
they?re going to HAVE to WORK it OUT to WORKING
part TIME.
The examples attest to the presence of variation
in production: in the first utterance, for example, we
see the words ?did?, ?and? and ?that? produced both
as prominent and not prominent. Intonational phras-
ing most probably accounts for some of this varia-
tion since it is likely that even words that are typ-
ically not prominent will be accented if they occur
just before or after a longer pause. We come back to
this point in the closing section.
14
5 Robustness of accent ratio
While accent ratio works well for our data (Table
2), a feature based so strongly on memorizing the
status of each word in the training data might lead
to problems. One potential problem, suggested by
Pan et al (2002) for lexicalized features in general,
is whether a lexical feature like accent ratio might
be less robust across genres. Another question is
whether our definition of accent ratio is better than
one that does not use the binomial test: we need to
investigate whether these statistical tests indeed im-
prove performance. We focus on these two issues in
the next two subsections.
Binomial test cut-off
As discussed above, the original accent ratio feature
(Yuan et al, 2005) was based directly on the frac-
tion of accented occurrences in the training set. We
might expect such a use of raw frequencies to be
problematic. Given what we know about word dis-
tributions in text (Baayen, 2001), we would expect
about half of the words in a big corpus to appear only
once. In an accent ratio dictionary without binomial
test cut-off, all such words will have accent ratio of
either exactly 1 or 0, but one or even few occurrences
of a word would not be enough to determine statis-
tical significance. By contrast, our modified accent
ratio feature uses binomial test cut-off to make the
accent ratio more robust to small training sets.
To test if the binomial test cut-off really improved
the accent ratio feature, we compared the perfor-
mance on Switchboard of classifiers using accent
ratio with and without cut-off. The binominal test
improved the performance of the accent ratio fea-
ture from 73.49% (Yuan et al original version) to
75.59% (our version).
Moreover, Yuan et al report that their version of
the feature did not combine well with other features,
while in our experiments best performance was al-
ways achieved by the classifiers that made use of the
accent ratio feature in addition to others.
A cross-genre experiment: broadcast news
In a systematic analysis of the usefulness of differ-
ent informativeness, syntactic and semantic features
for prominence prediction, Pan et al (2002) showed
that word identity is a powerful feature. But they hy-
pothesized that this would not be a useful feature in
a domain independent pitch accent prediction task.
Their hypothesis that word identity cannot be a ro-
bust across genres would obviously carry over to ac-
cent ratio. In order to test the hypothesis, we used
the accent ratio dictionary derived from the Switch-
board corpus to predict prominence in the Boston
University Radio corpus of broadcast news. Using
an accent ratio dictionary from Switchboard and as-
signing class ?not accented? to words with accent ra-
tio less than 0.38 and ?accented? otherwise leads to
82% accuracy of prediction for this broadcast news
corpus. If the accent ratio dictionary is built from
the BU corpus itself, the performance is 83.67%.3
These results indicate that accent ratio is a robust
enough feature and is applicable across genres.
6 Conclusions and future work
In this paper we introduced a new feature for promi-
nence prediction, accent ratio. The accent ratio of
a word is the (maximum likelihood estimate) prob-
ability that a word is accented if there is a signifi-
cant preference for a class, and 0.5 otherwise. Our
experiments demonstrate that the feature is power-
ful both by itself and in combination with other fea-
tures. Moreover, the feature is robust to genre, and
accent ratio dictionaries can be used for prediction
of prominence in read news with very good results.
Of the linguistic features we examined, kontrast
is the only one that is helpful beyond what can be
gained using shallow features such as n-gram prob-
ability, POS or tf.idf. While the improvements from
kontrast are relatively small, the consistency of these
small improvements suggest that developing auto-
matic methods for approximating the gold-standard
annotation we used here, similar to what has been
done for information status in (Nissim, 2006), may
be worthwhile. An automatic predictor for kontrast
may also be helpful in other applications such as
question answering or textual entailment.
All of the features in our study were text-based.
There is a wide variety of research investigating
phonological or acoustic features as well. For exam-
ple Gregory and Altun (2004) used acoustic features
3This result is comparable with the result of (Yuan et al,
2005) who in their experiment with the same corpus report the
best result as 83.9% using three features: unigram, bigram and
backwards bigram probability.
15
such as duration and energy, and phonological fea-
tures such as oracle (hand-labeled) intonation phrase
boundaries, and the number of phones and sylla-
bles in a word. Although acoustic features are not
available in a text-to-speech scenario, we hypothe-
size that in a task where such features are available
(such as in speech recognition applications), acous-
tic or phonological features could improve the per-
formance of our text-only features. To test this hy-
pothesis, we augmented our best 5-feature classifier
which did not include kontrast with hand-labeled in-
tonation phrase boundary information. The resulting
classifier reached an accuracy of 77.45%, more than
one percent net improvement over 76.28% accuracy
of the model based solely on text features and not in-
cluding kontrast. Thus in future work we plan to in-
corporate more acoustic and phonological features.
Finally, prominence prediction classifiers need to
be incorporated in a speech synthesis system and
their performance should be gauged via listening
experiments that test whether the incorporation of
prominence leads to improvement in synthesis.
References
R. H. Baayen. 2001. Word Frequency Distributions.
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
D.L. Bolinger. 1961. Contrastive Accent and Contrastive
Stress. Language, 37(1):83?96.
J. Brenier, A. Nenkova, A. Kothari, L. Whitton,
D. Beaver, and D. Jurafsky. 2006. The (non)utility of
linguistic features for predicting prominence in spon-
taneous speech. In IEEE/ACL 2006 Workshop on Spo-
ken Language Technology.
G. Brown. 1983. Prosodic structure and the given/new
distinction. Prosody: Models and Measurements,
pages 67?77.
S. Calhoun, M. Nissim, M. Steedman, and J.M. Brenier.
2005. A framework for annotating information struc-
ture in discourse. Pie in the Sky: Proceedings of the
workshop, ACL, pages 45?52.
W. Chafe. 1976. Givenness, contrastiveness, definite-
ness, subjects, topics, and point of view. Subject and
Topic, pages 25?55.
C. Cieri, D. Graff, O. Kimball, D. Miller, and Kevin
Walker. 2004. Fisher English training speech part 1
transcripts. LDC.
J. Godfrey, E. Holliman, and J. McDaniel. 1992.
SWITCHBOARD: Telephone speech corpus for re-
search and development. In IEEE ICASSP-92.
M. Gregory and Y. Altun. 2004. Using conditional ran-
dom fields to predict pitch accents in conversational
speech. Proceedings of ACL, 2004.
J. Gundel, N. Hedberg, and R. Zacharski. 1993. Cog-
nitive status and the form of referring expressions in
discourse. Language, 69:274?307.
J. Hirschberg. 1993. Pitch Accent in Context: Predicting
Intonational Prominence from Text. Artificial Intelli-
gence, 63(1-2):305?340.
A. McCallum. 1996. Bow: A toolkit for statistical lan-
guage modeling, text retrieval, classification and clus-
tering. http://www.cs.cmu.edu/ mccallum/bow.
M. Nissim, S. Dingare, J. Carletta, and M. Steedman.
2004. An annotation scheme for information status in
dialogue. In LREC 2004.
M. Nissim. 2006. Learning information status of dis-
course entities. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2006.
M. Ostendorf, I. Shafran, S. Shattuck-Hufnagel,
L. Carmichael, and W. Byrne. 2001. A prosodically
labeled database of spontaneous speech. Proc. of the
ISCA Workshop on Prosody in Speech Recognition and
Understanding, pages 119?121.
S. Pan and J. Hirschberg. 2000. Modeling local context
for pitch accent prediction. In Proceedings of ACL-00.
S. Pan and K. McKeown. 1999. Word informativeness
and automatic pitch accent modeling. In Proceedings
of EMNLP/VLC-99.
S. Pan, K. McKeown, and J. Hirschberg. 2002. Ex-
ploring features from natural language generation in
prosody modeling. Computer speech and language,
16:457?490.
E. Prince. 1992. The ZPG letter: subject, definiteness,
and information status. In S. Thompson and W. Mann,
editors, Discourse description: diverse analyses of a
fund raising text, pages 295?325. John Benjamins.
Mats Rooth. 1992. A theory of focus interpretation. Nat-
ural Language Semantics, 1(1):75?116.
E. Vallduv?? and M. Vilkuna. 1998. On rheme and kon-
trast. Syntax and Semantics, 29:79?108.
I. H. Witten and E. Frank. 2005. Data Mining: Practical
machine learning tools and techniques. 2nd Edition,
Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco.
J. Yuan, J. Brenier, and D. Jurafsky. 2005. Pitch Accent
Prediction: Effects of Genre and Speaker. Proceed-
ings of Interspeech.
A. Zaenen, J. Carletta, G. Garretson, J. Bresnan,
A. Koontz-Garboden, T. Nikitina, M.C. O?Connor, and
T. Wasow. 2004. Animacy Encoding in English: why
and how. ACL Workshop on Discourse Annotation.
16
Proceedings of the ACL Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions,
pages 1?4, Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
An Information-State Approach to Collaborative Reference
David DeVault1 Natalia Kariaeva2 Anubha Kothari2 Iris Oved3 and Matthew Stone1
1Computer Science 2Linguistics 3Philosophy and Center for Cognitive Science
Rutgers University
Piscataway NJ 08845-8020
Firstname.Lastname@Rutgers.Edu
Abstract
We describe a dialogue system that works
with its interlocutor to identify objects.
Our contributions include a concise, mod-
ular architecture with reversible pro-
cesses of understanding and generation,
an information-state model of reference,
and flexible links between semantics and
collaborative problem solving.
1 Introduction
People work together to make sure they understand
one another. For example, when identifying an ob-
ject, speakers are prepared to give many alternative
descriptions, and listeners not only show whether
they understand each description but often help the
speaker find one they do understand (Clark and
Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). This natural collaboration is
part of what makes human communication so robust
to failure. We aim both to explain this ability and to
reproduce it.
In this paper, we present a novel model of collab-
oration in referential linguistic communication, and
we describe and illustrate its implementation. As we
argue in Section 2, our approach is unique in com-
bining a concise abstraction of the dynamics of joint
activity with a reversible grammar-driven model of
referential language. In the new information-state
model of reference we present in Section 3, inter-
locutors work together over multiple turns to asso-
ciate an entity with an agreed set of concepts that
characterize it. On our approach, utterance planning
and understanding involves reasoning about how
domain-independent linguistic forms can be used
in context to contribute to the task; see Section 4.
Our system reduces to four modules: understanding,
update, deliberation and generation, together with
some supporting infrastructure; see Section 5. This
design derives the efficiency and flexibility of refer-
ential communication from carefully-designed rep-
resentation and reasoning in this simple architecture;
see Section 6. With this proof-of-concept implemen-
tation, then, we provide a jumping-off point for more
detailed investigation of knowledge and processes in
conversation.
2 Overview and Related Work
Our demonstration system plays a referential com-
munication game, much like the one that pairs of
human subjects play in the experiments of Clark and
Wilkes-Gibbs (1986). We describe each episode in
this game as an activity involving the coordinated
action of two participants: a director D who knows
the referent R of a target variable T and a matcher
M whose task is to identify R. Our system can play
either role, D or M, using virtual objects in a graph-
ical display as candidate targets and distractors, and
using text as its input and output. Our system uses
the same task knowledge and the same grammar
whichever role it plays. Of course, the system also
draws on private knowledge to decide how best to
carry out its role; for now it describes objects using
the domain-specific iteration proposed by Dale and
Reiter (1995). The knowledge we have formalized is
targeted to a proof-of-concept implementation, but
we see no methodological obstacle in adding to the
1
system?s resources.
We exemplify what our system does in (1).
(1) a. S: This one is a square.
b. U: Um-hm...
c. S: It?s light brown.
d. U: You mean like tan?
e. S: Yeah.
f. S: It?s solid.
g. U: Got it.
The system (S) and user (U) exchange seven utter-
ances in the course of identifying a tan solid square.
We achieve this interaction using the information-
state approach to dialogue system design (Larsson
and Traum, 2000). This approach describes dialogue
as a coordinated effort to maintain an agreed record
of the state of the conversation. Our model contrasts
with traditional plan-based models, as exemplified
by Heeman and Hirst?s model of goals and beliefs
in collaborative reference (1995). Our approach ab-
stracts away from such details of individuals? men-
tal states and cognitive processes, for principled rea-
sons (Stone, 2004a). We are able to capture these
details implicitly in the dynamics of conversation,
whereas plan-based models must represent them ex-
plicitly. Our representations are simpler than Hee-
man and Hirst?s but support more flexible dialogue.
For example, their approach to (1) would have in-
terlocutors coordinating on goals and beliefs about
a syntactic representation for the tan solid square;
for us, this description and the interlocutors? com-
mitment to it are abstract results of the underlying
collaborative activity.
Another important antecedent to our work is
Purver?s (2004) characterization of clarification of
names for objects and properties. We extend this
work to develop a treatment of referential descriptive
clarification. When we describe things, our descrip-
tions grow incrementally and can specify as much
detail as needed. Clarification becomes correspond-
ingly cumulative and open-ended. Our revised in-
formation state includes a model of cumulative and
open-ended collaborative activity, similar to that ad-
vocated by Rich et al (2001). We also benefit from
a reversible goal-directed perspective on descriptive
language (Stone et al, 2003).
3 Information State
Our information state (IS) models the ongoing col-
laboration using a stack of tasks. For a task of col-
laborative reference, the IS tracks how interlocutors
together set up and solve a constraint-satisfaction
problem to identify a target object. In any state, D
and M have agreed on a target variable T and a set of
constraints that the value of T must satisfy. When M
recognizes that these constraints identify R, the task
ends successfully. Until then, D can take actions
that contribute new constraints on R. Importantly,
what D says adds to what is already known about R,
so that the identification of R can be accomplished
across multiple sentences with heterogeneous syn-
tactic structure.
Our IS also allows subtasks of questioning or clar-
ification that interlocutors can use to maintain align-
ment. The same constraint-satisfaction model is
used not only for referring to displayed objects but
also for referring to abstract entities, such as actions
or properties. Our IS tracks the salience of entity
and property referents and, like Purver?s, maintains
the previous utterance for reference in clarification
questions. Note, however, that we do not factor
updates to the IS through an abstract taxonomy of
speech acts. Instead, utterances directly make do-
main moves, such as adding a constraint, so our ar-
chitecture allows utterances to trigger an open-ended
range of domain-specific updates.
4 Linguistic Representations
The way utterances signal task contributions is
through a collection of presupposed constraints. To
understand an utterance, we solve the utterance?s
grammatically-specified semantic constraints. An
interpretation is only feasible if it represents a
contextually-appropriate contribution to the ongoing
task. Symmetrically, to generate an utterance, we
use the grammar to formulate a set of constraints;
these constraints must identify the contribution the
system intends to make. We view interpreted lin-
guistic structures as representing communicative in-
tentions; see (Stone et al, 2003) or (Stone, 2004b).
As in (DeVault et al, 2004), a knowledge in-
terface mediates between domain-general meanings
and the domain-specific ontology supported in a par-
ticular application. This allows us to build inter-
2
pretations using domain-specific representations for
referents, for task moves, and for the domain prop-
erties that characterize referents.
5 Architecture
Our system is implemented in Java. A set of in-
terface types describes the flow of information and
control through the architecture. The representation
and reasoning outlined in Sections 3 and 4 is ac-
complished by implementations of these interfaces
that realize our approach. Modules in the architec-
ture exchange messages about events and their in-
terpretations. (1) Deliberation responds to changes
in the IS by proposing task moves. (2) Generation
constructs collaborative intentions to accomplish the
planned task moves. (3) Understanding infers col-
laborative intentions behind user actions. Genera-
tion and understanding share code to construct inten-
tions for utterances, and both carry out a form of in-
ference to the best explanation. (4) Update advances
the IS symmetrically in response to intentions sig-
naled by the system or recognized from the user;
the symmetric architecture frees the designer from
programming complementary updates in a symmet-
rical way. Additional supporting infrastructure han-
dles the recognition of input actions, the realization
of output actions, and interfacing between domain
knowledge and linguistic resources.
Our system is designed not just for users to inter-
act with, but also for demonstrating and debugging
the system?s underlying models. Processing can be
paused at any point to allow inspection of the sys-
tem?s representations using a range of visualization
tools. You can interactively explore the IS, including
the present state of the world, the agreed direction
of the ongoing task, and the representation of lin-
guistic distinctions in salience and information sta-
tus. You can test the grammar and other interpretive
resources. And you can visualize the search space
for understanding and generation.
6 Example
Let us return to dialogue (1). Here the system rep-
resents its moves as successively constraining the
shape, color and pattern of the target object. In gen-
erating (1c), the system iteratively elaborates its de-
scription from brown to light brown in an attempt
to identify the object?s color unambiguously. The
user?s clarification request at (1d) marks this de-
scription of color as problematic and so triggers a
nested instance of the collaborative reference task.
At (1e) the system adds the user?s proposed con-
straint and (we assume) solves this nested subtask.
The system returns to the main task at (1f) having
grounded the color constraint and continues by iden-
tifying the pattern of the target object.
Let us explore utterance (1c) in more detail. The
IS records the status of the identification process.
The system is the director; the user is the matcher.
The target is represented provisionally by a dis-
course referent t1, and what has been agreed so far
is that the current target is a square of the rele-
vant sort for this task, represented in the agent as
square-figure-object(t1). In addition, the system has
privately recorded that square o1 is the referent it
must identify. For this IS, it is expected that the
director will propose an additional constraint iden-
tifying t1. The discourse state represents t1 as being
in-focus, or available for pronominal reference.
Deliberation now gives the generator a specific
move for the system to achieve:
(2) add-constraint(t1,color-sandybrown(t1))
The content of the move in (2) is that the system
should update the collaborative reference task to in-
clude the constraint that the target is drawn in a par-
ticular, domain-specific color (RGB value F4-A4-60,
or XHTML standard ?sandy brown?). The system
finds an utterance that achieves this by exploring
head-first derivations in its grammar; it arrives at the
derivation of it?s light brown in (3).
(3)
brown [present predicative adjective]



H
HH
HH
it [subject] light [color degree adverb]
A set of presuppositions connect this linguistic
structure to a task domain; they are given in (4a).
The relevant instances in this task are shown in (4b).
(4) a. predication(M)?brown(C)? light(C)
b. predication(add-constraint)?
brown(color-sandybrown)?
light(color-sandybrown)
3
The utterance also uses it to describe a referent
X so presupposes that in-focus(X) holds. The
move effected by the utterance is schematized as
M(X ,C(X)). Given the range of possible task moves
in the current context, the constraints specified by
the grammar for (3) are modeled as determining the
instantiation in (2). The system realizes the utter-
ance and assumes, provisionally, that the utterance
achieves its intended effect and records the new con-
straint on t1.
Because the generation process incorporates en-
tirely declarative reasoning, it is normally reversible.
Normally, the interlocutor would be able to identify
the speaker?s intended derivation, associate it with
the same semantic constraints, resolve those con-
straints to the intended instances, and thereby dis-
cover the intended task move. In our example, this
is not what happens. Recognition of the user?s clari-
fication request is triggered as in (Purver, 2004). The
system fails to interpret utterance (1d) as an appro-
priate move in the main reference task. As an alter-
native, the system ?downdates? the context to record
the fact that the system?s intended move may be the
subject of explicit grounding. This involves push-
ing a new collaborative reference task on the stack
of ongoing activities. The system remains the direc-
tor, the new target is the variable C in interpretation
and the referent to be identified is the property color-
sandybrown. Interpretation of (1d) now succeeds.
7 Discussion
Our work bridges research on collaborative dialogue
in AI (Rich et al, 2001) and research on pragmat-
ics in computational linguistics (Stone et al, 2003).
The two traditions have a lot to gain from reconcil-
ing their assumptions, if as Clark (1996) suggests,
people?s language use is coextensive with their joint
activity. There are implications both ways.
For pragmatics, our model suggests that language
use requires collaboration in part because reaching
agreement about content involves substantive social
knowledge and coordination. Indeed, we suspect
that collaborative reference is only one of many rel-
evant social processes. For collaborative dialogue
systems, adopting rich declarative linguistic repre-
sentations enables us to directly interface the core
modules of a collaborative system with one another.
In language understanding, for example, we can col-
lapse together notional subprocesses like semantic
reconstruction, reference resolution, and intention
recognition and solve them in a uniform way.
Our declarative, reversible approach supports an
analysis of how the system?s specifications drive its
input-output behavior. The architecture of this sys-
tem thus provides the groundwork for further in-
vestigations into the interaction of social, linguis-
tic, cognitive and even perceptual and developmen-
tal processes in meaningful communication.
Acknowledgements
Supported in part by NSF HLC 0308121. Thanks to
Paul Tepper.
References
H. H. Clark and D. Wilkes-Gibbs. 1986. Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22:1?39.
H. H. Clark. 1996. Using Language. Cambridge.
R. Dale and E. Reiter. 1995. Computational interpreta-
tions of the Gricean maxims in the generation of refer-
ring expressions. Cognitive Science, 18:233?263.
D. DeVault, C. Rich, and C. L. Sidner. 2004. Natural
language generation and discourse context: Comput-
ing distractor sets from the focus stack. In FLAIRS.
P. Heeman and G. Hirst. 1995. Collaborating on refer-
ring expressions. Comp. Ling., 21(3):351?382.
S. Larsson and D. Traum. 2000. Information state and
dialogue management in the TRINDI dialogue move
engine toolkit. Natural Language Eng., 6:323?340.
M. Purver. 2004. The Theory and Use of Clarification
Requests in Dialogue. Ph.D. thesis, Univ. of London.
C. Rich, C. L. Sidner, and N. Lesh. 2001. COL-
LAGEN: applying collaborative discourse theory to
human-computer interaction. AI Magazine, 22:15?25.
M. Stone, C. Doran, B. Webber, T. Bleam, and M. Palmer.
2003. Microplanning with communicative intentions.
Comp. Intelligence, 19(4):311?381.
M. Stone. 2004a. Communicative intentions and conver-
sational processes. In J. Trueswell and M. K. Tanen-
haus, editors, Approaches to Studying World-Situated
Language Use, pages 39?70. MIT.
M. Stone. 2004b. Intention, interpretation and the com-
putational structure of language. Cognitive Science,
28(5):781?809.
4
