Proceedings of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 156?163,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
PoCoS ? Potsdam Coreference Scheme1
 Olga Krasavina 
Moscow State University 
krasavina@gmx.net 
Christian Chiarcos 
University of Potsdam 
chiarcos@ling.uni-potsdam.de
 
 
 
Abstract1
This document outlines minimal design 
principles underlying annotation of 
coreference relations in PoCoS, a scheme 
for cross-linguistic anaphoric annotation. 
We identify language-independent princi-
ples for markable identification which are 
essential for comparability of annotations 
produced for different languages. We fur-
ther suggest a clear and motivated structure 
of annotation stages, the separation of a 
coarse-grained core and a family of more 
elaborate extended schemes, and strategies 
for the systematic treatment of ambiguity. 
Explicit mark-up of ambiguities is a novel 
feature. We implemented three instantia-
tions of PoCoS for German, English and 
Russian applied to corpora of newspaper 
texts. 
1 Introduction 
Anaphoric annotation is notoriously problematic 
because of ambiguity and subjectivity issues. One 
has to deal with them at two stages: 1) by design-
ing annotation guidelines; 2) by performing anno-
tation. As for 1), it is a well-known problem that 
different schemes propose different annotation de-
cisions. As for 2), different annotators may have 
different judgments on coreference-related issues. 
The current paper focuses on the general principles 
and strategies of annotating coreference ? the theo-
retical core that should logically precede any anno-
tation decisions or schemes, but has not been for-
mulated explicitly by now. 
The number of existing schemes released just in 
the last few years is overwhelming and is out of the 
                                                          
1 The research by Olga Krasavina was supported by Russian 
Foundation for the Humanities, grant 05-04-04240?. 
scope here. The MUC is still generally accepted as 
the most standard-like annotation scheme 
(Hirschman, 1997). Given its simplicity is its most 
important advantage, it has been criticized for its 
limited coverage and its contra-intuitive under-
standing of coreference. One of the most well-
known later approaches is MATE/GNOME (Poe-
sio, 2004). As the author fairly notices, ?there can 
be no such thing as a general-purpose anaphoric 
annotation instructions?, due to the complexity of 
phenomena associated with the term of anaphora. 
So, its essential idea is combining a ?general-
purporse markup scheme? (MATE) with applica-
tion-specific scheme instantiations (GNOME). In 
PoCoS, we adapted and elaborated this idea, by 
suggesting the Core and Extended Schemes. 
The PoCoS, the Potsdam Coreference Scheme, 
both adapts selected features of existing schemes 
and implements a set of innovative features. We 
distinguish between the Core and Extended 
Scheme: the Core Scheme is general and reusable, 
while the Extended Scheme supports a wider range 
of specific extensions, see fig. 1. Here, we are talk-
ing about English and German instantiations of the 
PoCoS Core Scheme. 
2 Coreference annotation 
Coreference is a relation between textual elements, 
?referring expressions?, which denote the same 
entity. Semantically, these expressions are proto-
typical objects or ?(discourse) referents? (Kart-
tunen, 1976). Given a pair of two coreferring ex-
pressions, the preceding expression is termed ante-
cedent, the subsequent one is termed anaphor. 
Subject to annotation are ?markables? defined as 
a cover-term for potential anaphors and their ante-
cedents. Coreference annotation consists of as-
signment of relations pointing from an anaphor to 
an antecedent markable. Whether two markables 
are co-referent, i.e. referring to the same discourse 
referent, can be determined by a substitution test. If 
156
the substitution of anaphor and antecedent yield 
the same interpretation of the text, these are 
deemed coreferential. 
Syntactically, a markable is typically a phrase 
with a nominal or a pronominal head. According to 
the referential properties a syntactic construction 
typically has, we distinguish between primary 
markables, i.e. potential anaphors, and secondary 
markables, expressions which can not serve as 
anaphors, but only as antecedents.  
3 Annotation principles 
3.1 A principled approach 
In order to develop an annotation scheme which 
is maximally consistent, we initially identified a 
set of axiomatic requirements: 
? CONSTITUENCY 
o a primary or secondary markable must be an 
independent syntactic constituent 
? COMPLETENESS 
o neither sub-tokens nor non-phrasal nomi-
nals are subject to annotation, only syntac-
tic words (tokens) and phrases are 
? CONSISTENCY 
o corresponding features have to be analyzed 
in a corresponding way 
CONSTITUENCY and COMPLETENESS are necessary 
pre-conditions for an alignment between syntactic 
and anaphoric annotation, CONSISTENCY implies 
that annotation principles must be formulated in a 
way that allows for inter-subjective and cross-
linguistically valid annotation decisions. While 
CONSTITUENCY and COMPLETENESS define con-
straints for markable identification, consistency 
also affects selection preferences among potential 
antecedents, and it motivates the explicit represen-
tation of anaphoric ambiguity in PoCoS. 
In addition to these requirements, we add the 
preference for MAXIMAL ANALYSIS. It suggests 
longer anaphoric chains are preferred to the shorter 
ones by annotation. This defines preferences for 
coding decisions by ambiguity (see 4.1). 
In the remainder of this section, annotation prin-
ciples employed in the PoCoS scheme are shortly 
presented and discussed as to their relationship to 
these four requirements. 
3.2 Markable identification 
Cross-linguistically consistent markable identifica-
tion strategies are a necessary pre-condition for a 
comparative evaluation of anaphor annotation and 
anaphor resolution across different languages. It 
has been controversial, however, how to set mark-
able boundaries. So, for example, Ge et al (1998) 
and, MUC (Hirschman, 1997) propose a minimal 
string constraint motivated by evaluation consid-
erations. This procedure leads to systematic viola-
tions of the CONSTITUENCY and COMPLETENESS 
principles, though, cf. the potential markables 
Denver and bankruptcy in ex. (1)  
(1) The [Denver]?-based con-
cern, which emerged from ban-
cruptcy ... its new, post-
[bancruptcy]? law structure 
..." (WSJ, 1328)
We explicitly propose a maximum size principle as 
an alternative to the minimum string constraint 
(see Principle 1 below). So, a markable consists of 
the head, usually a noun or a pronoun, and of all 
modifiers, attributes, relative clauses, appositions, 
and dislocated elements attached to the head. 
Principle 1 Maximum size 
One markable includes all modifications of its 
head. 
Prepositions can be regarded as modifications of a 
noun as well, and following this line of 
argumentation, the seemingly clear-cut 
differentiation between NPs and PPs becomes 
questionable, cf. the unclear status of Japanese 
postpositions that can also be interpreted as 
morphological case markers (Giv?n 2001:115f). 
Further, in most European languages, functional 
elements such as prepositions and determiners tend 
to be fused. In combination with the 
COMPLETENESS constraint, a possible NP-
preference for the selection of markables will 
result in the selection of either PPs or non-phrasal 
markables if preposition-determiner fusion occurs.  
In order to achieve a more consistent analysis, in 
which the syntactic status of a markable does not 
depend on surface phenomena such as the 
(optional) fusion of prepositions and determiner, 
function words are integrated into a markable if 
they modify it. As a consequence, CONSISTENCY 
157
considerations call for the choice of PPs rather than 
NPs as markables where possible. 
Principle 2 Syntactic characterization 
If a referring expression is modified by func-
tion words, e.g. a determiner or an adposition, 
these are to be integrated into the markable. 
Like Principle 1, Principle 2 originates from CON-
SISTENCY and COMPLETENESS requirements ap-
plied both within one language and considering 
cross-linguistic validity, as the function of inflec-
tional marking in one language and the function of 
prepositions in another language are exchangeable.  
If a markable includes another markable, both 
are specified as markables in annotation. Such 
treatment provides consistency across languages, 
(cf. the fragment of parallel text in ex. 2), and has 
an additional advantage of representing the syntac-
tic structure of a markable. 
(2)[Dieses Recht]right kann nicht in Anspruch genommen werden [im 
Falle einer Strafverfolgung auf Grund von Handlungen, die [gegen 
die Ziele [der Vereinten Nationen]UN]purp versto?en]prosec. 
[This right]right may not be invoked [in the case of prosecutions 
arising from acts contrary [to the purposes [of the United Na-
tions]UN]purp]prosec. 
[??? ?????]right ?? ????? ???? ???????????? [? ?????? ?????????????, 
??????????? ?? ?????????? ??????, ??????????????? [????? 
[??????????? ???????????? ?????]UN]purp]prosec. (www.unhchr.ch/udhr,  
shortened) 
3.3 Antecedent selection 
For interconnecting co-referring expressions three 
basic strategies can be employed: (i) leave this de-
cision to an annotator, (ii) connect all mentions to 
the first one, or (iii) connect each following men-
tion to the immediately preceding one. In line with 
previous research and in order to enhance consis-
tency, we opted for (iii), as Principle 3 states: 
Principle 3 Chain principle 
Mark the most recent mention of a referent as 
antecedent, so that all mentions of the same ref-
erent make up an ordered chain. 
Possessive pronouns can often be used at the be-
ginning of a sentence, in case they are resolved in 
the same sentence as in (3) and (4). The chain 
principle suggests selecting a pronoun as the chain-
initial element which is contra-intuitive in this 
case: a pronoun introduces no lexical material 
which serves for subsequent re-identification of a 
referent. In order to respect the inter-subjective 
intuition to identify the controller of the possessive 
as a markable, we posit an exception to the chain 
principle for the case of pronominal cataphora. 
According to the CONSISTENCY requirement (see 
3.1), any bound pronoun, no matter if its is chain-
initial or not, has to be treated this way.  
Principle 4 Cataphora at sentence level 
If a pronoun which is typically used as a bound 
pronoun is bound by an intrasentential controller, 
annotate a pointing relation to the controller rather 
than to a candidate antecedent in previous dis-
course. 
In the Core Scheme for German, English and 
Russian, Principle 4 applies to possessive pronouns 
only. 
(3) Through [his]a lawyers, 
[Mr. Antar]a has denied alle-
gations in the SEC suit?(WSJ, 3) 
(4) [Die einstige Fu?ball-
Weltmacht]d zittert [vor einem 
Winzling]s. Mit [seinem]s Tor 
zum 1:0 [f?r die Ukraine]u 
st?rzte [der 1,62 Meter gro?e 
Gennadi Subow]s [die deutsche 
Nationalelf]d vor?bergehend in 
ein Trauma? (PCC, 10374) 
?[The former football World Power]d is shiver-
ing [in the face of a mite]s. By [his]s goal that 
set the score to 1:0 [for Ukraine]u pitched 
[Gennadi Subow]s, 1.62 Meter tall, [the German 
National Eleven]d in a shock for a while?? 
158
3.4 Identifying pointing relations 
A special case for annotation is pronominal or 
nominal reference by plural or NPs or both to mul-
tiple concrete antecedents mentioned at different 
points in a text. Thus, they cannot be regarded as 
single constituent. Since a referent of a plural NP is 
not the same as the sum of its parts, we deal with 
multiple antecedents by introducing a separate an-
notation layer called groups. Group referents are 
linked to their anaphors by regular anaphoric rela-
tions, see (5).  
(5) [Montedison]m now owns 
about 72% of [Erbamont?s]e 
shares outstanding. [The com-
panies]m+e said ? a sale of all 
of [Erbamont?s]e assets ... 
[to Montedison]m ? [The compa-
nies]m+e said ? (WSJ, 660) 
Special treatment of groups is important as they 
introduce an exception to the Chain Principle. 
Formally, the same group of people can be referred 
to at different points of time. However, following 
the preference for MAXIMAL ANALYSIS (see 3.1), 
longer anaphoric chains are preferred, and thus, 
once a pre-established group reference exists, it is 
marked as an antecedent instead of establishing a 
new group referent. Accordingly, in ex. (5), the 
preferred antecedent of the second companies 
is the previously established group reference The 
companies. More generally, this is formulated in 
Principle 5.
Principle 5 Maximize anaphoric chains 
The annotation of anaphoric references is pre-
ferred over the annotation of alternative analy-
ses. 
This principle is motivated by CONSISTENCY and 
coverage considerations. 
4 Dealing with vagueness 
4.1 Ambiguity resolution strategies 
The problem of identifying an appropriate pointing 
relation is especially acute in connection with ana-
phoric ambiguity. As opposed to general annota-
tion strategies, however, the ambiguity strategies 
apply only in case of doubt, i.e. if the annotator 
perceives different readings as equally possible. 
Consider ex. (6) as a continuation of ex. (4): 
(6) Je kleiner [die Ki-
cker]u?/d? daherkommmen, desto 
gr??er wird [der Gegner]d?/u? 
geredet. (PCC, 10374) 
?The smaller [the kickers]u?/d? are, the 
greater [the rivals]d?/u? are rumoured to be.? 
Antecedent of die Kicker ?kickers? depends 
on the understanding of the ?size? metaphor, it can 
be either the Ukrainian team (presented as having 
short players), or the German team (which has not 
been favored in the first match), or a generic 
description (which would mean that the sentence is 
not directly linked with the discourse). Here, also 
Principle 5 can be applied, since we are facing 
alternative readings, and accordingly, the generic 
reading in the example is excluded. This 
application of Principle 5 is reformulated in 
Principle 6. 
Principle 6 Primacy of anaphora  
In case of uncertainty between different read-
ings prefer anaphoric interpretation to antece-
dentless one. 
However, in the example under consideration, 
we still have the choice between two possible 
antecedents. The substitution test (see Sec. 2) 
fails to determine a unique antecedent, as both 
possible substitutions are plausible, depending 
on whether ?size? refers to physical size or an-
ticipated defeat. From the preference for MAXI-
MAL ANALYSIS, however, a more rigid version 
of Principle 5 can be motivated, cf. Principle 7. 
Principle 7 Avoid ambiguous antecedents 
In case of two possible antecedents, primary 
markable is preferred to secondary ones or to 
group referents. 
In case of two primary markables are possible 
antecedents, choose the one which leads to the 
longer anaphoric chain. 
In ex. (6), this results in a preference for the Ger-
man team as the antecedent of die Kicker. 
Finally, in order to narrow down the scope of 
ambiguity, another exception to the chain principle 
is necessary. Markables with ambiguous reference 
should be avoided as antecedents, but rather the 
last unambiguously coreferential expression. 
 
159
Principle 8 Primary markables as preferred 
antecedents 
Prefer antecedents which are unambiguous in 
their reference to antecedents which are am-
biguous. 
4.2 Annotation of ambiguities 
In order to investigate the effect of ambiguity and 
to document its influence on inter-annotator-
agreement, ambiguities are to be explicitly marked. 
For this purpose, we classified ambiguities as fol-
lows.  
Ambiguous antecedent ambiguity of antece-
dent of a markable, cf. (6). 
Ambiguous relation ambiguity wrt relation be-
tween a markable and the context: 
(7) Weil [die Polizei]p das 
wei?, richten sich [die Beam-
ten]? ? auf viele Anzeigen ... 
ein. (PCC, 19442) 
?As [the police]p knows this, [the officials]? are 
expecting ? a lot of statements??  
The relation between ?the police? and ?the po-
licemen? is either bridging (part-whole) or corefer-
ence.  
Ambiguous idiomatic ambiguity wrt whether a 
markable could be either understood as coreferen-
tial or as a part of an idiom. In (8), der Spatz in der 
Hand, a definite NP in German, can be generic, 
part of an idiom, or referring:  
(8) Lieber [der Spatz in der 
Hand] als [die Taube auf dem 
Dach] (PCC, 12666) 
?A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush?  
(Context: a mayor finds an investor for his town 
willing to make only minimal investments). 
5 PoCoS annotation scheme 
PoCoS disposes of three annotation levels: mark-
ables, relations and attributes (5.1, 5.2. and 5.3). In 
what follows, we concentrate on the Core Scheme 
because of relevance and space considerations. 
5.1 Markables 
Primary markables are all potential anaphors, i.e. 
referential forms which can be used to indicate 
subsequent mentions of a previously introduced 
referent in the discourse, such as definite NPs, pro-
nouns, and proper names. Secondary markables are 
expressions that normally indicates non-reference 
(e.g. indefinites; in the Extended Scheme also 
clauses). Secondary markables are subject to anno-
tation only if they serve as antecedents of a pri-
mary markable.  
The basic distinctive feature between primary 
and secondary markables is if they can refer to 
previously mentioned nominals or not. Using the 
above-mentioned grammatical criteria, most prob-
able referring expressions (i.e. primary markables) 
can be extracted automatically from syntactic an-
notation, which is an important advantage. 
Further, using this differentiation a more precise 
definition of the coreference annotation task can be 
given. Coreference annotation is complete, if all 
primary markables are classified as having an an-
tecedent or not. 
5.2 Coreference Relations 
We distinguish between two types of coreference: 
nominal and non-nominal. The Core Scheme only 
deals with nominal coreference, which we define 
as reference of NPs to explicitly mentioned NPs 
establishing a relation of identity (cf. Mitkov?s 
(2002) ?identity-of-reference direct nominal 
anaphora?). If a relation other than identity holds 
between a primary markable and an element from 
the preceding context, e.g. the bridging relation, 
the relation remains underspecified and can be as-
signed later, as part of Extended Scheme. 
Differently from MUC, we do not consider 
predicative nominals as coreferential with the sub-
ject in the sense of textual coreference defined 
above (for similar view, see van Deemter and Kib-
ble, 1999), as the relationship with the hypothetical 
antecedent is expressed by syntactic means.  
5.3 Annotation principles  
In sec. 3 and 4, we outlined a small set of heuris-
tics serving to guide annotators to more consistent 
annotation decisions. These principles are, how-
ever, not equal in their restrictive force, but rather 
they build the following preference hierarchy (cf. 
Carlson et al, 2003): 
obligatory principles > exception principles > 
default principles > ambiguity principles 
Principles 1 and 2 are obligatory and do not allow 
exceptions; 4, 5 and 8 are exceptions to the default, 
i.e. the Chain Principle (3). 6 and 7 are applied 
only if interpretation-dependent ambiguities occur, 
thus being no exceptions to default principles. 
160
 Figure 1. PoCoS: Core Scheme, Extended Scheme and language-specific instantiations 
5.4 Attributes 
Markables and relations are enriched by a set of 
additional features. These features encode attrib-
utes of pointing relations (e.g. anaphora type) or 
specify parameters of anaphoricity (e.g. referential-
ity, ambiguity). Further, certain grammatical fea-
tures of markables are integrated which are of gen-
eral interest when analyzing patterns of anaphora 
in corpora and can be extracted from other pre-
existing annotations. This way we gain a common 
minimal representation of grammatical features 
which can be extracted from different annotation 
schemes. This allows us to abstract from language-
, tool- or annotation-specific expressions of, say, 
grammatical roles. As a consequence, the scheme 
is self-contained to a higher degree, and thus, the 
cross-linguistic validity of the assembled data is 
enhanced.  
5.5. Annotation procedure 
The scheme suggests structuring annotation into 
several annotation cycles performed manually or 
semi-automatically: 
I. Core Scheme Annotation 
1. Identify primary markables 
2. Connect markables with coreference links 
a.     assign to every primary markable a 
unique antecedent 
b. if antecedent is not a primary markable, 
annotate it is as secondary markable if 
necessary 
3. Set attribute values 
II. Extended Scheme: steps 1 to 3 accordingly 
These stages correspond to the 3 annotation levels 
within the Core and Extended Schemes respec-
tively, because annotating at all levels at the same 
time has proved to be very labor-intensive and 
more time-consuming than one level at a time. 
6 Application and evaluation 
The original annotation guidelines were drafted in 
2004 by the authors for the annotation of the Pots-
dam Commentary Corpus of German newspaper 
commentaries (PCC) (Stede, 2004) and the RST 
Discourse Treebank of Wall Street Journal articles 
(WSJ) (Carlson et al, 2003).  
After a series of annotation experiments, the 
PoCoS Core Scheme was applied to the PCC by 
two instructed annotators, students of linguistics, 
whose portions had an overlap of 19 texts (11%). 
Based upon these texts, inter-annotator agreement 
was calculated using different agreement scores 
along the methodology of Popescu-Belis et al 
(2004). So, with respect to German, we achieved 
moderate to substantial agreement (full chains, 
?=0.61 with union of markables; ?=0.77 with in-
tersection of markables). 
Part of the WSJ corpus has been performed in 
co-operation with A.A. Kibrik, Moscow State Uni-
versity. Fourteen instructed annotators, also stu-
dents of linguistics, worked on the RST Discourse 
Treebank with pair-wise overlapping portions. Re-
garding 8 texts from 6 annotators, we also found 
substantial agreement (?=0.71 with union; ?=0.96 
with intersection). 
161
These results are reasonable in the light of ? 
values reported for an annotation experiment by 
Artstein and Poesio (2005, p.22) on English which 
yielded ?=0.48. However, ? is affected by parame-
ters of the text as a whole, and thus should be in-
terpreted with certain reservations. The texts of the 
PCC are generally short, but very demanding in 
their interpretation.  
A detailed study of outliers revealed several 
sources of errors in both corpora. Besides ?soft 
errors? such as inclusion of punctuation and con-
junctions within markables, occasionally missed 
integration of function words into markables, or 
obviously missed anaphors, we found several 
?hard? errors on syntax (e.g. different assumptions 
about PP attachment), semantics (e.g. vagueness, 
exact relationship between abstract concepts in a 
given context), and pragmatics (e.g. differentiation 
between metonymy and bridging). Above, we sug-
gested the annotation of ambiguity as an attempt to 
capture typical semantic and pragmatic sources of 
disagreement (cf. sec. 4.2 for examples). 
In order to evaluate the impact of such ?hard er-
rors? in the German data, two instructed annotators 
corrected 13 texts from the overlapping part of the 
portions independently. As a concequence, the 
original ? values increased by about 7%: original ? 
= 0.69 (union)/0.82 (intersection), and corrected ? 
=0.76 (union)/0.89 (intersection). These results, 
however, still suffer from the special problems 
with the demanding ? though, very interesting ? 
type of texts assembled in the PCC as well.  
Note that in spite of these short remarks, this 
paper has focused on the presentation of the 
scheme principles rather than on its evaluation. 
Currently, the PCC is annotated with information 
structure and a more thorough evaluation address-
ing both information status and co-reference is in 
preparation. A corpus of Russian is currently under 
construction, which PoCoS is being applied to (cf. 
Krasavina et al 2007). 
7 Discussion 
The majority of earlier coreference annotation ex-
periences were dealing with English, including the 
standard-like MUC-scheme (Hirschman, 1997). 
MATE was an attempt to extend annotation to 
other languages than English (Poesio, 2004). For 
German, several annotation schemes appeared and 
were applied to annotation of corpora recently: for 
newspaper texts, such as the T?Ba-D/Z (Naumann, 
2006) and for hypertexts, Holler et al (2004). As 
for Slavic languages, the Prague Dependency 
Treebank has been recently enriched by corefer-
ence annotation, see Ku?ov? and Haji?ov? (2004) . 
For Russian, though, we are aware of no similar 
experiences so far. The current approach is an ad-
vance on the existing work as it attempts at provid-
ing language-independent and systematic annota-
tion principles, including a language-neutral reper-
toire of relations and a language-neutral apparatus 
for identification of markables. This makes the 
resulting annotation scheme extendable and appli-
cable across languages. 
The Core Scheme is comparable to MUC by 
Hirschman, 1997; DRAMA by Passonneau, 1996; 
MATE by Poesio, 2004. Its specific instantiations 
formalized in a family of Extended Scheme(s) are 
comparable to Rocha, 1997, GNOME by Poesio, 
2004. By distinguishing between fundamental 
(?obligatory?), project-specific (?recommended?) 
and language-specific (?optional?) levels of anno-
tation (cf. Leech and Wilson, 1996), a compromise 
between a general character and a greater level of 
detail is achieved.  
A central innovation is the dichotomy of pri-
mary and secondary markables. As both are de-
fined on the basis of their syntactic properties, we 
recommend identifying primary markables auto-
matically, but annotate secondary markables 
manually and only if needed. The separation be-
tween both leads to a reduction of the number of 
possible attribute values subject to annotation, and 
thus to reduction of complexity. The definition of 
primary and secondary markables makes use of 
language-specifics such as existence of a definite 
determiner, etc. These specifications, although 
formulated here specifically for German and Eng-
lish, are subject to language-specific alternative 
instantiations of the PoCoS Scheme. Note that in 
Russian, the differentiation between primary and 
secondary markables is made on the basis of dif-
ferent linguistic cues, as definiteness is not explic-
itly marked. Therefore, in Russian, secondary 
markables are only certain quantified expressions. 
Nevertheless, the function of primary and secon-
dary markables remains the same. Further, exis-
tence of a pre-determined set of potential anaphors 
allows to verify if all primary markables are as-
signed a relation or have been explicitly marked as 
non-referring.  
162
Another important novel aspect is the systematic 
treatment of ambiguity in the annotation of large 
corpora. This aspect has never been included in 
coreference annotation before (except for one ex-
periment described by Poesio and Artstein, 2005) 
and thus defines the task of coreference annotation 
in a more precise way. Moreover, we specified a 
set of heuristic rules to guide an annotator to a spe-
cific decision in case of ambiguity or vagueness. 
These rules are ranked according to their priority. 
Similarly, Versley (2006) has recently argued that 
a ?light-weight theory? of anaphoric ambiguity is 
due, in order to ensure consistent coding decisions.  
Finally, splitting annotation procedure into 
stages allows explicit structuring of the process, in 
existing approaches presented no more than im-
plicitly (cf. Naumann, 2006, see p. 12).  
8 Conclusion 
This paper has presented the general coreference 
annotation framework and the PoCoS Scheme for 
coreference annotation. As an innovative feature 
for coreference annotation, it implements ambigu-
ity resolution strategies and proposes annotation of 
ambiguities. Also, by introducing language-neutral 
criteria for identification of markables, it both re-
duces the notorious complexity of anaphoric anno-
tation on the systematic basis and enables applica-
bility of similar principles across languages. Thus, 
it has a better portability and cross-language com-
parability as compared to the previous work. One 
possible field of application of the scheme can be 
seen in its utilisation for the anaphoric annotation 
of parallel corpora, an idea which is currently ex-
plored by the authors. 
References  
Artstein, R. and ?. Poesio. 2005. Kappa3=Alpha (or 
Beta). Technical Report CSM-437, Univ. of Essex. 
Carlson, L., D. Marcu and M. E. Okurowski. 2003. 
Building a Discourse-Tagged Corpus in the Frame-
work of Rhetorical Structure Theory. Current direc-
tions in discourse and dialogue, Kluwer. 
Deemter van, K. and R  Kibble. 1999. What is corefer-
ence, and what should coreference annotation be? 
Proc. of the ACL Workshop on Coreference. 
Ge, M, J. Hale, and E. Charniak. 1998. A statistical ap-
proach to anaphora resolution. Proc. of the Sixth 
Workshop on very Large Corpora. 
Holler, A., J.F.Maas and A.Storrer. 2004. Exploiting 
Coreference Annotations for Text-to-Hypertext Con-
version. Proc. of LREC 2004, Lissabon, Portugal. 
Hirschman, L. 1997. MUC-7 coreference task defini-
tion. Version 3.0. 
Karttunen, L. 1976. Discourse referents. Syntax and 
Semantics. J. McCawley, New York Academic Press. 
Krasavina, O., Ch. Chiarcos and D. Zalmanov. 2007. 
Aspects of topicality in the use of demonstrative ex-
pressions in German, English and Russian. Proc. of 
DAARC-2007, Lagos, Portugal, 29-30 March. 
Ku?ov?, L. and E. Haji?ov? (2004). Prague Dependency 
Treebank: Enrichment of the Underlying Syntactic 
Annotation by Coreferential Mark-Up. The Prague 
Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics 81. 
Leech, G. and J. Svartvik. 2003. A communicative 
grammar of English. London [u.a.].  
Leech, G. and A. Wilson. 1996. EAGLES Recommen-
dations for the Morphosyntactic Annotation of Cor-
pora. 
www.ilc.cnr.it/EAGLES/annotate/annotate.html 
Mitkov, R. 2002. Anaphora resolution. London [u.a.].  
Naumann, K. 2006. Manual for the Annotation of in-
document Referential Relations. http://www.sfs.uni-
tuebingen.de/de_tuebadz.shtml (July 2006). 
Passonneau, R. 1996. Instructions for applying Dis-
course Reference Annotation for Multiple Applica-
tions (DRAMA). Unpublished document. 
Poesio, M. 2004 The MATE/GNOME Proposals for 
Anaphoric Annotation, Revisited. Proc. of SIGDIAL. 
Poesio, M. and R. Artstein, 2005. Annotating (Ana-
phoric) Ambiguity. Proc. of Corpus Linguistics-05. 
Popescu-Belis, A., L. Rigouste, S. Salmon-Alt, and L- 
Romary. 2004, Online Evaluation of Coreference 
Resolution. Proc. of LREC 2004. 
Rocha de, M. 1997. Supporting anaphor resolution with 
a corpus-based probabilistic model. Proc. of the 
ACL'97 workshop on Operational factors in practical, 
robust anaphora resolution. Madrid, Spain. 
Stede, M. 2004. The Potsdam Commentary Corpus. 
Proc. of ACL-04 Workshop on Discourse Annota-
tion, Barcelona, July. 
Versley, Y. 2006. Disagreement Dissected: Vagueness 
as a Source of Ambiguity in Nominal (Co-) Refer-
ence. Proceedings of the ESSLLI 2006 Workshop on 
Ambiguity in Anaphora. 
163
