Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP 2005 Demonstration Abstracts, pages 14?15,
Vancouver, October 2005.
Prague Dependency Treebank as an exercise book of Czech
Barbora Hladka? and Ondr?ej Kuc?era
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Charles University
Malostransk?e n?am. 25
118 00 Prague, Czech Republic
hladka@ufal.mff.cuni.cz, ondrej.kucera@centrum.cz
Abstract
There was simply linguistics at the begin-
ning. During the years, linguistics has
been accompanied by various attributes.
For example corpus one. While a name
corpus is relatively young in linguistics,
its content related to a language - collec-
tion of texts and speeches - is nothing new
at all. Speaking about corpus linguistics
nowadays, we keep in mind collecting of
language resources in an electronic form.
There is one more attribute that comput-
ers together with mathematics bring into
linguistics - computational. The progress
from working with corpus towards the
computational approach is determined by
the fact that electronic data with the ?un-
limited? computer potential give opportu-
nities to solve natural language processing
issues in a fast way (with regard to the pos-
sibilities of human being) on a statistically
significant amount of data.
Listing the attributes, we have to stop for
a while by the notion of annotated cor-
pora. Let us build a big corpus including
all Czech text data available in an elec-
tronic form and look at it as a sequence of
characters with the space having dominat-
ing status ? a separator of words. It is very
easy to compare two words (as strings), to
calculate how many times these two words
appear next to each other in a corpus, how
many times they appear separately and so
on. Even more, it is possible to do it
for every language (more or less). This
kind of calculations is language indepen-
dent ? it is not restricted by the knowl-
edge of language, its morphology, its syn-
tax. However, if we want to solve more
complex language tasks such as machine
translation we cannot do it without deep
knowledge of language. Thus, we have
to transform language knowledge into an
electronic form as well, i.e. we have to
formalize it and then assign it to words
(e.g., in case of morphology), or to sen-
tences (e.g., in case of syntax). A cor-
pus with additional information is called
an annotated corpus.
We are lucky. There is a real annotated
corpus of Czech ? Prague Dependency
Treebank (PDT). PDT belongs to the top
of the world corpus linguistics and its sec-
ond edition is ready to be officially pub-
lished (for the first release see (Hajic? et al,
2001)). PDT was born in Prague and had
arisen from the tradition of the successful
Prague School of Linguistics. The depen-
dency approach to a syntactical analysis
with the main role of verb has been ap-
plied. The annotations go from the mor-
phological level to the tectogrammatical
level (level of underlying syntactic struc-
ture) through the intermediate syntactical-
analytical level. The data (2 mil. words)
have been annotated in the same direction,
i.e., from a more simple level to a more
14
complex one. This fact corresponds to
the amount of data annotated on a partic-
ular level. The largest number of words
have been annotated morphologically (2
mil. words) and the lowest number of
words tectogramatically (0.8 mil. words).
In other words, 0.8 million words have
been annotated on all three levels, 1.5 mil.
words on both morphological and syntac-
tical level and 2 mil. words on the lowest
morphological level.
Besides the verification of ?pre-PDT? the-
ories and formulation of new ones, PDT
serves as training data for machine learn-
ing methods. Here, we present a system
Styx that is designed to be an exercise
book of Czech morphology and syntax
with exercises directly selected from PDT.
The schoolchildren can use a computer to
write, to draw, to play games, to page en-
cyclopedia, to compose music - why they
could not use it to parse a sentence, to de-
termine gender, number, case, . . . ? While
the Styx development, two main phases
have been passed:
1. transformation of an academic ver-
sion of PDT into a school one. 20
thousand sentences were automati-
cally selected out of 80 thousand
sentences morphologically and syn-
tactically annotated. The complex-
ity of selected sentences exactly cor-
responds to the complexity of sen-
tences exercised in the current text-
books of Czech. A syntactically an-
notated sentence in PDT is repre-
sented as a tree with the same num-
ber of nodes as is the number of the
words in the given sentence. It dif-
fers from the schemes used at schools
(Grepl and Karl??k, 1998). On the
other side, the linear structure of PDT
morphological annotations was taken
as it is ? only morphological cate-
gories relevant to school syllabuses
were preserved.
2. proposal and implementation of ex-
ercises. The general computer facil-
ities of basic and secondary schools
were taken into account while choos-
ing a potential programming lan-
guage to use. The Styx is imple-
mented in Java that meets our main
requirements ? platform-independent
system and system stability.
At least to our knowledge, there is no
such system for any language corpus that
makes the schoolchildren familiar with an
academic product. At the same time, our
system represents a challenge and an op-
portunity for the academicians to popular-
ize a field devoted to the natural language
processing with promising future.
A number of electronic exercises of Czech
morphology and syntax were created.
However, they were built manually, i.e.
authors selected sentences either from
their minds or randomly from books,
newspapers. Then they analyzed them
manually. In a given manner, there is no
chance to build an exercise system that
reflects a real usage of language in such
amount the Styx system fully offers.
References
Jan Hajic?, Eva Hajic?ova?, Barbora Hladka?, Petr Pajas,Jarmila Panevova?, and Petr Sgall. 2001. Prague
Dependency Treebank 1.0 (Final Production Label)CD-ROM, CAT: LDC2001T10, ISBN 1-58563-212-0,Linguistic Data Consortium.
Miroslav Grepl and Petr Karl??k 1998. Skladba c?es?iny.
[Czech Langauge.] Votobia, Praha.
15
Proceedings of the Third ACL Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 36?43,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
An Annotated Corpus Outside Its Original Context: A Corpus-Based
Exercise Book
Barbora Hladka? and Ondr?ej Kuc?era
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Charles University
Malostranske? na?m. 25
118 00 Prague
Czech Republic
hladka@ufal.mff.cuni.cz, ondrej.kucera@centrum.cz
Abstract
We present the STYX system, which is de-
signed as an electronic corpus-based exercise
book of Czech morphology and syntax with
sentences directly selected from the Prague
Dependency Treebank, the largest annotated
corpus of the Czech language. The exercise
book offers complex sentence processing with
respect to both morphological and syntactic
phenomena, i. e. the exercises allow students
of basic and secondary schools to practice
classifying parts of speech and particular mor-
phological categories of words and in the pars-
ing of sentences and classifying the syntactic
functions of words. The corpus-based exer-
cise book presents a novel usage of annotated
corpora outside their original context.
1 Introduction
Schoolchildren can use a computer to chat with their
friends, to play games, to draw, to browse the Inter-
net or to write their own blogs - why should they not
use it to parse sentences or to determine the mor-
phological categories of words? We do not expect
them to practice grammar as enthusiastically as they
do what is mentioned above, but we believe that an
electronic exercise book could make the practicing,
which they need to do anyway, more fun.
We present the procedure of building an exercise
book of the Czech language based on the Prague
Dependency Treebank. First (in Section 2) we
present the motivation for building an exercise book
of Czech morphology and syntax based on an an-
notated corpus ? the Prague Dependency Treebank
(PDT). Then we provide a short description of the
PDT itself in Section 3. Section 4 is the core of
our paper. Section 4.1 is devoted to the filtering of
the PDT sentences in such a way that the complex-
ity of sentences included in the exercise book ex-
actly corresponds to the complexity of sentences ex-
ercised in traditional Czech textbooks and exercise
books. Section 4.2 documents the transformation of
the sentences ? more precisely a transformation of
their annotations into the school analysis scheme as
recommended by the official framework of the ed-
ucational programme for general secondary educa-
tion (Jer?a?bek and Tupy?, 2005). The evaluation of the
system is described in Section 4.3. Section 5 sum-
marizes this paper and plans for the future work.
2 Motivation
From the very beginning, we had an idea of us-
ing an annotated corpus outside its original context.
We recalled our experience from secondary school,
namely from language lessons when we learned
morphology and syntax. We did it ?with pen and pa-
per? and more or less hated it. Thus we decided to
build an electronic exercise book to learn and prac-
tice the morphology and the syntax ?by moving the
mouse around the screen.?
In principle, there are two ways to build an ex-
ercise book - manually or automatically. A manual
procedure requires collecting sentences the authors
usually make up and then process with regard to the
chosen aspects. This is a very demanding, time-
consuming task and therefore the authors manage
to collect only tens (possibly hundreds) of sentences
that simply cannot fully reflect the real usage of a
language. An automatic procedure is possible when
an annotated corpus of the language is available.
Then the disadvantages of the manual procedure dis-
36
appear. It is expected that the texts in a corpus are
already selected to provide a well-balanced corpus
reflecting the real usage of the language, the hard an-
notation work is also done and the size of such cor-
pus is thousands or tens of thousands of annotated
sentences. The task that remains is to transform the
annotation scheme used in the corpus into the sen-
tence analysis scheme that is taught in schools. In
fact, a procedure based on an annotated corpus that
we apply is semi-automatic, since the annotation
scheme transformation presents a knowledge-based
process designed manually - no machine-learning
technique is used.
We browsed the Computer-Assisted Language
Learning (CALL) approaches, namely those con-
centrated under the teaching and language cor-
pora interest group (e.g. (Wichmann and Fligel-
stone (eds.), 1997), (Tribble, 2001), (Murkherjee,
2004), (Schultze, 2003), (Scott, Tribble, 2006)).
We realized that none of them actually employs
manually annotated corpora ? they use corpora as
huge banks of texts without additional linguistic
information (i.e. without annotation). Only one
project (Keogh et al, 2004) works with an automat-
ically annotated corpus to teach Irish and German
morphology.
Reviewing the Czech electronic exercise books
available (e.g. (Terasoft, Ltd., 2003)), none of them
provides the users with any possibility of analyzing
the sentence both morphologically and syntactically.
All of them were built manually.
Considering all the facts mentioned above, we
find our approach to be novel one. One of the most
exciting aspects of corpora is that they may be used
to a good advantage both in research and teach-
ing. That is why we wanted to present this system
that makes schoolchildren familiar with an academic
product. At the same time, this system represents a
challenge and an opportunity for academics to pop-
ularize a field with a promising future that is devoted
to natural language processing.
3 The Prague Dependency Treebank
The Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT) presents
the largest annotated corpus of Czech, and its second
edition was published in 2006 (PDT 2.0, 2006). The
PDT had arisen from the tradition of the successful
Prague School of Linguistics. The dependency ap-
proach to syntactic analysis with the main role of
a verb has been applied. The annotations go from
the morphological layer through to the intermedi-
ate syntactic-analytical layer to the tectogrammati-
cal layer (the layer of an underlying syntactic struc-
ture). The texts have been annotated in the same
direction, i. e. from the simplest layer to the most
complex. This fact corresponds with the amount of
data annotated on each level ? 2 million words have
been annotated on the lowest morphological layer,
1.5 million words on both the morphological and the
syntactic layer, and 0.8 million words on all three
layers.
Within the PDT conceptual framework, a sen-
tence is represented as a rooted ordered tree with la-
beled nodes and edges on both syntactic (Hajic?ova?,
Kirschner and Sgall, 1999) and tectogrammatical
(Mikulova? et al, 2006) layers. Thus we speak about
syntactic and tectogrammatical trees, respectively.
Representation on the morphological layer (Hana et
al., 2005) corresponds to a list of (word token and
morphological tag) pairs. Figure 1 illustrates the
syntactic and morphological annotation of the sam-
ple sentence Rozd??l do regulovane? ceny byl hrazen
z dotac??. [The variation of the regulated price was
made up by grants.] One token of the morphological
layer is represented by exactly one node of the tree
(rozd??l [variation], do [of], regulovane? [regulated],
ceny [price], byl [was], hrazen [made up], z [by],
dotac?? [grants], ?.?) and the dependency relation be-
tween two nodes is captured by an edge between
them, i. e. between the dependent and its governor.
The actual type of the relation is given as a func-
tion label of the edge, for example the edge (rozd??l,
hrazen) is labeled by the function Sb (subject) of the
node rozd??l. Together with a syntactic function, a
morphological tag is displayed (rozd??l, NNIS1-----A-
---).
Since there is m:n correspondence between the
number of nodes in syntactic and tectogrammati-
cal trees, it would be rather confusing to display
the annotations on those layers all together in one
tree. Hence we provide a separate tree visualizing
the tectogrammatical annotation of the sample sen-
tence ? see Figure 2. A tectogrammatical lemma
and a functor are relevant to our task, thus we dis-
play them with each node in the tectogrammatical
37
DFPSUS