A Robust Cross-Style Bilingual Sentences Alignment Model
Tz-Liang Kueng Keh-Yih Su
Behavior Design Corporation
2F, No.5, Industry E. Rd. IV,
Science-Based Industrial Park,
Hsinchu, Taiwan 30077, R.O.C.
{cavs, kysu}@bdc.com.tw
Abstract
Most current sentence alignment approaches adopt
sentence length and cognate as the alignment features;
and they are mostly trained and tested in the docu-
ments with the same style. Since the length distribu-
tion, alignment-type distribution (used by length-based
approaches) and cognate frequency vary significantly
across texts with different styles, the length-based ap-
proaches fail to achieve similar performance when tested
in corpora of different styles. The experiments show that
the performance in F -measure could drop from 98.2%
to 85.6% when a length-based approach is trained by a
technical manual and then tested on a general magazine.
Since a large percentage of content words in the source
text would be translated into the corresponding trans-
lation duals to preserve the meaning in the target text,
transfer lexicons are usually regarded as more reliable
cues for aligning sentences when the alignment task is
performed by human. To enhance the robustness, a
robust statistical model based on both transfer lexicons
and sentence lengths are proposed in this paper. Af-
ter integrating the transfer lexicons into the model, a
60% F -measure error reduction (from 14.4% to 5.8%) is
observed.
1 Introduction
Since the bilingual corpus is a valuable resource for
training statistical language models [Dagon, 91; Su
et al, 95; Su and Chang, 99] and sentence align-
ment is the first step for most such tasks, many
alignment approaches have been proposed in the
literature [Brown, 91; Gale and Church, 93; Wu,
94; Vogel et al, 96; Och and Ney, 2000]. Most of
those reported approaches use the sentence length
as the main feature to perform the alignment task.
For example, Brown et al (91) used the feature
of number-of-words for alignment, and [Gale and
Church,93] claimed that better performance can be
achieved (5.8% error rate for English-French cor-
pus) if the number-of-characters is adopted instead.
As cognates are reliable cues for language pairs de-
rived from the same family, Church (93) also at-
tacked this problem by considering cognates addi-
tionally. Because most of those reported work are
performed on those Indo-European language-pairs,
for testing the performance on non-Indo-European
languages, Wu (94) had tried both length and cog-
nate features on the Hong Kong Hansard English-
Chinese corpus, and 7.9% error rate has been re-
ported. Besides, sentence alignment can also be
indirectly achieved via more complicated word cor-
responding models [Brown et al, 93; Vogel et al,
96; Och and Ney, 2000]. Since those word corre-
sponding models, which also achieve similar per-
formance, are more complicated and run relatively
slow, they seems to be over-killed for the task of
aligning sentences and will not be discussed in this
paper.
Although length-based approaches above men-
tioned are simple and can achieve good perfor-
mance, they are usually trained and tested in
the text with the same style. Therefore, they
are style-dependent approaches. Since performing
supervised-training for each style is not feasible in
many applications, it would be interesting to know
whether those length-based approaches can still
achieve the similar performance if they are tested in
the text with different styles other than the train-
ing corpora. An experiment was thus conducted
to train the parameters with a machinery technical
manual; the performance is then tested on a general
magazine (for introducing Taiwan to foreign visi-
tors). It shows that the testing set performance of
the length-based model (with cognates considered)
would drop from 98.2% (tested in the same tech-
nical domain) to 85.6% (tested in the new general
magazine) in F -measure. After investigating those
errors, it has been found that the length distribu-
tion and alignment-type distribution (used by those
length-based approaches) vary significantly across
the texts of different styles (as would be shown in
Tables 5.2 and 5.3), and the cognate-frequency1
drops greatly from the technical manual to a gen-
eral magazine in non-Indo-European languages (as
would be shown in Table 5.3).
On the other hand, sentence length is seldom
used by a human to align bilingual sentences. They
usually do not align bilingual sentences by counting
the number of characters (or words) in the sentence
pairs. Instead, since a large percentage of content
words in the source text would be translated into
their translation-duals to preserve the meaning in
the target text, transfer-lexicons are usually used
for aligning sentences when the alignment task is
performed by human. To enhance the robustness
across different styles, transfer-lexicons are thus in-
tegrated into the traditional sentence-length based
model in the proposed robust statistical model de-
scribed below. After integrating transfer-lexicons
into the model, a 60% F -measure error reduction
(from 14.4% to 5.8%) has been observed, which cor-
responds to improving the cross-style performance
from 85.6% to 94.2% in F -measure.
The details of the proposed robust model, the as-
sociated features extracted from the bilingual cor-
pora, and the probabilistic scoring function will be
given in Section 2. In Section 3, we briefly men-
tion some implementation issues. The associated
performance evaluation is given in Section 4, and
Section 5 would address error analysis and discusses
the limitation of the proposed statistical model. Fi-
nally, the concluding remarks are given in Section
6.
1Here ?Cognate? mainly refers to those English proper
nouns (such as those company names of IBM, HP; or the
technical terms such as IEEE-1394, etc.) that appear in the
Chinese text. As they are most likely to be directly copied
from the English sentence into the corresponding Chinese
one, they are reliable cues.
2 Statistical Sentence Alignment Model
Since an English-Chinese bilingual corpus will be
adopted in our experiments, we will denote the
source text with m sentences as ESm1 , and its
corresponding target text, with n sentences, as
CSn1 . Let Mi = {typei,1, ? ? ? , typei,Ni} denote
the i-th possible alignment-candidate, consisting of
Ni Alignment-Passages of typei,j , j = 1, ? ? ? , Ni;
where typei,j is the matching type (e.g., 1?1, 0?1,
1?0, etc.) of the j-th Alignment-Passage in the i-th
alignment-candidate, and Ni denotes the number of
the total Alignment-Passages in the i-th alignment-
candidate. Then the statistical alignment model is
to find the Bayesian estimate M? among all pos-
sible alignment candidates, shown in the following
equation
M? = argmax
Mi
P (Mi|ES
m
1 , CS
n
1 ). (2.1)
According to the Bayesian rule, the maximization
problem in (2.1) is equivalent to solving the follow-
ing maximization equation
M? = argmax
Mi
P (ESm1 , CS
n
1 |Mi)P (Mi)
= argmax
Mi
{P (Aligned-Pair
i,Ni
i,1
|type
i,Ni
i,1
)P (type
i,Ni
i,1
)}
= argmax
Mi
Ni?
j=1
{P (Aligned-Pairi,j |Aligned-Pair
i,j?1
i,1
, typei,j
i,1
) ?
P (typei,j |type
i,j?1
i,1
)}, (2.2)
where Aligned-Pairi,j , j = 1, ? ? ? , Ni, denotes
the j-th aligned English-Chinese bilingual sentence
groups pair in the i-th alignment candidate.
Assume that
P (Aligned-Pairi,j |Aligned-Pair
i,j?1
i,1 , type
i,j
i,1)
? P (Aligned-Pairi,j |typei,j), (2.3)
and different typei,j in the i-th alignment can-
didate are statistically independent2, then the
above maximization problem can be approached by
searching for
M? ? argmax
Mi
Ni?
j=1
{P (Aligned-Pairi,j |typei,j)P (typei,j)},
(2.4)
where M? denotes the desired candidate.
2A more reasonable one should be the first-order Markov
model (i.e., Type-Bigram model); however, it will signifi-
cantly increase the searching time and thus is not adopted
in this paper.
2.1 Baseline Model
To make the above model feasible, Aligned-Pairi,j
should be first transformed into an appropriate
feature space. The baseline model will use both
the length of sentence [Brown et al, 91; Gale and
Church, 93] and English cognates [Wu, 94], and is
shown as follows:
argmax
Mi
Ni?
j=1
f(?c, ?w|typei,j)P (?cognate)P (typei,j),
(2.5)
where ?c and ?w denote the normalized differences
of characters and words as explained in the follow-
ing; ?c is defined to be (ltc ? clsc)/
?
lscs2c , where
lsc and ltc are the character numbers of the aligned
bilingual portions of source text and target text,
respectively, under consideration; c denotes the
proportional constant for target-character-count
and s2c denotes the corresponding target-character-
count variance per source-character. Similarly, ?w
is defined to be (ltw ? wlsw)/
?
lsws2w, where lsw
and ltw are the word numbers of the aligned bilin-
gual portions of source text and target text, re-
spectively; w denotes the proportional constant
for target-word-count and s2w denotes the corre-
sponding target-word-count variance per source-
word. Also, the random variables ?c and ?w are
assumed to have bivariate normal distribution and
each possesses a standard normal distribution with
mean 0 and variance 1. Furthermore, ?cognate de-
notes (?Number of English cognates found in the
given Chinese sentences???Number of correspond-
ing English cognates found in the given English
sentences?), and is Poisson3 distributed indepen-
dent of its associated matching-type; also assume
that ?cognate is independent of other features (i.e.,
character-count and word-count).
2.2 Proposed Transfer Lexicon Model
Since transfer-lexicons are usually regarded as
more reliable cues for aligning sentences when the
alignment task is performed by human, the above
baseline model is further enhanced by adding
3Since almost all those English cognates found in the
given Chinese sentences can be found in the corresponding
English sentences, ?cognate had better to be modeled as a
Poisson distribution for a rare event (rather than Normal
distribution as some papers did).
those associated transfer lexicons to it. Those
translated Chinese words, which are derived from
each English word (contained in given English
sentences) by looking up some kinds of dictionar-
ies, can be viewed as transfer-lexicons because
they are very likely to appear in the translated
Chinese sentence. However, as the distribution
of various possible translations (for each English
lexicon) found in our bilingual corpus is far more
diversified4 compared with those transfer-lexicons
obtained from the dictionary, only a small num-
ber of transfer-lexicons can be matched if the
exact-match is specified. Therefore, each Chinese-
Lexicon obtained from the dictionary is first
augmented with its associated Chinese characters,
and then the augmented transfer-lexicons set are
matched with the target Chinese sentence(s). Once
an element of the augmented transfer-lexicons set
is matched in the target Chinese sentence, it is
counted as being matched. So we compute the
Normalized-Transfer-Lexicon-Matching-Measure,
?Transfer?Lexicons which denotes [(?Number of
augmented transfer-lexicons matched???Number
of augmented transfer-lexicons unmatched?)/
?Total Number of augmented transfer-lexicons
sets?], and add it to the original model as another
additional feature.
Assume follows normal distribution and the asso-
ciated parameters are estimated from the training
set, Equation (2.5) is then replaced by
argmaxMi
Ni?
j=1
{f1(?c, ?w|typei,j)P (?cognate)?
f2(?Transfer?Lexicons)?
P (typei,j)}. (2.6)
3 Implementation
The best bilingual sentence alignment in those
above models can be found by utilizing a dynamic
programming algorithm, which is similar to the dy-
namic time warping algorithm used in speech recog-
nition [Rabiner and Juang, 93]. Currently, the
4For example, the English word ?number? are found to be
translated into ??K?, ? K?, ??K?, ?? K?, ???K?, ??
}?, ? ? ? etc., for a specific sense in the given corpus; however,
the transfer entries listed in the dictionary are ??K? and ??
}? only.
Case I (Length-Type Error)
(E1) Compared to this, modern people have relatively better nutrition and mature faster, working women marry later, and there
has been a great decrease in frequency of births, so that the number of periods in a lifetime correspondingly increases, so
it is not strange that the number of people afflicted with endometriosis increases greatly.
(C1) ???, ?HA??? ?o, <?v??wu, ?>?byu??, ??2~%V??b?$??, ??q??P66??6.??J7
(E2) The problem is not confined to women.
(E3) ?Sperm activity also noticeably decreases in men over forty,? says Taipei Medical College urologist Chang Han-sheng.
(C2) .?u?4,?4??uJ(, ???6}p???'? C????+