Dependence Relationships between Gene Ontology Terms based on TIGR 
Gene Product Annotations 
Anand KUMAR 
IFOMIS, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Leipzig, 
Haertelstrasse 16-18  
Leipzig, Germany, D-04107 
anand.kumar@ifomis.uni-
leipzig.de 
URL:  
http://www.uni-
leipzig.de/~akumar/ 
Barry SMITH1,2 
1IFOMIS, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Leipzig, 
Haertelstrasse 16-18  
Leipzig, Germany, D-04107 
2Department of Philosophy, 
SUNY at Buffalo,  
Buffalo, NY 14260, USA 
phismith@buffalo.edu 
URL: 
http://ontology.buffalo.edu/smit
h// 
Christian BORGELT 
Department of Knowledge 
Processing and Language 
Engineering, Otto-von-Guericke 
University of Magdeburg, 
Universit?tsplatz 2, 
Magdeburg, Germany, D-39106 
christian.borgelt@cs.uni-
magdeburg.de 
URL:  
http://fuzzy.cs.uni-
magdeburg.de/~borgelt/ 
 
Abstract 
The Gene Ontology is an important tool for the 
representation and processing of information 
about gene products and functions. It provides 
controlled vocabularies for the designations of 
cellular components, molecular functions, and 
biological processes used in the annotation of 
genes and gene products. These constitute 
three separate ontologies, of cellular com-
ponents), molecular functions and biological 
processes, respectively. The question we 
address here is: how are the terms in these 
three separate ontologies related to each other? 
We use statistical methods and formal 
ontological principles as a first step towards 
finding answers to this question. 
1 Introduction 
 (Zhu et al2004) noted that creating a model of 
the dynamics of molecular interaction networks 
offers enormous potential for understanding 
systems biology. Existing work has led to the 
development of databases and ontologies which 
provide classifications and annotations based on a 
gene product?s function, location, structure and so 
on, as for example in PANTHER (Thomas PD et al
2003), a library of protein families and subfamilies 
indexed by function, and the Gene Ontology 
Annotation1 (GOA) (Camon et al2003).  
Further progress requires a robust formal 
ontology of structures, locations, functions and 
processes, linked together via relations such as 
is_part_of, is_located_at, is_realized_by, and so 
                                                     
1
 http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/ 
forth. As a step along this road, we provide a 
methodology for deriving and representing 
association rules between the entities present 
within the separate ontologies of the Gene 
Ontology.2 (Gene Ontology Consortium, 2001). 
Such rules will be able to situate a biological 
process in relation to a cellular location to an 
agent. They will be able to relate lower-granularity 
molecular functions in relation to higher-
granularity biological processes, and establish 
other sorts of relations between entities in different 
parts of GO. 
A preliminary study in this area (Burgun et al
2004) combines ontological, lexical and statistical 
principles. Their study provides association rules 
on a selected set of 23 gene products that were 
potentially involved in enterocyte differentiation 
and that showed similar levels of expression. 
(Clelland and Oinn) provide commonly annotated 
terms based on the CluSTr database (Kriventseva 
et al2001), which has recently been incorporated 
into the QuickGO browser.3 Association rules have 
been used for mining gene expression data by 
(Creighton and Hanash 2003). (Ogren et al2004) 
studied the compositional nature of the GO terms 
and described the dependencies among them. 
Our investigation draws on the fact that terms 
from GO?s separate ontologies are often used to 
annotation the same gene or gene product. We 
draw on the TIGR database to establish the 
corresponding patterns of association between 
terms in GO when taken in its entirety.  
In what follows we describe the results of this 
work We analysed all of TIGR?s 84,833 
                                                     
2
 http://www.geneontology.org/ 
3
 http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ego/ 
CompuTerm 2004  -  3rd International Workshop on Computational Terminology 31
annotations, pertaining to the 41,502 distinct gene 
products present within GOA and focusing on the 
TIGR database within the February 2004 edition of 
GO. These associations were mined to establish 
association links between GO terms using standard 
statistical database techniques based on the so-
called apriori algorithm and using a part of speech 
tagger. The discovered links  were then analysed 
on the basis of methods drawn from foundational 
ontology. 
2 Gene Ontology 
2.1 The Cellular Component Ontology  
GO?s cellular component (cc) vocabulary consists 
of terms such as flagellum, chromosome, ferritin, 
extracellular matrix and virion. This ontology is 
the GO counterpart of anatomy within the medical 
framework. GO includes in this vocabulary both 
the extracellular environment of cells and the cells 
themselves (that is, cell is subsumed in GO by 
cellular component).  
2.2 The Molecular Function Ontology  
GO?s  definition of molecular function (mf) is: ?the 
action characteristic of a gene product.? The mf 
vocabulary accordingly subsumes terms describing 
actions, for example: ice nucleation, binding, or 
protein stabilization. 
2.3 The Biological Process Ontology  
A biological process (bp) is defined in GO as: ?A 
phenomenon marked by changes that lead to a 
particular result, mediated by one or more gene 
products?. Terms in bp can be quite specific 
(glycolysis) or very general (death). GO?s mf and 
bp terms are clearly closely interrelated. The 
biological process of anti-apoptosis, for example, 
certainly involves the molecular function now 
labelled apoptosis inhibitor activity. Such 
molecular functions should stand to biological 
processes in a part-of relation. At the same time, 
however, GO?s authors insist that part-of holds 
only between entities within a single vocabulary, 
and they thus provide no guidance as to the cross-
vocabulary relations between the terms. We 
published a series of papers pointing out these and 
similar problems in GO as currently constituted 
(Smith et al2004; Smith et al2003; Kumar and 
Smith 2004; Kumar and Smith 2003). 
3 TIGR database annotations 
The Institute for Genome Research (TIGR)'s 
Genome Projects are a collection of curated 
databases containing DNA and protein sequence, 
gene expression, cellular role, protein family, and 
taxonomic data for microbes, plants and humans. 
(http://www.tigr.org/) TIGR has manually curated 
GO annotation for 6 bacterial genomes (V. 
cholerae, S. oneidensis, B. anthracis, G. 
sulfurreducens, P. syringae, and C. burnetii) and 
two eukaryotes (Arabidopsis thaliana, and 
Trypanosoma brucei). In addition, automated 
annotation has effected for Expressed Sequence 
Tags from several species. 
The TIGR database is a rich source of 
information about gene indices based on genetic 
sequence. TGICL is a pipeline for the analysis of 
large Expressed Sequence Tags (EST) and mRNA 
databases in which the sequences are first clustered 
on the basis of pairwise sequence similarity and 
then assembled by individual clusters (Pertia et al
2003). Association rules between GO terms will 
enable us to determine the clusters of gene 
expression functions and locations in a way that 
will add to the knowledge that is contained within 
representations of such clusters on the basis of the 
gene indices only. 
4 Methods 
Associations between GO terms were established 
on the basis of the annotations in the TIGR 
databases.  
4.1 Statistical approach 
All the annotations from the TIGR database 
present within GO?s association table were 
selected and placed into a separate table GO terms 
were then separated into three separate tables, 
depending on which of the three GO vocabularies 
they belong to. 
Those GO terms which belong to two different 
ontologies within GO but are annotated to the same 
gene products were then separated out for analysis. 
Three new tables were then created containing 
those annotations where cc and mf terms, mf and 
bp terms, and cc and bp terms are annotated 
together. 
The distinct term tuples present were grouped 
together and their count was used to provide a 
measure for weighting an association ? which is to 
say how many times two GO terms from two 
distinct axes are annotated together (Table 1). The 
co-occurrence of terms within the annotations were 
then combined together (Table 2). 
 
	
 


	
	

 

 

