Cascading XSL filters for content selection in multilingual 
document generation 
Guillermo BARRUTIETA 
Mondragon Unibertsitatea  
Loramendi, 4 
Arrasate, Spain, 20500 
gbarrutieta@eps.muni.es  
Joseba ABAITUA 
Universidad de Deusto 
Avenida de las Universidades, 24 
Bilbao, Spain, 48007 
abaitua@fil.deusto.es 
JosuKa D?AZ 
Universidad de Deusto 
Avenida de las Universidades, 24 
Bilbao, Spain, 48007 
josuka@eside.deusto.es  
 
Abstract 
Content selection is a key factor of any 
successful document generation system. 
This paper shows how a content selection 
algorithm has been implemented using an 
efficient combination of XML/XSL 
technology and the framework of RST for 
discourse modeling. The system generates 
multilingual documents adapted to user 
profiles in a learning environment for the 
web.  This CourseViewGenerator applies 
simplified RST schemes to the elaboration 
of a master document in XML from which 
content segments are chosen to suit the 
user's needs. The personalisation of the 
document is achieved through the 
application of a sequence of filtering levels 
of text selection based on the user aspects 
given as input. These cascading filters are 
implemented in XSL. 
Introduction 
It is widely accepted that content selection 
plays a crucial role in text generation (Reiter 
and Dale 2000). This process is normally seen 
as a goal-directed activity in which text 
segments are fit into the discourse structure of 
the text so as to convey a coherent 
communicative goal (Grosz and Sidner 1986). 
Content planning techniques, such as textual 
schemas (McKeown 1985) or plan operators 
(Moore and Paris 1993), have been successfully 
used as models of text generation. There are 
cases, though, in which these techniques may 
face some limitations, for example, when the 
structure of the discourse is difficult to 
anticipate (Mellish et al 1998). Nevertheless, 
when a set of well-defined communicative 
goals exists, complex goals can be broken down 
into sequences of utterances and generation 
becomes an efficient "top-down'' process 
(Marcu 1997). 
This paper shows a macro level content 
selection algorithm that applies user profiles to 
constrain and discriminate the contents of a 
text, whose discourse structure is represented 
using a simplified version of Rhetorical 
Structure Theory (Mann and Thompson 1988). 
The algorithm has been implemented using 
XML/XSL-based technology in a multilingual 
document generation system for educational 
purposes. The main objective of this 
CourseViewGenerator system (Barrutieta, 2001 
and Barrutieta et al, 2001) is to automatically 
produce multilingual learning documents that 
suit the student's needs at each particular stage 
of the learning process. Figure 1 shows the 
overall architecture of the system. 
 
 
 
Course material
(multilingual 
parallel corpus)
User aspects
xml-dtd
Document generation
Document view
COURSE GENERATOR
Generation engine
html-xml-dtd-
xsl-javascriptSelect content and format in an?intelligent? way.
Inputs
W eb browser
 
Figure 1: General scheme of the multilingual 
document generation system 
We will begin by explaining the different 
parts of the system before addressing in more 
detail the content selection algorithm itself. The 
system starts by constructing a master 
document of the kind Hirst et al (1997) 
proposed. This master document consists in a 
full-fledged text with references to all necessary 
multimedia elements (figures, tables, pictures, 
links, etc.). In our case, this master document 
takes the shape of a simple text file with all 
relevant information tagged in XML. Tags 
carry information of the logical composition of 
the text as well as metadata information about 
 its discourse structure. The text is seen as raw 
data, and tags encapsulate these raw data as 
metadata. The structure of the discourse is 
represented using a simplified version of RST. 
RST is simplified in the sense that the 
granularity of discourse segments does not 
transcend the boundaries of the sentence. 
Table 1. illustrates this gross-grained 
version of RST in which discourse relations are 
represented as XML tags.  
 
 
<RST> 
  <RST-S> 
    <PREPARATION> 
      <S>  What is knowledge management?  </S> 
    </PREPARATION> 
  </RST-S>    
  <RST-N> 
    <S> 
      Knowledge, in a business context, is the organizational    
      memory, which  people know collectively and individually 
    </S> 
    <S> 
      Management is the judicious use of means to accomplish     
      an end 
    </S> 
    <S> 
      Knowledge management is the combination of those  
       concepts, KM = knowledge + management 
    </S> 
  </RST-N> 
</RST> 
<RST> 
  <RST-S> 
    <PREPARATION> 
      <S>  ?Qu? es gesti?n del conocimiento?  </S> 
    </PREPARATION> 
  </RST-S>    
  <RST-N> 
    <S> 
      Conocimiento, en el contexto de los negocios, es la memoria 
      de la organizaci?n, lo que la gente sabe colectiva 
      e individualmente 
    </S> 
    <S> 
      Gesti?n es el uso juicioso de recursos para alcanzar un fin 
    </S> 
    <S> 
      Gesti?n del conocimiento es la combinaci?n de esos dos  
      conceptos, GC = gesti?n + conocimiento 
    </S> 
  </RST-N> 
</RST> 
<RST> 
  <RST-S> 
    <PREPARATION> 
      <S>  Zer da ezagutzaren kudeaketa?  </S> 
    </PREPARATION> 
  </RST-S>    
  <RST-N> 
    <S> 
      Kudeaketa, negozioetan, erakundearen memoria  
      da, jendeak bakarka eta taldeka dakiena  
    </S> 
    <S> 
      Kudeaketak erabideen erabilera zuzena du helburu 
    </S> 
    <S> 
      Ezagutzaren kudeaketa bi kontzeptu hauen nahasketa da,  
      EK = ezagutza + kudeaketa 
    </S> 
  </RST-N> 
</RST> 
Table 1: Gross-grained RST in XML 
As any other standard RST discourse tree, 
this simplified RST contains a nucleus for each 
text paragraph, and one or several satellites 
linked by a discourse relation to the nucleus 
within the same paragraph. The nucleus is an 
absolutely essential segment of the text, as it 
carries the main message that the author wants 
to convey. Satellites can be replaced or erased 
without changing the overall message and play 
an important supporting role for the nucleus. 
In our system, satellites are selected or 
discarded depending on the reader?s profile. 
The reader?s profile is defined through a set of 
user aspects. These take the form of multi-
value parameters that were sketched after a 
number of surveys were conducted among 
teachers, students and other experts from the 
educational context. As a result of these surveys 
a user model was proposed (Barrutieta et al 
2002). Table 2 illustrates a simplified version of 
the model. 
 
 
 
Specific User Aspects Discrete values 
Subject Language processors 
Moment in time Before the course / Period 1 / 
Period 2 / ? / After the 
course (review) 
Languages EN/ ES/ EU 
General User Aspects Discrete values 
Level of expertise Null / Basic / Medium / High
Reason to read To get an idea / To get deep 
into it 
Background Not related to the subject / 
Related to the subject 
Opinion or motivation Against / Without an opinion 
or motivation / In favour 
Time available A little bit of time / Quite 
some time / Enough time 
Table 2:  User model 
Based on this user model, we will now 
discuss the content selection algorithm 
(henceforth CSA). The CSA determines which 
segments of the discourse are going to be used 
in order to make explicit  the set of parameters 
that conform with the user?s profile. In 
principle, nuclei will always be chosen (as they 
convey the main message of the text); satellites, 
however, will be selected depending on their  
relation to the nucleus and the user aspects that 
are activated at the time of generation. 
 
 The selection algorithm works in three 
consecutive phases: parallel selection, 
horizontal filtering and vertical filtering. 
Vertical filtering is the most important phase of 
the three as it is here that the parts of the 
discourse tree are selected or discarded. 
1 CSA - Parallel selection - Phase 1 
In the phase of parallel selection two of the 
three specific user aspects are taken into 
account: subject and languages. These aspects 
identify the relevant XML master document in 
the chosen language (as illustrated in figure 2.). 
There is one master document for each subject 
covered by the system, and these documents 
contain parallel aligned versions of the texts in 
each language (English, Spanish and Basque, in 
our case). 
 
 
 
Figure 2: CSA ? Parallel selection 
As a result of this first filtering phase, the 
appropriate language division of the master 
document is selected. This text division is the 
input for subsequent filtering phases in which 
the particular segments of the document will be 
discriminated.  
2 CSA - Horizontal filtering - Phase 2 
The horizontal filtering phase concerns the third 
remaining user aspect that is moment in time, 
which is used to suit the generated text to the 
particular moment of the learning plan.  This 
aspect cuts horizontally the parallel selection of 
the previous section. 
The master document is structured in 
accordance with a set of course scheduling 
parameters. Each day and learning unit within 
the day is correlated with corresponding set of 
learning entities in the XML master document. 
In this way, the generated document can be  
targeted for learning unit 1 of day 1, or any 
other day or unit. The XML master file also 
contains some informative elements that the 
reader may need to know even before the 
course starts or after it has finished. These will 
be generated also as a result of some specific 
user aspects that are activated. Figure 3 shows a 
graphical representation of horizontal filtering. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3:  CSA ? Horizontal filtering 
3 CSA - Vertical filtering - Phase 3 
The final phase of vertical filtering comprises 
the five user aspects of level expertise, reason 
to read, professional background, opinion or 
motivation and time available. These five 
aspects will be relevant to discriminate those 
parts of the discourse tree which have been 
previously selected and filtered.  
Nuclei will be always maintained because 
they are, by definition, irreplaceable segments 
of the text and convey the main message. 
Satellites are segments of the text that will be 
subject to the algorithm's process of selection. 
Figure 4. shows graphically this filtering phase. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Vertical filtering 
 
 The set of discrimination rules applied in 
this first version of the content selection 
algorithm is described below. These rules apply 
in subsequent checking levels of filtering, and 
therefore have a cascading effect. It is known 
that RST covers an indefinite number of 
relation-satellites (Knott, 1995) which have 
been classified by Hovy & Maier (1997), but 
we will only mention the set of relation-
satellites used in the master document taken as 
example. 
 
3.1 Vertical filter ? Level of expertise 
If level_expertise = ?null? or  
   level_expertise = ?basic? Then 
   no relation-satellite is discarded; 
 
If level_expertise = ?medium? or      
   level_expertise = ?high? Then 
   discard example, exercise, background  
   and preparation relation-satellites; 
 
Rationale for the rule: Any user with a null 
or basic level of expertise on the selected 
subject will need all the information available 
to understand the text. Alternatively, a user with 
a medium or high level of expertise will not 
require examples, exercises, background, 
preparation and similar relation-satellites.  
 
3.2 Vertical filter ? Reason to read 
If reason_to_read = ?to get an idea? Then  
   discard exercise and elaboration (all the     
   types of elaboration: textual elaboration,  
   link elaboration and image elaboration)  
   relation-satellites; 
 
If reason_to_read = ?to get deep into it?Then 
   no relation-satellite is discarded; 
 
Rationale: Any user wishing to broaden his 
knowledge in the selected subject will need 
additional information. Conversely, a user with 
the intention of just getting an idea does not 
need any exercise, elaboration, or similar 
relation-satellites, which often require a more 
active role on the part of the user. 
 
3.3 Vertical filter ? Professional background 
If job_studies =  ?not related subject? Then 
   no relation-satellite is discarded; 
 
If job_studies = ?related subject? Then 
   discard background and preparation     
   relation-satellites; 
 
Rationale: Any user whose professional 
background is not related to the subject will 
need all the additional supporting text to 
understand its meaning. Conversely, if the user 
is related to the selected subject, we may 
assume that background, preparation and 
similar relation-satellites will be unnecessary. 
 
3.4 Vertical filter ? Opinion or motivation 
If opinion_motivation = ?against? or 
   opinion_motivation = ?without an opinion     
   or motivation? Then 
   no relation-satellite is discarded; 
 
If opinion_motivation = ?in favour? Then 
   discard motivate, antithesis, concession  
   and justify relation-satellite; 
 
Rationale: A motivated or favourable user 
will not require additional motivation and, 
therefore, the motivate, antithesis, concession, 
justification, and similar relation-satellites will 
be disregarded, since they play a role in 
changing the opinion of the user to be in favour 
of the course material. 
 
3.5 Vertical filter ? Time available 
If time_available = ?a little bit of time? Then 
discard all the relation-satellites; 
 
If time_available = ?quite some time? Then 
   discard exercise relation-satellite; 
 
If time_available = ?enough time? Then 
   no relation-satellite is discarded; 
 
Rationale: Time availability is a crucial user 
aspect. If the user is in a rush or has little time, 
the system has to provide only the most 
elementary information. In such case only 
nuclei will be generated. If the user has a bit 
more time, but not much, exercises are not 
offered, since they are usually quite time 
consuming and they require an active 
participation of the user. Finally, if the user has 
plenty of time, all the additional information is 
delivered. 
 
3.6 Final comments on vertical filters 
Cascading filters apply to the relation-
satellites that are still active after the previous 
phases in the generation process. When a 
vertical filter 3 tries to get rid of a relation-
satellite already abandoned at a previous phase 
(2 or 1), there will be nothing to act upon, but 
 
 this circumstance will produce no consequence, 
since the CSA continues the filtering process on 
the remaining text. Thus, the order in which the 
vertical filters are applied is not relevant. 
After the filtering process has been 
successfully completed, there is still a final 
presentation task. A good presentation is, in our 
opinion, one that will provide the student with 
an optimal version of the document to read, 
understand and fruitfully assimilate its content. 
4 Implementation 
The javascript code manages the user aspects 
(one of the inputs of the algorithm) and the 
application of the casdading filters (the CSA). 
Depending on the user aspects given by the 
user, the variables sXSL1 to sXSL5 take the 
value of the filter to be applied for each user 
aspect (level of expertise, reason to read, 
background, opinion or motivation and time 
available). 
The sResult variable contains the XML file 
whose content will be varying after each filter is 
applied. Table 3 shows the code that executes a 
filter. 
 
  
 
objData.loadXML(sResult); 
objStyle.load(sXSL1); 
sResult=objData.transformNode(objStyle);
 
Table 3:  Javascript implementation 
XSL filters pass on (or not) one element to 
the following vertical filter depending on the 
rules described before. Table 4 shows how this 
is done with the relation-satellite 
BACKGROUND. 
 
 
 
<xsl:template 
match="BACKGROUND"> 
  <xsl:copy> 
     <xsl:apply-templates/> 
  </xsl:copy> 
</xsl:template> 
 
Table 4:  XSL implementation 
5 Experimentation 
The objective of the experiment is to validate 
the hypothesis expressed in the filtering rules 
and the actual filtering mechanism of the CSA. 
Several ideas are taken into consideration in 
this respect, but we are aware that users 
(students, professor and other scholars) are the 
final judges. Their assessment of the system 
will depend on whether the generated document  
meet (or fail to do so) their information 
requirements, providing them with just the right 
type and amount of information. 
Conclusions 
In the tests conducted so far, the 
CourseViewGenerator is functioning correctly. 
One of the features that is worth considering is 
the scalability of the filtering mechanism. We 
anticipate two types of expansions to the 
system: (1) Increasing the size of the corpus, 
including more subjects and master documents, 
and (2) augmenting the user model by adding 
user aspects or by adding more parameters to 
the existing user aspects. 
The first type of expansion will not require 
any alteration of the CSA as long as the added 
document tokens conform to the existing DTD 
and our RST model. In order to increase the 
size of the corpus, it will be necessary to 
annotate XML discourse-tree metadata 
manually. This is a complex and time-
consuming task (as has been noted by Carlson 
and Marcu, 2001). Future research activities 
should focus on helping automate the 
annotation process, for example using cue 
phrases ? la Knott (Knott 1995; Alonso and 
Castell?n, 2001). 
The second type of expansion requires only 
the elaboration of additional XSL filters. 
Adding new values to existing user aspects 
requires only the modification of the 
corresponding XSL filter. Any of these last two 
operations can be incorporated easily. 
Therefore, adding a new user aspect or a new 
discrete value does not increase in any 
substantial way the complexity of the system.  
Acknowledgements  
This research was partly supported by the 
Basque Government (XML-Bi: multilingual 
document flow management procedures using 
XML/TEI-P3,  PI1999-72 project). 
 
 References 
Alonso, L. and Castell?n, I. (2001) Towards a 
delimitation of discursive segment for Natural 
Language Processing applications. First 
International Workshop on Semantics, Pragmatics 
and Rhetoric. Donostia (Spain), pp. 45-52. 
Barrutieta, G. (2001)  Generador inteligente de 
documentos de formaci?n. Virtual Educa 2001, 
Madrid (Spain), pp. 256-261. 
Barrutieta, G., Abaitua, J. and D?az, J. (2001) Gross-
grained RST through XML metadata for 
multilingual document generation. MT Summit 
VIII. Santiago de Compostela (Spain), pp. 39-42. 
Barrutieta, G., Abaitua, J. and D?az, J. (2002) User 
modelling and content selection for multilingual 
document generation. Unpublished but currently 
been evaluated for publication. 
Carlson, L.and Marcu, D. (2001) Discourse tagging 
manual. Technical report ISI-TR-545. ISI Marina 
del Rey (USA). 
Grosz, B. and Sidner, C. (1986) Attention, intentions 
and the structure of discourse'', Computational 
Linguistics, 12:175-204.  
Hirst, G., DiMarco, C., Hovy E. & Parsons K. 
(1997) Authoring and Generating Heath-
Education Documents That Are Tailored to the 
Needs of the Individual Patient. Proceedings of 
the Sixth International Conference. UM97. Vienna 
(NY-USA), pp. 107-118. 
Hovy, E. & Maier, E. (1997) Parsimonious or 
profligate: how many and which discourse 
structure relations? 
<http://citeseer.nj.nec.com/hovy97parsimonious.
html>  
Knott, A. (1995) A Data-Driven Methodology for 
Motivating a Set of Coherence Relations, Ph.D. 
thesis, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh (UK). 
Mann, W.C., and Thompson, S.A. (1988) Rhetorical 
Structure Theory: A theory of text organization. 
Tech. Rep. RS-87-190. Information Sciences 
Institute. Los Angeles, CA. 
Marcu, D. (1997) From local to global coherence: a 
bottom-up approach to text planning, in 
Proceedings of AAAI-97, American Association 
for Artificial Intelligence, pp.629-635. 
McKeown, K. (1985) Text Generation: Using 
Discourse Strategies and Focus Constraints to 
Generate Natural Language Text, Cambridge 
University Press.  
Mellish, C., M. O'Donnell, J. Oberlander and A. 
Knott (1998) An architecture for opportunistic text 
generation. Proceedings of the Ninth International 
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, 
Niagara-on-the-Lake, Ontario, Canada, pp. 28-37. 
 
Moore, J. and Paris, C. (1993) Planning texts for 
advisory dialogues: capturing intentional and 
rhetorical information, Computational Linguistics, 
19. 
Reiter, E. and Dale, R. (2000) Building applied 
natural language generation systems. Cambridge 
University Press (UK). 
 
