Event Clustering on Streaming News  
Using Co-Reference Chains and Event Words 
June-Jei Kuo 
Department of Computer Science and 
Information Engineering 
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
jjkuo@nlg.csie.ntu.edu.tw 
Hsin-Hsi Chen 
Department of Computer Science and 
Information Engineering  
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 
hh_chen@csie.ntu.edu.tw 
 
Abstract 
Event clustering on streaming news aims to 
group documents by events automatically.  
This paper employs co-reference chains to 
extract the most representative sentences, and 
then uses them to select the most informative 
features for clustering.  Due to the long span 
of events, a fixed threshold approach prohibits 
the latter documents to be clustered and thus 
decreases the performance.  A dynamic 
threshold using time decay function and 
spanning window is proposed.  Besides the 
noun phrases in co-reference chains, event 
words in each sentence are also introduced to 
improve the related performance.  Two models 
are proposed.  The experimental results show 
that both event words and co-reference chains 
are useful on event clustering. 
1 Introduction 
News, which is an important information source, 
is reported anytime and anywhere, and is 
disseminated across geographic barriers through 
Internet.  Detecting the occurrences of new events 
and tracking the processes of the events (Allan, 
Carbonell, and Yamron, 2002) are useful for 
decision-making in this fast-changing network era.  
Event clustering automatically groups documents 
by events that are specified in the documents in a 
temporal order.  The research issues behind event 
clustering include: how many features can be used 
to determine event clusters, which cue patterns can 
be employed to relate news stories in the same 
event, how the clustering strategies affect the 
clustering performance using retrospective data or 
on-line data, how the time factor affects clustering 
performance, and how multilingual data is 
clustered. 
Chen and Ku (2002) considered named entities, 
other nouns and verbs as cue patterns to relate 
news stories describing the same event.  A 
centroid-based approach with a two-threshold 
scheme determines relevance (irrelevance) 
between a news story and a topic cluster.  A least-
recently-used removal strategy models the time 
factor in such a way that older and unimportant 
terms will have no effect on clustering.  Chen, Kuo 
and Su (2003) touched on event clustering in 
multilingual multi-document summarization.  They 
showed that translation after clustering is better 
than translation before clustering, and translation 
deferred to sentence clustering, which reduces the 
propagation of translation errors, is most promising. 
Fukumoto and Suzuki (2000) proposed concepts 
of topic words and event words for event tracking.  
They introduced more semantic approach for 
feature selection than the approach of parts of 
speech.  Wong, Kuo and Chen (2001) employed 
these concepts to select informative words for 
headline generation, and to rank the extracted 
sentences in multi-document summarization (Kuo, 
Wong, Lin, and Chen, 2002).   
Bagga and Baldwin (1998) proposed entity-
based cross-document co-referencing which uses 
co-reference chains of each document to generate 
its summary and then use the summary rather than 
the whole article to select informative words to be 
the features of the document.  Azzam, Humphreys, 
and Gaizauskas (1999) proposed a primitive model 
for text summarization using co-reference chains 
as well.  Silber and McCoy (2002) proposed a text 
summarization model using lexical chains and 
showed that proper nouns and anaphora resolution 
is indispensable. 
The two semantics-based feature selection 
approaches, i.e., co-reference chains and event 
words, are complementary in some sense.  The 
former denotes equivalence classes of noun 
phrases, and the latter considers both nominal and 
verbal features, which appear across paragraphs.  
This paper will employ both co-reference chains 
and event words for temporal event clustering.  An 
event clustering system using co-reference chains 
is described in Section 2.  The evaluation method 
and the related experimental results are described 
in Section 3.  The event words are introduced and 
discussed in Section 4.  Section 5 proposes a 
summation model and a two-level model, 
respectively for event clustering using both co-
reference chains and event words.  Section 6 
concludes the remarks. 
2 Event Clustering using Co-Reference 
Chains 
A co-reference chain in a document denotes an 
equivalence class of noun phrases. (Cardie and 
Wagstaff, 1999)  A co-reference resolution 
procedure is first to find all the possible NP 
candidates.  It includes word segmentation, named 
entity extraction, part of speech tagging, and noun 
phrase chunking.  Then the candidates are 
partitioned into equivalence classes using the 
attributes such as word/phrase itself, parts of 
speech of head nouns, named entities, positions in 
a document, numbers (singular, plural, or 
unknown), pronouns, gender (female, male, or 
unknown), and semantics of head nouns.  As the 
best F-measure of automatic co-reference 
resolution in English documents in MUC-7 was 
61.8% (MUC, 1998), a corpus hand-tagged with 
named entities, and co-reference chains are 
prepared and employed to examine the real effects 
of co-reference chains in event clustering r. 
Headlines of a news story can be regarded as its 
short summary.  That is, the words in the headline 
represent the content of a document in some sense.  
The co-reference chains that are initiated by the 
words in the headlines are assumed to have higher 
weights.  A sentence which contains any words in 
a given co-reference chain is said to ?cover? that 
chain.  Those sentences which cover more co-
reference chains contain more information, and are 
selected to represent a document.  Each sentence in 
a document is ranked according to the number of 
co-reference chains that it covers.  Five scores 
shown below are computed.  Sentences are sorted 
by the five scores in sequence and the sentences of 
the highest score are selected.  The selection 
procedure is repeated until the designated number 
of sentences, e.g., 4 in this paper, is obtained. 
(1) For each sentence that is not selected, count 
the number of noun co-reference chains from 
the headline, which are covered by this 
sentence and have not been covered by the 
previously selected sentences. 
(2) For each sentence that is not selected, count 
the number of noun co-reference chains from 
the headline, which are covered by this 
sentence, and add the count to the number of 
verbal terms in this sentence which also appear 
in the headline. 
(3) For each sentence that is not selected, count 
the number of noun co-reference chains, which 
are covered by this sentence and have not been 
covered by the previously selected sentences. 
(4) For each sentence that is not selected, count 
the number of noun co-reference chains, which 
are covered by this sentence, and add the count 
to the number of verbal terms in this sentence 
which also appear in the headline. 
(5) The position of a sentence 
Score 1 only considers nominal features.  
Comparatively, Score 2 considers both nominal 
and verbal features together.  Both scores are 
initiated by headlines.  Scores 3 and 4 consider all 
the co-reference chains no matter whether these 
chains are initiated by headlines or not.  These two 
scores ranks those sentences of the same scores 1 
and 2.  Besides, they can assign scores to news 
stories without headlines.  Scores 1 and 3 are 
recomputed in the iteration.  Finally, since news 
stories tend to contain more information in the 
leading paragraphs, Score 5 determines which 
sentence will be selected according to position of 
sentences, when sentences are of the same scores 
(1)-(4).  The smaller the position number of a 
sentence is, the more it will be preferred. 
The sentences extracted from a document form a 
summary for this document.  It is in terms of a 
term vector with weights defined below.  It is a 
normalized TF-IDF. 
22
2
2
1
log
inii
j
ij
ij
sss
df
Ntf
w +???++
?
=   (1) 
where tfij is frequency of term tj in summary i, N 
is total number of summaries in the 
collection being examined, dfj is number 
of summaries that term tj occurs, and sij 
denotes the TF-IDF value of term tj in 
summary i. 
A single-pass complete link clustering algorithm 
incrementally divides the documents into several 
event clusters.  We compute the similarities of the 
summary of an incoming news story with each 
summary in a cluster.  Let V1 and V2 be the vectors 
for the two summaries extracted from documents 
D1 and D2.  The similarity between V1 and V2 is 
computed as follows. 
??
?
==
?
=
m
j j
n
j j
common
jj
ww
ww
VVSim
1
2
21
2
1
 t term
21
21
j),(  (2) 
If all the similarities are larger than a fixed 
threshold, the news story is assigned to the cluster.  
Otherwise, it forms a new cluster itself.  Life span 
is a typical phenomenon for an event.  It may be 
very long.  Figure 1 shows the life span of an air 
crash event is more than 100 days.  To tackle the 
long life span of an event, a dynamic threshold 
(d_th) shown below is introduced, where th is an 
initial threshold.  In other words, the earlier the 
documents are put in a cluster, the smaller their 
thresholds are.  Assume the published day of 
document D2 is later than that of document D1. 
th
)/w_sizedist(D
)/w_sizedist(DDDthd ?+
+=
1
1),(_
2
1
21  (3) 
where dist (day distance) denotes the number of 
days away from the day at which the 
event happens, and w_size (window size) 
keeps the threshold unchanged within the 
same window. 
Moreover, we use square root function to 
prevent the dynamic threshold from downgrading 
too fast. 
3 Test Collection 
In our experiment, we used the knowledge base 
provided by the United Daily News 
(http://udndata.com/), which has collected 
6,270,000 Chinese news articles from 6 Taiwan 
local newspaper companies since 1975/1/1.  To 
prepare a test corpus, we first set the topic to be 
?????? (Air Accident of China Airlines), 
and the range of searching date from 2002/5/26 to 
2002/9/4 (stopping all rescue activities).  Total 964 
related news articles, which have published date, 
news source, headline and content, respectively, 
are returned from search engine.  All are in SGML 
format.  After reading those news articles, we 
deleted 5 news articles which have headlines but 
without any content.  The average length of a news 
article is 15.6 sentences.  Figure 1 depicts the 
distribution of the document number within the 
event life span, where the x-axis denotes the day 
from the start of the year.  For example, ?146? 
denotes the day of ?2002/5/26?, which is the 146th 
day of year 2002.   
Then, we identify thirteen focus events, e.g., 
rescue status.  Meanwhile, two annotators are 
asked to read all the 959 news articles and classify 
these articles into 13 events.  If a news article can 
not be classified, the article is marked as ?other? 
type.  A news article which reports more than one 
event may be classified into more than one event 
cluster.  We compare the classification results of 
annotators and consider those consistent results as 
our answer set.  Table 1 shows the distribution of 
the 13 focus events. 
Event Name Number of 
Documents
Fly right negotiation between 
Taiwan and Hong Kong 
20 
Cause of air accident 57 
Confirmation of air accident 6 
Influence on stock market 27 
Influence on insurance fee 11 
Influence on China Airline 8 
Influence on Peng-Hu 
archipelagoes 
26 
Punishment for persons in charge 10 
News reporting 18 
Wreckage found 28 
Remains found 57 
Rescue status 65 
Solatium 34 
Other 664 
Table 1: Focus Events 
We adopt the metric used in Topic Detection 
and Tracking (Fiscus and Doddington, 2002).  The 
evaluation is based on miss and false alarm rates.  
Both miss and false alarm are penalties.  They can 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
145 155 165 175 185 195 205 215 225 235 245
Day
nu
mb
er 
of 
do
cs 
/ d
ay
Figure 1. Event Evolution of China Airlines Air Accident (2002/5/26 ~ 2002/9/4) 
measure more accurately the behavior of users who 
try to retrieve news stories.  If miss or false alarm 
is too high, users will not be satisfied with the 
clustering results.  The performance is 
characterized by a detection cost, , in terms of 
the probability of miss and false alarm: 
detC
ettnonFAFAettMissMissDet PPCPPCC argarg ???+??= (4) 
where  and  are costs of a miss and a 
false alarm, respectively,  and  
are the conditional probabilities of a miss 
and a false alarm, and  and 
MissC FAC
MissP FAP
ettP arg( )ettettnon PP argarg 1?=?  are the prior target 
probabilities. 
Manmatha, Feng and Allan (2002) indicated that 
the standard TDT cost function used for all 
evaluations in TDT is C , 
when C
FAMiss PP 098.002.0det +=
Miss, CFA and Ptarget are set to 1, 0.1 and 0.02, 
respectively.  The less the detection cost is, the 
higher the performance is. 
For comparison, the centroid-based approach 
and single pass clustering is regarded as a baseline 
model.  Conventional TF-IDF scheme selects 20 
features for each incoming news articles and each 
cluster uses 30 features to be its centroid.  
Whenever an article is assigned to a cluster, the 30 
words of the higher TF-IDFs are regarded as the 
new centroid of that cluster.  The experimental 
results with various thresholds are shown in Table 
2.  The best result is 0.012990 when the threshold 
is set to 0.05. 
Fixed Threshold Cdet
0.01 0.024644 
0.05 0.012990 
0.10 0.013736 
0.15 0.014331 
0.20 0.015480 
0.25 0.015962 
Table 2: Detection Costs Using Centroid Approach 
Kuo, Wong, Lin and Chen (2002) indicated that 
near 26% of compression rate is suitable for a 
normal reader in multi-document summarization.  
Recall that the average length of a news story is 
15.6 sentences.  Following their postulation, total 4 
sentences, i.e., 16/4, are selected using co-
reference chains.  Table 3 shows the detection cost 
with various threshold settings.  We found that the 
best result could be obtained using threshold 0.05, 
however, it was lower than the result of baseline 
(i.e., 0.013137 > 0.012990). 
Next, we study the effects of dynamic thresholds.  
Three dynamic threshold functions are 
experimented under the window size 1.  A linear 
decay approach removes the square root function 
in Formula (3).  A slow decay approach adds a 
constant (0.05) to Formula (3) to keep the 
minimum threshold to be 0.05 and degrades the 
threshold slowly.  Table 4 shows that Formula (3) 
obtained the best result, and the dynamic threshold 
approach is better than the baseline model. 
Fixed Threshold Cdet
0.01 0.015960 
0.05 0.013137 
0.10 0.015309 
0.15 0.016507 
0.20 0.016736 
0.25 0.017360 
Table 3. Detection Costs Using Co-Reference 
Chains 
Function 
Type 
Linear 
decaying 
Formula 
(3) 
Slow 
Decaying
Cdet 0.013196 0.012657 0.016344
Table 4. Detection Costs with Various Dynamic 
Threshold Functions (Initial Threshold = 0.05) 
Additionally, we evaluate the effect of the 
window size.  Table 5 shows the results using 
various window sizes in Formula (3).  The best 
detection cost, i.e., 0.012647, is achieved under 
window size 2.  It also shows the efficiency of 
dynamic threshold and window size. 
Window 
size 
1 2 3 4 
Cdet 0.012657 0.012647 0.012809 0.012942
Table 5. Detection Costs with Various Window 
Sizes Using Formula (3) (Initial Threshold = 0.05) 
4 Event Clustering Using Event Words 
The co-reference chains in the above approach 
considered those features, such as person name, 
organization name, location, temporal expression 
and number expression.  However, the important 
words ?black box? or ?rescue? in an air crash event 
are never shown in any co-reference chain.  This 
section introduces the concepts of event words.  
Topic and event words were applied to topic 
tracking successfully (Fukumoto and Suzuki, 
2000).  The basic hypothesis is that an event word 
associated with a news article appears across 
paragraphs, but a topic word does not.  In contrast, 
a topic word frequently appears across all news 
documents.  Because the goal of event clustering is 
to extract all the events associated with a topic, 
those documents belonging to the same topic, e.g., 
China Airlines Air Accident, always have the 
similar topic words like ?China Airlines?, ?flight 
611?, ?air accident?, ?Pen-Hu?, ?Taiwan strait?, 
?rescue boats?, etc.  Topic words seem to have no 
help in event clustering.  Comparatively, each 
news article has different event words, e.g., 
?emergency command center?, ?set up?, 
?17:10PM?, ?CKS airport?, ?Commander Lin?, 
?stock market?, ?body recovery?, and so on.  
Extracting such keywords is useful to understand 
the events, and distinguish one document from 
another. 
The postulation by Fukumoto and Suzuki (2002) 
is that the domain dependency among words is a 
key clue to distinguish a topic and an event.  This 
can be captured by dispersion value and deviation 
value.  The former tells if a word appears across 
paragraphs (documents), and the latter tells if a 
word appears frequently.  Event words are 
extracted by using these two values.  Formula (5) 
defines a weight of term t in the i-th story. 
tijj
it
it Ns
N
TFsMax
TFsWs log
)(
?=    (5) 
where TFsit denotes term frequency of term t in 
the i-th story, N is total number of stories, 
and Nst is the number of stories where 
term t occurs. 
Besides term weight in story level, Wpit defines 
a weight of term t in the i-th paragraph.  Formulas 
(6) and (7) define dispersion value and deviation 
value, respectively. 
m
meanWs
DispS
m
i tit
t
?= ?= 1 2)(    (6) 
?? +??=
t
tit
it DispS
meanWsDevS )(    (7) 
Where, meant is average weight of term t in 
story level.  Similarly, DispPt and DevPjt are 
defined in the paragraph level.  The dispersion 
value of term t in the story level denotes how 
frequently term t appears across m stories.  The 
deviation value of term t in the i-th story denotes 
how frequently it appears in a particular story.  
Coefficients ? and ? are used to adjust the number 
of event words.  In our experiments, 20 event 
words are extracted for each document.  In such a 
case, (?, ?) is set to (10, 50) in story level and set 
to (10, 25) in paragraph level, respectively. 
Formula (8) shows that term t frequently appears 
across paragraphs rather than stories.  Formula (9) 
shows that term t frequently appears in the i-th 
story rather than paragraph Pj.  An event word is 
extracted if it satisfies both formulas (8) and (9). 
                   tt DispSDispP <    (8) 
ijj S Psuch that  P allfor                   ?< itjt DevSDevP  (9) 
Below shows the event clustering using event 
words only.  At first, we extract the event words of 
each news article using the whole news collection.  
For each sentence, we then compute the number of 
event words in it.  After sorting all sentences, the 
designated number of sentences are extracted 
according to their number of event words.  In the 
experiments, we use different window sizes to 
study the change of detection cost after introducing 
event words.  Table 6 shows the experimental 
results under the same threshold (0.005) and test 
collection mentioned in Section 3. 
Window 
size 
1 2 3 4 
Cdet 0.011918 0.011842 0.011747 0.011923
Table 6. Detection Costs with Event Words and 
Various Window Sizes 
The results in Table 6 are much better than those 
in Table 5, because inclusion of event words 
selects more informative or representative 
sentences or paragraphs.  The more informative 
feature words documents have, the more 
effectively documents of one event can be 
distinguished from those of another.  In other 
words, the similarities of documents among 
different events become smaller, so that the 
documents cannot be assigned to the same cluster 
easily under the higher threshold, and the best 
performance is shifted from window size 2 to 
window size 3. 
5 Event Clustering Using Both Co-reference 
Chains and Event Words 
According to the above experimental results, it is 
evident that either co-reference chains or event 
words are useful for event clustering on streaming 
news.  As co-reference chains and event words are 
complementary in some sense, we further examine 
the effect on event clustering using both of them.  
Thus, two models called summation model and 
two-level model, respectively, are proposed.  The 
summation model is used to observe the 
summation effect using both the co-reference 
chains and the event words on event clustering.  
On the other hand, the two-level model is used to 
observe the interaction between co-reference 
chains and event words. 
5.1 Summation Model 
In summation model, we simply add the scores 
for both co-reference chains and event words, 
which are described above respectively to be the 
score for each sentence in the news document.  At 
first, we extract the event words of each news 
article using the whole news collection described 
in Section 3.  For each sentence, we then compute 
the number of event words in it, and add this count 
to the number of co-reference chains it covers. The 
iterative procedure specified in Section 2 extracts 
the designated number of sentences according to 
the number of event words and co-reference chains. 
Table 7 summarizes the experimental results 
under the same test collection mentioned in 
Section 3.  The experiments of summation model 
show that the best detection cost is 0.011603.  
Comparing the best result with those in Tables 5 
and 6, the detection costs are decreased 9% and 2%, 
respectively. 
Window 
size 
1 2 3 4 
Cdet 0.112233 0.011603 0.013109 0.013109
Table 7. Detection Costs Using Summation Model 
5.2 Two-level model 
By comparing the experimental results described 
in Section 3 and 4, we noticed that the event word 
factor seems more important than the co-reference 
factor on event clustering of news document.  
Moreover, from the summation model we only 
know that both factors are useful on event 
clustering.  In order to make clear which factor is 
more important during event clustering of news 
documents, a two-level model is designed in such a 
way that the co-reference chains or the event words 
are used separately rather than simultaneously.  For 
example, we use the score function and the 
sentence selection algorithm described in Section 3 
first, when there is a tie during sentence selection.  
Then we use the score function described in 
Section 4 to decide which sentence is selected from 
those candidate sentences, and vice versa.  Thus, 
two alternatives are considered.  Type 1 model 
uses the event words sentence selection algorithm 
described in Section 4 to select the representative 
sentences from each document, the co-reference 
chains are used to solve the tie issue.  In contrast, 
type 2 model uses the co-reference chains sentence 
selection algorithm described in Section 3 to select 
the representative sentences for each documents 
and use event words to solve the tie issue.  Table 8 
shows the experimental result under the same test 
collection as described in previous sections. 
Window
size 
2 3 4 5 
Type 1 0.012116 0.011987 0.011662 0.012266
Type 2 0.012789 0.012674 0.012854 0.012941
Table 8. Detection Costs Using Two level Models 
The performance of type 1 outperforms that of 
type 2.  This result conforms to those shown in 
Table 5 and Table 6.  We can say that the effect of 
event words is better than the co-reference chains 
in event clustering.  Furthermore, the best score of 
type 1 is also better than the best score of Table 6.  
Thus, the introduction of co-reference chains can 
really improve the performance of event clustering 
using event words.  On the other hand, the 
introduction of event words in type 2 does not have 
such an effect.  Moreover, to further examine the 
use of co-reference chain information and the 
event words in event clustering, a more elaborate 
combination, e.g., using mutual information or 
entropy, of the two approaches is needed. 
6 Concluding Remarks 
This paper presented an approach for event 
clustering on streaming news based on both co-
reference chains and event words.  The 
experimental results using event words only 
outperform the results using the co-reference 
chains only.  Nevertheless, as to the combination 
of co-reference chains and event words in event 
clustering, the experimental results show that the 
introduction of co-reference chains can improve 
the performance of event clustering using event 
words much.  To model the temporal behavior of 
event clustering of streaming news, a dynamic 
threshold setting using time decay function and 
spanning window size is proposed.  The 
experimental results, using TDT?s evaluation 
metric ? say, detection cost, show that the dynamic 
threshold is useful.  . 
We believe that the improvement of multi-
document co-reference resolution will have great 
impact on temporal event clustering.  In order to 
further improve our performance in even clustering 
on streaming news, there are still future works 
needed to be studied: 
(1) In order to verify the significance of the 
experimental results, statistical test is needed.  
(2) Instead of hand-tagging method, we will 
introduce automatic co-reference resolution 
tools to create large scale test corpus and 
conduct large scale experiments. 
(3) When the length of document is variable, the 
fixed number of representative sentences may 
lose many important sentences to degrade the 
performance of event clustering. The dynamic 
number of representative sentences for each 
document according to its length is introduced.  
(4) As the news stories are reported incrementally 
instead of being given totally in the on-line 
event clustering, the computation of event 
words is an important issue. 
(5) Apply the extracted sentences for each 
document to generate event-based short 
summary. 
References  
Allan, James; Carbonell, Jaime; and Yamron, 
Jonathan (Eds) (2002) Topic Detection and 
Tracking: Event-Based Information Organization, 
Kluwer. 
Azzam, S.; Humphreys, K; and Gaizauskas, R. 
(1999) ?Using Coreference Chains for Text 
Summarization,? Proceedings of the ACL 
Workshop on Coreference and Its Applications, 
Maryland. 
Bagga, A. and Baldwin, B. (1998) ?Entity-Based 
Cross-Document Coreferencing Using the 
Vector Space Model,? Proceedings of the 36th 
Annual Meeting of ACL and the 17th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics. 
Cardie, Claire and Wagstaff, Kiri (1999) ?Noun 
Phrase Co-reference as Clustering,? Proceeding 
of the Joint Coreference on EMNLP and VLC 
Chen, Hsin-Hsi and Ku, Lun-Wei (2002) ?An NLP 
& IR Approach to Topic Detection,? Topic 
Detection and Tracking: Event-Based 
Information Organization, James Allan, Jaime 
Carbonell, and Jonathan Yamron (Editors), 
Kluwer, pp. 243-264. 
Chen, Hsin-Hsi; Kuo, June-Jei and Su, Tsei-Chun 
(2003) ?Clustering and Visualization in a Multi-
Lingual Multi-Document Summarization 
System,? Proceedings of 25th European 
Conference on Information Retrieval Research, 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, LNCS 2633, 
pp. 266-280. 
Fiscus, Jonathan G. and Doddington, George R. 
(2002) ?Topic Detection and Tracking 
Evaluation Overview,? Topic Detection and 
Tracking: Event-Based Information Organization, 
James Allan, Jaime Carbonell, and Jonathan 
Yamron (Eds), Kluwer, pp. 17-32. 
Fukumoto, F. and Suzuki, Y. (2000) ?Event 
Tracking based on Domain Dependency,? 
Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGIR 2000 
Conference, pp. 57-64 
Kuo, June-Jei; Wong, Hung-Chia; Lin, Chuan-Jie 
and Chen, Hsin-Hsi (2002) ?Multi-Document 
Summarization Using Informative Words and Its 
Evaluation with a QA System,? Proceedings of 
The Third International Conference on 
Intelligent Text Processing and Computational 
Linguistics, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
LNCS 2276, pp. 391-401. 
Manmatha, R.; Feng, A. and Allan, James (2002) 
?A Critical Examination of TDT?s Cost 
Function,? Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGIR 
Conference, pp. 403-404. 
MUC (1998) Proceedings of 7th Message 
Understanding Conference, Fairfax, VA, 29 
April - 1 May, 1998, 
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iaui/894.02/ 
related_projects/muc/ index.html. 
Silber, H. Gregory and McCoy, Kathleen F. (2002) 
?Eficiently Computed Lexical Chains As an 
Intermediate Representation for Automatic Text 
Summarization.? Journal of Association for 
Computational Linguistics, Vol.28, No.4, pp. 
487-496. 
Wong, Hong-Jia; Kuo, June-Jei and Chen, Hsin-
Hsi (2001) ?Headline Generation for Summaries 
from Multiple Online Sources.? Proceedings of 
6th Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim 
Symposium, November 27-29 2001, Tokyo, 
Japan, pp. 653-660. 
