Strategies for Advanced Question Answering 
 
 
Sanda Harabagiu and Finley Lacatusu 
Language Computer Corporation 
1701 N. Collins Ste. 2000 
Richardson, TX 75080 
{sanda, finley}@languagecomputer.com 
 
 
Abstract 
Progress in Question Answering can be 
achieved by (1) combining multiple strategies 
that optimally resolve different question 
classes of various degrees of complexity; (2) 
enhancing the precision of question interpreta-
tion and answer extraction; and (3) question 
decomposition and answer fusion. In this pa-
per we also present the impact of modeling 
the user background on Q/A and discuss the 
pragmatics pf processing negation in Q/A. 
1 Introduction 
Our fundamental premise is that progress in Q/A cannot 
be achieved only by enhancing the processing compo-
nents, but it also requires generating the best strategies 
for processing each individual question.  Thus we be-
lieve that Q/A systems capable of successfully process-
ing complex questions should employ multiple 
strategies instead of the current pipeline approach, con-
sisting of (1) question processing, (2) passage retrieval 
and (3) answer selection. The pipeline architecture was 
reported in (Prager et al, 2000; Moldovan et al, 2000; 
Hovy et al, 2001). Recently, a novel approach based on 
combinations of multiple independent agents imple-
menting different answer finding strategies (multi-
strategy) and multiple search spaces (multiple-source) 
was developed by the IBM QA group (Chu-Carroll et 
al., 2003). In (Echihabi and Marcu, 2003) another form 
of combining strategies for advanced QA is proposed: 
(1) a knowledge-based Q/A implementation based on 
syntactic/semantic processing is combined using a 
maximum-entropy framework with (2) a statistical 
noisy-channel algorithm for Q/A and (3) a pattern-based 
approach that learn from Web data. In this project we 
propose a different form of finding optimal strategies of 
advanced QA which is based on (a) Question Decompo-
sition, (b) Answer Fusion and feedback from (c) Inter-
active Q&A and (d) User Background Recognition. 
We argue that all this new architectures operate un-
der the assumption that there is a concept-based or pat-
tern-based method for identifying the correct answer for 
any question that will be processed. However, we be-
lieve that there are complex questions that need first to 
be decomposed into simple questions, for which con-
cept-based or pattern-based resolving techniques either 
exists or may be developed. For instance, when asking 
Q1: ?How have thefts impacted on the safety of Russia?s 
nuclear navy, and has the theft problem been increased 
or decreased over time?? we may have series of simpler 
questions that decompose the question focus. One such 
example of simple question is Q1a: ?What specific in-
stances of theft do we know about?? ? which is a list-
question similar to those evaluated in the recent TREC 
tracks (Harabagiu et al, 2003). Related, simpler ques-
tion is Q1b:  ?What sort of items have been stolen??. 
Question Q1a asks about instantiations of the theft 
events, whereas question Q1b inquires about the objects 
of the events. The decompositions may follow other 
arguments of the event predicates, e.g. ? the agents in 
Q1c: ?Who are the perpetrators of these thefts?? as well 
as specializations of the events, e.g. ?economical im-
pact? specializing one of the possible impacts of the 
thefts in the question Q1d: ?Do thefts have an economi-
cal impact on the naval bases??. Furthermore, the con-
cepts from the complex question need to be clearly 
understood, and often definition questions will be con-
sidered as decompositions that enable the processing of 
complex questions. The definition may involve entities 
from the complex question, e.g. Q1e: ?What is meant by 
nuclear navy?? or events from the complex question, 
e.g. Q1f: ?What does ?impact? mean?? 
There are several criteria that guide question de-
composition, which also determine the answer resolu-
tion strategies. The criteria are: 
1. There are coordinations in the question format, 
suggesting decompositions along the constituents 
they coordinate. Coordinations may exist at: (a) 
question stem level, e.g. ?When and where did the 
thefts occur??; (b) at predicate level, e.g. ?How 
does one define an increase or a decrease in the 
theft problem??; (c) at argument level, e.g. ?To 
what degree do different thefts put nuclear or ra-
dioactive materials at risk??; (d) at question level, 
e.g. ?What specific instances of theft do we know 
about, and what are the sources of this informa-
tion??. Question decomposition by identifying co-
ordinations involves: (a) disambiguation of 
conjunctives for identifying when they indicate 
separate questions as opposed to when they just co-
ordinate constituents; (b) reference and ellipsis 
resolution of anaphoric expressions in the original 
question; (c) recognition of the relations between 
the resulting, decomposed questions, e.g. contrast, 
reinforcement, mutual exclusion. 
2. The question asks about (a) a complex relation, e.g. 
cause-effect, resultative, trend, likelihood, (b) com-
parison with similar situations, or (c) elaboration of 
a state of affairs. Therefore the expected answer 
type is of complex nature and it requires definitions 
in the context of the complex scenario. The ex-
pected answer, recognized in a predicate from the 
question, determines the decomposition into (a) a 
definition question, (b) specializations of the predi-
cate-concept, and (c) examples. 
3. In order to search for the complex answer, elabora-
tions of its arguments are needed. Such elabora-
tions, called argument-answer decompositions, may 
involve (a) nested predicate-argument structures, 
(b) quantifications, or (c) instantiations. 
When a complex question is processed, and is de-
composed into a set of simpler questions which are ana-
lyzed independently. Each decomposed question may 
belong to a different class, for which certain strategies 
may be optimal. Such strategies implement the prag-
matic processes that interact with the syntactic and se-
mantic information that results from the derivation of: 
(1) expected answer types or structures, (2) name enti-
ties which are recognized, as well as (3) syntactic and 
semantic dependencies derived from the parsing of the 
question into predicate-argument structures. To be able 
to process the question precisely we are developing 
techniques that leverage a database of one million ques-
tions that have answers in a controlled corpus. This 
large database provides wide coverage of answer types 
and answer instances. It also enhances the retrieval, 
navigation and fusion of partial answers. 
The challenge of creating a set of approximately one 
million question and answer pairs are twofold. First, the 
pairs need to be diverse in terms of difficulty, where 
difficulty can be defined in terms of answer type com-
plexity (common, uncommon, requiring decomposi-
tion), answer granularity (concentrated within a small 
fragment or spread across several passages and docu-
ments), ease of matching (requiring both surface-text 
and deep semantic understanding). Second, the pairs 
should be reliable, i.e. each question must be associated 
with a  correct answer. Our solution is a combination of 
collection and generation from semi-structured re-
sources, followed by expansion and validation. We will 
generate the collection of QA pairs from Frequently 
Asked Questions (FAQ) files on various topics. We will 
develop a dedicated harvesting algorithm to identify 
FAQ's on the Web and extract the QA pairs. 
The large database of questions also allows us to 
create a benchmark that will support the development of 
statistical techniques for Q/A. The architecture of the 
benchmark system is illustrated in Figure 1. Our system 
selects answers based on (1) question processing strate-
gies; (2) passage retrieval strategies made possible by 
(3) question decomposition and (4) answer fusion. 
When a question is posed to the system, it is either de-
composed on a set of simpler questions or it is proc-
essed in parallel with similar questions provided by the 
Interactive Question Answering component. Based on 
the user background, a set of similar questions may be 
selected and analyzed in parallel. Multiple strategies are 
available for retrieving relevant passages. The possible 
selections are once again dictated by feedback from 
Question Analysis
Question
Decomposition
Question Analysis
Question Analysis
Question Analysis
?
English
Question
Passage Retrieval 1
Passage Retrieval 2
Passage Retrieval n
?
Answer Selection 1
Answer Selection 2
Answer Selection n
Interactive Question Answering User Background
Question Processing Strategies
Answer
Fusion
English
Answer
1 million question/answer pairs
Passage Retrieval Strategies
Counter-Training for Answer Extraction
Figure 1: Answer resolution strategies 
interactions with the user. The relevant passages may 
also be combined on the basis of the same interactive 
and background information. We propose to study and 
develop several kernel methods that can operate in Sup-
port Vector Machines for determining the optimal 
strategies and compare the results with the Maximum 
Entropy combinations reported in (Echihabi and Marcu, 
2003). The answer is produced by an answer fusion 
module that uses fusion operators. Since such operators 
are template-like, pattern acquisition methods may be 
employed for acquiring them. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The 
answer fusion strategies are presented in Section 2. Sec-
tion 3details the methods for bootstrapping Question 
Answering. Section 4 describes the impact of the user 
background on the pragmatics of Q/A. Section 5 pre-
sents the problems engendered by processing negations 
in Question Answering. Section 6 summarizes the con-
clusions. 
2 Answer Fusion, Ranking and Reliability 
Given the size of today?s very large document re-
positories, one can expect that any complex topic will 
be covered from multiple points of view. This feature is 
exploited by the question decomposition techniques, 
which generate a set of multiple questions in order to 
cover all of the possible interpretations of a complex 
topic.  However, a set of decomposed questions may 
end up producing a disparate (and potentially contradic-
tory) set of answers.  In order for Q/A systems to use 
these collections of answers to their advantage, answer 
fusion must be performed in order to identify a single, 
unique, and coherent answer. 
We view answer fusion as a three-step process. First, 
an open-domain, template-based answer formalization is 
constructed based on predicate-argument frames.  Sec-
ond, a probabilistic model is trained to detect relations 
between the extracted templates.  Finally, a set of tem-
plate merging operators are introduced to construct the 
merged answer.   The block architecture for answer fu-
sion is illustrated in Figure 2. The system functionality 
is demonstrated with the example illustrated in Figure 3. 
Our method first converts the extracted answers into 
a series of open-domain templates, which are based on 
predicate-argument frames (Surdeanu et al 2003). The 
next component detects generic inter-template relations. 
Typical ?greedy? approaches in Information Extraction 
(Hobbs et al 1997; Surdeanu and Harabagiu, 2002) use 
heuristics that favor proximity for template merging. 
The example in Figure 3 proves that this is not always 
the best decision, even for templates that share the same 
predicate and have compatible slots. 
 
2.1 Open-domain template representation 
A key issue to the proposed approach is the open-
domain template representation. While template-based 
representations have been proposed for information 
merging in the past (Radev and McKeown, 1998), they 
considered only domain-specific scenarios. Based on 
our recent successes with the extraction of predicate-
argument frames (Surdeanu et al 2003), we propose a 
template representation that is a direct mapping of 
predicate-argument frames. For example, the first tem-
plate in Figure 3 is generated from the frame detected 
for the predicate ?assassinate?: the first slot ? ARG0 ? 
typically stands for subject or agent; the second slot ? 
ARG1 ? stands for the predicate object, and the modi-
fier arguments ARGM-LOC and ARGM-TMP indicate 
the location and date of the event. 
2.2 Detection of template relations 
In this section, we introduce a probabilistic model 
for the detection of template relations that has been 
proven to infer better connectivity.  
If the templates that are candidates for merging are 
selected entirely based on heuristics (Radev and McKe-
own, 1998; Surdeanu and Harabagiu, 2002), the applica-
tion of fusion operators for QA is unreliable, due to 
their relatively weak semantic understanding of the 
...
Pred/Arg
Frame
Detection
answers
Template
Generation
frames templates
Template
Relation
Detection
template
relations
combined
answer
Fusion
Operators
Figure 2: Answer fusion block architecture 
Israeli agents have assassinated a mastermind Palestinian terrorist and his bodyguard Friday 
in the Gaza Strip. Yehya Ayyash, nicknamed ?The Engineer?, is considered responsible for killing 
twelve Israelis. An Israeli source said the terrorists were killed with a phone bomb. 
T1: assassinate  
  ARG0: Israeli agents 
  ARG1: a mastermind Palestinian  
 terrorist and his bodyguard 
  ARGM-LOC: Gaza Strip 
   ARGM-TMP: Friday 
 
T2: kill  
  ARG0: Yehya Ayyash,  
  nicknamed ?The Engineer? 
  ARG1: twelve Israelis 
 
T3: kill  
  ARG1: the terrorists 
  ARG2: a phone bomb 
 
?greedy? merge 
correct merge 
Figure 3: Examples of templates and template relations 
templates. The novelty in our approach is to precede 
template merging by the discovery of relations among 
templates. 
We propose a novel matching approach based on 
template attributes that support relation detection for 
merging. The approach combines phrasal parsing, 
lemma normalization and semantic approximation (via 
WordNet lexical chains). For example, this approach 
detects that the attributes ARG1 of the first template 
(?assassinate?) and ARG1 of the third template (?kill?) 
from Figure 3 refer to the same entity, by matching ?ter-
rorist? with ?terrorists?. Moreover, the names of the 
templates (?assassinate? and ?kill?) are connected 
through a WordNet lexical chain.  
A "greedy" detection procedure would incorrectly 
merge templates with the same name and a similar 
structure. The second and third templates from Figure 3, 
both named ?kill?, illustrate this case. Instead, we pro-
pose a novel probabilistic algorithm for relation detec-
tion. The algorithm computes a probability distribution 
of possible relations among entity templates, and retains 
those relations whose probabilities exceed a confidence 
threshold. 
Operator Description 
CONTRADICTION Two templates contain contradicting informa-
tion, e.g. the same terrorist event is reported 
to have a different number of victims. 
ADDITION The second template introduces additional 
facts, e.g. one template indicates the loca-
tion/date of a terrorist event while the second 
indicates number of victims. 
REFINEMENT The second template provides more refined 
information about the same event, e.g. the 
town instead of the country of location. 
AGREEMENT The templates contain redundant information. 
This operator is useful to heighten the answer 
strength. 
GENERALIZATION The two templates contain only incomplete 
facts that form an event only when combined. 
TREND The templates indicate similar patterns over 
time.  
NO INFORMATION The templates contain no useful information, 
e.g. unconfirmed event.  
Table 1: Fusion Operators 
2.3 Fusion Operators 
The probabilistic model detects relations. A set of 7 
template fusion operators is applied on the detected rela-
tions to generate the final set of templates. The opera-
tors are described in Table 1. The purpose of the fusion 
operators is to label the generic relations with the re-
quired merge operation, e.g. ADDITION, 
CONTRADICTION, TREND. For example, the tem-
plates T1 and T3 can be merged with the ADDITION 
operator. Optionally, the resulting template can be 
merged with template T2 with the weaker operator 
TREND, because they mark a similar type of event that 
takes place in the same location and date.  
The generic template relations are labeled with one 
of the operators described in Table 1 with a machine 
learning approach based on Support Vector Machines 
(SVM) and a dedicated SVM kernel. SVMs are ideal for 
this task because they do not require an explicit set of 
features (a very complex endeavor in the planned open-
domain environment), but localized kernels that provide 
a measure of template similarity.  The labeled template 
relations direct the actual merging operation, which 
yields the final list of templates. Actual text can be gen-
erated from these templates, but this is beyond the goal 
of this paper. 
3 Bootstrapping Question Answering  
Two key components of modern QA systems are the 
identification of the answer type, and the extraction of 
candidate answers that are classified in the correspond-
ing answer type category. For example, the question 
?What weapons of mass destruction (WMD) does Iraq 
have?? has the answer type ?WMD? and accepts con-
cepts such as ?anthrax? as valid (but not necessarily 
correct) candidate answers. This approach provides an 
efficient implementation for the ?exact answer? ques-
tion answering spirit, but it is plagued by limited scal-
ability. 
We address the above scalability problem through 
several innovations: we develop a novel bootstrapping 
technique that increases significantly the coverage of 
the existing answer type categories. Furthermore, new 
answer type categories are created for concepts that can 
not be classified according to the currently available 
knowledge. In addition to the immediate application for 
answer extraction, the induced answer type knowledge 
is used to bootstrap the passage retrieval component, 
through intelligent query expansion. 
Like most of the successful AQUAINT QA systems, 
LCC?s system uses an answer type (AT) ontology for 
the classification of AT categories. The AT ontology is 
based on WordNet but can be extended with other open-
domain or domain-specific categories. Instances of 
given categories are identified in answer passages using 
a modified version of the CiceroLite Named-Entity 
Recognizer (NER).  
The first innovation in bootstrapping focuses on the 
capability of LCC?s QA system to identify AT in-
stances. The algorithm is summarized in Figure 4. The 
algorithm uses as input a very large set of ques-
tion/answer pairs, and the existing AT ontology cur-
rently used by LCC?s QA system. For each AT 
category, the algorithm adds the exact answers from the 
training question/answer pairs that share the same AT 
category to the BootstrappedLexicon, which is the lexi-
con generated as one outcome of this algorithm. Besides 
the lexicon, the algorithm induces a set of answer ex-
traction patterns, BootstrappedPatterns, which guaran-
tees the scalability of the proposed approach. Boot-
strappedPatterns is initialized to the empty set and is 
iteratively increased during the bootstrap loop. During 
the loop, the system scores all possible extraction pat-
terns, and selects the best pattern to be added to Boot-
strappedPatterns. Concepts discovered with the newly 
extracted pattern are appended to BootstrappedLexicon, 
and the process repeats.  
If a question/answer pair exists in the training set 
with ?anthrax? as the exact answer, step 1.2 of the boot-
strapping algorithm adds ?anthrax? to Boot-
strappedLexicon. The bootstrap loop (step 1.4) mines 
the training documents for all possible patterns that con-
tain anthrax. The best pattern selected is ?deploy an-
thrax?, which is generalized to ?deploy ANY-WMD?. 
This pattern is then used to extract other candidates for 
the WMD category, such as ?smallpox?, ?botulinum? 
etc.  
The algorithm illustrated in Figure 4 addresses the 
discovery of new instances for existing AT categories. 
A direct extension of this algorithm handles the situa-
tion when the discovered entities and patterns do not 
belong to a known category. The detection of new AT 
categories will be performed based on the AT word, 
which is the question concept that drives the selection of 
the AT. For example, the AT concept in the question: 
?What viral agent was used in Iraq?? is ?viral agent?, 
which does not exist in the current WordNet ontology. 
If the answer type concept does not exist in WordNet, 
the bootstrapping algorithm will create a distinct cate-
gory for this concept. If the answer type concept exists 
in WordNet, the algorithm attaches the bootstrapped 
entities and patterns to the concept hypernym that pro-
vides the largest coverage without overlapping any 
other known categories. This approach is robust enough 
to function without word sense disambiguation: the al-
gorithm explores all relevant synsets and selects the one 
that maximizes the above condition. For example, the 
answer type concept ?fighter aircraft? from the ques-
tion: ?What fighter aircrafts are in use in the Iraqi 
army?? is mapped to the hypernym synset airplane 
(Sense #1), instead of vehicle (Sense #1), which over-
laps with other vehicle categories such as cars.  
3.1 Enhancing retrieval, navigation, and fusion 
Answer accuracy is conditioned by the ability of the 
QA system to generate effective queries for the retrieval 
subsystem (Moldovan et al, 2003). Queries that are too 
restrictive will incorrectly narrow the search space, and 
fail to retrieve the relevant answer passages. An exam-
ple of such a query is (biological AND agents AND 
Qaeda), which is generated for the question ?What bio-
logical agents does al Qaeda possess??. This query will 
miss most of the relevant text passages since they do not 
include any explicit reference to biological agents.   
The extensions to the AT ontology, described above, 
enable an intelligent query expansion based on two ex-
pansion resources: AT instances, and extraction pat-
terns. More precisely, each question concept mapped 
under any of the AT categories is expanded with the 
instances and keywords from the extraction patterns 
associated with that category. In this case, the expanded 
query for the above question is:  ((biological AND 
agents) OR (bacterial AND agent) OR (viral AND 
agent) OR (fungal AND agent) OR (toxic AND agent) 
OR botulism OR botulinum OR smallpox OR encephali-
tis OR (deploy)) AND (Qaeda).  This query illustrates 
two important requirements: the conversion of extrac-
tion patterns into keywords (e.g., ?deploy? for "deploy 
ANY-WMD"); and the controlled expansion through 
selective keyword selection (e.g., for ?biological 
agents?).  
3.2 Continuous updating of scenario knowledge 
The bootstrapping algorithm described in the previ-
ous section is based on the large question/answer data 
set, which is largely open-domain. We consider a direct 
extension of this algorithm that automatically learns 
scenario knowledge by monitoring the user?s browsing 
habits. 
Question/answer pairs are extracted based on the 
user?s feedback. These pairs form the seeds for a meta-
bootstrapping loop, as illustrated in Figure 5. Similar 
documents ? i.e. documents where the identical exact 
answer and the question keywords are identified ? are 
produced from the relevant Q/A pairs. This process can 
1. For each AT category: 
1.1. Extract all question/answer pairs from the training data set, where the question has this AT category. 
1.2. Add all exact answers to BootstrappedLexicon. 
1.3. BootstrappedPatterns = ? 
1.4. Bootstrap loop: 
1.4.1. Generate all possible extraction patterns for BootstrappedLexicon. 
1.4.2. Score all extracted patterns. 
1.4.3. Find the best pattern Pbest not in BootstrappedPatterns. 
1.4.4. Add Pbest to BootstrappedPatterns. 
1.4.5. Add instances discovered with Pbest to BootstrappedLexicon. 
If termination condition not met go to 1.5.1. 
Figure 4: Answer instance bootstrapping algorithm 
be equally applied on the Web or on a static document 
collection. The bootstrapping algorithm described in 
Figure 5 is applied on the extracted documents. The 
inferred AT instances are further used to enrich the 
collection of considered documents, which forms the 
meta-bootstrapping loop.  
 
 
4 User Background 
Research in question answering, and in the more 
general field of information retrieval, has traditionally 
focused on building generic representations of the 
document content, largely independent of any subjective 
factors.   It is important to note, however, that all users 
are different: not only do they have different back-
grounds and expertise, but they also vary in their goals 
and reasons for using a Q/A system.  This variety has 
made it difficult for systems to represent user intentions 
automatically or to make use of them in Q/A systems. 
Figure 6 illustrates the inherent differences between 
system end-users.   Since (by definition) a novice lacks 
the domain-specific knowledge available to an expert, 
we should expect a novice user to choose a path com-
pletely different than an expert user, leading to ex-
tremely different results for the same top level question.  
 
4.1 Assessing User Background 
We evaluate users via a discrete evaluation scale, 
which ranks users as novice, casual, or expert users 
based on how much background knowledge they have 
on the given topic. The approach classifies users based 
on the path chosen in the generated question decomposi-
tion tree. 
This kind of characterization of user expertise can be 
used to reduce the exploration space generated through 
question decomposition. The most significant drawback 
of question decomposition is the exponential increase in 
the number of questions to be answered, which, to our 
knowledge, is not addressed by current QA research. 
We filter the generated question decomposition tree 
using the detected user expertise: for example, if the 
user is known to be an ?expert?, only the paths gener-
ated through ?expert? decomposition - i.e. generated 
using significant world and topic knowledge ? will be 
followed.  
To be able to use the question decomposition tree 
for user classification, we must first classify the decom-
position tree itself, i.e. the branches must be marked 
with one of the three discrete classification values. By 
shifting the classification problem from the (yet) ab-
stract user background to the decomposition tree, we 
argue that the problem is simplified because we know 
how much background and world knowledge was nec-
essary for the question decomposition. For example, to 
generate the ?expert user? path in Figure 6, the system 
must have access to world knowledge that indicates that 
an ?impact? can be economic, social etcetera and that 
Q/A  
pairs 
User 
Feedback 
Similar  
Documents 
Bootstrap  
AT 
Figure 6:Scenario-specific meta-bootstrapping loop 
How have thefts impacted the safety of Russia?s nuclear navy,
and has the the theft problem been increased or reduced over time?
How have thefts impacted the safety of Russia?s nuclear navy,
and has the the theft problem been increased or reduced over time?
What sort of items
have been stolen?
What sort of items
have been stolen?
To what degree do
different thefts put
nuclear or radioactive
materials at risk?
To what degree do
different thefts put
nuclear or radioactive
materials at risk?
What is meant by
nuclear navy?
What is meant by
nuclear navy?
Bases with
active vessels
carying nuclear
weapons only?
Bases with
active vessels
carying nuclear
weapons only?
Bases with
nuclear-powered
vessels (and
conventional
weapons)?
Bases with
nuclear-powered
vessels (and
conventional
weapons)?
What does
?impact? mean?
What does
?impact? mean?
Is this only
thefts of sensitive
equipment?
Is this only
thefts of sensitive
equipment?
Does it include
having an 
economic impact
on the naval base?
Does it include
having an 
economic impact
on the naval base?
How does one
define an increase
in the problem?
How does one
define an increase
in the problem?
By dollar
amounts?
By dollar
amounts?
By degree
of access
to sensitive
sites?
By degree
of access
to sensitive
sites?
...
...
...
...
...
Novice User
Expert User
Figure 5: Example of different user selections from the generated question decomposition tree 
nuclear materials are sensitive equipment. We will 
quantify the amount of knowledge used for decomposi-
tion and label the generated branches accordingly. 
 
Once a labeled decomposition tree is available, the 
user?s background can be classified based on the se-
lected path. The relevant answers (where ?relevancy? 
can be explicitly requested from the user, or implicitly 
detected based on the documents visited) are mapped 
back to the corresponding questions, which provides a 
dynamic trace in the question decomposition tree. Using 
the tree structure and the classification labels previously 
assigned, we will train machine learning algorithms that 
will infer the final user expertise classification.  
4.2 Representing User Background 
 We propose a new multi-modal approach for the 
representation of the user profile that includes concepts 
and relations in addition to terms.  
Traditionally, the user profile (or background) has 
been represented as a term vector, derived from the pre-
viously relevant document (be it online or offline infor-
mation). Under this approach, each profile P, is 
represented as: P = ((t1, w1), (t2, w2), ?, (tn, wn)), where 
ti are terms from relevant documents and wi are term 
weights, typically computed with the tf * idf metric.  
Our approach is novel in two regards.  The first in-
novation stems from the observation that it is common 
for one user to explore multiple topics even during the 
same session. For example, an analyst interested in the 
current Iraq situation, must explore topics related to 
military action, peace keeping, and terrorism. Hence the 
one vector representation for the profile P is clearly in-
sufficient. In the proposed representation, the profile P 
is represented as a set of vectors p1, p2, ?, pn, where:  pi 
= ((ti1, wi1), (ti2, wi2), ?(tim, wim)), i = 1, 2, ?, n, and m 
is the size of vector pi.  We expect the number and size 
of the profile vectors to change dynamically. When a 
new document is marked as relevant, the document vec-
tor is either: (a) merged with an existing profile, if their 
similarities are higher than a given threshold, or (b) used 
to generate a new profile. Profile vectors are removed 
based on negative feedback: if a document vector simi-
lar to an existing profile receives continuous negative 
feedback the corresponding profile is deleted in order to 
keep the profile synchronized with the user?s current 
interest patterns. We believe this profile representation 
to be flexible enough to accommodate all expertise lev-
els, from novice to expert. For example, the expert 
user?s background will consist of multiple vectors; each 
specializes on a clear, domain-specific direction, while 
the novice user?s profile will most likely contain fewer 
vectors with more generic terms.  
The second innovation includes concepts and rela-
tions in addition to lexical terms in the user profile. A 
preliminary analysis of the CNS documents indicates 
that ?al? is among the most frequent terms, but, by it-
self, ?al? is considered a stop word by most information 
retrieval systems. However, the significance of the term 
becomes evident when the complete concept, ?al 
Qaeda? is considered. This observation indicates that 
semantic information is significant for the representa-
tion of the user profile. In addition to indexing entities, 
we index generic of entity-to-entity relations that are 
significant, and often the goal, of the intelligence ana-
lyst?s work.  
5 Processing Negation in Question An-
swering 
Although all human systems of communication rep-
resent negation in some format, the issue of how best to 
address negation in open-domain Q/A still remains an 
open research question.  Previous Q/A systems have 
dealt with negation by filtering the retrieved answer and 
eliminating answers that share key terms with the query 
but are irrelevant for the reasons of negation (Martino-
vic, 2002; Attardi et al 2001) or by constructing rela-
tional databases to query the answers can handle 
negation in the question since the scope is clearly de-
fined in the relational database (Jung and Lee, 2001).  
However, neither of these systems has dealt with the 
central problem that negation poses for Q/A:  determin-
ing the scope of the negation context.  Consider the fol-
lowing examples: 
 
a. Which countries did not vote for the Iraq war 
resolution in the Security Council? 
b. Which countries did not provide help to the coali-
tion during the Gulf War in 1991? 
c. What planets have no moon? 
 
In question (a), the scope of negation only includes 
the countries that were members of the Security Council 
during the Iraq war resolution that were able to vote but 
did not.  However, examples (b) and (c) are ambiguous 
with respect to the scope of negation.  In question (b), 
the scope could encompass the whole world, or all the 
countries in the Middle East that should have provided 
help but did not. In question (c), even more entities can 
be included under the scope of negation:  all of the 
planets in the solar system or even all of the planets in 
the entire universe (including planets that are not yet 
discovered).   
In order for a Q/A system to answer questions like 
(b) or (c), the scope of negation must first be deter-
mined.  We initially propose to develop empirical stud-
ies for recognizing the most frequent cases of negation: 
e.g. the ?no? negation ? ?with no terrorists, the world 
would be safer?, the ?nothing? negation ? ?the inspec-
tors found nothing?, and other core cases of local nega-
tion ? e.g. ?thefts did not occur at the beginning?. We 
shall complement our methods of recognizing negation 
in textual sentences by analyzing various syntactic and 
semantic contexts of negation, e.g. adverbial negation ? 
?the president never leaves the White House without the 
Secret Service approval?. 
In addition, we assume that when a speaker is for-
mulating a question to find out whether a proposition is 
true or false, s/he formulates the question with the form 
of the proposition which would be the most informative 
if it turned out to be true.   We expect that if a question 
has the form of negation, the speaker believes that the 
negative answer is the most informative. Using such 
hypotheses, we argue that in a negation question, if the 
scope is ambiguous, like in (b) or (c), then we can solve 
the ambiguity by choosing the scope that will be more 
informative for the user.  
Given these assumptions, we propose that negation 
can be addressed in Q/A in three ways: 
By using the user background.  In questions like 
(b) above, if the user background is terrorism, then we 
can limit the scope of the countries to those who have 
been linked to terrorism.  
By interacting with the user.  If no user back-
ground can be established, as in question (c), we expect 
to use dialogue techniques to enable the user can specify 
the relevant scope.  
By finding cues from the answers to the positive 
question.  Finally, we expect to be able to use a combi-
nation of heuristics and information extraction methods 
to deduce the answer to a negative question from the 
answers to the corresponding positive question. For 
example, when searching for the answer to the positive 
analog of question (c), we can limit the scope of the 
negation to the solar systems where there are planets 
with moons.  
6 Conclusions 
In this position paper we discuss several strategies 
that enhance the pragmatic process involved in the in-
terpretation and resolution of complex questions. In 
support of our claims we present a Q/A architecture 
used to benchmark the impact of (1) question decompo-
sitions following several criteria; (2) answer fusion 
which composes a unique, coherent answer from the 
partial answers extracted for each decomposed question; 
(3) modeling of user background and (4) processing of 
negation in questions and/or answers. Additionally, we 
present a bootstrapping algorithm that enhances the pre-
cision of factual Q/A. We argue that each of these en-
hancements would allow us to advance the state-of-the-
art in Q/A and will enable us to correctly process com-
plex questions. 
 
 
References 
A. L. Berger, S. A. Della Pietra and V. J. Della Pietra. A 
maximum entropy approach to natural language 
processing. Computational Linguistics, 22(1):39-72, 
March 1996. 
Jennifer Chu-Carroll and Sandra Carberry. Generating 
Information-Sharing Subdialogues in Expert-User 
Consultation. In Proceedings of the 14th International 
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-
95), pages 1243-1250, Montreal, Canada, 1995. 
Michael Collins. A New Statistical Parser Based on 
Bigram Lexical Dependencies. In Proceedings of the 
34th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, ACL-96, pages 184-191, 1996. 
Abdessamad Echihabi and Daniel Marcu. A Noisy-
Channel Approach to Question Answering. In Pro-
ceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL-2003), 
Sapporo, Japan, 2003. 
Christiane Fellbaum (Editor). WordNet ? An Electronic 
Lexical Database. MIT Press, 1998. 
C.J. Fillmore and C.F. Baker and H. Sato. The  Frame-
Net Database  and  Software Tools. In M. Gonz?lez-
Rodr?guez and C.P. Su?rez-Araujo, Eds. In Proceed-
ings of the Third International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation. Las Palmas, Spain, 
2002. 
Michael Fleischman, Eduard Hovy and Abdessamad 
Echihabi. Offline Strategies for Online Question An-
swering: Answering Questions Before They Are 
Asked. In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-
2003), pages 1-7, Sapporo, Japan, 2003. 
Sanda Harabagiu, Marius Pa?ca and Steven Maiorano. 
Experiments with Open-Domain Textual Question 
Answering. In Proceedings of the 18th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING-
2000), pages 292-298, Saarbrucken, Germany, 2000. 
Sanda Harabagiu, Dan Moldovan, Christine Clark, 
Mitchell Bowden, John Williams and Jeremy 
Bensley. Answer Mining by Combining Extraction 
Techniques with Abductive Reasoning. In Proceed-
ings of the 12th Text Retrieval Conference (TREC 
2003). 
Jerry R. Hobbs, Doug E. Appelt, John Bear, David Is-
rael, Megumi Kameyama, Mark Stickel and Mabry 
Tyson. FASTUS: A Cascaded Finite-State Trans-
ducer for Extracting Information Natural-Language 
Text. In Finite State Language Processing, Edited by 
Emmanuel Roche and Yves Schabes, MIT Press, 
1997. 
E.H. Hovy, U. Hermjakob, C.-Y. Lin, ?The Use of Ex-
ternal Knowledge in Factoid QA?, TREC-10 confer-
ence, November 2001. 
Dan I. Moldovan, Sanda M. Harabagiu, Marius Pa?ca, 
Rada Mihalcea, Roxana G?rju, Richard Goodrum and 
Vasile Rus. The Structure and Performance of an 
Open-Domain Question Answering System. In Pro-
ceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL-2000), 
2000. 
John Prager, Eric Brown, Anni Coden and Dragomir 
Radev. Question-answering by predictive annotation. 
In Proceedings of the 23rd annual international ACM 
SIGIR conference on Research and development in 
information retrieval, pages: 184-191, Athens, 
Greece, 2000. 
Dragomir R. Radev and Kathleen McKeown. Generat-
ing natural languages summaries from multiple on-
line sources. Computational Linguistics, 24(3):469-
500, 1998. 
M. Surdeanu and S. Harabagiu, ?Infrastructure for 
Open-Domain Information Extraction?, in Proceed-
ings of the Conference for Human Language Tech-
nology (HLT-2002), pages 325-330, March 2002. 
Mihai Surdeanu, Sanda Harabagiu, John Williams and 
Paul Aarseth, ?Using Predicate-Argument Structures 
for Information Extraction?, In Proceedings of ACL 
2003. 
