Reference Resolution over a Restricted Domain: References to Documents
Andrei POPESCU-BELIS
ISSCO/TIM/ETI
University of Geneva
Bd. du Pont d?Arve 40
Geneva, CH-1211, Switzerland
andrei.popescu-belis
@issco.unige.ch
Denis LALANNE
DIUF
University of Fribourg
Ch. du Muse?e 3
Fribourg, CH-1700, Switzerland
denis.lalanne@unifr.ch
Abstract
This article studies the resolution of references
made by speakers to documents discussed during
a meeting. The focus is on transcribed record-
ings of press review meetings, in French. After
an overview of the required framework for refer-
ence resolution?specification of the task, data an-
notation, and evaluation procedure?we propose,
analyze and evaluate an algorithm for the resolu-
tion of references to documents (ref2doc) based on
anaphora tracking and context matching. Appli-
cations to speech-to-document alignment and more
generally to meeting processing and retrieval are fi-
nally discussed.
1 Introduction
The references made by the speakers to the entities
that they talk about are one of the keys to the un-
derstanding of human dialogs. When speakers dis-
cuss one or more documents, as in a press review
meeting, the references to these documents consti-
tute a significant proportion of all the occurring ref-
erences.
A computer representation of the referents is
available in this case, unlike references to more
abstract objects, since here the documents can be
stored in electronic format. Reference resolution
amounts thus to the construction of links between
each referring expression (RE) and the correspond-
ing document element. For example, if someone
says: ?I do not agree with the title of our latest re-
port?, then ?our latest report? refers to a document
available as a computer file, and ?the title of our lat-
est report? refers precisely to its title, an element that
can be retrieved from the file.
We propose here an algorithm for the resolution
of references to documents, or ref2doc. Its imple-
mentation and evaluation require a computational
framework that includes several types of data?
documents, transcriptions, and links?and an eval-
uation measure.
We summarize our view of reference resolution
over a restricted domain in Section 2. Then, we
situate the present task in the overall speech-to-
document alignment process (Section 3). The an-
notated data and the evaluation metric are described
in Section 4, along with empirical results regarding
the patterns of the REs. The resolution algorithm
is presented in Section 5, and the results obtained
in various configurations are analyzed in Section 6,
with conclusions about their relevance. Section 7
outlines the applications of the ref2doc algorithm to
the exploitation of documents in meeting processing
and retrieval applications.
2 Challenges of Reference Resolution over
a Restricted Domain
From a cognitive point of view, the role of referring
expressions in discourse is to specify the entities
about which the speaker talks. It has long been ob-
served that a more accurate view is that REs rather
specify representations of entities in the speaker?s or
hearer?s mind, an abstraction called discourse enti-
ties or DEs (Sidner, 1983; Grosz et al, 1995).
Reference resolution can be defined as the con-
struction of the discourse entities specified by re-
ferring expressions, or rather, the construction of
computational representations of DEs. This diffi-
cult but important task in discourse understanding
by computers appears to be more tractable when
enough knowledge about a domain is available to
a system (Gaizauskas and Humphreys, 1997), or
when the representations are considerably simpli-
fied (Popescu-Belis et al, 1998).
The coreference and anaphoric links, that is,
links between REs only, are somewhat different as-
pects of the phenomenon of reference (Devitt and
Sterelny, 1999; Lycan, 2000). Coreference is the re-
lation between two REs that specify the same DE.
Anaphora is a relation between two REs, called an-
tecedent RE and anaphoric RE, where the DE spec-
ified by the latter is determined by knowledge of the
DE specified by the former. In other terms, the DE
specified by the anaphoric RE cannot be fully de-
termined without knowledge of the antecedent RE.
Depending on how the referent of the second RE is
determined by the referent of the first one, the two
REs may be coreferent, as in example (1) below, or
they can be related by other referring relations, e.g.
whole/part, function/value, etc., as in (2).
1. The first articlei is particularly relevant to our
company. Iti discusses . . .
2. The first articlei is particularly relevant to our
company. The titlej suggests that we. . .
In the present case, reference resolution over
a restricted domain differs significantly both from
anaphora resolution (Mitkov, 2002) and from coref-
erence resolution (Hirschman, 1997; van Deemter
and Kibble, 2000). The REs available in the dialog
transcript must be matched against the set of poten-
tial referents or DEs, which can be derived from the
document structure. Therefore a computational rep-
resentation of the referents is here available to serve
as DEs. This advantage results directly from our
present research goal and could be later extended to
DEs derived computationally from document con-
tent, such as the persons mentioned in an article.
Reference resolution in a restricted domain
presents similarities with problems in natural lan-
guage generation (NLG) and in command dialogs,
that is, when the sets of referents are known a pri-
ori to the system. In NLG, the problem is to gen-
erate REs from existing computational descriptions
of entities?see Paraboni and van Deemter (2002)
for an application to intra-document references. In
command dialogs, the problem is to match the REs
produced by the user against the objects managed
by the interface, again known formally to the sys-
tem (Huls et al, 1995; Skantze, 2002).
3 Components of a Fully Automated
Ref2doc System
3.1 Overview
Within the overall goal of a fully automated un-
derstanding of references to documents in meet-
ing dialogs, several related sub-tasks can be dis-
tinguished, most simply envisaged as separate pro-
cesses in a computational architecture:
1. Generate a transcript of the utterances pro-
duced by each speaker.
2. Detect the REs from the transcripts that make
references to the documents of the meeting.
3. Generate a formal representation of the docu-
ments: articles, titles, etc.
4. Connect or match each RE to the document el-
ement it refers to.
Each of these components can be further subdi-
vided. Our main focus here is task (4). For this task,
an evaluation procedure, an algorithm, and its eval-
uation are provided respectively in Sections 4.3, 5,
and 6. Task (3) is discussed below in Section 3.2.1.
Task (1), which amounts more or less to auto-
mated speech recognition, is of course a standard
one, for which the performance level, as measured
by the word error rate (WER), depends on the mi-
crophone used, the environment, the type of the
meeting, etc. To factor out these problems, which
are far beyond the scope of this paper, we use
manual transcripts of recorded meetings (see Sec-
tion 4.2.1).
The present separation between tasks (2) and (4)
needs further explanations?see also (van Deemter
and Kibble, 2000; Popescu-Belis, 2003) for more
details. Our interest here is the construction of ref-
erence links between REs and document elements
(from which coreference can be inferred), so we do
not focus on task (2). Instead, we use a set of REs
identified by humans.
Task (2) is not trivial, but could be carried out
using a repertoire of pattern matching rules. The
patterns of the manually detected REs shown in Ta-
ble 1 (Section 4.4) are a first step in this direction.
The difficulty is that sometimes task (2) proposes
candidate REs, for which only task (4) can decide
whether they can really be matched to a document
element or not. For instance, REs such as pronouns
(?it?) or deictics (?this?) that refer to document ele-
ments can only be detected using a combination of
(2) and (4). This is one of our future goals.
3.2 Construction of the Logical Structure of
Documents
Inferring the structure of a document from its graph-
ical aspect is a task that can be automated with good
performances, as explained elsewhere (Hadjar et al,
2004). Here, the documents are front pages of news-
papers, in French. We first define the template of
document structures, then summarize the construc-
tion method.
3.2.1 Targeted Document Structure
Many levels of abstraction are present in the lay-
out and content of a document. They are conveyed
by its various structures: thematic, physical, log-
ical, relational or even temporal. The form of a
document, i.e. its layout and its logical structure,
carries important (and often underestimated) clues
about the content, in particular for newspaper pages,
Newspaper -> Date, Name,
MasterArticle,
Highlight*, Article+,
Other*, Filename
MasterArticle -> Title, Subheading?,
Summary*, Author*,
Source?, Content?,
Reference?, Other*,
JournalArticle*
Article -> Title, Subtitle?,
Source?, Content,
Author*, Summary*,
Reference*, Other?
JournalArticle -> Title, Source?,
Summary*, Content?,
Reference+
Highlight -> Title, Subtitle,
Reference+
Figure 1: Logical structure of a newspaper front
page (in DTD style). Terminal nodes contain text.
where articles are organized by zones, and titles are
clearly marked.
We consider that newspaper front pages have
a hierarchical structure, which can be expressed
using a very simple ontology. This is summa-
rized in Figure 1 using a DTD-like declaration,
as the document structure is encoded in XML.
For instance, the first rule in Figure 1 states
that a Newspaper front page bears the newspa-
per?s Name, the Date, one Master Article,
zero, one or more Highlights, one or more
Articles, etc. Each content element has an ID
attribute bearing a unique index.
3.2.2 Document Structure Extraction
The document structure can be extracted automat-
ically from the PDF version of a document, along
with a logical representation of the layout. Our ap-
proach merges low level extraction methods applied
to PDF files with layout analysis of a synthetically
generated TIFF image (Hadjar et al, 2004). A seg-
mentation algorithm first extracts from the image
the threads, frames and text lines, then separates
image and text zones, and finally merges lines into
homogeneous blocks. In parallel, the objects con-
tained in the PDF file (text, images, and graphics)
are extracted and matched with the result of the lay-
out analysis; for instance, text is associated to phys-
ical (graphical) blocks. Finally, the cleaned PDF is
parsed into a unique tree, which can be transformed
<dialog>
<channel id="1">
...
<er id="12">The title</er>reads...
</channel>
...
<ref2doc>
...
<ref er-id="12"
doc-file="LeMonde030404.Logic.xml"
doc-id="//Article[@ID=?3?]/Author"/>
...
</ref2doc>
</dialog>
Figure 2: Sample annotation of a dialog transcrip-
tion with ref2doc information (er stands for RE).
either into SVG or into an XML document, and used
for various applications.
4 Evaluation Method and Data
Two important elements for testing are the avail-
able data (4.2), which must be specifically annotated
(4.1), and a scoring procedure (4.3), which is quite
straightforward, and provides several scores.
4.1 Annotation Model
The annotation model for the references to docu-
ments builds upon a shallow dialog analysis model
(Popescu-Belis et al, 2004), implemented in XML.
The main idea is to add external annotation blocks
that do not alter the master resource?here the timed
meeting transcription, divided into separate chan-
nels. However, REs are annotated on the dialog
transcription itself. A more principled solution, but
more complex to implement, would be to index the
master transcriptions by the number of words, then
externalize the annotation of REs as well (Salmon-
Alt and Romary, 2004).
As shown in Figure 2, the ref pointers from
the REs to the document elements are grouped in a
ref2doc block at the end of the document, using
as attributes the index of the RE (er-id), the docu-
ment filename (doc-file), and an XPath expres-
sion (doc-id) that refers to a document element
from the XML document representation.
4.2 Annotation Procedure and Results
4.2.1 Data Recording and Transcription
A document-centric meeting room has been set up
at the University of Fribourg to record different
types of meetings. Several modalities related to
documents are recorded, thanks to a dozen cam-
eras and eight microphones. These devices are con-
trolled and synchronized by a master computer run-
ning a meeting capture and archiving application,
which helps the users organize the numerous data
files (Lalanne et al, 2004).
At the time of writing, 22 press-review meet-
ings of ca. 15 minutes each were recorded, between
March and November 2003. In such meetings, par-
ticipants discuss (in French) the front pages of one
or more newspapers of the day. Each participant
presents a selection of the articles to his/her col-
leagues, for information purposes. In general, after
a monologue of 5-10 utterances that summarize an
article, a brief discussion ensues, made of questions,
answers and comments. Then, the chair of the meet-
ing shifts the focus of the meeting to another article.
The recordings of the 22 meetings were manu-
ally transcribed using Transcriber,1 then exported as
XML files. The structure of the documents was also
encoded as XML files using the procedure described
above (3.2.1) with manual correction to ensure near
100% accuracy.
4.2.2 Ref2doc Annotation
The annotation of the ground truth references was
done directly in the XML format described above
(Figure 2). We have annotated 15 meetings with
a total of 322 REs. In a first pass, the annotator
marked the REs (with <er>...</er> tags), if
they referred to an article or to one of its parts, for
instance its title or author. However, REs that corre-
sponded only to quotations of an article?s sentences
were not annotated, since they refer to entities men-
tioned in the documents, rather than to the document
elements. Table 1 synthesizes the observed patterns
of REs.
The REs were then automatically indexed, and
a template for the ref2doc block and an HTML
view were generated using XSLT. In a second pass,
the annotator filled in directly the attributes of the
ref2doc block in the template. The annotators
were instructed to fill in, for each RE (er-id),
the name of the journal file that the RE referred to
(doc-file), and the XPath to the respective doc-
ument element (doc-id), using its ID. Examples
were provided for XPath expressions. The follow-
ing separate windows are all required for the anno-
tation:
? text/XML editor for the ref2doc block of the
dialog annotation file;
? HTML browser for the serialized HTML tran-
script (with REs in boldface);
1www.etca.fr/CTA/gip/Projets/Transcriber
? XML browser for the document structure rep-
resentation (one per document);
? PDF viewer for the actual layout of the articles
(one per document).
4.2.3 Inter-Annotator Agreement
We tested the reliability of the annotators on the sec-
ond part of their task, viz., filling in the ref2doc
blocks. The experiment involved three annotators,
for the three meetings that discuss several docu-
ments at a time, with a total of 92 REs. In a first
stage, annotation was done without any communi-
cation between annotators, only using the annota-
tion guidelines. The result was on average 96%
agreement for document assignment (that is, 3 er-
rors for 92 REs), and 90% agreement on document
elements (that is, 9 errors).2
In a second stage, we analyzed and solved some
of the disagreements, thus reaching 100% agree-
ment on document assignment, and 97% agreement
on document elements, that is only two disagree-
ments. These resulted from different interpretations
of utterances?e.g., they in ?they say. . . ? could de-
note the author, the newspaper, etc.?and could not
be solved.
This experiment shows that ref2doc annotation is
a very reliable task: referents can be clearly identi-
fied in most cases. A perfect system would match
the human performance at more than 95%.3
4.3 Evaluation Metrics
Unlike intra-document coreference resolution, for
which evaluation is a complex task (Popescu-Belis,
2003), the evaluation of reference resolution over a
specific domain is quite straightforward. One must
compare for each RE the referent found by the sys-
tem with the correct one selected by the annotators.
If the two are the same, the system scores 1, oth-
erwise it scores 0. The total score is the number
of correctly solved REs out of the total number of
REs (100% means perfect). The automatic evalua-
tion measure we implemented using the XML anno-
tation described above provides in fact three scores:
1. The number of times the document an RE
refers to is correctly identified. This is infor-
mative only when a dialog deals with more
than one document.
2These numbers were found using the evaluation software
described below (Section 4.3). Document element agreement
means here that the elements had the same ID.
3As for the first part of the process, recognizing the REs
that refer to documents, we can only hypothesize that inter-
annotator agreement is lower than for the second part.
2. The number of times the document element,
characterized by its ID attribute, is cor-
rectly identified. Here, the possible types
of document elements are article: Master-
Article, JournalArticle, Article
or Highlight.
3. The number of times the specific part of an ar-
ticle is correctly identified (e.g., content, title,
author, image, as indicated by the XPath anno-
tation in the XML output format).
The third score is necessarily lower than the sec-
ond one, and the second one is necessarily lower
than the first one. The third score is not used for the
moment, since our ref2doc algorithms do not target
sub-article elements. To help adjust the resolution
algorithm, the scoring program also outputs a de-
tailed evaluation report for each meeting, so that a
human scorer can compare the system?s output and
the correct answer explicitly.
4.4 Empirical Analysis of Occurring REs
The patterns of the annotated REs are synthesized
in Table 1 according to the type of entity they re-
fer to. This analysis attempts to derive regular ex-
pressions that describe the range of variation of the
REs that refer to documents, but without general-
izing too much. Words in capital letters represent
classes of occurring words: NEWSP are newspa-
per names, SPEC is a specifier (one or more words,
e.g., an adjective or a relative sentence), DATE and
TITLE are obvious. Items in brackets are optional,
and | indicates an exclusive-or. The patterns derived
here could be used to recognize automatically such
REs, except for two categories?anaphors and (dis-
course) indexicals?that must be disambiguated.
5 Ref2doc Algorithms
5.1 Preliminary Study
The first resolution method we implemented uses
co-occurrences of words in the speech transcript and
in the documents. More precisely, for each RE an-
notated in the transcript as referring to documents,
the words it contains and the words surrounding it
in the same utterance are matched, using the cosine
metric, with the bag of words of each logical block
of the document: article, title, author, etc. To in-
crease the importance of the words within the REs,
their weight is double the weight of the surrounding
words. The most similar logical block is considered
to be the referent of the RE, provided the similarity
value exceeds a fixed threshold (confidence level).
Referent # RE
Journal 6 (le|du) NEWSP
2 le journal
Front 33 la une NEWSP
page 6 la une DATE+NEWSP
(une) 5 (la|une) une
Article 33 (l?|le premier|le dernier) article
31 cet article
15 [l?] article suivant
14 un [petit] article SPEC
11 [un] autre article [SPEC]
7 l?article SPEC
5 [l?article] ?TITLE?
Title 10 le [grand] titre [principal]
4 (premier|second|autre) titre
Other 12 [un] autre (point|sujet|
text fait) [SPEC]
elements 10 . . . (rubrique|encart|enque?te|
page|actualite?|highlight|
analyse) . . .
5 (premier|dernier) point
3 un [petit] point [SPEC]
3 les grands points de l?actualite?
3 (le|au) point de vue [SPEC]
Graphic 11 . . . (dessin|photo|sche?ma|
elements image|figure) . . .
Authors 6 l?auteur
5 le journaliste
Anaphors 27 ils
12 il
8 l?
4 (le|au) dernier
3 autre chose [SPEC]
2 on
Indexicals 5 la`
4 c?a
4 celui-la`
2 celui-ci
2 celui SPEC
Table 1: Patterns of REs that refer to documents, in
French, ordered by the type of the referent (9 REs
out of 322 did not follow these patterns).
5.2 Algorithm based on Anaphora Tracking
A more complex algorithm was designed, which is
based on the identification of anaphoric vs. non-
anaphoric REs, as well as co-occurrences of words.
The algorithm scans each meeting transcript lin-
early (not by channel/speaker), and stores as vari-
ables the ?current document? and the ?current docu-
ment element? or article. For each RE, the algorithm
assigns first the hypothesized document, from the
list of documents associated to the meeting. REs
that make use of a newspaper?s name are consid-
ered to refer to the respective newspaper; the other
ones are supposed to refer to the current newspaper,
i.e. they are anaphors. This simple method does not
handle complex references such as ?the other news-
paper?, but obtains nevertheless a sufficient score
(see Section 6 below).
The algorithm then attempts to assign a document
element to the current RE. First, it attempts to find
out whether the RE is anaphoric or not, by match-
ing it against a list of typical anaphors found in the
meetings: ?it?, ?the article? (bare definite), ?this arti-
cle?, ?the author? (equivalents in French). If the RE
is anaphoric, then it is associated to the current arti-
cle or document element?a very simple implemen-
tation of a focus stack (Grosz et al, 1995)?except
if the RE is the first one in the meeting, which is
never considered to be anaphoric.
If the RE is not considered to be anaphoric, then
the algorithm attempts to link it to a document el-
ement by comparing the content words of the RE
with those of each article. The words of the RE
are considered, as well as those of its left and right
contexts. A match with the title of the article, or
the author name, is weighted more than one with
the content. Finally, the article that scores the most
matches is considered to be the referent of the RE,
and becomes the current document element.
Several parameters govern the algorithm, in par-
ticular the weights of the various matches?the nine
pairs generated by {RE word, left context word,
right context word} ? {title or subtitle word, au-
thor word, contents word}?and the size of the left
and right context?the number of preceding and
following utterances, and the number of words re-
tained. Evaluation provides insights about the best
values for these parameters.
6 Results and Observations
6.1 Baseline and Best Scores
We provide first some baseline scores on the set of
15 meetings and 322 REs, that is, scores of very
simple methods against which our algorithms must
be compared (rather than against a 0% score). For
RE ? document association, always choosing the
most frequent newspaper leads to 82% accuracy
(265 REs out of 322). But some meetings deal
only with one document; if we look only at meet-
ings that involve more than one newspaper, then the
score of this baseline procedure is 50% (46/92), a
much lower value. Regarding RE ? document ele-
ment association, if the referent is always the front
page as a whole (/Newspaper), then accuracy
is 16%. If the referent is always the main article
(/MasterArticle[ID=?1?]), then accuracy is
18%?in both cases quite a low value.
The word co-occurrence algorithm (described in
Section 5.1) correctly solves more than 50% of the
selected REs, in a preliminary evaluation performed
on six meetings. This simple algorithm gives inter-
esting results especially when REs belong to an ut-
terance that is thematically close to the content of
a document?s logical block. However, the method
uses only thematic linking and, furthermore, does
not take advantage of all the various document
structures.4 The 50% score should thus be consid-
ered more as another baseline.
The second algorithm (described in Section 5.2)
reaches 98% accuracy for the identification of doc-
uments referred to by REs, or 93% if we take into
account only the meetings with several documents;
remember that baseline was 82%, respectively 50%.
The accuracy for document element identification
is 73% (237 REs out of 322). If we score only
REs for which the document was correctly identi-
fied, the accuracy is 74% (236 REs out of 316), a
little higher.
6.2 Score-based Analysis of the Algorithm
The best scores quoted above are obtained when
only the right context of the RE is considered for
matching (i.e. the words after the RE), not the left
one. Also, the optimal number of words to look for
in the right context is about ten. If the right context
is not considered either, the score drops at 40%.
Regarding the weights, a match between the RE
and the title of an article appears to be more im-
portant than one between the right context and the
title, and much more important than matches with
the content of the article: weights are about 15 vs.
10 vs. 1. All these values have been determined em-
pirically, by optimizing the score on the available
data. It is possible that they change slightly when
more data is available.
If anaphor tracking is disabled, the accuracy of
document element identification drops at 65%, i.e.
35% of the REs are linked to the wrong document
element. Anaphor tracking is thus useful, though
apparently not essential: dropping it leads to an al-
gorithm close to our first attempt (Section 5.1).
Since the automatic scorer provides a detailed
evaluation report for each meeting, we are in the
4For instance, it cannot solve references related to the doc-
ument topological information (e.g. ?the figure at the bottom?),
or related to the document logical structure (e.g. ?the author of
the first article?), which need a semantic analysis of the REs.
process of analyzing the errors to find systematic
patterns, which could help us improve the algo-
rithm. Rules depending on the lexical items in the
RE seem to be required.
7 Applications
7.1 Speech to Document Alignment
The resolution of references to documents is part
of a cross-channel process aimed at detecting links
between what was said during a meeting and the
documents related to the meeting. The process en-
hances dialog and document processing, as well as
the multi-media rendering of the results. Transcript-
to-document alignment allows the generation of an
enhanced transcript which is aligned also with the
relevant documents, thanks to hyperlinks from tran-
script to document zones. Such a mechanism is in-
tegrated in the query and browsing interfaces that
we are building.
Reference-based alignment is not the only way
to align documents with the speech transcript. We
have proposed two other techniques (Mekhaldi et
al., 2003; Lalanne et al, 2004). Citation-based
alignment is a pure lexicographic match between
terms in documents and terms in the speech tran-
scription. Thematic alignment is derived from se-
mantic similarity between sections of documents
(sentences, paragraphs, logical blocks, etc.) and
units of the dialog structure (utterances, turns, and
thematic episodes). We have implemented an al-
gorithm that uses various state-of-the-art similar-
ity metrics (cosine, Jaccard, Dice) between bags of
weighted words.
For matching spoken utterances with document
logical blocks, using cosine metric, recall is 0.84,
and precision is 0.77, which are encouraging re-
sults. And when matching speech turns with log-
ical blocks, recall stays at 0.84 and precision rises
to 0.85. On the other hand, alignment of spoken ut-
terances to document sentences is less precise but
is more promising since it relies on less processing.
Using Jaccard metric, recall is 0.83, and precision is
0.76 (Lalanne et al, 2004). Thematic units have not
been considered yet, for want of reliable automatic
segmentation.
Reference-based alignment is complementary to
other methods; these could be integrated in a com-
mon framework, so that they can be consolidated
and compared. Their fusion should allow for more
robust document-to-speech alignment.
7.2 Overall Application: Meeting Processing
and Retrieval
A promising use of human dialog understanding is
for the processing and retrieval of staff or business
meetings (Armstrong et al, 2003). When meetings
deal with one or several documents, it is important
to link in a precise manner each episode or even ut-
terance of the meeting to the sections of the doc-
uments that they refer to. Considering users who
have missed a meeting or want to review a meet-
ing that they attended, this alignment is required for
two types of queries that appear in recent studies of
user requirements (Lisowska et al, 2004). First, the
users could look for episodes of a meeting in which
a particular section of a given document was dis-
cussed, so that they can learn what was said about
that section. Second, the relevant documents could
automatically be displayed when the users browse a
given episode of a meeting?so that a rich, multi-
modal context of the meeting episode is presented.
8 Conclusion
This article described a framework and an algorithm
for solving references made to documents in meet-
ing recordings by linking referring expressions to
the document elements they denote. The imple-
mentation of the algorithm, together with test data
(annotated meeting documents and transcripts) and
an evaluation metric, show that the best results are
obtained when combining anaphora tracking with a
weighted lexical matching between RE plus right
context, against title plus article contents.
An extension of the present algorithm is under
study, in which REs are processed differently ac-
cording to their type: REs explicitly referring to an
article (?the article?, ?the section?), REs referring to
positions (?the article at the bottom left?), REs refer-
ring to the entities of the contents, etc. These could
be matched to various data categories from the doc-
ument representations.
Since printed documents and spoken interaction
are two important modalities in communication, this
article is also a step towards cross-modal appli-
cations. The reference-based alignment between
transcripts and documents generates enriched tran-
scripts, with explicit information about the contents
and the timing of document mentions; conversely, it
also helps document structuring. These in turn en-
hance browsing and searching capabilities for mul-
timodal meeting processing and retrieval.
Acknowledgements
This work is part of (IM)2, Interactive Mul-
timodal Information Management, a NCCR
supported by the FNS / Swiss Govern-
ment (www.im2.ch). The authors are in-
volved in two (IM)2 projects: IM2.MDM,
Multimodal Dialogue Management (see
http://www.issco.unige.ch/projects/
im2/mdm/) and IM2.DI, Document Integration
(see http://diuf.unifr.ch/im2/).
The data we used is available from
http://diuf.unifr.ch/im2/data.html.
We thank Emmanuel Palacio, intern at ISSCO, for
his contribution to the inter-annotator agreement
test. We are also grateful to the reviewers for their
helpful suggestions.
References
Susan Armstrong, Alexander Clark, Giovanni
Coray, Maria Georgescul, Vincenzo Pallotta, An-
drei Popescu-Belis, David Portabella, Martin Ra-
jman, and Marianne Starlander. 2003. Natural
language queries on natural language data: a
database of meeting dialogues. In NLDB 2003,
Burg/Cottbus, Germany.
Michael Devitt and Kim Sterelny. 1999. Language
and Reality: an Introduction to the Philosophy
of Language. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
USA, 2nd edition.
Robert Gaizauskas and Kevin Humphreys. 1997.
Using a semantic network for information extrac-
tion. Natural Languge Engineering, 3(2-3):147?
169.
Barbara J. Grosz, Aravind K. Joshi, and Scott We-
instein. 1995. Centering: A framework for mod-
eling the local coherence of discourse. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 21(2):203?225.
Karim Hadjar, Maurizio Rigamonti, Denis Lalanne,
and Rolf Ingold. 2004. Xed: a new tool for ex-
tracting hidden structures from electronic docu-
ments. In Workshop on Document Image Analy-
sis for Libraries, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
Lynette Hirschman. 1997. MUC-7 coreference task
definition 3.0. Technical report, MITRE Corp.,
13 July 1997.
Carla Huls, Wim Claassen, and Edwin Bos. 1995.
Automatic referent resolution of deictic and
anaphoric expressions. Computational Linguis-
tics, 21(1):59?79.
Denis Lalanne, Dalila Mekhaldi, and Rolf Ingold.
2004. Talking about documents: revealing a
missing link to multimedia meeting archives.
In Document Recognition and Retrieval XI -
IS&T/SPIE?s Annual Symposium on Electronic
Imaging, San Jose, CA, USA.
Agnes Lisowska, Andrei Popescu-Belis, and Susan
Armstrong. 2004. User query analysis for the
specification and evaluation of a dialogue pro-
cessing and retrieval system. In LREC 2004, Lis-
bon, Portugal.
William G. Lycan. 2000. Philosophy of Language:
a Contemporary Introduction. Routledge, Lon-
don, UK.
Dalila Mekhaldi, Denis Lalanne, and Rolf Ingold.
2003. Thematic alignment of recorded speech
with documents. In ACM DocEng 2003, Greno-
ble, France.
Ruslan Mitkov. 2002. Anaphora Resolution. Long-
man, London, UK.
Ivandre? Paraboni and Kees van Deemter. 2002. To-
wards the generation of document deictic refer-
ences. In Kees van Deemter and Rodger Kib-
ble, editors, Information Sharing: Reference and
Presupposition in Language Generation and In-
terpretation, pages 329?352. CSLI Publications,
Stanford, CA, USA.
Andrei Popescu-Belis, Isabelle Robba, and Ge?rard
Sabah. 1998. Reference resolution beyond coref-
erence: a conceptual frame and its application.
In Coling-ACL ?98, volume II, pages 1046?1052,
Montre?al, Canada. Universite? de Montre?al.
Andrei Popescu-Belis, Maria Georgescul, Alexan-
der Clark, and Susan Armstrong. 2004. Building
and using a corpus of shallow dialogue annotated
meetings. In LREC 2004, Lisbon, Portugal.
Andrei Popescu-Belis. 2003. Evaluation-driven de-
sign of a robust reference resolution system. Nat-
ural Language Engineering, 9(3):281?306.
Susanne Salmon-Alt and Laurent Romary. 2004.
RAF: Towards a reference annotation framework.
In LREC 2004), Lisbon, Portugal.
Candace Sidner. 1983. Focusing in the compre-
hension of definite anaphora. In M. Brady and
R. Berwick, editors, Computational Models of
Discourse, pages 267?330. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA.
Gabriel Skantze. 2002. Coordination of referring
expressions in multimodal human-computer dia-
logue. In ICSLP 2002, Denver, CO, USA.
Kees van Deemter and Rodger Kibble. 2000. On
coreferring: Coreference in muc and related an-
notation schemes. Computational Linguistics,
26(4):629?637.
