Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the NAACL, Companion Volume, pages 284?287,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
SconeEdit: A Text-guided Domain Knowledge Editor 
 
 Alicia Tribble Benjamin Lambert Scott E. Fahlman 
Language Technologies  
Institute 
Language Technologies 
Institute 
Language Technologies  
Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University Carnegie Mellon University Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 Pittsburgh, PA 15213 Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
atribble@cs.cmu.edu benlambert@cmu.edu sef@cs.cmu.edu 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
We will demonstrate SconeEdit, a new tool 
for exploring and editing knowledge bases 
(KBs) that leverages interaction with do-
main texts.  The tool provides an annotated 
view of user-selected text, allowing a user 
to see which concepts from the text are in 
the KB and to edit the KB directly from 
this Text View.  Alongside the Text View, 
SconeEdit provides a navigable KB View 
of the knowledge base, centered on con-
cepts that appear in the text.  This unified 
tool gives the user a text-driven way to ex-
plore a KB and add new knowledge. 
1 Introduction 
We will demonstrate SconeEdit, a new tool for 
exploring and editing knowledge bases that inte-
grates domain text.  SconeEdit expands on the 
function of traditional ontology editors by showing 
the user an interactive text window (Text View) 
where the user can view and edit concepts from the 
knowledge base as highlighted terms in their origi-
nal context.  The Text View augments a traditional 
KB View, allowing the user to leverage existing 
knowledge as well as domain-focused text exam-
ples to perform a variety of knowledge-based 
tasks.   
Consider the task of assessing the quality of a 
knowledge base as a resource for a new AI or natu-
ral language system.  In SconeEdit, a user can view 
the knowledge base alongside a text document 
from the target domain.  SconeEdit searches for 
instances of KB concepts in the text and highlights 
them in the Text View.  Already the user can see a 
concise visual sample of the coverage of the KB 
for this domain. 
Now the user can work with the KB View and 
Text View together to navigate the ontology.  
Double-clicking on a highlighted concept like 
?keyboard? opens a detailed view of that concept 
in the KB View.  Inside the KB View, the user can 
click on the superclass of the keyboard concept to 
see the concept computer input device and all of its 
children.  Next, SconeEdit selectively highlights all 
instances of computer input device in the text.  The 
system uses type inference from the KB to high-
light ?mouse?, ?touchpad?, and ?wireless key-
board.?  If ?scanner? appears in the text but isn?t 
included in the knowledge base, the user can spot 
the omission quickly.   
 
 
Figure 1.  The SconeEdit Interface  
 
284
In this way, domain text is used as a measuring 
tool for coverage of domain knowledge.  Our dem-
onstration allows the user to try SconeEdit and to 
explore the interaction of text and knowledge. 
2 The Knowledge Base 
SconeEdit is a software client to the Scone Knowl-
edge Base System, or simply ?Scone? (Fahlman, 
2005).  Scone is an efficient, open-source knowl-
edge base (KB) system being developed in the 
Language Technologies Institute of Carnegie Mel-
lon University.  Scone is intended to be a practical 
KB system that can be used as a component in a 
wide range of AI and natural language software 
applications.  One of the goals in developing Scone 
is to make it easy to use, especially when adding 
new knowledge. 
The SconeEdit interface makes Scone more us-
able in several ways: the Text View display gives 
the user a convenient and intuitive starting point 
for exploring the knowledge base.  SconeEdit also 
provides an easy way of adding knowledge to the 
KB without learning the formal input language for 
Scone.  This demonstration focuses on the effec-
tiveness of SconeEdit and Scone together, but the 
design principles of SconeEdit are applicable to 
knowledge bases written in other formalisms. 
Figure 1 shows the SconeEdit window with a 
document and KB loaded.  The left side of the in-
terface contains the Text View, and the KB View 
is on the right.  Each of these views is described in 
detail below. 
3 Architecture 
3.1 Text View 
In a traditional ontology browser, the user starts 
looking for concepts of interest by typing words 
and phrases into a search field.  This is the model 
for several existing tools, including the VisDic 
viewer for WordNet (Hor?k and Smr?, 2004), the 
INOH ontology viewer (INOH, 2004), and the 
Gene Ontology viewer presented by Koike and 
Takagi (2004), among others. 
SconeEdit improves on this browsing paradigm 
by giving a user who is unfamiliar with the knowl-
edge base an easy way to start exploring.  Rather 
than generating a series of guesses at what may be 
 
Figure 2.  Excerpt from Text View, with Search 
and Text Tabs 
 
covered by the KB, the user can load natural lan-
guage text into SconeEdit from a file or the system 
clipboard.  We take an article from Xinhuanet 
News Service (Xinhuanet, 2006) as an example.  
Figure 2 shows an excerpt of this text after it has 
been loaded. 
When the text file is loaded, it appears in the 
Text Tab of the Text View pane.  SconeEdit high-
lights all strings that it can identify as concepts 
from the knowledge base. In this example, ?Wash-
ington? is correctly identified as the city, not the 
state.  In many cases the concept may be ambigu-
ous from the string alone.  SconeEdit currently 
uses dynamic programming to highlight the long-
est-matching concept names it can find (see Sec-
tion 5).  More sophisticated disambiguation is a 
priority for our future work.   
The result of highlighting is a concise visual 
representation of what is ?known? about that text.  
The Text View helps a user find relevant knowl-
edge quickly, even in a large general-domain KB.  
Clicking on any highlighted term in the Text View 
brings up a hierarchical representation of that con-
cept in the KB View.  
3.2 KB View 
The KB View contains two tabs: a Graph Tab and 
a List Tab. The Graph Tab displays an excerpt 
from the knowledge base as a network of linked 
concepts with one focus concept in the center.  
When the user clicks on a highlighted concept in 
the Text View, a graph focused on that concept 
appears in the Graph Tab.  Continuing with our 
Xinhuanet example, Figure 3 shows the Graph Tab 
after a user has clicked on ?Washington? in the 
text.  The Graph View now displays concepts that 
are closely related to Washington-Dc in the knowl-
edge base.   
285
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  KB View, Graph Tab of Washington-Dc 
 
 
Figure 4.  KB View, List Tab of City 
 
Clicking on any of these related concepts in the 
Graph Tab moves the focus of the graph to that 
concept. 
The List Tab shows an alternative view of the 
same focus concept.  It displays KB information as 
a set of property lists.  As in the Graph Tab, the 
user can double-click on any concept in the List 
Tab to bring that concept into focus.  When the 
focus concept is densely connected to other con-
cepts in the KB, the List Tab can be easier to inter-
pret than the Graph Tab.  In general, research has 
shown that preference for the list style or graph 
style is personal and varies from user to user 
(Tribble and Ros?, 2006). Figure 4 shows the List 
Tab, focused on the concept City.  
4 Adding Knowledge 
Browsing the knowledge base in this way gives the 
user a detailed, domain-targeted view of its con-
tents.  A natural extension of this paradigm is to 
allow the user to edit the KB while browsing.  For 
example, a user may encounter a concept in the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Adding a concept synonym 
 
text that is not present in the knowledge base. 
SconeEdit allows the user to simply click on a 
word in the text to create a new concept in the KB 
(see Figure 5).  To specify where the new concept 
belongs, the user navigates to the appropriate loca-
tion in the KB View (List Tab or Graph Tab). 
The user can also modify an existing KB con-
cept by adding English synonyms.  For example, 
the word ?United States? may be highlighted in a 
text example, while ?U.S.? is not.  To add a syno-
nym for the ?United States? concept, the user 
navigates to this concept in the KB View, and then 
clicks on the text ?U.S.?.  A menu offers the choice 
of adding a synonym to the existing focus concept.  
Figure 5 illustrates this process.   
5 Identifying KB Concepts in Text 
Elements in a Scone knowledge base represent 
specific concepts, rather than words or word 
senses.  Each concept is linked with a list of Eng-
lish names (words or phrases). This association 
between Scone elements and English names is 
many-to-many.  
To map a sentence to the set of concepts that 
appear there, a dynamic-programming alignment is 
performed using the English names in the KB as a 
dictionary.  SconeEdit searches for an alignment 
that covers as much of the input text as possible.  
The result of aligning an input string with concepts 
is a set of triples, each consisting of a concept, an 
offset, and a length.  These triples are used directly 
by the Text Tab to highlight substrings and associ-
ate them with KB concepts. 
Consider the sentence ?Washington, D.C. is a 
city.?  Table 1 shows some example Scone con-
cepts and their English names.  Given a knowledge  
286
Concept Name English Names 
Washington-State ?Washington?, ?Washing-ton State?,  
Washington-Dc ?Washington?, ?Washing-ton, D.C.? 
City ?city? 
Table 1.  Example concepts and their English 
Name lists 
 
base with these concepts, SconeEdit returns the 
alignment: (concept: Washington-DC, offset: 1, 
length: 16) (concept: City, offset: 23, length: 4). 
6 Planned Features 
A single node in the KB could have hundreds or 
thousands of outgoing links.  For readability, the 
browser must select a subset of these links to dis-
play to the user.  We plan to leverage Scone?s rea-
soning ability, along with SconeEdit?s document-
driven design, to select which nodes are likely to 
be relevant to the user in the context of the loaded 
document(s).  For example, a user who views sub-
classes of disease in a medical ontology may be 
presented with thousands of disease types.  If the 
current document loaded into SconeEdit is a 
document about food, Scone may be able to prune 
the subclasses it lists to only food-borne illnesses.  
Another feature we hope to add is better integra-
tion with an entire corpus. The current system al-
lows the user to work with individual documents.  
This could be extended to allow a user to navigate 
to a particular concept in the knowledge base and 
retrieve all documents in a corpus containing that 
concept (in its various forms).  These documents 
could then be used to generate more KB concepts 
of interest. 
7 Related Work 
To the best of our knowledge, existing ontology 
and KB editors and viewers do not specifically 
focus on editing and viewing an ontology or KB in 
the context of natural language text.  Other ontol-
ogy editors such as Prot?g? (Gennari, 2002) and 
OntoEdit (Sure, 2002) offer many features for gen-
erating complex ontologies, but do not provide the 
rich interaction with domain text that is the focus 
of SconeEdit.  The CNet Big Picture (CNet News 
Online, 2000) is one example of a system that does 
link ontology knowledge to text, but the concepts 
in the ontology are limited to a small fixed set. 
Acknowledgements 
This material is based upon work supported by the 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(DARPA) under Contract No. NBCHD030010.  
The authors would like to thank Vasco Pedro, Eric 
Nyberg, and Tim Isganitis for their contributions to 
SconeEdit.  
References 
CNet News Online. 2000. The Big Picture, 
http://news.com.com/The+Big+Picture/2030-12_3-
5843390.html. 
Scott E. Fahlman. 2006. Scone User's Manual,  
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~sef/scone/. 
J. Gennari, M. A. Musen, R. W. Fergerson, W. E. 
Grosso, M. Crubezy, H. Eriksson, N. F. Noy, S. W. 
Tu. 2002. The Evolution of Prot?g?: An Environment 
for Knowledge-Based Systems Development. Inter-
national Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 
58(1), pp. 89?123. 
Ale? Hor?k and Pavel Smr?. 2004. VisDic -- WordNet 
Browsing and Editing Tool. Proceedings of GWC 
2004, pp. 136?141. 
INOH, 2004. INOH Ontology Viewer Website.  
http://www.inoh.org:8083/ontology-viewer/. 
Asako Koike and Toshishisa Takagi, 2004. 
Gene/protein/family name recognition in biomedical 
literature.  In Proceedings of  BioLINK 2004: Linking 
Biological Literature, Ontologies, and Databases, 
pp. 9-16. 
Alicia Tribble and Carolyn Ros?.  2006. Usable Brows-
ers for Ontological Knowledge Acquisition.  To ap-
pear in Proceedings of CHI-2006.  Montr?al, Canada. 
April 22-27, 2006. 
Xinhuanet. 2006. US accused of blocking approval of 
new UN human rights body. 
http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2006-
03/02/content_4247159.htm. 
 Y. Sure, M. Erdmann, J. Angele, S. Staab, R. Studer 
and D. Wenke. OntoEdit: Collaborative Ontology 
Engineering for the Semantic Web. In Proceedings of 
the first International Semantic Web Conference 
2002 (ISWC 2002). 
287
