Portability Issues for Speech Recognition Technologies 
Lori Lamel, Fabrice Lefevre, Jean-Luc Gauvain and Gilles Adda
Spoken Language Processing Group,
CNRS-LIMSI, 91403 Orsay, France
flamel,lefevre,gauvain,gaddag@limsi.fr
ABSTRACT
Although there has been regular improvement in speech recog-
nition technology over the past decade, speech recognition is far
from being a solved problem. Most recognition systems are tuned
to a particular task and porting the system to a new task (or lan-
guage) still requires substantial investment of time and money, as
well as expertise. Todays state-of-the-art systems rely on the avail-
ability of large amounts of manually transcribed data for acous-
tic model training and large normalized text corpora for language
model training. Obtaining such data is both time-consuming and
expensive, requiring trained human annotators with substantial a-
mounts of supervision.
In this paper we address issues in speech recognizer portabil-
ity and activities aimed at developing generic core speech recogni-
tion technology, in order to reduce the manual effort required for
system development. Three main axes are pursued: assessing the
genericity of wide domain models by evaluating performance under
several tasks; investigating techniques for lightly supervised acous-
tic model training; and exploring transparent methods for adapting
generic models to a specific task so as to achieve a higher degree of
genericity.
1. INTRODUCTION
The last decade has seen impressive advances in the capability
and performance of speech recognizers. Todays state-of-the-art
systems are able to transcribe unrestricted continuous speech from
broadcast data with acceptable performance. The advances arise
from the increased accuracy and complexity of the models, which
are closely related to the availability of large spoken and text cor-
pora for training, and the wide availability of faster and cheaper
computational means which have enabled the development and im-
plementation of better training and decoding algorithms. Despite
the extent of progress over the recent years, recognition accuracy is
still extremely sensitive to the environmental conditions and speak-
ing style: channel quality, speaker characteristics, and background
This work was partially financed by the European Commission
under the IST-1999 Human Language Technologies project 11876
Coretex.
.
noise have an important impact on the acoustic component of the
speech recognizer, whereas the speaking style and the discourse
domain have a large impact on the linguistic component.
In the context of the EC IST-1999 11876 project CORETEX we
are investigating methods for fast system development, as well as
development of systems with high genericity and adaptability. By
fast system development we refer to: language support, i.e., the
capability of porting technology to different languages at a reason-
able cost; and task portability, i.e. the capability to easily adapt a
technology to a new task by exploiting limited amounts of domain-
specific knowledge. Genericity and adaptability refer to the capac-
ity of the technology to work properly on a wide range of tasks and
to dynamically keep models up to date using contemporary data.
The more robust the initial generic system is, the less there is a
need for adaptation. Concerning the acoustic modeling component,
genericity implies that it is robust to the type and bandwidth of the
channel, the acoustic environment, the speaker type and the speak-
ing style. Unsupervised normalization and adaptation techniques
evidently should be used to enhance performance further when the
system is exposed to data of a particular type.
With today?s technology, the adaptation of a recognition system
to a new task or new language requires the availability of suffi-
cient amount of transcribed training data. When changing to new
domains, usually no exact transcriptions of acoustic data are avail-
able, and the generation of such transcribed data is an expensive
process in terms of manpower and time. On the other hand, there
often exist incomplete information such as approximate transcrip-
tions, summaries or at least key words, which can be used to pro-
vide supervision in what can be referred to as ?informed speech
recognition?. Depending on the level of completeness, this infor-
mation can be used to develop confidence measures with adapted or
trigger language models or by approximate alignments to automatic
transcriptions. Another approach is to use existing recognizer com-
ponents (developed for other tasks or languages) to automatically
transcribe task-specific training data. Although in the beginning the
error rate on new data is likely to be rather high, this speech data
can be used to re-train a recognition system. If carried out in an
iterative manner, the speech data base for the new domain can be
cumulatively extended over time without direct manual transcrip-
tion.
The overall objective of the work presented here is to reduce
the speech recognition development cost. One aspect is to develop
?generic? core speech recognition technology, where by ?generic?
we mean a transcription engine that will work reasonably well on a
wide range of speech transcription tasks, ranging from digit recog-
nition to large vocabulary conversational telephony speech, with-
out the need for costly task-specific training data. To start with we
assess the genericity of wide domain models under cross-task con-
Table 1: Brief descriptions and best reported error rates for the corpora used in this work.
Corpus Test Year Task Train (#spkr) Test (#spkr) Textual Resources Best WER
BN 98 TV & Radio News 200h 3h Closed-captions, commercial transcripts,
manual transcripts of audio data
13.5
TI-digits 93 Small Vocabulary 3.5h (112) 4h (113) - 0.2
ATIS 93 H-M Dialog 40h (137) 5h (24) Transcriptions 2.5
WSJ 95 News Dictation 100h (355) 45mn (20) Newspaper, newswire 6.6
S9 WSJ 93 Spontaneous Dictation 43mn (10) Newspaper, newswire 19.1
ditions, i.e., by recognizing task-specific data with a recognizer de-
veloped for a different task. We chose to evaluate the performance
of broadcast news acoustic and language models, on three com-
monly used tasks: small vocabulary recognition (TI-digits), read
and spontaneous text dictation (WSJ), and goal-oriented spoken di-
alog (ATIS). The broadcast news task is quite general, covering a
wide variety of linguistic and acoustic events in the language, en-
suring reasonable coverage of the target task. In addition, there are
sufficient acoustic and linguistic training data available for this task
that accurate models covering a wide range of speaker and language
characteristics can be estimated.
Another research area is the investigation of lightly supervised
techniques for acoustic model training. The strategy taken is to
use a speech recognizer to transcribe unannotated data, which are
then used to estimate more accurate acoustic models. The light
supervision is applied to the broadcast news task, where unlim-
ited amounts of acoustic training data are potentially available. Fi-
nally we apply the lightly supervised training idea as a transpar-
ent method for adapting the generic models to a specific task, thus
achieving a higher degree of genericity. In this work we focus on
reducing training costs and task portability, and do not address lan-
guage transfer.
We selected the LIMSI broadcast news (BN) transcription sys-
tem as the generic reference system. The BN task covers a large
number of different acoustic and linguistic situations: planned to
spontaneous speech; native and non-native speakers with different
accents; close-talking microphones and telephone channels; quiet
studio, on-site reports in noisy places to musical background; and
a variety of topics. In addition, a lot of training resources are avail-
able including a large corpus of annotated audio data and a huge
amount of raw audio data for the acoustic modeling; and large
collections of closed-captions, commercial transcripts, newspapers
and newswires texts for linguistic modeling. The next section pro-
vides an overview of the LIMSI broadcast news transcription sys-
tem used as our generic system.
2. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
The LIMSI broadcast news transcription system has two main
components, the audio partitioner and the word recognizer. Data
partitioning [6] serves to divide the continuous audio stream into
homogeneous segments, associating appropriate labels for cluster,
gender and bandwidth with the segments. The speech recognizer
uses continuous density HMMs with Gaussian mixture for acous-
tic modeling and n-gram statistics estimated on large text corpora
for language modeling. Each context-dependent phone model is a
tied-state left-to-right CD-HMM with Gaussian mixture observa-
tion densities where the tied states are obtained by means of a de-
cision tree. Word recognition is performed in three steps: 1) initial
hypothesis generation, 2) word graph generation, 3) final hypoth-
esis generation. The initial hypotheses are used for cluster-based
acoustic model adaptation using the MLLR technique [13] prior to
word graph generation. A 3-gram LM is used in the first two de-
coding steps. The final hypotheses are generated with a 4-gram LM
and acoustic models adapted with the hypotheses of step 2.
In the baseline system used in DARPA evaluation tests, the acous-
tic models were trained on about 150 hours of audio data from the
DARPA Hub4 Broadcast News corpus (the LDC 1996 and 1997
Broadcast News Speech collections) [9]. Gender-dependent acous-
tic models were built using MAP adaptation of SI seed models for
wide-band and telephone band speech [7]. The models contain
28000 position-dependent, cross-word triphone models with 11700
tied states and approximately 360k Gaussians [8].
The baseline language models are obtained by interpolation of
models trained on 3 different data sets (excluding the test epochs):
about 790M words of newspaper and newswire texts; 240M word
of commercial broadcast news transcripts; and the transcriptions of
the Hub4 acoustic data. The recognition vocabulary contains 65120
words and has a lexical coverage of over 99% on all evaluation test
sets from the years 1996-1999. A pronunciation graph is associated
with each word so as to allow for alternate pronunciations. The
pronunciations make use of a set of 48 phones set, where 3 phone
units represent silence, filler words, and breath noises. The lexicon
contains compound words for about 300 frequent word sequences,
as well as word entries for common acronyms, providing an easy
way to allow for reduced pronunciations [6].
The LIMSI 10x system obtained a word error of 17.1% on the
1999 DARPA/NIST evaluation set and can transcribe unrestricted
broadcast data with a word error of about 20% [8].
3. TASK INDEPENDENCE
Our first step in developing a ?generic? speech transcription en-
gine is to assess the most generic system we have under cross-
task conditions, i.e., by recognizing task-specific data with a rec-
ognizer developed for a different task. Three representative tasks
have been retained as target tasks: small vocabulary recognition
(TI-digits), goal-oriented human-machine spoken dialog (ATIS),
and dictation of texts (WSJ). The broadcast news transcription task
(Hub4E) serves as the baseline. The main criteria for the task se-
lection were that they are realistic enough and task-specific data
should be available. The characteristics of these four tasks and the
available corpora are summarized in Table 1.
For the small vocabulary recognition task, experiments are car-
ried out on the adult speaker portion of the TI-digits corpus [14],
containing over 17k utterances from a total of 225 speakers. The
vocabulary contains 11 words, the digits ?1? to ?9?, plus ?zero? and
?oh?. Each speaker uttered two versions of each digit in isolation
and 55 digit strings. The database is divided into training and test
sets (roughly 3.5 hours each, corresponding to 9k strings). The
speech is of high quality, having been collected in a quiet environ-
ment. The best reported WERs on this task are around 0.2-0.3%.
The digit phonemic coverage being very low, only 108 context-
dependent models are used in our recognition system. The task-
Table 2: Word error rates (%) for BN98, TI-digits, ATIS94,
WSJ95 and S9 WSJ93 test sets after recognition with three dif-
ferent configurations: (left) BN acoustic and language models;
(center) BN acoustic models combined with task-specific lex-
ica and LMs and (right) task-dependent acoustic and language
models.
Test Set BN models Task LMs Task models
BN98 13.6 13.6 13.6
TI-digits 17.5 1.7 0.4
ATIS94 22.7 4.7 4.4
WSJ95 11.6 9.0 7.6
S9 WSJ93 12.1 13.6 15.3
specific LM for the TI-digits is a simple grammar allowing any se-
quence of up to 7 digits. Our task-dependent system performance
is 0.4% WER.
The DARPA Air Travel Information System (ATIS) task is cho-
sen as being representative of a goal-oriented human-machine di-
alog task, and the ARPA 1994 Spontaneous Speech Recognition
(SPREC) ATIS-3 data (ATIS94) [4] is used for testing purposes.
The test data amounts for nearly 5 hours of speech from 24 speakers
recorded with a close-talking microphone. Around 40h of speech
data are available for training. The word error rates for this task in
the 1994 evaluation were mainly in the range of 2.5% to 5%, which
we take as state-of-the-art for this task. The acoustic models used
in our task-specific system include 1641 context-dependent phones
with 4k independent HMM states. A back-off trigram language
model has been estimated on the transcriptions of the training ut-
terances. The lexicon contains 1300 words, with compounds words
for multi-word entities in the air-travel database (city and airport
names, services etc.). The WER obtained with our task-dependent
system is 4.4%.
For the dictation task, the Wall Street Journal continuous speech
recognition corpus [17] is used, abiding by the ARPA 1995 Hub3
test (WSJ95) conditions. The acoustic training data consist of 100
hours of speech from a total of 355 speakers taken from the WSJ0
and WSJ1 corpora. The Hub3 baseline test data consist of stu-
dio quality read speech from 20 speakers with a total duration of
45 minutes. The best result reported at the time of the evaluation
was 6.6%. A contrastive experiment is carried out with the WSJ93
Spoke 9 data comprised of 200 spontaneous sentences spoken by
journalists [11]. The best performance reported in the 1993 evalua-
tion on the spontaneous data was 19.1% [18], however lower word
error rates have since been reported on comparable test sets (14.1%
on the WSJ94 Spoke 9 test data). 21000 context and position-
dependent models have been trained for the WSJ system, with 9k
independent HMM states. A 65k-word vocabulary was selected
and a back-off trigram model obtained by interpolating models trained
on different data sets (training utterance transcriptions and newspa-
pers data). The task-dependent WSJ system has a WER of 7.6% on
the read speech test data and 15.3% on the spontaneous data.
For the BN transcription task, we follow the conditions of the
1998 ARPA Hub4E evaluation (BN98) [15]. The acoustic training
data is comprised of 150 hours of North-American TV and radio
shows. The best overall result on the 1998 baseline test was 13.5%.
Three sets of experiments are reported. The first are cross-task
recognition experiments carried out using the BN acoustic and lan-
guage models to decode the test data for the other tasks. The second
set of experiments made use of mixed models, that is the BN acous-
tic models and task-specific LMs. Due to the different evaluation
paradigms, some minor modifications were made in the transcrip-
tion procedure. First of all, in contrast with the BN data, the data
for the 3 tasks is already segmented into individual utterances so
the partitioning step was eliminated. With this exception, the de-
coding process for the WSJ task is exactly the same as described in
the previous section. For the TI-digits and ATIS tasks, word decod-
ing is carried out in a single trigram pass, and no speaker adaptation
was performed.
The WERs obtained for the three recognition experiments are
reported in Table 2. A comparison with Table 1 shows that the
performances of the task-dependent models are close to the best re-
ported results even though we did not devote too much effort in op-
timizing these models. We can also observe by comparing the task-
dependent (Table 2, right) and mixed (Table 2, middle) conditions,
that the BN acoustic models are relatively generic. These mod-
els seem to be a good start towards truly task-independent acoustic
models. By using task-specific language models For the TI-digits
and ATIS we can see that the gap in performance is mainly due
a linguistic mismatch. For WSJ the language models are more
closely matched to BN and only a small 1.6% WER reduction is
obtained. On the spontaneous journalist dictation (WSJ S9 spoke)
test data there is even an increase in WER using the WSJ LMs,
which can be attributed to a better modelization of spontaneous
speech effects (such as breath and filler words) in the BN models.
Prior to introducing our approach for lightly supervised acoustic
model training, we describe our standard training procedure in the
next section.
4. ACOUSTIC MODEL TRAINING
HMM training requires an alignment between the audio signal
and the phone models, which usually relies on a perfect ortho-
graphic transcription of the speech data and a good phonetic lex-
icon. In general it is easier to deal with relatively short speech seg-
ments so that transcription errors will not propagate and jeopardize
the alignment. The orthographic transcription is usually considered
as ground truth and training is done in a closely supervised man-
ner. For each speech segment the training algorithm is provided
with the exact orthographic transcription of what was spoken, i.e.,
the word sequence that the speech recognizer should hypothesize
when confronted with the same speech segment.
Training acoustic models for a new corpus (which could also re-
flect a change of task and/or language), usually entails the follow-
ing sequence of operations once the audio data and transcription
files have been loaded:
1. Normalize the transcriptions to a common format (some ad-
justment is always needed as different text sources make use
of different conventions).
2. Produce a word list from the transcriptions and correct blatant
errors (these include typographical errors and inconsistencies).
3. Produce a phonemic transcription for all words not in our mas-
ter lexicon (these are manually verified).
4. Align the orthographic transcriptions with the signal using ex-
isting models and the pronunciation lexicon (or bootstrap mod-
els from another task or language). This procedure often re-
jects a substantial portion of the data, particularly for long seg-
ments.
5. Eventually correct transcription errors and realign (or just ig-
nore these if enough audio data is available)
6. Run the standard EM training procedure.
This sequence of operations is usually iterated several times to
refine the acoustic models. In general each iteration recovers a por-
tion of the rejected data.
5. LIGHTLY SUPERVISED ACOUSTIC
MODEL TRAINING
One can imagine training acoustic models in a less supervised
manner, by using an iterative procedure where instead of using
manual transcriptions for alignment, at each iteration the most likely
word transcription given the current models and all the information
available about the audio sample is used. This approach still fits
within the EM training framework, which is well-suited for miss-
ing data training problems. A completely unsupervised training
procedure is to use the current best models to produce an ortho-
graphic transcription of the training data, keeping only words that
have a high confidence measure. Such an approach, while very en-
ticing, is limited since the only supervision is provided by the con-
fidence measure estimator. This estimator must in turn be trained
on development data, which needs to be small to keep the approach
interesting.
Between using carefully annotated data such as the detailed tran-
scriptions provided by the LDC and no transcription at all, there is
a wide spectrum of possibilities. What is really important is the
cost of producing the associated annotations. Detailed annotation
requires on the order of 20-40 times real-time of manual effort, and
even after manual verification the final transcriptions are not ex-
empt from errors [2]. Orthographic transcriptions such as closed-
captions can be done in a few times real-time, and therefore are
quite a bit less costly. These transcriptions have the advantage that
they are already available for some television channels, and there-
fore do not have to be produced specifically for training speech
recognizers. However, closed-captions are a close, but not exact
transcription of what is being spoken, and are only coarsely time-
aligned with the audio signal. Hesitations and repetitions are not
marked and there may be word insertions, deletions and changes
in the word order. They also are missing some of the additional
information provided in the detailed speech transcriptions such as
the indication of acoustic conditions, speaker turns, speaker identi-
ties and gender and the annotation of non-speech segments such as
music. NIST found the disagreement between the closed-captions
and manual transcripts on a 10 hour subset of the TDT-2 data used
for the SDR evaluation to be on the order of 12% [5].
Another approach is to make use of other possible sources of
contemporaneous texts from newspapers, newswires, summaries
and the Internet. However, since these sources have only an indirect
correspondence with the audio data, they provide less supervision.
The basic idea is of light supervision is to use a speech recog-
nizer to automatically transcribe unannotated data, thus generat-
ing ?approximate? labeled training data. By iteratively increasing
the amount of training data, more accurate acoustic models are ob-
tained, which can then be used to transcribe another set of unanno-
tated data. The modified training procedure used in this work is:
1. Train a language model on all texts and closed captions after
normalization
2. Partition each show into homogeneous segments and label the
acoustic attributes (speaker, gender, bandwidth) [6]
3. Train acoustic models on a very small amount of manually
annotated data (1h)
4. Automatically transcribe a large amount of training data
5. (Optional) Align the closed-captions and the automatic tran-
scriptions (using a standard dynamic programming algorithm)
6. Run the standard acoustic model training procedure on the
speech segments (in the case of alignment with the closed
captions only keep segments where the two transcripts are in
agreement)
7. Reiterate from step 4.
It is easy to see that the manual work is considerably reduced, not
only in generating the annotated corpus but also during the training
procedure, since we no longer need to extend the pronunciation lex-
icon to cover all words and word fragments occurring in the training
data and we do not need to correct transcription errors. This ba-
sic idea was used to train acoustic models using the automatically
generated word transcriptions of the 500 hours of audio broadcasts
used in the spoken document retrieval task (part of the DARPA
TDT-2 corpus used in the SDR?99 and SDR?00 evaluations) [3].
This corpus is comprised of 902 shows from 6 sources broadcast
between January and June 1998: CNN Headline News (550 30-
minute shows), ABC World News Tonight (139 30-minute shows),
Public Radio International The World (122 1-hour shows), Voice of
America VOA Today and World Report (111 1-hour shows). These
shows contain about 22k stories with time-codes identifying the
beginning and end of each story.
First, the recognition performance as a function of the available
acoustic and language model training data was assessed. Then we
investigated the accuracy of the acoustic models obtained after rec-
ognizing the audio data using different levels of supervision via
the language model. With the exception of the baseline Hub4 lan-
guage models, none of the language models include a component
estimated on the transcriptions of the Hub4 acoustic training data.
The language model training texts come from contemporaneous
sources such as newspapers and newswires, and commercial sum-
maries and transcripts, and closed-captions. The former sources
have only an indirect correspondence with the audio data and pro-
vide less supervision than the closed captions. For each set of LM
training texts, a new word list was selected based on the word fre-
quencies in the training data. All language models are formed by
interpolating individual LMs built on each text source. The interpo-
lation coefficients were chosen in order to minimize the perplexity
on a development set composed of the second set of the Nov98
evaluation data (3h) and a 2h portion of the TDT2 data from Jun98
(not included in the LM training data). The following combinations
were investigated:
 LMa (baseline Hub4 LM): newspaper+newswire (NEWS), com-
mercial transcripts (COM) predating Jun98, acoustic transcripts
 LMn t c: NEWS, COM, closed-captions through May98
 LMn t: NEWS, COM through May98
 LMn c: NEWS, closed-captions through May98
 LMn: NEWS through May98
 LMn to: NEWS through May98, COM through Dec97
 LMno: NEWS through Dec97
Table 3: Word error rate for various conditions using acous-
tic models trained on the HUB4 training data with detailed
manual transcriptions. All runs were done in less than 10xRT,
except the last row. ?1S? designates one set of gender-
independent acoustic models, whereas ?4S? designates four sets
of gender and bandwidth dependent acoustic models.
Training Conditions bn99 1 bn99 2 Average
1h 1S, LMn t c 35.2 31.9 33.3
69h 1S, LMn t c 20.2 18.0 18.9
123h 1S, LMn t c 19.3 17.1 18.0
123h 4S, LMn t c 18.5 16.1 17.1
123h 4S, LMa 18.3 16.3 17.1
123h 4S, LMa, 50x 17.1 14.5 15.6
Table 4: Word error rate for different language models and increasing quantities of automatically labeled training data on the 1999
evaluation test sets using gender and bandwidth independent acoustic models. LMn t c: NEWS, COM, closed-captions through
May98 LMn t: NEWS, COM through May98 LMn c: NEWS, closed-captions through May98 LMn: NEWS through May98
LMn to: NEWS through May98, COM through Dec97 LMno: NEWS through Dec97.
Amount of training data %WER
raw unfiltered LMn t c LMn t LMn c LMn LMn to LMno
150h 123h 18.0 18.6 19.1 20.6 18.7 20.9
1h 1h 33.3 33.7 34.4 35.9 33.9 36.1
14h 8h 26.4 27.6 27.4 29.0 27.6 30.6
28h 17h 25.2 25.7 25.6 28.1 25.7 28.9
58h 28h 24.3 25.2 25.7 27.4 25.1 27.9
It should be noted that all of the conditions include newspaper
and newswire texts from the same epoch as the audio data. These
provide an important source of knowledge particularly with re-
spect to the vocabulary items. Conditions which include the closed
captions in the LM training data provide additional supervision in
the decoding process when transcribing audio data from the same
epoch.
For testing purposes we use the 1999 Hub4 evaluation data, which
is comprised of two 90 minute data sets selected by NIST. The first
set was extracted from 10 hours of data broadcast in June 1998,
and the second set from a set of broadcasts recorded in August-
September 1998 [16]. All recognition runs were carried out in un-
der 10xRT unless stated otherwise. The LIMSI 10x system ob-
tained a word error of 17.1% on the evaluation set (the combined
scores in the penultimate row in Table 3 4S, LMa) [8]. The word
error can be reduced to 15.6% for a system running at 50xRT (last
entry in Table 3).
As can be seen in Table 3, the word error rates with our orig-
inal Hub4 language model (LMa) and the one without the tran-
scriptions of the acoustic data (LMn t c) give comparable results
using the 1999 acoustic models trained on 123 hours of manually
annotated data (123h, 4S). The quality of the different language
models listed above are compared in the first row of Table 3 us-
ing speaker-independent (1S) acoustic models trained on the same
Hub4 data (123h). As can be observed, removing any text source
leads to a degradation in recognition performance. It appears it is
more important to include commercial transcripts (LMn t), even
if they are old (LMn to) than the closed captions (LMn c). This
suggests that the commercial transcripts more accurately represent
spoken language than closed-captioning. Even if only newspaper
and newswire texts are available (LMn), the word error increases
by only 14% over the best configuration (LMn t c), and even using
older newspaper and newswire texts (LMno) does not substantially
increase the word error rate. The second row of Table 3 gives the
word error rates with acoustic models trained on only 1 hour of
manually transcribed data. These are the models used to initialize
the process of automatically transcribing large quantities of data.
These word error rates range from 33% to 36% across the language
models.
We compared a straightforward approach of training on all the
automatically annotated data with one in which the closed-captions
are used to filter the hypothesized transcriptions, removing words
that are ?incorrect?. In the filtered case, the hypothesized transcrip-
tions are aligned with the closed captions story by story, and only
regions where the automatic transcripts agreed with the closed cap-
tions were kept for training purposes. To our surprise, somewhat
comparable recognition results were obtained both with and with-
out filtering, suggesting that inclusion of the closed-captions in the
language model training material provided sufficient supervision
(see Table 5).1 It should be noted that in both cases the closed-
caption story boundaries are used to delimit the audio segments
after automatic transcription.
To investigate this further we are assessing the effects of reduc-
ing the amount of supervision provided by the language model
training texts on the acoustic model accuracy (see Table 4). With
14 hours (raw) of approximately labeled training data, the word er-
ror is reduced by about 20% for all LMs compared with training on
1h of data which has carefully manual transcriptions. Using larger
amounts of data transcribed with the same initial acoustic models
gives smaller improvements, as seen by the entries for 28h and 58h.
The commercial transcripts (LMn+t and LMn+to), even if predat-
ing the data epoch, are seen to be more important than the closed-
captions (LMn+c), supporting the earlier observation that they are
closer to spoken language. Even if only news texts from the same
period (LMn) are available, these provide adequate supervision for
lightly supervised acoustic model training.
Table 5: Word error rates for increasing quantities of auto-
matically label training data on the 1999 evaluation test sets
using gender and bandwidth independent acoustic models with
the language model LMn t c (trained on NEWS, COM, closed-
captions through May98).
Amount of training data %WER
raw unfiltered filtered unfiltered filtered
14h 8h 6h 26.4 25.7
28h 17h 13h 25.2 23.7
58h 28h 21h 24.3 22.5
140h 76h 57h 22.4 21.1
287h 140h 108h 21.0 19.9
503h 238h 188h 20.2 19.4
6. TASK ADAPTATION
The experiments reported in the section 3 show that while direct
recognition with the reference BN acoustic models gives relatively
1The difference in the amounts of data transcribed and actually
used for training is due to three factors. The first is that the total du-
ration includes non-speech segments which are eliminated prior to
recognition during partitioning. Secondly, the story boundaries in
the closed captions are used to eliminate irrelevant portions, such
as commercials. Thirdly, since there are many remaining silence
frames, only a portion of these are retained for training.
Table 6: Word error rates (%) for TI-digits, ATIS94, WSJ95 and S9 WSJ93 test sets after recognition with three different configura-
tions, all including task-specific lexica and LMs: (left) BN acoustic models, (middle left) unsupervised adaptation of the BN acoustic
models, (middle right) supervised adaptation of the BN acoustic models and (right) task-dependent acoustic models.
Test Set BN models Unsupervised Adaptation Supervised Adaptation Task-dep. models
BN models BN models
TI-digits 1.7 0.8 0.5 0.4
ATIS94 4.7 4.7 3.2 4.4
WSJ95 9.0 6.9 6.7 7.6
S9 WSJ93 13.6 12.6 11.4 15.3
competitive results, the WER on the targeted tasks can still be im-
proved. Since we want to minimize the cost and effort involved in
tuning to a target task, we are investigating methods to transpar-
ently adapt the reference acoustic models. By transparent we mean
that the procedure is automatic and can be carried out without any
human expertise. We therefore apply the approach presented in the
previous section, that is the reference BN system is used to tran-
scribe the training data of the destination task. This supposes of
course that audio data have been collected. However, this can be
carried out with an operational system and the cost of collecting
task-specific training data is greatly reduced since no manual tran-
scriptions are needed. The performance of the BN models under
cross task conditions is well within the range for which the approx-
imate transcriptions can be used for acoustic model adaptation.
The reference acoustic models are then adapted by means of a
conventional adaptation technique such as MLLR and MAP. Thus
there is no need to design a new set of models based on the training
data characteristics. Adaptation is also preferred to the training
of new models as it is likely that the new training data will have
a lower phonemic contextual coverage than the original reference
models.
The cross-task unsupervisedadaptation is evaluated for the tasks:
TI-digits, ATIS and WSJ. The 100 hours of the WSJ data were tran-
scribed using the BN acoustic and language models. For ATIS, only
26 of the 40 hours of training data from 276 speakers were tran-
scribed, due to time constraints. For TI-digits, the training data was
transcribed using a mixed configuration, combining the BN acous-
tic models with the simple digit loop grammar.2 For completeness
we also used the task-specific audio data and the associated tran-
scriptions to carry out supervised adaptation of the BN models.
Gender-dependent acoustic models were estimated using the cor-
responding gender-dependent BN models as seeds and the gender-
specific training utterances as adaptation data. For WSJ and ATIS,
the speaker ids were directly used for gender identification since
in previous experiments with this test set there were no gender
classification errors. Only the acoustic models used in the sec-
ond and third word decoding passes have been adapted. For the
TI-digits, the gender of each training utterance was automatically
classified by decoding each utterance twice, once with each set of
gender-dependent models. Then, the utterance gender was deter-
mined based on the best global score between the male and female
models (99.0% correct classification).
Both the MLLR and MAP adaptation techniques were applied.
The recognition tests were carried out under mixed conditions (i.e.,
with the adapted acoustic models and the task-dependent LM). The
2In order to assess the quality of the automatic transcription, we
compared the system hypotheses to the manually provided training
transcriptions. For resulting word error rates on the training data
are 11.8% for WSJ, 29.1% for ATIS and 1.2% for TI-digits.
BN models are first adapted using MLLR with a global transforma-
tion, followed by MAP adaptation.
The word error rates obtained with the task-adapted BN mod-
els are given in Table 6 for the four test sets. Using unsupervised
adaptation the performance is improved for TIdigits (53% relative),
WSJ (19% relative) and S9 (7% relative).
The manual transcriptions for the targeted tasks were used to
carry out supervised model adaptation. The results (see the 4th col-
umn of Table 6) show a clear improvement over unsupervisedadap-
tation for both the TI-digits (60% relative) and ATIS (47% relative)
tasks. A smaller gain of about 10% relative is obtained for the spon-
taneous dictation task, and only 3% relative for read WSJ data. The
gain appears to be correlated with the WER of the transcribed data:
the difference between BN and task specific models is smaller for
WSJ than ATIS and TI-digits. The TI-digit task is the only task for
which the best performance is obtained using task-dependent mod-
els rather than BN models adapted with supervised. For the other
tasks, the lowest WER is obtained when the supervised adapted BN
acoustic models are used: 3.2% for ATIS, 6.7% for WSJ and 11.4%
for S9. This result confirms our hypothesis that better performance
can be achieved by adapting generic models with task-specific data
than by directly training task-specific models.
7. CONCLUSIONS
This paper has explored methods to reduce the cost of developing
models for speech recognizers. Two main axes have been explored:
developing generic acoustic models and the use of low cost data for
acoustic model training.
We have explored the genericity of state-of-the-art speech recog-
nition systems, by testing a relatively wide-domain system on data
from three tasks ranging in complexity. The generic models were
taken from the broadcast news task which covers a wide range of
acoustic and linguistic conditions. These acoustic models are rel-
atively task-independent as there is only a small increase in word
error relative to the word error obtained with task-dependent acous-
tic models, when a task-dependent language model is used. There
remains a large difference in performance on the digit recogni-
tion task which can be attributed to the limited phonetic coverage
of this task. On a spontaneous WSJ dictation task, the broadcast
news acoustic and language are more robust to deviations in speak-
ing style than the read-speech WSJ models. We also have shown
that unsupervised acoustic model adaptation can reduce the perfor-
mance gap between task-independent and task-dependent acoustic
models, and that supervised adaptation of generic models can lead
to better performance than that achieved with task-specific models.
Both supervised and unsupervised adaptation are less effective for
the digits task indicating that these may be a special case.
We have investigated the use of low cost data to train acoustic
models for broadcast news transcription, with supervision provided
the language models. Recognition results obtained with acoustic
models trained on large quantities of automatically annotated data
are comparable (under a 10% relative increase in word error) to
results obtained with acoustic models trained on large quantities
of manually annotated data. Given the significantly higher cost of
detailed manual transcription (substantially more time consuming
than producing commercial transcripts, and more expensive since
closed captions and commercial transcripts are produced for other
purposes), such approaches are very promising as they require sub-
stantial computation time, but little manual effort. Another advan-
tage offered by this approach is that there is no need to extend the
pronunciation lexicon to cover all words and word fragments oc-
curring in the training data. By eliminating the need for manual
transcription, automated training can be applied to essentially un-
limited quantities of task-specific training data. While the focus of
our work has been on reducing training costs and task portability,
we have been exploring these in a multi-lingual context.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Adda, M. Jardino, J.L. Gauvain, ?Language Modeling for Broad-
cast News Transcription,? ESCA Eurospeech?99, Budapest, 4, pp.
1759-1760, Sept. 1999.
[2] C. Barras, E. Geoffrois et al,?Transcriber: development and use of a
tool for assisting speech corpora production,? SpeechCommunication,
33(1-2), pp. 5-22, Jan. 2001.
[3] C. Cieri, D. Graff, M. Liberman, ?The TDT-2 Text and Speech
Corpus,? DARPA Broadcast News Workshop, Herndon. (see also
http://morph.ldc.upenn.edu/TDT).
[4] D. Dahl, M. Bates et al, ?Expanding the Scope of the ATIS Task : The
ATIS-3 Corpus,? Proc. ARPA Spoken Language Systems Technology
Workshop, Plainsboro, NJ, pp. 3-8, 1994.
[5] J. Garofolo, C. Auzanne, E. Voorhees, W. Fisher, ?1999 TREC-8 Spo-
ken Document Retrieval Track Overview and Results,? 8th Text Re-
trieval Conference TREC-8, Nov. 1999.
[6] J.L. Gauvain, G. Adda, et al, ?Transcribing Broadcast News: The
LIMSI Nov96 Hub4 System,? Proc. ARPA Speech Recognition Work-
shop, pp. 56-63, Chantilly, Feb. 1997.
[7] J.L. Gauvain, C.H. Lee, ?Maximum a Posteriori Estimation for Mul-
tivariate Gaussian Mixture Observation of Markov Chains,? IEEE
Trans. on SAP, 2(2), pp. 291-298, April 1994.
[8] J.L. Gauvain, L. Lamel, ?Fast Decoding for Indexation of Broadcast
Data,? ICSLP?2000, 3, pp. 794-798, Beijing, Oct. 2000.
[9] D. Graff, ?The 1996 Broadcast News Speech and Language-Model
Corpus,? Proc. DARPA Speech Recognition Workshop, Chantilly, VA,
pp. 11-14, Feb. 1999.
[10] T. Kemp, A. Waibel, ?UnsupervisedTraining of a Speech Recognizer:
Recent Experiments,? Eurospeech?99, 6, Budapest, pp. 2725-2728,
Sept. 1999.
[11] F. Kubala, J. Cohen et al, ?The Hub and Spoke Paradigm for CSR
Evaluation,? Proc. ARPA SpokenLanguageSystems TechnologyWork-
shop, Plainsboro, NJ, pp. 9-14, 1994.
[12] L. Lamel, J.L. Gauvain, G. Adda, ?Lightly Supervised Acoustic
Model Training,? Proc. ISCA ITRW ASR2000, pp. 150-154, Paris,
Sept. 2000.
[13] C.J. Leggetter, P.C. Woodland, ?Maximum likelihood linear regres-
sion for speaker adaptation of continuous density hidden Markov
models,? Computer Speech & Language, 9(2), pp. 171-185, 1995.
[14] R.G. Leonard, ?A Database for speaker-independent digit recogni-
tion,? Proc. ICASSP, 1984.
[15] D.S. Pallett, J.G. Fiscus, et al ?1998 Broadcast News Benchmark Test
Results,? Proc. DARPA Broadcast News Workshop, pp. 5-12, Hern-
don, VA, Feb. 1999.
[16] D. Pallett, J. Fiscus, M. Przybocki, ?Broadcast News 1999 Test Re-
sults,? NIST/NSA Speech Transcription Workshop, College Park, May
2000.
[17] D.B. Paul, J.M. Baker, ?The Design for the Wall Street Journal-based
CSR Corpus,? Proc. ICSLP, Kobe, Nov. 1992.
[18] G. Zavaliagkos, T. Anastsakos et al, ?ImprovedSearch, Acoustic, and
Language Modeling in the BBN BYBLOS Large Vocabulary CSR
Systems,? Proc. ARPA Spoken Language Systems Technology Work-
shop, Plainsboro, NJ, pp. 81-88, 1994.
[19] G. Zavaliagkos, T. Colthurst, ?Utilizing Untranscribed Training Data
to Improve Performance,? DARPA Broadcast News Transcription and
Understanding Workshop, Landsdowne, pp. 301-305, Feb. 1998.
Processing Broadcast Audio for Information Access
Jean-Luc Gauvain, Lori Lamel, Gilles Adda, Martine Adda-Decker,
Claude Barras, Langzhou Chen, and Yannick de Kercadio
Spoken Language Processing Group
LIMSI-CNRS, B.P. 133, 91403 Orsay cedex, France
(gauvain@limsi.fr http://www.limsi.fr/tlp)
Abstract
This paper addresses recent progress in
speaker-independent, large vocabulary,
continuous speech recognition, which
has opened up a wide range of near and
mid-term applications. One rapidly ex-
panding application area is the process-
ing of broadcast audio for information
access. At LIMSI, broadcast news tran-
scription systems have been developed
for English, French, German, Mandarin
and Portuguese, and systems for other
languages are under development. Au-
dio indexation must take into account
the specificities of audio data, such as
needing to deal with the continuous
data stream and an imperfect word tran-
scription. Some near-term applications
areas are audio data mining, selective
dissemination of information and me-
dia monitoring.
1 Introduction
A major advance in speech processing technology
is the ability of todays systems to deal with non-
homogeneous data as is exemplified by broadcast
data. With the rapid expansion of different me-
dia sources, there is a pressing need for automatic
processing of such audio streams. Broadcast au-
dio is challenging as it contains segments of vari-
ous acoustic and linguistic natures, which require
appropriate modeling. A special section in the
Communications of the ACM devoted to ?News
on Demand? (Maybury, 2000) includes contribu-
tions from many of the sites carrying out active
research in this area.
Via speech recognition, spoken document re-
trieval (SDR) can support random access to rel-
evant portions of audio documents, reducing the
time needed to identify recordings in large multi-
media databases. The TREC (Text REtrieval Con-
ference) SDR evaluation showed that only small
differences in information retrieval performance
are observed for automatic and manual transcrip-
tions (Garofolo et al, 2000).
Large vocabulary continuous speech recogni-
tion (LVCSR) is a key technology that can be used
to enable content-based information access in au-
dio and video documents. Since most of the lin-
guistic information is encoded in the audio chan-
nel of video data, which once transcribed can be
accessed using text-based tools. This research has
been carried out in a multilingual environment in
the context of several recent and ongoing Euro-
pean projects. We highlight recent progress in
LVCSR and describe some of our work in de-
veloping a system for processing broadcast au-
dio for information access. The system has two
main components, the speech transcription com-
ponent and the information retrieval component.
Versions of the LIMSI broadcast news transcrip-
tion system have been developed in American En-
glish, French, German, Mandarin and Portuguese.
2 Progress in LVCSR
Substantial advances in speech recognition tech-
nology have been achieved during the last decade.
Only a few years ago speech recognition was pri-
marily associated with small vocabulary isolated
word recognition and with speaker-dependent (of-
ten also domain-specific) dictation systems. The
same core technology serves as the basis for a
range of applications such as voice-interactive
database access or limited-domain dictation, as
well as more demanding tasks such as the tran-
scription of broadcast data. With the exception of
the inherent variability of telephone channels, for
most applications it is reasonable to assume that
the speech is produced in relatively stable envi-
ronmental and in some cases is spoken with the
purpose of being recognized by the machine.
The ability of systems to deal with non-
homogeneous data as is found in broadcast au-
dio (changing speakers, languages, backgrounds,
topics) has been enabled by advances in a vari-
ety of areas including techniques for robust signal
processing and normalization; improved training
techniques which can take advantage of very large
audio and textual corpora; algorithms for audio
segmentation; unsupervised acoustic model adap-
tation; efficient decoding with long span language
models; ability to use much larger vocabularies
than in the past - 64 k words or more is common
to reduce errors due to out-of-vocabulary words.
With the rapid expansion of different media
sources for information dissemination including
via the internet, there is a pressing need for au-
tomatic processing of the audio data stream. The
vast majority of audio and video documents that
are produced and broadcast do not have associ-
ated annotations for indexation and retrieval pur-
poses, and since most of today?s annotation meth-
ods require substantial manual intervention, and
the cost is too large to treat the ever increasing
volume of documents. Broadcast audio is chal-
lenging to process as it contains segments of vari-
ous acoustic and linguistic natures, which require
appropriate modeling. Transcribing such data re-
quires significantly higher processing power than
what is needed to transcribe read speech data
in a controlled environment, such as for speaker
adapted dictation. Although it is usually as-
sumed that processing time is not a major issue
since computer power has been increasing con-
tinuously, it is also known that the amount of data
appearing on information channels is increasing
at a close rate. Therefore processing time is an
important factor in making a speech transcription
system viable for audio data mining and other re-
lated applications. Transcription word error rates
of about 20% have been reported for unrestricted
broadcast news data in several languages.
As shown in Figure 1 the LIMSI broadcast
news transcription system for automatic indexa-
tion consists of an audio partitioner and a speech
recognizer.
3 Audio partitioning
The goal of audio partitioning is to divide the
acoustic signal into homogeneous segments, la-
beling and structuring the acoustic content of the
data, and identifying and removing non-speech
segments. The LIMSI BN audio partitioner re-
lies on an audio stream mixture model (Gauvain
et al, 1998). While it is possible to transcribe the
continuous stream of audio data without any prior
segmentation, partitioning offers several advan-
tages over this straight-forward solution. First,
in addition to the transcription of what was said,
other interesting information can be extracted
such as the division into speaker turns and the
speaker identities, and background acoustic con-
ditions. This information can be used both di-
rectly and indirectly for indexation and retrieval
purposes. Second, by clustering segments from
the same speaker, acoustic model adaptation can
be carried out on a per cluster basis, as opposed
to on a single segment basis, thus providing more
adaptation data. Third, prior segmentation can
avoid problems caused by linguistic discontinu-
ity at speaker changes. Fourth, by using acoustic
models trained on particular acoustic conditions
(such as wide-band or telephone band), overall
performance can be significantly improved. Fi-
nally, eliminating non-speech segments substan-
tially reduces the computation time. The result
of the partitioning process is a set of speech seg-
ments usually corresponding to speaker turns with
speaker, gender and telephone/wide-band labels
(see Figure 2).
4 Transcription of Broadcast News
For each speech segment, the word recognizer de-
termines the sequence of words in the segment,
associating start and end times and an optional
confidence measure with each word. The LIMSI
system, in common with most of today?s state-of-
the-art systems, makes use of statistical models
of speech generation. From this point of view,
message generation is represented by a language
model which provides an estimate of the probabil-
ity of any given word string, and the encoding of
the message in the acoustic signal is represented
by a probability density function. The speaker-
independent 65k word, continuous speech rec-
ognizer makes use of 4-gram statistics for lan-
guage modeling and of continuous density hidden
Markov models (HMMs) with Gaussian mixtures
for acoustic modeling. Each word is represented
by one or more sequences of context-dependent
phone models as determined by its pronunciation.
The acoustic and language models are trained on
large, representative corpora for each task and
language.
Processing time is an important factor in mak-
ing a speech transcription system viable for au-
tomatic indexation of radio and television broad-
casts. For many applications there are limita-
tions on the response time and the available com-
putational resources, which in turn can signifi-
cantly affect the design of the acoustic and lan-
guage models. Word recognition is carried out in
one or more decoding passes with more accurate
acoustic and language models used in successive
passes. A 4-gram single pass dynamic network
decoder has been developed (Gauvain and Lamel,
2000) which can achieve faster than real-time de-
coding with a word error under 30%, running in
less than 100 Mb of memory on widely available
platforms such Pentium III or Alpha machines.
5 Multilinguality
A characteristic of the broadcast news domain is
that, at least for what concerns major news events,
similar topics are simultaneously covered in dif-
ferent emissions and in different countries and
languages. Automatic processing carried out on
contemporaneous data sources in different lan-
guages can serve for multi-lingual indexation and
retrieval. Multilinguality is thus of particular in-
terest for media watch applications, where news
may first break in another country or language.
At LIMSI broadcast news transcription systems
have been developed for the American English,
French, German, Mandarin and Portuguese lan-
guages. The Mandarin language was chosen be-
cause it is quite different from the other lan-
guages (tone and syllable-based), and Mandarin
resources are available via the LDC as well as ref-
erence performance results.
Our system and other state-of-the-art sys-
tems can transcribe unrestricted American En-
glish broadcast news data with word error rates
under 20%. Our transcription systems for French
and German have comparable error rates for news
broadcasts (Adda-Decker et al, 2000). The
character error rate for Mandarin is also about
20% (Chen et al, 2000). Based on our expe-
rience, it appears that with appropriately trained
models, recognizer performance is more depen-
dent upon the type and source of data, than on the
language. For example, documentaries are partic-
ularly challenging to transcribe, as the audio qual-
ity is often not very high, and there is a large pro-
portion of voice over.
6 Spoken Document Retrieval
The automatically generated partition and word
transcription can be used for indexation and in-
formation retrieval purposes. Techniques com-
monly applied to automatic text indexation can
be applied to the automatic transcriptions of the
broadcast news radio and TV documents. These
techniques are based on document term frequen-
cies, where the terms are obtained after standard
text processing, such as text normalization, tok-
enization, stopping and stemming. Most of these
preprocessing steps are the same as those used to
prepare the texts for training the speech recog-
nizer language models. While this offers advan-
tages for speech recognition, it can lead to IR er-
rors. For better IR results, some words sequences
corresponding to acronymns, multiword named-
entities (e.g. Los Angeles), and words preceded
by some particular prefixes (anti, co, bi, counter)
are rewritten as a single word. Stemming is used
to reduce the number of lexical items for a given
word sense. The stemming lexicon contains about
32000 entries and was constructed using Porter?s
algorithm (Porter80, 1980) on the most frequent
words in the collection, and then manually cor-
rected.
The information retrieval system relies on a un-
Lexicon
Acoustic models
Recognition
Word
Audio signal
Language model
Analysis
Acoustic
partitioned
speech acoustic models
Music, noise and
non speech
Filter out
segments
telephone/non-tel models
word transcription
(SGML file)data
Male/female models
Iterative 
segmentation 
and labelling
Figure 1: Overview of an audio transcription system. The audio partitioner divides the data stream into
homogeneous acoustic segments, removing non-speech portions. The word recognizer identifies the
words in each speech segment, associating time-markers with each word.
 
audiofile filename=19980411 1600 1630 CNN HDL language=english 
 
segment type=wideband gender=female spkr=1 stime=50.25 etime=86.83 
 
wtime stime=50.38 etime=50.77  c.n.n.
 
wtime stime=50.77 etime=51.10  headline
 
wtime stime=51.10 etime=51.44  news
 
wtime stime=51.44 etime=51.63  i?m
 
wtime stime=51.63 etime=51.92  robert
 
wtime stime=51.92 etime=52.46  johnson
it is a day of final farewells in alabama the first funerals for victims of this week?s tornadoes are being held today along
with causing massive property damage the twisters killed thirty three people in alabama five in georgia and one each
in mississippi and north carolina the national weather service says the tornado that hit jefferson county in alabama had
winds of more than two hundred sixty miles per hour authorities speculated was the most powerful tornado ever to hit the
southeast twisters destroyed two churches to fire stations and a school parishioners were in one church when the tornado
struck
  /segment 
 
segment type=wideband gender=female spkr=2 stime=88.37 etime=104.86 
at one point when the table came onto my back i thought yes this is it i?m ready ready protects protect the children because
the children screaming the children were screaming they were screaming in prayer that were screaming god help us
  /segment 
 
segment type=wideband gender=female spkr=1 stime=104.86 etime=132.37 
vice president al gore toured the area yesterday he called it the worst tornado devastation he?s ever seen we will have a
complete look at the weather across the u. s. in our extended weather forecast in six minutes
  /segment 
. . .
 
segment type=wideband gender=male spkr=19 stime=1635.60 etime=1645.71 
so if their computing systems don?t tackle this problem well we have a potential business disruption and either erroneous
deliveries or misdeliveries or whatever savvy businesses are preparing now so the january first two thousand would just be
another day on the town not a day when fast food and everything else slows down rick lockridge c.n.n.
  /segment 
  /audiofile 
Figure 2: Example system output obtained by automatic processing of the audio stream of a CNN show
broadcasted on April 11, 1998 at 4pm. The output includes the partitioning and transcription results. To
improve readability, word time stamps are given only for the first 6 words. Non speech segments have
been removed and the following information is provided for each speech segment: signal bandwidth
(telephone or wideband), speaker gender, and speaker identity (within the show).
Transcriptions Werr Base BRF
Closed-captions - 46.9% 54.3%
10xRT 20.5% 45.3% 53.9%
1.4xRT 32.6% 40.9% 49.4%
Table 1: Impact of the word error rate on the
mean average precision using using a 1-gram doc-
ument model. The document collection contains
557 hours of broadcast news from the period of
February through June 1998. (21750 stories, 50
queries with the associated relevance judgments.)
igram model per story. The score of a story is ob-
tained by summing the query term weights which
are simply the log probabilities of the terms given
the story model once interpolated with a general
English model. This term weighting has been
shown to perform as well as the popular TF  IDF
weighting scheme (Hiemstra and Wessel, 1998;
Miller et al, 1998; Ng, 1999; Spa?rk Jones et al,
1998).
The text of the query may or may not include
the index terms associated with relevant docu-
ments. One way to cope with this problem is to
use query expansion (Blind Relevance Feedback,
BRF (Walker and de Vere, 1990)) based on terms
present in retrieved contemporary texts.
The system was evaluated in the TREC SDR
track, with known story boundaries. The SDR
data collection contains 557 hours of broadcast
news from the period of February through June
1998. This data includes 21750 stories and a set
of 50 queries with the associated relevance judg-
ments (Garofolo et al, 2000).
In order to assess the effect of the recogni-
tion time on the information retrieval results we
transcribed the 557 hours of broadcast news data
using two decoder configurations: a single pass
1.4xRT system and a three pass 10xRT system.
The word error rates are measured on a 10h test
subset (Garofolo et al, 2000). The information
retrieval results are given in terms of mean av-
erage precision (MAP), as is done for the TREC
benchmarks in Table 1 with and without query ex-
pansion. For comparison, results are also given
for manually produced closed captions. With
query expansion comparable IR results are ob-
tained using the closed captions and the 10xRT
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Pe
rc
en
ta
ge
 o
f s
ec
tio
ns
Number of speaker turns
Figure 3: Histogram of the number of speaker
turns per section in 100 hours of audio data from
radio and TV sources (NPR, ABC, CNN, CSPAN)
from May-June 1996.
transcriptions, and a moderate degradation (4%
absolute) is observed using the 1.4xRT transcrip-
tions.
7 Locating Story Boundaries
The broadcast news transcription system also pro-
vides non-lexical information along with the word
transcription. This information is available in
the partition of the audio track, which identifies
speaker turns. It is interesting to see whether or
not such information can be used to help locate
story boundaries, since in the general case these
are not known. Statistics were made on 100 hours
of radio and television broadcast news with man-
ual transcriptions including the speaker identities.
Of the 2096 sections manually marked as reports
(considered stories), 40% start without a manu-
ally annotated speaker change. This means that
using only speaker change information for detect-
ing document boundaries would miss 40% of the
boundaries. With automatically detected speaker
changes, the number of missed boundaries would
certainly increase. At the same time, 11,160 of
the 12,439 speaker turns occur in the middle of a
document, resulting in a false alarm rate of almost
90%. A more detailed analysis shows that about
50% of the sections involve a single speaker, but
that the distribution of the number of speaker
turns per section falls off very gradually (see Fig-
ure 3). False alarms are not as harmful as missed
detections, since it may be possible to merge ad-
jacent turns into a single document in subsequent
processing. These results show that even perfect
00.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
0 30 60 90 120 150 180 210 240 270 300
D
en
si
ty

Duration (seconds)
1997 Hub-4
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0 30 60 90 120 150 180 210 240 270 300
D
en
si
ty

Duration (seconds)
TREC-9 SDR Corpus
Figure 4: Distribution of document durations for
100 hours of data from May-June 1996 (top) and
for 557 hours from February-June 1998 (bottom).
speaker turn boundaries cannot be used as the pri-
mary cue for locating document boundaries. They
can, however, be used to refine the placement
of a document boundary located near a speaker
change.
We also investigated using simple statistics on
the durations of the documents. A histogram of
the 2096 sections is shown in Figure 4. One
third of the sections are shorter than 30 seconds.
The histogram has a bimodal distribution with a
sharp peak around 20 seconds, and a smaller, flat
peak around 2 minutes. Very short documents
are typical of headlines which are uttered by sin-
gle speaker, whereas longer documents are more
likely to contain data from multiple talkers. This
distribution led us to consider using a multi-scale
segmentation of the audio stream into documents.
Similar statistics were measured on the larger cor-
pus (Figure 4 bottom).
As proposed in (Abberley et al, 1999; John-
son et al, 1999), we segment the audio stream
into overlapping documents of a fixed duration.
As a result of optimization, we chose a 30 sec-
ond window duration with a 15 second overlap.
Since there are many stories significantly shorter
than 30s in broadcast shows (see Figure 4) we
conjunctured that it may be of interest to use a
double windowing system in order to better tar-
get short stories (Gauvain et al, 2000). The win-
dow size of the smaller window was selected to
be 10 seconds. So for each query, we indepen-
dently retrieved two sets of documents, one set
for each window size. Then for each document
set, document recombination is done by merging
overlapping documents until no further merges
are possible. The score of a combined document
is set to maximum score of any one of the com-
ponents. For each document derived from the
30s windows, we produce a time stamp located
at the center point of the document. However,
if any smaller documents are embedded in this
document, we take the center of the best scor-
ing document. This way we try to take advantage
of both window sizes. The MAP using a single
30s window and the double windowing strategy
are shown in Table 2. For comparison, the IR re-
sults using the manual story segmentation and the
speaker turns located by the audio partitioner are
also given. All conditions use the same word hy-
potheses obtained with a speech recognizer which
had no knowledge about the story boundaries.
manual segmentation (NIST) 59.6%
audio partitioner 33.3%
single window (30s) 50.0%
double window 52.3%
Table 2: Mean average precision with manual and
automatically determined story boundaries. The
document collection contains 557 hours of broad-
cast news from the period of February through
June 1998. (21750 stories, 50 queries with the
associated relevance judgments.)
From these results we can clearly see the inter-
est of using a search engine specifically designed
to retrieve stories in the audio stream. Using an
a priori acoustic segmentation, the mean aver-
age precision is significantly reduced compared
to a ?perfect? manual segmentation, whereas the
window-based search engine results are much
closer. Note that in the manual segmentation all
non-story segments such as advertising have been
removed. This reduces the risk of having out-of-
topic hits and explains part of the difference be-
tween this condition and the other conditions.
The problem of locating story boundaries is be-
ing further pursued in the context of the ALERT
project, where one of the goals is to identify ?doc-
uments? given topic profiles. This project is in-
vestigating the combined use of audio and video
segmentation to more accurately locate document
boundaries in the continuous data stream.
8 Recent Research Projects
The work presented in this paper has benefited
from a variety of research projects both at the Eu-
ropean and National levels. These collaborative
efforts have enabled access to real-world data al-
lowing us to develop algorithms and models well-
suited for near-term applications.
The European project LE-4 OLIVE: A
Multilingual Indexing Tool for Broadcast
Material Based on Speech Recognition
(http://twentyone.tpd.tno.nl/ olive/) addressed
methods to automate the disclosure of the infor-
mation content of broadcast data thus allowing
content-based indexation. Speech recognition
was used to produce a time-linked transcript of
the audio channel of a broadcast, which was then
used to produce a concept index for retrieval.
Broadcast news transcription systems for French
and German were developed. The French data
come from a variety of television news shows and
radio stations. The German data consist of TV
news and documentaries from ARTE. OLIVE also
developed tools for users to query the database,
as well as cross-lingual access based on off-line
machine translation of the archived documents,
and online query translation.
The European project IST ALERT: Alert sys-
tem for selective dissemination (http://www.fb9-
ti.uni-duisburg.de/alert) aims to associate state-
of-the-art speech recognition with audio and
video segmentation and automatic topic index-
ing to develop an automatic media monitoring
demonstrator and evaluate it in the context of real
world applications. The targeted languages are
French, German and Portuguese. Major media-
monitoring companies in Europe are participating
in this project.
Two other related FP5 IST projects are: CORE-
TEX: Improving Core Speech Recognition Tech-
nology and ECHO: European CHronicles On-
line. CORETEX (http://coretex.itc.it/), aims at
improving core speech recognition technologies,
which are central to most applications involv-
ing voice technology. In particular the project
addresses the development of generic speech
recognition technology and methods to rapidly
port technology to new domains and languages
with limited supervision, and to produce en-
riched symbolic speech transcriptions. The ECHO
project (http://pc-erato2.iei.pi.cnr.it/echo) aims to
develop an infrastructure for access to histori-
cal films belonging to large national audiovisual
archives. The project will integrate state-of-the-
art language technologies for indexing, searching
and retrieval, cross-language retrieval capabilities
and automatic film summary creation.
9 Conclusions
This paper has described some of the ongoing re-
search activites at LIMSI in automatic transcrip-
tion and indexation of broadcast data. Much of
this research, which is at the forefront of todays
technology, is carried out with partners with real
needs for advanced audio processing technolo-
gies.
Automatic speech recognition is a key tech-
nology for audio and video indexing. Most of
the linguistic information is encoded in the au-
dio channel of video data, which once transcribed
can be accessed using text-based tools. This is in
contrast to the image data for which no common
description language is widely adpoted. A va-
riety of near-term applications are possible such
as audio data mining, selective dissemination of
information (News-on-Demand), media monitor-
ing, content-based audio and video retrieval.
It appears that with word error rates on the
order of 20%, comparable IR results to those
obtained on text data can be achieved. Even
with higher word error rates obtained by run-
ning a faster transcription system or by transcrib-
ing compressed audio data (Barras et al, 2000;
J.M. Van Thong et al, 2000) (such as that can be
loaded over the Internet), the IR performance re-
mains quite good.
Acknowledgments
This work has been partially financed by the Eu-
ropean Commission and the French Ministry of
Defense. The authors thank Jean-Jacques Gan-
golf, Sylvia Hermier and Patrick Paroubek for
their participation in the development of differ-
ent aspects of the automatic indexation system de-
scribed here.
References
Dave Abberley, Steve Renals, Dan Ellis and Tony
Robinson, ?The THISL SDR System at TREC-8?,
Proc. of the 8th Text Retrieval Conference TREC-8,
Nov 1999.
Martine Adda-Decker, Gilles Adda, Lori Lamel, ?In-
vestigating text normalization and pronunciation
variants for German broadcast transcription,? Proc.
ICSLP?2000, Beijing, China, October 2000.
Claude Barras, Lori Lamel, Jean-Luc Gauvain, ?Auto-
matic Transcription of Compressed Broadcast Au-
dio Proc. ICASSP?2001, Salt Lake City, May 2001.
Langzhou Chen, Lori Lamel, Gilles Adda and Jean-
Luc Gauvain, ?Broadcast News Transcription in
Mandarin,? Proc. ICSLP?2000, Beijing, China, Oc-
tober 2000.
John S. Garofolo, Cedric G.P. Auzanne, and Ellen
M. Voorhees, ?The TREC Spoken Document Re-
trieval Track: A Success Story,? Proc. of the 6th
RIAO Conference, Paris, April 2000. Also John
S. Garofolo et al, ?1999 Trec-8 Spoken Docu-
ment Retrieval Track Overview and Results,? Proc.
8th Text Retrieval Conference TREC-8, Nov 1999.
(http://trec.nist.gov).
Jean-Luc Gauvain, Lori Lamel, ?Fast Decoding for
Indexation of Broadcast Data,? Proc. ICSLP?2000,
3:794-798, Oct 2000.
Jean-Luc Gauvain, Lori Lamel, Gilles Adda, ?Parti-
tioning and Transcription of Broadcast News Data,?
ICSLP?98, 5, pp. 1335-1338, Dec. 1998.
Jean-Luc Gauvain, Lori Lamel, Claude Barras, Gilles
Adda, Yannick de Kercadio ?The LIMSI SDR sys-
tem for TREC-9,? Proc. of the 9th Text Retrieval
Conference TREC-9, Nov 2000.
Alexander G. Hauptmann and Michael J. Witbrock,
?Informedia: News-on-Demand Multimedia Infor-
mation Acquisition and Retrieval,? Proc Intelli-
gent Multimedia Information Retrieval, M. May-
bury, ed., AAAI Press, pp. 213-239, 1997.
Djoerd Hiemstra, Wessel Kraaij, ?Twenty-One at
TREC-7: Ad-hoc and Cross-language track,? Proc.
of the 8th Text Retrieval Conference TREC-7, Nov
1998.
Sue E. Johnson, Pierre Jourlin, Karen Spa?rck Jones,
Phil C. Woodland, ?Spoken Document Retrieval for
TREC-8 at Cambridge University?, Proc. of the 8th
Text Retrieval Conference TREC-8, Nov 1999.
Mark Maybury, ed., Special Section on ?News on De-
mand?, Communications of the ACM, 43(2), Feb
2000.
David Miller, Tim Leek, Richard Schwartz, ?Using
Hidden Markov Models for Information Retrieval?,
Proc. of the 8th Text Retrieval Conference TREC-7,
Nov 1998.
Kenney Ng, ?A Maximum Likelihood Ratio Informa-
tion Retrieval Model,? Proc. of the 8th Text Re-
trieval Conference TREC-8, 413-435, Nov 1999.
M. F. Porter, ?An algorithm for suffix stripping?, Pro-
gram, 14, pp. 130?137, 1980.
Karen Spa?rk Jones, S. Walker, Stephen E. Robert-
son, ?A probabilistic model of information retrieval:
development and status,? Technical Report of the
Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge,
U.K., 1998.
J.M. Van Thong, David Goddeau, Anna Litvi-
nova, Beth Logan, Pedro Moreno, Michael Swain,
?SpeechBot: a Speech Recognition based Audio In-
dexing System for the Web?, Proc. of the 6th RIAO
Conference, Paris, April 2000.
S. Walker, R. de Vere, ?Improving subject retrieval in
online catalogues: 2. Relevance feedback and query
expansion?, British Library Research Paper 72,
British Library, London, U.K., 1990.
JEP-TALN-RECITAL 2012, Atelier TALAf 2012: Traitement Automatique des Langues Africaines, pages 1?12,
Grenoble, 4 au 8 juin 2012. c?2012 ATALA & AFCP
Mbochi : corpus oral, traitement automatique et exploration phonologique  Annie Rialland 1, Martial Embanga Aborobongui 1, Martine Adda-Decker1, 2, Lori Lamel2.  (1) LPP, UMR 7018, 19, rue des Bernardins 75005 Paris  (2) LIMSI, UPR 3251, b?t. 508, rue John von Neumann, 91403, Orsay  annie.rialland@univ-paris3.fr, aborobongui@yahoo.fr, {madda,lamel}@limsi.fr RESUME ____________________________________________________________________________________________________________  !Nous d?crivons la constitution d?un corpus oral en langue mbochi, une des langues bantoues parl?es au Congo-Brazzaville, catalogu?e comme C25 dans le riche inventaire de ces langues. Le mat?riel enregistr? comprend dans un premier temps de la lecture de contes de tradition orale, transcrits par un des co-auteurs, natif de la langue. Un deuxi?me volet incluant de la parole radiophonique est pr?vu. Le corpus a ?t? ensuite align? automatiquement en mots et en segments phon?miques, permettant des ?tudes acoustico-phon?tiques et phonologiques ? grande ?chelle. Il permettra ? terme d?envisager la mise au point d?un syst?me de transcription automatique pour cette langue sous-dot?e. Dans l?imm?diat, les ressources nous permettent de pr?senter une description de la langue et d??tudier des processus phonologiques entra?nant des ?lisions de voyelles ? la fronti?re de mots. Le corpus cr??, permettant de documenter le mbochi et d?am?liorer sa visibilit? sur la toile, pourra ?tre mis ? disposition d?autres chercheurs. Abstract  Mbochi: oral corpus, automatic processing & phonological mining  This contribution describes ongoing research on Mbochi, a Bantu C language spoken by more than 100000 native speakers in Congo-Brazzaville. A first oral corpus has been collected as read speech corresponding to 3 folktales. It has been transcribed by one of the co-authors and it will be extended to radio broadcasts. The corpus is aligned automatically into words and phonemic segments, allowing acoustic-phonetic and phonological studies on a large scale. It is providing the first step towards an automatic transcription system for this under-resourced language. Currently, these resources allow us to improve the description of the language and to improve our knowledge of the nature and conditions of phonological processes such as vowel elision with or without compensatory lengthening at word junctions. The corpus which will contribute to the documentation of Mbochi and its visibility on the web, will be made available to other researchers. MOTS-CLES : mbochi, alignement automatique, ?lision vocalique, dissimilation consonantique.  KEYWORDS : Mbochi, automatic alignment, vowel elision, consonantal dissimilation 
1
1 Introduction Le mbochi (ou "mb!"s?, son nom dans la langue m?me) est une langue sans standard d??criture, sous-dot?e en termes de ressources, qu?elles soient ?lectroniques ou non. Le but de notre travail est de commencer ? combler cette lacune en constituant un corpus align? automatiquement. L?alignement automatique a d? ?tre adapt? ? des caract?ristiques du mbochi, en particulier, ? ses processus d??lision vocalique qui g?n?rent de nombreuses variantes de mots. L?article pr?sentera cette adaptation avec des r?sultats quantifi?s. Il montrera ?galement comment ces corpus annot?s peuvent devenir des outils permettant de documenter ? grande ?chelle les contextes d?occurrence de processus phonologiques. La langue et ses principales r?gles phonologiques seront d?abord pr?sent?es avant d?aborder la partie exp?rimentale.  2 Pr?sentation de la langue mbochi Le mbochi est une langue bantoue du groupe C, appartenant au sous-groupe mbochi et r?pertori?e comme C 25 dans la classification de  Guthrie (1967-1970). Elle comporte plusieurs dialectes, en particulier le dialecte de Boundji qui retiendra plus particuli?rement notre attention dans la pr?sente ?tude. 2.1 Situation et statut de la langue Le mbochi est principalement parl?e dans le Nord du Congo-Brazzaville, en terre mbochi situ?e dans la r?gion de la cuvette Ouest, mais aussi dans les grandes villes et dans la diaspora. Le nombre de locuteurs de la langue en terre mbochi ?tait estim? ? 108 000 en 2000 d?apr?s le site Ethnologue (http://www.ethnologue.com), chiffre reconnu comme tr?s approximatif.  Le mbochi est une langue qui n?a pas de forme d??criture officielle et qui a ?t? tr?s peu ?crite. Les documents ?crits en mbochi, avec des notations qui sont propres ? chaque auteur ou groupe d?auteurs, sont tr?s peu nombreux : on trouve un recueil de contes (Ob?nga, 1984), des brochures (par la SIL CONGO, en particulier), des textes peu diffus?s pour l??ducation religieuse. La Bible n?est pas disponible en mbochi. La langue ?crite utilis?e dans la r?gion est le fran?ais, qui est la langue de l??ducation et la langue officielle du Congo-Brazzaville. Actuellement, il n?y a pas de projet pour donner une forme ?crite officielle au mbochi ni pour l?utiliser dans l??ducation. Boundji, sous-pr?fecture de la r?gion de la Cuvette, a depuis 2009 une cha?ne de radio-t?l?vision ALIMA FM. Cette cha?ne a un rayon d??mission de 50 km et couvre 32 villages de la sous-pr?fecture de Boundji. Elle diffuse des informations ? la fois locales et internationales ainsi que diverses ?missions en fran?ais, en lingala et dans les deux langues de la r?gion : le mbochi et le teke lima. Cette nouvelle cha?ne commence ? jouer un r?le important dans la revitalisation des langues et des cultures de la r?gion, dans la red?couverte des contes, des chants traditionnels qui n??taient plus chant?s que par les personnes ?g?es dans les r?unions familiales ainsi que des traditions musicales.   
2
Par ailleurs, on note que les t?l?phones portables sont tr?s r?pandus et que les SMS sont ?crits en fran?ais.  Ainsi, ? ce jour, le mbochi est fondamentalement une langue non ?crite, dont les formes orales commencent ? b?n?ficier du soutien d?une diffusion par de nouvelles techniques de communication.  2.2 Principales ?tudes sur le mbochi Un certain nombre de travaux ont port? sur le mbochi, en particulier : Ollassa 1969, Ob?nga 1976, 1984, Fontaney 1988, 1989, Ndinga Oba 2003, 2004, Leitch 1997, Amboulou 1998, Bedrosian 1998,  Chatfield 1999, Beltzung & al 2010, Embanga Aborobongui & al 2011, Embanga Aborobongui & al (sous presse). Le plus complet est actuellement la th?se  d?Amboulou (1998) qui pr?sente une description d?ensemble d?un des dialectes, le dialecte olee. Des questions plus sp?cifiques ont ?t? approfondies par divers auteurs : ainsi, les processus d?harmonie vocalique se sont trouv?s mieux compris gr?ce ? l??tude de Leich (1997), qui a montr? que le trait actif ?tait le trait RTR. Les processus tonals, quant ? eux, ont ?t? ?clair?s par Embanga Aborobongui et al (sous presse) qui ont d?gag? le r?le central d?une contrainte d??vitement de contour dans les modifications tonales observ?es. 2.3 Principales caract?ristiques phonologiques du mbochi Les syllabes possibles en mbochi sont de la forme : CV, CVV, V ou VV. Comme la plupart des langues bantoues, le mbochi n?a pas de syllabes ferm?es, c?est ? dire se terminant par une consonne. Le mbochi a un syst?me vocalique comportant 7 voyelles,  qui peuvent ?tre analys?es selon les traits : [haut], [rond], [bas] et [RTR]. ?  ? i ? e ? ! ? a ? " ? o ? u ? Haut ? * ?  ?  ?  ?  ?  ? * ? Rond ?  ?  ?  ?  ? * ? * ? * ? Bas ?  ?  ?  ? * ?  ?  ?  ? RTR ?  ?  ? * ? * ? * ?  ?  TABLE 1.  Les voyelles du mbochi Les traits [RTR] (Retracted Tongue Root) et [Rond] sont actifs dans les harmonies vocaliques (voir Leich, 1997). Chaque voyelle a un pendant long, qui correspond ? deux mores vocaliques et est not? en doublant la voyelle (aa pour a long, par exemple).   
3
  Le mbochi compte 24 consonnes, pr?sent?es dans le tableau ci-dessous :  Bilabiales Labiodentales Alv?olaires Alv?opalatales et palatales V?laires Occlusives p           b  pf           bv   t               d ts              dz k Pr?-nasalis?e           mb             mbv               nd                ndz ng Nasales           m                  n                   # $ Fricatives  f  s  Approximantes %  r/l   
Semi-voyelles w   y  TABLE 2.  Les consonnes du mbochi Les points marquants du syst?me sont : la s?rie de pr?nasalis?es, la pr?sence d?un ! dans le syst?me ? c?t? d?un b, le grand nombre de consonnes labiales et l?absence de g.  Par ailleurs, le mbochi poss?de deux tons : un ton haut et un ton bas. Chaque ton est port? par une more et toute more porte un ton. Une contrainte absolue interdit tout contour sur une more et d?clenche des processus permettant d??viter toute configuration non conforme, en particulier, ? la suite de l??lision de voyelle (voir Embanga Aborobongui et al, sous presse).  Le mbochi pr?sente des r?gles de dissimilation consonantique et d??lision vocalique tr?s productives. Les r?gles de dissimilation consonantique concernent les pr?fixes de forme CV pr?c?dant les noms (pr?fixes de classe) et les verbes (marqueurs personnels). La dissimilation est totale dans le sens o? la consonne tombe lorsque le pr?fixe pr?c?de une racine commen?ant par une consonne. Cette r?gle g?n?re un ensemble d?allomorphes : ainsi le pr?fixe de la classe 2 ba- appara?t-il sous la forme b(a) devant une racine qui commence par une voyelle et sous la forme a devant une racine commen?ant par une consonne. Les exemples suivants illustrent cette alternance : 1. ba+?s?   & b-?s?   ? ?pouses ? 2.   ba+?na  & b-?na  ? enfants ?             3.   ba+kondzi   & a-kondzi ? chefs ?             4.   ba+ k ?su   ? a-k?su  ? tortues ? (voir Beltzung et al 2010)  
4
Le processus de dissimilation ne s?accompagne pas d?une disparition totale de la consonne : elle laisse une trace, une position consonantique qui entra?ne la formation d?une voyelle longue dans certains contextes (voir ex. 7 et 8). Cette consonne, qu?on peut dire ? flottante ? sera not?e entre parenth?ses. Des processus d??lision vocalique se produisent r?guli?rement ? la rencontre de deux mots phonologiques (c?est ? dire de l?ensemble : mot +clitiques) lorsque le premier mot phonologique (MP) se termine par une voyelle et le deuxi?me commence par une voyelle. Dans le cas g?n?ral (en l?absence de consonne flottante et en dehors de la suite a+i), la derni?re voyelle (ou la derni?re more) du premier MP tombe. Exemples : 5. oy?lal?mbi (m) o -y?lu        ?-l?mb-i   Cl1.femme  Cl1.Pas-cuisiner-R?cent  ? La femme a cuisin?. ?  6.  okondz?s"ri (m)o-kondzi  ?-s"r-i Cl1.chef  Cl1.Pas-dire-R?cent ? Le chef a dit. ? Lorsque a et un i viennent en contact, il y a optionnellement une coalescence, r?sultant en la formation d?une voyelle interm?diaire e ou ! (en fonction de l?harmonie vocalique avec la voyelle suivante). Les consonnes flottantes interviennent dans ces processus d??lision, engendrant la formation de voyelles longues, comme l?illustrent les exemples suivants : 7.   ay?laal?mbi  (b)a-y?lu       (b)?-l?mb-i   Cl2.femme  Cl2.Pas-cuisiner-R?cent  ? Les femmes ont cuisin?. ?   8.  akondza?s"ri (b)a-kondzi  ( b ) ? -s"r-i Cl2.chef  Cl2.Pas-dire-R?cent ? Les chefs ont dit. ?  Les voyelles longues r?sultent d?un allongement compensatoire, dans la mesure o? la voyelle suivante s?est allong?e pour compenser la perte de la premi?re voyelle. La pr?sence de la consonne flottante a pour effet de maintenir la more de la premi?re voyelle et de la prot?ger de l??lision. Ajoutons que des m?canismes de restructuration tonale sont associ?s ? ces processus d??lision. Ces divers m?canismes tonals et segmentaux sont en cours d??tude par M. Embanga Aborobongui (en pr?paration).  
5
 3 Corpus et m?thodes L??tude se situe dans la ligne d??tudes pr?c?dentes sur des langues africaines sous dot?es, fond?es sur des corpus oraux et utilisant une proc?dure d?alignement automatique originellement d?velopp?e pour des langues ? bien dot?es ? (A. Sharma Grover & al. 2010, Gelas & al. 2010). Corpus Le corpus utilis? dans cette ?tude repose sur la lecture de contes traditionnels, une des rares oeuvres transcrites de langue mbochi (Obenga 1984).  Ces contes ont ?t? lus par un locuteur natif. La pr?sente ?tude se limite a trois de ces contes: nd?ng? y? di? ts!"si "mw!n!"  ?Le li?vre et l??l?phant?, !b!"! b? la "n""  ? La main et la bouche ? et  Lek? ?ya? la ay?lu  ?La mort et la femme? d?une dur?e totale de 10 minutes.   Pour ces trois contes, une transcription manuelle avec notation des consonnes flottantes entre parenth?ses a ?t? effectu?e.   Le tableau 3 donne une description du corpus en termes de phon?mes et de mots (types et tokens) inclus dans le corpus, de nombre de jonctions de mots avec deux voyelles venant en contact (V1#V2) ou deux voyelles et consonne flottante (V1#CflottV2):   tokens types  total phon?mes total voyelles total consonnes total labiales (hors w) total /%/ total /b/ 
4035 2438 1597   514   197   128 
30   7 23   6   1   1 
   /%,b,m,mb,bv,mbv/    total mots 1348 460  tot. contextes V1#V2 tot. contextesV1#CflottV2   386   198   -   -   TABLE 3 ? Description du corpus CONTESOBENGA en termes de phon?mes (avec focus sur les labiales) et mots lexicaux (types et leurs occurrences dans le corpus=tokens), nombre de contextes V1#V2 et V1#CflottV2.  Syst?me d?alignement automatique ? partir du fran?ais                            Afin de pouvoir rechercher et ?couter des mots ou des r?alisations de s?quences de phon?mes mbochi sp?cifiques dans le signal, nous avons align? notre corpus par alignement automatique en adaptant le syst?me de reconnaissance du LIMSI (Gauvain et al2005). Ce syst?me, d?velopp? pour le fran?ais, n?a que tr?s peu ?t? modifi? pour traiter la langue mbochi. Des mod?les acoustiques du fran?ais (ind?pendants du contexte) ont ?t? utilis?s pour emprunter ou initialiser des mod?les acoustiques mbochi. Nous rappelons ici rapidement les ?tapes essentielles pour traiter le mbochi:  1. d?finir un transcodage entre inventaires phon?miques fran?ais et mbochi afin 
6
d??tablir une correspondance entre mbochi et fran?ais en s?appuyant sur les correspondances IPA. La bilabiale /%/ a ?t? mod?lis?e par le /w/ fran?ais et la nasale /ng/ comme s?quence /n/ et /g/. 2. emprunter des mod?les acoustiques ? partir de mod?les existants d?une autre langue (fran?ais). Les mod?les acoustiques du fran?ais servent ainsi comme approximation des  sons en mbochi. Les consonnes complexes telles que /mbv/ ont ?t? d?compos?es pour ?tre mod?lis?es comme concat?nation (/m/, /b/ et /v/ fran?ais pour /mbv/). Nous sommes conscients que cette mani?re de proc?der augmente la topologie des mod?les des sons complexes mbochi et ne correspond certainement pas au mieux au d?cours temporels de ces sons. 3. cr?er un vocabulaire pour la langue mbochi (une liste de mots). Notre vocabulaire se limite aux mots pr?sents dans les transcriptions du corpus enregistr?. 4. cr?er un dictionnaire de prononciation. La correspondance graph?me-phon?me est transparente. Nous avons ?crit un script PERL qui transforme les graph?mes (lettres accentu?es indiquant les tons) en phon?mes (correspondant essentiellement ? la m?me lettre sans accent). Les tons n?ont pas ?t? cod?s dans les prononciations, dans la mesure o? nous n?avons pas de mod?les ? tons en fran?ais. 5. la tire lexicale des fichiers .TextGrid a ?t? transform?e par script PERL en format NIST .stm qui permet d??tre comprise par les syst?mes de reconnaissance automatique.  Afin d??tudier les contacts de mots, en particulier les contacts V1#V2 et V1#CflottV2 nous avons explor? notre corpus par alignement automatique en utilisant le syst?me de reconnaissance du LIMSI par alignement automatique.   Alignement automatique Concernant l??tape 4 du dictionnaire de prononciation, nous avons ?labor? deux versions de dictionnaires (voir Table 4). La premi?re version donne pour chaque entr?e lexicale sa prononciation compl?te (ou canonique) telle que d?riv?e de l??criture. Afin de pouvoir rendre compte des processus d??lision vocalique, la deuxi?me version propose ?galement des prononciations plus courtes avec des ?lisions conditionnelles de voyelles en d?but et fin de mot, la condition ?tant que le mot pr?c?dent se termine par une voyelle ou que le mot suivant commence par une voyelle.                       Mots Prononciation canonique Variantes i b??  ts! "si oy ? nga ng? 
ibaa ts"si ojenga nga 
iba(V), (V)baa ts"s(V) ojeng(V), (V)jenga ng(V)  TABLE 4 ? Exemples de mots et prononciations du dictionnaire de prononciation. La deuxi?me colonne indique les prononciations compl?tes, la troisi?me colonne montre des variantes rajout?es pour tester le ph?nom?ne d??lision vocalique. La notation (V) en d?but et fin de prononciation indique une prononciation conditionnelle, d?pendant des 
7
contextes. Nous avons effectu? deux s?ries d?alignement pour ?tudier en particulier les ph?nom?nes d??lision de voyelles en fronti?re de mots. La premi?re s?rie utilise le dictionnaire canonique avec les formes compl?tes tandis que la deuxi?me s?rie s?appuie sur un dictionnaire enrichi des variantes afin de rendre compte des chutes vocaliques. Un exemple des deux alignements en parall?le est illustr? par la figure 1.                       FIGURE 1 ? Spectrogramme montrant un extrait du conte La main et la bouche avec 2 lignes d?alignements/segmentations en phones : 1) en fonction du dictionnaire de prononciations compl?tes ; 2) en fonction du dictionnaire enrichi des variantes ? chute vocalique. Les barres verticales indiquent les fronti?res de mot. L?ellipse rouge montre un  contact V1#CflottV2 avec une chute de voyelle. La figure 1 montre un spectrogramme d?un extrait de parole en mbochi avec en-dessous deux alignements en phones l?g?rement diff?rents. La nasale /ng/ r?sulte ainsi en deux segments cons?cutifs [n] et [g] (que nous avons refusionn?s pour compter le nombre de phon?mes pr?sents dans le corpus). L?ellipse rouge illustre un contact V1#CflottV2, o? se produit une chute vocalique de V1. Le premier alignement (? partir d?un dictionnaire de prononciation sans variantes) n?a pas pr?vu une telle ?lision : en cons?quence un segment [a] de dur?e minimale (30ms) est pr?sent ici, alors qu?il dispara?t dans la ligne du dessous.  4 Exploration phonologique  Les processus d??lision pr?sent?s en 1. ont ?t? ?tablis ? partir de proc?dures communes en phonologie, consistant ? cr?er des exemples afin de valider ou non une hypoth?se. 
8
Ainsi, les rencontres des diverses voyelles en finale et en d?but de mot ont ?t? test?es syst?matiquement dans des exemples pr?sentant les rencontres de voyelles possibles. Le m?me type de travail sur la combinatoire a permis de d?gager le r?le des consonnes flottantes dans la formation des allongements compensatoires. Les effets des divers contextes syntaxiques (sujet+ verbe, verbe+compl?ment, etc)  ont aussi ?t? explor?s et ceux-ci ne paraissent pas avoir d?influence sur ces processus. Le traitement automatique mis en ?uvre pour ce corpus nous permet d?explorer ces processus ? plus grande ?chelle et de v?rifier leur r?gularit? et g?n?ralit?.  La table suivante pr?sente le nombre de mots du corpus avec voyelle initiale et finale ainsi que leurs pourcentages respectifs :  total avec V initiale avec V finale #nombre de mots 1348 460 1348 pourcentage de mots 100% 34.1% 100% Table 5 : Nombre et pourcentages de mots avec voyelle initiale et voyelle finale L?analyse des contacts V1+V2  et V1 C flottante V2 ? la jonction de mots aboutit aux r?sultats suivants :   V1+V2  V1 Cflottante V2 nombre de mots  386 198 pourcentage ?lision V1 85% 83.3% pourcentage ?lision V2 3.9% 6.1% moyenne de la dur?e vocalique   0,16s 0,18s Table 6.  Contacts V1+V2 et V1 Cflottante V2 ? la jonction de mots : nombre de mots, pourcentage d??lision de V1, V2, et moyenne de la dur?e de la voyelle r?sultante. Les chiffres indiquent un processus d??lision dans le corpus tr?s important pour V1 (85% pour le contact V1+V2, et 83,3% pour le contact V1 Cflottante V2) et au contraire faible pour V2 (respectivement 3.9% et 6.1%).  La pr?sence ou non d??lision vocalique a ?t? v?rifi?e ? l??coute et not?e manuellement pour les 80 contacts de mots de la forme V1V2 et V1 CflottV2 pr?sents dans un des contes du corpus (Le li?vre et l??l?phant).  On note 7 non-?lisions correspondant ? des pauses, relev?es de fa?on concordante dans la notation manuelle et la notation automatique. 57 ?lisions reconnues ? l??coute ont ?t? ?galement prises en compte par l?alignement automatique. Dans l??tat actuel de son adaptation au mbochi, les cas 
9
probl?matiques pour l?alignement automatique sont : 1) la coalescence, avec son changement vocalique non pr?vu dans la proc?dure d?alignement (1cas), 2) l??lision de voyelles longues, qui dans l?alignement automatique n?est que partielle du fait de la transcription des voyelles longues par deux voyelles (7 cas), 3) la non-?lision des voyelles des racines monosyllabiques, qui seraient ? prot?ger de l?application des m?canismes d??lision (2 cas).  En d?pit de la limitation de la proc?dure d?alignement aux cas les plus typiques (mais aussi de loin les plus nombreux),  les donn?es ?manant de l?alignement automatique, confirment que les processus d??lision vocaliques sont tr?s g?n?raux dans la langue, qu?ils ne sont pas limit?s ? des constituants prosodiques ou syntaxiques, comme l?est par exemple, la liaison en fran?ais. Ce point est important dans la mesure o?, typologiquement, il est peu fr?quent que ce type de m?canismes se produise dans l?ensemble de la phrase. Les pourcentages d??lision de V1 comme V2 sont comparables pour V1+V2 et V1 Cflottante V2, ce qui ?tait attendu, la pr?sence de la consonne flottante ne semblant pas intervenir dans les ?lisions de timbre vocalique mais au niveau de la dur?e de la voyelle r?sultante. La derni?re ligne du tableau pr?sente la dur?e moyenne des voyelles r?sultant des processus d??lision  sans et avec consonne flottante. On s?attendait ? ce que la voyelle soit plus longue lorsqu?une consonne flottante est pr?sente. Les r?sultats vont dans ce sens mais assez faiblement, l?accroissement n??tant que de 20ms lorsqu?une consonne flottante est impliqu?e. Des investigations suppl?mentaires seraient ici n?cessaires. 5 Conclusion Notre ?tude repr?sente une premi?re tentative d?alignement automatique sur une langue bantoue du Congo-Brazzaville, impliquant quelques difficult?s ? surmonter dans l?adaptation ? ses caract?ristiques propres. Le corpus align? a permis de quantifier la proportion de voyelles et de consonnes, en particulier des consonnes labiales. L?ensemble des mots du corpus se termine en syllabe ouverte et un tiers des occurrences de mots ont une voyelle en d?but de mot. Nous avons impl?ment? les m?canismes d??lision vocalique dans le syst?me d?alignement. Une premi?re ?tude quantifi?e, sur la base des 3 contes enregistr?s, sur ces processus d??lision vocalique et leurs contextes d?occurrence, confirme leurs fr?quences (autour de 85%) et leur non-limitation ? des constituants en dessous de la phrase. Par ailleurs, concernant l?hypoth?se d?allongement compensatoire en cas de consonne flottante, les donn?es tendent ? montrer une augmentation de la dur?e vocalique V2 autour de 20ms, sans pour autant clairement d?montrer l?existence de cet alongement.  Les travaux en cours visent ? la fois ? augmenter le corpus audio en variant les styles et les locuteurs, ? approfondir les descriptions acoustico-phon?tiques et les m?canismes phonologiques ? plus grande ?chelle et ? augmenter nos connaissances sur la langue mbochi et sa visibilit? en particulier sur la toile.  
10
Remerciements Le travail pr?sent? a ?t? en partie soutenu par le projet ANR-DFG BANTUPSYN Phonology/Syntax Interface in Bantu languages (ANR-08-FASHS-005-01) et par le LabEx EFL (Empirical Foundations of Linguistics).  R?f?rences AMBOULOU, C. (1998). Le Mbochi : langue bantoue du Congo Brazzaville (zone C, groupe C20). Th?se de Doctorat, INALCO : Paris. BELTZUNG, J-M, RIALLAND, A, EMBANGA ABOROBONGUI, M. (2010). Les relatives possessives en "mb!"s? (C25). ZAS Papers in Linguistics 53, pages 7-37. BEDROSIAN, P. L. (1998). The Mbochi noun class system. Journal of West African Languages 26, pages 27-47.  CHATFIELD, R. (1999). Temps modes et aspects en mbochi. ms. S.I.L., Congo  EMBANGA ABOROBONGUI, M, RIALLAND, A, BELTZUNG, J-M. (sous presse).Tone and intonation in a Bantu language: Embosi, In Proceedings of the 4th World Conference on African Languages, Cologne, August 2009. EMBANGA ABOROBONGUI, M, BELTZUNG, J-M, FATIMA, H, RIALLAND, A. (2011).Questions partielles en "mb!"s ? . ZASPIL 55, pages 7-21. FONTANEY, L. (1988), Mboshi : Steps toward a Grammar: Part I. Pholia 3, pages 87-169. FONTANEY, L. (1989), Mboshi : Steps toward a Grammar: Part II. Pholia 4, pages 71-131. GAUVAIN, J.L et al (2005), Where are we in transcribing French broadcast news? In Proceedings of Interspeech, Lisbonne, pages 1665-1668. GELAS, H., BESACIER, L., ROSSATO, S. & PELLEGRINO, F., (2010), Using automatic speech recognition for phonological purposes: study of vowel length in Punu (Bantu B40), LabPhon 12, New-Mexico, 8-10 juillet.  GUTHRIE, M. (1967-1971). Comparative Bantu. 4. volumes. Farborough : Gregg LEITCH, M. (1997), Vowel harmonies of the Congo Basin: An Optimality Theory analysis of variation in the Bantu zone C. University British Columbia, Doctoral thesis. NDINGA OBA, A. (2003). Les langues bantoues du Congo Brazzaville : ?tude typologique des langues du groupe C20 (mbosi ou mbochi). Tome 1 : Introduction, Pr?sentation, Phonologie. Paris : L?Harmattan. NDINGA OBA, A. (2004). Les langues bantoues du Congo Brazzaville : ?tude typologique des langues du groupe C20 (mbosi ou mbochi). Tome 2 : Classes nominales, Conclusion g?n?rale. Paris : L?Harmattan. OBENGA, T. (1976), la cuvette congolaise : les hommes et les structures. Paris, Pr?sence Africaine. OBENGA, T. (1984), Litt?rature traditionnelle des mbochi : Etsee leyamba. Paris, Pr?sence  
11
Africaine. OLLASA, P. (1969), Phonologie du mbosi (dialecte du Congo Brazzaville). M?moire de Ma?trise, Facult? des Lettres et Sciences Humaines de Bordeaux. SHARMA GROVER, A., CALTEAUX, K., VAN HUYSSTEEN, K. & PRETORIUS M. (2010), An overview of HLTs for South African Bantu languages? In Proceedings of the 2010 Annual Research Conference of the South African Institute for Computer Scientists and Information Technologists (SAICSIT), Bela-Bela (South Africa), pages 370-375.    
12
