Proceedings of the BioNLP Workshop on Linking Natural Language Processing and Biology at HLT-NAACL 06, pages 91?92,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
BioKI:Enzymes ? an adaptable system to locate low-frequency information
in full-text proteomics articles
Sabine Bergler, Jonathan Schuman, Julien Dubuc, Alexandr Lebedev
The CLaC Laboratory
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering
Concordia University, 1455 de Maisonneuve Blvd West, Montreal, Quebec, H3G 1M8
bioki@cs.concordia.ca
1 Goals
BioKI:Enzymes is a literature navigation system that
uses a two-step process. First, full-text articles are
retrieved from PubMed Central (PMC). Then, for
each article, the most relevant passages are identified
according to a set of user selected keywords, and the
articles are ranked according to the pertinence of the
representative passages.
In contrast to most existing systems in informa-
tion retrieval (IR) and information extraction (IE) for
bioinformatics, BioKI:Enzymes processes full-text
articles, not abstracts. Full-text articles1 permit to
highlight low-frequency information?i.e. informa-
tion that is not redundant, that does not necessarily
occur in many articles, and within each article, may
be expressed only once (most likely in the body of
the article, not the abstract). It contrasts thus with
GoPubMed (Doms and Schroeder, 2005), a cluster-
ing system that retrieves abstracts using PMC search
and clusters them according to terms from the Gene
Ontology (GO).
Scientists face two major obstacles in using IR
and IE technology: how to select the best keywords
for an intended search and how to assess the validity
and relevance of the extracted information.
To address the latter problem, BioKI provides
convenient access to different degrees of context by
allowing the user to view the information in three
different formats. At the most abstract level, the
ranked list of articles provides the first five lines of
the most pertinent text segment selected by BioKI
(similar to the snippets provided by Google). Click-
ing on the article link will open a new window with a
1Only articles that are available in HTML format can cur-
rently be processed.
side-by-side view of the full-text article as retrieved
through PMC on the left and the different text seg-
ments2, ordered by their relevance to the user se-
lected keywords, on the right. The user has thus the
possibility to assess the information in the context of
the text segment first, and in the original, if desired.
2 Keyword-based Ranking
To address the problem of finding the best keywords,
BioKI:Enzymes explores different approaches. For
research in enzymology, our users specified a stan-
dard pattern of information retrieval, which is re-
flected in the user interface.
Enzymes are proteins that catalyze reactions dif-
ferently in different environments (pH and tem-
perature). Enzymes are characterized by the sub-
strate they act on and by the product of their catal-
ysis. Accordingly, a keyphrase pattern has enti-
ties (that tended to recur) prespecified for selection
in four categories: enzymes, their activities (such
as carbohydrate degrading), their qualities (such
as maximum activity), and measurements (such as
pH). The provided word lists are not exhaustive
and BioKI:Enzymes expects the user to specify new
terms (which are not required to conceptually fit the
category). The word lists are convenient for select-
ing alternate spellings that might be hard to enter (?-
amylase) and for setting up keyphrase templates in a
prole, which can be stored under a name and later
reused. Completion of the keyword lists is provided
through stemming and the equivalent treatment of
Greek characters and their different transliterations.
The interface presents the user with a search win-
dow, which has two distinct fields, one to specify
2We use TextTiler (Hearst, 1997) to segment the article.
91
the search terms for the PMC search, the other to
specify the (more fine-grained) keywords the sys-
tem uses to select the most relevant passages in the
texts and to rank the texts based on this choice. The
BioKI specific keywords can be chosen from the
four categories of keyword lists mentioned above or
entered. What distinguishes BioKI:Enzymes is the
direct control the user has over the weight of the key-
words in the ranking and the general mode of con-
sidering the keywords. Each of the four keyword
categories has a weight associated with it. In ad-
dition, bonus scores can be assigned for keywords
that co-occur at a distance less than a user-defined
threshold. The two modes of ranking are a basic
?and?, where the weight and threshold settings are
ignored and the text segment that has the most spec-
ified keywords closest together will be ranked high-
est. This is the mode of choice for a targeted search
for specific information, like ?pH optima? in a PMC
subcorpus for amylase.
The other mode is a basic ?or?, with additional
points for the co-occurrence of keywords within the
same text segment. Here, the co-occurrence bonus
is given for terms from the four different lists, not
for terms from the same list. While the search space
is much too big for a scientist to control all these de-
grees of freedom without support, our initial exper-
iments have shown that we could control the rank-
ing behavior with repeated refinements of the weight
settings, and even simulate the behavior of an ?and?
by judicious weight selection.
3 Assessment and Future Work
The evaluation of a ranking of full-text articles, for
which there are no Gold standards as of yet, is dif-
ficult and begins in the anecdotal. Our experts did
not explore the changes in ranking based on differ-
ent weight settings, but found the ?and? to be just
what they wanted from the system. We will ex-
periment with different weight distribution patterns
to see whether a small size of different weight set-
tings can be specified for predictable behavior and
whether this will have better acceptance.
The strength of BioKI lies in its adaptability to
user queries. In this it contrasts with template-based
IE systems like BioRAT (Corney et al, 2004), which
extracts information from full-length articles, but
uses handcoded templates to do so. Since BioKI
is not specific to an information need, but is meant
to give more control to the user and thus facilitate
access to any type of PMC search results, it is im-
portant that the same PMC search results can be re-
ordered by successively refining the selected BioKI
keywords until more desirable texts appear at the
top. This behavior is modeled after frequent behav-
ior using search engines such as Google, where of-
ten the first search serves to better select keywords
for a subsequent, better targeted search. This rerank-
ing based on keyword refinement can be done al-
most instantaneously (20 sec for 480 keyphrases on
161 articles), since the downloaded texts from PMC
are cached, and since the system spends most of its
runtime downloading and storing the articles from
PMC. This is currently a feasibility study, targeted to
eventually become a Web service. Performance still
needs to be improved (3:14 min for 1 keyphrase on
161 articles, including downloading), but the quality
of the ranking and variable context views might still
entice users to wait for them.
In conclusion, it is feasible to develop a highly
user-adaptable passage highlighting system over
full-text articles that focuses on low-frequency infor-
mation. This adaptability is provided both through
increased user control of the ranking parameters and
through presentation of results in different contexts
which at the same time justify the ranking and au-
thenticate keyword occurrences in their source text.
Acknowledgments
The rst prototype of BioKI was implemented by Evan Desai.
We thank our domain experts Justin Powlowski, Emma Masters,
and Regis-Olivier Benech. Work funded by Genome Quebec.
References
D. P. A. Corney, B.F. Buxton, W.B. Langdon, and D.T. Jones.
2004. BioRAT: Extracting biological information from full-
length papers. Bioinformatics, 20(17):3206?3213.
Andreas Doms and Michael Schroeder. 2005. GoPubMed: ex-
ploring PubMed with the Gene Ontology. Nucleic Acids Re-
search, 33:W783?W786. Web Server issue.
M.A. Hearst. 1997. Texttiling: Segmenting text into multi-
paragraph subtopic passages. Computational Linguistics,
23(1):34?64.
92
