Coling 2008: Companion volume ? Posters and Demonstrations, pages 87?90
Manchester, August 2008
Easily Identifiable Discourse Relations
Emily Pitler, Mridhula Raghupathy, Hena Mehta, Ani Nenkova, Alan Lee, Aravind Joshi
University of Pennsylvania
3330 Walnut Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
Abstract
We present a corpus study of local dis-
course relations based on the Penn Dis-
course Tree Bank, a large manually anno-
tated corpus of explicitly or implicitly re-
alized relations. We show that while there
is a large degree of ambiguity in temporal
explicit discourse connectives, overall con-
nectives are mostly unambiguous and al-
low high-accuracy prediction of discourse
relation type. We achieve 93.09% accu-
racy in classifying the explicit relations
and 74.74% accuracy overall. In addition,
we show that some pairs of relations oc-
cur together in text more often than ex-
pected by chance. This finding suggests
that global sequence classification of the
relations in text can lead to better results,
especially for implicit relations.
1 Introduction
Discourse relations between textual units are con-
sidered key for the ability to properly interpret
or produce discourse. Various theories of dis-
course have been developed (Moore and Wiemer-
Hastings, 2003) and different relation taxonomies
have been proposed (Hobbs, 1979; McKeown,
1985; Mann and Thompson, 1988; Knott and
Sanders, 1998). Among the most cognitively
salient relations are causal (contingency), contrast
(comparison), and temporal.
Very often, the discourse relations are explicit,
signaled directly by the use of appropriate dis-
course connectives:
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
(E1) He is very tired because he played tennis all morning.
(E2) He is not very strong, but he can run amazingly fast.
(E3) We had some tea in the afternoon and later went to a
restaurant for a big dinner.
Discourse relations can also be implicit, inferred
by the context of the utterance and general world
knowledge.
(I1) I took my umbrella this morning. [because] The forecast
was rain in the afternoon.
(I2) She is never late for meetings. [but] He always arrives
10 minutes late.
(I3) She woke up early. [afterward] She had breakfast and
went for a walk in the park.
An additional complication for automatic clas-
sification of discourse relations is that even in the
presence of an explicit discourse connective, the
connective might be ambiguous between several
senses. For example, since can be used to signal
either a temporal or a contingency relation.
They have not spoken to each other since they argued last
fall. (Temporal)
I assumed you were not coming since you never replied to
the invitation. (Causal)
Several questions directly related to efforts in
automatic recognition of discourse relations arise:
In a general text, what is the proportion of ex-
plicit versus implicit relations? Since implicit rela-
tions are presumably harder to recognize automati-
cally, the larger their proportion, the more difficult
the overall prediction of discourse relation will be.
How ambiguous are discourse connectives?
The degree of ambiguity would give an upper
bound on the accuracy with which explicit rela-
tions can be identified. The more ambiguous dis-
course connectives are, the more difficult it would
be to automatically decide which discourse rela-
tion is expressed in a given sentence, even in the
presence of a connective.
87
In a text, are adjacent discourse relations inde-
pendent of each other or are certain sequences of
relations more likely? In the latter case, a ?dis-
course grammar? of text can be used and easy to
identify relations such as unambiguous explicit re-
lations can help determine the class of implicit re-
lations that immediately follow or precede them.
In this study, we address the above questions us-
ing the largest existing corpus manually annotated
with discourse relations?the Penn Discourse Tree
Bank (Prasad et al, 2008).
2 The Penn Discourse Tree Bank
The Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB) is a new re-
source (Prasad et al, 2008) of annotated discourse
relations. The annotation covers the same 1 mil-
lion word Wall Street Journal (WSJ) corpus used
for the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al, 1994).
he PDTB is the first corpus to systematically
identify and distinguish explicit and implicit dis-
course relations. By definition, an explicit relation
is triggered by the presence of a discourse con-
nective which occurs overtly in the text. The dis-
course connective can essentially be viewed as a
discourse-level predicate which takes two clausal
arguments. For example, sentence E1 above could
be represented as BECAUSE(?He is very tired?,
?he played tennis all morning?). The corpus rec-
ognizes 100 such explicit connectives and contains
annotations for 19,458 explicit relations
1
.
The PDTB also contains provisions for the an-
notation of implicit discourse relations between
adjacent sentences which are inferred by the reader
but are not overtly marked by a discourse connec-
tive. In this case, the annotator was asked to pro-
vide a connective that best captured the inferred
relation. There are a total of 16,584 implicit rela-
tions annotated in the corpus.
2
In addition to discourse relations and their ar-
guments, the PDTB also provides the senses of
each relation(Miltsakaki et al, 2008). The tagset
of senses is organized hierarchically into three lev-
els - class, type, and subtype. The top class level
contains the four major semantic classes: Expan-
sion, Comparison, Contingency and Temporal.
1
The PDTB allows annotators to tag a relation with multi-
ple senses. In this work we count both of the annotated senses.
So even though there are only 18,459 explicit relations, there
are 19,458 explicit senses.
2
Again, because of multiple senses per relation, the 16,584
senses are part of 16,224 relations.
Class Explicit (%) Implicit (%) Total
Comparison 5590 (69.05%) 2505 (30.95%) 8095
Contingency 3741 (46.75%) 4261 (53.25%) 8002
Temporal 3696 (79.55%) 950 (20.45%) 4646
Expansion 6431 (42.04%) 8868 (57.96%) 15299
Table 1: Discourse relation distribution in seman-
tic and explicit/implicit classes in the PDTB
3 Distribution and ambiguity of
connectives
Table 1 shows the distribution of discourse rela-
tions between the four main relation classes and
their type of realization (implicit or explicit). In-
terestingly, temporal and comparison relations are
predominantly explicit. About 80% and 70%, re-
spectively, of their occurrences are marked by a
discourse connective. The contingency relations
are almost evenly distributed between explicit and
implicit. The expansion relations, the overall
largest class of discourse relations, is in most cases
implicit and not marked by a discourse connective.
Given the figures in Table 1, we would expect
that overall temporal and comparison relations will
be more easily identified since they are overtly
marked. Of course this would only be the case if
discourse markers are mostly unambiguous.
Here we show all connectives that appear more
than 50 times in the PDTB, their predominant
sense (comparison, contingency, temporal or ex-
pansion), as well as the percentage of occurrences
of the connective in its predominant sense. For
example the connective but has comparison as its
predominant sense and 97.19% of the 3,308 occur-
rences of this connective were comparisons.
Comparison but (3308; 97.19%), while (781; 66.07%),
however (485; 99.59%), although (328; 99.70%),
though (320; 100.00%), still (190; 98.42%), yet (101;
97.03%)
Expansion and (3000; 96.83%), also (1746; 99.94%), for
example (196; 100.00%), in addition (165; 100.00%),
instead (112; 97.32%), indeed (104; 95.19%), more-
over (101; 100.00%), for instance (98, 100.00%), or
(98; 96.94%), unless (95; 98.95%), in fact (82; 92.68%)
separately (74; 100.00%)
Contingency if (1223; 95.99%), because (858, 100.00%),
so (263; 100.00%), since (184; 52.17%), thus (112;
100.00%), as a result (78; 100.00%)
Temporal when (989; 80.18%), as (743; 70.26%), af-
ter (577; 99.65%), then (340; 93.24%), before (326;
100.00%), meanwhile (193; 48.70%), until (162;
87.04%), later (91; 98.90%), once (84; 95.24%)
The connectives that signal comparison and
contingency are mostly unambiguous. Obvious
exceptions are two of the connectives that are often
used to signal temporal relations: while and since.
88
The predominant senses of these connectives are
comparison (66.07%) and contingency (52.17%)
respectively. Disambiguating these problematic
connectives has already been addressed in previ-
ous work (Miltsakaki et al, 2005), but even the
predominantly temporal connectives are rather am-
biguous. For example less than 95% of the occur-
rances of meanwhile, as, when, until, and then are
temporal relaions.
While some connectives such as ?since? are am-
biguous, most are not. The discourse connec-
tives in the corpus appear in their predominant
sense 93.43% (for comparsion), 94.72% (for con-
tingency), 84.10% (for temporal), and 97.63% (for
expansion) of the time. Temporal connectives are
most ambiguous and connectives signaling expan-
sion are least ambiguous.
4 Automatic classification
The analyses in the previous section show two very
positive trends: many of the discourse relations are
explicitly marked by the use of a discourse connec-
tive, especially comparison and temporal relations,
and discourse connectives are overall mostly un-
ambiguous. These facts would suggest that even
based only on the connective, classification of dis-
course relations could be done well for all data (in-
cluding both implicit and explicit examples) and
particularly well for explicit examples alone. In-
deed, Table 2 shows the performance of a decision
tree classifier for discourse relations, on all data
and on the explicit subset in the second and third
column respectively.
We use the natural distribution of relation
classes found in theWall Street Journal texts, with-
out downsampling to get balanced distribution of
classes. There are four task settings, distinguishing
each type of relation from all others. For example,
comparison relations can be distinguished from all
other relations in the corpus with overall accuracy
of 91.28%, based only on the discourse connective
(first line in Table 2). The recall for recognizing
comparison relations is 0.66, directly reflecting the
fact that 31% of all comparison relations are im-
plicit (Table 1) and the connective feature did not
help at all in those cases. Over explicit data only,
the classification accuracy for comparison relation
versus any other relation is 97.23%, and precision
and recall is 0.95 and above.
As expected, the overall accuracy of identify-
ing contingency and expansion relations is lower,
Task All relations Explicit relations only
Comparison 91.28% (76.54%) 97.23% (69.72%)
Contingency 84.44% (76.81%) 93.99% (79.73%)
Temporal 94.79% (86.54%) 95.4% (79.98%)
Expansion 77.51% (55.67%) 97.61% (65.16%)
Table 2: Decision tree classification accuracy us-
ing only the presence of connectives as binary fea-
tures. The majority class is given in brackets.
Class Precision Recall
Temporal 0.841 [0.841] 0.729 [0.903]
Expansion 0.658 [0.973] 0.982 [0.957]
Contingency 0.948 [0.947] 0.369 [0.844]
Comparison 0.935 [0.935] 0.671 [0.971]
Table 3: Four-way classification. The first number
is for all data, thesecond for explicit relations only.
84.44% and 77.51% on all data respectively, re-
flecting the fact that these relations are often im-
plicit. But by themselves these accuracy numbers
are actually reasonable, setting a rather high base-
line for any more sophisticated method of classify-
ing discourse relations. On explicit data only, the
two-way classification accuracy for the four main
types of relations is 94% and higher.
In four-way classification, disambiguating be-
tween the four main semantic types of discourse
relations leads to 74.74% classification accuracy.
The accuracy for four-way classification of explicit
relations is 93.09%. The precision and recall for
each class is shown in Table 4. The worst per-
formance on the explicit portion of the data is the
precision for temporal relations and the recall for
contingency relations, both of which are 0.84.
5 N-gram discourse relation models
We have shown above that some relations, such as
comparison, can be easily identified because they
are often explicit and are expressed by an unam-
biguous connective. However, one must build a
more subtle automatic classifier to find the implicit
relations. We now look at the frequencies in which
various relations are adjacent in the PDTB. Results
from previous studies of discourse relations sug-
gest that the context of a relation can be helpful in
disambiguating the relation (Wellner et al, 2006).
Here we identify specific dependencies that exist
between sequences of relations.
We computed ?
2
statistics to test the indepen-
dence of each pair of relations. The question is:
do relations A and B occur adjacent to each other
more than they would simply due to chance? The
89
First Relation Second Relation ?
2
p-value
E. Comparison I. Contingency 20.1 .000007
E. Comparison E. Comparison 17.4 .000030
E. Comparison I. Expansion 9.91 .00161
I. Temporal E. Temporal 9.42 .00214
I. Contingency E. Contingency 9.29 .00230
I. Expansion E. Expansion 6.34 .0118
E. Expansion I. Expansion 5.50 .0191
I. Contingency E. Comparison 4.95 .0260
Table 4: ?
2
results for pairs of relations
pairs of implicit and explicit relations which have
significant associations with each other (pval <
0.05) are shown in Table 4. For example, ex-
plicit comparison and implicit contingency co-
occur much more often than would be expected if
they were independent. As explicit comparisons
are generally fairly easy to identify, knowing that
they tend to co-occur may be helpful when search-
ing for implicit contingency relations in a text.
6 Conclusion
We have tried to summarize the difficulty of find-
ing discourse relations using the Penn Discourse
Treebank. We noted that explicit and implicit rela-
tions are approximately evenly distributed overall,
making the task easier than many researchers have
feared. We have found that some relations, such as
temporal and comparison, are more likely to be ex-
plicit than implicit, making them relatively easier
to find, while contingency and expansion are more
often implicit. Among the discourse connectives,
the majority are not very ambiguous between the
different types of relations, with some notable ex-
ceptions such as since and meanwhile.
We have carried out a novel quantitative study
of the patterns of dependencies between discourse
relations. We found that while there does not ap-
pear to be a clear template for the sequence of
relations, there are individual relation pairs that
tend to co-occur. Specifically, we found that even
though contingency relations are likely to be im-
plicit and thus difficult to find, they are likely to
be found near an explicit comparison. We plan to
exploit these findings in future work, addressing
discourse relation labeling in text as a sequence la-
beling problem and using the explicit cue words
of surrounding relations as features for finding the
?hidden? implicit relations.
7 Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by an Integra-
tive Graduate Education and Research Traineeship
grant from National Science Foundation (NSF-
IGERT 0504487) and by NSF Grant IIS -07-
05671. We would like to thank Nikhil Dinesh for
help with the PDTB, and Rashmi Prasad, Bonnie
Webber and Eleni Miltsakaki for insightful discus-
sions.
References
Hobbs, J. 1979. Coherence and coreference. Cognitive
Science, 3:67?90.
Knott, A. and T. Sanders. 1998. The classification of
coherence relations and their linguistic markers: An
exploration of two languages. Journal of Pragmat-
ics, 30(2):135?175.
Mann, W. and S. Thompson. 1988. Rhetorical struc-
ture theory: Toward a functional theory of text orga-
nization. Text, 8:243?281.
Marcus, M.P., B. Santorini, and M.A. Marcinkiewicz.
1994. Building a Large Annotated Corpus of En-
glish: The Penn Treebank. Computational Linguis-
tics, 19(2):313?330.
McKeown, Kathleen R. 1985. Text generation: us-
ing discourse strategies and focus constraints to gen-
erate natural language text. Cambridge University
Press, New York, NY, USA.
Miltsakaki, E., N. Dinesh, R. Prasad, A. Joshi, and
B. Webber. 2005. Experiments on sense annotations
and sense disambiguation of discourse connectives.
In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Treebanks
and Linguistic Theories (TLT2005).
Miltsakaki, Eleni, Livio Robaldo, Alan Lee, and Ar-
avind Joshi. 2008. Sense annotation in the penn dis-
course treebank. Computational Linguistics and In-
telligent Text Processing, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 4919:275?286.
Moore, J. and P. Wiemer-Hastings. 2003. Discourse in
computational linguistics and artificial intelligence.
Prasad, R., N. Dinesh, A. Lee, E. Miltsakaki,
L. Robaldo, A. Joshi, and B. Webber. 2008. The
penn discourse treebank 2.0. In Proceedings of
the 6th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC).
Wellner, B., J. Pustejovsky, C. Havasi, R. Sauri, and
A. Rumshisky. 2006. Classification of discourse co-
herence relations: An exploratory study using mul-
tiple knowledge sources. In Proceedings of the 7th
SIGDIAL Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue.
90
Event Detection and Summarization in Weblogs with Temporal Collocations 
Chun-Yuan Teng and Hsin-Hsi Chen 
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering 
National Taiwan University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
{r93019, hhchen}@csie.ntu.edu.tw 
Abstract 
 
This paper deals with the relationship between weblog content and time. With the proposed temporal mutual information, we analyze 
the collocations in time dimension, and the interesting collocations related to special events. The temporal mutual information is 
employed to observe the strength of term-to-term associations over time. An event detection algorithm identifies the collocations that 
may cause an event in a specific timestamp. An event summarization algorithm retrieves a set of collocations which describe an event. 
We compare our approach with the approach without considering the time interval. The experimental results demonstrate that the 
temporal collocations capture the real world semantics and real world events over time. 
 
1. 
2. 
Introduction 
Compared with traditional media such as online news 
and enterprise websites, weblogs have several unique 
characteristics, e.g., containing abundant life experiences 
and public opinions toward different topics, highly 
sensitive to the events occurring in the real world, and 
associated with the personal information of bloggers. 
Some works have been proposed to leverage these 
characteristics, e.g., the study of the relationship between 
the content and bloggers? profiles (Adamic & Glance, 
2005; Burger & Henderson, 2006; Teng & Chen, 2006), 
and content and real events (Glance, Hurst & Tornkiyo, 
2004; Kim, 2005; Thelwall, 2006; Thompson, 2003). 
In this paper, we will use temporal collocation to 
model the term-to-term association over time.  In the past, 
some useful collocation models (Manning & Sch?tze, 
1999) have been proposed such as mean and variance, 
hypothesis test, mutual information, etc. Some works 
analyze the weblogs from the aspect of time like the 
dynamics of weblogs in time and location (Mei, et al, 
2006), the weblog posting behavior (Doran, Griffith & 
Henderson, 2006; Hurst, 2006), the topic extraction (Oka, 
Abe & Kato, 2006), etc. The impacts of events on social 
media are also discussed, e.g., the change of weblogs after 
London attack (Thelwall, 2006), the relationship between 
the warblog and weblogs (Kim, 2005; Thompson, 2003), 
etc. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines 
temporal collocation to model the strength of term-to-term 
associations over time.  Section 3 introduces an event 
detection algorithm to detect the events in weblogs, and 
an event summarization algorithm to extract the 
description of an event in a specific time with temporal 
collocations. Section 4 shows and discusses the 
experimental results.  Section 5 concludes the remarks. 
Temporal Collocations 
We derive the temporal collocations from Shannon?s 
mutual information (Manning & Sch?tze, 1999) which is 
defined as follows (Definition 1). 
Definition 1 (Mutual Information) The mutual 
information of two terms x and y is defined as: 
)()(
),(log),(),(
yPxP
yxPyxPyxI =  
where P(x,y) is the co-occurrence probability of x and y, 
and P(x) and P(y) denote the occurrence probability of x 
and y, respectively. 
Following the definition of mutual information, we 
derive the temporal mutual information modeling the 
term-to-term association over time, and the definition is 
given as follows.  
 Definition 2 (Temporal Mutual Information) Given 
a timestamp t and a pair of terms x and y, the temporal 
mutual information of x and y in t is defined as: 
)|()|(
)|,(log)|,()|,(
tyPtxP
tyxPtyxPtyxI =
where P(x,y|t) is the probability of co-occurrence of terms 
x and y in timestamp t, P(x|t) and P(y|t) denote the 
probability of occurrences of x and y in timestamp t, 
respectively. 
To measure the change of mutual information in time 
dimension, we define the change of temporal mutual 
information as follows. 
Definition 3 (Change of Temporal Mutual 
Information) Given time interval [t1, t2], the change of 
temporal mutual information is defined as: 
12
12
21
)|,()|,(),,,(
tt
tyxItyxIttyxC ?
?=  
where C(x,y,t1,t2) is the change of temporal mutual 
information of terms x and y in time interval [t1, t2], I(x,y| 
t1) and I(x,y| t2) are the temporal mutual information in 
time t1 and t2, respectively. 
3. Event Detection 
Event detection aims to identify the collocations 
resulting in events and then retrieve the description of 
events. Figure 1 sketches an example of event detection. 
The weblog is parsed into a set of collocations. All 
collocations are processed and monitored to identify the 
plausible events.  Here, a regular event ?Mother?s day? 
and an irregular event ?Typhoon Chanchu? are detected.  
The event ?Typhoon Chanchu? is described by the words  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: An Example of Event Detection
?Typhoon?, ?Chanchu?, ?2k?, ?Eye?, ?Path? and 
?chinaphillippine?.  
The architecture of an event detection system includes 
a preprocessing phase for parsing the weblogs and 
retrieving the collocations; an event detection phase 
detecting the unusual peak of the change of temporal 
mutual information and identifying the set of collocations 
which may result in an event in a specific time duration; 
and an event summarization phase extracting the 
collocations related to the seed collocations found in a 
specific time duration. 
The most important part in the preprocessing phase is 
collocation extraction. We retrieve the collocations from 
the sentences in blog posts. The candidates are two terms 
within a window size. Due to the size of candidates, we 
have to identify the set of tracking terms for further 
analysis. In this paper, those candidates containing 
stopwords or with low change of temporal mutual 
information are removed. 
In the event detection phase, we detect events by 
using the peak of temporal mutual information in time 
dimension.  However, the regular pattern of temporal 
mutual information may cause problems to our detection. 
Therefore, we remove the regular pattern by seasonal 
index, and then detect the plausible events by measuring 
the unusual peak of temporal mutual information. 
If a topic is suddenly discussed, the relationship 
between the related terms will become higher. Two 
alternatives including change of temporal mutual 
information and relative change of temporal mutual 
information are employed to detect unusual events. Given 
timestamps t1 and t2 with temporal mutual information 
MI1 and MI2, the change of temporal mutual information 
is calculated by (MI2-MI1). The relative change of 
temporal mutual information is calculated by (MI2-
MI1)/MI1. 
For each plausible event, there is a seed collocation, 
e.g., ?Typhoon Chanchu?. In the event description 
retrieval phase, we try to select the collocations with the 
highest mutual information with the word w in a seed 
collocation. They will form a collocation network for the 
event.  Initially, the seed collocation is placed into the 
network.  When a new collocation is added, we compute 
the mutual information of the multiword collocations by 
the following formula, where n is the number of 
collocations in the network up to now. 
?= n iMInInformatioMutualMultiwo  
If the multiword mutual information is lower than a 
threshold, the algorithm stops and returns the words in the 
collocation network as a description of the event.  Figure 
2 sketches an example.  The collocations ?Chanchu?s 
path?, ?Typhoon eye?, and ?Chanchu affects? are added 
into the network in sequence based on their MI. 
We have two alternatives to add the collocations to 
the event description. The first method adds the 
collocations which have the highest mutual information 
as discussed above. In contrast, the second method adds 
the collocations which have the highest product of mutual 
information and change of temporal mutual information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: An Example of Collocation network 
4. 
4.1. 
Experiments and Discussions 
Temporal Mutual Information versus 
Mutual Information 
In the experiments, we adopt the ICWSM weblog data 
set (Teng & Chen, 2007; ICWSM, 2007). This data set 
collected from May 1, 2006 through May 20, 2006 is 
about 20 GB. Without loss of generality, we use the 
English weblog of 2,734,518 articles for analysis. 
To evaluate the effectiveness of time information, we 
made the experiments based on mutual information 
(Definition 1) and temporal mutual information 
(Definition 2). The former called the incremental 
approach measures the mutual information at each time 
point based on all available temporal information at that 
time. The latter called the interval-based approach 
considers the temporal mutual information in different 
time stamps.  Figures 3 and 4 show the comparisons 
between interval-based approach and incremental 
approach, respectively, in the event of Da Vinci Code.   
We find that ?Tom Hanks? has higher change of 
temporal mutual information compared to ?Da Vinci 
Code?. Compared to the incremental approach in Figure 4, 
the interval-based approach can reflect the exact release 
date of ?Da Vinci Code.? 
 rd
=i 1 4.2. Evaluation of Event Detection 
We consider the events of May 2006 listed in 
wikipedia1 as gold standard. On the one hand, the events 
posted in wikipedia are not always complete, so that we 
adopt recall rate as our evaluation metric.  On the other 
hand, the events specified in wikipedia are not always 
discussed in weblogs.  Thus, we search the contents of 
blog post to verify if the events were touched on in our 
blog corpus. Before evaluation, we remove the events 
listed in wikipedia, but not referenced in the weblogs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Interval-based Approach in Da Vinci Code  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Incremental Approach in Da Vinci Code 
gure 5 sketches the idea of evaluation.  The left side 
of t s figure shows the collocations detected by our event 
dete tion system, and the right side shows the events 
liste  in wikipedia.  After matching these two lists, we 
can find that the first three listed events were correctly 
identified by our system.  Only the event ?Nepal Civil 
War? was listed, but not found. Thus, the recall rate is 
75% in this case. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Evaluation of Event Detection Phase 
As discussed in Section 3, we adopt change of 
temporal mutual information, and relative change of 
temporal mutual information to detect the peak. In Figure 
6, we compare the two methods to detect the events in 
weblogs. The relative change of temporal mutual 
information achieves better performance than the change 
of temporal mutual information. 
                                                     
1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/May_2006 
Table 1 and Table 2 list the top 20 collocations based 
on these two approaches, respectively. The results of the 
first approach show that some collocations are related to 
the feelings such as ?fell left? and time such as ?Saturday 
night?. In contrast, the results of the second approach 
show more interesting collocations related to the news 
events at that time, such as terrorists ?zacarias 
moussaoui? and ?paramod mahajan.? These two persons 
were killed in May 3. Besides, ?Geena Davis? got the 
golden award in May 3. That explains why the 
collocations detected by relative change of temporal 
mutual information are better than those detected by 
change of temporal mutual information. 
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19
Time (day)
M
ut
ua
l i
nf
or
m
at
io
n
Da-Vinci Tom Hanks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Performance of Event Detection Phase 
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19
Time (day)
M
ut
ua
l i
nf
or
m
at
io
n
Da-Vinci Tom Hanks
Collocations CMI Collocations CMI 
May 03 9276.08 Current music 1842.67
Illegal immigrants 5833.17 Hate studying 1722.32
Feel left 5411.57 Stephen Colbert 1709.59
Saturday night 4155.29 Thursday night 1678.78
Past weekend 2405.32 Can?t believe 1533.33
White house 2208.89 Feel asleep 1428.18
Red sox 2208.43 Ice cream 1373.23
Album tool 2120.30 Oh god 1369.52
Sunday morning 2006.78 Illegalimmigration 1368.12
16.56
f 
CMI
32.50
31.63
29.09
28.45
28.34
28.13Sunday night 1992.37 Pretty cool 13
Table 1: Top 20 collocations with highest change o
temporal mutual information 
Collocations CMI Collocations 
casinos online 618.36 Diet sodas 
zacarias moussaoui 154.68 Ving rhames 
Tsunami warning 107.93 Stock picks 
Conspirator zacarias 71.62 Happy hump 
Artist formerly 57.04 Wong kan 
Federal  
Jury 
41.78 Sixapartcom 
movabletype Wed 3 39.20 Aaron echolls 27.48
Pramod mahajan 35.41 Phnom penh 25.78
BBC  
Version 
35.21 Livejournal 
sixapartcom 
23.83  Fi
hi
c
dGeena davis 33.64 George yeo 20.34
Table 2: Top 20 collocations with highest relative change 
of mutual information 
4.3. Evaluation of Event Summarization 
As discussed in Section 3, we have two methods to 
include collocations to the event description. Method 1 
employs the highest mutual information, and Method 2 
utilizes the highest product of mutual information and 
change of temporal mutual information. Figure 7 shows 
the performance of Method 1 and Method 2. We can see 
that the performance of Method 2 is better than that of 
Method 1 in most cases. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Overall Performance of Event Summarization 
The results of event summarization by Method 2 are 
shown in Figure 8. Typhoon Chanchu appeared in the 
Pacific Ocean on May 10, 2006, passed through 
Philippine and China and resulted in disasters in these 
areas on May 13 and 18, 2006.  The appearance of the 
typhoon Chanchu cannot be found from the events listed 
in wikipedia on May 10.  However, we can identify the 
appearance of typhoon Chanchu from the description of 
the typhoon appearance such as ?typhoon named? and 
?Typhoon eye.  In addition, the typhoon Chanchu?s path 
can also be inferred from the retrieved collocations such 
as ?Philippine China? and ?near China?. The response of 
bloggers such as ?unexpected typhoon? and ?8 typhoons? 
is also extracted.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Event Summarization for Typhoon Chanchu 
5. Concluding Remarks 
This paper introduces temporal mutual information to 
capture term-term association over time in weblogs. The 
extracted collocation with unusual peak which is in terms 
of relative change of temporal mutual information is 
selected to represent an event.  We collect those 
collocations with the highest product of mutual 
information and change of temporal mutual information 
to summarize the specific event.  The experiments on 
ICWSM weblog data set and evaluation with wikipedia 
event lists at the same period as weblogs demonstrate the 
feasibility of the proposed temporal collocation model 
and event detection algorithms. 
Currently, we do not consider user groups and 
locations. This methodology will be extended to model 
the collocations over time and location, and the 
relationship between the user-preferred usage of 
collocations and the profile of users. 
Acknowledgments 
Research of this paper was partially supported by 
National Science Council, Taiwan (NSC96-2628-E-002-
240-MY3) and Excellent Research Projects of National 
Taiwan University (96R0062-AE00-02). 
References 
Adamic, L.A., Glance, N. (2005). The Political 
Blogosphere and the 2004 U.S. Election: Divided 
They Blog. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International 
Workshop on Link Discovery, pp. 36--43. 
Burger, J.D., Henderson J.C. (2006). An Exploration of 
Observable Features Related to Blogger Age. In: 
Proceedings of AAAI 2006 Spring Symposium on 
Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs, pp. 
15--20. 
Doran, C., Griffith, J., Henderson, J. (2006). Highlights 
from 12 Months of Blogs. In: Proceedings of AAAI 
2006 Spring Symposium on Computational 
Approaches to Analysing Weblogs, pp. 30--33. 
Glance, N., Hurst, M., Tornkiyo, T. (2004). Blogpulse: 
Automated Trend Discovery for Weblogs. In: 
Proceedings of WWW 2004 Workshop on the 
Weblogging Ecosystem: Aggregation, Analysis, and 
Dynamics. 
Hurst, M. (2006). 24 Hours in the Blogosphere. In: 
Proceedings of AAAI 2006 Spring Symposium on 
Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs, pp. 
73--77. 
ICWSM (2007). http://www.icwsm.org/data.html 
Kim, J.H. (2005). Blog as an Oppositional Medium? A 
Semantic Network Analysis on the Iraq War Blogs. In: 
Internet Research 6.0: Internet Generations. 
 
Manning, C.D., Sch?tze, H. (1999). Foundations of 
Statistical Natural Language Processing, The MIT 
Press, London England. 
Mei, Q., Liu, C., Su, H., Zhai, C. (2006). A Probabilistic 
Approach to Spatiotemporal Theme Pattern Mining on 
Weblogs. In: Proceedings of the 15th International 
Conference on World Wide Web, Edinburgh, Scotland, 
pp. 533--542. 
Oka, M., Abe, H., Kato, K. (2006). Extracting Topics 
from Weblogs Through Frequency Segments. In: 
Proceedings of WWW 2006 Annual Workshop on the 
Weblogging Ecosystem: Aggregation, Analysis, and 
Dynamics. 
Teng, C.Y., Chen, H.H. (2006). Detection of Bloggers? 
Interest: Using Textual, Temporal, and Interactive 
Features. In: Proceeding of IEEE/WIC/ACM 
International Conference on Web Intelligence, pp. 
366--369. 
Teng, C.Y., Chen, H.H. (2007). Analyzing Temporal 
Collocations in Weblogs. In: Proceeding of 
International Conference on Weblogs and Social 
Media, 303--304. 
Thelwall, M. (2006). Blogs During the London Attacks: 
Top Information Sources and Topics. In: Proceedings 
of 3rd Annual Workshop on the Weblogging 
Ecosystem: Aggregation, Analysis and Dynamics. 
Thompson, G. (2003). Weblogs, Warblogs, the Public 
Sphere, and Bubbles. Transformations, 7(2). 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation II: Pie in the Sky, pages 29?36,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Attribution and the (Non-)Alignment of Syntactic and Discourse Arguments
of Connectives
Nikhil Dinesh and Alan Lee and Eleni Miltsakaki and Rashmi Prasad and Aravind Joshi
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
fnikhild,aleewk,elenimi,rjprasad,joshig@linc.cis.upenn.edu
Bonnie Webber
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, EH8 9LW Scotland
bonnie@inf.ed.ac.uk
Abstract
The annotations of the Penn Discourse
Treebank (PDTB) include (1) discourse
connectives and their arguments, and (2)
attribution of each argument of each con-
nective and of the relation it denotes. Be-
cause the PDTB covers the same text as
the Penn TreeBank WSJ corpus, syntac-
tic and discourse annotation can be com-
pared. This has revealed significant dif-
ferences between syntactic structure and
discourse structure, in terms of the argu-
ments of connectives, due in large part to
attribution. We describe these differences,
an algorithm for detecting them, and fi-
nally some experimental results. These re-
sults have implications for automating dis-
course annotation based on syntactic an-
notation.
1 Introduction
The overall goal of the Penn Discourse Treebank
(PDTB) is to annotate the million word WSJ cor-
pus in the Penn TreeBank (Marcus et al, 1993) with
a layer of discourse annotations. A preliminary re-
port on this project was presented at the 2004 work-
shop on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation (Miltsakaki
et al, 2004a), where we described our annotation
of discourse connectives (both explicit and implicit)
along with their (clausal) arguments.
Further work done since then includes the an-
notation of attribution: that is, who has expressed
each argument to a discourse connective (the writer
or some other speaker or author) and who has ex-
pressed the discourse relation itself. These ascrip-
tions need not be the same. Of particular interest is
the fact that attribution may or may not play a role
in the relation established by a connective. This may
lead to a lack of congruence between arguments at
the syntactic and the discourse levels. The issue of
congruence is of interest both from the perspective
of annotation (where it means that, even within a
single sentence, one cannot merely transfer the an-
notation of syntactic arguments of a subordinate or
coordinate conjunction to its discourse arguments),
and from the perspective of inferences that these an-
notations will support in future applications of the
PDTB.
The paper is organized as follows. We give a brief
overview of the annotation of connectives and their
arguments in the PDTB in Section 2. In Section 3,
we describe the annotation of the attribution of the
arguments of a connective and the relation it con-
veys. In Sections 4 and 5, we describe mismatches
that arise between the discourse arguments of a con-
nective and the syntactic annotation as provided by
the Penn TreeBank (PTB), in the cases where all the
arguments of the connective are in the same sen-
tence. In Section 6, we will discuss some implica-
tions of these issues for the theory and practice of
discourse annotation and their relevance even at the
level of sentence-bound annotation.
2 Overview of the PDTB
The PDTB builds on the DLTAG approach to dis-
course structure (Webber and Joshi, 1998; Webber
et al, 1999; Webber et al, 2003) in which con-
nectives are discourse-level predicates which project
predicate-argument structure on a par with verbs at
29
the sentence level. Initial work on the PDTB has
been described in Miltsakaki et al (2004a), Milt-
sakaki et al (2004b), Prasad et al (2004).
The key contribution of the PDTB design frame-
work is its bottom-up approach to discourse struc-
ture: Instead of appealing to an abstract (and arbi-
trary) set of discourse relations whose identification
may confound multiple sources of discourse mean-
ing, we start with the annotation of discourse con-
nectives and their arguments, thus exposing a clearly
defined level of discourse representation.
The PDTB annotates as explicit discourse connec-
tives all subordinating conjunctions, coordinating
conjunctions and discourse adverbials. These pred-
icates establish relations between two abstract ob-
jects such as events, states and propositions (Asher,
1993).1
We use Conn to denote the connective, and Arg1
and Arg2 to denote the textual spans from which the
abstract object arguments are computed.2 In (1), the
subordinating conjunction since establishes a tem-
poral relation between the event of the earthquake
hitting and a state where no music is played by a
certain woman. In all the examples in this paper, as
in (1), Arg1 is italicized, Arg2 is in boldface, and
Conn is underlined.
(1) She hasn?t played any music since the earthquake
hit.
What counts as a legal argument? Since we take
discourse relations to hold between abstract objects,
we require that an argument contains at least one
clause-level predication (usually a verb ? tensed or
untensed), though it may span as much as a sequence
of clauses or sentences. The two exceptions are
nominal phrases that express an event or a state, and
discourse deictics that denote an abstract object.
1For example, discourse adverbials like as a result are dis-
tinguished from clausal adverbials like strangely which require
only a single abstract object (Forbes, 2003).
2Each connective has exactly two arguments. The argument
that appears in the clause syntactically associated with the con-
nective, we call Arg2. The other argument is called Arg1. Both
Arg1 and Arg2 can be in the same sentence, as is the case for
subordinating conjunctions (e.g., because). The linear order of
the arguments will be Arg2 Arg1 if the subordinate clause ap-
pears sentence initially; Arg1 Arg2 if the subordinate clause ap-
pears sentence finally; and undefined if it appears sentence me-
dially. For an adverbial connective like however, Arg1 is in the
prior discourse. Hence, the linear order of its arguments will be
Arg1 Arg2.
Because our annotation is on the same corpus as
the PTB, annotators may select as arguments textual
spans that omit content that can be recovered from
syntax. In (2), for example, the relative clause is
selected as Arg1 of even though, and its subject can
be recovered from its syntactic analysis in the PTB.
In (3), the subject of the infinitival clause in Arg1 is
similarly available.
(2) Workers described ?clouds of blue dust? that hung
over parts of the factory even though exhaust fans
ventilated the air.
(3) The average maturity for funds open only to institu-
tions, considered by some to be a stronger indicator
because those managers watch the market closely,
reached a high point for the year ? 33 days.
The PDTB also annotates implicit connectives be-
tween adjacent sentences where no explicit connec-
tive occurs. For example, in (4), the two sentences
are contrasted in a way similar to having an explicit
connective like but occurring between them. Anno-
tators are asked to provide, when possible, an ex-
plicit connective that best describes the relation, and
in this case in contrast was chosen.
(4) The $6 billion that some 40 companies are looking to
raise in the year ending March 21 compares with only
$2.7 billion raise on the capital market in the previous
year. IMPLICIT - in contrast In fiscal 1984, before
Mr. Gandhi came into power, only $810 million
was raised.
When complete, the PDTB will contain approxi-
mately 35K annotations: 15K annotations of the 100
explicit connectives identified in the corpus and 20K
annotations of implicit connectives.3
3 Annotation of attribution
Wiebe and her colleagues have pointed out the
importance of ascribing beliefs and assertions ex-
pressed in text to the agent(s) holding or making
them (Riloff and Wiebe, 2003; Wiebe et al, 2004;
Wiebe et al, 2005). They have also gone a consid-
erable way towards specifying how such subjective
material should be annotated (Wiebe, 2002). Since
we take discourse connectives to convey semantic
predicate-argument relations between abstract ob-
jects, one can distinguish a variety of cases depend-
ing on the attribution of the discourse relation or its
3The annotation guidelines for the PDTB are available at
http://www.cis.upenn.edu/pdtb.
30
arguments; that is, whether the relation or arguments
are ascribed to the author of the text or someone
other than the author.
Case 1: The relation and both arguments are at-
tributed to the same source. In (5), the concessive
relation between Arg1 and Arg2, anchored on the
connective even though is attributed to the speaker
Dick Mayer, because he is quoted as having said
it. Even where a connective and its arguments are
not included in a single quotation, the attribution can
still be marked explicitly as shown in (6), where only
Arg2 is quoted directly but both Arg1 and Arg2 can
be attibuted to Mr. Prideaux. Attribution to some
speaker can also be marked in reported speech as
shown in the annotation of so that in (7).
(5) ?Now, Philip Morris Kraft General Foods? parent
company is committed to the coffee business and to
increased advertising for Maxwell House,? says Dick
Mayer, president of the General Foods USA division.
?Even though brand loyalty is rather strong for cof-
fee, we need advertising to maintain and strengthen
it.?
(6) B.A.T isn?t predicting a postponement because the
units ?are quality businesses and we are en-
couraged by the breadth of inquiries,? said Mr.
Prideaux.
(7) Like other large Valley companies, Intel also noted
that it has factories in several parts of the nation,
so that a breakdown at one location shouldn?t leave
customers in a total pinch.
Wherever there is a clear indication that a relation
is attributed to someone other than the author of the
text, we annotate the relation with the feature value
SA for ?speaker attribution? which is the case for
(5), (6), and (7). The arguments in these examples
are given the feature value IN to indicate that they
?inherit? the attribution of the relation. If the rela-
tion and its arguments are attributed to the writer,
they are given the feature values WA and IN respec-
tively.
Relations are attributed to the writer of the text by
default. Such cases include many instances of re-
lations whose attribution is ambiguous between the
writer or some other speaker. In (8), for example,
we cannot tell if the relation anchored on although
is attributed to the spokeswoman or the author of the
text. As a default, we always take it to be attributed
to the writer.
Case 2: One or both arguments have a different at-
tribution value from the relation. While the default
value for the attribution of an argument is the attribu-
tion of its relation, it can differ as in (8). Here, as in-
dicated above, the relation is attributed to the writer
(annotated WA) by default, but Arg2 is attributed to
Delmed (annotated SA, for some speaker other than
the writer, and other than the one establishing the
relation).
(8) The current distribution arrangement ends in March
1990 , although Delmed said it will continue to pro-
vide some supplies of the peritoneal dialysis prod-
ucts to National Medical, the spokeswoman said.
Annotating the corpus with attribution is neces-
sary because in many cases the text containing the
source of attribution is located in a different sen-
tence. Such is the case for (5) where the relation
conveyed by even though, and its arguments are at-
tributed to Dick Mayer.
We are also adding attribution values to the anno-
tation of the implicit connectives. Implicit connec-
tives express relations that are inferred by the reader.
In such cases, the author intends for the reader to
infer a discourse relation. As with explicit connec-
tives, we have found it useful to distinguish implicit
relations intended by the writer of the article from
those intended by some other author or speaker. To
give an example, the implicit relation in (9) is at-
tributed to the writer. However, in (10) both Arg1
and Arg2 have been expressed by the speaker whose
speech is being quoted. In this case, the implicit re-
lation is attributed to the speaker.
(9) Investors in stock funds didn?t panic the week-
end after mid-October?s 190-point market plunge.
IMPLICIT-instead Most of those who left stock
funds simply switched into money market funds.
(10) ?People say they swim, and that may mean they?ve
been to the beach this year,? Fitness and Sports. ?It?s
hard to know if people are responding truthfully.
IMPLICIT-because People are too embarrassed to
say they haven?t done anything.?
The annotation of attribution is currently under-
way. The final version of the PDTB will include an-
notations of attribution for all the annotated connec-
tives and their arguments.
Note that in the Rhetorical Structure Theory
(RST) annotation scheme (Carlson et al, 2003), at-
tribution is treated as a discourse relation. We, on
the other hand, do not treat attribution as a discourse
31
relation. In PDTB, discourse relations (associated
with an explicit or implicit connective) hold between
two abstracts objects, such as events, states, etc. At-
tribution relates a proposition to an entity, not to an-
other proposition, event, etc. This is an important
difference between the two frameworks. One conse-
quence of this difference is briefly discussed in Foot-
note 4 in the next section.
4 Arguments of Subordinating
Conjunctions in the PTB
A natural question that arises with the annotation
of arguments of subordinating conjunctions (SUB-
CONJS) in the PDTB is to what extent they can be
detected directly from the syntactic annotation in the
PTB. In the simplest case, Arg2 of a SUBCONJ is its
complement in the syntactic representation. This is
indeed the case for (11), where since is analyzed as
a preposition in the PTB taking an S complement
which is Arg2 in the PDTB, as shown in Figure 1.
(11) Since the budget measures cash flow, a new $1 di-
rect loan is treated as a $1 expenditure.
Furthermore, in (11), since together with its com-
plement (Arg2) is analyzed as an SBAR which mod-
ifies the clause a new $1 direct loan is treated as a
$1 expenditure, and this clause is Arg1 in the PDTB.
Can the arguments always be detected in this
way? In this section, we present statistics showing
that this is not the case and an analysis that shows
that this lack of congruence between the PDTB and
the PTB is not just a matter of annotator disagree-
ment.
Consider example (12), where the PTB requires
annotators to include the verb of attribution said
and its subject Delmed in the complement of al-
though. But although as a discourse connective de-
nies the expectation that the supply of dialysis prod-
ucts will be discontinued when the distribution ar-
rangement ends. It does not convey the expectation
that Delmed will not say such things. On the other
hand, in (13), the contrast established by while is be-
tween the opinions of two entities i.e., advocates and
their opponents.4
4This distinction is hard to capture in an RST-based pars-
ing framework (Marcu, 2000). According to the RST-based an-
notation scheme (Carlson et al, 2003) ?although Delmed said?
and ?while opponents argued? are elementary discourse units
(12) The current distribution arrangement ends in March
1990, although Delmed said it will continue to pro-
vide some supplies of the peritoneal dialysis prod-
ucts to National Medical, the spokeswoman said.
(13) Advocates said the 90-cent-an-hour rise, to $4.25 an
hour by April 1991, is too small for the working poor,
while opponents argued that the increase will still
hurt small business and cost many thousands of
jobs.
In Section 5, we will identify additional cases. What
we will then argue is that it will be insufficient to
train an algorithm for identifying discourse argu-
ments simply on the basis of syntactically analysed
text.
We now present preliminary measurements of
these and other mismatches between the two corpora
for SUBCONJS. To do this we describe a procedural
algorithm which builds on the idea presented at the
start of this section. The statistics are preliminary in
that only the annotations of a single annotator were
considered, and we have not attempted to exclude
cases in which annotators disagree.
We consider only those SUBCONJS for which both
arguments are located in the same sentence as the
connective (which is the case for approximately 99%
of the annotated instances). The syntactic configura-
tion of such relations pattern in a way shown in Fig-
ure 1. Note that it is not necessary for any of Conn,
Arg1, or Arg2 to have a single node in the parse tree
that dominates it exactly. In Figure 1 we do obtain a
single node for Conn, and Arg2 but for Arg1, it is
the set of nodes fNP; V Pg that dominate it exactly.
Connectives like so that, and even if are not domi-
nated by a single node, and cases where the annota-
tor has decided that a (parenthetical) clausal element
is not minimally necessary to the interpretation of
Arg2 will necessitate choosing multiple nodes that
dominate Arg2 exactly.
Given the node(s) in the parse tree that dominate
Conn (fINg in Figure 1), the algorithm we present
tries to find node(s) in the parse tree that dominate
Arg1 and Arg2 exactly using the operation of tree
subtraction (Sections 4.1, and 4.2). We then discuss
its execution on (11) in Section 4.3.
annotated in the same way: as satellites of the relation Attribu-
tion. RST does not recognize that satellite segments, such as
the ones given above, sometimes participate in a higher RST
relation along with their nuclei and sometimes not.
32
S12
SBAR NP
A new $1 direct
loan
VP
is treated as a
$1 expenditure
IN S
2
the budget mea-
sures cash flowsince
Given N
Conn
= fINg, our goal is to find N
Arg1
=
fNP; V Pg, and N
Arg2
= fS
2
g. Steps:
 h
Conn
= IN
 x
Conn+Arg2
= SBAR  parent(h
Conn
)
 x
Conn+Arg1+Arg2
= S
12
 lowest Ancestor
parent(x
Conn+Arg2
)
with la-
bel S or SBAR. Note that x 2 Ancestor
x
 N
Arg2
= x
Conn+Arg2
 N
Conn
= SBAR  fINg
= fS
2
g
 N
Arg1
= x
Conn+Arg1+Arg2
  fx
Conn+Arg2
g
= S
12
  fSBARg
= fNP; V Pg
Figure 1: The syntactic configuration for (11), and the execution of the tree subtraction algorithm on this configuration.
4.1 Tree subtraction
We will now define the operation of tree subtraction
the graphical intuition for which is given in Figure
2. Let T be the set of nodes in the tree.
Definition 4.1. The ancestors of any node t 2 T ,
denoted by Ancestor
t
 T is a set of nodes such
that t 2 Ancestor
t
and parent(u; t) ) ([u 2
Ancestor
t
] ^ [Ancestor
u
Proceedings of the Workshop on Sentiment and Subjectivity in Text, pages 31?38,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Annotating Attribution in the Penn Discourse TreeBank
Rashmi Prasad and Nikhil Dinesh and Alan Lee and Aravind Joshi
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
 
rjprasad,nikhild,aleewk,joshi  @linc.cis.upenn.edu
Bonnie Webber
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, EH8 9LW Scotland
bonnie@inf.ed.ac.uk
Abstract
An emerging task in text understanding
and generation is to categorize information
as fact or opinion and to further attribute
it to the appropriate source. Corpus an-
notation schemes aim to encode such dis-
tinctions for NLP applications concerned
with such tasks, such as information ex-
traction, question answering, summariza-
tion, and generation. We describe an anno-
tation scheme for marking the attribution
of abstract objects such as propositions,
facts and eventualities associated with dis-
course relations and their arguments an-
notated in the Penn Discourse TreeBank.
The scheme aims to capture the source and
degrees of factuality of the abstract ob-
jects. Key aspects of the scheme are anno-
tation of the text spans signalling the attri-
bution, and annotation of features record-
ing the source, type, scopal polarity, and
determinacy of attribution.
1 Introduction
News articles typically contain a mixture of infor-
mation presented from several different perspec-
tives, and often in complex ways. Writers may
present information as known to them, or from
some other individual?s perspective, while further
distinguishing between, for example, whether that
perspective involves an assertion or a belief. Re-
cent work has shown the importance of recogniz-
ing such perspectivization of information for sev-
eral NLP applications, such as information extrac-
tion, summarization, question answering (Wiebe
et al, 2004; Stoyanov et al, 2005; Riloff et al,
2005) and generation (Prasad et al, 2005). Part of
the goal of such applications is to distinguish be-
tween factual and non-factual information, and to
identify the source of the information. Annotation
schemes (Wiebe et al, 2005; Wilson and Wiebe,
2005; PDTB-Group, 2006) encode such distinc-
tions to facilitate accurate recognition and repre-
sentation of such perspectivization of information.
This paper describes an extended annotation
scheme for marking the attribution of discourse re-
lations and their arguments annotated in the Penn
Discourse TreeBank (PDTB) (Miltsakaki et al,
2004; Prasad et al, 2004; Webber et al, 2005), the
primary goal being to capture the source and de-
grees of factuality of abstract objects. The scheme
captures four salient properties of attribution: (a)
source, distinguishing between different types of
agents to whom AOs are attributed, (b) type, re-
flecting the degree of factuality of the AO, (c) sco-
pal polarity of attribution, indicating polarity re-
versals of attributed AOs due to surface negated
attributions, and (d) determinacy of attribution, in-
dicating the presence of contexts canceling the en-
tailment of attribution. The scheme also describes
annotation of the text spans signaling the attri-
bution. The proposed scheme is an extension of
the core scheme used for annotating attribution
in the first release of the PDTB (Dinesh et al,
2005; PDTB-Group, 2006). Section 2 gives an
overview of the PDTB, Section 3 presents the ex-
tended annotation scheme for attribution, and Sec-
tion 4 presents the summary.
2 The Penn Discourse TreeBank (PDTB)
The PDTB contains annotations of discourse rela-
tions and their arguments on the Wall Street Jour-
nal corpus (Marcus et al, 1993). Following the
approach towards discourse structure in (Webber
et al, 2003), the PDTB takes a lexicalized ap-
31
proach towards the annotation of discourse rela-
tions, treating discourse connectives as the an-
chors of the relations, and thus as discourse-level
predicates taking two abstract objects (AOs) as
their arguments. For example, in (1), the subordi-
nating conjunction since is a discourse connective
that anchors a TEMPORAL relation between the
event of the earthquake hitting and a state where
no music is played by a certain woman. (The 4-
digit number in parentheses at the end of examples
gives the WSJ file number of the example.)
(1) She hasn?t played any music since the earthquake
hit. (0766)
There are primarily two types of connectives
in the PDTB: ?Explicit? and ?Implicit?. Explicit
connectives are identified form four grammati-
cal classes: subordinating conjunctions (e.g., be-
cause, when, only because, particularly since),
subordinators (e.g., in order that), coordinating
conjunctions (e.g., and, or), and discourse adver-
bials (e.g., however, otherwise). In the examples
in this paper, Explicit connectives are underlined.
For sentences not related by an Explicit connec-
tive, annotators attempt to infer a discourse rela-
tion between them by inserting connectives (called
?Implicit? connectives) that best convey the in-
ferred relations. For example, in (2), the inferred
CAUSAL relation between the two sentences was
annotated with because as the Implicit connective.
Implicit connectives together with their sense clas-
sification are shown here in small caps.
(2) Also unlike Mr. Ruder, Mr. Breeden appears to
be in a position to get somewhere with his agenda.
Implicit=BECAUSE (CAUSE) As a former White
House aide who worked closely with Congress, he
is savvy in the ways of Washington. (0955)
Cases where a suitable Implicit connective
could not be annotated between adjacent sentences
are annotated as either (a) ?EntRel?, where the
second sentence only serves to provide some fur-
ther description of an entity in the first sentence
(Example 3); (b) ?NoRel?, where no discourse re-
lation or entity-based relation can be inferred; and
(c) ?AltLex?, where the insertion of an Implicit
connective leads to redundancy, due to the rela-
tion being alternatively lexicalized by some ?non-
connective? expression (Example 4).
(3) C.B. Rogers Jr. was named chief executive officer of
this business information concern. Implicit=EntRel
Mr. Rogers, 60 years old, succeeds J.V. White, 64,
who will remain chairman and chairman of the ex-
ecutive committee (0929).
(4) One in 1981 raised to $2,000 a year from $1,500
the amount a person could put, tax-deductible,
into the tax-deferred accounts and widened cov-
erage to people under employer retirement plans.
Implicit=AltLex (consequence) [This caused] an ex-
plosion of IRA promotions by brokers, banks, mu-
tual funds and others. (0933)
Arguments of connectives are simply labelled
Arg2, for the argument appearing in the clause
syntactically bound to the connective, and Arg1,
for the other argument. In the examples here, Arg1
appears in italics, while Arg2 appears in bold.
The basic unit for the realization of an AO ar-
gument of a connective is the clause, tensed or un-
tensed, but it can also be associated with multiple
clauses, within or across sentences. Nominaliza-
tions and discourse deictics (this, that), which can
also be interpreted as AOs, can serve as the argu-
ment of a connective too.
The current version of the PDTB also contains
attribution annotations on discourse relations and
their arguments. These annotations, however, used
the earlier core scheme which is subsumed in the
extended scheme described in this paper.
The first release of the Penn Discourse
TreeBank, PDTB-1.0 (reported in PDTB-
Group (2006)), is freely available from
http://www.seas.upenn.edu/?pdtb.
PDTB-1.0 contains 100 distinct types of Explicit
connectives, with a total of 18505 tokens, anno-
tated across the entire WSJ corpus (25 sections).
Implicit relations have been annotated in three
sections (Sections 08, 09, and 10) for the first
release, totalling 2003 tokens (1496 Implicit
connectives, 19 AltLex relations, 435 EntRel
tokens, and 53 NoRel tokens). The corpus also
includes a broadly defined sense classification for
the implicit relations, and attribution annotation
with the earlier core scheme. Subsequent releases
of the PDTB will include Implicit relations
annotated across the entire corpus, attribution
annotation using the extended scheme proposed
here, and fine-grained sense classification for both
Explicit and Implicit connectives.
3 Annotation of Attribution
Recent work (Wiebe et al, 2005; Prasad et al,
2005; Riloff et al, 2005; Stoyanov et al, 2005),
has shown the importance of recognizing and rep-
resenting the source and factuality of information
in certain NLP applications. Information extrac-
tion systems, for example, would perform better
32
by prioritizing the presentation of factual infor-
mation, and multi-perspective question answering
systems would benefit from presenting informa-
tion from different perspectives.
Most of the annotation approaches tackling
these issues, however, are aimed at performing
classifications at either the document level (Pang
et al, 2002; Turney, 2002), or the sentence or word
level (Wiebe et al, 2004; Yu and Hatzivassiloglou,
2003). In addition, these approaches focus primar-
ily on sentiment classification, and use the same
for getting at the classification of facts vs. opin-
ions. In contrast to these approaches, the focus
here is on marking attribution on more analytic se-
mantic units, namely the Abstract Objects (AOs)
associated with predicate-argument discourse re-
lations annotated in the PDTB, with the aim of
providing a compositional classification of the fac-
tuality of AOs. The scheme isolates four key prop-
erties of attribution, to be annotated as features:
(1) source, which distinguishes between different
types of agents (Section 3.1); (2) type, which en-
codes the nature of relationship between agents
and AOs, reflecting the degree of factuality of the
AO (Section 3.2); (3) scopal polarity, which is
marked when surface negated attribution reverses
the polarity of the attributed AO (Section 3.3), and
(4) determinacy, which indicates the presence of
contexts due to which the entailment of attribu-
tion gets cancelled (Section 3.4). In addition, to
further facilitate the task of identifying attribution,
the scheme also aims to annotate the text span
complex signaling attribution (Section 3.5)
Results from annotations using the earlier attri-
bution scheme (PDTB-Group, 2006) show that a
significant proportion (34%) of the annotated dis-
course relations have some non-Writer agent as
the source for either the relation or one or both ar-
guments. This illustrates the simplest case of the
ambiguity inherent for the factuality of AOs, and
shows the potential use of the PDTB annotations
towards the automatic classification of factuality.
The annotations also show that there are a variety
of configurations in which the components of the
relations are attributed to different sources, sug-
gesting that recognition of attributions may be a
complex task for which an annotated corpus may
be useful. For example, in some cases, a rela-
tion together with its arguments is attributed to the
writer or some other agent, whereas in other cases,
while the relation is attributed to the writer, one
or both of its arguments is attributed to different
agent(s). For Explicit connectives. there were 6
unique configurations, for configurations contain-
ing more than 50 tokens, and 5 unique configura-
tions for Implicit connectives.
3.1 Source
The source feature distinguishes between (a) the
writer of the text (?Wr?), (b) some specific agent
introduced in the text (?Ot? for other), and (c)
some generic source, i.e., some arbitrary (?Arb?)
individual(s) indicated via a non-specific reference
in the text. The latter two capture further differ-
ences in the degree of factuality of AOs with non-
writer sources. For example, an ?Arb? source for
some information conveys a higher degree of fac-
tuality than an ?Ot? source, since it can be taken
to be a ?generally accepted? view.
Since arguments can get their attribution
through the relation between them, they can be an-
notated with a fourth value ?Inh?, to indicate that
their source value is inherited from the relation.
Given this scheme for source, there are broadly
two possibilities. In the first case, a relation
and both its arguments are attributed to the same
source, either the writer, as in (5), or some other
agent (here, Bill Biedermann), as in (6). (At-
tribution feature values assigned to examples are
shown below each example; REL stands for the
discourse relation denoted by the connective; At-
tribution text spans are shown boxed.)
(5) Since the British auto maker became a takeover
target last month, its ADRs have jumped about
78%. (0048)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Wr Inh Inh
(6) ?The public is buying the market when in re-
ality there is plenty of grain to be shipped,?
said Bill Biedermann  (0192)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Ot Inh Inh
As Example (5) shows, text spans for im-
plicit Writer attributions (corresponding to im-
plicit communicative acts such as I write, or I say),
are not marked and are taken to imply Writer attri-
bution by default (see also Section 3.5).
In the second case, one or both arguments have
a different source from the relation. In (7), for
example, the relation and Arg2 are attributed to
the writer, whereas Arg1 is attributed to another
agent (here, Mr. Green). On the other hand, in (8)
and (9), the relation and Arg1 are attributed to the
writer, whereas Arg2 is attributed to another agent.
33
(7) When Mr. Green won a $240,000 verdict in a land
condemnation case against the state in June 1983,
he says Judge O?Kicki unexpectedly awarded him
an additional $100,000. (0267)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Wr Ot Inh
(8) Factory orders and construction outlays were largely
flat in December while purchasing agents said
manufacturing shrank further in October. (0178)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Wr Inh Ot
(9) There, on one of his first shopping trips, Mr.
Paul picked up several paintings at stunning prices.
 Afterward, Mr. Paul is said by Mr. Guterman
to have phoned Mr. Guterman, the New York de-
veloper selling the collection, and gloated. (2113)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Wr Inh Ot
Example (10) shows an example of a generic
source indicated by an agentless passivized attri-
bution on Arg2 of the relation. Note that pas-
sivized attributions can also be associated with
a specific source when the agent is explicit, as
shown in (9). ?Arb? sources are also identified
by the occurrences of adverbs like reportedly, al-
legedly, etc.
(10) Although index arbitrage is said to add liquidity to
markets, John Bachmann,  says too much liq-
uidity isn?t a good thing. (0742)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Wr Ot Arb
We conclude this section by noting that ?Ot?
is used to refer to any specific individual as the
source. That is, no further annotation is provided
to indicate who the ?Ot? agent in the text is. Fur-
thermore, as shown in Examples (11-12), multiple
?Ot? sources within the same relation do not indi-
cate whether or not they refer to the same or differ-
ent agents. However, we assume that the text span
annotations for attribution, together with an inde-
pendent mechanism for named entity recognition
and anaphora resolution can be employed to iden-
tify and disambiguate the appropriate references.
(11) Suppression of the book, Judge Oakes observed ,
would operate as a prior restraint and thus involve
the First Amendment. Moreover, and
here Judge Oakes went to the heart of the question ,
?Responsible biographers and historians con-
stantly use primary sources, letters, diaries, and
memoranda. (0944)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Wr Ot Ot
(12) The judge was considered imperious, abrasive and
ambitious, those who practiced before him say .
Yet, despite the judge?s imperial bearing, no one
ever had reason to suspect possible wrongdoing,
says John Bognato, president of Cambria  .(0267)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Wr Ot Ot
3.2 Type
The type feature signifies the nature of the rela-
tion between the agent and the AO, leading to dif-
ferent inferences about the degree of factuality of
the AO. In order to capture the factuality of the
AOs, we start by making a three-way distinction
of AOs into propositions, facts and eventualities
(Asher, 1993). This initial distinction allows for
a more semantic, compositional approach to the
annotation and recognition of factuality. We de-
fine the attribution relations for each AO type as
follows: (a) Propositions involve attribution to an
agent of his/her (varying degrees of) commitment
towards the truth of a proposition; (b) Facts in-
volve attribution to an agent of an evaluation to-
wards or knowledge of a proposition whose truth
is taken for granted (i.e., a presupposed proposi-
tion); and (c) Eventualities involve attribution to
an agent of an intention/attitude towards an even-
tuality. In the case of propositions, a further dis-
tinction is made to capture the difference in the de-
gree of the agent?s commitment towards the truth
of the proposition, by distinguishing between ?as-
sertions? and ?beliefs?. Thus, the scheme for the
annotation of type ultimately uses a four-way dis-
tinction for AOs, namely between assertions, be-
liefs, facts, and eventualities. Initial determination
of the degree of factuality involves determination
of the type of the AO.
AO types can be identified by well-defined se-
mantic classes of verbs/phrases anchoring the at-
tribution. We consider each of these in turn.
Assertions are identified by ?assertive predi-
cates? or ?verbs of communication? (Levin, 1993)
such as say, mention, claim, argue, explain etc.
They take the value ?Comm? (for verbs of Com-
munication). In Example (13), the Ot attribution
on Arg1 takes the value ?Comm? for type. Im-
plicit writer attributions, as in the relation of (13),
also take (the default) ?Comm?. Note that when an
argument?s attribution source is not inherited (as
in Arg1 in this example) it also takes its own inde-
pendent value for type. This example thus conveys
that there are two different attributions expressed
within the discourse relation, one for the relation
and the other for one of its arguments, and that
both involve assertion of propositions.
34
(13) When Mr. Green won a $240,000 verdict in a land
condemnation case against the state in June 1983,
he says Judge O?Kicki unexpectedly awarded him
an additional $100,000. (0267)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Wr Ot Inh
[Type] Comm Comm Null
In the absence of an independent occurrence of
attribution on an argument, as in Arg2 of Exam-
ple (13), the ?Null? value is used for the type on
the argument, meaning that it needs to be derived
by independent (here, undefined) considerations
under the scope of the relation. Note that unlike
the ?Inh? value of the source feature, ?Null? does
not indicate inheritance. In a subordinate clause,
for example, while the relation denoted by the sub-
ordinating conjunction may be asserted, the clause
content itself may be presupposed, as seems to be
the case for the relation and Arg2 of (13). How-
ever, we found these differences difficult to deter-
mine at times, and consequently leave this unde-
fined in the current scheme.
Beliefs are identified by ?propositional attitude
verbs? (Hintikka, 1971) such as believe, think, ex-
pect, suppose, imagine, etc. They take the value
?PAtt? (for Propostional Attitude). An example of
a belief attribution is given in (14).
(14) Mr. Marcus believes spot steel prices will continue
to fall through early 1990 and then reverse them-
selves. (0336)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Ot Inh Inh
[Type] PAtt Null Null
Facts are identified by the class of ?factive and
semi-factive verbs? (Kiparsky and Kiparsky, 1971;
Karttunen, 1971) such as regret, forget, remember,
know, see, hear etc. They take the value ?Ftv?
(for Factive) for type (Example 15). In the current
scheme, this class does not distinguish between
the true factives and semi-factives, the former in-
volving an attitute/evaluation towards a fact, and
the latter involving knowledge of a fact.
(15) The other side , he argues knows Giuliani has al-
ways been pro-choice, even though he has personal
reservations. (0041)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Ot Inh Inh
[Type] Ftv Null Null
Lastly, eventualities are identified by a class of
verbs which denote three kinds of relations be-
tween agents and eventualities (Sag and Pollard,
1991). The first kind is anchored by verbs of influ-
ence like persuade, permit, order, and involve one
agent influencing another agent to perform (or not
perform) an action. The second kind is anchored
by verbs of commitment like promise, agree, try,
intend, refuse, decline, and involve an agent com-
mitting to perform (or not perform) an action. Fi-
nally, the third kind is anchored by verbs of ori-
entation like want, expect, wish, yearn, and in-
volve desire, expectation, or some similar mental
orientation towards some state(s) of affairs. These
sub-distinctions are not encoded in the annotation,
but we have used the definitions as a guide for
identifying these predicates. All these three types
are collectively referred to and annotated as verbs
of control. Type for these classes takes the value
?Ctrl? (for Control). Note that the syntactic term
control is used because these verbs denote uni-
form structural control properties, but the primary
basis for their definition is nevertheless semantic.
An example of the control attribution relation an-
chored by a verb of influence is given in (16).
(16) Eward and Whittington had planned to leave the bank
earlier, but Mr. Craven had persuaded them to re-
main until the bank was in a healthy position.
(1949)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Ot Inh Inh
[Type] Ctrl Null Null
Note that while our use of the term source ap-
plies literally to agents responsible for the truth of
a proposition, we continue to use the same term
for the agents for facts and eventualities. Thus,
for facts, the source represents the bearers of atti-
tudes/knowledge, and for considered eventualities,
the source represents intentions/attitudes.
3.3 Scopal Polarity
The scopal polarity feature is annotated on re-
lations and their arguments to primarily identify
cases when verbs of attribution are negated on the
surface - syntactically (e.g., didn?t say, don?t think)
or lexically (e.g., denied), but when the negation in
fact reverses the polarity of the attributed relation
or argument content (Horn, 1978). Example (17)
illustrates such a case. The ?but? clause entails an
interpretation such as ?I think it?s not a main con-
sideration?, for which the negation must take nar-
row scope over the embedded clause rather than
the higher clause. In particular, the interpretation
of the CONTRAST relation denoted by but requires
that Arg2 should be interpreted under the scope
of negation.
35
(17) ?Having the dividend increases is a supportive ele-
ment in the market outlook, but I don?t think it?s a
main consideration,? he says. (0090)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Ot Inh Inh
[Type] Comm Null PAtt
[Polarity] Null Null Neg
To capture such entailments with surface nega-
tions on attribution verbs, an argument of a con-
nective is marked ?Neg? for scopal polarity when
the interpretation of the connective requires the
surface negation to take semantic scope over the
lower argument. Thus, in Example (17), scopal
polarity is marked as ?Neg? for Arg2.
When the neg-lowered interpretations are not
present, scopal polarity is marked as the default
?Null? (such as for the relation and Arg1 of Ex-
ample 17).
It is also possible for the surface negation of at-
tribution to be interpreted as taking scope over the
relation, rather than an argument. We have not ob-
served this in the corpus yet, so we describe this
case with the constructed example in (18). What
the example shows is that in addition to entailing
(18b) - in which case it would be annotated par-
allel to Example (17) above - (18a) can also en-
tail (18c), such that the negation is intrepreted as
taking semantic scope over the ?relation? (Lasnik,
1975), rather than one of the arguments. As the
scopal polarity annotations for (18c) show, low-
ering of the surface negation to the relation is
marked as ?Neg? for the scopal polarity of the re-
lation.
(18) a. John doesn?t think Mary will get cured because
she took the medication.
b.   John thinks that because Mary took the
medication, she will not get cured.
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Ot Inh Inh
[Type] PAtt Null Null
[Polarity] Null Neg Null
c.   John thinks that Mary will get cured
not because she took the medication (but be-
cause she has started practising yoga.)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Ot Inh Inh
[Type] PAtt Null Null
[Polarity] Neg Null Null
We note that scopal polarity does not capture
the appearance of (opaque) internal negation that
may appear on arguments or relations themselves.
For example, a modified connective such as not
because does not take ?Neg? as the value for sco-
pal polarity, but rather ?Null?. This is consistent
with our goal of marking scopal polarity only for
lowered negation, i.e., when surface negation from
the attribution is lowered to either the relation or
argument for interpretation.
3.4 Determinacy
The determinacy feature captures the fact that the
entailment of the attribution relation can be made
indeterminate in context, for example when it ap-
pears syntactically embedded in negated or condi-
tional contexts.. The annotation attempts to cap-
ture such indeterminacy with the value ?Indet?.
Determinate contexts are simply marked as the de-
fault ?Null?. For example, the annotation in (19)
conveys the idea that the belief or opinion about
the effect of higher salaries on teachers? perfor-
mance is not really attributed to anyone, but is
rather only being conjectured as a possibility.
(19) It is silly libel on our teachers to think they would
educate our children better if only they got a few
thousand dollars a year more. (1286)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Ot Inh Inh
[Type] PAtt Null Null
[Polarity] Null Null Null
[Determinacy] Indet Null Null
3.5 Attribution Spans
In addition to annotating the properties of attribu-
tion in terms of the features discussed above, we
also propose to annotate the text span associated
with the attribution. The text span is annotated as
a single (possibly discontinuous) complex reflect-
ing three of the annotated features, namely source,
type and scopal polarity. The attribution span also
includes all non-clausal modifiers of the elements
contained in the span, for example, adverbs and
appositive NPs. Connectives, however, are ex-
cluded from the span, even though they function
as modifiers. Example (20) shows a discontinu-
ous annotation of the attribution, where the paren-
thetical he argues is excluded from the attribution
phrase the other side knows, corresponding to the
factive attribution.
(20) The other side , he argues knows Giuliani has al-
ways been pro-choice, even though he has personal
reservations. (0041)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Ot Inh Inh
[Type] Ftv Null Null
[Polarity] Null Null Null
[Determinacy] Null Null Null
Inclusion of the fourth feature, determinacy,
is not ?required? to be included in the current
scheme because the entailment cancelling contexts
36
can	 be very complex. For example, in Exam-
ple (19), the conditional interpretation leading to
the indeterminacy of the relation and its arguments
is due to the syntactic construction type of the en-
tire sentence. It is not clear how to annotate the
indeterminacy induced by such contexts. In the
example, therefore, the attribution span only in-
cludes the anchor for the type of the attribution.
Spans for implicit writer attributions are left un-
marked since there is no corresponding text that
can be selected. The absence of a span annota-
tion is simply taken to reflect writer attribution,
together with the ?Wr? value on the source fea-
ture.
Recognizing attributions is not trivial since they
are often left unexpressed in the sentence in which
the AO is realized, and have to be inferred from the
prior discourse. For example, in (21), the relation
together with its arguments in the third sentence
are attributed to Larry Shapiro, but this attribution
is implicit and must be inferred from the first sen-
tence.
(21) ?There are certain cult wines that can command these
higher prices,? says Larry Shapiro of Marty?s, 
?What?s different is that it is happening with young
wines just coming out. We?re seeing it partly because
older vintages are growing more scarce.? (0071)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Ot Inh Inh
The spans for such implicit ?Ot? attributions
mark the text that provides the inference of the
implicit attribution, which is just the closest occur-
rence of the explicit attribution phrase in the prior
text.
The final aspect of the span annotation is that
we also annotate non-clausal phrases as the an-
chors attribution, such as prepositional phrases
like according to X, and adverbs like reportedly,
allegedly, supposedly. One such example is shown
in (22).
(22) No foreign companies bid on the Hiroshima project,
according to the bureau . But the Japanese prac-
tice of deep discounting often is cited by Ameri-
cans as a classic barrier to entry in Japan?s mar-
ket. (0501)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Wr Ot Inh
[Type] Comm Comm Null
[Polarity] Null Null Null
[Determinacy] Null Null Null
Note that adverbials are free to pick their own type
of attribution. For example, supposedly as an at-
tribution adverb picks ?PAtt? as the value for type.
3.6 Attribution of Implicit Relations
Implicit connectives and their arguments in the
PDTB are also marked for attribution. Implicit
connectives express relations that are inferred by
the reader. In such cases, the writer intends for
the reader to infer a discourse relation. As with
Explicit connectives, implicit relations intended
by the writer of the article are distinguished from
those intended by some other agent introduced by
the writer. For example, while the implicit rela-
tion in Example (23) is attributed to the writer, in
Example (24), both Arg1 and Arg2 have been
expressed by someone else whose speech is be-
ing quoted: in this case, the implicit relation is at-
tributed to the other agent.
(23) The gruff financier recently started socializing in
upper-class circles. Implicit = FOR EXAMPLE
(ADD.INFO) Although he says he wasn?t keen on go-
ing, last year he attended a New York gala where
his daughter made her debut. (0800)
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Wr Inh Inh
[Type] Comm Null Null
[Polarity] Null Null Null
[Determinacy] Null Null Null
(24) ?We asked police to investigate why they are
allowed to distribute the flag in this way.
Implicit=BECAUSE (CAUSE) It should be con-
sidered against the law,?
said Danny Leish, a spokesman for the association .
REL Arg1 Arg2
[Source] Ot Inh Inh
[Type] Comm Null Null
[Polarity] Null Null Null
[Determinacy] Null Null Null
For implicit relations, attribution is also anno-
tated for AltLex relations but not for EntRel and
NoRel, since the former but not the latter refer to
the presense of discourse relations.
4 Summary
In this paper, we have proposed and described an
annotation scheme for marking the attribution of
both explicit and implicit discourse connectives
and their arguments in the Penn Discourse Tree-
Bank. We discussed the role of the annotations for
the recognition of factuality in natural language
applications, and defined the notion of attribution.
The scheme was presented in detail with exam-
ples, outlining the ?feature-based annotation? in
terms of the source, type, scopal polarity, and
determinacy associated with attribution, and the
?span annotation? to highlight the text reflecting
the attribution features.
37
Ackno


wledgements
The Penn Discourse TreeBank project is partially
supported by NSF Grant: Research Resources,
EIA 02-24417 to the University of Pennsylva-
nia (PI: A. Joshi). We are grateful to Lukasz
Abramowicz and the anonymous reviewers for
useful comments.
References
Nicholas. Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects
in Discourse. Kluwer, Dordrecht.
Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi
Prasad, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie Webber. 2005.
Attribution and the (non)-alignment of syntactic and
discourse arguments of connectives. In Proceedings
of the ACL Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Anno-
tation II: Pie in the Sky, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Jaakko Hintikka. 1971. Semantics for propositional at-
titudes. In L. Linsky, editor, Reference and Modal-
ity, pages 145?167. Oxford.
Laurence Horn. 1978. Remarks on neg-raising. In
Peter Cole, editor, Syntax and Semantics 9: Prag-
matics. Academic Press, New York.
Lauri Karttunen. 1971. Some observations on factiv-
ity. Papers in Linguistics, 4:55?69.
Carol Kiparsky and Paul Kiparsky. 1971. Fact. In
D. D. Steinberg and L. A. Jakobovits, editors, Se-
mantics: An Interdisciplinary Reader in Philosophy,
Linguistics and Psychology, pages 345?369. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge.
Howard Lasnik. 1975. On the semantics of nega-
tion. In Contemporary Research in Philosophi-
cal Logic and Linguistic Semantics, pages 279?313.
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes And Alter-
nations: A Preliminary Investigation. University of
Chicago Press.
Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of english: The Penn Treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 19(2):313?330.
Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, and
Bonnie Webber. 2004. Annotating discourse con-
nectives and their arguments. In Proceedings of the
HLT/NAACL Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus An-
notation, pages 9?16, Boston, MA.
Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up? sentiment classification using
machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-2002), pages 79?86.
Rashmi Prasad, Eleni Miltsakaki, Aravind Joshi, and
Bonnie Webber. 2004. Annotation and data mining
of the Penn Discourse Treebank. In Proceedings of
the ACL Workshop on Discourse Annotation, pages
88?95, Barcelona, Spain.
Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan
Lee, Eleni Miltsakaki, and Bonnie Webber. 2005.
The Penn Discourse TreeBank as a resource for nat-
ural language generation. In Proceedings of the
Corpus Linguistics Workshop on Using Corpora for
NLG.
Ellen Riloff, Janyce Wiebe, and Willian Phillips. 2005.
Exploiting subjectivity classification to improve in-
formation extraction. In Proceedings of the 20th Na-
tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-
2005).
Ivan A. Sag and Carl Pollard. 1991. An integrated
theory of complement control. Language, 67(1):63?
113.
The PDTB-Group. 2006. The Penn Discourse Tree-
Bank 1.0 Annotation Manual. Technical Report
IRCS-06-01, Institute for Research in Cognitive Sci-
ence, University of Pennsylvania.
Veseli Stoyanov, Claire Cardie, and Janyce Wiebe.
2005. Multi-perspective question answering using
the OpQA corpus. In Proceedings of HLT-EMNLP.
Peter D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down?
semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classi-
fication of reviews. In Proceedings of ACL 2002,
pages 417?424.
Bonnie Webber, Aravind Joshi, M. Stone, and Alis-
tair Knott. 2003. Anaphora and discourse structure.
Computational Linguistics, 29(4):545?587.
Bonnie Webber, Aravind Joshi, Eleni Miltsakaki,
Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, and
K. Forbes. 2005. A short introduction to the PDTB.
In Copenhagen Working Papers in Language and
Speech Processing.
Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, Rebecca Bruce,
Matthew Bell, and Melanie Martin. 2004. Learn-
ing subjective language. Computational Linguistics,
30(3):277?308.
Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, , and Claire Cardie.
2005. Annotating expressions of opinions and emo-
tions in language. Language Resources and Evalu-
ation, 1(2).
Theresa Wilson and Janyce Wiebe. 2005. Annotating
attributions and private states. In Proceedings of the
ACL Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation
II: Pie in the Sky, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Hon Yu and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou. 2003. To-
wards answering opinion questions: separating facts
from opinions and identifying the polarity of opinion
sentences. In Proceedings of EMNLP-2003, pages
129?136, Saporo, Japan.
38
BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 92?93,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
A Pilot Annotation to Investigate Discourse Connectivity in Biomedical Text  
 
 
 
Hong Yu, Nadya Frid, Susan McRoy Rashmi Prasad, Alan Lee, Aravind Joshi 
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee University of Pennsylvania 
P.O.Box 413 3401 Walnut Street 
Milwaukee, WI 53201 Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA 
Hongyu,frid,mcroy@uwm.edu Rjprasad,aleewk,joshi@seas.upenn.edu
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
The goal of the Penn Discourse Treebank 
(PDTB) project is to develop a large-scale cor-
pus, annotated with coherence relations marked 
by discourse connectives. Currently, the primary 
application of the PDTB annotation has been to 
news articles. In this study, we tested whether 
the PDTB guidelines can be adapted to a differ-
ent genre. We annotated discourse connectives 
and their arguments in one 4,937-token full-text 
biomedical article. Two linguist annotators 
showed an agreement of 85% after simple con-
ventions were added. For the remaining 15% 
cases, we found that biomedical domain-specific 
knowledge is needed to capture the linguistic 
cues that can be used to resolve inter-annotator 
disagreement. We found that the two annotators 
were able to reach an agreement after discussion. 
Thus our experiments suggest that the PDTB an-
notation can be adapted to new domains by mini-
mally adjusting the guidelines and by adding 
some further domain-specific linguistic cues. 
1 Introduction 
Large scale annotated corpora, e.g., the Penn 
TreeBank (PTB) project (Marcus et al 1993), 
have played an important role in text-mining. 
The Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB) 
(http://www.seas.upenn.edu/~pdtb) (Prasad et al 
2008a) annotates the argument structure, seman-
tics, and attribution of discourse connectives and 
their arguments. The current release of PDTB-
2.0 contains the annotations of 1,808 Wall Street 
Journal articles (~1 million words) from the 
Penn TreeBank (Marcus et al 1993) II distribu-
tion and a total of 40,600 discourse connective  
tokens (Prasad et al 2008b). This work exam-
ines whether the PDTB annotation guidelines 
can be adapted to a different genre, the biomedi-
cal literature.  
2 Notation 
A discourse connective can be defined as a 
word or multiword expression that signals a 
discourse relation. Discourse connectives 
can be subordinating conjunctions (e.g., be-
cause, when, although), coordinating con-
junctions (e.g., but, or, nor) and adverbials 
(e.g., however, as a result, for example). A 
discourse connective takes in two argu-
ments, Arg1 and Arg2. Arg2 is the argument 
that appears in the clause that is syntacti-
cally bound to the connective and Arg1 is 
the other argument. In the sentence ?John 
failed the exam because he was lazy? the dis-
course connective is underlined, Arg1 ap-
pears in italics and Arg2 appears in bold. 
3 A Pilot Annotation 
Following the PDTB annotation manual (Prasad 
et al 2008b), we conducted a pilot annotation of 
discourse connectivity in biomedical text. As an 
initial step, we only annotated the three most 
92
important components of a discourse relation; 
namely, a discourse connective and its two ar-
guments; we did not annotate attribution. Two 
linguist annotators independently annotated one 
full-text biomedical article (Verpy et al 1999) 
that we randomly selected. The article is 4,937 
tokens long. When the annotation work was 
completed, we measured the inter-annotator 
agreement, following the PDTB exact match 
criterion (Miltsakaki et al 2004). According to 
this criterion, a discourse relation is in dis-
agreement if there is disagreement on any text-
span (i.e., the discourse connective or any of its 
two arguments). In addition, we also measured 
the agreement in the components (i.e., discourse 
connectives and the arguments). We discussed 
the annotation results and made suggestions to 
adapt the PDTB guidelines to biomedical text.  
4 Results and Discussion 
The first annotator identified 74 discourse con-
nectives, and the second annotator identified 75, 
68 of which were the same as those identified by 
the first annotator. The combined total number 
of discourse connectives was 81. The overall 
agreement in discourse connective identification 
was 68/81=84%.  
 
Of the 68 discourse connectives that were anno-
tated by both annotators, 31 were an exact 
match, 31 had an exact match for Arg1, and 54 
had an exact match for Arg2. The overall 
agreement for the 68 discourse relations is 
45.6% for exact match, 45.6% for Arg1, and 
79.4% for Arg2. The PDTB also reported a 
higher level of agreement in annotating Arg2 
than in annotating Arg1 (Miltsakaki et al 2004). 
We manually analyzed the cases with disagree-
ment. We found the disagreements are nearly all 
related to the annotation of citation references, 
supplementary clauses, and other conventions. 
When a few conventions for these cases were 
added, the inter-annotator agreement went up to 
85%. We also found that different interpretation 
of a relation and its arguments by annotators 
plays an important role for the remaining 15% 
inconsistency, and domain-specific knowledge 
is necessary to resolve such cases.   
 
5 New Conventions 
After the completion of the pilot annotation and 
the discussion, we decided to add the following 
conventions to the PDTB annotation guidelines 
to address the characteristics of biomedical text: 
 
i. Citation references are to be annotated as 
a part of an argument because the inclu-
sion will benefit many text-mining tasks 
including identifying the semantic rela-
tions among citations. 
ii. Clausal supplements (e.g., relative or 
parenthetical constructions) that modify  
arguments but are not minimally 
necessary for the interpretation of the 
relation,  are annotated as part of the 
arguments. 
iii. We will annotate a wider variety of 
nominalizations as arguments than 
allowed by the PDTB guidelines. 
 
We anticipate that these changes will both de-
crease the amount of effort required for annota-
tion and increase the reliability of the 
annotation. 
6 References 
Marcus M, Santorini B, Marcinkiewicz M (1993) 
Building a Large Annotated Corpus of Eng-
lish: The Penn Treebank. Computational 
Linguistics 19 
Miltsakaki E, Prasad R, Joshi A, Webber B (2004) 
Annotating discourse connectives and their 
arguments. Paper presented at Proceedings 
of the NAACL/HLT Workshop: Frontiers in 
Corpus Annotation 
Prasad R, Dinesh N, Lee A, Miltsakaki E, Robaldo L, 
Joshi A, Webber B (2008a) The Penn Dis-
course Treebank 2.0. Paper presented at The 
6th International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC). Marra-
kech, Morroco 
Prasad R, Miltsakaki E, Dinesh N, Lee A, Joshi A, 
Robaldo L, Webber B (2008b) The Penn 
Discourse TreeBank 2.0 Annotation Manual. 
Technical Report: IRCS-08-01 
Verpy E, Leibovici M, Petit C (1999) Characteriza-
tion of otoconin-95, the major protein of 
murine otoconia, provides insights into the 
formation of these inner ear biominerals. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96:529-534 
 
 
93
