A Transitive Model for Extracting Translation Equivalents of Web 
Queries through Anchor Text Mining 
 
Wen-Hsiang Lu 
Institute of Information Science 
Academia Sinica; 
Dept. of Computer Science and 
Information Engineering 
National Chiao Tung University 
Hsinchu 300, Taiwan, ROC 
whlu@iis.sinica.edu.tw 
Lee-Feng Chien 
Institute of Information 
Science, Academia Sinica 
Nangang 115, Taiwan, ROC 
lfchien@iis.sinica.edu.tw 
Hsi-Jian Lee 
Dept. of Computer Science and 
Information Engineering 
National Chiao Tung University 
 Hsinchu 300, Taiwan, ROC 
 hjlee@csie.nctu.edu.tw 
 
Abstract  
One of the existing difficulties of 
cross-language information retrieval (CLIR) 
and Web search is the lack of appropriate 
translations of new terminology and proper 
names. Different from conventional 
approaches, in our previous research we 
developed an approach for exploiting Web 
anchor texts as live bilingual corpora and 
reducing the existing difficulties of query 
term translation. Although Web anchor texts, 
undoubtedly, are very valuable multilingual 
and wide-scoped hypertext resources, not 
every particular pair of languages contains 
sufficient anchor texts in the Web to extract 
corresponding translations in the language 
pair. For more generalized applications, in 
this paper we extend our previous approach 
by adding a phase of transitive (indirect) 
translation via an intermediate (third) 
language, and propose a transitive model to 
further exploit anchor-text mining in term 
translation extraction applications. 
Preliminary experimental results show that 
many query translations which cannot be 
obtained using the previous approach can be 
extracted with the improved approach. 
 
1. Introduction 
Cross-language information retrieval (CLIR), 
addressing the special need where users can 
query in one language and retrieve relevant 
documents written or indexed in another 
language, has become an important issue in the 
research of information retrieval (Dumais et al, 
1996; Davis et al, 1997; Ballesteros & Croft, 
1998; Nie et al, 1999). However, its application 
to practical Web search services has not lived up 
to expectations, since they suffer a major 
bottleneck that lacks up-to-date bilingual 
lexicons containing the translation of popular 
query terms 1  such as proper nouns (Kwok, 
2001). 
To enable capability of CLIR, existing IR 
systems mostly rely on bilingual dictionaries for 
cross-lingual retrieval. In these systems, queries 
submitted in a source language normally have to 
be translated into a target language by means of 
simple dictionary lookup. These 
dictionary-based techniques are limited in 
real-world applications, since the queries given 
by users often contain proper nouns. 
Another kind of popular approaches to 
dealing with query translation based on 
corpus-based techniques uses a parallel corpus 
containing aligned sentences whose translation 
pairs are corresponding to each other (Brown et 
al., 1993; Dagan et al, 1993; Smadja et al, 
1996). Although more reliable translation 
equivalents can be extracted by these techniques, 
the unavailability of large enough parallel 
corpora for various subject domains and 
multiple languages is still in a thorny situation. 
On the other hand, the alternative approach 
using comparable or unrelated text corpora were 
studied by Rapp (1999) and Fung et al (1998). 
This task is more difficult due to lack of parallel 
correlation between document or sentence pairs.  
                                                   
1
 In our collected query logs, most of user queries 
contain only one or two words, so we use query term, 
query or term interchangeably in this paper. 
In our previous research we have developed 
an approach to extracting translations of Web 
queries through mining of Web anchor texts and 
link structures (Lu, et al, 2001). This approach 
exploits Web anchor texts as live bilingual 
corpora to reduce the existing difficulties of 
query translation.  Anchor text sets, which are 
composed of a number of anchor texts linking to 
the same pages, may contain similar description 
texts in multiple languages, thus it is more likely 
that user?s queries and their corresponding 
translations frequently appear together in the 
same anchor text sets. The anchor-text mining 
approach has been found effective particularly 
for proper names, such as international company 
names, names of foreign movie stars, worldwide 
events, e.g., ?Yahoo?, ?Anthrax?, ?Harry Potter?, 
etc. 
Discovering useful knowledge from the 
potential resource of Web anchor texts is still 
not fully explored. According to our previous 
experiments, the extracted translation 
equivalents might not be reliable enough when a 
query term whose corresponding translations 
either appear infrequently in the same anchor 
text sets or even do not appear together. 
Especially, the translation process will be 
unavailable if there is a lack of sufficient anchor 
texts for a particular language pair. Although 
Web anchor texts, undoubtedly, are live 
multilingual resources, not every particular pair 
of languages contains sufficient anchor texts. 
To deal with the problems, this paper 
extends the previous anchor-text-based approach 
by adding a phase of indirect translation via an 
intermediate language. For a query term which 
is unable to be translated, our idea is to translate 
it into a set of translation candidates in an 
intermediate language, and then seek for the 
most likely translation from the candidates, 
which are translated from the intermediate 
language into the target language (Gollins et al, 
2001; Borin, 2000). We therefore propose a 
transitive translation model to further exploit 
anchor text mining for translating Web queries. 
A series of experiments has been conducted to 
realize the performance of the proposed 
approach. Preliminary experimental results show 
that many query translations which cannot be 
obtained using the previous approach can be 
extracted with the improved approach. 
 
2 The Previous Approach  
For query translation, the anchor-text-based 
approach is a new technique compared with the 
bilingual-dictionary- and parallel-corpus-based 
approaches. In this section we will introduce the 
basic concept of the anchor-text-based approach. 
For more details please refer to our initial work 
(Lu, et al, 2001). 
 
2.1 Anchor-Text Set 
An anchor text is the descriptive part of an 
out-link of a Web page. It represents a brief 
description of the linked Web page. For a Web 
page (or URL) ui, its anchor-text set is defined 
as all of the anchor texts of the links, i.e., ui's 
in-links, pointing to ui. In general, the 
anchor-text set records ui's alternative concepts 
and textual expressions such as titles and 
headings, which are cited by other Web pages. 
With different preferences, conventions and 
language competence, the anchor-text set could 
be composed of multilingual phrases, short texts, 
acronyms, or even ui's URL. For a query term 
appearing in the anchor-text set, it is likely that 
its corresponding translations also appear 
together. The anchor-text sets can be considered 
as a comparable corpus of translated texts, from 
the viewpoint of translation extraction.  
 
2.2 The Probabilistic Inference Model 
To determine the most probable target 
translation t for source query term s, we 
developed a probabilistic inference model 
(Wong et al, 1995). This model is adopted for 
estimating probability value between source 
query and each translation candidate that 
co-occur in the same anchor-text sets. The 
estimation assumes that the anchor texts linking 
to the same pages may contain similar terms 
with analogous concepts. Therefore, a candidate 
translation has a higher chance to be an effective 
translation if it is written in the target language 
and frequently co-occurs with the source query 
term in the same anchor-text sets. In the field of 
Web research, it has been proven that the use of 
link structures is effective for estimating the 
authority of Web pages (Kleinberg, 1998; 
Chakrabarti et al, 1998). The model further 
assumes that the translation candidates in the 
anchor-text sets of the pages with higher 
authority may have more reliability in 
confidence. The similarity estimation function 
based on the probabilistic inference model is 
defined below: 
 
(1)              . 
)()|(
)()|(
                    
))((
)(
)(
)()(
1
1
1
1
?
?
?
?
=
=
=
=
?
?
=
??
??
=
?
?
=?
n
i
n
i
n
i
n
i
ii
ii
i
i
uPutsP
uPutsP
utsP
utsP
tsP
tsP
tsP
 
 
The above measure is adopted to estimate the 
degree of similarity between source term s and 
target translation t. The measure is estimated 
based on their co-occurrence in the anchor text 
sets of the concerned Web pages U = {u1, u2, ... 
un}, in which ui is a page of concern and P(ui) is 
the probability value used to measure the 
authority of page ui. By considering the link 
structures and concept space of Web pages, P(ui) 
is estimated with the probability of ui being 
linked, and its estimation is defined as follows: 
P(ui)= L(ui)/?j=1,n L(uj), where L(uj)= the number 
of in-links of page uj. Such estimation is 
simplified from HITS algorithm (Kleinberg, 
1998).  
In addition, we assume that s and t are 
independent given ui, then the joint probability 
P(s?t|ui) is equal to the product of P(s|ui) and 
P(t|ui), and the similarity measure becomes: 
(2). 
)(]||)|()|([
)(||
 
)(
1
1
?
?
=
=
?+
?
=?
n
i
n
i
iiiii
iii
uP)u)P(tuP(sutPusP
u)Pu)P(tuP(s
tsP
 
The values of P(s|ui) and P(t|ui) are defined to 
be estimated by calculating the fractions of the 
numbers of ui?s in-links containing s and t over 
L(ui), respectively. 
Therefore, a candidate translation has a higher 
confidence value to be an effective translation if 
it frequently co-occurs with the source term in 
the anchor-text sets of the pages with higher 
authority. 
 
2.3 The Estimation Process  
For each source term, the probabilistic inference 
model extracts the most probable translation that 
maximizes the estimation. The estimation 
process based on the model was developed to 
extract term translations through mining of 
real-world anchor-text sets. The process contains 
three major computational modules: anchor-text 
extraction, term extraction and term translation 
extraction. The anchor-text extraction module 
was constructed to collect pages from the Web 
and build up a corpus of anchor-text sets. On the 
other hand, for each given source term s, the 
term extraction module extracts key terms as the 
translation candidate set from the anchor-text 
sets of the pages containing s. At last, the term 
translation module extracts the translation that 
maximizes the similarity estimation. For more 
details about the estimation process, please refer 
to our previous work (Lu et al, 2001). 
To make a difference from the translation 
process via an intermediate language, the above 
process is called direct translation, and the 
adopted model called direct translation model 
hereafter. Meanwhile, we will use function 
Pdirect in Equation (3) for the estimation of the 
direct translation. 
 
 
(3)                         ).(log),( tsPtsPdirect ?=
 
3 The Improved Approach 
3.1 The Indirect Translation Model  
As mentioned above, for those query terms 
whose corresponding translations either appear 
infrequently in the same anchor text sets or do 
not appear together, the estimation with equation 
(2) is basically unreliable. To increase the 
possibility of translation extraction especially 
for the source terms whose corresponding 
translations do not co-occur, we add a phase of 
indirect translation through an intermediate 
language. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, our 
idea is to obtain the corresponding target 
translation ???? in simplified Chinese by 
translating the source term ???? in traditional 
Chinese into an intermediate term ?Sony? in 
English, and then seek for translating ?Sony? 
into a target term ???? in simplified Chinese. 
For both the source query and the target 
translation, we assume that their translations in 
the intermediate language are the same and can 
be found.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The above assumption is not unrealistic. 
For example, it is possible to find the Chinese 
translation of a Japanese movie star through 
submitting his/her English name to a search 
engine and browsing the retrieved Chinese pages 
containing the English name. The Web contains 
large amounts of multilingual pages, and 
English is the most likely intermediate language 
between other languages. Based on this 
assumption, we extend the probabilistic 
inference model and propose an indirect 
translation model as the following formula: 
 
(4)      ).(log)(log                    
)]()(log[                    
),(log),(
tmPmsP
tmPmsP
tmmsPtsPindirect
?+?=
????
??=
 
 
, where m is the transitive translation of s and t 
in the intermediate language, P(s?m) and 
P(m?t) are the probability values obtained with 
the direct translation model which can be 
calculated by Equation (2). 
 
3.2 The Transitive Translation Model 
The transitive model is developed to combine 
both the direct and indirect translation models 
and improve the translation accuracy. By 
combining Equation (3) and (4), the transitive 
translation model is defined as follows: 
 
??
? >
=
(5)                           otherwise.  ),,(
 if  ),,(
),(
tsPindirect
?t)Pdirect(s,tsPdirect
tsPtrans
 
, where ? is a predefined threshold value. 
 
4 Experimental Results 
4.1 Analysis of Anchor-Text Sets and 
Query Logs 
In the initial experiments, we took traditional 
Chinese and simplified Chinese as the source 
and target language respectively, and used 
English as the intermediate language. We have 
collected 1,980,816 traditional Chinese Web 
pages in Taiwan. Among these pages, 109,416 
pages whose anchor-text sets contained both 
traditional Chinese and English terms were 
taken as the anchor-text set corpus. We also 
collected 2,179,171 simplified Chinese Web 
pages in China and extracted 157,786 pages 
whose anchor-text sets contained both simplified 
Chinese and English terms. In addition, through 
merging the two Web page collections into a 
larger one, we extracted 4,516 Web pages 
containing both traditional and simplified 
Chinese terms. The three comparable corpora 
provide a potential resource of translation pairs 
for some Web queries. In order to realize the 
feasibility in translating query terms via 
transitive translation, we aim at finding out the 
corresponding simplified Chinese translations of 
traditional Chinese query terms via English as 
the intermediate language.  
Fig. 1. An abstract diagram showing the 
concepts of direct translation and indirect 
translation. 
m 
t s 
Sony 
(English) 
??
(Traditional 
Chinese) 
s : source term 
t : target translation 
m : intermediate translation 
??
(Simplified 
Chinese) 
We also collected popular query terms with 
the logs from two real-world Chinese search 
engines in Taiwan, i.e., Dreamer and GAIS2. 
The Dreamer log contained 228,566 unique 
query terms from a period of over 3 months in 
1998, and the GAIS log contained 114,182 
unique query terms from a period of two weeks 
in 1999. There were 9,709 most popular query 
terms whose frequencies were above 10 in both 
of the logs and 1,230 of them were English 
terms. After filtering out the terms which were 
used locally, we obtained 258 terms. These 
query terms were taken as the major test set in 
the term translation extraction analysis. The 
traditional Chinese translations of the test query 
terms were determined manually and taken as 
the source query set in the following 
experiments. 
According to our previous work (Lu et al, 
2001), there were three methods for term 
extraction, which is a necessary process step in 
extracting translations from anchor-text corpus. 
Since we have not yet collected a query log in 
simplified Chinese, in the following experiments 
we adopted the PAT-tree-based keyword 
extraction method, which is an efficient 
statistics-based approach that can extract longer 
terms without using a dictionary (Chien, 1997). 
To evaluate the achieved performance of 
query translation, we used the average top-n 
inclusion rate as a metric. For a set of test query 
terms, its top-n inclusion rate is defined as the 
percentage of the query terms whose effective 
translation(s) can be found in the top n extracted 
translations. 
 
4.2 Performance with the Direct 
Translation Model 
In order to realize the feasibility of the transitive 
translation model, we carried out some 
experiments based on the direct translation 
models and the three different anchor-text set 
corpora in the first step. Table 1 shows the 
results of the obtained top-5 inclusion rates, 
                                                   
2
 These two search engines are second-tier portals in 
Taiwan, whose logs have certain representatives in 
the Chinese communities, and whose URL?s are as 
follows: http://www.dreamer.com.tw/ and 
http://gais.cs.cu.edu.tw/. 
where terms ?TC?, ?SC? and ?ENG? represent 
traditional Chinese, simplified Chinese and 
English terms respectively. The performance of 
translating TC into SC is worse than that of the 
other two since the size of the anchor-text set 
corpus containing both TC and SC is relatively 
small in comparison with the others. This is why 
we are pursuing in this paper to integrate the 
direct translation with the indirect translation via 
a third language. However, the performance of 
the direct translation from TC to SC is used as a 
reference in comparison with our proposed 
models in the following experiments.  
 
Table 1. Top-n inclusion rates obtained with the 
direct translation model and the three specific 
language pairs corpora. 
Type Top1 Top2 Top3 Top4 Top5 
TC=>SC 35.7% 43.0% 46.9% 49.6% 51.2% 
TC=>ENG 68.6% 82.2% 85.7% 88.0% 88.8% 
ENG=>SC 45.3% 55.8% 59.3% 61.6% 64.0% 
 
4.3 Performance with the Indirect and 
Transitive Translation Models 
To realize the improvement using the transitive 
translation model, some further experiments 
were conducted. As shown in Table 2, the 
indirect and transitive translation models 
outperform than the direct translation model. As 
mentioned above, the size of the anchor-text 
corpus that contains both TC and SC is small. 
The indirect translation model is, therefore, 
helpful to find out the corresponding translations 
for some terms with low-frequency values in the 
corpora. For example, the traditional Chinese 
term ???? ? was found can obtain its 
corresponding translation equivalent ????? 
in simplified Chinese via the intermediate 
translation ?Siemens?, which cannot be found 
only using the direct translation. 
By examining the top-1 translations 
obtained with the three different models, it was 
found that the inclusion rates can be from 44.2% 
using the indirect translation to 49.2% using the 
transitive translation model. Table 3 illustrates 
some of the translations extracted using the 
transitive translation model. 
 
Table 2. Top-n inclusion rates obtained with 
different models. 
Model Top1 Top2 Top3 Top4 Top5 
Direct 
Translation 
35.7% 43.0% 46.9% 49.6% 51.2% 
Indirect 
Translation 
44.2% 55.1% 58.0% 59.7% 60.5% 
Transitive 
Translation 
49.2% 58.1% 60.9% 61.6% 62.0% 
Combination 
of Transitive 
Translation 
and Lexicon 
55.8% 60.8% 64.0% 65.9% 67.8% 
 
4.4 Performance with an Integration of 
Lexicon Lookup 
An additional experiment was also made to 
compare with the use of a translation lexicon for 
query translation. The lexicon contained more 
than 23,948 word/phrase entries in both 
traditional Chinese and simplified Chinese. It 
was found the top-1 inclusion rate that using the 
lexicon lookup was 12.4% which is obviously 
lower than the 49.2% that using the proposed 
transitive translation model. In addition, the 
top-1 inclusion rate can reach to 55.8% (see the 
last row of Table 2) if both of the approaches are 
combined. With the combined approach, the  
translation(s) of a query term is picked up from 
the lexicon if such a translation is already in the 
lexicon, otherwise it is obtained based on the 
transitive translation model.  
 
5 Concluding Remarks 
Anchor-text set corpus is a valuable resource for 
extracting translations of Web queries. How to 
exploit such kind of corpora in query translation 
is a challenging and potential research task. In 
this paper, we extend our previous approach by 
proposing a transitive translation model and 
achieve some improvements on translating those 
queries whose translations cannot be extracted 
using the previous approach. The improved 
approach has been proven particularly useful for 
the specific language pairs whose anchor texts 
are insufficient. However, there are still some 
problems need to be further investigated in the 
future. 
 
References  
Ballesteros, L. and Croft, W. B. (1997) Phrasal 
Translation and Query Expansion Techniques for 
Cross-Language Information Retrieval, 
Proceedings of ACM-SIGIR ?97, pp. 84-91. 
Borin, L. (2000) You?ll Take the High Road and I?ll 
Take the Low Road: Using a Third Language to 
Improve Bilingual Word Alignment, Proceedings 
of the 18th COLING, pp. 97-103. 
Brown, P., Pietra, S. A. D., Pietra, V. D. J., Mercer, R. 
L. (1993) The Mathematics of Machine Translation, 
Computational Linguistics, 19(2), pp. 263-312. 
Chakrabarti, S., Dom, B., Gibson, D., Kleinberg, J., 
Raghavan, P., Rajagopalan, S. (1998) Automatic 
Resource List Compilation by Analysing Hyperlink 
Structure and Associated Text, Proceedings of the 
seventh World Wide Web Conference. 
Chien, L. F. (1997) PAT-Tree-Based Keyword 
Extraction for Chinese Information Retrieval, 
Proceedings of ACM-SIGIR ?97, pp. 50-59. 
Dagan, I., Church, K. W., Gale, W. A (1993) Robust 
Bilingual Word Alignment for Machine Aided 
Translation. Proceedings of the Workshop on Very 
Large Corpora, pp. 1-8. 
Davis, M. and Ogden, W. C. (1997) Quilt: 
Implementing a large-scale cross-language text 
retrieval system, Proceedings of ACM-SIGIR?97 
Conference, pp. 92-98. 
Dumais, S. T., Landauer, T. K., Littman, M. L. (1996) 
Automatic Cross-linguistic Information Retrieval 
Using Latent Semantic Indexing, SIGIR?96 
Workshop on Cross-Linguistic Information 
Retrieval, pp. 16-24. 
Fung, P. and Yee, L. Y. (1998) An IR Approach for 
Translating New Words from Nonparallel, 
Comparable Texts, Proceedings of The 36th 
Annual Conference of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, pp. 414-420. 
Gollins, T., Sanderson, M. (2001) Improving Cross 
language Information with Triangulated 
Translation, Proceedings of ACM-SIGIR2001 
Conference, pp. 90-95. 
Kleinberg, J. (1998) Authoritative Sources in a 
Hyperlinked Environment, Proceedings of 9th 
ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms. 
Kwok, K. L. (2001) NTCIR-2 Chinese, Cross 
Language Retrieval Experiments Using PIRCS, 
Proceedings of NTCIR workshop meeting. 
Lu, W. H., Chien, L. F., Lee, H. J. (2001) Anchor 
Text Mining for Translation of Web Queries, 
Proceedings of The 2001 IEEE International 
Conference on Data Mining. 
Nie, J. Y., Isabelle, P., Simard, M., and Durand, R. 
(1999) Cross-language Information Retrieval 
Based on Parallel Texts and Automatic Mining of 
Parallel Texts from the Web, Proceedings of 
ACM-SIGIR?99 Conference. 
Rapp, R. (1999) Automatic Identification of Word 
Translations from Unrelated English and German 
Corpora, Proceedings of The 37th Annual 
Conference of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Smadja, F., McKeown, K., Hatzivassiloglou, V. 
(1996) Translating Collocations for Bilingual 
Lexicons: A Statistical Approach, Computational 
Linguistics, 22(1), pp. 1-38. 
Wong, S. K. M., Yao Y. Y. (1995) On Modeling 
Information Retrieval with Probabilistic Inference, 
ACM transactions on Information Systems, Vol.13, 
pp. 38-68. 
 
 
Table 3. Some examples of extracted target translations with the three different models. (the asterisk 
indicates the correct translation) 
 
 
Top-5 extracted target translations in simplified Chinese  Source terms in 
traditional Chinese Direct Translation  
Model 
Indirect Translation 
Model 
Transitive Translation Model 
???(Siemens) Not available 
???* (Siemens) 
??(Company) 
??(China) 
??(website) 
??(cooperation) 
???* (Siemens) 
??(Company) 
??(China) 
??(website) 
??(cooperation) 
??(Compaq) Not available ??* (Compaq) 
????(computer company) 
??(company) 
??(America) 
??(computer) 
??* (Compaq) 
????(computer company) 
??(company) 
??(America) 
??(computer) 
??(Sony) 
 
??* (Sony) 
???(our company) 
??* (Sony) 
??(record) 
???(Chinese version) 
??* (Sony) 
??* (Sony) 
???(movie site) 
??(entertainment) 
????(record company) 
??* (Sony) 
??* (Sony) 
???(movie site) 
??(entertainment) 
????(record company) 
 
