Translation Selection through Source Word Sense Disambiguation
and Target Word Selection
Hyun Ah Lee
yz
and Gil Chang Kim
y
y
Dept. of EECS, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST),
373-1 Kusong-Dong Yusong-Gu Taejon 305-701 Republic of Korea
z
Daumsoft Inc., Daechi-Dong 946-12 Kangnam-Gu Seoul 135-280 Republic of Korea
halee@csone.kaist.ac.kr, gckim@cs.kaist.ac.kr
Abstract
A word has many senses, and each sense can
be mapped into many target words. Therefore,
to select the appropriate translation with a cor-
rect sense, the sense of a source word should be
disambiguated before selecting a target word.
Based on this observation, we propose a hybrid
method for translation selection that combines
disambiguation of a source word sense and se-
lection of a target word. Knowledge for transla-
tion selection is extracted from a bilingual dic-
tionary and target language corpora. Dividing
translation selection into the two sub-problems,
we can make knowledge acquisition straightfor-
ward and select more appropriate target words.
1 Introduction
In machine translation, translation selection is
a process that selects an appropriate target lan-
guage word corresponding to a word in a source
language. Like other problems in natural lan-
guage processing, knowledge acquisition is cru-
cial for translation selection. Therefore, many
researchers have endeavored to extract knowl-
edge from existing resources.
As masses of language resources become avail-
able, statistical methods have been attempted
for translation selection and shown practical re-
sults. Some of the approaches have used a bilin-
gual corpus as a knowledge source based on the
idea of Brown et al (1990), but they are not
preferred in general since a bilingual corpus is
hard to come by. Though some latest approach-
es have exploited word co-occurrence that is ex-
tracted from a monolingual corpus in a target
language (Dagan and Itai, 1994; Prescher et al,
2000; Koehn and Knight, 2001), those methods
often fail in selecting appropriate words because
they do not consider sense ambiguity of a target
word.
In a bilingual dictionary, senses of a word are
classied into several sense divisions and also its
translations are grouped by each sense division.
Therefore, when one looks up the translation
of a word in a dictionary, she/he ought to re-
solve the sense of a word in a source language
sentence, and then choose a target word among
translations corresponding to the sense. In this
paper, the fact that a word has many senses
and each sense can be mapped into many tar-
get words (Lee et al, 1999) is referred to as the
`word-to-sense and sense-to-word' relationship,
based on which we propose a hybrid method for
translation selection.
In our method, translation selection is taken
as the combined problem of sense disambigua-
tion of a source language word and selection of
a target language word. To disambiguate the
sense of a source word, we employ both a dic-
tionary based method and a target word co-
occurrence based method. In order to select a
target word, the co-occurrence based method is
also used.
We introduce three measures for translation
selection: sense preference, sense probability
and word probability. In a bilingual dictionary,
example sentences are listed for each sense di-
vision of a source word. The similarity between
those examples and an input sentence can serve
as a measure for sense disambiguation, which we
dene as sense preference. In the bilingual dic-
tionary, target words are also recorded for each
sense division. Since the set of those words can
model each sense, we can calculate the probabil-
ity of the sense by applying the co-occurrence
based method to the set of words. We dene
the estimated probability as sense probability,
which is taken for the other measure of sense
disambiguation. Using co-occurrence, the prob-
ability of selecting a word from the set of trans-
lations can be calculated. We dene it as word
probability, which is a measure for word selec-
tion. Merging sense preference, sense probabili-
ty and word probability, we compute preference
for each translation, and then choose a target
word with the highest translation preference as
a translation.
2 Translation Selection based on
`word-to-sense and sense-to-word'
The `word-to-sense and sense-to-word' relation-
ship means that a word in a source language
could have multiple senses, each of which might
be mapped into various words in a target lan-
guage. As shown in examples below, a Korean
verb `meok-da' has many senses (work, deaf, eat,
etc.). Also `kkae-da' has three senses (break,
hatch, wake), among which the break sense of
`kkae-da' is mapped into multiple words such
as `break', `smash' and `crack'. In that case, if
break

kkae-da
wakehatch
break smash hatch awakewake_up
  (jeobsi-reul kkae-da)
? (X) hatch a dish
? (O) break a dish
? (O) smash a dish
? (O) crack a dish
crack
work

meok-da
eatdeaf
saw bite deaf takeeatcut
?.
dye have
 	 (jeomsim-eul meok-da)
? (X) saw a lunch
? (?) eat a lunch
? (O) have a lunch
? (O) take a lunch
`hatch' is selected as a translation of `kkae-da' in
a sentence `jeobsi-reul kkae-da', the translation
must be wrong because the sense of `kkae-da'
in the sentence is break rather than hatch. In
contrast, any word of the break sense of `kkae-
da' forms a well-translated sentence. Howev-
er, selecting a correct sense does not always
guarantee a correct translation. If the sense of
`meok-da' in `jeomsim-eul meok-da' is correctly
disambiguated as eat but an inappropriate tar-
get word is selected, an improper or unnatural
translation will be produced like `eat a lunch'.
Therefore, in order to get a correct transla-
tion, such a target word must be selected that
has the right sense of a source word and form-
s a proper target language sentence. Previous
approaches on translation selection usually try
to translate a source word directly into a target
word without considering the sense. Thus, they
increase the complexity of the problem and suf-
Target
Language
Corpus
Input
Sentence
Get
Sense
Preference
Get
Word
Probability
Sense Definition &
Example Sentence
Bilingual
Dictionary
Sense & Taget
Word Mapping
Word-level
Translation
Get
Sense
Probability
Combine
spf, sp, wp
WordNet Target WordCooccurrence
Sense
Disambiguation
Word
Selection
Figure 1: Our process of translation selection
fer from the problem of knowledge acquisition
and incorrect selection of translation.
In this paper, we propose a method for
translation selection that reects `word-to-sense
and sense-to-word' relationship. We divide the
problem of translation selection into sense dis-
ambiguation of a source word and selection of
a target word. Figure 1 shows our process of
selecting translation. We introduce three mea-
sures for translation selection: sense preference
(spf) and sense probability (sp) for sense disam-
biguation, and word probability (wp) for word
selection.
Figure 2 shows a part of an English-English-
Korean Dictionary (EssEEK, 1995)
1
. As shown
in the gure, example sentences and denition
sentences are listed for each sense of a source
word. In the gure, example sentences of the
destroy sense of `break' consist of words such as
`cup', `piece', and `thread', and those for the vio-
late sense consist of words such as `promise' and
`contract', which can function as indicators for
the sense of `break'. We calculate sense pref-
erence of a word for each sense by estimating
similarity between words in an input sentence
and words in example and denition sentences.
Each sense of a source word can be mapped
into a set of translations. As shown in the ex-
ample, the break sense of `kkae-da' is mapped
into the set f`break', `smash', `crack'g and some
words in the set can replace each other in a
translated sentence like `break/smash/crack a
1
The English-English-Korean Dictionary used here is
an English-Korean one, where English denitions are
paired with Korean translations.
break breikvbroke, brok "envt1  cause (something) to come to 
pieces by a blow or strain; destroy; crack; smashL 	

	 & ~ a cup   ~ a glass to [into] piece     
~ a thread   ~ one's arm   ~ a stick in two 