Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 905?912,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Grammatical Approach to Understanding Textual Tables using
Two-Dimensional SCFGs
Dekai WU1 Ken Wing Kuen LEE
Human Language Technology Center
HKUST
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
{dekai,cswkl}@cs.ust.hk
Abstract
We present an elegant and extensible
model that is capable of providing seman-
tic interpretations for an unusually wide
range of textual tables in documents. Un-
like the few existing table analysis mod-
els, which largely rely on relatively ad hoc
heuristics, our linguistically-oriented ap-
proach is systematic and grammar based,
which allows our model (1) to be concise
and yet (2) recognize a wider range of data
models than others, and (3) disambiguate
to a significantly finer extent the under-
lying semantic interpretation of the table
in terms of data models drawn from rela-
tion database theory. To accomplish this,
the model introduces Viterbi parsing under
two-dimensional stochastic CFGs. The
cleaner grammatical approach facilitates
not only greater coverage, but also gram-
mar extension and maintenance, as well as
a more direct and declarative link to se-
mantic interpretation, for which we also
introduce a new, cleaner data model. In
disambiguation experiments on recogniz-
ing relevant data models of unseen web ta-
bles from different domains, a blind evalu-
ation of the model showed 60% precision
and 80% recall.
1 Introduction
Natural language processing has historically
tended to emphasize understanding of linear
strings?sentences, paragraphs, discourse struc-
ture. The vast body of work that focuses on text
understanding is often seen as an approximation of
1The authors would like to thank the Hong Kong Re-
search Grants Council (RGC) for supporting this research
in part through grants RGC6083/99E, RGC6256/00E, and
DAG03/04.EG09.
spoken language understanding. Yet real-life text
is actually heavily dependent on visual layout and
formatting, which compensate for cues normally
found in spoken language but are absent in text.
As Scott (2003) reiterated in the opening ACL?03
invited talk: ?The overlay of graphics on text is in
many ways equivalent to the overlay of prosody on
speech... Just as prosody undoubtedly contributes
to the meaning of utterances, so too does a text?s
graphical presentation contribute to its meaning.
However... few natural language understanding
systems use graphical presentational features to
aid interpretation...? (Power et al, 2003).
Nowhere is this more evident than in the wide-
spread use of tables in real-world, unsimplified
text documents. Tables have a comparable or
greater complexity as other elements of text. Un-
fortunately, in mainstream NLP it is not uncom-
mon for tables to be regarded as a somehow ?de-
generate? form of text, unworthy of the same de-
gree of attention as the rest of the text. But as
we will discuss, the degree of ambiguity in ta-
ble understanding is at least as great as for many
sense and attachment problems. Many of the same
mechanisms used for understanding linear text are
also required for table understanding. The same
division of surface syntax and underlying seman-
tics is found.
Indeed, to perceive the limitations of existing
table understanding models, we may distinguish
several very different levels of table analysis tasks.
In table classification, the table is classified into
one of several coarse categories (in the extreme
case, some models simply predict whether the pur-
pose of the table is for page layout versus tabular
data). In table synactic recognition, the surface
types of individual cells or block regions are la-
beled (e.g., as heading or data) but the underlying
semantic relationships between the table elements
remain unrecognized and usually highly ambigu-
ous (i.e., no logical relations between the elements
905
in the table are assigned). In contrast, in table se-
mantic interpretation, the exact logical relations
between the elements in the table must be recog-
nized (e.g., by associating the table and/or subre-
gions thereof with precise table schemas in rela-
tional database style).
Existing table understanding work largely lies at
the level of superficial table classification or syn-
tactic recognition. Rarely, if ever, are precise logi-
cal relations assigned between the elements in the
table. Ad hoc heuristic approaches tend to rule,
rather than linguistic approaches.
On the other hand, in the linguistic approach ad-
vocated by Scott (2003) and (Power et al, 2003),
tables were not considered. The various physical
presentation elements discussed included head-
ings, captions, and bulleted lists?all of which
exhibit numerous similarities to tabular elements.
Possibly, tables were not considered because they
are difficult to describe adequately within the ex-
pressiveness of common linguistic formalisms like
CFGs.
The work presented here aims to address this
problem. Our model provides an enabling foun-
dation toward a linguistic approach by first shift-
ing to a two-dimensional CFG framework. This
permits us to construct a grammar where all the
rules are meaningfully discriminative, such that?
unlike existing table understanding models?any
analysis of a table includes a full parse tree that
assigns precise data model labels to all its regions
(including nested subregions) thereby specifying
the logical relations between the table?s elements.
Additionally, probabilities on the production rules
support thresholding (or ranking) of the alternative
candidate table interpretation hypotheses.
As with many natural language phenomena, a
full model of disambiguation must ultimately inte-
grate lexical semantics. However, in this research
step we focus on the question of howmuch seman-
tic interpretation can be performed on the basis of
other features, in the absence of a lexical or on-
tological model. Just as syntax and morphology
and prosody alone already permit much recogni-
tion and disambiguation of semantic roles and ar-
gument structure to be done for sentence, the same
can be done for tables. At the same time, we be-
lieve future integration of lexical semantics will be
facilitated by the grammatical framework of our
model.
One way to think about this is that we wish to
Table 1: Example ?Martian? table (see text).
Pbje Kwe Zxc Amc
Hoer 15 - 18 17 - 20 19 - 23
NQ 85 - 95% 70 - 90% 75 - 95%
Ncowifl Djhi Djhi Rubzlx
model what you might be able to recognize from a
?Martian? table such as that in Table 1. The non-
Martian reader relies solely on knowledge of al-
phabets and numbers, can spot font and formatting
clues, and is familiar with the conventions (i.e.,
grammars) of tables in general.
You might reasonably interpret this table as a
collection of vertical records with an attributes
header column (Pbje, Hoer, NQ, Ncowifl) on the
left. You might additionally interpret it as a ta-
ble that contains an record key header row (Kwe,
Zxc, Amc) along with the attributes header col-
umn (Pbje, Hoer, NQ, Ncowifl). You might as-
sign the latter interpretation a slightly higher prob-
ability, noticing the slightly longer form of Pbje
compared to Kwe, Zxc, and Amc. On the other
hand, even without reading English, you could re-
ject the interpretation as a collection of horizon-
tal records under the header attributes row (Pbje,
Kwe, Zxc, Amc), since each row contains differ-
ent forms and types, in a pattern that is consistent
across columns. Other interpretations are also pos-
sible, but unlikely given the regularity of the pat-
terns.
Thus by analyzing the structure of a table, the
reader would form a hypothesis about its data
model, providing a semantic interpretation that al-
lows the reader to extract information from the ta-
ble. As can be seen from the restored original
English version of the same example in Table 2,
the most likely interpretation was predicted even
without access to specific lexical knowledge. We
aim to show that a fairly useful baseline level of
semantic interpretation accuracy can already be
achieved, even with relatively little lexical and on-
tological knowledge.
We model these alternative hypotheses for the
interpretation of ambiguous tables as competing
parses. Just as with ordinary parsing and seman-
tic interpretation, the reader often builds multiple
competing interpretations of the same table.
Note that many previous models do not even
distinguish between the alternative possible inter-
pretations in the Martian example. Existing mod-
906
els such as Hurst (2000) and Yang (2002) inter-
pret tables with the same structural layout simply
by assigning them same data model, which stops
short of recognizing that it is necessary to rank
multiple competing interpretations that entail dif-
ferent sets of logical relations.
In contrast, our proposed model is capable of
producing multiple competing parses indicating
different semantic interpretations of tables having
the same structural layout, by selecting specific
data models for the table and its subregions.
2 Data Models for Specifying Semantic
Interpretations
To begin, some formal basis is needed to facilitate
precise specification of the alternative semantic in-
terpretations of a table, such that the exact logical
relations between its elements are unambiguously
specified. This will enable us to then design a ta-
ble understanding model that attempts to map any
given table (and recursively, its subregions) to al-
ternative data models depending on which is most
appropriate.
The set of data models we define below is a
more comprehensive and precise inventory than
found in the previous table analysis models dis-
cussed in this paper. It describes all the common
conventional patterns of logical relations we have
found in the course of empirically analyzing tables
from corpora. One advantage of this inventory of
data models arises from our appropriation of re-
lational database theory wherever possible to help
describe the form of the data models (Silberschatz
et al, 2002), allowing broad coverage of different
table types without sacrificing precision as to the
logical relations between entities.
Each data model assigns a clear semantics in
terms of logical relations between the table ele-
ments, thereby allowing extraction of relational
facts. In contrast, previous work on table analy-
sis tends to either classify a table using only one
single limited data model (e.g., Hurst (2000)), or
using data models which essentially are merely
surface layout types whose semantics are vague
and ambiguous (e.g., Yang (2002), Yang and Luk
(2002), Wang et al (2000), Yoshida et al (2001)).
A table is a logical view of a collection of inter-
related items usually presented as a row-column
structure such that the reader?s ability to access
and compare information can be enhanced, as also
noted by Wang (1996). From a database manage-
Table 2: Example from Table 1 in its original ver-
sion, with the English words restored.
Date Thu Fri Sat
Temp 15 - 18 17 - 20 19 - 23
RH 85 - 95% 70 - 90% 75 - 95%
Weather Cool Cool Cloudy
ment system perspective, each table can be con-
sidered as a (tiny) database. Like a program, the
reader accesses the data. As a result, we consider
that every table must correspond to a data model,
and this model determines how the reader extracts
information from the table.
Each data model has a schema which, as we
shall see below, may or may not surface (partially
or completely) as a subset of cells in the table that
describe attributes. Recognizing the data models
of a table correctly therefore also implies that both
attribute-value pairings and table structures have
been recognized.
At the top level, we categorize the data models
into three broad types:
? Flat model: A table is interpreted as a
database table in non-1NF normal relational
model.
? Nested model: A table is interpreted as a
database table in an object-relational model,
which allow complex types such as nested re-
lations and concept hierarchy.
? Dimensional data model: A table (usually
cross-tabular) is interpreted as a data cube
(multidimensional table) in a multidimen-
sional data model.
We now consider each of these types of data
models in turn.
2.1 Flat model
A flat model is used for the semantic interpretation
of any table as a relational database table in non-
1NF. For example, tables such as Tables 2 and 3
are often interpreted by humans in terms of flat
models. It is obvious that Table 3 can be viewed
as a relational database table with a schema (Pos,
Teams, Pld, Pts) and three records, because the
table?s surface form resembles how records are
stored in a relational database tables. Similarly,
Table 2 resembles a relational database table, but
transposed to a vertical orientation, with the first
907
Table 3: Example of a ranking table, which is typ-
ically laid out in a flat relational model.
Pos Teams Pld Pts
1. Chelsea 38 95
2. Arsenal 38 83
3. Man United 38 77
column as the schema (Date, Temp, RH, Weather)
and other columns as data records.
The flat model is closest to the 1-dimensional
table approach used by the majority of previous
models, but our approach designates the flat model
as a semantic representation, in contrast to the
previous models which see 1-dimensional tables
merely as a syntactic surface form (e.g., Yang
(2002), Yang and Luk (2002), Wang et al (2000),
Yoshida et al (2001)). While such previous mod-
els only recognize tables that are physically laid
out in this form, our approach clearly delineates an
explicit separation of syntax and semantics, which
provides greater flexibility allowing any table to be
interpreted as a flat model, regardless of its surface
form (though the flat model interpretation is more
common for some surface forms than others).
As an example showing that any kind of
table can be categorized as flat model, consider
Table 6. Even such a table can be semantically
interpreted as a flat model because related at-
tributes can join together to form a composite
attribute, though humans would less naturally
choose this semantic interpretation. Certainly
there are hierarchical relationship between
attributes; for example, Ass1 is a subtype of
Assignments. However, it is also valid to consider
the attributes along a hierarchical path as one
composite attribute. For example, ?Mark -> As-
signments -> Ass1? becomes the single attribute
?Mark-Assignments-Ass1?. Then the complete
flat model schema is (Year, Team, Mark-
Assignments-Ass1, Mark-Assignments-Ass2,
Mark-Assignments-Ass3, Mark-Examinations-
Midterm, Mark-Examinations-Final), and the first
record is (1991, Winter, 85, 80, 75, 60, 75, 75).
2.2 Nested model
With the exception of Hurst (2000), previous work
has not generally considered nested models in ex-
plicit fashion. Hurst (2000)?s model is based on
Wang (1996)?s abstract table model, in which at-
tributes may be related in a hierarchical way. On
the other hand, Wang et al (2000) oversimplis-
tically considers nested models as 1-dimensional,
thus missing the correct relationships between at-
tributes and values.
A nested model can be seen as a generalization
of the flat model, in which attributes may be re-
lated through composition or inheritance. Table 6
is naturally interpreted as a nested data model be-
cause the attributes have an inheritance relation-
ship. The corresponding schema is (Year, Team,
Mark (Assignments (Ass1, Ass2, Ass3), Exami-
nations (Midterm, Final, Grade)).
A nested model is not appropriate for tables
without hierarchical structure, such as Table 2 and
Table 3.
2.3 Dimensional model
Our approach also nicely handles dimensional
models, which are generally handled quite weakly
in previous models. A dimensional model refers
to a table, such as the table in Table 4, that resem-
bles a view of collection of data stored in multi-
dimensional data model. A multidimensional data
cube, as described in the database literature (e.g.,
Han and Kamber (2000), Chaudhuri and Dayal
(1997)), consists of a set of numeric measures
(though in fact the data need not be numeric), each
of which is determined by a set of dimensions.
Each dimension is described by a set of attributes.
For example, Table 5 can be semantically inter-
preted using the multidimensional data model de-
picted in Figure 1. Likewise, the cross-tabular ta-
ble in Table 4 can also be semantically interpreted
using the same multidimensional data model in
Figure 1. The value of the first three columns in
Table 5 are the dimension attributes and the rev-
enue values are the measures.
In contrast, among previous models, Yang
(2002) produces a semantically incorrect recogni-
tion of a multidimensional table that inappropri-
ately presents the attributes in hierarchical struc-
ture. Yang and Luk (2002) and Wang et al
(2000) only recognize the simplest 2-dimensional
case and apparently cannot handle 3 or more di-
mensions. Yoshida et al (2001) only handle 1-
dimensional cases.
A dimensional model is an inappropriate inter-
pretation for non-cross-tabular tables, such as Ta-
ble 2 and Table 3. A dimensional model is also not
valid for tables such as Table 6. Semantically, it
is not possible for ?Assignments? and ?Midterm?
908
Table 4: Example table showing revenue accord-
ing to Location = {Vancouver, Victoria}, Type =
{Phone, Computer} and Time = {2001, 2002}, us-
ing a tabular view of a 3-dimensional data cube.
Vancouver Victoria
Phone Computer Phone Computer
2001 845 1078 818 968
2002 943 1130 894 1024
1
Table 5: Example relational database table con-
taining the same logical information as Table 4.
Location Type Time Revenue
Vancouver Phone 2001 845
Vancouver Phone 2002 943
Vancouver Computer 2001 1078
Vancouver Computer 2002 1130
Victoria Phone 2001 818
Victoria Phone 2002 894
Victoria Computer 2001 968
Victoria Computer 2002 1024
Location
Type
Time
Vancouver Victoria
Phone
Computer
845
1078
2001 2002
Figure 1: Multidimensional data cube corre-
sponding to Tables 4 and 5.
to belong to different dimensions because it is in-
correct to determine the score by both ?Assign-
ments? and ?Midterm?. Syntactically, the texts
in the last attribute row of Table 6 are all unique;
however, the last attribute row of the table in Ta-
ble 4 is a repeating sequence of (?Phone?, ?Com-
puter?). Therefore, to a non-English reader, an
English cross-tabular table which possess repeat-
ing sequences in the attribute rows is likely to be
semantically interpreted as a dimensional model,
while a cross-tabular table which does not have
this property is likely to be interpreted as a nested
Table 6: Example table of grades.
Mark
Assignments Examinations
Ass1 Ass2 Ass3 Midterm Final Grade
Winter 85 80 75 60 75 75
Spring 80 65 75 60 70 70
Fall 80 85 75 55 80 75
Winter 85 80 70 70 75 75
Spring 80 80 70 70 75 75
Fall 75 70 65 60 80 70
Year Team
1991
1992
1
model.
3 A 2D SCFG Model for Table Analysis
In this section, we will present our two-
dimensional SCFG parsing model for table analy-
sis which has several advantages over the ad hoc
approaches. First, the probabilistic grammar ap-
proach permits a cleaner encapsulation and gen-
eralization of the kind of knowledge that previ-
ous models attempted to capture within their ad
hoc heuristics. Most previous works (e.g. Yang
(2002), Yang and Luk (2002), Hurst (2000), Hurst
(2002)) gradually built up their ad hoc heuristics
manually by inspecting some set of training sam-
ples. This approach may work if tables are from
limited domains of similar nature. However, like
text documents, the syntactic layout of textual ta-
bles may be determined by its context as well as its
language. For instance, it is natural for an Arabic
reader to read an Arabic table taking the rightmost
column as the attribute column, instead of the left-
most column. Yoshida et al (2001) use machine-
learning techniques to analyze nine types of table
structures, all 1-dimensional. Our grammar-based
approach allows the model to be readily adapted
to different situations by applying different sets of
grammar rules.
Another advantage is that grammatical ap-
proach can make more accurate decisions while
being simpler to implement, because it requires
only a single integrated parsing process to com-
plete the entire table analysis. This includes clas-
sifying the functions of each cell (as attribute or
value), pairing attributes and values, and identify-
ing the structure and the data model of a table. In
contrast, previous works require several stages to
complete the entire analysis, introducing complex
909
problems that are difficult to resolve, such as pre-
mature commitment to incorrect early-stage deci-
sions.
To our knowledgeWang et al (2000) is the only
textual table analysis model that uses a grammar
to describe table structures. However, in that case,
only a simple template matching analyzer is used.
Their grammar notation is unable to show both
physical structure and the semantics of a table at
the same time in a hierarchical manner. In con-
trast, information such as ?a data block contains
three rows of data cell? can be stored in the parse
tree constructed by our parsing model.
Outside of the table understanding literature,
there exists a different 2D parsing technique called
PLEX (Feder, 1971), (Costagliola et al, 1994)
which allows an object to have finite sets of attach-
ing points. PLEX is used to generate 2D diagrams
such as molecular structures, circuit diagrams and
flow charts in a grammatical way. However, we
consider it too complex and computationally ex-
pensive for our application because it does not ex-
ploit that fact that a textual table cell only has at
most four attaching points in fixed directions.
Our parser is a two-dimensional extension of
the conventional probabilistic chart parsing algo-
rithm (Lari and Young, 1990), (Goodman, 1998).
Intuitively, consider a sentence as a vector of to-
kens that will be parsed horizontally; then a ta-
ble is a matrix of tokens (like a crossword puzzle)
that will be parsed both horizontally and vertically.
Because of this, our parser must run in both direc-
tions. We achieve this by employing a grammar
notation that specifies the direction of parsing.
The two-dimensional grammar notation in-
cludes of a set of nonterminals, terminals, and two
generation operators ??>? and ?|->?. Let X be a
nonterminal and Y, Z, be two symbols which may
be either nonterminals or terminals. Then:
? X ?> Y Z denotes a horizontal production
rule saying that the nonterminal X horizon-
tally generates two symbols Y and Z.
? X |-> Y Z denotes a vertical production rule
saying that the nonterminal X vertically gen-
erates two symbols Y and Z.
? X ?> Y or X |-> Y equivalently denote a
unary production rule saying that the nonter-
minal X generates a symbol Y.
We assume that all rules are binary without loss
of generality, since any grammar can be mechan-
ically binarized without materially changing the
parse tree structure, just as in the case of ordinary
1D grammars.
The operators ??>? and ?|->? control the gen-
eration direction. In term of table analysis, a non-
terminal represents a matrix of tokens and a termi-
nal represents a single token. Sub-matrices gen-
erated by a horizontal rule will have same height
but not necessarily same width; similarly, sub-
matrices generated by a vertical rule will have
same width but not necessarily same height. In
other words, a matrix is partitioned into two halves
by the binary production rule.
Probabilities are placed on each rule, as in ordi-
nary 1D SCFGs. They are used to eliminate parses
falling below a threshold, which also helps to re-
duce the time complexity in practice.
Parsing with two-dimensional grammars can be
conceptualized most easily via parse tree exam-
ples. Figure 2 shows a complete parse tree for
parsing the table in Table 7 into a flat model. Fig-
ure 3 is a portion of a parse tree for parsing the
table in Table 8 into a nested model, while Figure
4 is a portion of parse trees for parsing Table 7 into
a dimensional model. The following is the gram-
mar fragment that gives the parse tree as Figure
2:
T1-1H |-> FlatModel
FlatModel |-> FlatSchema Records
FlatSchema --> CompositeAttribute FlatSchema
FlatSchema --> CompositeAttribute
Records |-> Record Records
Records |-> Record
Record --> Data Record
Record --> Record
Note that the internal nodes of the parse trees
serve to label subregions with data models, thus
assigning a semantic interpretation specifying the
exact logical relations between table elements.
None of the previous models construct declara-
tive parse trees like these, which are necessary for
many types of subsequent analysis, including in-
formation extraction applications.
4 Experimental Method
To the best of our knowledge, unfortunately none
of the table corpora mentioned in previous work
are available to the public. Thus, it was neces-
sary to construct a corpus for our experiments.
We collected a large sample of tables by issuing
Google searches with a list of random keywords,
for example, census age, confusion matrix, data
table, movie ranking, MSFT, school ranking, tele-
phone plan, tsunami numbers, weather report, and
910
D:\ust\ner\docs\emnlp\parse_flat.html
T1-1H |->
FlatModel |->
FlatSchema -->
Composite
Attribute |->
Attribute |->
VA
Composite
Attribute |->
Attribute
P
FlatSchema -->
Composite
Attribute |->
Attribute |->
VA
Composite
Attribute |->
Attribute
C
FlatSchema -->
Composite
Attribute |->
Attribute |->
VB
Composite
Attribute |->
Attribute |->
P
FlatSchema -->
Composite
Attribute |->
Attribute |->
VB
Composite
Attribute |->
Attribute
C
Records |->
Record -->
Data |->
11
Record -->
Data |->
12
Record -->
Data |->
13
Data |->
14
Records |->
Record -->
Data |->
21
Record -->
Data |->
22
Record -->
Data |->
23
Data |->
24
1
Figure 2: A parse tree for a flat model.
NestedModelSchema -->
NestedAttribute |->
Base |->
VA
Final -->
Attribute |->
P
Final -->
Attribute |->
C
NestedAttribute |->
Base |->
VB
Final -->
Attribute |->
X
Final -->
Attribute |->
Y
1
Figure 3: A partial parse for a nested model.
DimensionalModelSchema |->
Dimension -->
DimAttribute |->
DimAttribute |->
VA
Dimension -->
Dim
Attribute |->
P
Dimension
-->
Dim
Attribute |->
C
Dimension -->
DimAttribute |->
DimAttribute |->
VB
Dimension -->
Dim
Attribute |->
P
Dimension
-->
Dim
Attribute |->
C
1
Figure 4: A partial parse for a dimensional model.
so on. Tables were extracted from the collected
sample, automatically cleaned, and tokenized into
two-dimensional array of tokens.
Table 7: Example table for Figures 2 and 4.
VA VB
P C P C
11 12 13 14
21 22 23 24
1
Table 8: Example table for Figure 3.
VA VB
P C X Y
11 12 13 14
21 22 23 24
1
Table 9: Example table showing a floor legend.
6 School of Business & Management
5 Department of Biochemistry
4 Classrooms 4202 - 4205
3 Department of Computer Science
3 Department of Mathematics
For the blind evaluation, a human annotator in-
dependently manually annotated a randomly cho-
sen sample of 45 tables from the collection. All ta-
bles in the evaluation sample were previously un-
seen test cases, never inspected prior to the con-
struction of the two-dimensional grammar.
Each tokenized table was tagged by the human
judge with a list of types T relevant to the table.
The relevance is defined as follows: a data model
is relevant to a table if and only if the human
would agree that such a data model would natu-
rally be hypothesized as an interpretation for that
table (analogously to the way that word senses are
manually annotated for WSD evaluations). Each
type is a tuple of the form (R, O, S), where R is
the relevant data model, O is the reading orienta-
tion of R, and S is a boolean saying if a schema
(i.e. attributes) exist in the table. Thus, Table 2
would be tagged as {(flat, vertical, true)} while
the table in Table 4 would be tagged as {(flat, hor-
izontal, true), (flat, vertical, true), (dimensional, ,
true)}. But Table 9 may be tagged as {(flat, hor-
izontal, false)}. The exceptions are that both the
nested model and the dimensional model always
have a schema, while the dimensional model does
not have orientation. In cases where multiple legit-
imate readings were possible, the table was tagged
911
Table 10: Experimental results.
Precision Recall
0.60 0.80
with multiple types. A total of 92 relevant types
were generated from the tokenized tables.
We processed the tokenized tables with the two-
dimensional SCFG parser, and computed the pre-
cision and the recall rates against the judge?s lists
of tags for all the test cases.
5 Results and Discussion
The experimental results are summarized in Table
10. All tables could be parsed; in general, it is very
rare for any table to be rejected by the parser, since
the grammar permits so many different configura-
tions that can be recursively composed.
Unfortunately it is impossible to compare re-
sults directly against previous models, since nei-
ther those models nor the data they evaluated on
are available.
Moreover, it is difficult to compare with pre-
vious models as our evaluation criteria are more
stringent than in earlier work. Most previous work
evaluated the performance in terms of the (vaguer
and less demanding) criteria of number of correct
attribute-value pairings. Such an evaluation ap-
proach gives unduly high weight to large repetitive
tables, and neglects structural errors in the analysis
of the table. In contrast, our approach gives equal
weight to all tables regardless of how many entries
they contain, requires semantically valid structural
analyses, and yet still accepts any parse that yields
the correct attribute-value pairings (since the tag-
ging of the test set includes all legitimate types
when there are multiple valid alternatives).
The fact that precision was lower than recall is
due to the fact that many tables were wrongly in-
terpreted as tables without schema or in wrong ori-
entations. The current grammar has difficulty dis-
tinguishing attributes from values. Significant im-
provement can be obtained by using constraints to
limit the number of incorrect parses, a strategy we
are currently implementing.
6 Conclusion
We have introduced a framework to support a
more linguistically-oriented approach to finer in-
terpretation of tables, using two-dimensional sto-
chastic CFGs with Viterbi parsing to find appro-
priate semantic interpretations of textual tables in
terms of different data models. This approach
yields a concise model that at the same time fa-
cilitates broader coverage than existing models,
and is more easily scalable and maintainable. We
also introduce a cleaner and richer data model to
represent semantic interpretations, and illustrate
how it systematically captures a wider range of ta-
ble types. Without such a data model, the right
attribute-value relations caanot be extracted from
a table, even if surface elements like ?header? and
?data? are correctly labeled as previous models at-
tempted to do. Our experiments show that even
without other ontological and linguistic knowl-
edge, excellent semantic interpretation accuracy
can be obtained by parsing with a two-dimensional
grammar based on these data models, by using
a wide variety of surface features in the terminal
symbols. We plan next to extend the model by in-
corporating ontological and linguistic knowledge
for additional disambiguation leverage.
References
Surajit Chaudhuri and Umesh Dayal. An overview of data warehousing and
OLAP technology. ACM SIGMOD Record, 26(1), March 1997.
Gennaro Costagliola, Andrea De Lucia, and Sergio Orefice. Towards efficient
parsing of diagrammatic languages. In AVI ?94: Proceedings of the work-
shop on Advanced visual interfaces, pages 162?171, New York, NY, USA,
1994. ACM Press.
Jerome Feder. Plex languages. Information Sciences, 3:225?241, 1971.
Joshua T. Goodman. Parsing Inside-Out. PhD thesis, Harvard University,
1998.
Jiawei Han and Micheline Kamber. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques.
Morgan Kaufmann, 1 edition, 2000.
Matthew Francis Hurst. The Interpretation of Tables in Texts. PhD thesis, The
University of Edinburgh, 2000.
Matthew Hurst. Classifying table elements in html. In The 11th International
World Wide Web Conference, Hawaii, USA, 2002.
K. Lari and S. J. Young. The estimation of stochastic context-free grammars
using the inside-outside algorithm. Computer Speech and Language, 4:35?
36, 1990.
Richard Power, Donia Scott, and Nadjet Bouayad-Agha. Document structure.
Computational Linguistics, 29(4):211?260, Dec 2003.
Donia Scott. Layout in NLP: The case for document structure (invited talk).
In 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL-2003), Aug 2003.
Abraham Silberschatz, Henry F. Korth, and S. Sudarshan. Database System
Concepts. McGraw-Hill, 4th edition, 2002.
H. L. Wang, S. H. Wu, I. C. Wang, C. L. Sung, W. L. Hsu, and W. K. Shih.
Semantic search on internet tabular information extraction for answering
queries. In CIKM ?00: Proceedings of the ninth international conference
on Information and knowledge management, pages 243?249, New York,
NY, USA, 2000. ACM Press.
Xinxin Wang. Tabular Abstraction, Editing, and Formatting. PhD thesis, The
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, 1996.
Yingchen Yang and Wo-Shun Luk. A framework for web table mining. In
WIDM ?02: Proceedings of the 4th international workshop on Web infor-
mation and data management, pages 36?42, New York, NY, USA, 2002.
ACM Press.
Yingchen Yang. Web table mining and database discovery. Master?s thesis,
Simon Fraser University, August 2002.
M. Yoshida, K. Torisawa, and J. Tsujii. A method to integrate tables of the
world wide web, 2001.
912
