Two-Phase Biomedical NE Recognition based on SVMs
Ki-Joong Lee Young-Sook Hwang and Hae-Chang Rim
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Korea University
1, 5-ka, Anam-dong, SEOUL, 136-701, KOREA
{kjlee, yshwang, rim}@nlp.korea.ac.kr
Abstract
Using SVMs for named entity recogni-
tion, we are often confronted with the
multi-class problem. Larger as the num-
ber of classes is, more severe the multi-
class problem is. Especially, one-vs-rest
method is apt to drop the performance by
generating severe unbalanced class distri-
bution. In this study, to tackle the prob-
lem, we take a two-phase named entity
recognition method based on SVMs and
dictionary; at the first phase, we try to
identify each entity by a SVM classifier
and post-process the identified entities by
a simple dictionary look-up; at the sec-
ond phase, we try to classify the seman-
tic class of the identified entity by SVMs.
By dividing the task into two subtasks, i.e.
the entity identification and the semantic
classification, the unbalanced class distri-
bution problem can be alleviated. Further-
more, we can select the features relevant
to each task and take an alternative classi-
fication method according to the task. The
experimental results on the GENIA cor-
pus show that the proposed method is ef-
fective not only in the reduction of train-
ing cost but also in performance improve-
ment: the identification performance is
about 79.9(F? = 1), the semantic clas-
sification accuracy is about 66.5(F? = 1).
1 Introduction
Knowledge discovery in the rapidly growing area of
biomedicine is very important. While most knowl-
edge are provided in a vast amount of texts, it is im-
possible to grasp all of the huge amount of knowl-
edge provided in the form of natural language. Re-
cently, computational text analysis techniques based
on NLP have received a spotlight in bioinformat-
ics. Recognizing the named entities such as proteins,
DNAs, RNAs, cells etc. has become one of the most
fundamental tasks in the biomedical knowledge dis-
covery.
Conceptually, named entity recognition consists
of two tasks: identification, which finds the bound-
aries of a named entity in a text, and classifi-
cation, which determines the semantic class of
that named entity. Many machine learning ap-
proaches have been applied to biomedical named
entity recognition(Nobata, 1999)(Hatzivalssiloglou,
2001)(Kazama, 2002). However, no work has
achieved sufficient recognition accuracy. One rea-
son is the lack of annotated corpora. This is some-
what appeased with announcement of the GENIA
corpus v3.0(GENIA, 2003). Another reason is that
it is difficult to recognize biomedical named entities
by using general features compared with the named
entities in newswire articles. In addition, since non-
entity words are much more than entity words in
biomedical documents, class distribution in the class
representation combining a B/I/O tag with a seman-
tic class C is so severely unbalanced that it costs too
much time and huge resources, especially in SVMs
training(Hsu, 2001).
Therefore, Kazama and his colleagues tackled the
problems by tuning SVMs(Kazama, 2002). They
splitted the class with unbalanced class distribution
into several subclasses to reduce the training cost.
In order to solve the data sparseness problem, they
explored various features such as word cache fea-
tures and HMM state features. According to their re-
port, the word cache and HMM state features made
a positive effect on the performance improvement.
But, not separating the identification task from the
semantic classification, they tried to classify the
named entities in the integrated process.
By the way, the features for identifying the
biomedical entity are different from those for se-
mantically classifying the entity. For example, while
orthographical characteristics and a part-of-speech
tag sequence of an entity are strongly related to the
identification, those are weakly related to the seman-
tic classification. On the other hand, context words
seem to provide useful clues to the semantic classifi-
cation of a given entity. Therefore, we will separate
the identification task from the semantic classifica-
tion task. We try to select different features accord-
ing to the task. This approach enables us to solve the
unbalanced class distribution problem which often
occurs in a single complicated approach. Besides, to
improve the performance, we will post-process the
results of SVM classifiers by utilizing the dictionary.
That is, we adopt a simple dictionary lookup method
to correct the errors by SVMs in the identification
phase.
Through some experiments, we will show how
separating the entity recognition task into two sub-
tasks contributes to improving the performance of
biomedical named entity recognition. And we will
show the effect the hybrid approach of the SVMs
and the dictionary-lookup.
2 Definition of Named Entity
Classification Problem
We divide the named entity recognition into two
subtasks, the identification task which finds the re-
gions of the named entities in a text and the semantic
classification which determines the semantic classes
of them. Figure 1 illustrates the proposed method,
which is called two-phase named entity recognition
method.
Figure 1: Examples of Biomedical Named Entity
Recognition
The identification task is formulated as classifica-
tion of each word into one of two classes, T or O
that represent region information. The region infor-
mation is encoded by using simple T/O representa-
tion: T means that current word is a part of a named
entity, and O means that the word is not in a named
entity. With the representation, we need only one
binary SVM classifier of two classes, T, O.
The semantic classification task is to assign one
of semantic classes to the identified entity. At the
semantic classification phase, we need to classify
only the identified entities into one of the N seman-
tic classes because the entities were already identi-
fied. Non-entity words are ignored at this phase. The
classes needed to be classified are just only the N se-
mantic classes. Note that the number of total classes,
N + 1 is remarkably small compared with the num-
ber, 2N + 1 required in the complicated recognition
approaches in which a class is represented by com-
bining a region information B/I/O with a semantic
class C. It can considerably reduce workload in the
named entity recognition.
Especially when using SVMs, the number of
classes is very critical to the training in the as-
pect of training time and required resources. Let
L be the number of training samples and let N be
the number of classes. Then one-vs-rest method
takes N ? O(L) in the training step. The com-
plicated approach with the B/I/O notation requires
(2N + 1)?O(Lwords) (L is number of total words
in a training corpus). In contrast, the proposed ap-
proach requires (N ? O(Lentities)) + O(Lwords).
Here, O(Lwords) stands for the number of words in
a training corpus and O(Lentities) for the number of
entities. It is a considerable reduction in the training
cost. Ultimately, it affects the performance of the
entity recognizer.
To achieve a high performance of the defined
tasks, we use SVM(Joachims, 2002) as a machine
learning approach which has showed the best perfor-
mance in various NLP tasks. And we post-process
the classification results of SVMs by utilizing a dic-
tionary. Figure 2 outlines the proposed two-phase
named entity recognition system. At each phase,
each classifier with SVMs outputs the class of the
best score. For classifying multi-classes based on a
binary classifier SVM, we use the one-vs-rest clas-
sification method and the linear kernel in both tasks.
Furthermore, for correcting the errors by SVMs,
the entity-word dictionary constructed from a train-
ing corpus is utilized in the identification phase. The
dictionary is searched to check whether the bound-
ary words of an identified entity were excluded or
not because the boundary words of an entity might
be excluded during the entity identification. If a
boundary word was excluded, then we concatenate
the left or the right side word adjacent to the iden-
tified entity. This post-processing may enhance the
capability of the entity identifier.
3 Biomedical Named Entity Identification
The named entity identification is defined as the
classification of each word to one of the classes that
represent the region information. The region infor-
mation is encoded by using simple T/O representa-
tion: T means that the current word is a part of a
named entity, and O means that the current word is
not in a named entity.
The above representation yields two classes of the
task and we build just one binary SVM classifiers for
them. By accepting the results of the SVM classifier,
we determine the boundaries of an entity. To correct
boundary errors, we post-process the identified enti-
ties with the entity-word dictionary.
3.1 Features for Entity Identification
An input x to a SVM classifier is a feature represen-
tation of a target word to be classified and its context.
We use a bit-vector representation. The features of
the designated word are composed of orthographi-
cal characteristic features, prefix, suffix, and lexical
of the word.
Table 1 shows all of the 24 orthographical fea-
tures. Each feature may be a discriminative fea-
ture appeared in biomedical named entites such as
protein, DNA and RNA etc. Actually, the name of
protein, DNA or RNA is composed by combining
alpha-numeric string with several characters such as
Greek or special symbols and so on.
Table 1: Orthographical characteristic features of
the designated word
Orthographic Feature examples
DIGITS 1 , 39
SINGLE CAP A , M
COMMA ,
PERIOD .
HYPHON -
SLASH /
QUESTION MARK ?
OPEN SQUARE [
CLOSE SQUARE ]
OPEN PAREN (
CLOSE PAREN )
COLON :
SEMICOLON ;
PERCENT %
APOSTROPHE ?
ETC SYMBOL +, *, etc.
TWO CAPS alphaCD28
ALL UPPER AIDS
INCLUDE CAPS c-Jun
GREEK LETTER NF-kappa
ALPHA NUMERIC p65
ALL LOWER motif
CAPS DIGIT CD40
INIT CAP Rel
And the suffix/prefix, the designated word and the
context word features are as follows:
wi =
?
??
??
1 if the word is the ith word
in the vocabulary V
0 otherwise
Figure 2: System Configuration of Two Phase Biomedical NE Recognition System
posi =
?
??
??
1 if the word is assigned the ith
POS tag in the POS tag list
0 otherwise
sufi =
?
??
??
1 if the word contains the
ith suffix in the suffix list
0 otherwise
prei =
?
??
??
1 if the word contains the
ith prefix in the prefix list
0 otherwise
wki =
?
??
??
1 if a word at k is the ith word
in the vocabulary V
0 otherwise
poski =
?
??
??
1 if a word at k is assigned the
ith POS tag in the POS tag list
0 otherwise
In the definition, k is the relative word position
from the target word. A negative value represents
a preceeding word and a positive value represents
a following word. Among them, the part-of-speech
tag sequence of the word and the context words is a
kind of a syntactic rule to compose an entity. And
lexical information is a sort of filter to identify an
entity which is as possible as semantically cohesive.
3.2 Post-Processing by Dictionary Look-Up
After classifying the given instances, we do post-
processing of the identified entities. During the post-
processing, we scan the identified entities and exam-
ine the adjacent words to those. If the part-of-speech
of an adjacent word belongs to one of the group, ad-
jective, noun, or cardinal, then we look up the dic-
tionary to check whether the word is in it or not. If it
exists in the dictionary, we include the word into the
entity region. The dictionary is constructed of words
consisting of the named entities in a training corpora
and stopwords are ignored.
Figure 3 illustrates the post-processing algorithm.
In Figure 3, the word cell adjacent to the left of the
identified entity cycle-dependent transcription, has
the part-of-speech NN and exists in the dictionary.
The word factor adjacent to the right of the entity
has the part-of-speech NN. It exists in the dictionary,
too. Therefore, we include the words cell and factor
into the entity region and change the position tags of
the words in the entity.
By taking the post-processing method, we can
correct the errors by a SVM classifier. It also gives
us a great effect of overcoming the low coverage
problem of the small-sized entity dictionary.
4 Semantic Classification of Biomedical
Named Entity
The objects of the semantic tagging are the entities
identified in the identification phase. Each entity is
assigned to a proper semantic class by voting the
SVM classifiers.
Figure 3: An example of the post-processing of an entity identification
4.1 Features for Semantic Classification
For semantically tagging an entity, an input x to a
SVM classifier is represented by a feature vector.
The vector is composed of following features:
fwi =
?
??
??
1 if a given entity contains one
of the functional words
0 otherwise
inwi =
?
??
??
1 if one of the words in the
entity is in the inside word list
0 otherwise
lcwi =
?
????
????
1 if noun or verb word in the
left context is the ith word
in the left context word list
0 otherwise
rcwi =
?
????
????
1 if noun or verb word in the
right context is the ith word
in the right context word list
0 otherwise
Of the above features, fwi checks whether the
entity contains one of functional words. The func-
tional words are similar to the feature terms used by
(Fukuda, 1998). For example, the functional words
such as factor, receptor and protein are very help-
ful to classifying named entities into protein and the
functional words such as gene, promoter and motif
are very useful for classifying DNA.
In case of the context features of a given entity, we
divide them into two kinds of context features, inside
context features and outside context features. As in-
side context features, we take at most three words
from the backend of the entity 1. We make a list of
the inside context words by collecting words in the
1The average length of entities is about 2.2 in GENIA cor-
pus.
range of the inside context. If one of the three words
is the ith word in the inside context word list, we set
the inwi bit to 1. The outside context features are
grouped in the left ones and the right ones. For the
left and the right context features, we restrict them
to noun or verb words in a sentence, whose position
is not specified. This grouping make an effect of al-
leviating the data sparseness problem when using a
word as a feature.
For example, given a sentence with the entity,
RNA polymerase II as follows:
General transcription factor are required
for accurate initiation of transcription by
RNA polymerase II PROTEIN .
The nouns transcription, factor, initiation and the
verbs are, required are selected as left context fea-
tures, and the words RNA, polymerase, II are se-
lected as inside context features. The bit field cor-
responding to each of the selected word is set to 1.
In this case, there is no right context features. And
since the entity contains the functional word RNA,
the bit field of RNA is set to 1.
For classifying a given entity, we build SVM clas-
sifiers as many as the number of semantic classes.
We take linear kernel and one-vs-rest classification
method.
5 Experiments
5.1 Experimental Environments
Experiments have been conducted on the GENIA
corpus(v3.0p)(GENIA, 2003), which consists of
2000 MEDLINE abstracts annotated with Penn
Treebank (PTB) POS tags. There exist 36 distinct
semantic classes in the corpus. However, we used
22 semantic classes which are all but protein, DNA
and RNA?s subclasses on the GENIA ontology 2.
The corpus was transformed into a B/I/O annotated
corpus to represent entity boundaries and a semantic
class.
We divided 2000 abstracts into 10 collections for
10-fold cross validation. Each collection contains
not only abstracts but also paper titles. The vo-
cabularies for lexical features and prefix/suffix lists
were constructed by taking the most frequent 10,000
words from the training part only.
Also, we made another experimental environ-
ment to compare with the previous work by
(Kazama, 2002). From the GENIA corpus, 590
abstracts(4,808 sentences; 20,203 entities; 128,463
words) were taken as a training part and 80 ab-
stracts(761 sentences; 3,327 entities; 19,622 words)
were selected as a test part. Because we couldn?t
make the experimental environment such as the
same as that of Kazama?s, we tried to make a com-
parable environment.
We implemented our method using the SVM-light
package(Joachims, 2002). Though various learning
parameters can significantly affect the performance
of the resulting classifiers, we used the SVM system
with linear kernel and default options.
The performance was evaluated by precision, re-
call and F?=1. The overall F?=1 for two models and
ten collections, were calculated using 10-fold cross
validation on total test collection.
5.2 Effect of Training Data Size
In this experiment, varying the size of training set,
we observed the change of F?=1 in the entity identi-
fication and the semantic classification. We fixed the
test data with 200 abstracts(1,921 sentences; 50,568
words). Figure 4 shows that the performance was
improved by increasing the training set size. As the
performance of the identification increases, the gap
between the performance of the identification and
that of the semantic classification is gradually de-
creased.
5.3 Computational Efficiency
When using one-vs-rest method, the number of
negative samples is very critical to the training in
2That is, All of the protein?s subclass such as pro-
tein molecule, protein family or group were regarded as pro-
tein.
Figure 4: Perfomance shift according to the increase
of training data size w/o post-processing
the aspect of training time and required resources.
The SVM classifier for entity identifiation deter-
mines whether each word is included in an entity
or not. Figure 5 shows there are much more nega-
tive samples than positive samples in the identifica-
tion phase. Once entities are identified, non-entity
words are not considered in next semantic classifi-
cation phase. Therefore, the proposed method can
effectively remove the unnecessary samples. It en-
ables us effectively save the training costs.
Furthermore, the proposed method could effec-
tively decrease the degree of the unbalance among
classes by simplifying the classes. Figure 6 shows
how much the proposed method can alleviate the un-
balanced class distribution problem compared with
1-phase complicated classification model. However,
even though the unbalanced class distribution prob-
lem could be alleviated in the identification phase,
we are still suffering from the problem in the seman-
tic classification as long as we take the one-vs-rest
method. It indicates that we need to take another
classification method such as a pairwise method in
the semantic classification(Krebel, 1999).
5.4 Discriminative Feature Selection
We subsequently examined several alternatives for
the feature sets described in section 3.1 and section
4.1.
The column (A) in Table 2 shows the identifica-
tion cases. The base feature set consisted of only the
designated word and the context words in the range
from the left 2 to the right 2. Several alternatives for
feature sets were constructed by adding a different
combination of features to the base feature set. From
Figure 5: training size vs. positive and negative sam-
ple size in identification phase and semantic classi-
fication phase
Figure 6: 2-phase model vs. 1-phase model : change
of the negative and the positive sample size accord-
ing to the training data size
( A ) ( B )
FeatSet F-score FeatSet F-score
base 74.6 base(inw) 65.8
pos 77.4 (+2.8) fw 67.9 (+2.1)
pre 75.0 (+0.4) lcw 67.9 (+2.1)
suf 75.2 (+0.6) rcw 67.0 (+1.2)
pre+suf 75.6 (+1.0) lcw+rcw 66.4 (+0.6)
pos+pre 77.9 (+3.3) fw+lcw 68.1(+2.3)
pos+suf 77.9 (+3.3) fw+rcw 67.1 (+1.3)
all 77.9 (+3.3) all 66.9 (+1.1)
Table 2: Effect of each feature set(training with 900
abstracts, test with 100 abstracts): (A) identification
phase, (B) semantic classification phase
Table 2, we can see that part-of-speech information
certainly improves the identification accuracy(about
+2.8). Prefix and suffix features made a positive ef-
fect, but only modestly(about +1.2 on average).
The column (B) in Table 2 shows semantic clas-
sification cases with the identification phase of the
best performance. We took the feature set composed
of the inside words of an entity as a base feature set.
And we made several alternatives by adding another
features. The experimental results show that func-
tional words and left context features are useful, but
right context features are not. Furthermore, part-of-
speech information was not effective in the seman-
tic classification while it was useful for the entity
identification. That is, when we took the part-of-
speech tags of inside context words instead of the
inside context words, the performance of the seman-
tic classification was very low(F?=1.0 was 25.1).
5.5 Effect of PostProcessing by Dictionary
Lookup
Our two-phase model has the problem that identifi-
cation errors are propagated to the semantic classi-
fication. For this reason, it is necessary to ensure
a high accuracy of the boundary identification by
adopting a method such as post processing of the
identified entities. Table 3 shows that the post pro-
cessing by dictionary lookup is effective to improv-
ing the performance of not only the boundary identi-
fication accurary(79.2 vs. 79.9) but also the seman-
tic classification accuracy(66.1 vs. 66.5).
When comparing with the (Kazama, 2002) even
though the environments is not the same, the pro-
posed two-phase model showed much better per-
formance in both the entity identification (73.6 vs.
81.4) and the entity classification (54.4 vs. 68.0).
One of the reason of the performance improvement
is that we could take discriminative features for each
subtask by separating the task into two subtasks.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a new method of two-
phase biomedical named entity recognition based on
SVMs and dictionary-lookup. At the first phase, we
tried to identify each entity with one SVM classifier
and to post-process with a simple dictionary look-up
for correcting the errors by the SVM. At the second
Table 3: Performance comparison with or w/o post-processing(F?=1): (A)10-fold cross validation(1800
abstracts, test with 200 abstracts), (B)training with 590 abstracts, test with 80 abstracts
A B (Kazama, 2002)
No. of W/O PostProc with PostProc No. of W/O PostProc with PostProc No. of
Inst Inst Inst
Identification 76.2/82.4/79.2 76.8/83.1/79.9 78.4/80.8/79.6 80.2/82.6/81.4 75.9/71.4/73.6
Classification 63.6/68.8/66.1 64.0/69.2/66.5 65.8/67.9/66.8 67.0/69.0/68.0 56.2/52.8/54.4
protein 25,276 60.9/79.8/69.1 61.7/78.8/69.2 1,056 61.3/81.3/69.9 62.8/80.7/70.6 709 49.2/66.4/56.5
DNA 8,858 65.1/63.9/64.5 65.0/63.8/64.4 474 71.4/61.0/65.8 72.1/61.6/66.4 460 49.6/37.0/42.3
RNA 683 72.2/71.7/72.0 73.8/72.5/73.1 36 74.4/88.9/81.0 75.6/86.1/80.5
cell line 3,783 71.6/54.2/61.7 72.3/72.3/72.3 201 73.2/44.8/55.6 73.2/44.8/55.6 121 60.2/46.3/52.3
cell type 6,423 67.2/77.5/72.0 67.5/67.5/67.5 252 64.9/82.1/72.5 65.4/81.7/72.7 199 70.0/75.4/72.6
phase, we tried to classify the identified entity into
its semantic class by voting the SVMs. By dividing
the task into two subtasks, the identification and the
semantic classification task, we could select more
relevant features for each task and take an alternative
classification method according to the task. This is
resulted into the mitigation effect of the unbalanced
class distribution problem but also improvement of
the performance of the overall tasks.
References
N. Collier, C. Nobata, and J. Tsujii 2000. Extracting
the Names of Genes and Gene Products with a Hidden
Markov Model. In Proc. of Coling2000, pages 201-
207.
K. Fukuda, T. Tsunoda, A. Tamura, and T. Takagi. 1998.
Information extraction: identifying protein nmes from
biological papers. In Proc. of the Pacific Symposium
on Biocomputing ?98(PSB?98).
GENIA Corpus 3.0p. 2003. available
at http://www-tsujii.is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/ ge-
nia/topics/Corpus/3.0/GENIA3.0p.intro.html
V. Hatzivalssiloglou, P. A. Duboue, and A. Rzhetsky.
2001. Disambiguating proteins, genes, and RNA in
text: a machine learning approach. Bioinformatics. 17
Supple 1.
C. Hsu and C. Lin. 2001. A comparison on methods for
multi-class support vector machines. Technical report,
National Taiwan University, Taiwan.
T. Joachims. 1998. Making Large-Scale SVM Learning
Practical. LS8-Report, 24, Universitat Dortmund, LS
VIII-Report.
T. Joachims. 2000. Estimating the generalization per-
formance of a SVM efficiently. In Proc. of the Seven-
teenth International Conference on Machine Learning.
Morgan Kaufmann, pages 431-438.
SVM Light. 2002. available at
http://svmlight.joachims.org/
Jun?ichi Kazama, Takaki Makino, Yoshihiro Ohta and
Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2002. Tuning support vector machines
for biomedical named entity recognition. In Proc. of
ACL-02 Workshop on Natural Language Processing in
the Biomedical Domain, pages 1-8.
U. H.-G Krebel 1999. Pairwise Classification and Sup-
port Vector machines. In B. Scholkopf, C.J.C. Burges,
Advances in Kernel Methods: Support Vector Learn-
ing, pp. 255-268, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
C. Nobata, N. Collier, and J. Tsujii. 1999. Automatic
term identification and classification in biology texts.
In Proc. of the 5th NLPRS, pages 369-374.
B.J. Stapley, L.A. Kelley, and M.J.E. Sternberg. 2002.
Predicting the Sub-Cellular Location of Proteins from
Text Using Support Vector Machines. In Proc. of Pa-
cific Symposium on Biocomputing 7, pages 374-385.
Vladimir Vapnik. 1998. Statistical Learning Theory Wi-
ley, New York.
76
77
78
79
