Speech to Speech Translation for Medical Triage in Korean 
 
Farzad Ehsani, Jim Kimzey, Demitrios Master, Karen Sudre Hunil Park 
Engineering Department  
Sehda, Inc. Independent Consultant 
Mountain View, CA 94043 Seoul, Korea 
{farzad,jkimzey,dlm,karen}@sehda.com phunil@hotmail.com 
 
  
Abstract 
S-MINDS is a speech translation engine, 
which allows an English speaker to communi-
cate with a non-English speaker easily within 
a question-and-answer, interview-style format. 
It can handle limited dialogs such as medical 
triage or hospital admissions. We have built 
and tested an English-Korean system for do-
ing medical triage with a translation accuracy 
of 79.8% (for English) and 78.3% (for Ko-
rean) for all non-rejected utterances.  We will 
give an overview of the system building proc-
ess and the quantitative and qualitatively sys-
tem performance. 
1 Introduction 
Speech translation technology has the potential to 
give nurses and other clinicians immediate access 
to consistent, easy-to-use, and accurate medical 
interpretation for routine patient encounters. This 
could improve safety and quality of care for pa-
tients who speak a different language from that of 
the healthcare provider. 
This paper describes the building and testing of a 
speech translation system, S-MINDS (Speaking 
Multilingual Interactive Natural Dialog System), 
built in less than 4 months from specification to the 
test scenario described. Although this paper shows 
a number of areas for improvement in the S-
MINDS system, it does demonstrate that building 
and deploying a successful speech translation sys-
tem is becoming possible and perhaps even com-
mercially viable. 
 
 
2 Background 
Sehda is focused on creating speech translation 
systems to overcome language barriers in health-
care settings in the U.S. The number of people in 
the U.S. who speak a language other than English 
is large and growing, and Spanish is the most 
commonly spoken language next to English. Ac-
cording to the 2000 census, 18% of the U.S. popu-
lation aged 5 and older (47 million people) did not 
speak English at home.1 This represents a 48% in-
crease from the 1990 figure. In 2000, 8% of the 
population (21 million) was Limited English Profi-
cient (LEP). More than 65% of the LEP population 
(almost 14 million people) spoke Spanish. 
A body of research shows that language barriers 
impede access to care, compromise quality, and 
increase the risk of adverse outcomes. Although 
trained medical interpreters and bilingual health-
care providers are effective in overcoming such 
language barriers, the use of semi-fluent healthcare 
professionals and ad hoc interpreters causes more 
interpreter errors and lower quality of care (Flores 
2005). 
One study analyzed the problem of language barri-
ers for hospitalized inpatients. The study, which 
focused on pediatric patients, sought to determine 
whether patients whose families have a language 
barrier are more likely to incur serious medical 
errors than patients without a language barrier 
(Cohen et al, 2005). The study?s conclusion was 
that patients of LEP families had a twofold in-
creased risk for serious medical incident compared 
with patients whose families did not have a lan-
guage barrier. It is important to note that the LEP 
                                                          
1   US Census Bureau, 2000 
patients in this study were identified as needing 
interpreters during their inpatient stay and medical 
interpreters were available.  
Although the evidence favors using trained medi-
cal interpreters, there is a gap between best prac-
tice and reality. Many patients needing an 
interpreter do not get one, and many must use ad 
hoc interpreters. In a study of 4,161 uninsured pa-
tients who received care in 23 hospitals in 16 cit-
ies, more than 50% who needed an interpreter did 
not get one (Andrulis et al, 2002). 
Another study surveyed 59 residents in a pediatric 
residency program in an urban children?s hospital 
(O?Leary and Hampers, 2003). Forty of the 59 resi-
dents surveyed spoke little or no Spanish. Again, it 
is important to note that this hospital had in-house 
medical interpreters. Of this group of nonproficient 
residents: 
? 100% agreed that the hospital interpreters 
were effective; however, 75% ?never? or 
only ?sometimes? used the hospital inter-
preters. 
? 53% used their inadequate language skills 
in the care of patients ?often? or ?every 
day.? 
? 53% believed the families ?never? or only 
?sometimes? understood their child?s diag-
nosis. 
? 43% believed the families ?never? or only 
?sometimes? understood discharge instruc-
tions. 
? 40% believed the families ?never? or only 
?sometimes? understood the follow-up 
plan. 
? 28% believed the families ?never? or only 
?sometimes? understood the medications. 
? 53% reported calling on their Spanish-
proficient colleagues ?often? or ?every 
day? for help. 
? 80% admitted to avoiding communication 
with non-English-speaking families. 
 
The conclusion of the study was as follows: ?De-
spite a perception that they are providing subopti-
mal communication, nonproficient residents rarely 
use professional interpreters. Instead, they tend to 
rely on their own inadequate language skills, im-
pose on their proficient colleagues, or avoid com-
munication with Spanish-speaking families with 
LEP.? 
Virtually every study on language barriers suggests 
that these residents are not unique. Physicians and 
staff at several hospitals have told Sehda that they 
are less likely to use a medical interpreter or tele-
phone-based interpreter because it takes too long 
and is too inconvenient. Sehda believes that to 
bridge this gap requires 2-way speech translation 
solutions that are immediately available, easy to 
use, accurate, and consistent in interpretation. 
The need for speech translation exists in health-
care, and a lot of work has been done in speech 
translation over the past two decades.  Carnegie-
Mellon University has been experimenting with 
spoken language translation in its JANUS project 
since the late 1980s (Waibel et al, 1996). The 
University of Karlsruhe, Germany, has also been 
involved in an expansion of JANUS. In 1992, these 
groups joined ATR in the C-STAR consortium 
(Consortium for Speech Translation Advanced Re-
search) and in January 1993 gave a successful pub-
lic demonstration of telephone translation between 
English, German and Japanese, within the limited 
domain of conference registrations (Woszczyna, 
1993). A number of other large companies and 
laboratories including NEC (Isotani, et al, 2003) in 
Japan, the Verbmobil Consortium (Wahlster, 
2000), NESPOLE! Consortium (Florian et al, 
2002), AT&T (Bangalore and Riccardi, 2001), and 
ATR have been making their own research effort 
(Yasuda et al, 2003). LC-Star and TC-Star are two 
recent European efforts to gather the data and the 
industrial requirements to enable pervasive speech-
to-speech translation (Zhang, 2003). Most recently, 
the DARPA TransTac program (previously known 
as Babylon) has been focusing on developing de-
ployable systems for English to Iraqi Arabic. 
3 System Description 
Unlike other systems that try to solve the speech 
translation problem with the assumption that there 
is a moderate amount of data available, S-MINDS 
focuses on rapid building and deployment of 
speech translation systems in languages where lit-
tle or no data is available. S-MINDS allows the 
user to communicate easily in a question-and-
answer, interview-style conversation across lan-
guages in limited domains such as border control, 
hospital admissions or medical triage, or other nar-
row interview fields.  
S-MINDS uses a number of voice-independent 
speech recognition engines with the usage depend-
ent on the languages and the particular domain. 
These engines include Nuance 8.52, SRI EduSpeak 
2.03, and Entropic?s HTK-based engine.4 There is a 
dialog/translation creation tool that allows us to 
compile and run our created dialogs with any of 
these engines. This allows our developers to be 
free from the nuances of any particular engine that 
is deployed. S-MINDS uses a combination of 
grammars and language models with these engines, 
depending on the task and the availability of train-
ing data. In the case of the system described in this 
document, we were using Nuance 8.5 for both 
English and Korean speech recognition. 
We use our own semantic parser, which identifies 
keywords and phrases that are tagged by the user; 
these in turn are fed into an interpretation engine. 
Because of the limited context, we can achieve 
high translation accuracy with the interpretation 
engine. However, as the name suggests, this engine 
does not directly translate users? utterances but 
interprets what they say and paraphrases their 
statements. Finally, we use a voice generation sys-
tem (which splices human recordings) along with 
the Festival TTS engine to output the translations. 
This has been recently replaced by the Cepstral 
TTS engine. 
Additionally, S-MINDS includes a set of tools to 
modify and augment the existing system with addi-
tional words and phrases in the field in a matter of 
a few minutes. 
The initial task given to us was a medical disaster 
recovery scenario that might occur near an Ameri-
can military base in Korea. We were given about 
270 questions and an additional 90 statements that 
might occur on the interviewer side. Since our sys-
tem is an interview-driven system (sometimes re-
ferred to as ?1.5-way?), the second-language 
person is not given the option of initiating conver-
sations. The questions and statements given to us 
covered several domains related to the task above, 
including medical triage, force protection at the 
                                                          
2   http://www.nuance.com/nuancerecognition/ 
3   http://www.speechatsri.com/products/eduspeak.shtml 
4   http://htk.eng.cam.ac.uk/ 
installation gate, and some disaster recovery ques-
tions. In addition to the 270 assigned questions, we 
created 120 of our own in order to make the do-
mains more complete.  
3.1 Data Collection 
Since we assumed that we could internally gener-
ate the English language data used to ask the ques-
tion but not the language data on the Korean side, 
our entire focus for the data collection task was on 
Korean. As such, we collected about 56,000 utter-
ances from 144 people to answer the 390 questions 
described above. This data collection was con-
ducted over the course of 2 months via a tele-
phone-based computer system that the native 
Korean speakers could call. The system first intro-
duced the purpose of the data collection and then 
presented the participants with 12 different scenar-
ios. The participants were then asked a subset of 
the questions after each of the scenarios. One ad-
vantage of the phone-based system ? in addition to 
the savings in administrative costs ? was that the 
participants were free to do the data collection any 
time during the day or night, from any location. 
The system also allowed participants to hang up 
and call back at a later time. The participants were 
paid only if they completed all the scenarios.  
Of this data, roughly 7% was unusable and was 
thrown away. Another 31% consisted of one-word 
answers (like ?yes?). The rest of the data consisted 
of utterances 2 to 25 words long. Approximately 
85% of the usable data was used for training; the 
remainder was used for testing.  
The transcription of the data started one week after 
the start of the data collection, and we started 
building the grammars three weeks later.  
3.2  System Development 
We have an extensive set of tools that allow non-
specialists, with a few days of training, to build 
complete mission-oriented domains. In this project, 
we used three bilingual college graduates who had 
no knowledge of linguistics. We spent the first 10 
days training them and the next two weeks closely 
supervising their work. Their work involved taking 
the sentences that were produced from the data 
collection and building grammars for them until 
the ?coverage? of our grammars ? that is, the num-
ber of utterances from the training set that our sys-
tem would handle ? was larger than a set threshold 
(generally set between 80% and 90%). Because of 
the scarcity of Korean-language data, we built this 
system based entirely on grammar language mod-
els rather than statistical language models.  Gram-
mars are generally more rigid than statistical 
language models, and as such grammars tend to 
have higher in-domain accuracy and much lower 
out-of-domain accuracy5 than statistical language 
models.  This means that the system performance 
will depend greatly upon on how well our gram-
mars cover the domains.   
The semantic tagging and the paraphrase transla-
tions were built simultaneously with the grammars. 
This involved finding and tagging the semantic 
classes as well as the key concepts in each utter-
ance.  Frame-based translations were performed by 
doing concept and semantic transfer. Because our 
tools allowed the developers to see the resulting 
frame translations right away, they were able to 
make fixes to the system as they were building it; 
hence, the system-building time was greatly re-
duced.  
We used about 15% of the collected telephone data 
for batch testing. Before deployment, our average 
word accuracy on the batch results was 92.9%. The 
translation results were harder to measure directly, 
mostly because of time constraints.  
3.3 System Testing 
We tested our system with 11 native Korean 
speakers, gathering 968 utterances from them. The 
results of the test are shown in Table 1. Most of the 
valid rejected utterances occurred because partici-
pants spoke too softly, too loudly, before the 
prompt, or in English. Note that there was one ut-
terance with bad translation; that and a number of 
other problems were fixed before the actual field 
testing.  
 
                                                          
5   Note that there are many factors effecting both gram-
mar-based and statistical language model based speech 
recognition, including noise, word perplexity, acoustic 
confusability, etc.  The statement above has been true 
with some of the experiments that we have done, but we 
can not claim that it is universally true.   
Category Percentage
Total Recognized Correctly 82.0% 
Total Recognized Incorrectly 5.8% 
Total Valid Rejection 8.0% 
Total Invalid Rejected   4.1% 
Total unclear translations 0.1% 
Table 1: Korean-to-English system testing re-
sults for the 11 native Korean speakers.  
4 Experimental Setup 
A military medical group used S-MINDS during a 
medical training exercise in January 2005 in Carls-
bad, California. The testing of speech translation 
systems was integrated into the exercise to assess 
the viability of such systems in realistic situations. 
The scenario involved a medical aid station near 
the front lines treating badly injured civilians. The 
medical facilities were designed to quickly triage 
severely wounded patients, provide life-saving 
surgery if necessary, and transfer the patients to a 
safer area as soon as possible. 
4.1 User Training 
Often the success or failure of these interactive 
systems is determined by how well the users are 
trained on the systems? features.  
Training and testing on S-MINDS took place from 
November 2004 through January 2005. The train-
ing had three parts: a system demonstration in No-
vember, two to three hours of training per person 
in December, and another three-hour training ses-
sion in January. About 30 soldiers were exposed to 
S-MINDS during this period. Because of the tsu-
nami in Southeast Asia, many of the people who 
attended the November demo and December train-
ing were not available for the January training and 
the exercise. Nine service members used S-
MINDS during the exercise. Most of them had at-
tended only the training session in January. 
4.2 Test Scenarios 
Korean-speaking ?patients? arrived by military am-
bulance. They were received into one of three tents 
where they were (notionally) triaged, treated, and 
prepared for surgery. The tents were about 20 feet 
wide by 25 feet deep, and each had six to eight cots 
for patients. The tents had lights and electricity. 
The environment was noisy, sandy, and ?bloody.? 
The patients? makeup coated our handsets by the 
end of the day. There were many soldiers available 
to help and watch. Nine service members used S-
MINDS during a four-hour period.  
All of the ?patients? spoke both English and Ko-
rean. A few ?patients? were native Korean speak-
ers, and two were American service members who 
spoke Korean fairly fluently but with an accent. 
The ?patients? were all presented as severely in-
jured from burns, explosions, and cuts and in need 
of immediate trauma care. 
The ?patients? were instructed to act as if they were 
in great pain. Some did, and they sounded quite 
realistic. In fact, their recorded answers to ques-
tions were sometimes hard for a native Korean 
speaker to understand. The background noise in the 
tents was quite loud (because of the number of 
people involved, screaming patients and close 
quarters). Although we did not directly measure 
the noise; we estimate it ranged from 65 to 75 deci-
bels. 
4.3 Physical and Hardware Setup 
S-MINDS is a flexible system that can be config-
ured in different ways depending on the needs of 
the end user. Because of the limited time available 
for training, the users were trained on a single 
hardware setup, tailored to our understanding of 
how the exercises would be conducted. Diagrams 
available before the exercises showed that each 
tent would have a ?translation station? where Ko-
rean-speaking patients would be brought. The ex-
perimenters (two of the authors) had expected that 
the tents would be positioned at least 40 feet apart. 
In reality, the tents were positioned about 5 feet 
apart, and there was no translation station.  
Our original intent was to use S-MINDS on a Sony 
U-50 tablet computer mounted on a computer 
stand with a keyboard and mouse at the translation 
station, and for a prototype wireless device ? based 
on a Bluetooth-like technology to eliminate the 
need for wires between the patient and the system 
? that we had built previously. However, because 
of changes in the conduct of the exercise, the ex-
perimenters had to step in and quickly set up two 
of the S-MINDS systems without the wireless sys-
tem (because of the close proximity of the tents) 
and without the computer stands. The keyboards 
and mice were also removed so that the S-MINDS 
systems could be made portable. The medics 
worked in teams of two; one medic would hold the 
computer and headset for the injured patient while 
the other medic conducted the interview. 
5 Results 
The nine participants used our system to commu-
nicate with ?patients? over a four-hour period. We 
analyzed qualitative problems with using the sys-
tem and quantitative results of translation accu-
racy. 
5.1 Problems with System Usage 
We observed a number of problems in the test sce-
narios with our system. These represent some of 
the more common problems with the S-MINDS 
system. The authors suspect these may be endemic 
of all such systems.  
5.1.1 Inadequate Training on the System 
Users were trained to use the wireless units, which 
interfered with each other when used in close prox-
imity. For the exercise, we had to set up the units 
without the wireless devices because the users had 
not been trained on this type of setup. As a result, 
service members were forced to use a different 
system from the one they were trained on. 
Also, the users had difficulty navigating to the 
right domain. S-MINDS has multiple domains 
each optimized for a particular scenario (medical 
triage, pediatrics, etc.), but the user training did not 
include navigation among domains. 
5.1.2 User Interface Issues 
The user interface and the system?s user feedback 
messages caused unnecessary confusion with the 
interviewers. The biggest problem was that the 
system responded with, ?I?m sorry, I didn?t hear 
that clearly? whenever a particular utterance 
wasn?t recognized. This made the users think they 
should just repeat their utterance over and over. In 
fact, the problem was that they were saying some-
thing that were out of domain or did not fit any 
dialogs in S-MINDS, so no matter how many times 
they repeated the phrase, it would not be recog-
nized. This caused the users significant frustration. 
5.2. Quantative Analysis 
During the system testing, there were 363 recorded 
interactions for the English speakers. Unfortu-
nately, the system was not set up to record the ut-
terances that had a very low confidence score (as 
determined by the Nuance engine), and the user 
was asked to repeat those utterances again. Here is 
the rough breakdown for all of the English interac-
tions:  
? 52.5% were translated correctly into Ko-
rean 
? 34.2% were rejected by the system 
? 13.3% had misrecognition or mistranslation 
errors 
 
This means that S-MINDS tried to recognize and 
translate 65.8% of the English utterances and of 
those 79.8% were correctly translated. A more de-
tailed analysis is presented in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Detailed breakdown for the English 
utterances and percentage breakdown for 
each category.  
 
The Korean speakers? responses to each of the 
questions that were recognized and translated are 
analyzed in Figure 2. Note that the accuracy for the 
non-rejected responses is 78.3%.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Detailed breakdown of the recogni-
tion for the Korean utterances and percentage 
breakdown for each category. 
6 Discussion 
Although these results are less than impressive, a 
close evaluation pointed to three areas where a 
concentration of effort would significantly improve 
translation accuracy and reduce mistranslations. 
These areas were: 
1) Data collection with English speakers to in-
crease coverage on the dialogs.  
a) 34% of the things the soldiers said were 
things S-MINDS was not designed to 
translate. 
b) We had assumed that our existing English 
system would have adequate coverage 
without any additional data collection.  
2) User verification on low-confidence results.  
3) Improved feedback prompts when a phrase is 
not recognized; for example: 
a) One user said, ?Are you allergic to any al-
lergies?? three times before he caught him-
self and said, ?Are you allergic to any 
medications?? 
b) Another user said, ?How old are you?? 
seven times before realizing he needed to 
switch to a different domain, where he was 
able to have the phrase translated. 
c) Another user repeated, ?What is your 
name?? nine times before giving up on the 
phrase (this phrase wasn?t in the S-MINDS 
Korean medical mission set). 
 
Beyond improving the coverage, the system?s pri-
mary problem seemed to be in the voice user inter-
face since even the trained users had a difficult 
time in using the system. 
Statements + 
Questions 
(100%) 
Concepts in 
Dialog (90%) 
Concepts not 
in Dialog 
(10%)
Rejected  
(7.4%) 
Incorrect 
Transl. (2.5%)
In Grammar  
(64.7%) 
Not in Gram-
mar (25.3%) 
Correct  
Transl. (50%) 
Rejected 
(8.3%) 
Correct  
Transl. (2.5%) 
Rejected 
 (14.9%) 
Incorrect 
Transl. (8.0%) 
Incorrect  
Transl. (2.8%) 
Wrong topic 
Select (3.6%) 
 
Korean  
Responses  
(100%) 
Translated  
Correctly  
(63.4%) 
Mistranslated  
(4.2%) 
Could Not  
Hear 
(13.4%) 
Rejected  
(19.0%) 
The attempt at realism in playing out a high-trauma 
scenario may have detracted from the effectiveness 
of the event as a test of the systems? abilities under 
more routine (but still realistic) conditions. 
7 New Results 
Based on the results of this experiment, we had a 
secondary deployment in a medical setting for a 
very similar system.  
We applied what we had learned to that setting and 
achieved better results in a few areas. For example: 
1. Data collection in English helped tremen-
dously. S-MINDS recognized about 40% 
more concepts than it had been able to rec-
ognize using only grammars created by 
subject-matter experts. 
2. Verbal verification of the recognized utter-
ance was added to system, and that im-
proved the user confidence, although too 
much verification tended to frustrate the 
users. 
3. Feedback prompts were designed to give 
more specific feedback, which seemed to 
reduce user frustration and the number of 
mistakes. 
 
Overall, the system performance seemed to im-
prove. We continue to gather data on this task, and 
we believe that this is going to enable us to identify 
the next set of problems that need to be solved. 
8 Acknowledgement 
This research was funded in part by the LASER 
ACTD. We specially wish to thank Mr. Pete Fisher 
of ARL for his generous support and his participa-
tion in discussions related to this project. 
References  
 
Andrulis Dennis, Nanette Goodman, Carol Pryor 
(2002), ?What a Difference an Interpreter Can 
make? April 2002. Access Project, 
www.accessproject.org/downloads/c_LEPreport
ENG.pdf 
Bangalore, S. and G. Riccardi, (2001), ?A Finite 
State Approach to Machine Translation,? North 
American ACL 2001, Pittsburgh.  
Cohen, L, F. Rivara, E. K. Marcuse, H. McPhillips, 
and R. Davis, (2005), ?Are Language Barriers 
Associated With Serious Medical Events in 
Hospitalized Pediatric Patients??, Pediatrics, 
September 1, 2005; 116(3): 575 - 579  
Flores Glenn, (2005), ?The Impact of Medical In-
terpreter Services on the Quality of Health Care: 
A Systematic Review,? Medical Care Research 
and Review, Vol. 62, No. 3, pp. 255-299 
Florian M., et. al. (2002), ?Enhancing the Usability 
and Performance of NESPOLE!: a Real-World 
Speech-to-Speech Translation System?, HLT 
2002, San Diego, California U.S., March 2002. 
Isotani, R., Kiyoshi Yamabana, Shinichi Ando, 
Ken Hanazawa, Shin-ya Ishikawa and Ken-ichi 
ISO  (2003), ?Speech-to-Speech Translation 
Software on PDAs for Travel Conversation,? 
NEC Research and Development, Apr. 2003, 
Vol.44, No.2. 
O?Leary and Hampers (2003) ?The Truth About 
Language Barriers: One Residency Program's 
Experience,? Pediatrics, May 1, 2003; 111(5): 
pp. 569 - 573. 
Keiji Yasuda, Eiichiro Sumita, Seiichi Yamamoto, 
Genichiro Kikui, Masazo Yanagida, ?Real-Time 
Evaluation Architecture for MT Using Multiple 
Backward Translations,? Recent Advances in 
Natural Language Processing, pp. 518-522, 
Sep., 2003  
Wahlster, W. (2000), Verbmobil: Foundations of 
Speech-to-Speech Translation.  Springer. 
Waibel, A., (1996), ?Interactive Translation of 
Conversational Speech,? IEEE Computer, July 
1996, 29-7, pp. 41-48. 
Woszczyna, et al, (1993), ?Recent Advances in 
JANUS: A Speech Translation System,? 
DARPA Speech and Natural Language Work-
shop 1993, session 6 ? MT. 
Zhang, Ying, (2003), ?Survey of Current Speech 
Translation Research,? Found on Web: 
http://projectile.is.cs.cmu.edu/research/public/tal
ks/ speechTranslation/sst-survey-joy.pdf 
