Induction of Cross-Language Affix and 
Letter Sequence Correspondence 
 
Ari Rappoport 
Institute of Computer Science 
The Hebrew University 
www.cs.huji.ac.il/~arir 
 
Tsahi Levent-Levi 
Institute of Computer Science 
The Hebrew University 
Abstract 
We introduce the problem of explicit 
modeling of form relationships between 
words in different languages, focusing 
here on languages having an alphabetic 
writing system and affixal morphology. 
We present an algorithm that learns the 
cross-language correspondence between 
affixes and letter sequences. The algo-
rithm does not assume prior knowledge 
of affixes in any of the languages, using 
only a simple single letter correspon-
dence as seed. Results are given for the 
English-Spanish language pair. 
1 Introduction 
Studying various relationships between lan-
guages is a central task in computational linguis-
tics, with many application areas. In this paper 
we introduce the problem of induction of form 
relationships between words in different lan-
guages. More specifically, we focus on lan-
guages having an alphabetic writing system and 
affixal morphology, and we construct a model 
for the cross-language correspondence between 
letter sequences and between affixes. Since the 
writing system is alphabetic, letter sequences are 
highly informative regarding sound sequences as 
well.  
Concretely, the model is designed to answer 
the following question: what are the affixes and 
letter sequences in one language that correspond 
frequently to similar entities in another lan-
guage? Such a model has obvious applications to 
the construction of learning materials in language 
education and to statistical machine translation.  
The input to our algorithm consists of word 
pairs from two languages, a sizeable fraction of 
which is assumed to be related graphemically 
and affixally. The algorithm has three main 
stages. First, an alignment between the word 
pairs is computed by an EM algorithm that uses 
an edit distance metric based on an increasingly 
refined individual letter correspondence cost 
function. Second, affix pair candidates are dis-
covered and ranked, based on a language inde-
pendent abstract model of affixal morphology. 
Third, letter sequences that correspond produc-
tively in the two languages are discovered and 
ranked by EM iterations that use a cost function 
based on the discovered affixes and on compati-
bility of alignments.  
The affix learning part of the algorithm is to-
tally unsupervised, in that we do not assume 
knowledge of affixes in any of the single lan-
guages involved. The letter sequence learning 
part utilizes a simple initial correspondence be-
tween individual letters, and the rest of its opera-
tion is unsupervised.  
We believe that this is the first paper that ex-
plicitly addresses cross-language morphology, 
and the first that presents a comprehensive inter-
language word form correspondence model that 
combines morphology and letter sequences.  
Section 2 motivates the problem and defines it 
in detail. In Section 3 we discuss relevant previ-
ous work. The algorithm is presented in Section 
4, and results for English-Spanish in Section 5. 
2 Problem Motivation and Definition 
We would like to discover characteristics of 
word form correspondence between languages. 
In this section we discuss what exactly this 
means and why it is useful.  
17
Word form. Word forms have at least three dif-
ferent aspects: sound, writing system, and inter-
nal structure, corresponding to the linguistics 
fields of phonology, orthography and morphol-
ogy. When the writing system is phonetically 
based, the written form of a word is highly in-
formative of how the word sounds. Individual 
writing units are referred to as graphemes.  
Morphology studies the internal structure of 
words when viewed as comprised of semantics 
carrying components. Morphological units can 
be classified into two general classes, stems (or 
roots) and bound morphemes, which combine to 
create words using various kinds of operators. 
The linear affixing operator combines stems and 
bound morphemes (affixes) using linear ordering 
with possible fusion effects, usually at the seams.  
Word form correspondence. In this paper we 
study cross-language word form correspondence. 
We should first ask why there should be any re-
lationship at all between word forms in different 
languages. There are at least two factors that cre-
ate such relationships. First, languages may share 
a common ancestor. Second, languages may bor-
row words, writing systems and even morpho-
logical operators from each other. Note that us-
age of proper names can be viewed as a kind of 
borrowing. In both cases form relationships are 
accompanied by semantic relatedness. Words 
that possess a degree of similarity of form and 
meaning are usually termed cognates.
Our goal in examining word forms in different 
languages is to identify correspondence phenom-
ena that could be useful for certain applications. 
These would usually be correspondence similari-
ties that are common to many word pairs.  
Problem statement for the present paper. For 
reasons of paper length, we focus here on lan-
guages having the following two characteristics. 
First, we assume an alphabetic writing system. 
This implies that grapheme correspondences will 
be highly informative of sound correspondences 
as well. From now on we will use the term ?let-
ter? instead of ?grapheme?. Second, we assume 
linear affixal morphology (prefixing and suffix-
ing), which is an extremely frequent morpho-
logical operator in many languages.   
We address the two fundamental word form 
entities in languages that obey those assump-
tions: affixes and letter sequences. Our goal is to 
discover frequent cross-language pairs of those 
entities and quantify the correspondence. Pairing 
of letter sequences is expected to be mostly due 
to regular sound transformations and spelling 
conventions. Pairing of affixes could be due to 
morphological principles ? predictable relation-
ships between the affixing operators (their form 
and meaning) ? or, again, due to sound transfor-
mations and spelling.  
The input to the algorithm consists of a set of 
ordered pairs of words, one from each language. 
We do not assume that all input word pairs ex-
hibit the correspondence relationships of interest, 
but obviously the quality of results will depend 
on the fraction of the pair set that does exhibit 
them. A particular word may participate in more 
than a single pair. As explained above, the rela-
tionships of interest to us in this paper usually 
imply semantic affinity between the words; 
hence, a suitable pair set can be generated by 
selecting word pairs that are possible translations 
of each other. Practical ways to obtain such pairs 
are using a bilingual dictionary or a word aligned 
parallel corpus. We had used the former, which 
implies that we addressed only derivational, not 
inflectional, morphology. Using a dictionary pro-
vides a kind of semantic supervision that allows 
us to focus on the desired form relationships.  
We also assume that the algorithm is provided 
with a prototypical individual letter mapping as 
seed. Such a mapping is trivial to obtain in virtu-
ally all practical situations, either because both 
languages utilize the same alphabet or by using a 
manually prepared, coarse alphabet mapping 
(e.g., anybody even shallowly familiar with Cy-
rillic or Semitic scripts can prepare such a map-
ping in just a few minutes.) 
We do not assume knowledge of affixes in any 
of the languages. Our algorithm is thus fully un-
supervised in terms of morphology and very 
weakly seeded in term of orthography.  
Motivating applications. There are two main 
applications that motivate our research. In sec-
ond language education, a major challenge for 
adult learners is the high memory load due to the 
huge number of lexical items in a language. Item 
memorization is known to be greatly assisted by 
tying items with existing knowledge (Matlin02). 
When learning a second language lexicon, it is 
beneficial to consciously note similarities be-
tween new and known words. Discovering and 
explaining such similarities automatically would 
help teachers in preparing reliable study materi-
als, and learners in remembering words.  
Recognition of familiar components also helps 
learners when encountering previously unseen 
words. For example, suppose an English speaker 
who learns Spanish and sees the word ?parcial-
18
mente?. A word form correspondence model 
would tell her that ?mente? is an affix strongly 
corresponding to the English ?ly?, and that the 
letter pair ?ci? often corresponds to the English 
?ti?. The model thus enables guessing or recalling 
the English word ?partially?.  
Our model could also warn the learner of cog-
nates that are possibly false, by recognizing simi-
lar words that are not paired in the dictionary.  
A second application area is machine transla-
tion. Both cognate identification (Kondrak et al
03) and morphological information in one of the 
languages (Niessen00) have been proven useful 
in statistical machine translation. 
3 Previous Work  
Cross-language models for phonology and or-
thography have been developed for back-
transliteration in cross-lingual information re-
trieval (CLIR), mostly from Japanese and Chi-
nese to English. (Knight98) uses a series of 
weighted finite state transducers, each focusing 
on a particular mapping. (Lin02) uses minimal 
edit distance with a ?confusion matrix? that mod-
els phonetic similarity. (Li04, Bilac04) general-
ize using the sequence alignment algorithm pre-
sented in (Brill00) for spelling correction. (Bi-
lac04) explicitly separates the phonemic and gra-
phemic models. None of that work addresses 
morphology and in all of it grapheme and pho-
neme correspondence is only a transient tool 
which is not studied on its own.  (Mueller05) 
explicitly models phonological similarities be-
tween related languages, but does not address 
morphology and orthography.  
Cognate identification has been studied in 
computational historical linguistics. (Coving-
ton96, Kondrak03a) use a fixed, manually de-
termined single entity mapping. (Kondrak03b) 
generalizes to letter sequences based on the algo-
rithm in (Melamed97). The results are good for 
the historical linguistics application. However, 
morphology is not addressed, and the sequence 
correspondence model is less powerful than that 
employed in the back-transliteration and spelling 
correction literature. In addition, all effects that 
occur at word endings, including suffixes, are 
completely ignored. (Mackay05) presents good 
results for cognate identification using a word 
similarity measure based on pair hidden Markov 
models. Again, morphology was not modeled 
explicitly.    
A nice application for cross-language mor-
phology is (Schulz04), which acquires a Spanish 
medical lexicon from a Portuguese seed lexicon 
using a manually prepared table of 842 Spanish 
affixes.  
Unsupervised learning of affixal morphology 
in a single language is a heavily researched prob-
lem. (Medina00) studies several methods, includ-
ing the squares method we use in Section 4. 
(Goldsmith01) presents an impressive system 
that searches for ?signatures?, which can be 
viewed as generalized squares. (Creutz04) pre-
sents a very general method that excels at dealing 
with highly inflected languages. (Wicen-
towsky04) deals with inflectional and irregular 
morphology by using semantic similarity be-
tween stem and stem+affix, also addressing 
stem-affix fusion effects. None of these papers 
deals with cross-language morphology. 
4 The Algorithm 
Overview. Letter sequences and affixes are dif-
ferent entities exhibiting different correspon-
dence phenomena, hence are addressed at sepa-
rate stages. The result of addressing one will as-
sist us in addressing the other.  
The fundamental tool that we use to discover 
correspondence effects is alignment of the two 
words in a pair. Stage 1 of the algorithm creates 
an alignment using the given coarse individual 
letter mapping, which is simultaneously im-
proved to a much more accurate one.  
Stage 2 discovers affix pairs using a general 
language independent affixal morphology model.  
In stage 3 we utilize the improved individual 
letter relation from stage 1 and the affix pairs 
discovered in stage 2 to create a general letter 
sequence mapping, again using word alignments. 
In the following we describe in detail each of 
these stages. 
Initial alignment. The main goal of stage 1 is to 
align the letters of each word pair. This is done 
by a standard minimal edit distance algorithm, 
efficiently implemented using dynamic pro-
gramming (Gusfield97, Ristad98). We use the 
standard edit distance operations of replace, in-
sert and delete. The letter mapping given as input 
defines a cost matrix where replacement of cor-
responding letters has a low (0) cost and of all 
others a high (1) cost. The cost of insert and de-
lete is arbitrarily set to be the same as that of re-
placing non-identical letters. We use a hash table 
rather than a matrix, to prepare for later stages of 
the algorithm.   
When the correspondence between the lan-
guages is very high, this initial alignment can 
19
already provide acceptable results for the next 
stage. However, in order to increase the accuracy 
of the alignment we now refine the letter cost 
matrix by employing an EM algorithm that itera-
tively updates the cost matrix using the current 
alignment and computes an improved alignment 
based on the updated cost matrix (Brill00, Lin02, 
Li04, Bilac04). The cost of mapping a letter K to 
a letter L is updated to be proportional to the 
count of this mapping in all of the current align-
ments divided by the total number of mappings 
of the letter K.  
Affix pairs. The computed letter alignment as-
sists us in addressing affixes. Recall that we pos-
sess no knowledge of affixes; hence, we need to 
discover not only pairing of affixes, but the par-
ticipating affixes as well. Our algorithm discov-
ers affixes and their pairing simultaneously. It is 
inspired by the squares algorithm for affix learn-
ing in a single language (Medina00)1.
The squares method assumes that affixes gen-
erally combine with very many stems, and that 
stems are generally utilized more than once. 
These assumptions are due to a functional view 
of affixal morphology as a process whose goal is 
to create a large number of word forms using 
fewer parameters. A stem that combines with an 
affix is quite likely to also appear alone, so the 
empty affix is allowed. 
We first review the method as it is used in a 
single language. Given a word W=AB (where A 
and B are non-empty letter sequences), our task 
is to measure how likely it is for B to be a suffix 
(prefix learning is similar.) We refer to AB as a 
segmentation of W, using a hyphen to show 
segmentations of concrete words. Define a 
square to be four words (including W) of the 
forms W=AB, U=AD, V=CB, and Y=CD (one of 
the letter sequences C, D is allowed to be 
empty.)  
Such a square might attest that B, D are suf-
fixes and that A, C are stems. However, we must 
be careful: it might also attest that B, D are stems 
and A, C are prefixes. A square attests for a seg-
mentation, not for a particular labeling of its 
components.  
As an example, if W is ?talking?, a possible 
square is {talk-ing, hold-ing, talk-s, hold-s} 
where A=talk, B=ing, C=hold, and D=s. Another 
possible square is {talk-ing, danc-ing, talk-ed, 
danc-ed}, where A=talk, B=ing, C=danc, and 
D=ed. This demonstrates a drawback of the 
 
1 (Medina00) attributes the algorithm to Joseph Greenberg. 
method, namely its sensitivity to spelling; C with 
the empty suffix is written ?dance?, not ?danc?. 
The four words {talking, dancing, talk, dance} 
do not form a square. 
We now count the number of squares in which 
B appears. If this number is relatively large 
(which needs to be precisely defined), we have a 
strong evidence that B is a suffix or a stem. We 
can distinguish between these two cases using 
the number of witnesses ? actual words in which 
B appears.   
We generalize the squares method to the dis-
covery of cross-language affix pairs, as follows. 
We now use W to denote not a single word but a 
word pair W1:W2. B does not denote a suffix 
candidate but a suffix pair candidate, B1:B2, and 
similarly for D. A and C denote stem pair candi-
dates A1:A2 and C1:C2, respectively.  
We now define a key concept. Given a word 
pair W=W1:W2 aligned under an alignment T, 
two segmentations W1=A1B1 and W2=A2B2 
are said to be compatible if no alignment line of 
T connects a subset of A1 to a subset of B2 or a 
subset of A2 to a subset of B1. This definition is 
also applicable to alignments between letter se-
quences. 
We now impose our key requirement: for all 
of the words involved in the cross-lingual square, 
their segmentations into two parts must be com-
patible under the alignment computed at stage 1. 
For example, consider the English-Spanish 
word pair affirmation : afirmacion. The segmen-
tation affirma-tion : afirma-cion is attested by the 
square 
 A1B1 : A2B2 = affirma-tion : afirma-cion 
 A1D1 : A2D2 = affirma-tively :  
afirma-tivamente 
 C1B1 : C2B2 = coopera-tion : coopera-cion 
 C1D1 : C2D2 = coopera-tively :  
coopera-tivamente 
assuming that the appropriate parts are aligned. 
Note that ?tively? is comprised of two smaller 
affixes, but the squares method legitimately con-
siders it an affix by itself. Note also that since all 
of A1, A2, C1 and C2 end with the same letter, 
that letter can be moved to the beginning of B1, 
B2, D1, D2 to produce a different square (affirm-
ation : afirm-acion, etc.) from the same four 
word pairs.  
 Since we have no initial reason to favor a par-
ticular affix candidate over another, and since the 
total computational cost is not prohibitive, we 
20
now simply count the number of attesting 
squares for all possible compatible segmenta-
tions of all word pairs, and sort the list according 
to the number of witnesses. To reduce noise, we 
remove affix candidates for which the absolute 
number of witnesses or squares is small (e.g.,  
ten.) 
Letter sequences. The third and last stage of the 
algorithm discovers letter sequences that corre-
spond frequently. This is again done by an edit 
distance algorithm, generalizing that of stage 1 
so that sequences longer than a single letter can 
be replaced, inserted or deleted. In order to re-
duce noise, prior to that we remove word pairs 
whose stems are very different. Those are identi-
fied by comparing their edit distance costs, 
which should hence be normalized according to 
length (of the longer stem in a pair.) Note that 
accuracy is increased by considering only stems: 
affix pairs might be very different, thus might 
increase edit distance cost even when the stems 
do exhibit good sequence pairing effects.  
When generalizing the edit distance algorithm, 
we need to specify which letter sequences will be 
considered, because it does not make sense to 
consider all possible mappings of all subsets to 
all possible subsets ? the number of different 
such pairs will be too large to show any mean-
ingful statistics.  
The letter sequences considered were obtained 
by ?fattening? the lines in alignments yielding 
minimal edit distances, using an EM algorithm as 
done in (Brill00, Bilac04, Li04). The details of 
the algorithm can be found in these papers. The 
most important step, line fattening, is done as 
follows. We examine all alignment lines, each 
connecting two letter sequences (initially, of 
length 1.) We unite those sequences with adja-
cent sequences in all ways that are compatible 
with the alignment, and add the new sequences 
to the cost function to be used in the next EM 
iteration.  
If we kept letter sequence pairs that are not 
frequent in the cost function, they would distort 
the counts of more frequent letter sequences with 
which they partially overlap. We thus need to 
retain only some of the sequence pairs discov-
ered. We have experimented with several ways 
to do that, all yielding quite similar results. For 
the results presented in this paper, we used the 
idea that sequences that clearly map to specific 
sequences are more important to our model than 
sequences that ?fuzzily? map to many sequences. 
To quantify this approach, for each language-1 
sequence we sorted the corresponding language-
2 sequences according to count, and removed 
pairs in which the language-2 item was responsi-
ble for only a small percentage of the total (we 
used a threshold of 0.05). We further removed 
sequence pairs whose absolute counts are low.  
Discussion. We deal with affixes before se-
quences because, as we have seen, identification 
of affixes helps us in identifying sequences, 
while the opposite order actually hurts us: se-
quences sometimes contain letters from both 
stem and affix, which invalidates squares that are 
otherwise valid.  
It may be asked why the squares stage is 
needed at all ? perhaps affixes would be discov-
ered anyway as sequences in stage 3. Our as-
sumption was that affixes are best discovered 
using properties resulting from their very nature. 
We have experimented with the option of remov-
ing stage 2 and discovering affixes as letter se-
quences in stage 3, and verified that it gives 
markedly lower quality results. Even the very 
frequent pair -ly:-mente was not signaled out, 
because its count was lowered by those of the 
pairs -ly:-ente, -ly:nte, -y:-te, etc. 
5 Results 
We have run the algorithm on several language 
pairs using affixal morphology and the Latin al-
phabet: English vs. Spanish, Portuguese and Ital-
ian, and Spanish vs. Portuguese. All of them are 
related both historically and through borrowing 
(obviously at varying degrees), so we expect 
relatively many correspondence phenomena. 
Testing results for one of these pairs, English ? 
Spanish, are presented in this section.   
The input word pair set was created from a bi-
lingual dictionary (Freelang04) by taking all 
translations of single English words to single 
Spanish words, generating about 13,000 word 
pairs.   
Individual letter mapping. The cost matrix af-
ter EM convergence (25 iterations) exhibits the 
following phenomena (e:s (c) denotes that the 
final cost of replacing the English letter e by the 
Spanish letter s is c): (1) English letters mostly 
map to identical Spanish letters, apart from let-
ters that Spanish does not make use of like k and 
w; (2) some English vowels map frequently to 
some Spanish vowels: y maps almost exclusively 
to i (0.01), e:a (0.47) is highly productive, e:o 
(0.98), i:e (0.97), e:o (0.98); (3) some English 
consonants map to different Spanish ones: t:c 
21
(0.89) (due to an affix, -tion:-cion); m:n (0.44) is 
highly frequent; b:v(0.80); x:j (0.78), x:s(0.94); 
w always maps to v; j:y (0.11); (4) h usually dis-
appears, h:NULL (0.13); and (5) inserted Span-
ish letters include the vowels o, e, a and i, at that 
order, where o overwhelms the others. The Eng-
lish o maps exclusively to the Spanish o and not 
to other vowels. 
Affixes. Table 1 shows some of the conspicuous 
affix pairs discovered by the algorithm. We show 
both the number of witnesses and of squares. 
The table shows many interesting correspon-
dence phenomena. However, discussing those at 
depth from a linguistic point of view is out of the 
scope of this paper. Some notes: (1) some of the 
most frequent affix pairs are not that close ortho-
graphically: -ity:-idad, -ness:- (nouns), -ate:-ar 
(verbs), -ly-:-mente (adverbs), -al:-o (adjectives), 
so will not necessarily be found using ordinary 
edit distance methods; (2) some affixes are 
ranked high both with and without a letter that 
they favor when attaching to a stem: -ation:-
acion, -ate:-ar; (3) some English suffixes map 
strongly to several Spanish ones: -er:-o, -er:-
ador. 
Recall that the table cannot include inflec-
tional affixes, since our input was taken from a 
bilingual dictionary, not from a text corpus.  
Letter sequences. Table 2 shows some nice pair-
ings, stemming from all three expected phenom-
ena: st-:est- (due to phonology), ph:f, th:t, ll:l 
(due to orthography), and tion:cion, tia:cia (due 
to morphology: affixes located in the middle of 
words.) 
Such affix and letter sequence pairing results 
can clearly be useful for English speakers learn-
ing Spanish (and vice versa), for remembering 
words by associating them to known ones, for 
avoidance of spelling mistakes, and for analyzing 
previously unseen words.   
Evaluation. An unsupervised learning model can 
be evaluated on the strength of the phenomena 
that it discovers, on its predictive power for un-
seen data, or by comparing its data analysis re-
sults with results obtained using other means. We 
have performed all three evaluations.  
For evaluating the discovered phenomena, a 
repository of known phenomena is needed. The 
only such repository of which we are aware are 
language learning texts. Unfortunately, the phe-
nomena these present are limited to the few most 
conspicuous pairs (e.g., -ly:-mente, -ity:-idad, 
ph:f), all of which are easily discovered by our 
model. The next best thing are studies that pre-
sent data of a single language. We took the affix 
information given in a recent, highly detailed, 
corpus based English grammar (Biber99), and 
compared it manually to ours. Of the 35 most 
productive affixes, our model finds 27. Careful 
study of the word pair list showed that the re-
maining 8 (-ment, -ship, -age, -ful, -less, -en, dis-
, mis-) indeed do not map to Spanish ones fre-
quently. Note that some of those are indeed ex-
tremely frequent inside English yet do not corre-
spond significantly with any Spanish affix. 
As a second test, we took a comprehensive 
English-Spanish dictionary (Collins), selected 10 
pages at random (out of 680), studied them, and 
listed the prominent word form phenomena (85). 
All but one (the verbal suffix in seduce:seducir) 
were found by our model.  
The numbers reported above for the two tests 
are recall numbers. To evaluate affix precision, 
we have manually graded the top 100 affix pairs 
(as sorted at the end of stage 2 of the algorithm.) 
8 of those were clearly not affixes; however, 3 of 
the 8 (-t:-te, ?t:-to, -ve:-vo) were important pho-
nological phenomena that should indeed appear 
in our final model. Of the remaining 92, 15 were 
valid but ?duplicates? in the sense of being sub-
strings of other affixes (e.g., -ly:-mente, -ly:-
emente.) In the next 50 pairs, only 6 were clearly 
not affixes. Note that by their very definition, we 
should not expect the number of frequent deriva-
tional affixes to be very large, so there is not 
much point in looking further down the list. 
Nonetheless, inspection of the rest of the list re-
veals that it is not dominated by noise but by du-
plicates, with many specialized, less frequent 
affixes (e.g., -graphy:-grafia) being discovered.  
Regarding letter sequences, precision was very 
high: of the 38 different pairs discovered, only 
one (hr:r) was not regular, and there were 11 du-
plicates. Recall was impressive, but harder to 
verify due to the lack of standards. We found 
only one (not very frequent) pair that was not 
discovered (-sp:-esp).  
To evaluate the model on its data analysis ca-
pability, we took out 100 word pairs at random, 
trained the model without them, analyzed them 
using the final cost function, and compared with 
prominent phenomena noted manually (again, we 
had to grade manually due to the lack of a gold 
standard.) The model identified those prominent 
phenomena (including a total lack thereof) in 91 
of the pairs. Notable failures included the pairs 
superscribe : sobrescribir and coded : codificado, 
where none of the prefixes and suffixes were 
22
identified. Some successful examples are listed 
below (affixes are denoted by [], sequences by 
<>, and insert by _: or :_):  
installation : instalacion. <ll:l>, [ation:acion] 
volution : circonvolucion.  _:c, _:i, _:r, _:c, _:o, _:n,  
[tion:cion] 
intelligibility : inteligibilidad. [in:in], <ll:l>, 
[ity:idad] 
sapper : zapador. <s:z>, <pp:p>, [er:ador] 
harpist : arpista. <h:_>, [ist:ista] 
pathologist : patologo.  <th:t>, [ist:o] 
elongate : prolongar.  [te:r] 
industrialize: industrializar. [in:in], <ial>, [e:ar] 
demographic : demografico. <ph:f>, [ic:ico] 
gynecological :ginecologico. <yn:in>, [ical:ico] 
peeled : pelado. [ed:ado] 
The third and final evaluation method is to 
compare the model?s results with results obtained 
using other means. We are not aware of any data 
bank in which cross-language affix or letter se-
quence correspondences are explicitly tagged, so 
we had used a relatively simple algorithm as a 
baseline: We invoked the squares method for 
each language independently, ending up with 
affix candidates. For every word pair E:S, if E 
contains an affix candidate C and S contains an 
affix candidate D, we increment the count of the 
candidate affix pair C:D. Finally, we sort the 
candidates according to their count.  
Baseline recall is obviously as good as in our 
algorithm (it produces a superset), but precision 
is so bad so as to render the baseline method use-
less: out of the first 100, only 19 were affixes, 
the rest being made up of noise and badly seg-
mented ?duplicates?.  
In summary, the results are good, but gold 
standards are needed for a more consistent 
evaluation of different cross-language word form 
algorithms. Results for the other language pairs 
were overall good as well. 
6 Discussion 
We have introduced the problem of cross-
language modeling of word forms, presented an 
algorithm for addressing affixal morphology and 
letter sequences, and described good results on 
English-Spanish dictionary word pairs.  
Natural directions for future work on the 
model include: (1) test the algorithm on more 
language pairs, including languages utilizing 
non-Latin alphabets; (2) modify the input model 
to assume that single language affixes are 
known; (3) address additional morphological 
operators, such as templatic morphology; (4) ad-
dress phonology directly instead of indirectly; (5) 
use pairs acquired from a parallel corpus rather 
than a dictionary, to address inflectional mor-
phology and to see how the algorithm performs 
with more noisy data; (6) extend the algorithm to 
other types of writing systems; (7) examine more 
sophisticated affix discovery algorithms, such as 
(Goldsmith01); and (8) improve the evaluation 
methodology.  
There are many possible applications of the 
model: (1) for statistical machine translation; (2) 
for computational historical linguistics; (3) for 
CLIR back-transliteration; (4) for constructing 
learning materials and word memorization meth-
ods in second language education; and (5) for 
improving word form learning algorithms inside 
a single language.  
The length and diversity of the lists above pro-
vide an indication of the benefit and importance 
of cross-language word form modeling in com-
putational linguistics and its application areas.  
References  
Biber Douglas, 1999. Longman Grammar of Spoken 
and Written English. (Pages 320, 399, 530, 539. )  
Bilac Slaven, Tanaka Hozumi, 2004. A Hybrid Back-
Transliteration System for Japanese. COLING 
2004.  
Brill Eric, Moore Robert, 2000. An Improved Error 
Model for Noisy Channel Spelling Correction. 
ACL 2000. 
Covington Michael A, 1996. An Algorithm to Align 
Words for Historical Comparison. Comput. Ling., 
22(4):481?496.  
Creutz Mathias, Lugas Krista, 2004. Induction of a 
Simple Morphology for Highly-Inflecting Lan-
guages. ACL 2004 Workshop on Comput. Phonol-
ogy and Morphology. 
Freelang, 2004.  http: // www.freelang.net / dictionary 
/ spanish.html.  
Goldsmith John. 2001. Unsupervised Learning of the 
Morphology of a Natural Language. Comput. Ling. 
153-189 (also see an unpublished 2004 document 
at 
http://humanities.uchicago.edu/faculty/goldsmith.)  
Gusfield, Dan, 1997. Algorithms on Strings, Trees, 
and Sequences. Cambridge University Press.  
Knight Kevin, Graehl Jonathan, 1998. Machine 
Transliteration. Comput. Ling. 24(4):599?612. 
Kondrak Grzegorz, 2003a. Phonetic Alignment and 
Similarity. Comput. & the Humanities 37:273?
291.  
Kondrak Grzegorz, 2003b. Identifying Complex 
Sound Correspondences in Bilingual Wordlists.. 
Comput. Ling. & Intelligent Text Processing (CI-
CLing 2003). 
Kondrak Grzegorz, Marcu Daniel, Knight Kevin, 
2003. Cognates Can Improve Statistical Transla-
23
tion Models.  Human Language Technology (HLT) 
2003.  
Li Haizhou et al 2004. A Joint Source-Channel 
Model for Machine Transliteration. ACL 2004.  
Lin Wei-Hao, Chen Hsin-Hsi, 2002. Backward Ma-
chine Transliteration by Learning Phonetic Similar-
ity. CoNLL 2002. 
Mackay Wesley, Kondrak Grzegorz, 2005. Comput-
ing Word Similarity and Identifying Cognates with 
Pair Hidden Markov Models. CoNLL 2005.   
Matlin Margaret W., 2002. Cognition, 6th ed. John 
Wiley & Sons.  
Medina Urrea Alfonso, 2000. Automatic Discovery of 
Affixes by Means of a Corpus: A Catalog of Span-
ish Affixes. J. of Quantitative Linguistics 7(3):97 ? 
114.  
Melamed Dan, 1997. Automatic Discovery of Non-
Compositional Compounds in Parallel Data. 
EMNLP 1997. 
Mueller Karin, 2005. Revealing Phonological Simi-
larities between Related Languages from Auto-
matically Generated Parallel Corpora. ACL ?05  
Workshop on Building and Using Parallel Texts.  
Niessen Sonja, Ney Hermann, 2000. Improving SMT 
Quality with Morph-syntactic analysis. COLING 
2000. 
Ristad Eric Sven, Yianilos Peter, 1998. Learning 
String Edit Distance. IEEE PAMI, 20(5):522?
532.    
Schulz Stefan, et al2004. Cognate Mapping. COL-
ING 2004.  
Wicentowsky Richard, 2004. Multilingual Noise-
Robust Supervised Morphological Analysis using 
the WordFrame Model. ACL 2004 Workshop on 
Comput. Phonology and Morphology. 
 
Eng. Span. Wit. Squ. Example 
-tion - 623 309 reformation:reforma 
-e -ar 461 1182 convene:convocar 
-tion -cion 434 3770 vibration:vibracion 
co- co- 363 95 coexistence:coexistencia 
-ness - 352 128 persuasiveness:persuasiva 
-ation -acion 333 4854 formulation:formulacion 
in- In- 332 1294 inapt:inepto 
re- Re- 312 194 recreative:recreativo 
-ed -ado 289 102 abridged:abreviado 
-ic -ico 274 3192 strategic:estrategico 
-ly -mente 269 207 aggressively:agresivamente
-y -ia 251 2086 agronomy:agronomia 
-ble -ble 238 153 incredible:increible 
-al -al 233 440 genital:genital 
-ity -idad 208 687 stability:estabilidad 
-te -r 206 3603 tabulate:tabular 
-er -o 203 166 biographer:biografo 
-al -o 186 2728 practical:practico 
de- de- 174 68 deformation:deformacion 
-ate -ar 170 3593 manipulate:manipular 
-ous -o 154 59 analogous:analogo 
con- con- 153 53 conceivable:concebible 
-ism -ismo 147 2173 tourism:turismo 
un- In- 134 164 undistinguishable:indistinto
-er -ador 134 95 progammer:programador 
-nt -nte 120 514 tolerant:tolerante 
-ical -ico 111 3185 lyrical:lirico 
-ist -ista 111 1691 tourist:turista 
-ize -izar 90 974 privatize:privatizar 
-ce -cia 87 445 belligerence:beligerancia 
-tive -tivo 70 249 superlative:superlativo 
Table 1: Some affix pairs discovered. 
Eng. Span. Example 
ph f aphoristic:aforistico 
th t lithography:litografia 
ll l collaboration:colaboracion 
tion cion unconditional:incodicional 
st- est- stylist:estilista 
tia cia unnegotiable:innegociable 
Table 2: Some letter sequence pairs discovered. 
 
24
