Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics, pages 584?591,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
A Seed-driven Bottom-up Machine Learning Framework  
for Extracting Relations of Various Complexity 
Feiyu Xu, Hans Uszkoreit and Hong Li 
Language Technology Lab, DFKI GmbH 
Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3, D-66123 Saarbruecken 
{feiyu,uszkoreit,hongli}@dfki.de  
 
Abstract 
A minimally supervised machine learning 
framework is described for extracting rela-
tions of various complexity. Bootstrapping 
starts from a small set of n-ary relation in-
stances as ?seeds?, in order to automati-
cally learn pattern rules from parsed data, 
which then can extract new instances of the 
relation and its projections. We propose a 
novel rule representation enabling the 
composition of n-ary relation rules on top 
of the rules for projections of the relation. 
The compositional approach to rule con-
struction is supported by a bottom-up pat-
tern extraction method. In comparison to 
other automatic approaches, our rules can-
not only localize relation arguments but 
also assign their exact target argument 
roles. The method is evaluated in two 
tasks: the extraction of Nobel Prize awards 
and management succession events. Perfor-
mance for the new Nobel Prize task is 
strong. For the management succession 
task the results compare favorably with 
those of existing pattern acquisition ap-
proaches.  
1 Introduction 
Information extraction (IE) has the task to discover 
n-tuples of relevant items (entities) belonging to an 
n-ary relation in natural language documents. One 
of the central goals of the ACE program1 is to de-
velop a more systematically grounded approach to 
IE starting from elementary entities, binary rela-
                                                 
1 http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/ace/ 
tions to n-ary relations such as events. Current 
semi- or unsupervised approaches to automatic 
pattern acquisition are either limited to a certain 
linguistic representation (e.g., subject-verb-object), 
or only deal with binary relations, or cannot assign 
slot filler roles to the extracted arguments, or do 
not have good selection and filtering methods to 
handle the large number of tree patterns (Riloff, 
1996; Agichtein and Gravano, 2000; Yangarber, 
2003; Sudo et al, 2003; Greenwood and Stevenson, 
2006; Stevenson and Greenwood, 2006). Most of 
these approaches do not consider the linguistic in-
teraction between relations and their projections on 
k dimensional subspaces where 1?k<n, which is 
important for scalability and reusability of rules.  
Stevenson and Greenwood (2006) present a sys-
tematic investigation of the pattern representation 
models and point out that substructures of the lin-
guistic representation and the access to the embed-
ded structures are important for obtaining a good 
coverage of the pattern acquisition. However, all 
considered representation models (subject-verb-
object, chain model, linked chain model and sub-
tree model) are verb-centered. Relations embedded 
in non-verb constructions such as a compound 
noun cannot be discovered: 
(1)  the 2005  Nobel Peace Prize 
 
(1) describes a ternary relation referring to three 
properties of a prize: year, area and prize name. 
We also observe that the automatically acquired 
patterns in Riloff (1996), Yangarber (2003), Sudo 
et al (2003), Greenwood and Stevenson (2006) 
cannot be directly used as relation extraction rules 
because the relation-specific argument role infor-
mation is missing. E.g., in the management succes-
sion domain that concerns the identification of job 
changing events, a person can either move into a 
584
job (called Person_In) or leave a job (called Per-
son_Out). (2) is a simplified example of patterns 
extracted by these systems: 
(2) <subject: person> verb <object:organisation> 
 
In (2), there is no further specification of whether 
the person entity in the subject position is Per-
son_In or Person_Out.   
The ambitious goal of our approach is to provide 
a general framework for the extraction of relations 
and events with various complexity. Within this 
framework, the IE system learns extraction pat-
terns automatically and induces rules of various 
complexity systematically, starting from sample 
relation instances as seeds. The arity of the seed 
determines the complexity of extracted relations. 
The seed helps us to identify the explicit linguistic 
expressions containing mentionings of relation in-
stances or instances of their k-ary projections 
where 1?k<n. Because our seed samples are not 
linguistic patterns, the learning system is not re-
stricted to a particular linguistic representation and 
is therefore suitable for various linguistic analysis 
methods and representation formats. The pattern 
discovery is bottom-up and compositional, i.e., 
complex patterns can build on top of simple pat-
terns for projections.  
We propose a rule representation that supports 
this strategy. Therefore, our learning approach is 
seed-driven and bottom-up. Here we use depend-
ency trees as input for pattern extraction. We con-
sider only trees or their subtrees containing seed 
arguments. Therefore, our method is much more 
efficient than the subtree model of Sudo et al, 
(2003), where all subtrees containing verbs are 
taken into account. Our pattern rule ranking and 
filtering method considers two aspects of a pattern: 
its domain relevance and the trustworthiness of its 
origin. We tested our framework in two domains: 
Nobel Prize awards and management succession. 
Evaluations have been conducted to investigate the 
performance with respect to the seed parameters: 
the number of seeds and the influence of data size 
and its redundancy property.  The whole system 
has been evaluated for the two domains consider-
ing precision and recall. We utilize the evaluation 
strategy ?Ideal Matrix? of Agichtein and Gravano 
(2000) to deal with unannotated test data.   
The remainder of the paper is organised as fol-
lows: Section 2 provides an overview of the system 
architecture. Section 3 discusses the rule represen-
tation. In Section 4, a detailed description of the 
seed-driven bottom-up pattern acquisition is pre-
sented. Section 5 describes our experiments with 
pattern ranking, filtering and rule induction. Sec-
tion 6 presents the experiments and evaluations for 
the two application domains. Section 7 provides a 
conclusion and an outline of future work.   
2 System Architecture 
Given the framework, our system architecture 
can be depicted as follows: 
 
Figure 1. Architecture 
 
This architecture has been inspired by several 
existing seed-oriented minimally supervised ma-
chine learning systems, in particular by Snowball 
(Agichtein and Gravano, 2000) and ExDisco 
(Yangarber et al, 2000). We call our system 
DARE, standing for ?Domain Adaptive Relation 
Extraction based on Seeds?. DARE contains four 
major components: linguistic annotation, classifier, 
rule learning and relation extraction. The first com-
ponent only applies once, while the last three com-
ponents are integrated in a bootstrapping loop.  At 
each iteration, rules will be learned based on the 
seed and then new relation instances will be ex-
tracted by applying the learned rules. The new re-
lation instances are then used as seeds for the next 
iteration of the learning cycle.  The cycle termi-
nates when no new relations can be acquired. 
The linguistic annotation is responsible for en-
riching the natural language texts with linguistic 
information such as named entities and depend-
ency structures.  In our framework, the depth of the 
linguistic annotation can be varied depending on 
the domain and the available resources. 
The classifier has the task to deliver relevant 
paragraphs and sentences that contain seed ele-
ments. It has three subcomponents: document re-
585
trieval, paragraph retrieval and sentence retrieval. 
The document retrieval component utilizes the 
open source IR-system Lucene2. A translation step 
is built in to convert the seed into the proper IR 
query format. As explained in Xu et al (2006), we 
generate all possible lexical variants of the seed 
arguments to boost the retrieval coverage and for-
mulate a boolean query where the arguments are 
connected via conjunction and the lexical variants 
are associated via disjunction. However, the trans-
lation could be modified. The task of paragraph 
retrieval is to find text snippets from the relevant 
documents where the seed relation arguments co-
occur. Given the paragraphs, a sentence containing 
at least two arguments of a seed relation will be 
regarded as relevant. 
As mentioned above, the rule learning compo-
nent constitutes the core of our system. It identifies 
patterns from the annotated documents inducing 
extraction rules from the patterns, and validates 
them.  In section 4, we will give a detailed expla-
nation of this component.  
The relation extraction component applies the 
newly learned rules to the relevant documents and 
extracts relation instances. The validated relation 
instances will then be used as new seeds for the 
next iteration.  
3 DARE Rule Representation  
Our rule representation is designed to specify the 
location and the role of the arguments w.r.t. the 
target relation in a linguistic construction. In our 
framework, the rules should not be restricted to a 
particular linguistic representation and should be 
adaptable to various NLP tools on demand.  A 
DARE rule is allowed to call further DARE rules 
that extract a subset of the arguments. Let us step 
through some example rules for the prize award 
domain. One of the target relations in the domain is 
about a person who obtains a special prize in a cer-
tain area in a certain year, namely, a quaternary 
tuple, see (3). (4) is a domain relevant sentence.  
(3) <recipient, prize, area, year> 
(4) Mohamed ElBaradei won the 2005 Nobel 
Peace Prize on Friday for his efforts to limit the 
spread of atomic weapons. 
(5) is a rule that extracts a ternary projection in-
stance <prize, area, year>  from a  noun phrase 
                                                 
2 http://www.lucene.de 
compound, while (6) is a rule which triggers (5) in 
its object argument and extracts all four arguments. 
(5) and (6) are useful rules for  extracting argu-
ments from (4). 
(5)  
 
 (6) 
 
 
Next we provide a definition of a DARE rule: 
A DARE rule has three components  
1. rule name: ri; 
2. output: a set A containing the n arguments 
of the n-ary relation, labelled with their ar-
gument roles; 
3. rule body in AVM format containing: 
- specific linguistic labels or attributes 
(e.g., subject, object, head, mod), de-
rived from the linguistic analysis, e.g., 
dependency structures and the named en-
tity information 
- rule: its value is a DARE rule which ex-
tracts a subset of arguments of A  
The rule in (6) is a typical DARE rule. Its sub-
ject and object descriptions call appropriate DARE 
rules that extract a subset of the output relation 
arguments.  The advantages of this rule representa-
tion strategy are that (1) it supports the bottom-up 
rule composition; (2) it is expressive enough for 
the representation of rules of various complexity; 
(3) it reflects the precise linguistic relationship 
among the relation arguments and reduces the 
template merging task in the later phase; (4) the 
rules for the subset of arguments may be reused for 
other relation extraction tasks.  
The rule representation models for automatic or 
unsupervised pattern rule extraction discussed by 
586
Stevenson and Greenwood (2006) do not account 
for these considerations.  
4 Seed-driven Bottom-up Rule Learning  
Two main approaches to seed construction have 
been discussed in the literature: pattern-oriented 
(e.g., ExDisco) and semantics-oriented (e.g., 
Snowball) strategies. The pattern-oriented method 
suffers from poor coverage because it makes the IE 
task too dependent on one linguistic representation 
construction (e.g., subject-verb-object) and has 
moreover ignored the fact that semantic relations 
and events could be dispersed over different sub-
structures of the linguistic representation. In prac-
tice, several tuples extracted by different patterns 
can contribute to one complex relation instance.   
The semantics-oriented method uses relation in-
stances as seeds. It can easily be adapted to all re-
lation/event instances. The complexity of the target 
relation is not restricted by the expressiveness of 
the seed pattern representation. In Brin (1998) and 
Agichtein and Gravano (2000),  the semantics-
oriented methods have proved to be effective in 
learning patterns for some general binary relations 
such as booktitle-author and company-headquarter 
relations. In Xu et al (2006), the authors show that 
at least for the investigated task it is more effective 
to start with the most complex relation instance, 
namely, with an n-ary sample for the target n-ary 
relation as seed, because the seed arguments are 
often centred in a relevant textual snippet where 
the relation is mentioned.  Given the bottom-up 
extracted patterns, the task of the rule induction is 
to cluster and generalize the patterns. In compari-
son to the bottom-up rule induction strategy (Califf 
and Mooney, 2004), our method works also in a 
compositional way. For reasons of space this part 
of the work will be reported in Xu and Uszkoreit 
(forthcoming).  
4.1 Pattern Extraction 
Pattern extraction in DARE aims to find linguistic 
patterns which do not only trigger the relations but 
also locate the relation arguments. In DARE, the 
patterns can be extracted from a phrase, a clause or 
a sentence, depending on the location and the dis-
tribution of the seed relation arguments.   
 
Figure 2. Pattern extraction step 1 
 
Figure 3. Pattern extraction step 2 
 
Figures 2 and 3 depict the general steps of bot-
tom-up pattern extraction from a dependency tree t 
where three seed arguments arg1, arg2 and arg3 are 
located. All arguments are assigned their relation 
roles r1, r2 and r3. The pattern-relevant subtrees are 
trees in which seed arguments are embedded: t1, t2 
and t3. Their root nodes are n1, n2 and n3.  Figure 2 
shows the extraction of a unary pattern n2_r3_i, 
while Figure 3 illustrates the further extraction and 
construction of a binary pattern n1_r1_r2_j and a 
ternary pattern n3_r1_r2_r3_k. In practice, not all 
branches in the subtrees will be kept. In the follow-
ing, we give a general definition of our seed-driven 
bottom-up pattern extraction algorithm: 
input:  (i) relation = <r1, r2, ..., rn>: the target rela-
tion tuple with n argument roles. 
 T: a set of linguistic analysis trees anno-
tated with i seed relation arguments (1?i?n) 
output: P: a set of pattern instances which can ex-
tract i or a subset of i arguments.  
Pattern extraction: 
 for each tree t ?T 
587
Step 1: (depicted in Figure 2) 
1. replace all terminal nodes that are instanti-
ated with the seed arguments by new 
nodes. Label these new nodes with the 
seed argument roles and possibly the cor-
responding entity classes; 
2. identify the set of the lowest nonterminal 
nodes N1 in t that dominate only one ar-
gument (possibly among other nodes). 
3. substitute N1 by nodes labelled with the 
seed argument roles and their entity classes 
4. prune the subtrees dominated by N1 from t 
and add these subtrees into P. These sub-
trees are assigned the argument role infor-
mation and a unique id. 
Step2: For i=2 to n: (depicted in Figure 3) 
1. find the set of the lowest nodes N1 in t that 
dominate in addition to other children only 
i seed arguments; 
2. substitute N1 by nodes labelled with the i 
seed argument role combination informa-
tion (e.g., ri_rj) and with a unique id. 
3. prune the subtrees Ti dominated by Ni in t; 
4. add Ti to P together with the argument role 
combination information and the unique id  
With this approach, we can learn rules like (6) in 
a straightforward way. 
4.2 Rule Validation: Ranking and Filtering 
Our ranking strategy has incorporated the ideas 
proposed by Riloff (1996), Agichtein and Gravano 
(2000), Yangarber (2003) and Sudo et al (2003). 
We take two properties of a pattern into account: ? domain relevance: its distribution in the rele-
vant documents and irrelevant documents 
(documents in other domains); 
? trustworthiness of its origin: the relevance 
score of the seeds from which it is extracted.   
In Riloff (1996) and Sudo et al (2003), the rele-
vance of a pattern is mainly dependent on its oc-
currences in the relevant documents vs. the whole 
corpus.  Relevant patterns with lower frequencies 
cannot float to the top. It is known that some com-
plex patterns are relevant even if they have low 
occurrence rates. We propose a new method for 
calculating the domain relevance of a pattern. We 
assume that the domain relevance of a pattern is 
dependent on the relevance of the lexical terms 
(words or collocations) constructing the pattern, 
e.g., the domain relevance of (5) and (6) are de-
pendent on the terms ?prize? and ?win? respec-
tively. Given n different domains, the domain rele-
vance score (DR) of a term t in a domain di is: 
DR(t, di)= 
0, if df(t, di) =0; 
df(t,di)
N?D ?LOG(n?
df(t,di)
df(t,dj)
j=1
n?
), otherwise 
where 
? df(t, di): is the document frequency of a 
term t in the domain di  
? D: the number of the documents in di 
? N: the total number of the terms in di 
Here the domain relevance of a term is dependent 
both on its document frequency and its document 
frequency distribution in other domains. Terms 
mentioned by more documents within the domain 
than outside are more relevant (Xu et al, 2002).   
In the case of n=3 such different domains might 
be, e.g., management succession, book review or 
biomedical texts. Every domain corpus should ide-
ally have the same number of documents and simi-
lar average document size. In the calculation of the 
trustworthiness of the origin, we follow Agichtein 
and Gravano (2000) and Yangarber (2003). Thus, 
the relevance of a pattern is dependent on the rele-
vance of its terms and the score value of the most 
trustworthy seed from which it origins. Finally, the 
score of a pattern p is calculated as follows: 
score(p)= }:)(max{)(
0
SeedsssscoretDR
T
i
i ???
=
 
where    |T|> 0 and ti ? T 
? T: is the set of the terms occur in p; 
? Seeds: a set of seeds from which the pat-
tern is extracted; 
? score(s): is the score of the seed s; 
This relevance score is not dependent on the distri-
bution frequency of a pattern in the domain corpus. 
Therefore, patterns with lower frequency, in par-
ticular, some complex patterns, can be ranked 
higher when they contain relevant domain terms or 
come from reliable seeds. 
588
5 Top down Rule Application 
After the acquisition of pattern rules, the DARE 
system applies these rules to the linguistically an-
notated corpus. The rule selection strategy moves 
from complex to simple. It first matches the most 
complex pattern to the analyzed sentence in order 
to extract the maximal number of relation argu-
ments. According to the duality principle (Yangar-
ber 2001), the score of the new extracted relation 
instance S is dependent on the patterns from which 
it origins. Our score method is a simplified version 
of that defined by Agichtein and Gravano (2000): 
score(S)=1? (1? score(Pi )
i=0
P
? )  
where P={Pi} is the set of patterns that extract S. 
 
The extracted instances can be used as potential 
seeds for the further pattern extraction iteration, 
when their scores are validated.  The initial seeds 
obtain 1 as their score. 
6 Experiments and Evaluation 
 We apply our framework to two application do-
mains: Nobel Prize awards and management suc-
cession events.  Table 1 gives an overview of our 
test data sets. 
Data Set Name Doc Number Data Amount 
Nobel Prize A  (1999-2005) 2296 12,6 MB 
Nobel Prize B (1981-1998)  1032 5,8 MB 
MUC-6 199 1 MB 
Table1. Overview of Test Data Sets.  
For the Nobel Prize award scenario, we use two 
test data sets with different sizes: Nobel Prize A 
and Nobel Prize B. They are Nobel Prize related 
articles from New York Times, online BBC and 
CNN news reports.   The target relation for the ex-
periment is a quaternary relation as mentioned in 
(3), repeated here again: 
<recipient, prize, area, year> 
 Our test data is not annotated with target rela-
tion instances. However, the entire list of Nobel 
Prize award events is available for the evaluation 
from the Nobel Prize official website3. We use it as 
our reference relation database for building our 
Ideal table (Agichtein and Gravano, 2000).      
For the management succession scenario, we use 
the test data from MUC-6 (MUC-6, 1995) and de-
                                                 
3 http://nobelprize.org/ 
fine a simpler relation structure than the MUC-6 
scenario template with four arguments:  
<Person_In, Person_Out, Position, Organisation> 
In the following tables, we use PI for Person_In, 
PO for Person_Out, POS for Position and ORG for 
Organisation. In our experiments, we attempt to 
investigate the influence of the size of the seed and 
the size of the test data on the performance. All 
these documents are processed by named entity 
recognition (Drozdzynski et al, 2004) and depend-
ency parser MINIPAR (Lin, 1998).      
6.1 Nobel Prize Domain Evaluation 
For this domain, three test runs have been evalu-
ated, initialized by one randomly selected relation 
instance as seed each time.  In the first run, we use 
the largest test data set Nobel Prize A. In the sec-
ond and third runs, we have compared two random 
selected seed samples with 50% of the data each, 
namely Nobel Prize B. For data sets in this do-
main, we are faced with an evaluation challenge 
pointed out by DIPRE (Brin, 1998) and Snowball 
(Agichtein and Gravano, 2000), because there is no 
gold-standard evaluation corpus available. We 
have adapted the evaluation method suggested by 
Agichtein and Gravano, i.e., our system is success-
ful if we capture one mentioning of a Nobel Prize 
winner event through one instance of the relation 
tuple or its projections. We constructed two tables 
(named Ideal) reflecting an approximation of the 
maximal detectable relation instances: one for No-
bel Prize A and another for Nobel Prize B. The 
Ideal tables contain the Nobel Prize winners that 
co-occur with the word ?Nobel? in the test corpus. 
Then precision is the correctness of the extracted 
relation instances, while recall is the coverage of 
the extracted tuples that match with the Ideal table. 
In Table 2 we show the precision and recall of the 
three runs and their random seed sample: 
Recall Data 
Set 
Seed Preci-
sion total time interval 
Nobel 
Prize A
[Zewail, Ahmed H], 
nobel, chemistry,1999 
71,6% 50,7% 70,9% 
(1999-2005) 
Nobel 
Prize B
[Sen, Amartya], no-
bel, economics, 1998 
87,3% 31% 43% 
(1981-1998) 
Nobel 
Prize B
[Arias, Oscar],  
nobel, peace, 1987 
83,8% 32% 45% 
(1981-1998) 
Table 2. Precision, Recall against the Ideal Table  
The first experiment with the full test data has 
achieved much higher recall than the two experi-
ments with the set Nobel Prize B. The two experi-
ments with the Nobel Prize B corpus show similar 
589
performance. All three experiments have better 
recalls when taking only the relation instances dur-
ing the report years into account, because there are 
more mentionings during these years in the corpus.  
Figure (6) depicts the pattern learning and new 
seed extracting behavior during the iterations for 
the first experiment. Similar behaviours are ob-
served in the other two experiments.   
 
Figure 6. Experiment with Nobel Prize A  
6.2 Management Succession Domain 
The MUC-6 corpus is much smaller than the Nobel 
Prize corpus. Since the gold standard of the target 
relations is available, we use the standard IE preci-
sion and recall method. The total gold standard 
table contains 256 event instances, from which we 
randomly select seeds for our experiments. Table 3 
gives an overview of performance of the experi-
ments. Our tests vary between one seed, 20 seeds 
and 55 seeds. 
Initial Seed Nr.  Precision Recall 
A 12.6% 7.0% 1  
B 15.1% 21.8% 
20  48.4%  34.2% 
55  62.0% 48.0% 
Table 3. Results for various initial seed sets  
The first two one-seed tests achieved poor per-
formance. With 55 seeds, we can extract additional  
67 instances to obtain the half size of the instances 
occurring in the corpus. Table 4 show evaluations 
of the single arguments. B works a little better be-
cause the randomly selected single seed appears a 
better sample for finding the pattern for extracting 
PI argument.  
Arg precision 
(A) 
precision 
(B) 
Recall 
(A) 
Recall 
(B) 
PI 10.9% 15.1% 8.6% 34.4% 
PO 28.6% - 2.3% 2.3% 
ORG 25.6% 100% 2.6% 2.6% 
POS 11.2% 11.2% 5.5% 5.5% 
Table 4. Evaluation of one-seed tests (A and B) 
Table 5 shows the performance with 20 and 55 
seeds respectively. Both of them are better than the 
one-seed tests, while 55 seeds deliver the best per-
formance in average, in particular, the recall value. 
  
arg precision 
(20) 
precision 
(55) 
recall 
(20) 
recall 
(55) 
PI 84% 62.8% 27.9% 56.1% 
PO 41.2% 59% 34.2% 31.2% 
ORG 82.4% 58.2% 7.4% 20.2% 
POS 42% 64.8% 25.6% 30.6% 
Table 5. Evaluation of 20 and 55 seeds tests 
Our result with 20 seeds (precision of 48.4% and 
recall of 34.2%) is comparable with the best result 
reported by Greenwood and Stevenson (2006) with 
the linked chain model (precision of 0.434 and re-
call of 0.265). Since the latter model uses patterns 
as seeds, applying a similarity measure for pattern 
ranking, a fair comparison is not possible. Our re-
sult is not restricted to binary relations and our 
model also assigns the exact argument role to the 
Person role, i.e. Person_In or Person_Out.   
We have also evaluated the top 100 event-
independent binary relations such as Person-
Organisation and Position-Organisation. The preci-
sion of these by-product relations of our IE system 
is above 98%.  
7 Conclusion and Future Work 
Several parameters are relevant for the success 
of a seed-based bootstrapping approach to relation 
extraction. One of these is the arity of the relation.  
Another one is the locality of the relation instance 
in an average mentioning. A third one is the types 
of the relation arguments:  Are they  named entities 
in the classical sense? Are they lexically marked? 
Are there several arguments of the same type? 
Both tasks we explored involved extracting quater-
nary relations. The Nobel Prize domain shows bet-
ter lexical marking because of the prize name.  The 
management succession domain has two slots of 
the same NE type, i.e., persons. These differences 
are relevant for any relation extraction approach.   
The success of the bootstrapping approach cru-
cially depends on the nature of the training data 
base.  One of the most relevant properties of this 
data base is the ratio of documents to relation in-
stances. Several independent reports of an instance 
usually yield a higher number of patterns.   
The two tasks we used to investigate our method 
drastically differ in this respect.  The Nobel Prize 
590
domain we selected as a learning domain for gen-
eral award events since it exhibits a high degree of 
redundancy in reporting.  A Nobel Prize triggers 
more news reports than most other prizes.  The 
achieved results met our expectations.  With one 
randomly selected seed, we could finally extract 
most relevant events in some covered time interval. 
However, it turns out that it is not just the aver-
age number of reports per events that matters but 
also the distribution of reportings to events.  Since 
the Nobel prizes data exhibit a certain type of 
skewed distribution, the graph exhibits properties 
of scale-free graphs.  The distances between events 
are shortened to a few steps. Therefore, we can 
reach most events in a few iterations. The situation 
is different for the management succession task 
where the reports came from a single newspaper.  
The ratio of events to reports is close to one.  This 
lack of informational redundancy requires a higher 
number of seeds.  When we started the bootstrap-
ping with a single event, the results were rather 
poor.  Going up to twenty seeds, we still did not 
get the performance we obtain in the Nobel Prize 
task but our results compare favorably to the per-
formance of existing bootstrapping methods.  
The conclusion, we draw from the observed dif-
ference between the two tasks is simple:  We shall 
always try to find a highly redundant training data 
set.  If at all possible, the training data should ex-
hibit a skewed distribution of reports to events.  
Actually, such training data may be the only realis-
tic chance for reaching a large number of rare pat-
terns.  In future work we will try to exploit the web 
as training resource for acquiring patterns while 
using the parsed domain data as the source for ob-
taining new seeds in bootstrapping the rules before 
applying these to any other nonredundant docu-
ment base.  This is possible because our seed tu-
ples can be translated into simple IR queries and 
further linguistic processing is limited to the re-
trieved candidate documents.   
Acknowledgement 
The presented research was partially supported by a 
grant from the German Federal Ministry of Education 
and Research to the project Hylap (FKZ: 01IWF02) and 
EU?funding for the project RASCALLI. Our special 
thanks go to Doug Appelt and an anonymous reviewer 
for their thorough and highly valuable comments. 
 
References 
E. Agichtein and L. Gravano. 2000. Snowball: extract-
ing relations from large plain-text collections. In 
ACM 2000, pages 85?94, Texas, USA. 
S. Brin. Extracting patterns and relations from the 
World-Wide Web. In Proc. 1998 Int'l Workshop on 
the Web and Databases (WebDB '98), March 1998. 
M. E. Califf and R. J. Mooney. 2004. Bottom-Up Rela-
tional Learning of Pattern Matching Rules for Infor-
mation Extraction. Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search, MIT Press. 
W. Drozdzynski,  H.-U.Krieger, J.  Piskorski; U. Sch?-
fer, and F. Xu. 2004. Shallow Processing with Unifi-
cation and Typed Feature Structures ? Foundations 
and Applications. K?nstliche Intelligenz 1:17?23.  
M. A. Greenwood and M. Stevenson. 2006. Improving 
Semi-supervised Acquisition of Relation Extraction 
Patterns. In Proc. of the Workshop on Information 
Extraction Beyond  the Document, Australia.  
D. Lin. 1998. Dependency-based evaluation of  MINI-
PAR. In Workshop on the Evaluation of Parsing Sys-
tems, Granada, Spain. 
MUC. 1995. Proceedings of the Sixth Message Under-
standing Conference (MUC-6), Morgan Kaufmann. 
E. Riloff. 1996. Automatically Generating Extraction 
Patterns from Untagged Text. In Proc. of the Thir-
teenth National Conference on Articial Intelligence, 
pages 1044?1049, Portland, OR, August. 
M. Stevenson and Mark A. Greenwood. 2006. Compar-
ing Information Extraction Pattern Models. In Proc. 
of the Workshop on Information Extraction Beyond  
the Document, Sydney, Australia.  
K. Sudo, S. Sekine, and R. Grishman. 2003. An Im-
proved Extraction Pattern Representation Model for 
Automatic IE Pattern Acquisition. In Proc. of ACL-
03, pages 224?231, Sapporo, Japan. 
R. Yangarber, R. Grishman, P. Tapanainen, and S. Hut-
tunen. 2000. Automatic Acquisition of Domain 
Knowledge for Information Extraction. In Proc. of 
COLING 2000, Saarbr?cken, Germany. 
R. Yangarber. 2003. Counter-training in the Discovery 
of Semantic Patterns. In Proceedings of ACL-03, 
pages 343?350, Sapporo, Japan. 
F. Xu, D. Kurz, J. Piskorski and S. Schmeier. 2002. A 
Domain Adaptive Approach to Automatic Acquisition 
of Domain Relevant Terms and their Relations with 
Bootstrapping.  In Proc. of LREC 2002, May 2002.  
F. Xu, H. Uszkoreit and H. Li. 2006. Automatic Event 
and Relation Detection with Seeds of Varying Com-
plexity. In Proceedings of AAAI 2006 Workshop 
Event Extraction and Synthesis, Boston, July, 2006.  
591
Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 1354?1362,
Beijing, August 2010
Boosting Relation Extraction with Limited Closed-World Knowledge
Feiyu Xu Hans Uszkoreit Sebastian Krause Hong Li
Language Technology Lab
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI GmbH)
{feiyu,uszkoreit,sebastian.krause,lihong}@dfki.de
Abstract
This paper presents a new approach to im-
proving relation extraction based on min-
imally supervised learning. By adding
some limited closed-world knowledge for
confidence estimation of learned rules to
the usual seed data, the precision of re-
lation extraction can be considerably im-
proved. Starting from an existing base-
line system we demonstrate that utilizing
limited closed world knowledge can ef-
fectively eliminate ?dangerous? or plainly
wrong rules during the bootstrapping pro-
cess. The new method improves the re-
liability of the confidence estimation and
the precision value of the extracted in-
stances. Although recall suffers to a cer-
tain degree depending on the domain and
the selected settings, the overall perfor-
mance measured by F-score considerably
improves. Finally we validate the adapt-
ability of the best ranking method to a new
domain and obtain promising results.
1 Introduction
Minimally supervised machine-learning ap-
proaches to learning rules or patterns for relation
extraction (RE) in a bootstrapping framework are
regarded as very effective methods for building
information extraction (IE) systems and for
adapting them to new domains (e. g., (Riloff,
1996), (Brin, 1998), (Agichtein and Gravano,
2000), (Yangarber, 2001), (Sudo et al, 2003),
(Jones, 2005), (Greenwood and Stevenson,
2006), (Agichtein, 2006), (Xu et al, 2007),
(Xu, 2007)). On the one hand, these approaches
show very promising results by utilizing minimal
domain knowledge as seeds. On the other hand,
they are all confronted with the same problem,
i.e., the acquisition of wrong rules because of
missing knowledge for their validation during
bootstrapping. Various approaches to confidence
estimation of learned rules have been proposed
as well as methods for identifying ?so-called?
negative rules for increasing the precision value
(e.g., (Brin, 1998), (Agichtein and Gravano,
2000), (Agichtein, 2006), (Yangarber, 2003),
(Pantel and Pennacchiotti, 2006), (Etzioni et al,
2005), (Xu et al, 2007) and (Uszkoreit et al,
2009)).
In this paper, we present a new approach to esti-
mating or ranking the confidence value of learned
rules by utilizing limited closed-world knowl-
edge. As many predecessors, our ranking method
is built on the ?Duality Principle? (e. g., (Brin,
1998), (Yangarber, 2001) and (Agichtein, 2006)).
We extend the validation method by an evalu-
ation of extracted instances against some lim-
ited closed-world knowledge, while also allowing
cases in which knowledge for informed decisions
is not available. In comparison to previous ap-
proaches to negative examples or negative rules
such as (Yangarber, 2003), (Etzioni et al, 2005)
and (Uszkoreit et al, 2009), we implicitly gener-
ate many negative examples by utilizing the pos-
itive examples in the closed-world portion of our
knowledge. Rules extracting wrong instances are
lowered in rank.
In (Xu et al, 2007) and (Xu, 2007), we develop
a generic framework for learning rules for rela-
tions of varying complexity, called DARE (Do-
main Adaptive Relation Extraction). Furthermore,
there is a systematic error analysis of the base-
1354
line system conducted in (Xu, 2007). We employ
our system both as a baseline reference and as a
platform for implementing and evaluating our new
method.
Our first experiments conducted on the same
data used in (Xu et al, 2007) demonstrate: 1) lim-
ited closed-world knowledge is very useful and ef-
fective for improving rule confidence estimation
and precision of relation extraction; 2) integration
of soft constraints boosts the confidence value of
the good and relevant rules, but without strongly
decreasing the recall value. In addition, we val-
idate our method on a new corpus of newspaper
texts about celebrities and obtain promising re-
sults.
The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows: Section 2 explains the relevant related work.
Sections 3 and 4 describe DARE and our exten-
sions. Section 5 reports the experiments with
two ranking strategies and their results. Section
6 gives a summary and discusses future work.
2 Related Work
In the existing minimally supervised rule learning
systems for relation extraction based on bootstrap-
ping, they already employ various approaches to
confidence estimation of learned rules and differ-
ent methods for identification of so-called nega-
tive rules. For estimation of confidence/relevance
values of rules, most of the approaches follow
the so-called ?Duality Principle? as mentioned by
Brin (1998) and Yangarber (2001), namely, the
confidence value of learned rules is dependent
on the confidence value of their origins, which
can be documents or relation instances. For ex-
ample, Riloff (1996), Yangarber (2001), Sudo et
al. (2003) and Greenwood and Stevenson (2006)
use domain relevance of documents in which pat-
terns are discovered as well as the distribution fre-
quency of these patterns in those relevant docu-
ments as an indication of good patterns. Their
methods are aimed at detecting all patterns for
a specific domain, but those patterns cannot be
applied directly to a specific relation. In con-
trast, systems presented by Brin (1998), Agichtein
and Gravano (2000), Agichtein (2006), Pantel
and Pennacchiotti (2006) as well as our base-
line system (Xu et al, 2007) are designed to
learn rules for a specific relation. They start with
some relation instances as their so-called ?seman-
tic seeds? and detect rules from texts matching
with these instances. The new rules are applied
to new texts for extracting new instances. These
new instances in turn are utilized as new seeds.
All these systems calculate their rule confidence
based on the confidence values of the instances
from which they stem. In addition to the confi-
dence value of the seed instances, most of them
also consider frequency information and include
some heuristics for extra validation. For exam-
ple, Agichtein (2006) intellectually defines certain
constraints for evaluating the truth value of ex-
tracted instances. But it is not clear whether this
strategy can be adapted to new domains and other
relations. In (Xu et al, 2007) we make use of do-
main relevance values of terms occurring in rules.
This method is not applicable to general relations.
Parallel to confidence estimation strategies, the
learning of negative rules is useful for identifying
wrong rules straightforwardly. Yangarber (2003)
and Etzioni et al (2005) utilize the so-called
Counter-Training for detecting negative rules for
a specific domain or a specific class by learning
from multiple domains or classes at the same time.
Examples of one certain domain or class are re-
garded as negative examples for the other ones.
Bunescu and Mooney (2007) follow a classifi-
cation-based approach to RE. They use positive
and negative sentences of a target relation for a
SVM classifier. Uszkoreit et al (2009) exploit
negative examples as seeds for learning further
negative instances and negative rules. The dis-
advantage of the above four approaches is that
the selected negative domains or classes or neg-
ative instances cover only a subset of the neg-
ative domains/classes/relations of the target do-
main/class/relation.
3 DARE Baseline System
Our baseline system DARE is a minimally super-
vised learning system for relation extraction, ini-
tialized by so-called ?semantic seeds?, i.e., exam-
ples of the target relations, labelled with their se-
mantic roles. The system supports domain adap-
tation through a compositional rule representation
and a bottom-up rule discovery strategy. In this
1355
way, DARE can handle target relations of varying
arity. The following example is a relation instance
of the target relation from (Xu, 2007) concerning
Nobel Prize awards: <Mohamed ElBaradei, No-
bel, Peace, 2005>. The target relation contains
four arguments: WINNER, PRIZE NAME, PRIZE AREA
and YEAR. This example refers to an event men-
tioned in the sentence in example (1).
(1) Mohamed ElBaradei, won the 2005 Nobel
Prize for Peace on Friday because of ....
Figure 1 is a simplified dependency tree of ex-
ample (1). DARE utilizes a bottom-up rule dis-
covery strategy to extract rules from such depen-
dency trees. All sentences are processed with
named entity recognition and dependency parsing.
?win?subject
wwnnnn
n object
''PPP
PP
Winner ?Prize?lex-mod
ssggggg
ggggg
ggg
lex-mod  mod ''O
OOOO
Year Prize ?for?
pcomp-n 
Area
Figure 1: Dependency tree for example (1)
From the tree in Figure 1, DARE learns three
rules. The first rule is dominated by the prepo-
sition ?for?, extracting the argument PRIZE AREA
(Area). The second rule is dominated by the noun
?Prize?, extracting the arguments YEAR (Year) and
PRIZE NAME (Prize), and calling the first rule for
the argument PRIZE AREA (Area). The rule ?win-
ner prize area year 1? from Figure 2 extracts all
four arguments from the verb phrase dominated
by the verb ?win? and calls the second rule to
handle the arguments embedded in the linguistic
argument ?object?.
Rule name :: winner prize area year 1
Rule body ::?
????????????
head
?
?
pos verb
mode active
lex-form ?win?
?
?
daughters <
[
subject
[
head 1 Winner
]]
,
?
??object
?
?
rule year prize area 1 ::
< 4 Year, 2 Prize,
3 Area >
?
?
?
??>
?
????????????
Output :: < 1 Winner, 2 Prize, 3 Area, 4 Year >
Figure 2: DARE extraction rule.
We conduct a systematic error analysis based
on our experiments with the Nobel Prize award
data (Xu, 2007). The learned rules are divided
into four groups: good, useless, dangerous and
bad. The good rules are rules that only extract cor-
rect instances, while bad ones exclusively produce
wrong instances. Useless rules are those that do
not detect any new instances. Dangerous rules are
dangerous because they extract both correct and
wrong instances. Most good rules are rules with
high specificity, namely, extracting all or most ar-
guments of the target relation. The 14.7% extrac-
tion errors are from bad rules and dangerous rules.
Other errors are caused by wrong reported con-
tent, negative modality, parsing and named entity
recognition errors.
4 Our Approach: Boosting Relation Ex-
traction
4.1 Closed-World Knowledge: Modeling and
Construction
The error analysis of DARE confirms that the
identification of bad rules or dangerous rules is
important for the precision of an extraction sys-
tem. Using closed-world knowledge with large
numbers of implicit negative instances opens a
possibility to detect such rules directly. In our
work, closed-world knowledge for a target rela-
tion is the total set of positive relation instances
for entire relations or for some selected subsets
of individuals. For most real world applications,
closed-world knowledge can only be obtained for
relatively small subsets of individuals participat-
ing in the relevant relations. We store the closed-
world knowledge in a relational database, which
we dub ?closed-world knowledge database? (abbr.
cwDB). Thus, a cwDB for a target relation should
fill the following condition:
A cwDB must contain all correct relation
instances (insts) for an instantiation value
(argValue) of a selected relation argument
cwArg in the target relation.
Given R (the total set of relation instances of a
target relation), a cwDB is defined as follows:
cwDB={inst ? R : cwArg(inst) = argValue}.
An example of a cwDB is the set of all prize win-
ners of a specific prize area such as Peace, where
PRIZE AREA is the selected cwArg and argValue is
Peace. Note that the merger of two cwDBs, for
example with PRIZE AREAs Peace and Literature,
is again a cwDB (with two argValues in this case).
1356
4.2 Modified Learning Algorithm
In Algorithm 1, we present the modification of the
DARE algorithm (Xu, 2007). The basic idea of
DARE is that it takes some initial seeds as input
and learns relation extraction rules from sentences
in the textual corpus matching the seeds. Given
the learned rules, it extracts new instances from
the texts. The modified algorithm adds the val-
idate step to evaluate the new instances against
the closed-world knowledge cwDB. Based on the
evaluation result, both new instances and learned
rules are ranked with a confidence value.
INPUT: initial seeds
1 i? 0 (iteration of bootstrapping)
2 seeds ? initial seeds
3 all instances ? {}
4 while (seeds 6= {})
5 rulesi ? getRules(seeds)
6 instancesi ? getInstances(rulesi)
7 new instancesi ? instancesi ? all instances
8 validate(new instances i , cwDB)
9 rank(new instancesi)
10 rank(rulesi)
11 seeds ? new instancesi
12 all instances ? all instances + new instancesi
13 i? i+ 1
OUTPUT: all instances
Algorithm 1: Extended DARE
4.3 Validation against cwDB
Given a cwDB of a target relation and its argValue
of its selected argument cwArg, the validation of
an extracted instance (inst) against the cwDB is
defined as follows.
inst correct ? inst ? cwDB (1)
inst wrong ? inst 6? cwDB ?
cwArg(inst) = argValue
inst unknown ? ( inst 6? cwDB ?
cwArg(inst) 6= argValue )
? ( inst 6? cwDB ?
cwArg(inst) is unspecified )
4.4 Rule Confidence Ranking with cwDB
We develop two rule-ranking strategies for con-
fidence estimation, in order to investigate the
best way of integrating the closed-world knowl-
edge: (a) exclusive ranking: This ranking strat-
egy excludes every rule which extracts wrong in-
stances after their validation against the closed-
world knowledge; (b) soft ranking: This ranking
strategy is built on top of the duality principle and
takes specificity and the depth of learning into ac-
count.
Exclusive Ranking The exclusive ranking
method is a very naive ranking method which
estimates the confidence value of a learned rule
(e.g., rule) depending on the truth value of its
extracted instances (getInstances(rule)) against
a cwDB. Any rule with one wrong extraction
is regarded as a bad rule in this method. This
method works effectively in a special scenario
where the total list of the instances of the target
relation is available as the cwDB.
confidence(rule) =
{
1 if getInstances(rule) ? cwDB,
0 otherwise. (2)
Soft Ranking The soft ranking method works
in the spirit of the ?Duality Principle?, the con-
fidence value of rules is dependent on the truth
value of their extracted instances and on the seed
instances from which they stem. The confi-
dence value of the extracted instances is estimated
based on their validation against the cwDB or the
confidence value of their ancestor seed instances
from which their extraction rules stem. Further-
more, the specificity of the instances (percentage
of the filled arguments) and the learning depth
(iteration step of bootstrapping) are parameters
too. The definition of instance scoring, namely,
score(inst), is given as follows:
score(inst) =
?
?
?
? > 0 if validate(inst , cwDB) = correct,
0 if validate(inst , cwDB) = wrong,
UN inst if validate(inst , cwDB) = unknown.
(3)
As defined above, if a new instance is con-
firmed as correct by the cwDB, it will obtain a
positive value. In our experiment, we set ?=10
in order to boost the precision. In the case of un-
known about its truth value, the confidence value
of a new instance (inst) is dependent on the confi-
dence values of the seed instances (ancestor seeds)
from which its mother rules (Rinst ) stem. Below,
the scoring of the unknown case, namely, UN inst ,
is defined, where Rinst are rules that extract the
new instance inst , while Irule are instances from
which a rule inRinst is learned and ? is the speci-
ficity value of inst while ? is utilized to express
the noisy potential of each further iteration during
bootstrapping.
1357
UN inst =
?
rule?Rinst
(?
j?Irule score(j)
|Irule | ? ?
irule
)
|Rinst |
? ?
where
Rinst = getMotherRulesOf(inst),
Irule = getMotherInstancesOf(rule),
? = specificity,
? = 0.8,
irule = i-th iteration where rule occurs
(4)
Given the scoring of instance inst , the confidence
estimation of a rule is the average score of all
insts extracted by this rule:
confidence(rule) =
?
inst?I score(inst)
|I|
where I = getInstances(rule) (5)
5 Experiments
5.1 Corpora and Closed-World Knowledge
We conduct our experiments with two different
domains. We start with the Nobel Prize award do-
main reported in (Xu, 2007) and apply our method
to the same corpus, a collection from various on-
line newspapers. The target relation is the one
with the four arguments as mentioned in Sec-
tion 3. In this way, we can compare our results
with those reported in (Xu, 2007). Furthermore,
all Nobel Prize winners can be found from http:
//nobelprize.org, so it is easy to construct
a cwDB for Nobel Prize winners. We take the
PRIZE AREA as our selected argument for closing
sub-relations and construct various cwDBs with
the instantiation of this argument (e.g., all win-
ners of Nobel Peace Prize). The second domain
is about celebrities. Our text corpus is collected
from tabloid newspaper texts, containing 6850 ar-
ticles from the years 2001 and 2002. The target
relation is the marriage relationship between two
persons. We construct a cwDB of 289 persons in
which we have listed all their (ex-)spouses as well
as the time span of the marriage relation.
Table 1 summarizes the size of the corpus data
of the two domains.
Domain Space #Doc.
Nobel Prize 18,4 MB 3328
Celebrity Marr. 16,6 MB 6850
Table 1: Corpus data.
5.2 Nobel Prize Domain
We apply the extended DARE system to the Nobel
Prize corpus at first and conduct two rule rank-
ing strategies with different sizes of the cwDB.
We conduct all our experiments with the seed
<Guenter Grass, Nobel, Literature, 1999>. The
DARE-Baseline performance is shown in Table 2.
Precision Absolute Recall
Baseline 77.98% 89.01%
Table 2: DARE-Baseline Performance
Exclusive Ranking
Given the complete list of Nobel Laureates, we
can apply the exclusive ranking strategy to this do-
main. Our cwDB is the total list of Nobel Prize
winners. The wrong instances will not be used as
seed for the next iteration. Rules that extracted
at least one wrong instance are marked as bad, the
other rules as good. We utilize only the good rules
for relation extraction.
Prec. Rel. Recall Rel. F-Measure
100.00% 82.88% 90.64%
Table 3: Performance of Exclusive Ranking in
Nobel Prize award domain.
In comparison to the DARE baseline system,
given the same seed setup, this experiment results
in a precision boost from 77.98% to 100% (see
Table 3). This is not surprising since the cwDB
covers all relation instances for the target rela-
tion. Nevertheless, this experiment shows that the
closed-world knowledge approach is effective to
exclude bad rules. However, the recall decreases
and is only 82.88% of the one of the baseline sys-
tem. As we explain above, not all rules extracting
wrong instances are bad rules because wrong ex-
tractions can also be caused by other error sources
such as named entity recognition. Therefore, even
good rules can be excluded because of other er-
ror sources. The exclusive ranking strategy is use-
ful for application scenarios where people want to
learn rules for achieving 100% precision perfor-
mance and do not expect high recall. It is espe-
cially effective when a big cwDB is available.
Soft Ranking
This ranking strategy does not exclude any
rules and assigns a score to each rule based on
1358
the definition in Section 4.4. Rules which extract
correct instances, more specific relation instances
and stem from high-scored seed instances obtain
a better value than others. In our approach, the
specificity is dependent on the number of the ar-
guments in the extracted instances. For this do-
main, the most specific instances contain all four
arguments. In the following, we conduct two ex-
periments with two different sizes of the cwDB:
1) with the total list of winners (complete cwDB)
and 2) with only winners in one PRIZE AREA (lim-
ited cwDB).
1) Complete closed-world database Figure 3
displays the correlation between the score of rules
and their extraction precision performance. Each
point stands for a set of rules with the same
score and extraction precision. In this setup, the
higher the score, the higher the precision. Given
the scored rules, Figure 4 depicts precision, re-
call and F-Measure for different score thresholds.
For a given threshold j we take all rules with
score(rule) ? j and use the instances they ex-
tract. The recall value here is the relative recall
w. r. t. to the DARE baseline performance: i. e. the
number of correct extracted instances divided by
the number of correct instances extracted by the
DARE baseline system. The F-Measure value is
calculated by using the relative recall values, we
therefore refer to it as the relative F-Measure. If
the system takes all rules with score ? 7, the sys-
tem achieves the best relative F-Measure.
  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100,00%10,00%
20,00%30,00%
40,00%50,00%
60,00%70,00%
80,00%90,00%
100,00%
Rule-Score
Correctne
ss of extra
cted insta
nces
Figure 3: Rule scores vs. precisions with the
complete closed-world database.
2) Limited closed-world database This experi-
ment investigates the system performance in cases
in which only a limited cwDB is available. This is
the typical situation for most real world RE appli-
cations. Therefore, this experiment is much more
  0 012 3 312 4 412 5 512 6 612 2 212 7 712 8 812 9 912 , ,12 3020%00R22%00R
70%00R72%00R80%00R
82%00R90%00R92%00R
,0%00R,2%00R300%00R
ule-ScSorCtrcnsr-ec  efsnSxeC e-sff  efsnSxeCadiesc?le
??lec?of?C?olC ?fed?-ole
Figure 4: Performance with the complete closed-
world database.
important than the previous one. We construct
a smaller database containing only Peace Nobel
Prize winners, which is about 1/8 of the previous
complete cwDB.
  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100,00%10,00%
20,00%30,00%
40,00%50,00%
60,00%70,00%
80,00%90,00%
100,00%
Rule-Score
Correctne
ss of extra
cted insta
nces
Figure 5: Rule score vs. precision with the lim-
ited closed-world database
  0 012 3 312 4 412 5 512 6 612 2 212 7 712 8 812 9 912 , ,12 300%00R30%00R
40%00R50%00R60%00R
20%00R70%00R80%00R
90%00R,0%00R300%00R
ule-ScSorCtrcnsr-ec  efsnSxeC e-sff  efsnSxeCadiesc?le
??lec?of?C?olC ?fed?-ole
Figure 6: Performance with the limited closed-
world database
Figure 5 shows the correlation between the
score of the rules and their extraction precision.
Although the development curve here is not as
smooth as depicted in Figure 3, the higher scored
rules have better precision values than most of the
lower scored rules. However, we can observe that
some very good rules are scored low, located in
1359
Thresh. Good Dangerous Bad
Baseline 58.94% 26.49% 14.57%
1 64.96% 29.20% 5.84%
2 66.67% 27.91% 5.43%
3 69.23% 26.50% 4.27%
4 73.27% 23.76% 2.97%
5 76.00% 22.67% 1.33%
6 77.59% 20.69% 1.72%
7 77.50% 22.50% 0.00%
8 87.50% 12.50% 0.00%
9 85.71% 14.29% 0.00%
10 90.00% 10.00% 0.00%
Table 4: Quality analysis of rules with the limited
closed-world database
the left upper corner. The reason is that many of
their extracted instances are unknown, even if their
extracted instances are mostly correct.
As shown in Figure 6, even with the limited
cwDB, the precision values are comparable with
the complete cwDB (see Figure 4). However, the
recall value drops much earlier than with the com-
plete cwDB. With a threshold of score 4, the sys-
tem achieves the best modified F-Measure 92,21%
with an improvement of precision of about 11 per-
centage points compared to the DARE baseline
system (89.39% vs. 77.98%). These results show
that even with a limited cwDB this ranking system
can help to improve the precision without loosing
too much recall.
We take a closer look on the useful (actively ex-
tracting) rules and their extraction performance,
using the same rule classification as (Xu, 2007).
As shown in Table 4, more than one fourth of
the extraction rules created by the baseline system
are dangerous ones and almost 15% are plainly
wrong. Applying the rule scoring with the limited
cwDB increases the fraction of good rules to al-
most three quarters and nearly eliminates all bad
rules at threshold 4. By choosing higher thresh-
olds, surviving good rules raises to 90%. The total
remaining set of rules then only consists of rules
that at least partially extract correct instances.
5.3 Celebrity Domain
As presented above, the soft ranking method de-
livers very promising result. In order to val-
idate this ranking method, we choose an ad-
ditional domain and decide to learn marriage
relations among celebrities, where the target
relation consists of the following arguments:
[ NAME OF SPOUSE, NAME OF SPOUSE, YEAR].
The value of the marriage year is valid when
the year is within the marriage time interval. The
motivation of selecting this target relation is the
large number of possible relations between two
persons leading to dangerous or even bad rules.
For example, the rule in Figure 7 is a very dan-
gerous rule because ?meeting? events of two mar-
ried celebrities are often reported. A good confi-
dence estimation method is very useful for boost-
ing the good rules like the one in Figure 8. From
our text corpus we extract 37.000 sentences that
mention at least two persons. The cwDB con-
sists of sample relation instances, in which one
NAME OF SPOUSE is instantiated, i. e. we manu-
ally construct a database which contains all (ex-)
spouses of 289 celebrities.
head([SPOUSE<ne_person>]),
mod({head(("meet", VB)),
subj({head([SPOUSE<ne_person>])})})
Figure 7: A dangerous extraction rule example
head(("marry", VB)),
aux({head(("be", VB))}),
dep({head([SPOUSE<ne_person>]),
dep({head([DATE<point>])})}),
nsubj({head([SPOUSE<ne_person>])})
Figure 8: Example of a positive rule
Since a gold standard of mentions for this cor-
pus is not available, we manually validate 100 ran-
dom samples from each threshold group. This
evaluation gives us an opportunity to estimate the
effect of a cwDB in this domain. Table 5 presents
the performance of the rules with different thresh-
olds. The precision value of the baseline system
is very low. Threshold 3 slightly improves the
precision of the DARE baseline without damag-
ing recall too much. Step 4 excludes dangerous
rules such as the one in Figure 7 which drastically
boosts the precision. Unfortunately, the exclusion
of such general rules leads to the loss of many cor-
rect relation instances too, therefore, the immense
drop of recall from threshold 3 to 4 as well as from
threshold 4 to 5. Positive extraction rules such as
Figure 8 are quite highly scored. Because of the
large number of rules and instances, we start the
quality analysis of rules with score 3. As the table
indicates, the use of the rule scoring in this domain
clearly improves the quality of the created extrac-
tion rules. The error analysis shows that the ma-
jor error resource for this domain is wrong coref-
erence resolution or identity resolution. For ex-
1360
Thresh. # Instances Prec. Rel. Rec. Rel. F-Meas. # Rules Good Dangerous Bad
Baseline 25183 9.00% 100.00% 16.51% 12258
1 19806 7.00% 61.17% 12.56% 562
2 14542 9.00% 57.75% 15.57% 159
3 11259 15.00% 74.51% 24.97% 121 19.83% 33.88% 46.28%
4 788 65.00% 22.60% 33.54% 72 25.00% 27.78% 47.22%
5 195 67.00% 5.76% 10.62% 29 37.93% 17.24% 44.83%
6 115 84.00% 4.26% 8.11% 11 45.45% 27.27% 27.27%
7 55 89.09% 2.16% 4.22% 6 50.00% 33.33% 16.67%
8 9 77.78% 0.31% 0.62% 4 75.00% 0.00% 25.00%
9 5 60.00% 0.13% 0.26% 3 66.67% 0.00% 33.33%
10 5 60.00% 0.13% 0.26% 3 66.67% 0.00% 33.33%
Table 5: Soft ranking for the celebrity marriage domain with a limited cwDB.
ample, the inability to distinguish Prince Charles
(former husband of British princess Diana) from
Charles Spencer (her brother) is the reason that
DARE crosses the border between the marriage
and the sibling relation. In comparison to the
Nobel Prize award event, the marriage relation
between persons is often used as additional in-
formation to a person which is involved in a re-
ported event. Therefore, anaphoric references oc-
cur more often in their mentionings, as the exam-
ple relation in (3).
(3) ?My kids, I really don?t like them to
watch that much television,? said :::::Cruise, 40, whoadopted Isabella and Connor while ::he was mar-ried to second wife Nicole Kidman.
6 Summary
We propose a new way in which prior knowledge
about domains can be efficiently used as addi-
tional criteria for confidence estimation of learned
new rules or new instances in a minimally su-
pervised machine learning framework. By intro-
ducing rule scoring on the basis of available do-
main knowledge (the cwDB), rules can be eval-
uated during the bootstrapping process with re-
spect to their extraction precision. The results
are rather promising. The rule score threshold is
an easy way for users of an extraction system to
adjust the precision-recall-trade-off to their own
needs. The rule estimation method is also general
enough to extend to integration of common sense
knowledge. Although the relation instances in
the closed-world knowledge database can also be
used as seed in the beginning, the core idea of our
research work is to develop a general confidence
estimation strategy for discovered new informa-
tion. As discussed in (Xu, 2007) and (Uszkoreit
et al, 2009), the size of seed is not always rele-
vant for the learning and extraction performance,
in particular if the data corpus exhibits the small
world property. Using all instances in the cwDB
as seed, our experiments with the baseline system
yield worse precision performance than the modi-
fied DARE algorithm with only one seed instance.
This approach is quite general and easily adapt-
able to many domains; the only prerequisite is
the existence of a database with relation instances
from the target domain with a fulfilled closed-
world property on some relational argument. A
database of this kind should be easily obtainable
for many domains, e. g. by exploiting structured
and semi-structured information sources in the In-
ternet, such as YAGO (Suchanek et al (2007)) and
DBpedia (Bizer et al (2009)). Furthermore, in
some areas, such as Business Intelligence, there
is nearly complete knowledge already present for
past years, while the task is to extract informa-
tion only from recent news articles. Construct-
ing closed-worlds out of the present knowledge to
improve the learning of new information is there-
fore a straightforward approach. Even the manual
collection of suitable data might be a reasonable
choice since appropriate closed worlds could be
rather small if cwDBis chosen properly.
Acknowledgments
The work presented here has been partially sup-
ported through the prject KomParse by the ProFIT
program of the Federal State of Berlin which in
turn is co-funded by the EFRE program of the
European Union. It is additionally supported
through a grant to the project TAKE, funded by
the German Ministry for Education and Research
(BMBF, FKZ: 01IW08003).
1361
References
Agichtein, Eugene and Luis Gravano. 2000. Snow-
ball: extracting relations from large plain-text col-
lections. In DL ?00: Proceedings of the fifth ACM
conference on Digital libraries, pages 85?94, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.
Agichtein, Eugene. 2006. Confidence estimation
methods for partially supervised information extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of the Sixth SIAM International
Conference on Data Mining, Bethesda, MD, USA,
April. SIAM.
Bizer, Christian, Jens Lehmann, Georgi Kobilarov,
So?ren Auer, Christian Becker, Richard Cyganiak,
and Sebastian Hellmann. 2009. DBpedia - a crys-
tallization point for the web of data. Journal of Web
Semantics, 7(3):154?165.
Brin, Sergey. 1998. Extracting patterns and rela-
tions from the world wide web. In WebDB Work-
shop at 6th International Conference on Extending
Database Technology, EDBT?98.
Bunescu, Razvan C. and Raymond J. Mooney. 2007.
Learning to extract relations from the web using
minimal supervision. In Proceedings of the 45th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Etzioni, Oren, Michael Cafarella, Doug Downey, Ana-
Maria Popescu, Tal Shaked, Stephen Soderland,
Daniel S. Weld, and Alexander Yates. 2005. Un-
supervised named-entity extraction from the web:
An experimental study. Artificial Intelligence,
165(1):91 ? 134.
Greenwood, Mark A. and Mark Stevenson. 2006. Im-
proving semi-supervised acquisition of relation ex-
traction patterns. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Information Extraction Beyond The Document,
pages 29?35, Sydney, Australia, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Jones, R. 2005. Learning to Extract Entities from La-
beled and Unlabeled Text. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Utah.
Pantel, Patrick and Marco Pennacchiotti. 2006.
Espresso: Leveraging generic patterns for automati-
cally harvesting semantic relations. In Proceedings
of the 21st International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, Sydney,
Australia, July. The Association for Computer Lin-
guistics.
Riloff, Ellen. 1996. Automatically generating extrac-
tion patterns from untagged text. In Proceedings
of Thirteenth National Conference on Artificial In-
telligence (AAAI-96), pages 1044?1049. The AAAI
Press/MIT Press.
Suchanek, Fabian M., Gjergji Kasneci, and Gerhard
Weikum. 2007. Yago: A Core of Semantic Knowl-
edge. In 16th international World Wide Web con-
ference (WWW 2007), New York, NY, USA. ACM
Press.
Sudo, K., S. Sekine, and R. Grishman. 2003. An im-
proved extraction pattern representation model for
automatic IE pattern acquisition. Proceedings of
ACL 2003, pages 224?231.
Uszkoreit, Hans, Feiyu Xu, and Hong Li. 2009. Anal-
ysis and improvement of minimally supervised ma-
chine learning for relation extraction. In 14th In-
ternational Conference on Applications of Natural
Language to Information Systems. Springer.
Xu, Feiyu, Hans Uszkoreit, and Hong Li. 2007. A
seed-driven bottom-up machine learning framework
for extracting relations of various complexity. In
Proceedings of ACL 2007, 45th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Prague, Czech Republic, June.
Xu, Feiyu. 2007. Bootstrapping Relation Extraction
from Semantic Seeds. Phd-thesis, Saarland Univer-
sity.
Yangarber, Roman. 2001. Scenarion Customization
for Information Extraction. Dissertation, Depart-
ment of Computer Science, Graduate School of Arts
and Science, New York University, New York, USA.
Yangarber, Roman. 2003. Counter-training in dis-
covery of semantic patterns. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 343?350, Sapporo Con-
vention Center, Sapporo, Japan, July.
1362
Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Demonstrations Session, pages 13?16,
Athens, Greece, 3 April 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
GOSSIP GALORE
A Self-Learning Agent for Exchanging Pop Trivia
Xiwen Cheng, Peter Adolphs, Feiyu Xu, Hans Uszkoreit, Hong Li
DFKI GmbH, Language Technology Lab
Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3, D-66123 Saarbru?cken, Germany
{xiwen.cheng,peter.adolphs,feiyu,uszkoreit,lihong}@domain.com
Abstract
This paper describes a self-learning soft-
ware agent who collects and learns knowl-
edge from the web and also exchanges her
knowledge via dialogues with the users.
The agent is built on top of information
extraction, web mining, question answer-
ing and dialogue system technologies, and
users can freely formulate their questions
within the gossip domain and obtain the
answers in multiple ways: textual re-
sponse, graph-based visualization of the
related concepts and speech output.
1 Introduction
The system presented here is developed within the
project Responsive Artificial Situated Cognitive
Agents Living and Learning on the Internet (RAS-
CALLI) supported by the European Commission
Cognitive Systems Programme (IST-27596-2004).
The goal of the project is to develop and imple-
ment cognitively enhanced artificial agents, using
technologies in natural language processing, ques-
tion answering, web-based information extraction,
semantic web and interaction driven profiling with
cognitive modelling (Krenn, 2008).
This paper describes a conversational agent
?Gossip Galore?, an active self-learning system
that can learn, update and interpret information
from the web, and can make conversations with
users and provide answers to their questions in the
domain of celebrity gossip. In more detail, by
applying a minimally supervised relation extrac-
tion system (Xu et al, 2007; Xu et al, 2008), the
agent automatically collects the knowledge from
relevant websites, and also communicates with the
users using a question-answering engine via a 3D
graphic interface.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2
gives an overview of the system architecture and
Figure 1: Gossip Galore responding to ?Tell me
something about Carla Bruni!?
presents the design and functionalities of the com-
ponents. Section 3 explains the system setup and
discusses implementation details, and finally Sec-
tion 4 draws conclusions.
2 System Overview
Figure 1 shows a use case of the system. Given a
query ?Tell me something about Carla Bruni?, the
application would trigger a series of background
actions and respond with: ?Here, have a look at
the personal profile of Carla Bruni?. Meanwhile,
the personal profile of Carla Bruni, would be dis-
played on the screen. The design of the interface
reflects the domain of celebrity gossip: the agent
is depicted as a young lady in 3D graphics, who
communicates with users. As an additional fea-
ture, users can access the dialogue memory of the
system, which simulates the human memory in di-
alogues. An example of the dialogue memory is
sketched in Figure 2.
As shown in Figure 3, the system consists of a
number of components. In principle, first, a user?s
query is linguistically analyzed, and then inter-
13
Dialogue
State
Dialogue
Memory
MM GeneratorResponseHandler
NE RecognizerSpellChecker Parser
Anaphora
Resolver
Knowledge
Base
Web
Miner
Input
Interpreter
Input
Analyzer
Relation
Extractor
Information
Wrapper
NL Generator
Conversational
Agent
Figure 3: Agent architecture and interaction of components
Figure 2: Representation of Social Network in Di-
alogue Memory
preted with respect to the context of the dialogue.
A Response Handler will then consult the knowl-
edge base pre-constructed by extracting relevant
information from the Web, and pass the answer, in
an abstract representation, to a Multimodal Gener-
ator, which realizes and presents the answer to the
user in multiple ways. The main components are
described in the following sections.
2.1 Knowledge Base
The knowledge base is automatically built by the
Web Miner. It contains knowledge regarding prop-
erties of persons or groups and their social rela-
tionships. The persons and groups that we concern
are celebrities in the entertainment industry (e.g.,
singers, bands, or movie stars) and their relatives
(e.g., partners) and friends. Typical properties of a
person include name, gender, birthday, etc., and
profiles of celebrities contain additional proper-
ties such as sexual orientation, home pages, stage
names, genres of their work, albums, and prizes.
Social relationships between the persons/groups
such as parent-child, partner, sibling, influenc-
ing/influenced and group-member, are also stored.
2.2 Web Miner
The Web Miner fetches relevant concepts and their
relations by means of two technologies: a) infor-
mation wrapping for exaction of personal profiles
from structured and semi-structured web content,
and b) a minimally supervised machine learning
method provided by DARE (Xu et al, 2007; Xu
et al, 2008) to acquire relations from free texts.
DARE learns linguistic patterns indicating the tar-
get semantic relations by taking some relation in-
stances as initial seed. For example, assume that
the following seed for a parent-child relationship
is given to the DARE system:
(1) Seed: ?Angelina Jolie, Shiloh Nouvel Jolie-Pitt,
daughter?
One sentence that matches the entities men-
tioned in the seed above could be (2), and from
which the DARE system can derive a linguistic
pattern as shown in 3.
(2) Matched sentence: Angelina Jolie and Brad Pitt
welcome their new daughter Shiloh Nouvel Jolie-Pitt.
(3) Extracted pattern: ?subject: celebrity? welcome
?mod: ?new daughter?? ?object: person?
Given the learned pattern, new instances of the
?parent-child? relationship can be automatically
discovered, e.g.:
(4) New acquired instances: ?Adam Sandler, Sunny
Madeline? ?Cynthia Rodriguez, Ella Alexander?
Given the discovered relations among the
celebrities and other people, the system constructs
a social network, which is the basis for providing
answers to users? questions regarding celebrities?
relationships. The network also serves as a re-
source for the active dialogue memory of the agent
as shown in Figure 2.
14
2.3 Input Analyzer and Input Interpreter
The Input Analyzer is designed as both domain
and dialogue context independent. It relies on sev-
eral linguistic analysis tools: 1) a spell checker, 2)
a named entity recognizer SProUT (Drozdzynski
et al, 2004), and 3) a syntactic parsing component
for which we currently employ a fuzzy paraphrase
matcher to approximate the output of a deep syn-
tactic/semantic parser.
In contrast to the Input Analyzer, the Input In-
terpreter analyzes the input with respect to the
context of the dialogue. It contains two major
components: 1) anaphoric resolution, which refers
pronouns to previously mentioned entities with the
help of the dialogue memory, and 2) domain clas-
sification, which determines whether the entities
contained in a user query can be found in the gos-
sip knowledge base (cf. ?Carla Bruni? vs. ?Nico-
las Sarkozy?) and whether the answer focus be-
longs to the domain (cf. ?stage name? vs ?body
guard?). For example, a simple factoid query such
as ?Who is Madonna?, an embedded questions
like ?I wonder who Madonna is?, and expressions
of requests and wishes such as ?I?m interested in
Madonna?, would share the same answer focus,
i.e., the ?personal profile? of ?Madonna?. In ad-
dition to the simple answer types such as ?person
name?, ?location? and ?date/time?, our system can
also deal with complex answer focus types such as
?personal profile?, ?social network? and ?relation
path?, as well as domain-relevant concepts such as
?party affiliation? or ?sexual orientation?.
Finally, the analysis of each query is associated
with a meaning representation, an answer focus
and an expected answer type.
2.4 Response Handler
This component executes the planned action based
on the properties of the answer focus and the en-
tities in a query. In cases where the answer focus
or the entities cannot be found in the knowledge
base, the system would still attempt to provide a
constructive answer. For instance, if a question
contains a domain-specific answer focus but en-
tities unknown to the knowledge base, the agent
will automatically look for alternative knowledge
resources, e.g., Wikipedia. For example, given
the question ?Tell me something about Nicolas
Sarkozy!?, the agent would attempt a Web search
and return the corresponding page on Wikipedia
about ?Nicolas Sarkozy?, even if the knowledge
base does not contain his information since he is a
politician rather than an entertainer.
In addition, specific strategies have been devel-
oped to deal with negative answers. For instance,
the agent would answer the question: When did
Madonna die?, with ?As far as I know, Madonna
is still alive.?, as it cannot find any information re-
garding Madonna?s death.
2.5 Multimodal Generator
The agent (i.e., the young lady in Figure 1) is
equipped with multimodal capabilities to inter-
act with users. It can show the results in tex-
tual and speech forms, using body gestures, fa-
cial expressions, and finally via multimedia out-
put to an embedded screen. We currently employ
template-based generators for producing both the
natural language utterances and the instructions to
the agent that controls the multimodal communi-
cation with the user.
2.6 Dialogue State
The responsibility of this component is to keep
track of the current state of the dialogue between a
user and the agent. It models the system?s expec-
tation of the user?s next action and the system?s re-
actions. For example, if a user misspelled a name
as in the question ?Who is Roby Williams??, the
system would answer with a clarification question:
?Did you mean Robbie Williams?? The user is
then expected to react to the question with either
?yes? or ?no?, which would not be interpretable in
other dialogue contexts where the user is expected
to ask a question. The fact that the system asks a
clarification question and expects a yes/no answer
as well as the repaired question are stored in the
Dialogue State component.
2.7 Dialogue Memory
This component aims to simulate the cognitive ca-
pacity of the memory of a human being: con-
struction of a short-time memory and activation
of long-time memory (our Knowledge Base). It
records the sequence of all entities mentioned dur-
ing the conversation and their respective target
foci. Simultaneously, it retrieves all the related in-
formation from the Knowledge Base. In figure 2,
the dialogue memory for the three questions ?Tell
me something about Carla Bruni.?, ?Can you tell
me some news about her??, ?How many kids does
Brad Pitt have?? is shown. Green and yellow bub-
bles are entities mentioned in the dialogue context,
15
where the yellow one is the last mentioned entity.
White bubbles indicate the newest records which
are acquired in the last process of online QA.
3 Implementation
The system uses a client-server architecture. The
server is responsible for accepting new connec-
tions, managing accounts, processing conversa-
tions and passing responses to the clients. All
the server-side functions are implemented in Java
1.6. We use Jetty as a web server to deliver mul-
timedia representations of an answer and to pro-
vide selected functionalities of the system as web
services to our partners. The knowledge base is
stored in a MySQL database whose size is 11MB,
and contains information of 38,758 persons in-
cluding 16,532 artists and 1,407 music groups. As
for the social connection data, there are 14,909
parent-child, 16,886 partner, 4,214 sibling, 308
influence/influenced and 9,657 group-member re-
lational pairs. The social network is visualized
in JGraph, and speech output is generated by the
open-source speech synthesis system OpenMary
(Schro?der and Hunecke, 2007).
There are two interfaces realizing the client-
side of the system: a 3D software application and
a web interface. The software application uses
a 3D computer game engine, and communicates
with the server by messages in an XML format
based on BML and SSML. In addition, we provide
a web interface1, implemented using HTML and
Javascript on the browser side, and Java Servlets
on the server side, offering the same core func-
tionality as the 3D client.
Both the server and the web client are platform
independent. The 3D client runs on Windows with
a dedicated 3D graphics card. The recommended
memory for the server is 1GB.
4 Conclusions
This paper describes a fully implemented software
application, which discovers and learns informa-
tion and knowledge from the Web, and communi-
cates with users and exchanges gossip trivia with
them. The system uses many novel technologies
in order to achieve the goal of vividly chatting and
interacting with the users in a fun way. The tech-
nologies include information extraction, question
answering, dialogue modeling, response planning
and multimodal presentation generation. Please
1http://rascalli.dfki.de/live/dialogue.page
refer to (Xu et al, 2009) for additional details
about the ?Gossip Galore? system.
The planned future extensions include the in-
tegration of deeper language processing methods
to discover more precise linguistic patterns. A
prime candidate for this extension is our own deep
syntactic/semantic parser. Another plan concerns
the required temporal aspects of relations together
with credibility checking. Finally, we plan to ex-
ploit the dialogue memory for moving more of the
dialogue initiative to the agent. In cases of miss-
ing or negative answers or in cases of pauses on
the user side, the agent can use the active parts
of the dialogue memory to propose additional rel-
evant information or to guide the user to fruitful
requests within the range of user?s interests.
References
Witold Drozdzynski, Hans-Ulrich Krieger, Jakub Piskorski,
Ulrich Scha?fer, and Feiyu Xu. 2004. Shallow processing
with unification and typed feature structures ? foundations
and applications. Ku?nstliche Intelligenz, 1:17?23.
Brigitte Krenn. 2008. Responsive artificial situated cognitive
agents living and learning on the internet, April. Poster
presented at CogSys 2008.
Marc Schro?der and Anna Hunecke. 2007. Mary tts partici-
pation in the Blizzard Challenge 2007. In Proceedings of
the Blizzard Challenge 2007, Bonn, Germany.
Feiyu Xu, Hans Uszkoreit, and Hong Li. 2007. A seed-
driven bottom-up machine learning framework for extract-
ing relations of various complexity. Proceedings of ACL-
2007, pages 584?591.
Feiyu Xu, Hans Uszkoreit, and Hong Li. 2008. Task driven
coreference resolution for relation extraction. In Proceed-
ings of ECAI 2008, Patras, Greece.
Feiyu Xu, Peter Adolphs, Hans Uszkoreit, Xiwen Cheng, and
Hong Li. 2009. Gossip galore: A conversational web
agent for collecting and sharing pop trivia. In Joaquim
Filipe, Ana Fred, and Bernadette Sharp (eds). Proceed-
ings of ICAART 2009, Porto, Portugal.
16
