Building A Large Chinese Corpus 
Annotated With Semantic Dependency 
 
LI Mingqin 
Department of Electronic Engineering, 
Tsinghua University,  
Beijing 100084, China 
lmq@thsp.ee.tsinghua
.edu.cn  
LI Juanzi 
Department of Computer Science 
and Technology,  
Tsinghua University, 
 Beijing 100084, China
 
ljz@thsp.ee.tsinghu
a.edu.cn 
DONG Zhendong 
Research Centre of Computer & 
Language Engineering, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, 100084,China
 
dzd@keenage.com 
WANG Zuoying 
Department of Electronic Engineering,  
Tsinghua University, 
 Beijing 100084, China 
wzy-dee@tsinghua.edu.cn  
LU Dajin 
Department of Electronic Engineering,  
Tsinghua University, 
 Beijing 100084, China 
ludj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn 
 
 
 
Abstract 
At present most of corpora are annotated 
mainly with syntactic knowledge. In this 
paper, we attempt to build a large corpus 
and annotate semantic knowledge with 
dependency grammar. We believe that 
words are the basic units of semantics, 
and the structure and meaning of a 
sentence consist mainly of a series of 
semantic dependencies between 
individual words. A 1,000,000-word-
scale corpus annotated with semantic 
dependency has been built. Compared 
with syntactic knowledge, semantic 
knowledge is more difficult to annotate, 
for ambiguity problem is more serious. In 
the paper, the strategy to improve 
consistency is addressed, and congruence 
is defined to measure the consistency of 
tagged corpus.. Finally, we will compare 
our corpus with other well-known 
corpora. 
1   Introduction 
As basic research tools for investigators in natural 
language processing, large annotated corpora play 
an important role in investigating diverse lan-
guage phenomena, building statistical language 
models, evaluating and comparing kinds of pars-
ing models. At present most of corpora are anno-
tated mainly with syntactic knowledge, though 
some function tags are added to annotate semantic 
knowledge. For example, the Penn Treebank 
(Marcus et al, 1993) was annotated with skeletal 
syntactic structure, and many syntactic parsers 
were evaluated and compared on the corpus. For 
Chinese, some corpora annotated with phrase 
structure also have been built, for instance the 
Penn Chinese Treebank (Xia et al, 2000) and Sina 
Corpus (Huang and Chen, 1992). A syntactic an-
notation scheme based on dependency was pro-
posed by (Lai and Huang, 2000), and a small 
corpus was built for testing. However, very lim-
ited work has been done with annotation semantic 
knowledge in all languages. From 1999, Berkeley 
started FrameNet project (Baker et al, 1998), 
which produced the frame-semantic descriptions 
of several thousand English lexical items and 
backed up these description with semantically an-
notated attestations from contemporary English 
corpus. Although few corpora annotated with se-
mantic knowledge are available now, there are 
some valuable lexical databases describing the 
lexical semantics in dictionary form, for example 
English WordNet (Miller et al, 1993) and Chinese 
HowNet (Dong and Dong, 2001). 
For Chinese, many attentions have been natu-
rally paid to researches on semantics, because 
Chinese is a meaning-combined language, its syn-
tax is very flexible, and semantic rules are more 
stable than syntactic rules. For instance, in Chi-
nese it is very pervasive that more than one part-of 
-speeches a word has, and a word does not have 
tense or voice flectional transition under different 
tenses or voices. Nevertheless, no large Chinese 
corpus annotated with semantic knowledge has 
ever been built at present. In Semantic Depend-
ency Net (SDN), we try to describe deeper seman-
tic dependency relationship between individual 
words and represent the meaning and structure of 
a sentence by these dependencies. 
Compared with syntactic corpus, it is more dif-
ficult to build a semantic corpus, for the granular-
ity of semantic knowledge is smaller, and 
behaviors of different words differ more greatly. 
Furthermore, ambiguity in semantics is commoner. 
Different people may have different opinions on 
understanding the same word in the same sentence, 
and even the same people may have different 
opinions on understanding the same word in dif-
ferent occasions. In this paper, we emphatically 
discuss the strategy to improve the consistency of 
Semantic Dependency Net. 
The paper is organized as follows. The tagging 
scheme is discussed in Section 2, which describes 
the semantic dependency grammar and the tag set 
of semantic relations. In section 3, we describe the 
tagging task. First, we briefly introduce the text of 
this corpus, which has been tagged with semantic 
classes. Second, we describe the strategy to im-
prove consistency during tagging and checking. 
At last, congruence is defined to measure the con-
sistency of tagged corpus. In Section 4, we briefly 
introduce some of the works on the corpus, and 
indicate the directions that the project is likely to 
take in the future. Finally, we compare SDN cor-
pus with some other well-known corpora.   
  
 
Figure 1:  A sample sentence from the corpus. (a) The sentence tagged with semantic classes; (b) The sen-
tence annotated with semantic dependency; (c) The semantic dependency tree of the sentence, headwords 
are linked with bold lines, and modifier words are linked with arrow lines. 
2 The tagging scheme of semantic depend-
ency 
2.1 Semantic dependency grammar 
Like Word grammar (Hudson, 1998), We believe 
that words are the basic units of semantics, and 
the structure and meaning of a sentence consist 
mainly of semantic dependencies between indi-
vidual words. So a sentence could be annotated 
with a series of semantic dependency relations (Li 
Juanzi and Wang, 2002). Let S be a sentence 
composed of words tagged with semantic classes, 
},,,,,,{ 2211 ><><><= nn swswswS L
. A 
list of semantic dependency relations is defined as: 
)}(,),2(),1({ nSRSRSRSRL L=
, 
where ),()( ii rhiSR = . SR stands for ? semantic 
relation?. ),()( ii rhiSR =  states that the ih -th 
word is the headword to the i-th word with seman-
tic relation ir . If the word j is the root, )( jSR  is 
defined to be (-1, ?kernel word?).  
For example, a sample sentence from the cor-
pus is shown in Figure 1 (a). The semantic de-
pendency relation list and semantic dependency 
tree are shown in Figure 1 (b) and (c) respectively. 
More samples will be seen in Appendix A. 
In semantic dependency grammar, the head-
word of sentence represents the main meaning of 
the whole sentence, and the headword of constitu-
ent represents the main meaning of the constituent. 
In a compound constituent, the headword inherits 
the headword of the head sub-constituent, and 
headwords of other sub-constituents are dependent 
on that headword. We select the word that can 
represent the meaning of the constituent to the 
most extent as headword. For example, the verb is 
the headword of verb phrase, the object is the 
headword of preposition phrase, and the location 
noun is the headword of the location phrase.  
At the same time, semantic dependency rela-
tions do not damage the phrase structure, that is, 
all words in the same phrase are in the same sub-
tree whose root is the headword of the phrase. 
Therefore, when tagging dependency relations, 
semantic and syntactic restrictions are both taken 
into account. The structures of dependency tree 
are mainly determined by syntactic restrictions, 
and the semantic relations are mainly determined 
by semantic restrictions. For example, in Figure 1 
the phrase ??( of his invention pro-
duction) modifies the phrase ?	
? (popu-
larization and application) in syntax, so the word 
?? (popularization) governs the word ?? 
(production).  However, the production is the con-
tent of the action popularization in semantics, so 
the relation between them is ?content?. 
Our tagging scheme is more concise compared 
with phrase structure grammar, in which the 
boundaries of all phrases have to be marked and 
the corresponding labels have to be tagged. In the 
semantic dependency grammar, phrases are im-
plicit, but play no part in grammar. More empha-
sis is paid to the syntactic and semantic functions 
of the word, especially of the headword. 
2.2 The dependency relation tag set 
The dependency relation tag set mainly consists of 
three kinds of relations: semantic relations, syn-
tactic relations and special relations. Semantics is 
the main content of this corpus, so semantic rela-
tions are in the majority, and syntactic relations 
are used to annotate the special structures that do 
not have exact sense in terms of semantics. In ad-
dition, there are two special relations: ?kernel 
word? is to indicate the headword of a sentence, 
and ?failure? is to indicate the word that cannot be 
annotated with dependency relations because the 
sentence is not completed. 
The selections of semantic relations were re-
ferred to HowNet (Dong and Dong, 2001). 
HowNet is a lexical database, which describes the 
relations among words and concepts as a network. 
In HowNet, senventy-six semantic relations are 
defined to describe all relations among various 
concepts, and most of them describe the semantic 
relations between action and other concepts. With 
these semantic relations, necessary role frame is 
further defined. The roles in the necessary role 
frame must take part in the action in real word, 
while these roles may not appear in the same sen-
tence. Hong Kong Technology University has 
successfully tagged a news corpus with the neces-
sary role frame (Yan and Tan, 1999), which 
shows that these roles can describe all semantic 
phenomena in real texts. 
 In order to make tagging task easier and the 
corpus more suitable for statistical learning, we 
have pared down some relations in HowNet and 
got fifty-nine semantic relations. Some HowNet 
relations seldom occurred in the corpus, and their 
semantic functions are somewhat similar, so they 
are merged. Some relations are ambiguous, for 
example ?degree? and ?range?. In order to im-
prove the consistency, we also merge these two 
relations. 
Semantic relations can describe the relations 
between notional words, but they cannot annotate 
function words in some special phrase structures. 
So nine syntactic relations are added. 
The tag set is listed in table 1. Full definition 
of each dependency relation can be seen in (Li 
Mingqin et al, 2002). 
   

	


	

		

	


	 

	