Text Type Structure and Logical Document Structure
Hagen Langer
Justus-Liebig-Universita?t/
Universita?t Osnabru?ck
hagen.langer@web.de
Harald Lu?ngen
Justus-Liebig-Universita?t
Gie?en, Germany
luengen@uni-giessen.de
Petra Saskia Bayerl
Justus-Liebig-Universita?t
Gie?en, Germany
bayerl@uni-giessen.de
Abstract
Most research on automated categorization of doc-
uments has concentrated on the assignment of one
or many categories to a whole text. However, new
applications, e.g. in the area of the Semantic Web,
require a richer and more fine-grained annotation
of documents, such as detailed thematic informa-
tion about the parts of a document. Hence we in-
vestigate the automatic categorization of text seg-
ments of scientific articles with XML markup into
16 topic types from a text type structure schema. A
corpus of 47 linguistic articles was provided with
XML markup on different annotation layers repre-
senting text type structure, logical document struc-
ture, and grammatical categories. Six different fea-
ture extraction strategies were applied to this corpus
and combined in various parametrizations in differ-
ent classifiers. The aim was to explore the contribu-
tion of each type of information, in particular the
logical structure features, to the classification ac-
curacy. The results suggest that some of the topic
types of our hierarchy are successfully learnable,
while the features from the logical structure layer
had no particular impact on the results.
1 Introduction
Our project Semantics of Generic Document Struc-
tures is concerned with the text type structure of sci-
entific articles and its relations to document gram-
mars and markup. One of its goals is to explore
the feasibility of an automatic categorization of
text segments of scientific articles which are an-
notated with logical structure tags (e.g. section,
paragraph, appendix) into topic types such as
background, researchTopic, method, and results de-
fined in a hierarchical text type schema. The schema
representing the text type structure (or, thematic
structure) of scientific articles is shown in Figure
1 (explained more fully in section 2). It is as-
sumed that authors to some degree adhere to such
a schema when creating a logical structure for their
documents for instance by XML markup, and that
therefore such markup bears clues as to the thematic
structure of scientific articles.
content
evidence
background framework method_evd
problem answers
theory
_frm
con
ceptsframe
work_
R
metho
d_evd
_R
data dataC
ollect
ion
dataA
nalysi
s
resu
lts interp
retatio
n
con
clusio
ns
textual
rese
archT
opic
ration
ale
others
Work
backg
round
_R
resource
Figure 1: Text type schema
Automatic document classification is an ad-
vanced field within computational linguistics with
many practical applications and has yielded a
wealth of standard methods and tools over the past
10 years. Many systems have been developed on
the Reuters-21578 corpus containing 21578 English
newpaper articles manually categorized into 135
topic categories, e.g. (Zu et al, 2003). Besides
newspaper articles, some approaches have treated
the automatic categorization of (HTML) hypertexts
available on the W3 into universal text topic sets
such as the ones used in the LookSmart and Yahoo
web directories (Dumais and Chen, 2000). An ap-
proach that focuses solely on research papers is
CiteSeer (Giles et al, 1998), the online digital li-
brary of scientific articles that can be navigated via
citation indices. Though the focus of CiteSeer is
on the citation indices, it also provides a classifica-
tion of articles from computer science into the hi-
erarchically ordered topic set of its computer sci-
ence directory. The bag-of-words model of docu-
ment representation still prevails in automatic text
categorization, but the advent of XML calls for ex-
tending this model to include logical structure fea-
tures in the vector space. Yi and Sundaresan (2000)
have developed a so-called semi-structured classi-
fier for semi-structured documents (e.g. XML doc-
uments) based on a document representation that
combines terms with path expressions. This clas-
sifier was shown to reduce classification error rates
considerably in comparison with a purely term-
based classifier when run on US patent documents
provided with XML markup and re?sume? documents
in HTML. Our aim is to explore similar methods to
classify thematic segments of scientific articles in
XML.
2 Text type ontology for scientific articles
Previous approaches to the text type structure of sci-
entific articles have been developed in the context of
automatic text summarization. In Teufel and Moens
(2002), a categorization scheme of seven ?rhetori-
cal zones? including background, other, own, aim,
textual, contrast, basis is used for the classification
of the sentences of a scientific article according to
their rhetorical status and subsequently finding the
most suitable ones for a summary. The schema we
employ (see below) is more fine-grained, consist-
ing of 16 categories that are hierarchically ordered
(although in the present experiments we did not
make use of this hierarchical order). These 16 cat-
egories refer to the dimension that is discussed un-
der problem structure in (Teufel and Moens, 2002),
rather than to exclusively rhetorical zones and are
viewed as types of topics. A topic ?is the semantic-
pragmatic function that selects which concept of the
contextual information will be extended with new
information? (van Dijk, 1980, p.97). Thus while
the concept The daily newspaper Neue Zu?rcher
Zeitung is the topic of several sentences in the ar-
ticle Bu?hlmann (2002), it is an instance of the topic
type ?data? which in turn is part of the text type
structure of many scientific articles. This text type
structure is captured in our text type schema with
16 bottom-level topic types (Figure 1) that were ob-
tained by evaluating articles from the disciplines of
linguistics and psychology. Kando (1997) presented
a similar hierarchical schema with 51 bottom-level
categories, which were employed for manually an-
notating sentences in Japanese scientific articles.
Her ?text constituents? resemble our topic types, but
we have aimed at sorting out functional categories
such as ?Reason for...?, including only purely the-
matic categories and keeping the number of cate-
gories lower for the experiments described in this
paper.
In Figure 1, the arcs represent the part-of rela-
tion such that a type lower in the hierarchy is a part
of the immediately dominating, more general type
in terms of text type structure. The schema is sup-
posed to represent the typical thematic structure of
research papers. The order of the categories repre-
sents a canonical, expected order of topic types in a
scientific article. The text type schema was initially
encoded as an XML Schema grammar where topic
types are represented by elements that are nested
such that the XML structure reflects the structure
of the text type structure tree (Figure 2).
<xs:element name="problem">
<xs:complexType>
<xs:sequence>
<xs:element name="background" minOccurs="0">
<xs:complexType>
<xs:sequence>
<xs:element name="othersWork"
type="xs:string"
minOccurs="0"/>
<xs:element name="background_R"
type="xs:string"
minOccurs="0"/>
</xs:sequence>
</xs:complexType>
</xs:element>
...
Figure 2: XML Schema grammar (extract) for the
text type schema
3 Data and annotation levels
We carried out the experiments on a corpus of 47
linguistic research articles, taken from the German
online journal ?Linguistik Online?,1 from the vol-
umes 2000-2003. The selected articles came with
HTML markup and have an average length of 8639
word forms, dealing with subjects as diverse as
the syntax of adverbs, chat analysis, and language
learning.
Taking a text-technological approach, this cor-
pus was prepared such that all required types of in-
formation, including the target classification cate-
gories and the classification features to be extracted,
are realized as XML annotations of the raw text.
Thus, XML markup was provided for the thematic
level, a logical structure level, and a grammatical
level. As described in Bayerl et al (2003), anno-
tation levels are distinguished from annotation lay-
ers. An annotation level is an abstract level of infor-
mation (such as the morphology and syntax levels
in linguistics), originally independent of any anno-
tation scheme. The term annotation layer, in con-
trast, refers to the realization of an annotation level
as e.g. XML markup. There need not be a 1:1-
correspondence between annotation levels and lay-
ers. As for the three annotation levels in our setting,
1http://www.linguistik-online.de/
one (the structural level) was realized as an inde-
pendent layer, and two (thematic and grammatical)
were realized in one single annotation layer. Each
annotation layer of an article is stored in a separate
file, while it is ensured that the PCDATA of each
layer are identical.
3.1 Annotation of text type structure
The order of topic types in a specific scientific ar-
ticle may deviate from the canonical order repre-
sented in the XML schema grammar of the text type
structure shown in Figure 2. Thus a flat version of
the hierarchical XML schema was derived by means
of an XSLT style sheet, exploiting the fact that XML
schema grammars, unlike DTDs, are XML docu-
ments themselves. In the derived flat XML schema,
topic types are represented as attribute values of el-
ements called <group> and <segment>, instead
of names of nested elements. Empty <group> el-
ements represent topic types that corresponded to
the nodes in the original tree of topic types, while
<segment> elements correspond to leaves (termi-
nal categories). The original hierarchical structure
is still represented via the ID/IDREF attributes id
and parent, similar to O?Donnell?s (2000) repre-
sentation of rhetorical structure trees.
For the annotation, the raw text of each arti-
cle was automatically partitioned into text segments
corresponding to sentences, but the annotators were
allowed to modify (join or split) segments to yield
proper thematic units. The problem of finding the-
matic boundaries other than sentence boundaries
automatically (e.g. Utiyama and Isahara (2001)) is
thus not addressed in this work. The annotator then
provided the values of the attribute topic using
the XML spy editor, choosing exactly one of the
16 terminal topic types for each segment, or alter-
natively the category void meta for metadata such
as acknowledgements. If more than one topic type
could in principle be assigned, the annotators were
instructed to choose the one that was most central to
the argumentation. An extract from a THM annota-
tion layer is shown in Figure 3.2
The two annotators were experienced in that they
had received intense training as well as annotated
a corpus of psychological articles according to an
extended version of the schema in Figure 1 earlier
(Bayerl et al, 2003). We assessed inter-rater reli-
ability on three articles from the present linguistics
corpus, which were annotated by both annotators in-
dependently according to the topic type set shown
in Figure 1. (Prior to the analysis the articles were
2The extract, which is also shown in Figure 4, is taken from
Bu?hlmann (2002).
<segment id="s75a" parent="g19"
topic="dataAnalysis">
Die obige Reihenfolge vera?ndert sich etwas,
wenn nicht die gesamte Anzahl der
Personenbezeichnungen ausschlaggebend ist,
sondern die Anzahl unterschiedlicher
Personenbezeichnungen (das heisst, eine
Personenbezeichnung wie z.B. Jugendliche,
die acht Mal verwendet wurde, wird trotzdem
nur einmal geza?hlt):
</segment>
<segment id="s76" parent="g4" topic="results">
Im ganzen kommen in den untersuchten Artikel
261 verschiedene Personenbezeichnungen vor.
Davon sind u?ber 46,7% generische Maskulina,
und nur 31% sind Institutions- und
Kollektivbezeichnungen. Es folgen die
geschlechtsneutralen und -abstrakten
Bezeichnungen mit 18,4%, und nach wie vor
stehen die Doppelformen mit 3,8% Bezeichnungen
am Schluss.
</segment>
Figure 3: THM annotation (extract)
resegmented manually so that segment boundaries
were completely identical.) An average agreement
of Kappa = 0.73 was reached (min: .63, max: .78),
which can be interpreted as ?substantial? agreement
(Landis and Koch, 1977). In order to test for anno-
tation biases we also performed a Stuart-Maxwell
Test (Stuart, 1955; Maxwell, 1970), leading to the
conclusion that marginal homogeneity must be re-
jected on the 1% level (?2 = 61.24; df = 14). The
McNemar Tests (McNemar, 1947) revealed that the
topic types textual, results, interpretation, others-
Work, and conclusions were the problematic cate-
gories. Subsequent log-linear analyses revealed that
annotator1 systematically had assigned background
where annotator2 had assigned framework. Also
interpretation was regularly confused with conclu-
sions, and concepts with either background or oth-
ersWork (model-fit: ?2 = 173.14, df = 155, p =
.15).
3.2 Annotation of syntax and morphology
For an annotation of grammatical categories to word
form tokens in our corpus, the commercial tagger
Machinese Syntax by Connexor Oy was employed.
This tagger is a rule-based, robust syntactic parser
available for several languages and based on Con-
straint Grammar and Functional Dependency Gram-
mar (Tapanainen and Ja?rvinen, 1997). It provides
morphological, surface syntactic, and functional
tags for each word form and a dependency struc-
ture for sentences, and besides is able to process
and output ?simple? XML (that is, XML without
attributes). No conflicts in terms of element over-
laps can arise between our THM annotation layer
and the grammatical tagging, because all tags pro-
vided by Machinese Syntax pertain to word forms.
The grammatical annotations could therefore be in-
tegrated with the THM annotations, forming the
XML annotation layer that we call THMCNX. An
XSLT stylesheet is applied to convert the THM
annotations into attribute-free XML by integrating
the information from attribute-value specifications
into the names of their respective elements. Af-
ter the grammatical tagging, a second stylesheet
re-converts the resulting attribute-free XML repre-
sentations into the original complex XML enriched
by the grammatical tags. Besides, we re-formatted
the original Machinese Syntax tags by omitting,
merging, and renaming some of them, again using
XSLT. The <cmp-head-lemma> tag (containing
the lemma of the head of the present word form), for
example, was derived from the original <lemma>
tag, the value of which contains compound segmen-
tation information. On the THMCNX layer, a sub-
set of 15 grammatical tags may appear at each word
form, including <pos> (part of speech), <aux>
(auxiliary verb), and <num> (number feature for
nominal categories).
3.3 Logical document structure annotation
Since HTML is a hybrid markup language including
a mixture of structural and layout information, we
chose to convert the original HTML of the corpus
into XML based on the DocBook standard (Walsh
and Muellner, 1999). DocBook was originally de-
signed for technical documentation and represents a
purely logical document structure, relying on style
sheets to interpret the logical elements to produce a
desired layout. We did not employ the whole, very
large official DocBook DTD, but designed a new
XML schema that defines a subset with 45 Doc-
Book elements plus 13 additional logical elements
such as tablefootnote and numexample, which
appear in the annotations after the namespace pre-
fix log.3 The annotations were obtained using a
perl script that provided raw DocBook annotations
from the HTML markup, and the XML spy editor
for validation and manually filling in elements that
have no correspondences in HTML. Figure 4 shows
the DocBook annotation of the extract that was also
given in Figure 3.
Moreover, structural position attributes were
added to each element by means of an XSLT style
sheet. These ?POSINFO? attributes make explicit the
position of the element in the XML DOM tree of
3This XML schema was designed in collaboration
with the HyTex project at the University of Dortmund,
http://www.hytex.info
<sect2>
...
<log:figure>
<log:mediaobject>
<xhtml:img src="buehlmann20.gif"/>
</log:mediaobject>
</log:figure>
<para>Die obige Reihenfolge vera?ndert sich
etwas, wenn nicht die gesamte Anzahl der
Personenbezeichnungen ausschlaggebend ist,
sondern die Anzahl unterschiedlicher
Personenbezeichnungen (das heisst, eine
Personenbezeichnung wie z.B. Jugendliche, die
acht Mal verwendet wurde, wird trotzdem nur
einmal geza?hlt): Im ganzen kommen in den
untersuchten Artikel 261 verschiedene
Personenbezeichnungen vor. Davon sind u?ber
46,7% generische Maskulina, und nur 31% sind
Institutions- und Kollektivbezeichnungen. Es
folgen die geschlechtsneutralen und
-abstrakten Bezeichnungen mit 18,4%, und
nach wie vor stehen die Doppelformen mit
3,8% Bezeichnungen am Schluss.
...
</para>
...
</sect2>
Figure 4: Annotation according to DocBook (ex-
tract)
the document instance in an XPATH-expression as
shown in Figure 5.
<para POSINFO1=
"/article[1]/sect1[4]/sect2[1]/para[10]">
Die obige Reihenfolge vera?ndert sich etwas,
...
</para>
Figure 5: Structural position path on the doc layer
As pointed out above, XML document structure
has been exploited formerly in the automatic classi-
fication of complete documents, e.g. in (Yi and Sun-
daresan, 2000; Denoyer and Gallinari, 2003). How-
ever, we want to use XML document structure in the
classification of thematic segments of documents,
where the thematic segments are XML elements in
the THM annotation layer. The THM and DOC
layers cannot necessarily be combined in a single
layer, as we had refrained from imposing the con-
straint that they always should be compatible, i.e.
not contain overlaps. Still we had to relate element
instances on the DOC layer to element instances on
the THM layer.
For this purpose, we resorted to the Prolog query
tool seit.pl developed at the University of Biele-
feld in the project Sekimo4 for the inference of re-
4see (Goecke et al, 2003; Bayerl et al, 2003) and
http://www.text-technology.de/
lations between two annotation layers of the same
text. seit.pl infers 13 mutually exclusive rela-
tions between instances of element types on sep-
arate annotation layers on account of their shared
PCDATA. In view of the application we envisaged,
we defined four general relations, one of which was
Identity and three of which were defined by the
union of several more specific seit.pl relations:
Identity: The original identity relation from
seit.pl.
Included: Holds if a thematic segment is prop-
erly included in a DocBook element in terms of
the ranges of the respective PCDATA, i.e. is de-
fined as the union of the original seit.pl-relations
included A in B, starting point B and end point B.
This relation was considered to be significant be-
cause we would for example expect THM segments
annotated with the topic type interpretation to ap-
pear within /article[1]/sect1[5] rather than
/article[1]/sect1[1] elements (i.e. the fifth
rather than the first sect1 element).
Includes: Holds if a thematic segment prop-
erly includes a DocBook element in terms of the
ranges of the respective PCDATA, i.e. is defined
as the union of the original seit.pl relations in-
cluded B in A, starting point A, end point A. This
relation was considered to be significant because we
would for example expect logical elements such as
numexample to be included preferably in segments
labelled with the topic type data.
Overlap: Holds if a thematic segment prop-
erly overlaps with a DocBook element in terms of
the ranges of the respective PCDATA. This relation
was considered less significant because the overlap-
ping portion of PCDATA might be very small and
seit.pl so far does not allow for querying how
large the overlapping portion actually is.
The Prolog code of seit.pl was modified such
that it outputs XML files that contain the THM an-
notation layer including structural positions from
the DOC layer within each segment as values of el-
ements that indicate the relation found, cf. Figure
6.
4 Automatic text segment classification
experiments
We applied different classification models, namely a
KNN classifier (cf. section 4.1) and, for purposes of
comparison, a simplified Rocchio classifier to text
segments, in order to evaluate the feasibility of an
automatic annotation of scientific articles according
to our THM annotation layer. One important moti-
vation for these experiments was to find out which
kind of data representation yields the best classifi-
cation accuracy, and particularly, if the combination
of complementary information sources, such as bag-
of-words representations of text, on the one hand,
and the structural information provided by the Doc-
Book path annotations, on the other hand, produces
additional synergetic effects.
4.1 KNN classification
The basic idea of the K nearest neighbor (KNN)
classification algorithm is to use already categorized
examples from a training set in order to assign a cat-
egory to a new object. The first step is to choose the
K nearest neighbors (i.e. the K most similar objects
according to some similarity metric, such as cosine)
from the trainings set. In a second step the cate-
gorial information of the nearest neighbors is com-
bined, in the simplest case, by determining the ma-
jority class.
The version of KNN classification, adopted
here, uses the Jensen-Shannon divergence (also
known as information radius or iRad) as a
(dis-)similarity metric:
iRad(q, r) = 12 [D(q?
q+r
2 ) + D(r?
q+r
2 )]
D(x?y) is the Kullback-Leibler divergence (KL
divergence) of probability distributions x and y:
D(x?y) =
n?
i=1
x(i)(log(x(i)) ? log(y(i)))
iRad ranges from 0 (identity) to 2log2 (no simi-
larity) and requires that the compared objects are
probability distributions.
Let NO,C = {n1, . . . , nm} (0 ? m ? K) be
the set of those objects among the K nearest
neighbors of some new object O that belong to a
particular category C. Then the score assigned to
the classification O ? C is
score(O,C) =
m?
j=1
iRad(O,nj)E .
Depending on the choice of E, one yields either
a simple majority decision (if E = 0), a linear
weighting of the iRad similarity (if E = 1), or a
stronger emphasis on closer training examples (if
E > 1). Actually, it turned out that very high values
of E improved the classification accuracy. Finally,
the KNN scores for each segment were normalized
to probability distributions, in order to get compa-
rable results for different K and E, when the KNN
classifications get combined with the bigram model.
<segment id="s75a" topic="dataCollection">
<included>/article[1]</included>
<included>/article[1]/sect1[4]</included>
<included>/article[1]/sect1[4]/sect2[1]</included>
<includes>/article[1]/sect1[4]/sect2[1]/log:figure[5]</includes>
<includes>/article[1]/sect1[4]/sect2[1]/log:figure[5]/log:mediaobject[1]</includes>
<includes>/article[1]/sect1[4]/sect2[1]/log:figure[5]/log:mediaobject[1]/xhtml:img[1]</includes>
<included>/article[1]/sect1[4]/sect2[1]/para[10]</included>
<text>Die obige Reihenfolge vera?ndert sich etwas, wenn nicht die gesamte Anzahl
der Personenbezeichnungen
...
</text>
</segment>
<segment id="s76" topic="results">
<included>/article[1]</included>
<included>/article[1]/sect1[4]</included>
<included>/article[1]/sect1[4]/sect2[1]</included>
<included>/article[1]/sect1[4]/sect2[1]/para[10]</included>
<text>Im ganzen kommen in den untersuchten Artikel 261 verschiedene Personenbezeichnungen vor.
Davon sind ...
</text>
</segment>
Figure 6: Generated THMDOC layer
4.2 Bigram model
The bigram model gives the conditional probability
of a topic type Tn+1, given its predecessor Tn.
For a sequence of segments s1 . . . sm the total
score ?(T, si) for the assignment of a topic type T to
si is the product of bigram probability, given the pu-
tative predecessor topic type (i.e. the topic type T ?
with the highest ?(T ?, si?1) computed in the pre-
vious step), and the normalized score of the KNN
classifier. The total score of the topic type sequence
is the product of its ? scores.
4.3 Information sources
In our classification experiments we used six differ-
ent representations which can be viewed as different
feature extraction strategies or different levels of ab-
straction:
? word forms (wf): a bag-of-words represen-
tation of the segment without morphologi-
cal analysis; special characters (punctuation,
braces, etc.) are treated as words.
? compound heads (ch): stems; in case of com-
pounds, the head is used instead of the whole
compound. These features were extracted from
the THMCNX layer (cf. section 3.2).
? size (sz): number of words per segment (calcu-
lation based on the THM annotation layer, cf.
section 3.1).
? DocBook paths (dbp): the segment is repre-
sented as the set of the DocBook paths which
include it (the segment stand in the the In-
cluded relation to it as explained in section
3.3).
? selected DocBook features (df): a set of 6 Doc-
Book features which indicate occurrences of
block quotes, itemized lists, numbered exam-
ples, ordered lists, tables, and references to
footnotes standing in any of the four relations
listed in section 3.2.
? POS tags (pos): the distribution of part-of-
speech tags of the segment taken from the
THMCNX layer (cf. section 3.2).
4.4 Training and Evaluation
For each test document the bigram model and the
classifier were trained with all other documents.
The overall size of the data collection was 47 docu-
ments. Thus, each classifier and each bigram model
has been trained on the basis of 46 documents, re-
spectively. The total number of segments was 7330.
4.5 Results
We performed several hundred classification tests
with different combinations of data representation,
classification algorithm, and classifier parameter
setting. Table 1 summarizes some results of these
experiments. The baseline (a ?classifier? guessing
always the most frequent topic type) had an accu-
racy of 22%.
The best combination of data representation and
classifier setting achieved about 47% accuracy. In
this configuration we used a mixture of the com-
pound head representation (40%), the POS tag dis-
tribution (40%), the segment size (10%), and the
selected DocBook features (10%). However, the
combination of compound heads (50%) and part-
of-speech tags (50%) and a similar combination in-
classifier feature K E accuracy accuracy
weights classifier classifier
+ bigram
most
frequent - - - 22.4147 -
KNN* ch 40%
pos 40%
sz 10%
df 10% 20 40 56.9785 -
Rocchio ch - - 39.0267 -
KNN ch 30%
pos 30%
dbp 40% 20 40 41.1278 41.6294
KNN wf 20 40 38.9725 41.6429
KNN pos 20 40 40.5314 41.9005
KNN ch 25 40 40.4094 42.8765
KNN ch 50%
pos 50% 50 40 44.8556 45.8859
KNN ch 50%
pos 50% 13 40 44.3270 46.6179
KNN ch 49%
pos 49%
dbp 2% 20 40 44.8150 46.9296
KNN ch 40%
pos 40%
sz 10%
df 10% 20 40 45.5063 47.0788
Table 1: Results
cluding a 2% portion of DocBook path structure
features had similar results. In all experiments the
KNN algorithm performed better than the simplified
Rocchio algorithm. For illustrative purpose, we also
included a configuration, where all other segments
(i.e. including those from the same document) were
available as training segments (?KNN*? in the sec-
ond line of table 1).
The variation of classification accuracy was very
high both across the topic types and across the doc-
uments. In the best configuration of our classifica-
tion experiments the average segment classification
accuracy per document had a range from 22% to
77%, reflecting the fact that the document collec-
tion was very heterogeneous in many respects. The
topic type resource had an average recall of 97.56%
and an average precision of 91.86%, while several
other topic types, e.g. rationale and dataAnalysis
were near to zero both w.r.t. precision and recall.
The most frequent error was the incorrect assign-
ment of topic type othersWork to segments of topic
types framework, concepts, and background.
4.6 Discussion
The task of classifying small text segments, as op-
posed to whole documents, is a rather new ap-
plication field for general domain-independent text
categorization methods. Thus, we lack data from
previous experiments to compare our own results
with. Nevertheless, there are some conclusions to
be drawn from our experiments.
Although the results probably suffer from limita-
tions of our data collection (small sample size, re-
stricted thematic domain), our main conclusion is
that at least some of the topic types of our hierarchy
are successfully learnable. It is, however, question-
able if an overall accuracy of less than 50% is suffi-
cient for applications that require a high reliability.
Moreover, it should be emphasized that our classifi-
cation experiments were carried out on the basis of
manually segmented input.
The usage of structural information improved the
accuracy results slightly, but the impact of this infor-
mation source was clearly below our expectations.
The effect of adding this kind of information was
within the range of improvements which can also be
achieved by fine-tuning a classifier parameter, such
as K.
A somewhat surprising result was that a pure
part-of-speech tag representation achieved nearly
42% accuracy in combination with the bigram
model.
The usage of a bigram model improved the results
in almost all configurations.
5 Conclusion
The best combination of data representation and
classifier configuration included ch (40%), pos
(40%), sz (10%) and df (10%), combined with a
topic type bigram model, which yielded an accu-
racy of 47%. However, almost the same accuracy
could be achieved by selecting ch and pos features
only. Other test runs showed that the dbp features
could not improve the results in any combination,
although these features are the ones that indicate
where a segment is situated in an article. An in-
spection of data representations revealed that, for a
particular test document (i.e. text segment), the ma-
jority of training documents with an identical dpb
representation are often assigned the desired topic
type, but this majority is so small that many other
test documents with identical dbp representation are
mis-classified. An accuracy improvement might
therefore be achieved by running different (local)
KNN classifiers trained on different feature sets and
combine their results afterwards.
More future work will focus on the inspection of
categories that have a very low precision and recall
(such as rationale) with a possible review of the text
type ontology. Furthermore, we aim at testing al-
ternative algorithms (e.g. support vector machines),
feature selection methods and at enlarging our train-
ing set. Besides, we will investigate the question,
inhowfar our results are generalizable to scientific
articles from other disciplines and languages.
References
Petra S. Bayerl, H. Lu?ngen, D. Goecke, A. Witt, and
D. Naber. 2003. Methods for the semantic anal-
ysis of document markup. In Proceedings of the
ACM Symposium on Document Engineering (Do-
cEng 2003).
Regula Bu?hlmann. 2002. Ehefrau Vreni
haucht ihm ins Ohr... Untersuchungen
zur geschlechtergerechten Sprache und zur
Darstellung von Frauen in Deutschschweizer
Tageszeitungen. Linguistik Online, 11.
http://www.linguistik-online.de.
Ludovic Denoyer and Patrick Gallinari. 2003. Us-
ing belief networks and fisher kernels for struc-
tured document classification. In Proceedings of
the 7th European Conference on Principles and
Practices of Knowledge Discovery in Databases,
Cavtat-Dubrovnik, Croatia.
Susan T. Dumais and Hao Chen. 2000. Hierarchi-
cal classification of web content. In Proceedings
of SIGIR-00, 23rd ACM International Conference
on Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval, pages 256?263, Athens, Greece. ACM
press, New York.
C. Lee Giles, Kurt Bollacker, and Steve Lawrence.
1998. CiteSeer: An automatic citation index-
ing system. In Ian Witten, Rob Akscyn, and
Frank M. Shipman III, editors, Digital Libraries
98 - The Third ACM Conference on Digital
Libraries, pages 89?98, Pittsburgh, PA. ACM
Press.
Daniela Goecke, Daniel Naber, and Andreas Witt.
2003. Query von Multiebenen-annotierten XML-
Dokumenten mit Prolog. In Uta Seewald-Heeg,
editor, Sprachtechnologie fu?r die multilin-
guale Kommunikation. Beitra?ge der GLDV-
Fru?hjahrstagung, Ko?then 2003, volume 5 of
Sprachwissenschaft Computerlinguistik Neue
Medien, pages 391?405, Sankt Augustin.
gardez!-Verlag.
Noriko Kando. 1997. Text-level structure of re-
search papers: Implications for text-based infor-
mation processing systems. In Proceedings of the
British Computer Society Annual Colloquium of
Information Retrieval Research, pages 68?81.
J.R. Landis and G. G. Koch. 1977. The measure-
ment of observer agreement for categorical data.
Biometrics, 33:159?174.
A. Maxwell. 1970. Comparing the classification of
subjects by two independent judges. British Jour-
nal of Psychiatry, 116:651 ? 655.
Q. McNemar. 1947. Note on the sampling error of
the difference between correlated proportions or
percentages. Psychometrika, 12:153 ? 157.
A Stuart. 1955. A test for homogeneity of the
marginal distributions in a two-way classifica-
tion. Biometrika, 42:412 ? 416.
Pasi Tapanainen and Timo Ja?rvinen. 1997. A non-
projective dependency parser. In Proceedings of
the 5th Conference on Applied Natural Language
Processing, pages 64?71, Washington D.C. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Simone Teufel and Marc Moens. 2002. Summariz-
ing scientfic articles: Experiments with relevance
and rhetorical status. Computational Linguistics,
28(4):409?445.
Masao Utiyama and Hitoshi Isahara. 2001. A sta-
tistical model for domain-independent text seg-
mentation. In Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 491?498.
Teun A. van Dijk. 1980. Macrostructures: An in-
terdisciplinary study of global structures in dis-
course, interaction, and cognition. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, New Jersey.
Norman Walsh and Leonard Muellner. 1999. Doc-
Book: The Definitive Guide. O?Reilly.
Jeonghee Yi and Neel Sundaresan. 2000. A classi-
fier for semi-structured documents. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference on Knowledge Discovery
in Data, pages 190?197.
Guowei Zu, Wataru Ohyama, Tetsushi Wak-
abayashi, and Fumitaka Kimura. 2003. Accu-
racy improvement of automatic text classifica-
tion based on feature transformation. In Christine
Vanoirbeek, C. Roisin, and Ethan Munson, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the 2003 ACM Symposium
on Document Engineering - DocEng03, pages
118?120, Grenoble, France.
Squibs and Discussions
Identifying Sources of Disagreement:
Generalizability Theory in Manual
Annotation Studies
Petra Saskia Bayerl?
University of Oklahoma
Karsten Ingmar Paul?
University of Erlangen-Nuremberg
Many annotation projects have shown that the quality of manual annotations often is not as
good as would be desirable for reliable data analysis. Identifying the main sources responsible
for poor annotation quality must thus be a major concern. Generalizability theory is a valuable
tool for this purpose, because it allows for the differentiation and detailed analysis of factors that
influence annotation quality. In this article we will present basic concepts of Generalizability
Theory and give an example for its application based on published data.
1. Introduction
Manual annotations are still a major source of information in many small- and large-
scale projects in diverse areas of corpus and computational linguistics. Often, however,
manual annotations are not reliable enough for a given application. Measures must
be taken to increase and secure the consistency of linguistic annotations, if analyses
and applications are not to suffer from low data quality. Because a multitude of fac-
tors may be responsible for inadequate reliability, a method is needed that is able to
simultaneously consider a variety of probable factors and indicate those that are mainly
responsible for low reliability in a given case. Generalizability Theory, or G-Theory
(Cronbach et al 1972), is a methodological framework specifically designed for this
purpose. Because it is not restricted to any type of data or study design, it can be of
great use in any kind of manual annotation project that needs to systematically identify
sources of annotator disagreement. In this article we provide an outline of the approach
and its basic assumptions and demonstrate its application based on an annotation study
done by Shriberg and Lof (1991).1
? Department of Psychology, Tulsa Graduate College, 4502 East 41st Street, Tulsa, OK 74135, USA.
? Chair of Psychology, especially Organizational and Social Psychology (Prof. Dr. Moser), Lange Gasse 20,
90403 Nuremberg, Germany.
1 A more comprehensive introduction to G-Theory is provided in a longer version of this article, which is
available from the authors.
The work for this article was done at the Department for Applied and Computational Linguistics,
Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Germany.
? 2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
2. The G-Theory Approach
Reliability in G-Theory is defined by the amount of variation or variance observed in
annotations; the lower the total variance in the data, the higher is its reliability. G-Theory
further assumes that data reliability is influenced by several independent factors or
facets, which are, individually as well as in interaction, responsible for the observed
variation.2 Sources of variation might be idiosyncratic behaviors of individual annota-
tors or external influences like alterations in the tools used for annotations, increasing
time pressure, removal or adding of rewards, or changes in the annotation scheme. Each
of these influences can lead to systematic changes in an annotator?s behavior and so
to higher disagreement among annotators. According to G-Theory each possible facet,
annotator, tools, rewards, and so on, will have its own independent impact on the quality,
that is, reliability, of annotations. The task of a G-study is to isolate the influence of
single facets and determine the degree of their impact.
2.1 Basic G-Study Designs
The main distinction with respect to G-study designs is the choice between a crossed
and a (partially) nested design. In crossed designs measurements are obtained for
each possible combination of facet values. Given two facets, items and coders, each
individual item (phrase, phone, gesture, etc.) is annotated by all possible coders, so
that each value of the item facet is measured on every value of the coders facet. Nested
designs, in contrast, only measure a subset of possible combinations of facet values,
for instance, when limited resources determine that only some of the coders annotate
the same objects on more than one occasion. In general, fully crossed designs require
a higher number of observations, but also provide more information. To obtain a full
picture of possible influences crossed designs should therefore be preferred. For a
detailed discussion of G-study designs, including unbalanced designs or missing data,
and random and fixed facets, see, for example, Brennan (2001).
2.2 Estimating Variance Components
In fully crossed designs the total variance in the data is a result of individual facets as
well as their interactions. Because G-Theory assumes independence of facets, effects of
components are additive. Given three facets a, b, c, the total variance ?2(Xabc) therefore
is calculated as
?2(Xabc) = ?2a + ?
2
b + ?
2
c + ?
2
ab + ?
2
ac + ?
2
bc + ?
2
abc,e (1)
where ?2 refers to variance and the subscripts to the name of one or more facets.
The subscript e in the last variance component denotes error variance. In nested de-
signs some facets cannot be determined as independent terms due to their confounding
with other facets. For instance, in a nested design with three factors a, b, c, different
2 This definition of reliability differs from the traditional true-score-model of classical reliability theory
(Spearman 1904) and can be considered a modern approach to the question of consistency or
?dependability? of data measurement. A discussion of the conceptual differences is beyond the scope
of this article. Information on this topic may be found in Thompson (2002) or Matt (2001).
4
Bayerl and Paul Identifying Sources of Disagreement
values of c may be associated with different values of b. Here the effect for c will be
confounded both with bc and the residual term abc,e so that no independent term for
the c facet can be obtained. Instead of the seven variance components in the crossed
design only five variance components can be calculated, again stressing the fact that
nested designs provide less information than fully crossed designs
?2(Xabc) = ?2a + ?
2
b + ?
2
ab + ?
2
c,cb + ?
2
ac,abc,e (2)
For information on the mathematical foundation of G-Theory and the derivation of
estimates see Cronbach et al (1972) and Brennan (2001).
2.3 Interpreting Variance Components
Based on the assumption that the total variance is a sum of single variance components,
the total variance is 100%. The relative magnitude of each component with respect to
the total variance is an indicator of the individual contribution of this component with
respect to overall (un)reliability. A facet explaining 60% of the total variance would thus
be considered a major source of variation in contrast to a minor facet explaining only 5%
of the variance. For instance, given that the coder facet is the largest facet, variation can
be explained through systematic differences in the annotation behavior of individual
coders?for example, annotators differ in their tendency to set prosodic boundaries in
utterances leading to systematic differences in the number of boundaries placed. In this
case retraining of annotators to reach a more comparable behavior would be advisable.
A high schema component indicates that there is systematic variation in the use of
categories, whereas a high coder?schema interaction indicates systematic differences in
annotators? use of these categories; for example, coders annotating rhetorical (RST)
relations could differ in the frequency with which they use individual relations such as
?background?, ?concession?, ?evidence?, and so forth, pointing to possible problems with
the interpretation of rhetorical relations and their application. Variation mainly due to
the item facet indicates that certain materials are harder to annotate than others. Such a
result would imply retraining or elimination of overly difficult material. In consequence,
the identification of distinct sources of variation should lead to specifically designed
steps for improvement.
3. A Re-Analysis of Shriberg and Lof (1991)
As an illustration for the application of G-Theory we reanalyzed data provided by
Shriberg and Lof (1991), who studied the accuracy of broad and narrow phonetic tran-
scriptions. In Set A of their study they investigated four facets: annotation scheme (type
of consonant, C), granularity (broad vs. narrow transcription G), material (continuous
speech vs. articulation test, M), and annotation team (T). Data in Set A were given as
agreement percentages. Our G-study results are shown in Table 1.
Traditionally, reliability concerns focus on disagreements among individual anno-
tators assuming that variation is due to incommensurable annotator behavior. In our
case, however, the team facet explains only a very small percentage of variance both
as an individual factor and in interaction with other factors. This suggests that the
four annotation teams are comparable in their annotation quality. The major factors
responsible for the observed variance are granularity and type of consonants. Material
5
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
Table 1
G-Study results for Shriberg and Lof (1991), Table 8, Set A.
Effect df Variance Percentage of
components estimates total variance
Consonant (C) 23 234.86877 25.70
Granularity (G) 1 312.80278 34.23
Team (T) 3 3.70906 0.41
Material (M) 1 0.0 [?3.08672]? ?
CG 23 99.18526 10.85
CT 69 0.0 [?8.25984]? ?
CM 23 45.80498 5.01
GT 3 0.0 [?1.12263]? ?
GM 1 0.0 [?6.05138]? ?
TM 3 0.0 [?1.74740]? ?
CGT 69 3.84207 0.42
CGM 23 111.61108 12.12
CTM 69 57.64646 6.31
GTM 3 6.04318 0.66
CGTM,e 36 38.23065 4.18
913.74429 99.99
? Values set zero, original negative estimates in brackets.
For the analysis the GENOVA program as described in Brennan (2001) was used.
does not exhibit a substantial individual influence on reliability, but becomes relevant
in the CGM-interaction. Our G-study therefore reveals that unreliability in Shriberg and
Lof?s data is caused not by idiosyncrasies of individuals, but due to the characteristics
of the task, namely, granularity and scheme.
Having identified the critical facets, it might now be interesting to look at the values
of these facets that are especially prone to produce disagreement. Because we operated
with agreement data, this information can be easily obtained from the data entered into
the analysis. Because neither team nor material are major sources for variance, we only
have to examine the values for granularity and consonants. Due to the same reason
we can base the comparison on mean values over teams and material types. For the
granularity facet we find overall lower agreement in narrow transcriptions (64.15%)
compared to broad transcriptions (89.46%). On the consonant facet we can differentiate
critical phonemes such as /D/ or /S/ from uncritical ones (e. g., /j/, /b/). Interpreting
the CG-interaction in this light, disagreement on consonants in narrow transcriptions
seems to be comparably higher than in broad transcriptions. Implications from this
study would be that the selection of annotators and the training of annotation teams are
successful in producing comparable results. For high reliability, however, transcriptions
should be done on a broad level with specific training for difficult consonants and some
special care for material from articulation tests (see CGM-interaction).
4. Practical Considerations in Planning G-Studies
In planning and conducting a G-study some deliberation is necessary to achieve inter-
pretable results. Foremost, the overall quality of the G-study depends on the choice of
factors that completely and accurately represent the situation of the annotators. As it is
6
Bayerl and Paul Identifying Sources of Disagreement
quite easy to overlook relevant but rather inconspicuous factors like minor changes in
the annotation tool or increasing time pressure due to upcoming project deadlines, the
choice of correct facets relies heavily on the experience and knowledge of the researcher.
The statistical results, however, will give indications for likely misspecifications of facets
by showing a high error or rest variance ?e for the tested model. Theoretically, the
number of facets that can be included in a G-study is unlimited. Having more than four
or five facets in one study might make the final interpretation overly complex, however.
Even though there is no minimum necessary number of observations, missing data due
to a low number of observations pose a problem for model interpretation. Approaches
to deal with such unbalanced designs are given by Brennan (2001) and Chiu and Wolfe
(2003). Additionally, there is no clear-cut rule when a component might be considered
?too small? to be of importance. As a rule of thumb a component of less than 8% might
be considered ?small?, but the decision remains one of ?relative importance? depending
on the distribution of explained variance across components.
5. G-Theory and Agreement Indices
Two well-known measures for capturing the quality of manual annotations are agree-
ment percentages and the kappa statistic (Cohen 1960; Carletta 1996; Eugenio and
Glass 2004). Both measures provide a ?summary index? (Agresti 1992) that expresses
the degree of (dis)agreement among coders. Where the calculation of percentages and
kappa provides a measure for overall reliability (or reliability indices for individual
facets), G-Theory has been designed to analyze multiple possible influencing factors in
a single run and to compare the relative importance of components among each other.
Shriberg and Lof (1991), for instance, compare narrow and broad transcriptions using
graphics that show the agreement percentages for each consonant for both transcrip-
tion types, arguing that overall narrow transcriptions seem unreliable. Based on their
experience with the study context they further assumed that these differences were not
due to annotator training, behaviors, or experience. They did not provide any direct
evidence, however. The G-study presented in this article could prove both assumptions
in a single run. It further allows us to investigate the interactions and mutual influences
of these factors, thus clearly exceeding the possibilities of summary statistics. As we
have seen in the example, G-Theory, however, does not provide answers as to which
values of a facet are responsible for higher or lower reliability. This information must
be obtained by a review of the data. Agreement indices and G-Theory should thus
not be seen as competing, but rather as complementary, approaches. Kappa can serve
as a first approximation to the degree of disagreement present in the data, whereas
G-Theory in a second step investigates the underlying reasons of inadequate reliability
and subsequently guides efforts to improve reliability.
6. Final Remarks
Generalizability theory is a valuable approach for identifying problematic areas in
annotation projects. The investigation of multiple facets at the same time can provide a
clearer understanding of reasons underlying insufficient annotation quality and subse-
quently offer avenues to its improvement. In this article we could not give more than
a passing glance over the possibilities provided by the G-Theory approach. For the
interested reader, Shavelson and Webb (1981) give a good introduction into the material.
Further references are provided throughout the article and in the reference section.
7
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
References
Agresti, Alan. 1992. Modelling patterns
of agreement and disagreement.
Statistical Methods in Medical Research,
1(2):201?218.
Brennan, Robert L. 2001. Generalizability
Theory. Statistics for Social Science and
Public Policy. Springer Verlag, New York.
Carletta, Jean. 1996. Assessing agreement
on classification tasks: The kappa
statistic. Computational Linguistics,
22(2):249?254.
Chiu, Christopher W. T. and Edward W.
Wolfe. 2003. A method for analyzing
sparse data matrices in the generalizability
theory framework. Applied Psychological
Measurement, 26(3):321?338.
Cohen, Jacob. 1960. A coefficient of
agreement for nominal scales. Educational
and Psychological Measurement, 20(1):37?46.
Cronbach, Lee J., Goldine C. Gleser, Harinder
Nanda, and Nageswari Rajaratnam.
1972. The Dependability of Behavioral
Measurements: Theory of Generalizability
for Scores and Profiles. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., New York.
Eugenio, Barbara Di and Michael Glass.
2004. The kappa statistic: A second look.
Computational Linguistics, 30(1):95?101.
Matt, Georg E. 2001. Generalizabilty theory.
In Neil J. Smelser and Paul B. Baltes,
editors, International Encyclopedia of the
Social and Behavioral Sciences. Elsevier,
Oxford.
Shavelson, Richard J. and Noreen M. Webb.
1981. Generalizability Theory: A Primer. Sage
Publications, Newbury Park, London,
New Delhi.
Shriberg, Lawrence D. and Gregory L. Lof.
1991. Reliability studies in broad and
narrow phonetic transcription. Clinical
Linguistics and Phonetics, 5(3):225?279.
Spearman, Charles. 1904. The proof and
measurement of association between two
things. American Journal of Psychology,
15:72?101.
Thompson, Bruce. 2002. A brief introduction
to Generalizability Theory. In Bruce
Thompson, editor, Score Reliability:
Contemporary Thinking on Reliability Issues.
Sage Publication, Thousand Oaks, CA,
pages 43?58.
Statistical Software
 GENOVA, urGENOVA, mGENOVA: Available online at
http://www.education.uiowa.edu/casma/GenovaPrograms.htm
8
