Restoring an Elided Entry Word in a Sentence  
for Encyclopedia QA System  
Soojong Lim 
Speech/Language 
Information Research 
Department 
ETRI, Korea  
isj@etri.re.kr 
Changki Lee 
Speech/Language Informa-
tion Research Department 
ETRI, Korea  
leeck@etri.re.kr 
Myoung-Gil Jang 
Speech/Language Informa-
tion Research Department 
ETRI, Korea  
mgjang@etri.re.kr 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a hybrid model for 
restoring an elided entry word for en-
cyclopedia QA system. In Korean en-
cyclopedia, an entry word is frequently 
omitted in a sentence. If the QA system 
uses a sentence without an entry word, 
it cannot provide a right answer. For 
resolving this problem, we combine a 
rule-based approach with Maximum 
Entropy model to use the merit of each 
approach. A rule-based approach uses 
caseframes and sense classes. The re-
sult shows that combined approach 
gives a 20% increase over our baseline.  
1 Introduction 
Ellipsis is a linguistic phenomenon that peo-
ple omit a word or phrase not to repeat a same 
word or phrase in a sentence or a document. 
Usually, ellipsis involves the use of clauses that 
are not syntactically complete sentences (Allen, 
1995) but the fact does not apply to all cases. An 
ellipsis occurring in encyclopedia documents in 
Korean is an example.  
 
 (Entry word: Kim Daejung) 
 
Korean: ??[gongro]?[ro] 2000?[nyeon]  
????? [nobel pyeonghwasang]?[eul] 
???[batatda].  
English: won the Nobel prize for peace in 
2000 by meritorious deed. 
 
In QA system(Kim et al 2004), it answers a 
question using the predicate-argument relation 
as in the following example.  
 
Korean: 2000?[nyeon]?[e] ????? [no-
belpyeonghwasang ] ?[eul]  ?? [bateun ] 
??[saram]?[eun]? 
English: Who?s the winner of the Nobel prize for 
peace on 2000? 
 
??(subj:??, obj:?????, adv:2000?) 
( batda(subj:saram, obj: nobelpyeonghwasang, 
adv:ichunnyeon) 
win(subj:who, obj:the Nobel prize for peace, 
adv:2000) 
 
Entry word: ??? 
(Entry word: Kim Daejun) 
 
??(subj:NULL(???), obj:?????, 
adv:2000?, ??) 
(batda(subj:NULL(kimdaejung), obj, nobelpyeongh-
wasang, adv: ichunnyeon, gongro) 
win(subj:NULL(Kim Daejung), obj:the Nobel prize 
for peace, adv:2000, deed) 
 
If an entry word of Korean encyclopedia per-
forms a function of a subject or an objects, it is 
frequently omitted in the sentences of the Ko-
rean encyclopedia. If the QA system uses the 
result in the above example, it cannot find who 
won the Nobel prize for peace in the year of 
2000.  We need to restore an entry word as a 
subject or an object to answer a right question.  
In this paper, to overcome this problem, we 
first try to classify entry words in encyclopedia 
into sense classes and determine which sense 
classes are restored to the subjects or the objects. 
Then we use caseframes for determining sense 
215
classes which are not restored using sense 
classes. If there is no caseframes, we use a sta-
tistical method, ME model, for determining 
whether the entry word is restored or not. Be-
cause each approach has both strength and 
weakness, we combine three approaches to 
achieve a better performance.  
2 Related Work 
Ellipsis is a pervasive phenomenon in natural 
languages. While previous work provides im-
portant insight into the abstract syntactic and 
semantic representations that underlie ellipsis 
phenomena, there has been little empirically 
oriented work on ellipsis.  
There are only two similar empirical experi-
ments done for this task. First is Hardt?s algo-
rithm(Hardt, 1997) for detecting VPE in the 
Penn Treebank. It achieves precision levels of 
44% and recall of 53%, giving an F-Measure of 
48% using a simple search technique, which 
relies on the annotation having identified empty 
expressions correctly. Second is Nielsen?s ma-
chine learning techniques(Nielsen, 2003). They 
only try to detect of elliptical verbs using four 
different machine learning techniques,  Trans-
formation-based learning, Maximum entropy 
modeling, Decision Tree Learning, Memory 
Based Learning. It achieves precision levels of 
85.14% and recall of 69.63%, giving an F-
Measure of 76.61%. There are 4 steps: detection, 
identification of antecedents, difficult antece-
dents, resolving antecedents. Because this study 
only concentrates on the detection, a comparison 
with our study is inadequate.  
We combine rule-based techniques with ma-
chine learning technique for using the merit of 
each technique.  
3 Restoring an Elided Entry Word 
We use three kinds of algorithms: A caseframe 
algorithm, an acceptable sense class algorithm, 
and Maximum Entropy (ME) algorithm. For 
knowing a strength and weakness points of each 
algorithm, we do experiments on each algorithm. 
Then we combine algorithms for higher per-
formance.  
Our system answers in three ways: restoring 
an  entry word as a subject, restoring an entry 
word as an object, and does not restore an entry 
word. We evaluate an algorithm in two ways. 
First, we evaluate all answers with precision. 
Second,  we  evaluate just two answers, restor-
ing an entry word as a subject and object, with 
F-measure.  
 
recallprecision
recallprecisionmeasureF
foundwordsentryelidedall
foundwordsentryelidedcorrectprecision
settestinwordsentryelidedall
foundwordsentryelidedcorrectrecall
+
??=?
=
=
2
 
3.1 Using Caseframes 
We use modified caseframes constructed for 
Korean-Chinese machine translation. The format 
of Korean-Chinese machine translation case 
frame is as the following: 
 
A=Sense_code!case_particle verb > Chinese > 
Korean Sentence 
A=??(saram)!?(ga) B=??(jangso)!?(ro) 
?(ga)!?(da) > A 0x53bb:v B [?(geu)[A]?(ga) 
??(bada)[B]?(ro) ??(gada)] 
A=Person!subj B=Location!adv go. 
 
In the caseframe, we only use Sense Class, 
case particle marker, and the verb. The case-
frame used in this research consists of 30,000 
verbs and 153,000 caseframes.  
The sense class used in this research is se-
lected from the nodes of the ETRI Lexical Con-
cept Network for Korean Nouns which consists 
of about 60,000 nodes. (If we include proper 
nouns, the total entry of ETRI Lexical Concept 
Network for Korean Nouns is about 300,000 
nodes).  
First, we analyze a sentence using depend-
ency parser (LIM, 2004), and then we convert a 
result of a parser into the caseframe format. We 
determine to restore an entry word if there is an 
exactly matched caseframe of a target except a 
sense class of an entry word.  
Table 1 shows an example.  
First, we analyze a sentence using depend-
ency parser (LIM, 2004), and then we convert a 
result of a parser into the caseframe format. We 
determine to restore an entry word if there is an 
exactly matched caseframe of a target except a 
sense class of an entry word.  
216
Table 1. An Example of Caserframe Algorithm 
Input Entry word: Along Bay  
Sense: Location 
Sentence: Located in East of Haiphong 
Parsing Locate(subj:NULL, obj:NULL, adv: east
of Haiphong) 
Caseframe of sentence  
direction!e locate 
Matching 24265-2 A=Location!ga B=Location!eseo
C=direction!e 
24265-4 A=Location!ga B=direction!e 
24265-8 A=weather!ga B=direction!e 
24265-12 A=direction!e 
24265-17 A=body!ga B=direction!e 
decision Restoring an entry word as a subject 
 
The result of caseframe algorithm is in table 
2. The result of caseframe algorithm shows that 
it has a high precision but a relatively low recall 
because it is impossible to construct caseframes 
for all sentences.  
 
Table 2. Result of Caseframe Algorithm 
 Subject Object Sum 
Precision 88.16 6.38 56.91 
Recall 59.29 27.28 56.45 
F-measure 70.90 10.34 56.68 
 
3.2 Acceptable Sense Class 
All entry words in the encyclopedia belong to at 
least one sense class. We verify all 444 sense 
classes to see whether they could be restored in 
a sentence.  We set a precision threshold 50% 
and we fix 36 sense classes to ?acceptable sense 
class?. An acceptable sense class is a sense class 
that if an entry word is included in an acceptable 
sense class, we unconditionally restore an entry 
word in a sentence. Our verification tells that 
there is only acceptable sense classes for sub-
jects. Table 3 shows acceptable sense classes. 
 
Table 3. Acceptable Sense Classes 
PERSON, ORGANIZATION, STUDY, WORK, 
LOCATION, ANIMAL, PLANT, ART,  
BUILDING, BUSINESS MATTERS, POSITION,  
SPORTS, CLOTHES, ESTABLISHMENT, 
 PUBLICATION, MEANS of TRANSPORTATION, 
EQUIPMENT, SITUATION, HARDWARE,  
BROADCASTING, HUMAN RACE, EXISTENCE, 
BRANCH, MATERIAL OBJECT, WEAPON,  
EXPLOSIVE, LANGUAGE, FACILITIES,  
ACTION, SYMBOL, TOPOGRAPHY, ROAD,  
ECONOMY, ADVERTISEMENT, EVENT, TOMB
The result of acceptable sense class algo-
rithm is presented in table 4. Because we cannot 
get acceptable sense classes for objects, F-
measure of object is 0.  
 
Table 4.  Result of ASC Algorithm 
 Subject Object Sum 
Precision 58.14 0.0 58.14 
Recall 66.37 0.0 60.48 
F-measure 61.98 0.0 59.29 
 
3.3 Maximum Entropy Modeling 
Maximum entropy modeling uses features, 
which can be complex, to provide a statistical 
model of the observed data which has the high-
est possible entropy, such that no assumptions 
about the data are made. 
 
)(maxarg* pHp =
*p
( pH
Cp?
 
where is the most uniform distribution, C is a set 
of probability distributions under the constraints and 
 is entropy of ) p .  
 
 Ratnaparkhi(Ratnaparkhi 98) makes a strong 
argument for the use of maximum entropy 
modes, and demonstrates their use in a variety of 
NLP tasks.  
The Maximum Entropy Toolkit was used for 
the experiments.1  
Because maximum entropy allows for a wide 
range of features, we can use various features, 
such as lexical feature, POS feature, sense fea-
ture, and syntactic feature. Each feature consists 
of subfeatures: 
 
Lexical feature; 
Verb_lex : lexeme of a target verb  
Verb_e_lex : lexeme of a suffix attatched 
to a target verb 
 
POS feature;  
Verb_pos : pos of a target verb 
Verb_e_pos : pos of a suffix attatch to a 
target verb 
 
Sense feature; 
                                                          
1 Downloadable from  
http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/s0450736/maxent_toolkit.ht
ml 
217
Ti_res_code: where sense of an entry 
word is included in acceptable sense class 
Verb_cf_subj, obj: whether a sense of en-
try word is included in caseframe of a 
targe verb 
Ti_sense : sense class of entry word 
 
Syntactic feature; 
Tree_posi: position of parse tree 
Rel_type: relation type between verbs in 
a sentence 
Sen_subj, sen_obj : existence of subject 
or object 
 
Hybrid feature; 
 Pair =(sense class of entry word, verb) 
 
 Table 5 shows an example of features that 
we use for finding an elided entry word.  
Previous work using ME model adopted dis-
tance-based context for training. Because we use 
syntactic features, we can use not only distance-
based context but also predicate-argument based 
context. The training data for ME algorithm 
consist of verbs in the encyclopedia document 
and their syntactic arguments. Each verb-
arguments set is augmented with the information 
that signifies whether a subject, an object or nei-
ther of them should be restored. For training, we 
use a dependency parser[Lim, 2004]. A preci-
sion of this parser is about 75%. The results of 
ME model algorithm is shown in table 6. The 
results of ME model shows that its score is the 
lowest of all. We guess the reason is that there is 
not enough training data for covering all sense 
classes.  
 
 
Table 5. An Example of Features 
Entry word, 
Sentence 
!TI Cirsotrema perplexam 
!SENSE Animal 
!VERB live 
!SENT lives in a tidal zone 
Lexical 
feature 
verb_lex=??(salda) verb_e_lex=?
(myeo) 
POS feature verb_pos=4 verb_e_pos=24 
Sense fea-
ture 
ti_res_code=1 verb_cf_subj=1  
verb_cf_obj=0 ti_sense=Animal 
Syntactic 
feature 
tree_posi=high rel_type=-1 sen_subj=
0 sen_obj=0 
Hybrid fea-
ture 
pair=(Animal, live) 
 
Table 6. Result of ME Model 
 Subject Object Sum 
Precision 62.50 40.0 60.87 
Recall 35.40 18.18 33.87 
F-measure 45.20 25.00 43.52 
 
3.4 Combining Algorithms 
Different algorithms have different characteris-
tics. For example, the acceptable sense class 
algorithm has relatively high recall but low pre-
cision, while the opposite holds true for the 
caseframe algorithm,  we need to combine algo-
rithms for maximizing advantages of each algo-
rithm. 
First, we combine the acceptable sense class 
algorithm with the ME model. We process the 
problem using the sense class algorithm. Instead 
of applying the algorithm exactly, we use the 
ME model for helping the acceptable sense class 
algorithm. If the acceptable sense class algo-
rithm determines a restoration, we adopt the 
case to ME model. Then if the score of ME 
model is over the negative threshold, we deter-
mine not to restore an entry word.  
Second, we combine the caseframe algorithm 
with the ME model. We process the cases not 
resolved in the first processing time using the 
caseframe algorithm. We try to match case-
frames exactly to sentence with an entry word 
sense code. If we cannot find the exactly match-
ing caseframe, we try matching caseframes par-
tially. In this case, a precision is maybe lower 
than an exact match, we also use the ME model 
for reliability. If the score of ME model is over 
the positive threshold, we determine to restore 
an entry word.  
4 Result and Conclusion 
For ME model, we made a training set 
manually. The training set consists of 2895 sen-
tences: 916 sentences for restoring an entry 
word as a subject, 232 sentences for restoring an 
entry word as an object, 1756 sentences for not 
restoring any. For a test, we randomly selected 
277 sentences.  
We did 6 kinds of experiments. Using Case-
frame algorithm(CF), Acceptable sense class 
algorithm(ASC), ME model(ME) and combine 
ASC with CF(ASC_CF), ASC with ME 
218
(ASC_ME), and ASC with CF and 
ME(ASC_CF_ME). 
 
Table 7. Result of Combined Algorithm 
 Recall Precision F-measure
baseline 100.00 31.64 48.07 
ASC_CF_ME 78.23 60.25 68.07 
ASC_CF 68.55 50.00 57.82 
ASC_ ME 79.03 59.39 67.82 
 
The performance of the methods is calculated 
using recall, precision and F-measure.  
Table 7 and Figure 1 show the performance 
of each experiment.  
Our proposed approach (ASC_CF_ME) 
gives the best results among all experiments, 
with an F-measure of 68.1%, followed closely 
by ASC_ME. This gives a 20% increase over 
our baseline. For testing a portability of our ap-
proach, we experiment the noun phrase ellipsis 
(NPE) detection. The performance of NPE is 
alike an elided entry word. Recall is 69.31, Pre-
cision is 65.05, and F-measure is 67.12. So we 
expect the performance of our approach not to 
drop when applied to NPE or other ellipsis prob-
lem. The results so far are encouraging, and 
show that the approach taken is capable of pro-
ducing a robust and accurate system.  
In this paper, we suggested the approach that 
restores an elided entry word for Encyclopedia 
QA systems combining an acceptable sense 
class algorithm, a caseframe algorithm, and ME 
model.  
For future work, we plan to pursue the fol-
lowing research. First, we will use various ma-
chine learning methods and compare them with 
the ME model. Second, because we plan to ap-
ply this approach in the encyclopedia document, 
we need to design the more general approach to 
use other ellipsis phenomenon. Third, we try to 
find a method for enhancing performance of 
restoring elided entry words as the object.  
References 
James Allen. 1995. Natural Language Under-
standing, Benjamin/Cummings Publishing 
Company, 449~455 
Leif Arda Nielsen. 2003. Using Machine Learn-
ing Techniques for VPE detection, RANLP 03, 
Bulgaria. 
Daniel Hardt. 1997. An empirical approach to 
vp ellipsis, Computational Linguistics, 23(4).  
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
CF AS
C ME
AS
C_C
F
AS
C_M
E
AS
C_C
F_M
E
70
80
90
Precision
Recall
F-Measure
 
Figure 1. Comparison of All Results 
 
Adwait Ratnaparkhi. 1998. Maximum Entropy 
Models for Natural LANGUAGE Ambiguity 
Resolution, Unpublished PhDthesis, University 
of Pennsylvania.  
Lim soojong. 2004. Dependency Relation 
Analysis Using Caseframe for Encyclopedia 
Question-Answering Systems, IECON, Korea. 
H. J. Kim, H. J. Oh, C. H. Lee., et al 2004.  The 
3-step Answer Processing Method for Encyclo-
pedia Question-Answering System: AnyQues-
tion 1.0. The Proceedings of Asia Information 
Retrieval Symposium (AIRS) 309-312 
 
219
