Proceedings of the Fourth International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 33?40,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Using Distributional Similarity to Identify Individual Verb Choice
Jing Lin
Department of Computing Science
University of Aberdeen
jlin@csd.abdn.ac.uk
Abstract
Human text is characterised by the indi-
vidual lexical choices of a specific au-
thor. Significant variations exist be-
tween authors. In contrast, natural lan-
guage generation systems normally pro-
duce uniform texts. In this paper we
apply distributional similarity measures
to help verb choice in a natural lan-
guage generation system which tries to
generate text similar to individual au-
thor. By using a distributional sim-
ilarity (DS) measure on corpora col-
lected from a recipe domain, we get
the most likely verbs for individual au-
thors. The accuracy of matching verb
pairs produced by distributional similar-
ity is higher than using the synonym out-
puts of verbs from WordNet. Further-
more, the combination of the two meth-
ods provides the best accuracy.
1 Introduction
Human text is characterised by the individual lex-
ical choices of the specific author. It varies from
author to author. Individual authors use different
verbs to describe the same action. Natural lan-
guage generation (NLG) systems, in contrast, nor-
mally produce uniform outputs without consider-
ing other lexical possibilities. Consider the fol-
lowing example from our corpora that are the BBC
corpus and the Recipes for health eating corpus.
1. BBC Corpus: Finely grate the ginger and
squeeze out the juice into a shallow non-
metallic dish. (BBC online recipes)
2. Author2: Extract juice from orange and add
this with the water to the saucepan. (Recipes
for health eating).
Here, we can see that the two authors express the
same type of action with different verbs, ?squeeze?
and ?extract?. In fact, when expressing this action,
the BBC corpus always use the verb ?squeeze?, and
Author2 only uses the verb ?extract?. Therefore,
we can assume that Author2 considers the verb
?extract? to describe the same action as the verb
?squeeze? used by the BBC corpus. The purpose of
our research is to develop a NLG system that can
detect these kinds of individual writing features,
such as the verb choice of individual authors, and
can then generate personalised text.
The input of our personalised NLG system is an
unseen recipe from the BBC food website. Our
system, then, translates all sentences into the style
of a personal author based on features drawn from
analysing an individual corpus we collected. In
this paper, we address the verb choice of the indi-
vidual author in the translation process.
Our system defines the writing style of an in-
dividual author by analysing an individual cor-
pus. Therefore, our system is a corpus-based NLG
system. Lexical choice for individual authors is
predicted by analysing the distributional similar-
ity between words in a general large recipe cor-
pus that is used to produce the verbs as the ac-
tion representation and words in a specific indi-
33
vidual recipe corpus. Firstly, we collected a large
corpus in the recipe domain from the BBC online
website. This large recipe corpus is used to ex-
tract feature values, for example verb choice, by
analysing an individual corpus. Secondly, we col-
lected our individual corpora for a number of in-
dividual authors. Each of them is used to extract
feature values that may define the individual writ-
ing style. The individual author may choose the
same or a different verb to describe cooking ac-
tions. The question is how can we identify the in-
dividual choice? For example, Author2 uses the
verb ?extract? instead of the verb ?squeeze?. How-
ever, if the author does express the action by a dif-
ferent verb, the problem is how our system picks
out verbs according to the individual choice of an
author.
One way to solve this problem is to access
large-scale manually constructed thesauri such as
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998), Roget?s (Roget, 1911)
or the Macquarie (Bernard, 1990) to get al syn-
onyms and choose the most frequent one in the
individual corpus. Another possible way is to use
a lexical knowledge based system, like VerbNet
(Kipper et al, 2000) to get more possible lexical
choices. However, both methods only provide a
number of pre-produced lexical choices that may
or may not be the words that the individual author
would choose. In other words, the lexical choice
of an author may not be based on the synonyms
extracted from one of the thesauri or may not even
belong to the same semantic class. In our exam-
ple, ?squeeze? and ?extract? are neither synonyms
nor Coordinate Terms in WordNet. In a small do-
main, it is possible to manually build a verb list
so that each action is described by a set of possi-
ble verbs. The drawback is that this is expensive.
Furthermore, it still cannot catch verbs that are not
included in the list. Is it possible to predict the
individual verbs automatically?
The distributional hypothesis (Harris, 1968)
says the following:
The meaning of entities, and the
meaning of grammatical relations
among them, is related to the restriction
of combinations of these entities relative
to other entities.
Over recent years, many applications (Lin,
1998), (Lee, 1999), (Lee, 2001), (Weeds et al,
2004), and (Weeds and Weir, 2006) have been in-
vestigating the distributional similarity of words.
Similarity means that words with similar meaning
tend to appear in similar contexts. In NLG, the
consideration of semantic similarity is usually pre-
ferred to just distributional similarity. However, in
our case, the most important thing is to capture the
most probable choice of a verb of an individual au-
thor for expressing an action. The expression of
an action can be either the same verb, synonyms,
or Coordinate terms to the verb in the big corpus,
or any verbs that an individual author chooses for
this action. If we check an individual corpus, there
are a set of verbs in our list that do not occur. If
these actions occur in the individual corpus, the
individual author must use different verbs. Distri-
butional similarity technology helps us to build the
links between verbs in our list and the verbs in an
individual corpus.
The rest of this paper is organised as follows.
In Section 2, we describe the recipe domain, our
corpora and our verb list. Section 3 disscuss our
baseline system. In Section 4, we present the dis-
tributional similarity measures that we are propos-
ing for analysing our corpora. The combination
method is disscussed in Section5. In Section 6,
we present an evaluation of our results. In Section
7, we draw conclusions and discuss future work.
2 The Recipe Domain and our Corpora
To find the most expressive verb pairs, we have to
have corpora to be analysed. Therefore, the se-
lection of a corpus is very important. As the re-
search of authorship attribution (AA) shows (Bur-
row, 1987), (Holmes and Forsyth, 1995), (Keuelj
et al, 2003), (Peng, 2003), and (Clement and
Sharp, 2003), there can be style variations of an in-
dividual author. This happens even with the same
topic and genre, and for the same action expres-
sions. Firstly, a person?s writing style can change
as time, genre, and topic change. Can and Pat-
ton (Can and Patton, 2004) have drawn the con-
clusion:
A higher time gap may have positive
impact in separation and categorization.
34
Even within one text, the style may not be uni-
form. (Burrow, 1987) has pointed out that, for ex-
ample, in fiction:
The language of its dialogue and that
of its narrative usually differ from each
other in some obvious and many less ob-
vious ways.
These problems require us to collect high-quality
corpora. The recipe domain is a good start in
this case. Sentences in it are narrative, impera-
tive and objective, compared with other normal
human text. For example, journal articles nor-
mally contain a large number of quotations, and
they are more subjective. Furthermore, journal ar-
ticles are more varied in content, even within the
same topic. Secondly, most large corpora are not
author-categorised. This requires us to collect our
own individual corpora.
2.1 Our Corpora
As we mentioned before, we collected a general
corpus in the recipe domain from the BBC food
website. To make recipes varied enough, this cor-
pus contains different cooking styles from west-
ern to eastern, different courses, including starters,
main courses and desserts, and a number of recipes
of famous cooks, such as Ainsley Harriott. Since
recipes are widely-available both from the Internet
and from publications, it is easy to collect author-
categorised corpora. Our individual recipe corpora
include four individual authors so far. Two of them
are from two published recipe books, and another
two we collected online. Recipe books are useful,
because they are written in an unique style. Ta-
ble 1 shows information about both our individual
corpora and our large general corpus.
Although we are focusing on a small domain,
verb variation between individual authors is a
common phenomenon. Here are a few further ex-
amples from our corpora, which we want to cap-
ture.
1. BBC corpus: Preheat the oven to
200C/400F/Gas 6. (BBC online food
recipes)
2. Author2: Switch on oven to 200C, 400F or
Gas Mark 6 and grease a 12 litre ovenproof
serving dish. (Recipes for Healthy Eating)
Our Corpora Number Total Total
of Recipes Lines Words
Large corpus 823 6325 85594
(BBC online recipes)
Recipes for 76 961 9212
Health Eating
Food for Health 113 1347 11791
CM 48 537 6432
(www.cooks.com)
Jo Pratt 91 904 15417
(www.bbc.co.uk)
Table 1: Our corpora information
3. Author3. Put the oven on. (Food for Health)
1. BBC corpus: Sift the flour, baking powder
and salt into a large bowl. (BBC online
Recipes)
2. Author2: Sieve the flour, baking powder and
bicarbonate of soda into a large mixing bowl.
(Recipes for Health Eating)
3. Author3: Sieve the flour in, one-third at a
time. (Food for Health)
2.2 Our Verb List
Figure 1: The information of the verblist
We manually built a verb list with 146 verbs in
total from our BBC corpus. Each verb represents
an unique cooking action, associated with defini-
tions and synonyms extracted from WordNet. For
example, the verb ?squeeze? contains the follow-
ing information shown in Figure 1. The BBC Cor-
pus also contains a number of synonyms, such as
the verb sift and the verb sieve. In this case, we
only pick up the most frequent verb, which is the
verb sift in this case, as an cooking action, and we
35
record its synonyms, such as the verb sieve, in the
late part of our verb list.
2.3 Using RASP in our corpora
Our data consists of verb-object pairs for verbs ob-
tained from our BBCCorpus using RASP (Briscoe
and Carroll, 2002). To derive reliable results, we
deal with our data by the following rules. To avoid
the sparse data problem and parsing mistakes, we
removed a number of verbs that occur less than
3 times in our large corpus, and a set of mistake
verbs made by the parser. We consider both direct
objects and indirect objects together at the same
time.
3 The Baseline Method - WordNet
Synonyms
After the individual corpus is parsed, there are a
number of main verbs appearing only in the BBC
recipe corpus, but not in the individual corpus.
This kind of main verbs is called missing verb
in a corpus. For example, verbs such as ?roast?,
?insert?, ?drizzle? appear in the BBC corpus, but
not in the Food for Health corpus. We say they
are missing verbs in the Food for Health corpus.
In this case, if the individual author expresses ac-
tions in the missing verb group, other verbs must
be chosen instead. Our purpose is to find alter-
natives used by the individual author. To solve
this problem, our baseline measure is the WordNet
synonyms. If the missing verb contains synonyms
in the verb list, we pick one as the candidate verb,
called an available candiate. The following ways
decide the verb alternatives for a missing verb. If
there is more than one candidate verb for one miss-
ing verb, the most frequent synonym of the miss-
ing verb in the individual corpus is chosen as the
alternative. The chosen synonym also has to be a
main verb in the individual corpus. If the miss-
ing verb does not have a synonym or all available
candidates do not appear in the individual corpus,
we assign no alternative to this missing verb. In
this case, we say there is no available alternative
for the missing verb. The number of available al-
ternatives for the missing verb and the accuracy is
shown in Table 2, and Figure 2.
4 Distributional Similarity Measure
In this section, we introduce the idea of using dis-
tributional similarity measures, and discuss how
this methodology can help us to capture verbs
from individual authors.
By calculating the co-occurrence types of target
words, distributional similarity defines the similar-
ity between target word pairs. The co-occurrence
types of a target word (w) are the context, c, in
which it occurs and these have associated frequen-
cies which may be used to form probability esti-
mates (Weeds et al, 2004). In our case, the tar-
get word is main verbs of sentences and the co-
occurrence types are objects. In section 6, simi-
larity between verbs is derived from their objects,
since normally there is no subject in the recipe do-
main. We are using the Additive t-test based Co-
occurrence Retrieval Model of (Weeds and Weir,
2006). This method considers for each word w
which co-occurrence types are retrieved. In our
case, objects have been extracted from both the
BBC Corpus and an individual corpus. Weeds and
Weir use the the co-occurrence types as the fea-
tures of word (w), F(w):
F (w) = {c : D(w, c) > 0}
where D(w, c) is the weight associated with word
w and co-occurrence type c. T-test is used as a
weight function, which is listed later.
Weeds and Weir use the following formula to
describe the set of True Positives of co-occurrence
types, which w1 and w2 are considered main verbs
in copora:
TP (w1, w2) = F (w1) ? F (w2)
They use the t-test from (Manning and Schu?tze,
1999) as the weight formula Dt(w, c):
Dt(w, c) =
p(c, w) ? P (c)P (w)
?
P (c,w)
N
Weeds and Weir then calculate the precision by
using the proportion of features of w1 which oc-
curs in both words, and the recall by using the
proportion of features of w2 which occur in both
words. In our experiment, precision is relative to
36
Total Available Available Available Correct
Individual Corpora Numbers Candidates Candidates Candidates Alternatives by
of Missing by by by (DS VS. WordNet
Verbs WordNet DS Combination VS. Combination)
Recipes for Health Eating 56 A = 36 A = 47 A = 52 8 VS. 10 VS. 17
Food for Health 57 A = 34 A = 52 A = 54 12 VS. 18 VS. 27
CM (www.cooks.com) 58 A = 25 A = 44 A = 51 10 VS. 4 VS. 14
Jo Pratt (www.bbc.co.uk) 26 A = 13 A = 22 A = 24 4 VS. 5 VS. 8
Table 2: The number of available missing verbs by the Distributional Similarity (DS) and by WordNet
and by combination of DS and WordNet. (?A? means the total number of missing verbs in the individual
corpus that have candidate alternatives in an individual corpus from methods.)
the BBC Corpus, and the recall is relative to an
individual corpus.
P add(w1, w2) =
?
TP (w1,w2) D(w1, c)
?
F (w1) D(w1, c)
Radd(w1, w2) =
?
TP (w1,w2) D(w2, c)
?
F (w2) D(w2,c)
Finally, Weeds and Weir combine precision and
recall together by the following formulas:
mh(P (w1, w2), R(w1, w2)) =
2.P (w1, w2).R(w1, w2)
P (w1, w2) + R(w1, w2)
ma(P (w1, w2), R(w1, w2)) =
?.P (w1, w2) + (1 ? ?).R(w1, w2)
sim(w1, w2) = r.mh(P (w1, w2), R(w1, w2))
+(1 ? r).ma(P (w1, w2), R(w1, w2))
where both r, ? are between [0, 1]. In our ex-
periments, we only assigned r=1. However, fur-
ther performs can be done by assigning different
values to r and ?.
4.1 The Distributional Similarity method
Each missing verb in the BBC corpus is assigned
the most likely verb as the available candidate
from the individual corpus. The most likely verb
is always chosen according to the largest similarity
using the DS measure. In our case, if the largest
similarity of the verb pair is larger than a certain
value (-5.0), we say the missing verb has an avail-
able candidate. Otherwise, there is no available
candidate existing in the individual corpus. For
instance, DS suggests verb ?switch? is the most
likely-exchangable verb for missing verb ?preheat?
in the Recipes for Health Eating corpus. ?switch?
appears 33 times in the individual corpus, in which
there are 33 times that ?switch? has the same ob-
ject as ?preheat?. Meanwhile, ?preheat? shows 191
times in total in the BBC corpus, with the same
objects as ?switch? 176 times. By using the DS for-
mulas, the similarity value between ?preheat? and
?switch? is 11.99. The number of available can-
didates of the missing verbs and the accuracy are
shown in Table 2, and Figure 2.
There is only one corpus in the DS measures.
In our case, w1 and w2 are from different corpora.
For example, verb ?preheat? is from the BBC cor-
pus, and verb ?switch? is in the Recipes for Health
Eating. Although the co-occurence type is objects
of the main verb, the precision is for the general
corpus ??the BBC corpus, and the recall is for
the individual corpus in our experiments.
5 The Combination method
We also combine the baseline and the DS method
together in the combination method. The combi-
nation method tries the baseline first. For each
missing verb, if the baseline returns an available
alternative, this is the final available alternative of
the combination method. If not, the available al-
ternative is calculated by the DS method. If there
is still no candidate for the missing verb, there is
37
no available alternative in this case.
6 Evaluation
To justify accuracy of results by both the baseline
method and the DS method, we manually judge
whether or not the alternatives are inter change-
able for the missing verbs. Table 2 shows the total
number of missing verbs for each individual cor-
pus and numbers of available alternatives as well.
Also, it presents the number of correct alternatives
for cases where both methods return answers, and
results of a combination of two methods. In the
future, we would like to evaluate the accuracy by
more judges.
From Table 2, accuracies of distributional simi-
larity are higher than WordNet synonyms in most
cases, except in the individual corpus CM. The
reason that CM got worse results is probably that
the corpus size is not big enough. Since CM is
the only individual corpus that has less than 50
recipes, this could lead to unreliable accuracy. In
table 2, ?A? means the total number of missing
verbs in the individual corpus that have candidate
alternatives in an individual corpus from meth-
ods. It is obvious that distributional methods pro-
duce more available verbs than the synonyms of
WordNet. In this case, we assume that WordNet
is not very productive to provide alternative verb
choices for individual authors compared with dis-
tributional similarity in a domain.
Figure 2 represents the accuracies of all meth-
ods. In Figure 2, we can see the overall accuracy
of WordNet is not as good as the distributional
similarity method. Moreover, we calculate the ac-
curacy for the available verb pairs from the com-
bination method of both the distributional similar-
ity and WordNet. We can see that all combina-
tion accuracies are significantly better than accu-
racies of either distributional similarity or Word-
Net synonyms. In this case, distributional similar-
ity and WordNet find different types of verbs. In
other words, the similarity distributional method
is very useful to find verbs that are not synonyms
but represent the same type of action in individual
corpora. And the type of verbs found by distribu-
tional similarity could not be pre-predicted, which
makes the verb choice personalised.
In our verb pair outputs from distributional sim-
ilarity, one problem is that we got similar verb
pairs, for instances the verb ?simmer? matches to
?fry?. This is a common problem with distribu-
tional similarity, since it is not based on semantic
meaning. This problem can perhaps be solved by
building some hierarchical relationships between
verbs. For instance, roast is one type of cooking.
The following examples are correct cases of
verb pairs that are captured by distributional simi-
larity. In each example, the semantic meanings of
sentences are different, but the representation of
action are the same.
roast (BBC Corpus) - cook (Food for Health):
1. BBC Corpus: Season generously and roast
for 30 minutes until softened and a little
charred. (BBC online recipes)
2. Author2: Cover with a lid or foil and cook
in the centre of the oven for 20 minutes, then
turn down the oven to Reg 3 or 160C and con-
tinue cooking for 1 hour or until the kidneys
are cooked. (Food for Health)
saute (BBC Corpus) - fry (Food for Health):
1. BBC Corpus: Melt the butter in a small to
medium ovenproof pan and saute the cashew
nuts for 2-3 minutes. (BBC online recipes)
2. Author2: Add the carrots and fry quickly for
5 minutes, stirring continuously. (Food for
Health)
preheat (BBC Corpus) - switch on (Food for
Health):
1. BBC Corpus: Preheat the oven to
200C/400F/Gas 6. (BBC online recipes)
2. Author2: Switch on oven to 190C, 375F or
Gas Mark 5. (Food for Health)
So far distributional similarity cannot capture
the prepositions such as on in the third example.
This is our future work.
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we used a distributional similar-
ity method to help us to find matching verbs in
38
Figure 2: The Accuracy for Missing Verbs in Individual Corpora
an individual corpus. We have compared the re-
sult between the distributional similarity method
and WordNet and the overall accuracy of distribu-
tional similarity is better than WordNet. Further-
more, the combination of the distributional simi-
larity method and WordNet achieved the best ac-
curacy. This suggests that distributional similar-
ity is very helpful in choosing the proper verbs
for individual authors. It is especially useful to
find verbs that are not synonyms but represent the
same type of action in individual corpora. This
means distributional similarity can capture unpre-
dicted verb preferences of individual authors from
the individual corpora.
References
John R.L Bernard. 1990. The Macquarie Encyclo-
pedic Thesaurus. The Macquarie Library, Sydney,
Australia.
Edward Briscoe and John Carroll. 2002. Robust Accu-
rate Statistical Annotation of General Text. In Pro-
ceedings of the LREC-2002, pages 1499?1504.
John F. Burrow. 1987. Word-patterns and Story-
shapes: the Statistical Analusis of Narrative style.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 2(2):61?70.
Fazli Can and Jon M. Patton. 2004. Change of Writ-
ing Style with Time. Computers and Humanities,
38:61?82.
R. Clement and D. Sharp. 2003. Ngram and
Bayesian Classification of Documents for Topic and
Authorship. Literary and Linguistic Computing,
18(4):423?447.
Christiance Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An
Electronic lexical Database. MIT Press.
Zelig S. Harris. 1968. Mathematical Structures of Lan-
guage. John Wiley.
D. I Holmes and R.S Forsyth. 1995. The Federalist Re-
visited: New Directions in Authoriship attribution.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 10(2):111?127.
V. Keuelj, F. C. Peng, N. Cercone, and C. Thomas.
2003. N-Gram-Based Author Profiles for Author-
ship Attribution. In Proceedings the Pacific Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Karin Kipper, Hoa Trang Dang, and Martha Palmer.
2000. Class-Based Construction of a Verb Lexicon.
In Proceedings the AAAI/IAAI, pages 691?696.
Lillian Lee. 1999. Measure of Distributional Similar-
ity. In Proceedings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL).
Lillian Lee. 2001. On the Effectiveness of the Skew
Divergence for Statistical Language. In AIR.
Dekang Lin. 1998. Automatic Retrieval and Clus-
tering of Similar Words. In Proceedings of the
COLING-ACL.
Christopher D. Manning and Hinrich Schu?tze. 1999.
Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Pro-
cessing. The MIT Press.
39
F. C. Peng. 2003. Language Independent Authorship
Attribution using Character Level Language Mod-
els. In Proceedings of the European Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL).
Peter Roget. 1911. Thesaurus of English Words and
Phrases. Longmans.
Julie Weeds and David Weir. 2006. Co-occurrence
Retrieval: A Flexible Framework for lexical Dis-
tributional Similarity. Computational Linguistics,
31(4):440?475.
Julie Weeds, David Weir, and Diana McCarthy. 2004.
Charactersing Measures of Lexical Distributional
Similarity. In Proceedings of the COLING.
40
