Unsupervised Learning of Contextual Role Knowledge for Coreference
Resolution
David Bean
Attensity Corporation, Suite 600
Gateway One 90 South 400 West
Salt Lake City, UT 84101
dbean@attensity.com
Ellen Riloff
School of Computing
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
riloff@cs.utah.edu
Abstract
We present a coreference resolver called
BABAR that uses contextual role knowledge to
evaluate possible antecedents for an anaphor.
BABAR uses information extraction patterns
to identify contextual roles and creates four
contextual role knowledge sources using unsu-
pervised learning. These knowledge sources
determine whether the contexts surrounding
an anaphor and antecedent are compatible.
BABAR applies a Dempster-Shafer probabilis-
tic model to make resolutions based on ev-
idence from the contextual role knowledge
sources as well as general knowledge sources.
Experiments in two domains showed that the
contextual role knowledge improved corefer-
ence performance, especially on pronouns.
1 Introduction
The problem of coreference resolution has received con-
siderable attention, including theoretical discourse mod-
els (e.g., (Grosz et al, 1995; Grosz and Sidner, 1998)),
syntactic algorithms (e.g., (Hobbs, 1978; Lappin and Le-
ass, 1994)), and supervised machine learning systems
(Aone and Bennett, 1995; McCarthy and Lehnert, 1995;
Ng and Cardie, 2002; Soon et al, 2001). Most compu-
tational models for coreference resolution rely on prop-
erties of the anaphor and candidate antecedent, such as
lexical matching, grammatical and syntactic features, se-
mantic agreement, and positional information.
The focus of our work is on the use of contextual role
knowledge for coreference resolution. A contextual role
represents the role that a noun phrase plays in an event
or relationship. Our work is motivated by the observa-
tion that contextual roles can be critically important in
determining the referent of a noun phrase. Consider the
following sentences:
(a) Jose Maria Martinez, Roberto Lisandy, and Dino
Rossy, who were staying at a Tecun Uman hotel,
were kidnapped by armed men who took them to an
unknown place.
(b) After they were released...
(c) After they blindfolded the men...
In (b) ?they? refers to the kidnapping victims, but in (c)
?they? refers to the armed men. The role that each noun
phrase plays in the kidnapping event is key to distinguish-
ing these cases. The correct resolution in sentence (b)
comes from knowledge that people who are kidnapped
are often subsequently released. The correct resolution in
sentence (c) depends on knowledge that kidnappers fre-
quently blindfold their victims.
We have developed a coreference resolver called
BABAR that uses contextual role knowledge to make
coreference decisions. BABAR employs information ex-
traction techniques to represent and learn role relation-
ships. Each pattern represents the role that a noun phrase
plays in the surrounding context. BABAR uses unsu-
pervised learning to acquire this knowledge from plain
text without the need for annotated training data. Train-
ing examples are generated automatically by identifying
noun phrases that can be easily resolved with their an-
tecedents using lexical and syntactic heuristics. BABAR
then computes statistics over the training examples mea-
suring the frequency with which extraction patterns and
noun phrases co-occur in coreference resolutions.
In this paper, Section 2 begins by explaining how
contextual role knowledge is represented and learned.
Section 3 describes the complete coreference resolution
model, which uses the contextual role knowledge as well
as more traditional coreference features. Our corefer-
ence resolver also incorporates an existential noun phrase
recognizer and a Dempster-Shafer probabilistic model to
make resolution decisions. Section 4 presents experimen-
tal results on two corpora: the MUC-4 terrorism cor-
pus, and Reuters texts about natural disasters. Our re-
sults show that BABAR achieves good performance in
both domains, and that the contextual role knowledge
improves performance, especially on pronouns. Finally,
Section 5 explains how BABAR relates to previous work,
and Section 6 summarizes our conclusions.
2 Learning Contextual Role Knowledge
In this section, we describe how contextual role knowl-
edge is represented and learned. Section 2.1 describes
how BABAR generates training examples to use in the
learning process. We refer to this process as Reli-
able Case Resolution because it involves finding cases
of anaphora that can be easily resolved with their an-
tecedents. Section 2.2 then describes our representation
for contextual roles and four types of contextual role
knowledge that are learned from the training examples.
2.1 Reliable Case Resolutions
The first step in the learning process is to generate train-
ing examples consisting of anaphor/antecedent resolu-
tions. BABAR uses two methods to identify anaphors
that can be easily and reliably resolved with their an-
tecedent: lexical seeding and syntactic seeding.
2.1.1 Lexical Seeding
It is generally not safe to assume that multiple occur-
rences of a noun phrase refer to the same entity. For
example, the company may refer to Company X in one
paragraph and Company Y in another. However, lex-
ically similar NPs usually refer to the same entity in
two cases: proper names and existential noun phrases.
BABAR uses a named entity recognizer to identify proper
names that refer to people and companies. Proper names
are assumed to be coreferent if they match exactly, or if
they closely match based on a few heuristics. For exam-
ple, a person?s full name will match with just their last
name (e.g., ?George Bush? and ?Bush?), and a company
name will match with and without a corporate suffix (e.g.,
?IBM Corp.? and ?IBM?). Proper names that match are
resolved with each other.
The second case involves existential noun phrases
(Allen, 1995), which are noun phrases that uniquely spec-
ify an object or concept and therefore do not need a
prior referent in the discourse. In previous work (Bean
and Riloff, 1999), we developed an unsupervised learn-
ing algorithm that automatically recognizes definite NPs
that are existential without syntactic modification be-
cause their meaning is universally understood. For exam-
ple, a story can mention ?the FBI?, ?the White House?,
or ?the weather? without any prior referent in the story.
Although these existential NPs do not need a prior ref-
erent, they may occur multiple times in a document. By
definition, each existential NP uniquely specifies an ob-
ject or concept, so we can infer that all instances of the
same existential NP are coreferent (e.g., ?the FBI? always
refers to the same entity). Using this heuristic, BABAR
identifies existential definite NPs in the training corpus
using our previous learning algorithm (Bean and Riloff,
1999) and resolves all occurrences of the same existential
NP with each another.1
2.1.2 Syntactic Seeding
BABAR also uses syntactic heuristics to identify
anaphors and antecedents that can be easily resolved. Ta-
ble 1 briefly describes the seven syntactic heuristics used
by BABAR to resolve noun phrases. Words and punctua-
tion that appear in brackets are considered optional. The
anaphor and antecedent appear in boldface.
1. Reflexive pronouns with only 1 NP in scope.
Ex: The regime gives itself the right...
2. Relative pronouns with only 1 NP in scope.
Ex: The brigade, which attacked ...
3. Some cases of the pattern ?NP to-be NP?.
Ex: Mr. Cristiani is the president ...
4. Some cases of ?NP said [that] it/they?
Ex: The government said it ...
5. Some cases of ?[Locative-prep] NP [,] where?
Ex: He was found in San Jose, where ...
6. Simple appositives of the form ?NP, NP?
Ex: Mr. Cristiani, president of the country ...
7. PPs containing ?by? and a gerund followed by ?it?
Ex: Mr. Bush disclosed the policy by reading it...
Table 1: Syntactic Seeding Heuristics
BABAR?s reliable case resolution heuristics produced
a substantial set of anaphor/antecedent resolutions that
will be the training data used to learn contextual role
knowledge. For terrorism, BABAR generated 5,078 res-
olutions: 2,386 from lexical seeding and 2,692 from
syntactic seeding. For natural disasters, BABAR gener-
ated 20,479 resolutions: 11,652 from lexical seeding and
8,827 from syntactic seeding.
2.2 Contextual Role Knowledge
Our representation of contextual roles is based on infor-
mation extraction patterns that are converted into simple
caseframes. First, we describe how the caseframes are
represented and learned. Next, we describe four con-
textual role knowledge sources that are created from the
training examples and the caseframes.
2.2.1 The Caseframe Representation
Information extraction (IE) systems use extraction pat-
terns to identify noun phrases that play a specific role in
1Our implementation only resolves NPs that occur in the
same document, but in retrospect, one could probably resolve
instances of the same existential NP in different documents too.
an event. For IE, the system must be able to distinguish
between semantically similar noun phrases that play dif-
ferent roles in an event. For example, management suc-
cession systems must distinguish between a person who
is fired and a person who is hired. Terrorism systems
must distinguish between people who perpetrate a crime
and people who are victims of a crime.
We applied the AutoSlog system (Riloff, 1996) to our
unannotated training texts to generate a set of extraction
patterns for each domain. Each extraction pattern repre-
sents a linguistic expression and a syntactic position in-
dicating where a role filler can be found. For example,
kidnapping victims should be extracted from the subject
of the verb ?kidnapped? when it occurs in the passive
voice (the short-hand representation of this pattern would
be ?<subject> were kidnapped?). The types of patterns
produced by AutoSlog are outlined in (Riloff, 1996).
Ideally we?d like to know the thematic role of each ex-
tracted noun phrase, but AutoSlog does not generate the-
matic roles. As a (crude) approximation, we normalize
the extraction patterns with respect to active and passive
voice and label those extractions as agents or patients.
For example, the passive voice pattern ?<subject> were
kidnapped? and the active voice pattern ?kidnapped
<direct object>? are merged into a single normalized
pattern ?kidnapped <patient>?.2 For the sake of sim-
plicity, we will refer to these normalized extraction pat-
terns as caseframes.3 These caseframes can capture two
types of contextual role information: (1) thematic roles
corresponding to events (e.g, ?<agent> kidnapped? or
?kidnapped <patient>?), and (2) predicate-argument re-
lations associated with both verbs and nouns (e.g., ?kid-
napped for <np>? or ?vehicle with <np>?).
We generate these caseframes automatically by run-
ning AutoSlog over the training corpus exhaustively so
that it literally generates a pattern to extract every noun
phrase in the corpus. The learned patterns are then nor-
malized and applied to the corpus. This process produces
a large set of caseframes coupled with a list of the noun
phrases that they extracted. The contextual role knowl-
edge that BABAR uses for coreference resolution is de-
rived from this caseframe data.
2.2.2 The Caseframe Network
The first type of contextual role knowledge
that BABAR learns is the Caseframe Network
(CFNet), which identifies caseframes that co-occur in
anaphor/antecedent resolutions. Our assumption is that
caseframes that co-occur in resolutions often have a
2This normalization is performed syntactically without se-
mantics, so the agent and patient roles are not guaranteed to
hold, but they usually do in practice.
3These are not full case frames in the traditional sense, but
they approximate a simple case frame with a single slot.
conceptual relationship in the discourse. For example,
co-occurring caseframes may reflect synonymy (e.g.,
?<patient> kidnapped? and ?<patient> abducted?)
or related events (e.g., ?<patient> kidnapped? and
?<patient> released?). We do not attempt to identify
the types of relationships that are found. BABAR
merely identifies caseframes that frequently co-occur in
coreference resolutions.
Terrorism Natural Disasters
murder of <NP> <agent> damaged
killed <patient> was injured in <NP>
<agent> reported <agent> occurred
<agent> added cause of <NP>
<agent> stated <agent> wreaked
<agent> added <agent> crossed
perpetrated <patient> driver of <NP>
condemned <patient> <agent> carrying
Figure 1: Caseframe Network Examples
Figure 1 shows examples of caseframes that co-occur
in resolutions, both in the terrorism and natural disaster
domains. The terrorism examples reflect fairly obvious
relationships: people who are murdered are killed; agents
that ?report? things also ?add? and ?state? things; crimes
that are ?perpetrated? are often later ?condemned?. In the
natural disasters domain, agents are often forces of na-
ture, such as hurricanes or wildfires. Figure 1 reveals that
an event that ?damaged? objects may also cause injuries;
a disaster that ?occurred? may be investigated to find its
?cause?; a disaster may ?wreak? havoc as it ?crosses? ge-
ographic regions; and vehicles that have a ?driver? may
also ?carry? items.
During coreference resolution, the caseframe network
provides evidence that an anaphor and prior noun phrase
might be coreferent. Given an anaphor, BABAR iden-
tifies the caseframe that would extract it from its sen-
tence. For each candidate antecedent, BABAR identifies
the caseframe that would extract the candidate, pairs it
with the anaphor?s caseframe, and consults the CF Net-
work to see if this pair of caseframes has co-occurred in
previous resolutions. If so, the CF Network reports that
the anaphor and candidate may be coreferent.
2.2.3 Lexical Caseframe Expectations
The second type of contextual role knowledge learned
by BABAR is Lexical Caseframe Expectations, which are
used by the CFLex knowledge source. For each case-
frame, BABAR collects the head nouns of noun phrases
that were extracted by the caseframe in the training cor-
pus. For each resolution in the training data, BABAR also
associates the co-referring expression of an NP with the
NP?s caseframe. For example, if X and Y are coreferent,
then both X and Y are considered to co-occur with the
caseframe that extracts X as well as the caseframe that
extracts Y. We will refer to the set of nouns that co-occur
with a caseframe as the lexical expectations of the case-
frame. Figure 2 shows examples of lexical expectations
that were learned for both domains.
Terrorism
Caseframe: engaged in <NP>
NPs: activity, battle, clash, dialogue, effort, fight, group,
shoot-out, struggle, village, violence
Caseframe: ambushed <patient>
NPs: company, convoy, helicopter, member, motorcade,
move, Ormeno, patrol, position, response, soldier,
they, troops, truck, vehicle, which
Natural Disasters
Caseframe: battled through <NP>
NPs: flame, night, smoke, wall
Caseframe: braced for <NP>
NPs: arrival, battering, catastrophe, crest, Dolly, epidemics,
evacuate, evacuation, flood, flooding, front, Hortense,
hurricane, misery, rains, river, storm, surge, test, typhoon.
Figure 2: Lexical Caseframe Expectations
To illustrate how lexical expectations are used, suppose
we want to determine whether noun phrase X is the an-
tecedent for noun phrase Y. If they are coreferent, then
X and Y should be substitutable for one another in the
story.4 Consider these sentences:
(S1) Fred was killed by a masked man with a revolver.
(S2) The burglar fired the gun three times and fled.
?The gun? will be extracted by the caseframe ?fired
<patient>?. Its correct antecedent is ?a revolver?, which
is extracted by the caseframe ?killed with <NP>?. If
?gun? and ?revolver? refer to the same object, then it
should also be acceptable to say that Fred was ?killed
with a gun? and that the burglar ?fired a revolver?.
During coreference resolution, BABAR checks (1)
whether the anaphor is among the lexical expectations for
the caseframe that extracts the candidate antecedent, and
(2) whether the candidate is among the lexical expecta-
tions for the caseframe that extracts the anaphor. If either
case is true, then CFLex reports that the anaphor and can-
didate might be coreferent.
2.2.4 Semantic Caseframe Expectations
The third type of contextual role knowledge learned
by BABAR is Semantic Caseframe Expectations. Se-
mantic expectations are analogous to lexical expectations
except that they represent semantic classes rather than
nouns. For each caseframe, BABAR collects the seman-
tic classes associated with the head nouns of NPs that
were extracted by the caseframe. As with lexical expec-
tions, the semantic classes of co-referring expressions are
4They may not be perfectly substitutable, for example one
NP may be more specific (e.g., ?he? vs. ?John F. Kennedy?).
But in most cases they can be used interchangably.
collected too. We will refer to the semantic classes that
co-occur with a caseframe as the semantic expectations
of the caseframe. Figure 3 shows examples of semantic
expectations that were learned. For example, BABAR
learned that agents that ?assassinate? or ?investigate a
cause? are usually humans or groups (i.e., organizations).
Terrorism
Caseframe Semantic Classes
<agent> assassinated group, human
investigation into <NP> event
exploded outside <NP> building
Natural Disasters
Caseframe Semantic Classes
<agent> investigating cause group, human
survivor of <NP> event, natphenom
hit with <NP> attribute, natphenom
Figure 3: Semantic Caseframe Expectations
For each domain, we created a semantic dictionary by
doing two things. First, we parsed the training corpus,
collected all the noun phrases, and looked up each head
noun in WordNet (Miller, 1990). We tagged each noun
with the top-level semantic classes assigned to it in Word-
Net. Second, we identified the 100 most frequent nouns
in the training corpus and manually labeled them with
semantic tags. This step ensures that the most frequent
terms for each domain are labeled (in case some of them
are not in WordNet) and labeled with the sense most ap-
propriate for the domain.
Initially, we planned to compare the semantic classes
of an anaphor and a candidate and infer that they might be
coreferent if their semantic classes intersected. However,
using the top-level semantic classes of WordNet proved
to be problematic because the class distinctions are too
coarse. For example, both a chair and a truck would be la-
beled as artifacts, but this does not at all suggest that they
are coreferent. So we decided to use semantic class in-
formation only to rule out candidates. If two nouns have
mutually exclusive semantic classes, then they cannot be
coreferent. This solution also obviates the need to per-
form word sense disambiguation. Each word is simply
tagged with the semantic classes corresponding to all of
its senses. If these sets do not overlap, then the words
cannot be coreferent.
The semantic caseframe expectations are used in two
ways. One knowledge source, called WordSem-CFSem,
is analogous to CFLex: it checks whether the anaphor and
candidate antecedent are substitutable for one another,
but based on their semantic classes instead of the words
themselves. Given an anaphor and candidate, BABAR
checks (1) whether the semantic classes of the anaphor
intersect with the semantic expectations of the caseframe
that extracts the candidate, and (2) whether the semantic
classes of the candidate intersect with the semantic ex-
pectations of the caseframe that extracts the anaphor. If
one of these checks fails then this knowledge source re-
ports that the candidate is not a viable antecedent for the
anaphor.
A different knowledge source, called CFSem-CFSem,
compares the semantic expectations of the caseframe that
extracts the anaphor with the semantic expectations of the
caseframe that extracts the candidate. If the semantic ex-
pectations do not intersect, then we know that the case-
frames extract mutually exclusive types of noun phrases.
In this case, this knowledge source reports that the candi-
date is not a viable antecedent for the anaphor.
2.3 Assigning Evidence Values
Contextual role knowledge provides evidence as to
whether a candidate is a plausible antecedent for an
anaphor. The two knowledge sources that use semantic
expectations, WordSem-CFSem and CFSem-CFSem, al-
ways return values of -1 or 0. -1 means that an NP should
be ruled out as a possible antecedent, and 0 means that the
knowledge source remains neutral (i.e., it has no reason
to believe that they cannot be coreferent).
The CFLex and CFNet knowledge sources provide
positive evidence that a candidate NP and anaphor might
be coreferent. They return a value in the range [0,1],
where 0 indicates neutrality and 1 indicates the strongest
belief that the candidate and anaphor are coreferent.
BABAR uses the log-likelihood statistic (Dunning, 1993)
to evaluate the strength of a co-occurrence relationship.
For each co-occurrence relation (noun/caseframe for
CFLex, and caseframe/caseframe for CFNet), BABAR
computes its log-likelihood value and looks it up in the

2 table to obtain a confidence level. The confidence
level is then used as the belief value for the knowledge
source. For example, if CFLex determines that the log-
likelihood statistic for the co-occurrence of a particular
noun and caseframe corresponds to the 90% confidence
level, then CFLex returns .90 as its belief that the anaphor
and candidate are coreferent.
3 The Coreference Resolution Model
Given a document to process, BABAR uses four modules
to perform coreference resolution. First, a non-anaphoric
NP classifier identifies definite noun phrases that are exis-
tential, using both syntactic rules and our learned existen-
tial NP recognizer (Bean and Riloff, 1999), and removes
them from the resolution process. Second, BABAR per-
forms reliable case resolution to identify anaphora that
can be easily resolved using the lexical and syntactic
heuristics described in Section 2.1. Third, all remain-
ing anaphora are evaluated by 11 different knowledge
sources: the four contextual role knowledge sources just
described and seven general knowledge sources. Finally,
a Dempster-Shafer probabilistic model evaluates the ev-
idence provided by the knowledge sources for all can-
didate antecedents and makes the final resolution de-
cision. In this section, we describe the seven general
knowledge sources and explain how the Dempster-Shafer
model makes resolutions.
3.1 General Knowledge Sources
Figure 4 shows the seven general knowledge sources
(KSs) that represent features commonly used for corefer-
ence resolution. The gender, number, and scoping KSs
eliminate candidates from consideration. The scoping
heuristics are based on the anaphor type: for reflexive
pronouns the scope is the current clause, for relative pro-
nouns it is the prior clause following its VP, for personal
pronouns it is the anaphor?s sentence and two preced-
ing sentences, and for definite NPs it is the anaphor?s
sentence and eight preceding sentences. The semantic
agreement KS eliminates some candidates, but also pro-
vides positive evidence in one case: if the candidate and
anaphor both have semantic tags human, company, date,
or location that were assigned via NER or the manually
labeled dictionary entries. The rationale for treating these
semantic labels differently is that they are specific and
reliable (as opposed to the WordNet classes, which are
more coarse and more noisy due to polysemy).
KS Function
Gender filters candidate if gender doesn?t agree.
Number filters candidate if number doesn?t agree.
Scoping filters candidate if outside the anaphor?s scope.
Semantic (a) filters candidate if its semantic tags
don?t intersect with those of the anaphor.
(b) supports candidate if selected semantic
tags match those of the anaphor.
Lexical computes degree of lexical overlap
between the candidate and the anaphor.
Recency computes the relative distance between the
candidate and the anaphor.
SynRole computes relative frequency with which the
candidate?s syntactic role occurs in resolutions.
Figure 4: General Knowledge Sources
The Lexical KS returns 1 if the candidate and anaphor
are identical, 0.5 if their head nouns match, and 0 other-
wise. The Recency KS computes the distance between
the candidate and the anaphor relative to its scope. The
SynRole KS computes the relative frequency with which
the candidates? syntactic role (subject, direct object, PP
object) appeared in resolutions in the training set. Dur-
ing development, we sensed that the Recency and Syn-
role KSs did not deserve to be on equal footing with the
other KSs because their knowledge was so general. Con-
sequently, we cut their evidence values in half to lessen
their influence.
3.2 The Dempster-Shafer Decision Model
BABAR uses a Dempster-Shafer decision model (Stefik,
1995) to combine the evidence provided by the knowl-
edge sources. Our motivation for using Dempster-Shafer
is that it provides a well-principled framework for com-
bining evidence from multiple sources with respect to
competing hypotheses. In our situation, the competing
hypotheses are the possible antecedents for an anaphor.
An important aspect of the Dempster-Shafer model is
that it operates on sets of hypotheses. If evidence indi-
cates that hypotheses C and D are less likely than hy-
potheses A and B, then probabilities are redistributed to
reflect the fact that fA, Bg is more likely to contain the
answer than fC, Dg. The ability to redistribute belief val-
ues across sets rather than individual hypotheses is key.
The evidence may not say anything about whether A is
more likely than B, only that C and D are not likely.
Each set is assigned two values: belief and plausibil-
ity. Initially, the Dempster-Shafer model assumes that all
hypotheses are equally likely, so it creates a set called 
that includes all hypotheses.  has a belief value of 1.0,
indicating complete certainty that the correct hypothesis
is included in the set, and a plausibility value of 1.0, in-
dicating that there is no evidence for competing hypothe-
ses.5 As evidence is collected and the likely hypotheses
are whittled down, belief is redistributed to subsets of .
Formally, the Dempster-Shafer theory defines a proba-
bility density function m(S), where S is a set of hypothe-
ses. m(S) represents the belief that the correct hypothe-
sis is included in S. The model assumes that evidence also
arrives as a probability density function (pdf) over sets of
hypotheses.6 Integrating new evidence into the existing
model is therefore simply a matter of defining a function
to merge pdfs, one representing the current belief system
and one representing the beliefs of the new evidence. The
Dempster-Shafer rule for combining pdfs is:
m
3
(S) =
X
X\Y =S
m
1
(X)  m
2
(Y )
1 ?
X
X\Y =;
m
1
(X)  m
2
(Y )
(1)
All sets of hypotheses (and their corresponding belief
values) in the current model are crossed with the sets of
hypotheses (and belief values) provided by the new evi-
dence. Sometimes, however, these beliefs can be contra-
dictory. For example, suppose the current model assigns
a belief value of .60 to fA, Bg, meaning that it is 60%
sure that the correct hypothesis is either A or B. Then
new evidence arrives with a belief value of .70 assigned
5Initially there are no competing hypotheses because all hy-
potheses are included in  by definition.
6Our knowledge sources return some sort of probability es-
timate, although in some cases this estimate is not especially
well-principled (e.g., the Recency KS).
to fCg, meaning that it is 70% sure the correct hypothe-
sis is C. The intersection of these sets is the null set be-
cause these beliefs are contradictory. The belief value
that would have been assigned to the intersection of these
sets is .60*.70=.42, but this belief has nowhere to go be-
cause the null set is not permissible in the model.7 So this
probability mass (.42) has to be redistributed. Dempster-
Shafer handles this by re-normalizing all the belief values
with respect to only the non-null sets (this is the purpose
of the denominator in Equation 1).
In our coreference resolver, we define  to be the set
of all candidate antecedents for an anaphor. Each knowl-
edge source then assigns a probability estimate to each
candidate, which represents its belief that the candidate is
the antecedent for the anaphor. The probabilities are in-
corporated into the Dempster-Shafer model using Equa-
tion 1. To resolve the anaphor, we survey the final be-
lief values assigned to each candidate?s singleton set. If
a candidate has a belief value  .50, then we select that
candidate as the antecedent for the anaphor. If no candi-
date satisfies this condition (which is often the case), then
the anaphor is left unresolved. One of the strengths of the
Dempster-Shafer model is its natural ability to recognize
when several credible hypotheses are still in play. In this
situation, BABAR takes the conservative approach and
declines to make a resolution.
4 Evaluation Results
4.1 Corpora
We evaluated BABAR on two domains: terrorism and
natural disasters. We used the MUC-4 terrorism cor-
pus (MUC-4 Proceedings, 1992) and news articles from
the Reuter?s text collection8 that had a subject code cor-
responding to natural disasters. For each domain, we
created a blind test set by manually annotating 40 doc-
uments with anaphoric chains, which represent sets of
noun phrases that are coreferent (as done for MUC-6
(MUC-6 Proceedings, 1995)). In the terrorism domain,
1600 texts were used for training and the 40 test docu-
ments contained 322 anaphoric links. For the disasters
domain, 8245 texts were used for training and the 40 test
documents contained 447 anaphoric links.
In recent years, coreference resolvers have been evalu-
ated as part of MUC-6 and MUC-7 (MUC-7 Proceedings,
1998). We considered using the MUC-6 and MUC-7 data
sets, but their training sets were far too small to learn reli-
able co-occurrence statistics for a large set of contextual
role relationships. Therefore we opted to use the much
7The Dempster-Shafer theory assumes that one of the hy-
potheses in  is correct, so eliminating all of the hypotheses
violates this assumption.
8Volume 1, English language, 1996-1997, Format version 1,
correction level 0
Terrorism Disasters
Anaphor Rec Pr F Rec Pr F
Def. NPs .43 .79 .55 .42 .91 .58
Pronouns .50 .72 .59 .42 .82 .56
Total .46 .76 .57 .42 .87 .57
Table 2: General Knowledge Sources
Terrorism Disasters
Anaphor Rec Pr F Rec Pr F
Def. NPs .45 .71 .55 .46 .84 .59
Pronouns .63 .73 .68 .57 .79 .66
Total .53 .73 .61 .51 .82 .63
Table 3: General + Contextual Role Knowledge Sources
larger MUC-4 and Reuters corpora.9
4.2 Experiments
We adopted the MUC-6 guidelines for evaluating coref-
erence relationships based on transitivity in anaphoric
chains. For example, if fNP
1
, NP
2
, NP
3
g are all coref-
erent, then each NP must be linked to one of the other two
NPs. First, we evaluated BABAR using only the seven
general knowledge sources. Table 2 shows BABAR?s
performance. We measured recall (Rec), precision (Pr),
and the F-measure (F) with recall and precision equally
weighted. BABAR achieved recall in the 42-50% range
for both domains, with 76% precision overall for terror-
ism and 87% precision for natural disasters. We suspect
that the higher precision in the disasters domain may be
due to its substantially larger training corpus.
Table 3 shows BABAR?s performance when the four
contextual role knowledge sources are added. The F-
measure score increased for both domains, reflecting a
substantial increase in recall with a small decrease in pre-
cision. The contextual role knowledge had the greatest
impact on pronouns: +13% recall for terrorism and +15%
recall for disasters, with a +1% precision gain in terror-
ism and a small precision drop of -3% in disasters.
The difference in performance between pronouns and
definite noun phrases surprised us. Analysis of the data
revealed that the contextual role knowledge is especially
helpful for resolving pronouns because, in general, they
are semantically weaker than definite NPs. Since pro-
nouns carry little semantics of their own, resolving them
depends almost entirely on context. In contrast, even
though context can be helpful for resolving definite NPs,
context can be trumped by the semantics of the nouns
themselves. For example, even if the contexts surround-
ing an anaphor and candidate match exactly, they are not
coreferent if they have substantially different meanings
9We would be happy to make our manually annotated test
data available to others who also want to evaluate their corefer-
ence resolver on the MUC-4 or Reuters collections.
Pronouns Definite NPs
Rec Pr F Rec Pr F
No CF KSs .50 .72 .59 .43 .79 .55
CFLex .56 .74 .64 .42 .73 .53
CFNet .56 .74 .64 .43 .74 .54
CFSem-CFSem .58 .76 .66 .44 .76 .56
WordSem-CFSem .61 .74 .67 .45 .76 .56
All CF KSs .63 .73 .68 .45 .71 .55
Table 4: Individual Performance of KSs for Terrorism
Pronouns Definite NPs
Rec Pr F Rec Pr F
No CF KSs .42 .82 .56 .42 .91 .58
CFLex .48 .83 .61 .44 .88 .59
CFNet .45 .82 .58 .43 .88 .57
CFSem-CFSem .51 .81 .62 .44 .87 .58
WordSem-CFSem .52 .79 .63 .43 .86 .57
All CF KSs .57 .79 .66 .46 .84 .59
Table 5: Individual Performance of KSs for Disasters
(e.g., ?the mayor? vs. ?the journalist?).
We also performed experiments to evaluate the impact
of each type of contextual role knowledge separately. Ta-
bles 4 and 5 show BABAR?s performance when just one
contextual role knowledge source is used at a time. For
definite NPs, the results are a mixed bag: some knowl-
edge sources increased recall a little, but at the expense
of some precision. For pronouns, however, all of the
knowledge sources increased recall, often substantially,
and with little if any decrease in precision. This result
suggests that all of contextual role KSs can provide use-
ful information for resolving anaphora. Tables 4 and 5
also show that putting all of the contextual role KSs in
play at the same time produces the greatest performance
gain. There are two possible reasons: (1) the knowl-
edge sources are resolving different cases of anaphora,
and (2) the knowledge sources provide multiple pieces of
evidence in support of (or against) a candidate, thereby
acting synergistically to push the Dempster-Shafer model
over the belief threshold in favor of a single candidate.
5 Related Work
Many researchers have developed coreference resolvers,
so we will only discuss the methods that are most closely
related to BABAR. Dagan and Itai (Dagan and Itai, 1990)
experimented with co-occurrence statistics that are sim-
ilar to our lexical caseframe expectations. Their work
used subject-verb, verb-object, and adjective-noun rela-
tions to compare the contexts surrounding an anaphor and
candidate. However their work did not consider other
types of lexical expectations (e.g., PP arguments), seman-
tic expectations, or context comparisons like our case-
frame network.
(Niyu et al, 1998) used unsupervised learning to ac-
quire gender, number, and animacy information from res-
olutions produced by a statistical pronoun resolver. The
learned information was recycled back into the resolver
to improve its performance. This approach is similar to
BABAR in that they both acquire knowledge from ear-
lier resolutions. (Kehler, 1997) also used a Dempster-
Shafer model to merge evidence from different sources
for template-level coreference.
Several coreference resolvers have used supervised
learning techniques, such as decision trees and rule learn-
ers (Aone and Bennett, 1995; McCarthy and Lehnert,
1995; Ng and Cardie, 2002; Soon et al, 2001). These
systems rely on a training corpus that has been manually
annotated with coreference links.
6 Conclusions
The goal of our research was to explore the use of contex-
tual role knowledge for coreference resolution. We iden-
tified three ways that contextual roles can be exploited:
(1) by identifying caseframes that co-occur in resolu-
tions, (2) by identifying nouns that co-occur with case-
frames and using them to cross-check anaphor/candidate
compatibility, (3) by identifying semantic classes that co-
occur with caseframes and using them to cross-check
anaphor/candidate compatability. We combined evidence
from four contextual role knowledge sources with ev-
idence from seven general knowledge sources using a
Dempster-Shafer probabilistic model.
Our coreference resolver performed well in two do-
mains, and experiments showed that each contextual role
knowledge source contributed valuable information. We
found that contextual role knowledge was more beneficial
for pronouns than for definite noun phrases. This sug-
gests that different types of anaphora may warrant differ-
ent treatment: definite NP resolution may depend more
on lexical semantics, while pronoun resolution may de-
pend more on contextual semantics. In future work, we
plan to follow-up on this approach and investigate other
ways that contextual role knowledge can be used.
7 Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the National Sci-
ence Foundation under grant IRI-9704240. The inven-
tions disclosed herein are the subject of a patent applica-
tion owned by the University of Utah and licensed on an
exclusive basis to Attensity Corporation.
References
J. Allen. 1995. Natural Language Understanding. Ben-
jamin/Cummings Press, Redwood City, CA.
C. Aone and S. Bennett. 1995. Applying Machine Learning
to Anaphora Resolution. In IJCAI-95 Workshop on New Ap-
proaches to Learning for NLP.
D. Bean and E. Riloff. 1999. Corpus-Based Identification of
Non-Anaphoric Noun Phrases. In Proc. of the 37th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
I. Dagan and A. Itai. 1990. Automatic Processing of Large
Corpora for the Resolution of Anaphora References. In Pro-
ceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics (COLING-90), pages 330?332.
T. Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the statistics of sur-
prise and coincidence. Computational Linguistics, 19(1):61?
74.
B. Grosz and C. Sidner. 1998. Lost Intuitions and Forgotten In-
tentions. In M. Walker, A. Joshi, and E. Prince, editors, Cen-
tering Theory in Discourse, pages 89?112. Clarendon Press.
B. Grosz, A. Joshi, and S. Weinstein. 1995. Centering: A
Framework for Modeling the Local Coherence of Discourse.
Computational Linguistics, 21(2):203?226.
J. Hobbs. 1978. Resolving Pronoun References. Lingua,
44(4):311?338.
A. Kehler. 1997. Probabilistic Coreference in Information Ex-
traction. In Proceedings of the Second Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
S. Lappin and H. Leass. 1994. An algorithm for pronominal
anaphora resolution. Computational Linguistics, 20(4):535?
561.
J. McCarthy and W. Lehnert. 1995. Using Decision Trees for
Coreference Resolution. In Proc. of the Fourteenth Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
G. Miller. 1990. Wordnet: An On-line Lexical Database. In-
ternational Journal of Lexicography, 3(4).
MUC-4 Proceedings. 1992. Proceedings of the Fourth Mes-
sage Understanding Conference (MUC-4).
MUC-6 Proceedings. 1995. Proceedings of the Sixth Message
Understanding Conference (MUC-6).
MUC-7 Proceedings. 1998. Proceedings of the Seventh Mes-
sage Understanding Conference (MUC-7).
V. Ng and C. Cardie. 2002. Improving Machine Learning Ap-
proaches to Coreference Resolution. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.
G. Niyu, J. Hale, and E. Charniak. 1998. A statistical approach
to anaphora resolution. In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop
on Very Large Corpora.
E. Riloff. 1996. An Empirical Study of Automated Dictionary
Construction for Information Extraction in Three Domains.
Artificial Intelligence, 85:101?134.
W. Soon, H. Ng, and D. Lim. 2001. A Machine Learning Ap-
proach to Coreference of Noun Phrases. Computational Lin-
guistics, 27(4):521?541.
M. Stefik. 1995. Introduction to Knowledge Systems. Morgan
Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA.
