Proceedings of the Fifth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, pages 209?212,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Description of the NCU Chinese Word Segmentation and Named Entity 
Recognition System for SIGHAN Bakeoff 2006 
 
 
Yu-Chieh Wu Jie-Chi Yang Qian-Xiang Lin 
Dept. of Computer Science and 
Information Engineering 
Graduate Institute of Net-
work Learning Technology 
Dept. of Computer Science and 
Information Engineering 
National Central University National Central University National Central University 
Taoyuan, Taiwan Taoyuan, Taiwan Taoyuan, Taiwan 
bcbb@db.csie.ncu.edu.tw yang@cl.ncu.edu.tw 93522083@cc.ncu.edu.tw 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Asian languages are far from most west-
ern-style in their non-separate word se-
quence especially Chinese. The 
preliminary step of Asian-like language 
processing is to find the word boundaries 
between words. In this paper, we present 
a general purpose model for both Chinese 
word segmentation and named entity rec-
ognition. This model was built on the 
word sequence classification with prob-
ability model, i.e., conditional random 
fields (CRF). We used a simple feature set 
for CRF which achieves satisfactory clas-
sification result on the two tasks. Our 
model achieved 91.00 in F rate in UPUC-
Treebank data, and 78.71 for NER task. 
 
1 Introduction 
With the rapid expansion of text media sources 
such as news articles, technical reports, there is an 
increasing demand for text mining and processing. 
Among different cultures and countries, the Asian 
languages are far from the other languages, there is 
not an explicit boundary between words, for exam-
ple Chinese. Similar to English, the preliminary 
step of most natural language processing is to ?to-
kenize? each word. In Chinese, the word tokeniza-
tion is also known as word segmentation or 
Chinese word tokenization.  
To support the above targets, it is necessary to 
detect the boundaries between words in a given 
sentence. In tradition, the Chinese word segmenta-
tion technologies can be categorized into three 
types, (heuristic) rule-based, machine learning, and 
hybrid. Among them, the machine learning-based 
techniques showed excellent performance in many 
research studies (Peng et al, 2004; Zhou et al, 
2005; Gao et al, 2004). This method treats the 
word segmentation problem as a sequence of word 
classification. The classifier online assigns either 
?boundary? or ?non-boundary? label to each word 
by learning from the large annotated corpora. Ma-
chine learning-based word segmentation method is 
quite similar to the word sequence inference tech-
niques, such as part-of-speech (POS) tagging, 
phrase chunking (Wu et al, 2006a) and named en-
tity recognition (Wu et al, 2006b). 
In this paper, we present a prototype for Chinese 
word segmentation and named entity recognition 
based on the word sequence inference model. 
Unlike previous researches (Zhou et al, 2005; Shi, 
2005), we argue that without using the word seg-
mentation information, Chinese named entity rec-
ognition task can also be viewed as a variant word 
segmentation technique. Therefore, the two tasks 
can be accomplished without adapting the word 
sequence inference model. The preliminary ex-
perimental result show that in the word segmenta-
tion task, our method can achieve 91.00 in F rate 
for the UPUC Chinese Treebank data, while it at-
209
tends 78.76 F rate for the Microsoft Chinese 
named entity recognition task.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 describes the word sequence inference 
model and the used learner. Experimental result 
and evaluations are reported in section 3. Finally, 
in section 4, we draw conclusion and future re-
marks. 
 
2 System Description 
In this section, we firstly describe the overall sys-
tem architecture for the word segmentation and 
named entity recognition tasks. In section 2.2, the 
employed classification model- conditional random 
fields (CRF) is then presented. 
 
2.1 Word Sequence Classification 
Similar to English text chunking (Ramshaw and 
Marcus, 1995; Wu et al, 2006a), the word se-
quence classification model aims to classify each 
word via encoding its context features. An example 
can be shown in Figure 1. In Figure1, the model is 
classifying the Chinese character ??? (country). 
The second row in Figure 1 means the correspond-
ing category of each in the word-segmentation 
(WS) task, while the third row indicates the class 
in the named entity recognition (NER) task. For 
the WS task, there are only two word types, B-CP 
(Begin of Chinese phrase) and I-CP (Interior of 
Chinese phrase). In contrast, the word types in the 
NER task depend on the pre-defined named class. 
For example, both in MSR and CityU datasets, 
person, location, and organization should be identi-
fied. In this paper, we used the similar IOB2 repre-
sentation style (Wu et al, 2006a) to express the 
Chinese word structures. 
  By encoding with IOB style, both WS and NER 
problems can be viewed as a sequence of word 
classification. During testing, we seek to find the 
optimal word type for each Chinese character. 
These types strongly reflect the actual word 
boundaries for Chinese words or named entity 
phrases.   
To effect classify each character, in this paper, 
we employ 13 feature templates to capture the con-
text information of it. Table 1 lists the adopted fea-
ture templates. 
 
Table 1: Feature template used for both Chi-
nese word segmentation and named entity rec-
ognition tasks 
Feature 
Type 
Examples Feature Type Examples 
W-2 ? W0 + W+1 ?+?
W-1 ? W+1 + W+2 ?+?
W0 ? W+1 + W+2 ?+?
W+1 ? W-2+W-1+W0 ?+?+?
W+2 ? W-1+W0+W+1 ?+?+?
W-2 + W-1 ?+? W0+W+1+W+2 ?+?+?
W-1 + W0 ?+?
 
2.2 Conditional Random Fields 
Conditional random field (CRF) was an extension 
of both Maximum Entropy Model (MEMs) and 
Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) that was firstly 
introduced by (Lafferty et al, 2001). CRF defined 
conditional probability distribution P(Y|X) of given 
sequence given input sentence where Y is the 
?class label? sequence and X denotes as the obser-
vation word sequence.  
A CRF on (X,Y) is specified by a feature vector 
F of local context and the corresponding feature 
weight ?. The F can be treated as the combination 
of state transition and observation value in conven-
tional HMM. To determine the optimal label se-
quence, the CRF uses the following equation to 
estimate the most probability. 
 
),(maxarg),|(maxarg xyFxyPy
yy
?? ==  
CP: Chinese word phrase   LOC: Location   ORG: Organization   O: Non-named entity word 
Figure 1: Sequence of word classification model 
210
The most probable label sequence y can be effi-
ciently extracted via the Viterbi algorithm. How-
ever, training a CRF is equivalent to estimate the 
parameter set?for the feature set. In this paper, we 
directly use the quasi-Newton L-BFGS 1  method 
(Nocedal and Wright, 1999) to iterative update the 
parameters. 
 
3 Evaluations and Experimental Result 
3.1 Dataset and Evaluations 
We evaluated our model in the close track on 
UPUC Chinese Treebank for Chinese word seg-
mentation task, and CityU corpus for Chinese NER 
task. Both settings are the same for the two tasks. 
The evaluations of the two tasks were mainly 
measured by the three metrics, namely recall, pre-
cision, and f1-measurement. However, the evalua-
tion style for the NER and WS is quite different. In 
WS, participant should reformulate the testing data 
into sentence level whereas the NER was evaluated 
in the token-level. Table 2 lists the results of the 
two tasks with our preliminary model. 
 
Table 2: Official results on the word segmenta-
tion and named entity recognition tasks 
 Dataset F1-measure
Word segmentation UPUC 91.00
Named entity recognition CityU 78.71
 
Table 3: Experimental results for the three 
Chinese word segmentation datasets 
Closed Task CityU MSR UPUC
Recall 0.958 0.940 0.917
Precision 0.926 0.906 0.904
F-measure 0.942 0.923 0.910
 
3.2 Experimental Result on Word Segmenta-
tion Task 
To explore the effectiveness of our method, we go 
on extend our model to the other three tasks for the 
WS track, namely CityU, MSR. Table3 shows the 
experimental results of our model in the all close 
WS track except for CKIP corpus. These results do 
not officially provided by the SIGHAN due to the 
time limitation. 
 
                                                          
1 http://www-unix.mcs.anl.gov/tao/ 
3.3 Experimental Result on Named Entity 
Recognition Task 
In the second experiment, we focus on directly 
adapting our method for the NER track. Table 4 
lists the experimental result of our method in the 
CityU and MSR datasets. It is worth to note that 
due to the different evaluation style in NER tracks, 
our tokenization rules did not consistent with the 
SIGHAN provided testing tokens. Our preliminary 
tokenization rules produced 371814 characters for 
the testing data, while there are 364356 tokens in 
the official provided testing set. Such a big trouble 
deeply earns the actual performance of our model. 
To propose a reliable and actual result, we directly 
evaluate our method in the official provided testing 
set again. As shown in Table 4, the our method 
achieved 0.787 in F rate with non-correct version. 
In contrast, after correcting the Chinese tokeniza-
tion rules as well as SIGHAN official provided 
tokens, our method significantly improved from 
0.787 to 0.868. Similarly, our method performed 
very on the MSR track which reached 0.818 in F 
rate. 
 
Table 4: Experimental results for MSR and 
City closed NER tasks 
Closed Task City (official 
result) 
City 
(correct) 
MSR 
Recall 0.697 0.931 0.752
Precision 0.935 0.814 0.896
F-measure 0.787 0.868 0.818
 
4 Conclusions and Future Work 
Chinese word segmentation is the most important 
foundations for many Chinese linguistic technolo-
gies such as text categorization and information 
retrieval. In this paper, we present simple Chinese 
word segmentation and named entity recognition 
models based on the conventional sequence classi-
fication technique. The main focus of our work is 
to provide a light-weight and simple model that 
could be easily ported to different domains and 
languages. Without any prior knowledge and rules, 
such a simple technique shows satisfactory results 
on both word segmentation and named entity rec-
ognition tasks. To reach state-of-the-art this model 
still needs to employed more detail feature engines 
and analysis. In the future, one of the main direc-
tions is to extend this model toward full unsuper-
211
vised learning from large un-annotated text. Min-
ing from large unlabeled data have been showed 
benefits to improve the original accuracy. Thus, 
not only the more stochastic feature analysis, but 
also adjust the learner from unlabeled data are im-
portant future remarks. 
 
References  
Lafferty, J., McCallum, A., and Pereira, F. 2001. 
Conditional Random Field: Probabilistic models 
for segmenting and labeling sequence data. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning. 
Gao, J., Wu, A., Li, M., Huang, C. N., Li, H., Xia, X., 
and Qin, H. 2004. Adaptive Chinese word segmen-
tation. In Proceedings the 41st Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 
21-26. 
Lance A. Ramshaw and Mitchell P. Marcus. 1995. 
Text chunking using transformation-based learning. 
In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Very 
Large Corpora, pages 82-94. 
Nocedal, J., and Wright, S. 1999. Numerical optimi-
zation. Springer. 
Peng, F., Feng, F., and McCallum, A. 2004. Chinese 
segmentation and new word detection using condi-
tional random fields. In Porceedings of the Com-
putational Linguistics, pp. 562-568. 
Shi, W. 2005. Chinese Word Segmentation Based On 
Direct Maximum Entropy Model. In Proceedings 
of the Fourth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese 
Language Processing. 
Wu, Y. C., Chang, C. H. and Lee, Y. S. 2006a. A 
general and multi-lingual phrase chunking model 
based on masking method. Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science (LNCS): Computational Linguistics 
and Intelligent Text Processing, 3878: 144-155. 
Wu, Y. C., Fan, T. K., Lee Y. S. and Yen, S. J. 2006b. 
Extracting named entities using support vector 
machines," Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics 
(LNBI): Knowledge Discovery in Life Science 
Literature, (3886): 91-103. 
Wu, Y. C., Lee, Y. S., and Yang, J. C. 2006c. The 
Exploration of Deterministic and Efficient De-
pendency Parsing. In Proceedings of the 10th Con-
ference on Natural Language Learning (CoNLL). 
Zhou, J., Dai, X., Ni, R., Chen, J. 2005. .A Hybrid 
Approach to Chinese Word Segmentation around 
CRFs. In Proceedings of the Fourth SIGHAN 
Workshop on Chinese Language Processing. 
212
