Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 227?230,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Identifying Perspectives at the Document and Sentence Levels Using
Statistical Models
Wei-Hao Lin?
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 U.S.A.
whlin@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
In this paper we investigate the problem of
identifying the perspective from which a
document was written. By perspective we
mean a point of view, for example, from
the perspective of Democrats or Repub-
licans. Can computers learn to identify
the perspective of a document? Further-
more, can computers identify which sen-
tences in a document strongly convey a
particular perspective? We develop sta-
tistical models to capture how perspec-
tives are expressed at the document and
sentence levels, and evaluate the proposed
models on a collection of articles on the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The results
show that the statistical models can suc-
cessfully learn how perspectives are re-
flected in word usage and identify the per-
spective of a document with very high ac-
curacy.
1 Introduction
In this paper we investigate the problem of auto-
matically identifying the perspective from which a
document was written. By perspective, we mean
?subjective evaluation of relative significance, a
point-of-view.? For example, documents about the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict may appear to be about
the same topic, but reveal different perspectives:
?This is joint work with Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and
Alexander Hauptmann, and supported by the Advanced Re-
search and Development Activity (ARDA) under contract num-
ber NBCHC040037.
(1) The inadvertent killing by Israeli forces of
Palestinian civilians ? usually in the course of
shooting at Palestinian terrorists ? is
considered no different at the moral and ethical
level than the deliberate targeting of Israeli
civilians by Palestinian suicide bombers.
(2) In the first weeks of the Intifada, for example,
Palestinian public protests and civilian
demonstrations were answered brutally by
Israel, which killed tens of unarmed protesters.
Example 1 is written from a Israeli perspective; Ex-
ample 2 is written from a Palestinian perspective .
We aim to address a research question: can comput-
ers learn to identify the perspective of a document
given a training corpus of documents that are writ-
ten from different perspectives?
When an issue is discussed from different per-
spectives, not every sentence in a document strongly
reflects the perspective the author possesses. For ex-
ample, the following sentences are written by one
Palestinian and one Israeli:
(3) The Rhodes agreements of 1949 set them as
the ceasefire lines between Israel and the Arab
states.
(4) The green line was drawn up at the Rhodes
Armistice talks in 1948-49.
Example 3 and 4 both factually introduce the back-
ground of the issue of the ?green line? without
expressing explicit perspectives. Can computers
automatically discriminate between sentences that
strongly express a perspective and sentences that
only reflect shared background information?
227
A system that can automatically identify the per-
spective from which a document written will be a
highly desirable tool for people analyzing huge col-
lections of documents from different perspectives.
An intelligence analyst regularly monitors the po-
sitions that foreign countries take on political and
diplomatic issues. A media analyst frequently sur-
veys broadcast news, newspapers, and web blogs for
different viewpoints. What these analysts need in
common is that they would like to find evidence of
strong statements of differing perspectives, while ig-
noring statements without strong perspectives as less
interesting.
In this paper we approach the problem of learning
perspectives in a statistical learning framework. We
develop statistical models to learn how perspectives
are reflected in word usage, and evaluate the models
by measuring how accurately they can predict the
perspectives of unseen documents. Lacking anno-
tation on how strongly individual sentences convey
a particular perspective in our corpus poses a chal-
lenge on learning sentence-level perspectives. We
propose a novel statistical model, Latent Sentence
Perspective Model, to address the problem.
2 Related Work
Identifying the perspective from which a document
is written is a subtask in the growing area of auto-
matic opinion recognition and extraction. Subjec-
tive language is used to express opinions, emotions,
and sentiments. So far research in automatic opinion
recognition has primarily addressed learning sub-
jective language (Wiebe et al, 2004; Riloff et al,
2003; Riloff and Wiebe, 2003), identifying opinion-
ated documents (Yu and Hatzivassiloglou, 2003) and
sentences (Yu and Hatzivassiloglou, 2003; Riloff et
al., 2003; Riloff and Wiebe, 2003), and discriminat-
ing between positive and negative language (Yu and
Hatzivassiloglou, 2003; Turney and Littman, 2003;
Pang et al, 2002; Dave et al, 2003; Nasukawa and
Yi, 2003; Morinaga et al, 2002).
Although by its very nature we expect much of
the language of presenting a perspective or point-
of-view to be subjective, labeling a document or a
sentence as subjective is not enough to identify the
perspective from which it is written. Moreover, the
ideology and beliefs authors possess are often ex-
pressed in ways more than conspicuous positive or
negative language toward specific targets.
3 Corpus
Our corpus consists of articles published on the
bitterlemons website1. The website is set up
to ?contribute to mutual understanding [between
Palestinians and Israels] through the open exchange
of ideas?. Every week an issue about Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is selected for discussion, for
example, ?Disengagement: unilateral or coordi-
nated??, and a Palestinian editor and an Israeli edi-
tor contribute a article addressing the issue. In ad-
dition, the Israeli and Palestinian editors invite or
interview one Israeli and one Palestinian to express
their views, resulting in a total of four articles in a
weekly edition.
We evaluate the subjectivity of each sentence us-
ing the patterns automatically extracted from foreign
news documents (Riloff and Wiebe, 2003), and find
that 65.6% of Palestinian sentences and 66.2% of Is-
raeli sentences are classified as subjective. The high
but almost equivalent percentages of subjective sen-
tences from two perspectives supports our observa-
tion in Section 2 that perspective is largely expressed
in subjective language but subjectivity ratio is not
necessarily indicative of the perspective of a docu-
ment.
4 Statistical Modeling of Perspectives
We approach the problem of learning perspectives in
a statistical learning framework. Denote a training
corpus as pairs of documents Wn and their perspec-
tives labels Dn, n = 1, . . . ,N , N is the total number
of documents in the corpus. Given a new document
W? with a unknown document perspective D?, iden-
tifying its perspective is to calculate the following
conditional probability,
P (D?|W? , {Dn,Wn}Nn=1) (5)
We are interested in how strongly each sentence in
the document convey perspective. Denote the inten-
sity of the m-th sentence of the n-th document as a
binary random variable Sm,n, m = 1, . . . ,Mn, Mn
is the total number of sentences of the n-th docu-
ment. Evaluating how strongly a sentence conveys
1http://www.bitterlemons.org
228
a particular perspective is to calculate the following
conditional probability,
P (Sm,n|{Dn,Wn}Nn=1) (6)
4.1 Document Perspective Models
The process of generating documents from a partic-
ular perspective is modeled as follows,
pi ? Beta(?pi, ?pi)
? ? Dirichlet(??)
Dn ? Binomial(1, pi)
Wn ? Multinomial(Ln, ?d)
The model is known as na??ve Bayes models (NB),
which has been widely used for NLP tasks such as
text categorization (Lewis, 1998). To calculate (5)
under NB in a full Bayesian manner is, however,
complicated, and alternatively we employ Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods to simulate
samples from the posterior distributions.
4.2 Latent Sentence Perspective Models
We introduce a new binary random variables, S, to
model how strongly a perspective is expressed at
the sentence level. The value of S is either s1 or
s0, where s1 means the sentence is written strongly
from a perspective, and s0 is not. The whole gener-
ative process is modeled as follows,
pi ? Beta(?pi, ?pi)
? ? Beta(?? , ?? )
? ? Dirichlet(??)
Dn ? Binomial(1, pi)
Sm,n ? Binomial(1, ?)
Wm,n ? Multinomial(Lm,n, ?)
pi and ? carry the same semantics as those in NB.
S is naturally modeled as a binary variable, where
? is the parameter of S and represents how likely
a perspective is strongly expressed at the sentence
given on the overall document perspective. We call
this model Latent Sentence Perspective Models
(LSPM), because S is never directly observed in ei-
ther training or testing documents and need to be in-
ferred. To calculate (6) under LSPM is difficult. We
again resort to MCMC methods to simulate samples
from the posterior distributions.
5 Experiments
5.1 Identifying Perspectives at the Document
Level
To objectively evaluate how well na??ve Bayes mod-
els (NB) learn to identify perspectives expressed
at the document level, we train NB against on the
bitterlemons corpus, and evaluate how accu-
rately NB predicts the perspective of a unseen doc-
ument as either Palestinian or Israeli in ten-fold
cross-validation manner. The average classification
accuracy over 10 folds is reported. We compare
three different models, including NB with two dif-
ferent inference methods and Support Vector Ma-
chines (SVM) (Cristianini and Shawe-Taylor, 2000).
NB-B uses full Bayesian inference and NB-M uses
Maximum a posteriori (MAP).
Model Data Set Accuracy Reduction
Baseline 0.5
SVM Editors 0.9724
NB-M Editors 0.9895 61%
NB-B Editors 0.9909 67%
SVM Guests 0.8621
NB-M Guests 0.8789 12%
NB-B Guests 0.8859 17%
Table 1: Results of Identifying Perspectives at the
Document Level
The results in Table 1 show that both NB and
SVM perform surprisingly well on both Editors and
Guests subsets of the bitterlemons corpus. We
also see that NBs further reduce classification er-
rors even though SVM already achieves high accu-
racy. By considering the full posterior distribution
NB-B further improves on NB-M, which performs
only point estimation. The results strongly suggest
that the word choices made by authors, either con-
sciously or subconsciously, reflect much of their po-
litical perspectives.
5.2 Identifying Perspectives at the Sentence
Level
In addition to identify the perspectives of a doc-
ument, we are interested in which sentences in
the document strongly convey perspectives. Al-
though the posterior probability that a sentence
229
covey strongly perspectives in (6) is of our inter-
est, we can not directly evaluate their quality due to
the lack of golden truth at the sentence level. Alter-
natively we evaluate how accurately LSPM predicts
the perspective of a document, in the same way of
evaluating SVM and NB in the previous section. If
LSPM does not achieve similar identification accu-
racy after modeling sentence-level information, we
will doubt the quality of predictions on how strongly
a sentence convey perspective made by LSPM.
Model Training Testing Accuracy
Baseline 0.5
NB-M Guest Editor 0.9327
NB-B Guest Editor 0.9346
LSPM Guest Editor 0.9493
NB-M Editors Guests 0.8485
NB-B Editors Guests 0.8585
LSPM Guest Editor 0.8699
Table 2: Results of Perspective Identification at the
Sentence Level
The experimental results in Table 2 show that the
LSPM achieves similarly or even slightly better ac-
curacy than those of NBs, which is very encourag-
ing and suggests that the proposed LSPM closely
match how perspectives are expressed at the docu-
ment and sentence levels. If one does not explic-
itly model the uncertainty at the sentence level, one
can train NB directly against the sentences to clas-
sify a sentence into Palestinian or Israeli perspec-
tive. We obtain the accuracy of 0.7529, which is
much lower than the accuracy previously achieved
at the document level. Therefore identifying per-
spective at the sentence level is much harder than
at that the document level, and the high accuracy
of identifying document-level perspectives suggests
that LPSM closely captures the perspectives ex-
pressed at the document and sentence levels, given
individual sentences are very short and much less in-
formative about overall perspective.
6 Summary of Contributions
In this paper we study the problem of learning
to identify the perspective from which a text was
written at the document and sentence levels. We
show that perspectives are expressed in word us-
age, and statistical learning algorithms such as SVM
and na??ve Bayes models can successfully uncover
the word patterns chosen by authors from differ-
ent perspectives. Furthermore, we develop a novel
statistical model to infer how strongly a sentence
convey perspective without any labels. By intro-
ducing latent variables, Latent Sentence Perspective
Models are shown to capture well how perspectives
are reflected at the document and sentence levels.
The proposed statistical models can help analysts
sift through a large collection of documents written
from different perspectives. The unique sentence-
level perspective modeling can automatically iden-
tify sentences that are strongly representative of the
perspective of interest, and we plan to manually
evaluate their quality in the future work.
References
Nello Cristianini and John Shawe-Taylor. 2000. An Introduction to Support Vec-
tor Machines and Other Kernel-based Learning Methods. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Kushal Dave, Steve Lawrence, and David M. Pennock. 2003. Mining the
peanut gallery: Opinion extraction and semantic classification of product re-
views. In Proceedings of the 12th International World Wide Web Conference
(WWW2003).
David D. Lewis. 1998. Naive (Bayes) at forty: The independence assumption in
information retrieval. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Machine
Learning (ECML).
S. Morinaga, K. Yamanishi, K. Tateishi, and T. Fukushima. 2002. Mining product
reputations on the web. In Proceedings of the 2002 ACM SIGKDD Interna-
tional Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
T. Nasukawa and J. Yi. 2003. Sentiment analysis: Capturing favorability using
natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Confer-
ence on Knowledge Capture (K-CAP 2003).
Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan. 2002. Thumbs up? Senti-
ment classification using machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
2002).
Ellen Riloff and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Learning extraction patterns for subjec-
tive expressions. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-2003).
Ellen Riloff, Janyce Wiebe, and Theresa Wilson. 2003. Learning subjective nouns
using extraction pattern bootstrapping. In Proceedings of the 7th Conference
on Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-2003).
Peter Turney and Michael L. Littman. 2003. Measuring praise and criticism:
Inference of semantic orientation from association. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems (TOIS), 21(4):315?346.
Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, Rebecca Bruce, Matthew Bell, and Melanie Mar-
tin. 2004. Learning subjective language. Computational Linguistics, 30(3).
Hong Yu and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou. 2003. Towards answering opinion ques-
tions: Separating facts from opinions and identifying the polarity of opinion
sentences. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-2003).
230
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 1057?1064,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Are These Documents Written from Different Perspectives? A Test of
Different Perspectives Based On Statistical Distribution Divergence
Wei-Hao Lin
Language Technologies Institute
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 U.S.A.
whlin@cs.cmu.edu
Alexander Hauptmann
Language Technologies Institute
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 U.S.A.
alex@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
In this paper we investigate how to auto-
matically determine if two document col-
lections are written from different per-
spectives. By perspectives we mean a
point of view, for example, from the per-
spective of Democrats or Republicans. We
propose a test of different perspectives
based on distribution divergence between
the statistical models of two collections.
Experimental results show that the test can
successfully distinguish document collec-
tions of different perspectives from other
types of collections.
1 Introduction
Conflicts arise when two groups of people take
very different perspectives on political, socio-
economical, or cultural issues. For example, here
are the answers that two presidential candidates,
John Kerry and George Bush, gave during the third
presidential debate in 2004 in response to a ques-
tion on abortion:
(1) Kerry: What is an article of faith for me is
not something that I can legislate on some-
body who doesn?t share that article of faith. I
believe that choice is a woman?s choice. It?s
between a woman, God and her doctor. And
that?s why I support that.
(2) Bush: I believe the ideal world is one in
which every child is protected in law and wel-
comed to life. I understand there?s great dif-
ferences on this issue of abortion, but I be-
lieve reasonable people can come together
and put good law in place that will help re-
duce the number of abortions.
After reading the above transcripts some readers
may conclude that one takes a ?pro-choice? per-
spective while the other takes a ?pro-life? perspec-
tive, the two dominant perspectives in the abortion
controversy.
Perspectives, however, are not always mani-
fested when two pieces of text together are put to-
gether. For example, the following two sentences
are from Reuters newswire:
(3) Gold output in the northeast China province
of Heilongjiang rose 22.7 pct in 1986 from
1985?s level, the New China News Agency
said.
(4) Exco Chairman Richard Lacy told Reuters
the acquisition was being made from Bank
of New York Co Inc, which currently holds
a 50.1 pct, and from RMJ partners who hold
the remainder.
A reader would not from this pair of examples per-
ceive as strongly contrasting perspectives as the
Kerry-Bush answers. Instead, as the Reuters an-
notators did, one would label Example 3 as ?gold?
and Example 4 as ?acquisition?, that is, as two top-
ics instead of two perspectives.
Why does the contrast between Example 1 and
Example 2 convey different perspectives, but the
contrast between Example 3 and Example 4 result
in different topics? How can we define the impal-
pable ?different perspectives? anyway? The defi-
nition of ?perspective? in the dictionary is ?subjec-
tive evaluation of relative significance,?1 but can
we have a computable definition to test the exis-
tence of different perspectives?
1The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Lan-
guage, 4th ed. We are interested in identifying ?ideologi-
cal perspectives? (Verdonk, 2002), not first-person or second-
person ?perspective? in narrative.
1057
The research question about the definition of
different perspectives is not only scientifically in-
triguing, it also enables us to develop important
natural language processing applications. Such
a computational definition can be used to detect
the emergence of contrasting perspectives. Me-
dia and political analysts regularly monitor broad-
cast news, magazines, newspapers, and blogs to
see if there are public opinion splitting. The huge
number of documents, however, make the task ex-
tremely daunting. Therefore an automated test of
different perspectives will be very valuable to in-
formation analysts.
We first review the relevant work in Section 2.
We take a model-based approach to develop a
computational definition of different perspectives.
We first develop statistical models for the two doc-
ument collections, A and B, and then measure the
degree of contrast by calculating the ?distance?
between A and B. How document collections are
statistically modeled and how distribution differ-
ence is estimated are described in Section 3. The
document corpora are described in Section 4. In
Section 5, we evaluate how effective the proposed
test of difference perspectives based on statistical
distribution. The experimental results show that
the distribution divergence can successfully sepa-
rate document collections of different perspectives
from other kinds of collection pairs. We also in-
vestigate if the pattern of distribution difference is
due to personal writing or speaking styles.
2 Related Work
There has been interest in understanding how be-
liefs and ideologies can be represented in comput-
ers since mid-sixties of the last century (Abelson
and Carroll, 1965; Schank and Abelson, 1977).
The Ideology Machine (Abelson, 1973) can simu-
late a right-wing ideologue, and POLITICS (Car-
bonell, 1978) can interpret a text from conserva-
tive or liberal ideologies. In this paper we take
a statistics-based approach, which is very differ-
ent from previous work that rely very much on
manually-constructed knowledge base.
Note that what we are interested in is to deter-
mine if two document collections are written from
different perspectives, not to model individual per-
spectives. We aim to capture the characteristics,
specifically the statistical regularities of any pairs
of document collections with opposing perspec-
tives. Given a pair of document collections A and
B, our goal is not to construct classifiers that can
predict if a document was written from the per-
spective of A or B (Lin et al, 2006), but to deter-
mine if the document collection pair (A,B) con-
vey opposing perspectives.
There has been growing interest in subjectivity
and sentiment analysis. There are studies on learn-
ing subjective language (Wiebe et al, 2004), iden-
tifying opinionated documents (Yu and Hatzivas-
siloglou, 2003) and sentences (Riloff et al, 2003;
Riloff and Wiebe, 2003), and discriminating be-
tween positive and negative language (Turney and
Littman, 2003; Pang et al, 2002; Dave et al,
2003; Nasukawa and Yi, 2003; Morinaga et al,
2002). There are also research work on automati-
cally classifying movie or product reviews as pos-
itive or negative (Nasukawa and Yi, 2003; Mullen
and Collier, 2004; Beineke et al, 2004; Pang and
Lee, 2004; Hu and Liu, 2004).
Although we expect by its very nature much of
the language used when expressing a perspective
to be subjective and opinionated, the task of la-
beling a document or a sentence as subjective is
orthogonal to the test of different perspectives. A
subjectivity classifier may successfully identify all
subjective sentences in the document collection
pair A and B, but knowing the number of sub-
jective sentences in A and B does not necessarily
tell us if they convey opposing perspectives. We
utilize the subjectivity patterns automatically ex-
tracted from foreign news documents (Riloff and
Wiebe, 2003), and find that the percentages of
the subjective sentences in the bitterlemons corpus
(see Section 4) are similar (65.6% in the Pales-
tinian documents and 66.2% in the Israeli docu-
ments). The high but almost equivalent number of
subjective sentences in two perspectives suggests
that perspective is largely expressed in subjective
language but subjectivity ratio is not enough to tell
if two document collections are written from the
same (Palestinian v.s. Palestinian) or different per-
spectives (Palestinian v.s. Israeli)2.
3 Statistical Distribution Divergence
We take a model-based approach to measure to
what degree, if any, two document collections are
different. A document is represented as a point
2However, the close subjectivity ratio doesn?t mean that
subjectivity can never help identify document collections of
opposing perspectives. For example, the accuracy of the test
of different perspectives may be improved by focusing on
only subjective sentences.
1058
in a V -dimensional space, where V is vocabulary
size. Each coordinate is the frequency of a word
in a document, i.e., term frequency. Although vec-
tor representation, commonly known as a bag of
words, is oversimplified and ignores rich syntactic
and semantic structures, more sophisticated rep-
resentation requires more data to obtain reliable
models. Practically, bag-of-word representation
has been very effective in many tasks, including
text categorization (Sebastiani, 2002) and infor-
mation retrieval (Lewis, 1998).
We assume that a collection of N documents,
y1, y2, . . . , yN are sampled from the following
process,
? ? Dirichlet(?)
yi ? Multinomial(ni, ?).
We first sample a V -dimensional vector ? from a
Dirichlet prior distribution with a hyperparameter
?, and then sample a document yi repeatedly from
a Multinomial distribution conditioned on the pa-
rameter ?, where ni is the document length of the
ith document in the collection and assumed to be
known and fixed.
We are interested in comparing the parameter ?
after observing document collections A and B:
p(?|A) = p(A|?)p(?)p(A)
= Dirichlet(?|?+
?
yi?A
yi).
The posterior distribution p(?|?) is a Dirichlet dis-
tribution since a Dirichlet distribution is a conju-
gate prior for a Multinomial distribution.
How should we measure the difference between
two posterior distributions p(?|A) and p(?|B)?
One common way to measure the difference be-
tween two distributions is Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence (Kullback and Leibler, 1951), defined
as follows,
D(p(?|A)||p(?|B))
=
?
p(?|A) log p(?|A)p(?|B) d?. (5)
Directly calculating KL divergence according to
(5) involves a difficult high-dimensional integral.
As an alternative, we approximate KL divergence
using Monte Carlo methods as follows,
1. Sample ?1, ?2, . . . , ?M from Dirichlet(?|?+
?
yi?A yi).
2. Return D? = 1M
?M
i=1 log p(?i|A)p(?i|B) as a Monte
Carlo estimate of D(p(?|A)||p(?|B)).
Algorithms of sampling from Dirichlet distribu-
tion can be found in (Ripley, 1987). As M ? ?,
the Monte Carlo estimate will converge to true KL
divergence by the Law of Large Numbers.
4 Corpora
To evaluate how well KL divergence between pos-
terior distributions can discern a document collec-
tion pair of different perspectives, we collect two
corpora of documents that were written or spoken
from different perspectives and one newswire cor-
pus that covers various topics, as summarized in
Table 1. No stemming algorithms is performed;
no stopwords are removed.
Corpus Subset |D| ?|d| V
bitterlemons
Palestinian 290 748.7 10309
Israeli 303 822.4 11668
Pal. Editor 144 636.2 6294
Pal. Guest 146 859.6 8661
Isr. Editor 152 819.4 8512
Isr. Guest 151 825.5 8812
2004
Presiden-
tial
Debate
Kerry 178 124.7 2554
Bush 176 107.8 2393
1st Kerry 33 216.3 1274
1st Bush 41 155.3 1195
2nd Kerry 73 103.8 1472
2nd Bush 75 89.0 1333
3rd Kerry 72 104.0 1408
3rd Bush 60 98.8 1281
Reuters-
21578
ACQ 2448 124.7 14293
CRUDE 634 214.7 9009
EARN 3987 81.0 12430
GRAIN 628 183.0 8236
INTEREST 513 176.3 6056
MONEY-FX 801 197.9 8162
TRADE 551 255.3 8175
Table 1: The number of documents |D|, average
document length ?|d| , and vocabulary size V of
the three corpora.
The first perspective corpus consists of arti-
cles published on the bitterlemons website3 from
late 2001 to early 2005. The website is set up
to ?contribute to mutual understanding [between
Palestinians and Israelis] through the open ex-
change of ideas?4. Every week an issue about the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is selected for discus-
sion (e.g., ?Disengagement: unilateral or coordi-
nated??), and a Palestinian editor and an Israeli
editor each contribute one article addressing the
3http://www.bitterlemons.org/
4http://www.bitterlemons.org/about/
about.html
1059
issue. In addition, the Israeli and Palestinian ed-
itors interview a guest to express their views on
the issue, resulting in a total of four articles in a
weekly edition. The perspective from which each
article is written is labeled as either Palestinian or
Israeli by the editors.
The second perspective corpus consists of the
transcripts of the three Bush-Kerry presidential de-
bates in 2004. The transcripts are from the website
of the Commission on Presidential Debates5. Each
spoken document is roughly an answer to a ques-
tion or a rebuttal. The transcript are segmented
by the speaker tags already in the transcripts. All
words from moderators are discarded.
The topical corpus contains newswire from
Reuters in 1987. Reuters-215786 is one of the
most common testbeds for text categorization.
Each document belongs to none, one, or more of
the 135 categories (e.g., ?Mergers? and ?U.S. Dol-
lars?.) The number of documents in each category
is not evenly distributed (median 9.0, mean 105.9).
To estimate statistics reliably, we only consider
categories with more than 500 documents, result-
ing in a total of seven categories (ACQ, CRUDE,
EARN, GRAIN, INTEREST, MONEY-FX, and
TRADE).
5 Experiments
A test of different perspectives is acute when it
can draw distinctions between document collec-
tion pairs of different perspectives and document
collection pairs of the same perspective and others.
We thus evaluate the proposed test of different per-
spectives in the following four types of document
collection pairs (A,B):
Different Perspectives (DP) A and B are writ-
ten from different perspectives. For example,
A is written from the Palestinian perspective
and B is written from the Israeli perspective
in the bitterlemons corpus.
Same Perspective (SP) A and B are written from
the same perspective. For example, A and B
consist of the words spoken by Kerry.
Different Topics (DT) A and B are written on
different topics. For example, A is about
5http://www.debates.org/pages/
debtrans.html
6http://www.ics.uci.edu/?kdd/
databases/reuters21578/reuters21578.html
acquisition (ACQ) and B is about crude oil
(CRUDE).
Same Topic (ST) A and B are written on the
same topic. For example, A and B are both
about earnings (EARN).
The effectiveness of the proposed test of differ-
ent perspectives can thus be measured by how the
distribution divergence of DP document collection
pairs is separated from the distribution divergence
of SP, DT, and ST document collection pairs. The
little the overlap of the range of distribution di-
vergence, the sharper the test of different perspec-
tives.
To account for large variation in the number of
words and vocabulary size across corpora, we nor-
malize the total number of words in a document
collection to be the same K, and consider only the
top C% frequent words in the document collection
pair. We vary the values of K and C , and find that
K changes the absolute scale of KL divergence
but does not change the rankings of four condi-
tions. Rankings among four conditions is consis-
tent when C is small. We only report results of
K = 1000, C = 10 in the paper due to space limit.
There are two kinds of variances in the estima-
tion of divergence between two posterior distribu-
tion and should be carefully checked. The first
kind of variance is due to Monte Carlo methods.
We assess the Monte Carlo variance by calculat-
ing a 100? percent confidence interval as follows,
[D? ? ??1(?2 )
???
M
, D? + ??1(1? ?2 )
???
M
]
where ??2 is the sample variance of ?1, ?2, . . . , ?M ,
and ?(?)?1 is the inverse of the standard normal
cumulative density function. The second kind of
variance is due to the intrinsic uncertainties of data
generating processes. We assess the second kind
of variance by collecting 1000 bootstrapped sam-
ples, that is, sampling with replacement, from each
document collection pair.
5.1 Quality of Monte Carlo Estimates
The Monte Carlo estimates of the KL divergence
from several document collection pair are listed in
Table 2. A complete list of the results is omit-
ted due to the space limit. We can see that the
95% confidence interval captures well the Monte
Carlo estimates of KL divergence. Note that KL
divergence is not symmetric. The KL divergence
1060
A B D? 95% CI
ACQ ACQ 2.76 [2.62, 2.89]
Palestinian Palestinian 3.00 [3.54, 3.85]
Palestinian Israeli 27.11 [26.64, 27.58]
Israeli Palestinian 28.44 [27.97, 28.91]
Kerry Bush 58.93 [58.22, 59.64]
ACQ EARN 615.75 [610.85, 620.65]
Table 2: The Monte Carlo estimate D? and 95%
confidence interval (CI) of the Kullback-Leibler
divergence of several document collection pairs
(A,B) with the number of Monte Carlo samples
M = 1000.
of the pair (Israeli, Palestinian) is not necessarily
the same as (Palestinian, Israeli). KL divergence is
greater than zero (Cover and Thomas, 1991) and
equal to zero only when document collections A
and B are exactly the same. Here (ACQ, ACQ) is
close to but not exactly zero because they are dif-
ferent samples of documents in the ACQ category.
Since the CIs of Monte Carlo estimates are reason-
ably tight, we assume them to be exact and ignore
the errors from Monte Carlo methods.
5.2 Test of Different Perspectives
We now present the main result of the paper.
We calculate the KL divergence between poste-
rior distributions of document collection pairs in
four conditions using Monte Carlo methods, and
plot the results in Figure 1. The test of different
perspectives based on statistical distribution diver-
gence is shown to be very acute. The KL diver-
gence of the document collection pairs in the DP
condition fall mostly in the middle range, and is
well separated from the high KL divergence of the
pairs in DT condition and from the low KL diver-
gence of the pairs in SP and ST conditions. There-
fore, by simply calculating the KL divergence of
a document collection pair, we can reliably pre-
dict that they are written from different perspec-
tives if the value of KL divergence falls in the
middle range, from different topics if the value is
very large, from the same topic or perspective if
the value is very small.
5.3 Personal Writing Styles or Perspectives?
One may suspect that the mid-range distribution
divergence is attributed to personal speaking or
writing styles and has nothing to do with differ-
ent perspectives. The doubt is expected because
half of the bitterlemons corpus are written by one
Palestinian editor and one Israeli editor (see Ta-
ble 1), and the debate transcripts come from only
two candidates.
We test the hypothesis by computing the dis-
tribution divergence of the document collection
pair (Israeli Guest, Palestinian Guest), that is, a
Different Perspectives (DP) pair. There are more
than 200 different authors in the Israeli Guest and
Palestinian Guest collection. If the distribution di-
vergence of the pair with diverse authors falls out
of the middle range, it will support that mid-range
divergence is due to writing styles. On the other
hand, if the distribution divergence still fall in the
middle range, we are more confident the effect
is attributed to different perspectives. We com-
pare the distribution divergence of the pair (Israeli
Guest, Palestinian Guest) with others in Figure 2.
ST SP DP Guest DT
KL
 D
iv
er
ge
nc
e
1
2
5
10
20
50
20
0
50
0
Figure 2: The average KL divergence of document
collection pairs in the bitterlemons Guest subset
(Israeli Guest vs. Palestinian Guest), ST ,SP, DP,
DT conditions. The horizontal lines are the same
as those in Figure 1.
The results show that the distribution diver-
gence of the (Israeli Guest, Palestinian Guest) pair,
as other pairs in the DP condition, still falls in the
middle range, and is well separated from SP and
ST in the low range and DT in the high range. The
decrease in KL divergence due to writing or speak-
ing styles is noticeable, and the overall effect due
to different perspectives is strong enough to make
the test robust. We thus conclude that the test of
different perspectives based on distribution diver-
gence indeed captures different perspectives, not
personal writing or speaking styles.
5.4 Origins of Differences
While the effectiveness of the test of different per-
spectives is demonstrated in Figure 1, one may
1061
2 5 10 20 50 100 200 500 1000
0.
00
0.
05
0.
10
0.
15
KL Divergence
D
en
si
ty
SP
ST
DP
DT
Figure 1: The KL divergence of the document collection pairs in four conditions: Different Perspectives
(DP), Same Perspective (SP), Different Topics (DT), and Same Topic (ST). Note that the x axis is in log
scale. The Monte Carlo estimates D? of the pairs in DP condition are plotted as rugs. D? of the pairs in
other conditions are omitted to avoid clutter and summarized in one-dimensional density using Kernel
Density Estimation. The vertical lines are drawn at the points with equivalent densities.
wonder why the distribution divergence of the
document collection pair with different perspec-
tives falls in the middle range and what causes the
large and small divergence of the document collec-
tion pairs with different topics (DT) and the same
topic (ST) or perspective (SP), respectively. In
other words where do the differences result from?
We answer the question by taking a closer look
at the causes of the distribution divergence in our
model. We compare the expected marginal dif-
ference of ? between two posterior distributions
p(?|A) and p(?|B). The marginal distribution of
the i-th coordinate of ?, that is, the i-th word in the
vocabulary, is a Beta distribution, and thus the ex-
pected value can be easily calculated. We plot the
?? = E[?i|A]? E[?i|B] against E[?i|A] for each
condition in Figure 3.
How ?? is deviated from zero partially explains
different patterns of distribution divergence in Fig-
ure 1. In Figure 3d we see that the ?? increases
as ? increases, and the deviance from zero is much
greater than those in the Same Perspective (Fig-
ure 3b) and Same Topic (Figure 3a) conditions.
The large ?? not only accounts for large distribu-
tion divergence of the document pairs in DT con-
ditions, but also shows that words in different top-
ics that is frequent in one topic are less likely to be
frequent in the other topic. At the other extreme,
document collection pairs of the Same Perspective
(SP) or Same Topic (ST) show very little differ-
ence in ?, which matches our intuition that docu-
ments of the same perspective or the same topic
use the same vocabulary in a very similar way.
The manner in which ?? is varied with the
value of ? in the Different Perspective (DP) con-
dition is very unique. The ?? in Figure 3c is not
as small as those in the SP and ST conditions,
but at the same time not as large as those in DT
conditions, resulting in mid-range distribution di-
vergence in Figure 1. Why do document collec-
tions of different perspectives distribute this way?
Partly because articles from different perspectives
focus on the closely related issues (the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict in the bitterlemons corpus, or the
political and economical issues in the debate cor-
pus), the authors of different perspectives write or
speak in a similar vocabulary, but with emphasis
on different words.
6 Conclusions
In this paper we develop a computational test of
different perspectives based on statistical distri-
bution divergence between the statistical models
of document collections. We show that the pro-
1062
0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06
?
0.
04
?
0.
02
0.
00
0.
02
0.
04
(a) Same Topic (ST)
0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06
?
0.
04
?
0.
02
0.
00
0.
02
0.
04
(b) Same Topic (SP)
0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06
?
0.
04
?
0.
02
0.
00
0.
02
0.
04
0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06
?
0.
04
?
0.
02
0.
00
0.
02
0.
04
(c) Two examples of Different Perspective (DP)
Figure 3: The ?? vs. ? plots of the typical docu-
ment collection pairs in four conditions. The hori-
zontal line is ?? = 0.
0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06
?
0.
04
?
0.
02
0.
00
0.
02
0.
04
0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06
?
0.
04
?
0.
02
0.
00
0.
02
0.
04
(d) Two examples of Different Topics (DT)
Figure 3: Cont?d
posed test can successfully separate document col-
lections of different perspectives from other types
of document collection pairs. The distribution di-
vergence falling in the middle range can not sim-
ply be attributed to personal writing or speaking
styles. From the plot of multinomial parameter
difference we offer insights into where the differ-
ent patterns of distribution divergence come from.
Although we validate the test of different per-
spectives by comparing the DP condition with DT,
SP, and ST conditions, the comparisons are by
no means exhaustive, and the distribution diver-
gence of some document collection pairs may also
fall in the middle range. We plan to investigate
more types of document collections pairs, e.g., the
document collections from different text genres
(Kessler et al, 1997).
Acknowledgment
We would like thank the anonymous reviewers for
useful comments and suggestions. This material
is based on work supported by the Advanced Re-
search and Development Activity (ARDA) under
contract number NBCHC040037.
1063
References
Robert P. Abelson and J. Douglas Carroll. 1965. Com-
puter simulation of individual belief systems. The
American Behavioral Scientist, 8:24?30, May.
Robert P. Abelson, 1973. Computer Models of Thought
and Language, chapter The Structure of Belief Sys-
tems, pages 287?339. W. H. Freeman and Company.
Philip Beineke, Trevor Hastie, and Shivakumar
Vaithyanathan. 2004. The sentimental factor: Im-
proving review classification via human-provided
information. In Proceedings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL-2004).
Jaime G. Carbonell. 1978. POLITICS: Automated
ideological reasoning. Cognitive Science, 2(1):27?
51.
Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas. 1991. Elements
of Information Theory. Wiley-Interscience.
Kushal Dave, Steve Lawrence, and David M. Pennock.
2003. Mining the peanut gallery: Opinion extraction
and semantic classification of product reviews. In
Proceedings of the 12th International World Wide
Web Conference (WWW2003).
Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summa-
rizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the 2004
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining.
Brett Kessler, Geoffrey Nunberg, and Hinrich Schu?tze.
1997. Automatic detection of text genre. In Pro-
ceedings of the 35th Conference on Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 32?38.
S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler. 1951. On information
and sufficiency. The Annals of Mathematical Statis-
tics, 22(1):79?86, March.
David D. Lewis. 1998. Naive (Bayes) at forty: The in-
dependence assumption in information retrieval. In
Proceedings of the 9th European Conference on Ma-
chine Learning (ECML).
Wei-Hao Lin, Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and
Alexander Hauptmann. 2006. Which side are you
on? identifying perspectives at the document and
sentence levels. In Proceedings of Tenth Conference
on Natural Language Learning (CoNLL).
S. Morinaga, K. Yamanishi, K. Tateishi, and
T. Fukushima. 2002. Mining product reputations on
the web. In Proceedings of the 2002 ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining.
Tony Mullen and Nigel Collier. 2004. Sentiment anal-
ysis using support vector machines with diverse in-
formation sources. In Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-2004).
T. Nasukawa and J. Yi. 2003. Sentiment analysis:
Capturing favorability using natural language pro-
cessing. In Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Knowledge Capture (K-CAP 2003).
Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2004. A sentimental edu-
cation: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity sum-
marization based on minimum cuts. In Proceed-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL-2004).
Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up? Sentiment classification using
machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-2002).
Ellen Riloff and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Learning ex-
traction patterns for subjective expressions. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-2003).
Ellen Riloff, Janyce Wiebe, and Theresa Wilson. 2003.
Learning subjective nouns using extraction pattern
bootstrapping. In Proceedings of the 7th Conference
on Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-2003).
B. D. Ripley. 1987. Stochastic Simulation. Wiley.
Roger C. Schank and Robert P. Abelson. 1977. Scripts,
plans, goals, and understanding: an inquiry into hu-
man knowledge structures. Lawrene Erlbaum Asso-
ciates.
Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2002. Machine learning in au-
tomated text categorization. ACM Computing Sur-
veys, 34(1):1?47, March.
Peter Turney and Michael L. Littman. 2003. Mea-
suring praise and criticism: Inference of semantic
orientation from association. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems (TOIS), 21(4):315?346.
Peter Verdonk. 2002. Stylistics. Oxford University
Press.
Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, Rebecca Bruce,
Matthew Bell, and Melanie Martin. 2004. Learn-
ing subjective language. Computational Linguistics,
30(3).
Hong Yu and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou. 2003. To-
wards answering opinion questions: Separating facts
from opinions and identifying the polarity of opin-
ion sentences. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-2003).
1064
W  e i-     
    	   
  
         
        	  


           	  
 

  
   

    
   
  
        Proceedings of the 10th Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-X),
pages 109?116, New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Which Side are You on? Identifying Perspectives at the Document and
Sentence Levels
Wei-Hao Lin
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
whlin@cs.cmu.edu
Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe
Intelligent Systems Program
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
{twilson,wiebe}@cs.pitt.edu
Alexander Hauptmann
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
alex@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
In this paper we investigate a new problem
of identifying the perspective from which
a document is written. By perspective we
mean a point of view, for example, from
the perspective of Democrats or Repub-
licans. Can computers learn to identify
the perspective of a document? Not every
sentence is written strongly from a per-
spective. Can computers learn to identify
which sentences strongly convey a partic-
ular perspective? We develop statistical
models to capture how perspectives are
expressed at the document and sentence
levels, and evaluate the proposed mod-
els on articles about the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The results show that the pro-
posed models successfully learn how per-
spectives are reflected in word usage and
can identify the perspective of a document
with high accuracy.
1 Introduction
In this paper we investigate a new problem of au-
tomatically identifying the perspective from which
a document is written. By perspective we mean
a ?subjective evaluation of relative significance, a
point-of-view.?1 For example, documents about the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict may appear to be about
the same topic but reveal different perspectives:
1The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Lan-
guage, 4th ed.
(1) The inadvertent killing by Israeli forces of
Palestinian civilians ? usually in the course of
shooting at Palestinian terrorists ? is
considered no different at the moral and ethical
level than the deliberate targeting of Israeli
civilians by Palestinian suicide bombers.
(2) In the first weeks of the Intifada, for example,
Palestinian public protests and civilian
demonstrations were answered brutally by
Israel, which killed tens of unarmed protesters.
Example 1 is written from an Israeli perspective;
Example 2 is written from a Palestinian perspec-
tive. Anyone knowledgeable about the issues of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can easily identify the
perspectives from which the above examples were
written. However, can computers learn to identify
the perspective of a document given a training cor-
pus?
When an issue is discussed from different per-
spectives, not every sentence strongly reflects the
perspective of the author. For example, the follow-
ing sentences were written by a Palestinian and an
Israeli.
(3) The Rhodes agreements of 1949 set them as
the ceasefire lines between Israel and the Arab
states.
(4) The green line was drawn up at the Rhodes
Armistice talks in 1948-49.
Examples 3 and 4 both factually introduce the back-
ground of the issue of the ?green line? without ex-
pressing explicit perspectives. Can we develop a
109
system to automatically discriminate between sen-
tences that strongly indicate a perspective and sen-
tences that only reflect shared background informa-
tion?
A system that can automatically identify the per-
spective from which a document is written will be
a valuable tool for people analyzing huge collec-
tions of documents from different perspectives. Po-
litical analysts regularly monitor the positions that
countries take on international and domestic issues.
Media analysts frequently survey broadcast news,
newspapers, and weblogs for differing viewpoints.
Without the assistance of computers, analysts have
no choice but to read each document in order to iden-
tify those from a perspective of interest, which is ex-
tremely time-consuming. What these analysts need
is to find strong statements from different perspec-
tives and to ignore statements that reflect little or no
perspective.
In this paper we approach the problem of learning
individual perspectives in a statistical framework.
We develop statistical models to learn how perspec-
tives are reflected in word usage, and we treat the
problem of identifying perspectives as a classifica-
tion task. Although our corpus contains document-
level perspective annotations, it lacks sentence-level
annotations, creating a challenge for learning the
perspective of sentences. We propose a novel sta-
tistical model to overcome this problem. The ex-
perimental results show that the proposed statisti-
cal models can successfully identify the perspective
from which a document is written with high accu-
racy.
2 Related Work
Identifying the perspective from which a document
is written is a subtask in the growing area of au-
tomatic opinion recognition and extraction. Sub-
jective language is used to express opinions, emo-
tions, and sentiments. So far, research in automatic
opinion recognition has primarily addressed learn-
ing subjective language (Wiebe et al, 2004; Riloff
et al, 2003), identifying opinionated documents (Yu
and Hatzivassiloglou, 2003) and sentences (Yu and
Hatzivassiloglou, 2003; Riloff et al, 2003), and dis-
criminating between positive and negative language
(Pang et al, 2002; Morinaga et al, 2002; Yu and
Hatzivassiloglou, 2003; Turney and Littman, 2003;
Dave et al, 2003; Nasukawa and Yi, 2003; Popescu
and Etzioni, 2005; Wilson et al, 2005). While by its
very nature we expect much of the language that is
used when presenting a perspective or point-of-view
to be subjective, labeling a document or a sentence
as subjective is not enough to identify the perspec-
tive from which it is written. Moreover, the ideol-
ogy and beliefs authors possess are often expressed
in ways other than positive or negative language to-
ward specific targets.
Research on the automatic classification of movie
or product reviews as positive or negative (e.g.,
(Pang et al, 2002; Morinaga et al, 2002; Turney
and Littman, 2003; Nasukawa and Yi, 2003; Mullen
and Collier, 2004; Beineke et al, 2004; Hu and Liu,
2004)) is perhaps the most similar to our work. As
with review classification, we treat perspective iden-
tification as a document-level classification task, dis-
criminating, in a sense, between different types of
opinions. However, there is a key difference. A pos-
itive or negative opinion toward a particular movie
or product is fundamentally different from an overall
perspective. One?s opinion will change from movie
to movie, whereas one?s perspective can be seen as
more static, often underpinned by one?s ideology or
beliefs about the world.
There has been research in discourse analysis that
examines how different perspectives are expressed
in political discourse (van Dijk, 1988; Pan et al,
1999; Geis, 1987). Although their research may
have some similar goals, they do not take a compu-
tational approach to analyzing large collections of
documents. To the best of our knowledge, our ap-
proach to automatically identifying perspectives in
discourse is unique.
3 Corpus
Our corpus consists of articles published on the
bitterlemonswebsite2. The website is set up to
?contribute to mutual understanding [between Pales-
tinians and Israelis] through the open exchange of
ideas.?3 Every week an issue about the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is selected for discussion (e.g.,
2http://www.bitterlemons.org
3http://www.bitterlemons.org/about/
about.html
110
?Disengagement: unilateral or coordinated??), and
a Palestinian editor and an Israeli editor each con-
tribute one article addressing the issue. In addition,
the Israeli and Palestinian editors invite one Israeli
and one Palestinian to express their views on the
issue (sometimes in the form of an interview), re-
sulting in a total of four articles in a weekly edi-
tion. We choose the bitterlemons website for
two reasons. First, each article is already labeled
as either Palestinian or Israeli by the editors, allow-
ing us to exploit existing annotations. Second, the
bitterlemons corpus enables us to test the gen-
eralizability of the proposed models in a very real-
istic setting: training on articles written by a small
number of writers (two editors) and testing on arti-
cles from a much larger group of writers (more than
200 different guests).
We collected a total of 594 articles published on
the website from late 2001 to early 2005. The dis-
tribution of documents and sentences are listed in
Table 1. We removed metadata from all articles, in-
Palestinian Israeli
Written by editors 148 149
Written by guests 149 148
Total number of documents 297 297
Average document length 740.4 816.1
Number of sentences 8963 9640
Table 1: The basic statistics of the corpus
cluding edition numbers, publication dates, topics,
titles, author names and biographic information. We
used OpenNLP Tools4 to automatically extract sen-
tence boundaries, and reduced word variants using
the Porter stemming algorithm.
We evaluated the subjectivity of each sentence us-
ing the automatic subjective sentence classifier from
(Riloff and Wiebe, 2003), and find that 65.6% of
Palestinian sentences and 66.2% of Israeli sentences
are classified as subjective. The high but almost
equivalent percentages of subjective sentences in the
two perspectives support our observation in Sec-
tion 2 that a perspective is largely expressed using
subjective language, but that the amount of subjec-
tivity in a document is not necessarily indicative of
4http://sourceforge.net/projects/
opennlp/
its perspective.
4 Statistical Modeling of Perspectives
We develop algorithms for learning perspectives us-
ing a statistical framework. Denote a training corpus
as a set of documents Wn and their perspectives la-
bels Dn, n = 1, . . . ,N , where N is the total number
of documents in the corpus. Given a new document
W? with a unknown document perspective, the per-
spective D? is calculated based on the following con-
ditional probability.
P (D?|W? , {Dn,Wn}Nn=1) (5)
We are also interested in how strongly each sen-
tence in a document conveys perspective informa-
tion. Denote the intensity of the m-th sentence of
the n-th document as a binary random variable Sm,n.
To evaluate Sm,n, how strongly a sentence reflects
a particular perspective, we calculate the following
conditional probability.
P (Sm,n|{Dn,Wn}Nn=1) (6)
4.1 Na??ve Bayes Model
We model the process of generating documents from
a particular perspective as follows:
pi ? Beta(?pi, ?pi)
? ? Dirichlet(??)
Dn ? Binomial(1, pi)
Wn ? Multinomial(Ln, ?d)
First, the parameters pi and ? are sampled once from
prior distributions for the whole corpus. Beta and
Dirichlet are chosen because they are conjugate pri-
ors for binomial and multinomial distributions, re-
spectively. We set the hyperparameters ?pi, ?pi, and
?? to one, resulting in non-informative priors. A
document perspective Dn is then sampled from a bi-
nomial distribution with the parameter pi. The value
of Dn is either d0 (Israeli) or d1 (Palestinian). Words
in the document are then sampled from a multino-
mial distribution, where Ln is the length of the doc-
ument. A graphical representation of the model is
shown in Figure 1.
111
pi ?
Dn Wn
N
Figure 1: Na??ve Bayes Model
The model described above is commonly known
as a na??ve Bayes (NB) model. NB models have
been widely used for various classification tasks,
including text categorization (Lewis, 1998). The
NB model is also a building block for the model
described later that incorporates sentence-level per-
spective information.
To predict the perspective of an unseen document
using na??ve Bayes , we calculate the posterior distri-
bution of D? in (5) by integrating out the parameters,
? ?
P (D?, pi, ?|{(Dn,Wn)}Nn=1, W? )dpid? (7)
However, the above integral is difficult to compute.
As an alternative, we use Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) methods to obtain samples from the
posterior distribution. Details about MCMC meth-
ods can be found in Appendix A.
4.2 Latent Sentence Perspective Model
We introduce a new binary random variable, S, to
model how strongly a perspective is reflected at the
sentence level. The value of S is either s1 or s0,
where s1 indicates a sentence is written strongly
from a perspective while s0 indicates it is not. The
whole generative process is modeled as follows:
pi ? Beta(?pi, ?pi)
? ? Beta(?? , ?? )
? ? Dirichlet(??)
Dn ? Binomial(1, pi)
Sm,n ? Binomial(1, ?)
Wm,n ? Multinomial(Lm,n, ?)
The parameters pi and ? have the same semantics as
in the na??ve Bayes model. S is naturally modeled as
a binomial variable, where ? is the parameter of S.
S represents how likely it is that a sentence strongly
conveys a perspective. We call this model the La-
tent Sentence Perspective Model (LSPM) because S
is not directly observed. The graphical model repre-
sentation of LSPM is shown in Figure 2.
pi ? ?
Dn
Sm,n Wm,n
N
Mn
Figure 2: Latent Sentence Perspective Model
To use LSPM to identify the perspective of a new
document D? with unknown sentence perspectives S?,
we calculate posterior probabilities by summing out
possible combinations of sentence perspective in the
document and parameters.
? ? ?
?
Sm,n
?
S?
P (D?, Sm,n, S?, pi, ?, ?| (8)
{(Dn,Wn)}Nn=1, W? )dpid?d?
As before, we resort to MCMC methods to sample
from the posterior distributions, given in Equations
(5) and (6).
As is often encountered in mixture models, there
is an identifiability issue in LSPM. Because the val-
ues of S can be permuted without changing the like-
lihood function, the meanings of s0 and s1 are am-
biguous. In Figure 3a, four ? values are used to rep-
resent the four possible combinations of document
perspective d and sentence perspective intensity s. If
we do not impose any constraints, s1 and s0 are ex-
changeable, and we can no longer strictly interpret
s1 as indicating a strong sentence-level perspective
and s0 as indicating that a sentence carries little or
no perspective information. The other problem of
this parameterization is that any improvement from
LSPM over the na??ve Bayes model is not necessarily
112
d0
?d0,s0
s0
?d0,s1
s1
d1
?d1,s0
s0
?d0,s0
s1
(a) s0 and s1 are not identifiable
s1
?d0,s1
d0
?d1,s1
d1 ?s0
s0
(b) sharing ?d1,s0 and
?d0,s0
Figure 3: Two different parameterization of ?
due to the explicit modeling of sentence-level per-
spective. S may capture aspects of the document
collection that we never intended to model. For ex-
ample, s0 may capture the editors? writing styles and
s1 the guests? writing styles in the bitterlemons
corpus.
We solve the identifiability problem by forcing
?d1,s0 and ?d0,s0 to be identical and reducing the
number of ? parameters to three. As shown in Fig-
ure 3b, there are separate ? parameters conditioned
on the document perspective (left branch of the tree,
d0 is Israeli and d1 is Palestinian), but there is single
? parameter when S = s0 shared by both document-
level perspectives (right branch of the tree). We as-
sume that the sentences with little or no perspective
information, i.e., S = s0, are generated indepen-
dently of the perspective of a document. In other
words, sentences that are presenting common back-
ground information or introducing an issue and that
do not strongly convey any perspective should look
similar whether they are in Palestinian or Israeli doc-
uments. By forcing this constraint, we become more
confident that s0 represents sentences of little per-
spectives and s1 represents sentences of strong per-
spectives from d1 and d0 documents.
5 Experiments
5.1 Identifying Perspective at the Document
Level
We evaluate three different models for the task
of identifying perspective at the document level:
two na??ve Bayes models (NB) with different infer-
ence methods and Support Vector Machines (SVM)
(Cristianini and Shawe-Taylor, 2000). NB-B uses
full Bayesian inference and NB-M uses Maximum
a posteriori (MAP). We compare NB with SVM not
only because SVM has been very effective for clas-
sifying topical documents (Joachims, 1998), but also
to contrast generative models like NB with discrimi-
native models like SVM. For training SVM, we rep-
resent each document as a V -dimensional feature
vector, where V is the vocabulary size and each co-
ordinate is the normalized term frequency within the
document. We use a linear kernel for SVM and
search for the best parameters using grid methods.
To evaluate the statistical models, we train them
on the documents in the bitterlemons corpus
and calculate how accurately each model predicts
document perspective in ten-fold cross-validation
experiments. Table 2 reports the average classi-
fication accuracy across the the 10 folds for each
model. The accuracy of a baseline classifier, which
randomly assigns the perspective of a document as
Palestinian or Israeli, is 0.5, because there are equiv-
alent numbers of documents from the two perspec-
tives.
Model Data Set Accuracy Reduction
Baseline 0.5
SVM Editors 0.9724
NB-M Editors 0.9895 61%
NB-B Editors 0.9909 67%
SVM Guests 0.8621
NB-M Guests 0.8789 12%
NB-B Guests 0.8859 17%
Table 2: Results for Identifying Perspectives at the
Document Level
The last column of Table 2 is error reduction
relative to SVM. The results show that the na??ve
Bayes models and SVM perform surprisingly well
on both the Editors and Guests subsets of the
bitterlemons corpus. The na??ve Bayes mod-
els perform slightly better than SVM, possibly be-
cause generative models (i.e., na??ve Bayes models)
achieve optimal performance with a smaller num-
ber of training examples than discriminative models
(i.e., SVM) (Ng and Jordan, 2002), and the size of
the bitterlemons corpus is indeed small. NB-B,
which performs full Bayesian inference, improves
113
on NB-M, which only performs point estimation.
The results suggest that the choice of words made
by the authors, either consciously or subconsciously,
reflects much of their political perspectives. Statis-
tical models can capture word usage well and can
identify the perspective of documents with high ac-
curacy.
Given the performance gap between Editors and
Guests, one may argue that there exist distinct edit-
ing artifacts or writing styles of the editors and
guests, and that the statistical models are capturing
these things rather than ?perspectives.? To test if the
statistical models truly are learning perspectives, we
conduct experiments in which the training and test-
ing data are mismatched, i.e., from different subsets
of the corpus. If what the SVM and na??ve Bayes
models learn are writing styles or editing artifacts,
the classification performance under the mismatched
conditions will be considerably degraded.
Model Training Testing Accuracy
Baseline 0.5
SVM Guests Editors 0.8822
NB-M Guests Editors 0.9327 43%
NB-B Guests Editors 0.9346 44%
SVM Editors Guests 0.8148
NB-M Editors Guests 0.8485 18%
NB-B Editors Guests 0.8585 24%
Table 3: Identifying Document-Level Perspectives
with Different Training and Testing Sets
The results on the mismatched training and test-
ing experiments are shown in Table 3. Both SVM
and the two variants of na??ve Bayes perform well
on the different combinations of training and testing
data. As in Table 2, the na??ve Bayes models per-
form better than SVM with larger error reductions,
and NB-B slightly outperforms NB-M. The high ac-
curacy on the mismatched experiments suggests that
statistical models are not learning writing styles or
editing artifacts. This reaffirms that document per-
spective is reflected in the words that are chosen by
the writers.
We list the most frequent words (excluding stop-
words) learned by the the NB-M model in Ta-
ble 4. The frequent words overlap greatly be-
tween the Palestinian and Israeli perspectives, in-
cluding ?state,? ?peace,? ?process,? ?secure? (?se-
curity?), and ?govern? (?government?). This is in
contrast to what we expect from topical text classi-
fication (e.g., ?Sports? vs. ?Politics?), in which fre-
quent words seldom overlap. Authors from differ-
ent perspectives often choose words from a simi-
lar vocabulary but emphasize them differently. For
example, in documents that are written from the
Palestinian perspective, the word ?palestinian? is
mentioned more frequently than the word ?israel.?
It is, however, the reverse for documents that are
written from the Israeli perspective. Perspectives
are also expressed in how frequently certain people
(?sharon? v.s. ?arafat?), countries (?international?
v.s. ?america?), and actions (?occupation? v.s. ?set-
tle?) are mentioned. While one might solicit these
contrasting word pairs from domain experts, our re-
sults show that statistical models such as SVM and
na??ve Bayes can automatically acquire them.
5.2 Identifying Perspectives at the Sentence
Level
In addition to identifying the perspective of a docu-
ment, we are interested in knowing which sentences
of the document strongly conveys perspective in-
formation. Sentence-level perspective annotations
do not exist in the bitterlemons corpus, which
makes estimating parameters for the proposed La-
tent Sentence Perspective Model (LSPM) difficult.
The posterior probability that a sentence strongly
covey a perspective (Example (6)) is of the most in-
terest, but we can not directly evaluate this model
without gold standard annotations. As an alterna-
tive, we evaluate how accurately LSPM predicts the
perspective of a document, again using 10-fold cross
validation. Although LSPM predicts the perspec-
tive of both documents and sentences, we will doubt
the quality of the sentence-level predictions if the
document-level predictions are incorrect.
The experimental results are shown in Table 5.
We include the results for the na??ve Bayes models
from Table 3 for easy comparison. The accuracy of
LSPM is comparable or even slightly better than that
of the na??ve Bayes models. This is very encouraging
and suggests that the proposed LSPM closely cap-
tures how perspectives are reflected at both the doc-
ument and sentence levels. Examples 1 and 2 from
the introduction were predicted by LSPM as likely to
114
Palestinian palestinian, israel, state, politics, peace, international, people, settle, occupation, sharon,
right, govern, two, secure, end, conflict, process, side, negotiate
Israeli israel, palestinian, state, settle, sharon, peace, arafat, arab, politics, two, process, secure,
conflict, lead, america, agree, right, gaza, govern
Table 4: The top twenty most frequent stems learned by the NB-M model, sorted by P (w|d)
Model Training Testing Accuracy
Baseline 0.5
NB-M Guests Editors 0.9327
NB-B Guests Editors 0.9346
LSPM Guests Editors 0.9493
NB-M Editors Guests 0.8485
NB-B Editors Guests 0.8585
LSPM Editors Guests 0.8699
Table 5: Results for Perspective Identification at the
Document and Sentence Levels
contain strong perspectives, i.e., large Pr(S? = s1).
Examples 3 and 4 from the introduction were pre-
dicted by LSPM as likely to contain little or no per-
spective information, i.e., high Pr(S? = s0).
The comparable performance between the na??ve
Bayes models and LSPM is in fact surprising. We
can train a na??ve Bayes model directly on the sen-
tences and attempt to classify a sentence as reflect-
ing either a Palestinian or Israeli perspective. A sen-
tence is correctly classified if the predicted perspec-
tive for the sentence is the same as the perspective
of the document from which it was extracted. Us-
ing this model, we obtain a classification accuracy of
only 0.7529, which is much lower than the accuracy
previously achieved at the document level. Identify-
ing perspectives at the sentence level is thus more
difficult than identifying perspectives at the docu-
ment level. The high accuracy at the document level
shows that LSPM is very effective in pooling evi-
dence from sentences that individually contain little
perspective information.
6 Conclusions
In this paper we study a new problem of learning to
identify the perspective from which a text is written
at the document and sentence levels. We show that
much of a document?s perspective is expressed in
word usage, and statistical learning algorithms such
as SVM and na??ve Bayes models can successfully
uncover the word patterns that reflect author per-
spective with high accuracy. In addition, we develop
a novel statistical model to estimate how strongly
a sentence conveys perspective, in the absence of
sentence-level annotations. By introducing latent
variables and sharing parameters, the Latent Sen-
tence Perspective Model is shown to capture well
how perspectives are reflected at the document and
sentence levels. The small but positive improvement
due to sentence-level modeling in LSPM is encour-
aging. In the future, we plan to investigate how con-
sistently LSPM sentence-level predictions are with
human annotations.
Acknowledgment
This material is based on work supported by
the Advanced Research and Development Activity
(ARDA) under contract number NBCHC040037.
A Gibbs Samplers
Based the model specification described in Sec-
tion 4.2 we derive the Gibbs samplers (Chen et al,
2000) for the Latent Sentence Perspective Model as
follows,
pi(t+1) ? Beta(?pi +
N
?
n=1
dn + d?(t+1),
?pi + N ?
N
?
n=1
dn + 1 ? d?(t+1))
? (t+1) ? Beta(?? +
N
?
n=1
Mn
?
m=1
sm,n +
M?
?
m=1
s?m,
?? +
N
?
n=1
Mn ?
N
?
n=1
Mn
?
m=1
sm,n + M? ?
M?
?
m=1
s?m)
115
?(t+1) ? Dirichlet(?? +
N
?
n=1
Mn
?
m=1
wm,n)
Pr(S(t+1)n,m = s1) ? P (Wm,n|Sm,n = 1, ?(t))
Pr(S(t+1)m,n = 1|?,Dn)
Pr(D?(t+1) = d1) ?
M?
?
m=1
dbinom(? (t+1)d )
M?
?
m=1
dmultinom(?d,m?(t))dbinom(pi(t))
where dbinom and dmultinom are the density func-
tions of binomial and multinomial distributions, re-
spectively. The superscript t indicates that a sample
is from the t-th iteration. We run three chains and
collect 5000 samples. The first half of burn-in sam-
ples are discarded.
References
Philip Beineke, Trevor Hastie, and Shivakumar
Vaithyanathan. 2004. The sentimental factor:
Improving review classification via human-provided
information. In Proceedings of ACL-2004.
Ming-Hui Chen, Qi-Man Shao, and Joseph G. Ibrahim.
2000. Monte Carlo Methods in Bayesian Computa-
tion. Springer-Verlag.
Nello Cristianini and John Shawe-Taylor. 2000. An
Introduction to Support Vector Machines and Other
Kernel-based Learning Methods. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Kushal Dave, Steve Lawrence, and David M. Pennock.
2003. Mining the peanut gallery: Opinion extraction
and semantic classification of product reviews. In Pro-
ceedings of WWW-2003.
Michael L. Geis. 1987. The Language of Politics.
Springer.
Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summariz-
ing customer reviews. In Proceedings of KDD-2004.
Thorsten Joachims. 1998. Text categorization with sup-
port vector machines: Learning with many relevant
features. In Proceedings of ECML-1998.
David D. Lewis. 1998. Naive (Bayes) at forty: The inde-
pendence assumption in information retrieval. In Pro-
ceedings of ECML-1998.
S. Morinaga, K. Yamanishi, K. Tateishi, and
T. Fukushima. 2002. Mining product reputations on
the web. In Proceedings of KDD-2002.
Tony Mullen and Nigel Collier. 2004. Sentiment analy-
sis using support vector machines with diverse infor-
mation sources. In Proceedings of EMNLP-2004.
T. Nasukawa and J. Yi. 2003. Sentiment analysis: Cap-
turing favorability using natural language processing.
In Proceedings of K-CAP 2003.
Andrew Y. Ng and Michael Jordan. 2002. On discrim-
inative vs. generative classifiers: A comparison of lo-
gistic regression and naive bayes. In NIPS-2002, vol-
ume 15.
Zhongdang Pan, Chin-Chuan Lee, Joseph Man Chen, and
Clement Y.K. So. 1999. One event, three stories: Me-
dia narratives of the handover of hong kong in cultural
china. Gazette, 61(2):99?112.
Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up? Sentiment classification using ma-
chine learning techniques. In Proceedings of EMNLP-
2002.
Ana-Maria Popescu and Oren Etzioni. 2005. Extracting
product features and opinions from reviews. In Pro-
ceedings of HLT/EMNLP-2005, pages 339?346.
Ellen Riloff and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Learning extrac-
tion patterns for subjective expressions. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP-2003.
Ellen Riloff, Janyce Wiebe, and Theresa Wilson. 2003.
Learning subjective nouns using extraction pattern
bootstrapping. In Proceedings of CoNLL-2003.
Peter Turney and Michael L. Littman. 2003. Measuring
praise and criticism: Inference of semantic orientation
from association. ACM TOIS, 21(4):315?346.
T.A. van Dijk. 1988. News as Discourse. Lawrence
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, Rebecca Bruce, Matthew
Bell, and Melanie Martin. 2004. Learning subjective
language. Computational Linguistics, 30(3).
Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level
sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP-
2005.
Hong Yu and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou. 2003. Towards
answering opinion questions: Separating facts from
opinions and identifying the polarity of opinion sen-
tences. In Proceedings of EMNLP-2003.
116
