The Need for Accurate Alignment in 
Natural Language System Evaluation 
Andrew Kehler* 
UC San Diego 
Douglas Appelt* 
SRI International 
John Bear* 
SRI International 
As evaluations of computational linguistics technology progress toward higher-level interpre- 
tation tasks, the problem o/determining alignments between system responses and answer key 
entries may become l ss straightforward. We present an extensive analysis o/the alignment pro- 
cedure used in the MUC-6 evaluation o/information extraction technology, which reveals effects 
that interfere with the stated goals of the evaluation. These ffects are shown to be pervasive nough 
that they have the potential to adversely impact he technology development process. These results 
argue strongly/or the use o/accurate alignment criteria in natural anguage valuations, and/or 
maintaining the independence o/alignment criteria and mechanisms used to calculate scores. 
1. Introduction 
It would be hard to overestimate he influence of evaluation on current natural an- 
guage processing (NLP) research and development. In contrast o the primarily qual- 
itative methodologies that characterized research in the 1980's, purely quantitative 
evaluation methods now pervade all aspects of the research and development process 
in many areas of NLP. These roles are well summarized by Chinchor and Dungca 
(1995), who refer specifically to the methods used for the U.S.-government-sponsored 
Message Understanding Conference (MUC) evaluations of information extraction (IE) 
technology: 
The resulting scores \[assigned by the MUC evaluation process\] are 
used for decision-making over the entire evaluation cycle, including 
refinement of the task definition based on interannotator comparisons, 
technology development using training data, validating answer keys, 
and benchrnarking both system and human capabilities on the test 
data. (p. 33) 
This passage highlights three major roles an evaluation method can serve. First, 
the method may be used during the process of task definition, to assess interannotator 
agreement on proposed task specifications and revise them accordingly, and to sub- 
sequently validate the final answer keys. Second, the method may be used to drive 
* Department of Linguistics #0108, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 
92093-0108. E-mail: kehler@ling.ucsd.edu 
j" Artificial Intelligence C nter, 333 Ravenswood Avenue, Menlo Park, CA 94025. E-mail: bear@ai.sri.com. 
~: Artificial Intelligence C nter, 333 Ravenswood Avenue, Menlo Park, CA 94025. E-maih 
appelt@ai.sri.com. 
? 2001 Association for Computational Linguistics 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 2 
the system development process, as system developers and machine learning algo- 
rithms rely heavily on the feedback it provides to determine whether proposed sys- 
tem changes hould be adopted. Third, the results may be used for final cross-system 
comparison, on which judgments concerning the adequacy of competing technologies 
are based. Given their pervasiveness in the entire technology development process, 
the need for adequate valuation methods is of the essence, and has thus become 
a prominent opic for research in itself (Sparck-Jones and Galliers 1996; CSL Special 
Issue 1998, inter alia). 
The need to serve all these roles has necessitated the development of automated 
evaluation methods that are capable of being run repeatedly with little time and cost 
overhead. Automated methods are commonly used for application tasks, including 
speech recognition, information retrieval, and IE, as well as for natural anguage com- 
ponent echnologies, including part-of-speech tagging, syntactic annotation, and coref- 
erence resolution. Such methods generally consist of a two-step rocess--first, system- 
generated responses are aligned with corresponding human-generated responses en- 
coded in an answer key, and then a predetermined scoring procedure is applied to the 
aligned response pairs. 
The second of these tasks (scoring procedure) has been the focus of most previous 
research on evaluation. In this paper, we focus instead on the less well studied problem 
of alignment. The relative inattention to problems in alignment is no doubt a result of 
the fact that alignment is relatively unproblematic n many natural anguage valua- 
tion scenarios. In evaluations of component technologies such as part-of-speech tag- 
ging and treebank-style syntactic annotation systems, for instance, a system-generated 
annotation is simply scored against the human-generated annotation for the same 
word or sentence, regardless of whether matching it to the annotation for a different 
word or sentence would improve the overall score assigned. Alignment is similarly 
trivial in evaluations of applications uch as information retrieval, since the notion of 
document identity is well defined. Alignment in speech recognition evaluations can 
be a bit more complex, but constraints inherent in the methods nonetheless prohibit 
clear misalignments, uch that a system cannot receive credit for recognizing a word 
from an acoustic signal that occurred several utterances later, for instance. 
As the field progresses to address higher-level interpretation tasks, however, the 
problem of determining alignments may become less straightforward. Such tasks may 
require that the output contain information that is synthesized (and perhaps even 
inferred) from disparate parts of the input signal, making the correspondence b tween 
information in the system output and information in the answer key more difficult to 
recover. A case in point is the evaluation IE technology, as most prominently carried 
out by the series of MUCs. For a typical MUC-style IE task, a text may contain several 
extractable events, and thus a method is required for aligning the (often only partially 
correct) event descriptions extracted by a system to the appropriate ones in the answer 
key. It is therefore important o investigate the issues involved in the definition of 
alignment criteria in such tasks, and we can use the MUC experience as a basis for 
such an investigation. 
In this paper, we focus specifically on the criterion used for alignment in MUC-6. In 
light of difficulties in identifying a perfect alignment criterion for the MUC-6 task, the 
MUC-6 community agreed upon on a rather weak and forgiving criterion, leaving the 
resolution of alignment ambiguities to a mechanism that sought o maximize the score 
assigned. While this decision may have been thought o be relatively benign, we report 
on the results of an extensive, post hoc analysis of a 13 1/2-month effort focused on the 
MUC-6 task which reveals several unforeseen and negative consequences a sociated 
with this decision, particularly with respect o its influence on the incremental system 
232 
Kehler, Bear, and Appelt Accurate Alignment in Evaluation 
development process. While we do not argue that these consequences are so severe 
that they call the integrity of the MUC-6 evaluation into question, they are substantial 
enough that they demonstrate the potential of such an alignment strategy to have a 
significantly adverse impact on the goals of an evaluation. It is therefore important 
that these lessons be brought to bear in the design of future evaluations for IE and 
other high-level language processing tasks. 
We begin with an overview of IE tasks, systems, and evaluation, including the 
alignment procedure used for MUC-6. We then provide an example from the MUC-6 
development corpus that illustrates properties of the alignment process that interfere 
with the stated goals of the evaluation. We assess the pervasiveness of these problems 
based on data compiled from an extended evelopment effort centered on the MUC-6 
task, and conclude that the effect of the alignment criterion is robust enough that it 
could potentially undermine the technology development process. We conclude that 
these results argue strongly for the use of strict and accurate alignment criteria in future 
natural anguage valuations---evaluations in which alignment problems will become 
exacerbated as the natural anguage applications addressed become more complex-- 
and for maintaining the independence of alignment criteria and the mechanisms used 
to calculate scores. 
2. Information Extraction, MUC, and the F-score Metric 
IE systems process streams of natural language input and produce representations 
of the information relevant o a particular task, typically in the form of database 
templates. In accordance with the aforementioned array of roles served by evaluation 
methods, the MUCs have been very influential, being the primary driving force behind 
IE research in the past decade: 
The MUCs have helped to define a program of research and develop- 
ment .. . .  The MUCs are notable ... in that they have substantially 
shaped the research program in information extraction and brought it 
to its current state. (Grishman and Sundheim 1995, 1-2) 
There have been seven MUCs, starting with MUC-1 in 1987, and ending with 
MUC-7 in 1997. The metrics used--precision, recall, and F-score--are probably the 
most exhaustively used metrics for any natural anguage understanding application; 
precision and recall have been in use since MUC-2 in 1989 (Grishman and Sundheim 
1995), and F-score since MUC-4 in 1992 (Hirschman 1998). IE evaluation has thus been 
extensively thought out, revised, and experimented with: 
For the natural anguage processing community in the United States, 
the pre-eminent evaluation activity has been the series of Message Un- 
derstanding Conferences (MUCs) .. . .  the MUC conferences provide us 
with over a decade of experience in evaluating language understand- 
ing. (Hirschman 1998, 282) 
The MUCs therefore provide a rich and established basis for the study of the 
effects of evaluation with respect o its roles noted above. As previously indicated, 
we will focus in this paper on MUC-6, held in 1995, and exclusively on the procedure 
used for aligning system-generated r sponses with those in an answer key. 
233 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 2 
(TEMPLATE) 
CONTENT (succession_event) 
(SUCCESSION_EVENT} 
SUCCESSION_ORE (organization) 
POST string 
IN_AND_OUT (in_and_out} 
VACANCY_REASON { DEPART_WORKFORCE, 
REASSIGNMENT, 
NEW _POST _CREATED I 
OTH_UNK } 
(ORGANIZATION) 
ORE_NAME string 
ORE_ALIAS string 
ORG_DESCRIPTOR string 
ORG_TYPE { COMPANY~ GOVERNMENT, 
OTHER } 
ORE_LOCALE string 
ORE_COUNTRY string 
(IN_AND_OUT) 
IO_PERSON (person} 
NEW_STATUS { IN, m_ACT~NG, 
OUT~ OUT-ACTING } 
ON_THE_ JOB { YES, NO, UNCLEAR } 
OTHER_ORE (organization) 
REL_OTHER_ORG { SAME_ORE, 
RELATED-ORE t 
OUTSIDE_ORE } 
{PERSON} 
PER_NAME string 
PER_ALIAS string 
PER_TITLE string 
Figure 1 
Output template for MUC-6. 
Marketing & Media: Star TV Chief Steps Down After News Corp. Takeover 
In the wake of a takeover by News Corp., the chief executive officer of Star TV resigned after less 
than six months in that post, industry executives said. 
Last week, News Corp. bought 63.6% of the satellite broadcaster, which serves the entire Asian 
region, for $525 million in cash and stock from Hutchison Whampoa Ltd. and the family of Li Ka-shing. 
At the time of the purchase, News Corp. executives said they would like the executive, Julian 
Mounter, to stay. However, Star's chief balked at the prospect of not reporting directly to Rupert 
Murdoch, News Corp.'s chairman and chief executive officer, people close to Mr. Mounter said. Both 
Mr. Mounter and a Star spokesman declined to comment. 
It is likely that Star's new chief executive will report to either Sam Chisholm, chief executive of 
News Corp.'s U.K.-based satellite broadcaster, British Sky Broadcasting, or Chase Carey, chief operating 
officer of News Corp.'s Fox Inc. film and television unit. 
Mr. Mounter's departure is expected to be formally announced this week. 
Although there are no obvious successors, it is expected that Mr. Murdoch will choose someone 
from either British Sky Broadcasting or Fox to run Star, said a person close to News Corp. 
Figure 2 
Example text from MUC-6 development set (9308040024). 
2.1 Task Definition 
The MUC-6 task was, roughly speaking, to identify information in business news 
that describes executives moving in and out of high-level positions within companies 
(Grishman and Sundheim 1995). The template structure that MUC-6 systems popu- 
lated is shown in Figure 1. There are three types of values used to fill template slots. 
String fills, shown italicized, are simply strings taken from the text, such as CEO for 
the POST slot in a SUCCESSION_EVENT. Set fills are chosen from a fixed set of values, 
such as DEPART_WORKFORCE for the VACANCY_REASON slot in a SUCCESSION_EVENT. 
Finally, Pointer fills, shown in angle brackets, hold the identifier of another template 
structure, e.g., the SUCCESSION_ORE slot in a SUCCESSION_EVENT will contain a pointer 
to an ORGANIZATION template. 
Figure 2 displays a text from the MUC-6 development corpus. When a partici- 
pating system encounters this passage, it should extract he information that Julian 
234 
Kehler, Bear, and Appelt Accurate Alignment in Evaluation 
cor 
cor 
cor 
cor 
inc 
cor 
mis 
mis 
cor 
spu 
spu 
cor 
inc 
inc 
cor 
mis 
mis 
Figure 3 
TEMPLATE-024-1) 
CONTENT (SUCC_EVENT-024-  i} 
SUCC_EVENT-024-1}  
SUCCESS ION_ORG (ORG-024-1} 
POST "CEO"  
IN_AND_OUT ( IN_AND_OUT-024-  i} 
VACANCY_REASON REASSIGNMENT 
ORG-024-1) 
ORG_NAME "STAR Tv" 
ORG_ALIAS "STAR" 
ORG_DESCRIPTOR "THE SAT BDSTR" 
ORG_TYPE COMPANY 
IN_AND_OUT-024-1} 
IO_PERSON (PERSON-024-1} 
NEW_STATUS OUT 
ON_THE_JOB UNCLEAR 
PERSON-024-1} 
PER_NAME "JULIAN MOUNTER" 
PER_ALIAS "MouNTER" 
PER_TITLE "MR." 
Target and hypothetical outputs for the example text. 
(TEMPLATE-024-1) 
CONTENT (SUCC_EVENT-024- I}  
(SUCC_EVENT-024-1)  
SUCCESS ION_ORG (ORG-024-11 
POST "CEO"  
IN_AND_OUT ( IN_AND_OUT-024-1} 
VACANCY_REASON OTH_UNK 
(ORG-024-1) 
ORG_NAME "STAR TV" 
ORG_TYPE COMPANY 
ORG_LOCALE WHAMPOA 
ORG_COUNTRY UNITED KINGDOM 
(IN_AND_OUT-024-1} 
IO_PERSON (PERSON-024-1) 
NEW_STATUS IN 
ON_THE_JOB No 
(PERSON-024-1) 
PER_NAME "JULIAN MOUNTER" 
Mounter is "out" of the position of CEO of company Star TV, along with other infor- 
mation associated with the event. The correct results for this passage, as encoded in a 
human-annotated answer key, are shown in the middle column of Figure 3. 
2.2 Evaluation: Alignment 
The rightmost column of Figure 3 shows hypothetical output of an IE system. The 
first step of the evaluation algorithm, alignment, determines which templates in the 
system's output correspond to which ones in the key. Generally speaking, there can 
be any number of templates in the key and system response for a given document; 
all, some, or no pairs of which may be descriptions of the same event. The alignment 
algorithm must thus determine the correct emplate pairing. 
This process is not necessarily straightforward, since there may be no slot in a 
template that uniquely identifies the event or object which it describes. In response 
to this problem, the MUC community decided to adopt a relatively lax alignment 
criterion, leaving it to the alignment algorithm to find the alignment hat optimizes 
the resulting score. The procedure has two major steps. First, it determines which 
pairs of templates are possible candidates for alignment; the criterion for candidacy 
was only that the templates hare a common value for at least one slot. (Pointer fills 
share a common value if they point to objects that are aligned by the algorithm.) This 
criterion often results in alignment ambiguities--a key template will often share a 
common slot value with several templates in the system's output, and vice versa--  
and thus a method for selecting among the alternative mappings is necessary. The 
candidate pairs are rank ordered by a mapping score, which simply counts the number 
of slot values the templates have in common. 1 The scoring algorithm then considers 
1 The scoring software provided for MUC-6 allows for alternative scoring configurations based on slot 
content, including the ability to assign different weights to slots, but this was the configuration used 
for development and evaluation i MUC-6. 
235 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 2 
key and response template pairs according to this order, aligning them when neither 
member has already been mapped to another template. Ties between pairs with the 
same number of common slot values are broken arbitrarily. Because this algorithm is 
heuristic--with many combinations of alignments never being considered--the r sult 
may not be the globally optimal alignment in terms of score assigned. 
In our example, there is only one template of each type in each response, and 
thus there are no mapping ambiguities. The only requirement is that each pair share 
a common slot value, which is the case, and so the algorithm aligns each as shown in 
Figure 3. 
2.3 Evaluation: Scoring 
Once the templates are aligned, the scoring algorithm performs lot-by-slot compar- 
isons to determine rrors. The leftmost column in Figure 3 shows examples of the 
three types of errors that the algorithm will mark. First, while our hypothetical sys- 
tem recognized that the correct PERSON and ORGANIZATION are Julian Mounter and 
Star TV, respectively, it missed the ORG_ALIAS, ORG_DESCRIPTOR, PER_ALIAS, and 
PER_TITLE values that appear later in the passage, resulting in four missing slot fills 
(denoted by mis in the left hand column). Next, it also erroneously assigned a value 
to the ORG_LOCALE and ORG_COUNTRY slots in the ORGANIZATION, resulting in two 
spurious slot fills (denoted by spu). Finally, the system got three of the set fill slots 
wrong--the VACANCY_REASON slot in the SUCCESSION_EVENT, and the NEW_STATUS 
and ON_THE_JOB slots of the IN_AND_OuT template--resulting in three incorrect slot 
fills (denoted by inc). The remainder of the slot fills are correct (denoted by cor). 2 
Again, pointer slots are scored as correct when they point to templates that have been 
aligned. 
The possible fills are those in the key which contribute to the final score, and the 
actual fills are those in the system's response which contribute to the final score: 
POS = COR + INC + MIS 
ACT = COR + INC + SPU 
Three metrics are computed from these results: precision, recall, and F-score. Pre- 
cision is the number of correct fills divided by the total number generated by the 
system, and recall is the number of correct fills divided by the the total number in the 
key: 
COR 
PRE - 
ACT  
COR 
REC - 
POS 
In the example, there are 8 correct fills, 13 generated fills, and 15 possible fills 
in the key, resulting in a precision of 0.615 and a recall of 0.533. Note that the four 
missing slot fills do not figure into the precision computation, and the two spurious 
fills do not figure into the recall computation. F-score is determined by a harmonic 
mean of precision and recall (van Rijsbergen 1979): 
1 (f12 + 1) x PRE x REC 
(1 -- 1 1 1 1 (f12 X PRE) + REC 
2 There is also the possibility of getting partial credit, which we will not discuss further nor include in 
the equations below. 
236 
Kehler, Bear, and Appelt Accurate Alignment in Evaluation 
In the standard computation of F-score, fl is set to one (indicating equal weight 
for precision and recall), resulting in: 
2 x PRE x REC 
F= 
PRE + REC 
For our example, we get an F-score of 0.571. 
2 x 0.615 x 0.533 = 0.571 
0.615 + 0.533 
2.4 Focus of the Paper 
Before proceeding to the analysis, we take care to note that our aim is neither to provide 
a thorough analysis of all problematic aspects of NLP evaluation, nor to provide a 
criticism of the MUCs in particular. Problematic aspects of the scoring procedures used 
in a variety of NLP evaluations are well attested, including the existence of side effects 
of scoring procedures which reward behavior that may not be perfectly consistent with 
the goals of the evaluations that these scoring procedures erve. For instance, word 
error metrics used in evaluations of speech recognition technology have been criticized 
for the fact that they assign the same degree of credit for the recognition of all words, 
a policy that rewards a focus on recognizing frequent but less important words (e.g., 
urn) over more important but less frequent content words. Similarly, evaluations of 
syntactic annotation systems that use locally oriented crossing brackets and labeled 
precision/recall metrics can assign high degrees of credit to cases in which the assigned 
structures are fairly inaccurate when viewed more globally. Likewise, there are aspects 
of the scoring procedure used for MUC-6 that one could question, such as the choice 
of slots included in each template and their corresponding definitions, the decision 
to weight all slots equally without regard to perceived importance, and the choice to 
define the templates to have hierarchical structure and give credit for slots that merely 
contain pointers to lower-level templates. We believe that any mechanical evaluation 
is likely to have such issues, and while they are very worthy of study and debate, a
more detailed discussion of them would take us too far afield from the main purpose 
of this paper. 
The focus of this paper is purposefully more narrow, being concerned only with 
the effects of alignment criteria on the goals of evaluation. While it is unclear as 
of this writing whether there will be future MUCs, evaluation-driven efforts in IE 
continue to be sponsored, and future evaluations of interpretation tasks of equal or 
greater complexity are not only likely but crucial if the field is to progress while 
maintaining its current focus on quantitative evaluation. Because alignment questions 
will almost certainly become exacerbated as the interpretation problems addressed 
become more complex, and because of the aforementioned pervasiveness of evaluation 
in the entire technology development process, the payoff in avoiding potential pitfalls 
in such evaluations i high. Thus, our aim is to bring lessons learned from the MUC 
experience to the fore so that they can inform future evaluations that, like the MUCs, 
are likely to be principal driving forces for research over extended periods of time. 
3. The Impact of Inaccurate Alignment 
In the introduction, we described several roles that the MUC-6 evaluation has played 
in bringing IE technology to its current state: task definition, system development, and 
cross-system evaluation. We focus here on its role in the system development process, 
where its influence has been substantial, as it has provided system developers the abil- 
ity to obtain rapid feedback with which to iteratively gauge their progress on a training 
237 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 2 
cor 
(TEMPLATE-024-1} 
CONTENT (SUCC_EVENT-024-1} 
(SUCC_EVENT-024-1) 
cor SUCCESSION_ORG (ORG-024-1} 
cor POST "CEO" 
cor IN_AND_OUT (IN_AND_OUT-024-1) 
inc VACANCY_REASON REASSIGNMENT 
(TEMPLATE-024-1} 
CONTENT (SUCC_EVENT-024-1) 
(SUCC_EVENT-024-1} 
SUCCESSION_ORG {ORG-024-1} 
POST "CEO" 
IN_AND_OUT (IN_AND_OUT-024-1} 
VACANCY_REASON OTH_UNK 
(ORG-024-1)  (ORG-024-1}  
inc ORG_NAME "STAR TV"  ORG_NAME "NEWS CORP."  
mis ORG_ALIAS "STAR" 
mis ORG_DESCRIPTOR "THE SAT BDSTR" 
cor ORG_TYPE COMPANY ORG_TYPE COMPANY 
(IN_AND_OUT-024-1} (IN_AND_OUT-024-1} 
cor IO_PERSON (PERSON-024-1} IO_PERSON (PERSON-024-1} 
inc NEW_STATUS OUT NEW_STATUS IN 
cor ON_THE_JOB UNCLEAR ON_THE_JOB UNCLEAR 
(PERSON-024-1) (PERSON-024-1) 
inc PERd~AME "JULIAN MOUNTER"  PER_NAME "RUPERT MURDOCH"  
inc PER_ALIAS "MOUNTER" PER_ALIAS "MURDOCH" 
cor PER_TITLE "MR." PER_TITLE "MR." 
Figure 4 
Target and actual outputs for the example text. 
corpus.  In essence, a deve loper  can incorporate  a new process ing s t rategy or data  mod-  
if ication, eva luate  the sys tem wi th  the change,  keep it if end- to -end  per fo rmance  (i.e., 
F-score) improves ,  and  w i thdraw it if it does  not. Often changes  have  unant ic ipated  
results,  and  thus a formal  eva luat ion  method is requ i red  to aff i rm or deny  deve lopers '  
(often mis lead ing)  intuit ions.  L ikewise,  the method has an ana logous  role for suppor t -  
ing systems that learn rules automat ica l ly .  In a typica l  learn ing scenario,  an automated  
procedure  i terat ive ly  proposes  rule modi f icat ions  and  adopts  them on ly  in those cases 
in wh ich  an object ive funct ion - - that  is, the eva luat ion  method- - ind icates  that perfor-  
mance  has improved.  Thus, it is abso lute ly  crucial  that both  pos i t ive  and  negat ive  sys- 
tem changes  are ref lected as such in the feedback  prov ided  by  the scor ing mechan ism.  
As we i l lustrate w i th  the passage  shown in F igure 2, the weak  a l ignment  cr i ter ion 
used  in MUC-6  causes the scor ing mechan ism to not  respect  this requ i rement .  3 The 
answer  key  in F igure 4 is as it was  in F igure  3, represent ing  the event  of Ju l ian Mounter  
leav ing the pos i t ion  of CEO at Star TV. The results  of an IE sys tem (in this case, a 
s l ight ly  mod i f ied  vers ion  of what  SRI's FASTUS \ [Appe l t  et al 1995\] extracted for this 
example)  are shown in the r ighthand co lumn.  The IE sys tem made two s igni f icant 
mis takes  on this text: It fa i led to extract any  in format ion  re lat ing to the correct event,  
and  it overgenerated  an incorrect  "event ,"  speci f ical ly  Ruper t  Murdoch 's  becoming  
CEO of News  Corp.  4 Thus, the sys tem's  prec is ion shou ld  be o = 0, s ince it generated  
3 In this section we will be arguing our point primarily on the basis of a single illustrative xample, 
where in fact the MUC development process utilized a 100-text corpus. The arguments extend to this 
broader setting, of course, a topic to which we return in Section 4. 
4 An anonymous reviewer points out that because no slot in the template structure can be guaranteed to
identify an object, intuitions alone are not enough (despite how strong they might be in a case such as 
this) to establish that the system output in Figure 4 actually represents a different event, rather than the 
event described in the output in Figure 3 corrupted by the selection of wrong names for certain slots. 
The FASTUS system produces byte offsets to tie information i  templates to the places in the text from 
which they were created, and from this we can confirm that the event was indeed created solely from 
textual material unrelated to the event described in the key. See also footnote 7. 
238 
Kehler, Bear, and Appelt Accurate Alignment in Evaluation 
Table 1 
Approximate distribution of values for low-entropy slots. 
Template Type Slot Total Templates Slot Value Distribution 
SUCCESSION_EVENT VACANCY_REASON 214 REASSIGNMENT: 101 
OTH_UNK: 77 
NEW_POST_CREATED: 21 
DEPART_WORKFORCE: 18 
IN_AND_OuT NEW_STATUS 287 IN: 129 
OUT: 148 
IN_ACTING: 7 
OUT_ACTING: 4 
IN_AND_OuT ON_THE_JOB 287 YES: 82 
NO: 137 
UNCLEAR: 96 
IN_AND_OuT REL_OTHER_ORG 287 SAME_ORG: 93 
OUTSIDE_ORG: 66 
RELATED_ORG: 43 
(none): 91 
ORGANIZATION ORG_TYPE 117 COMPANY: 115 
GOVERNMENT: 3 
OTHER:  0 
PERSON PER_TITLE 158 "Mr.": 68 
"Dr.": 3 
"Ms.": 3 
(none): 84 
13 spur ious  slot fills for an i r re levant  event,  and  its recal l  shou ld  be o = 0, since it 
generated  none  of the 15 slots assoc iated wi th  the correct event.  5
In actuality, however ,  the scor ing a lgor i thm a l igned these templates  as shown in 
F igure 4, since each template  pa i r  shares at least one slot value.  With  this a l ignment ,  
the scor ing procedure  ident i f ies 8 correct slot values,  5 incorrect  values,  and  2 miss ing  
values,  resul t ing in a recal l  of 8 = 0.533, a prec is ion of 8 = 0.615, and  an F-score of 
0.571. These are the same scores received for the output  in F igure 3, in wh ich  a part ia l  
but  most ly  accurate descr ip t ion  of the correct event  was  extracted.  
The fact that the who l ly  incorrect output  in F igure 4 and  the largely  correct output  
in F igure 3 receive equa l ly  good  scores demonst ra tes  a ser ious f law wi th  the eva luat ion  
method.  As shown in Table 1, the d is t r ibut ions  of va lues  for several  slots in the MUC-6  
t ra in ing data  have re lat ive ly  low entropy,  and  thus a l ignments  based  on a fortu i tous 
over lap  in these va lues  are not  rare. 6 For  instance, the fact that  the ORG_TYPE slot in 
ORGANIZATION templates  has the va lue COMPANY in 115 out  of 117 instances a lmost  
ensures that any  ORGANIZATION template  produced by  a sys tem can get matched to an 
arb i t rary  one in the key  for a g iven document .  F rom this, in turn, the inaccurate  al ign- 
ments  may then cascade: Two unre la ted  SUCCESSION_EVENT templates  can be a l igned 
5 Its F-score should be undefined, since the denominator in the F-score quation will be zero. For all 
intents and purposes, however, the F-score can be considered to be zero, in the sense that its overall 
contribution to the F-score assigned to the results over a larger corpus will be zero. With this in mind, 
for simplicity we may speak of such cases as having an F-score of zero. 
6 In some cases, the sum of the counts in the rightmost column is greater than the total template count. 
This is because in some cases a key entry allowed for alternative slot values; matching any of the 
alternatives was sufficient for both alignment and scoring. Likewise, instances of optional slot fills were 
also included. 
239 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 2 
on the basis of sharing pointers to two unrelated (but nonetheless aligned) ORGANIZA- 
TION templates. Likewise, two unrelated IN_AND_OUT templates can be aligned on the 
basis of sharing pointers to two unrelated PERSON templates that share the value Mr. 
for the TITLE slot. Between this prospect and the three set fills for IN_AND_OUT tem- 
plates in Table 1, it is highly likely that an arbitrary IN_AND_OUT template produced by 
a system will overlap in at least one slot value with an arbitrary one in the key, which 
may in turn allow the SUCCESSION_EVENTS that point to them to be incorrectly aligned. 
Although the fact that the scoring algorithm is capable of assigning undeserved 
credit due to overly optimistic alignments i  not unknown to the MUC community (see, 
for instance, Aberdeen et al \[1995, 153, Table 4\] for a reference to "enthusiastic s oring 
mapping" for the Template Element ask of MUC-6), we are unaware of any previous 
acknowledgement of, or similar example which demonstrates, the potential severity 
of the problem to the extent hat Figure 4 does. This notwithstanding, one might still 
be tempted to view this behavior as relatively benign--perhaps there is no real harm 
done by giving systems the benefit of the doubt, along with a little undeserved credit 
that goes with it. While this will perhaps result in somewhat artificially inflated scores, 
there may be no reason to think that it would benefit one system or approach more 
than another, and this concession might seem reasonable considering the fact that there 
is likely to be no completely foolproof way to perform alignments. 
However, the potential harm that this behavior manifests in terms of the tech- 
nology development process--which, to our knowledge, has never been brought o 
light--is that it creates a situation in which uncontroversially positive changes in sys- 
tem output may result in a dramatically worse score, and likewise negative changes 
may result in a dramatically better score. Consider a (common) development scenario 
in which, starting from a state in which the system produces the output in Figure 4 
for the text in Figure 2, it is technically too difficult o modify the system to extract he 
correct (i.e., Julian Mounter) event, but in which a change can nonetheless be made to 
block the overgenerated (i.e., Rupert Murdoch) event. After such a modification, one 
would expect no change in recall, since no correct output is created or removed, and 
an improvement in precision, since an overgenerated vent is removed. 
What actually happens in this example is that recall drops from 0.533 (8) to zero 
(o), and precision goes from 0.615 (8) to undefined (0). To circumvent comparisons 
with undefined values, we can suppose that there was another, independent event 
extracted from a different part of the text that was aligned correctly against its cor- 
responding event in the answer key. For simplicity, we will assume that this event 
receives the same score as the overgenerated vent: a precision of 8 and a recall of 8 ig" 
With the overgenerated vent left in, the same scores as before are obtained: 16 ~___ 0.615 
16 ~--  0.533 recall, resulting in an F-score of 0.571. With the overgenerated precision and ~  
event removed, we obtain 8 = 0.615 precision and 8 = .267 recall, resulting in an 
F-score of 0.372. Instead of no change in recall and an improvement in precision, the 
reward for eliminating the overgenerated vent is the same precision, a 50% reduction 
in recall, and a 20-point reduction in F-score. Our clear "improvement" thus has the 
effect of reducing performance dramatically, implicitly instructing the developer to 
reintroduce the rules responsible for producing the overgenerated vent. 
The converse scenario yields an analogous problem. Consider a situation in which 
a system developer can add a rule to extract at least some of the information in 
the correct event--producing the output shown in Figure 5, for instance--but for 
whatever reason cannot make a change to block the overgenerated vent. We would 
expect his change to result in a marked increase in both recall and precision, since 
unlike before, information for a relevant event is now being produced. Indeed, the 
240 
Kehler, Bear, and Appelt Accurate Alignment in Evaluation 
<TEMPLATE-024-1> 
CONTENT <SUCC_EVENT-024-1> 
(SUCC_EVENT-024-1> 
SUCCESSION_ORG (ORG-024-1> 
POST "CEO" 
IN_AND_OUT <IN_AND_OUT-024-1} 
VACANCY_REASON OTH_UNK 
(ORG-024-1> 
ORG_NAME "STAR TV" 
ORG-TYPE COMPANY 
Figure 5 
Additional output for example text. 
(IN_AND_OUT-024-1> 
IO_PERSON (PERSON-024-1) 
NEW_STATUS IN 
ON_THE_JOB NO 
<PERSON-024-1> 
PER_NAME "JULIAN MOUNTER" 
PER_ALIAS "MOUNTER" 
alignment algorithm will correctly align this event with the key and leave the Rupert 
Murdoch event unaligned, resulting in a precision of 9 = .600, a recall of 9 = .360, 
and an F-score of 0.450. This is the anticipated result, and would constitute a large 
increase over the zero F-score that the overgenerated vent should have received when 
standing alone. However, this is a substantial reduction from the F-score of 0.571 
that the overgenerated vent actually receives, a change which implicitly instructs the 
developer to remove the rules responsible for extracting the correct event. 
In these two scenarios, positive changes to system output resulted in a dramat- 
ically reduced score. The opposite situation can also occur, in which a change that 
reduces the quality of the system's response nonetheless receives an increased score. 
One can merely reverse the scenarios. For instance, in a situation in which no output 
is being created for the Julian Mounter event and a developer considers adding a rule 
that produces the Rupert Murdoch event, the rise in F-score will indicate that this 
rule should be kept. Likewise, starting with the incorrect output in Figure 4 together 
with the correct output in Figure 5, a developer might consider emoving the rule 
responsible for creating the correct output. This would cause the F-score to rise from 
0.450 to 0.571, implicitly instructing the developer to keep it removed. 
Thus, in all of these scenarios, the feedback provided by the evaluation method 
may steer our system developer off of the path to the optimal system state. Likewise, 
the same effect would occur when employing automatic learning methods that use 
F-score as an objective function. Starting from the state of producing the output in Fig- 
ure 4, for example, suppose the learning procedure could in fact propose ach change 
necessary to get to the desired output, that is, to (i) eliminate the rules producing the 
erroneous output, and (ii) add rules for producing the output shown in Figure 5. These 
changes would result in a precision of 9 = .60, a recall of 9 = .75, and an F-score 
of 0.667, which is an improvement over both the zero result that the current output 
should receive, and the (artificially inflated) score of 0.571 it actually does receive. 
However, the type of incremental search process that efficiency concerns generally 
necessitate--one that can only perform one of steps (i) or (ii) in a single iteration and 
will only adopt the proposed change if it improves on its objective function--will not 
find this system state, since as we have seen, either move taken first would actually 
reduce the F-score. 
To sum, the fortuitous alignments allowed by the MUC-6 evaluation method create 
a situation in which both positive and negative system changes may not be reflected 
as such in the evaluation results. While there are other properties of the evaluation 
that conspire to help produce these anomalous results--including the choice to score 
all slot fills equally without respect o importance or entropy of their distribution of 
values, and to score slots which contain only pointers to other templates--these only 
241 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 2 
serve to make the effects more or less dramatic than they might otherwise be. The 
root cause of this behavior is the alignment process: None of the foregoing behaviors 
would occur if the alignment criterion was such that the templates in Figure 4 were 
not alignable, thus producing an F-score of zero. 
4. A Case Study 
The foregoing examples demonstrate he pitfalls of not employing strong alignment 
constraints in natural anguage system evaluations. In the case of IE, the constraints 
should come as close as possible to establishing that two template representations 
are meant o describe the same events or objects. Just as it would be nonsensical for 
evaluations of part-of-speech tagging systems to give credit for a correct ag assigned 
to a different word, or evaluations of syntactic annotation systems to give credit for 
bracketings assigned to a different sentence, IE evaluations should not give credit for 
a template structure that represents a different event in the text. While it may be 
tempting to give systems the benefit of the doubt in light of the fact that alignment 
in IE is inherently more difficult than in these other scenarios, we have seen that the 
negative consequences of such a move can subvert he goals and purposes of the 
evaluation, and indeed the technology development process. 
Having said this, a question that naturally arises is how robust his effect actually 
was for the MUC-6 task. Is the example shown in Figure 4 exceptional for MUC-6, and 
thus useful mainly for pedagogical purposes, or is it indicative of a more pervasive 
problem that could impact development using a larger set of training documents? It 
is difficult to answer this question, of course, since one cannot replay past phases of 
technology development. However, we do have a case study with which to investigate 
this question, as we have previously performed a 13 1/2-month effort in which we 
focused on improving performance on the MUC-6 task. Specifically, our goal was to see 
how far the FASTUS paradigm could be pushed by way of making as many incremental 
improvements a possible. We relied heavily on the MUC-6 scoring mechanism during 
this process, using the feedback it provided to drive our development in the manner 
described in Section 3. Throughout this process, we remained ignorant of the problems 
that we are reporting on presently. 
As a result of our effort, we have a record of the output of our system as it ex- 
isted in 53 distinct states of development. We can compare the feedback provided by 
the scoring algorithm used during the development process (henceforth, the standard 
algorithm), with the feedback that would have been received from a more accurate 
and restrictive alignment criterion (henceforth, the restrictive algorithm), which we 
describe in Section 4.1. We report on two types of comparison, each at the level of in- 
dividual documents (Section 4.2) and the entire 100-text development set (Section 4.3). 
We first report on the overall effects that the restrictive algorithm has on scores for 
individual system states. We then report on the extent o which the two algorithms 
disagreed on the direction of the difference in performance between a pair of system 
states--that is,whether the changes implemented between these states had a positive 
or negative ffect--as this is the central factor that developers and learning algorithms 
use to determine whether to adopt proposed system changes. As the difference be- 
tween any pair of states constitutes a set of intermediate system changes that one can 
evaluate, our 53 distinct states provide us with 53?52 = 1,378 pairs to examine. 2 
4.1 A Stricter Alignment Criterion 
As we mentioned in footnote 1, the scoring system provided for MUC-6 allows one to 
customize alignment criteria based on slot content. Because no slot in a template will 
242 
Kehler, Bear, and Appelt Accurate Alignment in Evaluation 
consistently and uniquely identify the event or object that it describes, it is difficult 
or impossible to design a perfect slot-based criterion. Nonetheless, there are more 
restrictive parameterizations that come much closer to producing only the correct 
alignments. We sought out the criterion that eliminates as many incorrect alignments 
as possible without being so restrictive that a system would be denied partial credit 
for correctly extracted information. 
Table 1 readily suggests a principled manner in which to restrict the mapping 
criterion: Avoid aligning templates olely on the basis of slots with only a small set 
of possible values (and in particular, those which have low entropy distributions), 
since shared values for these provide little evidence that the two templates represent 
the same entity or event. Indeed, our experience confirms that the large majority of 
alignment errors result from a fortuitous match on one of these slots. Each of the slots 
in Table 1 have at most four possible slot values, whereas the set of possible values for 
the remainder of the slots is essentially unbounded (except possibly for the POST slot 
of the SUCCESSION_EVENT template; we will return to this momentarily). Thus, while 
it is unlikely that templates for two unrelated companies will have the same company 
name, it is very likely that they both will have the value COMPANY in the ORG_TYPE 
slot. 
We therefore modified the MUC-6 alignment criterion so that any single shared 
value for a slot not in Table I is sufficient for alignment. (All other aspects of the align- 
ment criterion and procedure remained unchanged.) This criterion is still generous 
in some cases, for instance, the system output shown in Figure 4 receives an F-score 
of 0.143: The system will get credit for the coincidentally identical POST slot values 
and for the pointers to the SUCCESSION_\]~VENTS that will be aligned on the basis of 
those values. However, a criterion that bars such alignments may also disallow cer- 
tain cases in which a system should arguably deserve credit. 7While a small amount 
of undeserved credit may therefore remain, this amount is dramatically reduced from 
that which results from the standard algorithm. All slot values were still counted for 
scoring purposes, as in MUC-6. 
4.2 Effects of Stricter A l ignment  on Individual  Document  Results 
With our more restrictive alignment algorithm in hand, we begin by looking at its 
effect on performance at the document level. Only 53 of the 100 MUC-6 development 
texts were relevant, and because the recall of an irrelevant document is undefined 
regardless of what the system produces, only these 53 have defined F-scores. 
4.2.1 Effect on Scores. The restrictive algorithm tended to assign lower scores than 
the standard algorithm, as one would expect, since the best-scoring alignment found 
by the standard algorithm may be correctly disallowed by the restrictive algorithm. In 
7 As indicated in footnote 4, it is theoretically possible that a template produced by a system and a 
template in the answer key originate from a description ofthe same ntity or event, but in which the 
system's template isso corrupted by inaccurate orincomplete processing that the only correct slots that 
remain are included in Table 1. In our extensive analyses of system results, we found the number of 
such cases to be quite infrequent, and overwhelmed bythe number of cases in which alignments based 
only on these slots were demonstrably incorrect. One could argue about whether any partial credit is 
actually deserved in the former set of cases; in any case, we believe that not assigning the small 
amount of credit a system would receive isa small price to pay for rectifying the much greater negative 
effects of maintaining an overly lax alignment s rategy. Even if such partial credit is deemed eserved, 
however, our analyses suggest that the missed credit is more than made up for by the undeserved 
credit resulting from fortuitous matches on the POST slots of SUGCESSION_EVENT templates that our 
new criterion still allows, as described above. In fact, the overall effect of both appears to be rather 
negligible alone, and even more so when their opposite ffects on scores are taken together. 
243 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 2 
Madison Group Says Board Has Dismissed Lucas as Its President 
Madison Group Associates Inc. said its board dismissed Kenneth Lucas, president, naming Dean 
J. Trantalis as interim president. 
The company also said two new directors - Roland Breton and Steve Gibboney - had been appointed 
to its board. 
Mr. Lucas became chief executive of the media concern less than two months ago, when William 
T. Craig resigned from his job as a director and chief executive officer. 
The company gave no reason for Mr. Lucas's dismissal. Neither he nor Madison executives could 
be reached for comment. 
The management change is the latest in a series of events that have shaken the company in recent 
months. As previously reported, the Securities and Exchange Commission contacted several individuals 
about their dealings with the company. One of those individuals aid the SEC had asked about how the 
company valued its assets. 
Those assets consist largely of video libraries. According to a recent securities filing, an accountant 
formerly hired by Madison recommended that an independent specialist be hired to evaluate the video 
libraries. 
Figure 6 
Example text from MUC-6 development set (9403100087). 
our system runs, the scores for an average of 21.2 of the 53 documents were reduced. 
Thus, in a typical run, a substantial percentage of the document results--40%--had 
benefited from incorrect alignments from the standard algorithm. The magnitude of 
the reduction in document scores ranged from 0.14 to 36.84 points of F-score, averaging 
7.74. 
Interestingly, there were also cases in which the restrictive algorithm actually as- 
signed a higher score to the results for a document than the standard algorithm. One 
might wonder how this could happen, since the set of possible alignments allowed 
by the restrictive algorithm is a strict subset of those allowed by the standard algo- 
rithm. The reason lies in the fact that the alignment procedure does not perform an 
exhaustive search; instead, it uses the heuristic search method described in Section 2. 
It is therefore possible that an optimal but nonetheless correct solution exists which 
the standard algorithm does not find, but which the restrictive algorithm finds within 
the narrower search-space associated with its more restrictive criterion. 
Figure 6 shows an example from the MUC-6 development corpus, and Figures 7 
and 8 show a fragment of the alignments produced by the standard and restrictive al- 
gorithms, respectively. All of the remaining system output not shown received the 
same alignment by both algorithms. William Craig was represented by templates 
(PERSON-087-5) in the key and (PERSON-087-8) in the system response, and Kenneth 
Lucas was represented by templates (PERSON-087-1) in the key and {PERSON-087-20) 
in the system response; both were aligned correctly by both algorithms. 
The alignment in Figure 7, along with the remainder of the output not shown, 
results in an F-score of 69.44 for the text. Template /IN_AND_OUT-087-1) is aligned 
with (IN_AND_OuT-087-1), and (IN_AND_OuT-087-4) is aligned with (IN_AND_OUT-087- 
3), although in neither case do the IO_PERSON slots point to the (correctly) aligned 
PERSON templates. Nonetheless, each pair yields two correct values, specifically for 
the NEW_STATUS and ON_THE_JOB slots. 
This alignment is not possible with the restrictive algorithm, since it is performed 
solely on the basis of slots listed in Table 1. The restrictive algorithm finds the opposite 
alignment between the IN_AND_OuT templates, hown in Figure 8. This mapping also 
yields two correct slot fills for each IN_AND_OUT template, in this case, the IO_PERSON 
244 
Kehler, Bear, and Appelt Accurate Alignment in Evaluation 
COR (IN-AND_OUT-087-1) (IN-AND_OUT-087-1) 
inc IO~PERSON:  (PERSON-087-1) (PERSON-087-8) 
cor NEW_STATUS: OUT OUT 
cor ON_THE_JOB: UNCLEAR UNCLEAR 
COR (IN_AND_OUT-087-4) (IN-AND_OUT-087-3) 
inc IO_PERSON:  (PERSON-087-5) (PERSON-087-20) 
cor NEW-STATUS: OUT OUT 
cor ON_THE_JOB: No No 
spu OTHER_ORG: (ORGANIZATION-087-3) 
spu REL_OTHER_ORG: OUTSIDE_ORG 
COR (SUCCESSION_EVENT-087-1) (SUCCESSION_EVENT-087-2) 
cor SUCCESSION_ORG: (ORGANIZATION-087-1) (ORGANIZATION-087-9) 
cor POST: "PRESIDENT . . . .  PRESIDENT" 
cor IN-AND_OUT: (IN-AND_OUT-087-2) (IN-AND_OUT-087-4) 
inc (IN-AND_OUT-087-1) (IN-AND_OUT-087-3) 
cor VACANCY_REASON: REASSIGNMENT REASSIGNMENT 
COR (SUCCESS1ONfl~VENT-087-2) (SUCCESSION_EVENT-087-1) 
inc SUCCESSION_ORG: (ORGANIZATION-087-1) (ORGANIZATION-087-3) 
cor POST: "CHIEF EXECUTIVE . . . .  CHIEF EXECUTIVE" 
cor IN-AND_OUT: (IN-AND_OUT-087-3) (1N-AND_OUT-087-2) 
inc (IN-AND_OUT-087-4) (IN-AND_OUT-087-1) 
inc VACANCY_REASON: REASSIGNMENT OTH-UNK 
Figure 7 
Alignment for text 9403100087 with the standard algorithm. 
COR (IN_AND_OUT-087-4) (IN_AND_OUT-087-1) 
cor IO_PERSON:  (PERSON-087-5) (PERSON-087-8) 
cor NEW_STATUS: OUT OUT 
inc ON_THE_JOB: No UNCLEAR 
COR (1NAND_OUT-087-1) (INAND_OUT-087-3) 
cor IOA)ERSON:  (PERSON-087-1) (PERSON-087-20) 
cor NEW_STATUS: OUT OUT 
inc ON_THE_JOB: UNCLEAR NO 
spu OTHER_ORG: (ORGANIZATION-087-3) 
spu REL_OTHER_ORG: OUTSIDE_ORG 
COR (SUCCESSIONfl~VENT-087-1) (SUCCESSION_EVENT-087-2) 
cor SUCCESSION_ORG: (ORGANIZATION-087-1) (ORGANIZATION-087-9) 
cor POST: "PRESIDENT . . . .  PRESIDENT" 
cor IN.AND_OUT: ( IN_AND_OUT-087-1) (IN-AND_OUT-087-3) 
cor (IN_AND_OUT-087-2) (IN_AND_OUT-087o4) 
cor VACANCY_REASON: REASSIGNMENT REASSIGNMENT 
COR (SUCCESSION~VENT-087-2) (SUCCESSION_EVENT-087-1) 
inc SUCCESSION_ORG: (ORGANIZATION-087-1) (ORGANIZATION-087-3) 
cor POST: "CHIEF EXECUTIVE" "CHIEF EXECUTIVE" 
cor IN.AND_OUT: (IN-AND_OUT-087-4) (IN-AND_OUT-087-1) 
cor (IN-AND_OUT-087-3} (IN-AND_OUT-087-2) 
inc VACANCY_REASON: REASSIGNMENT OTH_UNK 
Figure 8 
Alignment for text 9403100087 with the restrictive algorithm. 
and  NEW_STATUS slots. This a l ignment - -wh ich  is the correct one- - resu l t s  in an F- 
score of 75.00: Despi te  the fact that  the SUCCESSION_EVENT templates  are a l igned the 
same way in both  cases, the restr ict ive a lgor i thm a l ignment  leads to two add i t iona l  
correct fills for the po in ters  to the proper ly  a l igned IN_AND_OUT templates.  Whi le  this 
a l ignment  was  a poss ib le  so lut ion for the s tandard  a lgor i thm,  it arb i t rar i ly  chose the 
wrong pa i r ing  of IN_AND_OuT templates - -both  possib i l i t ies  resu l ted in two shared slot 
va lues - -and  thus the system was den ied  more  than five po ints  of F-score on the article. 
245 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 2 
This behavior was not specific to this example in our system runs; 18 of the 53 
relevant texts (34%) displayed this behavior for at least one of the 53 system states. An 
average of 2.7 documents rose in score per system run. The magnitude of the increase 
in document score ranged from 0.25 to 7.27 points of F-score. 
To sum, the more accurate alignment criterion affected approximately 24 out of 
53 relevant documents (45%) for an average system run. In most cases, the effect was 
to reduce the score assigned by the standard algorithm, since the best-scoring (albeit 
incorrect) alignment found by the standard algorithm was often disallowed by the 
restrictive algorithm. However, due to the fact that the heuristic search process used 
for alignment is less likely to find the optimal mapping with the standard criterion, 
there were also cases in which the effect was to increase the score. 
4.2.2 Diverging Indications Between System States. We now ask to what extent hese 
documents exhibit the behaviors een in the four development scenarios described 
in Section 3. In the first two of these scenarios, a system change that should have 
improved F-score decreased it instead. For these, we would expect he restrictive al- 
gorithm to correctly indicate an improvement. In the second two scenarios, a system 
change that should have decreased F-score increased it instead. For these, we would ex- 
pect the restrictive algorithm to correctly indicate a reduction. Thus, we are interested 
in identifying those documents for which one algorithm signaled an improvement and 
the other signaled a reduction in score between a pair of system states. 
It turns out that the output for 42 of the 53 relevant documents (79%) displayed 
this behavior for at least one pair of system states. The magnitude of the difference 
between document scores varied greatly, from 0.10 to 25.00 points of F-score. In the 
case of the 25.00 point difference, the standard algorithm indicated a change from 
59.62 to 51.69, whereas the restrictive algorithm indicated achange from 34.62 to 51.69. 
Thus, while both algorithms assigned the same score to the second system state, the 
standard algorithm had assigned undeserved credit to the first system state, and what 
should have resulted in a 17-point improvement was shown instead as an 8-point 
reduction. 
To sum, the problems we noted in Section 3 are not peculiar to the example shown 
in Figure 2; examples exhibiting this behavior are readily found in practice. 
4.3 Effects of Stricter Alignment on Entire MUC-6 Development Set Results 
In an actual development setting, of course, developers generally do not focus on 
differences in F-score for a single text, but rely instead on the scores assigned to the 
entire 100-text development corpus. Although the previous discussion showed that 
our development scenarios occur in practice, it is quite possible that these document- 
level differences were inconsequential n terms of the feedback obtained for the entire 
development set. We thus look at the difference between the algorithms with respect 
to the scores they assign to this larger set. 
4.3.1 Effect on Scores. Unsurprisingly, the restrictive algorithm assigned a lower over- 
all score than the standard algorithm for all 53 system states. The magnitude of the 
reduction ranged from 2.09 to 4.97 points of F-score, averaging 3.29 points. 
4.3.2 Diverging Indications Between System States. We now ask if the two algorithms 
ever disagree about whether the difference between two system states constitutes a 
positive or negative change. This occurred for 90 of the 1,378 system state pairs (6.5%). 
The magnitude of the difference between the changes of performance measured by 
each algorithm ranged from 0.14 to 2.55 points, averaging 1.38. The magnitude was 
246 
Kehler, Bear, and Appelt Accurate Alignment in Evaluation 
less than I point in 33 cases, between i and 2 points in 42 cases, and was greater than 
2 points in 15 cases. 
These differences, and in particular those in the 2-point range, are large enough 
that they could affect a developer's decision about whether to adopt proposed system 
changes. In the case in which the difference was 2.55 points, for instance, a posi- 
tive change was reported by the standard algorithm as a negative one: It indicated a
decrement in performance of 1.26 points (from 56.74 to 55.48), whereas the restrictive 
algorithm indicated an increment of 1.29 points (from 51.84 to 53.13). In our experi- 
ence, by the time an IE system is in the 50-point performance range on the MUC-6 
task, the majority of further progress results from a series of incremental changes that 
have a relatively small affect on the overall score. Thus, a change that decreases per- 
formance by 1.26 points will almost certainly be removed from the system, whereas a
change that increases performance by 1.29 will almost certainly be kept. 
There were also cases in which a negative change was reported by the standard 
algorithm as a positive one. For one pair of system states, for example, the standard 
algorithm indicated an increase of 2.13 points (from 51.49 to 53.62), whereas the restric- 
tive algorithm indicated a reduction of 0.26 (from 48.91 to 48.65). Again, this difference 
could cause a developer to keep rules in the system that negatively impact he quality 
of its output. 
4.4 Summary 
A study of the results of a 13 1/2-month effort focused on the MUC-6 task suggests that 
the problems described in Section 3 are not merely pedagogical, but can and do occur 
in actual practice. These problems are prevalent enough that they could realistically 
affect he technology development process in an adverse manner. 
While it would be difficult to determine the extent o which these problems may 
have affected evelopment in MUC-6, we take care to note that we do not find that 
their severity was so strong that they, in and of themselves, compromised the integrity 
of the MUC-6 evaluation process. Indeed, the existing evidence suggests that any 
impact he alignment criterion may have had on the manner in which MUC-6 systems 
were developed, as well as how they were ranked with respect o each other in the 
final evaluation, was not likely to have been dramatic. 
The outcome of our study is therefore dually positive, in that the results demon- 
strate the potential of a lax alignment strategy to have a dramatically adverse ffect 
on the technology development process, without this potential having actually been 
fully realized in MUC-6 itself. It should be borne in mind that it would not be dif- 
ficult to construct a scenario in which the ramifications for a MUC-like task would 
have been far more severe--with a different task specification, template structure, set 
of slot definitions, or scoring scheme, for instance--to the extent hat the integrity of 
such an evaluation could be compromised. Thus, these results erve to highlight a po- 
tential pitfall to be avoided in future evaluations of IE and other high-level language 
processing tasks, which, like the MUCs, may be the principle driving forces behind 
technology development for extended periods of time. 
5. Conclusions 
Methods for evaluating NLP systems are essential for tracking progress during the 
technology development process. To properly drive this process in both system build- 
ing and machine learning settings, it is crucial that positive and negative modifications 
be reflected as such in the feedback provided by the scoring mechanism. We have pre- 
sented several scenarios which demonstrate hat the alignment strategy employed in 
247 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 2 
the MUC-6 evaluation creates a situation in which this requirement is not respected. 
Furthermore, we have shown that the problem is pervasive nough that it could re- 
alistically impact the development process using a larger set of development data. 
These results argue strongly for the use of strict and accurate alignment criteria in 
future natural language evaluations and for maintaining the independence of align- 
ment criteria and the mechanisms used to calculate scores. This lesson is important 
because alignment problems will likely become exacerbated in future evaluations, as 
the natural anguage applications addressed become yet more complex. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was completed while the first 
author was at SRI International. We would 
like to thank Nancy Chinchor, Lynette 
Hirschman, Jerry Hobbs, David Israel, 
Andreas Stolcke, Beth Sundheim, Mabry 
Tyson, Ralph Weischedel, and two 
anonymous reviewers for helpful comments 
on earlier versions of the paper. All 
opinions expressed herein remain our own. 
This work would not have been possible 
without he contributions of the following 
people at SRI: Jerry Hobbs, David Israel 
Megumi Kameyama, David Martin, Karen 
Myers, and Mabry Tyson. 
References 
Aberdeen, John, John Burger, David Day, 
Lynette Hirschman, Patricia Robinson, 
and Marc Vilain. 1995. MITRE: 
Description of the Alembic system used 
for MUC-6. In Proceedings ofthe Sixth 
Message Understanding Conference (MUC-6), 
pages 141-155, Columbia, MD, 
November. Morgan Kaufmann. 
Appelt, Douglas E., Jerry R. Hobbs, John 
Bear, David Israel, Megumi Kameyama, 
Andy Kehler, David Martin, Karen Myers, 
and Mabry Tyson. 1995. SRI International 
FASTUS system MUC-6 test results and 
analysis. In Proceedings ofthe Sixth Message 
Understanding Conference (MUC-6), 
pages 237-248, Columbia, MD, 
November. Morgan Kaufmann. 
Chinchor, Nancy and Gary Dungca. 1995. 
Four scorers and seven years ago: The 
scoring method for MUC-6. In Proceedings 
of the Sixth Message Understanding 
Conference (MUC-6), pages 33-38, 
Columbia, MD, November. Morgan 
Kaufmann. 
CSL Special Issue. 1998. Special Issue on 
Evaluation in Language and Speech 
Technology. Computer Speech and Language, 
12(4). 
Grishman, Ralph and Beth Sundheim. 1995. 
Design of the MUC-6 evaluation. In 
Proceedings ofthe Sixth Message 
Understanding Conference (MUC-6), 
pages 1-11, Columbia, MD, November. 
Morgan Kaufmann. 
Hirschrnan, L. 1998. The evolution of 
evaluation: Lessons from the message 
understanding conferences. Computer 
Speech and Language, 12(4):281-305. 
Sparck-Jones, Karen and Julia Rose Galliers. 
1996. Evaluating Natural Language 
Processing Systems: An Analysis and Review. 
Lecture notes in computer science, 1083. 
Springer. 
van Rijsbergen, C. J. 1979. Information 
Retrieval. Butterworths, London. 
248 
