The NICE Fairy-tale Game System1 
 
 
Joakim Gustafson, Linda Bell, Johan Boye, Anders Lindstr?m and Mats Wir?n 
TeliaSonera AB, 12386 Farsta, Sweden 
firstname.lastname@teliasonera.com 
 
                                                          
1 The work described in this paper was supported by the EU/HLT funded project NICE (IST-2001-35293), www.niceproject.com 
Abstract 
This paper presents the NICE fairy-tale game 
system, in which adults and children can 
interact with various animated characters in a 
3D world. Computer games is an interesting 
application for spoken and multimodal 
dialogue systems. Moreover, for the 
development of future computer games, 
multimodal dialogue has the potential to 
greatly enrichen the user?s experience. In this 
paper, we also present some requirements that 
have to be fulfilled to successfully integrate 
spoken dialogue technology with  a computer 
game application. 
1 Introduction 
The goal of the NICE project is to allow users of all 
ages to interact with lifelike conversational characters 
in a fairy-tale world inspired by the Danish author     
H C Andersen. To make these characters convincing 
in a computer game scenario, they have to possess 
conversational skills as well as the ability to perform  
physical actions in an interactive 3D world.  
What primarily distinguishes the NICE fairy-tale 
game system from other spoken dialogue systems is 
that the human-computer dialogue takes place within 
the context of an interactive computer game. 
However, spoken and multimodal dialogue is not 
supposed to be just an ?add-on? to the game, but the 
user?s primary means of progression through the 
story. The rationale for this is the great potential for 
more natural interaction we see in making methods 
from multimodal dialogue systems available in 
controlling gameplay. Potentially, spoken and 
multimodal interaction will make it possible to create 
a more engaging and immersive experience, or even 
facilitate the development of new kinds of computer 
games.    
Secondly, what makes NICE differ from typical 
spoken dialogue systems is the attempt to move away 
from strictly task-oriented dialogue. Instead, the 
interaction with the characters is domain-oriented. 
This means that the dialogue concerns different 
subplots in the fairy-tales, but without a clear goal-
orientation and without other demands than it being 
entertaining to the user. Furthermore, social 
interaction plays an important role in the fairy-tale 
world where the game takes place. By engaging in 
socializing with the animated characters, the user will 
find out things necessary to overcome various 
obstacles and enable progression through the story.  
Thirdly, a feature that differentiates NICE from 
other systems is that the main target user group of the 
system is children and young users. Previous studies 
have indicated that children employ partly different 
strategies when interacting with dialogue systems 
than adults do, and that there are also differences 
between age groups. For instance, younger children 
use less overt politeness markers and verbalize their 
frustration more than older children do (Arunachalam 
et al 2001). It has also been shown that children?s 
user experience is improved if they can communicate 
with a system with a ?personality? and that they 
benefit from being able to choose from several input 
modalities (Narayanan and Potamianos 2002). 
Furthermore, since many young people have a lot of 
experience with computer games, the believability of 
the dialogue characters and natural expressions will 
be critical aspects for the system?s success.  
Thus, computer games provide an excellent 
application area for research in spoken dialogue 
technology, requiring an advance of the state-of-the-
art in several fronts. Perhaps more importantly, game 
players will have a lot to gain from a successful 
incorporation of spoken dialogue technology into 
computer games. Today?s computer games are 
limited by the user?s input options, which are often 
restricted to direct manipulation and simple 
commands. In the development of the next generation 
of computer games, we believe that multimodal 
dialogue has the potential to greatly enrichen the 
user?s experience. For instance, spoken interaction 
makes it possible to refer to past events and objects 
currently not visible on the screen. Social interaction, 
which is already part of popular games such as SIMS, 
can be improved with spoken dialogue. Furthermore, 
speech and multimodal interaction supports 
cooperative games, where the user and character 
works together in solving a mutual problem.  
2 Spoken dialogue systems 
Spoken dialogue systems have so far mostly been 
designed with an overall goal to carry out a specific 
task, e.g. accessing time table information or ordering 
tickets (e.g. Zue et al 1991; Aust et al 1995). With 
task-oriented systems, it is possible to build domain 
models that can be used to predefine the language 
models and dialogue rules. The existence of 
predefined tasks makes it rather straight-forward to 
evaluate the performance of the dialogue system.  
Recent developments have made it possible to 
modify and extend the goals of spoken dialogue 
systems. Explorative dialogues, in which users are 
encouraged to browse through information without 
pursuing a specific task, have been presented by 
(Cassell et al 1999; Bell et al 2001). These 
dialogues still contain tasks to be solved during the 
interaction, e.g. giving constraints or receiving 
information about objects. However, explorative 
dialogue systems cannot be evaluated using merely 
the number of turns between different user 
interactions. A user who continues speaking with the 
system for a long time may do so because she is 
finding a lot of interesting information.  
Yet another type of dialogue system aims to 
present its users with an engaging and entertaining 
experience, without the presence of an external 
predetermined task. Conversational kiosks, such as 
August (Gustafson and Bell 2000) and MACK 
(Cassell et al 2002), encourage users to engage in 
social dialogues with embodied characters. Such 
dialogues are amenable to handling by a correctly 
designed dialogue system, since they primarily bring 
up features from the shared context. 
3 Interactive storytelling   
Interactivity has been defined as ?a kind of drama 
where the audience can modify the course of the 
actions [?] thus having an active role? (Szilas 1999). 
In interactive scenarios, the user helps the story 
unfold and may affect its course depending on his or 
her active participation. It has been argued that 
interactive storytelling will change computer 
entertainment by introducing better narrative content 
and allowing users to interfere with the progression 
of the storyline (Cavazza et al 2002). However, 
Young (2001) suggests that the drama manager of the 
system should put a limit to the user?s actions by not 
allowing interference that violates the overall 
narrative plan. Most interactive games developed so 
far allow users to intervene in the storytelling by 
acting on physical objects on the screen using direct 
maniputation (Young 2001; Cavazza et al 2002). 
Moreover, some systems allow users to interact with 
characters by means of written text input (Mateas and 
Stern 2002). In addition, Cavazza et al (2002) 
explored using a speech interface that handled 
isolated utterances from the user.  
4 The NICE fairy-tale game scenario  
The overall goal of the project is to provide users 
with an immersive dialogue experience in a 3D fairy-
tale world, see Figure 1. To this end, we have chosen 
to make spoken and multimodal dialogue the user?s 
primary vehicle of progressing through the story. It is 
also by verbal and non-verbal communication that the 
user can gain access to the goals and desires of the 
fairy-tale characters. This will be critical as the 
characters will ask the users to help them in solving 
problems. These problems either relate to objects that 
have to be manipulated or information that has to be 
retrieved from other fairy-tale characters.  
 
Figure 1. Cloddy Hans in the fairy-tale world. 
The fairy-tale domain was chosen because of its 
classic themes and stereotypical characters, well-
known to most adults as well as children. Some of 
these familiar characters are shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. The fairy-tale characters. 
To facilitate the progression through the story, we 
introduce Cloddy Hans, the user?s faithful assistant.  
Cloddy Hans?s character is conveyed to the users in 
the following way: he is a bit slow to understand, or 
so it seems. He sometimes appears hard of hearing 
and only understands spoken utterances and graphical 
gestures at a rather simple level. Cloddy Hans does 
not take a lot of initiatives, but is honest and anxious 
to try to help the user. In spite of his limited 
intellectual and perceptual capabilities, he may 
sometimes provide important clues through sudden 
flashes of insight.  
The user can ask Cloddy Hans to manipulate objects 
by referring to them verbally and/or by using the 
mouse. To understand the reason for not allowing 
users to directly manipulate objects on the screen, we 
have to recall what distinguishes NICE from other 
games, namely, spoken multimodal dialogue. We 
thus want to ensure that multimodal dialogue is 
appreciated by the user not just as an ?add-on? but as 
the primary means of progressing in the game. Our 
key to achieving this is to deliberately limit the 
capabilities of the key actors ? the user and Cloddy 
Hans ? in such a way that they can succeed only by 
cooperating through spoken multimodal dialogue. In 
other words, the user is intelligent but cannot himself 
affect objects in the world; Cloddy Hans on the other 
hand is a bit slow but capable of physical action 
according to what he gets told (and he may 
occasionally also provide tips to the user). 
The fairy-tale game will start with an introductory 
dialogue, in which the user meets Cloddy Hans in H C 
Andersen?s fairy-tale laboratory, see Figure 3. The 
simple task the user and Cloddy have to solve 
together is to take fairy-tale objects from a shelf and 
put them in the appropriate slot in a fairy-tale 
machine. Each slot is labelled with a symbol, which 
denotes the type of object supposed to go there, but 
since Cloddy Hans is not very bright, he needs help 
understanding these labels.  
 
Figure 3. Cloddy Hans in the fairy-tale lab 
The initial scenario is a ?grounding game? set in the 
context of a narrow task. In other words, its real 
purpose is a training session in which the user and 
Cloddy Hans agree on what different objects can be 
used for and how they can be referred to. This 
process also lets the player find out (by trial-and-
error) how to adapt in order to make it easier for the 
system to understand him or her. Moreover, Cloddy 
Hans sometimes explicitly instructs the user. For 
example, one lesson might be that it is sometimes 
more efficient to use multimodal input instead of just 
spoken utterances.  
The subsequent game in the fairy-tale world 
depends on what objects have been chosen by the 
user in the initial scenario. The advantage of this is 
that the objects are already grounded; for example, a 
sack of gold will be visually recognized by the player 
and there is an already agreed way of referring to it. 
5 System characteristics  
The game scenario as presented in the preceding 
section puts a number of requirements on the system. 
The scenario involves several animated characters, 
each with its own intended distinct personality. These 
personalities must be made explicit for the game 
player, and manifest themselves on all levels: from 
the appearance of the characters, their gestures and 
voices, choice of words, to their long-term behavior 
and overall role in the fairy-tale world. Furthermore, 
the characters need to be responsive, and be able to 
engage in conversation which makes sense to the 
player of the game. 
On the surface level, then, we need to have 
beautifully crafted animated characters and 
environments (these have been designed by the 
computer-game company Liquid Media). Each 
character must have its own voice that conveys the 
nature of that character?s personality, and be able to 
use prosodic cues to signal mood and emotions. To 
this end, a unit-selection speech synthesizer has been 
developed. Cloddy Hans has been given a slow, deep 
voice that goes along with his intended dunce 
personality. His repertoire of gestures and his style of 
walking also amplifies the impression of a slow-
witted but friendly person.  
On the input side, we need to recognize 
continuous, unconstrained speech for users of all 
ages. Previous studies have shown that children?s 
speech is associated with elevated error rates 
(Potamianos et al 1997; Oviatt and Adams 2000), 
making it necessary for Scansoft to retrain the NICE 
recognizer?s acoustic models. In addition, we need to 
take into account the disfluent speech patterns that 
are likely to arise, most probably because the users 
are unused to the situation or distracted by the virtual 
environment. On the other hand, not all input needs 
to be adequately interpreted. Much of the socializing 
utterances from the user can be handled in a 
satisfactory way by using shallow methods. 
Furthermore, the interpretation of the goal oriented 
interactions is simplified by the fact that the system 
knows which objects are visible on the screen and, 
more importantly, since it already knows what 
problems the fairy-tale characters has asked the user 
to help them to solve. Finally, the user also has the 
possibility of referring to objects using a pointing 
device. The software for the interpretation of this 
graphical input has been developed by LIMSI.  
The above characteristics have led us to design the 
system?s interpretation of user input in the following 
way. The system is implemented as a set of event-
driven processes that communicate via message-
passing. The architecture is essentially an extension 
of the one described in (Bell et al 2001). This 
architecture allows, among other things, for highly 
flexible turn-taking. When the user speaks, the 
system first tries to categorize the utterance as either 
social (needing only shallow interpretation) or goal-
oriented (needing further analysis). 
Finally, the long-term behavior of a character is 
decided by its set of internal goals and rules. A goal 
is essentially a predicate (that can be either true or 
false) concerning of the state of the virtual world. For 
instance, a character may have a goal to acquire a 
certain object or visit a certain place. If a given goal 
is not fulfilled (the predicate is false), the character 
will try to fulfill it. To this end it will use its set of 
rules, that define actions and dialogue acts that are 
likely to contribute to reaching the goal. 
6  Evaluation issues  
Task-oriented spoken dialogue systems are usually 
evaluated in terms of objective and subjective 
features. Objective criteria include the technical 
robustness and core functionality of the system 
components as well as system performance measures 
such as task completion rate. Subjective usability 
evaluations estimate features like naturalness and 
quality of the interactions, as well as user satisfaction 
reported in post-experimental interviews. However, 
many of these measures are simply not relevant for 
entertainment-type applications, where user 
satisfaction increases rather than decreases with task 
completion time. It can even be difficult to define 
what the completion of the task would be. In practice, 
computer games are usually evaluated by 
professional game reviewers and by the users in 
terms of number of copies sold.  
In the evaluation of the NICE fairy-tale game sales 
figures will not be possible to use, and several of the 
traditional objective measures are less relevant due to 
the domain. Instead, subjective measures involving 
features like ?narrative progression?, ?character 
believability?, and ?entertainment value?, will be 
used. They will be obtained off-line, by interviewing 
the users after their interactions and asking them to 
fill out questionnaires. Users will be asked how they 
perceived the quality of the actual interaction, as well 
as the personality of the fairy-tale characters. Expert 
evaluators, who will be able to replay the user 
interactions and inspect the system logs, will also be 
employed. Examples of evaluation questions to the 
experts include: ?Do the characters display 
meaningful roles and believable personalities that 
contribute to the story??, ?Do they succeed in 
signaling their level of understanding?, ?To what 
extent is the user able to affect the plot?? 
In order to be able to replay the user interactions with 
the fairy-tale system, all communication between the 
system modules are logged with time stamps. This 
will be a valuable tool both in the iterative system 
development and for system evaluations. At present, 
we are in the process of collecting data with the 
introductory game scenario. The data collected will 
be used to develop the subsequent scenarios in the 
fairy-tale game.  
References 
Arunachalam, S., D. Gould, E. Andersen, D. Byrd and S. S. 
Narayanan. (2001). Politeness and frustration language 
in child-machine interactions. Proceedings of 
Eurospeech: 2675-2678. 
Aust, H., M. Oerder, F. Seide and V. Steinbiss (1995). The 
Philips automatic train timetable information system. 
Speech Communication 17(3-4): 249-262. 
Bell, L., J. Boye and J. Gustafson (2001). Real-time 
handling of fragmented utterances. Proc. NAACL 2001 
workshop on Adaptation in Dialogue Systems. 
Cassell, J., T. Bickmore, M. Billinghurst, L. Campbell, K. 
Chang, H. Vilhj?lmsson and H. Yan (1999). 
Embodiment in conversational interfaces: Rea. 
Proceedings of CHI: 520-527. 
Cassell, J., T. Stocky, T. Bickmore, Y. Gao, Y. Nakano, K. 
Ryokai, D. Tversky, C. Vaucelle and H. Vilhjlmsson 
(2002). MACK: Media lab Autonomous 
Conversational Kiosk. Imagina 02. Monte Carlo. 
Cavazza, M., F. Charles and S. J. Mead (2002). Character-
based interactive storytelling. IEEE Intelligent 
Systems, Special issue on AI in Interactive 
Entertainment: 17-24. 
Gustafson, J. and L. Bell (2000). Speech technology on 
trial - Experiences from the August system. Natural 
Language Engineering 6(3-4): 273-286. 
Mateas, M. and A. Stern (2002). Architecture, authorial 
idioms and early observations of the interactive drama 
Facade. Technical report CM-CS-02-198. 
Narayanan, S. and A. Potamianos (2002). Creating 
conversational interfaces for children. IEEE 
Transactions on Speech and Audio Proc. 10(2): 65-78. 
Oviatt, S. and B. Adams (2000). Designing and evaluating 
conversational interfaces with animated characters. 
Embodied Conversational Agents. J. Cassell, J. 
Sullivan, S. Prevost and E. Churchill. MIT Press. 
Potamianos, A., S. Narayanan and S. Lee (1997). 
Automatic speech recognition for children. 
Proceedings of Eurospeech. 5: 2371-2374. 
Szilas, N. (1999). Interactive drama on the computer: 
beyond linear narrative. AAAI 1999 Fall Symposium 
on Narrative Intelligence. 
Young, R. M. (2001). An Overview of the Mimesis 
Architecture: Integrating Intelligent Narrative Control 
into an Existing Gaming Environment. Working Notes 
of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Artificial 
Intelligence and Interactive Entertainment. 
Zue, V., J. Glass, D. Goodline, H. Leung, M. Phillips, J. 
Polifroni and S. Seneff (1991). Integration of speech 
recognition and natural language processing in the 
MIT voyager system. Proc. ICASSP'91. Toronto. 
