Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 97?100,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Exploration of Term Dependence in Sentence Retrieval 
Keke Cai, Jiajun Bu, Chun Chen, Kangmiao Liu 
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University 
Hangzhou, 310027, China  
{caikeke,bjj,chenc,lkm}@zju.edu.cn 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper focuses on the exploration of 
term dependence in the application of 
sentence retrieval. The adjacent terms ap-
pearing in query are assumed to be related 
with each other. These assumed depend-
ences among query terms will be further 
validated for each sentence and sentences, 
which present strong syntactic relation-
ship among query terms, are considered 
more relevant. Experimental results have 
fully demonstrated the promising of the 
proposed models in improving sentence 
retrieval effectiveness. 
1 Introduction 
Sentence retrieval is to retrieve sentences in re-
sponse to certain requirements. It has been widely 
applied in many tasks, such as passage retrieval 
(Salton et al 1994), document summarization 
(Daum? and Marcu, 2006), question answering 
(Li, 2003) and novelty detection (Li and Croft 
2005). A lot of different approaches have been 
proposed for this service, but most of them are 
based on term matching. Compared with docu-
ment, sentence always consists of fewer terms. 
Limited information contained in sentence makes 
it quite difficult to implement such term based 
matching approaches. 
Term dependence, which means that the pres-
ence or absence of one set of terms provides in-
formation about the probabilities of the presence 
or absence of another set of terms, has been 
widely accepted in recent studies of information 
retrieval. Taking into account the limited infor-
mation about term distribution in sentence, the 
necessary of incorporating term dependence into 
sentence retrieval is clear. 
Two kinds of dependence can be considered in 
the service of sentence retrieval. The first one 
occurs among query or sentence terms and an-
other one occurs between query and sentence 
terms. This paper mainly focuses on the first kind 
of dependence and correspondingly proposes a 
new sentence retrieval model (TDSR). In general, 
TDSR model can be achieved through the follow-
ing two steps: 
The first step is to simulate the dependences 
among query terms and then represent query as a 
set of term combinations, terms of each of which 
are considered to be dependent with each other.  
The second step is to measure the relevance of 
each sentence by considering the syntactic rela-
tionship of terms in each term combination 
formed above and then sort sentences according 
to their relevance to the given query.  
The remainder is structured as follows: Section 
2 introduces some related studies. Section 3 de-
scribes the proposed sentence retrieval model. In 
Section 4, the experimental results are presented 
and section 5 concludes the paper. 
2 Related Works 
Sentence retrieval is always treated as a special 
type of document retrieval (Larkey et al 2002; 
Schiffman, 2002; Zhang et al 2003). Weight 
function, such as tfidf algorithm, is used to con-
struct the weighted term vectors of query and 
sentence. Similarity of these two vectors is then 
used as the evidence of sentence relevance. In 
fact, document retrieval differs from sentence 
retrieval in many ways. Thus, traditional docu-
97
ment retrieval approaches, when implemented in 
the service of sentence retrieval, cannot achieve 
the expected retrieval performance.  
Some systems try to utilize linguistic or other 
features of sentences to facilitate the detection of 
sentence relevance. In the study of White (2005), 
factors used for ranking sentences include the 
position of sentence in the source document, the 
words contained in sentence and the number of 
query terms contained in sentence. In another 
study (Collins-Thompson et al, 2002), semantic 
and lexical features are extracted from the initial 
retrieved sentences to filter out possible non-
relevant sentences. Li and Croft (2005) chooses 
to describe a query by patterns that include both 
query words and required answer types. These 
patterns are then used to retrieve sentences.  
Term dependence also has been tried in some 
sentence retrieval models. Most of these ap-
proaches realize it by referring to query expan-
sion or relevance feedback. Terms that are se-
mantically equivalent to the query terms or co-
occurred with the query terms frequently can be 
selected as expanded terms (Schiffman, 2002). 
Moreover, query also can be expanded by using 
concept groups (Ohgaya et al, 2003). Sentences 
are then ranked by the cosine similarity between 
the expanded query vector and sentence vector. 
In (Zhang et al, 2003), blind relevance feedback 
and automatic sentence categorization based 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) are combined 
together to finish the task of sentence retrieval. In 
recent study, a translation model is proposed for 
monolingual sentence retrieval (Murdock and 
Croft, 2005). The basic idea is to use explicit re-
lationships between terms to evaluate the transla-
tion probability between query and sentence. Al-
though the translation makes an effective utiliza-
tion of term relationships in the service of sen-
tence retrieval, the most difficulty is how to con-
struct the parallel corpus used for term translation. 
Studies above have shown the positive effects 
of term dependence on sentence retrieval. How-
ever, it is considered that for the special task of 
sentence retrieval the potentialities of term de-
pendence have not been fully explored. Sentence, 
being an integrated information unit, always has 
special syntactic structure. This kind of informa-
tion is considered quite important to sentence 
relevance. How to incorporate this kind of infor-
mation with information about dependences in 
query to realize the most efficient sentence re-
trieval is the main objective of this paper.   
3 TDSR Model 
As discussed above, the implementation of TDSR 
model consists of two steps. The following will 
give the detail description of each step. 
3.1 Term Dependences in Query 
Past studies have shown the importance of de-
pendences among query terms and different ap-
proaches have been proposed to define the styles 
of term dependence in query. In this paper, the 
assumption of term dependence starts by consid-
ering the possible syntactic relationships of terms. 
For that the syntactic relationships can happen 
among any set of query terms, hence the assump-
tion of dependence occurring among any query 
terms is considered more reasonable.  
The dependences among all query terms will 
be defined in this paper. Based on this definition, 
the given query Q can be represented as: Q = 
{TS1, TS2, ?, TSn}, each item of which contains 
one or more query terms. These assumed depend-
ences will be further evaluated in each retrieved 
sentence and then used to define the relevance of 
sentence 
3.2 Identification of Sentence Relevance 
Term dependences defined above provide struc-
ture basis for sentence relevance estimate. How-
ever, their effects to sentence relevance identifi-
cation are finally decided by the definition of sen-
tence feature function. Sentence feature function 
is used to estimate the importance of the esti-
mated dependences and then decides the rele-
vance of each retrieved sentence.  
In this paper, feature function is defined from 
the perspective of syntactic relationship of terms 
in sentence. The specific dependency grammar is 
used to describe such relationship in the form of 
dependency parse tree. A dependency syntactic 
relationship is an asymmetric relationship be-
tween a word called governor and another word 
called modifier. In this paper, MINIPAR is 
adopted as the dependency parser. An example of 
a dependency parse tree parsed by MINIPAR is 
shown in Figure 1, in which nodes are labeled by 
part of speeches and edges are labeled by relation 
types. 
98
 
Figure 1. Dependency parse tree of sentence ?Ev-
erest is the highest mountain?.  
 
As we know, terms within a sentence can be 
described by certain syntactic relationship (direct 
or indirect). Moreover, different syntactic rela-
tionships describe different degrees of associa-
tions. Given a query, the relevance of each sen-
tence is considered different if query terms pre-
sent different forms of syntactic relationships. 
This paper makes an investigation of syntactic 
relationships among terms and then proposes a 
novel feature function. 
To evaluate the syntactic relationship of terms, 
the concept of association strength should be de-
fined to each TSi ?Q with respect to each sen-
tence S. It describes the association of terms in 
TSi. The more closely they are related, the higher 
the value is. In this paper, the association strength 
of TSi is valued from two aspects: 
z Size of TSi. Sentences containing more 
query terms are considered more relevant. 
z Distance of TSi. In the context of depend-
ency parse tree, the link between two terms 
means their direct syntactic relationship. For 
terms with no direct linkage, their syntactic rela-
tionship can be described by the path between 
their corresponding nodes in tree. For example, in 
Figure 1 the syntactic relationship between terms 
?Everest? and ?mountain? can be described by 
the path: 
 
 
This paper uses term distance to evaluate terms 
syntactic relationship. Given two terms A and B, 
their distance distance(A, B) is defined as the 
number of linkages between A and B with no 
consideration of direction. Furthermore, for the 
term set C, their distance is defined as:  
               qqdistance
N
CD ji
Cqq ji
),(
1
)(
,
??=
?
                 (1) 
where N is the number of term pairs of C.  
Given the term set TSi, the association strength 
of TSi in sentence S is defined as: 
)()(
1
),( ii TSDTSSi STSAS ?? ?=                               (2) 
where S(TSi) is the size of term set TSi and pa-
rameters ? and ? are valued between 0 and 1 and 
used to control the influence of each component 
on the computation of AS(TSi).  
Based on the definition of association strength, 
the feature function of S can be further defined as: 
),(max),( STSASQSF i
QTSi?
=                                     (3) 
Taking the maximum association strength to 
evaluate sentence relevance conforms to the Dis-
junctive Relevance Decision principle (Kong et 
al., 2004). Based on the feature function defined 
above, sentences can be finally ranked according 
to the obtained maximum association strength. 
4 Experiments 
In this paper, the proposed method is evaluated 
on the data collection used in TREC novelty track 
2003 and 2004 with the topics N1-N50 and N51-
N100. Only the title portion of these TREC topics 
is considered. 
To measure the performance of the suggested 
retrieval model, three traditional sentence re-
trieval models are also performed, i.e., TFIDF 
model (TFIDF), Okapi model (OKAPI) and KL-
divergence model with Dirichlet smoothing 
(KLD). The result of TFIDF provides the base-
line from which to compare other retrieval mod-
els.  
Table 1 shows the non-interpolated average 
precision of each different retrieval models. The 
value in parentheses is the improvement over the 
baseline method. As shown in the table, TDSR 
model outperforms TFIDF model obviously. The 
improvements are respectively 15.3% and 10.2%.  
 
 N1-N50 N51-N100 
TFIDF 0.308 0.215 
OKAPI 0.239 (-22.4) 0.165 (-23.3%) 
KLD 0.281 (-8.8) 0.204 (-5.1%) 
TDSR 0.355 (15.3%) 0.237 (10.2%) 
 
Table 1.  Average precision of each different re-
trieval models 
 
Everest Be mountain
s pred 
Be (VBE)
Everest (N) mountain  (N)
the  (Det) highest  (A)Everest (N)
s pred
subj
det mod
99
Figure 2 and Figure 3 further depict the preci-
sion recall curve of each retrieval model when 
implemented on different query sets. The im-
provements of the proposed retrieval model indi-
cated in these figures are clear. TDSR outper-
forms other retrieval models at any recall point. 
 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Recall
Pr
ec
is
io
n TFIDF
OKAPI
KL
TDSR
 
 
Figure 2. Precision-Recall Curve of Each Re-
trieval Model (N1-N50) 
 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Recall
Pr
ec
is
io
n TFIDF
OKAPI
KL
TDSR
 
 
Figure 3. Precision-Recall Curve of Each Re-
trieval Model (N51-N100) 
5 Conclusions 
This paper presents a novel approach for sentence 
retrieval. Given a sentence, its relevance is meas-
ured by the degree of its support to the depend-
ences between query terms. Term dependence, 
which has been widely considered in the studies 
of document retrieval, is the basis of this retrieval 
model. Experimental results show the promising 
of the proposed models in improving sentence 
retrieval performance. 
References 
Barry Schiffman. 2002. Experiments in Novelty De-
tection at Columbia University. In Proceedings of 
the 11th Text REtrieval Conference, pages 188-196. 
Gerard Salton, James Allan, and Chris Buckley. 1994. 
Automatic structuring and retrieval of large text 
files. Communication of the ACM, 37(2): 97-108. 
Hal Daum? III and Daniel Marcu. 2006. Bayesian 
query-focused summarization. In Proceedings of 
the 21st International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting of 
the ACL, pages 305-312, Sydney, Australia. 
Kevyn Collins-Thompson, Paul Ogilvie, Yi Zhang, 
and Jamie Callan. 2002. Information filtering, Nov-
elty detection, and named-page finding. In Proceed-
ings of the 11th Text REtrieval Conference, Na-
tional Institute of Standards and Technology. 
Leah S. Larkey, James Allan, Margaret E. Connell, 
Alvaro Bolivar, and Courtney Wade. 2002. UMass 
at TREC 2002: Cross Language and Novelty 
Tracks. In Proceeding of the Eleventh Text Re-
trieval Conference, pages 721?732, Gaithersburg, 
Maryland. 
Min Zhang, Chuan Lin, Yiqun Liu, Le Zhao, Liang 
Ma, and Shaoping Ma. 2003. THUIR at TREC 
2003: Novelty, Robust, Web and HARD. In Pro-
ceedings of 12th Text Retrieval Conference, pages 
137-148. 
Ryen W. White, Joemon M. Jose, and Ian Ruthven. 
2005. Using top-ranking sentences to facilitate ef-
fective information access. Journal of the American 
Society for Information Science and Technology, 
56(10): 1113-1125. 
Ryosuke Ohgaya, Akiyoshi Shimmura, Tomohiro Ta-
kagi, and Akiko N. Aizawa. 2003. Meiji University 
web and novelty track experiments at TREC 2003. 
In Proceedings of the Twelfth Text Retrieval Con-
ference. 
Vanessa Murdock and W. Bruce Croft. 2005. A trans-
lation Model for Sentence retrieval. HLT/EMNLP. 
In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Lan-
guage Technologies and Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing, pages 684-691. 
Xiaoyan Li. 2003. Syntactic Features in Question An-
swering. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Inter-
national ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and 
Development in Information Retrieval, pages 455-
456, Toronto, Canada. 
Xiaoyan Li and W. Bruce Croft. 2005. Novelty detec-
tion based on sentence level patterns. In Proceed-
ings of ACM Fourteenth Conference on Information 
and Knowledge Management (CIKM), pages 744-
751, Bremen, Germany. 
Y.K. Kong, R.W.P. Luk, W. Lam, K.S. Ho and F.L. 
Chung. 2004. Passage-based retrieval based on pa-
rameterized fuzzy operators, ACM SIGIR Workshop 
on Mathematical/Formal Methods for Information 
Retrieval.  
100
