Word Sense Disambiguation for Cross-Language Information 
Retrieval 
Mary Xiaoyong Liu, Ted Diamond, and Anne R. Diekema 
School of  Information Studies 
Syracuse University 
Syracuse, NY 13244 
xliu03@mailbox.syr.edu 
t..diar0onl @twcny.rr.com 
diekemar@griailbox, syr. edu 
Abstract 
We have developed a word sense 
disambiguation algorithm, following Cheng and 
Wilensky (1997), to disambiguate among 
WordNet synsets. This algorithm is to be used in 
a cross-language information retrieval system, 
CINDOR, which indexes queries and documents 
in a language-neutral concept representation 
based on WordNet synsets. Our goal is to 
improve retrieval precision through word sense 
disambiguation. An evaluation against human 
disambiguation judgements suggests promise for 
our approach. 
1 Introduction 
The CINDOR cross-language information 
retrieval system (Diekema et al, 1998) uses an 
information structure known as "conceptual 
interlingua" for query and document 
representation. This conceptual interlingua is a 
hierarchically organized multilingual concept 
lexicon, which is structured following WordNet 
(Miller, 1990). By representing query and 
document terms by their WordNet synset 
numbers we arrive at essentially a language 
neutral representation consisting of synset 
numbers representing concepts. This 
representation facilitates cross-language retrieval 
by matching tea-m synonyms in English as well as 
across languages. However, many terms are 
polysemous and belong to multiple synsets, 
resulting in spurious matches in retrieval. The 
nounfigure for example appears in 13 synsets in 
WordNet 1.6. This research paper describes the 
early stages I of our efforts to develop a word 
sense disambiguation (WSD) algorithm aimed at 
improving the precision of our cross-language 
retrieval system. 
2 Related Work  
To determine the sense of a word, a WSD 
algorithm typically uses the context of the 
ambiguous word, external resources such as 
machine-readable dictionaries, or a combination 
of both. Although dictionaries provide useful 
word sense information and thesauri provide 
additional information about relatiomhips 
between words, they lack pragmatic information 
as can be found in corpora. Corpora contain 
examples of words that enable the development of 
statistical models of word senses and their 
contexts (Ide and Veronis, 1998; Leacock and 
Chodorow, 1998). 
There are two general problems with using 
corpora however; 1) corpora typically do not 
come pre-tagged with manually disambiguated 
senses, and 2) corpora are often not large nor 
diverse nough for all senses of a word to appear 
often enough for reliable statistical models (data 
sparseness). Although researchers have tried 
sense-tagging corpora automatically by using 
either supervised or unsupervised training 
methods, we have adopted a WSD algorithm 
which avoids the necessity for a sense-tagged 
training corpus. 
l Please note that he disambiguation research 
described inthis paper has not yet been extended to
multiple language areas. 
35 
P(synsetlcontext(w)) = 
P(context(w) I synset) P(synset) 
P(context(w)) 
(I) 
The problem of data sparseness i usually 
solved by using either smoothing methods, class- 
based methods, or by relying on similarity-based 
methods between words and co-occurrence data. 
Since we are using a WordNet-based resource for 
retrieval, using class-based methods seems a 
natural choice. Appropriate word classes can be 
formed by synsets or groups of synsets. The 
evidence of a certain sense (synset) is then no 
longer dependent on one word but on all the 
members of a particular synset. 
Yarowsky (1992) used Rogets Thesaurus 
categories as classes for WSD. His approach was 
based on selecting the most likely Roget category 
for nouns given their context of 50 words on 
either side. When any of the category indicator 
words appeared in the context of an ambiguous 
word, the indicator weights for each category 
were summed to determine the most likely 
category. The category with the largest sum was 
then selected. 
A similar approach to that of Yarowsky was 
followed by Cheng and Willensky (1997) who 
used a training matrix of associations of words 
with a certain category. Their algorithm was 
appealing to us because it requires no human 
intervention, and more importantly, it avoids the 
use of sense-tagged ata. Our methodology 
described in the next section is therefore based on 
Cheng and Wilensky's approach. 
Methods to reduce (translation) ambiguity in 
cross-language information retrieval have 
included using part-of-speech taggers to restrict 
the translation options (Davis 1997), applying 
pseudo-relevance feedback loops to expand the 
query with better terms aiding translation 
(Ballesteros and Croft 1997), using corpora for 
term translation disambiguation (Ballesteros and 
Croft, 1998), and weighted Boolean models 
which tend to have a self-disambiguating quality 
(Hull, 1997; Diekema et al, 1999; Hiemstra nd 
Kraaij, 1999). 
3 Methodology 
To disambiguate a given word, we would like 
to know the probability that a sense occurs in a 
given context, i.e., P(semse\[context). In this study, 
WordNet synsets are used to represent word 
senses, so P(senselcontext) can be rewritten as 
P(synsetlcontext), for each synset of which that 
word is a member. For nouns, we define the 
context of word w to be the occurrence of words 
in a moving window of I00 words (50 words on 
each side) around w 2. 
By Bayes Theorem, we can obtain the desired 
probability by inversion (see equation (I)). Since 
we are not specifically concerned with getting 
accurate probabilities but rather relative rank 
order for sense selection, we ignore P(context(w)) 
and focus on estimating 
P(context(w)lsymet)P(synset). The event space 
l~om which "context(w)" is drawn is the set of 
sets of words that ever appear with each other in 
the window around w. In other words, w induces 
a partition on the set of words. We define 
"context(w)" to be true whenever any of the 
words in the set appears in the window around w, 
and conversely to be false whenever none of the 
words in the set appears around w. If we assume 
independence of appearance of any two words in 
a given context, then we get: 
P(synset)?(1- l-I(1-P(wilsynset))) (2) 
wiecontext 
Due to the lack of sense-tagged corpora, we 
are not able to directly estimate P(synset) and 
P(wilsymet). Instead, we introduce "noisy 
estimators" (Pdsymet) and Pdwl\]symet)) to 
approximate hese probabilities. In doing so, we 
make two assumptions: l) The presence of any 
word Wk that belongs to synset si signals the 
presence of si; 2) Any word Wk belongs to all its 
synsets simultaneously, and with equal 
probability. Although the assumptions underlying 
the "noisy estimators" are not strictly true, it is 
our belief that the "noisy estimators" hould work 
reasonably well if: 
? The words that belong to symet sitend to 
appear in similar contexts when si is their 
intended sense; 
? These words do not completely overlap 
with the words belonging to some synset 
sj ( i ~ j ) that partially overlaps with si; 
2 For other parts of speech, the window size should 
be much smaller as suggested by previous research. 
36 
The common words between si and sj 
appear in different contexts when si and 
sj are their intended senses. 
4 The WSD Algorithm 
We chose as a basis the algorithms described 
by Yan'owsky (1992) and by Cheng and 
Wilensky (1997). In our variation, we use the 
synset numbers in WordNet to represent he 
senses of a word. Our algorithm learns 
associations of WordNet synsets with words in a 
surrounding context o determine a word sense. It 
consists of two phases. 
During the training phase, the algorithm 
reads in all training documents in collection and 
computes the distance-adjusted weight of co- 
occurrence of each word with each corresponding 
synset. This is done by establishing a 100-word 
window around a target word (50 words on each 
side), and correlating each synset to which the 
target word belongs with each word in the 
surrounding window. The result of the training 
phase is a matrix of associations of words with 
synsets. 
In the sense prediction phase, the algorithm 
takes as input randomly selected testing 
documents or sentences that contain the 
polysemous words we want to disambiguate and 
exploits the context vectors built in the training 
phase by adding up the weighted "votes". It then 
returns a ranked list of probability values 
associated with each synset, and chooses the 
synset with the highest probability as the sense of 
the ambiguous word. 
Figure 1 and Figure 2 show an outline of the 
algorithm. 
In this algorithm, "noisy estimators" are 
employed in the sense prediction phase. They are 
calculated using following formulas: 
M\[w, Ix\] 
Po(wilx)-- LwM\[wIx\] (3) 
where wi is a stem, x is a given synset, 
M\[w\]\[x\] is a cell in the correlation matrix that 
corresponds to word w and synset x, and 
Z.,,,,M\[wlx\] 
P~(x)= Z,,~w.y~rM\[wly \] (4) 
where w is any stem in the collection, x 
is a given symet, y is any synset ever occurred in 
collection. 
For each document d in collection 
read in a noun stem w from d 
for each synset s in which w occurs 
get the column b in the association matrix M that corresponds tos if the column already 
exists; create anew column for s otherwise 
for each word stem j appearing in the 100-word window around w 
get the row a in M that corresponds toj if the row already exists; create anew 
row for j otherwise 
add a distance-adjusted weight o M\[a\]\[b\] 
Figure 1: WSD Algorithm: the training phase 
Set value = 1 
For each word w to be disambiguated 
get synsets of w 
for each synset x ofw 
for each wi in the context ofw (within the 100-window around w) 
calculate Pc(wilx) 
value *= ( 1 - Pc(wilx)) 
P(context(w)lx) = 1 - value 
Calculate pc(x) 
P(xlcontext(w)) =p~(x)* P(eontext(w)lx) 
display a ranked list of the synsets arranged according to their P(xlcontext(w)) in decreasing 
order 
Figure 2: WSD Algorithm: the sense prediction phase 
37 
5 Evaluation 
As suggested by the WSD literature, 
evaluation of word sense disambiguation systems 
is not yet standardized (Resnik and Yarowsky, 
1997). Some WSD evaluations have been done 
using the Brown Corpus as training and testing 
resources and comparing the results against 
SemCor 3, the sense-tagged version of the Brown 
Corpus (Agirre and Rigau, 1996; Gonzalo et al, 
1998). Others have used common test suites such 
as the 2094-word line data of Leacock et al 
(1993). Still others have tended to use their own 
metrics. We chose an evaluation with a user- 
based component that allowed a ranked list of 
sense selection for each target word and enabled 
a comprehensive comparison between automatic 
and manual WSD results. In addition we wanted 
to base the disambiguation matrix on a corpus 
that we use for retrieval. This approach allows 
for a much richer evaluation than a simple hit-or- 
miss test. For vahdation purpose, we will conduct 
a fully automatic evaluation against SemCor in 
our future efforts. 
We use in vitro evaluation in this study, i.e. 
the WSD algorithm is tested independent of the 
retrieval system. The population consists of all 
the nouns in WordNet, after removal of 
monoseanous nouns, and after removal of a 
problematic lass of polysemous nouns. 4 We 
drew a random sample of 87 polysemous nouns 5
from this population. 
In preparation, for each noun in our sample 
we identified all the documents containing that 
noun from the Associated Press (AP) newspaper 
corpus. The testing document set was then 
formed by randomly selecting 10 documents from 
the set of identified ocuments for each of the 87 
nouns. In total, there are 867 documents in the 
3 SemCor is a semantically sense-tagged corpus 
comprising approximately 250, 000 words. The 
reported error rate is around 10% for polysemous 
words. 
4 This class of nouns refers to nouns that are in 
synsets in which they are the sole word, or in synsets 
whose words were subsets of other synsets for that 
noun. This situation makes disambiguation 
extremely problematic. This class of noun will be 
dealt with in a future version of our algorithm but for 
now it is beyond the scope of this evaluation. 
5 A polysemous noun is defined as a noun that 
belongs to two or more synsets. 
testing set. The training document set consists of 
all the documents in the AP corpus excluding the 
above-mentioned 867 documents. For each noun 
in our sample, we selected all its corresponding 
WordNet noun synsets and randomly selected 10 
sentence occurrences with each from one of the 
10 random documents. 
After collecting 87 polysemous nouns with 
10 noun sentences each, we had 870 sentences for 
disambiguation. Four human judges were 
randomly assigned to two groups with two judges 
each, and each judge was asked to disambiguate 
275 word occurrences out of which 160 were 
unique and 115 were shared with the other judge 
in the same group. For each word occurrence, the 
judge put the target word's possible senses in 
rank order according to their appropriateness 
given the context (ties are allowed). 
Our WSD algorithm was also fed with the 
identical set of 870 word occurrences in the sense 
prediction phase and produced a ranked hst of 
senses for each word occurrence. 
Since our study has a matched-group design 
in which the subjects (word occurrences) receive 
both the treatments and control, the measurement 
of variables is on an ordinal scale, and there is no 
apparently applicable parametric statistical 
procedure available, two nonparametric 
procedures -the Friedman two-way analysis of 
variance and the Spearman rank correlation 
coefficient -were originally chosen as candidates 
for the statistical analysis of our results. 
However, the number of ties in our results 
renders the Spearman coefficient unreliable. We 
have therefore concentrated on the Friedman 
analysis of our experimental results. We use the 
two-alternative test with o~=0.05. 
The first tests of interest were aimed at 
estabhshing inter-judge reliability across the 115 
shared sentenees by each pair of judges. The null 
hypothesis can be generalized as "There is no 
difference in judgments on the same word 
occurrences between two judges in the same 
group". Following general steps of conducting a
Friedman test as described by Siegel (1956), we 
cast raw ranks in a two-way table having 2 
conditions/columns (K = 2) with each of the 
human judges in the pair serving as one condition 
and 365 subjects/rows (N = 365) which are all 
the senses of the 115 word occurrences that were 
judged by both human judges. We then ranked 
38 
N K Xr 2 df Rejection region Reject H0? 
First pair of judges 365 2 .003 1 3.84 No 
Second pair of judges 380 2 2.5289 1 3.84 No 
Figure 3." Statistics for significance tests of inter-judge reliability (ct=.05, 2-alt. Test) 
Auto WSD vs man. WSD 
VS sense poo,Ung 
Auto WSD vs man. WSD 
Auto WSD vs sense pooling 
Man. WSD vs sense pooling 
N 
2840 
2840 
2840 
2840 
K x? 
3 73.217 
2 3.7356 
2 5.9507 
2 126.338 
df 
2 
Rejection region Reject H9? 
5.99 Yes 
3.84 No 
3.84 Yes 
3.84 Yes 
Figure 4: Statistics for significance tests among automatic WSD, manual WSD, 
and sense pooling (ct=.05, 2-alt. TesO 
the scores in each row from 1 to K (in this case K 
is 2), summed the derived ranks in each column, 
and calculated X\[ which is .003. For ct=0.05, 
degrees of freedom df = 1 (df = K -1), the 
rejection region starts at 3.84. Since .003 is 
smaller than 3.84, the null hypothesis is not 
rejected. Similar steps were used for analyzing 
reliability between the second pair of judges. In 
both cases, we did not find significant difference 
between judges (see Figure 3). 
Our second area of interest was the 
comparison of automatic WSD, manual WSD, 
and "sense pooling". Sense pooling equates to no 
disambiguation, where each sense of a word is 
considered equally likely (a tie). The null 
hypothesis (H0) is "There is no difference among 
manual WSD, automatic WSD, and sense 
pooling (all the conditions come from the same 
population)". The steps for Friedman analysis 
were similar to what we did for the inter-judge 
reliability test while the conditions and subjects 
were changed in each test according to what we 
would like to compare. Test results are 
summarized in Figure 4. In the three-way 
comparison shown in the first row of the table, 
we rejected H0 so there was at least one condition 
that was from a different population. By further 
conducting tests which examined each two of the 
above three conditions at a time we found that it 
was sense pooling that came from a different 
population while manual and automatic WSD 
were not significantly different. We can therefore 
conclude that our WSD algorithm is better than 
no disambiguation. 
6 Concluding Remarks 
The ambiguity of words may negatively 
impact the retrieval performance of a concept- 
based information retrieval system like CINDOR. 
We have developed a WSD algorithm that uses 
all the words in a WordNet symet as evidence of 
a given sense and builds an association matrix to 
learn the co-occurrence between words and 
senses. An evaluation of our algorithm against 
human judgements of a small sample of nouns 
demonstrated no significant difference between 
our automatic ranking of senses and the human 
judgements. There was, however, a significant 
difference between human judgement and 
rankings produced with no disambiguation where 
all senses were tied. 
These early results are such as to encourage 
us to continue our research in this area. In our 
future work we must tackle issues associated 
with the fine granularity of some WordNet sense 
distinctions, synsets which are proper subsets of 
other synsets and are therefore impossible to 
distinguish, and also extend our evaluation to 
multiple languages and to other parts of speech. 
The next step in our work will be to evaluate our 
WSD algorithm against the manually sense- 
tagged SemCor Corpus for validation, and then 
integrate our WSD algorithm into CINDOR's 
processing and evaluate directly the impact on 
retrieval performance. We hope to verify that 
word sense disambiguation leads to improved 
precision in cross-language retrieval. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was completed under a research 
practicum at MNIS-TextWise Labs, Syracuse, 
NY. We thank Paraie Sheridan for many useful 
discussions and the anonymous reviewers for 
constructive comments on the manuscript. 
39
References 
Agirre, E., and Rigau, G. (1996). Word sense 
disambiguation using conceptual density. In: 
Proceedings of the 16th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, 
Copenhagen, 1996. 
Ballesteros, L., and Croft, B. (1997). Phrasal 
Translation and Query Expansion Techniques 
for Cross-Language Information Retrieval. In: 
Proceedings of the Association for Computing 
Machinery Special lnterest Group on 
Information Retrieval (ACM/SIGIR) 20th 
International Conference on Research and 
Development in Information Retrieval; 1997 
July 25-31; Philadelphia, PA. New York, NY: 
ACM, 1997.84-91. 
Ballesteros, L., and CroR, B. (1998). Resolving 
Ambiguity for Cross-language Retrieval. In: 
Proceedings of the Association for Computing 
Machinery Special lnterest Group on 
Information Retrieval (ACM/SIGIR) 21st 
International Conference on Research and 
Development in Information Retrieval; 1998 
August 24-28; Melbourne, Australia. New York, 
NY: ACM, 1998. 64-71. 
Cheng, I., and Wilensky, R. (1997). An Experiment 
in Enhancing Information Access by Natural 
Language Processing. UC Berkeley Computer 
Science Technical Report UCB/CSD 
UCB//CSD-97-963. 
Davis, M. (1997). New Experiments in Cross- 
language Text Retrieval at NMSU's Computing 
Research Lab. In: D.K. Harman, Ed. The Fifth 
Text Retrieval Conference (TREC-5). 1996, 
November. National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg, MD. 
Diekema, A., Oroumchian, F., Sheridan, P., and 
Liddy, E. D. (1999). TREC-7 Evaluation of 
Conceptual Interlingua Document Retrieval 
(CINDOR) in English and French. In: E.M. 
Voorhees and D.K. Harman (Eds.) The Seventh 
Text REtrieval Conference (TREC-7). 1998, 
November 9-11; National Institute of Standards 
and Technology 0NIST), Gaithersburg, MD. 
169-180. 
Gonzalo, J., Verdejo, F., Chugur, I., and Cigarran, J. 
(1998). Indexing with WordNet synsets can 
improve text retrieval. In: Proceedings of the 
COLING/ACL Workshop on Usage of WordNet 
in Natural Language Processing Systems, 
Montreal, 1998. 
Hiemstra, D., and Kraaij, W. (1999). Twenty-One at 
TREC-7: Ad-hoc and Cross-language Track. In: 
E.M. Voorhees and D.K. Harman (Eds.) The 
Seventh Text REtrieval Conference (TREC-7). 
1998, November 9-11; National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST), 
Gaithersburg, MD. 227-238. 
Hull, D. A. (1997). Using Structured Queries for 
Disambiguation i  Cross-Language Information 
Retrieval. In: American Association for 
Artificial Intelligence (AAA1) Symposium on 
Cross-Language Text and Speech Retrieval; 
1997 March 24-26; Palo Alto, CA 1997.84-98. 
Ide, N., and Veronis, J. (1998). Introduction to the 
Special Issue on Word Sense Disambiguation: 
The State of the Art. Computational Linguistics, 
Vol. 24, No. 1, 1-40. 
Leacock, C., and Chodorow, M. (1998). Combining 
Local Context and WordNet Similarity for Word 
Sense Identification. In: Christiane Fellbaum 
rEds.) WordNet: An Electronic Lexical 
Database. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
l_e, acock, C., ToweU, G., and Voorhees, E. (1993). 
Corpus-based Statistical Sense Resolution. In: 
Proceedings, ARPA Human Language 
Technology Workshop, Plainsboro, NJ. 260-265. 
Miller, G. (1990). WordNet: An On-line Lexical 
Database. International Journal of 
Lexicography, Vol. 3, No. 4, Special Issue. 
Resnik, P., and Yarowsky, D. (1997). A Perspective 
on Word Sense Disambiguation Methods and 
Their Evaluation, position paper presented atthe 
ACL SIGLEX Workshop on Tagging Text with 
Lexical Semantics: Why, What, and Howl held 
April 4-5, 1997 in Washington, D.C., USA in 
conjunction with ANLP-97. 
Siegel, S. (1956). Nonparametric Statistics for the 
Behavioral Sciences. New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1956. 
Yarowsky, D. (1992). Word-Sense Disambiguation 
Using Statistical Models of Roger's Categories 
Trained on Large Corpora. In: Proceedings of 
the Fourteenth International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics. Nantes, France. 454- 
460. 
40
