Portability Issues for Speech Recognition Technologies 
Lori Lamel, Fabrice Lefevre, Jean-Luc Gauvain and Gilles Adda
Spoken Language Processing Group,
CNRS-LIMSI, 91403 Orsay, France
flamel,lefevre,gauvain,gaddag@limsi.fr
ABSTRACT
Although there has been regular improvement in speech recog-
nition technology over the past decade, speech recognition is far
from being a solved problem. Most recognition systems are tuned
to a particular task and porting the system to a new task (or lan-
guage) still requires substantial investment of time and money, as
well as expertise. Todays state-of-the-art systems rely on the avail-
ability of large amounts of manually transcribed data for acous-
tic model training and large normalized text corpora for language
model training. Obtaining such data is both time-consuming and
expensive, requiring trained human annotators with substantial a-
mounts of supervision.
In this paper we address issues in speech recognizer portabil-
ity and activities aimed at developing generic core speech recogni-
tion technology, in order to reduce the manual effort required for
system development. Three main axes are pursued: assessing the
genericity of wide domain models by evaluating performance under
several tasks; investigating techniques for lightly supervised acous-
tic model training; and exploring transparent methods for adapting
generic models to a specific task so as to achieve a higher degree of
genericity.
1. INTRODUCTION
The last decade has seen impressive advances in the capability
and performance of speech recognizers. Todays state-of-the-art
systems are able to transcribe unrestricted continuous speech from
broadcast data with acceptable performance. The advances arise
from the increased accuracy and complexity of the models, which
are closely related to the availability of large spoken and text cor-
pora for training, and the wide availability of faster and cheaper
computational means which have enabled the development and im-
plementation of better training and decoding algorithms. Despite
the extent of progress over the recent years, recognition accuracy is
still extremely sensitive to the environmental conditions and speak-
ing style: channel quality, speaker characteristics, and background
This work was partially financed by the European Commission
under the IST-1999 Human Language Technologies project 11876
Coretex.
.
noise have an important impact on the acoustic component of the
speech recognizer, whereas the speaking style and the discourse
domain have a large impact on the linguistic component.
In the context of the EC IST-1999 11876 project CORETEX we
are investigating methods for fast system development, as well as
development of systems with high genericity and adaptability. By
fast system development we refer to: language support, i.e., the
capability of porting technology to different languages at a reason-
able cost; and task portability, i.e. the capability to easily adapt a
technology to a new task by exploiting limited amounts of domain-
specific knowledge. Genericity and adaptability refer to the capac-
ity of the technology to work properly on a wide range of tasks and
to dynamically keep models up to date using contemporary data.
The more robust the initial generic system is, the less there is a
need for adaptation. Concerning the acoustic modeling component,
genericity implies that it is robust to the type and bandwidth of the
channel, the acoustic environment, the speaker type and the speak-
ing style. Unsupervised normalization and adaptation techniques
evidently should be used to enhance performance further when the
system is exposed to data of a particular type.
With today?s technology, the adaptation of a recognition system
to a new task or new language requires the availability of suffi-
cient amount of transcribed training data. When changing to new
domains, usually no exact transcriptions of acoustic data are avail-
able, and the generation of such transcribed data is an expensive
process in terms of manpower and time. On the other hand, there
often exist incomplete information such as approximate transcrip-
tions, summaries or at least key words, which can be used to pro-
vide supervision in what can be referred to as ?informed speech
recognition?. Depending on the level of completeness, this infor-
mation can be used to develop confidence measures with adapted or
trigger language models or by approximate alignments to automatic
transcriptions. Another approach is to use existing recognizer com-
ponents (developed for other tasks or languages) to automatically
transcribe task-specific training data. Although in the beginning the
error rate on new data is likely to be rather high, this speech data
can be used to re-train a recognition system. If carried out in an
iterative manner, the speech data base for the new domain can be
cumulatively extended over time without direct manual transcrip-
tion.
The overall objective of the work presented here is to reduce
the speech recognition development cost. One aspect is to develop
?generic? core speech recognition technology, where by ?generic?
we mean a transcription engine that will work reasonably well on a
wide range of speech transcription tasks, ranging from digit recog-
nition to large vocabulary conversational telephony speech, with-
out the need for costly task-specific training data. To start with we
assess the genericity of wide domain models under cross-task con-
Table 1: Brief descriptions and best reported error rates for the corpora used in this work.
Corpus Test Year Task Train (#spkr) Test (#spkr) Textual Resources Best WER
BN 98 TV & Radio News 200h 3h Closed-captions, commercial transcripts,
manual transcripts of audio data
13.5
TI-digits 93 Small Vocabulary 3.5h (112) 4h (113) - 0.2
ATIS 93 H-M Dialog 40h (137) 5h (24) Transcriptions 2.5
WSJ 95 News Dictation 100h (355) 45mn (20) Newspaper, newswire 6.6
S9 WSJ 93 Spontaneous Dictation 43mn (10) Newspaper, newswire 19.1
ditions, i.e., by recognizing task-specific data with a recognizer de-
veloped for a different task. We chose to evaluate the performance
of broadcast news acoustic and language models, on three com-
monly used tasks: small vocabulary recognition (TI-digits), read
and spontaneous text dictation (WSJ), and goal-oriented spoken di-
alog (ATIS). The broadcast news task is quite general, covering a
wide variety of linguistic and acoustic events in the language, en-
suring reasonable coverage of the target task. In addition, there are
sufficient acoustic and linguistic training data available for this task
that accurate models covering a wide range of speaker and language
characteristics can be estimated.
Another research area is the investigation of lightly supervised
techniques for acoustic model training. The strategy taken is to
use a speech recognizer to transcribe unannotated data, which are
then used to estimate more accurate acoustic models. The light
supervision is applied to the broadcast news task, where unlim-
ited amounts of acoustic training data are potentially available. Fi-
nally we apply the lightly supervised training idea as a transpar-
ent method for adapting the generic models to a specific task, thus
achieving a higher degree of genericity. In this work we focus on
reducing training costs and task portability, and do not address lan-
guage transfer.
We selected the LIMSI broadcast news (BN) transcription sys-
tem as the generic reference system. The BN task covers a large
number of different acoustic and linguistic situations: planned to
spontaneous speech; native and non-native speakers with different
accents; close-talking microphones and telephone channels; quiet
studio, on-site reports in noisy places to musical background; and
a variety of topics. In addition, a lot of training resources are avail-
able including a large corpus of annotated audio data and a huge
amount of raw audio data for the acoustic modeling; and large
collections of closed-captions, commercial transcripts, newspapers
and newswires texts for linguistic modeling. The next section pro-
vides an overview of the LIMSI broadcast news transcription sys-
tem used as our generic system.
2. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
The LIMSI broadcast news transcription system has two main
components, the audio partitioner and the word recognizer. Data
partitioning [6] serves to divide the continuous audio stream into
homogeneous segments, associating appropriate labels for cluster,
gender and bandwidth with the segments. The speech recognizer
uses continuous density HMMs with Gaussian mixture for acous-
tic modeling and n-gram statistics estimated on large text corpora
for language modeling. Each context-dependent phone model is a
tied-state left-to-right CD-HMM with Gaussian mixture observa-
tion densities where the tied states are obtained by means of a de-
cision tree. Word recognition is performed in three steps: 1) initial
hypothesis generation, 2) word graph generation, 3) final hypoth-
esis generation. The initial hypotheses are used for cluster-based
acoustic model adaptation using the MLLR technique [13] prior to
word graph generation. A 3-gram LM is used in the first two de-
coding steps. The final hypotheses are generated with a 4-gram LM
and acoustic models adapted with the hypotheses of step 2.
In the baseline system used in DARPA evaluation tests, the acous-
tic models were trained on about 150 hours of audio data from the
DARPA Hub4 Broadcast News corpus (the LDC 1996 and 1997
Broadcast News Speech collections) [9]. Gender-dependent acous-
tic models were built using MAP adaptation of SI seed models for
wide-band and telephone band speech [7]. The models contain
28000 position-dependent, cross-word triphone models with 11700
tied states and approximately 360k Gaussians [8].
The baseline language models are obtained by interpolation of
models trained on 3 different data sets (excluding the test epochs):
about 790M words of newspaper and newswire texts; 240M word
of commercial broadcast news transcripts; and the transcriptions of
the Hub4 acoustic data. The recognition vocabulary contains 65120
words and has a lexical coverage of over 99% on all evaluation test
sets from the years 1996-1999. A pronunciation graph is associated
with each word so as to allow for alternate pronunciations. The
pronunciations make use of a set of 48 phones set, where 3 phone
units represent silence, filler words, and breath noises. The lexicon
contains compound words for about 300 frequent word sequences,
as well as word entries for common acronyms, providing an easy
way to allow for reduced pronunciations [6].
The LIMSI 10x system obtained a word error of 17.1% on the
1999 DARPA/NIST evaluation set and can transcribe unrestricted
broadcast data with a word error of about 20% [8].
3. TASK INDEPENDENCE
Our first step in developing a ?generic? speech transcription en-
gine is to assess the most generic system we have under cross-
task conditions, i.e., by recognizing task-specific data with a rec-
ognizer developed for a different task. Three representative tasks
have been retained as target tasks: small vocabulary recognition
(TI-digits), goal-oriented human-machine spoken dialog (ATIS),
and dictation of texts (WSJ). The broadcast news transcription task
(Hub4E) serves as the baseline. The main criteria for the task se-
lection were that they are realistic enough and task-specific data
should be available. The characteristics of these four tasks and the
available corpora are summarized in Table 1.
For the small vocabulary recognition task, experiments are car-
ried out on the adult speaker portion of the TI-digits corpus [14],
containing over 17k utterances from a total of 225 speakers. The
vocabulary contains 11 words, the digits ?1? to ?9?, plus ?zero? and
?oh?. Each speaker uttered two versions of each digit in isolation
and 55 digit strings. The database is divided into training and test
sets (roughly 3.5 hours each, corresponding to 9k strings). The
speech is of high quality, having been collected in a quiet environ-
ment. The best reported WERs on this task are around 0.2-0.3%.
The digit phonemic coverage being very low, only 108 context-
dependent models are used in our recognition system. The task-
Table 2: Word error rates (%) for BN98, TI-digits, ATIS94,
WSJ95 and S9 WSJ93 test sets after recognition with three dif-
ferent configurations: (left) BN acoustic and language models;
(center) BN acoustic models combined with task-specific lex-
ica and LMs and (right) task-dependent acoustic and language
models.
Test Set BN models Task LMs Task models
BN98 13.6 13.6 13.6
TI-digits 17.5 1.7 0.4
ATIS94 22.7 4.7 4.4
WSJ95 11.6 9.0 7.6
S9 WSJ93 12.1 13.6 15.3
specific LM for the TI-digits is a simple grammar allowing any se-
quence of up to 7 digits. Our task-dependent system performance
is 0.4% WER.
The DARPA Air Travel Information System (ATIS) task is cho-
sen as being representative of a goal-oriented human-machine di-
alog task, and the ARPA 1994 Spontaneous Speech Recognition
(SPREC) ATIS-3 data (ATIS94) [4] is used for testing purposes.
The test data amounts for nearly 5 hours of speech from 24 speakers
recorded with a close-talking microphone. Around 40h of speech
data are available for training. The word error rates for this task in
the 1994 evaluation were mainly in the range of 2.5% to 5%, which
we take as state-of-the-art for this task. The acoustic models used
in our task-specific system include 1641 context-dependent phones
with 4k independent HMM states. A back-off trigram language
model has been estimated on the transcriptions of the training ut-
terances. The lexicon contains 1300 words, with compounds words
for multi-word entities in the air-travel database (city and airport
names, services etc.). The WER obtained with our task-dependent
system is 4.4%.
For the dictation task, the Wall Street Journal continuous speech
recognition corpus [17] is used, abiding by the ARPA 1995 Hub3
test (WSJ95) conditions. The acoustic training data consist of 100
hours of speech from a total of 355 speakers taken from the WSJ0
and WSJ1 corpora. The Hub3 baseline test data consist of stu-
dio quality read speech from 20 speakers with a total duration of
45 minutes. The best result reported at the time of the evaluation
was 6.6%. A contrastive experiment is carried out with the WSJ93
Spoke 9 data comprised of 200 spontaneous sentences spoken by
journalists [11]. The best performance reported in the 1993 evalua-
tion on the spontaneous data was 19.1% [18], however lower word
error rates have since been reported on comparable test sets (14.1%
on the WSJ94 Spoke 9 test data). 21000 context and position-
dependent models have been trained for the WSJ system, with 9k
independent HMM states. A 65k-word vocabulary was selected
and a back-off trigram model obtained by interpolating models trained
on different data sets (training utterance transcriptions and newspa-
pers data). The task-dependent WSJ system has a WER of 7.6% on
the read speech test data and 15.3% on the spontaneous data.
For the BN transcription task, we follow the conditions of the
1998 ARPA Hub4E evaluation (BN98) [15]. The acoustic training
data is comprised of 150 hours of North-American TV and radio
shows. The best overall result on the 1998 baseline test was 13.5%.
Three sets of experiments are reported. The first are cross-task
recognition experiments carried out using the BN acoustic and lan-
guage models to decode the test data for the other tasks. The second
set of experiments made use of mixed models, that is the BN acous-
tic models and task-specific LMs. Due to the different evaluation
paradigms, some minor modifications were made in the transcrip-
tion procedure. First of all, in contrast with the BN data, the data
for the 3 tasks is already segmented into individual utterances so
the partitioning step was eliminated. With this exception, the de-
coding process for the WSJ task is exactly the same as described in
the previous section. For the TI-digits and ATIS tasks, word decod-
ing is carried out in a single trigram pass, and no speaker adaptation
was performed.
The WERs obtained for the three recognition experiments are
reported in Table 2. A comparison with Table 1 shows that the
performances of the task-dependent models are close to the best re-
ported results even though we did not devote too much effort in op-
timizing these models. We can also observe by comparing the task-
dependent (Table 2, right) and mixed (Table 2, middle) conditions,
that the BN acoustic models are relatively generic. These mod-
els seem to be a good start towards truly task-independent acoustic
models. By using task-specific language models For the TI-digits
and ATIS we can see that the gap in performance is mainly due
a linguistic mismatch. For WSJ the language models are more
closely matched to BN and only a small 1.6% WER reduction is
obtained. On the spontaneous journalist dictation (WSJ S9 spoke)
test data there is even an increase in WER using the WSJ LMs,
which can be attributed to a better modelization of spontaneous
speech effects (such as breath and filler words) in the BN models.
Prior to introducing our approach for lightly supervised acoustic
model training, we describe our standard training procedure in the
next section.
4. ACOUSTIC MODEL TRAINING
HMM training requires an alignment between the audio signal
and the phone models, which usually relies on a perfect ortho-
graphic transcription of the speech data and a good phonetic lex-
icon. In general it is easier to deal with relatively short speech seg-
ments so that transcription errors will not propagate and jeopardize
the alignment. The orthographic transcription is usually considered
as ground truth and training is done in a closely supervised man-
ner. For each speech segment the training algorithm is provided
with the exact orthographic transcription of what was spoken, i.e.,
the word sequence that the speech recognizer should hypothesize
when confronted with the same speech segment.
Training acoustic models for a new corpus (which could also re-
flect a change of task and/or language), usually entails the follow-
ing sequence of operations once the audio data and transcription
files have been loaded:
1. Normalize the transcriptions to a common format (some ad-
justment is always needed as different text sources make use
of different conventions).
2. Produce a word list from the transcriptions and correct blatant
errors (these include typographical errors and inconsistencies).
3. Produce a phonemic transcription for all words not in our mas-
ter lexicon (these are manually verified).
4. Align the orthographic transcriptions with the signal using ex-
isting models and the pronunciation lexicon (or bootstrap mod-
els from another task or language). This procedure often re-
jects a substantial portion of the data, particularly for long seg-
ments.
5. Eventually correct transcription errors and realign (or just ig-
nore these if enough audio data is available)
6. Run the standard EM training procedure.
This sequence of operations is usually iterated several times to
refine the acoustic models. In general each iteration recovers a por-
tion of the rejected data.
5. LIGHTLY SUPERVISED ACOUSTIC
MODEL TRAINING
One can imagine training acoustic models in a less supervised
manner, by using an iterative procedure where instead of using
manual transcriptions for alignment, at each iteration the most likely
word transcription given the current models and all the information
available about the audio sample is used. This approach still fits
within the EM training framework, which is well-suited for miss-
ing data training problems. A completely unsupervised training
procedure is to use the current best models to produce an ortho-
graphic transcription of the training data, keeping only words that
have a high confidence measure. Such an approach, while very en-
ticing, is limited since the only supervision is provided by the con-
fidence measure estimator. This estimator must in turn be trained
on development data, which needs to be small to keep the approach
interesting.
Between using carefully annotated data such as the detailed tran-
scriptions provided by the LDC and no transcription at all, there is
a wide spectrum of possibilities. What is really important is the
cost of producing the associated annotations. Detailed annotation
requires on the order of 20-40 times real-time of manual effort, and
even after manual verification the final transcriptions are not ex-
empt from errors [2]. Orthographic transcriptions such as closed-
captions can be done in a few times real-time, and therefore are
quite a bit less costly. These transcriptions have the advantage that
they are already available for some television channels, and there-
fore do not have to be produced specifically for training speech
recognizers. However, closed-captions are a close, but not exact
transcription of what is being spoken, and are only coarsely time-
aligned with the audio signal. Hesitations and repetitions are not
marked and there may be word insertions, deletions and changes
in the word order. They also are missing some of the additional
information provided in the detailed speech transcriptions such as
the indication of acoustic conditions, speaker turns, speaker identi-
ties and gender and the annotation of non-speech segments such as
music. NIST found the disagreement between the closed-captions
and manual transcripts on a 10 hour subset of the TDT-2 data used
for the SDR evaluation to be on the order of 12% [5].
Another approach is to make use of other possible sources of
contemporaneous texts from newspapers, newswires, summaries
and the Internet. However, since these sources have only an indirect
correspondence with the audio data, they provide less supervision.
The basic idea is of light supervision is to use a speech recog-
nizer to automatically transcribe unannotated data, thus generat-
ing ?approximate? labeled training data. By iteratively increasing
the amount of training data, more accurate acoustic models are ob-
tained, which can then be used to transcribe another set of unanno-
tated data. The modified training procedure used in this work is:
1. Train a language model on all texts and closed captions after
normalization
2. Partition each show into homogeneous segments and label the
acoustic attributes (speaker, gender, bandwidth) [6]
3. Train acoustic models on a very small amount of manually
annotated data (1h)
4. Automatically transcribe a large amount of training data
5. (Optional) Align the closed-captions and the automatic tran-
scriptions (using a standard dynamic programming algorithm)
6. Run the standard acoustic model training procedure on the
speech segments (in the case of alignment with the closed
captions only keep segments where the two transcripts are in
agreement)
7. Reiterate from step 4.
It is easy to see that the manual work is considerably reduced, not
only in generating the annotated corpus but also during the training
procedure, since we no longer need to extend the pronunciation lex-
icon to cover all words and word fragments occurring in the training
data and we do not need to correct transcription errors. This ba-
sic idea was used to train acoustic models using the automatically
generated word transcriptions of the 500 hours of audio broadcasts
used in the spoken document retrieval task (part of the DARPA
TDT-2 corpus used in the SDR?99 and SDR?00 evaluations) [3].
This corpus is comprised of 902 shows from 6 sources broadcast
between January and June 1998: CNN Headline News (550 30-
minute shows), ABC World News Tonight (139 30-minute shows),
Public Radio International The World (122 1-hour shows), Voice of
America VOA Today and World Report (111 1-hour shows). These
shows contain about 22k stories with time-codes identifying the
beginning and end of each story.
First, the recognition performance as a function of the available
acoustic and language model training data was assessed. Then we
investigated the accuracy of the acoustic models obtained after rec-
ognizing the audio data using different levels of supervision via
the language model. With the exception of the baseline Hub4 lan-
guage models, none of the language models include a component
estimated on the transcriptions of the Hub4 acoustic training data.
The language model training texts come from contemporaneous
sources such as newspapers and newswires, and commercial sum-
maries and transcripts, and closed-captions. The former sources
have only an indirect correspondence with the audio data and pro-
vide less supervision than the closed captions. For each set of LM
training texts, a new word list was selected based on the word fre-
quencies in the training data. All language models are formed by
interpolating individual LMs built on each text source. The interpo-
lation coefficients were chosen in order to minimize the perplexity
on a development set composed of the second set of the Nov98
evaluation data (3h) and a 2h portion of the TDT2 data from Jun98
(not included in the LM training data). The following combinations
were investigated:
 LMa (baseline Hub4 LM): newspaper+newswire (NEWS), com-
mercial transcripts (COM) predating Jun98, acoustic transcripts
 LMn t c: NEWS, COM, closed-captions through May98
 LMn t: NEWS, COM through May98
 LMn c: NEWS, closed-captions through May98
 LMn: NEWS through May98
 LMn to: NEWS through May98, COM through Dec97
 LMno: NEWS through Dec97
Table 3: Word error rate for various conditions using acous-
tic models trained on the HUB4 training data with detailed
manual transcriptions. All runs were done in less than 10xRT,
except the last row. ?1S? designates one set of gender-
independent acoustic models, whereas ?4S? designates four sets
of gender and bandwidth dependent acoustic models.
Training Conditions bn99 1 bn99 2 Average
1h 1S, LMn t c 35.2 31.9 33.3
69h 1S, LMn t c 20.2 18.0 18.9
123h 1S, LMn t c 19.3 17.1 18.0
123h 4S, LMn t c 18.5 16.1 17.1
123h 4S, LMa 18.3 16.3 17.1
123h 4S, LMa, 50x 17.1 14.5 15.6
Table 4: Word error rate for different language models and increasing quantities of automatically labeled training data on the 1999
evaluation test sets using gender and bandwidth independent acoustic models. LMn t c: NEWS, COM, closed-captions through
May98 LMn t: NEWS, COM through May98 LMn c: NEWS, closed-captions through May98 LMn: NEWS through May98
LMn to: NEWS through May98, COM through Dec97 LMno: NEWS through Dec97.
Amount of training data %WER
raw unfiltered LMn t c LMn t LMn c LMn LMn to LMno
150h 123h 18.0 18.6 19.1 20.6 18.7 20.9
1h 1h 33.3 33.7 34.4 35.9 33.9 36.1
14h 8h 26.4 27.6 27.4 29.0 27.6 30.6
28h 17h 25.2 25.7 25.6 28.1 25.7 28.9
58h 28h 24.3 25.2 25.7 27.4 25.1 27.9
It should be noted that all of the conditions include newspaper
and newswire texts from the same epoch as the audio data. These
provide an important source of knowledge particularly with re-
spect to the vocabulary items. Conditions which include the closed
captions in the LM training data provide additional supervision in
the decoding process when transcribing audio data from the same
epoch.
For testing purposes we use the 1999 Hub4 evaluation data, which
is comprised of two 90 minute data sets selected by NIST. The first
set was extracted from 10 hours of data broadcast in June 1998,
and the second set from a set of broadcasts recorded in August-
September 1998 [16]. All recognition runs were carried out in un-
der 10xRT unless stated otherwise. The LIMSI 10x system ob-
tained a word error of 17.1% on the evaluation set (the combined
scores in the penultimate row in Table 3 4S, LMa) [8]. The word
error can be reduced to 15.6% for a system running at 50xRT (last
entry in Table 3).
As can be seen in Table 3, the word error rates with our orig-
inal Hub4 language model (LMa) and the one without the tran-
scriptions of the acoustic data (LMn t c) give comparable results
using the 1999 acoustic models trained on 123 hours of manually
annotated data (123h, 4S). The quality of the different language
models listed above are compared in the first row of Table 3 us-
ing speaker-independent (1S) acoustic models trained on the same
Hub4 data (123h). As can be observed, removing any text source
leads to a degradation in recognition performance. It appears it is
more important to include commercial transcripts (LMn t), even
if they are old (LMn to) than the closed captions (LMn c). This
suggests that the commercial transcripts more accurately represent
spoken language than closed-captioning. Even if only newspaper
and newswire texts are available (LMn), the word error increases
by only 14% over the best configuration (LMn t c), and even using
older newspaper and newswire texts (LMno) does not substantially
increase the word error rate. The second row of Table 3 gives the
word error rates with acoustic models trained on only 1 hour of
manually transcribed data. These are the models used to initialize
the process of automatically transcribing large quantities of data.
These word error rates range from 33% to 36% across the language
models.
We compared a straightforward approach of training on all the
automatically annotated data with one in which the closed-captions
are used to filter the hypothesized transcriptions, removing words
that are ?incorrect?. In the filtered case, the hypothesized transcrip-
tions are aligned with the closed captions story by story, and only
regions where the automatic transcripts agreed with the closed cap-
tions were kept for training purposes. To our surprise, somewhat
comparable recognition results were obtained both with and with-
out filtering, suggesting that inclusion of the closed-captions in the
language model training material provided sufficient supervision
(see Table 5).1 It should be noted that in both cases the closed-
caption story boundaries are used to delimit the audio segments
after automatic transcription.
To investigate this further we are assessing the effects of reduc-
ing the amount of supervision provided by the language model
training texts on the acoustic model accuracy (see Table 4). With
14 hours (raw) of approximately labeled training data, the word er-
ror is reduced by about 20% for all LMs compared with training on
1h of data which has carefully manual transcriptions. Using larger
amounts of data transcribed with the same initial acoustic models
gives smaller improvements, as seen by the entries for 28h and 58h.
The commercial transcripts (LMn+t and LMn+to), even if predat-
ing the data epoch, are seen to be more important than the closed-
captions (LMn+c), supporting the earlier observation that they are
closer to spoken language. Even if only news texts from the same
period (LMn) are available, these provide adequate supervision for
lightly supervised acoustic model training.
Table 5: Word error rates for increasing quantities of auto-
matically label training data on the 1999 evaluation test sets
using gender and bandwidth independent acoustic models with
the language model LMn t c (trained on NEWS, COM, closed-
captions through May98).
Amount of training data %WER
raw unfiltered filtered unfiltered filtered
14h 8h 6h 26.4 25.7
28h 17h 13h 25.2 23.7
58h 28h 21h 24.3 22.5
140h 76h 57h 22.4 21.1
287h 140h 108h 21.0 19.9
503h 238h 188h 20.2 19.4
6. TASK ADAPTATION
The experiments reported in the section 3 show that while direct
recognition with the reference BN acoustic models gives relatively
1The difference in the amounts of data transcribed and actually
used for training is due to three factors. The first is that the total du-
ration includes non-speech segments which are eliminated prior to
recognition during partitioning. Secondly, the story boundaries in
the closed captions are used to eliminate irrelevant portions, such
as commercials. Thirdly, since there are many remaining silence
frames, only a portion of these are retained for training.
Table 6: Word error rates (%) for TI-digits, ATIS94, WSJ95 and S9 WSJ93 test sets after recognition with three different configura-
tions, all including task-specific lexica and LMs: (left) BN acoustic models, (middle left) unsupervised adaptation of the BN acoustic
models, (middle right) supervised adaptation of the BN acoustic models and (right) task-dependent acoustic models.
Test Set BN models Unsupervised Adaptation Supervised Adaptation Task-dep. models
BN models BN models
TI-digits 1.7 0.8 0.5 0.4
ATIS94 4.7 4.7 3.2 4.4
WSJ95 9.0 6.9 6.7 7.6
S9 WSJ93 13.6 12.6 11.4 15.3
competitive results, the WER on the targeted tasks can still be im-
proved. Since we want to minimize the cost and effort involved in
tuning to a target task, we are investigating methods to transpar-
ently adapt the reference acoustic models. By transparent we mean
that the procedure is automatic and can be carried out without any
human expertise. We therefore apply the approach presented in the
previous section, that is the reference BN system is used to tran-
scribe the training data of the destination task. This supposes of
course that audio data have been collected. However, this can be
carried out with an operational system and the cost of collecting
task-specific training data is greatly reduced since no manual tran-
scriptions are needed. The performance of the BN models under
cross task conditions is well within the range for which the approx-
imate transcriptions can be used for acoustic model adaptation.
The reference acoustic models are then adapted by means of a
conventional adaptation technique such as MLLR and MAP. Thus
there is no need to design a new set of models based on the training
data characteristics. Adaptation is also preferred to the training
of new models as it is likely that the new training data will have
a lower phonemic contextual coverage than the original reference
models.
The cross-task unsupervisedadaptation is evaluated for the tasks:
TI-digits, ATIS and WSJ. The 100 hours of the WSJ data were tran-
scribed using the BN acoustic and language models. For ATIS, only
26 of the 40 hours of training data from 276 speakers were tran-
scribed, due to time constraints. For TI-digits, the training data was
transcribed using a mixed configuration, combining the BN acous-
tic models with the simple digit loop grammar.2 For completeness
we also used the task-specific audio data and the associated tran-
scriptions to carry out supervised adaptation of the BN models.
Gender-dependent acoustic models were estimated using the cor-
responding gender-dependent BN models as seeds and the gender-
specific training utterances as adaptation data. For WSJ and ATIS,
the speaker ids were directly used for gender identification since
in previous experiments with this test set there were no gender
classification errors. Only the acoustic models used in the sec-
ond and third word decoding passes have been adapted. For the
TI-digits, the gender of each training utterance was automatically
classified by decoding each utterance twice, once with each set of
gender-dependent models. Then, the utterance gender was deter-
mined based on the best global score between the male and female
models (99.0% correct classification).
Both the MLLR and MAP adaptation techniques were applied.
The recognition tests were carried out under mixed conditions (i.e.,
with the adapted acoustic models and the task-dependent LM). The
2In order to assess the quality of the automatic transcription, we
compared the system hypotheses to the manually provided training
transcriptions. For resulting word error rates on the training data
are 11.8% for WSJ, 29.1% for ATIS and 1.2% for TI-digits.
BN models are first adapted using MLLR with a global transforma-
tion, followed by MAP adaptation.
The word error rates obtained with the task-adapted BN mod-
els are given in Table 6 for the four test sets. Using unsupervised
adaptation the performance is improved for TIdigits (53% relative),
WSJ (19% relative) and S9 (7% relative).
The manual transcriptions for the targeted tasks were used to
carry out supervised model adaptation. The results (see the 4th col-
umn of Table 6) show a clear improvement over unsupervisedadap-
tation for both the TI-digits (60% relative) and ATIS (47% relative)
tasks. A smaller gain of about 10% relative is obtained for the spon-
taneous dictation task, and only 3% relative for read WSJ data. The
gain appears to be correlated with the WER of the transcribed data:
the difference between BN and task specific models is smaller for
WSJ than ATIS and TI-digits. The TI-digit task is the only task for
which the best performance is obtained using task-dependent mod-
els rather than BN models adapted with supervised. For the other
tasks, the lowest WER is obtained when the supervised adapted BN
acoustic models are used: 3.2% for ATIS, 6.7% for WSJ and 11.4%
for S9. This result confirms our hypothesis that better performance
can be achieved by adapting generic models with task-specific data
than by directly training task-specific models.
7. CONCLUSIONS
This paper has explored methods to reduce the cost of developing
models for speech recognizers. Two main axes have been explored:
developing generic acoustic models and the use of low cost data for
acoustic model training.
We have explored the genericity of state-of-the-art speech recog-
nition systems, by testing a relatively wide-domain system on data
from three tasks ranging in complexity. The generic models were
taken from the broadcast news task which covers a wide range of
acoustic and linguistic conditions. These acoustic models are rel-
atively task-independent as there is only a small increase in word
error relative to the word error obtained with task-dependent acous-
tic models, when a task-dependent language model is used. There
remains a large difference in performance on the digit recogni-
tion task which can be attributed to the limited phonetic coverage
of this task. On a spontaneous WSJ dictation task, the broadcast
news acoustic and language are more robust to deviations in speak-
ing style than the read-speech WSJ models. We also have shown
that unsupervised acoustic model adaptation can reduce the perfor-
mance gap between task-independent and task-dependent acoustic
models, and that supervised adaptation of generic models can lead
to better performance than that achieved with task-specific models.
Both supervised and unsupervised adaptation are less effective for
the digits task indicating that these may be a special case.
We have investigated the use of low cost data to train acoustic
models for broadcast news transcription, with supervision provided
the language models. Recognition results obtained with acoustic
models trained on large quantities of automatically annotated data
are comparable (under a 10% relative increase in word error) to
results obtained with acoustic models trained on large quantities
of manually annotated data. Given the significantly higher cost of
detailed manual transcription (substantially more time consuming
than producing commercial transcripts, and more expensive since
closed captions and commercial transcripts are produced for other
purposes), such approaches are very promising as they require sub-
stantial computation time, but little manual effort. Another advan-
tage offered by this approach is that there is no need to extend the
pronunciation lexicon to cover all words and word fragments oc-
curring in the training data. By eliminating the need for manual
transcription, automated training can be applied to essentially un-
limited quantities of task-specific training data. While the focus of
our work has been on reducing training costs and task portability,
we have been exploring these in a multi-lingual context.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Adda, M. Jardino, J.L. Gauvain, ?Language Modeling for Broad-
cast News Transcription,? ESCA Eurospeech?99, Budapest, 4, pp.
1759-1760, Sept. 1999.
[2] C. Barras, E. Geoffrois et al,?Transcriber: development and use of a
tool for assisting speech corpora production,? SpeechCommunication,
33(1-2), pp. 5-22, Jan. 2001.
[3] C. Cieri, D. Graff, M. Liberman, ?The TDT-2 Text and Speech
Corpus,? DARPA Broadcast News Workshop, Herndon. (see also
http://morph.ldc.upenn.edu/TDT).
[4] D. Dahl, M. Bates et al, ?Expanding the Scope of the ATIS Task : The
ATIS-3 Corpus,? Proc. ARPA Spoken Language Systems Technology
Workshop, Plainsboro, NJ, pp. 3-8, 1994.
[5] J. Garofolo, C. Auzanne, E. Voorhees, W. Fisher, ?1999 TREC-8 Spo-
ken Document Retrieval Track Overview and Results,? 8th Text Re-
trieval Conference TREC-8, Nov. 1999.
[6] J.L. Gauvain, G. Adda, et al, ?Transcribing Broadcast News: The
LIMSI Nov96 Hub4 System,? Proc. ARPA Speech Recognition Work-
shop, pp. 56-63, Chantilly, Feb. 1997.
[7] J.L. Gauvain, C.H. Lee, ?Maximum a Posteriori Estimation for Mul-
tivariate Gaussian Mixture Observation of Markov Chains,? IEEE
Trans. on SAP, 2(2), pp. 291-298, April 1994.
[8] J.L. Gauvain, L. Lamel, ?Fast Decoding for Indexation of Broadcast
Data,? ICSLP?2000, 3, pp. 794-798, Beijing, Oct. 2000.
[9] D. Graff, ?The 1996 Broadcast News Speech and Language-Model
Corpus,? Proc. DARPA Speech Recognition Workshop, Chantilly, VA,
pp. 11-14, Feb. 1999.
[10] T. Kemp, A. Waibel, ?UnsupervisedTraining of a Speech Recognizer:
Recent Experiments,? Eurospeech?99, 6, Budapest, pp. 2725-2728,
Sept. 1999.
[11] F. Kubala, J. Cohen et al, ?The Hub and Spoke Paradigm for CSR
Evaluation,? Proc. ARPA SpokenLanguageSystems TechnologyWork-
shop, Plainsboro, NJ, pp. 9-14, 1994.
[12] L. Lamel, J.L. Gauvain, G. Adda, ?Lightly Supervised Acoustic
Model Training,? Proc. ISCA ITRW ASR2000, pp. 150-154, Paris,
Sept. 2000.
[13] C.J. Leggetter, P.C. Woodland, ?Maximum likelihood linear regres-
sion for speaker adaptation of continuous density hidden Markov
models,? Computer Speech & Language, 9(2), pp. 171-185, 1995.
[14] R.G. Leonard, ?A Database for speaker-independent digit recogni-
tion,? Proc. ICASSP, 1984.
[15] D.S. Pallett, J.G. Fiscus, et al ?1998 Broadcast News Benchmark Test
Results,? Proc. DARPA Broadcast News Workshop, pp. 5-12, Hern-
don, VA, Feb. 1999.
[16] D. Pallett, J. Fiscus, M. Przybocki, ?Broadcast News 1999 Test Re-
sults,? NIST/NSA Speech Transcription Workshop, College Park, May
2000.
[17] D.B. Paul, J.M. Baker, ?The Design for the Wall Street Journal-based
CSR Corpus,? Proc. ICSLP, Kobe, Nov. 1992.
[18] G. Zavaliagkos, T. Anastsakos et al, ?ImprovedSearch, Acoustic, and
Language Modeling in the BBN BYBLOS Large Vocabulary CSR
Systems,? Proc. ARPA Spoken Language Systems Technology Work-
shop, Plainsboro, NJ, pp. 81-88, 1994.
[19] G. Zavaliagkos, T. Colthurst, ?Utilizing Untranscribed Training Data
to Improve Performance,? DARPA Broadcast News Transcription and
Understanding Workshop, Landsdowne, pp. 301-305, Feb. 1998.
Processing Broadcast Audio for Information Access
Jean-Luc Gauvain, Lori Lamel, Gilles Adda, Martine Adda-Decker,
Claude Barras, Langzhou Chen, and Yannick de Kercadio
Spoken Language Processing Group
LIMSI-CNRS, B.P. 133, 91403 Orsay cedex, France
(gauvain@limsi.fr http://www.limsi.fr/tlp)
Abstract
This paper addresses recent progress in
speaker-independent, large vocabulary,
continuous speech recognition, which
has opened up a wide range of near and
mid-term applications. One rapidly ex-
panding application area is the process-
ing of broadcast audio for information
access. At LIMSI, broadcast news tran-
scription systems have been developed
for English, French, German, Mandarin
and Portuguese, and systems for other
languages are under development. Au-
dio indexation must take into account
the specificities of audio data, such as
needing to deal with the continuous
data stream and an imperfect word tran-
scription. Some near-term applications
areas are audio data mining, selective
dissemination of information and me-
dia monitoring.
1 Introduction
A major advance in speech processing technology
is the ability of todays systems to deal with non-
homogeneous data as is exemplified by broadcast
data. With the rapid expansion of different me-
dia sources, there is a pressing need for automatic
processing of such audio streams. Broadcast au-
dio is challenging as it contains segments of vari-
ous acoustic and linguistic natures, which require
appropriate modeling. A special section in the
Communications of the ACM devoted to ?News
on Demand? (Maybury, 2000) includes contribu-
tions from many of the sites carrying out active
research in this area.
Via speech recognition, spoken document re-
trieval (SDR) can support random access to rel-
evant portions of audio documents, reducing the
time needed to identify recordings in large multi-
media databases. The TREC (Text REtrieval Con-
ference) SDR evaluation showed that only small
differences in information retrieval performance
are observed for automatic and manual transcrip-
tions (Garofolo et al, 2000).
Large vocabulary continuous speech recogni-
tion (LVCSR) is a key technology that can be used
to enable content-based information access in au-
dio and video documents. Since most of the lin-
guistic information is encoded in the audio chan-
nel of video data, which once transcribed can be
accessed using text-based tools. This research has
been carried out in a multilingual environment in
the context of several recent and ongoing Euro-
pean projects. We highlight recent progress in
LVCSR and describe some of our work in de-
veloping a system for processing broadcast au-
dio for information access. The system has two
main components, the speech transcription com-
ponent and the information retrieval component.
Versions of the LIMSI broadcast news transcrip-
tion system have been developed in American En-
glish, French, German, Mandarin and Portuguese.
2 Progress in LVCSR
Substantial advances in speech recognition tech-
nology have been achieved during the last decade.
Only a few years ago speech recognition was pri-
marily associated with small vocabulary isolated
word recognition and with speaker-dependent (of-
ten also domain-specific) dictation systems. The
same core technology serves as the basis for a
range of applications such as voice-interactive
database access or limited-domain dictation, as
well as more demanding tasks such as the tran-
scription of broadcast data. With the exception of
the inherent variability of telephone channels, for
most applications it is reasonable to assume that
the speech is produced in relatively stable envi-
ronmental and in some cases is spoken with the
purpose of being recognized by the machine.
The ability of systems to deal with non-
homogeneous data as is found in broadcast au-
dio (changing speakers, languages, backgrounds,
topics) has been enabled by advances in a vari-
ety of areas including techniques for robust signal
processing and normalization; improved training
techniques which can take advantage of very large
audio and textual corpora; algorithms for audio
segmentation; unsupervised acoustic model adap-
tation; efficient decoding with long span language
models; ability to use much larger vocabularies
than in the past - 64 k words or more is common
to reduce errors due to out-of-vocabulary words.
With the rapid expansion of different media
sources for information dissemination including
via the internet, there is a pressing need for au-
tomatic processing of the audio data stream. The
vast majority of audio and video documents that
are produced and broadcast do not have associ-
ated annotations for indexation and retrieval pur-
poses, and since most of today?s annotation meth-
ods require substantial manual intervention, and
the cost is too large to treat the ever increasing
volume of documents. Broadcast audio is chal-
lenging to process as it contains segments of vari-
ous acoustic and linguistic natures, which require
appropriate modeling. Transcribing such data re-
quires significantly higher processing power than
what is needed to transcribe read speech data
in a controlled environment, such as for speaker
adapted dictation. Although it is usually as-
sumed that processing time is not a major issue
since computer power has been increasing con-
tinuously, it is also known that the amount of data
appearing on information channels is increasing
at a close rate. Therefore processing time is an
important factor in making a speech transcription
system viable for audio data mining and other re-
lated applications. Transcription word error rates
of about 20% have been reported for unrestricted
broadcast news data in several languages.
As shown in Figure 1 the LIMSI broadcast
news transcription system for automatic indexa-
tion consists of an audio partitioner and a speech
recognizer.
3 Audio partitioning
The goal of audio partitioning is to divide the
acoustic signal into homogeneous segments, la-
beling and structuring the acoustic content of the
data, and identifying and removing non-speech
segments. The LIMSI BN audio partitioner re-
lies on an audio stream mixture model (Gauvain
et al, 1998). While it is possible to transcribe the
continuous stream of audio data without any prior
segmentation, partitioning offers several advan-
tages over this straight-forward solution. First,
in addition to the transcription of what was said,
other interesting information can be extracted
such as the division into speaker turns and the
speaker identities, and background acoustic con-
ditions. This information can be used both di-
rectly and indirectly for indexation and retrieval
purposes. Second, by clustering segments from
the same speaker, acoustic model adaptation can
be carried out on a per cluster basis, as opposed
to on a single segment basis, thus providing more
adaptation data. Third, prior segmentation can
avoid problems caused by linguistic discontinu-
ity at speaker changes. Fourth, by using acoustic
models trained on particular acoustic conditions
(such as wide-band or telephone band), overall
performance can be significantly improved. Fi-
nally, eliminating non-speech segments substan-
tially reduces the computation time. The result
of the partitioning process is a set of speech seg-
ments usually corresponding to speaker turns with
speaker, gender and telephone/wide-band labels
(see Figure 2).
4 Transcription of Broadcast News
For each speech segment, the word recognizer de-
termines the sequence of words in the segment,
associating start and end times and an optional
confidence measure with each word. The LIMSI
system, in common with most of today?s state-of-
the-art systems, makes use of statistical models
of speech generation. From this point of view,
message generation is represented by a language
model which provides an estimate of the probabil-
ity of any given word string, and the encoding of
the message in the acoustic signal is represented
by a probability density function. The speaker-
independent 65k word, continuous speech rec-
ognizer makes use of 4-gram statistics for lan-
guage modeling and of continuous density hidden
Markov models (HMMs) with Gaussian mixtures
for acoustic modeling. Each word is represented
by one or more sequences of context-dependent
phone models as determined by its pronunciation.
The acoustic and language models are trained on
large, representative corpora for each task and
language.
Processing time is an important factor in mak-
ing a speech transcription system viable for au-
tomatic indexation of radio and television broad-
casts. For many applications there are limita-
tions on the response time and the available com-
putational resources, which in turn can signifi-
cantly affect the design of the acoustic and lan-
guage models. Word recognition is carried out in
one or more decoding passes with more accurate
acoustic and language models used in successive
passes. A 4-gram single pass dynamic network
decoder has been developed (Gauvain and Lamel,
2000) which can achieve faster than real-time de-
coding with a word error under 30%, running in
less than 100 Mb of memory on widely available
platforms such Pentium III or Alpha machines.
5 Multilinguality
A characteristic of the broadcast news domain is
that, at least for what concerns major news events,
similar topics are simultaneously covered in dif-
ferent emissions and in different countries and
languages. Automatic processing carried out on
contemporaneous data sources in different lan-
guages can serve for multi-lingual indexation and
retrieval. Multilinguality is thus of particular in-
terest for media watch applications, where news
may first break in another country or language.
At LIMSI broadcast news transcription systems
have been developed for the American English,
French, German, Mandarin and Portuguese lan-
guages. The Mandarin language was chosen be-
cause it is quite different from the other lan-
guages (tone and syllable-based), and Mandarin
resources are available via the LDC as well as ref-
erence performance results.
Our system and other state-of-the-art sys-
tems can transcribe unrestricted American En-
glish broadcast news data with word error rates
under 20%. Our transcription systems for French
and German have comparable error rates for news
broadcasts (Adda-Decker et al, 2000). The
character error rate for Mandarin is also about
20% (Chen et al, 2000). Based on our expe-
rience, it appears that with appropriately trained
models, recognizer performance is more depen-
dent upon the type and source of data, than on the
language. For example, documentaries are partic-
ularly challenging to transcribe, as the audio qual-
ity is often not very high, and there is a large pro-
portion of voice over.
6 Spoken Document Retrieval
The automatically generated partition and word
transcription can be used for indexation and in-
formation retrieval purposes. Techniques com-
monly applied to automatic text indexation can
be applied to the automatic transcriptions of the
broadcast news radio and TV documents. These
techniques are based on document term frequen-
cies, where the terms are obtained after standard
text processing, such as text normalization, tok-
enization, stopping and stemming. Most of these
preprocessing steps are the same as those used to
prepare the texts for training the speech recog-
nizer language models. While this offers advan-
tages for speech recognition, it can lead to IR er-
rors. For better IR results, some words sequences
corresponding to acronymns, multiword named-
entities (e.g. Los Angeles), and words preceded
by some particular prefixes (anti, co, bi, counter)
are rewritten as a single word. Stemming is used
to reduce the number of lexical items for a given
word sense. The stemming lexicon contains about
32000 entries and was constructed using Porter?s
algorithm (Porter80, 1980) on the most frequent
words in the collection, and then manually cor-
rected.
The information retrieval system relies on a un-
Lexicon
Acoustic models
Recognition
Word
Audio signal
Language model
Analysis
Acoustic
partitioned
speech acoustic models
Music, noise and
non speech
Filter out
segments
telephone/non-tel models
word transcription
(SGML file)data
Male/female models
Iterative 
segmentation 
and labelling
Figure 1: Overview of an audio transcription system. The audio partitioner divides the data stream into
homogeneous acoustic segments, removing non-speech portions. The word recognizer identifies the
words in each speech segment, associating time-markers with each word.
 
audiofile filename=19980411 1600 1630 CNN HDL language=english 
 
segment type=wideband gender=female spkr=1 stime=50.25 etime=86.83 
 
wtime stime=50.38 etime=50.77  c.n.n.
 
wtime stime=50.77 etime=51.10  headline
 
wtime stime=51.10 etime=51.44  news
 
wtime stime=51.44 etime=51.63  i?m
 
wtime stime=51.63 etime=51.92  robert
 
wtime stime=51.92 etime=52.46  johnson
it is a day of final farewells in alabama the first funerals for victims of this week?s tornadoes are being held today along
with causing massive property damage the twisters killed thirty three people in alabama five in georgia and one each
in mississippi and north carolina the national weather service says the tornado that hit jefferson county in alabama had
winds of more than two hundred sixty miles per hour authorities speculated was the most powerful tornado ever to hit the
southeast twisters destroyed two churches to fire stations and a school parishioners were in one church when the tornado
struck
  /segment 
 
segment type=wideband gender=female spkr=2 stime=88.37 etime=104.86 
at one point when the table came onto my back i thought yes this is it i?m ready ready protects protect the children because
the children screaming the children were screaming they were screaming in prayer that were screaming god help us
  /segment 
 
segment type=wideband gender=female spkr=1 stime=104.86 etime=132.37 
vice president al gore toured the area yesterday he called it the worst tornado devastation he?s ever seen we will have a
complete look at the weather across the u. s. in our extended weather forecast in six minutes
  /segment 
. . .
 
segment type=wideband gender=male spkr=19 stime=1635.60 etime=1645.71 
so if their computing systems don?t tackle this problem well we have a potential business disruption and either erroneous
deliveries or misdeliveries or whatever savvy businesses are preparing now so the january first two thousand would just be
another day on the town not a day when fast food and everything else slows down rick lockridge c.n.n.
  /segment 
  /audiofile 
Figure 2: Example system output obtained by automatic processing of the audio stream of a CNN show
broadcasted on April 11, 1998 at 4pm. The output includes the partitioning and transcription results. To
improve readability, word time stamps are given only for the first 6 words. Non speech segments have
been removed and the following information is provided for each speech segment: signal bandwidth
(telephone or wideband), speaker gender, and speaker identity (within the show).
Transcriptions Werr Base BRF
Closed-captions - 46.9% 54.3%
10xRT 20.5% 45.3% 53.9%
1.4xRT 32.6% 40.9% 49.4%
Table 1: Impact of the word error rate on the
mean average precision using using a 1-gram doc-
ument model. The document collection contains
557 hours of broadcast news from the period of
February through June 1998. (21750 stories, 50
queries with the associated relevance judgments.)
igram model per story. The score of a story is ob-
tained by summing the query term weights which
are simply the log probabilities of the terms given
the story model once interpolated with a general
English model. This term weighting has been
shown to perform as well as the popular TF  IDF
weighting scheme (Hiemstra and Wessel, 1998;
Miller et al, 1998; Ng, 1999; Spa?rk Jones et al,
1998).
The text of the query may or may not include
the index terms associated with relevant docu-
ments. One way to cope with this problem is to
use query expansion (Blind Relevance Feedback,
BRF (Walker and de Vere, 1990)) based on terms
present in retrieved contemporary texts.
The system was evaluated in the TREC SDR
track, with known story boundaries. The SDR
data collection contains 557 hours of broadcast
news from the period of February through June
1998. This data includes 21750 stories and a set
of 50 queries with the associated relevance judg-
ments (Garofolo et al, 2000).
In order to assess the effect of the recogni-
tion time on the information retrieval results we
transcribed the 557 hours of broadcast news data
using two decoder configurations: a single pass
1.4xRT system and a three pass 10xRT system.
The word error rates are measured on a 10h test
subset (Garofolo et al, 2000). The information
retrieval results are given in terms of mean av-
erage precision (MAP), as is done for the TREC
benchmarks in Table 1 with and without query ex-
pansion. For comparison, results are also given
for manually produced closed captions. With
query expansion comparable IR results are ob-
tained using the closed captions and the 10xRT
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Pe
rc
en
ta
ge
 o
f s
ec
tio
ns
Number of speaker turns
Figure 3: Histogram of the number of speaker
turns per section in 100 hours of audio data from
radio and TV sources (NPR, ABC, CNN, CSPAN)
from May-June 1996.
transcriptions, and a moderate degradation (4%
absolute) is observed using the 1.4xRT transcrip-
tions.
7 Locating Story Boundaries
The broadcast news transcription system also pro-
vides non-lexical information along with the word
transcription. This information is available in
the partition of the audio track, which identifies
speaker turns. It is interesting to see whether or
not such information can be used to help locate
story boundaries, since in the general case these
are not known. Statistics were made on 100 hours
of radio and television broadcast news with man-
ual transcriptions including the speaker identities.
Of the 2096 sections manually marked as reports
(considered stories), 40% start without a manu-
ally annotated speaker change. This means that
using only speaker change information for detect-
ing document boundaries would miss 40% of the
boundaries. With automatically detected speaker
changes, the number of missed boundaries would
certainly increase. At the same time, 11,160 of
the 12,439 speaker turns occur in the middle of a
document, resulting in a false alarm rate of almost
90%. A more detailed analysis shows that about
50% of the sections involve a single speaker, but
that the distribution of the number of speaker
turns per section falls off very gradually (see Fig-
ure 3). False alarms are not as harmful as missed
detections, since it may be possible to merge ad-
jacent turns into a single document in subsequent
processing. These results show that even perfect
00.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
0 30 60 90 120 150 180 210 240 270 300
D
en
si
ty

Duration (seconds)
1997 Hub-4
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0 30 60 90 120 150 180 210 240 270 300
D
en
si
ty

Duration (seconds)
TREC-9 SDR Corpus
Figure 4: Distribution of document durations for
100 hours of data from May-June 1996 (top) and
for 557 hours from February-June 1998 (bottom).
speaker turn boundaries cannot be used as the pri-
mary cue for locating document boundaries. They
can, however, be used to refine the placement
of a document boundary located near a speaker
change.
We also investigated using simple statistics on
the durations of the documents. A histogram of
the 2096 sections is shown in Figure 4. One
third of the sections are shorter than 30 seconds.
The histogram has a bimodal distribution with a
sharp peak around 20 seconds, and a smaller, flat
peak around 2 minutes. Very short documents
are typical of headlines which are uttered by sin-
gle speaker, whereas longer documents are more
likely to contain data from multiple talkers. This
distribution led us to consider using a multi-scale
segmentation of the audio stream into documents.
Similar statistics were measured on the larger cor-
pus (Figure 4 bottom).
As proposed in (Abberley et al, 1999; John-
son et al, 1999), we segment the audio stream
into overlapping documents of a fixed duration.
As a result of optimization, we chose a 30 sec-
ond window duration with a 15 second overlap.
Since there are many stories significantly shorter
than 30s in broadcast shows (see Figure 4) we
conjunctured that it may be of interest to use a
double windowing system in order to better tar-
get short stories (Gauvain et al, 2000). The win-
dow size of the smaller window was selected to
be 10 seconds. So for each query, we indepen-
dently retrieved two sets of documents, one set
for each window size. Then for each document
set, document recombination is done by merging
overlapping documents until no further merges
are possible. The score of a combined document
is set to maximum score of any one of the com-
ponents. For each document derived from the
30s windows, we produce a time stamp located
at the center point of the document. However,
if any smaller documents are embedded in this
document, we take the center of the best scor-
ing document. This way we try to take advantage
of both window sizes. The MAP using a single
30s window and the double windowing strategy
are shown in Table 2. For comparison, the IR re-
sults using the manual story segmentation and the
speaker turns located by the audio partitioner are
also given. All conditions use the same word hy-
potheses obtained with a speech recognizer which
had no knowledge about the story boundaries.
manual segmentation (NIST) 59.6%
audio partitioner 33.3%
single window (30s) 50.0%
double window 52.3%
Table 2: Mean average precision with manual and
automatically determined story boundaries. The
document collection contains 557 hours of broad-
cast news from the period of February through
June 1998. (21750 stories, 50 queries with the
associated relevance judgments.)
From these results we can clearly see the inter-
est of using a search engine specifically designed
to retrieve stories in the audio stream. Using an
a priori acoustic segmentation, the mean aver-
age precision is significantly reduced compared
to a ?perfect? manual segmentation, whereas the
window-based search engine results are much
closer. Note that in the manual segmentation all
non-story segments such as advertising have been
removed. This reduces the risk of having out-of-
topic hits and explains part of the difference be-
tween this condition and the other conditions.
The problem of locating story boundaries is be-
ing further pursued in the context of the ALERT
project, where one of the goals is to identify ?doc-
uments? given topic profiles. This project is in-
vestigating the combined use of audio and video
segmentation to more accurately locate document
boundaries in the continuous data stream.
8 Recent Research Projects
The work presented in this paper has benefited
from a variety of research projects both at the Eu-
ropean and National levels. These collaborative
efforts have enabled access to real-world data al-
lowing us to develop algorithms and models well-
suited for near-term applications.
The European project LE-4 OLIVE: A
Multilingual Indexing Tool for Broadcast
Material Based on Speech Recognition
(http://twentyone.tpd.tno.nl/ olive/) addressed
methods to automate the disclosure of the infor-
mation content of broadcast data thus allowing
content-based indexation. Speech recognition
was used to produce a time-linked transcript of
the audio channel of a broadcast, which was then
used to produce a concept index for retrieval.
Broadcast news transcription systems for French
and German were developed. The French data
come from a variety of television news shows and
radio stations. The German data consist of TV
news and documentaries from ARTE. OLIVE also
developed tools for users to query the database,
as well as cross-lingual access based on off-line
machine translation of the archived documents,
and online query translation.
The European project IST ALERT: Alert sys-
tem for selective dissemination (http://www.fb9-
ti.uni-duisburg.de/alert) aims to associate state-
of-the-art speech recognition with audio and
video segmentation and automatic topic index-
ing to develop an automatic media monitoring
demonstrator and evaluate it in the context of real
world applications. The targeted languages are
French, German and Portuguese. Major media-
monitoring companies in Europe are participating
in this project.
Two other related FP5 IST projects are: CORE-
TEX: Improving Core Speech Recognition Tech-
nology and ECHO: European CHronicles On-
line. CORETEX (http://coretex.itc.it/), aims at
improving core speech recognition technologies,
which are central to most applications involv-
ing voice technology. In particular the project
addresses the development of generic speech
recognition technology and methods to rapidly
port technology to new domains and languages
with limited supervision, and to produce en-
riched symbolic speech transcriptions. The ECHO
project (http://pc-erato2.iei.pi.cnr.it/echo) aims to
develop an infrastructure for access to histori-
cal films belonging to large national audiovisual
archives. The project will integrate state-of-the-
art language technologies for indexing, searching
and retrieval, cross-language retrieval capabilities
and automatic film summary creation.
9 Conclusions
This paper has described some of the ongoing re-
search activites at LIMSI in automatic transcrip-
tion and indexation of broadcast data. Much of
this research, which is at the forefront of todays
technology, is carried out with partners with real
needs for advanced audio processing technolo-
gies.
Automatic speech recognition is a key tech-
nology for audio and video indexing. Most of
the linguistic information is encoded in the au-
dio channel of video data, which once transcribed
can be accessed using text-based tools. This is in
contrast to the image data for which no common
description language is widely adpoted. A va-
riety of near-term applications are possible such
as audio data mining, selective dissemination of
information (News-on-Demand), media monitor-
ing, content-based audio and video retrieval.
It appears that with word error rates on the
order of 20%, comparable IR results to those
obtained on text data can be achieved. Even
with higher word error rates obtained by run-
ning a faster transcription system or by transcrib-
ing compressed audio data (Barras et al, 2000;
J.M. Van Thong et al, 2000) (such as that can be
loaded over the Internet), the IR performance re-
mains quite good.
Acknowledgments
This work has been partially financed by the Eu-
ropean Commission and the French Ministry of
Defense. The authors thank Jean-Jacques Gan-
golf, Sylvia Hermier and Patrick Paroubek for
their participation in the development of differ-
ent aspects of the automatic indexation system de-
scribed here.
References
Dave Abberley, Steve Renals, Dan Ellis and Tony
Robinson, ?The THISL SDR System at TREC-8?,
Proc. of the 8th Text Retrieval Conference TREC-8,
Nov 1999.
Martine Adda-Decker, Gilles Adda, Lori Lamel, ?In-
vestigating text normalization and pronunciation
variants for German broadcast transcription,? Proc.
ICSLP?2000, Beijing, China, October 2000.
Claude Barras, Lori Lamel, Jean-Luc Gauvain, ?Auto-
matic Transcription of Compressed Broadcast Au-
dio Proc. ICASSP?2001, Salt Lake City, May 2001.
Langzhou Chen, Lori Lamel, Gilles Adda and Jean-
Luc Gauvain, ?Broadcast News Transcription in
Mandarin,? Proc. ICSLP?2000, Beijing, China, Oc-
tober 2000.
John S. Garofolo, Cedric G.P. Auzanne, and Ellen
M. Voorhees, ?The TREC Spoken Document Re-
trieval Track: A Success Story,? Proc. of the 6th
RIAO Conference, Paris, April 2000. Also John
S. Garofolo et al, ?1999 Trec-8 Spoken Docu-
ment Retrieval Track Overview and Results,? Proc.
8th Text Retrieval Conference TREC-8, Nov 1999.
(http://trec.nist.gov).
Jean-Luc Gauvain, Lori Lamel, ?Fast Decoding for
Indexation of Broadcast Data,? Proc. ICSLP?2000,
3:794-798, Oct 2000.
Jean-Luc Gauvain, Lori Lamel, Gilles Adda, ?Parti-
tioning and Transcription of Broadcast News Data,?
ICSLP?98, 5, pp. 1335-1338, Dec. 1998.
Jean-Luc Gauvain, Lori Lamel, Claude Barras, Gilles
Adda, Yannick de Kercadio ?The LIMSI SDR sys-
tem for TREC-9,? Proc. of the 9th Text Retrieval
Conference TREC-9, Nov 2000.
Alexander G. Hauptmann and Michael J. Witbrock,
?Informedia: News-on-Demand Multimedia Infor-
mation Acquisition and Retrieval,? Proc Intelli-
gent Multimedia Information Retrieval, M. May-
bury, ed., AAAI Press, pp. 213-239, 1997.
Djoerd Hiemstra, Wessel Kraaij, ?Twenty-One at
TREC-7: Ad-hoc and Cross-language track,? Proc.
of the 8th Text Retrieval Conference TREC-7, Nov
1998.
Sue E. Johnson, Pierre Jourlin, Karen Spa?rck Jones,
Phil C. Woodland, ?Spoken Document Retrieval for
TREC-8 at Cambridge University?, Proc. of the 8th
Text Retrieval Conference TREC-8, Nov 1999.
Mark Maybury, ed., Special Section on ?News on De-
mand?, Communications of the ACM, 43(2), Feb
2000.
David Miller, Tim Leek, Richard Schwartz, ?Using
Hidden Markov Models for Information Retrieval?,
Proc. of the 8th Text Retrieval Conference TREC-7,
Nov 1998.
Kenney Ng, ?A Maximum Likelihood Ratio Informa-
tion Retrieval Model,? Proc. of the 8th Text Re-
trieval Conference TREC-8, 413-435, Nov 1999.
M. F. Porter, ?An algorithm for suffix stripping?, Pro-
gram, 14, pp. 130?137, 1980.
Karen Spa?rk Jones, S. Walker, Stephen E. Robert-
son, ?A probabilistic model of information retrieval:
development and status,? Technical Report of the
Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge,
U.K., 1998.
J.M. Van Thong, David Goddeau, Anna Litvi-
nova, Beth Logan, Pedro Moreno, Michael Swain,
?SpeechBot: a Speech Recognition based Audio In-
dexing System for the Web?, Proc. of the 6th RIAO
Conference, Paris, April 2000.
S. Walker, R. de Vere, ?Improving subject retrieval in
online catalogues: 2. Relevance feedback and query
expansion?, British Library Research Paper 72,
British Library, London, U.K., 1990.
Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 107?110,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
LIMSI?s statistical translation systems for WMT?08
Daniel D?chelotte, Gilles Adda, Alexandre Allauzen, H?l?ne Bonneau-Maynard,
Olivier Galibert, Jean-Luc Gauvain, Philippe Langlais? and Fran?ois Yvon
LIMSI/CNRS
firstname.lastname@limsi.fr
Abstract
This paper describes our statistical machine
translation systems based on the Moses toolkit
for the WMT08 shared task. We address the
Europarl and News conditions for the follow-
ing language pairs: English with French, Ger-
man and Spanish. For Europarl, n-best rescor-
ing is performed using an enhanced n-gram
or a neuronal language model; for the News
condition, language models incorporate extra
training data. We also report unconvincing re-
sults of experiments with factored models.
1 Introduction
This paper describes our statistical machine trans-
lation systems based on the Moses toolkit for the
WMT 08 shared task. We address the Europarl and
News conditions for the following language pairs:
English with French, German and Spanish. For Eu-
roparl, n-best rescoring is performed using an en-
hanced n-gram or a neuronal language model, and
for the News condition, language models are trained
with extra training data. We also report unconvinc-
ing results of experiments with factored models.
2 Base System architecture
LIMSI took part in the evaluations on Europarl data
and on News data, translating French, German and
Spanish from and to English, amounting a total
of twelve evaluation conditions. Figure 1 presents
the generic overall architecture of LIMSI?s transla-
tion systems. They are fairly standard phrase-based
?Univ. Montr?al, felipe@iro.umontreal.ca
Other
Targettext
Targettext
MosestextSource or
Translation model 4g language model 4g language model
and extractionRescoring
$n$?besttranslations
LM InterpolationPhrase pairextraction Neural network
or
or
+ News Co.EuroparlEuroparl EuroparlNews Co.sources
Figure 1: Generic architecture of LIMSI?s SMT systems.
Depending on the condition, the decoder generates ei-
ther the final output or n-best lists. In the latter case,
the rescoring incorporates the same translation features,
except for a better target language model (see text).
translation systems (Och and Ney, 2004; Koehn et
al., 2003) and use Moses (Koehn et al, 2007) to
search for the best target sentence. The search uses
the following models: a phrase table, providing 4
scores and a phrase penalty, a lexicalized reordering
model (7 scores), a language model score and a word
penalty. These fourteen scores are weighted and lin-
early combined (Och and Ney, 2002; Och, 2003);
their respective weights are learned on development
data so as to maximize the BLEU score. In the fol-
lowing, we detail several aspects of our systems.
2.1 Translation models
The translation models deployed in our systems for
the europarl condition were trained on the provided
Europarl parallel data only. For the news condition,
they were trained on the Europarl data merged with
107
the news-commentary parallel data, as depicted on
Figure 1. This setup was found to be more favor-
able than training on Europarl data only (for obvious
mismatching domain reasons) and than training on
news-commentary data only, most probably because
of a lack of coverage. Another, alternative way of
benefitting from the coverage of the Europarl corpus
and the relevance of the news-commentary corpus
is to use two phrase-tables in parallel, an interest-
ing feature of Moses. (Koehn and Schroeder, 2007)
found that this was the best way to ?adapt? a transla-
tion system to the news-commentary task. These re-
sults are corroborated in (D?chelotte, 2007)1 , which
adapts a ?European Parliament? system using a ?Eu-
ropean and Spanish Parliaments? development set.
However, we were not able to reproduce those find-
ings for this evaluation. This might be caused by the
increase of the number of feature functions, from 14
to 26, due to the duplication of the phrase table and
the lexicalized reordering model.
2.2 Language Models
2.2.1 Europarl language models
The training of Europarl language models (LMs)
was rather conventional: for all languages used in
our systems, we used a 4-gram LM based on the
entire Europarl vocabulary and trained only on the
available Europarl training data. For French, for
instance, this yielded a model with a 0.2 out-of-
vocabulary (OOV) rate on our LM development set,
and a perplexity of 44.9 on the development data.
For French also, a more accurate n-gram LM was
used to rescore the first pass translation; this larger
model includes both Europarl and giga word corpus
of newswire text, lowering the perplexity to 41.9 on
the development data.
2.2.2 News language models
For this condition, we took advantage of the a
priori information that the test text would be of
newspaper/newswire genre and from the November-
december 2007 period. We consequently built much
larger LMs for translating both to French and to En-
glish, and optimized their combination on appropri-
1(D?chelotte, 2007) further found that giving an increased
weight to the small in-domain data could out-perform the setup
with two phrase-tables in parallel. We haven?t evaluated this
idea for this evaluation.
ate source of data. For French, we interpolated five
different LMs trained on corpus containing respec-
tively newspapers, newswire, news commentary and
Europarl data, and tuned their combination with text
downloaded from the Internet. Our best LM had an
OOV rate of about 2.1% and a perplexity of 111.26
on the testset. English LMs were built in a similar
manner, our largest model combining 4 LMs from
various sources, which, altogether, represent about
850M words. Its perplexity on the 2008 test set was
approximately 160, with an OOV rate of 2.7%.
2.2.3 Neural network language models
Neural-Network (NN) based continuous space
LMs similar to the ones in (Schwenk, 2007) were
also trained on Europarl data. These networks com-
pute the probabilities of all the words in a 8192 word
output vocabulary given a context in a larger, 65000-
word vocabulary. Each word in the context is first
associated with a numerical vector of dimension 500
by the input layer. The activity of the 500 neurons in
the hidden layer is computed as the hyperbolic tan-
gent of the weighted sum of these vectors, projecting
the context into a [?1, 1] hypercube of dimension
500. Final projection on a set of 8192 output neurons
yields the final probabilities through a softmax-ed,
weighted sum of the coordinates in the hypercube.
The final NN-based model is interpolated with the
main LM model in a 0.4-0.6 ratio, and yields a per-
plexity reduction of 9% relative with respect to the
n-gram LM on development data.
2.3 Tuning procedure
We use MERT, distributed with the Moses decoder,
to tune the first pass of the system. The weights
were adjusted to maximize BLEU on the develop-
ment data. For the baseline system, a dozen Moses
runs are necessary for each MERT optimization, and
several optimization runs were started and compared
during the system?s development. Tuning was per-
formed using dev2006 for the Europarl task and on
News commentary dev2007 for the news task.
2.4 Rescoring and post processing
For the Europarl condition, distinct 100 best trans-
lations from Moses were rescored with improved
LMs: when translating to French, we used the
French model described in section 2.2.1; when
108
Es-En En-Es Fr-En En-Fr
baseline 32.21 31.62 32.41 29.31
Limsi 32.49 31.23 32.62 30.27
Table 1: Comparison of two tokenization policies
All results on Europarl test2007
CI system CS system
En?Fr 27.23 27.55
Fr?En 30.96 30.98
Table 2: Effect of training on true case texts, for English
to French (case INsensitive BLEU scores, untuned sys-
tems, results on test2006 dataset)
translating to English, we used the neuronal LM de-
scribed in section 2.2.3.
For all the ?lowcase? systems (see below), recase-
ing was finally performed using our own recaseing
tool. Case is restored by creating a word graph al-
lowing all possible forms of caseing for each word
and each component of a compound word. This
word graph is then decoded using a cased 4-gram
LM to obtain the most likely form. In a final step,
OOV words (with respect to the source language
word list) are recased to match their original form.
3 Experiments with the base system
3.1 Word tokenization and case
We developed our own tokenizer for English, French
and Spanish, and used the baseline tokenizer for
German. Experiments on the 2007 test dataset for
Europarl task show the impact of the tokenization
on the BLEU scores, with 3-gram LMs. Results are
always improved with our own tokenizer, except for
English to Spanish (Table 1).
Our systems were initially trained on lowercase
texts, similarly to the proposed baseline system.
However, training on true case texts proved bene-
ficial when translating from English to French, even
when scoring in a case insensitive manner. Table 2
shows an approximate gain of 0.3 BLEU for that di-
rection, and no impact on French to English perfor-
mance. Our English-French systems are therefore
case sensitive.
3.2 Language Models
For Europarl, we experimented with LMs of increas-
ing orders: we found that using a 5-gram LM only
yields an insignificant improvement over a 4-gram
LM. As a result, we used 4-gram LMs for all our
first pass decodings. For the second pass, the use
of the Neural Network LMs, if used with an appro-
priate (tuned) weight, yields a small, yet consistent
improvement of BLEU for all pairs.
Performance on the news task are harder to ana-
lyze, due to the lack of development data. Throwing
in large set of in-domain data was obviously helpful,
even though we are currently unable to adequately
measure this effect.
4 Experiments with factored models
Even though these models were not used in our sub-
missions, we feel it useful to comment here our (neg-
ative) experiments with factored models.
4.1 Overview
In this work, factored models (Koehn and Hoang,
2007) are experimented with three factors : the sur-
face form, the lemma and the part of speech (POS).
The translation process is composed of different
mapping steps, which either translate input factors
into output factors, or generate additional output fac-
tors from existing output factors. In this work, four
mapping steps are used with two decoding paths.
The first path corresponds to the standard and di-
rect mapping of surface forms. The second decod-
ing path consists in two translation steps for respec-
tively POS tag and the lemmas, followed by a gener-
ation step which produces the surface form given the
POS-lemma couple. The system also includes three
reordering models.
4.2 Training
Factored models have been built to translate from
English to French for the news task. To estimate the
phrase and generation tables, the training texts are
first processed in order to compute the lemmas and
POS information. The English texts are tagged and
lemmatized using the English version of the Tree-
tagger2. For French, POS-tagging is carried out
with a French version of the Brill?s tagger trained
2http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/projekte/corplex/TreeTagger
109
on the MULTITAG corpus (Allauzen and Bonneau-
Maynard, 2008). Lemmatization is performed with
a French version of the Treetagger.
Three phrase tables are estimated with the Moses
utilities, one per factor. For the surface forms, the
parallel corpus is the concatenation of the official
training data for the tasks Europarl and News com-
mentary, whereas only the parallel data of news
commentary are used for lemmas and POS. For the
generation step, the table built on the parallel texts of
news commentary is augmented with a French dic-
tionary of 280 000 forms. The LM is the largest LM
available for French (see section 2.2.2).
4.3 Results and lessons learned
On the news test set of 2008, this system obtains a
BLEU score of 20.2, which is worse than our ?stan-
dard? system (20.9). A similar experiment on the
Europarl task proved equally unsuccessful.
Using only models which ignore the surface form
of input words yields a poor system. Therefore, in-
cluding a model based on surface forms, as sug-
gested (Koehn and Hoang, 2007), is also neces-
sary. This indeed improved (+1.6 BLEU for Eu-
roparl) over using one single decoding path, but not
enough to match our baseline system performance.
These results may be explained by the use of auto-
matic tools (POS tagger and lemmatizer) that are not
entirely error free, and also, to a lesser extend, by the
noise in the test data. We also think that more effort
has to be put into the generation step.
Tuning is also a major issue for factored trans-
lation models. Dealing with 38 weights is an op-
timization challenge, which took MERT 129 itera-
tions to converge. The necessary tradeoff between
the huge memory requirements of these techniques
and computation time is also detrimental to their use.
Although quantitative results were unsatisfactory,
it is finally worth mentioning that a manual exami-
nation of the output revealed that the explicit usage
of gender and number in our models (via POS tags)
may actually be helpful when translating to French.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented our statistical MT sys-
tems developed for the WMT 08 shared task. As ex-
pected, regarding the Europarl condition, our BLEU
improvements over the best 2007 results are limited:
paying attention to tokenization and caseing issues
brought us a small pay-off; rescoring with better
language models gave also some reward. The news
condition was new, and more challenging: our satis-
factory results can be attributed to the use of large,
well tuned, language models. In comparison, our ex-
periments with factored models proved disappoint-
ing, for reasons that remain to be clarified. On a
more general note, we feel that the performance of
MT systems for these tasks are somewhat shadowed
by normalization issues (tokenization errors, incon-
sistent use of caseing, typos, etc), making it difficult
to clearly analyze our systems? performance.
References
A. Allauzen and H. Bonneau-Maynard. 2008. Training
and evaluation of POS taggers on the French multitag
corpus. In Proc. LREC?08, To appear.
D. D?chelotte. 2007. Traduction automatique de la pa-
role par m?thodes statistiques. Ph.D. thesis, Univ.
Paris XI, December.
P. Koehn and H. Hoang. 2007. Factored translation mod-
els. In Proc. EMNLP-CoNLL, pages 868?876.
P. Koehn and J. Schroeder. 2007. Experiments in domain
adaptation for statistical machine translation. In Proc.
of the Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 224?227, Prague, Czech Republic.
P. Koehn, F. J. Och, and D. Marcu. 2003. Statistical
phrase-based translation. In Proc. HLT-NAACL, pages
127?133, Edmonton, Canada, May.
P. Koehn, H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison-Burch,
M. Federico, N. Bertoldi, B. Cowan, W. Shen,
C. Moran, R. Zens, C. Dyer, O. Bojar, A. Constantin,
and E. Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit for
statistical machine translation. In ACL, demonstration
session, Prague, Czech Republic.
F.J. Och and H. Ney. 2002. Discriminative training
and maximum entropy models for statistical machine
translation. In Proc. ACL, pages 295?302.
Franz J. Och and Hermann Ney. 2004. The alignment
template approach to statistical machine translation.
Computational Linguistics, 30(4):417?449.
F. J. Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in statistical
machine translation. In Proc. ACL, Sapporo, Japan.
H. Schwenk. 2007. Continuous space language models.
Computer Speech and Language, 21:492?518.
110
Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 309?315,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30?31, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
LIMSI @ WMT11
Alexandre Allauzen
He?le`ne Bonneau-Maynard
Hai-Son Le
Aure?lien Max
Guillaume Wisniewski
Franc?ois Yvon
Univ. Paris-Sud and LIMSI-CNRS
B.P. 133, 91403 Orsay cedex, France
Gilles Adda
Josep M. Crego
Adrien Lardilleux
Thomas Lavergne
Artem Sokolov
LIMSI-CNRS
B.P. 133, 91403 Orsay cedex, France
Abstract
This paper describes LIMSI?s submissions to
the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation. We report results for the French-
English and German-English shared transla-
tion tasks in both directions. Our systems
use n-code, an open source Statistical Ma-
chine Translation system based on bilingual
n-grams. For the French-English task, we fo-
cussed on finding efficient ways to take ad-
vantage of the large and heterogeneous train-
ing parallel data. In particular, using a sim-
ple filtering strategy helped to improve both
processing time and translation quality. To
translate from English to French and Ger-
man, we also investigated the use of the
SOUL language model in Machine Trans-
lation and showed significant improvements
with a 10-gram SOUL model. We also briefly
report experiments with several alternatives to
the standard n-best MERT procedure, leading
to a significant speed-up.
1 Introduction
This paper describes LIMSI?s submissions to the
Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
where LIMSI participated in the French-English and
German-English tasks in both directions. For this
evaluation, we used n-code, our in-house Statistical
Machine Translation (SMT) system which is open-
source and based on bilingual n-grams.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 pro-
vides an overview of n-code, while the data pre-
processing and filtering steps are described in Sec-
tion 3. Given the large amount of parallel data avail-
able, we proposed a method to filter the French-
English GigaWord corpus (Section 3.2). As in our
previous participations, data cleaning and filtering
constitute a non-negligible part of our work. This
includes detecting and discarding sentences in other
languages; removing sentences which are also in-
cluded in the provided development sets, as well as
parts that are repeated (for the monolingual news
data, this can reduce the amount of data by a fac-
tor 3 or 4, depending on the language and the year);
normalizing the character set (non-utf8 characters
which are aberrant in context, or in the case of the
GigaWord corpus, a lot of non-printable and thus in-
visible control characters such as EOT (end of trans-
mission)1).
For target language modeling (Section 4), a stan-
dard back-off n-gram model is estimated and tuned
as described in Section 4.1. Moreover, we also in-
troduce in Section 4.2 the use of the SOUL lan-
guage model (LM) (Le et al, 2011) in SMT. Based
on neural networks, the SOUL LM can handle an
arbitrary large vocabulary and a high order marko-
vian assumption (up to 10-gram in this work). Fi-
nally, experimental results are reported in Section 5
both in terms of BLEU scores and translation edit
rates (TER) measured on the provided newstest2010
dataset.
2 System Overview
Our in-house n-code SMT system implements the
bilingual n-gram approach to Statistical Machine
Translation (Casacuberta and Vidal, 2004). Given a
1This kind of characters was used for Teletype up to the sev-
enties or early eighties.
309
source sentence sJ1, a translation hypothesis t?
I
1 is de-
fined as the sentence which maximizes a linear com-
bination of feature functions:
t?I1 = argmax
tI1
{
M
?
m=1
?mhm(sJ1, tI1)
}
(1)
where sJ1 and t
I
1 respectively denote the source and
the target sentences, and ?m is the weight associated
with the feature function hm. The translation fea-
ture is the log-score of the translation model based
on bilingual units called tuples. The probability as-
signed to a sentence pair by the translation model is
estimated by using the n-gram assumption:
p(sJ1, t
I
1) =
K
?
k=1
p((s, t)k|(s, t)k?1 . . .(s, t)k?n+1)
where s refers to a source symbol (t for target) and
(s, t)k to the kth tuple of the given bilingual sentence
pair. It is worth noticing that, since both languages
are linked up in tuples, the context information pro-
vided by this translation model is bilingual. In ad-
dition to the translation model, eleven feature func-
tions are combined: a target-language model (see
Section 4 for details); four lexicon models; two lex-
icalized reordering models (Tillmann, 2004) aim-
ing at predicting the orientation of the next transla-
tion unit; a ?weak? distance-based distortion model;
and finally a word-bonus model and a tuple-bonus
model which compensate for the system preference
for short translations. The four lexicon models are
similar to the ones used in a standard phrase-based
system: two scores correspond to the relative fre-
quencies of the tuples and two lexical weights are
estimated from the automatically generated word
alignments. The weights associated to feature func-
tions are optimally combined using a discriminative
training framework (Och, 2003) (Minimum Error
Rate Training (MERT), see details in Section 5.4),
using the provided newstest2009 data as develop-
ment set.
2.1 Training
Our translation model is estimated over a training
corpus composed of tuple sequences using classi-
cal smoothing techniques. Tuples are extracted from
a word-aligned corpus (using MGIZA++2 with de-
fault settings) in such a way that a unique segmenta-
tion of the bilingual corpus is achieved, allowing to
estimate the n-gram model. Figure 1 presents a sim-
ple example illustrating the unique tuple segmenta-
tion for a given word-aligned pair of sentences (top).
Figure 1: Tuple extraction from a sentence pair.
The resulting sequence of tuples (1) is further re-
fined to avoid NULL words in the source side of the
tuples (2). Once the whole bilingual training data is
segmented into tuples, n-gram language model prob-
abilities can be estimated. In this example, note that
the English source words perfect and translations
have been reordered in the final tuple segmentation,
while the French target words are kept in their orig-
inal order.
2.2 Inference
During decoding, source sentences are encoded
in the form of word lattices containing the most
promising reordering hypotheses, so as to reproduce
the word order modifications introduced during the
tuple extraction process. Hence, at decoding time,
only those encoded reordering hypotheses are trans-
lated. Reordering hypotheses are introduced using
a set of reordering rules automatically learned from
the word alignments.
In the previous example, the rule [perfect transla-
tions ; translations perfect] produces the swap of
the English words that is observed for the French
and English pair. Typically, part-of-speech (POS)
information is used to increase the generalization
power of such rules. Hence, rewriting rules are built
using POS rather than surface word forms. Refer
2http://geek.kyloo.net/software
310
to (Crego and Marin?o, 2007) for details on tuple ex-
traction and reordering rules.
3 Data Pre-processing and Selection
We used all the available parallel data allowed in
the constrained task to compute the word align-
ments, except for the French-English tasks where
the United Nation corpus was not used to train our
translation models. To train the target language
models, we also used all provided data and mono-
lingual corpora released by the LDC for French
and English. Moreover, all parallel corpora were
POS-tagged with the TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994).
For German, the fine-grained POS information used
for pre-processing was computed by the RFTag-
ger (Schmid and Laws, 2008).
3.1 Tokenization
We took advantage of our in-house text process-
ing tools for the tokenization and detokenization
steps (De?chelotte et al, 2008). Previous experi-
ments have demonstrated that better normalization
tools provide better BLEU scores (Papineni et al,
2002). Thus all systems are built in ?true-case.?
As German is morphologically more complex
than English, the default policy which consists in
treating each word form independently is plagued
with data sparsity, which poses a number of diffi-
culties both at training and decoding time. Thus,
to translate from German to English, the German
side was normalized using a specific pre-processing
scheme (described in (Allauzen et al, 2010)), which
aims at reducing the lexical redundancy and splitting
complex compounds.
Using the same pre-processing scheme to trans-
late from English to German would require to post-
process the output to undo the pre-processing. As in
our last year?s experiments (Allauzen et al, 2010),
this pre-processing step could be achieved with a
two-step decoding. However, by stacking two de-
coding steps, we may stack errors as well. Thus, for
this direction, we used the German tokenizer pro-
vided by the organizers.
3.2 Filtering the GigaWord Corpus
The available parallel data for English-French in-
cludes a large Web corpus, referred to as the Giga-
Word parallel corpus. This corpus is very noisy, and
contains large portions that are not useful for trans-
lating news text. The first filter aimed at detecting
foreign languages based on perplexity and lexical
coverage. Then, to select a subset of parallel sen-
tences, trigram LMs were trained for both French
and English languages on a subset of the available
News data: the French (resp. English) LM was used
to rank the French (resp. English) side of the cor-
pus, and only those sentences with perplexity above
a given threshold were selected. Finally, the two se-
lected sets were intersected. In the following exper-
iments, the threshold was set to the median or upper
quartile value of the perplexity. Therefore, half (or
75%) of this corpus was discarded.
4 Target Language Modeling
Neural networks, working on top of conventional
n-gram models, have been introduced in (Bengio
et al, 2003; Schwenk, 2007) as a potential means
to improve conventional n-gram language models
(LMs). However, probably the major bottleneck
with standard NNLMs is the computation of poste-
rior probabilities in the output layer. This layer must
contain one unit for each vocabulary word. Such a
design makes handling of large vocabularies, con-
sisting of hundreds thousand words, infeasible due
to a prohibitive growth in computation time. While
recent work proposed to estimate the n-gram dis-
tributions only for the most frequent words (short-
list) (Schwenk, 2007), we explored the use of the
SOUL (Structured OUtput Layer Neural Network)
language model for SMT in order to handle vocabu-
laries of arbitrary sizes.
Moreover, in our setting, increasing the order of
standard n-gram LM did not show any significant
improvement. This is mainly due to the data spar-
sity issue and to the drastic increase in the number of
parameters that need to be estimated. With NNLM
however, the increase in context length at the input
layer results in only a linear growth in complexity
in the worst case (Schwenk, 2007). Thus, training
longer-context neural network models is still feasi-
ble, and was found to be very effective in our system.
311
4.1 Standard n-gram Back-off Language
Models
To train our language models, we assumed that the
test set consisted in a selection of news texts dat-
ing from the end of 2010 to the beginning of 2011.
This assumption was based on what was done for
the 2010 evaluation. Thus, for each language, we
built a development corpus in order to optimize the
vocabulary and the target language model.
Development set and vocabulary In order to
cover different periods, two development sets were
used. The first one is newstest2008. This corpus is
two years older than the targeted time period; there-
fore, a second development corpus named dev2010-
2011 was collected by randomly sampling bunches
of 5 consecutive sentences from the provided news
data of 2010 and 2011.
To estimate such large LMs, a vocabulary
was first defined for each language by including
all tokens observed in the Europarl and News-
Commentary corpora. For French and English, this
vocabulary was then expanded with all words that
occur more than 5 times in the French-English Gi-
gaWord corpus, and with the most frequent proper
names taken from the monolingual news data of
2010 and 2011. As for German, since the amount
of training data was smaller, the vocabulary was ex-
panded with the most frequent words observed in the
monolingual news data of 2010 and 2011. This pro-
cedure resulted in a vocabulary containing around
500k words in each language.
Language model training All the training data al-
lowed in the constrained task were divided into sev-
eral sets based on dates or genres (resp. 9 and 7
sets for English and French). On each set, a stan-
dard 4-gram LM was estimated from the 500k words
vocabulary using absolute discounting interpolated
with lower order models (Kneser and Ney, 1995;
Chen and Goodman, 1998).
All LMs except the one trained on the news cor-
pora from 2010-2011 were first linearly interpolated.
The associated coefficients were estimated so as to
minimize the perplexity evaluated on dev2010-2011.
The resulting LM and the 2010-2011 LM were fi-
naly interpolated with newstest2008 as development
data. This procedure aims to avoid overestimating
the weight associated to the 2010-2011 LM.
4.2 The SOUL Model
We give here a brief overview of the SOUL LM;
refer to (Le et al, 2011) for the complete training
procedure. Following the classical work on dis-
tributed word representation (Brown et al, 1992),
we assume that the output vocabulary is structured
by a clustering tree, where each word belongs to
only one class and its associated sub-classes. If wi
denotes the i-th word in a sentence, the sequence
c1:D(wi) = c1, . . . ,cD encodes the path for the word
wi in the clustering tree, with D the depth of the tree,
cd(wi) a class or sub-class assigned to wi, and cD(wi)
the leaf associated with wi (the word itself). The
n-gram probability of wi given its history h can then
be estimated as follows using the chain rule:
P(wi|h) = P(c1(wi)|h)
D
?
d=2
P(cd(wi)|h,c1:d?1)
Figure 2 represents the architecture of the NNLM
to estimate this distribution, for a tree of depth
D = 3. The SOUL architecture is the same as for
the standard model up to the output layer. The
main difference lies in the output structure which in-
volves several layers with a softmax activation func-
tion. The first softmax layer (class layer) estimates
the class probability P(c1(wi)|h), while other out-
put sub-class layers estimate the sub-class proba-
bilities P(cd(wi)|h,c1:d?1). Finally, the word layers
estimate the word probabilities P(cD(wi)|h,c1:D?1).
Words in the short-list are a special case since each
of them represents its own class without any sub-
classes (D = 1 in this case).
5 Experimental Results
The experimental results are reported in terms of
BLEU and translation edit rate (TER) using the
newstest2010 corpus as evaluation set. These auto-
matic metrics are computed using the scripts pro-
vided by the NIST after a detokenization step.
5.1 English-French
Compared with last year evaluation, the amount of
available parallel data has drastically increased with
about 33M of sentence pairs. It is worth noticing
312
wi-1
w
i-2
w
i-3
R
R
R
W
ih
 shared context space
input layer
hidden layer:
tanh activation
word layers
sub-class 
layers
}
short list
Figure 2: Architecture of the Structured Output Layer
Neural Network language model.
that the provided corpora are not homogeneous, nei-
ther in terms of genre nor in terms of topics. Never-
theless, the most salient difference is the noise car-
ried by the GigaWord and the United Nation cor-
pora. The former is an automatically collected cor-
pus drawn from different websites, and while some
parts are indeed relevant to translate news texts, us-
ing the whole GigaWord corpus seems to be harm-
ful. The latter (United Nation) is obviously more
homogeneous, but clearly out of domain. As an il-
lustration, discarding the United Nation corpus im-
proves performance slightly.
Table 1 summarizes some of our attempts at deal-
ing with such a large amount of parallel data. As
stated above, translation models are trained with
the news-commentary, Europarl, and GigaWord cor-
pora. For this last data set, results show the reward of
sentence pair selection as described in Section 3.2.
Indeed, filtering out 75% of the corpus yields to
a significant BLEU improvement when translating
from English to French and of 1 point in the other
direction (line upper quartile in Table 1). More-
over, a larger selection (50% in the median line) still
increases the overall performance. This shows the
room left for improvement by a more accurate data
selection process such as a well optimized thresh-
old in our approach, or a more sophisticated filtering
strategy (see for example (Foster et al, 2010)).
Another issue when using such a large amount
System en2fr fr2en
BLEU TER BLEU TER
All 27.4 56.6 26.8 55.0
Upper quartile 27.8 56.3 28.4 53.8
Median 28.1 56.0 28.6 53.5
Table 1: English-French translation results in terms of
BLEU score and TER estimated on newstest2010 with
the NIST script. All means that the translation model is
trained on news-commentary, Europarl, and the whole
GigaWord. The rows upper quartile and median corre-
spond to the use of a filtered version of the GigaWord.
of data is the mismatch between the target vocab-
ulary derived from the translation model and that of
the LM. The translation model may generate words
which are unknown to the LM, and their probabili-
ties could be overestimated. To avoid this behaviour,
the probability of unknown words for the target LM
is penalized during the decoding step.
5.2 English-German
For this translation task, we compare the impact of
two different POS-taggers to process the German
part of the parallel data. The results are reported
in Table 2. Results show that to translate from En-
glish to German, the use of a fine-grained POS infor-
mation (RFTagger) leads to a slight improvement,
whereas it harms the source reordering model in the
other direction. It is worth noticing that to translate
from German to English, the RFTagger is always
used during the data pre-processing step, while a dif-
ferent POS tagger may be involved for the source
reordering model training.
System en2de de2en
BLEU TER BLEU TER
RFTagger 22.8 60.1 16.3 66.0
TreeTagger 23.1 59.4 16.2 66.0
Table 2: Translation results in terms of BLEU score
and translation edit rate (TER) estimated on newstest2010
with the NIST scoring script.
5.3 The SOUL Model
As mentioned in Section 4.2, the order of a con-
tinuous n-gram model such as the SOUL LM can
be raised without a prohibitive increase in complex-
ity. We summarize in Table 3 our experiments with
313
SOUL LMs of orders 4, 6, and 10. The SOUL LM
is introduced in the SMT pipeline by rescoring the
n-best list generated by the decoder, and the asso-
ciated weight is tuned with MERT. We observe for
the English-French task: a BLEU improvement of
0.3, as well as a similar trend in TER, when intro-
ducing a 4-gram SOUL LM; an additional BLEU
improvement of 0.3 when increasing the order from
4 to 6; and a less important gain with the 10-gram
SOUL LM. In the end, the use of a 10-gram SOUL
LM achieves a 0.7 BLEU improvement and a TER
decrease of 0.8. The results on the English-German
task show the same trend with a 0.5 BLEU point
improvement.
SOUL LM en2fr en2de
BLEU TER BLEU TER
without 28.1 56.0 16.3 66.0
4-gram 28.4 55.5 16.5 64.9
6-gram 28.7 55.3 16.7 64.9
10-gram 28.8 55.2 16.8 64.6
Table 3: Translation results from English to French and
English to German measured on newstest2010 using a
100-best rescoring with SOUL LMs of different orders.
5.4 Optimization Issues
Along with MIRA (Margin Infused Relaxed Al-
gorithm) (Watanabe et al, 2007), MERT is the
most widely used algorithm for system optimiza-
tion. However, standard MERT procedure is known
to suffer from instability of results and very slow
training cycle with approximate estimates of one de-
coding cycle for each training parameter. For this
year?s evaluation, we experimented with several al-
ternatives to the standard n-best MERT procedure,
namely, MERT on word lattices (Macherey et al,
2008) and two differentiable variants to the BLEU
objective function optimized during the MERT cy-
cle. We have recast the former in terms of a spe-
cific semiring and implemented it using a general-
purpose finite state automata framework (Sokolov
and Yvon, 2011). The last two approaches, hereafter
referred to as ZHN and BBN, replace the BLEU
objective function, with the usual BLEU score on
expected n-gram counts (Rosti et al, 2010) and
with an expected BLEU score for normal n-gram
counts (Zens et al, 2007), respectively. All expecta-
tions (of the n-gram counts in the first case and the
BLEU score in the second) are taken over all hy-
potheses from n-best lists for each source sentence.
Experiments with the alternative optimization
methods achieved virtually the same performance in
terms of BLEU score, but 2 to 4 times faster. Neither
approach, however, showed any consistent and sig-
nificant improvement for the majority of setups tried
(with the exception of the BBN approach, that had
almost always improved over n-best MERT, but for
the sole French to English translation direction). Ad-
ditional experiments with 9 complementary transla-
tion models as additional features were performed
with lattice-MERT, but neither showed any substan-
tial improvement. In the view of these rather incon-
clusive experiments, we chose to stick to the classi-
cal MERT for the submitted results.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we described our submissions to
WMT?11 in the French-English and German-
English shared translation tasks, in both directions.
For this year?s participation, we only used n-code,
our open source Statistical Machine Translation sys-
tem based on bilingual n-grams. Our contributions
are threefold. First, we have shown that n-gram
based systems can achieve state-of-the-art perfor-
mance on large scale tasks in terms of automatic
metrics such as BLEU. Then, as already shown by
several sites in the past evaluations, there is a signifi-
cant reward for using data selection algorithms when
dealing with large heterogeneous data sources such
as the GigaWord. Finally, the use of a large vocab-
ulary continuous space language model such as the
SOUL model has enabled to achieve significant and
consistent improvements. For the upcoming evalua-
tion(s), we would like to suggest that the important
work of data cleaning and pre-processing could be
shared among all the participants instead of being
done independently several times by each site. Re-
ducing these differences could indeed help improve
the reliability of SMT systems evaluation.
Acknowledgment
This work was achieved as part of the Quaero Pro-
gramme, funded by OSEO, French State agency for
innovation.
314
References
Alexandre Allauzen, Josep M. Crego, I?lknur Durgar El-
Kahlout, and Francois Yvon. 2010. LIMSI?s statis-
tical translation systems for WMT?10. In Proc. of the
Joint Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation and
MetricsMATR, pages 54?59, Uppsala, Sweden.
Yoshua Bengio, Re?jean Ducharme, Pascal Vincent, and
Christian Janvin. 2003. A neural probabilistic lan-
guage model. JMLR, 3:1137?1155.
P.F. Brown, P.V. de Souza, R.L. Mercer, V.J. Della Pietra,
and J.C. Lai. 1992. Class-based n-gram models of nat-
ural language. Computational Linguistics, 18(4):467?
479.
Francesco Casacuberta and Enrique Vidal. 2004. Ma-
chine translation with inferred stochastic finite-state
transducers. Computational Linguistics, 30(3):205?
225.
Stanley F. Chen and Joshua T. Goodman. 1998. An
empirical study of smoothing techniques for language
modeling. Technical Report TR-10-98, Computer Sci-
ence Group, Harvard University.
Josep Maria Crego and Jose? Bernardo Marin?o. 2007. Im-
proving statistical MT by coupling reordering and de-
coding. Machine Translation, 20(3):199?215.
Daniel De?chelotte, Gilles Adda, Alexandre Allauzen,
Olivier Galibert, Jean-Luc Gauvain, He?le`ne Mey-
nard, and Franc?ois Yvon. 2008. LIMSI?s statisti-
cal translation systems for WMT?08. In Proc. of the
NAACL-HTL Statistical Machine Translation Work-
shop, Columbus, Ohio.
George Foster, Cyril Goutte, and Roland Kuhn. 2010.
Discriminative instance weighting for domain adapta-
tion in statistical machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 451?459, Cambridge,
MA, October.
Reinhard Kneser and Herman Ney. 1995. Improved
backing-off for m-gram language modeling. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing, ICASSP?95, pages
181?184, Detroit, MI.
Hai-Son Le, Ilya Oparin, Alexandre Allauzen, Jean-Luc
Gauvain, and Franc?ois Yvon. 2011. Structured output
layer neural network language model. In IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP 2011), Prague (Czech Republic),
22-27 May.
Wolfgang Macherey, Franz Josef Och, Ignacio Thayer,
and Jakob Uszkoreit. 2008. Lattice-based minimum
error rate training for statistical machine translation.
In Proc. of the Conf. on EMNLP, pages 725?734.
Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in
statistical machine translation. In ACL ?03: Proc. of
the 41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 160?167.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In ACL ?02: Proc. of
the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 311?318. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Antti-Veikko I. Rosti, Bing Zhang, Spyros Matsoukas,
and Richard Schwartz. 2010. BBN system description
for wmt10 system combination task. In Proceedings of
the Joint Fifth Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation and MetricsMATR, WMT ?10, pages 321?326,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Helmut Schmid and Florian Laws. 2008. Estimation
of conditional probabilities with decision trees and an
application to fine-grained POS tagging. In Proceed-
ings of the 22nd International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics (Coling 2008), pages 777?784,
Manchester, UK, August.
Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech tag-
ging using decision trees. In Proc. of International
Conference on New Methods in Language Processing,
pages 44?49, Manchester, UK.
Holger Schwenk. 2007. Continuous space language
models. Computer, Speech & Language, 21(3):492?
518.
Artem Sokolov and Franc?ois Yvon. 2011. Minimum er-
ror rate training semiring. In Proceedings of the 15th
Annual Conference of the European Association for
Machine Translation, EAMT?2011, May.
Christoph Tillmann. 2004. A unigram orientation model
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
HLT-NAACL 2004, pages 101?104. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Taro Watanabe, Jun Suzuki, Hajime Tsukada, and Hideki
Isozaki. 2007. Online large-margin training for sta-
tistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing and Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 764?
773, Prague, Czech Republic.
Richard Zens, Sasa Hasan, and Hermann Ney. 2007.
A systematic comparison of training criteria for sta-
tistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing and Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 524?
532.
315
Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 358?364,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30?31, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Joint WMT Submission of the QUAERO Project
?Markus Freitag, ?Gregor Leusch, ?Joern Wuebker, ?Stephan Peitz, ?Hermann Ney,
?Teresa Herrmann, ?Jan Niehues, ?Alex Waibel,
?Alexandre Allauzen, ?Gilles Adda,?Josep Maria Crego,
?Bianka Buschbeck, ?Tonio Wandmacher, ?Jean Senellart
?RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
?Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany
?LIMSI-CNRS, Orsay, France
?SYSTRAN Software, Inc.
?surname@cs.rwth-aachen.de
?firstname.surname@kit.edu
?firstname.lastname@limsi.fr ?surname@systran.fr
Abstract
This paper describes the joint QUAERO sub-
mission to the WMT 2011 machine transla-
tion evaluation. Four groups (RWTH Aachen
University, Karlsruhe Institute of Technol-
ogy, LIMSI-CNRS, and SYSTRAN) of the
QUAERO project submitted a joint translation
for the WMT German?English task. Each
group translated the data sets with their own
systems. Then RWTH system combination
combines these translations to a better one. In
this paper, we describe the single systems of
each group. Before we present the results of
the system combination, we give a short de-
scription of the RWTH Aachen system com-
bination approach.
1 Overview
QUAERO is a European research and develop-
ment program with the goal of developing multi-
media and multilingual indexing and management
tools for professional and general public applica-
tions (http://www.quaero.org). Research in machine
translation is mainly assigned to the four groups
participating in this joint submission. The aim of
this WMT submission was to show the quality of a
joint translation by combining the knowledge of the
four project partners. Each group develop and main-
tain their own different machine translation system.
These single systems differ not only in their general
approach, but also in the preprocessing of training
and test data. To take the advantage of these dif-
ferences of each translation system, we combined
all hypotheses of the different systems, using the
RWTH system combination approach.
1.1 Data Sets
For WMT 2011 each QUAERO partner trained their
systems on the parallel Europarl and News Com-
mentary corpora. All single systems were tuned on
the newstest2009 dev set. The newstest2008 dev set
was used to train the system combination parame-
ters. Finally the newstest2010 dev set was used to
compare the results of the different system combi-
nation approaches and settings.
2 Translation Systems
2.1 RWTH Aachen Single Systems
For the WMT 2011 evaluation the RWTH utilized
RWTH?s state-of-the-art phrase-based and hierar-
chical translation systems. GIZA++ (Och and Ney,
2003) was employed to train word alignments, lan-
guage models have been created with the SRILM
toolkit (Stolcke, 2002).
2.1.1 Phrase-Based System
The phrase-based translation (PBT) system is
similar to the one described in Zens and Ney (2008).
After phrase pair extraction from the word-aligned
bilingual corpus, the translation probabilities are es-
timated by relative frequencies. The standard feature
set alo includes an n-gram language model, phrase-
level IBM-1 and word-, phrase- and distortion-
penalties, which are combined in log-linear fash-
ion. Parameters are optimized with the Downhill-
Simplex algorithm (Nelder and Mead, 1965) on the
word graph.
358
2.1.2 Hierarchical System
For the hierarchical setups described in this pa-
per, the open source Jane toolkit (Vilar et al, 2010)
is employed. Jane has been developed at RWTH
and implements the hierarchical approach as intro-
duced by Chiang (2007) with some state-of-the-art
extensions. In hierarchical phrase-based translation,
a weighted synchronous context-free grammar is in-
duced from parallel text. In addition to contiguous
lexical phrases, hierarchical phrases with up to two
gaps are extracted. The search is typically carried
out using the cube pruning algorithm (Huang and
Chiang, 2007). The model weights are optimized
with standard MERT (Och, 2003) on 100-best lists.
2.1.3 Phrase Model Training
For some PBT systems a forced alignment pro-
cedure was applied to train the phrase translation
model as described in Wuebker et al (2010). A
modified version of the translation decoder is used
to produce a phrase alignment on the bilingual train-
ing data. The phrase translation probabilities are es-
timated from their relative frequencies in the phrase-
aligned training data. In addition to providing a sta-
tistically well-founded phrase model, this has the
benefit of producing smaller phrase tables and thus
allowing more rapid and less memory consuming
experiments with a better translation quality.
2.1.4 Final Systems
For the German?English task, RWTH conducted
experiments comparing the standard phrase extrac-
tion with the phrase training technique described in
Section 2.1.3. Further experiments included the use
of additional language model training data, rerank-
ing of n-best lists generated by the phrase-based sys-
tem, and different optimization criteria.
A considerable increase in translation quality can
be achieved by application of German compound
splitting (Koehn and Knight, 2003). In comparison
to standard heuristic phrase extraction techniques,
performing force alignment phrase training (FA)
gives an improvement in BLEU on newstest2008
and newstest2009, but a degradation in TER. The
addition of LDC Gigaword corpora (+GW) to the
language model training data shows improvements
in both BLEU and TER. Reranking was done on
1000-best lists generated by the the best available
system (PBT (FA)+GW). Following models were
applied: n-gram posteriors (Zens and Ney, 2006),
sentence length model, a 6-gram LM and IBM-1 lex-
icon models in both normal and inverse direction.
These models are combined in a log-linear fashion
and the scaling factors are tuned in the same man-
ner as the baseline system (using TER?4BLEU on
newstest2009).
The final table includes two identical Jane sys-
tems which are optimized on different criteria. The
one optimized on TER?BLEU yields a much lower
TER.
2.2 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology Single
System
2.2.1 Preprocessing
We preprocess the training data prior to training
the system, first by normalizing symbols such as
quotes, dashes and apostrophes. Then smart-casing
of the first words of each sentence is performed. For
the German part of the training corpus we use the
hunspell1 lexicon to learn a mapping from old Ger-
man spelling to new German spelling to obtain a cor-
pus with homogeneous spelling. In addition, we per-
form compound splitting as described in (Koehn and
Knight, 2003). Finally, we remove very long sen-
tences, empty lines, and sentences that probably are
not parallel due to length mismatch.
2.2.2 System Overview
The KIT system uses an in-house phrase-based
decoder (Vogel, 2003) to perform translation. Op-
timization with regard to the BLEU score is done
using Minimum Error Rate Training as described
by Venugopal et al (2005). The translation model
is trained on the Europarl and News Commentary
Corpus and the phrase table is based on a GIZA++
Word Alignment. We use two 4-gram SRI language
models, one trained on the News Shuffle corpus and
one trained on the Gigaword corpus. Reordering is
performed based on continuous and non-continuous
POS rules to cover short and long-range reorder-
ings. The long-range reordering rules were also ap-
plied to the training corpus and phrase extraction
was performed on the resulting reordering lattices.
Part-of-speech tags are obtained using the TreeTag-
1http://hunspell.sourceforge.net/
359
ger (Schmid, 1994). In addition, the system applies
a bilingual language model to extend the context of
source language words available for translation. The
individual models are described briefly in the fol-
lowing.
2.2.3 POS-based Reordering Model
We use a reordering model that is based on parts-
of-speech (POS) and learn probabilistic rules from
the POS tags of the words in the training corpus and
the alignment information. In addition to continu-
ous reordering rules that model short-range reorder-
ing (Rottmann and Vogel, 2007), we apply non-
continuous rules to address long-range reorderings
as typical for German-English translation (Niehues
and Kolss, 2009). The reordering rules are applied
to the source sentences and the reordered sentence
variants as well as the original sequence are encoded
in a word lattice which is used as input to the de-
coder.
2.2.4 Lattice Phrase Extraction
For the test sentences, the POS-based reordering
allows us to change the word order in the source sen-
tence so that the sentence can be translated more eas-
ily. If we apply this also to the training sentences, we
would be able to extract also phrase pairs for origi-
nally discontinuous phrases and could apply them
during translation of reordered test sentences.
Therefore, we build reordering lattices for all
training sentences and then extract phrase pairs from
the monotone source path as well as from the re-
ordered paths. To limit the number of extracted
phrase pairs, we extract a source phrase only once
per sentence, even if it is found in different paths and
we only use long-range reordering rules to generate
the lattices for the training corpus.
2.2.5 Bilingual Language Model
In phrase-based systems the source sentence is
segmented by the decoder during the search pro-
cess. This segmentation into phrases leads to the
loss of context information at the phrase boundaries.
The language model can make use of more target
side context. To make also source language context
available we use a bilingual language model, an ad-
ditional language model in the phrase-based system
in which each token consist of a target word and all
source words it is aligned to. The bilingual tokens
enter the translation process as an additional target
factor.
2.3 LIMSI-CNRS Single System
2.3.1 System overview
The LIMSI system is built with n-code2, an open
source statistical machine translation system based
on bilingual n-grams.
2.3.2 n-code Overview
In a nutshell, the translation model is im-
plemented as a stochastic finite-state transducer
trained using a n-gram model of (source,target)
pairs (Casacuberta and Vidal, 2004). Training this
model requires to reorder source sentences so as to
match the target word order. This is performed by a
stochastic finite-state reordering model, which uses
part-of-speech information3 to generalize reordering
patterns beyond lexical regularities.
In addition to the translation model, eleven fea-
ture functions are combined: a target-language
model; four lexicon models; two lexicalized reorder-
ing models (Tillmann, 2004) aiming at predicting
the orientation of the next translation unit; a weak
distance-based distortion model; and finally a word-
bonus model and a tuple-bonus model which com-
pensate for the system preference for short transla-
tions. The four lexicon models are similar to the ones
use in a standard phrase based system: two scores
correspond to the relative frequencies of the tuples
and two lexical weights estimated from the automat-
ically generated word alignments. The weights asso-
ciated to feature functions are optimally combined
using a discriminative training framework (Och,
2003), using the newstest2009 data as development
set.
The overall search is based on a beam-search
strategy on top of a dynamic programming algo-
rithm. Reordering hypotheses are computed in a
preprocessing step, making use of reordering rules
built from the word reorderings introduced in the tu-
ple extraction process. The resulting reordering hy-
potheses are passed to the decoder in the form of
word lattices (Crego and Marin?o, 2007).
2http://www.limsi.fr/Individu/jmcrego/n-code
3Part-of-speech information for English and German is com-
puted using the TreeTagger.
360
2.3.3 Data Preprocessing
Based on previous experiments which have
demonstrated that better normalization tools provide
better BLEU scores (K. Papineni and Zhu, 2002),
all the English texts are tokenized and detokenized
with in-house text processing tools (De?chelotte et
al., 2008). For German, the standard tokenizer sup-
plied by evaluation organizers is used.
2.3.4 Target n-gram Language Models
The English language model is trained assuming
that the test set consists in a selection of news texts
dating from the end of 2010 to the beginning of
2011. This assumption is based on what was done
for the 2010 evaluation. Thus, a development cor-
pus is built in order to create a vocabulary and to
optimize the target language model.
Development Set and Vocabulary In order to
cover different period, two development sets are
used. The first one is newstest2008. However, this
corpus is two years older than the targeted time pe-
riod. Thus a second development corpus is gath-
ered by randomly sampling bunches of 5 consecu-
tive sentences from the provided news data of 2010
and 2011.
To estimate a LM, the English vocabulary is first
defined by including all tokens observed in the Eu-
roparl and news-commentary corpora. This vocabu-
lary is then expanded with all words that occur more
that 5 times in the French-English giga-corpus, and
with the most frequent proper names taken from the
monolingual news data of 2010 and 2011. This pro-
cedure results in a vocabulary around 500k words.
Language Model Training All the training data
allowed in the constrained task are divided into 9
sets based on dates on genres. On each set, a
standard 4-gram LM is estimated from the 500k
word vocabulary with in-house tools using abso-
lute discounting interpolated with lower order mod-
els (Kneser and Ney, 1995; Chen and Goodman,
1998).
All LMs except the one trained on the news cor-
pora from 2010-2011 are first linearly interpolated.
The associated coefficients are estimated so as to
minimize the perplexity evaluated on the dev2010-
2011. The resulting LM and the 2010-2011 LM are
finally interpolated with newstest2008 as develop-
ment data. This two steps interpolation aims to avoid
an overestimate of the weight associated to the 2010-
2011 LM.
2.4 SYSTRAN Software, Inc. Single System
The data submitted by SYSTRAN were obtained by
the SYSTRAN baseline system in combination with
a statistical post editing (SPE) component.
The SYSTRAN system is traditionally classi-
fied as a rule-based system. However, over the
decades, its development has always been driven by
pragmatic considerations, progressively integrating
many of the most efficient MT approaches and tech-
niques. Nowadays, the baseline engine can be con-
sidered as a linguistic-oriented system making use of
dependency analysis, general transfer rules as well
as of large manually encoded dictionaries (100k ?
800k entries per language pair).
The basic setup of the SPE component is identi-
cal to the one described in (L. Dugast and Koehn,
2007). A statistical translation model is trained on
the rule-based translation of the source and the tar-
get side of the parallel corpus. This is done sepa-
rately for each parallel corpus. Language models are
trained on each target half of the parallel corpora and
also on additional in-domain corpora. Moreover, the
following measures ? limiting unwanted statistical
effects ? were applied:
? Named entities are replaced by special tokens
on both sides. This usually improves word
alignment, since the vocabulary size is signif-
icantly reduced. In addition, entity translation
is handled more reliably by the rule-based en-
gine.
? The intersection of both vocabularies (i.e. vo-
cabularies of the rule-based output and the ref-
erence translation) is used to produce an addi-
tional parallel corpus (whose target is identical
to the source). This was added to the parallel
text in order to improve word alignment.
? Singleton phrase pairs are deleted from the
phrase table to avoid overfitting.
? Phrase pairs not containing the same number
of entities on the source and the target side are
also discarded.
361
? Phrase pairs appearing less than 2 times were
pruned.
The SPE language model was trained 15M
phrases from the news/europarl corpora, provided
as training data for WMT 2011. Weights for these
separate models were tuned by the MERT algorithm
provided in the Moses toolkit (P. Koehn et al, 2007),
using the provided news development set.
3 RWTH Aachen System Combination
System combination is used to produce consensus
translations from multiple hypotheses produced with
different translation engines that are better in terms
of translation quality than any of the individual hy-
potheses. The basic concept of RWTH?s approach
to machine translation system combination has been
described by Matusov et al (2006; 2008). This ap-
proach includes an enhanced alignment and reorder-
ing framework. A lattice is built from the input hy-
potheses. The translation with the best score within
the lattice according to a couple of statistical mod-
els is selected as consensus translation. A deeper
description will be also given in the WMT11 sys-
tem combination paper of RWTH Aachen Univer-
sity. For this task only the A2L framework has been
used.
4 Experiments
We tried different system combinations with differ-
ent sets of single systems and different optimiza-
tion criteria. As RWTH has two different transla-
tion systems, we put the output of both systems into
system combination. Although both systems have
the same preprocessing, their hypotheses differ. Fi-
nally, we added for both RWTH systems two addi-
tional hypotheses to the system combination. The
two hypotheses of Jane were optimized on differ-
ent criteria. The first hypothesis was optimized on
BLEU and the second one on TER?BLEU. The first
RWTH phrase-based hypothesis was generated with
force alignment, the second RWTH phrase-based
hypothesis is a reranked version of the first one as
described in 2.1.4. Compared to the other systems,
the system by SYSTRAN has a completely different
approach (see section 2.4). It is mainly based on a
rule-based system. For the German?English pair,
SYSTRAN achieves a lower BLEU score in each
test set compared to the other groups. But since the
SYSTRAN system is very different to the others, we
still obtain an improvement when we add it also to
system combination.
We obtain the best result from system combina-
tion of all seven systems, optimizing the parameters
on BLEU. This system was the system we submitted
to the WMT 2011 evaluation.
For each dev set we obtain an improvement com-
pared to the best single systems. For newstest2008
and newstest2009 we get an improvement of 0.5
points in BLEU and 1.8 points in TER compared to
the best single system of Karlsruhe Institute of Tech-
nology. For newstest2010 we get an improvement
of 1.8 points in BLEU and 2.7 points in TER com-
pared to the best single system of RWTH. The sys-
tem combination weights optimized for the best run
are listed in Table 2. We see that although the single
system of SYSTRAN has the lowest BLEU scores,
it gets the second highest system weight. This high
value shows the influence of a completely different
system. On the other hand, all RWTH systems are
very similar, because of their same preprocessing
and their small variations. Therefor the system com-
bination parameter of all four systems by themselves
are relatively small. The summarized ?RWTH ap-
proach? system weight, though, is again on par with
the other systems.
5 Conclusion
The four statistical machine translation systems of
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, RWTH Aachen
and LIMSI and the very structural approach of SYS-
TRAN produce hypotheses with a huge variability
compared to the others. Finally the RWTH Aachen
system combination combined all single system hy-
potheses to one hypothesis with a higher BLEU
compared to each single system. If the system
combination implementation can handle enough sin-
gle systems we would recommend to add all single
systems to the system combination. Although the
single system of SYSTRAN has the lowest BLEU
scores and the RWTH single systems are similar we
achieved the best result in using all single systems.
362
newstest2008 newstest2009 newstest2010 description
BLEU TER BLEU TER BLEU TER
22.73 60.73 22.50 59.82 25.26 57.37 sc (all systems) BLEU opt
22.61 60.60 22.28 59.39 25.07 56.95 sc (all systems - (1)) TER?BLEU opt
22.50 60.41 22.52 59.61 25.23 57.40 sc (all systems) TER?BLEU opt
22.19 60.09 22.05 59.31 24.74 56.89 sc (all systems - (4)) TER?BLEU opt
22.21 60.71 21.89 59.95 24.72 57.58 sc (all systems - (4,7)) TER?BLEU opt
22.22 60.45 21.79 59.72 24.32 57.59 sc (all systems - (3,4)) TER?BLEU opt
22.27 60.60 21.75 59.92 24.35 57.64 sc (all systems - (3,4)) BLEU opt
22.10 62.59 22.01 61.64 23.34 60.35 (1) Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
21.41 62.77 21.12 61.91 23.44 60.06 (2) RWTH PBT (FA) rerank +GW
21.11 62.96 21.06 62.16 23.29 60.26 (3) RWTH PBT (FA)
21.47 63.89 21.00 63.33 22.93 61.71 (4) RWTH jane + GW BLEU opt
20.89 61.05 20.36 60.47 23.42 58.31 (5) RWTH jane + GW TER?BLEU opt
20.33 64.50 19.79 64.91 21.97 61.44 (6) Limsi-CNRS
17.06 69.48 17.52 67.34 18.68 66.37 (7) SYSTRAN Software
Table 1: All systems for the WMT 2011 German?English translation task (truecase). BLEU and TER results are in
percentage. FA denotes systems with phrase training, +GW the use of LDC data for the language model. sc denotes
system combination.
system weight
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 0.350
RWTH PBT (FA) rerank +GW 0.001
RWTH PBT (FA) 0.046
RWTH jane + GW BLEU opt 0.023
RWTH jane + GW TER?BLEU opt 0.034
Limsi-CNRS 0.219
SYSTRAN Software 0.328
Table 2: Optimized systems weights for each system of the best system combination result.
Acknowledgments
This work was achieved as part of the QUAERO
Programme, funded by OSEO, French State agency
for innovation.
References
F. Casacuberta and E. Vidal. 2004. Machine translation
with inferred stochastic finite-state transducers. Com-
putational Linguistics, 30(3):205?225.
S.F. Chen and J.T. Goodman. 1998. An empirical
study of smoothing techniques for language modeling.
Technical Report TR-10-98, Computer Science Group,
Harvard University.
D. Chiang. 2007. Hierarchical Phrase-Based Transla-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 33(2):201?228.
J.M. Crego and J.B. Marin?o. 2007. Improving statistical
MT by coupling reordering and decoding. Machine
Translation, 20(3):199?215.
D. De?chelotte, O. Galibert G. Adda, A. Allauzen, J. Gau-
vain, H. Meynard, and F. Yvon. 2008. LIMSI?s statis-
tical translation systems for WMT?08. In Proc. of the
NAACL-HTL Statistical Machine Translation Work-
shop, Columbus, Ohio.
L. Huang and D. Chiang. 2007. Forest Rescoring: Faster
Decoding with Integrated Language Models. In Proc.
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 144?151, Prague, Czech Republic,
June.
T. Ward K. Papineni, S. Roukos and W. Zhu. 2002. Bleu:
363
a method for automatic evaluation of machine transla-
tion. In ACL ?02: Proc. of the 40th Annual Meeting
on Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
311?318. Association for Computational Linguistics.
R. Kneser and H. Ney. 1995. Improved backing-off for
m-gram language modeling. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Sig-
nal Processing, ICASSP?95, pages 181?184, Detroit,
MI.
P. Koehn and K. Knight. 2003. Empirical Methods
for Compound Splitting. In Proceedings of European
Chapter of the ACL (EACL 2009), pages 187?194.
J. Senellart L. Dugast and P. Koehn. 2007. Statistical
post-editing on systran?s rule-based translation system.
In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Statisti-
cal Machine Translation, StatMT ?07, pages 220?223,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
E. Matusov, N. Ueffing, and H. Ney. 2006. Computing
Consensus Translation from Multiple Machine Trans-
lation Systems Using Enhanced Hypotheses Align-
ment. In Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL),
pages 33?40.
E. Matusov, G. Leusch, R.E. Banchs, N. Bertoldi,
D. Dechelotte, M. Federico, M. Kolss, Y.-S. Lee,
J.B. Mari no, M. Paulik, S. Roukos, H. Schwenk, and
H. Ney. 2008. System Combination for Machine
Translation of Spoken and Written Language. IEEE
Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Pro-
cessing, 16(7):1222?1237.
J.A. Nelder and R. Mead. 1965. The Downhill Simplex
Method. Computer Journal, 7:308.
J. Niehues and M. Kolss. 2009. A POS-Based Model for
Long-Range Reorderings in SMT. In Fourth Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation (WMT 2009),
Athens, Greece.
F.J. Och and H. Ney. 2003. A Systematic Comparison of
Various Statistical Alignment Models. Computational
Linguistics, 29(1):19?51.
F.J. Och. 2003. Minimum Error Rate Training for Statis-
tical Machine Translation. In Proc. Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
160?167, Sapporo, Japan, July.
A. Birch P. Koehn, H. Hoang, C. Callison-Burch, M. Fed-
erico, N. Bertoldi, B. Cowan, W. Shen, C. Moran,
R. Zens, C. Dyer, O. Bojar, A. Constantin, and
E. Herbst. 2007. Moses: open source toolkit for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
45th Annual Meeting of the ACL on Interactive Poster
and Demonstration Sessions, ACL ?07, pages 177?
180, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
K. Rottmann and S. Vogel. 2007. Word Reordering in
Statistical Machine Translation with a POS-Based Dis-
tortion Model. In TMI, Sko?vde, Sweden.
H. Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic Part-of-Speech Tagging
Using Decision Trees. In International Conference
on NewMethods in Language Processing, Manchester,
UK.
A. Stolcke. 2002. SRILM - an extensible language mod-
eling toolkit. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Spoken Language
Processing, volume 2, pages 901?904, Denver, Col-
orado, USA, September.
C. Tillmann. 2004. A unigram orientation model for sta-
tistical machine translation. In Proceedings of HLT-
NAACL 2004, pages 101?104. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
A. Venugopal, A. Zollman, and A. Waibel. 2005. Train-
ing and Evaluation Error Minimization Rules for Sta-
tistical Machine Translation. In Workshop on Data-
drive Machine Translation and Beyond (WPT-05), Ann
Arbor, MI.
D. Vilar, S. Stein, M. Huck, and H. Ney. 2010. Jane:
Open Source Hierarchical Translation, Extended with
Reordering and Lexicon Models. In ACL 2010 Joint
Fifth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation and
Metrics MATR, pages 262?270, Uppsala, Sweden,
July.
S. Vogel. 2003. SMT Decoder Dissected: Word Re-
ordering. In Int. Conf. on Natural Language Process-
ing and Knowledge Engineering, Beijing, China.
J. Wuebker, A. Mauser, and H. Ney. 2010. Training
Phrase Translation Models with Leaving-One-Out. In
Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Assoc.
for Computational Linguistics, pages 475?484, Upp-
sala, Sweden, July.
R. Zens and H. Ney. 2006. N-gram Posterior Proba-
bilities for Statistical Machine Translation. In Human
Language Technology Conf. / North American Chap-
ter of the Assoc. for Computational Linguistics Annual
Meeting (HLT-NAACL), Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 72?77, New York City, June.
R. Zens and H. Ney. 2008. Improvements in Dynamic
Programming Beam Search for Phrase-based Statisti-
cal Machine Translation. In Proc. of the Int. Workshop
on Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT), Honolulu,
Hawaii, October.
364
