Scenario forms for web information seeking and summarizing in
bone marrow transplantation
Margit Becher Brigitte Endres-Niggemeyer Gerrit Fichtner
Fachhochschule Hannover (University of Applied Sciences and Arts)
Dept. of Information and Communication
Ricklinger Stadtweg 120, D-30459 Hanover, Germany
{Brigitte.Endres-Niggemeyer, Margit.Becher, Gerrit.Fichtner}@ik.fh-hannover.de
Abstract
This paper presents the user-centered
interface of a summarization system for
physicians in Bone Marrow Transplan-
tation (BMT). It serves both retrieval
and summarization, eliciting the query
and presenting multi-document summa-
ries in a situation-specific organization.
Introduction: User-centered scenario
forms for retrieval and summarization
This paper presents the user interface of a
summarization system for physicians in Bone
Marrow Transplantation (BMT). The interface
has users state well-articulated questions that
serve as summarization targets and basis for
retrieval queries, and it displays summarization
results in an organization that fits the user?s
situation. Although user interfaces have at-
tracted almost no interest in summarization
research so far, we think that a suitable user-
oriented interface is important for a summari-
zation system. This paper deals with such an
interface, not with the summarization proce-
dures the interface enables. In good user-cen-
tered design attitude (Norman and Draper,
1986), we developed the user interface first,
and are still equipping it component by com-
ponent with the intended functionality.
Our users are highly specialized physicians in
Bone Marrow Transplantation (BMT), a life-
critical field of internal medicine. They need
answers to their questions that are fast, to the
point, and prepared for direct application. Us-
ing question/answer scenario forms derived
from empirical scenario descriptions, they can
specify their current situation and the missing
knowledge items with the help of a domain-
specific ontology. The system accepts the filled
out question scenario, projects it to a query for
search engines and Medline (the most common
medical reference retrieval engine), and starts
the search. Retrieved documents are down-
loaded, preprocessed, and then checked for
passages where question terms accumulate.
These passages are examined by summariza-
tion agents that follow strategies of human
summarizers (Endres-Niggemeyer 1998). Ac-
cepted statements enter the summary, under the
heading given by the scenario element that
asked for them. Thus the summary organizes
new knowledge in a fashion that mirrors the
user?s situation. All the time, the user-centered
interface keeps users in their own task envi-
ronment.
To produce summaries that fit users? informa-
tion needs, reasonably precise question state-
ments are required. Questions (think of Who?
Why? etc.) also have well-known qualities as
text organizers, so that they can serve summary
organization, the query items switching to
headings for (partial) summaries when answers
are delivered.
Well-structured queries are most easily elicited
by a convenient form. With a suitable choice of
real-life scenarios (ideas inspired by Carroll,
2000), users can formulate their search and
summarizing requests by filling out such a
form, simply stating what they know and what
they are missing in a given situation. Where
the user identifies a knowledge gap (a ques-
tion), the system will feed in the respective
summary items if possible.
In order to mediate between the users? and the
system perspective, we equip the scenario
forms with intermediary structures - a detailed
interpretation for summarizing and an abridged
one for IR. Within these interpretations, the
form itself is represented by constants, the user
query provides variables.
In the following, we explain where our inspi-
ration for the interface came from, how its de-
sign aims are met, ensued by empirical mod-
eling and implementational details.
1 Background and related
approaches
While graphical output of summaries was al-
ready addressed in the 80ies, interest in user in-
terfaces of summarization systems is more
recent. Aone et al (1999) as well as Strzal-
kowski et al (1999) and Ando et al (2000)
describe graphical user interfaces of their
summarizers. White, Ruthven and Joemon
(2001) positively evaluate a summarization
function and interface added to Altavista and
Google. Buyukkokten et al (w.d.) summarize
for hand-helds. Their small screens make them
consider the user interface. Kan, McKeown
and Klavans (2001) see summarization on top
of an IR task, as we do. They intend to replace
the common ranked output lists of retrieval or
search engines by a multi-document summary
structure. Our graphical user interface applies
findings and principles of user-centered infor-
mation seeking. We are not aware of any ear-
lier approaches that deal with user-centered
query formulation in summarization.
Human-computer interaction and interface
development are well-trodden research areas in
IR (overviews by Hearst 1999; Marchionini
and Komlodi, 1998). Especially in the Digital
Libraries context there is plenty of work and
new ideas about how to improve user access
and to make retrieval interfaces more intuitive,
both on the Internet and in specialized
collections such as videos (see e.g. Mackinlay,
Rao and Card, 1995, or Geisler et al, 2001). In
IR, templates are frequent, but we see no user
interfaces that consistently derive the query
from a description of the user need. One possi-
ble reason for this is that most approaches deal
with less well-defined environments, while in
the setting of clinical BMT, users are in well-
circumscribed situations.
Figure 1. User-oriented query formulation scenario: Adverse drug effects (simplified)
Underlying disease
chronic myelogenous leukemia
ide effects included nausea, vomiting and diarrhea, muscle cramps, arthralgias, 
eriorbital edema, peripheral edema, dermatitis and myelosuppression. Most of 
hese were grade 1 or 2 toxicities. Grade 3/4 drug related adverse events included 
eutropenia (12%), thrombocytopenia (6%), dermatitis and eczema (3%), nausea 
nd vomiting (2%), and anemia (1%) [27]. 
uthor Michael E. O'Dwyer and Brian J. Druker 
itle The Role of the Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor STI571 in the Treatment of Cancer 
ull Text 
Drug
Glivec
Adverse clinical effect
hrombocytopenia
Statistical characteristic of adverse drug effect
Complete blood counts must be performed regularly during therapy with Glivec. 
Treatment of CML patients with Glivec has been associated with neutropenia or 
thrombocytopenia. However, the occurrence of these cytopenias is dependent on the 
stage of the disease being treated and they were more frequent in patients with 
accelerated phase CML or blast crisis as compared to patients with chronic phase 
CML. Treatment with Glivec may be interrupted or the dose be reduced, as 
recommended in section (Dosage and method of administration). 
Author 
Title Data Sheet
Full Text 
AdverseDrugEffect
Patient
ge 21-50
ransplantation allogeneic BMT
onth after BMT > 12
cute GvHD Grade I
The initial results of these phase II trials were presented at the annual meeting of the American Society 
of Hematology (ASH) in December 2000. In these studies patients were treated with STI571 at 400 to 
600 mg daily dose. This dose range was based on analysis of pharmacokinetic and response data from 
the phase I study. In the dose finding study a dose level of 300mg appeared to be the threshold for 
significant therapeutic benefit. In addition, pharmacokinetic data showed that this dose achieved a 
trough level of 1?M, which is the in vitro IC50 for cellular proliferation. Finally, an analysis of 
responses in white blood counts and platelets over time suggested that doses of 400 to 600 mg were on 
the plateau of a dose-response curve, indicating that this dose range would be efficacious for phase II 
testing [26]. In phase II testing, 532 chronic phase patients who were refractory to or intolerant of 
interferon-? were treated with a STI571 dose of 400mg daily. Eligibility criteria in this study allowed 
inclusion of patients with up to 15% blasts and 15% basophils in the marrow or peripheral blood. After a
median exposure of 254 days (86% of patients were treated for 6-12 months), 47% and 28% of patients 
achieved major and complete cytogenetic responses, respectively. Only 3% of patients discontinued 
treatment due to disease progression with only 2% of all patients stopping therapy due to adverse events.
Side effects included nausea, vomiting and diarrhea, muscle cramps, arthralgias, periorbital edema, 
peripheral edema, dermatitis and myelosuppression. Most of these were grade 1 or 2 toxicities. Grade 
3/4 drug related adverse events included neutropenia (12%), thrombocytopenia (6%), dermatitis and 
eczema (3%), nausea and vomiting (2%), and anemia (1%) [27]. Results of the phase II study in 
accelerated phase patients were equally impressive [28]. Overall, 91% of 233 patients showed some 
form of hematologic response, while 63% of patients achieved a complete hematologic response (CHR) 
with or without peripheral blood recovery, with 44% achieving a CHR with peripheral blood recovery 
(neutrophils > 1.0 x 109/L and platelets > 100 x 109/L). Twenty-one percent (21%) of patients achieved 
a major cytogenetic response with 14% complete responses. Overall, 41% of accelerated phase patients 
had some form of cytogenetic response. Again, these results were achieved without substantial toxicity. 
Not surprisingly, there was a higher incidence of grade 3/4 hematological toxicity in this patient 
population, 20%, 17% and 15% of patients developing grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia, anemia or 
neutropenia, respectively. However, only 2% of patients developed febrile neutropenia. Finally, results 
of the phase II study treating 260 myeloid blast crisis patients with STI571 were presented [29]. The 
overall response rate was 64% with 11% achieving complete remission (CR = < 5% blasts) with 
peripheral blood recovery. Another 15% of patients cleared their marrows to less than 5% blasts but did 
not meet the criteria for CR due to persistent cytopenias. Lastly, 38% of patients were either returned to 
chronic phase or had partial responses. Cytogenetic responses were seen in 27% of cases with 15% 
major and 6% complete responses. Median survival was 6.8 months (8.6 months in patients treated with 
STI571 as first line therapy versus 4.4 months when STI571 was used as second line therapy). Thirty 
percent (30%) of patients were still alive at 14 months with a suggestion of a plateau on the survival 
curve. These results compare favorably in a historical context to chemotherapy for myeloid blast crisis 
in which the median survival is approximately 3 months. Toxicity was comparable to that seen in the 
accelerated phase study.
Future directions in therapy of CML
In addition to the ongoing phase II studies, a phase III randomized study, comparing STI571 with 
interferon and ara-C in newly diagnosed patients is ongoing. The results of this study, plus longer follow
up on patients in the phase II studies will be required to determine the place of STI571 in CML 
treatment algorithms. From the results presented above, it is clear that STI571 works best when used 
early in the disease course, chronic phase as opposed to blast crisis. As it is possible that Bcr-Abl is the 
sole oncogenic abnormality in early stage disease, STI571 may be sufficient as a single agent in some 
patients with CML. With disease progression, additional genetic abnormalities may render CML cells 
less dependent on Bcr-Abl for survival. Thus, in blast crisis patients, it is clear that therapy with STI571 
alone is insufficient for the vast majority of these patients.
 
incidence
2
1
3
Figure 2. Answering state of the scenario form ? source document at the right side. Numbered arrows point to
items explained in section 2.1.
User-centered research on information seeking
(Belkin, Oddy and Brookes 1982; Bates, 1989;
Ingwersen, 1992; Marchionini, 1995; Borg-
man, 1996; Marchionini and Komlodi, 1998)
claims that users are entitled to state their in-
formation needs in their own thinking and
working context. The research history reflects
a long struggle for user-oriented information
seeking as opposed to machine-driven query
formulation in IR. The ASK (Anomalous State
of Knowledge) hypothesis of Belkin, Oddy and
Brooks (1982) gives the classic formulation of
the problem: Users who ask are in difficulty,
they lack a piece of knowledge and are busy
restructuring their convictions. This is a bad
moment to additionally confront them with an
IR system, instead of adapting to their needs.
Bates? (1989) landmark ?berrypicking? model
of information seeking pinpoints the advance
in understanding of how human users seek and
process information in natural environments.
During an information seeking process, Bates
(1989) observes many rounds of retrieving
documents and learning with changing goals.
Empirical data have confirmed her analysis
(see Hearst, 1999). When Marchionini and
Komlodi (1998) wrote their overview of in-
formation seeking interfaces, they put user-
centered query interfaces on the research
agenda.
It is commonplace knowledge in IR that end
users are not very proficient in IR tasks, be-
cause of missing background knowledge and
practice. They have poor chances to overcome
an ?eternal novice? condition (Borgman,
1996). Therefore, the traditional work orga-
nization in IR includes intermediaries (cf.
Ingwersen, 1992). For better retrieval results,
they help with problem definition, structure the
question strategy in a presearch interview, de-
velop queries that promise retrieval success,
execute the search, and check the retrieval
result in a post-search interview.
Our summarization follows a knowledge-based
human-like style of argumentation (Endres-
Niggemeyer, 1998). The main knowledge
source is a BMT ontology comprising about
4400 concepts of the domain.  Since users state
their information need with concepts from this
ontology, the ontology is also an important
component of the user interface (see figures 1,
4). From an IR point of view, ontologies are le-
gitimate offspring of thesauri. Many thesauri
are used for indexing documents and formulat-
ing queries (see Lutes, 1998). By applying a
domain ontology like a classic thesaurus, we
use a practice that has stood the test of de-
cades.
2 The scenario interface
A scenario reflects a concrete situational con-
text. When an information need comes up in a
situation, situation characteristics inspire and
restrict information seeking: if the patient is a
toddler, specific therapies for geriatric patients
are out of scope. Situational features of this
type are in an obvious way useful for finding
out what information is desired to fill a current
knowledge gap. They are recorded in our in-
ductively developed scenarios. The graphical
user interface supports interaction supported
by scenarios: navigation, selection and transfer
of items, etc. in a way that is easy and safe to
use. A movie helps novice users to get started.
2.1 User view and use
The claim of user-centered information seek-
ing is to enable users to remain integrated in
their own domain and think about their own is-
sues when stating their information needs.
We serve physicians in high-duty situations.
Well-designed scenarios help them to structure
their questions for better retrieval and summa-
rization performance. They incorporate knowl-
edge about the important features of an infor-
mation need situation.
To fill out the query template of Medline, their
standard information source, our users have to
deal with features of IR systems, with data-
bases and database fields to be searched,
search terms, document types, publication
dates and the well-known Boolean operators.
The query scenario presented in figure 1
avoids these problems. With this interface, the
retrieval and summarization apparatus remains
behind the scenes: no databases to choose, no
database fields to select, no Boolean operators
to apply.
Instead, we have some unobtrusive technical
controls at the screen: check buttons (pointer
1), simple text fields (pointer 2), multiple text
fields (pointer 3), field headings procuring the
appropriate ontology classes when clicked
(pointer 4), question marks (pointer 5). Text
fields are labeled and prestructured. They re-
ceive an ontology concept that fits the class
indicated by the label. If a text field is left
empty with the question button selected, this
means a question about the ontology class that
is prespecified in the slot. Entries for the slots
hop in from the system ontology (left side of
the screen) by means of a mouse-click. By
clicking on the question mark, the user flags a
slot as conveying a question. All other slots
and checkboxes state the given features of the
current situation.
Related scenarios are linked to each other by
hypertext links in the head of the forms.
We illustrate how the interaction with scenario
forms works with ?Adverse drug effect?, a
scenario serving situations with drug-related
complications. In  Figure 1, the physician?s
problem is to clear up an adverse drug event: a
patient?s platelet count has dropped (trombo-
cytopenia) when Glivec was administered.
Figure 1 shows the question scenario screen
with the question already formulated: In the
patient block, the user has ticked checkboxes
for stating the patient?s age, the type of trans-
plantation (s)he has had, the time that has gone
by since the transplant, and the mild (grade 1)
Graft-versus-host disease of the patient. After
that, the user has clicked on the field label
?Adverse drug effect? (pointer 4). The re-
spective class of the ontology showed up on
the left of the screen, in systematic order (up-
per half - pointer 6) and in alphabetical order
(lower half ? pointer 7). There, the user found
?thrombocytopenia?. In both displays a little
?D? icon in front of an entry (pointer 8) pro-
vides a description of the concept when clicked
on. With a click on the ?thrombocytopenia?
entry, the concept has slipped into its target
field ?Adverse drug effect?. The user has
stated the statistical value of interest, which
happens to be ?incidence?, and activated the
question mark of the slot (pointer 5). This is
his information need. The question form is
ready for search.
The system returns with the answer screen
(Figure 2). The answer (pointer 1) is given as
an excerpt from the original. It is inserted un-
der the question field, having here the content
?incidence?. This field functions now as a sort
of subheading, in line with standard ideas of
text organization. Each text clip is linked to its
position in the source document (pointer 2). By
a click on the hypertext link, the source docu-
ment is displayed with the extract highlighted
(pointer 3).
2.2 Predicate logic interpretation and
queries for search engines
Scenarios are equipped with a predicate logic
interpretation that sets up the target structure
for summarization. It restates the scenario by
means of propositions contained in the ontol-
ogy. Possible user input is introduced by vari-
ables.
Figure 3 shows how the intermediary structure
buffers users from IR machinery. It comprises
the code of the user-oriented scenario and its
interpretation: the structured question for
summarization formulated in first-order
statements including user-produced values, and
the query strategy derived from it.
Figure 4 presents the interpretation of the ?Ad-
verse drug effect? scenario whose user view is
shown in figure 1. It consists of Prolog-style
first-order assertions. The generic state of the
scenario interpretation is given in the upper left
corner of the figure. From this representation,
an abridged generic scenario query set has
been developed and tested for retrieval capac-
ity (upper right corner). As soon as the user has
entered values, they replace in the assertions
the surface variable names (tagged with ?#?)
that serve as their placeholders. Thus a specific
scenario interpretation (middle left in Figure 4)
is built up. Retrieval queries need fewer items
than summarization target specifications, but
they are derived likewise by replacing vari-
ables with their current content. We use up to
four queries, relaxing the constraints if the
answer set is too small.
Summarization targets are first-order contexts
(McCarthy and Buvac, 1993) as used in the
ontology. They equip first-order statements
with additional context propositions. This is
useful in medicine where many assertions are
limited in scope. Restrictions must be stated in
order to make up true expressions.
When building the target context expression
for summarization (see Figure 4, lower left
corner), propositions without user input are
disregarded. If the respective slot is given the
question property, the proposition goes into the
core of the context, otherwise it is put into its
context section. Like this, different instances of
the same scenario give rise to different query
sets and trigger different summaries.
2.3 Empirical modeling
Scenario Acquisition. During scenario acqui-
sition, we provide broad scenario families and
ask physicians to describe scenarios that might
fit into them, drawing from their experience
during the last week or month. We obtain em-
pirical scenarios such as:
 ?Patient with clearly progressing MDS and
isochromosome 13. Autologous Tx??
(MDS = Myelodysplastic Syndrome, Tx =
Therapy, here bone marrow transplantation)
So far, we have collected 131 empirical sce-
narios.
Content Engineering. Almost all scenarios of
our users need reworking (splitting, restructu-
ring, reformulation etc.) in order to provide the
basis for scenario forms of general usability.
First, scenario descriptions are filled up with
items left out by the physicians, but needed for
successful retrieval. Next, empirical scenario
descriptions are generalized by separating
parameters of the individual situation from its
more general and recurring features. If a
physician asks for therapies against a herpes
simplex infection, the same framework will
apply to questions about other infections, for
instance about a fusarium infection. A user will
enter fusarium instead of herpes simplex. The
scenario form codes the reusable structure,
individual content is filled in from the
ontology.
On the whole, we manage to remodel empirical
scenarios.
3 Implementation
Nearly the whole user interface is coded in
JavaScript. The scenario interpretations and the
ontology are stored in an XML database. For
processing, scenarios are transferred with the
user input in an XML structure defined by a
general DTD describing the common pattern of
all scenarios. After processing the user input,
for every field marked as a question, extracts
of the retrieved documents as well as links to
the corresponding full text documents are in-
serted in the scenario structure. In this way,
exactly the same data structure is used both for
the question scenario and for the answer sce-
nario.
Figure 3. Scenarios mediating between user and system
<--! patient-->
age (patient, #Patient#Age)
treatmentCharacteristic (#Patient#Transplantation)
timeperiod (bone marrow transplantation, , #Patient#Months after BMT)
suffer (patient, #Patient#Acute GvHD)
<--! scenario body -->
isMainDisease (patient, #Underlying disease)
cause (#Drug, #Adverse clinical effect)
hasCharacteristic (#Adverse clinical effect,
           #Statistical characteristic of adverse drug effect)
bone marrow transplantation; #Drug; #Adverse clinical effect;
         #Statistical characteristic of adverse drug effect
bone marrow transplantation; #Drug; #Adverse clinical effect
#Drug; #Adverse clinical effect; #Statistical characteristic
         of adverse drug effect
#Drug; #Adverse clinical effect
Generic scenario interpretation
variable
constant
Specific scenario interpretation
age (patient, 21- 50) &
treatmentCharacteristic (allogeneic BMT) &
timeperiod (bone marrow transplantation, , > 12) &
suffer (patient, acute GvHD grade 1)
ist (age (patient, 21- 50) &
treatmentCharacteristic (allogeneic BMT) &
timeperiod (bone marrow transplantation, , > 12) &
suffer (patient, acute GvHD grade 1) &
isMainDisease (patient, chronic myelogenous leukemia) &
cause (Glivec, thrombocytopenia),
hasCharacteristic (thrombocytopenia, incidence))
?
Summarization target
user input
Generic scenario queries (descending specifity)
Specific scenario queries
bone marrow transplantation; Glivec; thrombocytopenia; incidence
bone marrow transplantation; Glivec; thrombocytopenia
Glivec; thrombocytopenia; incidence
Glivec; thrombocytopenia
user input
isMainDisease (patient, chronic myelogenous leukemia)
cause (Glivec, thrombocytopenia)
hasCharacteristic (thrombocytopenia, incidence)
user input
knowledge engineering and testing
derivation
Figure 4. The example scenario?s interpretation
4. Current state of development
At the time of writing, our current scenario li-
brary comprises 40 scenarios. We expect to
have a manageable set (less than 100 of them)
when we finish. They serve recurrent situ-
ational structures. A catch-all scenario deals
with cases where no prefabricated scenario is
appropriate. It passes users to PubMed and
Google.
Our BMT ontology currently comprises about
4400 concepts, 2800 propositions, and some
1400 contexts. This should be mentioned, since
the ontology is crucial for the usability of the
system and the user interface.
Scenario engineering is carried out in coopera-
tion with a BMT specialist. We adhere to for-
mative evaluation (Scriven, 1967). Currently,
we are starting retrieval tests. Summarization
trials will follow. A serious restructuring that
will change the usability features of the inter-
face is envisaged for later when we shall move
it to a mobile hand-held device.
Conclusion
In this article we have shown how user-based
scenario forms support users? interaction with
information during information seeking. Thus
we comply with a core requirement for user-
centered information-seeking interfaces, and
we manage to obtain structured questions that
set up a reasonable target structure for multi-
document summarizing.
Acknowledgements
The thanks of the authors go to Bernd Herten-
stein, Claudia Villiger and Juliane Topp for
their help with scenario development, and to
Arnold Ganser and Michael Stadler for testing
the interface.
Implementation of SummIt-BMT is supported
by the German Science Foundation (DFG)
under grant EN 186/6-1 and HE 2927/2-1, by
the German Federal Ministery of Education
and Research (bmbf) under grant 1701200, and
by the Ministery of Science and Culture of
Lower Saxony under grant 1999.384.
References
Ando, R. K., Boguraev, B. K., Byrd, R. J., & Neff,
M. S. (2000) Multi-document Summarization by
Visualizing Topical Content. Workshop on Auto-
matic Summarization, 2000, 79-88.
Aone, C., Okurowski, M.E., Gorlinsky, J. & Lar-
sen, B. (1999) A scalable summarization system
using robust NLP. In I. Mani and M. Maybury
(eds), Advances in automated text summarization.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 71?80.
Bates, M. J. (1989) The design of browsing and
berrypicking techniques for the online search
interface. Online Review 13, 407-424.
Belkin, N., Oddy, R.N., & Brooks, H.M. (1982)
ASK for information retrieval: Part I. Back-
ground and theory. Journal of Documentation 38,
2, 61-71.
Borgman, C. L. (1996) Why are online catalogs still
hard to use. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science 47, 7, 493-503.
Buyukkokten, O., Garcia-Molina, H. & Paepcke, A.
(w.d.) Seeing the whole in parts: Text summari-
zation for web browsing with handheld devices.
http://www-db.stanford.edu/~orkut/papers/www10b/index.html
Carroll, J.M. (2000) Making use. Scenario-based
design of human-computer interfaces. Cambridge
MA: MIT Press.
Endres-Niggemeyer, B. (1998) Summarizing infor-
mation. Berlin: Springer.
Geisler, G., Marchionini, G., Nelson, M., Spinks,
R., &  Yang, M. (2001) Interface concepts for the
Open Video Project. Proc. of the 64th Annual
Meeting of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology (pp. 58 ? 75). Washing-
ton DC.
Hearst, M. (1999) User Interfaces and visualization.
In R. Baeza-Yates & B. Ribeiro-Neto  (Eds.)
Modern Information Retrieval. (pp. 257?324).
New York: ACM Press.
http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/~hearst/irbook/10/node1.html
Ingwersen, P. (1992) Information retrieval inter-
action. London: Taylor Graham.
Kan, M.-Y., McKeown, K.R. & Klavans, J.L.
(2001) Domain-specific informative and indica-
tive summarization for information retrieval.
Workshop on Text Summarization / DUC 2001
Meeting on Summary Evaluation. New Orleans.
http://wwwnlpir.nist.gov/projects/duc/duc2001/agenda_duc20
01.html
Lutes, B. (1998) Web thesaurus compendium.
http://www-cui.darmstadt.gmd.de/~lutes/thesauri.html
Mackinlay, J. D., Rao, R. & Card S. K. (1995) An
organic user interface for searching citation links.
http://www.acm.org/sigchi/chi95/Electronic/documnts/papers/
jdm_bdy.htm
Marchionini, G. (1995) Information seeking in
electronic environments. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Marchionini, G., & Komlodi, A. (1998) Design of
interfaces for information seeking. In ARIST 33,
1998 Annual Review of Information Science and
Technology (pp. 89-130). Medford, NJ: Informa-
tion Today.
McCarthy, J. & Buvac, S. (1993) Notes on formal-
izing context. Proceedings of IJCAI?93 (pp.
555?560). Chambery, France. http://www-for-
mal.stanford.edu/jmc/context3/context3.html
Norman, D. A. & Draper, S. W. (eds.). (1986)
User-centered system design. London: Erlbaum.
Scriven, M. (1967). The methodology of evalua-
tion. In R. Tyler, R. Gagne & M. Scriven, (Eds.)
Perspectives of curriculum evaluation. (pp. 39-
83). Chicago: Rand McNally. Strzalkowski, T.,
Stein, G. , Wang, J. & Wise,  B. (1999). A robust
practical text summarizer.  In I. Mani and M.
Maybury (eds), Advances in automated text
summarization.  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
137?154.
White, R., Ruthven, I. & Jose, J. M. (2001). Web
document summarisation: a task-oriented evalua-
tion. International Workshop on Digital Libraries.
Proc. of the 12th International Database and Ex-
pert Systems Applications Conference (DEXA
2001). Munich.  http://www.cs.strath.ac.uk/~ir/papers/

