Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the NAACL, Companion Volume, pages 269?272,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
AquaLog: An ontology-driven Question Answering System to interface 
the Semantic Web 
Vanessa Lopez Garcia 
Knowledge Media Institute 
The Open University.  
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes,  
MK7 6AA United Kingdom. 
 v.lopez@open.ac.uk 
Enrico Motta 
Knowledge Media Institute  
The Open University.  
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes,  
MK7 6AA United Kingdom. 
e.motta@open.ac.uk 
Victoria Uren 
Knowledge Media Institute  
The Open University.  
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes,  
MK7 6AA United Kingdom. 
v.s.uren@open.ac.uk 
   
Abstract 
The semantic web (SW) vision is one in 
which rich, ontology-based semantic 
markup will become widely available. 
The availability of semantic markup on 
the web opens the way to novel, sophisti-
cated forms of question answering. 
AquaLog is a portable question-answering 
system which takes queries expressed in 
natural language (NL) and an ontology as 
input, and returns answers drawn from 
one or more knowledge bases (KB). 
AquaLog presents an elegant solution in 
which different strategies are combined 
together in a novel way. AquaLog novel 
ontology-based relation similarity service 
makes sense of user queries. 
1 Introduction 
AquaLog (Lopez, 2005) is a fully implemented 
ontology-driven Question Answering (QA) sys-
tem1, which takes an ontology and a NL query as 
an input and returns answers drawn from semantic 
markup (viewed as a KB) compliant with the input 
ontology. In contrast with much existing work on 
ontology-driven QA, which tends to focus on the 
use of ontologies to support query expansion in 
information retrieval (Mc Guinness, 2004), 
AquaLog exploits the availability of semantic 
statements to provide precise answers to complex 
queries expressed in NL.  
AquaLog makes use of the GATE NLP plat-
form, string distance metric, generic lexical re-
sources, such as WordNet, as well as the structure 
                                                          
1 AquaLog is available as Open Source https://sourceforge.net/projects/aqualog
of the input ontology, to make sense of the terms 
and relations expressed in the input query with re-
spect to the target KB. Naturally, these terms and 
relations match the terminology familiar to the user 
rather than those used in the ontology.  
We say that AquaLog is portable because the 
configuration time required to customize the sys-
tem for a particular ontology is negligible. We be-
lieve that in the SW scenario it makes sense to 
provide a NL query interface portable with respect 
to ontologies, our AquaLog system allows to 
choose an ontology and then ask queries with re-
spect to its universe of discourse. The reason for 
this is that the architecture of the system and the 
reasoning methods are domain-independent,  rely-
ing on an understanding of general-purpose knowl-
edge representation languages, such as OWL2, and 
the use of generic lexical resources, such as 
WordNet.  
Moreover, AquaLog learning mechanism en-
sures that, for a given ontology and a particular 
community jargon used by end users, its perform-
ance improves over time, as the users can easily 
correct mistakes and allow AquaLog to learn novel 
associations between the NL relations used by us-
ers and the ontology structure. 
Approach. AquaLog uses a sequential process 
model (see Fig. 1), in which NL input is first trans-
lated into a set of intermediate representations ? 
called Query Triples, by the Linguistic Compo-
nent. The Linguistic Component uses the GATE 
infrastructure and resources (Cunningham, 2002) 
to obtain a set of syntactic annotations associated 
with the input query and to classify the query. 
Once this is done, it becomes straight-forward for 
the Linguistic Component to automatically create 
the Query-Triples. Then, these query triples are 
                                                          
2 A plug-in mechanism and a generic API ensure that different Knowledge 
Representation languages can be used. 
269
further processed and interpreted by the Relation 
Similarity Service Component (RSS), which uses 
lexical resources and the ontology to map them to 
ontology-compliant semantic markup or triples.  
NL SENTENCE
INPUT 
LINGUISTIC
&
QUERY CLASSIFICATION
RELATION
SIMILARITY
SERVICE
INFERENCE
ENGINE
QUERY
TRIPLES
ONTOLOGY
COMPATIBLE
TRIPLES
ANSWER 
 
Fig. 1.  AquaLog data model 
2 Linguistic Component 
The Linguistic Component?s task is to map the NL 
input query to the Query-Triple. GATE  (Cunning-
ham, 2002) infrastructure and resources (e.g. proc-
essing resources like ANNIE) are part of the 
Linguistic Component.  
After the execution of the GATE controller, a 
set of syntactic annotations associated with the in-
put query are returned. These annotations include 
information about sentences, tokens, nouns and 
verbs.  For example, we get voice and tense for the 
verbs and categories for the nouns, such as deter-
minant, singular/plural, conjunction, possessive, 
determiner, preposition, existential, wh-determiner, 
etc. When developing AquaLog we extended the 
set of annotations returned by GATE, by identify-
ing terms, relations, question indicators 
(which/who/when. etc.) and patterns or types of 
questions. This is achieved through the use of Jape 
grammars, which consist of a set of phases, that 
run sequentially, and each phase is defined as a set 
of pattern rules, which allow us to recognize regu-
lar expressions using previous annotations in 
documents.  
Thanks to this architecture that takes advantage 
of the Jape grammars, although we can still only 
deal with a subset of NL, it is possible to extend 
this subset in a relatively easy way by updating the 
regular expressions in the Jape grammars. This 
ensures the easy portability of the system with re-
spect to both ontologies and natural languages. 
Currently, the linguistic component, through the 
Jape grammars, dynamically identifies around 14 
different linguistic categories or intermediate rep-
resentations, including: basic queries requiring an  
affirmation/negation or a description as an answer; 
or the big set of queries constituted by a wh-
question (such as the ones starting with: what, 
who, when, where, are there any, does any-
body/anyone or how many, and imperative com-
mands like list, give, tell, name, etc.), like ?are 
there any PhD students in dotkom?? where the re-
lation is implicit or unknown or ?which is the job 
title of John?? where no information about the type 
of the expected answer is provided; etc. 
Categories tell us not only  the kind of solu-
tion that needs to be achieved, but also they give 
an indication of the most likely common problems 
that the system will need to deal with to understand 
this particular NL query and in consequence it 
guides the process of creating the equivalent in-
termediate representation. Categories are the driv-
ing force to generate an answer by combining the 
triples in an appropriate way. For example, in 
?who are the academics involved in the semantic 
web?? the triple will be of the form <generic term, 
relation, second term>, i.e. <academics, involved, 
semantic web>. A query with a equivalent triple 
representation is ?which technologies has KMi 
produced??, where the triple will be <technologies, 
has produced, KMi>. However, a query like ?are 
there any PhD students in akt?? has another 
equivalent representation, where the relation is im-
plicit or unknown <phd students, ?, akt> . Other 
queries may provide little information about the 
type of the expected answer, i.e. ?what is the job 
title of John??, or they can be just a generic en-
quiry about someone or something, i.e. ?who is 
Vanessa??, ?what is an ontology??  
At this stage we do not have to worry about get-
ting the representation completely right as the in-
terpretation is completely domain independent. 
The role of the triple-based intermediate represen-
tation is simply to provide an easy way to represent 
the NL query and to manipulate the input for the 
RSS. Consider the request ?List all the projects in 
the knowledge media institute about the semantic 
web?, where both ?in knowledge media institute? 
and ?about semantic web? are modifiers (i.e. they 
modify the meaning of other syntactic constitu-
ents). The problem here is to identify the constitu-
ent to which each modifier has to be attached. The 
RSS is responsible for resolving this ambiguity 
through the use of the ontology, or by interacting 
with the user. The linguistic component?s task is 
therefore to pass the ambiguity problem to the RSS 
through the intermediate representation.  
270
Nevertheless, a query can be a composition of 
two basic queries. In this case, the intermediate 
representation usually consists of two triples, one 
triple per relationship. There are different ways in 
which queries can be combined. Firstly, queries 
can be combined by using a ?and? or ?or? conjunc-
tion operator, as in ?which projects are funded by 
epsrc and are about semantic web??. This query 
will generate two Query-Triples: <projects, funded, 
epsrc> and <projects, ?, semantic web> and the 
subsequent answer will be a combination of both 
lists obtained after resolving each triple. Secondly, 
a query may be conditioned to a second query, as 
in ?which researchers wrote publications related to 
social aspects?? which generates the Query-Triples 
<researchers, wrote, publications> and <which are, 
related, social aspects>,where the second clause 
modifies one of the terms in the first triple. In this 
example, ambiguity cannot be solved by linguistic 
procedures; therefore the term to be modified by 
the second clause remains uncertain.      
3 Relation Similarity Service 
This is the backbone of the QA system. The RSS 
component is invoked after the NL query has been 
transformed into a term-relation form and classi-
fied into the appropriate category. Essentially the 
RSS tries to make sense of the input query by look-
ing at the structure of the ontology, string metrics3, 
WordNet, and a domain-dependent lexicon ob-
tained by the Learning Mechanism.  
In any non-trivial NL system, it is important to 
deal with the various sources of ambiguity. Some 
sentences are structurally ambiguous and although 
general world knowledge does not resolve this am-
biguity, within a specific domain it may happen 
that only one of the interpretations is possible. The 
key issue here is to determine some constraints 
derived from the domain knowledge and to apply 
them in order to resolve ambiguity. Whether the 
ambiguity cannot be resolved by domain knowl-
edge the only reasonable course of action is to get 
the user to choose between the alternative readings.  
Moreover, since every item on the onto-triple is an 
entry point in the KB or ontology the user has the 
possibility to navigate through them. In fact, to 
ensure user acceptance of the system justifications 
are provided for every step of the user interaction.  
                                                          
3 http://secondstring.sourceforge.net/ 
4 Related Work 
This scenario is similar to research in NL queries 
to databases (NLIDB). However, the SW provides 
a new and potentially important context in which 
results from this research area can be applied. 
There are linguistic problems common in most 
kinds of NL understanding systems, see (Androut-
sopoulos, 1995) for an overview of the state of the 
art. In contrast with the latest generation of NLIDB 
systems (see (Popescu, 2003) for recent work) 
AquaLog uses an intermediate representation from 
the representation of the user?s query (NL front 
end) to the representation of an ontology compliant 
triple, from which an answer can be directly in-
ferred. It takes advantage of the use of ontologies 
in a way that the entire process highly portable and 
it is easy to handle unknown vocabulary. For in-
stance, in PRECISE (Popescu, 2003) the problem 
of finding a mapping from the tokenization to the 
database requires that all tokens must be distinct, 
questions with unknown words are not semanti-
cally tractable and cannot be handled. In contrast 
with PRECISE, AquaLog interpret the user query 
by means of the ontology vocabulary and structure 
in order to make sense of unknown vocabulary 
which appears not to have any match.  
Current work on QA is somewhat different in 
nature from AquaLog as they are open-domain 
systems. QA applications to text typically involve 
(Hirschman, 2001) identifying the semantic type of 
the entity sought by the question (a date, a per-
son?); and determining key words or relations to 
be use in matching candidate answers. Moreover, 
as pointed by Srihari et al (Srihari, 2004) Named 
Entity (NE) tagging is often necessary. The main 
differences between AquaLog and open-domains 
systems are: (1) it is not necessary to build hierar-
chies or heuristic to recognize NE, as all the se-
mantic information needed is in the ontology. (2) 
AquaLog has mechanisms to exploit the relation-
ships to understand a query. Nevertheless, the RSS 
goal is to map the relationships in the Query-Triple 
into an ontology-compliant-triple. Both AquaLog 
and open-domain systems attempt to find syno-
nyms plus their morphological variants. AquaLog 
also automatically classifies the question before 
hand, based on the kind of triple needed, while 
most of the open-domain QA systems classify 
questions according to their answer target. The 
triple contains information not only about the an-
271
swer expected, but also about the relationships of 
the other terms in the query. To conclude, other 
QA systems also follow a relational data model 
(triple-based), e.g. the START ?object-property-
value? approach (Katz, 2002).  
5 AquaLog in action: illustrative example.  
For demonstration purposes AquaLog application 
is used with the AKT ontology in the context of the 
academic domain in our department (Lei, 2006), 
e.g., AquaLog translates the query ?what is the 
homepage of Peter who has an interest on the se-
mantic web?" into a conjunction of ontology-
compliant non-ground triples: <what is?, has-web-
address, peter-scott> & <person?, has-research-
interest, Semantic Web area>. 
Consider the query ?what is the homepage of 
Peter?? on Fig. 2. Given that the system is unable 
to disambiguate between Peter-Scott, Peter-Sharpe, 
etc, user feedback is required. Also the user is call  
to disambiguate that ?homepage? is the same that 
?has-web-address? as it is the first time the system 
came across this term, no synonyms have been 
identified, and the ontology does not provide fur-
ther ways to disambiguate. The system will learn 
the mapping and context for future occasions. 
 
Fig. 2.  Example of user disambiguation 
On Fig. 3 we are asking for the web address of Pe-
ter, who has an interest in SW. In this case 
AquaLog does not need any assistance from the 
user, given that only one of the Peters has an inter-
est in SW. Also the similarity relation between 
?homepage? and ?has-web-address? has been 
learned by the Learning Mechanism. When the 
RSS comes across a query like that it has to access 
to the ontology information to recreate the context 
and complete the ontology triples. In that way, it 
realizes that ?who has an interest on the Semantic 
Web? is a modifier of the term ?Peter?.  
 
Fig. 3.  Example of AquaLog disambiguation 
References  
Androutsopoulos, I., Ritchie, G.D., Thanisch P.: Natural 
Language Interfaces to Databases - An Introduction. 
Natural Language Engineering, 1(1) (1995) 29-81. 
Cunningham, H., Maynard, D., Bontcheva, K., Tablan, 
V.: GATE: A Framework and Graphical Development 
Environment for Robust NLP Tools and Applications. 
In Proceedings of the 40th Anniversary Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics (2002).  
Hirschman, L., Gaizauskas, R.: Natural Language ques-
tion answering: the view from here. Natural Language 
Engineering, Special Issue on Question Answering, 
7(4) (2001) 275-300. 
Katz, B., et al: Omnibase: Uniform Access to Heteroge-
neous Data for QA. In Proceedings of the 7th Interna-
tional Workshop on Applications of Natural Language 
to Information Systems (NLDB) (2002) 
Lopez, V., Pasin, M., and Motta, E. AquaLog: An Ontol-
ogy-portable Question Answering System for the Se-
mantic Web. In proceeding of the ESWC (2005). 
Mc Guinness, D.: Question Answering on the Semantic 
Web.  IEEE Intelligent Systems, 19(1), 2004. 
Popescu, A., M., Etzioni, O., Kautz, H., A.: Towards a 
theory of natural language interfaces to databases. In 
Proceedings of the 2003 International Conference on 
Intelligent User Interfaces, (2003) 149-157 
Srihari, K., Li, W., Li, X.: Information Extraction Sup-
ported QA, In T. Strzalkowski & S. Harabagiu (Eds.), 
in Advances in Open- Domain Question Answering. 
Kluwer Academic Publishers (2004) 
Lei, Y., Sabou, M., Lopez, V., Zhu, J., Uren, V. and 
Motta. E. An Infrastructure for Acquiring high Quality 
Semantic Metadata. In proceedings of the 3rd Euro-
pean Semantic Web Conference. Montenegro, (2006). 
272
