Product Named Entity Recognition Based on Hierarchical Hidden
Markov Model?
Feifan Liu, Jun Zhao, Bibo Lv, Bo Xu
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing P.O. Box 2728, 100080
{ffliu,jzhao,bblv,xubo}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Hao Yu
FUJITSU R&D
Xiao Yun Road No.26
Chao Yang District, Beijing, 100016
yu@frdc.fujitsu.com
Abstract
A hierarchical hidden Markov model
(HHMM) based approach of product
named entity recognition (NER) from
Chinese free text is presented in this pa-
per. Characteristics and challenges in
product NER is also investigated and
analyzed deliberately compared with
general NER. Within a unified statis-
tical framework, the approach we pro-
posed is able to make probabilistically
reasonable decisions to a global opti-
mization by leveraging diverse range
of linguistic features and knowledge
sources. Experimental results show that
our approach performs quite well in two
different domains.
1 Introduction
Named entity recognition(NER) plays a sig-
nificantly important role in information extrac-
tion(IE) and many other applications. Previous
study on NER is mainly focused either on the
proper name identification of person(PER), lo-
cation(LOC), organization(ORG), time(TIM) and
numeral(NUM) expressions almost in news do-
main, which can be viewed as general NER, or
other named entity (NE) recognition in specific
domain such as biology.
As far as we know, however, there is little prior
research work conducted by far on product named
0This work was supported by the Natural Sciences Foun-
dation of China(60372016,60272041) and the Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of Beijing(4052027).
entity recognition which can be crucial and valu-
able in many business IE applications, especially
with the increasing research interest in Market
Intelligence Management(MIM), Enterprise Con-
tent Management (ECM) [Pierre 2002] and etc.
This paper describes a prototype system for
product named entity recognition, ProNER, in
which a HHMM-based approach is employed.
Within a unified statistical framework, the ap-
proach based on a mixture model is able to make
probabilistically reasonable decisions to a global
optimization by exploiting diverse range of lin-
guistic features and knowledge sources. Experi-
mental results show that ProNER performs quite
well in two different domains.
2 Related Work
Up to now not much work has been done on
product named entity recognition, nor systematic
analysis of characteristics for this task. [Pierre
2002] developed an English NER system capable
of identifying product names in product views. It
employed a simple Boolean classifier for identi-
fying product name, which was constructed from
the list of product names. The method is sim-
ilar to token matching and has a limitation for
product NER applications. [Bick et al 2004] rec-
ognized named entities including product names
based on constraint grammar based parser for
Danish. This rule-based approach is highly de-
pendent on the performance of Danish parser and
suffers from its weakness in system portability.
[C. Niu et al 2003] presented a bootstrapping ap-
proach for English named entity recognition us-
ing successive learners of parsing-based decision
40
System Statistical Model Linguistic Feature Combinative Points
[Zhang et al 2003] HMM semantic role, tokens pattern rules
[Sun et al 2002] class-based LM word form, NE category cue words list
[Tsai et al 2004] ME model tokens knowledge representation
Table 1: Comparison between several Chinese NER systems1
list and HMM, and promising experiment results
(F-measure: 69.8%) on product NE (correspond-
ing to our PRO) were obtained. Its main advan-
tage lies in that manual annotation of a sizable
training corpus can be avoided, but it suffers from
two problems, one is that it is difficult to find suf-
ficient concept-based seeds needed in bootstrap-
ping for the coverage of the variations of PRO
subcategories, another it is highly dependent on
parser performance as well.
Research on product NER is still at its early
stage, especially in Chinese free text collec-
tions. However, considerable amount of work
has been done in the last decade on the gen-
eral NER task and biological NER task. The
typical machine learning approaches for English
NE are transformation-based learning[Aberdeen
et al 1995], hidden Markov model[Bikel et
al. 1997], maximum entropy model[Borthwick,
1999], support vector machine learning[Eunji Yi
et al 2004], unsupervised model[Collins et al
1999]and etc.
For Chinese NER, the prevailing methodology
applied recently also lie in machine learning com-
bining other knowledge base or heuristic rules,
which can be compared on the whole in three as-
pects showed in Table 1.
In short, the trend in NER is to adopt a statis-
tical framework which try to exploit some knowl-
edge base as well as different level of text features
within and outside NEs. Further those ideas, we
present a hybrid approach based on HHMM [S.
Fine et al 1998] which will be described in de-
tail.
3 Problem Statements and Analysis
3.1 Task Definition
3.1.1 Definition of Product Named Entity
In our study, only three kinds of prod-
uct named entities are considered, namely
1Note: LM(language model); ME(maximum entropy).
Brand Name(BRA), Product Type(TYP), Product
Name(PRO), and BRA and TYP are often embed-
ded in PRO. In the following two examples, there
are two BRA NEs, one TYP NE and one PRO
NE all of which belong to the family of product
named entities.
Exam 1: ??(Benq)/BRA ??(brand)?
? ? ? ?(market shares)? ?(steadily)?
?(ascend)b
Exam 2: ? ?(corporation)? ?(will)?
?(deliver) [Canon/BRA 334?(ten thou-
sand)? ?(pixels)? ?(digital)? ?(camera)
Pro90IS/TYP]/PROb
Brand Name refer to proper name of product
trademark such as ???(Benq)? in Exam 1.
Product Type is a kind of product named en-
tities indicating version or series information of
product, which can consist of numbers, English
characters, or other symbols such as ?+? and ?-
? etc.In our study, two principles should be fol-
lowed.
(1) Chinese characters are not considered to
be TYP, nor subpart of TYP although some of
them can contain version or series information.
For instance, in ?2005????(happy new
year)?(version)??(cell phone)?, here ???
??(happy new year)?(version)?should not be
considered as a TYP.
(2) Numbers are essential elements in prod-
uct type entity. For instance, in ?PowerShot
??(series)??(digital)??(camera)?, ?Pow-
erShot? is not considered as a TYP, however,
in ?PowerShot S10 ??(digital)??(camera)?,
?PowerShot S10? can make up of a TYP.
Product Name, as showed above in Exam 2, is
a kind of product named entities expressing self-
contained proper name for some specified product
in real world compared to BRA and TYP which
only express one attribute of product. i.e. a PRO
NE must be assigned with distinctly discrimina-
tive information which can not shared with other
general product-related expressions.
41
(1) Product-related expressions which are em-
bedded with either BRA or TYP can be qual-
ified to be a PRO entity. e.g. ?BenQ?
?(flash)?(disk)? is a PRO entity, but the gen-
eral product-related expression ???(flash)?
?(market)??(investigation)? cannot make up
of a PRO entity.
(2) Product-related expressions indicating
some specific version or series information which
is unique for a BRA can also be considered as a
PRO entity. e.g. ?DIGITAL IXUS??(series)?
?(digital)? ?(camera)? is a PRO because
?DIGITAL IXUS? series is unique for Canon
product, but ?? ?(intelligent)?(version)?
?(cell phone)? is not a PRO because the at-
tribute of ?intelligent version? can be assigned to
any cell phone product.
3.1.2 Product Named Entity Recognition
Product named entity recognition involves the
identification of product-related proper names
in free text and their classification into differ-
ent kinds of product named entities, referring to
PRO, TYP and BRA in this paper.In comparison
with general NER, nested product NEs should be
tagged separately rather than being tagged just as
a single item, shown as Figure 1.
3.2 Challenges for Product Named Entity
Recognition
?For general named entities, there are some
cues which are very useful for entity recogni-
tion, such as ???(city), ????(Inc.), and etc. In
comparison, product named entities have no such
named conventions and cues, resulting in higher
boundary ambiguities and more complex NE can-
didate triggering difficulties.
?In comparison with general NER, more chal-
lenges in product NER result from miscellaneous
classification ambiguities. Many entities with
identical form can be a kind of general named en-
tity, a kind of product named entity, or just com-
mon words.
?In comparison with general named entities,
product named entities show more flexible vari-
ant forms. The same entity can be expressed in
several different forms due to spelling variation,
word permutation and etc. This also compounds
the difficulties in product named entity recogni-
tion.
?In comparison with general named entities,
it is more frequent that product named entities are
nested as Figure 1 illustrates. More efforts have
to be made to identify such named entities sepa-
rately.
3.3 Our Solutions
We adopt the following strategies in triggering
and disambiguating process respectively.
(1) As to product NER, it?s pivotal to control
the triggering candidates efficiently for the bal-
ance between precision and recall. Here we use
the knowledge base such as brand word list, and
other heuristic information which can be easily
acquired.
(2)After triggering candidates, we try to em-
ploy a statistical model to make the most of
multi-level context information mentioned above
in disambiguation. We choose hierarchical hid-
den Markov model (HHMM) [S. Fine et al 1998]
for its more powerful ability to model the multi-
plicity of length scales and recursive nature of se-
quences.
42
4 Hybrid Approach for Product NE
Recognition
4.1 Overall Workflow of ProNER
?Preprocessing: Segment, POS tagging and
general NER is primarily conducted using our off-
shelf SegNer2.0 toolkit on input text.
?Generating Product NE Candidates: First,
BRA or ORG and TYP are triggered by brand
word list and some word features respectively.
Here we categorize the triggering word features
into six classes: alphabet string, alphanumeric
string, digits, alphabet string with fullwidth, dig-
its with fullwidth and other symbols except Chi-
nese characters. Then PRO are triggered by BRA
and TYP candidates as well as some clue words
indicating type information to some extent such
as ???(version), ????(series). In this step the
model structure(topology) of HHMM[S. Fine et
al. 1998] is dynamically constructed, and some
conjunction words or punctuations and specified
maximum length of product NE are used to con-
trol it.
?Disambiguating Candidates: In this mod-
ule, boundary and classification ambiguities be-
tween candidates are resolved simultaneously.
And Viterbi algorithm is applied for most-likely
state sequences based on the HHMM topology.
4.2 Integration with Heuristic Information
To get more efficient control in triggering process
above, we try to integrate some heuristic informa-
tion. The heuristic rules we used are as domain-
independent as possible in order that they can
be integrated with statistical model systematically
rather than just some tricks on it.
(1) Stop Word List:
Common English words, English brand word,
and some punctuations are extracted automati-
cally from training set to make up of stop word
list for TYP; by co-occurrence statistics between
ORG and its contexts, some words are extracted
from the contexts to make up of stop word list
for PRO in order to overcome the case that brand
word is prone to bind its surroundings to be a
PRO.
(2) Constrain Rules:
Rule 1: For the highly frequent pattern ??
?+?????(number + English quantifier
ES PS5IS2IS1
IS0
ES PS1 PS2 PS4PS3ES
0.2 0.5
0.3
0.7  0.3 0.5 0.30.7
0.2
0.3
Figure 2 Structure of Hierarchical Hidden
Markov Model (HHMM)
word), all the corresponding TYP candidates trig-
gered by categorized word features(CWF) should
be removed.
Rule 2: Product NE candidates in which some
binate symbols don?t match each other should be
removed.
Rule 3: Unreasonable symbols such as ?-? or
?:? should not occur in the beginning or end of
product NE candidates.
4.3 HHMM for product NER application
By HHMM [S. Fine et al 1998] the product
NER can be formulated as a tagging problem us-
ing Viterbi algorithm. Unlike traditional HMM
in POS tagging, here the topology of HHMM is
not fixed and internal states can be also a similar
stochastic model on themselves, called internal
states compared to production states which will
emit only observations.
Our HHMM structure actually consists of three
level approximately illustrated as figure 2 in
which IS denotes internal state, PS denotes pro-
duction state and ES denote end state at ev-
ery level. For our application, an input se-
quence from our SegNer2.0 toolkit can be formal-
ized as w1/t1w2/t2 . . . wi/ti . . . wn/tn, among
which wi and ti is the ith word and its part-of-
speech, n is the number of words. The POS
tag set here is the combination of tag set from
Peking University(PKU-POS) and our general
NE categories(GNEC) including PER(person),
LOC(location), ORG(organization), TIM(time ex-
pression), NUM(numeric expression). Therefore
we can construct our HHMM model by the state
set {S} consisting of {GNEC}, {BRA, PRO,
TYP}, and {V} as well as the observation set {O}
consisting of {V} which is the word set from
training data. That is to say, the word forms
43
in {V} which are not included in NEs are also
viewed as production states.
In our model, only PRO are internal state which
may activate other production states such as BRA
and TYP resulting in recursive HMM. In consis-
tence with S. Fine?s work, qdi (1? d ? D) is used
to indicate the ith state in the dth level of hierar-
chy. So, the product NER problem is to find the
most-likely state activation sequence Q*, a multi-
scale list of states, based on the dynamic topol-
ogy of HHMM given a observation sequence W
= w1w2 . . . wi . . . wn, formulated as follows based
on Bayes rule (P (W )=1).
Q?= argmax
Q
P (Q|W )= argmax
Q
P (Q)P (W |Q)
(1)
From the root node of HHMM, activity flows
to all other nodes at different levels according to
their transition probability. For description conve-
nience, we take the kth level as example(activated
by the mth state at the k-1th level).
P (Q) ?= p(qk1 |qk?1m )
? ?? ?
vertical transition
horizontal transition
? ?? ?
p(qk2 |qk1 )
|qk|
?
j=3
p(qkj |qkj?1, qkj?2)
(2)
P (W |Q)=
?
???????
???????
?=
|qkPS |?
j=1
p([wqkj ?begin...wqkj ?end]|q
k
j )
if qkj /? {IS}
activate other states recursively
if qkj ? {IS}
(3)
Where |qk| is the number of all states and |qkPS |
is the number of production states in the kth level;
wqkj ?begin...wqkj ?end indicates the word sequence
corresponding to the state qkj .
(1) In equation (3), if qkj ? {{GNEC},{V}},
p([wqkj ?begin...wqkj ?end]|q
k
j )=1, because we as-
sume that the general NER results from the pre-
ceding toolkit are correct;
(2) If qkj = PRO, production states in the
(k+1)th level will be activated by this internal
state through equation (2),(3) and go back when
arriving at an end state, thus hierarchical compu-
tation is implemented;
(3) If qkj =BRA, we assign equation (3) a con-
stant value in that BRA candidates consist of only
a single brand word in our method. In addition
brand word can also generate ORG candidates,
thus we can assign equation (3) as follows.
p([wqkj ?begin...wqkj ?end]|q
k
j = BRA) = 0.5 (4)
(4) If qkj = TY P , categorized word fea-
tures(CWFs) defined in section 4.1 are applied,
i.e. the words associated with the current state are
replaced with their CWFs (WC) acting as obser-
vations. Then we can compute the emission prob-
ability of this TYP production state as the follow-
ing equation, among which |qkj | is the length of
observation sequence associated with the current
state.
p([wqkj ?begin...wqkj ?end]|q
k
j = TY P )
?=p(wc1|begin)p(end|wc|qkj |)
|qkj |?
m=2
p(wcm|wcm?1)
All the parameters in every level of HHMM can
be acquired using maximum likelihood method
with smoothing from training data.
4.4 Mixture of Two Hierarchical Hidden
Markov Models
Now we have implemented a simple HHMM
for product NER. Note that in the above
model(HHMM-1), we exploit both internal and
external features of product NEs only at lev-
els of simply semantic classification and just
word form. To achieve our motivation in sec-
tion 3.3, we construct another HHMM(HHMM-
2) for exploiting multi-level contexts by mixing
with HHMM-1.
In HHMM-2, the difference from HHMM-1
lies in the state set SII and observation set OII .
Because the input text will be processed by seg-
ment, POS tagging and general NER, as a alterna-
tive, we can also take T=t1t2 . . . ti . . . tn as obser-
vation sequence, i.e. OII={PKU-POS}. Accord-
ingly, SII= {{PKU-POS}, {GNEC}, BRA, TYP,
44
Data Sets PRO BRA TYP PER LOC ORG
DataSetPRO1.2 12,432 5,047 10,606 424 1,733 4,798
OpenTestSet 1800 803 1364 39 207 614
CloseTestSet 1553 513 1296 55 248 619
Table 2: Overview of Data Sets
PRO}, among which PRO is internal state. Sim-
ilarly, the problem is formulated as follows with
HHMM-2.
Q?II = argmax
QII
P (QII |T )
= argmax
QII
P (QII)P (T |QII) (5)
The description and computation of HHMM-2
is similar to HHMM-1 and is omitted here.
We can see that besides making use of semantic
classification of NEs in common, HHMM-1 and
HHMM-2 exploit word form and part-of-speech
(POS) features respectively. Word form features
make the model more discriminative, while POS
features result in robustness. Intuitively, the mix-
ture of these two models is desirable for higher
performance in product NER by balancing the ro-
bustness and discrimination which can be formu-
lated in logarithmic form as follows.
(Q?, Q?II)
= argmax
Q,QII
{log(P (Q)) + log(P (W |Q))
+ ?[log(P (QII)) + log(P (T |QII))]} (6)
Where ? is a tuning parameter for adjusting the
weight of two models.
5 Experiments and analysis
5.1 Data Set Preparation
A large number of web pages in mobile phone
and digital domain are compiled into text collec-
tions, DataSetPRO, on which multi-level process-
ing were performed. Our final version, DataSet-
PRO1.2, consists of 1500 web pages, roughly
1,000,000 Chinese characters. Randomly se-
lected 140 texts (digital 70, mobile phone 70) are
separated from DataSetPRO1.2 as our OpenTest-
Set, the rest as TrainingSet, from which 160 texts
are extracted as CloseTestSet. Table 2 illustrates
the overview of them.
5.2 Experiments
Due to various and flexible forms of product NEs,
though some boundaries of recognized NEs are
inconsistent with manual annotation, they are also
reasonable. So soft evaluation is also applied
in our experiments to make the evaluation more
reasonable. The main idea is that a discount
score will be given to recognized NEs with wrong
boundary but correct detection and classification.
However, strict evaluation only score completely
correct ones.
All the results is conducted on OpenTestSet un-
less it is particularly specified. Also, the evalu-
ation scores used below are obtained mainly by
45
Digital Domain (??8)
Product NEs Close Test Open TestPrecision Recall F-measure Precision Recall F-measure
PRO 0.864 0.799 0.830 0.762 0.744 0.753
TYP 0.903 0.906 0.905 0.828 0.944 0.882
BRA 0.824 0.702 0.758 0.723 0.705 0.714
Mobile Phone Domain (??8)
Product NEs Close Test Open TestPrecision Recall F-measure Precision Recall F-measure
PRO 0.917 0.935 0.926 0.799 0.856 0.827
TYP 0.959 0.976 0.967 0.842 0.886 0.864
BRA 0.911 0.741 0.818 0.893 0.701 0.785
Table 3: Experimental Results in Digital and Mobile Phone Domain
soft metrics, and strict scores are also given for
comparison in experiment 3.
1. Evaluation on the Influence of ? in the Mix-
ture Model.
In the mixture model denoted as equation (6),
the ? value reflects the different contribution of
two individual models to the overall system per-
formance. The larger ?, the more contribution
made by HHMM-2. Figure 3, 4, 5 illustrate the
varying curves of recognition performance with
the ? value on PRO, TYP, BRA respectively.
Note that, if ? equal to 1 then two models
are mixed with equivalent weight. We can see
that, as ? goes up, the F-measures of PRO and
TYP increase obviously firstly, and begin to go
down slightly after a period of growing flat. It
can be explained that HHMM-2 mainly exploits
part-of-speech and general NER features which
can relieve the sparseness problem to some ex-
tent, which is more serious in HHMM-1 due to
using lower level of contextual information such
as word form. However, as ? becomes larger,
the problem of imprecise modeling in HHMM-
2 will be more salient and begin to illustrate a
side-effect in the mixture model. Whereas, the
influence of ? on BRA is negligible because its
candidates are triggered by the relatively reliable
knowledge base and its sub-model in HHMM is
assigned a constant as shown in equation(4).
Summings-up:
(1) Mixture with HHMM-2 can make up the
weakness of HHMM-1.
(2) HHMM-2 can make more contributions
to the mixture model under the conditions that
limited annotated data is available at present. In
our system, ? is assigned to 8 based on above ex-
perimental results.
2. Evaluation on the portability of ProNER in
two domains.
First, we can see from Table 3 that ProNER
have achieved fairly high performance in both
digital and mobile phone domain. This can val-
idate to some extent the portability of our sys-
tem?which is consistent with our initial motiva-
tion.
Second, the results also show that our system
performs slightly better in mobile phone domain
for both close test and open test. This can be ex-
plained that there are more challenging ambigui-
ties in digital domain due to more complex prod-
uct taxonomy and more flexible variants of prod-
uct NEs.
Summings-up: The results provide promising
evidence on the portability of our system to dif-
ferent domains though there are some differences
between them.
3. Evaluation on the efficiency of the mixture
model and the improvement of the triggering
control with heuristics.
In table 4, ?1? denotes HHMM-1; ?2? denotes
HHMM-2; ?+? means the mixture model; ?*?
means integrating with heuristics mentioned in
section 4.2.
The results reveal that the mixture model out-
performs each individual model with both soft
and strict metrics. Also, the results show that
heuristic information can increase the F-measure
of PRO and TYP by 10 points or so for both indi-
46
HHMM
BRA TYP PRO
strict
score
soft
score
strict
score
soft
score
strict
score
soft
score
1 0.68 0.72 0.57 0.66 0.52 0.61
1* 0.70 0.74 0.70 0.80 0.63 0.72
2 0.67 0.73 0.66 0.74 0.61 0.68
2* 0.70 0.74 0.76 0.85 0.70 0.76
1+2 0.70 0.75 0.67 0.77 0.67 0.72
1+2* 0.72 0.76 0.76 0.87 0.75 0.80
Table 4: Improvement results (F-measure) with
heuristics and model mixture
vidual model and the mixture model. Addition-
ally we can see that HHMM-2 performs better
on the whole than HHMM-1, which is consistent
with experiment 1 that heavier weights should be
assigned to HHMM-2 in the mixture model.
Summings-up:
(1) Either HHMM-1 or HHMM-2 can not
perform quite well independently, but systemat-
ical integration of them can achieve obvious per-
formance improvement due to the leverage of di-
verse levels of linguistic features by their efficient
interaction.
(2) Heuristic information can highly enhance
the performance for both individual model and the
mixture model.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
This paper presented a hierarchical HMM (hidden
Markov model) based approach of product named
entity recognition from Chinese free text. By uni-
fying some heuristic rules into a statistical frame-
work based on a mixture model of HHMM, the
approach we proposed can leverage diverse range
of linguistic features and knowledge sources to
make probabilistically reasonable decisions for a
global optimization. The prototype system we
built achieved the overall F-measure of 79.7%,
86.9%, 75.8% corresponding to PRO, TYP, BRA
respectively, which also provide experimental ev-
idence to some extent on its portability to differ-
ent domains.
Our future work will focus on the following:
(1) Using long dependency information;
(2) Integrating segment, POS tagging, general
NER and product NER to avoid error spread.
References
John M. Pierre. (2002) Mining Knowledge from Text
Collections Using Automatically Generated Meta-
data. In: Procs of Fourth International Conference
on Practical Aspects of Knowledge Management.
Michael Collins and Yoram Singer. (1999) Unsuper-
vised Models for Named Entity Classification. In:
Proc. of EMNLP/VLC-99.
Eunji Yi, Gary Geunbae Lee, and Soo-Jun Park.
(2004) SVM-based Biological Named Entity
Recognition using Minimum Edit-Distance Feature
Boosted by Virtual Examples. In: Proceedings of
the First International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (IJCNLP-04).
Bick, Eckhard (2004) A Named Entity Recognizer for
Danish. In: Proc. of 4th International Conf. on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation,pp:305-308.
Jian Sun, Jianfeng Gao, Lei Zhang, Ming Zhou,
Changning Huang. (2002) Chinese Named Entity
Identification Using Class-based Language Model.
In: COLING 2002. Taipei, Taiwan.
Huaping Zhang, Qun Liu, Hongkui Yu, Xueqi Cheng,
Shuo Bai. Chinese Named Entity Recognition Us-
ing Role Model. Special Iissue ?Word Formation
and Chinese Language processing? of the Inter-
national Journal of Computational Linguistics and
Chinese Language Processing, 8(2),2003, pp:29-60
Aberdeen, John et al (1995)MITRE: Description of
the ALEMBIC System Used for MUC-6. Proc. of
MUC-6, pp. 141-155
D.M. Bikel, S. Miller, R. Schwartz, R. Weischedel.
(1997) Nymble: a High-Performance Learning
Name-finder. In: Fifth Conference on Applied Nat-
ural Language Processing, pp 194-201.
Borthwick. A. (1999) A Maximum Entropy Approach
to Named Entity Recognition. PhD Dissertation.
Tzong-Han Tsai, S.H. Wu, C.W. Lee, Cheng-Wei
Shih, and Wen-Lian Hsu. (2004) Mencius: A Chi-
nese Named Entity Recognizer Using the Maxi-
mum Entropy-based Hybrid Model. International
Journal of Computational Linguistics and Chinese
Language Processing, Vol. 9, No 1.
Cheng Niu, W. Li, J.h. Ding and R.K. Srihari. (2003) A
Bootstrapping Approach to Named Entity Classifi-
cation Using Successive Learners. In: Proceedings
of the 41st ACL, Sapporo, Japan, pp:335-342.
S. Fine, Y. Singer, N. Tishby. (1998) The Hierarchical
Hidden Markov Model: Analysis and Applications.
Machine Learning. 32(1), pp:41-62
47
