Application of Analogical Modelling to Example Based Machine Translation 
Chr i s tos  Ma lavazos  l' 2 Ste l ios P iper id is  !'2 
%stitute for Language and Speech Processing, 2National Technical University of Athens 
6 Artemidos & Epidavrou, 151 25 Marousi, Athens, Greece 
{christos, pip}@ilsp.gr 
Abstract 
This paper describes a self-modelling, incremental gorithm for learning translation rules from existing 
bilingual corpora. The notions of supracontext and subcontext are extended to encompass bilingual 
information through simultaneous analogy on both source and target sentences and juxtaposition of 
corresponding results. Analogical modelling is performed uring the learning phase and translation 
patterns are projected in a multi-dimensional analogical network. The proposed fi'amework was evaluated 
on a small training corpus providing promising results. Suggestions to improve system performance are 
1. Introduction 
Ideally, an EBMT system must determine 
correspondences at a sub-sentence l vel if optimal 
adaptation of matching fragments i to be achieved 
(Collins, B., & Cunningham, P. 1995). In practice, 
EBMT systems that operate at sub-sentence l vel 
involve the dynamic derivation of the optimum 
length of segments of the input sentence by 
analysing the available parallel corpora. This 
requires a procedure for determining the best 
"cover" of an input text by segments of sentences 
contained in the database (Nirenburg, S. 
Domashnev, C., Grannes, D. 1993), (Cranias, L. et 
al 1994), (Frederking, R., Nirenburg, S., 1994), 
(Sato, S. 1995). What is needed is a procedure for 
aligning parallel texts at sub-sentence level, 
(Sadler, V., Vendehnans, R. 1990), (Boutsis, S., 
Piperidis, S. 1998). If sub-sentence alignment is 
available, the approach is fully automated but is 
quite vulnerable to the problem of low quality, as 
well as to translational mbiguity problems when 
the produced segments are rather small. 
Several approaches aim at proceeding a step 
further, by attempting to build a transfer-rule base 
in the form of abstract representations through 
different ypes of generalization processes applied 
on the available corpora relying on different levels 
of linguistic information and processing (Kaji et al 
92), (Juola, P. 1994), (Furuse, O., Iida, H. 1996), 
(Veale, T. and Way, A. 1997), (McTait, K., et al 
1999), thus providing more complete "context" 
information to the translation phase. The deeper the 
linguistic analysis involved in such a process, the 
more flexible the final translation structures will be 
and the better the quality of the results. However, 
tiffs kind of analysis unquestionably leads to more 
computationally expensive and difficult to obtain 
systems. Our approach consists in a fully modular 
analogical fiamework, which can cope with lack of 
resources, and will perform even better when these 
are available. 
Analogical Modelling (AM) has been proposed as 
an alternative model of language usage. The main 
assumption underlying this approach is that many 
aspects of speaker performance are better 
accounted for in terms of "analogy", i.e. the 
identification of similarities and differences with 
forms in memory (the lexicon), than by referring to 
explicit and inaccessible rules. By "analogy" we 
mean the process of matching between an input 
pattern and a database of stored examples 
(exemplars). The result of this matching process is 
a collection of examples called the "analogical set" 
and classification of the input pattern is achieved 
through extrapolation fi'om this set. At any given 
time, the main source of knowledge consists in a 
database of stored translation examples. These 
examples themselves are used to classify new 
items, without intermediate abstraction i the form 
of rules. In order to achieve this exhaustive 
database search is needed, and during this search, 
less relevant examples need to be discarded. All 
text features are equally important initially, and 
serve to partition the database into several disjoint 
classes of examples. 
In contrast o most of the analogy-based systems 
our approach applies tile same principles during the 
learning phase in an attempt to extract appropriate 
generalizations (translatiou rules) based on 
similarities and differences between input 
exemplars. In this way, analogy is treated as more 
516 
than simple pairwisc simila,ity between input and 
database xemplars, rather it is conside,'ed as the 
main relation underlying a more complex network 
of relations between database xemplars. 
2. General 
The main idea behind otu" approach is based o,1 the 
observation that given any source and target 
language sentence pair, any alteration of the source 
sentence will most likely result in one or more 
changes in the respective target, while it is also 
highly likely that constant and variable units of the 
source sentence correspond to constant and variable 
target units respectively. Apart from cases of so 
called "translational divergences" (Dorr, B. 1994) 
as well as cases of idiomatic expressions, in most 
eases the above assumption hokts true. Especially 
in the case of technical sublanguagcs, where rather 
literal and accurate translation is expected, 
? y '~ "translational divergences are limited while 
idiomatic expressions can be captured and finally 
rejected fiom the main process, through certain 
constraints, as this will be explained later on. 
The matching process as this is described by 
(Daelemans W., et al 1997) based on Skousen's 
analogical modelling algorithm (Skousen, R. 1989), 
consists of two subsequent s ages. The first stage of 
the matching process is the construction of 
"subcontexts", these are sets o1' examples and they 
are obtained by matching the input tmttern, feature 
by feature, to each database item on an equal/not- 
equal base, and classify the database examples 
accordingly. Taking the input pattern ABC as an 
example ight (=2 3) different and mutually disjoint 
subcontexts would be constructed: 
ABC, ~,BC, ABC, ABC, ABC, ABC, ABC, ABC 
where the macron denotes complementation. Thus 
exemplars in the second class share only the second 
and third feature with the input pattern. 
in the following stage "supraeontexts" are 
constructed by generalising over specific feature 
values. This is done by systematically discarding 
features fi'om the input pattern and taking the union 
of the subcontexts that are subsumed by this new 
pattern. Supracontexts can be ordered with respect 
to generality, so that most specific supracontext 
contains items that share all features with the input 
pattern while the less specific ones those items that 
share at least one feature. The most general 
supracontext contains all database examples 
whether or not they share any features with the 
input pattern. 
Some exemplary supracontexts together with the 
respective subeontexts for the input pattern ABC 
are I)rcsented in the following table? 
A B - ABe, ABC, 
A-  C ABC, ABC 
- B C ABe, ~,BC 
A- -  ABC, ABC, AB(~, ABC 
1,1 addition, our approach introduces a second 
dimension to tile above described process, that of 
language, by simultaneously performing the 
matching process to target language equivalents 
and aligning individual results, based on the 
principles described earlier. Therefore, what we are 
ultimately searching for, are source and target 
sentence pairs for which evidence of 
correspondence between any or all of respective 
subcontcxts within the available training corpora is 
available. This will subsequently lead to links 
between respective supracontexts. For example : 
\[As BsCs\] o \[At Bt Ct \ ] - '~  
AND __~>-=> \[As Bs-\] ~ \[At Bt-\] 
\[As B~Cs\] o \[At Bt Ct \ ] . . f l  
Subcontexts Supracontexts 
(Where s = Source Language, t = Target Language ) 
3. The learning mechanism 
3.1 Translation Templates 
Supracontexts and translation templates can be 
viewed as two sides of the same coin. 
Generalization through unification on feature 
values of neigbbouring sentences, if these satisfy, 
certain criteria, leads to more abstract expressions 
of bilingual pairs of "pseudo-sentences", consisting 
of sequences of constant and variable elements, 
517 
m~ 
.+ 
m~ 
I 
(application)41- . . . . . . . . . . .  T . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  ~ I ~?0appoy/l~ 
u + ; ' b v I v 
+ l++ 1 +- ' -+  ) + ,  x,+, I 
( 1 . . . . . . . . . .  ;{  ?.+u - - I I '+ network ~. . . . . . . . . . . .  I . . . . . . . . . .  
Syntagmatic Relations 
Customizing I + 
(1):Customizing application settings <=:> Flpoaappoyq puepicr~tov ~(oaPllOg/lf, and 
(2): Customizing network settings ~> npo<~cxppoyq puBpicr~tov 51KrOOU is" 
where ? \[ Xs l \ ]  ~ \[ Xt l \ ]  and, 
application ~ ~q)appoyfl(; 
network ~ 61KTt)OU 
Figure I 
where variable elements are represented by special 
symbols ("Xi") and constant-fixed elements act as 
the context in each case. 
3.2 Translation Units 
Discarded features (represented by the "-" symbol) 
of corresponding supracontexts, rising from 
variable elements of the matching sentences, 
correspond to the translation units of the respective 
translation patterns. As a result, single or multi- 
word elements (translation units) of source and 
target language appearing within corresponding 
supracontext positions, are linked and stored, 
comprising the bilingual translation unit lexicon. 
3.3 The Analogical Network 
The main linguistic object for which matching is 
performed is not the sentence but pairs of source 
and target sentences/exemplars. Therefore, 
matching between linguistic objects is performed in 
two dimensions imultaneously, that is between 
source and target sentences of matching pairs 
respectively. The result of the process, if certain 
conditions are met, are stored in an "analogical 
network" (Federici, S. & Pirrelli V., 1994) of inter- 
sentence and intrasentence r lations between these 
exemplars and their generalizations. A rather 
simple example of this is presented ill Figure 1. 
Different parts of matching sentences are replaced 
by corresponding variables, and are consequently 
assigned the role of translation units, while 
similar/constant parts are considered to be the 
context under which variable units are instantiated. 
The union of context and variables establishes the 
"generalized" translation (paradigmatic) patterns 
between source and target language. The similar 
(constant) and different (variable) parts between 
source and target sentences are factored out and 
presented as separate nodes in the above diagram. 
For each sentence we can view its constituent 
single or multi-word, constant or variable units as 
separate nodes, where links between these nodes 
indicate the syntagmatic relations between them, 
that is, the way they actually appear and are ordered 
in the respective sentence. The vertical axis 
represents the paradigmatic dimension of available 
alternants, that is, the information concerning 
which substrings are in complementary distribution 
with respect o the same syntagmatic context i.e. 
with respect o the same context '?Customizing __ 
518 
settings". Syntagmatic links constitute the 
intrasentence relations/links between sentence 
constituents Mille paradigmatic ones correspond to 
the interscntential relations. Furthermore, a third 
dhnension is added to the whole framework, that of 
the "l'mguage", since all principles are applied 
simultaneously to both source sentences and their 
target equivalents. In case, linguistic annotations 
are available, they are appropriately incorporated in
the respective nodes. 
At this point no conflicts are resolved. All possible 
patterus are stored in the network including 
conflicting as well as overlapping patterns. 
However, all links both paradigmatic and 
syntagmatic are weighted by frequency 
information. Tiffs will eventually provide the 
necessary informatiou to disable and even discard 
certain false or useless variables or templates. 
3.4 The Algorithm 
Translation templates as well as translation units 
are treated as paradigmatic flexible structures that 
depend on the available evidence. As new data 
come into the system, rules can be extended or even 
replaced by other more general ones. It is usually 
assulned that there is only one fixed way to assign a 
structural representation to a symbolic object either 
be a translation unit or a translation template. 
14owever, it is obvious that in our approach there is 
no initial fixed definition of this particular 
structure, rather it is left up to the training corpus 
and the learning mechanism. As was expected, 
under this kind of analogy-based approach, 
linguistic objects were determined based on the 
paradiglnatic context hey appeared in, resulting in 
a more flexible and also corpus dependent 
definition of translation units. 
Search Space Reduction 
In general, if sentence matching were 
unconstrained and all resulting matches were stored 
in tile analogical network, then the number of all 
links (inter/intra-sentential) for N equal to the 
number of translation patterns learned through the 
process and L equal to the number of words in a 
sentence (template) would be : 
while the complexity of the learning phase is also 
increased by tile fact that each candidate rule needs 
to be verified against the available corpus, 
introducing an additional parameter S, that of the 
size of tile training corpora (in number of 
sentences). 
Moreover, if a rather straightforward approach in 
matching was to be followed, the complexity 
involved for each individual candidate senteuce 
would be enormous. In such an approach, for each 
candidate sentence, all corresponding subcontexts 
would have to be identified and verified against he 
available corpora. For instance, a sentence of length 
L would generate 2 ~' subcontexts, thus resulting in 
0(2 L) required search actions against he available 
corpora. Even if constraints would be set upon the 
length of possible ignore (variable) areas, for 
example = 5 words, the process would still be too 
complex. For example for a sentence of length L = 
10 and for variables of length up to 5 words, the 
possible subcontexts that have to be matched 
against the corpus would be (,,,)+/:)_,_ (,;)+ (:)+ (,;)--,o+,, 
210 + 36 =- 421, where terms of tile previous 
cquation correspond to the subcontexts with 
variables of length 1 to 5 respectively. 
The SSR methodology, depends on the specific 
needs of the particular task. Run-time pruning of 
possible matches can speed up the learning process, 
however it also reduces ystem recall & coverage. 
On the other hand, constraints on paradigmatic 
relations are more reliable providing better esults 
but cannot contribute to the speed of the learning 
process. SSR was based on an efficient indexing 
and retrieval mechanism (Wilhnan, N. 1994) 
allowing fast identification of "relevant" sentences 
based on comlnon single/multi-word units. In this 
way, the search space for each individual candidate 
was significantly reduced to a smaller set of 
possible matching sentences. 
Distance Metric 
The main objects of knowledge generated by the 
learning process are the translation patterns and the 
bilingual lexicon of translation units. During the 
learning process, both sources are enriched when 
possible. Sentences are analysed and encoded to 
two-dimensional vectors based on the words (first 
dimension) and the linguistic annotations (second 
dimension) they might contain. Then sentence 
vectors are compared on an equal - not equal basis 
519 
through a Levensthein or Edit distance algorithrn 
(Damerau, F. 1964), (Oflazer, K. 1996). The 
algorithm, implemented through a dynamic 
programming framework (Stephen, G. 1992), 
computes the minimum number of required editing 
actions (insertions, deletions, substitutions, 
movements and transpositions) in order to 
transform one sentence into another through an 
inverse backtracking procedure. The final similarity 
score is computed by assigning appropriate weights 
to these actions. For the time being only insertions 
and deletions were accounted for. More complex 
actions, like transpositions or movements of words 
and their influence in the final translation pattern 
will be the focus of future work. 
Variable Elements 
Diflbrences between matching sentences result in 
coupling of corresponding source and target words, 
as explained earlier in this section, thus enriching 
the lexicon with new information. Coupling is 
restricted to content words. Content words can 
usually be replaced by other words of the same 
category acting as potential variables (Kaji, H. et al
1992). On the other hand fimctional words do 
present an "abnormal" translational behavior, since 
they sometimes act as optional units which do not 
appear in both source and target segments, other 
times have a one-to-one correspondence, yet it is 
not rare that they affect the target pattern 
(especially when they participate in verb 
complementation). "Exclusion lists" were used for 
this purpose in order to reject functional words 
from acting as translation w~riables. 
Workflow 
All sentences are stored as vectors of constituent 
words-annotations. Functional words are marked as 
such. The process runs iteratively tbr all sentences 
starting l'rom sentences of length 1 to the maximum 
length appearing in the training corpus. The process 
terminates in case of an unsuccesslifl loop, meaning 
an iteration where no new information either 
translation units or templates were extracted. The 
learning process consisting of five subsequent 
phases, is depicted in detail in Figure 2 : 
Phasel Search Space Reduction : Extract an 
initial set of possibly relevant sentences tbr the 
current input sentence. 
Phase2 Sentence Matching : Match Input sentence 
against he previous et. Matching candidates are 
SearehS_pace Reduction \] ~;i 
(SSR) 
I Sentence Matchinq~ \] 
(Edit Distance) 
LEARNING PHASE 
Identif~AII Subcontexts 1 -~-~h Target Equivalents 
Resolve Differences 
Identify Variables/Tunits 
_. Enrich Bilingual Lexicon 
Identi_fffy_A/l_S u p raco ntexts 
Unify Variable Feature Values \] 
Extract Translation Patterns 
Sup~x~a~erns  
L Fnrinh/llndat~ Ana~nical N~.twnrk 
Figure. 2 
sorted based on distance score. Matches with fewer 
differences are examined first. 
Phase3 Identification of Subcontexts :For each 
naatching candidate, identify the respective 
subcontext of the input sentence that it adheres to. 
Examine target language equivalents. Resolve 
differences between source and target language 
matching candidates based on already existing 
intbrmation contained in the bilingual exicon. 
During this process, the bilingual translation unit 
lexicon is enriched with any successfldly resolved 
difference (even if the particular candidate will not 
finally lead to a new translation pattern). 
520 
Phase4 Identification of Supracontcxts : Based 
on tile ah'eady identified subcontexts 
produce tile respective supraeontexts through 
unification of respective variable feature values. 
Phase5 Extraction of Translation Patterns : 
Construct corresponding translation patterns from 
existing supraeontexts. Update analogical network. 
In case a pattern ahcady exists, update the weight 
of its constituent links. 
At the end of the learning process the analogical 
network has been enriched with all possible 
translation patterns and variables/units extracted 
fi'om the available corpora. Conflict resolution and 
network refinement in general is performed on the 
final results, where all information is available as 
described in the next section. 
3.5 Network Refinement 
As mentioned earlier, tile analogical network 
contains all translation alternatives For individual 
translation units as well as all translation patterns 
resulting fiom the learning process, l lowever, link 
weight information is also included in the above 
framework representing the validily of a particular 
relation against he training corpus. 
Translation alternatives of individual units (in 
our case words) are implicitly classified through 
their context, that is the constant part of the 
translation patterns they participate in. These will 
constitute the main selection criterion during 
translation, l lowevcr, fi'equency inlimnation is 
also used in order to disable and finally discard 
obsolete or erroneous translation unit alternatives. 
Translation templates are compared with respect 
to their source and target language constituent 
patterns: (a) Conflicting templates, that is 
templates haring only one of the two patterns are 
subsequcntly checked in terms of weight 
information. Templates of equivalent weights are 
considered equally effective. This is usually tile 
case where different translations are produced fi'om 
the same source pattern due to semantic difliarences 
on the variables it contains. Conflicting templates 
with significantly low weights (under a predefined 
threshold), are judged ineffective or "exceptional" 
(Nomiyama, It. 1992) and are flagged as such in 
order to receive a special treatment during the 
translation phase (Watanabe, 1t. 1994). These can 
even be disabled or discarded fiom the network 
depending on their significance weight lhrough a 
dynamic 'Torgetting and remembering" process 
(Streiter, O. et al 1999). (b) Overlapping 
templates, where both source and target patterns of 
one template can be generated from the other by 
coupling words of the constant part of the template 
through valid translation alternatives included in 
the network, are identified and the more general 
ones are preferred. A basic requirement is that tile 
set of all translation alternatives instantiating the 
variables of the more general template is a superset 
of those instantiating the less general one. In any 
other case, both templates are retained. And finally, 
(c) complementary templates, are also identified 
and replaced by their union. 
4. Evaluation 
The training set consisted of a bilingual (EN-GR) 
technical corpus (automotive industry) of 5K 
sentences, -20K wordl'orms on each language. The 
process resulted in ~550 translation rules, and 350 
translation units (~50 multi-word ones). The 
precision estimated through manual evaluation was 
~75%. More than 23% of the erroneous rules were 
due to idiomatic expressions. The rest of tile errors 
was caused by imprecise translation patterns found 
in the corpus. However, these errors being rather 
exceptional, received a very low weight of 
effectiveness atlhe end of the process. No straight 
forward approach to measure the recall of the 
learning process was devised, since it was not easy 
to a-priori determine the number off rules that 
should be extracted fiom tile training corpus. 
Howcvcr, coverage of the final translation rule set 
against the corpus was measured and found equal to 
38%. More specifically, the set of 500 rules could 
tlu'ough an inverse process generate 38% of tile 
corpus sentences, subsequently interpreted in a 
significant gain in terms of storage space. Another 
obvious benefit is the subsentential alignment 
information that is, the source and target ranslation 
units learned at tile end of the process. 
5. Conclusion & Future Work 
We have presented a self-modelling, incremental 
analogical algorithm for extracting translatiou 
patterns fi'om existing bilingual corpora s well as a 
method for efficient storage and representation f
extracted relations between various units of text. 
Not surprisingly, the quality of the results depends 
on the available information in terms of quantity as 
521 
well as quality and depth. Lack of any kind of 
linguistic information will consequently result in 
translation rules based only owl "shallow" evidence. 
Similarly, information of low quality will generate 
erroneous rules. However, this is a basic 
presupposition of any EBMT system: "what you 
give is what you get...". 
Tile proposed fi'amework was initially evaluated 
based only owl string form information. However, 
tile model can easily take into account "deeper" 
linguistic knowledge during the learning phase, 
thus improving tile quality of the final results. 
Evaluation of learning performance in this case is 
the main object of ctn'rent work. 
Another, interesting issue is how the current 
fi'amework can constrain acceptable multi-word 
variables in order to reduce computational 
complexity. In present, accepting or rqiecting 
candidate variables extracted from the sentence 
matching process, is based on a simple heuristic of 
length in content words. This type of approach 
would presumably require some kind of clue on 
what could be an acceptable translation unit pattern 
(Juola, P. 1994), (Furuse, O., lida, 14. 1996). 
Finally, future work will mainly fbcus on how the 
system can invoke all existing information in order 
to generate new translations, mainly aiming at 
automatic and (senti-) automatic methods for 
"recursive" as well as "parallel" utilization of 
multiple translation rules towards optimal 
"coverage" of new incoming sentences. 
7. References 
(Boutsis, S., Piperidis, S. t998) Aligning Clauses in 
Parallel Texts. 3ld Conference on Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing, June 1998 
(Collins, B., & Cunningham, P. 1995) A Methodology 
th for EBMT. 4 International Conference on the Cognitive 
Science of Natural Language Processing, Dublin 1995. 
(Cranias, L., Papageorgiou, H. and Piperidis, S. 1994). 
A matching technique in Example-Based Machine 
Translation, Proc. of COLING-94, pp 100-105, 
(Daelemans, W., Gillis, S. & Durieux, G., 1997) 
Skousen's analogical modelling algorithm: a comparison 
with lazy learning. New Methods in Language 
Processing: Edited by Daniel Jones & Harold Somers, 
UCL Press, p.3-15. 
(Damerau, F. 1964) A Technique for Computer Detection 
and Correction of Spelling Errors. Communications of the 
ACM 7, p. 171-176, 1964. 
(Dorr, B. 1994) Machine Translation Divergences: A 
Formal Description and Proposed Solution. Association 
for Computational Linguistics, Vol. 20, 1994. 
(Federici, S. & Pirrelli, V. 1994). The compilation of 
large pronunciation lexica: the elicitation of letter to sound 
patterns through analogy based networks. Papers in 
Computational Lexicography, Complex '94, Budapest, 
59-67. 
(Frederking, R., Nirenburg, S., 1994)Three Heads are 
Better then One. Proceedings of the fourth Conference 
on Appfied Natural Language Processing, ANLP-94, 
Stuttgart, GernTany 
(Furuse, O., lida, H. 1996) Incremental Translation 
Utilizing Constituent Boundary Patterns. Proc. Coling-96, 
pp 412-417. 
(Juola, P. 1994) Self-Organizing Machine Translation: 
Example-Driven Induction of Transfer Functions. 
University of Colorado at Boulder, Technical Report CU- 
CS-722-94. 
(Kaji, H., Kida, Y., and Morimoto, Y., 1992) Learning 
Translation Templates from Bilingual TexL Proc. Coling., 
p. 672-678, 1992. 
(McTait, K., Olohan, M., Trujillo, A. 1999) A Building 
Blocks Approach to Translation Memory. Proc. From the 
21 st ASLIB Conference, London, 1999. 
(Nirenburg, S. Domashnev, C., Grannes, D. 1993) Two 
Approaches to Matching in Example-Based Machine 
Translation. Proc. of TMI-93, Kyoto, Japan, 1993. 
(Nomiyama, H. 1992) Machine Translation by Case 
Generalization. Proceedings of the \[sic\] International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, COLING-92, 
Nantes, p. 714-720. 
(Oflazer, K. t996) Error-tolerant Finite State Recognition 
with Applications to Morphological Analysis and Spelling 
Correction. Association for Computational Linguistics, 
Vol. 22, (1), 1996 
(Sadler, V., Vendelmans, R. 1990} Pilot Implementation 
of a Bilingual Knowledge Bank. Proc. of Coling, pp 449- 
451, 1990. 
(Sato, S. 1995). MBT2: A Method for Combining 
Fragments of Examples in Example-Based Machine 
Translation. Artificial Intelligence 75, 31-49. 
(Skousen, R. 1989} Analogical Modelling of language. 
Dordrecht: Kluwe~. 
(Stephen, G. 1992) String Search. University College of 
North Wales, Technical Report TR-92-gas-01. 
(Streiter, O., Iomdin,L., Hong,M., Hauck, U., 1999) 
IAI CA T2 Publications, www.iai, uni-sb.de 
(Veale, T. and Way, A. 1997) Gaijin: A Bootstrapping 
Approach to Example-Based Machine Translation. 
International Conf., Recent Advances in Natural 
Language Processing, Tzigov Chark, Bulgaria, 239-244. 
(Watanabe, H. 1994) A Method for Distinguishing 
Exceptional or General Examples in Example-Based 
Transfer Systems. The 15 t~' International Conference on 
Computational LhTguistics, COLING-94, Kyoto, p.39-44. 
(Willman, N. 1994) A Prototype Information Retrieval 
System to Perform a Best-Match Search for Names. 
Conference Proceeding of RIA 0 '94. 
522 
