Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Interactive Presentation Sessions, pages 9?12,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
LeXFlow: a System for Cross-fertilization of Computational Lexicons 
Maurizio Tesconi and Andrea Marchetti 
CNR-IIT 
Via Moruzzi 1, 56024 Pisa, Italy 
{maurizio.tesconi,andrea.marchetti}@iit.cnr.it 
Francesca Bertagna and Monica Monachini and Claudia Soria and Nicoletta Calzolari 
CNR-ILC 
Via Moruzzi 1, 56024 Pisa, Italy 
{francesca.bertagna,monica.monachini, 
claudia.soria,nicoletta.calzolari}@ilc.cnr.it 
 
  
Abstract 
This demo presents LeXFlow, a work-
flow management system for cross-
fertilization of computational lexicons. 
Borrowing from techniques used in the 
domain of document workflows, we 
model the activity of lexicon manage-
ment as a set of workflow types, where 
lexical entries move across agents in the 
process of being dynamically updated. A 
prototype of LeXFlow has been imple-
mented with extensive use of XML tech-
nologies (XSLT, XPath, XForms, SVG) 
and open-source tools (Cocoon, Tomcat, 
MySQL). LeXFlow is a web-based ap-
plication that enables the cooperative and 
distributed management of computational 
lexicons. 
1 Introduction 
LeXFlow is a workflow management system 
aimed at enabling the semi-automatic manage-
ment of computational lexicons. By management 
we mean not only creation, population and vali-
dation of lexical entries but also integration and 
enrichment of different lexicons.  
A lexicon can be enriched by resorting to 
automatically acquired information, for instance 
by means of an application extracting informa-
tion from corpora. But a lexicon can be enriched 
also by resorting to the information available in 
another lexicon, which can happen to encode 
different types of information, or at different lev-
els of granularity. LeXFlow intends to address 
the request by the computational lexicon com-
munity for a change in perspective on computa-
tional lexicons: from static resources towards 
dynamically configurable multi-source entities, 
where the content of lexical entries is dynami-
cally modified and updated on the basis of the 
integration of knowledge coming from different 
sources (indifferently represented by human ac-
tors, other lexical resources, or applications for 
the automatic extraction of lexical information 
from texts). 
This scenario has at least two strictly related 
prerequisites: i) existing lexicons have to be 
available in or be mappable to a standard form 
enabling the overcoming of their respective dif-
ferences and idiosyncrasies, thus making their 
mutual comprehensibility a reality; ii) an archi-
tectural framework should be used for the effec-
tive and practical management of lexicons, by 
providing the communicative channel through 
which lexicons can really communicate and 
share the information encoded therein. 
For the first point, standardization issues obvi-
ously play the central role. Important and exten-
sive efforts have been and are being made to-
wards the extension and integration of existing 
and emerging open lexical and terminological 
standards and best practices, such as EAGLES, 
ISLE, TEI, OLIF, Martif (ISO 12200), Data 
Categories (ISO 12620), ISO/TC37/SC4, and 
LIRICS. An important achievement in this re-
spect is the MILE, a meta-entry for the encoding 
of multilingual lexical information (Calzolari et 
al., 2003); in our approach we have embraced the 
MILE model.  
As far as the second point is concerned, some 
initial steps have been made to realize frame-
works enabling inter-lexica access, search, inte-
gration and operability. Nevertheless, the general 
impression is that little has been made towards 
the development of new methods and techniques 
9
for the concrete interoperability among lexical 
and textual resources. The intent of LeXFlow is 
to fill in this gap.  
2 LeXFlow Design and Application 
LeXFlow is conceived as a metaphoric extension 
and adaptation to computational lexicons of 
XFlow, a framework for the management of 
document workflows (DW, Marchetti et al, 
2005).  
A DW can be seen as a process of cooperative 
authoring where the document can be the goal of 
the process or just a side effect of the coopera-
tion. Through a DW, a document life-cycle is 
tracked and supervised, continually providing 
control over the actions leading to document 
compilation In this environment a document 
travels among agents who essentially carry out 
the pipeline receive-process-send activity.  
Each lexical entry can be modelled as a docu-
ment instance (formally represented as an XML 
representation of the MILE lexical entry), whose 
behaviour can be formally specified by means of 
a document workflow type (DWT) where differ-
ent agents, with clear-cut roles and responsibili-
ties, act over different portions of the same entry 
by performing different tasks.  
Two types of agents are envisaged: external 
agents are human or software actors which per-
form activities dependent from the particular 
DWT, and internal agents are software actors 
providing general-purpose activities useful for 
any DWT and, for this reason, implemented di-
rectly into the system. Internal agents perform 
general functionalities such as creat-
ing/converting a document belonging to a par-
ticular DWT, populating it with some initial data, 
duplicating a document to be sent to multiple 
agents, splitting a document and sending portions 
of information to different agents, merging du-
plicated documents coming from multiple agents, 
aggregating fragments, and finally terminating 
operations over the document. An external agent 
executes some processing using the document 
content and possibly other data, e.g. updates the 
document inserting the results of the preceding 
processing, signs the updating and finally sends 
the document to the next agent(s). 
The state diagram in Figure 1 describes the 
different states of the document instances. At the 
starting point of the document life cycle there is 
a creation phase, in which the system raises a 
new instance of a document with information 
attached.  
Figure 1. Document State Diagram. 
 
The document instance goes into pending 
state. When an agent gets the document, it goes 
into processing state in which the agent compiles 
the parts under his/her responsibility. If the 
agent, for some reason, doesn?t complete the in-
stance elaboration, he can save the work per-
formed until that moment and the document in-
stance goes into freezing state. If the elaboration 
is completed (submitted), or cancelled, the in-
stance goes back into pending state, waiting for a 
new elaboration. 
Borrowing from techniques used in DWs, we 
have modelled the activity of lexicon manage-
ment as a set of DWT, where lexical entries 
move across agents and become dynamically 
updated.  
3 Lexical Workflow General Architec-
ture 
As already written, LeXFlow is based on XFlow 
which is composed of three parts: i) the Agent 
Environment, i.e. the agents participating to all 
DWs; ii) the Data, i.e. the DW descriptions plus 
the documents created by the DW and iii) the 
Engine. Figure 2 illustrates the architecture of the 
framework. 
Figure 2. General Architecture. 
 
The DW environment is the set of human and 
software agents participating to at least one DW. 
10
The description of a DW can be seen as an ex-
tension of the XML document class. A class of 
documents, created in a DW, shares the schema 
of their structure, as well as the definition of the 
procedural rules driving the DWT and the list of 
the agents attending to it. Therefore, in order to 
describe a DWT, we need four components:  
? a schema of the documents involved in the 
DWT; 
? the agent roles chart, i.e. the set of the ex-
ternal and internal agents, operating on the 
document flow. Inside the role chart these 
agents are organized in roles and groups in 
order to define who has access to the 
document. This component constitutes the 
DW environment; 
? a document interface description used by 
external agents to access the documents. 
This component also allows checking ac-
cess permissions to the document; 
? a document workflow description defining 
all the paths that a document can follow in 
its life-cycle, the activities and policies for 
each role.  
The document workflow engine constitutes the 
run-time support for the DW, it implements the 
internal agents, the support for agents? activities, 
and some system modules that the external agents 
have to use to interact with the DW system. 
Also, the engine is responsible for two kinds of 
documents useful for each document flow: the 
documents system logs and the documents system 
metadata. 
4 The lexicon Augmentation Workflow 
Type 
In this section we present a first DWT, called 
?lexicon augmentation?, for dynamic augmenta-
tion of semantic MILE-compliant lexicons. This 
DWT corresponds to the scenario where an entry 
of a lexicon A becomes enriched via basically 
two steps. First, by virtue of being mapped onto 
a corresponding entry belonging to a lexicon B, 
the entry(A) inherits the semantic relations avail-
able in the mapped entry(B). Second, by resorting 
to an automatic application that acquires infor-
mation about semantic relations from corpora, 
the acquired relations are integrated into the en-
try and proposed to the human encoder. 
In order to test the system we considered the 
Simple/Clips (Ruimy et al, 2003) and ItalWord-
Net (Roventini et al, 2003) lexicons.  
An overall picture of the flow is shown in Fig-
ure 3, illustrating the different agents participat-
ing to the flow. Rectangles represent human ac-
tors over the entries, while the other figures 
symbolize software agents: ovals are internal 
agents and octagons external ones. The function-
ality offered to human agents are: display of 
MILE-encoded lexical entries, selection of lexi-
cal entries, mapping between lexical entries be-
longing to different lexicons1, automatic calcula-
tions of new semantic relations (either automati-
cally derived from corpora and mutually inferred 
from the mapping) and manual verification of the 
newly proposed semantic relations.  
5 Implementation Overview 
Our system is currently implemented as a web-
based application where the human external 
agents interact with system through a web 
browser. All the human external agents attending 
the different document workflows are the users 
of system. Once authenticated through username 
and password the user accesses his workload 
area where the system lists all his pending docu-
ments (i.e. entries) sorted by type of flow. 
The system shows only the flows to which the 
user has access. From the workload area the user 
                                                 
1 We hypothesize a human agent, but the same role could be 
performed by a software agent. To this end, we are investi-
gating the possibility of automatically exploiting the proce-
dure described in (Ruimy and Roventini, 2005). 
Figure 3. Lexicon Augmentation Workflow. 
 
11
can browse his documents and select some op-
erations  
 
Figure 4. LeXFlow User Activity State Diagram. 
 
such as: selecting and processing pending docu-
ment; creating a new document; displaying a 
graph representing a DW of a previously created 
document; highlighting the current position of 
the document. This information is rendered as an 
SVG (Scalable Vector Graphics) image. Figure 5 
illustrates the overall implementation of the sys-
tem. 
5.1 The Client Side: External Agent Inter-
action 
The form used to process the documents is ren-
dered with XForms. Using XForms, a browser 
can communicate with the server through XML 
documents and is capable of displaying the 
document with a user interface that can be de-
fined for each type of document. A browser with 
XForms capabilities will receive an XML docu-
ment that will be displayed according to the 
specified template, then it will let the user edit 
the document and finally it will send the modi-
fied document to the server. 
5.2 The Server Side 
The server-side is implemented with Apache 
Tomcat, Apache Cocoon and MySQL. Tomcat is 
used as the web server, authentication module 
(when the communication between the server 
and the client needs to be encrypted) and servlet 
container. Cocoon is a publishing framework that 
uses the power of XML. The entire functioning 
of Cocoon is based on one key concept: compo-
nent pipelines. The pipeline connotes a series of 
events, which consists of taking a request as in-
put, processing and transforming it, and then giv-
ing the desired response. MySQL is used for 
storing and retrieving the documents and the 
status of the documents. 
Each software agent is implemented as a web-
service and the WSDL language is used to define 
its interface.  
References 
Nicoletta Calzolari, Francesca Bertagna, Alessandro 
Lenci and Monica Monachini, editors. 2003. Stan-
dards and Best Practice for Multilingual Computa-
tional Lexicons. MILE (the Multilingual ISLE 
Lexical Entry). ISLE Deliverable D2.2 & 3.2. Pisa. 
Andrea Marchetti, Maurizio Tesconi, and Salvatore 
Minutoli. 2005. XFlow: An XML-Based Docu-
ment-Centric Workflow. In Proceedings of WI-
SE?05, pages 290- 303, New York, NY, USA. 
Adriana Roventini, Antonietta Alonge, Francesca 
Bertagna, Nicoletta Calzolari, Christian Girardi, 
Bernardo Magnini, Rita Marinelli, and Antonio 
Zampolli. 2003. ItalWordNet: Building a Large 
Semantic Database for the Automatic Treatment of 
Italian. In Antonio Zampolli, Nicoletta Calzolari, 
and Laura Cignoni, editors, Computational Lingui-
stics in Pisa, Istituto Editoriale e Poligrafico Inter-
nazionale, Pisa-Roma, pages 745-791. 
Nilda Ruimy, Monica Monachini, Elisabetta Gola, 
Nicoletta Calzolari, Cristina Del Fiorentino, Marisa 
Ulivieri, and Sergio Rossi. 2003. A Computational 
Semantic Lexicon of Italian: SIMPLE. In Antonio 
Zampolli, Nicoletta Calzolari, and Laura Cignoni, 
editors, Computational Linguistics in Pisa, Istituto 
Editoriale e Poligrafico Internazionale, Pisa-Roma, 
pages 821-864. 
Nilda Ruimy and Adriana Roventini. 2005. Towards 
the linking of two electronic lexical databases of 
Italian. In  Proceedings of L&T'05 - Language 
Technologies as a Challenge for Computer Science 
and Linguistics, pages 230-234, Poznan, Poland.
Figure 5. Overall System Implementation. 
12
Proceedings of the Workshop on Multilingual Language Resources and Interoperability, pages 17?24,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Towards Agent-based Cross-lingual Interoperability of Distributed    
Lexical Resources 
Claudia Soria* Maurizio Tesconi? Andrea Marchetti?
Francesca Bertagna* Monica Monachini*
Chu-Ren Huang?    Nicoletta Calzolari*
*CNR-ILC and ?CNR-IIT 
Via Moruzzi 1, 56024 Pisa 
Italy 
{firstname.lastname@ilc.cnr.it} 
{firstname.lastname@iit.cnr.it} 
?Academia Sinica  
Nankang, Taipei  
Taiwan 
churen@gate.sinica.edu.tw 
 
  
 
Abstract 
In this paper we present an application 
fostering the integration and interopera-
bility of computational lexicons, focusing 
on the particular case of mutual linking 
and cross-lingual enrichment of two wor-
dnets, the ItalWordNet and Sinica BOW 
lexicons. This is intended as a case-study 
investigating the needs and requirements 
of semi-automatic integration and inter-
operability of lexical resources. 
1 Introduction 
In this paper we present an application fostering 
the integration and interoperability of computa-
tional lexicons, focusing on the particular case of 
mutual linking and cross-lingual enrichment of 
two wordnets. The development of this applica-
tion is intended as a case-study and a test-bed for 
trying out needs and requirements posed by the 
challenge of semi-automatic integration and en-
richment of practical, large-scale multilingual 
lexicons for use in computer applications. While 
a number of lexicons already exist, few of them 
are practically useful, either since they are not 
sufficiently broad or because they don?t cover 
the necessary level of detailed information. 
Moreover, multilingual language resources are 
not as widely available and are very costly to 
construct: the work process for manual develop-
ment of new lexical resources or for tailoring 
existing ones is too expensive in terms of effort 
and time to be practically attractive.  
The need of ever growing lexical resources for 
effective multilingual content processing has 
urged the language resource community to call 
for a radical change in the perspective of lan-
guage resource creation and maintenance and the 
design of a ?new generation? of LRs: from static, 
closed and locally developed resources to shared 
and distributed language services, based on open 
content interoperability standards. This has often 
been called a ?change in paradigm? (in the sense 
of Kuhn, see Calzolari and Soria, 2005; Calzolari 
2006). Leaving aside the tantalizing task of 
building on-site resources, the new paradigm 
depicts a scenario where lexical resources are 
cooperatively built as the result of controlled co-
operation of different agents, adopting the para-
digm of accumulation of knowledge so success-
ful in more mature disciplines, such as biology 
and physics (Calzolari, 2006).  
According to this view (or, better, this vision), 
different lexical resources reside over distributed 
places and can not only be accessed but choreo-
graphed by agents presiding the actions that can 
be executed over them. This implies the ability to 
build on each other achievements, to merge re-
sults, and to have them accessible to various sys-
tems and applications. 
At the same time, there is another argument in 
favor of distributed lexical resources: language 
resources, lexicons included, are inherently dis-
tributed because of the diversity of languages 
distributed over the world. It is not only natural 
that language resources to be developed and 
maintained in their native environment. Since 
language evolves and changes over time, it is not 
possible to describe the current state of the lan-
17
guage away from where the language is spoken. 
Lastly, the vast range of diversity of languages 
also makes it impossible to have one single uni-
versal centralized resource, or even a centralized 
repository of resources. 
Although the paradigm of distributed and in-
teroperable lexical resources has largely been 
discussed and invoked, very little has been made 
in comparison for the development of new meth-
ods and techniques for its practical realization. 
Some initial steps are made to design frame-
works enabling inter-lexica access, search, inte-
gration and operability. An example is the Lexus 
tool (Kemps-Snijders et al, 2006), based on the 
Lexical Markup Framework (Romary et al, 
2006), that goes in the direction of managing the 
exchange of data among large-scale lexical re-
sources. A similar tool, but more tailored to the 
collaborative creation of lexicons for endangered 
language, is SHAWEL (Gulrajani and Harrison, 
2002). However, the general impression is that 
little has been made towards the development of 
new methods and techniques for attaining a con-
crete interoperability among lexical resources. 
Admittedly, this is a long-term scenario requiring 
the contribution of many different actors and ini-
tiatives (among which we only mention stan-
dardisation, distribution and international coop-
eration).  
Nevertheless, the intent of our project is to 
contribute to fill in this gap, by exploring in a 
controlled way the requirement and implications 
posed by new generation multilingual lexical 
resources. The paper is organized as follows: 
section 2 describes the general architectural de-
sign of our project; section 3 describes the mod-
ule taking care of cross-lingual integration of 
lexical resources, by also presenting a case-study 
involving an Italian and Chinese lexicons. Fi-
nally, section 4 presents our considerations and 
lessons learned on the basis of this exploratory 
testing. 
2 An Architecture for Integrating Lexi-
cal Resources 
 LeXFlow (Soria et al, 2006) was developed 
having in mind the long-term goal of lexical re-
source interoperability. In a sense, LeXFlow is 
intended as a proof of concept attempting to 
make the vision of an infrastructure for access 
and sharing of linguistic resources more tangible. 
LeXFlow is an adaptation to computational 
lexicons of XFlow, a cooperative web applica-
tion for the management of document workflows 
(DW, Marchetti et al, 2005). A DW can be seen 
as a process of cooperative authoring where a 
document can be the goal of the process or just a 
side effect of the cooperation. Through a DW, a 
document life-cycle is tracked and supervised, 
continually providing control over the actions 
leading to document compilation. In this envi-
ronment a document travels among agents who 
essentially carry out the pipeline receive-process-
send activity.  
There are two types of agents: external agents 
are human or software actors performing activi-
ties dependent from the particular Document 
Workflow Type; internal agents are software 
actors providing general-purpose activities useful 
for many DWTs and, for this reason, imple-
mented directly into the system. Internal agents 
perform general functionalities such as creat-
ing/converting a document belonging to a par-
ticular DW, populating it with some initial data, 
duplicating a document to be sent to multiple 
agents, splitting a document and sending portions 
of information to different agents, merging du-
plicated documents coming from multiple agents, 
aggregating fragments, and finally terminating 
operations over the document. External agents 
basically execute some processing using the 
document content and possibly other data; for 
instance, accessing an external database or 
launching an application.  
LeXFlow was born by tailoring XFlow to 
management of lexical entries; in doing so, we 
have assumed that each lexical entry can be 
modelled as a document instance, whose behav-
iour can be formally specified by means of a 
lexical workflow type (LWT). A LWT describes 
the life-cycle of a lexical entry, the agents al-
lowed to act over it, the actions to be performed 
by the agents, and the order in which the actions 
are to be executed. Embracing the view of coop-
erative workflows, agents can have different 
rights or views over the same entry: this nicely 
suits the needs of lexicographic work, where we 
can define different roles (such as encoder, anno-
tator, validator) that can be played by either hu-
man or software agents. Other software modules 
can be inserted in the flow, such as an automatic 
acquirer of information from corpora or from the 
web. Moreover, deriving from a tool designed 
for the cooperation of agents, LeXFlow allows to 
manage workflows where the different agents 
can reside over distributed places.  
LeXFlow thus inherits from XFlow the gen-
eral design and architecture, and can be consid-
ered as a specialized version of it through design 
18
of specific Lexical Workflow Types and plug-in 
of dedicated external software agents. In the next 
section we briefly illustrate a particular Lexical 
Workflow Type and the external software agents 
developed for the purpose of integrating different 
lexicons belonging to the same language. Since it 
allows the independent and coordinated sharing 
of actions over portions of lexicons, LeXFlow 
naturally lends itself as a tool for the manage-
ment of distributed lexical resources. 
Due to its versatility, LeXFlow is both a gen-
eral framework where ideas on automatic lexical 
resource integration can be tested and an infra-
structure for proving new methods for coopera-
tion among lexicon experts. 
2.1 Using LeXFlow for Lexicon Enrichment 
In previous work (Soria et al, 2006),  the LeX-
Flow framework has been tested for integration 
of lexicons with differently conceived lexical 
architectures and diverging formats. It was 
shown how interoperability is possible between 
two Italian lexicons from the SIMPLE and 
WordNet families, respectively, namely the 
SIMPLE/CLIPS (Ruimy et al, 2003) and Ital-
WordNet (Roventini et al, 2003) lexicons.  
In particular, a Lexical Workflow Type was 
designed where the two different monolingual 
semantic lexicons interact by reciprocally enrich-
ing themselves and moreover integrate informa-
tion coming from corpora. This LWT, called 
?lexicon augmentation?, explicitly addresses dy-
namic augmentation of semantic lexicons. In this 
scenario, an entry of a lexicon A becomes en-
riched via basically two steps. First, by virtue of 
being mapped onto a corresponding entry be-
longing to a lexicon B, the entryA inherits the 
semantic relations available in the mapped en-
tryB. Second, by resorting to an automatic appli-
cation that acquires information about semantic 
relations from corpora, the acquired relations are 
integrated into the entry and proposed to the hu-
man encoder. 
B
An overall picture of the flow is shown in 
Figure 1, illustrating the different agents partici-
pating in the flow. Rectangles represent human 
actors over the entries, while the other figures 
symbolize software agents: ovals are internal 
agents and octagons external ones. The two ex-
ternal agents involved in this flow are the ?rela-
tion calculator? and the ?corpora extractor?. The 
first is responsible for the mapping between the 
sets of semantic relations used by the different 
lexicons. The ?corpora extractor? module in-
vokes an application that acquires information 
about part-of relations by identifying syntactic 
constructions in a vast Italian corpus. It then 
takes care of creating the appropriate candidate 
semantic relations for each lemma that is pro-
posed by the application. 
Figure 1. Lexicons Augmentation Workflow 
Type. 
A prototype of LeXFlow has been imple-
mented with an extensive use of XML technolo-
gies (XML Schema, XSLT, XPath, XForms, 
SVG) and open-source tools (Cocoon, Tomcat, 
mySQL). It is a web-based application where 
human agents interact with the system through 
an XForms browser that displays the document 
to process as a web form whereas software 
agents interact with the system via web services. 
3 Multilingual WN Service 
In the Section above we have illustrated the gen-
eral architecture of LeXFlow and showed how a 
Lexical Workflow Type can be implemented in 
order to enrich already existing lexicons belong-
ing to the same language but realizing different 
models of lexicon encoding. In this section we 
move to a cross-lingual perspective of lexicon 
integration. We present a module that similarly 
addresses the issue of lexicon augmentation or 
enrichment focusing on mutual enrichment of 
two wordnets in different languages and residing 
at different sites. 
This module, named ?multilingual WN Ser-
vice? is responsible for the automatic cross-
lingual fertilization of lexicons having a Word-
19
Net-like structure. Put it very simply, the idea 
behind this module is that a monolingual word-
net can be enriched by accessing the semantic 
information encoded in corresponding entries of 
other monolingual wordnets.  
Since each entry in the monolingual lexicons 
is linked to the Interlingual Index (ILI, cf. Sec-
tion 3.1), a synset of a WN(A) is indirectly 
linked to another synset in another WN(B). On 
the basis of this correspondence, a synset(A) can 
be enriched by importing the relations that the 
corresponding synset(B) holds with other syn-
sets(B), and vice-versa. Moreover, the enrich-
ment of WN(A) will not only import the relations 
found in WN(B), but it will also propose target 
synsets in the language(A) on the basis of those 
found in language(B). 
The various WN lexicons reside over distrib-
uted servers and can be queried through web ser-
vice interfaces. The overall architecture for mul-
tilingual wordnet service is depicted in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. Multilingual Wordnet Service Archi-
tecture. 
 
Put in the framework of the general LeXFlow 
architecture, the Multilingual wordnet Service 
can be seen as an additional external software 
agent that can be added to the augmentation 
workflow or included in other types of lexical 
flows. For instance, it can be used not only to 
enrich a monolingual lexicon but to bootstrap a 
bilingual lexicon. 
3.1 Linking Lexicons through the ILI  
The entire mechanism of the Multilingual WN 
Service is based on the exploitation of Interlin-
gual Index (Peters et al, 1998), an unstructured 
version of WordNet used in EuroWordNet 
(Vossen et al, 1998) to link wordnets of different 
languages; each synset in the language-specific 
wordnet is linked to at least one record of the ILI 
by means of a set of equivalence relations 
(among which the most important is the 
EQ_SYNONYM, that expresses a total, perfect 
equivalence between two synsets).  
Figure 6 describes the schema of a WN lexical 
entry. Under the root ?synset? we find both in-
ternal relations (?synset relations?) and ILI Rela-
tions, which link to ILI synsets. 
Figure 3 shows the role played by the ILI as 
set of pivot nodes allowing the linkage between 
concepts belonging to different wordnets.  
 
 
Figure 3. Interlingual Linking of Language-
specific Synsets. 
 
In the Multilingual WN Service, only equiva-
lence relations of type EQ_SYNONYM and 
EQ_NEAR_SYNONYM have been taken into ac-
count, being them the ones used to represent a 
translation of concepts and also because they are 
the most exploited (for example, in IWN, they 
cover about the 60% of the encoded equivalence 
relations). The EQ_SYNONYM relation is used to 
realize the one-to-one mapping between the lan-
guage-specific synset and the ILI, while multiple 
EQ_NEAR_SYNONYM relations (because of their 
nature) might be encoded to link a single lan-
guage-specific synset to more than one ILI re-
cord. In Figure 4 we represented the possible 
relevant combinations of equivalence relations 
that can realize the mapping between synsets 
belonging to two languages. In all the four cases, 
a synset ?a? is linked via the ILI record to a syn-
set ?b? but a specific procedure has been fore-
seen in order to calculate different ?plausibility 
scores? to each situation. The procedure relies on 
different rates assigned to the two equivalence 
relations (rate ?1? to EQ_NEAR_SYNONYM rela-
tion and rate ?0? to the EQ_SYNONYM). In this 
way we can distinguish the four cases by assign-
ing respectively a weight of ?0?, ?1?, ?1? and 
?2?. 
20
  
Figure 4. Possible Combinations of Relations 
between two Lexicons A and B and the ILI. 
 
The ILI is a quite powerful yet simple method 
to link concepts across the many lexicons be-
longing to the WordNet-family. Unfortunately, 
no version of the ILI can be considered a stan-
dard and often the various lexicons exploit dif-
ferent version of WordNet as ILI 1 . This is a 
problem that is handled at web-service level, by 
incorporating the conversion tables provided by 
(Daud? et al, 2001). In this way, the use of dif-
ferent versions of WN does not have to be taken 
into consideration by the user who accesses the 
system but it is something that is resolved by the 
system itself2. This is why the version of the ILI 
is a parameter of the query to web service (see 
Section below). 
3.2 Description of the Procedure 
On the basis of ILI linking, a synset can be en-
riched by importing the relations contained in the 
corresponding synsets belonging to another 
wordnet. 
In the procedure adopted, the enrichment is 
performed on a synset-by-synset basis. In other 
words, a certain synset is selected from a word-
net resource, say WN(A). The cross-lingual mod-
ule identifies the corresponding ILI synset, on 
the basis of the information encoded in the syn-
set. It then sends a query to the WN(B) web ser-
vice providing the ID of ILI synset together with 
the ILI version of the starting WN. The WN(B) 
web service returns the synset(s) corresponding 
to the WN(A) synset, together with reliability 
scores. If WN(B) is based on a different ILI ver-
sion, it can carry out the mapping between ILI 
versions (for instance by querying the ILI map-
ping web service). The cross-lingual module then 
analyzes the synset relations encoded in the 
                                                 
1 For example, the Chinese and the Italian wordnets consid-
ered as our case-study use respectively versions 1.6 and 1.5. 
2 It should be noted, however, that the conversion between 
different WN versions could not be accurate so the mapping 
is always proposed with a probability score.
WN(B) synset and for each of them creates a 
new synset relation for the WN(A) synset. 
If the queried wordnets do not use the same set 
of synset relations, the module must take care of 
the mapping between different relation sets. In  
our case-study no mapping was needed, since the 
two sets were completely equivalent.   
Each new relation is obtained by substituting 
the target WN(B)  synset  with the corresponding 
synset WN(A), which again is found by querying 
back the WN(A) web service (all these steps 
through the ILI). The procedure is formally de-
fined by the following formula: 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Finding New Relations. 
 
Every local wordnet has to provide a web ser-
vice API  with the following methods: 
 
1. GetWeightedSynsetsByIli(ILIid, ILIversion) 
2. GetSynsetById(sysnsetID) 
3. GetSynsetsByLemma(lemma) 
 
21
The returned synsets of each method must be 
formatted in XML following the schema de-
picted in Figure 6: 
 
Figure 6. Schema of Wordnet Synsets Returned 
by WN Web Services. 
 
The scores returned by the method ?Get-
WeightedSynsetsByIli? are used by our module 
to calculate the reliability rating for each new 
proposed relation. 
3.3 A Case Study: Cross-fertilization be-
tween Italian and Chinese Wordnets. 
We explore this idea with a case-study involving 
the ItalianWordNet (Roventini et al, 2003) and 
the Academia Sinica Bilingual Ontological 
Wordnet (Sinica BOW, Huang et al, 2004).  
The BOW integrates three resources: Word-
Net, English-Chinese Translation Equivalents 
Database (ECTED), and SUMO (Suggested Up-
per Merged Ontology). With the integration of 
these three key resources, Sinica BOW functions 
both as an English-Chinese bilingual wordnet 
and a bilingual lexical access to SUMO. Sinica 
Bow currently has two bilingual versions, corre-
sponding to WordNet 1.6. and 1.7. Based on 
these bootstrapped versions, a Chinese Wordnet 
(CWN, Huang et al 2005) is under construction 
with handcrafted senses and lexical semantic re-
lations. For the current experiment, we have used 
the version linking to WordNet 1.6. 
ItalWordNet was realized as an extension of 
the Italian component of EuroWordNet. It com-
prises a general component consisting of about 
50,000 synsets and terminological wordnets 
linked to the generic wordnet by means of a spe-
cific set of relations. Each synset of ItalWordNet 
is linked to the Interlingual-Index (ILI). 
The two lexicons refer to different versions of 
the ILI (1.5 for IWN and 1.6 for BOW), thus 
making it necessary to provide a mapping be-
tween the two versions. On the other hand, no 
mapping is necessary for the set of synset rela-
tions used, since both of them adopt the same set. 
For the purposes of evaluating the cross-
lingual module, we have developed two web-
services for managing a subset of the two re-
sources.  
The following Figure shows a very simple ex-
ample where our procedure discovers and pro-
poses a new meronymy relation for the Italian 
synset {passaggio,strada,via}. This synset is 
equivalent to the ILI ?road,route? that is ILI-
connected with BOW synset ???,? ,?? (da-
o_lu, dao, lu) (Figure 7, A) . The Chinese synset 
has a meronymy relation with the synset ???
??? (wan) (B). This last  synset is equivalent 
to the ILI ?bend, crook, turn? that is ILI-
connected with Italian WordNet synset ?curva-
tura, svolta, curva? (C). Therefore the procedure 
will propose a new candidate meronymy relation 
between the two Italian WordNet synsets (D). 
 
 
Figure 7. Example of a New Proposed Mero-
nymy Relation for Italian. 
3.4 Considerations and Lessons Learned 
Given the diversity of the languages for which 
wordnets exist, we note that it is difficult to im-
plement an operational standard across all typo-
logically different languages. Work on enriching 
and merging multilingual resources presupposes 
that the resources involved are all encoded with 
the same standard. However, even with the best 
efforts of the NLP community, there are only a 
small number of language resources encoded in 
any given standard. In the current work, we pre-
suppose a de-facto standard, i.e. a shared and 
conventionalized architecture, the WordNet one. 
Since the WordNet framework is both conven-
tionalized and widely followed, our system is 
22
able to rely on it without resorting to a more sub-
stantial and comprehensive standard. In the case, 
for instance, of integration of lexicons with dif-
ferent underlying linguistic models, the availabil-
ity of the MILE (Calzolari et al, 2003) was an 
essential prerequisite of our work. Nevertheless, 
even from the perspective of the same model, a 
certain degree of standardization is required, at 
least at the format level. 
From a more general point of view, and even 
from the perspective of a limited experiment 
such as the one described in this paper, we must 
note that the realization of the new vision of dis-
tributed and interoperable language resources is 
strictly intertwined with at least two prerequi-
sites. On the one side, the language resources 
need to be available over the web; on the other, 
the language resource community will have to 
reconsider current distribution policies, and to 
investigate the possibility of developing an 
?Open Source? concept for LRs. 
4 Conclusion 
Our proposal to make distributed wordnets inter-
operable has the following applications in proc-
essing of lexical resources: 
 
? Enriching existing resources: informa-
tion is often not complete in any given 
wordnet: by making two wordnets inter-
operable, we can bootstrap semantic rela-
tions and other information from other 
wordnets. 
? Creation of new resources: multilingual 
lexicons can be bootstrapped by linking 
different language wordnets through ILI. 
? Validation of existing resources: seman-
tic relation information and other synset 
assignments can be validated when it is re-
inforced by data from a different wordnet. 
In particular, our work can be proposed as a 
prototype of a web application that would sup-
port the Global WordNet Grid initiative 
(www.globalwordnet.org/gwa/gwa_grid.htm).  
Any multilingual process, such as cross-
lingual information retrieval, must involve both 
resources and tools in a specific language and 
language pairs. For instance, a multilingual query 
given in Italian but intended for querying Eng-
lish, Chinese, French, German, and Russian 
texts, can be send to five different nodes on the 
Grid for query expansion, as well as performing 
the query itself. In this way, language specific 
query techniques can be applied in parallel to 
achieve best results that can be integrated in the 
future. As multilingualism clearly becomes one 
of the major challenges of the future of web-
based knowledge engineering, WordNet emerges 
as one leading candidate for a shared platform 
for representing a lexical knowledge model for 
different languages of the world. This is true 
even if it has to be recognized that the wordnet 
model is lacking in some important semantic in-
formation (like, for instance, a way to represent 
the semantic predicate). However, such knowl-
edge and resources are distributed. In order to 
create a shared multi-lingual knowledge base for 
cross-lingual processing based on these distrib-
uted resources, an initiative to create a grid-like 
structure has been recently proposed and pro-
moted by the Global WordNet Association, but 
until now has remained a wishful thinking. The 
success of this initiative will depend on whether 
there will be tools to access and manipulate the 
rich internal semantic structure of distributed 
multi-lingual WordNets. We believe that our 
work on LeXFlow offers such a tool to provide 
inter-operable web-services to access distributed 
multilingual WordNets on the grid. 
This allows us to exploit in a cross-lingual 
framework the wealth of monolingual lexical 
information built in the last decade. 
5 References 
Nicoletta Calzolari, Francesca Bertagna, Alessandro 
Lenci and Monica Monachini, editors. 2003. Stan-
dards and Best Practice for Multilingual Computa-
tional Lexicons. MILE (the Multilingual ISLE 
Lexical Entry). ISLE CLWG Deliverable D2.2 & 
3.2. Pisa. 
Nicoletta Calzolari and Claudia Soria. 2005. A New 
Paradigm for an Open Distributed Language Re-
source Infrastructure: the Case of Computational 
Lexicons. In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Sym-
posium ?Knowledge Collection from Volunteer 
Contributors (KCVC05)?, pages 110-114, Stan-
ford, CA. 
Nicoletta Calzolari. 2006. Technical and Strategic 
issues on Language Resources for a Research In-
frastructure In Proceedings of the International 
Symposium on Large-scale Knowledge Resources 
(LKR2006), pages 53-58, Tokyo, Tokyo Institute 
of Technology. 
Jordi Daud?, Lluis Padr? and German Rigau. 2001. A 
Complete WN1.5 to WN1.6 Mapping. In Proceed-
ings of NAACL Workshop "WordNet and Other 
Lexical Resources: Applications, Extensions and 
23
Customizations", pages 83-88, Pittsburg, PA, USA, 
Association for Computational Linguistics.  
Greg Gulrajani and David Harrison. 2002. SHAWEL: 
Sharable and Interactive Web-Lexicons. In Pro-
ceedings of the LREC2002 Workshop on Tools and 
Resources in Field Linguistics, pages 1-4, Las 
Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain. 
Chu-Ren Huang, Ru-Yng Chang,  and Shiang-Bin 
Lee. 2004. Sinica BOW (Bilingual Ontological 
Wordnet): Integration of Bilingual WordNet and 
SUMO. In Proceedings of LREC2004, pages 1553-
1556, Lisbon, Portugal. 
Chu-Ren Huang, Chun-Ling Chen, Cui-Xia Weng, 
Hsiang-Ping Lee, Yong-Xiang Chen and Keh-jiann 
Chen. 2005. The Sinica Sense Management Sys-
tem: Design and Implementation. Computational 
Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing. 
10(4): 417-430. 
Marc Kemps-Snijders, Mark-Jan Nederhof, and Peter 
Wittenburg. 2006. LEXUS, a web-based tool for 
manipulating lexical resources. Accepted for publi-
cation in Proceedings of LREC2006, Genoa, Italy. 
Andrea Marchetti, Maurizio Tesconi, and Salvatore 
Minutoli. 2005. XFlow: An XML-Based Docu-
ment-Centric Workflow. In Proceedings of 
WISE?05, pages 290-303, New York, NY, USA. 
Wim Peters, Piek Vossen, Pedro Diez-Orzas, and 
Geert Adriaens. 1998. Cross-linguistic Alignment 
of Wordnets with an Inter-Lingual-Index. In Nancy 
Ide, Daniel Greenstein, and Piek Vossen, editors, 
Special Issue on EuroWordNet, Computers and the 
Humanities, 32(2-3): 221-251. 
Laurent Romary, Gil Francopoulo, Monica Monachi-
ni, and Susanne Salmon-Alt 2006. Lexical Markup 
Framework (LMF): working to reach a consensual 
ISO standard on lexicons. Accepted for publication 
in Proceedings of LREC2006, Genoa, Italy. 
Adriana Roventini, Antonietta Alonge, Francesca 
Bertagna, Nicoletta Calzolari, Christian Girardi, 
Bernardo Magnini, Rita Marinelli, and Antonio 
Zampolli. 2003. ItalWordNet: Building a Large 
Semantic Database for the Automatic Treatment of 
Italian. In Antonio Zampolli, Nicoletta Calzolari, 
and Laura Cignoni, editors, Computational Lingui-
stics in Pisa, IEPI, Pisa-Roma, pages 745-791. 
Nilda Ruimy, Monica Monachini, Elisabetta Gola, 
Nicoletta Calzolari, Cristina Del Fiorentino, Marisa 
Ulivieri, and Sergio Rossi. 2003. A Computational 
Semantic Lexicon of Italian: SIMPLE. In Antonio 
Zampolli, Nicoletta Calzolari, and Laura Cignoni, 
editors, Computational Linguistics in Pisa, IEPI, 
Pisa-Roma, pages 821-864. 
Claudia Soria, Maurizio Tesconi, Francesca Bertagna, 
Nicoletta Calzolari, Andrea Marchetti, and Monica 
Monachini. 2006. Moving to Dynamic Computa-
tional Lexicons with LeXFlow. Accepted for pu-
blication in Proceedings of LREC2006, Genova, I-
taly.  
Piek Vossen. 1998. Introduction to EuroWordNet. In 
Nancy Ide, Daniel Greenstein, and Piek Vossen, 
editors, Special Issue on EuroWordNet, Computers 
and the Humanities, 32(2-3): 73-89. 
 
 
 
 
24
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Semantic Evaluations: Recent Achievements and Future Directions, pages 123?128,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
SemEval-2010 Task 17: All-words Word Sense Disambiguation
on a Specific Domain
Eneko Agirre
IXA NLP group
UBC
Donostia, Basque Country
e.agirre@ehu.es
Oier Lopez de Lacalle
IXA NLP group
UBC
Donostia, Basque Country
oier.lopezdelacalle@ehu.es
Christiane Fellbaum
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
Princeton, USA
fellbaum@princeton.edu
Andrea Marchetti
IIT
CNR
Pisa, Italy
andrea.marchetti@iit.cnr.it
Antonio Toral
ILC
CNR
Pisa, Italy
antonio.toral@ilc.cnr.it
Piek Vossen
Faculteit der Letteren
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Amsterdam, Netherlands
p.vossen@let.vu.nl
Abstract
Domain portability and adaptation of NLP
components and Word Sense Disambiguation
systems present new challenges. The diffi-
culties found by supervised systems to adapt
might change the way we assess the strengths
and weaknesses of supervised and knowledge-
based WSD systems. Unfortunately, all ex-
isting evaluation datasets for specific domains
are lexical-sample corpora. With this paper
we want to motivate the creation of an all-
words test dataset for WSD on the environ-
ment domain in several languages, and present
the overall design of this SemEval task.
1 Introduction
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) competitions
have focused on general domain texts, as attested
in the last Senseval and Semeval competitions (Kil-
garriff, 2001; Mihalcea et al, 2004; Pradhan et al,
2007). Specific domains pose fresh challenges to
WSD systems: the context in which the senses occur
might change, distributions and predominant senses
vary, some words tend to occur in fewer senses in
specific domains, and new senses and terms might
be involved. Both supervised and knowledge-based
systems are affected by these issues: while the first
suffer from different context and sense priors, the
later suffer from lack of coverage of domain-related
words and information.
Domain adaptation of supervised techniques is a
hot issue in Natural Language Processing, includ-
ing Word Sense Disambiguation. Supervised Word
Sense Disambiguation systems trained on general
corpora are known to perform worse when applied
to specific domains (Escudero et al, 2000; Mart??nez
and Agirre, 2000), and domain adaptation tech-
niques have been proposed as a solution to this prob-
lem with mixed results.
Current research on applying WSD to specific do-
mains has been evaluated on three available lexical-
sample datasets (Ng and Lee, 1996; Weeber et al,
2001; Koeling et al, 2005). This kind of dataset
contains hand-labeled examples for a handful of se-
lected target words. As the systems are evaluated on
a few words, the actual performance of the systems
over complete texts can not be measured. Differ-
ences in behavior of WSD systems when applied to
lexical-sample and all-words datasets have been ob-
served on previous Senseval and Semeval competi-
tions (Kilgarriff, 2001; Mihalcea et al, 2004; Prad-
han et al, 2007): supervised systems attain results
on the high 80?s and beat the most frequent base-
line by a large margin for lexical-sample datasets,
but results on the all-words datasets were much more
modest, on the low 70?s, and a few points above the
most frequent baseline.
Thus, the behaviour of WSD systems on domain-
specific texts is largely unknown. While some words
could be supposed to behave in similar ways, and
thus be amenable to be properly treated by a generic
123
WSD algorithm, other words have senses closely
linked to the domain, and might be disambiguated
using purpose-built domain adaptation strategies (cf.
Section 4). While it seems that domain-specific
WSD might be a tougher problem than generic
WSD, it might well be that domain-related words
are easier to disambiguate.
The main goal of this task is to provide a mul-
tilingual testbed to evaluate WSD systems when
faced with full-texts from a specific domain, that of
environment-related texts. The paper is structured
as follows. The next section presents current lexi-
cal sample datasets for domain-specific WSD. Sec-
tion 3 presents some possible settings for domain
adaptation. Section 4 reviews the state-of-the art in
domain-specific WSD. Section 5 presents the design
of our task, and finally, Section 6 draws some con-
clusions.
2 Specific domain datasets available
We will briefly present the three existing datasets
for domain-related studies in WSD, which are all
lexical-sample.
The most commonly used dataset is the Defense
Science Organization (DSO) corpus (Ng and Lee,
1996), which comprises sentences from two differ-
ent corpora. The first is the Wall Street Journal
(WSJ), which belongs to the financial domain, and
the second is the Brown Corpus (BC) which is a bal-
anced corpora of English usage. 191 polysemous
words (nouns and verbs) of high frequency in WSJ
and BC were selected and a total of 192,800 occur-
rences of these words were tagged with WordNet 1.5
senses, more than 1,000 instances per word in aver-
age. The examples from BC comprise 78,080 oc-
currences of word senses, and examples from WSJ
consist on 114,794 occurrences. In domain adapta-
tion experiments, the Brown Corpus examples play
the role of general corpora, and the examples from
the WSJ play the role of domain-specific examples.
Koeling et al (2005) present a corpus were the
examples are drawn from the balanced BNC cor-
pus (Leech, 1992) and the SPORTS and FINANCES
sections of the newswire Reuters corpus (Rose et al,
2002), comprising around 300 examples (roughly
100 from each of those corpora) for each of the 41
nouns. The nouns were selected because they were
salient in either the SPORTS or FINANCES domains,
or because they had senses linked to those domains.
The occurrences were hand-tagged with the senses
from WordNet version 1.7.1 (Fellbaum, 1998). In
domain adaptation experiments the BNC examples
play the role of general corpora, and the FINANCES
and SPORTS examples the role of two specific do-
main corpora.
Finally, a dataset for biomedicine was developed
by Weeber et al (2001), and has been used as
a benchmark by many independent groups. The
UMLS Metathesaurus was used to provide a set of
possible meanings for terms in biomedical text. 50
ambiguous terms which occur frequently in MED-
LINE were chosen for inclusion in the test set. 100
instances of each term were selected from citations
added to the MEDLINE database in 1998 and man-
ually disambiguated by 11 annotators. Twelve terms
were flagged as ?problematic? due to substantial dis-
agreement between the annotators. In addition to the
meanings defined in UMLS, annotators had the op-
tion of assigning a special tag (?none?) when none
of the UMLS meanings seemed appropriate.
Although these three corpora are useful for WSD
research, it is difficult to infer which would be the
performance of a WSD system on full texts. The
corpus of Koeling et al, for instance, only includes
words which where salient for the target domains,
but the behavior of WSD systems on other words
cannot be explored. We would also like to note that
while the biomedicine corpus tackles scholarly text
of a very specific domain, the WSJ part of the DSO
includes texts from a financially oriented newspaper,
but also includes news of general interest which have
no strict relation to the finance domain.
3 Possible settings for domain adaptation
When performing supervised WSD on specific do-
mains the first setting is to train on a general domain
data set and to test on the specific domain (source
setting). If performance would be optimal, this
would be the ideal solution, as it would show that a
generic WSD system is robust enough to tackle texts
from new domains, and domain adaptation would
not be necessary.
The second setting (target setting) would be to
train the WSD systems only using examples from
124
the target domain. If this would be the optimal set-
ting, it would show that there is no cost-effective
method for domain adaptation. WSD systems would
need fresh examples every time they were deployed
in new domains, and examples from general do-
mains could be discarded.
In the third setting, the WSD system is trained
with examples coming from both the general domain
and the specific domain. Good results in this setting
would show that supervised domain adaptation is
working, and that generic WSD systems can be sup-
plemented with hand-tagged examples from the tar-
get domain.
There is an additional setting, where a generic
WSD system is supplemented with untagged exam-
ples from the domain. Good results in this setting
would show that semi-supervised domain adapta-
tion works, and that generic WSD systems can be
supplemented with untagged examples from the tar-
get domain in order to improve their results.
Most of current all-words generic supervised
WSD systems take SemCor (Miller et al, 1993) as
their source corpus, i.e. they are trained on SemCor
examples and then applied to new examples. Sem-
Cor is the largest publicly available annotated cor-
pus. It?s mainly a subset of the Brown Corpus, plus
the novel The Red Badge of Courage. The Brown
corpus is balanced, yet not from the general domain,
as it comprises 500 documents drawn from differ-
ent domains, each approximately 2000 words long.
Although the Brown corpus is balanced, SemCor is
not, as the documents were not chosen at random.
4 State-of-the-art in WSD for specific
domains
Initial work on domain adaptation for WSD sys-
tems showed that WSD systems were not able to
obtain better results on the source or adaptation set-
tings compared to the target settings (Escudero et
al., 2000), showing that a generic WSD system (i.e.
based on hand-annotated examples from a generic
corpus) would not be useful when moved to new do-
mains.
Escudero et al (2000) tested the supervised adap-
tation scenario on the DSO corpus, which had exam-
ples from the Brown Corpus and Wall Street Journal
corpus. They found that the source corpus did not
help when tagging the target corpus, showing that
tagged corpora from each domain would suffice, and
concluding that hand tagging a large general corpus
would not guarantee robust broad-coverage WSD.
Agirre and Mart??nez (2000) used the same DSO cor-
pus and showed that training on the subset of the
source corpus that is topically related to the target
corpus does allow for domain adaptation, obtaining
better results than training on the target data alone.
In (Agirre and Lopez de Lacalle, 2008), the au-
thors also show that state-of-the-art WSD systems
are not able to adapt to the domains in the context
of the Koeling et al (2005) dataset. While WSD
systems trained on the target domain obtained 85.1
and 87.0 of precision on the sports and finances do-
mains, respectively, the same systems trained on the
BNC corpus (considered as a general domain cor-
pus) obtained 53.9 and 62.9 of precision on sports
and finances, respectively. Training on both source
and target was inferior that using the target examples
alone.
Supervised adaptation
Supervised adaptation for other NLP tasks has been
widely reported. For instance, (Daume? III, 2007)
shows that a simple feature augmentation method
for SVM is able to effectively use both labeled tar-
get and source data to provide the best domain-
adaptation results in a number of NLP tasks. His
method improves or equals over previously explored
more sophisticated methods (Daume? III and Marcu,
2006; Chelba and Acero, 2004). In contrast, (Agirre
and Lopez de Lacalle, 2009) reimplemented this
method and showed that the improvement on WSD
in the (Koeling et al, 2005) data was marginal.
Better results have been obtained using purpose-
built adaptation methods. Chan and Ng (2007) per-
formed supervised domain adaptation on a manu-
ally selected subset of 21 nouns from the DSO cor-
pus. They used active learning, count-merging, and
predominant sense estimation in order to save tar-
get annotation effort. They showed that adding just
30% of the target data to the source examples the
same precision as the full combination of target and
source data could be achieved. They also showed
that using the source corpus significantly improved
results when only 10%-30% of the target corpus
was used for training. In followup work (Zhong et
125
Projections for 2100 suggest that temperature in Europe will have risen by between 2 to 6.3 C above 1990
levels. The sea level is projected to rise, and a greater frequency and intensity of extreme weather events are
expected. Even if emissions of greenhouse gases stop today, these changes would continue for many decades
and in the case of sea level for centuries. This is due to the historical build up of the gases in the atmosphere
and time lags in the response of climatic and oceanic systems to changes in the atmospheric concentration
of the gases.
Figure 1: Sample text from the environment domain.
al., 2008), the feature augmentation approach was
combined with active learning and tested on the
OntoNotes corpus, on a large domain-adaptation ex-
periment. They significantly reduced the effort of
hand-tagging, but only obtained positive domain-
adaptation results for smaller fractions of the target
corpus.
In (Agirre and Lopez de Lacalle, 2009) the au-
thors report successful adaptation on the (Koeling
et al, 2005) dataset on supervised setting. Their
method is based on the use of unlabeled data, re-
ducing the feature space with SVD, and combina-
tion of features using an ensemble of kernel meth-
ods. They report 22% error reduction when using
both source and target data compared to a classifier
trained on target the target data alone, even when the
full dataset is used.
Semi-supervised adaptation
There are less works on semi-supervised domain
adaptation in NLP tasks, and fewer in WSD task.
Blitzer et al (2006) used Structural Correspondence
Learning and unlabeled data to adapt a Part-of-
Speech tagger. They carefully select so-called pivot
features to learn linear predictors, perform SVD on
the weights learned by the predictor, and thus learn
correspondences among features in both source and
target domains. Agirre and Lopez de Lacalle (2008)
show that methods based on SVD with unlabeled
data and combination of distinct feature spaces pro-
duce positive semi-supervised domain adaptation re-
sults for WSD.
Unsupervised adaptation
In this context, we take unsupervised to mean
Knowledge-Based methods which do not require
hand-tagged corpora. The predominant sense acqui-
sition method was succesfully applied to specific do-
mains in (Koeling et al, 2005). The methos has two
steps: In the first, a corpus of untagged text from the
target domain is used to construct a thesaurus of sim-
ilar words. In the second, each target word is disam-
biguated using pairwise WordNet-based similarity
measures, taking as pairs the target word and each of
the most related words according to the thesaurus up
to a certain threshold. This method aims to obtain,
for each target word, the sense which is the most
predominant for the target corpus. When a general
corpus is used, the most predominant sense in gen-
eral is obtained, and when a domain-specific corpus
is used, the most predominant sense for that corpus
is obtained (Koeling et al, 2005). The main motiva-
tion of the authors is that the most frequent sense is a
very powerful baseline, but it is one which requires
hand-tagging text, while their method yields simi-
lar information automatically. The results show that
they are able to obtain good results. In related work,
(Agirre et al, 2009) report improved results using
the same strategy but applying a graph-based WSD
method, and highlight the domain-adaptation poten-
tial of unsupervised knowledge-based WSD systems
compared to supervised WSD.
5 Design of the WSD-domain task
This task was designed in the context of Ky-
oto (Piek Vossen and VanGent, 2008)1, an Asian-
European project that develops a community plat-
form for modeling knowledge and finding facts
across languages and cultures. The platform op-
erates as a Wiki system with an ontological sup-
port that social communities can use to agree on the
meaning of terms in specific domains of their inter-
est. Kyoto will focus on the environmental domain
because it poses interesting challenges for informa-
tion sharing, but the techniques and platforms will
be independent of the application domain. Kyoto
1http://www.kyoto-project.eu/
126
will make use of semantic technologies based on
ontologies and WSD in order to extract and repre-
sent relevant information for the domain, and is thus
interested on measuring the performance of WSD
techniques on this domain.
The WSD-domain task will comprise comparable
all-words test corpora on the environment domain.
Texts from the European Center for Nature Con-
servation2 and Worldwide Wildlife Forum3 will be
used in order to build domain specific test corpora.
We will select documents that are written for a gen-
eral but interested public and that involve specific
terms from the domain. The document content will
be comparable across languages. Figure 1 shows an
example in English related to global warming.
The data will be available in a number of lan-
guages: English, Dutch, Italian and Chinese. The
sense inventories will be based on wordnets of the
respective languages, which will be updated to in-
clude new vocabulary and senses. The test data will
comprise three documents of around 2000 words
each for each language. The annotation procedure
will involve double-blind annotation plus adjudica-
tion, and inter-tagger agreement data will be pro-
vided. The formats and scoring software will fol-
low those of Senseval-34 and SemEval-20075 En-
glish all-words tasks.
There will not be training data available, but par-
ticipants are free to use existing hand-tagged cor-
pora and lexical resources (e.g. SemCor and pre-
vious Senseval and SemEval data). We plan to make
available a corpus of documents from the same do-
main as the selected documents, as well as wordnets
updated to include the terms and senses in the se-
lected documents.
6 Conclusions
Domain portability and adaptation of NLP com-
ponents and Word Sense Disambiguation systems
present new challenges. The difficulties found by
supervised systems to adapt might change the way
we assess the strengths and weaknesses of super-
vised and knowledge-based WSD systems. Unfor-
tunately, all existing evaluation datasets for specific
2http://www.ecnc.org
3http://www.wwf.org
4http://www.senseval.org/senseval3
5http://nlp.cs.swarthmore.edu/semeval/
domains are lexical-sample corpora. With this paper
we have motivated the creation of an all-words test
dataset for WSD on the environment domain in sev-
eral languages, and presented the overall design of
this SemEval task.
Further details can be obtained from the Semeval-
20106 website, our task website7, and in our distri-
bution list8
7 Acknowledgments
The organization of the task is partially funded
by the European Commission (KYOTO FP7 ICT-
2007-211423) and the Spanish Research Depart-
ment (KNOW TIN2006-15049-C03-01).
References
Eneko Agirre and Oier Lopez de Lacalle. 2008. On ro-
bustness and domain adaptation using SVD for word
sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 22nd In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics
(Coling 2008), pages 17?24, Manchester, UK, August.
Coling 2008 Organizing Committee.
Eneko Agirre and Oier Lopez de Lacalle. 2009. Super-
vised domain adaptation for wsd. In Proceedings of
the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL-09).
E. Agirre, O. Lopez de Lacalle, and A. Soroa. 2009.
Knowledge-based WSD and specific domains: Per-
forming over supervised WSD. In Proceedings of IJ-
CAI, Pasadena, USA.
John Blitzer, Ryan McDonald, and Fernando Pereira.
2006. Domain adaptation with structural correspon-
dence learning. In Proceedings of the 2006 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 120?128, Sydney, Australia, July. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Yee Seng Chan and Hwee Tou Ng. 2007. Domain adap-
tation with active learning for word sense disambigua-
tion. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of
the Association of Computational Linguistics, pages
49?56, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Ciprian Chelba and Alex Acero. 2004. Adaptation of
maximum entropy classifier: Little data can help a
lot. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
Barcelona, Spain.
6http://semeval2.fbk.eu/
7http://xmlgroup.iit.cnr.it/SemEval2010/
8http://groups.google.com/groups/wsd-domain
127
Hal Daume? III and Daniel Marcu. 2006. Domain adap-
tation for statistical classifiers. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research, 26:101?126.
Hal Daume? III. 2007. Frustratingly easy domain adapta-
tion. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of
the Association of Computational Linguistics, pages
256?263, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Gerard Escudero, Lluiz Ma?rquez, and German Rigau.
2000. An Empirical Study of the Domain Dependence
of Supervised Word Sense Disambiguation Systems.
Proceedings of the joint SIGDAT Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Very Large Corpora, EMNLP/VLC.
C. Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical
Database. MIT Press.
A. Kilgarriff. 2001. English Lexical Sample Task De-
scription. In Proceedings of the Second International
Workshop on evaluating Word Sense Disambiguation
Systems, Toulouse, France.
R. Koeling, D. McCarthy, and J. Carroll. 2005. Domain-
specific sense distributions and predominant sense
acquisition. In Proceedings of the Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference and Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
HLT/EMNLP, pages 419?426, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
G. Leech. 1992. 100 million words of English:
the British National Corpus. Language Research,
28(1):1?13.
David Mart??nez and Eneko Agirre. 2000. One Sense per
Collocation and Genre/Topic Variations. Conference
on Empirical Method in Natural Language.
R. Mihalcea, T. Chklovski, and Adam Killgariff. 2004.
The Senseval-3 English lexical sample task. In Pro-
ceedings of the 3rd ACL workshop on the Evaluation
of Systems for the Semantic Analysis of Text (SENSE-
VAL), Barcelona, Spain.
G.A. Miller, C. Leacock, R. Tengi, and R.Bunker. 1993.
A Semantic Concordance. In Proceedings of the
ARPA Human Language Technology Workshop. Dis-
tributed as Human Language Technology by San Ma-
teo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers., pages 303?
308, Princeton, NJ.
Hwee Tou Ng and Hian Beng Lee. 1996. Integrat-
ing multiple knowledge sources to disambiguate word
sense: An exemplar-based approach. In Proceedings
of the 34th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computationla Linguistics (ACL), pages 40?47.
Nicoletta Calzolari Christiane Fellbaum Shu-kai Hsieh
Chu-Ren Huang Hitoshi Isahara Kyoko Kanzaki An-
drea Marchetti Monica Monachini Federico Neri
Remo Raffaelli German Rigau Maurizio Tescon
Piek Vossen, Eneko Agirre and Joop VanGent. 2008.
Kyoto: a system for mining, structuring and distribut-
ing knowledge across languages and cultures. In
European Language Resources Association (ELRA),
editor, Proceedings of the Sixth International Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC?08), Mar-
rakech, Morocco, may.
Sameer Pradhan, Edward Loper, Dmitriy Dligach, and
Martha Palmer. 2007. Semeval-2007 task-17: English
lexical sample, srl and all words. In Proceedings of
the Fourth International Workshop on Semantic Eval-
uations (SemEval-2007), pages 87?92, Prague, Czech
Republic.
Tony G. Rose, Mark Stevenson, and Miles Whitehead.
2002. The Reuters Corpus Volumen 1: from Yes-
terday?s News to Tomorrow?s Language Resources.
In Proceedings of the Third International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2002),
pages 827?832, Las Palmas, Canary Islands.
Marc Weeber, James G. Mork, and Alan R. Aronson.
2001. Developing a test collection for biomedical
word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the
AMAI Symposium, pages 746?750, Washington, DC.
Zhi Zhong, Hwee Tou Ng, and Yee Seng Chan. 2008.
Word sense disambiguation using OntoNotes: An em-
pirical study. In Proceedings of the 2008 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 1002?1010, Honolulu, Hawaii, October.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
128
