Discriminating the registers and styles in the Modem Greek language 
George Tambouratzis*,  Stella Markantonatou*, Nikolaos Hairetakis*, 
Marina Vassiliou*, Dimitrios Tambouratzis ^,George Carayannis* 
* Institute for Language and Speech Processing 
Epidavrou & Artemidos 6,151 25 Maroussi, Greece 
{giorg_t, marks, nhaire, mvas, gkara} @ilsp.gr 
^ Agricultural University of Athens, 
lera Odos 75, 118 55, Athens, Greece. 
{dtamb@aua.gr} 
Abstract 
This article investigates (a) whether register 
discrimination can successfully exploit linguistic 
information reflecting the evolution of a 
language (such as the diglossia phenomenon of
the Modern Greek language) and (b) what kind 
of linguistic information and which statistical 
techniques may be employed to distinguish 
among individual styles within one register. 
Using clustering techniques and features 
reflecting the diglossia phenomenon, we have 
successfully discriminated registers in Modem 
Greek. However, diglossia information has not 
been shown sufficient to distinguish among 
individual styles within one register. Instead, a 
large number of linguistic features need to be 
studied with methods such as discriminant 
analysis in order to obtain a high degree of 
discrimination accuracy. 
1 Introduction 
The identification of the language style 
characterising the constituent parts of a corpus is 
very important o several appfieations. For 
example, in information retrieval applications, 
where large corpora of texts need to be searched 
efficiently, it is useful to have information about 
the language style used in each text, to improve 
the accuracy of the search (Karlgren, 1999). In 
fact, the criteria regarding language style may 
differ for each search and therefore - due to the 
large number of texts - there is a requirement to
perform style categorisation i an automated 
manner. Such systems normally use statistical 
methods to evaluate the properties of given texts. 
The complexity of the studied properties varies. 
Kilgarriff (1996) employs mainly the frequency- 
of-occurrence of words while Karlgren (1999) 
applies tatistical methods primarily on structural 
and part-of-speech information. 
Baayen et al (1996), who study the topic of 
author identification, apply statistical measures 
and methods on syntactic rewrite rules resulting 
by processing a given set of texts. They report 
that the accuracy thus obtained is higher than 
when applying the same statistical measures to 
the original text. On the other hand, Biber 
(1995) uses Multidimensional Analysis coupled 
with a large number of linguistic features to 
distinguish amongregisters. The underlying idea 
is that, rather than being distinguished on the 
basis of a set of finguistic features, registers are 
distinguished on the basis of combinations of 
weighted linguistic features, the so-called 
"dimensions". 
This article reports on the discrimination oftexts 
in written Modem Greek. The ongoing research 
described here has followed two distinct 
directions. First, we have tried to distinguish 
among registers of written Modern Greek. In a 
second phase, our research has focused on 
distinguishing among individual styles within 
one register and, more specifically, among 
speakers of the Greek Parliament. To achieve 
that, structural, morphological nd part-of-speech 
information is employed. Initially (in section 2) 
emphasis is placed on distinguishing among the 
different registers used. In section 3, the task of 
author identification is tested with selected 
statistical methods. In both sections, we describe 
the set of linguistic features measured, we argue 
for the statistical method employed and we 
comment on the results. Section 4 contains a 
description of future plans for extending this fine 
of research while in section 5 the conclusions of 
this article are provided. 
2 Distinguishing Registers 
To distinguish among registers, we successfully 
exploited a particular feature of Modem Greek, 
namely the contrast between Katharevousa and 
Demotiki. These are variation.,; of Modern Greek 
which correspond (if only roughly) to formal and 
informal speaking. Katharevoma was the official 
language of the Greek State until 1979 when it 
was replaced by Demotiki. By that time, 
Demotiki was the establis\]hed language of 
literature while, in times, it had been the 
language of elementary education. Compared to 
Demotiki, Katharevousa bears an important 
resemblance to Ancient Greek manifested 
explicitly on the morphological level and the use 
of the lexicon. At a second step, we dropped the 
Katharevousa-Demotiki approach and relied on 
part-of-speech information, which is often 
exploited in text categofisafion experiments (for 
instance, see Biber et al 1998). Again, we 
obtained satisfactory esults. 
2.1 Method of work 
The variables used to distinguish among registers 
may be grouped into the following categories: 
1. Morphological variables: These were verbal 
endings quantifying the contrast 
Katharevousa / Demofiki. Although the 
morphological differences between these two 
variations of Greek are not limited to the 
verb paradigm, we focused on the latter since 
it better highlights the contrast under 
consideration (Tainbouratzis et al, 2000). A 
total of 230 verbal endings were selected, 
split into 145 Demotiki and 85 Katharevousa 
endings (see also the Appendix). These 230 
frequencies-of-occurrence were grouped into 
12 variables for use in the, statistical nalysis. 
2. Lexical variables: Certain negation particles 
(ovd~ei?, otu~rere, oo~o4zo6, dryer)clearly 
signify a preference for Katharevousa while 
others (~51Xo~?, #are, Xcopi?) are clear 
indicators of Demotiki. However, the most 
frequently used negation particles (tzt,/a/v, 
~cv) are not characteristic ofeither of the two 
variations. 
3. Structural macro-features: average sentence 
length, number of commas, dashes and 
brackets (total of 4 variables). 
4. After the completion of the experiments with 
variables of type 1-3 (Tambouratzis et al, 
2000), Part-of-Speech (PoS) counts were 
introduced. The PoS categories were 
adjectives, adjunedons, adverbs, articles, 
conjunctions, nouns, pronouns, numerals, 
particles, verbs and a hold-all category (for 
non-classifiable ntries), resulting in 11 
variables expressed as percentages. 
These variables are more similar to the 
characteristics used by Karlgren (1999), and 
differ considerably from those used by Kilgarriff 
(1996) and Baayen et al (1996). For the metrics 
of the first and thkd categories, a custom-built 
program was used running under Linux. This 
program calculated all structural and 
morphological metrics for each text in a single 
pass and the results were processed with the help 
of a spreadsheet package. The metrics of the 
second category were calculated using a custom- 
built program in the C programming language. 
PoS counts were obtained using the ILSP tagger 
(Papageorgiou et al, 2000) coupled with a 
number of custom-built programs to determine 
the actual frequencies-of-occurrence from the 
tagged texts. Finally, the STATGRAPHICS 
package was used for the statistical nalysis. 
The dataset selected consisted of examples from 
three registers: 
(i) fiction (364 Kwords - 24 texts), 
(ii) texts of academic prose referring to 
historical issues, also referred to as the 
history register (361 Kwords - 32 texts) and 
(iii) political speeches obtained from the 
proceedings of the Greek parliament 
sessions, also referred to as the parliament 
register (509 Kwords - 12 texts). 
The texts of registers (I) and (II) were retrieved 
from the ILSP corpus (Gavrilidou et al, 1998), 
all of them dating from the period 1991-1999. 
The texts of register (III) were transcripts of the 
Greek Parliament sessions held during the first 
half of 1999. 
This dataset was processed using both seeded 
and unseeded clustering techniques with between 
3 and 6 clusters. The unseeded approach 
confirmed the existence of distinct natural 
classes, which correspond to the three registers. 
The seeded approach confirmed the ability to 
accurately separate these three registers and to 
cluster their elements together. Initially, a "short" 
data vector containing only the 12 morphological 
variables quantifying the Demofiki/Katharevousa 
contrast was used (Tambouratzis etal. 2000), as 
well as a 16-element vector combining structural 
and morphological characteristics. The seeds for 
the Parliaraent and History registers were chosen 
randomly. The seeds for the Fiction register were 
chosen so that at least one of them would not be 
36 
an "outlier" of the Fiction register. 
Representative results are shown in Table 1 for 
the different vectors and numbers of clusters. In 
each case, the classification rate quoted 
corresponds to the number of text elements 
correctly classified (according to the register of 
the respective seed). 
12-elem. 16-elem. 
6 clusL 95.6% 98.5% 
4 clust. 97.1% 98.5% 
3 clust. 95.6% 97.1% 
Table 1 - Seeded clustering accuracy as a 
function of  the cluster number and vector size. 
The vector size was augmented with PoS 
information, resulting in a 27-element data 
vector. A new set of clustering experiments were 
performed using Ward's method with the 
squared Euclidean distance measure to cluster 
the data in an unseeded manner. Finally, a 15- 
element data vector was used with PoS and 
structural information but without any 
morphological information. The results obtained 
(Table 2) show that PoS information improves 
the clustering performance. 
2.2 Comments on the Results 
Our results strongly suggest hat registers of 
written Modem Greek can be discriminated 
accurately on the basis of the contrast 
Katharevousa / Demotiki manifested with 
morphological variation. Languages with a 
different history may not be suited to such a 
categorisafion method. This is evident in Biber's 
work (1995) for the English language, where a 
variety of grammatical and macro-structural 
linguistic features but no morphological variation 
features were employed. It seems then that 
corpora of languages which are characterised by 
the phenomenon of diglossia, may be 
successfully categorisable on the basis of 
morphological information (or other reflexes of 
diglossia). Such a discrimination method may 
give results as satisfactory as approaches which 
are closer to the Biber (1995) spirit and rely on 
PoS and structural measures (see Tables 1 and 
2). 
Tables 1 and 2 show that the accuracy of 
clustering reaches approximately 99% while the 
seeded clustering approach ad a high degree of 
accuracy, reaching 100% when using 5 clusters. 
For the 27-element vector with both 
morphological and PoS information, perfect 
clustering has been achieved even with 4 
clusters. On the other hand, a successful 
clustering (albeit with a lower level of accuracy) 
is achieved using only structural and PoS 
information. 
It should be noted that the lexical variables used, 
that is the negation particles, did not contribute at 
all (Markantonatou et al, 2000). Furthermore, 
the system performed almost as well with and 
without macro-structure features, the difference 
in accuracy being less than 5%. 
The parliament texts can be claimed to form a 
register whose patterns are closely positioned in 
the pattern space. Of the three registers, the 
literature one presented the highest degree of 
variance, with more than one sub-clusters 
existing as well as outlier elements. This may be 
explained by the fact that the parliament 
proceedings, contrary to literature, undergo 
intensive diting by a small group of specialised 
public servants. 
3 Distinguishing Styles within One 
Register 
In this section, we report on our efforts to 
distinguish among individual styles within one 
register. In particular, we intend to distinguish 
among speakers of the Parliament by studying 
the transcripts of the speeches of five parliament 
members over the period 1997-2000. Each of 
these speakers belongs to one of the five political 
parties that were represented in the Greek 
parliament over that period. Up to date, the 
experiments have been limited to the period 
1999-2000. 
3.1 Method of work 
The number of variables (46 in total) calculated 
for each of the five speakers can be grouped as 
follows: 
. Morphological variables (20 variables): 
? Verbal endings expressing the 
Katharevousa / Demotiki contrast giving 
rise to 12 variables. 
~'7 
12-elem. 
6 clust. 95.5% 
5 clust. 95.5% 
4 clust. 94.1% 
3 clust. 94.1% 
16-elem. 
100.0% 
100.0% 
98.5% 
98.5% 
27-elem. 15-elem 
100.0% 100.0% 
100.0% . 89.6% 
100.0% 83.4% 
98.5% 83.4% 
Table 2 - Unseeded clu~?erin? accuracy as a function of the cluster number and vector size usevL 
* the use of infixes (2 variables) in the past 
tense forms. 
. the person and ntmaber of the verb form 
(6 variables). 
The last two types of variable are expressed 
as percentages normalised over the number 
of verb forms. 
2. Lexical variables (6 variables): 
? Negation particles (623, &v,/aft). 
? Negative words of Katharevousa (ovJei?, 
~iveo). 
? Other words which also express the 
contrast Katharevousa / Demotiki (the 
anaphoric pronouns 'o~oio?' (Kath) and 
'taro' (Dem)), currently resulting in a 
single variable. 
3. Structural macro-features: average sentence 
and word length, number of commas, 
question marks, dashes and brackets, 
resulting in a total of 6 variables. 
4. Structural micro-features (other than 
lexical): 
? Part-of-Speech ounts (10 variables). 
? Use of grammatical categories such as 
the genitive case with nouns and 
adjectives (2 variables). 
5. The year when the speech was presented in
the Parliament and the order of the speech in 
the daily schedule, that is whether it was the 
first speech of the speaker that clay (hereafter 
denoted as "protoloyia") or the second, third 
etc. (resulting in a total of 2 variables). 
6. The identity of the speaker, denoted as the 
speaker Signature (1 variable), which was 
used to determine the desired classification. 
Similarly to the clustering experiments, a set of 
C programs was used to extract automatically the 
values of the aforementioned variables from the 
transcripts. Most of these programs rely on 
measuring the occurrence of di-gram% and more 
generally n-grams, for letters, words and tagsets, 
thus being straight-forward. In the case of 
speaker identification, Discriminant Analysis 
was used, as the clustering approach did not give 
very good results, indicating that the distinction 
among personal styles is weaker than that among 
registers. Even when only 2 speakers were used, 
the clusters formed involved patterns from both 
speaker classes. 
We experimented with two corpora, Corpus I and 
Corpus 11, as described in Table 3. Corpus H is a 
subset of Corpus I. Each of the speeches 
included in Corpus II was delivered as an 
opening speech Cprotoloyia") at a parliament 
session when at least wo of the studied speakers 
delivered speeches. 
An important issue is whether the selected 
variables are strongly correlated. If indeed strong 
correlations do exist, these might be used to 
reduce the dimensionality of the pattern space. 
For the purposes of this analysis, the 46 
independent variables were used (45 in the case 
of Corpus II where only "protoioyiai" exist, since 
then the order variable is constantly equal to 1). 
The number of correlations of all variable pairs 
exceeding iven thresholds i depicted in Figure 
1, for both Corpus I and Corpus 11. According 
to this study, in Corpus IL the percentage of 
variable pairs with an absolute value of 
correlation exceeding 0.5 is approximately 3%, 
indicating a low correlation between the 
parameters. Additionally, out of 990 pairs of 
Corpus 11, only a single one has a correlation 
exceeding 0.8. The correlations for the same 
parameter pairs over the two corpora re similar, 
though as a rule the correlation for Corpus I is 
less that that for Corpus 11, reflecting the larger 
variability of texts in Corpus I. The correlation 
study indicated that most of the parameters are 
not strongly correlated. Thus, a factor analysis 
step is not necessary and the application of the 
diseriminant analysis directly on the original 
variables i  justified. 
Initially, Corpus I (see Table 3) was processed. 
The 46 aforementioned variables were used to 
generate discriminant functions accurately 
recognising the identity of the speaker. To that 
end, three different approaches were used: 
(i) the full model: all variables were used to 
determine the discriminant functions; 
38 
(ii) the forward model: starting from an 
empty model, variables were introduced in 
order to create a reduced model, with a 
small number of variables; 
(iii) the backward model: starting from the full 
model, variables were eliminated to create 
a reduced model. 
In the cases of the forward and backward 
models, the values of the F parameter to both 
enter and delete a variable were set to 4 while the 
maximum number of steps to generate the model 
was set to 50. 
Year 1999-2000 
Speaker Corpus I Corpus II 
A 92 30 
B 45 24 
C 33 21 
D 21 16 
E 150 36 
Table 3 - Comparative composition of 
Corpus I and Corpus 11. 
The performance ofthis model is improved if: 
I. the order in which each particular speech 
was delivered is taken into account: the 
subset of "protoloyiai" is well-defined and 
presents a low variance while the speeches of 
second or lower order have a higher 
variance. 
2. the corpus comprises only sessions where 
more than one speaker has delivered 
speeches. Thus, the more balanced Corpus II 
(Table 3) presents an improved 
discrimination performance. 
For these two corpora, the results of the 
diseriminant analysis are shown in Table 4. The 
discrimination rate obtained with Corpus II is 
much higher than that for Corpus I. In addition, 
smaller models, with 8 variables, may be created 
that correctly classify at least 75% of Corpus II. 
An example of the factors generated and the 
manner in which they separate the pattern space 
is shown in the diagrams of Figure 2. 
3.2 Comments  on the Results 
Though this research is continuing, certain facts 
can be reported with confidence. 
Within the Greek Parliament Proceedings 
register, individual styles can not be classified on 
the basis of morphological features expressing 
the contrast Katharevousa/Demotiki. This may 
be explained by the fact that these texts undergo 
intensive diting towards a well-established sub- 
language. This editing homogenises the 
morphological profile of the texts but, of course, 
does not go as far as homogenising the lexical 
preferences of the various speakers. That is why, 
contrary to the register-clustering experiments, 
lexical variables expressing the particular 
contrast seem to play a role in discriminating 
between speakers and why the use of 
Katharevousa-odented n gative particles, which 
was not important in register discrimination, 
seems to be of some importance in style 
discrimination. The observation that negative 
words play a role in style identification is in 
agreement with the observations ofLabb6 (1983) 
on the French political speech. 
Structural features have turned out to be 
important: the average word length, the use of 
punctuation and question marks and the use of 
certain parts-of-speech such as articles, 
conjunctions, adjuncfions and - especiaUy - 
verbs. Furthermore, the distribution of verbs into 
persons and numbers seems to be important, 
though the exact variables selected differ 
depending on the exact set of speeches used 
(these variables are of course complementary). 
One of the most interesting findings of this 
research is that it is important whether the 
speaker delivers a "protoloyia" or not. 
"Protoloyiai" can be classified at a rate of 95% 
while mixed deliveries result in a lower rate, as 
low as 75%. This may be caused by two factors: 
1. "Protoloyiai" represent longer stretches of 
text, which are more characteristic ofa given 
speaker. 
2. Speakers prepare meticulously for their 
"protoloyiai" while their other deliveries 
represent a more spontaneous type of speech, 
which tends to contain patterns hared by all 
the parliament members. 
Finally, certain additional patterns are emerging 
for each of the speakers. Certain speakers (e.g. 
speaker A) are more consistently recognised than 
others (e.g. speaker B) while speaker B is similar 
to speaker C and speaker D is similar to speaker 
E. This indicates that additional variables may be 
required to improve the classification accuracy 
for all speakers. 
correlation of variables 
m m 
o ~ ' ~ _ - - _ ~ _  : : := 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 
-10  
correlation level 
? ,e - Corpus  I 
Corpus  II 
Figure 1 - Percentage of variable pairs exceedin? a given level of absolute correlation. 
Dataset 
Corpus I
Corpus II 
Corpus II 
(reduced model) 
full 
93.79 % 
(46) 
97.64 % 
(45) 
97.64 %% 
(45) 
Model 
forward 
75.37 % 
(46) 
94.49 % 
(13) 
87.40 % 
(8) 
backward 
78.30 % 
(46) 
92.91% 
(20) 
79.53 %% 
(s) 
observations 
341 
127 
127 
Table 4 - Discrimination rate (the corresponding model size is shown in italics). 
4 Future Plans 5 Conclusions 
As a next step, frequency of use of certain 
lemmata shall be imroduced since visual 
inspection indicates that they may provide good 
discriminatory features. We also plan to 
substitute average lengths (of both words and 
sentences) with the distribution of lengths. 
Furthermore, we intend to introduce certain 
structural measurements such as repetition of 
structures, chains of nominals and the occurrence 
of negation within NP phrasal eousdments. 
Another possible extension involves the 
inclusion of the speech topic. As certain 
speakers' characteristics seem to change through 
time, we plan to process the entire corpus of 
speeches for the target period 1997/-2000. 
Finally, an important issue is the comparison of 
the results obtained in our experiments o these 
generatedby alternative t chniques proposed by 
other researchers. This will allow the deduction 
of more accurate conclusions regarding the 
strengths and the weaknesses of the research 
strategies. 
In this article, ongoing research on register and 
individual style eategorisation f written Modem 
Greek has been reported. A system has been 
proposed for the automatic register 
categorisafion of corpora in Modem Greek 
exploiting the highly inflectional nature of the 
language. The results have been obtained with a 
relatively constrained set of registers; however 
their recognition accuracy is remarkably high, 
exceeding 98% with an unseeded clustering 
approach using between 3and 6 clusters. 
On the front of individual style categorisation, a 
discrimination rate of over 80% was achieved for 
five speakers within the Greek Parliament 
register. Morphological variables were shown to 
be of less importance to this task, while lexieal 
and straetural variables eemed to take over. We 
are planning to introduce several new lexical and 
structural variables in order to achieve better 
discrimination rates and to determine 
discriminating features of the different styles. 
40 
Acknowledgements 
The authors wish to thank the Dept. of Language 
Technology Applications and specifically Dr. 
Harris Papageorgiou and Mr. Prokopis 
Prokopidis in obtaining the lemmatised versions 
of the parliament transcripts. Additionally, the 
authors wish to acknowledge the assistance of 
the Secretariat of the Hellenic Parliament in 
obtaining the session transcripts. 
References 
Baayen, R. H., van Halteren, H. and Tweedie, F. J. 
(1996). Outside the cave of shadows: Using 
syntactic annotation to enhance authorship 
attribution. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
Vol. 11, No. 3, pp. 121-131. 
Biber, D. (1995) Dimensions of Register Variation: A 
cross-linguistic omparison. Cambridge University 
Press. 
Biber, D., Conrad, S. & Reppen, R. (1998) Corpus 
Linguistics: Investigating Language Structure and 
Use. Cambridge University Press. 
Clairis, C. & Babiniofis, G. (1999) Grammar of 
Modern Greek - I1 Verbs. Ellinika Grammata, 
Athens (in Greek). 
Gavrilidou, M., Labropoulou P., Papakostopouiou N.,
Spiliotopoulou S., Nassos N. (1998) Greek Corpus 
Documentation, Parole LE2-4017/10369, WP2.9- 
WP-ATH-1. 
Holton D., Mackridge, P. & Philippaki-Warburton, I. 
(1997) Greek: A Comprehensive Grammar of the 
Modem Language. Roufledge, London and New 
York. 
Karlgren, J., (1999) Stylistic Experiments in 
Information Retrieval. In T. Strzalkowski (ed.), 
Natural Language Information Retrieval, pp. 147- 
166. Dordrecht: Kluwer. 
Kilgarriff, A. (1996). Which words are parfieuiarly 
characteristic of a text? A survey of statistical 
approaches. In Proc. AISB Workshop on Language 
Engineering for Document Analysis and 
Recognition, Sussex University, April, pp. 33-40. 
Labb~, D. (1983). Francois Mittermna~ Essai sur le 
discours. La Pens~,e Sauvage, Grenoble. 
Markantonatou, S. & Tambouratzis, G. (2000) Some 
quantitative observations regarding the use of 
grammatical negation in Modern Greek. 
Proceedings of the 21 st Annual Meeting of the 
Department of lz~guistics, Faculty of Philosophy 
of the Aristotelian University of Thessaloniki, May 
2000 (in print/in Greek). 
Papageorgiou, H., Prokopidis, P., Giouli, V. & 
Piperidis, S. (2000) A Unified PoS Tagging 
Architecture and its application to Greek. 
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluations, Athens, 
Greece, 31 May - 2 June, Vol. 3, pp. 1455-1462. 
Tambouratzis, G., Markantonatou, S., Hairetakis, N. 
& Carayannis, G. (2000) Automatic Style 
Categorisation f Corpora in the Greek Language. 
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluations, Athens, 
Greece, 31 May - 2 June, Vol. 1, pp. 135-140. 
APPENDIX 
Characteristics 
Demotiki 
of Katharevousa and 
Diglossia in Modem Greek is due to the contrast 
between Katharevousa and Demotiki and is well- 
manifested on the morphological level. Here we 
concentrate on verb morphology. 
Demotiki tends to have words ending with an 'open' 
syllable. So, 3 r~ Plural verbal endings in -n (1) are 
augmented to -ne (2). 
(1) ~ \[e'leyan\] (Kath ) (=they said) 
(2) 2b/etw \[le'yane\] (Dem) (=they said) 
In Demotik/, Katharevousa's consonant dusters of 
two fricatives or two plosives are convened into 
clusters of one fricative and one plosive (3) - (4) 
(Holton et al, 1997, pp. 14). 
(3) nmtrOtb \[pis0o'\]/n~zortb \[pisto'\] (=to be 
convinced) 
(4) ga2mpOd~ \[kalifSo'\]/xczivffrd~ \[kalifto'\] (--to be 
covered) 
Certain verb classes exhibit thematic vowel 
alternations either following the inflectional paradigm 
of Ancient Greek or Demotiki (5) (Clairis and 
Babiniotis, 1999). 
(5) e~aprdtraz \[eksarta'te\] ( Kath ) l e~odrakrou 
\[eksartiete\] (Dem) (=depends) 
Sometimes Deraotiki uses a verbal root, which is 
similar though not identical to the Katharevousa one 
(6). 
(6) AfioJ \[li'o\] (Kath)/2fivxo Oi" no\] (Dem ) (=to solve) 
Finally, many verbs inherited from Katharevausa 
survive in Demotik/, either having an equivalent - 
mainly colloquial- (7) or not (8) (Clalris and 
Babiniotis, 1999). 
(7) rcpodO~uoa \[profi'0eme\] ( Kath ) / oxoxe6oJ 
\[skope'vo\] (Dem) (=I intend to) 
(8) ztpo~arapaz \[proi'stame\] (=supervise) 
/11 
r~ 
o 
d 
0 Speak~ A " " 
v sp--k~el " .  . 
+ s . .~o  I "=- .  S=__ 
? - y_~,  
? ~ '~v  v 
+ * 
o .~j>,- . , 
:{ ?? ,o .o 
.3 o 0o# 
0 0 O0 
_____~_- - _~___~_ .~.~- - . ___ . _ , __@. - , . _ ___  
-8 -S -4 -2 0 2 4 6 
F=ctm I
0 Spsmlmr A * 
Speaker B ? 
4 " SpeakeT C ? * ? 
+ Speakm O ? . 
0 Speaker E 
2 ~ , " ' -  : "  
% ^ ~.o  o?~ ? . ? 
# + ., o + ++ 0 
Fact0r 2 
o 
6 - - .~- -~m-- . .~ .~=. - - . - . . -=========. , . - . . - - -  
Z~ SptakW B I ? 
Speaker C I 4 ? [ ? * 
+ Speaker O I ~ ? 
0 Spellker E [ * 
2 ~_ ? o 
0 ~ O0 " *. 
0 0 ^o ~ d+o 
o~O'~.  
0 -2 0 ++ + 
z~ 
-4 z~ 
-8 -8 -4 -2 0 2 4 
Facle? 1 
0 
~ o 
6~ 
4 
21 
o ~ 
u. 
-2 
-6 
.,6 
O Speaker A 
? ~ ~sdcer O 
? ,,peakeT C
+ Speaker D 
0 Speaker E 
e ? ? 
Oo  oO;O" : 
# o +'~,+ ~o + 
o 
+ ++ 
0 
e 
? 0 0 
0 
o :. ~ 
Z~ 
Fact0r2 
r 
i 0 Spe~kerA I SpeWer B + 
e Spe;lker C 
+ Speaker O ++ 
0 Spe~ikor E 
+ 
+.#-~ + 
+ ? 
+,  . "  0 0 
+ O+ 00 " " t~ ' : .  " O 0 
O O O " . .  ,~  # 0~000 
00~o_QP o ~ ~"~- 
-2 0 0 0 ZX 0 
0 ~ t , 
8 6 4 -2 0 2 4 6 
Factor I
'2  
3 
~T 
-I 
-2 
-3 
6 
6 r a m  
0 SpsakefA + 
5 z~ Speaker B 
? Speaker C 
4 + Spe=k~ O + + + 
O Speaks E 
3 + 
+ .~+ ? + 
++ +? e00 ? ."" 
0 : "  " "  
? 
Z~ z~O 0 Q> 0 o 
Z~ ~0 0 
-4 -2 0 2 4 
Factor 3 
Figure 2 - Discriminant factors plotted against he patterns for corpus I1. 
42 
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex 2010), pages 66?74,
Beijing, August 2010
In search of the ?right? word 
Stella  Markantonatou Institute for Lan-guage and Speech Processing / R.C. ?Athena? marks@ilsp.gr 
Aggeliki Fotopoulou  Institute for Lan-guage and Speech Processing / R.C. ?Athena? afotop@ilsp.gr  
Maria  Alexopoulou Institute for Lan-guage and Speech Processing / R.C. ?Athena? maralex@ilsp.gr  
Marianna  Mini Institute for Lan-guage and Speech Processing / R.C. ?Athena? minimar@ilsp.gr  
 
Abstract 
We report on a user needs investigation carried out in the framework of the pro-ject EKFRASIS1 that developed a plat-form for supporting authoring work in Modern Greek. The platform had as a backbone a conceptually organised dic-tionary enhanced with rich lexicographic and morphosyntactic information. Or-ganisation of information and encoding drew on Semantic Web technologies (on-tologies). Users were all professional au-thors (of literature, editors, translators, journalists) working for well-established firms. They were all familiar with printed conceptually organized dictionar-ies while most of them used a computer. They were asked to specify how the plat-form would be helpful to them when they searched for a word for which they had only vague or few clues, a situation that was familiar to all of them. Users preferred to have, in a first step, easy ac-cess to limited but to-the-point lexical in-formation while access to rich semantic information should be provided at a sec-ond step. They were interested in rich lexical material although they were not really able to identify the relations that would help them retrieve it.  They strongly preferred an organization of ma-terial by concept and PoS and appreci-                                                 1 EKFRASIS  http://www.ilsp.gr/ekfrasi_eng.html was funded by the General Secretariat of Research and Technology / Greece. 
ated easy access to normative informa-tion. 
1 Introduction 
We present an investigation of user needs that was conducted in the process of developing a platform for supporting authoring work in Mod-ern Greek. One main component of this platform is the dictionary ?EKFRASIS? (literally ?expres-sion?). EKFRASIS exploits technology and ideas developed for the Semantic Web (Guarino and Welty, 2002) to encode a conceptually organized dictionary enriched with translations as well as a wealth of lexicographic and morphosyntactic information. The overall organisation of the dic-tionary and, partially of the platform, aims at helping the user who needs a word but has few clues or just guesses about it and about its way of use.   The interviewed users were all professionals: journalists, translators, editors and authors of literature.  In this survey, we aimed to map user expecta-tions concerning interaction with the dictionary rather than to look for appropriate ways for populating it. Of course, some of the conclusions reached here may be useful for collecting lin-guistic material as well.  
2 The ?recollection problem? 
Authors (of any type of text) often find them-selves in the uncomfortable position whereby they remember or feel that the ?right? word ex-ists but they can not recall it.  Here, we will call this situation the ?recollection problem?. Alpha-betically organised dictionaries are of little help 
66
in such situations. Of course, the recollection problem is a well known one (for a discussion, see Zock and Bilac, 2004; Zock and Schwab, 2008).  Works with an international reputation have tried to face it and, of course, Roget?s The-saurus, a printed dictionary, and WordNet and EuroWordNet, both digital ones, spring easily to mind. An interesting difference between the two dictionaries is exactly about the interaction with the user: while in Roget?s lexical relations are left implicit and material is explicit, in WordNet one has to go via lexical relations such as ?hy-ponymy? and ?sister term? to find the material. In short, in Roget?s one is given the material di-rectly and no previous familiarity with taxono-mies is required while in WordNet one has to guess what taxonomic labels can offer in each case. Furthermore, just finding a word is often not enough to guarantee confidence in its usage, so information provided by an assortment of rele-vant sources is indispensable.  Of course, printed dictionaries would expand to unmanageable vol-ume if they accommodated all necessary infor-mation, but digital dictionaries are not subject to such limitations. For instance, Roget?s does not provide syntactic information but WordNet does. Digital lexica that have been compiled for NLP purposes such as Acquilex (Briscoe et al, 1993) and Simple have tried to accommodate semantic, syntactic, morphological and pragmatic informa-tion structured in a principled way and make it available to machines. In the Semantic Web era, efforts to better axiomatise the established re-sources have been made (Gangemi et al, 200; Old, 2004) as well as to combine detailed lin-guistic with ontological information for the pur-poses of Machine Translation (Nirenburg and Raskin, 2004). Such efforts were oriented to NLP mainly.  As regards human users, Roget?s success suggests that while wealth of material and good organisation of it matters, it is not necessary to present explicitly the relations among words in a ?concept?2 in order to provide a good solution to the recollection problem. On the other hand, humans do instinctively look for words on the 
                                                 2 We use the term concept to define a set of words that are conceptually related. Such sets are defined in Roget?s Thesaurus and the ?Onomasticon?. 
basis of domain relations several of which can be argued to mirror (aspects of) human cognition (Gaume et al, 2003; Kremer et al, 2008). Fur-thermore, the data we will present here indicate that searching for a word is also a matter of habit and training, having a lot to do with one?s pro-fession and familiarity with certain types of dic-tionary.  As already said, we report on a user require-ment survey that was conducted in the frame-work of the project EKFRASIS. Our aim was primarily to see how the lexicographic material should be presented to the user; however, we were also interested in fine-tuning our ideas about the nature of the material required. We start with a brief presentation of the main ideas behind the dictionary EKFRASIS. Next, we talk about how we organized the survey. For each group of questions addressed to the users, we present and comment their responses. Finally, we present our conclusions and decisions as re-gards the architecture of the dictionary EKFRA-SIS. 
3 About EKFRASIS 
A few words about the dictionary EKFRASIS are in order to set the context of the survey dis-cussed in this paper. EKFRASIS is a digital lexicon of Modern Greek (MG). 3  MG market makes available mainly alphabetically ordered printed dictionar-ies and, more recently, dictionaries of synonyms and antonyms. There is no dictionary of MG that combines lexicographic with semantic and mor-phosyntactic information.  There is one excellent thesaurus of Modern Greek, the ?Onomasticon? by Theofilos Vostantzoglou, published back in 1962. ?Ono-masticon? enjoys great reputation among Greek intellectuals. T. Vostantzoglou drew a lot on Ro-get?s Thesaurus. His material is organized in concepts and each concept is further structured into smaller groups of words. Notably, he intro-duced certain innovations of his own: contrastive presentation of concepts, eg ?Joking? and ?Speaking seriously? are presented contrastively on the same page using a special format, short definition of groups of words that form a con-cept and information on style. In addition, spe-
                                                 3 It comprises 6000 entries at the moment. 
67
cial attention is given to expressions and prov-erbs.  Links between concepts exist at lexical level introducing, in this way, relations among words in different concepts. There is no actual typology of these relations which remain im-plicit to the user. Very much like Roget?s, all the words in the conceptually organized part of the Onomasticon are also listed in alphabetical order in the second half of the book. Each word is in-dexed for the set of concepts it belongs.  In EKFRASIS we understand ?conceptual? organization as the result of the interplay of a set of domain relations. In addition, EKFRASIS is planned to help with the usage of words by pro-viding definition of concepts, glosses and trans-lation of words, usage examples and full mor-phosyntactic information. In our survey, we ex-posed the users to large amounts of information organized in more than one ways and asked them whether such a tool would be useful to them in their professional lives. Throughout the present discussion, we ask the reader to keep in mind that we aim at developing a resource that would be of use to a wide audience. 
4 The Survey 
Although the project EKFRASIS is addressed to anyone who writes in Modern Greek, we thought that professionals would have a clearer view of the authoring procedure and its needs.        Table 1. Composition of the user group  Table 1 shows the composition of the user group. Each group of professionals works under different conditions and has different require-ments. In general, journalists and translators work under time pressure while authors of litera-ture and editors are more concerned with linguis-tic and aesthetic quality. In the user group, au-thors, literature translators and editors are well known intellectuals of the country publishing with the publishing house ?Kastaniotis? (http://www. kastaniotis.com/), industrial translators work for a medium size firm ( http://www.orco.gr/ loc/frameset-gr.html? 
navbar-gr.html&0) and journalists work for the prestigious daily newspaper ?I Kathimerini? (http://www.kathimerini.gr/). Users were interviewed by teams of research-ers and 
? each of the literature authors and editors were interviewed personally  
? industrial translators and journalists were interviewed in groups according to their own requirement. 
To each person or group a presentation of the aims of the project was given and then, a spe-cially developed mock-up of a couple of usage cases of the authoring tool was presented. We used a different mock-up (.ppt file) for each au-thor and editor and for each of the journalist and translator groups because EKFRASIS is a novel application by Modern Greek standards and, since no user had some relevant experience, ver-bal description would not help at all. The presen-tations were followed by discussion and an in-terview that was taped and, finally, the users were asked to fill a questionnaire. Each user (au-thor, editor, translator, journalist) filled in a separate questionnaire.  For the first part of the mock-up, pieces of text produced by each one of the authors, a piece of Greek translation from the site of Nokia and a piece from ?I Kathimerini? were selected to de-velop the presentation that relied on the follow-ing scenario: hypothetically, when they devel-oped the particular text, the authors experienced the recollection problem and used EKFRASIS to find a couple of words. They started their search with an input word of somehow related meaning to the intended one but not necessarily of the same PoS. We present as an example extracts from the mock-up developed for one of the au-thors of literature.  In Figure 1 the author uses the noun mania as an input word.  EKFRASIS returns the names and definitions of all the concepts where the in-put word occurs (gray area on the left). The con-cepts are not necessarily related to each other. Here, the first one corresponds to ?proclivity, propensity?, the second to ?urge?, the third to ?mania? as a disorder, the fourth to ?mania, pas-sion?, the fifth to ?fury?, the sixth to ?wrath? and the seventh to ?love?. On the right, for each con-cept a set of semantically relevant words are 
Authors of literature 5 Editors 2 Translators  8 Journalists 6 Total 21 
68
given, all of the same PoS with the input one (here, a noun). For instance, concept 6 is labeled ???? ?wrath? and the words given are ???? ?wrath?, ????? ?anger?, ????? ?nerves?, ?????????? (being indignant), ????? ?mania?.   
????, ???????, ?????, ????, ????, ?????, ?????
????, ????, ?????, ?????
1. ???? [?? ?? ?????? ?????? ???????? ???? ????]
2. ???? [????? ? ?????? ??????]
3. ??????????? ???????????, ?????, ????????, ?????
???? ? ???? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????, ???????. 
4. ???????? ????????, ???????, ?????, ?????, ?????, ?????
5. ???????? [?? ?? ????????????????? ??? ????? ???????] ????????, ?????? ????, ?????, ?????, ?????
6. ???? [??????? ????????????????] ????, ?????, ?????, ??????????, ?????
7. ????? [?????? ?????????] ?????, ?????????, ?????? ????????, ???????, ?????  Figure1. Unrelated numbered concepts indi-cated with the labels on the left   In this hypothetical scenario, the user selects the 6th option (wrath). The screen shown in Fig-ure 2 pops up (on the upper left corner the label is ???? ?wrath?).   
????
??????????
????
???????
????????
1. ????
2. ???????? ???????? ?????
3. ?????? ????
????????? 4. ??????? ?????5. ?,?? ???????? ??? ????
6. ?? ?? ????????? ?????? ??????
7. ???? ??? ??????
???? ? ???? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????, ???????. 
 Figure 2.  The right hand column consists of the set of related concepts within  a PoS (noun here)  In this screen, the concepts are related to each other as they all are about wrath. The concepts in successive order are ?wrath?, ?sudden expres-sion of wrath?, ?strong wrath?, ?luck of wrath?, ?what causes wrath?, ?to become furious easily?, ?extreme wrath? and are listed on the right hand column. The list of PoS (noun, verb, adjective, adverb, expressions) is on the left hand column. In Figure 2, the activated PoS is ?noun?, how-ever, the user could activate any other PoS, an option he picks in Figure 4, where he activates the PoS ?verb?. In our hypothetical scenario, the 
user selects the 7th concept (extreme wrath) and receives the set of synonyms and antonyms, en-closed in the boxes in Figure 3. Antonyms are given in the box at the bottom of the screen. The user stores these findings and carries on with the PoS ?verb? (Figure 4).   
????
??????????
????
???????
????????
1. ????
2. ???????? ???????? ?????
3. ?????? ????
????????? 4. ??????? ?????5. ?,?? ???????? ??? ????
6. ?? ?? ????????? ????????????
7. ???? ??? ??????
???? ? ???? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????, ???????. 
??????????, ?????????, ?????????, ?????, ?????????
???????? ???????????, ????????  Figure 3. Synonyms and antonyms in a con-cept and PoS (?extreme wrath? and ?noun?). Words are organized in related numbered con-cepts indicated with the labels on the right  
????
??????????
????
???????
????????
?????????
???? ? ???? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????, ???????. 
??????? ??? ????, ??????, ????????, ??????, ??????, ??????, ?????????????? ??? ????, ?????????? ??? ????, ???????????, ???????? ???????????
 Figure 4. The PoS ?verb? for the concept  ?extreme wrath?  This PoS comprises only one concept, so the system shows the box with the lexical material. There is plenty of lexical material so the indica-tion ?more? guides the user who would require access to more information.  Two series of user responses were elicited -- one with the questionnaire and one with the in-terviews. The results of the interviews were not directly measurable but they greatly helped to clarify the picture. In what follows we will pre-sent the measurable results but in the conclu-sions, we will draw on the interviews as well. The questionnaire included different types of question (multiple choice questions, questions with graded answers, open questions). In this report we are interested in the parts of the ques-
69
tionnaire on (i) the contribution of dictionaries and spelling checkers to authoring work (ii) how authors experience the recollection problem and (iii) efficient searching for words. 
5 Questioning the users 
5.1 Contribution of technology and dic-tionaries to authoring work 
We first asked if professionals used computers and authoring aids.  Nearly 100% of users worked on a computer. All users with the exception of journalists used general language dictionaries or specialized ones including dictionaries of synonyms (Table 2). Journalists, on the other hand, seemed to pay attention mainly in word spelling.     Au-thors Edi-tors  Translators  Jour-nalists  To-tal Diction-aries (printed, digital) 
5 2 6 1 14 
Special diction-aries 
5 2 4 0 11 
Spelling checkers 0 0 2 4 6 
Table 2. Usage of authoring aids  Why do users use dictionaries and spelling checkers? We asked the users to give a yes/no answer to two contradictory statements. So, to the statement ?I can find easily what I look for in dictionaries and spelling checkers? all other us-ers and 2 journalists answered ?yes?. However, to the opposite statement ?I can not find easily what I look for in dictionaries and spelling checkers? no journalists replied while one editor and 3 authors replied ?yes?. So, the picture is somehow messed up but in the overall it shows that people have formed expectations about dic-tionaries and look for certain types of informa-tion that they more or less find. In addition, 1 editor, 4 translators, 3 authors and 4 journalists stated that dictionaries and spelling checkers speed up their work.  So, there is some kind of information in the dictionaries and the spelling checkers that helps and speeds up authoring work. Certainly, these resources provide little help with the recollection problem. So, in the next parts of the question-
naire we set out to make clear what kind of in-formation users considered useful in the diction-aries and  what else they would like to find and how. Mock-up presentations were of crucial help in this task. 
5.2 Experiencing the recollection problem 
We asked how often and in which way users ex-perienced the recollection problem. Users turned out to be quite familiar with experiences such as the following: (i) looking for a synonym (ii) en-tertaining the belief that a word exists but not being able to identify it (iii) having a general notion in mind but not being able to find words that ground it properly (Table 3).   
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total 
Synonym 1 2 6 5 14 
Heard in the past 0 2 6 5 13 General notion  4 1 6 5 16 
Other 0 0 0 3 3 
Table 3. The recollection problem  It is clear that professional demands influence authoring behavior at work: authors of literature, editors and translators are more into searching for the appropriate word than journalists. Ac-cording to the users, two are the main motives for searching words: (i) precision (ii) aesthetics (the example put forward by the users was the repetition of a word). It is also interesting that the answers already point to some important lexical relations, namely synonymy and hypernymy / hyponymy,   which can be used for both constructing and navigating a resource (and have been used in many diction-aries, for instance in WordNet).   
5.3 Searching for lexical information 
Despite the fact that answers such as ?heard in the past? and ?general notion? (Table 3) indicate that a variety of semantic relations can be used for searching for a word, it was not easy for the users to imagine which those relations would be. This became obvious because 
? users were able to fill in the part of the questionnaire on searching only after they 
70
had seen the mock-up that presented them with searching strategies other than al-phabetical listing 
? although they had twice in the question-naire the opportunity to describe some way of searching for words other than the ones suggested in the mock-up (see be-low) they did not do it ?despite the fact that interviews lasted for about 2.00 hours each on the average. 
Although they did not identify alternative searching strategies, they in the overall wel-comed the possibility of using morphologically (Table 4) and pragmatically (Table 5) related words for dealing with the recollection problem.  The example given to the users for illustrating morphologically related words was the triple adopt->adoption->adopted. The users were asked whether they would like the dictionary to ensure that such sequences would be automati-cally offered.  
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total YES 2 2 8 2 14 NO 4 0 0 2 6 Table 4. Morphological relations    A similar question was asked about domain relations with the following example: ?if you type in sell or seller or offer would you like to be given automatic access to buyer, client, con-sumer.?   
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total YES 5 2 6 4 17 NO 1 0 0 0 1 Table 5. Domain relations  Of the relations named explicitly in the ques-tionnaire, synonymy turned out to be the most likely one to be used for helping with the recol-lection problem (Table 6).  Hypernymy/hyponymy (Table 7) and an-tonymy (Table 8) were in the overall considered less useful for the recollection problem than synonymy, but still a high percentage voted for them.    
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 2 2 8 3 15 Occa-sionally 4 0 0 2 6 Rarely 0 0 0 0 0 Never 0 0 0 0 0 Table 6. Synonymy  
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 1 2 4 3 10 Occa-sionally 4 0 4 1 9 Rarely 1 0 0 1 2 Never 0 0 0 0 0 Table 7. Hypernymy/Hyponymy  
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 1 2 4 1 8 Occa-sionally 1 0 2 2 5 Rarely 3 0 2 2 7 Never 1 0 0 0 1 Table 8. Antonymy  Next, users were asked how they would like to see information presented (Table 9). They were offered mock-ups of the following four choices:  
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total ? 4 0 0 1 5 ? 0 1 2 1 4 C 2 1 4 1 8 D 0 0 2  2 4 Table 9. Presentation of information (a)   
? A. All linguistic material pops up in strict alphabetical order only (no PoS or seman-tic classification) 
? B. Only the linguistic material in the same PoS as the input word pops up in alpha-betical order 
71
? C. All linguistic material pops up in the form of a semantic tree4 together with PoS information?the tree reflects the concep-tual organization of the dictionary 
? D. Only the part of the tree that belongs to the PoS of the input word pops up 
In fact, options A and C are opposed to op-tions B and D in that the first pair offers imme-diate access to the whole lot of the related lexical material while the second pair only to the se-mantically related words in the same PoS with the input word---practically, its synonyms. In Table 9.a. we sum the answers according to this division. While the A&C option was preferred by 62% of the users, the fact that a good 38% has chosen the B&D option had to be taken into account.    
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total ?&C 6 1 4 2 13 ?&D 0 1 4 3 8 Table 9.a. Presentation of information (b)  A compromising solution to this split of re-quirements is to present first the minimal neces-sary information, practically the synonyms of the input word, and then allow users navigate through the whole lot of it.   Organisation of information in the form of a ?semantic tree? seems more popular than simple alphabetical presentation of material. Still, some users prefer information to be pre-sented as it always had, in alphabetical order, without any other complication. 
5.4 More information of interest 
 
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 1 2 2 4 9 Occ/ly 1 0 4 0 5 Rarely 4 0 2 1 7 Never 0 0 0 0 0 Table 10. Expressions   
                                                 4 ?Semantic tree? is a description of the situation in Figure 2 where words are organized in concepts indi-cated with the labels on the left hand column). 
The recollection problem concerns both one word units and expressions or collocates as is clearly indicated in Table 10 and Table 11. The question asked here was ?How often do you look for an expression / a collocate??.  We must note here that, ahead of its time, Onomasticon puts special emphasis on both types of information. Usage examples (Table 12) were requested mainly by translators and authors while glosses (Table 13) turned out to be of me-dium interest.  
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 1 1 6 3 11 Occ/ly 5 1 0 0 6 Rarely 0 0 2 2 4 Never 0 0 0 0 0 Table 11. Collocates  
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 0 1 4 2 7 Occa-sionally 1 0 4 1 6 Rarely 1 1 0 2 4 Never 4 0 0 0 4 Table 12. Usage examples  
 Jour-nalists  Edi3tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 0 1 2 1 4 Occa-sionally 3 0 4 2 9 Rarely 2 1 2 2 7 Never 1 0 0 0 1 Table 13. Glosses  On the other hand, users were interested in in-flection (Table 14) and spelling (Table 15) in-formation, as well as ?the right context of usage? (Table 16) of words or expressions.   
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 4 1 4 4 13 Occ/ly 0 0 2 1 3 Rarely 2 1 2 0 5 Never 0 0 0 0 0 Table 14. Inflection  
72
This comes as no surprise because Modern Greek reflects the long history of the language in several, often confusing ways: 
? by providing more than one spellings for a word, eg ?????? / ????? (mixture) 
? by being heavily inflected with many types for the same set of PoS and gram-matical features, eg  
???????, ??????, ??????? eat ? 3rd, plural, past continuous  Furthermore, the different forms are related with different styles, for instance in the example above the first form is considered the standard and the last the colloquial one.   
 Jour-nalists 
Edi-tors % 
Trans-lators  Au-thors  
Total 
Often 3 0 6 1 10 Occ/ly 1 0 0 1 2 Rarely 1 2 2 2 7 Never 0 0 0 0 0 Table 15. Spelling  
 Jour-nalists  Edi-tors  Trans-lators  Au-thors  Total Often 4 0 6 3 13 Occ/ly 0 0 2 1 3 Rarely 1 1 0 1 3 Never 1 1 0 0 2 Table 16. Right context of usage  Naturally, editors need the particular facilities less than the other groups given their specialty. 
6 Conclusions and decisions 
The professional occupation of the users seemed to determine the kind of available au-thoring aids they preferred. This may be due to the fact that they work under serious time pres-sure. However, they too experienced the recol-lection problem and would take advantage of domain relations to solve it. Editors require the least normative and usage information. Authors and translators seem to appreciate all types of information. Translators also stressed that effi-cient presentation of information is important, probably because they use translation aids regu-larly. 
On the basis of the questionnaire and the inter-views, we conclude that the features of the dic-tionary that would be attractive to the majority of users are: 
? Easy access to limited but to-the-point lexical information: the most usable synonyms and the most useful derivatives   
? Access to rich semantic information must be provided to those interested, al-though at a second step. Users are more interested in the lexical material than the labeling of semantic relations 
? Categorisation of lexical material by PoS. The PoS of the input word pops up first but all the other PoS in the same con-cept are available 
? Easy access to normative information given the particularities of Modern Greek in morphology and syntax  
On the basis of the above general conclusions, EKFRASIS interface design would satisfy the following minimum requirements: 
? All concepts to which an input word be-longs are shown at the first step of the search,  together with the synonyms of the word in each concept 
? Once a concept is selected, all existing sub-concepts are presented  
? If no sub-concepts exist, all PoS in a con-cept are made available to the user who sees the concept definition and the set of synonyms for each PoS (if they exist) 
? Once a word is selected all material about it pops up: gloss, example of usage, lexi-cal relations, inflection, syntactic proper-ties, collocations, translation  
Figure 5 is an extract from a mock-up where the hypothetical user has retrieved the multiword expression ????? ??? ??? ?bring to light?. In-formation given includes: gloss, synonyms (?present?, ?give away?, ?make something visi-ble?, ?make something obvious?),  inflection in-formation (concerning tense formation) and hints on its the usage. Users agreed that for each word an exhaustive summary of its properties should be provided. 
73
?????????? ???? ??? ???? ????? ? ?????????????????
??????????????????????
??????
?????????????? ????? ??? ???, ????????, ????????, ??????????, ??????? ??????, ??????? ???????
???????? ???????
??????
?????. ????? ??? ???
???. ?? ????? ??? ??? | ?? ???? ??? ???
???. ????? ??? ???
????.-?????. ??? ????? ??? ??? | ???? ????? ??? ???
????? ??? ???
??????? ?????????? ??????? ??????????????? ??? ?? ???????????. ?????? ?? ???? ??? ???? ??? ????????????? ???? ??????? ?????? ??? ?????.  
Figure 5. Presenting words 
 
References 
ACQUILEX   http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/research/nl/acquilex/ 
Briscoe, Ted, Ann Copestake and Valeria de Paiva. 1993. (eds). Inheritance, Defaults and the Lexicon. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.  
Fellbaum, Christiane. 1998. WordNet: An electronic Lexical Database, MIT Press, Cambridge. 
Gangemi, Aldo, Roberto Navigli and  Paola Velardi. 2003. The OntoWordNet Project: Extension and Axiomatization of Conceptual Relations in Word-Net. In R. Meersman et al (eds): CoopIS/DOA/ODBASE 2003, LNCS 2888, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg: 820-838. 
Gaume, Bruno, Karine Duvignau, Laurent Prevot and Yann Desalle. 2008. Toward a cognitive organisa-tion for electronic dictionaries, the case for se-mantic proxemy. In COLING 2008: Proceedings of the Workshop on cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (COGALEX 2008):86-93. 
Guarino, Nicola and Chris Welty. 2002. Evaluating Ontological Decisions with OntoClean. Communications of the ACM. 45(2):61-65. New York:ACM Press  
Kremer, Gerhard, Andrea Abel and Marco Baroni. 2008. Cognitively Salient Relations for Multilin-gual Lexicography. In COLING 2008: Proceed-ings of the Workshop on cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (COGALEX 2008): 94-101. 
Nirenburg, Sergei and Victor Raskin. 2004.  Onto-logical Semantics. The MIT Press. 
 Roget?s II: The New Thesaurus, Third Edition. 1995. (URL: http://www.bartleby. com/62/11.html) 
Old, L. John. 2003. The Semantic Structure of Ro-get?s: A whole language thesaurus. (URL: http://www.dcs.napier.ac.uk/~cs171/LJOld/papers/Dissertation.pdf) 
Old, L. John. 2004. Roget's Thesaurus of English Words and Phrases, by Roget ed. 1911 (URL: http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/10681). 
SIMPLE http://www.ub.es/gilcub/SIMPLE/simple.html 
Vossen, Piek. 1999. (ed.) EuroWordNet, General Document, (URL: http://www.illc.uva.nl/Euro WordNet  /docs.html) 
Zock, Michael and Bilac, Slaven. 2004. Word lookup on the basis of associations: from an idea to a roadmap. In COLING 2004: Proceedings of the Workshop on enhancing and using electronic dic-tionaries: 29-35. 
Zock, Michael and Didier Schwab. 2008. Lexical Access Based on Underspecified Input. In COL-ING 2008: Proceedings of the Workshop on cogni-tive Aspects of the Lexicon (COGALEX 2008): 9-18. 
?????????????,  ????????. 1962. ??????????? ? ??????????? ??? ????????????. ????, ?????.  
  
 
74
Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2014), pages 33?37,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 26-27 April 2014. c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
 
Parsing Modern Greek verb MWEs with LFG/XLE grammars 
 
Niki Samaridi 
National and Kapodistrian University 
of Athens 
nsamaridi@gmail.com 
Stella Markantonatou 
Institute for Language and Speech 
Processing/ ?Athena? RIC 
marks@ilsp.athena-
innovation.gr 
  
 
  
 
Abstract 
We report on the first, still on-going effort to 
integrate verb MWEs in an LFG grammar of 
Modern Greek (MG). Text is lemmatized and 
tagged with the ILSP FBT Tagger and is fed 
to a MWE filter that marks 
Words_With_Spaces in MWEs. The output is 
then formatted to feed an LFG/XLE grammar 
that has been developed independently. So far 
we have identified and classified about 2500 
MWEs, and have processed 40% of them by 
manipulating only the lexicon and not the 
rules of the grammar.  
Research on MG MWEs (indicatively, 
Anastasiadi-Simeonidi, 1986; Fotopoulou, 1993; 
Mini et al., 2011) has developed collections of 
MWEs and discussed classification, syntax and 
semantics issues. To the best of our knowledge, 
this is the first attempt to obtain deep parses of a 
wide range of types of MG verb MWEs with rich 
syntactic structure. 
1 The parsing system  
We take advantage of the mature ILSP FBT 
Tagger (Papageorgiou et al., 2000) that is an 
adaptation of the Brill tagger trained on MG text. 
It uses a PAROLE compatible tagset of 584 tags. 
The tagger works on the output of a sentence 
detection and tokenisation tool and assigns a 
lemma and a set of tags corresponding to an 
exhaustive morphological analysis of tokens   
(Fig. 1). The tagger is a black box for our system 
and allows for no preprocessing of MWEs, as it 
would be possible if the XFST/XLE component 
was used (Attia, 2006). We have been working 
on a system that aims to move as much as 
possible of the parsing burden from the 
LFG/XLE component to a MWE recognizer (the 
?filter?) at the same time allowing for ?natural? 
LFG analyses.  Oflazer et al. (2004) discuss a 
similar preprocessing step but they focus on the 
retrieval and not on the deep parsing of verb 
MWEs. Our filter, implemented in Perl, scans the 
output of the tagger for strings containing verb 
MWEs and feeds a script (?formatter?) that yields 
a format readable by an LFG/XLE grammar. 
1.1 The filter lexicon 
The filter consults the ?filter lexicon? where each 
verb MWE entry is specified for the following:  
1. Compositionality. Certain verb MWEs can 
take a compositional interpretation. For instance, 
the free subject, flexible (Sag et al, 2001) verbal 
33
MWE ???? ????? ????? ?? ?? ?? (9) has no 
compositional interpretation while the semi-fixed 
MWE ???_?????? (2) ?to be beaten up?, can take 
the compositional interpretation ?grab/steal 
them-FEM?. The filter lexicon specifies which 
MWEs will be eventually assigned both MWE 
and compositional XLE parses.  
2. The lemmatized form of Words_With_Spaces 
(WWS) whether they are independent fixed 
MWEs or substrings of a MWE. For instance, the 
lemmatised WWS ??????_???? would be stored 
for WWS ????? ?????  of the MWE (9).  
3. PoS of the WWS. For instance, we have 
classified the WWS ????-???-????????? 
?penniless and calm?(6) as adjective; however, 
only the second conjunct (????????? ?calm?) is 
an adjective while the first conjunct ???? is an 
indeclinable non-Greek word that occurs with 
this type of MWE only. Regarding distribution, 
the conjunction behaves as an adjective. In 
general, we have relied on distribution criteria in 
order to assign PoS to WWSs.  
4. Morphological constraints on the lemmatized 
constituents of a WWS that uniquely identify 
fixed or semi-fixed MWE substrings. For 
instance, for the adjective ????? in the WWS 
????? ????? (9) the lemma of the adjective 
?????? is stored together with the tags adjective-
plural-accusative-neutral-basic. 
5. Multiple WWSs if different word orders of the 
same WWS occur, for instance ????? [?? ???? ??? 
???????]WWS [gloss: drink the blood of people] 
and ????? [??? ??????? ?? ????]WWS ?takes a lot 
of money from people by applying force?. 
1.2 The filter 
The filter, implemented in Perl, reads the tagged 
sentence from an xml file (the output of the 
tagger), checks it for MWEs and feeds it to the 
formatter if no MWE or a MWE that can take a 
compositional interpretation is found. Strings 
containing MWEs are preprocessed by the filter: 
their fixed parts are replaced with the 
corresponding WWS and morphological 
constraints and the resulting new string is sent to 
the formatter. The filter can identify all word 
permutations available to a listed MWE. 
2 An outline of the LFG analysis  
The output of the formatter is parsed with an 
LFG grammar of MG. The grammar includes 
sublexical rules that parse the output of the 
tagger and ensure information flow from the 
tagger to XLE. The sub-lexical trees can be seen 
in the c-structure of Fig. 1. MG MWEs are rich 
in syntactic structure despite any simplifications 
that might result from the usage of WWSs. In 
agreement with Gross (1998a; 1998b) and Mini 
et al. (2011) who argue that MWEs and 
compositional structures can be treated with 
more or less the same grammar, we have so far 
manipulated only the lexicon  but not the 
grammar rules. Identification of phrasal 
constituents within the MWEs relies on possible 
permutations and the ability of XPs to intervene 
between two words, thus indicating the border 
between two constituents. Grammatical functions 
are identified with diagnostics that apply to 
compositional expressions such as morphological 
marking and WH questions. The types of 
syntactic structure we have treated thus far are: 
1. Fixed verb WWS (Table 1:1): no inflection or 
word permutation. 
(1)  ????         ????? 
      take-2-sg-IMP    five-numeral 
      ?You are silly.? 
2. Free subject-verb (Table 1:2): inflecting,  
SV/VS word order.  
(2) O     ??????    ???                   ?????? 
      the Peter-nom CL-pl-fem-acc grab-3-sg-past 
      ?Petros was beaten up.? 
3&4. Impersonal verb-complement: inflecting, 
fixed object (Table 1:3) or saturated sentential 
subject (Table 1:4), intervening XPs between the 
verb and its object or subject, VO/OV word 
order (but not VS/SV).  
(3) ?????               ????????????? ????.  
      pour-3-sg-past chair-legs          yesterday 
      ?It rained cats and dogs yesterday.? 
(4) ????                  ??????       ?? ??????. 
       have-3-sg-pres gusto-noun to rain 
      ?Don?t tell me that it might rain.? 
34
 LFG representation Sub-WWS C 
1 V: PRED ??????_?????  Y 
2 V: PRED ???_?????? <SUBJ >  Y 
3 V: PRED ????? <SUBJ,OBJ>,  OBJ PRED= ????????????o  N 
4 V: PRED ???_??????<SUBJ>, SUBJ COMPL=?? ???_?????? N 
5 V: PRED ???? <SUBJ,XCOMP>, XCOMP PRED=?????_????, XCOMP 
SUBJ=SUBJ 
?????_???? N 
6 V: PRED ????< SUBJ,XCOMP>, XCOMP PRED=????-???-?????????, 
XCOMP SUBJ=SUBJ 
????_??? 
_????????? 
N 
7 V: PRED ????/??????<SUBJ,OBJ>, OBJ PRED=o _????_? _??????,  OBJ 
POSS PRED= ???, OBJ POSS TYPE= weak pronoun, OBJ POSS 
PERSON/NUMBER/GENDER =SUBJ PERSON/NUMBER/GENDER 
o_????_o 
_?????? 
? 
8 V: PRED ????? <SUBJ, OBJ, XCOMP>, XCOMP COMPL= ??, OBJ 
PRED=??????, XCOMP PRED= ?????_???????, XCOMP SUBJ=SUBJ, 
XCOMP PERF=+, ?(XCOMP TENSE) 
????? 
_?????o? 
? 
9 V: PRED ???? <SUBJ, OBJ, XCOMP>, XCOMP COMPL=??, OBJ PRED= 
??????_????, XCOMP PRED=????? <SUBJ, OBJ>, OBJ PRED=???, 
XCOMP SUBJ=SUBJ, XCOMP PERF=+, ?(XCOMP TENSE) 
??????_???? 
 
 
? 
10 V: PRED ?????<SUBJ, OBJ>, OBJ PRED= o_??????_o_????? o_?????? 
o_????? 
? 
Table 1. LFG analysis of MG verb MWEs used in this text. Boldfaced words inflect within the MWE. 
C: compositional. Only lemmatised forms are given. 
5&6. Free subject-copula-complement: 
inflecting copula, complement fixed (Table 1:5), 
intervening XPs between the subject and the 
verb or between the copula and the complement, 
constituent permutations.  
(5) ?????                  ?    ???        ????? ?????? 
      be-left-3-sg-pres the Rea-nom stele-of-salt 
     ?Rea was left speechless.? 
Alternatively, the complement may inflect 
(Table 1:6) and agree with the free subject.  
(6) ???  ?????                  ?   ???  
     and   be-left3-sg-pres the Rea-sg-fem-nom   
     ????          ???  ???????? 
     penniless and  calm-sg-fem-nom 
    ?Rea lost all her money.? 
7. Free subject-verb-fixed object with subject 
bound possessive (Table 1:7): inflecting verb, 
object modified with a subject bound possessive 
weak pronoun, intervening XPs between the 
object and the verb, constituent permutations.  
(7) ?????/??????      ? ???j              ??  
     eat/grab-3-sg-past the Rea-nom  the 
???? ??? ???????      ??? j 
 beating the year-gen    weak-pron-fem-gen 
     ?Rea was beaten up.? 
8&9. Free subject (controller)-verb-object- 
subordinated clause with controlled subject: 
inflecting verb, object possibly fixed (Table 1: 
9), the subordinated clause possibly semi-fixed 
(Table 1:8), intervening XPs, VSO/OVS word 
orders.  
(8) ??????               ????? ?? ???????    ?????? 
      throw-3-pl-past empty to catch-3-pl full 
      ??hey tried to obtain information.? 
(9) ?????                  ?      ????                     ???    
      make-3-sg-past  the    mother-sg-nom    hisj      
?????  ?????  ?? ???   ??? 
      black    eyes    to  himj see-3-sg 
    ?It took his mother a long time to meet him.? 
The transitive verb ????? ?throw? (8) is used as 
a control verb only in (8). An alternative analysis 
that would insure identity of subjects could treat 
the exemplified MWE as a coordination 
structure. We opted for the control approach and 
defined a special entry of the verb ????? ?throw? 
because the particle ?? typically introduces 
35
(probably controlled) subordinated clauses and 
the constraints on verbal forms are those of ??-
subordination and not of coordination.   
10. Free subject-verb-object (Table 1:10): 
inflecting verb, fixed or non-fixed object, 
intervening XPs and OVS/VOS word order. 
(10) ??  ????????             ????????             ????   
        the people-pl-nom      pull-3-pl-past      then  
??? ???????? ??   ???? 
        the  linen       the  sufferings 
       ?People suffered a lot then.? 
3 Conclusions and future research 
This is ongoing work but up to this point, natural 
analyses of the verb MWEs are possible with the 
standing rule component of our LFG grammar of 
MG. On the other hand, the entries of the two 
lexica we have developed, namely the filter and 
the XLE lexicon, provide a rich resource for 
studying the features of the idiomaticity that 
verb MWEs bring into ?normal? MG 
(indicatively, see discussion of (8)).   In the 
immediate future, we will use the same 
methodology to parse the remaining types of 
MWE in our collection and will draw on the 
accumulated evidence to study the linguistic 
phenomena observed in verb MWEs against 
more general semasio-syntactic properties of 
MG, for instance the role of control 
constructions and of animacy in this language. 
We will consider a more sophisticated design of 
the filter. Last, we plan to investigate the issue of 
semantic representation of MWEs. 
 
      
 
Fig. 1. The XLE output for the flexilbe verb MWE ????? ????? ????? ?? ?? ?? (Table 1: 9). 
Acknowledgements 
We thank Tracy Holloway-King for her contribution to the development of the sublexical rules.                         
36
References  
???????????-?????????, ????.  1986. ? ???????? 
???? ????? ???????????, ???????????. ???? ??? 
???, ????????? ??. 65. 
Attia, Mohammed A. 2006. Accommodating 
Multiword Expressions in an Arabic LFG 
Grammar. Salakoski, Tapio, Ginter, Filip, 
Pahikkala, Tapio, Pyysalo, Tampo: Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science: Advances in Natural 
Language Processing, 5th International 
Conference, FinTAL. Turku, Finland. Vol. 4139: 
87-98. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 
Copestake, Ann, Fabre Lambeau, Aline 
 Villavicencio, Francis Bond, Timothy Balwin, 
Ivan A. Sag, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword 
expressions: linguistic precision and 
reusability. Proceedings of the 3rd International 
Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation. Las Palmas, Canary Islands. 
Fotopoulou, Aggeliki. 1993. Une Classification des 
Phrases a Complements Figes en Grec Moderne. 
Doctoral Thesis, Universite Paris VIII. 
Gross, Maurice. 1988a. Les limites de la phrase fig?e. 
Langage 90: 7-23. 
 Gross, Maurice. 1988b. Sur les phrases fig?es 
complexes du fran?ais. Langue fran?aise 77: 47-
70. 
Mini, Marianna, Kleopatra Diakogiorgi and Aggeliki 
Fotopoulou. 2011. What can children tell us about 
idiomatic phrases? fixedness: the psycholinguistic 
relevance of a linguistic model. DISCOURS 
(Revue de linguistique, psycholinguistique et 
informatique)(9). 
Oflazer, Kemal, Ozlem Cetinoglu and Bilge Say. 
2004. Integrating  Morphology with Mutli-word 
Expression Processing in Turkish. Second ACL 
Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Integrating 
Processing: 64-71. 
Papageorgiou, Haris, Prokopis Prokopidis, 
Voula Giouli and Stelios Piperidis. 2000. A 
Unified POS Tagging Architecture and its 
Application to Greek. Proceedings of the 2nd 
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. 
Athens. 
Sag, Ivan A., Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, 
Ann Copestake  and Dan Flickinger. 2002. 
Multiword Expressions: A Pain in the Neck for 
NLP. LinGO Working Paper No. 2001-03. In 
Alexander Gelbukh, ed., (2002) Proceedings of 
CICLING-2002. Springer. 
ILSP FBT Tagger http://lrt.clarin.eu/tools/ilsp-
feature-based-multi-tiered-pos-tagger 
XLE documentantion http://www2.parc.com/isl/ 
groups/nltt/xle/doc/xle_toc.html 
References used for the development of the filter: 
http://interoperating.info/courses/perl4data/node/26 
http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2970845/how-
to-parse-multi-record-xml-file-ues-xmlsimple-in-
perl 
http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2039143/how-
can-i-access-attributes-and-elements-from-
xmllibxml-in-perl 
http://stackoverflow.com/questions/7041719/using-
perl-xmllibxml-to-parse 
http://stackoverflow.com/questions/10404152/perl-
script-to-parse-xml-using-xmllibxml 
http://www.perlmonks.org/index.pl?node_id=4908
46 
http://lethain.com/xml-simple-for-non-perlers/ 
 
Perl: 
http://perldoc.perl.org/perlintro.html 
http://learn.perl.org/ 
http://qntm.org/files/perl/perl.html 
http://www.perl.org/books/beginning-perl/ 
http://www.it.uom.gr/project/perl/win32perltut.ht
ml  
http://www.comp.leeds.ac.uk/Perl/sandtr.html 
http://www.troubleshooters.com/codecorn/littperl/
perlreg.htm 
http://www.cs.tut.fi/~jkorpela/perl/regexp.html 
http://www.somacon.com/p127.php 
http://perlmaven.com/splice-to-slice-and-dice-
arrays-in-perl 
http://www.perlmonks.org/?node_id=822947 
http://www.perlmonks.org/?node_id=911102 
 
37
Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2014), pages 43?47,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 26-27 April 2014. c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Encoding MWEs in a conceptual lexicon
Aggeliki Fotopoulou, Stella Markantonatou, Voula Giouli
Institute for Language and Speech Processing, R.C. ?Athena? 
{afotop;marks;voula}@ilsp.athena-innovation.gr
Abstract
The proposed  paper  reports  on  work  in  progress 
aimed at the development of a conceptual lexicon 
of  Modern  Greek  (MG)  and  the  encoding  of 
MWEs  in  it.  Morphosyntactic  and  semantic 
properties  of  these  expressions  were  specified 
formally and encoded in the lexicon. The resulting 
resource will be applicable for a number of NLP 
applications.
1 Introduction
 Substantial research  in  linguistics  has  been 
devoted  to  the  analysis  and  classification  of 
MWEs from different perspectives (Fraser, 1970; 
Chomsky,  1980;  M. Gross 1982,  1988;  Ruwet, 
1983;  der  Linden,  1992;  Nunberg et  al.,  1994; 
Howarth, 1996; Jackendoff, 1997; Moon, 1998; 
Fellbaum,  2007).  Moreover,  cognitive  and 
psycholinguistic  approaches  to  MWEs  (Lakoff, 
1993;  Gibbs,  1998;  Glucksberg,  1993; 
Diakogiorgi&Fotopoulou, 2012) have accounted 
for  their  interpretation.  Within  the  NLP 
community,  there  is  a  growing  interest  in  the 
identification  of  MWEs  and  their  robust 
treatment,  as  this  seems  to  improve  parsing 
accuracy  (Nivre  and  Nilsson,  2004;  Arun  and 
Keller, 2005). In this respect, the development of 
large-scale,  robust  language resources that  may 
be integrated in parsing systems is of paramount 
importance. Representation, however, of MWEs 
in lexica poses a number of challenges. 
2 Basic Notions
Typically,  fixed  MWEs  are  identified  and 
classified on the basis of  semantic,  lexical  and 
morphosyntactic criteria. (M. Gross, 1982, 1987; 
Lamiroy, 2003), namely:
? non-compositionality:  i.e.,  the meaning of 
the  expression  cannot  be  computed  from 
the  meanings of  its  constituents  and  the 
rules used to combine them. Nevertheless, 
according  to  (Nunberg  et  al,  1994), 
compositionality refers to the fact that the 
constituents  of  some  idioms  ?carry 
identifiable  parts  of  the  idiomatic 
meaning?.  Variability has  been  further 
emphasised in (Hamblin and Gibbs 1999) 
and  (Nunberg  et  al.  1994):  fixed 
expressions  appear  in  a  continuum  of 
compositionality,  which  ranges  from 
expressions  that  are  very  analysable  to 
others  that  are  partially  analysable  or 
ultimately non-analysable.
? non-substitutability:  at  least  one  of  the 
expression  constituents  does  not  enter  in 
alternations at the paradigmatic axis 
? non-modifiability: MWEs are syntactically 
rigid structures, in that there are constraints 
concerning  modification,  transformations, 
etc. 
These  criteria,  however,  do  not  apply  in  all 
cases in a uniform way. The  variability attested 
brings about the notion ?degree of fixedness? (G. 
Gross 1996). The kind and degree of fixedness 
result in the classification of these expressions as 
fixed,  semi-fixed,  syntactically flexible or 
collocations (Sag et al, 2002). It is crucial for a 
satisfactory  MWEs  representation  in  a 
computational lexicon to provide an accurate and 
functional  formal  modelling  of  fixedness, 
variability and compositionality. 
In this paper, we will discuss the classification 
and encoding of compounds and fixed MWEs in 
a conceptually organised lexicon of MG. 
3 The conceptual lexicon 
The conceptually organised lexicon that is under 
development  (Markantonatou  &  Fotopoulou, 
2007)  capitalises  on two basic  notions:  (a)  the 
notion  of  lexical  fields,  along  with  (b)  the 
Saussurian notion of sign and its two inseparable 
facets,  namely,  the  SIGNIFIER and  the 
SIGNIFIED as the building blocks (main classes) 
of the underlying ontology.
43
In this sense, the intended language resource is 
a  linguistic  ontology  in  which  words  are 
instances in the  SIGNIFIER class. At this level, 
morphological,  syntactic  and  functional 
information about lemmas is encoded. Similarly, 
word meanings are instances in the  SIGNIFIED 
class.  Each instance in the  SIGNIFIER class is 
mapped onto a concept, the latter represented as 
an instance in the SIGNIFIED class.
The  Instances  of  the  class  SIGNIFIER are 
specified  for  (a)  features  pertaining  to  lexical 
semantic  relations  (i.e,  synonymy,  antonymy); 
(b)  lexical  relations  such  as  word  families, 
allomorphs,  syntactic  variants  etc.;  and  (c) 
morphosyntactic  properties  (PoS,  gender, 
declension,  argument  structure,  word  specific 
information  etc.).  Values  for  these features  are 
assigned to both single- and multi-word entries 
in the lexicon. MWEs are further coupled with 
rich  linguistic  information  pertaining  to  the 
lexical, syntactic and semantic levels.
4 Encoding MWEs in the lexicon
MWEs  are  encoded  as  instances  in  the 
SIGNIFIER class  of our ontology and are also 
mapped onto the corresponding concepts or word 
meanings (instances in the SIGNIFIED class).
In the remaining, we focus on the encoding of 
MWEs as instances in the SIGNIFIER class. We 
cater  for  sub-classes  corresponding  to 
grammatical  categories  (verb,  noun,  adjective, 
adverb,  preposition,  etc)  under  the  class 
SIGNIFIER in our schema. The class MWEs (as 
opposed to the class Simple Lexical Units) has 
been  defined  further  under  the  verb,  noun, 
adjective and adverb sub-classes.
Syntactic  configurations  pertaining  to  each 
class are also represented as distinct sub-classes 
hierarchically  organised  under  the  verb,  noun, 
adjective  and  adverb  classes.  Morphosyntactic 
properties, selectional preferences, and semantic 
interpretation  patterns  are  provided  for  each 
MWE depending on the grammatical category it 
pertains  to;  encoding  is  based  on  a  set  of 
parameters represented as feature-value pairs.
More  precisely,  a  typology  of  Greek  verbal 
MWEs has been defined in (Fotopoulou,  1993, 
Mini, 2009) (NP V NP1 NP2?) and of nominal 
MWEs in (Anastasiadis,  1986) (Adj  N,  NN?) 
on  the  basis  of  the  lexical  and  syntactic 
configurations involved. This typology has been 
mapped onto a hierarchy under classes  verb and 
noun).
In our approach, the main distinction between 
collocations and  fixed  MWEs is  made  explicit. 
The  degree  and  type  of  fixedness  are  then 
encoded  as  features.  Further  morphosyntactic 
information  is  also  encoded  depending  on  the 
grammatical  category  of  the  MWE  (i.e., 
declension  of  one  or  more  constituents, 
only_singular or  only_plural for nouns, etc.). In 
this way, information that may be useful for the 
automatic identification and interpretation of the 
MWEs may be retained. Moreover, the standard 
set  of  features  inherited  from  the  class 
SIGNIFIER  is  also  retained  (PoS,  Gender, 
Number, Tense, synonyms, antonyms, etc.).
4.1.The encoding schema
We have so far implemented an encoding schema 
for  nominal  and  verbal  MWEs.  We  aimed  at 
encoding rich linguistic knowledge in a formal 
way  that  would  be  exploitable  in  computer 
applications.  The  two  types  of  fixedness 
(collocations and fixed) are encoded as features: 
(a) Lexical_variance, and (b) Is_actually.
The feature  Lexical_variance1 has as possible 
values (yes or no). Collocations (assigned a yes 
value)  are  further  specified  with  respect  to 
alternative lemmas; these lemmas are encoded in 
the appropriate feature Variants. For instance, in 
example  (1)  the  two  alternative  lemmas  are 
??????????? and ???????????:
 
(1) ????????   (???????????  /  ???????????) 
(=emergency (situations / circumstances))
The feature  Is_actually (with possible values 
yes  or  no)  encodes  information  about  the 
interpretation  pattern:  a  value  yes signifies  a 
compositional  or  partially  compositional 
meaning; on the contrary,  a value  no denotes a 
non-compositional  interpretation  (fixed 
meaning).
Collocations  are  by  default  assigned feature 
values  corresponding  to  a  compositional 
meaning.  In  these  cases,  the  feature 
maintains_meaning further  specifies  the 
constituent(s)  that  contribute  to  the  non-fixed 
interpretation of the expression. For example, the 
meaning of the compound in (2) is retained from 
the  meaning  of  the  first  noun  ?????? (=trip), 
which,  in  turn,  is  the  value  assigned  to  the 
maintains_meaning feature:
1In  our  MWE  classification  scheme,  a  lexical  unit  is 
considered ?fixed? at the lemma level. This is because MG 
is a heavily inflected language.
44
(2) ??????  ??????? (trip  -  lightning  (=very 
sudden and short trip)
<maintains_meaning =  ?????? />
Finally,  the  feature  has_meta_meaning 
signifies  further  the  constituent(s)  ?  if  any  ? 
bearing a figurative meaning.  For example,  the 
compound  ??????  ??????? in  (2)  assumes  the 
figurative meaning of the second noun  ??????? 
(=very sudden and short-term).
On  the  contrary,  verbal  and  nominal 
expressions  with  a  non-compositional  meaning 
are  assigned  a  negative  value (no) for  the 
Is_actually feature since their constituents do not 
contribute to a compositional meaning; therefore, 
the  features maintains_meaning  and 
has_meta_meaning  are  left  empty  as  non-
applicable. This is exemplified in (3) below; the 
constituents ??????? (=kids?) and ???? (=joy) of 
the  expression  ??????? ???? (=playground)  do 
not contribute to the overall interpretation:
(3) ??????? ???? (=playground)
<maintains_meaning/>
<has_meta_meaning/>
This schema that applies to both nominal and 
verbal MWES, is presented in Table 1 below.
Slot Values
mwe_type Fixed;   collocation
Lexical_variance  Boolean (yes, no)
        Variants string 
?s_actually Boolean (yes, no)
  maintains_meaning String
 has_meta_meaning String
Table 1 The encoding schema for nouns & verbs
4.2.Nominal MWEs
Furthermore,  nominal  MWEs are also assigned 
values  for  features  that  are  specific  to  the 
nominal  MWEs.  Information  on  inflected 
constituents  -  if  any  ?  is  provided  in  the 
declension feature; values for  only_singular and 
only_plural provide further morphological/usage 
information;  when  used  in  combination  with 
other  features  (i.e,  is_actually)  this  type  of 
information is  evidence  of  fixedness. Frequent 
co-occurrence patterns with verbs are provided in 
the  verb_combined feature;  finally,  alternative 
nominalised  forms  are  listed  as  values  of  the 
feature  nominalization. The schema is presented 
in the table below:
only singular Boolean (yes, no)
only plural: Boolean (yes, no)
N_declension ?1, ?2, ?1_?2, Adj_N 
verb_combined string 
Nominalization string 
Table 2 The encoding schema for nouns
4.3.Verbal MWEs 
In the typology adopted for the verbal idiomatic 
expressions,  fixedness can  be  limited  to  only 
certain  constituents  of  the  sentence; a 
combination of fixed and non-fixed constituents 
in  Subject or  Object position  is  permitted.  For 
example,  in  sentences  (4)  and  (5)  below, 
fixedness relies on the relation among the verbs 
and the nouns that function as Objects (direct and 
indirect) and as Subject respectively:
(4) ???? ????NP-acc, Obj ???? ????PP 
to  give  way to  anger  (=to swallow one?s 
pride/anger) 
(5) ??????? ?? ???????? ???NP-nom, Subj
my lights are  switched on  (=to  become 
very angry)
Moreover,  the  typology  allows  for  a  restricted 
alternation of fixed elements of the expression. 
For  example,  in  the  MWE  in  (6),  the  two 
alternative lemmas are ???? and ?????????:
(6) ???? / ?????????   ??? ?????? ?? ?? ?????
to  undertake    to    offer   /  promise   the sky with 
the stars
This information is encoded in verbal MWEs, 
namely:  (a) the syntactic properties of the verb 
that occurs in the expression (valency); and (b) 
45
fixed and non-fixed arguments either in  Subject 
or  Object position.  Moreover,  selectional 
restrictions applied to the arguments (such as +/-
human) are also added.
The  encoding  schema  that  applies  to  verbal 
MWEs  specifically  is  presented  in  Table  3.  In 
this  schema,  N signifies  a  non-fixed  noun, 
whereas C denotes a fixed one; number 0 (in N0 
and C0) is used to represent a noun (either fixed 
or non-fixed in Subject position), and 1, 2, 3, etc. 
denote  complements  in  Object position  (or 
complements  of  prepositional  phrases).  Other 
features  provide  rich  linguistic  information 
regarding facets of the expression in terms of: (a) 
selectional restrictions (i.e., the features N0_type,  
N1_type,  etc., accept  as  values  the  semantic 
category in which a noun in  Subject  or  Object  
position respectively,  belongs  to),  (b)  syntactic 
alternations  (i.e.,  Poss_Ppv  encodes  the 
alternation  among  possessive and  personal 
pronoun),  grammatical  information  (i.e., 
Ppv_case  encodes  the  case  of  the  personal 
pronoun), etc.
Slot Value
N0_type hum, -hum, npc 
C0_variants string 
Poss=Ppv Boolean (yes or no)
Ppv_case gen, acc 
N1_type hum, -hum, npc (Nom de 
partie du corps/noun of 
the part of  body) 
N2_type hum, -hum, npc
N3_type hum, -hum, npc
C1_variants string 
C2_variants string 
C3_variants string 
Table 3. The encoding schema for verbs
Alternative  nouns  (in  Subject  or  Object 
position)  that  oftern  co-occur  with  the  verbal 
expression  are  also  provided  for  (C0_variant, 
C1_variant, etc).
5. Discussion
As it has been shown above, in our lexicon we 
have  opted  for  an  approach  to  MWE 
representation  that  builds  on  rich  linguistic 
knowledge. The linguistic classifications adopted 
deal  with  morphology,  syntax,  and  semantics 
interface  aspects.  Thus,  a  lexicon  ?  grammar 
representation of MWEs has been constructed by 
encoding  key  morphosyntactic  and  semantic 
information.The  typology  of  verbal  MWEs 
shares  common  characteristics  with  similar 
efforts  for  other  languages  (i.e,  DuELME, 
Gregoire,  2010 Morphosyntactic  properties  and 
selectional  preferences  account  better  for  a 
number  of  phenomena,  inherent  in  the  Greek 
language,  as  for  example  word order  and gaps 
attested in running text.
More specifically, Greek is a language with a 
relatively  free  word  order,  and  idiomatic 
expressions  often  occur  in  texts  in  various 
configurations. The encoding of fixed and non-
fixed  constituents  provides,  therefore,  extra 
information for the identification of expressions 
in texts.  Moreover, the identification of MWEs 
as  collocations  entails  a  relatively  loose 
fixedness,  allowing,  thus,  for  gaps  and 
discontinuities as shown in (7):
(7) ?? ????? ???? ?????? ?????????-?????
The  political  party  has  a  number of 
candidates record (=many candidates)
6. Conclusions and Future work
We have  given  an  overview of  the  conceptual 
lexicon  currently  under  development  and  the 
treatment of MWEs in it. We have so far treated 
nominal  and  verbal  MWEs  (~1000  entries). 
Future  work  involves  the  population  of  the 
lexicon with new expressions also pertaining to 
the grammatical categories adjective and adverb 
and the definition of a fine-grained typology for 
the  latter.  Moreover,  a  more  granular 
representation  of  fixedness  will  be  attempted. 
Compatibility  of  the  resource  with  diverse 
syntactic  approaches  will  also  be  investigated. 
The  evaluation  of  the  final  resource  will  be 
performed  by  integrating  it  in  a  tool  that 
automatically recognizes MWEs in texts.
References
???????????-????????? ?. (1986).  ? ???????? ????  
?????  ???????????.  ???????????:  ???????????? 
????????????  ????????????  (???????????? 
????????? ??????????? ??????).
46
Arun,  A.  and  F.  Keller.  2005.  Lexicalisation  in 
crosslinguistic  probablisitic  parsing:  The  case  of 
french. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting  
of  the Association for Computational  Linguistics, 
pp 306?313. Ann Arbor, MI
Chomsky, N. 1980.  Rules and Representations. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Diakogiorgi,  K.  &  Fotopoulou,  A.  2012. 
Interpretation of Idiomatic Expressions by Greek 
Speaking Children: implications for the Linguistic 
and  Psycholinguistic  Research.  An 
interdisciplinary  approach.  Lingvisticae  
Investigationes, Volume  35:1.  1-27, John 
Benjamins, Paris, France
Fellbaum,  C.  2007.  Introduction.  Fellbaum, C.  (ed). 
Idioms and Collocations: Corpus-based Linguistic  
and Lexicographic Studies. London: Continuum, 1-
Fotopoulou, A. 1993. Une Classification des Phrases  
? Compl?ments Fig?s en Grec Moderne.  Doctoral 
Thesis, Universite Paris VIII.
Fraser,  B.  1970.  Idioms  within  a  Transformational 
Grammar. Foundations of language, 1, 22-42.
Fritzinger,  F.,  Weller,  M.,  and  Heid.  U.  2010.  A 
survey  of  idiomatic  preposition-noun-verb  tiples  on 
token level. In Proceedings of LREC-10.
Gr?goire,  N.  2010.  DuELME:  a  Dutch  electronic 
lexicon  of  multiword  expressions;  Lang 
Resources & Evaluation (2010) 44:23?39
Gibbs  R.W.  1998.  The  Fight  over  Metaphor  in 
Thought and Language. In A.N. Katz, C. Cacciari, 
R.W.  Gibbs  &  M.  Turner  (eds.),  Figurative 
Language and Thought. OUP, 88-118.
Glucksberg, S. 1993. Idiom meanings and allusional 
context.  In  Idioms:  Processing,  structure,  and  
intepretation.  C.  Cacciari  and  P.  Tabossi  (eds.). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 201-225. 
Gross,  G.  1996.  Les  expressions fig?es  en fran?ais. 
Noms  compos?s  et  autres  locutions.  Paris/Gap: 
Ophrys.
Gross, M. 1982. Une classification des phrases fig?es 
du fran?ais. Revue Qu?b?coise de Linguistique 11 
(2), 151-185.
Gross,  M.  1988a.  Les  limites  de  la  phrase  fig?e. 
Langage 90: 7-23
 Gross,  Maurice.  1988b.  Sur  les  phrases  fig?es 
complexes du fran?ais. Langue fran?aise 77: 4770.
Hamblin, J., and Gibbs, W. R. 1999. Why You Can?t 
Kick  the  Bucket  as  You  Slowly  Die:  Verbs  in 
Idiom Comprehension. Journal of Psycholinguistic  
Research. 28 (1): 25-39.
Howarth P.A. 1996. Phraseology in English academic 
writing. Lexicographica Series 75.  T?bingen: Max 
Niemeyer. Jackendoff R. 1997. The Architecture of  
the Language Faculty. MIT Press.
Lakoff  G.  1993.  The  Contemporary  Theory  of 
Metaphor.  In  A.  Ortony  (ed.), Metaphor  and 
Thought, 2nd  edition  Cambridge  University  Press, 
202-251.
Lamiroy,  B.  2003.  Les  notions  linguistiques  de 
figement  et  de  contrainte.  Lingvisticae 
Investigationes 26:1,  53-66, 
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
van der Linden E-J. 1992. Incremental processing and 
the  hierarchical  lexicon.  Computational  
Linguistics, 18, 219-238
Markantonatou,  Stella  and  Fotopoulou,  Aggeliki. 
2007. The tool ?Ekfrasi". In Proceedings of the 8th  
International  Conference  on  Greek  Linguistics,  
The Lexicography Workshop. Ioannina, Greece.
Markantonatou,  S.,  Fotopoulou,  ?.,  Mini,  M.  & 
Alexopoulou, M. 2010. In search of the right word. 
In Proceedings of Cogalex-2: Cognitive Aspects of  
the  Lexicon,  2nd  SIGLEX  endorsed  Workshop. 
Beijing.
Mini, M. 2009. Linguistic and Psycholinguistic Study  
of Fixed Verbal Expressions with Fixed Subject in  
Modern  Greek:  A  Morphosyntactic  Analysis,  
Lexicosemantic  Gradation  and  Processing  by  
Elementary School Children. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation. University of Patras.
Moon,  R.  1998.  Fixed  Expressions  and  Idioms  in  
English: A Corpus-Based Approach. Oxford: OUP.
Nivre,  J.  and  Nilsson,  J.  2004.  Multiword  units  in 
syntactic parsing. Workshop on Methodologies and  
Evaluation  of  Multiword  Units  in  Real-World  
Applications.
Nunberg  ,G.,  Sag  I.,  Wasow,  T.  1994.  Idioms. 
Language 70, 491-538.
Ruwet,  N.  1983.  Du  Bon  Usage  des  Expressions 
Idiomatiques  dans  l'Argumentation  en  Syntaxe 
G?n?rative.  Revue Qu?becoise de Linguistique  13 
(1): 9-145.
Sag,  I.A.,  Bond,  F.,  Copestake  A.,  Flickinger,  D. 
2001.  Multiword  Expressions.  LinGO  Working 
PaperNo.2001-01. 
Sag,  Ivan  A.,  T.Baldwin,  F.Bond,  A. Copestake and 
Dan Flickinger.2001.Multiword  Expressions:  A 
Pain in the Neck for  NLP. LinGO Working Paper 
No.  2001-03.  In  Alexander  Gelbukh,  ed.,  (2002) 
Proceedings of COLING-2002.
 
47
