Cognate Mapping ? A Heuristic Strategy for the Semi-Supervised
Acquisition of a Spanish Lexicon from a Portuguese Seed Lexicon
Stefan Schulza,b Korne?l Marko?b,c Eduardo Sbrissiaa Percy Nohamaa Udo Hahnc
aMaster Program in Health Technology, Parana? Catholic University, Curitiba, Brazil
bDepartment of Medical Informatics, Freiburg University Hospital, Germany
cComputational Linguistics Research Group, Jena University, Germany
http://www.coling.uni-freiburg.de/
Abstract
We deal with the automated acquisition of a
Spanish medical subword lexicon from an al-
ready existing Portuguese seed lexicon. Using
two non-parallel monolingual corpora we de-
termined Spanish lexeme candidates from Por-
tuguese seed lexicon entries by heuristic cog-
nate mapping. We validated the emergent lex-
ical translation hypotheses by determining the
similarity of fixed-window context vectors on
the basis of Portuguese and Spanish text cor-
pora.
1 Introduction
Medical language presents a unique combination
of challenges for language engineering, with a fo-
cus on applications such as information retrieval,
text mining and information extraction. Document
collections ? on the Web or in clinical databases
? are usually very large and dynamic. In addi-
tion, medical document collections are truly multi-
lingual. Furthermore, the user population which ac-
cess medical documents are really diverse, ranging
from physicians and nurses to laypersons, who use
different jargons and sublanguages. Therefore, the
simplicity of the content representation of the docu-
ments, as well as automatically performed intra- and
interlingual lexical mappings or transformations of
equivalent expressions, become crucial issues for an
adequate machine support.
We respond to these challenges in terms of
the MORPHOSAURUS system (an acronym for
MORPHeme TheSAURUS). It is centered around a
new type of lexicon, in which the entries are sub-
words, i.e., semantically minimal, morpheme-style
units (Schulz and Hahn, 2000). Intralingual as well
as interlingual synonymy is then expressed by the
assignment of subwords to concept-like equivalence
classes. As subword equivalence classes abstract
away from subtle particularities within and between
languages, and reference to them is achieved via
a language-independent code system, they form an
interlingua characterized by semantic identifiers.
Compared to relationally richer, e.g., WORDNET
based, interlinguas as applied for cross-language in-
formation retrieval (CLIR) (Gonzalo et al, 1999;
Ruiz et al, 1999), we use a rather limited set of
semantic relations and pursue a more restrictive ap-
proach to synonymy. In particular, we restrict our-
selves to the specific sublanguage used in the con-
text of the medical domain. Our claim that this
interlingual approach is useful for the purpose of
cross-lingual text retrieval and categorization has al-
ready been experimentally supported (Schulz et al,
2002; Marko? et al, 2003).
The quality of cross-lingual indexing fundamen-
tally depends on the underlying lexicon and the-
saurus. Its manual construction and maintenance
is costly and error-prone. Therefore, machine-
supported lexical acquisition techniques increas-
ingly deserve attention. Whereas in the medical do-
main parallel corpora are only available for a lim-
ited number of language pairs, unrelated (i.e., non-
parallel, non-aligned) corpora might provide suffi-
cient evidence for cognate identification, at least in
languages which are closely related.
In this paper, we present the results of such an ex-
periment. We have chosen Spanish and Portuguese
as a pair of closely related languages. Both lan-
guages exhibit a high degree of similarity in their
lexical inventory, as well as in the rules govern-
ing word formation. Accordingly, a Portuguese na-
tive speaker is able to understand technical texts in
Spanish without much effort, and vice versa. In
both languages, there is also an increasing number
of electronic texts available, so that a cross-lingual
search interface would significantly improve the ac-
cessibility of domain relevant documents.
2 Lexicographic Aspects of
Morpho-Semantic Indexing
We briefly outline the lexicographic and semantic
aspects of our approach, called Morpho-Semantic
Indexing (henceforth, MSI), which translates source
documents (and queries) into an interlingual repre-
sentation in which their content is represented by
language-independent semantic descriptors.
2.1 Subwords as Lexicon Units
Our work is based on the assumption that neither
fully inflected nor automatically stemmed words
constitute the appropriate granularity level for lex-
icalized content description. Especially in scien-
tific and technical sublanguages, we observe a high
frequency of domain-specific and content-bearing
suffixes (e.g., ?-itis?, ?-ectomia? in the medical do-
main), as well as the tendency to construct ut-
terly complex word forms such as ?pseudo?hypo?
para?thyroid?ism?, ?gluco?corticoid?s?, or ?pan-
creat?itis?.1 In order to properly account for the
particularities of ?medical? morphology, we in-
troduced subwords (Schulz et al, 2002) as self-
contained, semantically minimal units and moti-
vated their existence by their usefulness for docu-
ment retrieval rather than by linguistic arguments.
The minimality criterion is quite difficult to de-
fine in a general way, but its implications can
be illustrated by the following example. Given
the text token ?diaphysis?, a linguistically plausible
morpheme decomposition would possibly lead to
?dia?phys?is?. From a medical perspective, a seg-
mentation into ?diaphys?is? seems much more rea-
sonable, because the linguistically canonical mor-
phological decomposition is far too fine-grained
and likely to create too many ambiguities. For in-
stance, comparable ?low-level? segmentations of se-
mantically unrelated tokens such as ?dia?lyt?ic?,
?phys?io?logy? lead to morpheme-style units ?dia?
and ?phys?, which unwarrantedly match segmenta-
tions such as ?dia?phys?is?, too. The (semantic)
self-containedness of the chosen subword is often
supported by the existence of a synonym, e.g., for
?diaphys? we have ?shaft?.
2.2 Subword Lexicon and Thesaurus
Subwords are assembled in a multilingual lexicon
and thesaurus, which contain subword entries, spe-
cial subword attributes and semantic relations be-
tween subwords. Up until now, the lexicon and
the thesaurus have both been constructed manually,
with the following considerations in mind:
? Subwords are entered, together with their at-
tributes such as language (English, German,
Portuguese) and subword type (stem, prefix,
suffix, invariant). Each lexicon entry is as-
signed a unique identifier representing one
synonymy class, the MORPHOSAURUS iden-
tifier (MID), which contains this entry as its
unique member.
1
??? denotes the concatenation operator.
? Synonymy classes which contain intralingual
synonyms and interlingual translations of sub-
words are fused. We restrict intra- and inter-
lingual semantic equivalence to the context of
medicine.
? Semantic links between synonymy classes are
added. We subscribe to a shallow approach
in which semantic relations are restricted to a
paradigmatic relation has-meaning, which re-
lates one ambiguous class to its specific read-
ings,2 and a syntagmatic relation expands-to,
which consists of predefined segmentations in
case of utterly short subwords.3
We refrain from introducing hierarchical rela-
tions between MIDs, because such links can be ac-
quired from domain-specific vocabularies, e.g., the
Medical Subject Headings (MESH, 2001).
Table 1 depicts how source documents (cf. the
first column with an English and Portuguese frag-
ment) are converted into an interlingual represen-
tation by a three-step procedure. First, each in-
put word is orthographically normalized in terms
of lower case characters and according to language-
specific rules for the transcription of diacritics (sec-
ond column). Next, words are segmented into se-
quences of semantically plausible sublexical items
according to the subwords listed in the lexicon (third
column). Finally, each meaning-bearing subword
is replaced by its language-independent semantic
identifier, the MID, which unifies intralingual and
interlingual (quasi-)synonyms. Then, the system
yields the interlingual output representation of the
system (fourth column).
The manual construction of the trilingual sub-
word lexicon and the subword thesaurus has con-
sumed, up until now, three and a half person
years. The project originally started from a bilin-
gual German-English lexicon, while the Portuguese
part was added in a later project phase. The com-
bined subword lexicon contains 58,479 entries,4
with 21,397 for English, 22,053 for German, and
15,029 for Portuguese.
Taking into account, on the one hand, the out-
standing importance of Spanish as a major Western
2For instance, {head} ? {zephal,kopf,caput,cephal,cabec,
cefal} OR {leader,boss,lider,chefe}
3For instance, {myalg} ? {muscle,muskel,muscul} ?
{schmerz, pain,dor}
4Just for comparison, the size of WORDNET assem-
bling the lexemes of general English in the 2.0 version is
on the order of 152,000 entries (http://www.cogsci.
princeton.edu/?wn/doc.shtml, last visited on Jan-
uary 3, 2004). Linguistically speaking, the entries are basic
forms of verbs, nouns, adjectives and adverbs.
Original Orthographic Morphological Semantic
Document Normalization Segmentation Normalization
High TSH values suggest
the diagnosis of primary
hypothyroidism while
a suppressed TSH level
suggests hyperthyroidism.
high tsh values suggest the
diagnosis of primary hy-
pothyroidism while a sup-
pressed tsh level suggests
hyperthyroidism.
high tsh value s suggest the
diagnos is of primar y hypo
thyroid ism while a sup-
press ed tsh level suggest s
hyper thyroid ism.
#up# tsh #value#
#suggest# #diagnost#
#primar# #small# #thyre#
#suppress# tsh #nivell#
#suggest# #up# #thyre# .
A presenc?a de valores
elevados de TSH sug-
ere o diagn o?stico de
hipotireoidismo prim a?rio,
enquanto n ??veis suprim-
idos de TSH sugerem
hipertireoidismo.
a presenca de valores ele-
vados de tsh sugere o diag-
nostico de hipotireoidismo
primario, enquanto niveis
suprimidos de tsh sugerem
hipertireoidismo.
a presenc a de valor es ele-
vad os de tsh suger e o di-
agnost ico de hipo tireoid
ismo primari o, enquanto
niveis suprimid os de tsh
suger em hiper tireoid ismo.
#actual# #value# #up#
tsh #suggest# #diagnost#
#small# #thyre# #primar#
, #nivell# #suppress# tsh
#suggest# #up# #thyre# .
Table 1: Morpho-Semantic Indexing Example for English (row 1) and Portuguese (row 2): The original document
(column 1) is orthographically transformed (column 2), segmented according to the subword lexicon (column 3), while
content-bearing subwords are mapped to MSI-specific equivalence classes whose identifiers (MIDs) are automatically
generated by the system (column 4). (Bold MIDs co-occur in both documents.)
language and, on the other hand, the close lexical
ties between Portuguese and Spanish as Romance
languages, we intended to augment the existing
MORPHOSAURUS system by Spanish as its fourth
language and at the same time reuse the knowledge
of Portuguese for the purpose of speeding up and
facilitating the Spanish lexicon acquisition.
3 Experiments
We use the following resources for the experiments:
? A Portuguese subword lexicon, as described in
the previous section.
? A manually created list of 842 Spanish affixes.
? Medical corpora for Spanish and Portuguese.
These corpora were compiled exploiting het-
erogeneous WWW sources. The size of the
acquired corpora amounts to 2,267,841 tokens
with 118,021 types for Spanish and 3,406,589
tokens with 133,146 types for Portuguese.
? Word frequency lists generated from these cor-
pora, for Spanish and Portuguese.
3.1 Spanish Subword Generation
In order to acquire a first-shot Spanish subword lex-
icon we designed the following lexeme generation
strategy: Using the Portuguese lexicon, identical
and similarly spelled Spanish subword candidates
(cognates) are generated. As an example, the Por-
tuguese word stem ?estomag? (?stomach?) is identi-
cal with its Spanish cognate. An example for a pair
of similar stems is ?mulher? (?woman?) (Portuguese)
vs. ?mujer? (Spanish). Similar subword candidates
Rule Portuguese Spanish
(P ? S) Example Example
qua ? cua quadr cuadr
eia ? ena veia vena
ss ? s fracass fracas
lh ? j mulher mujer
lh ? ll detalh detall
l ? ll lev llev
i ? y ensai ensay
f ? h formig hormig
+ca ? za cabeca cabeza
+o+ ? ue sort suert
... ... ...
Table 2: Sample of Portuguese-to-Spanish String Sub-
stitution Rules
were generated by applying a set of string substitu-
tion rules some of which are listed in Table 2. In to-
tal, we formulated 45 rules as a result of identifying
common-language Portuguese-Spanish cognates in
a commercial dictionary. Some of these substitu-
tion patterns cannot be applied to starting or end-
ing sequences of characters in the Portuguese source
subword. These regularities are captured by using a
wildcard (?+? in Table 2) representing at least one
arbitrary character.
First, for each Portuguese lexicon entry (n =
14,183 stems and invariants, excluding affixes),
all possible Spanish variant strings were generated
based upon the set of string substitution rules. This
led, on the average, to 9.53 Spanish variant hypothe-
ses per Portuguese subword entry (ranging from 5.3
variants for high-frequency four-character words to
355.2 for low-frequency 17-character words). All
these candidates were subsequently compared to
the Spanish word frequency list, we had previously
compiled from our Spanish text corpus. Wherever
a left-sided string match (in the case of stems) or
an exact one (in the case of invariants) occurred,
the matching string was listed as a potential Span-
ish cognate of the Portuguese subword it originated
from. Whenever several Spanish substitution alter-
natives for a Portuguese subword had to be con-
sidered (cognate ambiguity) that particular one was
chosen which had the closest relative distribution
in the corpus-derived Spanish word frequency list,
when compared to its Portuguese equivalent in the
Portuguese word list. As a result, we obtained a list
of tentative Spanish subwords each linked by the as-
sociated MIDs to its corresponding cognate in the
Portuguese lexicon.
Quantitatively, starting from 14,183 Portuguese
subwords, a total of 132,576 Spanish subword can-
didates were created using the string substitution
rules. Matching these Spanish candidates against
the Spanish corpus and allowing for a maximum of
one Spanish candidate per Portuguese subword, we
identified 11,206 tentative Spanish cognates (79%
of the Portuguese seed lexicon) which are linked to
a total of 8,992 MIDs from their Portuguese corre-
lates (hence, 2214 synonym relationships have also
been hypothesized). 2,977 generated items could
not be found in the Spanish corpus, at all.
3.2 Manual Semantic Validation
One of the authors evaluated manually a random
sample of 388 (3.5% of all generated) cognate pairs
in order to identify false friends, i.e., similar words
in different languages with different meanings. In
our sample we found, e.g., the Spanish candidate
*?crianz? for the Portuguese ?crianc? (the normal-
ized stem of ?crianc?a?; English: ?child?). The cor-
rect translation of Portuguese ?crianc? to Spanish,
however, would have been ?nin? (the stem of ?nin?o?),
whilst the Spanish ?crianz? refers to ?criac? (stem of
?criac?a?o? in Portuguese; English: ?breed?). Taking
these false friend errors into account, the automatic
generation of Portuguese-Spanish cognate pairs still
yields 89,4% accuracy.
Assuming then that approximately 1,188 false
friends are among the list of 11,206 generated
Spanish subword translations (10.6%), the question
arises how to distinguish false friends from true pos-
itives (cognates). Because a manual examination of
the entire candidate set is a tedious and still error-
prone work, we shifted our attention to automatic
semantic validation techniques.
3.3 Automatic Semantic Validation
In order to automatically validate all the generated
cognate pairs, we examined the local context in
which these cognates occur in non-parallel corpora
of both languages involved. The basic idea that
underlies this approach is that a subword that ap-
pears in a certain context should have a (true posi-
tive) cognate that occurs in a similar context, at least
when (very) large corpora are taken into account.
Cognate similarity can then be measured in terms
of context vector comparison (cf. also Rapp (1999)
or Koehn and Knight (2002)).
We therefore processed the Portuguese corpus us-
ing the morpho-semantic normalization routines as
discussed in Section 2. In the next step, we cre-
ated a context vector for each MID, the compo-
nents of which contained the relative frequencies of
co-occurring MIDs in a local window of four sub-
sequent, yet unordered MID units (a size also en-
dorsed by Rapp (1999)).
In order to compute the context vector for each
Spanish subword candidate, we then constructed
a seed lexicon with all the automatically created
Spanish subword candidates, together with the list
of Spanish affixes. Based on this lexicon, the Span-
ish corpus was morphologically normalized in the
same way, using the MIDs that were licensed by the
Portuguese cognates. For each of the candidate cog-
nate MIDs, we built a corresponding context vector.
We then measured the context similarity for each
MID considering its Portuguese source context and
the corresponding Spanish one. We chose two sim-
ilarity metrics, viz. the well-known cosine metric
(Salton and McGill, 1983) and an inverted, normal-
ized (within the interval [0,1]) variant of the city-
block metric (advocated by Rapp (1999) as an alter-
native that outperformed cosine in his experiments).
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  500  1000  1500  2000  2500  3000  3500
Ve
ct
or
 S
im
ilia
rit
y
MID (n = 3809)
Cosine 
City-Block
Figure 1: Context Similarity of MIDs Representing Por-
tuguese and Spanish Sources
 1
 10
 100
 1000
 10000
 100000
 0  1000  2000  3000  4000  5000  6000  7000  8000  9000
Ab
so
lu
te
 F
re
qu
en
cy
 in
 C
or
pu
s 
(lo
g-s
ca
le)
MID (n = 8992)
Portuguese Corpus
Spanish Corpus
Figure 2: Distribution of MIDs in the Portuguese and
Spanish Corpora
Figure 1 depicts the resulting curves. Both met-
rics reveal almost the same characteristics. Only for
higher similarities, city-block allows a more fine-
grained distinction.
For 5,183 (57.6%) from 8,992 pairs of MIDs (one
from a ?Portuguese? vector, the other from a ?Span-
ish? vector), no vector similarity at all could be mea-
sured. We distinguish between the following cases:
? There was no MID occurrence in the Spanish
corpus.
? There was a MID occurrence in the Spanish
corpus, but none in the Portuguese one.
? The vectors were orthogonal, i.e., the contexts
did not overlap at all, although the MID oc-
curred in the Spanish corpus, as well as in the
Portuguese one. This can be interpreted in two
ways: For reasonably frequent MIDs (cf. Fig-
ure 2 for the distribution in the corpora) this is
the strongest evidence for false friends (formal
cognates which are not semantically related),
whereas for sparsely distributed MIDs, it does
hardly permit any valid judgment concerning
their status as false or true cognates.
On the other hand, 1,540 MID pairs (in the sense
from above) exceed similarity values of 0.2 (17.1%)
and 2,065 pairs still share values greater than 0.15
(23%). The obvious question is: What is an ade-
quate threshold?
Figures 3 and 4 convey an answer to this ques-
tion. Both figures are meant to illustrate the trade-
off when one increases the threshold for the similar-
ity of both vectors, the Portuguese and the Span-
ish one, for the MIDs under consideration. The
central notion in these two figures is that of Kept
Hypotheses, i.e., the proportion of MIDs for which
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5%
 o
f A
ll G
en
er
at
ed
 M
ID
 H
yp
ot
he
se
s 
(n 
= 8
99
2)
Cosine Value Threshold
Kept Hypotheses
False Negatives
False Positives
Figure 3: The Effects of Applying a Threshold Value to
the Cosine Metrics for the Validation of MID Hypotheses
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5%
 o
f A
ll G
en
er
at
ed
 M
ID
 H
yp
ot
he
se
s 
(n 
= 8
99
2)
City Block Value Threshold
Kept Hypotheses
False Negatives
False Positives
Figure 4: The Effects of Applying a Threshold Value
to the City-Block Metrics for the Validation of MID Hy-
potheses
the assignment of the underlying cognate is judged
as being semantically valid. When we consider all
(100%) of the generated MIDs (n=8,992) as valid
(hence, cosine and city-block are both zero), we
get 953 false positives (given our empirically de-
termined accuracy rate of 89.4%, and, hence, er-
ror rate of 10.6%) and, obviously, no false negative.
Alternatively, when we consider instead 50% of the
generated MIDs (n=4,496) as valid (with thresholds
for cosine set at 0.05 and for city-block at 0.035),
we get 297 (3.3%) false positives, and the num-
ber of false negatives increases at a level of 3,687
(around 41%, for both metrics). In order to reduce
the set of false friends to zero using the cosine met-
ric, 92.2% of all generated MID cognates will be
rejected by the automatic validation for manual re-
vision (analogously, the number of false negatives
will increase). Interestingly, the same procedure us-
ing the city-block metric will lead to a rejection rate
of 97%.
At a first glance, this seems to contradict the
statement of Rapp (1999), who found in a num-
ber of experiments that the city-block metric yields
the best results among others, viz. cosine and Jac-
card measure, Euclidean distance and scalar prod-
uct. However, his measures were taken to find the
most similar vector for a given word in order to au-
tomatically identify word translations. On the other
hand, in our experiments, we intended to express the
degree of similarity given a pair of cognates. We hy-
pothesized that the city-block metric allows a more
fine grained similarity judgment whilst others, e.g.,
cosine, the Jaccard and Dice coefficient, etc., which
only account for overlapping elements of a vector,
have a stronger demarcation power.
Summarizing, when we increase the similarity
thresholds, the number of MID hypotheses de-
creases as does the number of false positives (al-
ready at a rather low level), while the number of
false negatives increases almost inversely related to
the number of MID hypotheses. Therefore, it is up
to the lexicon engineer to determine the level of pre-
selection in these three dimensions. We also con-
clude from our experiments that a much larger cor-
pus is needed in order to collect reasonable context
evidence for the infrequent MIDs, in particular.
4 Related Work
The rise of the empirical paradigm in the field of
machine translation is, to a large degree, due to the
wide-spread availability of parallel corpora (Brown
et al, 1990). They also constitute an important re-
source for the automated acquisition of translational
lexicons (Turcato, 1998). Unfortunately, the limited
availability of parallel corpora (e.g., the Canadian
Hansard corpus of English and French parliament
debates) restricts this method to a few language
pairs, mostly focused on specific sublanguages (e.g.
politics, legislation, economy). Neither exist such
parallel corpora for the medical sublanguage, nor
for the particular language pair, Spanish and Por-
tuguese, we focus on in this work.
The acquisition of unrelated, albeit comparable
corpora is much easier. Rapp (1999) used unre-
lated parallel corpora in order to learn English and
German word-to-word translations. His approach
is based on similarity measures and context clues,
using a seed lexicon of trusted translations. Koehn
and Knight (2002) derived such a seed lexicon from
German-English cognates which were selected by
using string similarity criteria. An additional boost
can be achieved by retrieving content-related doc-
ument pairs using CLIR techniques (Utsuro et al,
2003). An alternative generative approach is pro-
posed by Barker and Sutcliffe (2000) who created
Polish cognate candidates out of an English wordlist
using a set of string mapping rules.
Pirkola et al (2003) used aligned translation dic-
tionaries as source data. Based on that, they created
an algorithm to automatically generate transforma-
tion rules from five different languages to English,
including Spanish. Applying a two-step technique
(translation rules and fuzzy n-gram matching), they
achieved 81.1% of average precision in a Spanish-
to-English context covering biomedical words only.
However, their evaluation metrics considerably dif-
fered from ours, since they considered multiple hy-
potheses.
Our work differs from these precursors in many
ways. First of all, due to domain and language re-
strictions the size of our corpora is much smaller
than the commonly used newspaper corpora. For
the same reasons, CLIR techniques for retrieving
comparable documents are not yet available (on the
contrary, the goal of our work is to provide re-
sources for a medical CLIR system). Thirdly, the
two languages are so similar that a high amount
of translations could already be acquired by apply-
ing string mapping rules (this approach to cognate
mapping has also been discussed by MacWhinney
(1995) for second language acquisition of human
learners). Finally, rather than acquiring bilateral
word translation, our focus lies on assigning sub-
words to interlingual semantic identifiers.
5 Conclusions and Further Work
In a first round of experiments, we have shown
that a considerable amount of Portuguese subwords
from the medical domain could be mapped to Span-
ish cognate stems applying simple string transfor-
mation rules. We then used the local context in
language-specific corpora in order to validate these
cognate pairs. However, our results also reveal the
limitations of such an approach, at least for infre-
quent stems, due to the small corpus size. Ac-
cordingly, for future experiments one has to pro-
vide much larger text corpora, paticularly in the next
steps of our experiments, in which the Spanish lexi-
con will be completed by subwords which cannot be
generated from their Portuguese translations. Here,
we will acquire new Spanish lexeme candidates by
automated stemming, and retrieve their Portuguese
translations by exploring their local context. This
requires, however, huge corpora, exceeding the cur-
rent ones by several orders of magnitude. Addition-
ally, their documents will have to be related using
clustering techniques. The usability of the resulting,
mainly automatically generated Spanish extension
of the MORPHOSAURUS lexicon for the purpose of
cross-language text retrieval can then be evaluated
in real CLIR experiments as previously done for
English, German and Portuguese (cf. Hahn et al
(2004)).
Acknowledgements.
This work was partly supported by the German
Research Foundation (DFG), grant KL 640/5-1,
and by the Brazilian National Council for Scien-
tific Research and Development (CNPq), grants
551277/01-7 and 550240/03-9.
References
Gosia Barker and Richard F. E. Sutcliffe. 2000. An
experiment in the semi-automatic identification
of false-cognates between English and Polish. In
Proceedings of the Irish Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Cognitive Science.
Peter F. Brown, John Cocke, Stephen A. Della
Pietra, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Fredrick Je-
linek, John D. Lafferty, Robert L. Mercer, and
Paul S. Roossin. 1990. A statistical approach to
machine translation. Computational Linguistics,
16(2):79?85.
Julio Gonzalo, Felisa Verdejo, and Irina Chugur.
1999. Using EUROWORDNET in a concept-
based approach to cross-language text retrieval.
Applied Artificial Intelligence, 13(7):647?678.
Udo Hahn, Korne?l Marko?, Michael Poprat, Ste-
fan Schulz, and Joachim Wermter. 2004. Cross-
ing languages in text retrieval via an interlingua.
In Proceedings of the 7th International RIAO?04
Conference, pages 82?99.
Philipp Koehn and Kevin Knight. 2002. Learning
a translation lexicon from monolingual corpora.
In Unsupervised Lexical Acquisition: Proceed-
ings of the Workshop of the ACL Special Inter-
est Group on the Lexicon (SIGLEX), pages 9?16.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Brian MacWhinney. 1995. Language-specific pre-
diction in foreign language learning. Language
Testing, 12(3):292?320.
Korne?l Marko?, Phillip Daumke, Stefan Schulz,
and Udo Hahn. 2003. Cross-language MESH
indexing using morpho-semantic normalization.
In AMIA?03 ? Proceedings of the 2003 Annual
Symposium of the American Medical Informatics
Association, pages 425?429. Philadelphia, PA:
Hanley & Belfus.
Ari Pirkola, Jarmo Toivonen, Heikki Keskustalo,
Kari Visala, and Kalervo Ja?rvelin. 2003. Fuzzy
translation of cross-lingual spelling variants. In
SIGIR 2003 ? Proceedings of the 26th Annual In-
ternational ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval, pages
345?352. Toronto, Canada, 2003, New York, NY:
ACM.
Reinhard Rapp. 1999. Automatic identification
of word translations from unrelated English and
German corpora. In Proceedings of the 37th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 519?526. San Francisco,
CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Miguel Ruiz, Anne Diekema, and Pa?raic Sheridan.
1999. CINDOR conceptual interlingua document
retrieval: TREC-8 evaluation. In Proceedings
of the 8th Text REtrieval Conference (TREC-8),
pages 597?606. National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST). NIST Special Publica-
tion, No. 500-246.
Gerard Salton and Michael J. McGill. 1983. Intro-
duction to Modern Information Retrieval. New
York, NY: McGraw Hill.
MESH. 2001. Medical Subject Headings.
Bethesda, MD: National Library of Medicine.
Stefan Schulz and Udo Hahn. 2000. Morpheme-
based, cross-lingual indexing for medical docu-
ment retrieval. International Journal of Medical
Informatics, 59(3):87?99.
Stefan Schulz, Martin Honeck, and Udo Hahn.
2002. Biomedical text retrieval in languages with
a complex morphology. In Proceedings of the
ACL 2002 Workshop ?Natural Language Process-
ing in the Biomedical Domain?, pages 61?68.
New Brunswick, NJ: Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL).
Davide Turcato. 1998. Automaticaly creating bilin-
gual lexicons for machine translation from bilin-
gual text. In COLING/ACL?98 ? Proceedings of
the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics & 17th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics, vol-
ume 2, pages 1299?1306. San Francisco, CA:
Morgan Kaufmann.
Takehito Utsuro, Takashi Horiuchi, Takeshi
Hamamoto, Kohei Hino, and Takeaki Nakayama.
2003. Effect of cross-language IR in bilingual
lexicon acquisition from comparable corpora. In
EACL?03 ? Proceedings of the 11th Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 355?362.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
