Listen-Communicate-Show (LCS): Spoken Language
Command of Agent-based Remote Information Access
Jody J. Daniels and Benjamin Bell
Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Laboratories
1 Federal Street, A&E 3W
Camden, NJ 08102
{jdaniels, bbell@atl.lmco.com}
ABSTRACT
Listen-Communicate-Show (LCS) is a new paradigm for human
interaction with data sources. We integrate a spoken language
understanding system with intelligent mobile agents that
mediate between users and information sources. We have built
and will demonstrate an application of this approach called
LCS-Marine. Using LCS-Marine, tactical personnel can
converse with their logistics system to place a supply or
information request. The request is passed to a mobile,
intelligent agent for execution at the appropriate database.
Requestors can also instruct the system to notify them when
the status of a request changes or when a request is complete.
We have demonstrated this capability in several field exercises
with the Marines and are currently developing applications of
this technology in new domains.
Keywords
Spoken language understanding, agents, dialogue
management.
1. INTRODUCTION
An LCS system listens for information requests, communicates
both with the user and networked information resources, and
shows a tailored visualization to the individual user. The
LCS-Marine system employs a spoken language understanding
system (SLS) for assisting the user in placing a request and
mobile, intelligent agents for information access to implement
the LCS paradigm. The SLS converses with the user to generate
a request or to check status, amend, or cancel an existing
request. Once sufficient information is obtained from the user,
the SLS launches an agent to accomplish the requested task.
The agent accesses the appropriate databases via whatever
network services are available (including existing tactical
communications networks). Once the agent's tasks are
complete, it returns to the SLS, which generates an appropriate
response to the user. The response may be visual, verbal, or a
combination, depending on the available devices.
2. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
The LCS-Marine system consists of four major components: an
SLS, a collection of agents for information access, real-world
operational databases, and communications networks to
connect the user to the SLS and the agents to the databases.
The underlying architecture for the system is the MIT Galaxy II
conversational architecture [3]. It is a distributed, component-
based middleware product designed to be ?plug and play?.
Specialized servers handle specific tasks, such as translating
audio data to text. All Galaxy II-compliant servers com-
municate with each other through a central server known as the
Hub. The Hub manages flow control, handles traffic among
distributed servers, and provides state maintenance.
In the SLS, speech is sent from the Audio I/O server to the
Recognizer. The top n recognitions are then parsed, prior
context added, and processed using the Natural Language
(NL) servers (Frame Construction and Context Tracking) to
verify the new input's validity and context. The Turn Manager
(TM) determines how to proceed with the conversations and
generates a response. NL (Language Generation) converts it to
text and the Synthesis server generates the verbal response.
The audio server then speaks the waveform file to the user. We
customize the various servers to work with domain specific
issues and application-specific information and training.
Figure 1 shows our LCS architecture.
TINA
Info-
Server
GENESIS
Text-to-Speech
Conversion
Text-to-Speech
Conversion
HUB
SUMMIT
SAPI
Audio
Server
Audio
Server
Context
Tracking
Context
Tracking
Speech
Recognition
Speech
Recognition
Frame
Construction
Fra e
Construction
Language
Generation
Language
Generation
Turn
Manager
Turn
anager
Agent
Server
Agent
Server
Figure 1.  The LCS-Marine architecture.
We have integrated an additional server into the architecture
to support information access?an Agent server. The Agent
server manages a collection of agents that can be tasked to
accomplish a variety of missions, including migration to
distant machines with possibly different operating systems to
gather information or to monitor and report events [2].  
Typically, the Agent server receives its tasking from the TM
and supplies the TM with information from the data source(s).
For persistent tasks, the Agent server becomes the initiator of a
dialogue to inform the user of specific events by passing agent
reports to the TM. When a visual display is present, the Agent
server will dispatch an agent to pass the updated information
to the display machine.
For the LCS-Marine application our agents had to interact
with a logistics database that could be between one to one
hundred miles away. We later describe how our agents were
able to reach this live database over the tactical communication
links available.
Users interact with the LCS-Marine system using the voice
capture device appropriate to their organization (telephone,
cell phone, tactical radios, computer headsets, etc.).
3. MARINE COMBAT SERVICE SUPPORT
PROBLEM
Marines work in a dynamic, fluid environment where
requirements and priorities are constantly subject to change.
Under current operations, it might take up to 72 hours before a
Marine in a Combat Service Support Operations Center
(CSSOC) can confirm with a requesting unit that their order i s
in the logistics system. This is due to a lack of resources
available to the tactical units as well as a difficulty in turning
logistics data into information to enable timely analysis and
decision making. For Marines conducting tactical operations,
these restrictions and limited visibility into the supply chain
hamper logistics planning, decision, execution, and assess-
ment. Figure 2 shows the various echelons involved in tactical
Marine logistics operations. It is noteworthy that tactical
units have no organic means of accessing the logistical
databases other than via radio contact with personnel at the
CSSOC.
The focus of the LCS-Marine project is to provide Marines in
the field with this missing visibility into the supply chain.  By
using standard radio protocols and a common form, Marines
can now converse with a system that understands their task
and end goal and can assist them in getting both the
information and supplies they need. Figure 3 shows a sample of
the Rapid Request form, used when placing an order.
Supporting the LCS-Marine domain required understanding
and using proper radio protocols to communicate. It required
the system to understand call signs, military times, grid
coordinates, and special ordinance nomenclature. Additional-
ly, to fully support the dynamic environment, LCS-Marine
needed the ability to understand and translate usages of the
military phonetic alphabet. This alphabet is used to spell
difficult or unusual words. For example, to give the point of
contact for the request as Sergeant Frew, the user could say: ? P
O C is Sergeant I spell Foxtrot Romeo Echo Whiskey over.?
LCS-Marine would convert the phonetic words to the proper
letter combination. This way the vocabulary is potentially
much larger than that used for system training.
Supporting the dynamic aspects of the Marine environment, the
system is speaker independent. This is critical in applications
where the user may change and there is no additional time for
training the system for a new operator.
The recognizer is trained on the domain vocabulary, but not on
individual operator voices. The system also fully supports
natural, conversational dialogue, i.e., the recognizer expects
utterances at a normal rate of speech and the speaker does not
need to enunciate each syllable.
It is important to note that the amount of time spent training
personnel to use the LCS-Marine system is generally less than
10 minutes. After a short introduction, the user is shown a
sample dialogue for familiarization. The user is also given
information about meta-instructions ? how to start over or to
clear their previous statement ? before they begin operation.
4. OPERATIONAL EVALUATION
To measure the effectiveness of the LCS paradigm under
operational conditions?real users placing real requests,
accessing a live database, and using existing communications
links?we conducted a series of Integrated Feasibility
Experiments (IFE). The IFEs ranged from a pilot study that
featured scripted dialogue, replicated databases, and testing in
the lab with prior military personnel, to field experiments
where active duty Marines used the system operationally over
a series of days as their sole means of interaction with the
logistics system for rapid requests. We tested the system?s
support of placing and checking on requests for ammunition
(Class V), fuels (Class III), and subsistence (Class I) supplies.
More on the experimentation protocols can be found in [1] and
[4].
RF LAN
VOICE AND DATA
Rover?s
Sustainment
and
 Distribution
Teams (SDT)
AMMO
PEOPLE
FSSG
CSSOC
(MAIN)
BSSG/CSSD
CSSOC
(MEDIUM)
V
IX
III
I
IV VIII
II
BE01567N10234E TKS ON ROADBE01567N10234E TRPS IN OPENBE01567N10234E 4xTEL?S 12 MTI MOV NE
BE01567N10234E ADA SITE
BE01567N10234E UNK MOV SEBE01567N10234E 4xTEL?SBE01567N10234E 12 MTI MOV NE
UNK MOV SE
BE01567N10234E TKS ON ROAD
CIS
ECS NT
Server(s)
MSSG/MCSSD
CSSOC
(SMALL)
V III
VIII
I
WAN 1-5MBS
Replicated DBMS
Of CSS Data/Status
CIS
BE01567N10234E TKS ON ROADBE01567N10234E TRPS IN OPENBE01567N10234E 4xTEL?SBE01567N10234E 12 MTI MOV NEBE01567N10234E ADA SITEBE01567N10234E UNK MOV SEBE01567N10234E 4xTEL?SBE01567N10234E 12 MTI MOV NE
UNK MOV SEBE01567N10234E TKS ON ROAD
ECS NT
Server(s)
Figure 2.  The Marine logistics ordering chain.
Figure 3.  Partially Complete Rapid Request Form along with a portion of the database.
Over the course of the IFE process we were able to experiment
with differing server configurations as well as varying com-
munications linkages between servers. The most recent IFE
(December 2000) used the server layout shown in Figure 4.  
Win NT/95/98 Linux
Agent
Server
Agent
Dock
Synthesis
Audio-In/Out .wav
Text
Display info*
DB request*
Turn MgmtRecog NL
User?s PCS
Phone/Laptop/Handheld
SLS Server
Laptop/Handheld
*Compressed to
reduce bandwidth
HUB
Agent
Dock
GPS LCS Apps
Display
Dbms
Figure 4.  The physical LCS-Marine server layout.
The ideal configuration of the system would have a Marine
using their organic communications system calling in to a
remote location and communicating with the SLS there. This
would not add any additional cost or hardware to the existing
Marine infrastructure. This operational layout is depicted in
Figure 5. Unfortunately, the current tactical radio, the Single
Channel Ground and Airborne Radio System (SINCGARS),
can create a large amount of channel noise, which alters or
distorts the acoustic signal. Current recognizers can not yet
compensate for this distortion, although there is active
research into solving this problem.
We used a second operational layout to test the system and get
operator feedback on using a spoken language understanding
interface. This layout is depicted in Figure 6. In this layout, we
required the user to beat the same location as the entire SLS
system  and  the agents migrated over the SINCGARS data link
User CSSOC
DB
Database,
Agents
V
I
III
Spoken Language
System, Agents
SINCGARS
(voice)
User Request
SINCGARS
(data)
Mobile Agent
HMMWV
Figure 5.  The ideal LCS-Marine operational layout.
CSSOCUser/HMMWV
Database,
Agents
Spoken Language
System, Agents
SINCGARS
(data)
V I
III
Mobile Agent
DB
Figure 6.  The LCS-Marine actual operational layout.
to reach the logistics database. The recognizer still had to
contend with the issue of a noisy and dynamic background,
but the acoustic distortion was eliminated.
5. CONCLUSION
We have built a system that integrates a spoken language
understanding system with a mobile, intelligent agent system
that allows users in a hostile acoustic environment to place
and access data requests via a conversational interface. LCS-
Marine is speaker independent and requires little training. The
time to accomplish a task is significantly lower than the
manual input method it seeks to enhance, but it can still be
improved. Being able to rapidly access, insert, modify, and
delete requests gives the users greater visibility into the
supply system.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to members of the LCS team: James Denny, Jerry Franke,
Ray Hill, Bob Jones, Steve Knott, Dan Miksch, Kathy Stiller
and Mike Thomas. This research was supported by DARPA
contract N66001-98-D-8507 and Naval contract N47406-99-
C-7033.
7. REFERENCES
[1] Daniels, J. Integrating a Spoken Language System with
Agents for Operational Information Access. In Proc.. o f
Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-
2000), August, 2000, Austin, TX.
[2] McGrath, S., Chac?n, D., and Whitebread, K. Intelligent
Mobile Agents in the Military Domain. In Proc.. Of
Autonomous Agents 2000 Workshop on Agents in
Industry. Barcelona, Spain.
[3] Seneff, S., Lau, R., and Polifroni, J. 1999. Organization,
Communication, and Control in the GALAXY-II Conver-
sational System. In Proc.. of Eurospeech ?98. Budapest,
Hungary.
[4] Stibler, K., and Denny, J. A Three-tiered Evaluation Ap-
proach for Interactive Spoken Dialogue Systems. In Proc..
of the Human Language Technology Conference HLT-
2001, Mar, 2001, San Diego, CA.
