eBonsai: An integrated environment for annotating treebanks
Ichikawa Hiroshi, Noguchi Masaki, Hashimoto Taiichi, Tokunaga Takenobu, Tanaka Hozumi
Department of Computer Science, Tokyo Institute of Technology
Tokyo Meguro ?Ookayama 2-12-1, Japan
ichikawa@cl.cs.titech.ac.jp
Abstract
Syntactically annotated corpora (tree-
banks) play an important role in re-
cent statistical natural language pro-
cessing. However, building a large tree-
bank is labor intensive and time con-
suming work. To remedy this prob-
lem, there have been many attempts to
develop software tools for annotating
treebanks.
This paper presents an integrated en-
vironment for annotating a treebank,
called eBonsai. eBonsai helps annota-
tors to choose a correct syntactic struc-
ture of a sentence from outputs of a
parser, allowing the annotators to re-
trieve similar sentences in the treebank
for referring to their structures.
1 Introduction
Statistical approach has been a main stream of
natural language processing research for the last
decade. Particularly, syntactically annotated cor-
pora (treebanks), such as Penn Treebank (Marcus
et al, 1993), Negra Corpus (Skut et al, 1997)
and EDR Corpus (Jap, 1994), contribute to im-
prove the performance of morpho-syntactic anal-
ysis systems. It is notorious, however, that build-
ing a large treebank is labor intensive and time
consuming work. In addition, it is quite difficult
to keep quality and consistency of a large tree-
bank. To remedy this problem, there have been
many attempts to develop software tools for anno-
tating treebanks (Plaehn and Brants, 2000; Bird et
al., 2002).
This paper presents an integrated environment
for annotating treebanks, called eBonsai. Fig-
ure 1 shows a snapshot of eBonsai. eBonsai
first performs syntactic analysis of a sentence us-
ing a parser based on GLR algorithm (MSLR
parser) (Tanaka et al, 1993), and provides can-
didates of its syntactic structure. An annotator
chooses a correct structure from these candidates.
When choosing a correct structure, the annotator
can consult the system to retrieve already anno-
tated similar sentences to make the current deci-
sion. Integration of annotation and retrieval is a
significant feature of eBonsai.
To realize the tight coupling of annotation and
retrieval, eBonsai has been implemented as the
following two plug-in modules of an universal
tool platform: Eclipse (The Eclipse Foundation,
2001).
? Annotation plug-in module: This module
helps to choose a correct syntactic structure
from candidate structures.
? Retrieval plug-in module: This module re-
trieves similar sentences to a sentence in
question from already annotated sentences in
the treebank.
These two plug-in modules work cooperatively
in the Eclipse framework. For example, infor-
mation can be transferred easily between these
two modules in a copy-and-past manner. Further-
more, since they are implemented as Eclipse plug-
in modules, these functionalities can also inter-
act with other plug-in modules and Eclipse native
features such as CVS.
108
Figure 1: A snapshot of eBonsai
	

	

	
 
   


   	       
 
  
   
                    
 