Human Language Technologies for Knowledge Management:
Challenges and Opportunities
Mark Maybury
Information Technology Division
The MITRE Corporation
202 Burlington Road
Bedford, MA 01730, USA
maybury@mitre.org
www.mitre.org/resources/centers/it
Abstract
This paper outlines the central role a
range of human language technologies
play in the emerging discipline of
knowledge management.  We
articulate several grand challenges,
illustrate some early successes, and
recommend areas of continued
research.
1 Introduction
In the past few years, knowledge management
(KM) has received increasing attention from
industry, academia, and government. Effective
KM is often cited as a key capability for
competitive advantage for global enterprises.
Human language technology (HLT) plays a
central role in KM, as this article aims to
elucidate.
2 Knowledge Management
Challenges
Knowledge Management is the field of
enhancing organizational performance through
organizational knowledge sharing, learning, and
application of expertise. As an indicator of the
importance of knowledge management, many
corporations that traditionally measured only the
financial aspects of value are beginning to
measure human and intellectual value as well.
Knowledge management can be enabled by a
range of human language technologies including
but not limited to enhanced information
retrieval, extraction, summarization, and
presentation/generation. Moreover, human
language technologies promise to both enhance
human?s access to information as well as to
enhance their interaction with one another such
as by increasing their awareness of knowledge
artifacts or activities intersecting their interests.
Key elements of KM include cataloguing
existing knowledge, discovering expertise, and
creation of new knowledge, which we briefly
discuss in turn.
2.1 Knowledge Mapping
Often times a primary issue for organizations is
knowing what they know.  Even providing easy
access to explicitly captured knowledge in
artifacts such as written policies, strategies,
documents, and presentations can provide
individuals in organizations with tremendous
power and efficiency. Often, however, so much
material is created in an organization that its
effective organization is daunting. Tools are
required that can automatically generate
classifications and/or taxonomies of explicit
corporate and world knowledge. The success of
services such as Yahoo, Northernlight, and
Quiver illustrate the value of (and limitations of)
current classification-based collections and
collaborative filtering approaches.
2.2 Expert and Community Discovery
Knowing who to call, who knows a key fact, or
who has the know-how or the skill to analyze,
diagnose, or recommend in a particular domain
is a challenge.  Traditional manually-created
corporate skills databases are costly,
inconsistent across individuals and disciplines,
and become rapidly obsolete.  Finding experts or
communities of experts rapidly can be a
competitive advantage for a company. Indeed, it
is a key function of new business models of
virtual corporations.
2.3 Knowledge Discovery
Knowledge discovery is the facilitation of end
users or communities of experts directly or
collectively in discovering answers to their
questions.  Accomplishing this can include
question answering, discovery of new
knowledge through machine learning or data
mining, and ultimately new knowledge learning,
including ontology induction.
3 Preliminary Results
Human language technologies have already been
applied to some key knowledge management
areas (Bontcheva 2001). For example, Becerra-
Fernandez (2001) reports on NASA?s expert
finder. In our research we have created systems
which automatically extract and correlate
information from human created artifacts to
create assessments of human expertise
(Maybury, D?Amore, House, D., 2000). For
example, Figure 1 illustrates the screen
MITRE?s Expert Finder (also called People
Finder) generates after a user types in the
keywords ?machine translation?. Expert Finder
processes employee published resumes and
documents as well as corporate newsletters that
mention individual?s names in the context of this
topic (using named entity extraction) to
automatically create expertise profiles for each
employee.  Expert Finder then presents a rank-
ordered list of employees whose expertise
profile best matches this query.
Figure 1. Expert Finder
In spite of low inter-human agreement in
determining expertise, an empirical evaluation
comparing ten technical human resource
managers? performance with Expert Finder on
five specialty areas (data mining, chemicals,
human computer interaction, network security,
and collaboration) demonstrated that Expert
Finder performed at approximately 60%
precision and 40% recall when appropriate data
was available.  This is sufficient performance to
find an expert within one phone call, which was
the original knowledge management objective.
While we mentioned in Section 2.1 the value of
taxonomic search engines, another area of
preliminary success is in knowledge discovery.
Several research groups are working to create
more effective means to access multimedia
information sources (Maybury 2000).  Figure 2
illustrates MITRE?s Broadcast News Nagivator
(BNN), the culmination of many years of
research and an integration of multiple human
language and other technologies (Merlino et al
1997). BNN applies speech, language, and
image processing methods to segment, extract,
and summarize broadcast news sources to
enable personalized and targeted search of the
news. Figure 2 shows the user querying stories
from all sources for the last two weeks (19 April
to 3 May 2001 at the time of writing) containing
the keyword "aegis" and the location "Taiwan".
People, organization, and locations menus are
dynamically generated from extracted entities.
Figure 2. Broadcast News Navigator
The results of the Figure 2 search are show in
Figure 3 which includes 52 stories mentioning
"Taiwan" and "Aegis" war ships on multiple
programs (e.g., C-SPAN, Fox News at 6pm,
9pm and 10 pm, CNN Headline News, CNN
Morning Headline, CNN World Today, CNN
World View, and CNN Moneyline).  As shown
in Figure 3, BNN presents a quick skim
including a keyframe and the top 3 named
entities for each retrieved story. Clicking on any
of the keyframes brings the user to that story.
Clicking on any of the named entities (people,
places, organizations) brings the user to all
stories mentioning that name. Using document
clustering techniques, BNN further provides
users with quick access to related stories. An
extension of this system automatically mines
correlations among named entities that appear
across stories to detect and track novel topics.
Figure 3. Broadcast News Navigator
4 HLT for KM
Having considered the needs of knowledge
management and some preliminary promise of
human language technology to provide solutions
to these needs, we now more systematically
analyze how HLT can contribute to KM.  Table
1 outlines a range of functional areas of human
language technology that offer potential
solutions to some of the elements required to
enable knowledge management.  We consider
the following ten areas in turn:  input analysis,
information retrieval, information extraction,
question answering, translation, dialogue
management, user modeling, summarization,
presentation generation and awareness/
collaboration.
4.1 Input Analysis
Analysis of user spoken language and natural
input is key to knowledge access.  This is
essential for applications such as natural
language interfaces to databases, question and
answering, and multimedia interfaces.
Challenges include dealing with imprecise,
ambiguous, and/or partial input.  Addressing
these challenges in multimodal (e.g., text,
speech, and gesture) and/or multiplatform
(desktop, kiosk, mobile) interfaces provides
additional challenges. Input mechanisms that are
intuitive as well as user and situation adaptable
or automatically adaptive promise to mitigate
complexity and increase broad availability of
knowledge access.
4.2 Retrieval
The ability to leverage the above advances in
input processing (especially query processing)
together with advances in content-based access
to multimedia artifacts (e.g., text, audio,
imagery, video) promises to enhance the
richness and breadth of accessible material
while at the same time improving retrieval
precision and recall. Dealing with noisy, large
scale, and multimedia data from sources as
diverse as radio, television, documents, web
pages, and human conversations (e.g., chat
sessions and speech transcriptions) will offer
challenges.
4.3 Extraction
Extraction is the ability to identify and cull out
objects and events from multimedia sources
(text, audio, video).  An example challenge
includes extracting entities within media and
correlating those across media. For example,
this might include extracting names or locations
from written/spoken sources and correlating
those with associated images. Whereas
commercial products exist to extract named
entities from text with precision and recall in the
ninetieth percentile, domain independent event
extractors work at best in the fiftieth percentile
and performance degrades further with noisy,
corrupted, or idiosyncratic data.   
Table 1. Human Language Technology for Knowledge Management
Human
Language
Technology
Grand Challenges Benefits to Knowledge Discovery,
Access, Exploitation
Input/Query
Analysis
Interpretation of imprecise, ambiguous,
and/or partial multimodal input.
Facilities include spoken query
processing, visual query analysis (e.g.,
sketching), mixed media query (e.g., text
and graphics)
Natural (written, spoken, gestural) access to
information and knowledge. Decrease in
access complexity or user training. Broaden
availability of knoweldge to users.
Retrieval Natural language processing of queries
and documents.  Content-based retrieval
of text, imagery, audio, video.
Enhancements to document retrieval
precision and recall.  Direct access to media,
easing navigational burden of user.
Reduction of search time.
Extraction Segmentation, object and event
identification, and extraction from
multimedia sources (text, audio, video).
Direct access to information or knowledge
elements including specific types that may
be user preferred. Reuse of media elements
enabling user tailored selection or
presentations.
Question
Answering
Question analysis, response discovery
and generation from heterogeneous
sources.
Overcome time, memory or attention
limitations required to sift through many
returned web pages from a traditional search
by providing direct answers to questions.
Translation Rapid creation of translingual corpora.
Effective translingual retrieval,
summarization, and translation. Access
Verbalization of graphics, Visualization
of text.
Cross media/mode information and
knowledge access enabling broader access to
global information sources using methods
such as translingual information retrieval.
Dialogue
Management
Mixed initiative natural interaction that
deals robustly with context shift,
interruptions, feedback, and shift of
locus of control
Ability to tailor flow and control of
interactions and facilitate interactions.
Includes error detection and correction
tailored to individual physical, perceptual
and cognitive differences.  Motivational and
engaging life-like agents.
Agent/User
Modeling
Unobtrusive learning, representation,
and use of characteristics, beliefs, goals
and plans of agents (including the user).
Enables tracking of user characteristics,
skills and goals in order to enhance
interaction as well as discovery of experts by
other users or agents.
Summarization Scaleability, cross-linguality,
multimedia summarization.
Increasing speed of reviewing materials.
Multimedia summarization, cross-lingual
summarization, large multi-document
summarization.
Presentation
Generation
Automated generation of coordinated
speech, natural language, gesture,
animation, non-speech audio,
generation, possibly delivered via
interactive, animated life-like agents
(includes challenges of media selection,
allocation, coordination and realization)
Mixed media (e.g., text, graphics, video,
speech and non-speech audio) and mode
(e.g., linguistic, visual, auditory) displays
tailored to the user and context. Agents
engaging/motivating to younger and/or less
experienced users.
Awareness and
Collaboration
Topic detection and tracking, place-
based asychronous and sychronous
collaboration environments.
Enhance awareness of new knowledge as
well as other user?s interests and expertise
and the ability of experts to
exchange/integrate knowledge.
4.4 Question Answering
Drawing upon techniques from query
processing, retrieval and presentation, an
important new class of systems will move us
from our current form of search on the web
(type in keywords to retrieve documents) to a
more direct form of asking questions which are
then directly responded to with an extracted
answer. Challenges will include source
selection, source segmentation, extraction, and
semantic integration across heterogeneous
sources of unstructured, structured, and semi-
structured data.
4.5 Translation
Last year, for the first time, English constituted
less than half the material on the web. Some
predict that Chinese will be the primary
language of the web by 2007. Given that
information on the web will increasingly appear
in foreign languages and not all users will be
fluent in those languages, there will be a need to
gist or skim content for relevance assessment
and/or provide high quality translation for
deeper understanding.  New innovative
applications include the translation of
multilingual conversations (e.g., multilingual
chat).
4.6 Dialogue Management
Knowledge workers will require systems that
can support natural, mixed initiative human
computer interaction that deals robustly with
context shift, interruptions, feedback, and shift
of locus of control.  Open research challenges
include the ability to tailor flow and control of
interactions and facilitate interactions including
error detection and correction tailored to
individual physical, perceptual and cognitive
differences.  Motivational and engaging life-like
agents offer promising opportunities for
innovation.
4.7 Agent/User Modeling
Computers can construct models of user beliefs,
goals and plans as well as models of users?
individual and collective skills by processing
materials such as documents or user
interactions/conversations.  While raising
important privacy issues, modeling users or
groups of users unobtrusively from public
materials or conversations can enable a range of
important knowledge management capabilities.
For example, this might include expertise
databases which can be used to enhance
organizational awareness and efficiency.
4.8 Summarization
Summarization aims to select content and
condense it to present a compact form of the
original source or sources. Summaries can be an
extraction of or abstraction from original source
material as well as informative, indicative or
evaluative in purpose.  Some challenges include
multimedia, multilingual and cross document
summarization. Addressing scaleability to large
collections and user-tailored or purpose-tailored
summaries are active areas of research.
Summarization will enable knowledge workers
access to larger amounts of material with less
required reading time.
4.9 Presentation
Effective presentations require the appropriate
selection of content, allocation to media, and
fine grained coordination and realization in time
and space.  Discovery and presentation of
knowledge may require mixed media (e.g., text,
graphics, video, speech and non-speech audio)
and mixed mode (e.g., linguistic, visual,
auditory) displays tailored to the user and
context.  This might include tailoring content
and form to the specific physical, perceptual, or
cognitive characteristics of the user. It might
lead to new visualization and browsing
paradigms for massive multimedia and
multilingual repositories that reduce cognitive
load or task time, increase analytic depth and
breatdh, or simply increase user satisfaction.  A
grand challenge is the automated generation of
coordinated speech, natural language, gesture,
animation, non-speech audio, generation,
possibly delivered via interactive, animated life-
like agents.  Preliminary experiments suggest
that, independent of task performance, agents
may simply be more engaging/motivating to
younger and/or less experienced users (Andr?
2000).
4.10 Awareness and Collaboration
Our gobal web provides unprecedented
opportunity for world wide collaboration, both
asynchronously and sychronously. Users will
need enhanced awareness of both emerging
knowledge and of one another?s expertise. One
such aid is the detection and tracking of  topics
of interest to facilitate discovery and connection
among communities of interest. Another is the
creation of expertise profiles based on publically
available information (e.g., publications,
interviews, public conversations).
5 Summary and Conclusion
Human language technology promises to deliver
great value to the challenge of knowledge
management.  As discussed, many fundamental
scientific and technical challenges will need to
be addressed to ensure that value accrues. These
include:
Heterogeneity ? Dealing with the diverse nature
of human language artifacts, both in form and in
(semantic) content.
Scalability ? Addressing the size of corporate
collections and global content.
Portability ? Creating adaptive methods (e.g.,
corpus-based machine learning approaches) that
enable rapid retargetting of algorithms to new
languages and media.
Complexity ? Ensuring that the many content
forms and presentational methods and devices
do not overwhelm end users.
Security ? Ensuring authentication to control
access to source materials and/or ensuring the
identity/integrity of source materials.
Privacy ? Addressing the legal and social issues
of maintaining privacy and user control of a
user?s model extracted from public user
materials or interactions.
Overcoming these HLT challenges will be
essential to the advancement of knowledge
management.
6 References
Andr?, E., and Rist, T. 2000. Presenting
Through Performing: On the Use of Multiple
Lifelike Characters in Knowledge-Based
Presentation Systems, in: Proc. of the Second
International Conference on Intelligent User
Interfaces (IUI 2000), pp. 1-8, 2000. Best Paper
Award.
Becerra-Fernandez, I. 2001. Searching for
Experts with Expertise-Locator Knowledge
Management Systems. In ACL ?01 Workshop
on Human Language Technology and
Knowledge Mangement. Toulouse, France.
Maybury, M., D?Amore, R., House, D. Nov-
Dec, 2000. Automating the Finding of Experts.
International Journal of Research Technology
Management. 43(6): 12-15.
Maybury, M. (ed.), February 2000. News On
Demand.  Special Section in Communications of
the ACM. 43(2): 33-34, 35-79.
(www.acm.org/cacm/0200/0200toc.html)
Maybury, M., D?Amore, R. and House, D.
forthcoming.  Awareness of Organizational
Expertise. Journal of Human Computer
Interaction: Special issue on Awareness.
Merlino, A., Maybury, M., and Morey, D. 1997.
Broadcast News Navigation using Story
Segments, ACM International Multimedia
Conference, Seattle, WA, November 8-14, 381-
391.
Morey, D.; Maybury, M. and Thuraisingham, B.
editors, 2000.  Advances in Knowledge
Management: Classic and Contemporary
Works. Cambridge:  MIT Press.
Bontcheva, K., Brewster, C., Ciravegna, F.,
Cunningham, H. Guthrie, L., Gaizauskas, R.
Wilks, Y. 2001. Using HLT for Acquiring,
Retrieving and Publishing Knowledge in AKT.
In ACL ?01 Workshop on Human Language
Technology and Knowledge Mangement.
Toulouse, France.
7 Acknowledgements
The ideas described in this paper are inspired by
the efforts of several human language and
knowledge management researchers and groups
at The MITRE Corporation including but not
limited to Eric Breck, Ray D?Amore, David
Day, Chris Elsaesser, Lynette Hirschman, David
House, Manu Kanchady, Marc Light, Inderjeet
Mani, Harry Sleeper, Cynthia Small, Jean
Tatalias,  and Alex Yeh.  I also have benefit
from ideas from Elisabeth Andr?, Thomas Rist
and Christoph Thomas and the anonymous
reviewers.

