Extracting Multiword Expressions with A Semantic Tagger 
Scott S. L. Piao 
Dept. of Linguistics and MEL 
Lancaster University 
 s.piao@lancaster.ac.uk 
Paul Rayson 
Computing Department 
Lancaster University 
 paul@comp.lancs.ac.uk 
Dawn Archer 
Dept. of Linguistics and MEL 
Lancaster University 
d.archer@lancaster.ac.uk
Andrew Wilson 
Dept. of Linguistics and MEL 
Lancaster University 
 eiaaw@exchange.lancs.ac.uk 
Tony McEnery 
Dept. of Linguistics and MEL 
Lancaster University 
 amcenery@lancaster.ac.uk 
Abstract 
Automatic extraction of multiword 
expressions (MWE) presents a tough 
challenge for the NLP community 
and corpus linguistics. Although 
various statistically driven or knowl-
edge-based approaches have been 
proposed and tested, efficient MWE 
extraction still remains an unsolved 
issue. In this paper, we present our 
research work in which we tested 
approaching the MWE issue using a 
semantic field annotator. We use an 
English semantic tagger (USAS) de-
veloped at Lancaster University to 
identify multiword units which de-
pict single semantic concepts. The 
Meter Corpus (Gaizauskas et al, 
2001; Clough et al, 2002) built in 
Sheffield was used to evaluate our 
approach. In our evaluation, this ap-
proach extracted a total of 4,195 
MWE candidates, of which, after 
manual checking, 3,792 were ac-
cepted as valid MWEs, producing a 
precision of 90.39% and an esti-
mated recall of 39.38%. Of the ac-
cepted MWEs, 68.22% or 2,587 are 
low frequency terms, occurring only 
once or twice in the corpus. These 
results show that our approach pro-
vides a practical solution to MWE 
extraction. 
1 Introduction 
2 
Automatic extraction of Multiword ex-
pressions (MWE) is an important issue in the 
NLP community and corpus linguistics. An 
efficient tool for MWE extraction can be use-
ful to numerous areas, including terminology 
extraction, machine translation, bilin-
gual/multilingual MWE alignment, automatic 
interpretation and generation of language. A 
number of approaches have been suggested 
and tested to address this problem. However, 
efficient extraction of MWEs still remains an 
unsolved issue, to the extent that Sag et al 
(2001b) call it ?a pain in the neck of NLP?. 
In this paper, we present our work in 
which we approach the issue of MWE extrac-
tion by using a semantic field annotator. Spe-
cifically, we use the UCREL Semantic 
Analysis System (henceforth USAS), devel-
oped at Lancaster University to identify mul-
tiword units that depict single semantic 
concepts, i.e. multiword expressions. We have 
drawn from the Meter Corpus (Gaizauskas et 
al., 2001; Clough et al, 2002) a collection of 
British newspaper reports on court stories to 
evaluate our approach. Our experiment shows 
that it is efficient in identifying MWEs, in 
particular MWEs of low frequencies. In the 
following sections, we describe this approach 
to MWE extraction and its evaluation. 
Related Works 
Generally speaking, approaches to MWE 
extraction proposed so far can be divided into 
three categories: a) statistical approaches 
based on frequency and co-occurrence affin-
ity, b) knowledge?based or symbolic ap-
proaches using parsers, lexicons and language 
filters, and c) hybrid approaches combining 
different methods (Smadja 1993; Dagan and 
Church 1994; Daille 1995; McEnery et al 
1997; Wu 1997; Wermter et al 1997; Mi-
chiels and Dufour 1998; Merkel and Anders-
son 2000; Piao and McEnery 2001; Sag et al 
2001a, 2001b; Biber et al 2003). 
In practice, most statistical approaches use 
linguistic filters to collect candidate MWEs. 
Such approaches include Dagan and Church?s 
(1994) Termight Tool. In this tool, they first 
collect candidate nominal terms with a POS 
syntactic pattern filter, then use concordances 
to identify frequently co-occurring multiword 
units. In his Xtract system, Smadja (1993) 
first extracted significant pairs of words that 
consistently co-occur within a single syntactic 
structure using statistical scores called dis-
tance, strength and spread, and then exam-
ined concordances of the bi-grams to find 
longer frequent multiword units. Similarly, 
Merkel and Andersson (2000) compared fre-
quency-based and entropy based algorithms, 
each of which was combined with a language 
filter. They reported that the entropy-based 
algorithm produced better results. 
One of the main problems facing statistical 
approaches, however, is that they are unable 
to deal with low-frequency MWEs. In fact, 
the majority of the words in most corpora 
have low frequencies, occurring only once or 
twice. This means that a major part of true 
multiword expressions are left out by statisti-
cal approaches. Lexical resources and parsers 
are used to obtain better coverage of the lexi-
con in MWE extraction. For example, Wu 
(1997) used an English-Chinese bilingual 
parser based on stochastic transduction 
grammars to identify terms, including multi-
word expressions. In their DEFI Project, Mi-
chiels and Dufour (1998) used dictionaries to 
identify English and French multiword ex-
pressions and their translations in the other 
language. Wehrli (1998) employed a genera-
tive grammar framework to identify com-
pounds and idioms in their ITS-2 MT 
English-French system. Sag et al (2001b) 
introduced Head-driven Phrase Structure 
Grammar for analyzing MWEs. Like pure 
statistical approaches, purely knowledge-
based symbolic approaches also face prob-
lems. They are language dependent and not 
flexible enough to cope with complex struc-
tures of MWEs. As Sag et al (2001b) sug-
gest, it is important to find the right balance 
between symbolic and statistical approaches. 
In this paper, we propose a new approach 
to MWEs extraction using semantic field in-
formation. In this approach, multiword units 
depicting single semantic concepts are recog-
nized using the Lancaster USAS semantic 
tagger. We describe that system and the algo-
rithms used for identifying single and multi-
word units in the following section. 
3 
                                                          
Lancaster Semantic tagger 
The USAS system has been in develop-
ment at Lancaster University since 1990 1 . 
Based on POS annotation provided by the 
CLAWS tagger (Garside and Smith, 1997), 
USAS assigns a set of semantic tags to each 
item in running text and then attempts to dis-
ambiguate the tags in order to choose the 
most likely candidate in each context. Items 
can be single words or multiword expressions. 
The semantic tags indicate semantic fields 
which group together word senses that are 
related by virtue of their being connected at 
some level of generality with the same mental 
concept. The groups include not only syno-
nyms and antonyms but also hypernyms and 
hyponyms. 
The initial tagset was loosely based on 
Tom McArthur's Longman Lexicon of Con-
temporary English (McArthur, 1981) as this 
appeared to offer the most appropriate thesau-
rus type classification of word senses for this 
kind of analysis. The tagset has since been 
considerably revised in the light of practical 
tagging problems met in the course of the re-
search. The revised tagset is arranged in a 
hierarchy with 21 major discourse fields ex-
panding into 232 category labels. The follow-
ing list shows the 21 labels at the top level of 
the hierarchy (for the full tagset, see website: 
http://www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/ucrel/usas). 
 
1 This work is continuing to be supported by the Bene-
dict project, EU project IST-2001-34237. 
A general and abstract terms 
B the body and the individual 
C arts and crafts 
E emotion 
F food and farming 
G government and the public domain 
H architecture, buildings, houses and the 
home 
I money and commerce in industry 
K entertainment, sports and games 
L life and living things 
M movement, location, travel and trans-
port 
N numbers and measurement 
O substances, materials, objects and 
equipment 
P education 
Q linguistic actions, states and processes 
S social actions, states and processes 
T time 
W the world and our environment 
X psychological actions, states and 
processes 
Y science and technology 
Z names and grammatical words 
 
Currently, the lexicon contains just over 
37,000 words and the template list contains 
over 16,000 multiword units. These resources 
were created manually by extending and ex-
panding dictionaries from the CLAWS tagger 
with observations from large text corpora. 
Generally, only the base form of nouns and 
verbs are stored in the lexicon and a lemmati-
sation procedure is used for look-up. How-
ever, the base form is not sufficient in some 
cases. Stubbs (1996: 40) observes that ?mean-
ing is not constant across the inflected forms 
of a lemma?, and Tognini-Bonelli (2001: 92) 
notes that lemma variants have different 
senses. 
In the USAS lexicon, each entry consists 
of a word with one POS tag and one or more 
semantic tags assigned to it. At present, in 
cases where a word has more than one syntac-
tic tag, it is duplicated (i.e. each syntactic tag 
is given a separate entry).  
The semantic tags for each entry in the 
lexicon are arranged in approximate rank fre-
quency order to assist in manual post editing, 
and to allow for gross automatic selection of 
the common tag, subject to weighting by do-
main of discourse. 
In the multi-word-unit list, each template 
consists of a pattern of words and part-of-
speech tags. The semantic tags for each tem-
plate are arranged in rank frequency order in 
the same way as the lexicon. Various types of 
multiword expressions are included: phrasal 
verbs (e.g. stubbed out), noun phrases (e.g. ski 
boots), proper names (e.g. United States), true 
idioms (e.g. life of Riley).  
Figure 1 below shows samples of the actual 
templates used to identify these MWUs. Each 
of these example templates has only one se-
mantic tag associated with it, listed on the 
right-hand end of the template. However, the 
second example (ski boot) combines the 
clothing (B5) and sports (K5.1) fields into one 
tag. The pattern on the left of each template 
consists of a sequence of words joined to POS 
tags with the underscore character. The words 
and POS fields can include the asterisk wild-
card character to allow for inflectional vari-
ants and to write more powerful templates 
with wider coverage. USAS templates can 
match discontinuous MWUs, and this is illus-
trated by the first example, which includes 
optional intervening POS items marked 
within curly brackets. Thus this template can 
match stubbed out and stubbed the cigarette 
out. ?Np? is used to match simple noun 
phrases identified with a noun-phrase chun-
ker. 
 
stub*_* {Np/P*/R*} out_RP    O4.6- 
ski_NN1 boot*_NN*          B5/K5.1 
United_* States_N*              Z2 
life_NN1 of_IO Riley_NP1        K1 
 
Figure 1 Sample of USAS multiword templates 
 
As in the case of grammatical tagging, the 
task of semantic tagging subdivides broadly 
into two phases: Phase I (Tag assignment): 
attaching a set of potential semantic tags to 
each lexical unit and Phase II (Tag disam-
biguation): selecting the contextually appro-
priate semantic tag from the set provided by 
Phase I. USAS makes use of seven major 
techniques or sources of information in phase 
II. We will list these only briefly here, since 
they are described in more detail elsewhere 
(Garside and Rayson, 1997). 
  
1. POS tag. Some senses can be elimi-
nated by prior POS tagging. The CLAWS 
part-of-speech tagger is run prior to semantic 
tagging. 
2. General likelihood ranking for single-
word and MWU tags. In the lexicon and 
MWU list senses are ranked in terms of fre-
quency, even though at present such ranking 
is derived from limited or unverified sources 
such as frequency-based dictionaries, past 
tagging experience and intuition.  
3. Overlapping MWU resolution. Nor-
mally, semantic multi-word units take priority 
over single word tagging, but in some cases a 
set of templates will produce overlapping 
candidate taggings for the same set of words. 
A set of heuristics is applied to enable the 
most likely template to be treated as the pre-
ferred one for tag assignment.  
4. Domain of discourse. Knowledge of 
the current domain or topic of discourse is 
used to alter rank ordering of semantic tags in 
the lexicon and template list for a particular 
domain.  
5. Text-based disambiguation. It has 
been claimed (by Gale et al 1992) on the ba-
sis of corpus analysis that to a very large ex-
tent a word keeps the same meaning 
throughout a text. 
6. Contextual rules. The template 
mechanism is also used in identifying regular 
contexts in which a word is constrained to 
occur in a particular sense.  
7. Local probabilistic disambiguation. It 
is generally supposed that the correct seman-
tic tag for a given word is substantially de-
termined by the local surrounding context.  
 
After automatic tag assignment has been 
carried out, manual post-editing can take 
place, if desired, to ensure that each word and 
idiom carries the correct semantic classifica-
tion. 
From these seven disambiguation meth-
ods, our main interest in this paper is the third 
technique of overlapping MWU resolution. 
When more than one template match overlaps 
in a sentence, the following heuristics are ap-
plied in sequence: 
 
1. Prefer longer templates over shorter 
templates 
2. For templates of the same length, pre-
fer shorter span matches over longer 
span matches (a longer span indicates 
more intervening items for discon-
tinuous templates) 
3. If the templates do not apply to the 
same sequence of words, prefer the 
one that begins earlier in the sentence 
4. For templates matching the same se-
quence of words, prefer the one 
which contains the more fully defined 
template pattern (with fewer wild-
cards in the word fields) 
5. Prefer templates with a more fully de-
fined first word in the template 
6. Prefer templates with fewer wildcards 
in the POS tags 
 
These six rules were found to differentiate 
in all cases of overlapping MWU templates. 
Cases which failed to be differentiated indi-
cated that two (or more) templates in our 
MWU list were in fact identical, apart from 
the semantic tags and required merging to-
gether. 
4 Experiment of MWE extraction 
In order to test our approach of extracting 
MWEs using semantic information, we first 
tagged the newspaper part of the METER 
Corpus with the USAS tagger. We then col-
lected the multiword units assigned as a single 
semantic unit. Finally, we manually checked 
the results. 
The Meter Corpus chosen as the test data 
is a collection of court reports from the Brit-
ish Press Association (PA) and some leading 
British newspapers (Gaizauskas 2001; Clough 
et al, 2002). In our experiment, we used the 
newspaper part of the corpus containing 774 
articles with more than 250,000 words. It pro-
vides a homogeneous corpus (in the sense that 
the reports come from a restricted domain of 
court events) and is thus a good source from 
which to extract domain-specific MWEs. 
Another reason for choosing this corpus is 
that it has not been used in training the USAS 
system. As an open test, we assume the re-
sults of the experiment should reflect true ca-
pability of our approach for real-life 
applications. 
The current USAS tagger may assign mul-
tiple possible semantic tags for a term when it 
fails to disambiguate between them. As men-
tioned previously, the first one denotes the 
most likely semantic field of the term. There-
fore, in our experiment we chose the first tag 
when such situations arose. 
A major problem we faced in our experi-
ment is the definition of a MWE. Although it 
has been several years since people started to 
work on MWE extraction, we found that there 
is, as yet, no available ?clear-cut? definition 
for MWEs. We noticed various possible defi-
nitions have been suggested for MWE/MWU. 
For example, Smadja (1993) suggests a basic 
characteristic of collocations and multiword 
units is recurrent, domain-dependent and co-
hesive lexical clusters. Sag et el. (2001b) sug-
gest that MWEs can roughly be defined as 
?idiosyncratic interpretations that cross word 
boundaries (or spaces)?. Biber et al (2003) 
describe MWEs as lexical bundles, which 
they go on to define as combinations of words 
that can be repeated frequently and tend to be 
used frequently by many different speak-
ers/writers within a register. 
Although it is not difficult to interpret 
these deifications in theory, things became 
much more complicated when we undertook 
our practical checking of the MWE candi-
dates. Quite often, we experienced disagree-
ment between us about whether or not to 
accept a MWE candidate as a good one. In 
practice, we generally followed Biber et al?s 
definition, i.e. accept a candidate MWE as a 
good one if it can repeatedly co-occur in the 
corpus. 
Another difficulty we experienced relates 
to estimating recall. Because the MWEs in the 
METER Corpus are not marked-up, we could 
not automatically calculate the number of 
MWEs contained in the corpus. Conse-
quently, we had to manually estimate this fig-
ure. Obviously it is not practical to manually 
check though the whole corpus within the 
limited time allowed. Therefore, we had to 
estimate the recall on a sample of the corpus, 
as will be described in the following section. 
5 Evaluation 
In this section, we analyze the results of 
the MWE extraction in detail for a full 
evaluation of our approach to MWE extrac-
tion. 
Overall, after we processed the test corpus, 
the USAS tagger extracted 4,195 MWE can-
didates from the test corpus. After manually 
checking through the candidates, we selected 
3,792 as good MWEs, resulting in overall 
precision of 90.39%. 
As we explained earlier, due to the diffi-
culty of obtaining the total number of true 
MWEs in the entire test corpus, we had to 
estimate recall of the MWE extraction on a 
sample corpus. In detail, we first randomly 
selected fifty texts containing 14,711 words 
from the test corpus, then manually marked-
up good MWEs in the sample texts, finally 
counted the number of the marked-up MWUs. 
As a result, 1,511 good MWEs were found in 
the sample. Since the number of automatically 
extracted good MWEs in the sample is 595, 
the recall on the sample is calculated as fol-
lows: 
Recall=(595?1511)?100%=39.38%. 
Considering the homogenous feature of 
the test data, we assume this local recall is 
roughly approximate to the global recall of 
the test corpus. 
To analyze the performance of USAS in 
respect to the different semantic field catego-
ries, we divided candidates according to the 
assigned semantic tag, and calculated the pre-
cision for each of them. Table 1 lists these 
precisions, sorting the semantic fields by the 
number of MWE candidates (refer to section 
3 for definitions of the twenty-one main se-
mantic field categories). As shown in this ta-
ble, the USAS semantic tagger obtained 
precisions between 91.23% to 100.00% for 
each semantic field except for the field of 
?names and grammatical words? denoted by 
Z. As Z was the biggest field (containing 
45.39% of the total MWEs and 43.12% of the 
accepted MWEs), we examined these MWEs 
more closely. We discovered that numerous 
pairs of words are tagged as person names 
(Z1) and geographical names (Z2) by mistake, 
e.g. Blackfriars crown (tagged as Z1), stabbed 
Constance (tagged as Z2) etc. 
 
Semantic 
field 
Total 
MWEs 
Accepted 
MWEs 
Precision 
Z 1,904  1,635 85.87% 
T 497  459 92.35% 
A 351  328 93.44% 
M 254  241 94.88% 
N 227  211 92.95% 
S 180  177 98.33% 
B 131  128 97.71% 
G 118  110 93.22% 
X 114  104 91.23% 
I 74  72 97.30% 
Q 67  63 94.03% 
E 58  53 91.38% 
H 53  52 98.11% 
K 48  45 93.75% 
P 39  37 94.87% 
O 32  29 90.63% 
F 24  24 100.00% 
L 11  11 100.00% 
Y 6  6 100.00% 
C 5  5 100.00% 
W 2  2 100.00% 
Total 4,195 3,792 90.39% 
 
Table 1: Precisions for different semantic catego-
ries 
 
Another possible factor that affects the 
performance of the USAS tagger is the length 
of the MWEs. To observe the performance of 
our approach from this perspective, we 
grouped the MWEs by their lengths, and then 
checked precision for each of the categories. 
Table 2 shows the results (once again, they 
are sorted in descending order by MWE 
lengths). As we might expect, the number of 
MWEs decreases as the length increases. In 
fact, bi-grams alone constitute 80.52% and 
81.88% of the candidate and accepted MWEs 
respectively. The precision also showed a 
generally increasing trend as the MWE length 
increases, but with a major divergence of tri-
grams. One main type of error occurred on tri-
grams is that those with the structure of 
CIW(capital-initial word) + conjunction + 
CIW tend to be tagged as Z2 (geographical 
name). The table shows relatively high preci-
sion for longer MWEs, reaching 100% for 6-
grams. Because the longest MWEs extracted 
have six words, no longer MWEs could be 
examined.  
 
MWE 
length 
Total 
MWEs 
Accepted 
MWEs 
Precision 
2 3,378 3,105 91.92% 
3 700 575 82.14% 
4 95 91 95.44% 
5 18 17 94.44% 
6 4 4 100.00% 
Total 4,195 3,792 90.39% 
 
Table 2: Precisions for MWEs of different lengths 
 
As discussed earlier, purely statistical al-
gorithms of MWE extraction generally filter 
out candidates of low frequencies. However, 
such low-frequency terms in fact form major 
part of MWEs in most corpora. In our study, 
we attempted to investigate the possibility of 
extracting low frequency MWEs by using 
semantic field annotation. We divided MWEs 
into different frequency groups, then checked 
precision for each of the categories. Table 3 
shows the results, which are sorted by the 
candidate MWE frequencies. As we expected, 
69.46% of the candidate MWEs and 68.22% 
of the accepted MWEs occur in the corpus 
only once or twice. This means that, with a 
frequency filter of Min(f)=3, a purely statisti-
cal algorithm would exclude more than half of 
the candidates from the process. 
 
Freq. of 
MWE 
Total 
number 
Accepted 
MWEs 
Precision 
1 2,164  1,892 87.43% 
2 750  695 92.67% 
3 - 4 616 570 92.53% 
5 - 7 357 345 96.64% 
8 - 20 253 238 94.07% 
21 - 117 55 52 94.55% 
Total 4,195 3,792 90.39% 
 
Table 3: Precisions for MWEs with different fre-
quencies 
 
Table 3 also displays an interesting rela-
tionship between the precisions and the fre-
quencies. Generally, we would expect better 
precisions for MWEs of higher frequencies, 
as higher co-occurrence frequencies are ex-
pected to reflect stronger affinity between the 
words within the MWEs. By and large, 
slightly higher precisions were obtained for 
the latter groups of higher frequencies (5?7, 
8-20 and 21-117) than those for the preceding 
lower frequency groups, i.e. 94.07%-96.64% 
versus 87.43%-92.67%. Nevertheless, for the 
latter three groups of the higher frequencies 
(5-7, 8-20 and 21?117) the precision did not 
increase as the frequency increases, as we 
initially expected. 
When we made a closer examination of 
the error MWEs in this frequency range, we 
found that some frequent domain-specific 
terms are misclassified by the USAS tagger. 
For example, since the texts in the test corpus 
are newspaper reports of court stories, many 
law courts (e.g. Manchester crown court, 
Norwich crown court) are frequently men-
tioned throughout the corpus, causing high 
frequencies of such terms (f=20 and f=31 re-
spectively). Unfortunately, the templates used 
in the USAS tagger did not capture them as 
complete terms. Rather, fragments were as-
signed a Z1 person name tag (e.g. Manchester 
crown). A solution to this type of problem is 
to improve the multiword unit templates used 
in the USAS tagger. Other possible solutions 
may include incorporating a statistical algo-
rithm to help detect boundaries of complete 
MWEs. 
When we examined the error distribution 
within the semantic fields more closely, we 
found that most errors occurred within the Z 
and T categories (refer to Table 1). The errors 
occurring in these semantic field categories 
and their sub-divisions make up 76.18% of 
the total errors (403). Table 4 shows the error 
distribution across 14 sub-divisions (for defi-
nitions of these subdivisions, see: website: 
http://www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/ucrel/usas). No-
tice that the majority of errors are from four 
semantic sub-categories: Z1, Z2, Z3 and T1.3. 
Notice, also, that the first two of these ac-
count for 60.55% of the total errors. This 
shows that the main cause of the errors in the 
USAS tool is the algorithm and lexical entries 
used for identifying names - personal and 
geographical and, to a lesser extent, the algo-
rithm and lexical entries for identifying peri-
ods of time. If these components of the USAS 
can be improved, a much higher precision can 
be expected. 
In sum, our evaluation shows that our se-
mantic approach to MWE extraction is effi-
cient in identifying MWEs, in particular those 
of lower frequencies. In addition, a reasona-
bly wide lexical coverage is obtained, as indi-
cated by the recall of 39.38%, which is 
important for terminology building. Our ap-
proach provides a practical way for extracting 
MWEs on a large scale, which we envisage 
can be useful for both linguistic research and 
practical NLP applications. 
 
Stag  Err. Stag  Err. 
Z1:person names 119 T1.1.1:time-past 1 
Z2:geog. names 125 T1.1.2:time-present 1 
Z3:other names 16 T1.2:time-momentary 8 
Z4:discourse bin 3 T1.3:time-period 23 
Z5:gram. bin 2 T2:time-begin/end 2 
Z8:pronouns etc. 2 T3:time-age 1 
Z99:unmatched 2 T4:time-early/late 2 
 
Table 4: Errors for some semantic sub-divisions 
6 Conclusion 
In this paper, we have shown that it is a 
practical way to extract MWEs using seman-
tic field information. Since MWEs are lexical 
units carrying single semantic concepts, it is 
reasonable to consider the issue of MWE ex-
traction as an issue of identifying word bun-
dles depicting single semantic units. The main 
difficulty facing such an approach is that very 
few reliable automatic tools available for 
identifying lexical semantic units. However, a 
semantic field annotator, USAS, has been 
built in Lancaster University. Although it was 
not built aiming to the MWE extraction, we 
thought it might be very well suited for this 
purpose. Our experiment shows that the 
USAS tagger is indeed an efficient tool for 
MWE extraction. 
Nevertheless, the current semantic tagger 
does not provide a complete solution to the 
problem. During our experiment, we found 
that not all of the multiword units it collects 
are valid MWEs. An efficient algorithm is 
needed for distinguishing between free word 
combinations and relatively fixed, closely 
affiliated word bundles. 
References 
Douglas Biber, Susan Conrad and Viviana Cortes. 
2003. Lexical bundles in speech and writing: an 
initial taxonomy. In A. Wilson, P. Rayson and 
T. McEnery (eds.) Corpus Linguistics by the 
Lune: a festschrift for Geoffrey Leech, pp. 71-
92.  Peter Lang, Frankfurt. 
Paul Clough, Robert Gaizauskas and S. L. Piao. 
2002. Building and annotating a corpus for the 
study of journalistic text reuse. In Proceedings 
of the 3rd International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2002), 
pp. 1678-1691. Los Palmas de Gran Canaria, 
Spain. 
Ido Dagan, and Ken Church. 1994. Termight: 
identifying and translating technical terminol-
ogy. In Proceedings of the 4th Conference on 
Applied Natural Language Processing, pp. 34-
40. Stuttgard, German. 
B?atrice Daille. 1995. Combined approach for 
terminology extraction: lexical statistics and 
linguistic filtering. Technical paper. UCREL, 
Lancaster University. 
Robert Gaizauskas, Jonathan Foster, Yorick 
Wilks, John Arundel, Paul Clough and Scott 
Piao. 2001. The METER corpus: a corpus for 
analysing journalistic text reuse. In the Pro-
ceedings of the Corpus Linguistics 2001, pp: 
214-223. Lancaster, UK. 
William Gale, Kenneth Church, and David 
Yarowsky. 1992. One sense per discourse. In 
Proceedings of the 4th DARPA Speech and 
Natural Language Workshop, pp 233-7. 
Roger Garside and Nick Smith. 1997. A hybrid 
grammatical tagger: CLAWS4. In R. Garside, 
G. Leech and A. McEnery (eds.), Corpus 
Annotation: Linguistic Information from 
Computer Text Corpora, pp. 102-121. Long-
man, London. Roger Garside and Paul Rayson. 1997. Higher-
level annotation tools. In. Roger Garside, Geof-
frey Leech, and Tony McEnery (eds.) Corpus 
Annotation: Linguistic Information from Com-
puter Text Corpora, pp. 179 - 193. Longman, 
London.  
Tom McArthur. 1981. Longman Lexicon of 
Contemporary English. Longman, London. 
Tony McEnery, Lang? Jean-Marc, Oakes Michael 
and V?ronis Jean. 1997. The exploitation of 
multilingual annotated corpora for term extrac-
tion. In Garside Roger, Leech Geoffrey and 
McEnery Anthony (eds), Corpus annotation --- 
linguistic information from computer text cor-
pora, pp 220-230. London & New York, Long-
man. 
Magnus Merkel and Mikael Andersson. 2000. 
Knowledge-lite extraction of multi-word units 
with language filters and entropy thresholds. In 
Proceedings of 2000 Conference User-Oriented 
Content-Based Text and Image Handling 
(RIAO'00), pages 737--746, Paris, France. 
Archibald Michiels and Nicolas Dufour.1998. 
DEFI, a tool for automatic multi-word unit rec-
ognition, meaning assignment and translation 
selection. In Proceedings of the First Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources & 
Evaluation, pp. 1179-1186. Granada, Spain. 
Scott Songlin Piao and Tony McEnery. 2001. 
Multi-word unit alignment in English-Chinese 
parallel corpora. In the Proceedings of the Cor-
pus Linguistics 2001, pp. 466-475. Lancaster, 
UK. 
Ivan A. Sag, Francis Bond, Ann Copestake and 
Dan Flickinger. 2001a. Multiword Expressions. 
LinGO Working Paper No. 2001-01. Stanford 
University, CA. 
Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann 
Copestake and Dan Flickinger. 2001b. Multi-
word Expressions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. 
LinGO Working Paper No. 2001-03. Stanford 
University, CA. 
Frank Smadja. 1993. Retrieving collocations from 
text: Xtract. Computational Linguistics 
19(1):143-177. 
Michael Stubbs. 1996. Text and corpus analysis: 
computer-assisted studies of language and cul-
ture. Blackwell, Oxford. 
Elena Tognini-Bonelli. 2001. Corpus linguistics at 
work. Benjamins, The Netherlands. 
Eric Wehrli. 1998. Translating idioms. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING-ACL ?98, Montreal, Can-
ada, Vol. 2, pp. 1388-1392. 
Dekai Wu. 1997. Stochastic inversion transduction 
grammars and bilingual parsing of parallel cor-
pora. Computational Linguistics 23(3): 377-
401. 
 
