The Efficiency of Multimodal Interaction for a Map-based Task 
Philip COHEN, David McGEE, Josh CLOW 
Center for Human-Computer Communication 
Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology 
20000 N.W. Walker Road 
Beaverton, Oregon 97006 
{ pcohen, dmcgee } @cse.ogi.edu 
Abstract 
This paper compares the efficiency of using a 
standard direct-manipulation graphical user 
interface (GUI) with that of using the QuickSet 
pen/voice multimodal interface for supporting a 
military task. In this task, a user places military 
units and control measures (e.g., various types 
of lines, obstacles, objectives) on a map. Four 
military personnel designed and entered their 
own simulation scenarios via both interfaces. 
Analyses revealed that the multimodal interface 
led to an average 3.5-fold speed improvement in 
the average ntity creation time, including all 
error handling. The mean time to repair errors 
also was 4.3 times faster when interacting 
multimodally. Finally, all subjects reported a 
strong preference for multimodal interaction. 
These results indicate a substantial efficiency 
advantage for multimodal over GUI-based 
interaction during map-based tasks. 
Introduction 
Nearly two decades ago at ACL'80, Professor 
Ben Shneiderman challenged the field of natural 
language processing as follows: 
In constructing computer systems which mimic 
rather than serve people, the developer may 
miss opportunities for applying the unique and 
powerful features of a computer: extreme speed, 
capacity to repeat edious operations accurately, 
virtually unlimited storage for data, and 
distinctive input/output devices. Although the 
slow rate of human speech makes menu 
selection impractical, high-speed computer 
displays make menu selection an appealing 
alternative. Joysticks, light pens or the "mouse" 
are extremely rapid and accurate ways of 
selecting and moving graphic symbols or text on 
a display screen. Taking advantage of these and 
other computer-specific techniques will enable 
designers to create powerful tools without 
natural language commands. \[20, p. 139\] 
He also challenged us to go beyond mere 
claims, but to demonstrate the benefits of 
natural language processing technologies 
empirically. Since then, not only has there been 
a long period of unprecedented innovation in 
hardware, software architectures, speech 
processing, and natural language processing, but 
NLP research has also embraced empirical 
methods as one of its foundations. Still, we 
have yet to defend claims empirically that 
technologies for processing natural human 
communication are more efficient, effective, 
and/or preferred, than interfaces that are best 
viewed as "tools," especially interfaces 
involving a direct manipulation style of 
interaction. The present research attempts to 
take a small step in this direction. 
In fact, it has often been claimed that spoken 
language-based human-computer interaction 
will not only be more natural but also more 
efficient than keyboard-based interaction. 
Many of these claims derive from early 
modality comparison studies \[1\], which found a 
2-3 fold speedup in task performance when 
people communicated with each other by 
telephone vs. by keyboard. Studies of the use of 
some of the initial commercial speech 
recognition systems have reported efficiency 
gains of approximately 20% - 40% on a variety 
331 
of interactive hands-busy tasks [10] compared 
with keyboard input. Although these results 
were promising, once the time needed for error 
correction was included, the speed advantage of 
speech often evaporated [18] ~. A recent study of 
speech-based dictation systems [9] reported that 
dictation resulted in a slower and more errorful 
method of text creation than typing. From such 
results, it is often concluded that the age of 
spoken human-computer interaction is not yet 
upon us. 
Most of these studies have compared speech 
with typing, However, in order to affect 
mainstream computing, spoken interaction 
would at a minimum need to be found to be 
superior to graphical user interfaces (GUIs) for 
a variety of tasks. In an early study of one 
component of GUIs, Rudnicky [18] compared 
spoken interaction with use of a scroll bar, 
finding that error correction wiped out the speed 
advantages of speech, but users still preferred to 
speak. Pausch and Leatherby [17] examined the 
use of simple speaker-dependent discrete speech 
commands with a graphical editor, as compared 
with the standard menu-based interface. With a 
19-word vocabulary, subjects were found to 
create drawings 21% faster using speech and 
mouse than with the menu-based system. They 
conjectured that reduction in mouse-movement 
was the source of the advantage. In general, 
more research comparing speech and spoken- 
language-based interfaces with graphical user 
interfaces still is needed. 
We hypothesize that one reason for the 
equivocal nature of these results is that speech is 
often being asked toperform an unnatural act 
the interface design requires people to speak 
when other modalities of communication would 
be more appropriate. In the past, strengths and 
weaknesses of various communication 
modalities have been described [2, 6, 13], and a 
strategy of developing multimodal user 
interfaces has been developed using the 
strengths of one mode to overcome weaknesses 
in another, Interface simulation studies 
I See also [6, 10] for a survey of results. 
Figure 1. The ExInit GUI 
comparing multimodal (speech/pen) interaction 
with speech-only have found a 35% reduction in 
user errors, a 30% reduction in spoken 
dysfluencies (which lead to recognition errors), 
a 10% increase in speed, and a 100% user 
preference for multimodal interaction over 
speech-only in a map-based task [14]. These 
results suggest hat multimodal interaction may 
well offer advantages over GUI's for map-based 
tasks, and may also offer advantages for 
supporting error correction during dictation [16, 
19]. 
In order to investigate these issues, we 
undertook a study comparing a multimodal and 
a graphical user interface that were built for the 
same map-based task ~. 
1 Study ~ 
This study compares a 
graphical user interface 
pen/voice multimodal 
direct-manipulation 
with the QuickSet 
interface [4] for 
supporting a common military 
planning/simulation task. In this task, a user 
arrays forces on a map by placing icons 
representing military units (e.g., the 82 n~ 
Airbome Division) and "control measures," 
2 A high-performance spoken language system was also developed 
for a similar task [ 12] but to our knowledge it was not formally 
evaluated against the r levant GUI. 
3 A case study of one user was reported in [3]. This paper eports 
a fuller study, with different users, statistical analyses, and an 
expanded set of dependent measures (including error correction). 
332 
Figure 2. QuickSet 
(e.g., various types of lines, obstacles, and 
objectives). A shared backend application 
subsystem, called Exlnit, takes the user 
specifications and attempts to decompose the 
higher echelon units into their constituents. It 
then positions the constituent units on the map, 
subject o the control measures and features of 
the terrain. 
1.2 ExInit's GUI 
Exlnit provides a direct manipulation GUI (built 
by MRJ Corp.) based on the Microsoft 
Windows suite of interface tools, including a 
tree-browser, drop-down scrolling lists, buttons 
(see Figure 1). Many military systems 
incorporate similar user interface tools for 
accomplishing these types of tasks (e.g., 
ModSAF [7]). The tree-browser is used to 
represent and access the collection of military 
units. The user employs the unit browser to 
explore the echelon hierarchy until the desired 
unit is located. The user then selects that unit, 
and drags it onto the map in order to position it 
on the terrain. The system then asks for 
confirmation of the unit's placement. Once 
confirmed, Exlnit invokes its deployment server 
to decompose the unit into its constituents and 
position them on the terrain. Because this is a 
time-consuming process depending on the 
echelon of the unit, only companies and smaller 
units were considered. 
To create a linear or area control measure, the 
user pulls down a list of all control measure 
4 types, then scrolls and selects the desired type. 
Then the user pushes a button to start entering 
points, selects the desired locations, and finally 
clicks the button to exit the point creation mode. 
The user is asked to confirm that the selected 
points are correct, after which the system 
connects them and creates a control measure 
object of the appropriate type. 
Finally, there are many more features to this 
GUI, but they were not considered for the 
present comparison. The system and its GUI 
were well-received by the client, and were used 
to develop the largest known distributed 
simulation (60,000 entities) for the US 
Government's Synthetic Theater of War 
program (STOW). 
4 There were 45 entries, viewable in a window of size 9. The 
entries consisted of linear features (boundaries, obstacles, etc.), 
then areas. 
333 
1.3 QuickSet's Multimodai Interface 
QuickSet is a multimodal (pen/voice) interface 
for map-based tasks. With this system, a user 
can create entities on a map by simultaneously 
speaking and drawing \[4\]. With pen-based, 
spoken, or multimodal input, the user can 
annotate the map, creating points, lines, and 
areas of various types (see Figure 2). In virtue 
of its distributed multiagent architecture, 
QuickSet operates in various heterogeneous 
hardware configurations, including wearable, 
handheld, desktop, and wall-sized. Moreover, it 
controls numerous backend applications, 
including 3D terrain visualization \[5\] military 
simulation, disaster management \[15\] and 
medical informatics. 
The system operates as follows: When the pen is 
placed on the screen, the speech recognizer is 
activated, thereby allowing users to speak and 
gesture simultaneously. For this task, the user 
either selects a spot on the map and speaks the 
name of a unit to be placed there (e.g, 
"mechanized company"), or draws a control 
measure while speaking its name (e.g., "phase 
line green"). In response, QuickSet creates the 
appropriate military icon on its map and asks for 
confirmation. Speech and gesture are 
recognized in parallel, with the speech 
interpreted by a definite-clause natural language 
parser. For this study, IBM's Voice Type 
Application Factory, a continuous, speaker- 
independent speech recognition system, was 
used with a bigram grammar and 662-word 
vocabulary. In general, analyses of spoken 
language and of gesture ach produce a list of 
interpretations represented as typed feature 
structures \[8\]. The language supported by the 
system essentially consists of complex noun 
phrases, including attached prepositional 
phrases and gerunds, and a small collection of 
sentence forms. Utterances can be just spoken, 
or coupled with pen-based gestures. Multimodal 
integration searches among the set of 
interpretations for the best joint interpretation 
\[8, 22\], which often disambiguates both speech 
and gesture simultaneously \[15\]. Typed feature 
structure unification provides the basic 
information fusion operation. Taking advantage 
of the system's mutual disambiguation 
capability, QuickSet confirms its interpretation 
of the user input after multimodal integration 
\[11\], thereby allowing the system to correct 
recognition and interpretation errors. If the 
result is acceptable, the user needs only to 
proceed; only unacceptable results require 
explicit disconfirmation. Finally, the 
multimodal interpretation is sent directly to the 
Exlnit deployment server, effectively bypassing 
the Exlnit GUI. 
2 Procedure 
The study involved four subjects who were 
retired US military domain experts, including a 
US Army National Guard Brigadier General, a 
US Army Reserve Major, a US Marine Corps 
Captain, and a US Army communications 
specialist. Each of the subjects was a frequent 
computer user, and all had familiarity both with 
GUIs built around the Microsoft user interface 
tools as well as with pen-and-paper based 
drawing of unit symbology and diagrams on 
maps. Not having used either system before, the 
subjects were given 30 minutes to learn the 
Exlnit GUI, and the same amount of time to 
learn QuickSet. The subjects created scenarios 
of their own design, using entities common to 
both systems, first on paper, then with each of 
the two systems. The scenarios had 8-21 units, 
and 9-33 control measures. The order of 
interface styles was counterbalanced across 
subjects in this within-subject design. The 
systems were run on a Pentium Pro 200MHz 
computer with an Input Technologies 14" color 
flat-panel display. Stylus input was used for 
QuickSet, and keyboard and mouse were 
employed with the GUI. 
The mean time needed for each expert subject o 
create and position a unit or control measure 
was calculated for each interface. The time to 
create an entity began when the mouse entered 
the relevant interface tool or the time when the 
microphone was engaged by placing the pen on 
the map. Mouse "travel" time to the desired 
interface tool was not included because the pen 
could not be tracked when it was out of the 
sensitivity range of the digitizer. Timing ended 
334 
when the system asked for confirmation of its 
impending action. Separate creation time 
calculations were made for units and control 
measures because the GUI employed different 
user interface tools for each. Also, whereas the 
set of QuickSet units was a subset of the units 
available to the GUI, the set of control measures 
was identical for QuickSet and the GUI. 
The entity creation times reported in this study 
include correction of all errors needed for both 
QuickSet and the GUI. Error correction time 
was accumulated for each attempt until a user 
confirmation (explicit or implicit) was achieved, 
or until the entire entity creation attempt was 
aborted. Only 4 multimodal interactions (total = 
20.7 secs.) and 1 GUI interaction (total = 43.2 
secs.) were aborted. Errors for QuickSet 
included out-of-vocabulary or grammar, 
procedural errors (e.g., not clicking on the map), 
disfluencies, and recognition errors. For the 
GUI, errors involved failure to enter or leave 
drawing mode, selecting the wrong unit in the 
browser, disconfirming, etc. Overall, QuickSet 
provided an 88.5% successful understanding 
rate. 
By saying "multiple Xs," the QuickSet user 
could enter a "mode" in which he was creating 
an entity of type X (e.g., a mechanized 
company). To support his process, the system 
stored a discourse referent hat was then unified 
with subsequent input. The user needed only to 
say "here" and touch the screen in order to 
create another entity of that type at that 
location? In these cases, the time taken to enter 
the mode was amortized over the entities 
created. Likewise, the time taken to open the 
unit browser to show the desired unit was 
amortized over the units of that type created 
before the browser was again scrolled. 
3 Resu l ts  
Analyses revealed that multimodal interaction 
resulted in a 3.7-fold speed increase in creating 
units compared to the GUI, paired t-test, t (3) = 
5.791, p < 0.005, one-tailed. In addition, it 
provided a 3.3-fold increase in creating control 
measures paired t-test t (3) = 8.298, p < 0.002, 
one-tailed (see Table I). 6 Much of this speed 
differential can be traced to the need to browse 
the echelons of the US military, scrolling long 
lists of units with the GUI (e.g., 126 units are in 
the list of US Army companies), followed by a 
separate dragging operation to position the 
selected unit. In contrast, QuickSet users 
specified the type of entity directly, and 
supplied its location in parallel. Likewise, the 
speed differential for the control measures may 
be attributed to the user's ability to both-draw 
and speak in parallel, where the GUI required 
separate actions for going into and out of 
drawing mode, for selecting the type of control 
measure, and for selecting appropriate points on 
the map. 
Although there were fewer errors on average 
when using the direct manipulation GUI, they 
were not significantly fewer than when 
interacting multimodally. In contrast, the time 
needed to repair an error was significantly lower 
when interacting multimodally than with the 
GUI, paired t-test, t (3) = 4.703, p<0.009, one- 
tailed. On balance, the same users completing 
the same tasks spent 26% more total time 
correcting errors with the GUI than with the 
multimodal interface. 
s In general, the user could at that point say anything that would 
unify with the type of entity being created, such as "facing two 
two five degrees in defensive posture." This would add additional 
data to the type of entity being created. Similar data could be 
added via the GUI, but it required interacting with a dialogue box 
that was only created after the unit's constituents were loaded (a 
time-consuming operation). Since QuickSet users could supply 
the data before the constituents were loaded, it was deemed more 
fair to ignore this QuickSet capability even though it speeds up 
multimodal interaction considerably, and employs more extensive 
natural language processing. 
It should be pointed out that the paired t-test takes into 
consideration the number of subjects. Thus, these findings at these 
significance levels are particularly strong. A second set of 
nonparametric tests (Wilcox on signed ranks) were also performed, 
indicating that multimodal interaction was significantly faster (p < 
0.034, one-tailed), in creating units and control measures, and also 
in correcting errors. 
335 
Expert 
Subject 
Sl 
$2 
S3 
$4 
Means 
Table I: 
Create Units 
MM GUI 
8.4 25.6 
6.0 14.4 
6~3 27.2 
4.0 18.5 
Create 
Contr61 
Measures 
MM GUI 
6 .5  27.5 
5.2 19.0 
4.0 17.7 
Repair 
Errors 
MM GUI 
12.9 49,3 
7.7 30 
I I .6 56.1 
6.3 23.0 
i '  6 I 9i6 
Mean time m seconds required to create 
various types of entities and to repair errors when 
interacting multimodally versus with the Exlnit GUI 
The expert users were interviewed after the 
study regarding which interface they preferred 
and why. Multimodal interaction was strongly 
preferred by all users. Reasons cited included its 
efficiency and its support of precise drawing of 
linear and area features. 
Conclusions 
This study indicates that when the user knows 
what s/he wants, there can be substantial 
efficiency advantages of multimodal interaction 
over direct manipulation GUIs for a map-based 
taste. Despite having only four subjects, the 
results exhibited extremely strong statistical 
significance. These results stand in contrast o 
prior research \[6, 9, 10, 18\] in which speed 
advantages of spoken input were washed out by 
the cost of correcting recognition errors. 
In the present study, not only was multimodal 
interaction substantially faster than GUI-based 
interaction, even including error correction 
times, error correction itself was four times 
more costly with a GUI than with multimodal 
interaction. These findings do not support hose 
of Karat et al \[9\] who found that for correcting 
errors in a dictation task, keyboard-mouse input 
led to a 2.3-fold speed increase over speech. 
Both sets of findings might be reconciled by 
noting that advantages of any type of user 
interface, especially spoken and multimodal 
interaction, may be task dependent. 
We attribute the findings here to the ability of 
multimodal interfaces to support parallel 
specification of complementary parts of a 
communicative act, as well as direct rather than 
hierarchical or scrolled access to types of 
entities. Moreover, because the user can 
employ each mode for its strengths /he can 
offload different aspects of the communication 
to different human cognitive systems, leading to 
greater efficiency \[21\] and fewer user errors 
\[131. 
It might be claimed that these results apply only 
to this GUI, and that a different GUI might offer 
superior performance. First, it is worth noting 
that the same pattern of results were found for 
the two GUI elements (drop-down list and 
hierarchical browser). Thus, the results cannot 
simply be attributed to the misuse of a 
hierarchical tool. Second, we point out that this 
GUI was developed as a product, and that many 
military systems use very similar user interface 
tools for the same purposes (selecting units)/ 
Thus, these results may have substantial 
practical impact for users performing this task. 
More generally, one study cannot establish 
results for all possible user interfaces. There 
will certainly be occasions in which a menu- 
based GUI will be superior to a multimodal 
interface - e.g., when the user does not in fact 
know what s/he wants and needs to browse. 
Other GUI interface tools, such as a search field 
with command completion, can be envisioned 
that would provide direct access. However, it is 
arguable that such an interface lement belongs 
squarely to graphical user interfaces, but draws 
more on features of language. Also, it would 
require the user to type, even in circumstances 
(such as mobile usage) where typing would be 
infeasible. Given our philosophy of using each 
modality for its strengths, we believe 
multimodal and graphical user interfaces should 
be integrated, rather than cast as opposites. 
Finally, we would expect hat these advantages 
of multimodal interaction may generalize to 
other tasks and other user interfaces in which 
7 In fact, a recent experiment by the US Marines had mobile 
combatants using small portable computers with a similar direct 
manipulation i terface as they participated in field exercises. The 
user interface was generally regarded as the weakest aspect of the 
experiment. 
336 
selection among many possible options is 
required. 
Obviously, a small experiment only illuminates 
a small space. But it should be clear that when 
current technologies are blended into a 
synergistic multimodal interface the result may 
provide substantial improvements on some 
types of tasks heretofore performed with 
graphical user interface technologies. We 
conjecture that the more we can take advantage 
of the strengths of spoken language technology, 
the larger this advantage will become. Future 
research should be searching for more such 
tasks, and developing more general toolkits that 
support rapid adaptation of multimodal 
technologies tosupport hem. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported in part by the 
Information Technology and Information 
Systems offices of DARPA under multiple 
contract numbers DABT63-95-C-007 and 
N66001-99-D-8503, and in part by ONR grant 
N00014-95-1-1164. Many thanks to Jay 
Pittman for the ExInit integration, Michael 
Johnston for ExInit vocabulary and grammar 
development, Liang Chen for graphics and 
military symbology, Sharon Oviatt for advice in 
experimental nalysis, and to our test subjects. 
References 
1. Chapanis, A., Ochsman, R.B., Parrish, R.N., 
Weeks, G. D., Studies in interactive 
communication: I. The effects of four 
communication modes on the behavior of 
teams during cooperative problem solving. 
Human Factors, 1972. 14: pp. 487-509. 
2. Cohen, P.R., Dalrymple, M., Moran, D.B., 
Pereira, F,, Sullivan, J., Gargan, R., 
Schlossberg, J., and Tyler, S., Synergistic 
use of natural language and direct 
manipulation, in Proc. of the Human- 
Factors in Computing Systems Con-ference 
(CHI'89). 1989, ACM Press: New York, pp. 
227-234. 
3. Cohen, P.R., Johnston, M., McGee, D., 
Oviatt, S., Clow, J., and Smith, I., The 
efficiency of multimodal interaction: A 
case study, in the Proceedings of the 5th 
International Conference on Spoken 
Language Processing, Sydney, Australia, 
1998, 2: pp. 249-252. 
4. Cohen, P.R., Johnston, M., McGee, D., 
Oviatt, S., Pittman, J., Smith, I., Chen, L., 
Clow, J., QuickSet: Multimodal interaction 
for distributed applications, in Proc. of the 
Fifth A CM International Multmedia 
Conference, E. Glinert, Editor. 1997, ACM 
Press: New York. pp. 31-40. 
5. Cohen, P.R., McGee, D., Oviatt, S., Wu, L., 
Clow, J., King, R., Julier, S., Rosenblum, L., 
Multimodal Interaction for 2D and 3D 
Environments. IEEE Computer Graphics 
and Applications, 1999. 19(4): pp. 10-13. 
6. Cohen, P.R. and Oviatt, S.L., The Role of 
Voice Input for Human-Machine 
Communication. Proc. of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 1995. 92: pp. 9921- 
9927. 
7. Courtemanche, A.J., Ceranowicz, A., 
ModSAF Development S atus., in the Proc. 
of the Fifth Con-ference on Computer 
Generated Forces and Behavioral Rep- 
resentation, Orlando, 1995, Univ. of Central 
Florida, pp. 3-13. 
8, Johnston, M., Cohen, P. R., McGee, D., 
Oviatt, S. L., Pittman, J. A., Smith., I. 
Unification-based multimodal integration., 
in the Proc. of the 35th Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (ACL) and 8th Conference of the 
European Chapter of the ACL, 1997, pp. 
281-288. 
9. Karat, C., Halverson, C., Horn, D., and 
Karat, J., Patterns of entry and correction in 
large vocabulary continuous speech 
recognition systems, in the Proc. of Human 
Factors in Com-puting Systems, New York, 
1999, ACM Press, pp. 568-575. 
10. Martin, G.L., The utility of speech input in 
user-computer interfaces. International 
Journal of Man-machine Studies, 1989. 
30(4): pp. 355-375. 
337 
11. McGee, D., Cohen, P.R., and Oviatt, S.L., 
Confirmation in Multimodal Systems, in 
Proc. of the 17th International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics (COLING 
98) and 36th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics 
(ACL98). 1998: Montreal, Canada. pp. 823- 
829. 
12. Moore, R., Dowding, J., Bratt, H., Gawron, 
J., Gorfu, Y., Cheyer, A., CommandTalk: A 
Spoken-Language Interface for Battlefield 
Simulations, Proc. of the 5th Conference on 
Applied Natural Language Processing, 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 
1997: Washington, DC. pp. 1-7. 
13. Oviatt, S. L., Pen/Voice: Complementary 
multimodal communication, Proc. of 
Speech Tech'92, New York, 238-241 
14. Oviatt, S.L., Multimodal interactive maps: 
Designing for human performance. Human 
Computer Interaction, 1997. 12: pp. 93- 
129. 
15. Oviatt, S.L., Mutual disambiguation of 
recognition errors in a multimodal 
architecture, in the Proc. of the Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing System, 
New York, 1999, ACM Press, pp. 576-583. 
16. Oviatt, S.L., Cohen, P. R., Wu, L., Vergo, 
J., Duncan, L., Suhm, B., Bers, J., Holzman, 
T., Winograd, T., Landay, J., Larson, J., 
Ferro, D., Designing the user interface for 
multimodal speech and gesture applications: 
State-of-the-art systems and research 
directions for 2000 and beyond. In 
submission. 
17. Pausch, R. and Leatherby, J. H., A study 
comparing mouse-only vs. mouse-plus- 
voice input for a graphical editor, Journal 
of the American Voice Input~Output Society, 
9:2, July, 1991, pp 55-66 
18. Rudnicky, A.I., Mode Preference in a 
simple data-retrieval task, in ARPA Human 
Language Technology Workshop. March 
1993: Princeton, New Jersey. 
19. Suhm, B., Myers, B., and Waibel, A., 
Model-based and empirical evaluation of 
multimodal interactive rror correction, in 
the Proc. of the Conf. on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems, New York, 1999, 
ACM Press, 584-591. 
20. Shneiderman, B., Natural vs. precise 
concise languages for human operation of 
computers: Research issues and 
experimental pproaches. Proceedings of 
the 18 u' Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, and 
Parasession on Topics in Interactive 
Discourse, Univ. of Pennsylvania, June, 
1980, pp. 139-141. 
21. Wickens, C., Sandry, D., and Vidulich, M., 
Compatibility and resource competition 
between modalities of input, central 
processing, and output. Human Factors, 
1983.25(2): pp. 227-248. 
22. Wu, L., Oviatt, S., L. and Cohen, P. R., 
Statistical multimodal integration for 
intelligent HCI, in Neural Networks for 
Signal Processing, Y.H. Hu, Larsen, J., 
Wilson, E., and Douglas, S., Editors. 1999, 
IEEE Press: New York. pp. 487-496. 
338 
