In: Proceedings of CoNLL-2000 and LLL-2000, pages 87-90, Lisbon, Portugal, 2000. 
Generating Synthetic Speech Prosody with Lazy Learning 
in Tree Structures 
Laurent  Bl in  
IRISA-ENSSAT 
F-22305 Lannion, France 
blin@enssat, fr 
Laurent  M ic le t  
IRISA-ENSSAT 
F-22305 Lannion, France 
miclet@enssat, fr 
Abst rac t  
We present ongoing work on prosody predic- 
tion for speech synthesis. This approach con- 
siders sentences as tree structures and infers 
the prosody from a corpus of such structures 
using machine learning techniques. The predic- 
tion is achieved from the prosody of the closest 
sentence of the corpus through tree similarity 
measurements, using either the nearest neigh- 
bour algorithm or an analogy-based approach. 
We introduce two different ree structure rep- 
resentations, the tree similarity metrics consid- 
ered, and then we discuss the different predic- 
tion methods. Experiments are currently under 
process to qualify this approach. 
1 I n t roduct ion  
Natural prosody production remains a problem 
in speech synthesis ystems. Several automatic 
prediction methods have already been tried for 
this, including decision trees (Ross, 1995), neu- 
ral networks (Traber, 1992), and HMMs (Jensen 
et al, 1994). The original aspect of our pre- 
diction approach is a tree structure representa- 
tion of sentences, and the use of tree similar- 
ity measurements to achieve the prosody pre- 
diction. We think that reasoning on a whole 
structure rather than on local features of a sen- 
tence should better reflect the many relations 
influencing the prosody. This approach is an 
attempt o achieve such a goal. 
The data used in this work is a part of the 
Boston University Radio (WBUR) News Cor- 
pus (Ostendorfet al, 1995). The prosodic infor- 
mation consists of ToBI labeling of accents and 
breaks (Silverman et al, 1992). The syntactic 
and part-of-speech informations were obtained 
from the part of the corpus processed in the 
Penn Treebank project (Marcus et al, 1993). 
We firstly describe the tree structures defined 
for this work, then present he tree metrics that 
we are using, and finally discuss how they are 
manipulated to achieve the prosody prediction. 
2 T ree  S t ructures  
So far we have considered two types of struc- 
tures in this work: a simple syntactic structure 
and a performance structure (Gee and Grosjean, 
1983). Their comparison in use should provide 
some interesting knowledge about the usefulness 
or the limitations of the elements of information 
included in each one. 
2.1 Syntactic Structure 
The syntactic structure considered is built ex- 
clusively from the syntactic parsing of the given 
sentences. This parsing, with the relative syn- 
tactic tags, constitute the backbone of the struc- 
ture. Below this structure lie the words of the 
sentence, with their part-of-speech tags. Addi- 
tional levels of nodes can be added deeper in 
the structure to represent the syllables of each 
word, and the phonemes of each syllable. 
The syntactic structure corresponding to the 
sentence "Hennessy will be a hard act to follow" 
is presented in Figure 1 as an example (the syl- 
lable level has been omitted for clarity). 
2.2 Per fo rmance  Structure 
The performance structure used in our approach 
is a combination of syntactic and phonological 
informations. Its upper part is a binary tree 
where each node represents a break between the 
two parts of the sentence contained into the sub- 
trees of the node. This binary structure defines 
a hierarchy: the closer to the root the node is, 
the more salient (or stronger) the break is. 
87 
S 
Hennessy \[NNP\] a \ [D~j j \ ]  act ~ 
I vP 
to \ [TO~ow \[VB\] 
Figure 1: Syntactic structure for the sentence 
"Hennessy will be a hard act to follow". (Syn- 
tactic labels: S: simple declarative clause, NP: 
noun phrase, VP: verb phrase. Part-of-speech 
labels: NNP: proper noun, MD: modal, VB: 
base form verb, DT: determiner, J J: adjective, 
NN: singular noun, TO: special abel for "to"). 
The lower part represents the phonological 
phrases into which the whole sentence is divided 
by the binary structure, and uses the same rep- 
resentation levels as in the syntactic structure. 
The only difference comes from a simplification 
performed by joining the words into phonolog- 
ical words (composed of one content word - 
noun, adjective, verb or adverb - and of the 
surrounding function words). Each phonologi- 
cal phrase is labeled with a syntactic ategory 
(the main one), and no break is supposed to 
occur inside. 
A possible performance structure for the same 
example: "Hennessy will be a hard act to fol- 
low" is shown in Figure 2. 
I Hennessy \[NNP\] P ~ N P  
I will be \[VB\] a hard\[J J\] act \[NNI 
Figure 2: Performance structure for the sen- 
tence "Hennessy will be a hard act to follow". 
The syntactic and part-of-speech labels have the 
same meaning as in Figure 1. B1, B2 and B3 
are the break-related nodes. 
Unlike the syntactic structure, a first step of 
prediction is done in the performance structure 
with the break values. This prosody informa- 
tion is known for the sentences in the corpus, 
but has to be predicted for new ones (to put 
our system in a full synthesis context where 
no prosodic value is available). The currently 
used method (Bachenko and Fitzpatrick, 1990) 
provides rules to infer a default phrasing for 
a sentence. Not only the effects of this esti- 
mation will have to be quantified, but we plan 
to develop a more accurate solution to predict 
this structure accordingly to any corpus speaker 
characteristics. 
3 T ree  Met r i cs  
Now that the tree structures are defined, we 
need the tools to predict the prosody. We have 
considered two similarity metrics to calculate 
the "distance" between two tree structures, in- 
spired from the Wagner and Fisher's editing dis- 
tance (Wagner and Fisher, 1974). 
3.1 Pr inc ip les  
Introducing a small set of elementary transfor- 
mation operators upon trees (insertion or dele- 
tion of a node, substitution of a node by an- 
other one) it is possible to determine a set of 
specific operation sequences that transform any 
given tree into another one. Specifying costs 
for each elementary operation (possibly a func- 
tion of the node values) allows the evaluation 
of a whole transformation cost by adding the 
operation costs in the sequence. Therefore the 
tree distance can be defined as the cost of the 
sequence minimizing this sum. 
3.2 Cons idered  Met r i cs  
Many metrics can be defined from this princi- 
ple. The differences come from the application 
conditions which can be set on the operators. In 
our experiments, two metrics are tested. They 
both preserve the order of the nodes in the trees, 
an essential condition in our application. 
The first one (Selkow, 1977) allows only sub- 
stitutions between odes at the same depth level 
in the trees. Moreover, the insertion or deletion 
of a node involves respectively the insertion or 
deletion of the whole subtree depending of the 
node. These strict conditions hould be able to 
locate very close structures. 
The other one (Zhang, 1995) allows the sub- 
stitutions of nodes whatever theirs locations are 
inside the structures. It also allows the insertion 
or deletion of lonely nodes inside the structures. 
Compared to the previous metric, these less rig- 
orous stipulations hould not only retrieve the 
88 
very close structures, but also other ones which 
wouldn't have been found. 
Moreover, these two algorithms also provide 
a mapping between the nodes of the trees. This 
mapping illustrates the operations which led to 
the final distance value: the parts of the trees 
which were inserted or deleted, and the ones 
which were substituted or unchanged. 
3.3 Operation Costs 
As exposed in section 3.1, a tree is "close" to 
another one because of the definition of the op- 
erators costs. In this work, they have been set 
to allow the only comparison of nodes of same 
structural nature (break-related nodes together, 
syllable-related nodes together...), and to repre- 
sent the linguistic "similarity" between compa- 
rable elements (to set that an adjective may be 
"closer" to a noun than to a determiner...). 
These operation costs are currently manually 
set. To decide on the scale of values to affect 
is not an easy task, and it needs some human 
expertise. One possibility would be to further 
automate the process for setting these values. 
4 P rosody  Pred ic t ion  
The tree representations and the metrics can 
now be used to predict the prosody of a sen- 
tence. 
4.1 Nearest Neighbour Predict ion 
The simple method that we have firstly used is 
the nearest neighbour algorithm: given a new 
sentence, the closest match among the corpus 
of sentences of known prosody is retrieved and 
used to infer the prosody of the new sentence. 
The mapping from the tree distance computa- 
tions can be used to give a simple way to know 
where to apply the prosody of one sentence onto 
the other one, from the words linked inside. 
Unfortunately, this process may not be as 
easy. The ideal mapping would be that each 
word of the new sentence had a corresponding 
word in the other sentence. Hopeless, the two 
sentences may not be as closed as desired, and 
some words may have been inserted or deleted. 
To decide on the prosody for these unlinked 
parts is a problem. 
4.2 Analogy-Based Predict ion 
A potential way to improve the prediction is 
based on analogy. The previous mapping be- 
tween the two structures defines a tree transfor- 
mation. The idea of this approach is based on 
the knowledge brought by other pairs of struc- 
tures from the corpus sharing the same trans- 
formation. 
This approach can be connected to the ana- 
logical framework defined by Pirrelli and Yvon, 
where inference processes are presented for sym- 
bolic and string values by the mean of two no- 
tions: the analogical proportion, and the ana- 
logical transfer (Pirrelli and Yvon, 1999). 
Concerning our problem, and given three 
known tree structures T1, T2, T3 and a new one 
T I, an analogical proportion would be expressed 
as: T1 is to T2 as T3 is to T ~ if and only if the set 
of operations transforming T1 into T2 is equiva- 
lent to the one transforming T3 into T I, accord- 
ingly to a specific tree metric. There are various 
levels for defining this transformation equiva- 
lence. A strict identity would be for instance 
the insertion of the same structure at the same 
place, representing the same word (and having 
the same syntactic function in the sentence). A
less strict equivalence could be the insertion of 
a different word having the same number of syl- 
lables. Weaker and weaker conditions can be 
set. As a consequence, these different possibili- 
ties have to be tested accordingly to the amount 
of diversity in the corpus to prove the efficiency 
of this equivalence. 
Next, the analogical transfer would be to ap- 
ply on the phrase described by T3 the prosody 
transformation defined between T1 and T2 as to 
get the prosody of the phrase of T ~. The for- 
malization of this prosody transfer is still under 
development. 
From these two notions, the analogical infer- 
ence would be therefore defined as: 
? firstly, to retrieve all analogical proportions 
involving T ~ and three known structures in 
the corpus; 
? secondly, to compute the analogical trans- 
fer for each 3-tuple of known structures, 
and to store its result in a set of possible 
outputs if the transfer succeeds. 
This analogical inference as described above 
may be a long task in the retrieval of every 3- 
tuple of known structures ince a tree trans- 
formation can be defined between any pair of 
them. For very dissimilar structures, the set of 
89 
operations would be very complex and uneasy 
to employ. A first way to improve this search 
is to keep the structure resulting of the near- 
est neighbour computation as T3. The trans- 
formation between T t and T3 should be one of 
the simplest (accordingly to the operations cost; 
see section 3.3), and then the search would be 
limited to the retrieval of a pair (T1,T2) sharing 
an equivalent ransformation. However, this is 
still time-consuming, and we are trying to de- 
fine a general way to limit the search in such a 
tree structure space, for example based on tree 
indexing for efficiency (Daelemans et al, 1997). 
5 F i r s t  Resu l ts  
Because of the uncompleted evelopment of 
this approach, most experiments are still under 
progress. So far they were run to find the clos- 
est match of held-out corpus sentences using the 
syntactic structure and the performance struc- 
ture, for each of the distance metrics. We are 
using both the "actual" and estimated perfor- 
mance structures to quantify the effects of this 
estimation. Cross-validation tests have been 
chosen to validate our method. 
These experiments are not all complete, but 
an initial analysis of the results doesn't seem to 
show many differences between the tree metrics 
considered. We believe that this is due to the 
small size of the corpus we are using. With only 
around 300 sentences, most structures are very 
different, so the majority of pairwise compar- 
isons should be very distant. We are currently 
running experiments where the tree structures 
are generated at the phrase level. This strat- 
egy implies to adapt the tree metrics to take 
into consideration the location of the phrases in 
the sentences (two similar structures hould be 
privileged if they have the same location in their 
respective sentences). 
6 Conc lus ion  
We have presented a new prosody prediction 
method. Its original aspect is to consider sen- 
tences as tree structures. Tree similarity metrics 
and analogy-based learning in a corpus of such 
structures are used to predict the prosody of a 
new sentence. Further experiments are needed 
to validate this approach. 
An additional development of our method 
would be the introduction of focus labels. In 
a dialogue context, some extra information can 
refine the intonation. With the tree structures 
that we are using, it is easy to introduce spe- 
cial markers upon the nodes of the structure. 
According to their nature and location, they 
can indicate some focus either on a word, on a 
phrase or on a whole sentence. With the adap- 
tation of the tree metrics, the prediction process 
is kept unchanged. 
Re ferences  
J. Bachenko and E. Fitzpatrick. 1990. A compu- 
tational grammar of discourse-neutral prosodic 
phrasing in English. Comp. Ling., 16(3):155-170. 
W. Daelemans, A. van den Bosch, and T. Weijters. 
1997. IGTree: Using trees for compression and 
classification i lazy learning algorithms. In Arti\]. 
Intel. Review, volume 11, pages 407-423. Kluwer 
Academic Publishers. 
J. P. Gee and F. Grosjean. 1983. Performance struc- 
tures: a psycholinguistic and linguistic appraisal. 
Cognitive Psychology, 15:411-458. 
U. Jensen, R. K. Moore, P. Dalsgaard, and B. Lind- 
berg. 1994. Modelling intonation contours at 
the phrase level using continuous density HMMs. 
Comp. Speech and Lang., 8:247-260. 
M. P. Marcus, B. Santorini, and M. A. 
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large anno- 
tated corpus of English: the Penn Treebank. 
Comp. Ling., 19. 
M. Ostendorf, P. J. Price, and S. Shattuck-Hufnagel. 
1995. The Boston University Radio News Corpus. 
Technical Report ECS-95-001, Boston U. 
V. Pirrelli and F. Yvon. 1999. The hidden dimen- 
sion: a paradigmatic view of data-driven NLP. J. 
of Exp. and Theo. Artif. Intel., 11(3):391-408. 
K. Ross. 1995. Modeling of intonation for speech 
synthesis. Ph.D. thesis, Col. of Eng., Boston U. 
S. M. Selkow. 1977. The tree-to-tree editing prob- 
lem. Inf. Processing Letters, 6(6):184-186. 
K. Silverman, M. E. Beckman, J. Pitrelli, M. Osten- 
doff, C. W. Wightman, P. J. Price, J. B. Pier- 
rhumbert, and J. Hirschberg. 1992. TOBI: A 
standard for labelling English prosody. In Int. 
Conf. on Spoken Lang. Processing, pages 867-870. 
C. Traber, 1992. Talking machines: theories, mod- 
els and designs, chapter F0 generation with a 
database of natural F0 patterns and with a neural 
network, pages 287-304. 
R. A. Wagner and M. J. Fisher. 1974. The string- 
to-string correction problem. J. of the Asso. for 
Computing Machinery, 21(1):168-173. 
K. Zhang. 1995. Algorithms for the constrained 
editing distance between ordered labeled trees and 
related problems. Pattern Reco., 28(3):463-474. 
90 
