WordNet Nouns: Classes and Instances
George A. Miller
Princeton University
Florentina Hristea
University of Bucharest
WordNet, a lexical database for English that is extensively used by computational linguists, has
not previously distinguished hyponyms that are classes from hyponyms that are instances. This
note describes an attempt to draw that distinction and proposes a simple way to incorporate the
results into future versions of WordNet.
If you were to say ?Women are numerous,? you would not wish to imply that any
particular woman is numerous. Instead, you would probably mean something like ?The
class of women contains numerous instances.? To say, on the other hand, ?Rosa Parks
is numerous,? would be nonsense. Whereas the noun woman denotes a class, the proper
noun Rosa Parks is an instance of that class. As Quirk et al (1985, page 288) point out,
proper nouns normally lack number contrast.
This important distinction between classes and instances underlies the present dis-
cussion of WordNet nouns. Some nouns are understood to refer to classes; membership
in those classes determines the semantic relation of hyponymy that is basic for the
organization of nouns in WordNet (WN). Other nouns, however, are understood to refer
to particular individuals. In many cases the distinction is clear, but not always.
The distinction to be discussed here is between words ordinarily understood as
referring to classes and words ordinarily understood as referring to particular individ-
uals and places. In the literature on knowledge representation, the classic discussion of
this distinction is provided by Woods (1975). The distinction was not drawn in initial
versions of WN (Miller 1990; Fellbaum 1998), which used the ?is a? relation in both
cases. That is to say, both ?A heroine is a woman? and ?Rosa Parks is a woman? were
considered to be occurrences of the ?is a? relation and were encoded in the WN database
in the same manner.
Requests to incorporate a distinction between classes and instances have come from
ontologists, among others. In their discussion of WN, for example, Gangemi et al (2001)
and Oltramari et al (2002) complain about the confusion between individuals and
concepts. They suggest that if there was an ?instance of? relation, they could distinguish
between a concept-to-concept relation of subsumption and an individual-to-concept
relation of instantiation. That is, essentially, the suggestion we follow in the present
work, but in some cases the distinction was not easy to draw.
Incorporating this distinction was resisted at first because WN was not initially
conceived as an ontology, but rather as a description of lexical knowledge. WN in-
cludes verbs, adjectives, and adverbs in addition to nouns. Although no ontology was
intended, the organization of nouns in WN bore many similarities to an ontology.
As the importance of ontology became more apparent, requests to convert the WN
noun hierarchy could no longer be ignored. Version 2.1 of WN takes a step in that
direction: the Tops file is reorganized to have a single unique beginner: entity. In a
reasonable ontology, however, all terms might be expected to conform to the mem-
bership relation of set theory and would not contain individuals or placenames. The
confounding of classes and instances in WN posed a problem. The obvious way to solve
? 2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Computational Linguistics Volume 32, Number 1
that problem was to distinguish them. That is to say, the instances in WN had to be
identified.
There are three characteristics that all words denoting instances share. They are,
first of all, nouns. Second, they are proper nouns, which means that they should be
capitalized. And finally, the referent should be a unique entity, which implies that they
should not have hyponyms; it is meaningless to have an instance of an instance.
Unfortunately, these characteristics are shared by many words that are not in-
stances. In clear-cut cases, such as persons or cities, there is little problem identify-
ing instances. But there are many other proper nouns that are not instances. It was
decided that there was no alternative to inspecting the 24,073 sets of synonyms that
contained candidate nouns, one at a time. This was done manually by the authors, FH
and GM.
The strategy agreed on for assigning ?instance? tags was to concentrate on a word?s
referent. When they knew of a unique referent, it was considered a clear case of an
instance. Otherwise it was considered a class. For example, when Beethoven is used to
refer to the German composer, it is an instance, but when Beethoven is used to refer to the
composer?s music (as in ?She loved to listen to Beethoven?) the same word refers to a
class of musical compositions. Moreover, just to be clear, when there were two different
referents, both were tagged as instances. For example, Bethlehem in the Holy Land and
Bethlehem in Pennsylvania were both tagged as instances. And when an instance had
two or more hypernyms, it was tagged as an instance of all of them. For example, Mars
is an instance of a terrestrial planet (having a compact rocky surface) and also as an
instance of a superior planet (its orbit lies outside the Earth?s orbit).
The basic entries in WN are sets of synonyms, or synsets. A problem reported by
both taggers was the occurrence of capitalized and lower-case words in the same synset.
It makes no sense for a word to refer to an instance and for its synonym to refer to a
class, so in these cases the entire synset was considered to denote a class. For example,
acetaminophen and Tylenol are synonyms in WN and both were considered to denote
classes. The possibility that Tylenol might be an instance of acetaminophen seemed to be
refuted by such usages as ?She took two Tylenol and went to bed.? In short, giving
something a trade name does not change it from a class to an instance. The street names
of drugs were also considered to denote classes.
The two taggers disagreed in their treatment of sacred texts. Whereas they agreed
that Adi Granth, Zend Vesta, Bhagavadgita, Mahabharata, and others were instances of
sacred texts, when they came to the Christian Bible they disagreed. FH considered it
an instance, no different from other sacred texts; GM called it a class term because
there are many hyponyms of Bible: Vulgate, Douay, King James, Revised Version, American
Revised Version, etc. But GM?s decision made the Bible a special case, which may have
resulted from WN?s compilers knowing more about the Bible than they knew about
other sacred texts. It was decided that this was a case in which a sacred text could be
a class: Bible was tagged as a class of a sacred text and its hyponyms were tagged as
instances.
Languages posed another problem. For example, are Old Italian, Sardinian, and
Tuscan instances of Italian? It was decided that, from an ontological point of view,
languages are not instances. Only speech acts are instances.
Placenames included many geographical regions that do not have well-defined po-
litical boundaries: Andalusia, Appalachia, Antarctic Zone, Badlands, Barbary Coast, Bithynia,
Caucasia, etc., but the terms still have geographical significance and are in general use.
Although vague in denotation, the taggers considered them instances. The names of
cities and states, islands and continents, rivers and lakes, mountain peaks and mountain
2
Miller and Hristea WordNet Nouns: Classes and Instances
ranges, seas and oceans, planets and satellites, stars and constellations, were tagged as
instances, as were the signs of the zodiac.
The names of numbers and the names of monetary units were all considered as
classes; the Hong Kong dollar, for example, is not an instance of dollar.
Overall, there were 7,671 synsets in WN that the taggers finally agreed should be
tagged as instances. Version 2.1 of WordNet contains these distinctions and it will be
subjected to helpful criticism by WN users, as are all the other lexical relations in WN.
Finally, a word about the notation that will represent this distinction in WN. The
symbol used to code hypernyms has been @. That is to say, {peach, drupe,@} has repre-
sented ?a peach is a drupe? or ?all peaches are drupes.? This notation is appropriate
for representing relations between classes but it is not appropriate for representing
relations of instantiation. When {Berlin, city,@} is used to represent ?Berlin is a city,?
the instance Berlin is treated inappropriately as a class. A different symbol is needed to
code instances. It has been decided, therefore, simply to add an i to the @; to represent
?Berlin is an instance of a city? by {Berlin, city,@i} in the new notation.
Since WN 2.1 contains the distinctions between classes and instances described
here, it will be possible to treat WN nouns as a semi-ontology by simply ignoring all
nouns tagged with @i. It is hoped that this modification will make WN more useful to
future users.
Acknowledgments
Florentina Hristea is grateful to the
Romanian-U.S. Fulbright Commission for
the Fulbright Grant that made it possible for
her to collaborate in this research. Work by
the Cognitive Science Laboratory was
supported by a contract between Princeton
University and the Advanced Research
Development Activity (AQUAINT Program
Phase 2, Contract No. NBCHC40012). The
authors are indebted to Benjamin Haskell for
developing the interface that was used to tag
instances and to Christiane Fellbaum, Helen
Langone, and Randee Tengi for comments on
the manuscript.
References
Fellbaum, Christiane, editor. 1998. WordNet:
An Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Gangemi, Aldo, Nicola Guarino, and
Alessandro Oltramari. 2001. Conceptual
analysis of lexical taxonomies: The case
of WordNet top-level. In C. Welty and
B. Smith, editors, Formal Ontology in
Information Systems. Proceedings of
FOIS2001. ACM Press, 285?296.
Oltramari, Alessandro, Aldo Gangemi,
Nicola Guarino, and Claudio Masolo.
2002. Restructuring WordNet?s top-level:
The OntoClean approach. In Proceedings of
LREC2002 (OntoLex workshop), Las
Palmas, Spain.
Miller, George A., editor. 1990. WordNet: An
on-line lexical database [Special Issue].
International Journal of Lexicography,
3:235?312.
Quirk, Randolph, Sidney Greenbaum,
Geoffrey Leech, and Jan Svartvik. 1985.
A Comprehensive Grammar of the English
Language. Longman, London and
New York.
Woods, William A. 1975. What?s in a link:
Foundations for semantic networks.
In Daniel G. Bobrow and Alan Collins,
editors, Representation and Understanding:
Studies in Cognitive Science. Academic
Press, New York.
3

Annotating WordNet
Helen Langone, Benjamin R. Haskell, George A. Miller
Cognitive Science Laboratory
Princeton University
{helen,ben,geo}@clarity.princeton.edu
Abstract
High-quality lexical resources are needed to
both train and evaluate Word Sense Disam-
biguation (WSD) systems. The problem of am-
biguity persists even in limited domains, thus
the necessity for wide-coverage inventories of
senses (dictionaries) and corpora sense-tagged
to them. WordNet has been used extensively
for WSD, for both its broad coverage and its
large network of semantic relations. In this
paper, we present a report on the state of our
current endeavor to increase the connectivity
of WordNet through sense-tagging the glosses,
the result of which will be to create a more in-
tegrated lexical resource.
1 Introduction
High-quality lexical resources are needed to both train
and evaluate Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) sys-
tems. The problem of ambiguity persists even in lim-
ited domains, thus the necessity for wide-coverage inven-
tories of senses (dictionaries) and corpora sense-tagged
to them. WordNet (Miller et al, 1990; Fellbaum, ed.,
1998) has been used extensively for WSD, both for its
broad coverage and its large network of semantic rela-
tions. Entries in WordNet have, until now, been organized
primarily around the semantic relations of synonymy,
antonymy, hyponymy/troponymy, meronymy, and a few
others which hold mainly among lexicalized concepts and
word forms of the same grammatical class.1 The noun
and verb networks have been predominantly hierarchi-
1The exceptions have been the links existing between ad-
jectives derivationally related to nouns or verbs (conceptual is
related to concept and conceptuality, irritated to irritate), and
links between adverbs and the adjectives from which they de-
rive (absolutely is related to WordNet sense 1 of absolute).
cal, and the definitional glosses and illustrative sentences
have not participated in the network of relations at all.
This paper reports on a project currently underway to
sense-tag the glosses. Sense-tagging is the process of
linking an instance of a word to the WordNet synset rep-
resenting its context-appropriate meaning. Monosemous
words2 in the glosses can be tagged automatically, but
in order to be truly reliable, the sense-tagging of polyse-
mous words3 must be done manually. This approach is in
significant contrast with the work done at The University
of Texas at Dallas on Extended WordNet4, in which poly-
semous words in the WordNet glosses were sense-tagged
primarily by automatic means. The result of the project
described here will be to increase connectivity and make
possible the association of words with related concepts
that cut across grammatical class and hierarchy, provid-
ing a more integrated lexical resource.
2 Prior work
Previous efforts to sense-tag corpora manually have
demonstrated that the task is not trivial. To begin with,
the possibility of distinguishing word senses definitively
in general is recognized as being problematic (Atkins and
Levin, 1988; Kilgarriff, 1997; Hanks, 2000); indeed the
notion of a ?sense? has itself been the subject of long de-
bate (see the Hanks and Kilgarriff papers for two recent
contributions). These are topics in need of serious con-
sideration, but outside of the scope of this paper. Certain
issues emerge that are particularly relevant to designing
2Monosemous relative to WordNet (see footnote below).
3A word is polysemous if it has more than one related
sense. A word with more than one unrelated sense is called
a homonym. ?Bank? is the classic example, its unrelated senses
being ?river bank? and ?financial institution.? WordNet does not
make a distinction between homonymy and polysemy, therefore
a monosemous word in WordNet is one which has neither re-
lated nor unrelated senses.
4http://xwn.hlt.utdallas.edu/
a manual sense-tagging system, and it is these we will
concentrate on here.
The difficulties inherent in the sense-tagging task in-
clude the order in which words are presented to tag, a
word?s degree of polysemy and part of speech, vagueness
of the context, the order in which senses are presented,
granularity of the senses, and level of expertise of the per-
son doing the tagging. Each will be addressed briefly in
the following sections.
2.1 Targeted vs. sequential or ?lexical? vs. ?textual?
There are two approaches one can take to the order in
which words are tagged. In the sequential approach,
termed ?textual? by Kilgarriff (1998), the tagger proceeds
through the text one word at a time, assigning the context-
appropriate sense to each open class word as it is en-
countered. The targeted approach (?lexical? in Kilgar-
riff?s terms) involves tagging all corpus instances of a
pre-selected word, jumping through the text to each oc-
currence. The corpora produced by the SEMCOR and
READER projects were tagged sequentially; the Kilo and
HECTOR projects used the targeted approach (Kilo and
READER are described in Miller et al (1998), HECTOR
in Atkins (1993), and SEMCOR in Fellbaum, ed. (1998)).
In sequential tagging, the tagger is following the narra-
tive, and so has the meaning of the text in mind when
selecting senses for each new word encountered (con-
text is foremost). In targeted tagging, the tagger has the
various meanings of the word in mind when presented
with each new context (sense distinctions are foremost).
In their comparisons of the two approaches, Fellbaum et
al. (2003) and Kilgarriff (1998) both conclude that se-
quential tagging increases the difficulty of the task by re-
quiring the tagger to acquaint (and then reacquaint) them-
selves with the senses of a word each time they are con-
fronted with it in the text. The targeted approach, on
the other hand, enables the tagger to gain mastery of the
sense-distinctions of a single word at a time, reducing the
amount of effort required to tag each new instance. Miller
et al (1998) present a contrasting view. In evaluating the
Kilo and READER tagging tasks, they find targeted tag-
ging to be more tedious for the taggers than sequential
tagging, and no faster, as time is needed to assimilate new
contexts for each word occurrence.
2.2 Polysemy, POS, and sense order
In their 1997 paper, Fellbaum et al analyzed the results
of the SEMCOR project, in which part of the Brown Cor-
pus (Kuc?era and Francis, 1967) was tagged to WordNet
1.4 senses. Their analysis identified three factors that
influenced the difficulty level, and thus the accuracy, of
the tagging task: degree of polysemy of the word being
tagged, the word?s part of speech, and the order in which
the WordNet sense choices are displayed to the person
doing the tagging.
The effect of a high degree of polysemy is to present
more choices to the tagger, usually with finer distinctions
among the senses, increasing the difficulty of selecting
one out of several closely-related senses.
The correspondence of a word?s part of speech with
accuracy of tagging stems from the nature of the objects
that words of a certain class denote. Words that refer to
concepts that are concrete tend to have relatively fixed,
easily distinguishable senses. Words with more abstract
or generic referents tend to have a more flexible seman-
tics, with meanings being assigned in context, and hence
more difficult to pin down. Nouns tend to be in the for-
mer category, verbs in the latter. More abstract classes
also tend to have a higher degree of polysemy, adding to
the effect.
Finally, the presentation of the sense choices in Word-
Net order, with the most frequent sense first, creates a
bias towards selecting the first sense. Their study shows
that randomly ordering the senses removes this effect.
2.3 Granularity of senses
Palmer et al (to appear, 2004) examines the relationship
between manual and automatic tagging accuracy and the
granularity of the sense inventory. Granularity has to do
with fineness of distinctions made from a lexicographer?s
point of view, and not the number of senses that a word
form exhibits in context. It is related to polysemy, in
that the greater a word?s degree of polysemy, the finer the
distinctions that can be made in defining senses for that
word. In their experiment, Palmer et al have lexicogra-
phers group WordNet 1.75 senses according to syntactic
and semantic criteria, which are used by taggers to tag
corpus instances. An automatic WSD system trained on
the data tagged using grouped senses shows a 10% overall
improvement in performance against running it on data
tagged without using the groupings. Their study shows
that improvement came not from the fewer number of
senses resulting from the groupings, but from the group-
ings themselves, which increased the manual tags? accu-
racy (defined as agreement between taggers), thereby in-
creasing the accuracy of the systems that learned from
them. This effect arises from the slippery nature of word
senses and the impossibility of capturing them in neatly
delimited, universally agreed-upon sense-boxes. New us-
ages of words extending old meanings, vague contexts
that select for multiple senses, and the limits of the tag-
ger?s own knowledge of a specialized domain, all defy
the assignment of a single, unequivocal sense to a word?s
instance across annotators. Palmer et al propose sense
groupings as a practical solution in these situations.
5The words used for this experiment were the polysemous
verbs from the lexical sample task for SENSEVAL-2 (Edmonds
and Cotton, 2001).
2.4 Tagger expertise
Finally, there is the question of whether novice tag-
gers with adequate training can attain the level of accu-
racy of experienced lexicographers and linguists. Fell-
baum et al (1997) answer this in the negative. Their
findings show novice tagger accuracy decreasing as the
number of senses, or fineness of distinctions among the
senses, increases. Level of expertise likely influenced the
slow pace of tagging reported for the Kilo and READER
projects, which employed novice taggers. During the
tagging of the evaluation dataset for SENSEVAL-1, the
highly experienced lexicographers who did the tagging
reported the time spent absorbing new contexts dropped
off rapidly after a slow start-up period (Krishnamurthy
and Nicholls, 2000).
2.5 The present approach
To the extent that these difficulties can be addressed, we
have attempted to do so. We feel the most accurate re-
sults can be obtained from the targeted approach using
linguistically-trained taggers. The nature of the glosses
(relatively short, completely self-contained) means that
a fairly restricted context will need to be assimilated for
each instance of a token, eliminating one factor of diffi-
culty associated with the targeted approach. Since a def-
inition is, by definition, unambiguous, the context pro-
vided by a gloss should, in theory, never be insufficient to
disambiguate the words used within it. In this respect, the
glosses differ from KWIC (Key Word In Context) lines in
a concordance, with which they can be compared. KWIC
concordances, so named because they display corpus in-
stances of a (key) word along with surrounding text, are
used by lexicographers in a manner very similar to the
targeted approach to sense-tagging. There the task is to
define the word, to determine and delineate its senses
given its contexts of use. One further difference to be
exploited is the fact that, unlike a sentence in a typical
corpus, a gloss is embedded within a network of WordNet
relations. This means that immediate hypernym, domain
category, and other relations can be made available to the
user as additional disambiguation aids.
The order of the senses will be scrambled in the man-
ual tagging interface so as to prevent a bias towards the
first sense listed. To avoid putting any additional burden
on the tagger, the order of senses will be fixed at the be-
ginning of the session, and kept constant until the tagger
exits the program or selects another word to tag.
Underspecified word senses are expressed in WordNet
in the form of verb groups6, which will be presented to
the tagger in the sense display with the option to select
either the entire group, or individual senses within the
6Groupings exist for many, though not all, polysemous verbs
in WordNet.
group. Where no appropriate grouping exists, and con-
text and domain category are not enough to fully disam-
biguate, multiple tags can be assigned. Precise guidelines
for when multiple senses can be assigned, and under what
criteria, will need to be developed, and taggers will need
to be extensively trained on them.
3 Annotating the glosses
There are six major components to the present sense-
tagging system. They function in pipeline fashion, with
the output of one being fed as input to the next. Each
pass through the data produces output in valid XML, the
structure of which is covered in Subsection 3.1. The six
components are: (1) a gloss parser, (2) a tokenizer, (3) an
ignorable text chunker and classifier, (4) a WordNet col-
location7 recognizer, (5) an automatic sense tagger, and
(6) a manual tagging tool.
Prior to and in conjunction with building the prepro-
cessor (the first four components), analysis of the Word-
Net glosses was undertaken to determine what should be
presented for tagging, and what was not to be tagged.
Ignorable classes of word forms and multi-word forms
were determined during this phase. These were used as
a basis for the development of a stop list of words and
phrases to ignore completely, and a second, semi-stop list
that we have dubbed the ?wait list?. The stop list is re-
served for unequivocally closed-class words and phrases
including prepositions, conjunctions, determiners, pro-
nouns and modals, plus multi-word forms that function
as prepositions (e.g., ?by means of?). Words on the wait
list will be held out from the automatic tagging stage for
manual review and tagging later. Since WordNet covers
only open-class parts of speech, word forms that have ho-
mographs in both open and closed-class parts of speech
are on this list. During the manual tagging stage, the
open-class senses will be tagged. Highly polysemous
words such as ?be? and ?have? are also waitlisted.
Many glosses also contain example sentences. While
not an essential part of the semantic makeup of the
synset, they do give some information about the illus-
trated word?s sense-specific context of use, contributing
to meaning in a different way.8 For this reason, we will
be tagging the synset word (and only that word) of which
the sentence is an exemplar. By virtue of being located
within the synset, the exemplified form is in effect auto-
matically disambiguated?it?s just a matter of assigning
the tag.
7In WordNet terminology, a collocation is a superordinate
term for a variety of multi-word forms, including, but not re-
stricted to, names, compounds, phrasal verbs, and idiomatic
phrases.
8Insofar as meaning is defined in part by use.
3.1 The glosstag DTD
Development of the formal model for the sense-tagged
glosses took the DTD from the SEMCOR project as a
starting point (Landes et al, 1998). It went through sev-
eral iterations of modification, first to accommodate the
specifics of the dataset being tagged (WordNet glosses
as opposed to open text), and then to refine the han-
dling of WordNet collocations. Prior tagging efforts had
employed the WordNet method of representing colloca-
tions as single word forms, with underscores replacing
the spaces between words. While it is a practical solu-
tion that gives the collocation the same status and repre-
sentational form that it has as an entry in WordNet, by
treating a collocation as a ?word?, we lose the fact that it
is decomposable into smaller units. This renders difficult
the coding of discontinuous collocations (that is, colloca-
tions interrupted by one or more intervening words, for
example ?His performance blew the competition out of
the water?, where ?blow out of the water? is a WordNet
collocation). A scheme that enables collocations to be
treated both as individual words and as multi-word units
is therefore desirable, particularly if future parsing passes
need to identify the internal structure of a collocation, as
for distinguishing phrase heads from non-heads.
The smallest structural unit, then, is a word (or piece of
punctuation), marked as <cf> if it is part of a WordNet
collocation, and as <wf> otherwise. Attributes on the
<wf> and <cf> elements identify each form uniquely
in the gloss, and link together the constituent <cf>?s of a
collocation.
The major structural units of a gloss are <def>, <ex>,
and <aux>. <def> contains the definitional portion of
the gloss, the main interest of the tagging task. A <def>
may be followed by one or more <ex>?s, each contain-
ing an example sentence. Auxiliary information,9 coded
as <aux>, may precede or follow the <def>, or occur
within it. Figure 1 shows the marked up gloss for sense
11 of life (the gloss text is ?living things collectively;?),
as it looks after preprocessing.
Prior to sense-tagging, the lemma attribute on the
<wf> or head10 <cf> of a collocation is set to all
possible lemma forms, as determined during lemmatiza-
tion (explicated more fully below). After sense-tagging,
the lemma attribute is set to only the lemma of the
word/collocation that it is tagged to, all other options are
deleted. An <id> element representing the sense tag
is inserted as a child of the <wf> (or <cf>), if multi-
9Auxiliary text is a cover term for a range of numeric and
symbolic classes (dates, times, numbers, numeric ranges, mea-
surements, formulas, and the like), and parenthesized and other
secondary text that are inessential to the meaning of a synset.
10
?Head? here refers simply to the first word in the collo-
cation, and not the syntactic head. The head <cf> bears the
lemma and sense-tag(s) for the entire collocation.
ple sense-tags are assigned, then multiple <id>?s are as-
signed, one for each tag. Figure 2 shows the sense-tagged
gloss for life.
3.2 Preprocessing and automatic tagging
The preprocessing stage segments the gloss into chunks
and tokenizes the gloss contents into words and WordNet
collocations. The tokenization pass isolates word forms
and disambiguates lexical from non-lexical punctuation.
Lexical punctuation is retained as part of the word form,
non-lexical punctuation is encoded as ignorable <wf>?s.
Abbreviations and acronyms are recognized, contractions
split, and stop list and wait list forms are handled. All
<wf>?s other than punctuation are lemmatized, that is,
they are reduced to their WordNet entry form using an in-
house tool, moan11, that was developed for this purpose.
Part of speech is not disambiguated during preprocess-
ing, therefore lemmatizing assigns all potential lemma
forms for all part of speech classes that moan returns for
the token. Part of speech disambiguation will occur as a
side-effect of sense-tagging, avoiding the introduction of
errors related to POS-tagging. Lemmatizing serves two
functions, first when searching the database of glosses
for the term being tagged, and then when displaying the
sense choices for a particular instance.
The targeted tagging approach introduces the problem
of locating all inflected forms of the word/collocation to
be tagged. Rather than build a tool to generate inflected
forms, our solution was to pre-lemmatize the corpus and
search on the lemma forms, on the assumption that while
the search will overgenerate matches, it will not miss any.
Locating alternations in hyphenation will be handled in a
similar way, via the pre-indexing of alternate forms of
hyphenated words/collocations in WordNet.
The ignorable text classifier recognizes ignorable text
as described earlier, chunking multi-word terms and as-
signing attributes indicating semantic class. The markup
will enable them to be treated as individual words or, al-
ternatively, as a single form indicating the class, which
will be of use should further parsing or semantic process-
ing of the glosses be called for.
The WordNet collocation recognizer, or globber, uses a
bag-of-words approach to locate multi-word forms in the
glosses. First, all possible collocations are pulled from
the WordNet database. This list is then filtered by sev-
eral criteria designed to exclude candidates that cannot
be accurately identified automatically. The largest class
of excluded words is that of phrasal verbs, which cannot
11Moan falls somewhere between a stemmer and full mor-
phological analyzer?it recognizes inflectional endings and re-
stores a corpus instance to its possible lemma form(s) classified
by part of speech and grammatical category of the inflectional
suffix. Lemma form is the WordNet entry spelling, if the word
is in WordNet.
<synset pos="n" ofs="00005905">
<gloss desc="wsd">
<def>
<wf wf-num="1" tag="un" lemma="living%1|live%2|living%3">living</wf>
<wf wf-num="2" tag="un" lemma="thing%1|things%1">things</wf>
<wf wf-num="3" tag="un" lemma="collectively%4" sep="">collectively</wf>
<wf wf-num="4" type="punc" tag="ignore">;</wf>
</def>
</gloss>
</synset>
Figure 1: Preprocessed gloss for life, prior to semantic annotation
<synset pos="n" ofs="00005905">
<gloss desc="wsd">
<def>
<cf coll="a" tag="auto">
<glob coll="a" tag="auto">
<id coll="a" lemma="living_thing" pos="n" ofs="00004323"/>
</glob>
living
</cf>
<cf coll="a" tag="cf">things</cf>
<wf tag="auto" sep="">
<id lemma="collectively" pos="r" ofs="00119700"/>
collectively
</wf>
<wf tag="ignore" type="punc">;</wf>
</def>
</gloss>
</synset>
Figure 2: Semantically-annotated gloss for life
easily be distinguished from verbs followed by preposi-
tions heading prepositional phrases.12 Many of these will
be globbed by hand in the early stages of manual tagging.
From this list of excluded words, we also generate a list
of collocations that contain monosemous words. This list
will later be used to prevent those words from being erro-
neously tagged in the automatic sense-tagging stage. The
final list of words to be automatically globbed also takes
into account variations in hyphenation and capitalization.
Once the list is completed, the next step is to create an
index of the glosses referenced by the lemmatized forms
they contain. For each collocation, the globber calculates
the intersection of the lists of glosses containing its con-
stituent word forms. This list of possible collocations is
then ordered by gloss.
The final step of the globber iterates through each of
the glosses, three passes per gloss. The first pass marks
the monosemous words found in excluded collocations,
without globbing the collocation. Pass two identifies
multi-word forms that appear as consecutive <wf>?s in
the text. The final pass attempts to locate disjoint collo-
cations that follow certain set patterns of usage, such as
?ribbon, bull, and garter snakes?, where ?ribbon snake?,
?bull snake?, and ?garter snake? are all in WordNet.
?Garter snake? is globbed in pass two, and parallel struc-
ture helps identify ?ribbon snake? and ?bull snake? in the
third pass.
After preprocessing is complete, the automatic sense
tagger tags monosemous <wf>?s and <cf>?s to their
WordNet senses. Words and collocations tagged by the
automatic tagger are distinguished from manually tagged
terms by an attribute in the markup.
Sense-tagging the glosses to WordNet senses presup-
poses that all words used in the glosses (and all senses
used of those words) exist as entries. The preprocess-
ing and auto-tagging phase will therefore include a few
dry runs to identify any typographical errors and words
not covered, errors will be fixed and open class words or
word senses will be added to WordNet as necessary.
3.3 Manual tagger interface
The single most important design consideration for the
manual tagger interface is the repetitiveness inherent to
the task. With approximately 550,000 polysemous open-
class words and collocations13 in the glosses, each tag-
ger will tag hundreds of words in a day of work. We
have made every effort to minimize the amount of mouse
movement and the number of button presses required to
tag each word.
The layout of the program window is simple. The cur-
rent search term is displayed in an entry box near the top
12
?Last year legal fees ate up our profits.? versus ?Last night
we ate up the street.?
13With an average polysemy of 2.59 senses per word form.
of the screen. Below this box are two text boxes, for
glosses and examples, respectively. Buttons used to alter
the current tag or tags lie above the final text box, which
is used to display and select the WordNet sense or senses
for the current word.
The tag status of each word or collocation in the gloss
and example boxes is indicated through the use of color,
font, and highlighting. Orange text indicates a term that
has been automatically tagged, red type denotes a manu-
ally tagged word, words marked as ignorable are shown
in black, and the remainder of the taggable text is blue.
Words that are part of a collocation are underlined, and
forms that match the targeted search term are bolded. The
current selection is highlighted in yellow.
There are several ways to navigate the glosses. For tar-
geted tagging, the user chooses one or more senses, then
clicks the ?Tag? button, assigning those senses and auto-
matically jumping to the next untagged instance of the
search word. Other buttons allow movement to the next
or previous instance of the search term without altering
the tag status of the current selection. The interface was
designed with targeted tagging in mind, but the user can
switch between targeted and sequential modes, to fix an
improperly tagged word.
The interface allows a user to filter the displayed senses
by part of speech, to concentrate on the relevant options.
When context is insufficient to fully disambiguate, a word
or collocation can be tagged to more than one sense or to
a WordNet verb group. To prevent bias caused by the
order of the displayed senses, each time a new targeted
search term is entered, the senses shown in the sense box
are shuffled after being grouped by part of speech.
During the targeted tagging process, the interface also
enables a user to easily inspect and change the sense tags
assigned to words other than the search term. The inter-
face will display a box containing a tagged word?s senses
when the cursor is placed over it, providing useful infor-
mation for disambiguating the search term. Additionally,
if the user notices a tagging error, the mis-tagged word
can be selected for editing. Errors and omissions of glob-
bing can be corrected in a similar fashion. To ?un-glob?
a collocation, one need only click on the collocation and
click on the ?un-glob? button. To group separate <wf>s
into a new collocation, a user can select each constituent
form with the mouse and click the ?glob? button. The in-
terface will then provide a list of potential lemmas for the
collocation, from which the user can select the appropri-
ate choice.
4 Looking ahead
WordNet currently consists of 146,000 lexemes orga-
nized into more than 116,000 synsets. There are over
117,000 bidirectional links comprising the hyponymy,
troponymy, and meronymy hierarchies, and 4,000 bidi-
rectional antonym links. Once completed, the sense-
tagged glosses will contribute an estimated 800,000 links
to the network, increasing the internal connectivity and
associating words with related concepts that cut across
grammatical class and hierarchy. From the synset for a
word, the synsets for all conceptually-related words used
in its gloss can be accessed via their sense tags. From
those synsets, hierarchical and other semantic links can
be followed, as well the sense tags in those glosses, sit-
uating the word in an ever-expanding network of links.
The sense-tagged glosses will provide an additional di-
mension of meaning not expressible by purely hierarchi-
cal relations. The hierarchical structure of WordNet rep-
resents sense distinctions that stem from a polysemous
word?s distinct superordinates (paradigmatic difference).
Not represented are a word?s syntagmatic properties?
the ways in which meaning is constrained by the differ-
ing contexts in which a polysemous word appears. The
sense-tagged glosses, taken as a corpus of disambiguated
contexts for a word, provide just that.
NLP needs high-quality sense-tagged corpora and
sense inventories. The project currently underway is a
step towards providing both in one integrated lexical re-
source.
Acknowledgements: This work has been supported
by contracts between Princeton University and the Ad-
vanced Research and Development Activity (ARDA
Contract No. SO53100 000 and the ACQUAINT R&D
Program Contract No. MDA904-01-C-0986), as well
as DARPA Subcontract No. 621-03-S-0115 under U.S.
Government Contract No. N00174-02-0-0002. It would
also not have been possible without the input of Randee
Tengi and the work of the on-staff linguists, Christiane
Fellbaum and Susanne Wolff, and tagger Suzie Berger.
Many thanks also to Jin Oh for building the initial ver-
sion of the manual tagger tool.
References
Sue Atkins. 1993. Tools for computer-aided lexicog-
raphy: the Hector project. Papers in Computational
Lexicography: COMPLEX ?93. Budapest.
Beryl Atkins and Beth Levin. 1988. Admitting imped-
iments. Proceedings of the 4th Annual Conference of
the UW Center for the New OED. Oxford, UK.
Philip Edmonds and Scott Cotton. 2001. SENSEVAL-2:
Overview. Proceedings of SENSEVAL-2: Second In-
ternational Workshop on Evaluating Word Sense Dis-
ambiguation Systems. Toulouse, France.
Christiane Fellbaum, ed. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Christiane Fellbaum, Lauren Delfs, Susanne Wolff, and
Martha Palmer. 2003. Word meaning in dictionaries,
corpora, and the speaker?s mind. In Meaningful texts:
The Extraction of Semantic Information from Monolin-
gual and Multilingual Corpora, eds. Geoff Barnbrook,
Pernilla Danielsson and Michaela Mahlberg. Birming-
ham University Press, Birmingham, UK.
Christiane Fellbaum, Joachim Grabowski, and Shari Lan-
des. 1997. Analysis of a hand-tagging task. Proceed-
ings of the ACL/Siglex workshop. Somerset, NJ.
Patrick Hanks. 2000. Do word meanings exist? Com-
puters and the Humanities, 34(1-2):205-215. Special
Issue on SENSEVAL.
Adam Kilgarriff. 1997. I don?t believe in word senses.
Computers and the Humanities, 31(2):91-113.
Adam Kilgarriff. 1998. Gold standard datasets for eval-
uating Word Sense Disambiguation programs. Com-
puter Speech and Language, 12(3):453-472.
Ramesh Krishnamurthy and Diane Nicholls. 2000. Peel-
ing an onion: the lexicographer?s experience of manual
sense-tagging. Computers and the Humanities, 34(1-
2):85-97. Special Issue on SENSEVAL.
Henry Kuc?era and W. Nelson Francis. 1967. The stan-
dard corpus of present-day American English. (Elec-
tronic database.) Brown University, Providence, RI.
Shari Landes, Claudia Leacock, and Randee I. Tengi.
1998. Building semantic concordances. In WordNet:
An Electronic Lexical Database, ed. Christiane Fell-
baum. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
George A. Miller, Richard Beckwith, Christiane Fell-
baum, Derek Gross, and Katherine J. Miller. 1990.
Introduction to WordNet: an on-line lexical database.
International Journal of Lexicography, 3(4):235-244.
George A. Miller, Randee Tengi, and Shari Landes.
1998. Matching the tagging to the task. In WordNet:
An Electronic Lexical Database, ed. Christiane Fell-
baum. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Martha Palmer, Hoa Trang Dang, and Christiane Fell-
baum. To appear, 2004. Making fine-grained and
coarse-grained sense distinctions, both manually and
automatically. Natural Language Engineering.
