Identification of relevant terms to support the construction of Domain
Ontologies
Paola Velardi? and Michele Missikoff? and Roberto Basili+
? Universit? di Roma ?La Sapienza?
Velardi@dsi.uniroma1.it
?IASI-CNR, Roma
missikoff@iasi.rm.cnr.it
+ Roberto Basili
Universit? di Roma, Tor Vergata
basili@info.uniroma2.it
Abstract
Though the utility of domain
Ontologies is now widely
acknowledged in the IT (Information
Technology) community, several
barriers must be overcome before
Ontologies become practical and
useful tools. One important
achievement would be to reduce the
cost of identifying and manually
entering several thousand-concept
descriptions. This paper describes a
text mining technique to aid an
Ontology Engineer to identify the
important concepts in a Domain
Ontology.
1 Introduction
In cooperating to work together (or even in
interacting in social settings), people and
organizations must communicate among
themselves. However, due to different contexts
and backgrounds, there can be different
viewpoints, assumptions and needs regarding
the same domain or the same problem. They
may use different jargon and terminology,
sometimes even confused, overlapping, and
they may use concepts and evaluation methods
that are mismatched or poorly defined.
The consequence is the lack of a shared
understanding that leads to a poor
communication between people and
organizations. In particular, when IT solutions
are involved, this lack of a shared
understanding impacts on:
?  Effectiveness of people?s cooperation
?  Flaws in enterprise organization
?  The identification of the requirements for
the system specification
?  The inter-operability among systems and
?  The possibility of re-using and sharing of
systems components.
The goals of an Ontology is to reduce (or
eliminate) conceptual and terminological
confusion. This is achieved by identifying and
properly defining a set of relevant concepts
that characterize a given application domain.
With respect to a Thesaurus:
An Ontology aims at describing concepts,
whereas a Thesaurus aims at describing terms;
An Ontology can be seen as an enriched
Thesaurus where, besides the definitions and
relationships among terms of a given domain,
more conceptual knowledge, by means of
richer semantic relationships, is represented.
With respect to a Knowledge Base (KB):
An Ontology can be seen as a KB whose goal
is the description of the concepts necessary for
talking about domains;
A KB, in addition, includes the knowledge
needed to model and elaborate a problem,
derive new knowledge, prove theorems, or
answer to intentional queries about a domain.
Though the utility of domain Ontologies is
now widely acknowledged in the IT
community, several barriers must be overcome
before Ontologies become practical and useful
tools for shared knowledge management.
We envisage three main areas where
innovative computational solutions could
significantly reduce the cost and effort of
Ontology construction:
?  provide effective support for collaborative
development of consensus Ontologies,
since consensus is the first condition  to be
met in order to obtain the desired benefits
from an Ontology
?  enable distributed development and access
to Ontologies, since wide-spread usage of
a resource outweighs the cost of
development
?  develop tools to identify the relevant
concepts and (semi-)automatically  enrich
with semantic information the nodes of the
Ontology, thus reducing the cost and
complexity of manually defining several
thousand concepts
In this paper, we describe SymOntos, an
Ontology management system under
development at our institution since the last
several years.  In designing SymOntos, we
have been working to define innovative
solutions concerning the three critical issues
listed above. These solutions are currently
being experimented in the context of the
European project FETISH1, aimed at the
definition of an interoperability platform for
Small Medium Enterprises in the tourism
sector.
Though we will (very) briefly present
SymOntos, this paper is concerned with the
third issue, that is, the description of text
mining methods and tools to automatically
enrich the concept Ontology.
In the FETISH Project, we decided to explore
the possibility to support the extraction of
initial shared/able knowledge from on-line
textual documentation accessible from the
Web.
2 SymOntos: a symbolic Ontology
management  system
SymOntos (SymOntos 2000) is an Ontology
management system under development at
IASI_CNR. It supports the construction of an
Ontology  following the OPAL (Object,
Process, and Actor modeling Language)
methodology. OPAL is a methodology for the
modeling and management of the Enterprise
Knowledge Base and, in particular, it allows
the representation of the semi-formal
knowledge of an enterprise. As already
mentioned, an Ontology gathers a set of
concepts that are considered relevant to a given
domain. Therefore, in SymOntos the
construction of an Ontology is performed by
defining a set of concepts. In essence, in
SymOntos a concept is characterized by:
a term, that denotes the concept,
a definition, explaining the meaning of the
concept, generally in natural language,
a set of relationships with other concepts.
                                                     
1 The interested reader may access the Web site
reported in the bibliography
Figure 1 shows an example of  filled concept
form in the Tourism domain. The Domain
Ontology is called OntoTour. Concept
relationships play a key role since they allow
concepts to be inter-linked according to their
semantics. The set of concepts, together with
their links, forms a semantic network
(Brachman 1979).
In a semantically rich Ontology, both concepts
and semantic relationships are categorized.
Semantic relationships are distinguished
according to three main categories2 namely,
Broader Terms, Similar Terms, Related Terms,
that are described below.
The Broader Terms relationship allows a set of
concepts to be organized according to a
generalization hierarchy (corresponding in the
literature to the well-known ISA hierarchy).
With the Similar Terms relationship, a set of
concepts that are similar to the concept being
defined are given, each of which annotated
with a similarity degree. For instance, the
concept Hotel can have as similar concepts
Bed&Breackfast, , with similarity degree 0.6,
and camping, with similarity degree 0.4.
Finally, the Related Terms relationship allows
the definition of a set of concepts that are
semantically related to the concept being
defined. Related concepts may be of different
kinds, but they must be defined in the
Ontology.
For instance, TravelAgency, Customer, or
CreditCard, are concepts that are semantically
related to the Hotel concept.
In SymOntos, Broader relations are also
referred to as  ?vertical? , while Related and
Similar are called ?horizontal? relations.
SymOntos is equipped with functions to ensure
concept management, verification and
                                                     
2 The represented information is in fact quite more
rich, but we omit a detailed description for sake of
space
Ontology closure, and a web interface to help
developing consensus definitions in a given
user community (Missikoff and Wang, 2000).
These functions are not described here since
they are outside the purpose of the paper.
Hotel
Def: A place where a
tourist can stay
XML tag: <htl>
Gen: Accommodation
Spec: Country_ Guest_
house, motel
Part-of:
receptivity _system
Has-part:
fitness_facilities,
restaurant, garage
Related-objects: Reservation,
payment, deposit
Related-actors: Htl-manager,
cashier, room_service
Related-processes: reserving,
paying, billing,
airport_transfer
Similar-concepts: B&B[0.6],
camping[0.4],
holiday_apartment[0.7]
Figure 1 ? the Hotel concept in OntoTour
3 Text Mining tools to construct a
Domain Ontology
In Section 2 we illustrated the main features of
the SymOntos system, and provided an
example of  concept definition in the Tourism
domain.
The techniques described in this Section are
intended to significantly improve human
productivity in the process that a group of
domain experts accomplish in order to find an
agreement on:
?  the identification of the key concepts and
relationships in the domain of interest
?  providing an explicit representation of the
conceptualization captured in the previous
stage
To reduce time, cost (and, sometimes, harsh
discussions) it is highly advisable to refer to
the documents available in the field.  In this
paper we show that text-mining tools may be
of great help in this task.
At the present state of the project, natural
language processing tools have been used for
the following tasks:
1. Identification of  thesauric information, i.e.
discovery of terms that are good candidate
names for the concepts in the Ontology.
2. Identification of taxonomic relations
among these terms.
3. Identification of related terms
For sake of space, only the first method is
described in this paper. Details of the other
methods may be found in (Missikoff et al
2001).
To mine texts, we used  a corpus processor
named ARIOSTO (Basili et al 1996) whose
performance has been improved with the
addition of a Named Entity recognizer
(Cucchiarelli et al 1998) (Paliouras et al
2000) and a chunk parser CHAOS (Basili et al
1998). In the following, we will refer to this
enhanced release of the system as ARIOSTO+.
Figure 2 provides an example of final output
(simplified for sake of readability) produced by
ARIOSTO+  on a Tourism text. Interpreting
the output predicates of Figure 2 is rather
straightforward.
The main principles underlying the CHAOS
parsing technology are decomposition and
lexicalization. Parsing is carried out in four
steps: (1) POS tagging, (2) Chunking, (3) Verb
argument structure matching and (4) Shallow
grammatical analysis. .
Chunks are defined via prototypes. These are
sequences of morphosyntactical labels mapped
to specific grammatical functions, called chunk
types. Examples of labels for the inner
components are Det, N, Adj, and Prep
while types are related to traditional
constituents, like NP, PP, etc.
The definition of chunk prototypes in CHAOS
is implemented through regular expressions.
Chunks are the first types of output shown in
Figure 2. The link(..) predicates represent the
result of shallow parsing. Whenever the
argument structure information cannot be used
to link chunks, a plausibility measure is
computed, which is inversely proportional  to
the number of colliding syntactic attachments
(see the referred papers for details). The first
phase of the Ontology building process
consists in the identification of the key
concepts of the application domain.
______________________________________
The  Colorado River Trail   follows the  Colorado River
across 600 miles of beautiful  Texas Country  - from the
pecan orchards   of  San Saba   to the  Gulf of Mexico  .
[ 1 , Nom , [The,Colorado_River_Trail] ]
[ 2 , VerFin , [follows] ]
[ 3 , Nom , [the,Colorado_River] ]
[ 4 , Prep , [across,600_miles] ]
[ 5 , Prep , [of,beautiful,Texas_Country] ]
(more follows..)
link(0,2,'Sentence').
link(2,1,'V_Sog', plaus(1.0)).
link(2,3,'V_Obj', plaus(1.0)).
link(3,4,'NP_PP',plaus(0.5)).
link(2,4,'V_PP',plaus(0.5)).
link(4,5,'PP_PP',plaus(0.3333333333333333)).
link(3,5,'NP_PP',plaus(0.3333333333333333)).
link(2,5,'V_PP',plaus(0.3333333333333333)).
 (?morefollows?)
______________________________________________
Figure 2. An example of parsed Tourism
text
Though concept names do not always have a
lexical correspondent in natural language,
especially at the most general levels of the
Ontology, one such correspondence may be
naturally drawn among the more specific
concept names and  domain-specific words and
complex nominals, like:
?  Domain Named Entities (e.g., gulf of
Mexico, Texas Country, Texas Wildlife
Association)
?  Domain-specific complex nominals   (e.g.,
travel agent, reservation list, historic site,
preservation area)
?  Domain-specific singleton words (e.g.,
hotel, reservation, trail, campground)
We denote these singleton and complex words
as Terminology.
Terminology is the set of words or word
strings , which convey a single, possibly
complex, meaning within a given community.
In a sense, Terminology  is the surface
appearance, in texts, of  the domain knowledge
in a given domain. Because of their low
ambiguity and high specificity, these words are
also particularly useful to conceptualize a
knowledge domain, but on the other side, these
words are often not found in Dictionaries. We
now describe how the different types of
Terminology are captured  using NLP
techniques.
3.1 Detection of Named Entities
Proper names are the instances of domain
concepts, therefore they populate the leaves of
the Ontology.
Proper names are pervasive in texts. In the
Tourism domain, as in most domains, Named
Entities (NE) represent more than 20% of  the
total occurring words.
To detect NE, we used a module already
available in ARIOSTO+. A detailed
description of the method summarized
hereafter may be found in (Cucchiarelli et al
1998) (Paliouras et al 2000). In ARIOSTO+,
NE are detected and semantically tagged
according to three main conceptual categories:
locations (objects in OPAL), organizations and
persons (actors in OPAL) . When contextual
cues are sufficiently strong (e.g. "lake Tahoe is
located.".), names of locations are further sub-
categorized (city, bank, hotel, geographic
location, ..), therefore the Ontology Engineer is
provided with semantic cues to correctly place
the instance under  the appropriate concept
node of the Ontology.
Named Entity recognition is based on a set of
contextual rules (e.g.  "a complex or simple
proper name followed by the trigger word
authority is a organization named entity").
Rules are manually entered or machine learned
using decision lists. If a complex nominal does
not match  any  contextual  rule in the NE rule
base, the decision is delayed until syntactic
parsing. A classification based on syntactically
augmented context similarity is later
ttempted.
The NE tagger is also used to automatically
enrich the Proper Names dictionary, thus
leading to increasingly better coverage as long
as new texts are analyzed.
As reported in the referred papers, the F-
measure (combined recall and precision with a
weight factor w=0,5) of this method is
consistently (i.e. with different experimental
settings) around  89%, a performance that
compares very well with other NE recognizers
described in the literature3.
3.2 Detection of domain-specific words
and complex nominals
NEs are word strings in part or totally
capitalized, and they often appear in well-
characterized contexts. Therefore, the task of
NE recognition is relatively well assessed in
literature. Other not-named terminological
patterns (that we will refer hereafter again with
the word "terminology" though in principle
t rminology includes also NEs) are rather more
difficult to capture since the notion of erm is
mostly underspecified.
In the literature (see Bourigault et al (1998)
for an overview of recent research) the
following steps are in general adopted:
?  Detecting terminological candidates from
texts
?  Selecting the specific entries that can be
members of a terminological glossary in
the target domain of knowledge.
Candidates terminological expressions are
                                                     
3 ftp.muc.saic.com/proceedings/score_reports_index.html
usually captured with more or less shallow
techniques, ranging from stochastic methods
(Church, 1988) to more sophisticated syntactic
approaches (e.g. Jacquemin, 1997).
Obviously, richer syntactic information
positively influences the quality of the result to
be input to the statistical filtering. In our
research, we used the CHAOS parser to select
candidate terminological patterns. Nominal
expressions usually denoting terminological
items are very similar to chunk instances.
Specific chunk prototypes have been used to
match  terminological structures.
A traditional problem of purely syntactic
approaches to term extraction is
overgeneration. The available candidates that
satisfy grammatical constraints are far more
than the true terminological entries. Extensive
studies suggest that statistical filters be always
faced with 50-80% of non-terminological
candidates.
Filtering of true terms can be done by
estimating the strength of an association
among words in a candidate terminological
expression. Commonly used association
measures are the Mutual Information (Fano,
1961) and the Dice factor (Smadja et al 1996).
In both formulas, the denominator combines
the marginal probability of each word
appearing in the candidate term. If one of these
words is particularly frequent, both measures
tend to be low. This is indeed not desirable,
because certain very prominent domain words
appear in many terminological patterns. For
example, in the Tourism domain, the term visa
appears both in isolation and in many
multiword patterns, e.g.: business visa,
extended visa, multiple entry business visa,
transit visa, student visa, etc.?Such patterns
are usually not captured by standard
association measures, because of the high
marginal probability of visa.
Another widely used measure is the inverse
document frequency, idf.
  
idfi =log2
N
dfi
Where dfi is the number of documents in a
domain Di that include a term t, and N is the
total number of documents in a collection of n
domains (D1, ?, Dn). The idea underlying this
measure is to capture words that are frequent in
a subset of documents representing a given
domain, but are relatively rare in a collection
of  generic documents. This measure captures
also words that appear just one time in a
domain, which is in principle correct, but is
also a major source of noise.
Other corpus-driven studies suggested that
pure frequency as a ranking score (i.e. a
measure of the plausibility of any candidate to
be a term) is a good metrics (Daille 1994).
However, frequency alone cannot be taken as a
good indicator: several very frequent
expressions (e.g. last week) are perfect
candidates from a grammatical point of view
but they are totally irrelevant as terminological
expressions. It is worth noticing that this is true
for two independent reasons. First, they are not
related to specific knowledge, pertinent to the
target domain, but are language specific:
different languages express with different
syntactic structures  (adverbial vs. nominal
phrases) similar temporal or spatial
expressions. As a result such expressions have
similar distributions in different domain
corpora. True terminology is tightly related to
specific concepts so that their use in the target
corpus is highly different wrt other corpora.
Second, common sense expressions are only
occasionally used, their meaning depending on
factual rather than on conceptual information.
They occur often once in a document and tend
not to repeat throughout the discourse. Their
appearance is thus evenly spread throughout
documents of any corpus. Conversely, true
terms are central elements in discourses and
they tend to recur in the documents where they
appear. They are thus expected to show more
skewed (i.e. low entropy) distributions.
The above issues suggest the application of
two different evaluation (utility) functions.
Although both are related to the widely
employed notion of term probability, they
capture more specific aspects and provide a
more effective ranking.
3.2.1 Modeling Relevance in domains
As observed above, high frequency in a corpus
is a property observable for terminological as
well as non-terminological expressions (e.g.
"last week" or "real time"). The specificity of a
terminological candidate with respect to the
target domain (Tourism in our case) is
measured via comparative analysis across
different domains. A specific score, called
Domain Relevance (DR), has been defined.
More precisely, given a set of n d mains4 (D1,
?, Dn)  the domain relevance of a term t is
computed as:
(1)
  
D R ( t , D i )= P ( t | D i )
P(t | D i )
i=1..n
?
where the conditional probabilities (P(t|Di))
are estimated as:
  
E ( P ( t| D i ) )=
freq(t in Di)
freq(t in Di)
i=1..n
?
3.2.2 Modeling Consensus about a term
Terms are concepts whose meaning is agreed
upon large user communities in a given
domain. A more selective analysis should take
into account not only the overall occurrence in
the target corpus but also its appearance in
                                                     
4 ? domains ? are (pragmatically) represented by
texts collections in different areas, e.g. medicine,
finance, tourism, etc.
single documents. Domain concepts (e.g.
ravel agent) are referred frequently
throughout the documents of a domain, while
there are certain specific terms with a high
frequency within single documents but
completely absent in others (e.g. petrol station,
foreign income).
Distributed usage expresses a form of
consensus tied to the consolidated semantics of
a term (within the target domain) as well as to
its centrality in communicating domain
knowledge. A second indicator to be assigned
to candidate terms can thus be defined.
Domain consensus measures the distributed
use of a term in a domain Di.. The distribution
of a term t in documents dj can be taken as a
stochastic variable estimated throughout all dj
? Di. The entropy H of this distribution
expresses the degree of consensus of t in Di.
More precisely, the domain consensus is
expressed as follows
(2)     
DC(t,Di) =H(P(t,dj)=
P(t,dj)
dj? Di
? log2 1P(t,dj)
? 
? 
? ? 
? 
? 
?  
Where:
  
E(P(t ,dj))=
freq(t in dj)
f req( t in dj)
dj? Di
?
Pruning of not terminological (or not-domain)
candidate terms is performed using a
combination of the measures (1) and (2). We
experimented several combinations of these
two measures, with similar results. The results,
discussed in the next Section, have been
obtained applying a threshold a to the set of
terms ranked according to (1) and then
eliminating the candidates with a rank (2)
lower than b.
4 Experiments
An obvious problem of any automatic method
for concept extraction is to provide objective
performance evaluation.
?  Firstly, a "golden standard" tourism
terminology would be necessary to
formally measure the accuracy of the
method. One such standard is not
available, and determining this standard is
one of the objectives of FETISH.
Moreover, the notion of "term" is too
vague to consider available terminological
databases as "closed" sets, unless the
domain is extremely specific.   
?  Secondly, no formal methods to evaluate a
terminology are available in literature. The
best way to evaluate a "basic" linguistic
component (i.e. a module that performs
some basic task, such as POS tagging,
terminology extraction, etc.) within a
larger NLP application (information
extraction, document classification, etc.) is
to compute the difference in performance
with and without the basic component. In
our case, since Ontology does not perform
any measurable task, adopting a similar
approach is not straightforward. As a
matter of facts, an Ontology is a basic
component itself, therefore it can be
formally evaluated only in the context of
some specific usage of the Ontology itself.
Having in mind all these inherent difficulties,
we performed two sets of experiments. In the
first, we extracted the terminology from a
collection of texts in the Tourism domain, and
we manually evaluated the results, with the
help of other participants in the FETISH
project (see the FETISH web site). In the
second, we attempted to assess the generality
of our approach. We hence extracted the
terminology from a financial corpus (the Wall
Street journal) and then we both manually
evaluated the result, and compared the
extracted terminology with an available
thesaurus in a (approximately) similar domain.
As a reference set of terms we used the
Washington Post5 (WP) dictionary of
economic and financial terms.
To compute the Domain Relevance, we first
collected corpora in several domains: tourism
announcements and hotel descriptions,
economic prose (Wall Street Journal), medical
news (Reuters), sport news (Reuters), a
balanced corpus (Brown Corpus) and four
novels by Wells. Overall, about 3,2 million
words were collected.
In the first experiment, we used the Tourism
corpus as a ?target? domain for term
extraction.
The Tourism corpus was manually built using
the WWW and currently has only about
200,000 words, but it is rapidly growing.
Table 1 is a summary of the experiment. It is
seen that only 2% terms are extracted from the
initial list of candidates. This extremely high
filtering rate is due to the small corpus: many
candidates are found just one time in the
corpus. However, candidates are extracted with
high precision (over 85%).
N. of candidate multiword terms (after
parsing)
14.383
N. of extracted terms (with a=0.35 and
b=0.50)
288
% correct (3 human judges) 85.20%
Number of subtrees (of which with
depth>0)
177
(54)
Table 1. Summary results for the term
extraction task in the Tourism domain
Table 2 shows the 15 most highly rated
multiword terms, ordered by Consensus
(Relevance is 1 for all the terms in the list).
Table 3 illustrates the effectiveness of Domain
Consensus at pruning irrelevant terms: all the
                                                     
5http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
srv/business/longterm/glossary/indexag.htm
candidate terms in the list have DR>a, but
DC<b.
Terms Domain Consensus
credit card
tourist information
travel agent
swimming pool
service charge
car rental
credit card number
card number
room rate
information centre
beach hotel
tourist area
tour operator
standard room
video camera
0.846913
0.696701
0.686668
0.664041
0.640951
0.635580
0.616671
0.616671
0.596764
0.579662
0.571898
0.565462
0.543419
0.539450
0.523142
Table 2: The 15 most highly ranked
multiword Tourism terms
Domain
Relevance
Domain
Consensus
english cyclist
manual work
petrol station
school diploma
western movie
white cloud
false statement
best price
council decision
foreign income
gay community
mortgage interest
substantial discount
typical day
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
0.621369
0.612948
0.612948
0.441907
0.441907
0.441907
0.441907
0.441907
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.224244
0.000000
0.000000
0.224244
0.000000
0.224244
0.224244
Table 3. Terms with high Domain Relevance
and low Domain Consensus
In the second experiment, we used the one-
million-word Wall Street journal (WSJ) and
the Washington Post (WP) reference
terminology.
The WP  includes 1270 terms, but only 214
occur at least once in the WSJ. We used these
214 as the "golden standard" (Test1), but we
performed different experiments eliminating
terms with a frequency lower than 2 (Test2), 5
(Test5) and 10 (Test10). This latter set includes
only 73 terms.
During syntactic processing, 41,609 chunk
prototypes have been extracted as eligible
terminology.
The Tables 4 and 5 compare our method with t
with Mutual Information, Dice factor, and pure
frequency. Clearly, these measures are applied
on the same set of eligible candidates extracted
by the CHAOS chunker. The results reported
in each line are those obtained using the best
threshold for each adopted measure6. For our
method (DR+DC), the threshold is given by
the values a and b. As remarked in the
introduction, a comparison against a golden
standard may be unfair, since, on one side,
many terms may be present in the observed
documents, and not present in the terminology.
On the other side, low frequency terms in the
reference terminology are difficult to capture
using statistical filters. Due to these problems,
the F-measure is in general quite low, though
our method outperforms Mutual Information
and Dice factor.  As remarked by Daille
(1994), the frequency emerges as a reasonable
indicator, especially as for the Recall value,
which is a rather obvious result.
However pure frequency implies the problems
outlined in the previous section. Upon manual
inspection, we found that, as obvious,
undesired terms increase rapidly in the
frequency ranked term list, as the frequency
decreases. Manually inspecting the first 100
highly ranked terms produced a score of 87,5
precision for our method, and 77,5 for the
frequency measure. For the subsequent 100
terms, the discrepancy gets much higher
(18%).
Note that the precision score is in line with that
obtained for the Tourism corpus. Notice also
                                                     
6 as a matter of fact, for our method we are not
quite using the best value for b, as emarked later.
that the values of a and b are the same in the
two experiments.  In practice, we found that
the threshold a=0,35  for the Domain
Relevance is a generally ?good? value, while a
little tuning may be necessary for the Domain
Consensus. In the Tourism domain, where
statistical evidence is lower, a lower value for
b produces higher precision (+1, 2%).
Method Threshol
d
Prec Recall F
DR+DC 0.35 0.49 17.18 17.61 17.39
MI 0.00009 6.68 32.08 11.05
Dice 0.034 7.48 23.90 11.39
Freq 22 14.19 25.79 18.30
Table 4 WSJ/WP experiment on Test1
Method Threshol
d
Prec Recall F
DR+DC 0.35 0.57 23.80 19.42 21.39
MI 0.00009 6.42 47.57 11.30
Dice 0.057 8.22 23.30 12.15
Freq 22 14.19 39.81 20.92
Table 5 WSJ/WP experiment on Test5
5 Conclusion and Future Work
The text mining techniques  proposed in this
paper are meant to increase the productivity of
an Ontology Engineer during the time
consuming task of populating a Domain
Ontology.   The work presented in this paper is
in part well assessed, in part still under
development. We are designing new
algorithms and techniques to widen the
spectrum of information that can be extracted
from texts and from other on-line resources,
such as dictionaries and lexical taxonomies
(like EuroWordnet, a multilingual version of
Wordnet). An on-going extension of this
research is to detect similarity relations among
concepts on the basis of contextual similarity.
Similarity is one of the fields (see Figure 1) in
a concept definition form that are currently
filled by humans.
One admittedly weak part of the research
presented in this paper is evaluation: we could
produce a numerical evaluation of certain
specific subtasks (extraction of Named Entities
and extraction of thesauric information), but
we did not evaluate the overall effect that our
text mining tools produce on the Ontology.
However, we are not aware of any  assessed
Ontology evaluation methodology in the
literature, besides (Farquhar et al 1996) where
an analysis of Ontology Server user
distribution and requests is presented.  A better
performance indicator would have been the
number of users that access Ontology Server
on a regular basis, but the authors mention that
regular users are only a small percentage7. As
remarked in Subsection 3.1.2, an objective
evaluation of an Ontology as a stand-alone
artifact is not feasible: the only  possible
success indicator is the (subjective)
acceptance/rejection rate of the Ontology
Engineer when inspecting the automatically
extracted information. An Ontology  can only
be evaluated in a context in which many users
of a community (e.g. Tourism operators in our
application) access the Ontology  on a regular
basis and use this shared knowledge to
increase their ability to communicate, access
prominent information and documents,
improve collaboration. Though  a field
evaluation of OntoTour is foreseen during the
last months of the project, we believe that wide
accessibility and  a long-lasting monitoring of
user behaviors would provide the basis for a
sound evaluation of  the OntoTour system.
                                                     
7 The system described by Farquhar and his colleagues,
however, is not a specific Ontology, but a tool, Ontology
Server, to help publishing, editing and browsing an
Ontology.
6 References
E. Agirre, O. Ausa, E. Havy and D. Martinez
"Enriching very large ontologies using the WWW"
ECAI2000 workshop on Ontology Learning,
http://ol2000.aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de/, Berlin, August 2000
 R.J. Brachman ?On the epistemological status of
semantic networks?; in "Associative Networks -
Representation and use of Knowledge by Computers",
N.V.Findler (Ed.); Academic Press, New York, 1979.
Basili R., M.T. Pazienza, F.M. Zanzotto (1998), A
Robust Parser for Information Extraction, Proceedings of
the European Conference on Artificial Intelligence (ECAI
'98), Brighton (UK), August 1998.
Bourigault, D. , C. Jacquemin and M.C. L'Homme
(1998), Eds. Proceedings of the first Workshop on
Computational Terminology, jointly held with COLING-
98, Montreal, 1998
A. Cucchiarelli, D. Luzi and P. Velardi "Semantic
tagging of Unknown Proper Noun"s in Natural Language
Engineering, December 1998.
V. Paliouras Cucchiarelli A., Karkaletsis G.
Spyropolous C. Velardi P. "Automatic adaptation of
Proper Noun Dictionaries through cooperation of
machine learning and probabilistic methods" 23rd annual
SIGIR, Athens, June 2000
Basili, R., M.T. Pazienza, P. Velardi,  An Empyrical
Symbolic Approach to Natural Language Processing,
Artificial Intelligence, 85, 59-99,  August 1996
R. Basili, G. De Rossi, M.T. Pazienza "Inducing
Terminology for Lexical Acquisition" Proc. of the
Second Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Lanaguge Processing, Providence, USA, August 1997
R. Basili, M.T. Pazienza F. Zanzotto, "Customizable
Modular Lexicalized Parsing Extraction" proc. of  Int.
Workshop on  Parsing Technology, Povo (Trento)
February 2000
B. Daille "Study and Implementation of Combined
Techniques for Automatic Extraction of Terminology"
Proc. of  ACL94 Workshop "The Balancing Act:
combining Symbolic and Statistical Approaches to
Language" , New Mexico State University, July 1994.
R. Fano "Trasmission of Information, MIT press, 1961
Farquhar, R. Fikes, W. Pratt, J. Rice "Collaborative
Ontology Construction for Information Integration"
http://www-ksl-svc.stanford.edu:5915/doc/project-
papers.html
FETISH Groupware (2001)
http://liss.uni.net/QuickPlace/trial/Main.nsf?OpenDatabas
e
Jacquemin, C. (1997). Variation terminologique.
Memoire d'Habilitation Diriger des Recherces and
Informatique Fondamentale. Universit? de Nantes,
Nantes, France.
Justenson J.S. and S.M. Katz (1995) Technical
terminology: some linguistic properties and an algorithm
for identification in text. Natural language engineering,
Vol. 1, Part 1, March 1995
Klavans, J (2001). Text Mining Techniques for Fully
Automatic Glossary Construction, Proceedings of the
HTL2001 Conference, San Diego (CA), March, 2001.
Miller A. "WordNet: An on-line lexical resource"
Special issue of the Journal of Lexicography, 3(4) 1990
M.Missikoff, XF. Wang, ?Consys ? A Web System for
Collaborative Ontology Building?, submitted, Dic. 2000.
Missikoff M., Velardi P. and Fabriani P. (2001) ?Text
Mining Techniques to Automatically Enrich a Domain
Ontology? to appear on Applied Intelligence, Special
Issue on Text and Web Mining.
A. Maedche and S. Staab "Learning Ontologies for the
Semantic Web" http://www.aifb.uni-
karlsruhe.de/WBS/ama/publications.html
Pustejovsky  "The generative lexicon : a theory of
computational lexical semantics" MIT press 1993
Smadja, F, K. McKeown and V. Hatzivassiloglou
(1996) Translating Collocations for Bilingual Lexicons: a
statistical approach, Computational Linguistics, 22:1
SymOntos (2001), a Symbolic Ontology Management
System. http://www.symontos.org
A. Wagner "Enriching a Lexical Semantic Net with
Selectional Prefernces by means of Statistical Corpus
Analysis" ECAI2000 workshop on Ontology Learning,
ibidem
Y. Wilks, B. Slator and L. Guthrie "Electric Words:
Dictionaries, Computers, and Meaning", MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1999
