The State of the Art in Thai Language Processing
Virach Sornlertlamvanich, Tanapong Potipiti, Chai Wutiwiwatchai and Pradit Mittrapiyanuruk
National Electronics and Computer Technology Center (NECTEC),
National Science and Technology Development Agency,  Ministry of Science and Technology Environment.
22nd Floor Gypsum Metropolitan Tower 539/2 Sriayudhya Rd. Rajthevi Bangkok 10400 Thailand.
Email: {virach, tanapong, chai}@nectec.or.th, pmittrap@notes.nectec.or.th
Abstract
This paper reviews the current state of tech-
nology and research progress in the Thai
language processing. It resumes the charac-
teristics of the Thai language and the ap-
proaches to overcome the difficulties in each
processing task.
1 Some Problematic Issues in the Thai
Processing
It is obvious that the most fundamental semantic
unit in a language is the word. Words are ex-
plicitly identified in those languages with word
boundaries. In Thai, there is no word boundary.
Thai words are implicitly recognized and in
many cases, they depend on the individual
judgement. This causes a lot of difficulties in the
Thai language processing. To illustrate the
problem, we employed a classic English exam-
ple.
The segmentation of  ? GODISNOWHERE?.
No. Segmentation Meaning
(1) God is now here. God is here.
(2) God is no where. God doesn?t exist.
(3) God is nowhere. God doesn?t exist.
With the different segmentations, (1) and (2)
have absolutely opposite meanings. (2) and 3
are ambiguous that nowhere is one word or two
words. And the difficulty becomes greatly ag-
gravated when unknown words exist.
As a tonal language, a phoneme with differ-
ent tone has different meaning. Many unique
approaches are introduced for both the tone gen-
eration in speech synthesis research and tone
recognition in speech recognition research.
These difficulties propagate to many levels in
the language processing area such as lexical ac-
quisition, information retrieval, machine trans-
lation, speech processing, etc. Furthermore the
similar problem also occurs in the levels of sen-
tence and paragraph.
2 Word and Sentence Segmentation
The first and most obvious problem to attack is
the problem of word identification and segmen-
tation. For the most part, the Thai language
processing relies on manually created dictionar-
ies, which have inconsistencies in defining word
units and limitation in the quantity.  [1] proposed
a word extraction algorithm employing C4.5
wit  some string features such as entropy and
mutual information. They reported a result of
85% in precision and 50% in recall measures.
For word segmentation, the longest matching,
maximal matching and probabilistic segmenta-
tion had been applied in the early research [2],
[3]. However, these approaches have some
limitations in dealing with unknown words.
More advanced techniques of word segmenta-
tion captured many language features such as
context words, parts of speech, collocations and
semantics [4], [5]. These reported about 95-99 %
of accuracy. For sentence segmentation, the tr-
gram model was adopted and yielded 85% of
accuracy [6].
3 Machine Translation
Currently, there is only one machine
translation system available to
the public, called ParSit (http://www.
links.nectec.or.th/services/parsit),   it is a service
of English-to-Thai webpage translation.  ParSiT
is a collaborative work of NECTEC, Thailand
and NEC, Japan. This system is based on an in-
terlingual approach MT and the translation accu-
racy is about 80%.  Other approaches such as
generate-and-repair [7] and sentence pattern
mapping have been also studied [8].
4 Language Resources
The only Thai text corpus available for research
use is the ORCHID corpus. ORCHID is a 9-MB
Thai part-of-speech tagged corpus initiated by
NECTEC, Thailand and Communications Re-
search Laboratory, Japan. ORCHID is available
at http://www.links.nectec.or.th /orchid.
5 Research in Thai OCR
Frequently used Thai characters are about 80
characters, including alphabets, vowels, tone
marks, special marks, and numerals. Thai writ-
ing are in 4 levels, without spaces between
words, and the problem of similarity among
many patterns has made research challenging.
Moreover, the use of English and Thai in general
Thai text creates many more patterns which
must be recognized by OCR.
For more than 10 years, there has been a con-
siderable growth in Thai OCR research,
especially for ?printed character? task. The early
proposed approaches focused on structural
matching and tended towards neural-network-
based algorithms with input for some special
characteristics of Thai characters e.g., curves,
heads of characters, and placements. At least 3
commercial products have been launched in-
cluding ?ArnThai? by NECTEC, which claims
to achieve 95% recognition performance on
clean input. Recent technical improvement of
ArnThai has been reported in [9]. Recently, fo-
cus has been changed to develop system that are
more robust with any unclean scanning input.
The approach of using more efficient features,
fuzzy algorithms, and document analysis is re-
quired in this step.
At the same time, ?Offline Thai handwritten
character recognition? task has been investigated
but is only in the research phase of isolated
characters. Almost all proposed engines were
neural network-based with several styles of in-
put features [10], [11]. There has been a small
amount of research on ?Online handwritten
character recognition?. One attempt was pro-
posed by [12], which was also neural network-
based with chain code input.
6 Thai Speech Technology
Regarding speech, Thai, like Chinese, is a tonal
language. The tonal perception is important to
the meaning of the speech. The research cur-
rently being done in speech technology can be
divided into 3 major fields: (1) speech analysis,
(2) speech recognition and (3) speech synthesis.
Most of the research in (1) done by the linguists
are on the basic study of Thai phonetics e.g.
[13].
In speech recognition, most of the current
research [14] focus on the recognition of isolated
words. To develop continuous speech recogni-
tion, a large-scale speech corpus is needed. Th
status of practical research on continuous speech
recognition is in its initial step with at least one
published paper [15]. In contrast to western
speech recognition, topics specifying tonal lan-
guages or tone recognition have been deeply
researched as seen in many papers e.g., [16].
For text-to-speech synthesis, processing the
idiosyncrasy of Thai text and h ling the tones
i terplaying with intonation are the topics that
make the TTS algorithm for the Thai language
different from others. In the research, the first
su cessful system was accomplished by [14] and
later by NECTEC [15]. Both systems employ
the same synthesis technique based on the con-
aten tion of demisyllable inventory units.
R ferences
[1] V. Sornlertlamvanich, T. Potipiti and T. Charoenporn. Auto-
matic Corpus-Based Thai Word Extraction with the C4.5
Learning Algorithm. In forthcoming Proceedings of COLING
2000.
[2] V. Sornlertlamvanich. Word Segmentation for Thai in Machine
Translation System Machine Translation. N ti al Electronics
and Computer Technology Center, Bangkok. pp. 50-56, 1993.
(in Thai).
[3] A. Kawtrakul, S. Kumtanode, T. Jamjunya nd A. Jewriyavech.
Lexibase Model for Writing Production Assistant System. In
Proceedings of the Symposium on Natural Language Processing
in Thailand, 1995.
[4] S. Meknavin, P. Charoenpornsawat and B. Kijsirikul. Featured
Based Thai Word Segmentation. In Proceedings of Natural
Language Processing Pacific Rim Symposium, pp. 41-46, 1997.
[5] A. Kawtrakul, C. Thumkanon, P. Varasarai and M. Sukta-
rachan. Autmatic Thai Unknown Word Recognition. I  Proceed-
ings of Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim Symposium,
pp. 341-347, 1997.
[6] P. Mitrapiyanurak and V. Sornlertlamvanich. The Automatic
Thai Sentence Extraction. In Proceedings of the Fourth Sympo-
sium on Natural Language Processing, pp. 23-28, May 2000.
[7] K. Naruedomkul and N. Cercone. Generate and Repair
Machine Translation. I  Proceedings of the Fourth Symposium
on Natural Language Processing, pp. 63-79, May 2000.
[8] K. Chancharoen and B. Sirinaowakul. English Thai Machine
Translation Using Sentence Pattern Mapping. In Proceedings of
the Fourth Symposium on Natural Language Processing, pp. 29-
36, May 2000.
[9] C. Tanprasert and T. Koanantakool. Thai OCR: A Neural Net-
work Application. I  Proceedings of IEEE Region Ten Confer-
ence, vol.1, pp.90-95, November 1996.
[10] I. Methasate, S. Jitapankul, K. Kiratiratanaphung and W.
Unsiam. Fuzzy Feature Extraction for Thai Handwritten Char-
acter Recognition. I  Proceedings of the Forth Symposium on
Natural Language Processing, pp.136-141, May 2000.
[11] P. Phokharatkul and C. Kimpan. Handwritten Thai Character
Recognition using Fourior Descriptors and Genetic Neural Net-
works. In Proceedings of the Fourth Symposium on Natural
Language Processing, pp.108-123, May 2000.
[12] S. Madarasmi and P. Lekhachaiworakul. Customizable Online
Thai-English Handwriting Recognition. In Proceedings of the
Forth Symposium on Natural Language Processing, pp.142-153,
May 2000.
[13] J. T. Gandour, S. Potisuk and S. Dechongkit. Tonal Coarticu-
lation in Thai, Journal of Phonetics, vol 22, pp.477-492, 1994.
[14] S. Luksaneeyanawin, et al A Thai Text-to-Speech System. In
Proceedings of Fourth NECTEC Conference, pp.65-78, 1992. (in
Thai).
[15] P. Mittrapiyanuruk, C. Hansakunbuntheung, V. Tesprasit and
V. Sornlertlamvanich. Improving Naturalness of Thai Text-to-
Speech Synthesis by Prosodic Rule. In forthcoming Proceedings
of ICSLP2000.
[16] S. Jitapunkul, S. Luksaneeyanawin, V. Ahkuputra, C. Wuti-
wiwatchai. Recent Advances of Thai Speech Recognition in
Thailand. In Proceedings of IEEE Asia-Pacific conference on
Circuits and  Systems,  pp.173-176, 1998.
