Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 177?180,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics 
Moses: Open Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation 
Philipp Koehn 
Hieu Hoang  
Alexandra Birch 
Chris Callison-Burch 
University of Edin-
burgh1 
Marcello Federico 
Nicola Bertoldi 
ITC-irst2 
Brooke Cowan 
Wade Shen 
Christine Moran 
MIT3 
Richard Zens 
RWTH Aachen4 
Chris Dyer 
University of Maryland5 
 
Ond?ej Bojar 
Charles University6 
Alexandra Constantin 
Williams College7 
Evan Herbst 
Cornell8 
1 pkoehn@inf.ed.ac.uk, {h.hoang, A.C.Birch-Mayne}@sms.ed.ac.uk, callison-burch@ed.ac.uk. 
2{federico, bertoldi}@itc.it. 3 brooke@csail.mit.edu, swade@ll.mit.edu, weezer@mit.edu. 4 
zens@i6.informatik.rwth-aachen.de. 5 redpony@umd.edu. 6 bojar@ufal.ms.mff.cuni.cz. 7 
07aec_2@williams.edu. 8 evh4@cornell.edu 
 
Abstract 
We describe an open-source toolkit for sta-
tistical machine translation whose novel 
contributions are (a) support for linguisti-
cally motivated factors, (b) confusion net-
work decoding, and (c) efficient data for-
mats for translation models and language 
models. In addition to the SMT decoder, 
the toolkit also includes a wide variety of 
tools for training, tuning and applying the 
system to many translation tasks.  
1 Motivation 
Phrase-based statistical machine translation 
(Koehn et al 2003) has emerged as the dominant 
paradigm in machine translation research. How-
ever, until now, most work in this field has been 
carried out on proprietary and in-house research 
systems. This lack of openness has created a high 
barrier to entry for researchers as many of the 
components required have had to be duplicated. 
This has also hindered effective comparisons of the 
different elements of the systems. 
By providing a free and complete toolkit, we 
hope that this will stimulate the development of the 
field. For this system to be adopted by the commu-
nity, it must demonstrate performance that is com-
parable to the best available systems. Moses has 
shown that it achieves results comparable to the 
most competitive and widely used statistical ma-
chine translation systems in translation quality and 
run-time (Shen et al 2006). It features all the ca-
pabilities of the closed sourced Pharaoh decoder 
(Koehn 2004). 
Apart from providing an open-source toolkit 
for SMT, a further motivation for Moses is to ex-
tend phrase-based translation with factors and con-
fusion network decoding. 
The current phrase-based approach to statisti-
cal machine translation is limited to the mapping of 
small text chunks without any explicit use of lin-
guistic information, be it morphological, syntactic, 
or semantic. These additional sources of informa-
tion have been shown to be valuable when inte-
grated into pre-processing or post-processing steps. 
Moses also integrates confusion network de-
coding, which allows the translation of ambiguous 
input. This enables, for instance, the tighter inte-
gration of speech recognition and machine transla-
tion. Instead of passing along the one-best output 
of the recognizer, a network of different word 
choices may be examined by the machine transla-
tion system. 
Efficient data structures in Moses for the 
memory-intensive translation model and language 
model allow the exploitation of much larger data 
resources with limited hardware. 
177
 2 Toolkit 
The toolkit is a complete out-of-the-box trans-
lation system for academic research. It consists of 
all the components needed to preprocess data, train 
the language models and the translation models. It 
also contains tools for tuning these models using 
minimum error rate training (Och 2003) and evalu-
ating the resulting translations using the BLEU 
score (Papineni et al 2002).  
Moses uses standard external tools for some of 
the tasks to avoid duplication, such as GIZA++ 
(Och and Ney 2003) for word alignments and 
SRILM for language modeling.  Also, since these 
tasks are often CPU intensive, the toolkit has been 
designed to work with Sun Grid Engine parallel 
environment to increase throughput.  
In order to unify the experimental stages, a 
utility has been developed to run repeatable ex-
periments. This uses the tools contained in Moses 
and requires minimal changes to set up and cus-
tomize. 
The toolkit has been hosted and developed un-
der sourceforge.net since inception. Moses has an 
active research community and has reached over 
1000 downloads as of 1st March 2007.  
The main online presence is at  
http://www.statmt.org/moses/ 
where many sources of information about the 
project can be found. Moses was the subject of this 
year?s Johns Hopkins University Workshop on 
Machine Translation (Koehn et al 2006). 
The decoder is the core component of Moses. 
To minimize the learning curve for many research-
ers, the decoder was developed as a drop-in re-
placement for Pharaoh, the popular phrase-based 
decoder. 
In order for the toolkit to be adopted by the 
community, and to make it easy for others to con-
tribute to the project, we kept to the following 
principles when developing the decoder: 
? Accessibility 
? Easy to Maintain 
? Flexibility 
? Easy for distributed team development 
? Portability 
It was developed in C++ for efficiency and fol-
lowed modular, object-oriented design. 
3 Factored Translation Model 
Non-factored SMT typically deals only with 
the surface form of words and has one phrase table, 
as shown in Figure 1. 
i am buying you a green cat
using phrase dictionary:
i
 am buying
you
a
green
cat
je
ach?te
vous
un
vert
chat
a une
je vous ach?te un chat vert
Translate:
 
In factored translation models, the surface 
forms may be augmented with different factors, 
such as POS tags or lemma. This creates a factored 
representation of each word, Figure 2.  
1 1 1 / sing /
                                 
je vous achet un chat
PRO PRO VB ART NN
je vous acheter un chat
st st st present masc masc
? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?
1 1 / 1 sing sing
i buy you a cat
PRO VB PRO ART NN
i tobuy you a cat
st st present st
? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?  
 
Mapping of source phrases to target phrases 
may be decomposed into several steps. Decompo-
sition of the decoding process into various steps 
means that different factors can be modeled sepa-
rately. Modeling factors in isolation allows for 
flexibility in their application. It can also increase 
accuracy and reduce sparsity by minimizing the 
number dependencies for each step. 
For example, we can decompose translating 
from surface forms to surface forms and lemma, as 
shown in Figure 3. 
Figure 2. Factored translation 
Figure 1. Non-factored translation 
178
  
Figure 3. Example of graph of decoding steps 
By allowing the graph to be user definable, we 
can experiment to find the optimum configuration 
for a given language pair and available data.  
The factors on the source sentence are consid-
ered fixed, therefore, there is no decoding step 
which create source factors from other source fac-
tors. However, Moses can have ambiguous input in 
the form of confusion networks. This input type 
has been used successfully for speech to text 
translation (Shen et al 2006). 
Every factor on the target language can have its 
own language model. Since many factors, like 
lemmas and POS tags, are less sparse than surface 
forms, it is possible to create a higher order lan-
guage models for these factors. This may encour-
age more syntactically correct output. In Figure 3 
we apply two language models, indicated by the 
shaded arrows, one over the words and another 
over the lemmas. Moses is also able to integrate 
factored language models, such as those described 
in (Bilmes and Kirchhoff 2003) and (Axelrod 
2006). 
4 Confusion Network Decoding 
Machine translation input currently takes the 
form of simple sequences of words. However, 
there are increasing demands to integrate machine 
translation technology into larger information 
processing systems with upstream NLP/speech 
processing tools (such as named entity recognizers, 
speech recognizers, morphological analyzers, etc.). 
These upstream processes tend to generate multiple, 
erroneous hypotheses with varying confidence. 
Current MT systems are designed to process only 
one input hypothesis, making them vulnerable to 
errors in the input.  
In experiments with confusion networks, we 
have focused so far on the speech translation case, 
where the input is generated by a speech recog-
nizer. Namely, our goal is to improve performance 
of spoken language translation by better integrating 
speech recognition and machine translation models. 
Translation from speech input is considered more 
difficult than translation from text for several rea-
sons. Spoken language has many styles and genres, 
such as, formal read speech, unplanned speeches, 
interviews, spontaneous conversations; it produces 
less controlled language, presenting more relaxed 
syntax and spontaneous speech phenomena. Fi-
nally, translation of spoken language is prone to 
speech recognition errors, which can possibly cor-
rupt the syntax and the meaning of the input. 
There is also empirical evidence that better 
translations can be obtained from transcriptions of 
the speech recognizer which resulted in lower 
scores. This suggests that improvements can be 
achieved by applying machine translation on a 
large set of transcription hypotheses generated by 
the speech recognizers and by combining scores of 
acoustic models, language models, and translation 
models. 
Recently, approaches have been proposed for 
improving translation quality through the process-
ing of multiple input hypotheses. We have imple-
mented in Moses confusion network decoding as 
discussed in (Bertoldi and Federico 2005), and de-
veloped a simpler translation model and a more 
efficient implementation of the search algorithm. 
Remarkably, the confusion network decoder re-
sulted in an extension of the standard text decoder. 
5 Efficient Data Structures for Transla-
tion Model and Language Models 
With the availability of ever-increasing 
amounts of training data, it has become a challenge 
for machine translation systems to cope with the 
resulting strain on computational resources. Instead 
of simply buying larger machines with, say, 12 GB 
of main memory, the implementation of more effi-
cient data structures in Moses makes it possible to 
exploit larger data resources with limited hardware 
infrastructure. 
A phrase translation table easily takes up giga-
bytes of disk space, but for the translation of a sin-
gle sentence only a tiny fraction of this table is 
needed. Moses implements an efficient representa-
tion of the phrase translation table. Its key proper-
ties are a prefix tree structure for source words and 
on demand loading, i.e. only the fraction of the 
phrase table that is needed to translate a sentence is 
loaded into the working memory of the decoder. 
179
 For the Chinese-English NIST  task, the mem-
ory requirement of the phrase table is reduced from 
1.7 gigabytes to less than 20 mega bytes, with no 
loss in translation quality and speed (Zens and Ney 
2007). 
The other large data resource for statistical ma-
chine translation is the language model. Almost 
unlimited text resources can be collected from the 
Internet and used as training data for language 
modeling. This results in language models that are 
too large to easily fit into memory. 
The Moses system implements a data structure 
for language models that is more efficient than the 
canonical SRILM (Stolcke 2002) implementation 
used in most systems. The language model on disk 
is also converted into this binary format, resulting 
in a minimal loading time during start-up of the 
decoder.  
An even more compact representation of the 
language model is the result of the quantization of 
the word prediction and back-off probabilities of 
the language model. Instead of representing these 
probabilities with 4 byte or 8 byte floats, they are 
sorted into bins, resulting in (typically) 256 bins 
which can be referenced with a single 1 byte index. 
This quantized language model, albeit being less 
accurate, has only minimal impact on translation 
performance (Federico and Bertoldi 2006). 
6 Conclusion and Future Work 
This paper has presented a suite of open-source 
tools which we believe will be of value to the MT 
research community. 
We have also described a new SMT decoder 
which can incorporate some linguistic features in a 
consistent and flexible framework. This new direc-
tion in research opens up many possibilities and 
issues that require further research and experimen-
tation. Initial results show the potential benefit of 
factors for statistical machine translation, (Koehn 
et al 2006) and (Koehn and Hoang 2007). 
References 
Axelrod, Amittai. "Factored Language Model for Sta-
tistical Machine Translation." MRes Thesis. 
Edinburgh University, 2006. 
Bertoldi, Nicola, and Marcello Federico. "A New De-
coder for Spoken Language Translation Based 
on Confusion Networks." Automatic Speech 
Recognition and Understanding Workshop 
(ASRU), 2005. 
Bilmes, Jeff A, and Katrin Kirchhoff. "Factored Lan-
guage Models and Generalized Parallel Back-
off." HLT/NACCL, 2003. 
Koehn, Philipp. "Pharaoh: A Beam Search Decoder for 
Phrase-Based Statistical Machine Translation 
Models." AMTA, 2004. 
Koehn, Philipp, Marcello Federico, Wade Shen, Nicola 
Bertoldi, Ondrej Bojar, Chris Callison-Burch, 
Brooke Cowan, Chris Dyer, Hieu Hoang, 
Richard Zens, Alexandra Constantin, Christine 
Corbett Moran, and Evan Herbst. "Open 
Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Transla-
tion". Report of the 2006 Summer Workshop at 
Johns Hopkins University, 2006. 
Koehn, Philipp, and Hieu Hoang. "Factored Translation 
Models." EMNLP, 2007. 
Koehn, Philipp, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu. 
"Statistical Phrase-Based Translation." 
HLT/NAACL, 2003. 
Och, Franz Josef. "Minimum Error Rate Training for 
Statistical Machine Translation." ACL, 2003. 
Och, Franz Josef, and Hermann Ney. "A Systematic 
Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment 
Models." Computational Linguistics 29.1 
(2003): 19-51. 
Papineni, Kishore, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. "BLEU: A Method for Automatic 
Evaluation of Machine Translation." ACL, 
2002. 
Shen, Wade, Richard Zens, Nicola Bertoldi, and 
Marcello Federico. "The JHU Workshop 2006 
Iwslt System." International Workshop on Spo-
ken Language Translation, 2006. 
Stolcke, Andreas. "SRILM an Extensible Language 
Modeling Toolkit." Intl. Conf. on Spoken Lan-
guage Processing, 2002. 
Zens, Richard, and Hermann Ney. "Efficient Phrase-
Table Representation for Machine Translation 
with Applications to Online MT and Speech 
Recognition." HLT/NAACL, 2007. 
180
