Robust Reading: Identification and Tracing of Ambiguous Names
Xin Li Paul Morie Dan Roth
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801
{xli1,morie,danr}@uiuc.edu
Abstract
A given entity, representing a person, a location
or an organization, may be mentioned in text
in multiple, ambiguous ways. Understanding
natural language requires identifying whether
different mentions of a name, within and across
documents, represent the same entity.
We develop an unsupervised learning approach
that is shown to resolve accurately the name
identification and tracing problem. At the heart
of our approach is a generative model of how
documents are generated and how names are
?sprinkled? into them. In its most general form,
our model assumes: (1) a joint distribution over
entities, (2) an ?author? model, that assumes
that at least one mention of an entity in a docu-
ment is easily identifiable, and then generates
other mentions via (3) an appearance model,
governing how mentions are transformed from
the ?representative? mention. We show how to
estimate the model and do inference with it and
how this resolves several aspects of the prob-
lem from the perspective of applications such
as questions answering.
1 Introduction
Reading and understanding text is a task that requires the
ability to disambiguate at several levels, abstracting away
details and using background knowledge in a variety of
ways. One of the difficulties that humans resolve instan-
taneously and unconsciously is that of reading names.
Most names of people, locations, organizations and oth-
ers, have multiple writings that are used freely within and
across documents.
The variability in writing a given concept, along with
the fact that different concepts may have very similar
writings, poses a significant challenge to progress in nat-
ural language processing. Consider, for example, an open
domain question answering system (Voorhees, 2002) that
attempts, given a question like: ?When was President
Kennedy born?? to search a large collection of articles in
order to pinpoint the concise answer: ?on May 29, 1917.?
The sentence, and even the document that contains the
answer, may not contain the name ?President Kennedy?;
it may refer to this entity as ?Kennedy?, ?JFK? or ?John
Fitzgerald Kennedy?. Other documents may state that
?John F. Kennedy, Jr. was born on November 25, 1960?,
but this fact refers to our target entity?s son. Other men-
tions, such as ?Senator Kennedy? or ?Mrs. Kennedy?
are even ?closer? to the writing of the target entity, but
clearly refer to different entities. Even the statement
?John Kennedy, born 5-29-1941? turns out to refer to a
different entity, as one can tell observing that the doc-
ument discusses Kennedy?s batting statistics. A similar
problem exists for other entity types, such as locations,
organizations etc. Ad hoc solutions to this problem, as
we show, fail to provide a reliable and accurate solution.
This paper presents the first attempt to apply a unified
approach to all major aspects of this problem, presented
here from the perspective of the question answering task:
(1) Entity Identity - do mentions A and B (typically,
occurring in different documents, or in a question and a
document, etc.) refer to the same entity? This problem
requires both identifying when different writings refer to
the same entity, and when similar or identical writings
refer to different entities. (2) Name Expansion - given a
writing of a name (say, in a question), find other likely
writings of the same name. (3) Prominence - given
question ?What is Bush?s foreign policy??, and given that
any large collection of documents may contain several
Bush?s, there is a need to identify the most prominent, or
relevant ?Bush?, perhaps taking into account also some
contextual information.
At the heart of our approach is a global probabilistic
view on how documents are generated and how names
(of different entity types) are ?sprinkled? into them. In
its most general form, our model assumes: (1) a joint dis-
tribution over entities, so that a document that mentions
?President Kennedy? is more likely to mention ?Oswald?
or ? White House? than ?Roger Clemens?; (2) an ?au-
thor? model, that makes sure that at least one mention
of a name in a document is easily identifiable, and then
generates other mentions via (3) an appearance model,
governing how mentions are transformed from the ?rep-
resentative? mention. Our goal is to learn the model from
a large corpus and use it to support robust reading - en-
abling ?on the fly? identification and tracing of entities.
This work presents the first study of our proposed
model and several relaxations of it. Given a collection of
documents we learn the models in an unsupervised way;
that is, the system is not told during training whether two
mentions represent the same entity. We only assume the
ability to recognize names, using a named entity recog-
nizer run as a preprocessor. We define several inferences
that correspond to the solutions we seek, and evaluate the
models by performing these inferences against a large
corpus we annotated. Our experimental results suggest
that the entity identity problem can be solved accurately,
giving accuracies (F1) close to 90%, depending on the
specific task, as opposed to 80% given by state of the art
ad-hoc approaches.
Previous work in the context of question answering
has not addressed this problem. Several works in NLP
and Databases, though, have addressed some aspects of
it. From the natural language perspective, there has
been a lot of work on the related problem of corefer-
ence resolution (Soon et al, 2001; Ng and Cardie, 2003;
Kehler, 2002) - which aims at linking occurrences of
noun phrases and pronouns within a document based on
their appearance and local context. (Charniak, 2001)
presents a solution to the problem of name structure
recognition by incorporating coreference information. In
the context of databases, several works have looked at the
problem of record linkage - recognizing duplicate records
in a database (Cohen and Richman, 2002; Hernandez and
Stolfo, 1995; Bilenko and Mooney, 2003). Specifically,
(Pasula et al, 2002) considers the problem of identity un-
certainty in the context of citation matching and suggests
a probabilistic model for that. Some of very few works
we are aware of that works directly with text data and
across documents, are (Bagga and Baldwin, 1998; Mann
and Yarowsky, 2003), which consider one aspect of the
problem ? that of distinguishing occurrences of identical
names in different documents, and only of people.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: We for-
malize the ?robust reading? problem in Sec. 2. Sec. 3
describes a generative view of documents? creation and
three practical probabilistic models designed based on it,
and discusses inference in these models. Sec. 4 illustrates
how to learn these models in an unsupervised setting, and
Sec. 5 describes the experimental study. Sec. 6 concludes.
2 Robust Reading
We consider reading a collection of documents D =
{d1, d2, . . . , dm}, each of which may contain men-
tions (i.e. real occurrences) of |T | types of enti-
ties. In the current evaluation we consider T =
{Person, Location,Organization}.
An entity refers to the ?real? concept behind a mention
and can be viewed as a unique identifier to a real-world
object. Examples might be the person ?John F. Kennedy?
who became a president, ?White House? ? the residence
of the US presidents, etc. E denotes the collection of all
possible entities in the world and Ed = {edi }l
d
1 is the set
of entities mentioned in document d. M denotes the col-
lection of all possible mentions and Md = {mdi }n
d
1 is
the set of mentions in document d. Mdi (1 ? i ? ld) is
the set of mentions that refer to entity edi ? Ed. For en-
tity ?John F. Kennedy?, the corresponding set of mentions
in a document may contain ?Kennedy?, ?J. F. Kennedy?
and ?President Kennedy?. Among all mentions of an en-
tity edi in document d we distinguish the one occurring
first, rdi ? Mdi , as the representative of edi . In practice,
rdi is usually the longest mention of edi in the document
as well, and other mentions are variations of it. Repre-
sentatives are viewed as a typical representation of an
entity mentioned in a specific time and place. For ex-
ample, ?President J.F.Kennedy? and ?Congressman John
Kennedy? may be representatives of ?John F. Kennedy?
in different documents. R denotes the collection of all
possible representatives and Rd = {rdi }l
d
1 ? Md is the
set of representatives in document d. This way, each doc-
ument is represented as the collection of its entities, rep-
resentatives and mentions d = {Ed, Rd,Md}.
Elements in the name space W = E?R?M each have
an identifying writing (denoted as wrt(n) for n ? W )1
and an ordered list of attributes, A = {a1, . . . , ap},
which depends on the entity type. Attributes used in the
current evaluation include both internal attributes, such
as, for People, {title, firstname, middlename, lastname,
gender} as well as contextual attributes such as {time, lo-
cation, proper-names}. Proper-names refer to a list of
proper names that occur around the mention in the doc-
ument. All attributes are of string value and the values
could be missing or unknown2.
The fundamental problem we address in robust read-
ing is to decide what entities are mentioned in a given
document (given the observed set Md) and what the most
likely assignment of entity to each mention is.
3 A Model of Document Generation
We define a probability distribution over documents d =
{Ed, Rd,Md}, by describing how documents are being
generated. In its most general form the model has the
following three components:
(1) A joint probability distribution P (Ed) that governs
1The observed writing of a mention is its identifying writing.
For entities, it is a standard representation of them, i.e. the full
name of a person.
2Contextual attributes are not part of the current evaluation,
and will be evaluated in the next step of this work.
EEd
Rd
Md
e
eid
Mid
rid
d
John Fitzgerald Kennedy
John Fitzgerald Kennedy
President John F. Kennedy
{President Kennedy, Kennedy, JFK}
House of Representatives
House of Representatives
House of Representatives
{House of Representatives, The House}
Figure 1: Generating a document
how entities (of different types) are distributed into a doc-
ument and reflects their co-occurrence dependencies.
(2) The number of entities in a document, size(Ed),
and the number of mentions of each entity in Ed,
size(Mdi ), need to be decided. The current evaluation
makes the simplifying assumption that these numbers are
determined uniformly over a small plausible range.
(3) The appearance probability of a name generated
(transformed) from its representative is modelled as a
product distribution over relational transformations of at-
tribute values. This model captures the similarity be-
tween appearances of two names. In the current eval-
uation the same appearance model is used to calculate
both the probability P (r|e) that generates a representa-
tive r given an entity e and the probability P (m|r) that
generates a mention m given a representative r. Attribute
transformations are relational, in the sense that the dis-
tribution is over transformation types and independent of
the specific names.
Given these, a document d is assumed to be gener-
ated as follows (see Fig. 1): A set of size(Ed) entities
Ed ? E is selected to appear in a document d, accord-
ing to P (Ed). For each entity edi ? Ed, a representative
rdi ? R is chosen according to P (rdi |edi ), generating Rd.
Then mentions Mdi of an entity are generated from each
representative rdi ? Rd ? each mention mdj ? Mdi is
independently transformed from rdi according to the ap-
pearance probability P (mdj |rdi ). Assuming conditional
independency between Md and Ed given Rd, the proba-
bility distribution over documents is therefore
P (d) = P (Ed, Rd,Md) = P (Ed)P (Rd|Ed)P (Md|Rd),
and the probability of the document collection D is:
P (D) =
?
d?D
P (d).
Given a mention m in a document d (Md is the set of
observed mentions in d), the key inference problem is to
determine the most likely entity e?m that corresponds to
it. This is done by computing:
Ed = argmaxE??EP (Ed, Rd|Md, ?) (1)
= argmaxE??EP (Ed, Rd,Md|?), (2)
where ? is the learned model?s parameters. This gives the
assignment of the most likely entity e?m for m.
3.1 Relaxations of the Model
In order to simplify model estimation and to evaluate
some assumptions, several relaxations are made to form
three simpler probabilistic models.
Model I: (the simplest model) The key relaxation here
is in losing the notion of an ?author? ? rather than first
choosing a representative for each document, mentions
are generated independently and directly given an entity.
That is, an entity ei is selected from E according to the
prior probability P (ei); then its actual mention mi is se-
lected according to P (mi|ei). Also, an entity is selected
into a document independently of other entities. In this
way, the probability of the whole document set can be
computed simply as follows:
P (D) = P ({(ei,mi)}ni=1) =
n?
i=1
P (ei)P (mi|ei),
and the inference problem for the most likely entity given
m is:
e?m = argmaxe?EP (e|m, ?) = argmaxe?EP (e)P (m|e).
(3)
Model II: (more expressive) The major relaxation
made here is in assuming a simple model of choos-
ing entities to appear in documents. Thus, in order to
generate a document d, after we decide size(Ed) and
{size(Md1 , size(Md2 ), . . . } according to uniform distri-
butions, each entity edi is selected into d independently
of others according to P (edi ). Next, the representative rdi
for each entity edi is selected according to P (rdi |edi ) and
for each representative the actual mentions are selected
independently according to P (mdj |rdj ). Here, we have in-
dividual documents along with representatives, and the
distribution over documents is:
P (d) = P (Ed, Rd,Md) = P (Ed)P (Rd|Ed)P (Md|Rd)
?
|Ed|?
i=1
[P (edi )P (rdi |edi )]
?
(rdj ,m
d
j )
P (mdj |rdj )
after we ignore the size components (they do not influ-
ence inferences). The inference problem here is the same
as in Equ. (2).
Model III: This model performs the least relaxation.
After deciding size(Ed) according to a uniform distri-
bution, instead of assuming independency among enti-
ties which does not hold in reality (For example, ?Gore?
and ?George. W. Bush? occur together frequently, but
?Gore? and ?Steve. Bush? do not), we select entities us-
ing a graph based algorithm: entities in E are viewed
as nodes in a weighted directed graph with edges (i, j)
labelled P (ej |ei) representing the probability that entity
ej is chosen into a document that contains entity ei. We
distribute entities to Ed via a random walk on this graph
starting from ed1 with a prior probability P (edi ). Repre-
sentatives and mentions are generated in the same way
as in Model II. Therefore, a more general model for the
distribution over documents is:
P (d) ? P (ed1)P (rd1 |ed1)
|Ed|?
i=2
[P (edi |edi?1)P (rdi |edi )]?
?
(rdj ,m
d
j )
P (mdj |rdj ).
The inference problem is the same as in Equ. (2).
3.2 Inference Algorithms
The fundamental problem in robust reading can be solved
as inference with the models: given a mention m, seek the
most likely entity e ? E for m according to Equ. (3) for
Model I or Equ. (2) for Model II and III. Instead of all
entities in the real world, E can be viewed without loss
as the set of entities in a closed document collection that
we use to train the model parameters and it is known after
training. The inference algorithm for Model I (with time
complexity O(|E|)) is simple and direct: just compute
P (e,m) for each candidate entity e ? E and then choose
the one with the highest value. Due to exponential num-
ber of possible assignments of Ed, Rd to Md in Model
II and III, precise inference is infeasible and approximate
algorithms are therefore designed:
In Model II, we adopt a two-step algorithm: First, we
seek the representatives Rd for the mentions Md in docu-
ment d by sequentially clustering the mentions according
to the appearance model. The first mention in each group
is chosen as the representative. Specifically, when con-
sidering a mention m ? Md, P (m|r) is computed for
each representative r that have already been created and
a fixed threshold is then used to decide whether to create a
new group for m or to add it to one of the existing groups
with the largest P (m|r). In the second step, each rep-
resentative rdi ? Rd is assigned to its most likely entity
according to e? = argmaxe?EP (e) ?P (r|e). This algo-
rithm has a time complexity of O((|Md|+ |E|) ? |Md|).
Model III has a similar algorithm as Model II. The
only difference is that we need to consider the global
dependency between entities. Thus in the second step,
instead of seeking an entity e for each representative r
separately, we determine a set of entities Ed for Rd in
a Hidden Markov Model with entities in E as hidden
states and Rd as observations. The prior probabilities,
the transitive probabilities and the observation probabil-
ities are given by P (e), P (ej |ei) and P (r|e) respec-
tively. Here we seek the most likely sequence of enti-
ties given those representatives in their appearing order
using the Viterbi algorithm. The total time complexity is
e1= George Bush e2= George W. Bush e3= Steve Bush
m1,r1=President Bush
m2=Bush
m4,r2=Steve Bush
m5=Bushm3=J. Quayle
Entities E
d1 d2
Figure 2: An conceptual example. The arrows represent
the correct assignment of entities to mentions. r1, r2 are
representatives.
O(|Md|2 + |E|2 ? |Md|). The |E|2 component can be
simplified by filtering out unlikely entities for a represen-
tative according to their appearance similarity.
3.3 Discussion
Besides different assumptions, some fundamental differ-
ences exist in inference with the models as well. In Model
I, the entity of a mention is determined completely inde-
pendently of other mentions, while in Model II, it relies
on other mentions in the same document for clustering.
In Model III, it is not only related to other mentions but
to a global dependency over entities. The following con-
ceptual example illustrates those differences as in Fig. 2.
Example 3.1 Given E = {George Bush, George W. Bush,
Steve Bush}, documents d1, d2 and 5 mentions in them, and
suppose the prior probability of entity ?George W. Bush? is
higher than those of the other two entities, the entity assign-
ments to the five mentions in the models could be as follows:
For Model I, mentions(e1) = ?, mentions(e2) =
{m1,m2,m5} and mentions(e3) = {m4}. The result is
caused by the fact that a mention tends to be assigned to the
entity with higher prior probability when the appearance simi-
larity is not distinctive.
For Model II, mentions(e1) = ?, mentions(e2) =
{m1,m2} and mentions(e3) = {m4,m5}. Local depen-
dency (appearance similarity) between mentions inside each
document enforces the constraint that they should refer to the
same entity, like ?Steve Bush? and ?Bush? in d2.
For Model III, mentions(e1) = {m1,m2}, mentions(e2)
= ?, mentions(e3) = {m4,m5}. With the help of global
dependency between entities, for example, ?George Bush? and
?J. Quayle?, an entity can be distinguished from another one
with a similar writing.
3.4 Other Tasks
Other aspects of ?Robust Reading? can be solved based
on the above inference problem.
Entity Identity: Given two mentions m1 ? d1,m2 ? d2,
determine whether they correspond to the same entity by:
m1 ? m2 ?? argmaxe?EP (e,m1) = argmaxe?EP (e,m2)
for Model I and
m1 ? m2 ?? argmaxe?EP (Ed1 , Rd1 ,Md1) =
argmaxe?EP (Ed2 , Rd2 ,Md2).
for Model II and III.
Name Expansion: Given a mention mq in a query q,
decide whether mention m in the document collection D
is a ?legal? expansion of mq:
mq ? m ?? e?mq = argmaxe?EP (Eq, Rq,Mq)
& m ? mentions(e?).
Here it?s assumed that we already know the possible
mentions of e? after training the models with D.
Prominence: Given a name n ? W , the most promi-
nent entity for n is given by (P (e) is given by the prior
distribution PE and P (n|e) is given by the appearance
model.):
e? = argmaxe?EP (e)P (n|e).
4 Learning the Models
Confined by the labor of annotating data, we learn the
probabilistic models in an unsupervised way given a col-
lection of documents; that is, the system is not told dur-
ing training whether two mentions represent the same en-
tity. A greedy search algorithm modified after the stan-
dard EM algorithm (We call it Truncated EM algorithm)
is adopted here to avoid complex computation.
Given a set of documents D to be studied and the ob-
served mentions Md in each document, this algorithm
iteratively updates the model parameter ? (several under-
lying probabilistic distributions described before) and the
structure (that is, Ed and Rd) of each document d. Dif-
ferent from the standard EM algorithm, in the E-step, it
seeks the most likely Ed and Rd for each document rather
than the expected assignment.
4.1 Truncated EM Algorithm
The basic framework of the Truncated EM algorithm to
learn Model II and III is as follows:
1. In the initial (I-) step, an initial (Ed0 , Rd0) is assigned
to each document d by an initialization algorithm.
After this step, we can assume that the documents
are annotated with D0 = {(Ed0 , Rd0,Md)}.
2. In the M-step, we seek the model parameter ?t+1
that maximizes P (Dt|?). Given the ?labels? sup-
plied in the previous I- or E-step, this amounts to the
maximum likelihood estimation. (to be described in
Sec. 4.3).
3. In the E-step, we seek (Edt+1, Rdt+1) for each
document d that maximizes P (Dt+1|?t+1) where
Dt+1 = {(Edt+1, Rdt+1,Md)}. It?s the same infer-
ence problem as in Sec. 3.2.
4. Stopping Criterion: If no increase is achieved over
P (Dt|?t), the algorithm exits. Otherwise the algo-
rithm will iterate over the M-step and E-step.
The algorithm for Model I is similar to the above one,
but much simpler in the sense that it does not have the no-
tions of documents and representatives. So in the E-step
we only seek the most likely entity e for each mention
m ? D, and this simplifies the parameter estimation in
the M-step accordingly. It usually takes 3? 10 iterations
before the algorithms stop in our experiments.
4.2 Initialization
The purpose of the initial step is to acquire an initial guess
of document structures and the set of entities E in a closed
collection of documents D. The hope is to find all entities
without loss so duplicate entities are allowed. For all the
models, we use the same algorithm:
A local clustering is performed to group mentions in-
side each document: simple heuristics are applied to cal-
culating the similarity between mentions; and pairs of
mentions with similarity above a threshold are then clus-
tered together. The first mention in each group is chosen
as the representative (only in Model II and III) and an
entity having the same writing with the representative is
created for each cluster3. For all the models, the set of
entities created in different documents become the global
entity set E in the following M- and E-steps.
4.3 Estimating the Model Parameters
In the learning process, assuming documents have al-
ready been annotated D = {(e, r,m)}n1 from previous I-
or E-step, several underlying probability distributions of
the relaxed models are estimated by maximum likelihood
estimation in each M-step. The model parameters include
a set of prior probabilities for entities PE , a set of tran-
sitive probabilities for entity pairs PE|E (only in Model
III) and the appearance probabilities PW |W of each name
in the name space W being transformed from another.
? The prior distribution PE is modelled as a multi-
nomial distribution. Given a set of labelled entity-
mention pairs {(ei,mi)}n1 ,
P (e) = freq(e)n
where freq(e) denotes the number of pairs containing
entity e.
? Given all the entities appearing in D, the transitive
probability P (e|e) is estimated by
P (e2|e1) ? P (wrt(e2)|wrt(e1)) = doc
#(wrt(e2), wrt(e1))
doc#(wrt(e1)) .
Here, the conditional probability between two real-
world entities P (e2|e1) is backed off to the one be-
tween the identifying writings of the two entities
P (wrt(e2)|wrt(e1)) in the document set D to avoid
3Note that the performance of the initialization algorithm is
97.3% precision and 10.1% recall (measures are defined later.)
sparsity problem. doc#(w1, w2, ...) denotes the num-
ber of documents having the co-occurrence of writings
w1, w2, ....
? Appearance probability, the probability of one
name being transformed from another, denoted as
P (n2|n1) (n1, n2 ? W ), is modelled as a product
of the transformation probabilities over attribute val-
ues 4. The transformation probability for each attribute
is further modelled as a multi-nomial distribution over
a set of predetermined transformation types: TT =
{copy,missing, typical, non? typical}5.
Suppose n1 = (a1 = v1, a2 = v2, ..., ap = vp) and
n2 = (a1 = v?1, a2 = v?2, ..., ap = v?p) are two names be-
longing to the same entity type, the transformation prob-
abilities PM |R, PR|E and PM |E , are all modelled as a
product distribution (naive Bayes) over attributes:
P (n2|n1) = ?pk=1P (v?k|vk).
We manually collected typical and non-typical trans-
formations for attributes such as titles, first names,
last names, organizations and locations from multiple
sources such as U.S. government census and online dic-
tionaries. For other attributes like gender, only copy
transformation is allowed. The maximum likelihood es-
timation of the transformation probability P (t, k) (t ?
TT, ak ? A) from annotated representative-mention
pairs {(r,m)}n1 is:
P (t, k) = freq(r,m) : v
r
k ?t vmk
n (4)
vrk ?t vmk denotes the transformation from attribute
ak of r to that of m is of type t. Simple smoothing is
performed here for unseen transformations.
5 Experimental Study
Our experimental study focuses on (1) evaluating the
three models on identifying three entity types (Peo-
ple, Locations, Organization); (2) comparing our in-
duced similarity measure between names (the appearance
model) with other similarity measures; (3) evaluating the
contribution of the global nature of our model, and fi-
nally, (4) evaluating our models on name expansion and
prominence ranking.
5.1 Methodology
We randomly selected 300 documents from 1998-2000
New York Times articles in the TREC corpus (Voorhees,
4The appearance probability can be modelled differently by
using other string similarity between names. We will compare
the model described here with some other non-learning similar-
ity metrics later.
5copy denotes v?k is exactly the same as vk; missing denotes
?missing value? for v?k; typical denotes v?k is a typical variation
of vk, for example, ?Prof.? for ?Professor?, ?Andy? for ?An-
drew?; non-typical denotes a non-typical transformation.
2002). The documents were annotated by a named entity
tagger for People, Locations and Organizations. The an-
notation was then corrected and each name mention was
labelled with its corresponding entity by two annotators.
In total, about 8, 000 mentions of named entities which
correspond to about 2, 000 entities were labelled. The
training process gets to see only the 300 documents and
extracts attribute values for each mention. No supervision
is supplied. These records are used to learn the proba-
bilistic models.
In the 64 million possible mention pairs, most are triv-
ial non-matching one ? the appearances of the two men-
tions are very different. Therefore, direct evaluation over
all those pairs always get alost 100% accuracy in our
experiments. To avoid this, only the 130, 000 pairs of
matching mentions that correspond to the same entity are
used to evaluate the performance of the models. Since
the probabilistic models are learned in an unsupervised
setting, testing can be viewed simply as the evaluation of
the learned model, and is thus done on the same data. The
same setting was used for all models and all comparison
performed (see below).
To evaluate the performance, we pair two mentions
iff the learned model determined that they correspond
to the same entity. The list of predicted pairs is then
compared with the annotated pairs. We measure Preci-
sion (P ) ? Percentage of correctly predicted pairs, Recall
(R) ? Percentage of correct pairs that were predicted, and
F1 = 2PRP+R .
Comparisons: The appearance model induces a ?simi-
larity? measure between names, which is estimated dur-
ing the training process. In order to understand whether
the behavior of the generative model is dominated by
the quality of the induced pairwise similarity or by the
global aspects (for example, inference with the aid of
the document structure), we (1) replace this measure by
two other ?local? similarity measures, and (2) compare
three possible decision mechanisms ? pairwise classifica-
tion, straightforward clustering over local similarity, and
our global model. To obtain the similarity required by
pairwise classification and clustering, we use this for-
mula sima(n1, n2) = P (n1|n2) to convert the appear-
ance probability described in Sec. 4.3 to it.
The first similarity measure we use is a sim-
ple baseline approach: two names are similar iff
they have identical writings (that is, simb(n1, n2) =
1 if n1, n2 are identical or 0 otherwise). The second
one is a state-of-art similarity measure sims(n1, n2) ?
[0, 1] for entity names (SoftTFIDF with Jaro-Winkler dis-
tance and ? = 0.9); it was ranked the best measure in a
recent study (Cohen et al, 2003).
Pairwise classification is done by pairing two men-
tions iff the similarity between them is above a fixed
threshold. For Clustering, a graph-based clustering al-
All(P/L/O) Identity SoftTFIDF Appearance
Pairwise 70.7 (64.7/64.1/83.7) 82.1 (79.9/77.3/89.5) 81.5 (83.6/70.9/90.7)
Clustering 70.7 (64.7/64.1/83.7) 79.8 (70.6/76.7/91.0) 79.6 (70.9/76.1/91.0)
Model II 70.7 (64.7/64.1/83.7) 82.5 (79.8/77.4/90.2) 89.0 (92.7/81.9/92.9)
Table 1: Comparison of different decision levels and sim-
ilarity measures. Three similarity measures are evaluated
(rows) across three decision levels (columns). Performance is
evaluated by the F1 values over the whole test set. The first
number averages all entity types; numbers in parentheses repre-
sent People, Location and Organization respectively.
gorithm is used. Two nodes in the graph are connected
if the similarity between the corresponding mentions is
above a threshold. In evaluation, any two mentions be-
longing to the same connected component are paired the
same way as we did in Sec. 5.1 and all those pairs are then
compared with the annotated pairs to calculate Precision,
Recall and F1.
Finally, we evaluate the baseline and the SoftTFIDF
measure in the context of Model II, where the appear-
ance model is replaced. We found that the probabil-
ities directly converted from the SoftTFIDF similarity
behave badly so we adopt this formula P (n1|n2) =
e10?sims(n1,n2)?1
e10?1 instead to acquire P (n1|n2) needed by
Model II. Those probabilities are fixed as we estimate
other model parameters in training.
5.2 Results
The bottom line result is given in Tab. 1. All the similarity
measures are compared in the context of the three levels
of decisions ? local decision (pairwise), clustering and
our probabilistic model II. Only the best results in the
experiments, achieved by trying different thresholds in
pairwise classification and clustering, are shown.
The behavior across rows indicates that, locally, our
unsupervised learning based appearance model is about
the same as the state-of-the-art SoftTFIDF similarity. The
behavior across columns, though, shows the contribu-
tion of the global model, and that the local appearance
model behaves better with it than a fixed similarity mea-
sure does. A second observation is that the Location ap-
pearance model is not as good as the one for People and
Organization, probably due to the attribute transforma-
tion types chosen.
Tab. 2 presents a more detailed evaluation of the differ-
ent approaches on the entity identity task. All the three
probabilistic models outperform the discriminatory ap-
proaches in this experiment, an indication of the effec-
tiveness of the generative model.
We note that although Model III is more expressive
and reasonable than model II, it does not always perform
better. Indeed, the global dependency among entities in
Model III achieves two-folded outcomes: it achieves bet-
ter precision, but may degrade the recall. The following
example, taken from the corpus, illustrates the advantage
of this model.
Entity Type Mod InDoc InterDoc All
F1(%) F1(%) R(%) P(%) F1(%)
All Entities B 86.0 68.8 58.5 85.5 70.7
D 86.5 78.9 66.4 95.8 79.8
I 96.3 85.0 79.0 94.1 86.2
II 96.5 88.1 85.9 92.2 89.0
III 96.5 87.9 84.4 93.6 88.9
People B 82.4 59.0 48.5 86.3 64.7
D 82.4 67.1 54.5 91.5 70.6
I 96.2 84.8 80.6 94.8 87.4
II 96.4 91.7 94.0 91.5 92.7
III 96.4 88.9 89.8 91.3 90.5
Location B 88.8 63.0 54.8 75.0 64.1
D 91.4 76.0 61.3 95.9 76.7
I 92.9 78.9 70.9 89.1 79.5
II 93.8 81.4 76.2 88.1 81.9
III 93.8 82.8 76.0 91.2 83.3
Organization B 95.3 82.8 72.6 96.4 83.7
D 95.8 90.7 83.9 98.9 91.1
I 98.8 91.8 86.5 98.5 92.3
II 98.5 92.5 88.6 97.5 92.9
III 98.8 93.0 88.5 98.6 93.4
Table 2: Performance of different approaches over all test
examples. B, D, I, II and III denote the baseline model, the
SoftTFIDF similarity model with clustering, and the three prob-
abilistic models. We distinguish between pairs of mentions that
are inside the same document (InDoc, 15% of the pairs) or not
(InterDoc).
Example 5.1 ?Sherman Williams? is mentioned along with
the baseball team ?Dallas Cowboys? in 8 out of 300 documents,
while ?Jeff Williams? is mentioned along with ?LA Dodgers?
in two documents.
In all models but Model III, ?Jeff Williams? is judged to cor-
respond to the same entity as ?Sherman Williams? since their
appearances are similar and the prior probability of the latter is
higher than the former. Only Model III, due to the co-occurring
dependency between ?Jeff Williams? and ?Dodgers?, identi-
fies it as corresponding to an entity different from ?Sherman
Williams?.
While this shows that Model III achieves better preci-
sion, the recall may go down. The reason is that global
dependencies among entities enforces restrictions over
possible grouping of similar mentions; in addition, with
a limited document set, estimating this global depen-
dency is inaccurate, especially when the entities them-
selves need to be found when training the model.
Hard Cases: To analyze the experimental results further,
we evaluated separately two types of harder cases of the
entity identity task: (1) mentions with different writings
that refer to the same entity; and (2) mentions with sim-
ilar writings that refer to different entities. Model II and
III outperform other models in those two cases as well.
Tab. 3 presents F1 performance of different approaches
in the first case. The best F1 value is only 73.1%, indicat-
ing that appearance similarity and global dependency are
not sufficient to solve this problem when the writings are
very different. Tab. 4 shows the performance of differ-
ent approaches for disambiguating similar writings that
correspond to different entities.
Both these cases exhibit the difficulty of the problem,
and that our approach provides a significant improvement
over the state of the art similarity measure ? column D
vs. column II in Tab. 4. It also shows that it is necessary
to use contextual attributes of the names, which are not
yet included in this evaluation.
Model B D I II III
Peop 0 77.9 79.2 86.0 82.6
Loc 0 30.4 55.1 58.5 61.5
Org 0 77.7 69.5 71.7 71.2
All 0 63.3 68.4 73.1 72.5
Table 3: Identifying different writings of the same entity
(F1). We filter out identical writings and report only on cases
of different writings of the same entity. The test set contains
46, 376 matching pairs (but in different writings) in the whole
data set.
Model B D I II III
Peop 75.2 83.0 60.8 89.7 88.0
Loc 86.5 80.7 80.0 90.3 90.3
Org 80.0 89.4 71.0 93.1 92.6
All 78.7 78.9 68.1 90.7 89.7
Table 4: Identifying similar writings of different
entities(F1). The test set contains 39, 837 pairs of mentions
that associated with different entities in the 300 documents and
have at least one token in common.
5.3 Other Tasks
In the following experiments, we evaluate the genera-
tive model on other tasks related to robust reading. We
present results only for Model II, the best one in previous
experiments.
Name Expansion: Given a mention m in a query, we find
the most likely entity e ? E for m using the inference al-
gorithm as described in Sec. 3.2. All unique mentions of
the entity in the documents are output as the expansions
of m. The accuracy for a given mention is defined as the
percentage of correct expansions output by the system.
The average accuracy of name expansion of Model II is
shown in Tab. 5. Here is an example:
Query: Who is Gore ?
Expansions: Vice President Al Gore, Al Gore, Gore.
Prominence Ranking: We refer to Example 3.1 and use
it to exemplify quantitatively how our system supports
prominence ranking. Given a query name n, the ranking
of the entities with regard to the value of P (e) ? P (n|e)
(shown in brackets) by Model II is as follows.
Input: George Bush
1. George Bush (0.0448) 2. George W. Bush (0.0058)
Input: Bush
1. George W. Bush (0.0047) 2. George Bush (0.0015)
3. Steve Bush (0.0002)
6 Conclusion and Future Work
This paper presents an unsupervised learning approach to
several aspects of the ?robust reading? problem ? cross-
document identification and tracing of ambiguous names.
We developed a model that describes the natural gen-
eration process of a document and the process of how
Entity Type People Location Organization
Accuracy(%) 90.6 100 100
Table 5: Accuracy of name expansion. Accuracy is averaged
over 30 randomly chosen queries for each entity type.
names are ?sprinkled? into them, taking into account de-
pendencies between entities across types and an ?author?
model. Several relaxations of this model were developed
and studied experimentally, and compared with a state-
of-the-art discriminative model that does not take a global
view. The experiments exhibit encouraging results and
the advantages of our model.
This work is a preliminary exploration of the robust
reading problem. There are several critical issues that our
model can support, but were not included in this prelimi-
nary evaluation. Some of the issues that will be included
in future steps are: (1) integration with more contextual
information (like time and place) related to the target enti-
ties, both to support a better model and to allow temporal
tracing of entities; (2) studying an incremental approach
of training the model; that is, when a new document is
observed, coming, how to update existing model param-
eters ? (3) integration of this work with other aspects of
general coreference resolution (e.g., other terms like pro-
nouns that refer to an entity) and named entity recognition
(which we now take as given); and (4) scalability issues
in applying the system to large corpora.
Acknowledgments
This research is supported by NSF grants ITR-IIS-
0085836, ITR-IIS-0085980 and IIS-9984168 and an
ONR MURI Award.
References
A. Bagga and B. Baldwin. 1998. Entity-based cross-document
coreferencing using the vector space model. In ACL.
M. Bilenko and R. Mooney. 2003. Adaptive duplicate detection
using learnable string similarity measures. In KDD.
E. Charniak. 2001. Unsupervised learning of name structure
from coreference datal. In NAACL.
W. Cohen and J. Richman. 2002. Learning to match and clus-
ter large high-dimensional data sets for data integration. In
KDD.
W. Cohen, P. Ravikumar, and S. Fienberg. 2003. A comparison
of string metrics for name-matching tasks. In IIWeb Work-
shop 2003.
M. Hernandez and S. Stolfo. 1995. The merge/purge problem
for large databases. In SIGMOD.
A. Kehler. 2002. Coherence, Reference, and the Theory of
Grammar. CSLI Publications.
G. Mann and D. Yarowsky. 2003. Unsupervised personal name
disambiguation. In CoNLL.
V. Ng and C. Cardie. 2003. Improving machine learning ap-
proaches to coreference resolution. In ACL.
H. Pasula, B. Marthi, B. Milch, S. Russell, and I. Shpitser.
2002. Identity uncertainty and citation matching. In NIPS.
W. Soon, H. Ng, and D. Lim. 2001. A machine learning ap-
proach to coreference resolution of noun phrases. Computa-
tional Linguistics (Special Issue on Computational Anaphora
Resolution), 27:521?544.
E. Voorhees. 2002. Overview of the TREC-2002 question an-
swering track. In Proceedings of TREC, pages 115?123.
