Multi-word verbs in a flective language: the case of Estonian 
 
 
Heiki-Jaan Kaalep 
Dept of General Linguistics 
University of Tartu 
Tartu, Estonia 
Heiki-Jaan.Kaalep@ut.ee 
Kadri Muischnek 
Dept of General Linguistics 
University of Tartu 
Tartu, Estonia 
Kadri.Muischnek@ut.ee 
 
  
 
Abstract 
This paper describes automatic treatment 
of multi-word expressions in a 
morphologically complex flective 
language ? Estonian. It focuses on a 
special type of multi-word expressions ? 
the verbal multi-word expressions that 
can function as predicates. Authors 
describe two language resources ? a 
database of verbal multi-word 
expressions and a corpus where these 
items have been annotated manually. The 
analysis of the annotated corpus 
demonstrates that the Estonian verbal 
multi-word expressions alternate in 
several grammatical categories. Different 
types of the verbal multi-word 
expressions (opaque and transparent 
idioms, support verb constructions and 
collocations) behave differently in the 
corpus with regard to the freedom of 
alternation. The paper describes main 
types of these alternations and the 
methods for dealing with them 
automatically. 
 
1 Introduction 
This paper deals with verbal multiword 
expressions (VMWE) in real texts of a highly 
inflectional language ? Estonian. The main 
emphasis is on the morphological and syntactic 
variability of such constructions with some 
implications and recommendations for their 
automatic treatment. Once we have a lexicon of 
VMWEs, large enough to be used in real-life 
applications (to help with morphological 
disambiguation, syntactic analysis, machine 
translation etc.), we need to devise algorithms to 
actually use them. This in turn requires 
knowledge about the behavior of VMWEs in real 
texts. 
 Estonian language belongs to the Finnic 
group of the Finno-Ugric language family. 
Typologically Estonian is an agglutinating 
language but more fusional and analytic than the 
languages belonging to the northern branch of 
the Finnic languages. The word order is 
relatively free. One can find a detailed 
description of the grammatical system of 
Estonian in (Erelt 2003). 
 In this paper we will focus on a special 
type of Estonian multi-word expressions, namely 
those that can function as a predicate in a clause. 
 This paper is organized as follows. In 
section 2 we give a brief overview of the 
VMWEs in Estonian. Section 3 describes the 
database of the VMWEs and the corpus, where 
the VMWEs have been manually annotated. 
Here we will also present the statistics of the 
VMWEs in the corpus.  In section 4 we discuss 
the variability of these expressions as registered 
in our corpus and the consequences of these 
variations for the automatic treatment of the 
VMWEs. And finally we will make our 
conclusions in section 5. 
 
2 Types of verbal multi-word 
expressions in Estonian 
A VMWE consists of a verb and 1) a particle or 
2) a nominal phrase (usually, but not always, 
consisting of one noun) in more or less frozen 
inflectional form, or 3) a non-finite form of a 
verb. This last combination ? verb plus a non-
finite verb ? remains outside the scope of this 
paper. 
57
 The first combination results in a particle 
verb. The particle can express location or 
direction (1), perfectivity (2) etc. 
(1) Ta  kukkus   katuselt 
alla 
   S/he  fell    roof-ABL  
down(particle) 
    ?S/he fell off the roof? 
(2) Ta   s?i k?ik   kommid  
?ra. 
    S/he ate all    sweets   
away(particle)  
?S/he ate up all the sweets? 
 
 Particle verbs can be either idiomatic as 
in (3) or non-idiomatic as in (1-2). 
(3) Mida n??d  ette            
v?tta? 
  What now  ahead(particle) 
take-INF 
  ?What to do now?? 
 The combinations of a verb and a 
nominal phrase can be divided into three groups 
depending on how the components form the 
meaning of the expression:  1) idiomatic 
expressions; 2) support verb constructions; 3) 
collocations. 
 Idiomatic expressions are usually 
defined as word combinations, the meaning of 
which is not the sum or combination of the 
meanings of its parts. It is meaningful to 
distinguish between opaque (e.g. English idiom 
kick the bucket) and transparent idioms (e.g. 
English pull strings) as they allow different 
degrees of internal variability. 
 Support verb constructions, sometimes 
also called light verb constructions, are 
combinations of a verb and its object or, rarely, 
some other argument, where the nominal 
component denotes an action of some kind and 
the verb is semantically empty in this context, 
e.g. English make a speech, take a walk. 
 The collocations are the fuzziest 
category. They can be described as VMWEs that 
do not fit in the previous categories, but still, for 
some reason, have often been included in 
dictionaries or are statistically significant 
combinations of a verb and its argument(s) in the 
corpus. 
 In all three groups the non-verbal 
component is a nominal phrase (not a particle); it 
can formally be either the object of the verb as in 
(4), or some other argument as in (5). 
 
(4) Ta  saab  luuletusest h?sti 
aru 
 S/he  gets   poem-EL  well 
sense-PART 
 ?S/he understands the poem 
well.? 
(5) Talle j??vad luuletused 
h?sti meelde 
    S/he-ALL remain poems  
well  mind-ILL 
?S/he remembers poems well.? 
  
3 The database and corpus 
3.1 Database of VMWEs 
Prior to the corpus tagging experiment, a 
database of Estonian VMWEs (DB) had been 
compiled, with the aim of creating a 
comprehensive resource of VMWEs, consisting 
of 12,200 entries. First, it contained VMWEs 
from six human-created dictionaries: the 
Explanatory Dictionary of Estonian (EKSS, 
1988-2000), Index of the Thesaurus of Estonian 
(Saareste, 1979), a list of particle verbs 
(Hasselblatt, 1990), Dictionary of Phrases (?im, 
1991), Dictionary of Synonyms (?im, 1993) and 
the Filosoft thesaurus (http://www.filosoft.ee/ 
thes_et/). In addition, the database had been 
enriched with VMWEs, extracted semi-
automatically from corpora totaling 20 million 
words, and missing from any of the 
aforementioned human-made dictionaries. This 
collocation extraction experiment is described in 
(Kaalep, Muischnek 2003).  
 
3.2 Corpus 
We have a corpus where all the VMWEs have 
been tagged (by hand). Table 1 shows the 
composition of the corpus and the number of 
VMWE instances, compared with the number of 
sentences and simplex verb instances.  
58
  tokens sentences VMWEs simplex 
verbs 
fiction 104200 9000 3800 21200 
press 111100 9500 2400 18000 
popular 
science 
99000 7300 1900 15500 
total 314300 25800 8100 54700 
 
Table 1. Corpus with VMWEs tagged. 
 
 The fiction texts are 2000-word excerpts 
from Estonian authors from 1980ies. The press 
files represent various Estonian newspapers 
(nation-wide and local, dailies and weeklies, 
quality and tabloid press) from 1995-1999. 
Popular science comes from the journal 
?Horisont?, from 1996-2003. 
 Before tagging the VMWEs, the corpus 
had been morphologically analyzed and 
manually disambiguated (Kaalep, Muischnek 
2005), making it possible to pre-process the text 
automatically by tagging the candidate VMWEs 
in the texts, according to what VMWEs were 
present in a database of VMWEs. It was then the 
task of a human annotator to select the right 
VMWEs, and occasionally to tag new VMWEs, 
missing from the database and thus having not 
been tagged automatically. The tagged version 
was checked by another person, in order to 
minimize accidental mistakes. 
 Table 1 shows that the amount and 
proportion of VMWEs depends on the text class.  
 Table 2 serves to compare the lexicon of 
VMWEs based on the corpus with the entries of 
the DB (the VMWEs from the corpus have been 
converted to the base form they have in the DB). 
 
A DB entries 12200 
B A, found in the corpus 2300 
C hapax legomena of B 1200 
D new VMWEs 1100 
E hapax legomena of D 900 
 
Table 2. VMWEs in the DB and corpus. 
 
 First, from rows A, B and D we see that 
the intersection of the DB and the corpus lexicon 
is surprisingly small. 
 The small proportion of VMWEs of the 
DB that can be found in real texts (compare row 
B with row A) may be first explained by the 
small size of the corpus. The second reason is 
that the human-oriented dictionaries that were 
used when building the DB implicitly aimed at 
showing the phraseological richness of the 
language and thus contained a lot of idiomatic 
expressions well known to be rare in real-life 
texts. 
 The fact that so many VMWEs were 
missing from the DB was a surprise (compare 
row D with row A), because, as mentioned 
earlier, the DB had been enriched with VMWEs 
from real texts in order to be comprehensive. At 
the moment, it is not clear what the exact reason 
is. 
 The size of hapax legomena of new 
VMWEs also deserves some explanation 
(compare rows B and C versus D and E).  
 From the literature, one may find a 
number of MWU or collocation extraction 
experiments from a corpus that show that the 
extraction method yields many items, missing 
from the available pre-compiled lexicons. Some 
of the items may be false hits, but the authors 
(whose aim has been to present good extraction 
methods) tend to claim that a large number of 
those should be added to the lexicon. 
 (Evert 2005) lists a number of authors, 
who have found that lexical resources (machine 
readable or paper dictionaries, including 
terminological resources) are not suitable for 
serving as a gold standard for the set of MWUs 
(for a given language or domain). According to 
(Evert 2005), manual annotation of MWUs in a 
corpus would be more trustworthy, if one wants 
to compare the findings of a human (the gold 
standard) with those of a collocation extraction 
algorithm.  
 In lexicography, we may find a slightly 
conflicting view: not everything found in real 
texts deserves to be included in a dictionary. 
Producing a text is a creative process, sometimes 
resulting in ad hoc neologisms and MWUs that 
are never picked up and re-used after the final 
full stop of the text they were born in. 
 Unfortunately these two conflicting 
views mean that there is no general, simple 
solution for the problem of finding a gold 
standard for automatic treatment (extraction or 
tagging) of MWUs. It is normal that there is a 
discrepancy between a stand-alone lexicon and 
the vocabulary of a text. 
 We believe that the surprisingly high 
proportion of hapax legomena in the set of newly 
found VMWEs manifests this normal 
discrepancy of a precompiled lexicon and a text 
corpus, in our case. 
 
59
4 Behavior of the VMWEs in the corpus 
and the problems of their automatic 
analysis 
4.1 Particle verbs 
There are two main problems encountered in the 
automatic identification of the particle verbs. 
First, as shown in (6-7), the order of the 
components may vary, and the verb and the 
particle need not be adjacent to each other, 
behaving much like particle verbs in German. 
This varying order and disjuncture of the 
components is actually characteristic for all the 
Estonian VMWEs in the text. 
(6)Ma vaatan need paberid 
homseks ?le. 
   I  look  these papers  
tomorrow-TR over(particle). 
?I shall look over those 
papers by tomorrow.? 
(7)Kui sa need paberid    
?le        vaatad, siis on 
k?ik  valmis 
   If you these papers 
over(particle) look then is 
everything ready 
?Once you have looked over 
those papers, we will be 
done.? 
 The second main problem is that most of 
the particles are homonymous with pre- or 
postpositions (Estonian has both of them), 
creating a disambiguation problem, similar to the 
one concerning the English word over in the 
following examples. 
(8) He looked over the 
papers in less than 10 
minutes. 
(9) He looked over the fence 
and saw his neighbor. 
 Just like in English examples the word-
forms look and over form a phrasal verb look 
over in example (8), but don?t belong together in 
the same way in example (9), the Estonian verb 
vaatama ?to look? and adverb ?le ?over? form a 
particle verb in the examples (6) and (7), but not 
in the following example, where ?le is a 
preposition: 
 
(10) Ta  vaatas ?le   aia  
ja  n?gi  oma naabrit. 
  s/he looked over fence-GEN   
and saw own  neighbor-PART 
 ?S/he looked over the fence 
and saw his/her neighbor.? 
 As a pre- or postposition has to be 
adjacent to the noun phrase that is the constituent 
of the adpositional phrase, they are usually easier 
to detect. In (11), however, the invariable word 
?le, that can function both as a particle and a 
preposition, is positioned before the noun j?u 
?force? in genitive, as if ?le were a preposition in 
prepositional phrase ?le j?u ?exceeding 
capabilities?. Actually, it functions as a particle 
in this clause, forming a particle verb l?ks ?le 
?went over?. 
(11) Meelitustelt l?ks  ta 
?le   j?u kasutamisele. 
   Flattery-PL-ABL went s/he 
over force-GEN utilization-
ALL 
   ?S/he switched from 
flattery to violence? 
 Many of these invariable words that can 
function either as particles or as pre- and 
postpositions are quite frequent in the texts. The 
most frequent simplex verbs are also the most 
frequent verbal components, forming various 
VMWEs. The sentences of the written language 
tend to consist of several clauses. All this results 
in sentences like (12), where the possible 
components of particle verbs are scattered across 
several clauses. In this sentence there are four 
possible candidate particle verbs: ?le j??ma ?to 
have no choice but, lit. remain over?, ?le tegema 
?to redo, lit. do over?, ?ra j??ma ?be canceled, lit. 
remain away?, ?ra tegema ?to accomplish, lit. do 
away? 
(12) Tal   ei  j??   muud    
?le, kui t?? ise ?ra teha. 
  S/he-ALL not remain else 
over(particle)than work-GEN 
self away(particle) do-INF 
 ?S/he has no choice but to 
accomplish the work by 
her/himself.? 
 Our preprocessor took only sentence 
boundaries into account and that resulted in 
serious overgeneration of possible particle verbs. 
After experimental tagging of clause boundaries 
60
in the texts, the precision of pre-processor 
improved from 40% to 74% while tagging the 
particle verbs. 
 For other types of VMWEs the clause 
boundaries detection is not so essential. The 
nominal components of opaque idioms are not so 
frequent. Some transparent idioms, all support 
verb constructions and collocations can stretch 
across clause boundaries, like in (13). 
(13) K?ne, mille  president 
pidas, on m?jutanud meie 
v?lispoliitikat. 
   Speech  that-GEN president 
held is  influenced  our   
foreign-policy-PART 
 ?The speech held by the 
president has influenced our 
foreign policy.? 
 
4.2 VMWEs consisting of a verb and a 
nominal component 
In section 2 we differentiated between three 
types of VMWEs consisting of a verb and a 
nominal component, namely idioms, support 
verb constructions and collocations. All these 
constructions show considerable variability in 
the manually annotated corpus. Differently from 
English, there are no special restrictions on the 
morphological or syntactic behavior of the verb 
that is part of an idiom. A VP-idiom, for example 
the opaque idiom jalga laskma ?to run off, lit. to 
shoot the foot? combines freely with all the 
morphological categories relevant for the verb, 
including person, number, tense, mood, non-
finite forms and (impersonal) passive. (The latter 
differs from the English passive - it can be 
formed from all verbs, having a possible human 
agent.) The other types of VMWEs ? support 
verb constructions and collocations ? have also 
no restrictions with respect to the verbal 
inflection. 
 In this section we will concentrate on the 
variability of the nominal components of 
VMWEs ? their case and number alternations as 
registered in the corpus. The case alternation is 
relevant only for the nominal components that 
are syntactically in the object position. Our 
interest in case alternation is motivated by 
observation that multiword units generally and 
cross-linguistically tend to be frozen in form. 
The less variability there is in form, the easier the 
computational treatment is. We may also draw an 
analogy between simplex words and multiword 
units as items in a lexicon. For an inflectional 
language, every word has an inflectional 
paradigm, and words with similar paradigms 
form an inflectional type or class. Variability of 
VMWEs can be analyzed from the same 
viewpoint. 
 From these three types of VMWEs the 
variation of idioms has received most attention in 
the literature. Idioms have been regarded as units 
that can not be given a compositional analysis 
(e.g. Katz 1973 among others).  This view has 
been opposed later (e.g. Nunberg et. al. 1994). 
Riehemann (2001) has pointed out that English 
idioms show considerable variability in text 
corpora. Describing the automatic treatment of 
multiword expressions in Basque, Alegria et.al. 
(2004) show that the support verb constructions 
in Basque can have significant morphosyntactic 
variability, including modification of the noun 
and case alternation. Similar phenomenon 
(number and case alternation) in Turkish is 
described in (Oflazer et. al. 2004). 
 In the following subsections we will 
briefly describe the phenomenon of the case 
alternation of the object in Estonian and then 
discuss the variation of the nominal component 
of idioms and support verb constructions. Then 
we will describe the number alternations of the 
nominal components. 
 
4.3 The case alternation of the object in 
Estonian 
A VMWE often consists of a verb and a noun 
phrase that is its object syntactically. A few 
words should be said about the case alternation 
of the object in Estonian in general (cf also Erelt 
2003: 96-97). Three case forms are possible for 
the object ? in singular the object can be either in 
nominative, genitive or partitive; in plural it can 
be either in nominative or in partitive. Often the 
nominative and genitive forms are grouped 
together under the label ?total object?. 
 Partitive is the unmarked form of the 
object. The partial object, as it is often called, 
alternates with the total object only in the 
affirmative clause. In the negative clause only 
partial object can be used. In the affirmative 
clause the total object is used only if it denotes 
definite quantity (is quantitatively bounded) and 
the clause expresses perfective activity. So, in 
Estonian, the case alternation of the object is 
used to express the aspect of the clause ? total 
object can be used if the action described in the 
clause is perfective: 
61
 (14)Mees ehitas suvilat 
    Man  built summer-house-
PART 
    ?The man built a summer-
house/did some summer-house-
building.? (imperfective 
activity) 
(15) Mees ehitas suvila 
     Man  built  summer-
house-GEN 
 ?The man built a summer-
house.? (perfective 
activity) 
 In idioms and support verb constructions 
the nominal component is only formally or 
syntactically the object of the verb, semantically 
it is a part of the predicate. So, it would not be 
surprising, if such objects wouldn?t undergo the 
case alternations characteristic of the object and 
would be frozen into the partitive as the 
unmarked case for the object. Indeed ? that is 
true for the opaque idioms. But for transparent 
idioms and support verb constructions this is not 
the case ? our corpus data shows that their 
nominal components can alternate between the 
forms of total and partial object. 
 Ca 25% of the transparent idioms in our 
corpus have their nominal components in the 
case of the total object: 
(16) Esinemisele pani punkti 
ilutulestik. 
     Show-ALL put full-stop-
GEN firework 
  ?The fireworks put an end 
to the show.? 
 In the previous example (16) the 
transparent idiom with the nominal component in 
the form of the total object was used to describe 
a perfective action. But the transparent idioms do 
not form a homogenous group with respect to the 
case alternation of the nominal component. Some 
of them behave like regular verb-object 
combinations; others show irregular variation; 
and the nominal components of many of them 
are frozen in the partitive case. 
 In support verb constructions the case 
alternation of the object is regularly used to 
express the aspect of the clause, although the 
noun denoting an action is non-referential. 
 
 
 
(17) ??rii alles teeb otsust. 
  Jury still makes decision-
PART 
?The jury is still making 
the decision.? 
(imperfective) 
 
(18) ??rii tegi l?puks 
otsuse. 
    Jury   made at-last   
decision-GEN 
      ?The jury made the 
decision at last.? 
(perfective) 
 Some support verb constructions are 
generally used to refer to the imperfective aspect, 
to emphasize the process of the action (atelic 
action), not its result. Such expressions are e.g. 
t??d tegema ?to work, lit. do work-PART? or s?da 
pidama ?fight a war, lit. hold a war-PART?. But, 
while the nominal component is modified with 
an appropriate attribute, it can also be in the case 
of the total object and the support verb 
expression as a whole then refers to a perfective 
event: 
(19) X ja Y pidasid viimase    
omavahelise  s?ja 17. 
sajandil. 
     X and Y held  last-GEN  
mutual-GEN war-GEN 17. 
century-ADE 
    ?X and Y fought the last 
war in the 17th century.? 
 
4.4 Number alternations of the nominal 
components of VMWEs 
The nominal component of an opaque idiom in 
the corpus was always in the same number 
(singular or plural) as its base form in the DB. 
For the transparent idioms, the picture was 
clearly different. Although the nominal 
component of many transparent idioms does not 
alternate between singular and plural, there are 
exceptions, and 14% of the nominal components 
in the object position and 4% in some other 
position were in plural.  
 Support verb constructions, in turn, 
make extensive use of the number alternations of 
the nominal component, whereas the plural form 
62
of the noun denoting an action can really refer to 
several events as in (20) 
 
(20) Otsuseid tehti 
konsensuse p?him?ttel. 
     Decision-PL.PART made 
consensus-GEN principle-ADE 
     ?Decisions were made by 
consensus.? 
 
4.5 The conclusions for the automatic 
analysis of VMWEs 
The conclusions of the corpus findings for the 
automatic detection of the VMWEs are the 
following: 
1) The free word order requires that, while 
detecting automatically the particle verbs in a 
text, we should be limited with a clause as 
possible context for the co-occurrences. Using 
the whole sentence as the possible context would 
create too much noise, so the detection of clause 
boundaries is a must. 
2) We can treat opaque idioms much like the 
particle verbs ? multi-word units consisting of an 
inflecting verb and a frozen nominal component 
that don?t cross the clause boundaries. 
3) Transparent idioms in the database have to be 
divided into those enabling their nominal 
component to appear in the cases of the total 
object and those, which nominal component is 
always in partitive. But can the annotator rely on 
her/his intuition while making such decisions? 
Rather not, but carrying out corpus research 
separately on each item is a time-consuming 
task. It could be a better solution for the 
transparent idioms to generate all the case forms 
possible for the object, as the nouns that are part 
of the idioms are not as frequent as the non-
inflecting words that may be particles as well as 
pre- and postpositions. 
4)  The nominal component of the support verb 
constructions can under certain circumstances 
always be in the form of total object. The nouns 
denoting action in support verb constructions can 
also be pluralized. So the best solution for them 
is to generate all forms of the object, both in 
singular and in plural, in the database. 
 
5 Conclusion 
In this paper we have investigated a subtype of 
multiword expressions, namely verbal multi-
word expressions in a flective language ? 
Estonian. 
 We have described two linguistic 
resources ? a database of VMWEs and a corpus 
that has been manually annotated for VMWEs.  
 These expressions exhibit considerable 
variation in the corpus. The verb of a VMWE 
can combine with all the grammatical categories 
relevant for the verb. The nominal component of 
a VMWE can alternate in number and case. 
However, the nominal components of the 
different types of VMWEs (opaque and 
transparent idioms, support verb constructions 
and collocations) have different degrees of 
freedom. 
 For a morphologically rich flective 
language, like Estonian, previous morphological 
analysis and disambiguation prior to the 
detecting of the multi-word units in a text is 
essential. 
 
Credits 
The research described in this paper was partly 
supported by the Estonian Science Foundation 
(grant 5787). 
 
References 
Algeria, Inaki, Olatz Ansa, Xabier Artola, Nerea 
Ezeiza, Koldo Gojenola, Ruben Urizar. 2004. 
Representation and Treatment of Multiword 
Expressions in Basque. Second ACL Workshop on 
Multiword Expressions: Integrated Processing: 48-
55. 
EKSS 1988 ? 2000, Eesti kirjakeele 
seletuss?naraamat. Tallinn: ETA KKI.  
Erelt, Mati (editor) 2003. Estonian Language. 
Linguistica Uralica Supplementary Series vol 1. 
Estonian Academy Publishers, Tallinn. 
Evert, Stefan 2005. The statistics of word 
cooccurrences : word pairs and collocations.  
URL: http://elib.uni-
stuttgart.de/opus/volltexte/2005/2371/ 
Hasselblatt, C., 1990. Das Estnische Partikelverb als 
Lehn?bersetzung aus dem Deutschen, Wiesbaden. 
Kaalep, Heiki-Jaan, Kadri Muischnek. 2003. 
Inconsistent Selectional Criteria in Semi-automatic 
Multi-word Unit Extraction. COMPLEX 2003, 7th 
Conference on Computational Lexicography and 
Corpus Research, Ed. By F. Kiefer, J. Pajzs, 
Research Institute for Linguistics, Hungarian 
Academy of Sciences, Budapest: 27-36 
63
Kaalep, Heiki-Jaan, Kadri Muischnek. The 
corpora of Estonian at the University of Tartu: 
the current situation. Proceedings of the 
Second Baltic Conference on Human 
Language Technologies. Institute of 
Cybernetics, Tallinn University of 
Technology. Institute of the Estonian 
Language. Editors: Margit Langemets, Priit 
Penjam. Tallinn 2005: 267-272  
Katz, Jerrold J. 1973. Compositionality, Idiomaticity 
and Lexical Substitution. ? A Festschrift for Morris 
Halle, ed. By Stephen R. Anderson and Paul 
Kiparsky: 357-376. 
Oflazer, Kemal, ?zlem Cetinoglu, Bilge Say 2004. 
Integrating Morphology with Multi-word 
Expression Processing in Turkish. Second ACL 
Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Integrated 
Processing: 64-71. 
Nunberg, Geoffrey, Ivan A. Sag, Thomas Wasow 
1994. Idioms ? Langue 70 (3): 491-538 
Riehemann, Susanne Z. 2001. A Constructional 
Approach to Idioms and Word Formation. PhD 
dissertation. URL 
http://doors.stanford.edu/~sr/sr-diss.pdf 
Saareste, Andrus. 1979. Eesti keele m?istelise 
s?naraamatu indeks. Finsk-ugriska institutionen, 
Uppsala. 
?im, Asta. 1993. Fraseoloogias?naraamat. ETA 
KKI, Tallinn, Estonia. 
?im, Asta. 1991. S?non??mis?nastik. Tallinn, 
Estonia. 
Appendix 1. Abbreviations used in glosses 
ABL ? ablative case 
ADE ? adessive case 
ALL ? allative case 
GEN ? genitive case 
EL ? elative case 
ILL ? illative case 
INF ? infinitive 
PART ? partitive case 
PL ? plural 
TR ? translative case 
 
 
64
