Several directions for minority languages computerization 
 
Vincent BERMENT 
GETA, CLIPS, Joseph Fourier University  
385 avenue de la Biblioth?que 
Saint-Martin-d'H?res, France, 38400 
vincent.berment@imag.fr 
 
Abstract 
Less than 1% of the languages spoken in the 
world are correctly ?computerized?: spell 
checkers, hyphenation, machine translation 
are still lacking for the others. In this paper, 
we present several directions that may help 
the computerization of minority languages 
as well as two projects where we apply some 
of these directions to the Lao language. 
Introduction 
During the last ten years, research has been 
driven and products have been developed to 
provide efficient linguistic tools for many 
languages. For example, Unicode is more and 
more a reality in today's operating systems and 
Microsoft Office XP contains proofing tools for 
more than 40 languages. However, for most of 
the world's people, the Information Era is still 
limited to using hardware and software that do 
not meet their needs in terms of language and 
script resources. Following the SALTMIL1 
terminology, we will call a minority language a 
language which has a smaller resource base than 
the major languages. 
1 The available and the needed 
According to the Ethnologue2, more than 6800 
different languages are spoken in the world. This 
number of languages shows that we are still far 
from having a software answer for all of them. 
                                                     
1 : Speech And Language Technology for MInority 
Languages (http://isl.ntftex.uni-lj.si/SALTMIL/) is a 
Special Interest Group of the International Speech 
Communication Association. 
2 : http://www.ethnologue.com/. 
1.1 Commercial tools 
First, we will notice that a trend in operating 
systems design and standardization allows the 
recent multilingual evolution. Windows (since 
Windows NT 3.1), MacIntosh (since MacOS 
8.5) and Unix/Linux now support Unicode and 
many fonts are available, especially TrueType 
fonts3 such as Arial Unicode MS which contains 
a large part of Unicode (51,180 glyphs but also 
23 Mb that may slow our computers). 
If we look now at Microsoft Office4, one of the 
most widespread business suite, we observe that 
linguistic tools are available for 48 languages5. 
1.2 Research on minority languages 
Though we may find that the coverage of several 
tens of languages in tools such as a word 
processor is a significant evolution because it 
covers most of the languages in terms of number 
of speakers, we also have to notice that it still 
covers less than 1% of them in terms of number 
of languages. 
This question has been increasingly discussed in 
the recent years. The SALTMIL group was 
                                                     
3 : TrueType fonts can be used under Windows, 
MacOS X and Linux as well as, with limitations, 
under previous versions of MacOS. 
4 : http://www.microsoft.com/office/evaluation/indept
h/multilingual/prooftools.htm 
5 : These languages are: Arabic, Basque, Brazilian 
Portuguese, Bulgarian, Catalan, Chinese Simplified, 
Chinese Traditional, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, 
English, Estonian, Finnish, French, Galician, 
German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, 
Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Kannada, Korean, 
Latvian, Lithuanian, Marathi, Norwegian, Polish, 
Portuguese (Portugal), Punjabi, Romanian, Russian, 
Serbian, Slovakian, Slovenian, Spanish, Swedish, 
Tamil, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Ukrainian, Vietnamese 
and Welsh. 
created to ?promote research and development 
in the field of speech and language technology 
for lesser-used languages, particularly those of 
Europe?. Since 1998, it has organized specific 
workshops at the LREC conferences. 
Another definition of ?minority language? is 
used to talk about non-indigenous minority 
languages. This definition may differ from the 
SALTMIL one. The Lancaster University (UK) 
has two ongoing projects related to such 
?minority languages?. The Minority Language 
Engineering (MILLE) project1, ?jointly based in 
the Department of Linguistics at Lancaster 
University and Oxford University Computing 
Services, seeks to investigate the development of 
corpus resources for UK non-indigenous 
minority languages2 (NIMLs)?. The Enabling 
Minority Language Engineering (EMILLE) 
project3, a joined project of Lancaster and 
Sheffield Universities, plans to ?build a 63 
million word electronic corpus of South Asian 
languages, especially those spoken in the UK?. 
Here, the considered languages are Bengali, 
Gujarati, Hindi, Punjabi, Singhalese, Tamil and 
Urdu which are, for some of them, already 
widely studied languages. 
2 Difficult issues 
After having verified that the need of script is 
covered by Unicode or at least by a de facto 
standard or simply by a font, one of the first 
difficulties generally met when starting with a 
new language is the lack of texts and 
dictionaries. This prevents, in particular, 
classical machine translation solutions from 
being immediately applied. Here raises a major 
problem: such resources are time consuming, in 
other terms expensive. So we need to find a way, 
in line with the often limited means of the 
minority languages populations, for getting 
resources or, alternatively, to build new 
methods, based on smaller linguistic resources. 
                                                     
1 : http://www.ling.lancs.ac.uk/monkey/ihe/mille/1fra
1.htm 
2 : A census done in the UK in 1991 stated that non-
indigenous ethnic minorities formed about 6% of the 
Great Britain population (Somers 1997). 
3 : Enabling Minority Language Engineering 
http://www.emille.lancs.ac.uk/. 
3 Directions 
3.1 Generalized Linguistic Contribution 
Our point of view is that linguistic resources can 
be efficiently obtained by a collaborative work 
on the web (Boitet 1999), replacing a local 
development team with a free and potentially 
much bigger distributed team. This idea of a 
?generalized linguistic contribution? on the web, 
already present in an early Montaigne project 
(1996), has recently been implemented at GETA 
for the Lao language in a revisited version (see 
? 4.2). It has also been applied by Oki to the 
Japanese language4 (Shimohata  2001) and by 
NII/NECTEC to a Japanese-Thai dictionary5. At 
another (a meta-) level, the Open Language 
Archives Community6 (OLAC) provides a 
collaborative platform for "creating a worldwide 
virtual library of language resources". Founded 
in December 2000, this recent project already 
gathers more than twenty participants (data 
providers) which resources can be accessed by 
using a service provider such as "the Linguist"7. 
3.2 Dictionary recycling 
An alternative solution for building electronic 
dictionaries is to reengineer the document files 
made with a word processor to produce a paper 
lexicon or dictionary. When the files are not 
available, Optical Character Recognition (OCR) 
can sometimes be used to create it. There, 
recycling tools have to be applied to transform 
the original irregular format into a format that is 
suitable for automated tasks (Nguyen 1998). 
3.3 Using analogy between languages 
Another interesting direction is to take party of 
the similarities between languages, in particular 
in machine translation projects (Paul 2001). 
Here are several recent examples in the minority 
languages area. 
In Europe, machine translation projects between 
Spanish and two languages closely related to 
Spanish ? Catalan (Canals-Marote et al  2001) 
and Galician (Diz 2001) ? are already working. 
                                                     
4 : http://www.yakushite.net/. 
5 : Saikam project, http://saikam.nii.ac.jp/. 
6 : http://www.language-archives.org/. 
7 : http://www.linguistlist.org/olac/. 
In Asia, an example with languages from 
different families1 such as Japanese and Uighur 
shows that syntactical closeness can be 
sufficient to obtain good results (MAJO system, 
Mahsut et al  2001). 
These machine translation projects based on 
analogy generally use a relatively low level 
transfer module and present satisfying response 
times thanks to the use of finite state algorithms.  
3.4 International pivot-based projects 
The achievement of good quality machine 
translation for minority languages can be 
boosted by the adoption of a pivot approach. In 
such an approach, the development of one 
interface (with a pivot) gives access to all 
languages. International pivot-based projects 
such as Papillon2 and UNL3 provide examples of 
such pivot-based projects including minority 
languages. For example, after an initial period 
where only major languages were involved, less 
computerized languages such as Mongolian and 
Latvian have been looked at in the UNL project. 
3.5 CMU approach 
The Language Technologies Institute of the 
Carnegie Mellon University developed an 
original approach of machine translation for the 
AVENUE project (Probst & Levin 2002). This 
multi-engine system, based on a corpus-based 
machine translation (CBMT), uses both EBMT 
and SMT4 as well as an elicitation tool5 that 
learns transfer rules from a small and controlled 
corpus. This elicitation tool, currently being 
applied to Mapudungun, a language from Chile, 
seems to be well suited to the minority 
languages because of its low need of linguistic 
resources. 
4 Ongoing projects at GETA 
Hereafter are presented two developments we 
currently undertake at GETA in Grenoble to 
apply the ideas presented here6. Both are 
                                                     
1 : Uighur is a Turkic language and Japanese is 
considered as independent (Katzner 1995). 
2 : http://vulab.ias.unu.edu/papillon/. 
3 : http://www.unl.ias.unu.edu/. 
4 : Example-Based and Statistical MT. 
5 : Called iRBMT = instructible Rule-Based MT. 
6 : In our works, we focus on ?minority languages? 
applying these ideas to the Lao language. Lao is 
spoken in Laos by about 4 million people and in 
Thailand by more than 10 million people7. 
4.1 PapiLex8 
4.1.1 Principles 
PapiLex, a Lao lexical base developed in the 
context of the pivot-based Papillon project, 
follows the fundamental rules of this project: 
? lexical base in XML format, 
? use of the explanatory and combinatorial 
lexicology (ECL) concepts9 (from which the 
core monolingual Papillon XML schema is 
directly derived), 
? use of Unicode for the characters encoding. 
PapiLex is a mockup aimed at giving a help in 
evaluating the Papillon project difficulties. The 
dictionary structure contains eight fields, derived 
from the ECL: 
? Lexical item, 
? Part of speech, 
? Semantic formula, 
? Government pattern, 
? Lexical functions, 
? Examples, 
? Idioms, 
? Interlingual meaning. 
4.1.2 Architecture 
PapiLex has been developed using HTML and 
Perl. The Perl scripts handle the interaction with 
the XML base. The interface with this base 
relies on DOM, the Document Object Model 
standardized by the W3C. We used a DOM 
package for Perl which can be found on the 
perl.com site. The parsing set used on the web 
server is the one which is included in ActivePerl 
5.6.1 for Windows. It is made out of the Larry 
                                                                                
taken in the SALTMIL definition sense. 
7 : In the Isan area of Thailand where Lao is spoken, 
Thai scripts are used and also the language itself is 
somehow different from Lao spoken in Laos. There is 
also an important Lao diaspora in France, Australia 
and USA. See www.geocities.com/lao_thai2000. 
8 : http://cams-atid.ivry.cnrs.fr/papilex/. 
9 : On this matter, see Andr? Clas, Igor Mel'?uk and 
Alain Polgu?re's book, Introduction ? la lexico-
graphie explicative et combinatoire, Duculot 1995 
Wall and Clark Cooper ?XML::Parser? package 
and of ?Expat?, the James Clark's XML parser. 
4.2 Montaigne project1 
4.2.1 Initial specifications 
Basically, the Montaigne project?s idea is to 
offer a free collaborative work facility on the 
web for development of linguistic resources and 
machine translation tools. Though its ambition is 
generic, the project started with an application to 
Lao. 
In this early form, the web site mainly offers 
three kinds of services: 
? Lao-French translations, 
? Transcriptions of Lao, 
? Lexicographic creation. 
Contrarily to the two first items (translations and 
transcriptions) which are open to all visitors, the 
lexicographic creation access is limited to 
registered skilled users. Each registered user has 
his own space where he can save his private 
words and texts. 
The linguistic structure of the dictionary follows 
the ECL concepts so it can easily be exported 
toward Papillon. However, additional fields have 
also been added in order to derive other 
applications from the database as for example 
paper dictionaries or machine translation. 
In order to start the process, a first dictionary of 
1038 words has been entered, simply deriving 
from a paper dictionary done by Lamvieng 
Inthamone in Word format. So this initial 
dictionary does not meet yet the ECL concept of 
lexical item required for exporting the dictionary 
toward Papillon. An ?ECLization? of this base 
dictionary is then currently being handled by a 
group of Lao students from Inalco2 (Institut 
National des Langues et des Civilisations 
Orientales, located in Paris). This team will 
produce an ECL-compliant dictionary that will 
replace the current one at the end of their task. 
4.2.2 Architecture 
The architecture is based on HTML, SSI, PHP, 
JavaScript and compiled C code used as CGI. 
The dictionary is stored as a MySQL database 
table as well as the contributors? profiles. C code 
                                                     
1 : http://cams-atid.ivry.cnrs.fr/montlao/. 
2 : http://www.inalco.fr. 
is used for segmenting Lao texts into words3 and 
for sorting the dictionary4. It uses a syllable 
recognition technology (Berment 1998) and a 
longest matching algorithm (e.g. Meknavin et al 
1997). Unlike PapiLex, the Montaigne Lao 
project uses non-Unicode fonts. This is mainly 
due to the unavailability of Unicode fonts for 
Lao that would actually work. Text input is 
possible with the two currently used Lao 
keyboard layouts thanks to JavaScript and to 
TextArea or Input HTML forms controls. 
4.2.3 Several views 
Translation service 
Original text input page (Lao) 
 
Word for word translation page (French) 
 
                                                     
3 : Lao is written from left to right with an alphabet 
deriving from Indian scripts. A major characteristics 
of Lao writing is that words are not separated with 
spaces, like Khmer, Thai or Burmese writings. 
4 : Another important characteristics of Lao writing is 
that some vowels are placed before the consonant. 
This contributes to make the automatic sort of Lao 
dictionaries more complex. 
Lexical items input page 
 
Ordered list of lexical items 
Conclusion 
In the close future, we plan to develop the 
Montaigne project in two directions. 
First, the current prototype will become a full 
scale production tool. For that, the Lao-French 
translations and the lexicographic creation will 
be linked together so that a registered user can 
modify a translation. This will update his private 
dictionary and the altered word will be 
submitted to the Linguistic Management Team 
for updating the common dictionary. Analogy 
between Lao and Thai languages will also be 
looked at. 
The second anticipated milestone is to develop 
the project toward its initial generic aim: a free 
collaborative work facility on the web for 
development of linguistic resources and machine 
translation tools for any minority language. This 
includes: 
? gathering a free and structured set of generic 
tools (lemmatizers, segmenters, speech 
tools, ...) and making them available on the 
web site, 
? offering a collaborative environment for 
each candidate language, derived from the 
Lao experimental one. 
References 
Berment Vincent. (DEA  dissertation, Inalco 1998) 
Prol?gom?nes graphotaxiques du laotien. 160 p. 
Boitet Christian. (MT Summit 1999)  A research 
perspective on how to democratize machine 
translation and translation aids aiming at high 
quality final output. 10 p. 
Canals-Marote R., Esteve-Guill?n A., Garrido-
Alenda A., Guardiola-Savall M.I., Itturaspe-Bellver 
A., Montserrat-Buendia S., Ortiz-Rojas S., Pastor-
Pina H., P?rez-Ant?n P.M., Forcada M.L. (MT 
Summit 2001)  The Spanish-Catalan machine 
translation system interNOSTRUM. 4 p. 
Diz Gamallo In?s. (MT Summit 2001)  The 
importance of MT for the survival of minority 
languages: Spanish-Galician MT system. 4 p. 
Katzner Kenneth. (Routledge 1995, 3rd edition)  The 
Languages of the World. 378 p. 
Mahsut Muhtar, Ogawa Yasuhiro, Sugino Kazue, 
Inagaki Yasuyoshi. (MT Summit 2001) Utilizing 
Agglutinative Features in Japanese-Uighur 
Machine Translation. 6 p. 
Meknavin Surapant, Charoenpornsawat Paisarn, 
Kijsirikul Boonserm (Natural Language Processing 
Pacific Rim Symposium 1997) Featured-based 
Thai word segmentation.. pp 41-46. 
Nguyen Hai Doan. (PhD dissertation, UJF Grenoble 
1998)  Techniques g?n?riques d?accumulation 
d?ensembles lexicaux structur?s ? partir de 
ressources dictionnairiques informatis?es multi-
lingues h?t?rog?nes. 168 p. 
Paul Michael (MT Summit 2001) Translation 
Knowledge Recycling for Related Languages. 5 p. 
Probst Katharina, Levin Lori (Proceedings of TMI 
2002) Challenges in Automated Elicitation of a 
Controlled Bilingual Corpus. 11 p. 
Shimohata Sayori, Kitamura Mihoko, Sukehiro 
Tatsuya, Murata Toshiki. (MT Summit 2001)  
Collaborative Translation Environment on the 
Web. 4 p. 
Somers Harold. (Translating and the Computer 19, 
Papers from the ASLIB Conference 13/14 
November 1997)  Machine Translation and 
Minority Languages. 
 
Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on South and Southeast Asian NLP, 25th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 50?54,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23-29 2014.
RBMT as an alternative to SMT for under-resourced languages
Guillaume de Mal?zieux
INaLCO, Paris
guillaume2l2m@gmail.com
Am?lie Bosc
INaLCO, Paris
amelie.bosc@gmail.com
Vincent Berment
INaLCO, Paris
LIG/G?TALP, Grenoble
Vincent.Berment@imag.fr
Abstract
Despite SMT (Statistical Machine Translation) recently revolutionised MT for major language pairs, when
addressing under-resourced and, to some extent, mildly-resourced languages, it still faces some difficulties
such as the need of important quantities of parallel texts, the limited guaranty of the quality, etc. We thus
speculate that RBMT (Rule Based Machine Translation) can fill the gap for these languages.
1 Introduction
In this paper, we present an ongoing work that aims at assessing the relevance of specific methods to reach
?quick and quality? machine translation for under-resourced languages. These methods include working in
parallel  on several  languages,  reusing software and linguistic  resources,  relying on a  pivot  architecture,
opening our linguistic sources and letting any group of users the possibility to ?do it themselves?. We also
chose to adopt the old fashioned RBMT approach. 
More  concretely,  we  are  applying  Vauquois?  methodology  [Vauquois  and  Chappuy,  1985]  to  the
development of analysers for Khmer, Lao, Thai and Hindi, which we plan to ?connect? to existing and open
source syntheses of French and English through three means: deep transfer, deep hybrid transfer and UNL
pivot representation. In order to elaborate easy-to-understand guidelines for new comers, we chose to create
a primer methodological step involving the small novel of Saint-Exup?ry ?The Little Prince?, which has
been translated into 270 languages and dialects. Doing so, the principles for developing dictionaries and
grammars that follow Vauquois? methodology become much simpler to understand.
2 Tools and methodology
2.1 The Heloise RBMT framework
The RBMT framework we are using is called
Heloise.  It  has  been  presented  at  COLING
2012 [Berment and Boitet, 2012]. Heloise is an
online  environment  available  to  anyone
wishing to design his or her own operational
expert  MT  system,  especially  for  under-
resourced  pairs  of  languages.  It  is  upward-
compatible with Ariane-G5?s languages, so the
open-source  modules  developed  under  this
environment can be reused in any new system.
For example, in order to add a new language
X, an existing generation of French language
can  be  taken  as  such  for  a  new  X-French
system,  limiting  the  effort  to  an  analyser  of
language X and to a transfer from X to French.
Figure 1 represents the usual phases involved
in a development under Ariane-G5.
 FIGURE 1 ? Ariane-G5 phases.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence. Page numbers and proceedings footer are added 
by the organisers. Licence details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
50
2.2 G?TA?s methodology
The approach of the G?TA group of Grenoble (France), who created Ariane-G5, is a second generation MT,
in which the text to be translated is first transformed into an abstract representation, as independent of any
language as possible, so this abstract representation can then be translated in any other language. The abstract
representation is a multi-level structure (m-structure) ideally containing the logic (predicate-argument) and
semantic data that are the most language-independent computed in this approach. As this deep level is not
always reached, two other (lower) levels are borne by the m-structure: the syntagmatic level and the syntactic
dependency level, so the translation system will output the best it can do.
As one can see in Figure 1, the development is made of modules corresponding to the different steps of the
translation. If we concentrate on the analysis (the systems we are working on are X-French and X-English
systems  so  firstly  on  analysers  for  the  X  languages),  the  work  consists  in  developing  monolingual
dictionaries containing all the information necessary for the analysis, as well as structural analysers. As such
linguistic descriptions are rather complex, one first needs to specify what will be programmed, especially for
the structural part. G?TA?s answer to this issue consists in making a list of the different structural phenomena
found in the language, each one being represented as a correspondence between a string and its abstract
representation (?charts?), and establishing links between the charts so the charts can include references to
other charts. One can think it roughly as derivation rules in formal grammars in which terminal elements are
classes of words and non-terminal elements are charts.  For example, a noun phrase (the string) such as
[adjective+noun] can be represented as NP(AP,noun) where AP refers to a chart of general adjective phrases,
possibly containing adverbs as in ?a very cute cat?. The formalism for those charts has initially been called
?static grammar? and later SCSG (Static Correspondence Specification Grammar).
3 Parallel work on Khmer, Hindi, Lao and Thai languages
This work aims at elaborating an efficient and simple methodology for developing MT systems for groups of
under-resourced languages. We are using for that purpose a small corpus consisting in Saint-Exup?ry?s Little
Prince in Khmer, Hindi, Lao and Thai which are our source languages, and our target languages are French
and English. Two of the authors, Guillaume de Mal?zieux and Vincent Berment, are working on Khmer and
Lao, as two other persons, Jennifer Wong and Satenik Mkhitaryan, are working on Thai and Hindi.
3.1 Reuse of existing linguistic modules
The  systems  developed  under  Ariane-G5  are  made  of  linguistic  module  dedicated  to  each  step  of  the
translation  process  (analysis,  transfer,  generation).  In  G?TA?s  approach,  analyses  are  independent  from
generations so an analyser for a specific language can be used with a generation of any other language. As
French an English modules are available under BSD licence (among many others), we are using them for our
work so the analysers and the transfers have to be developed.
3.2 Segmentation and POS tagging
In the case of Khmer, Lao and Thai, one needs to segment into words first, as the writing systems do not
include  spaces  between  words.  This  is  done  by  Motor,  a  segmenter  performing  a  maximum matching
algorithm. It is currently available for Burmese, Khmer, Lao, Thai and Tibetan. Within the limits of our small
corpus, the obtained segmentation is 100% correct (the figure reached for general corpora is significantly
lower). In order to create the first step called ?morphological analysis? in Figure 1, we need a list of words
with a number of features that will be used for the analysis. To achieve that, we fill an Excel file with the
required  data.  The  following figure  is  an  extract  of  the  Excel  file  that  describe  a  noun phrase  with  a
possessive attribution. Note that Hindi is not completed and was not included is this paper.
 
FIGURE 2 ? Khmer, Lao and Thai data used in the ?morphological analysis?
We  used  parts  of  speech  often  found  in  G?TA systems:  V  verb,  N  noun,  A adjunct,  R  pronoun,  S
51
subordination (preposition,  subordinating conjunction and linking word),  C coordinating conjunction.  In
Figure 2, LU stands for Lexical Unit, which is a generalisation of lemma that groups together words deriving
from the same base such as build, building, builder, etc.  That notion is very useful,  for example during
transfers where it eases paraphrasing.
The  example  in  Figure  2  is  an  ideal  case
where  the  three  languages  involved  are
aligned  word  for  word.  When  it  is  not  the
case, we have different lines for the parts in
the  different  languages  that  are  not  aligned
and we mark them as ?similar?  thanks to a
colour given to those parts. That is used later
when  specifying  the  structural  analysers  as
blocks  of  words  that  are  not  aligned  may
share  common  structures  (see  the  next
section).
After the Excel file is completed, we can then
generate  automatically  the  ?morphological
analysis?  source  code  written  in  ATEF
language, thanks to a tool we developed for
that  aim.  Note  that  segmenting  and  POS
tagging  have  their  own  dictionaries  so  a
special  care  is  needed  to  ensure  their
consistency.
 
FIGURE 3 ? Result of the morphological analysis for
????????????? ?(Khmer)
3.3 Structural analysis
In order to perform the structural analysis of a text, one needs a formal description of the language. This
description,  that  we  call  a  specification,  will  be  written  according  to  the  formalism given  by  Bernard
Vauquois  and Sylviane Chappuy [Vauquois  et  Chappuy,  1985]  and mentioned in  section  2.2:  the  static
grammars. After we get such specification, we can start programming the analyser in the Ariane-G5 language
called ROBRA, which performs tree transformations.
Now let us have a closer look at what a static grammar is like. It is a series of charts, each chart describing a
family of strings by associating it to a tree. The charts may refer to each other. For example in order to
recognise a  complex noun phrase such as ?gaz reaction?,  the two nouns have to be first  recognised as
separate valid noun phrases (for example, ?gaz? is a word that makes sense on its own) so that then they can
be gathered into the same tree in order to take a new meaning. So that means the chart describing complex
noun phrases refers to the chart describing simple noun phrases. As a consequence, all the charts have to be
organised in the grammar so that the ones describing elementary phrases, that are the ones that do not need
referring to another chart, come first. Then come the charts describing simple phrases, because they can only
refer to lower charts in this hierarchy. At last come the charts for complex groups, they can refer to any chart
in the grammar. 
Now to write the charts, we need a list of variables to gather all the information we need. They can be of
different types, but for the purpose of our study, we will only need basic information. Because we use the
limited vocabulary of the Little Prince, we won't have to work much on disambiguation. So for now we are
only using POS information, with some refinements to recognise mass nouns from countable nouns, and
some subcategories  of verbs.  As an example,  we will  present  the  chart  describing  the possession noun
phrases, that are built identically in the three languages: noun + particle ?of ? + personal pronoun. Here in
order to write a chart that could apply to Lao, Thai and Khmer languages at a time, we will use the variable
OF to refer to ???? in Khmer, ??? in Thai, and ??? in Lao. A static chart is divided into three zones. The
first  one  is  a  string-tree  correspondence,  describing  the structure  to  be recognised.  Each node and leaf
receives a number. In FIGURE 4, the root node of our noun phrase is the number 1. Numbers 2, 3 and 4 are
the leaves, and each cross below represents a word of the string. The square brackets around number 3 mean
that it is optional. The last two lines at the bottom of the tree give information about the words. For example
leave 2 is a noun, and more precisely a common noun, leave 3 is a subordinating and its LU is the particle
OF, and at last, leave 4 is a personal pronoun. One particularity in this tree is the fact that the node 3 is not
52
linked to the root. This is because although the particle needs to be taken into account during the analysis, we
chose not to have it appear into the tree. All the information it carries will be transferred into other nodes.
Zone 2 of the static chart provides complementary information on the condition necessary for the structure to
be correct. This could be semantic information on one of the nodes, or the presence of one node excluding
another, etc. But we do not need any information of this type in the chart we are studying. At last, it is in
zone 3 that we present the actions to be taken on the tree. In our case, we store in a variable the possession
relation. We also assign the noun of leave 2 to be the governor, that is to say the head, of the phrase.
FIGURE 4 ? String-tree correspondence
FIGURE 5 ? Example of structural analysis for a Lao phrase
3.4 Lexical transfer
In transfers, we transform the Lexical Units and their variables from the source to the target lexical spaces.
As we found lexical similarities between Thai, Lao and Khmer languages ? ULs are between 50% and 70%
common ?, a large part of the transfers is also common to those languages.
4 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented an ongoing work. A lot remains to be done but we already observe that working
in parallel  on several  languages brings a  lot of  advantage.  For example,  when a question raises  on the
methodology, on how we can build a specific static chart, etc., people working on any language can answer.
For  this  purpose,  the  Ariane/Heloise  community  has  set-up  a  Web  site  and  enriches  it  continuously:
lingwarium.org. Also, as for the structural phases, we noted that many structures were common between
Khmer Lao and Thai (Hindi development is late because of the few common features shared with the other
languages), thus reducing the effort for making the static grammars. We also noted that the time to develop
the transfers were dramatically reduced as a large part of them were common to the three languages. That
remains to be further evaluated but we are already convinced it is a way that will help reaching Christian
Boitet?s prediction that 600 languages will have access to machine translation [Boitet, 2013].
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Jennifer Wong and Satenik Mkhitaryan for their contribution, as well as Michel
Antelme who helped a lot for the work on the Khmer language.
53
References
Bachut  D.,  Le projet  EUROLANG :  une  nouvelle  perspective  pour  les  outils  d?aide  ?  la  traduction,  TALN 1994
Proceedings ,PRC-CHM Days, Marseille University, April 7-8th 1994.
Bachut D., Verastegui N., Software tools for the environment of a computer aided translation system, COLING-1984,
Stanford University, pages 330 to 333, July 2-6th 1984.
Berment V., M?thodes pour informatiser des langues et des groupes de langues ? peu dot?es ?, PhD Thesis, Grenoble,
May 18th 2004.
http://portal.unesco.org/ci/fr/files/16735/10914394223these_Berment.pdf/these_Berment.pdf
Berment V., Boitet C.: Heloise ? A reengineering of Ariane-G5 SLLPs for application to ?-languages, COLING 2012,
Bombay, December 2012
Boitet C., Le point sur Ariane-78 d?but 1982 (DSE-1), vol. 1, partie 1, le logiciel, ADI Contract report n? 81/423, April
1982.
Boitet C., Guillaume P., Qu?zel-Ambrunaz M., A case study in software evolution: from Ariane-78.4 to Ariane-85,
Proceedings  of  the  Conference  on  Theoretical  and  Methodological  Issues  in  Machine  Translation  of  Natural
Languages, Colgate University, Hamilton, New York, August 14-16th 1985.
Boitet C., Current machine translation systems developed with GETA?s methodology and software tools, Translating
and the Computer 8, November 13-14th 1986.
Boitet C., La TAO ? Grenoble en 1990, 1980-90 : TAO du r?viseur et TAO du traducteur, LATL and CNET, Lannion,
1990.
Boitet C., A research perspective on how to democratize machine translation and translation aids aiming at high quality
final output, MT Summit VII, Kent Ridge Digital Labs, Singapour, pages 125 to 133, September13-17th 1999.
Boitet C., A roadmap for MT: four ? keys ? to handle more languages, for all kinds of tasks, while making it possible to
improve quality (on demand), International Conference on Universal Knowledge and Language (ICUKL 2002), Goa,
November 25-29th 2002.
Boitet C., Les architectures linguistiques et computationnelles en traduction automatique sont ind?pendantes, TALN
2008, Avignon, June 9-13th 2008.
Boitet C., Les logiciels traduiront 600 langues dans dix ans, Les dossiers de la Recherche, n?4, June-July 2013.
Chappuy S. Formalisation de la description des niveaux d'interpr?tation des langues naturelles, Thesis, 1983
Delavennat E., Comparaison des systemes de d?coration des linguiciels traitant les langues FRA, ENG, ALD, RUS,
final report, Traouiero project, 2010
Del Vigna C., Berment V., Boitet C., La notion d?occurrence de formes de for?t (orient?e et ordonn?e) dans le langage
ROBRA pour  la  traduction automatique,  Approches alg?brique,  logique et  algorithmique,  ATALA, ENST Paris,
December 1st  2007.
Collective work, Maquette P?dagogique du BEX FEX, GETA Document, 1983
Guillaume P., Ariane-G5 : Les langages sp?cialis?s TRACOMPL et EXPANS, G?TA document, June 1989.
Guilbaud J.-P., Ariane-G5 : Environnement de d?veloppement et d?ex?cution de systemes (linguiciels) de traduction
automatique, GDR I3 ATALA, Paris, November 1999.
Tang E.K., Natural languages Analysis in machine translation (MT) based on the STCG, PhD thesis, Sains Malaysia
University, Penang, March 1994
Vauquois B., Aspects of mechanical translation in 1979, Conference for Japan IBM Scientific program, July 1979.
Vauquois B., Computer aided translation and the Arabic language, First Arab school on science and technology, Rabat,
October 1983.
 Vauquois B., Chappuy S., Static grammars, A formalism for the description of linguistic models, Proceedings of the
Conference  on  Theoretical  and  Methodological  Issues  in  Machine  Translation  of  Natural  Languages,  Colgate
University, Hamilton, New York, August 14-16, 1985.
Zaharin Yusoff, Strategies and heuristics in the analysis of a natural language in machine translation, PhD thesis, Sains
Malaysia University, Penang, March 1986.
54
