Multilingual Extension of a Temporal Expression Normalizer using
Annotated Corpora
E. Saquete P. Mart??nez-Barco R. Mun?oz
gPLSI
DLSI. UA
Alicante, Spain
fstela,patricio,rafaelg@dlsi.ua.es
M. Negri M. Speranza
ITC-irst
Povo (TN), Italy
fnegri,mansperag@itc.it
R. Sprugnoli
CELCT
Trento, Italy
sprugnoli@celct.it
Abstract
This paper presents the automatic exten-
sion to other languages of TERSEO, a
knowledge-based system for the recogni-
tion and normalization of temporal ex-
pressions originally developed for Span-
ish1. TERSEO was first extended to En-
glish through the automatic translation of
the temporal expressions. Then, an im-
proved porting process was applied to Ital-
ian, where the automatic translation of
the temporal expressions from English and
from Spanish was combined with the ex-
traction of new expressions from an Ital-
ian annotated corpus. Experimental re-
sults demonstrate how, while still adher-
ing to the rule-based paradigm, the devel-
opment of automatic rule translation pro-
cedures allowed us to minimize the ef-
fort required for porting to new languages.
Relying on such procedures, and without
any manual effort or previous knowledge
of the target language, TERSEO recog-
nizes and normalizes temporal expressions
in Italian with good results (72% precision
and 83% recall for recognition).
1 Introduction
Recently, the Natural Language Processing com-
munity has become more and more interested
in developing language independent systems,
in the effort of breaking the language barrier
hampering their application in real use scenar-
ios. Such a strong interest in multilingual-
ity is demonstrated by the growing number of
1This research was partially funded by the Spanish Gov-
ernment (contract TIC2003-07158-C04-01)
international conferences and initiatives plac-
ing systems? multilingual/cross-language capabil-
ities among the hottest research topics, such as
the European Cross-Language Evaluation Forum2
(CLEF), a successful evaluation campaign which
aims at fostering research in different areas of
multilingual information retrieval. At the same
time, in the temporal expressions recognition and
normalization field, systems featuring multilin-
gual capabilities have been proposed. Among
others, (Moia, 2001; Wilson et al, 2001; Negri
and Marseglia, 2004) emphasized the potentiali-
ties of such applications for different information
retrieval related tasks.
As many other NLP areas, research in auto-
mated temporal reasoning has recently seen the
emergence of machine learning approaches trying
to overcome the difficulties of extending a lan-
guage model to other languages (Carpenter, 2004;
Ittycheriah et al, 2003). In this direction, the out-
comes of the first Time Expression Recognition
and Normalization Workshop (TERN 20043) pro-
vide a clear indication of the state of the field. In
spite of the good results obtained in the recog-
nition task, normalization by means of machine
learning techniques still shows relatively poor re-
sults with respect to rule-based approaches, and
still remains an unresolved problem.
The difficulty of porting systems to new lan-
guages (or domains) affects both rule-based and
machine learning approaches. With rule-based ap-
proaches (Schilder and Habel, 2001; Filatova and
Hovy, 2001), the main problems are related to
the fact that the porting process requires rewriting
from scratch, or adapting to each new language,
large numbers of rules, which is costly and time-
2http://www.clef-campaign.org/
3http://timex2.mitre.org/tern.html
1
consuming work. Machine learning approaches
(Setzer and Gaizauskas, 2002; Katz and Arosio,
2001), on the other hand, can be extended with
little human intervention through the use of lan-
guage corpora. However, the large annotated cor-
pora that are necessary to obtain high performance
are not always available. In this paper we describe
a new procedure to build temporal models for new
languages, starting from previously defined ones.
While still adhering to the rule-based paradigm, its
main contribution is the proposal of a simple, but
effective, methodology to automate the porting of
a system from one language to another. In this pro-
cedure, we take advantage of the architecture of an
existing system developed for Spanish (TERSEO,
see (Saquete et al, 2005)), where the recognition
model is language-dependent but the normalizing
procedure is completely independent. In this way,
the approach is capable of automatically learning
the recognition model by adjusting the set of nor-
malization rules.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2
provides a short overview of TERSEO; Section 3
describes the automatic extension of the system to
Italian; Section 4 presents the results of our evalu-
ation experiments, comparing the performance of
Ita-TERSEO (i.e. our extended system) with the
performance of a state of the art system for Italian.
2 The TERSEO system architecture
TERSEO has been developed in order to automat-
ically recognize temporal expressions (TEs) ap-
pearing in a Spanish written text, and normalize
them according to the temporal model proposed
in (Saquete, 2005), which is compatible with the
ACE annotation standards for temporal expres-
sions (Ferro et al, 2005). As shown in Figure 1,
the first step (recognition) includes pre-processing
of the input texts, which are tagged with lexical
and morphological information that will be used
as input to the temporal parser. The temporal
parser is implemented using an ascending tech-
nique (chart parser) and is based on a temporal
grammar. Once the parser has recognized the TEs
in an input text, these are passed to the normaliza-
tion unit, which updates the value of the reference
according to the date they refer to, and generates
the XML tags for each expression.
As TEs can be categorized as explicit and im-
plicit, the grammar used by the parser is tuned for
discriminating between the two groups. On the
TEXT
POS 
TAGGER
RECOGNITION: 
PARSER
Lexical and
morphological
information
Temporal 
expression
recognition
DATE
ESTIMATION
Dictionary
Temporal
Expression
Grammar
TEMPORAL
EXPRESSION
NORMALIZATION
EVENT 
ORDERING
ORDERED
TEXT
Documental 
DataBase
Figure 1: Graphic representation of the TERSEO
architecture.
one hand, explicit temporal expressions directly
provide and fully describe a date which does not
require any further reasoning process to be inter-
preted (e.g. ?1st May 2005?, ?05/01/2005?). On
the other hand, implicit (or anaphoric) time ex-
pressions (e.g. ?yesterday?, ?three years later?)
require some degree of reasoning (as in the case
of anaphora resolution). In order to translate such
expressions into explicit dates, such reasoning ca-
pabilities consider the information provided by the
lexical context in which they occur (see (Saquete,
2005) for a thorough description of the reasoning
techniques used by TERSEO).
2.1 Recognition using a temporal expression
parser
The parser uses a grammar based on two differ-
ent sets of rules. The first set of rules is in charge
of date and time recognition (i.e. explicit dates,
such as ?05/01/2005?). For this type of TEs, the
grammar adopted by TERSEO recognizes a large
number of date and time formats (see Table 1 for
some examples).
The second set of rules is in charge of the recog-
nition of the temporal reference for implicit TEs,
2
fecha! dd+?/?+mm+?/?+(yy)yy (12/06/1975)
(06/12/1975)
fecha! dd+?-?+mes+?-?+(yy)yy (12-junio-1975)
(12-Jun.-1975)
fecha! dd+?de?+mm+?de?+(yy)yy (12 de junio de 1975)
Table 1: Sample of rules for Explicit Dates Recognition.
reference! ?ayer? (yesterday)
Implicit dates reference! ?man?ana? (tomorrow)
referring to Document Date reference! ?anteayer? (the day before yesterdary)
Concrete reference! ?el pro?ximo d??a? (the next day)
Implicit Dates reference! ?un mes despue?s? (a month later)
Previous Date Period reference! num+?an?os despue?s?(num years later)
Imp. Dates Prev.Date Concrete reference! ?un d??a antes? (a day before)
Implicit Dates reference! ?d??as despue?s? (some days later)
Previous Date Fuzzy reference! ?d??as antes? (some days before)
Table 2: Sample of rules for Implicit Dates recognition.
i.e. TEs that need to be related to an explicit TE
to be interpreted. These can be divided into time
adverbs (e.g. ?yesterday?, ?tomorrow?), and nom-
inal phrases that are referring to temporal relation-
ships (e.g. ?three years later?, ?the day before?).
Table 2 shows some of the rules used for the de-
tection of these kinds of references.
2.2 Normalization
When the system finds an explicit temporal ex-
pression, the normalization process is direct as no
resolution of the expression is necessary. For im-
plicit expressions, an inference engine that inter-
prets every reference previously found in the input
text is used. In some cases references are solved
using the newspaper?s date (FechaP). Other TEs
have to be interpreted by referring to a date named
before in the text that is being analyzed (FechaA).
In these cases, a temporal model that allows the
system to determine the reference date over which
the dictionary operations are going to be done, has
been defined. This model is based on the follow-
ing two rules:
1. The newspaper?s date, when available, is
used as a base temporal referent by default;
otherwise, the current date is used as anchor.
2. In case a non-anaphoric TE is found, it is
stored as FechaA. This value is updated ev-
ery time a non-anaphoric TE appears in the
text.
Table 3 shows some of the entries of the dictio-
nary used in the inference engine.
3 Extending TERSEO: from Spanish
and English to Italian
As stated before, the main purpose of this paper is
to describe a new procedure to automatically build
temporal models for new languages, starting from
previously defined models. In our case, an English
model has been automatically obtained from the
Spanish one through the automatic translation of
the Spanish temporal expressions to English. The
resulting system for the recognition and normal-
ization of English TEs obtains good results both
in terms of precision (P) and recall (R) (Saquete et
al., 2004). The comparison of the results between
the Spanish and the English system is shown in
Table 4.
SPANISH ENGLISH
DOCS 50 100
POS 199 634
ACT 156 511
CORRECT 138 393
INCORRECT 18 118
MISSED 43 123
P 88% 77%
R 69% 62%
F 77% 69%
Table 4: Comparison between Spanish TERSEO
and English TERSEO.
This section presents the procedure we followed
to extend our system to Italian, starting from the
Spanish and English models already available, and
a manually annotated corpus. In this case, both
models have been considered as they can be com-
plemented reciprocally. The Spanish model was
3
REFERENCE DICTIONARY ENTRY
?ayer? Day(FechaP)-1/Month(FechaP)/Year(FechaP)
(yesterday)
?man?ana? Day(FechaP)+1/Month(FechaP)/Year(FechaP)
(tomorrow)
?anteayer? Day(FechaP)-2/Month(FechaP)/Year(FechaP)
(the day before yesterday)
?el pro?ximo d??a? Day(FechaP)+1/Month(FechaP)/Year(FechaP)
(the next day)
?un mes despue?s? [DayI/Month(FechaA)+1/Year(FechaA)--
(a month later) DayF/Month(FechaA)+1/Year(FechaA)]
num+?an?os despue?s? [01/01/Year(FechaA)+num --
(num years later) 31/12/Year(FechaA)+num]
?un d??a antes? Day(FechaA)-1/Month(FechaA)/Year(FechaA)
(a day before)
?d??as despue?s? >>>>FechaA
(some days later)
?d??as antes? <<<<FechaA
(some days before)
Table 3: Normalization rules
manually obtained and evaluated showing high
scores for precision (88%), so better results could
be expected when it is used. However, in spite of
the fact that the English model has shown lower
results on precision (77%), the on-line transla-
tors between Italian and English have better re-
sults than Spanish to Italian translators. As a re-
sult, both models are considered in the following
steps for the multilingual extension:
 Firstly, a set of Italian temporal expressions
is extracted from an Italian annotated corpus
and stored in a database. The selected cor-
pus is the training part of I-CAB, the Ital-
ian Content Annotation Bank (Lavelli et al,
2005). More detailed information about I-
CAB is provided in Section 4.
 Secondly, the resulting set of Italian TEs
must be related to the appropriate normaliza-
tion rule. In order to do that, a double transla-
tion procedure has been developed. We first
translate all the expressions into English and
Spanish simultaneously; then, the normaliza-
tion rules related to the translated expressions
are obtained. If both the Spanish and En-
glish expressions are found in their respec-
tive models in agreement with the same nor-
malization rule, then this rule is also assigned
to the Italian expression. Also, when only
one of the translated expressions is found in
the existing models, the normalization rule
is assigned. In case of discrepancies, i.e. if
both expressions are found, but not coincid-
ing in the same normalization rule, then one
of the languages must be prioritized. As the
Spanish model was manually obtained and
has shown a higher precision, Spanish rules
are preferred. In other cases, the expression
is reserved for a manual assignment.
 Finally, the set is automatically augmented
using the Spanish and English sets of tem-
poral expressions. These expressions were
also translated into Italian by on-line ma-
chine translation systems (Spanish-Italian4 ,
English-Italian5). In this case, a filtering
module is used to guarantee that all the ex-
pressions were correctly translated. This
module searches the web with Google6 for
the translated expression. If the expression
is not frequently found, then the translation
is abandoned. After that, the new Italian ex-
pression is included in the model, and related
to the same normalization rule assigned to the
Spanish or English temporal expression.
The entire translation process has been com-
pleted with an automatic generalization process,
oriented to obtain generalized rules from the con-
crete cases that have been collected from the cor-
4http://www.tranexp.com:2000/Translate/result.shtml
5http://world.altavista.com/
6http://www.google.com/
4
pus. This generalization process has a double ef-
fect. On the one hand, it reduces the number of
recognition rules. On the other hand, it allows the
system to identify new expressions that were not
previously learned. For instance, the expression
?Dieci mesi dopo? (i.e. ?Ten months later?) could
be recognized if the expression ?Nove mesi dopo?
(i.e. Nine months later) was learned.
The multilingual extension procedure (Figure 3)
is carried out in three phases:
Spanish
Temporal 
Recognition
Model
Spanish-Italian
TRANSLATOR
TEs FILTER
KEYWORDS Unit
NEW TEs
FINDER
RULE
ASSIGNMENTS
Google
WordNet
Italian TEs
Italian TEs
Temporal  keywords
New Italian TEs
New Normalizer rule
Italian
Temporal 
Normalizer
Model
Online 
DictionariesITALIAN TEs
GRAMATICS 
Generator
English
Temporal 
Recognition
Model
Italian
I-CAB   
Corpus
English-Italian
TRANSLATOR
Italian-Spanish
TRANSLATOR
Italian-English
TRANSLATOR
Spanish
Temporal 
Normalizer
Model
English
Temporal 
Normalizer
Model
Italian TEs
Italian generalized TEs
Phase
1
Phase 
2 
Phase 
3
Figure 2: Multilingual extension procedure.
 Phase 1: TE Collection. During this phase,
the Italian temporal expressions are col-
lected from I-CAB (Italian Content Annota-
tion Bank), and the automatically translated
Italian TEs are derived from the set of Span-
ish and English TEs. In this case, the TEs
are filtered removing those not being found
by Google.
 Phase 2: TE Generalization. In this phase,
the TEs Gramatics Generator uses the mor-
phological and syntactical information from
the collected TEs to generate the grammat-
ical rules that generalize the recognition of
the TEs. Moreover, the keyword unit is able
to extract the temporal keywords that will be
used to build new TEs. These keywords are
augmented with their synonyms in WordNet
(Vossen, 2000) to generate new TEs.
 Phase 3: TE Normalizing Rule Assignment.
In the last phase, the translators are used to
relate the recognizing rule to the appropriate
normalization rule. For this purpose, the sys-
tem takes advantage of the previously defined
Spanish and English temporal models.
4 Evaluation
The automatic extension of the system to Italian
(Ita-TERSEO) has been evaluated using I-CAB,
which has been divided in two parts: training and
test. The training part has been used, first of all,
in order to automatically extend the system. Af-
ter this extension, the system was evaluated both
against the training and the test corpora. The pur-
pose of this double evaluation experiment was to
compare the recall obtained over the training cor-
pus with the value obtained over the test corpus.
An additional evaluation experiment has also
been carried out in order to compare the perfor-
mance of the automatically developed system with
a state of the art system specifically developed for
Italian and English, i.e. the Chronos system de-
scribed in (Negri and Marseglia, 2004).
In the following sections, more details about I-
CAB and the evaluation process are presented, to-
gether with the evaluation results.
4.1 The I-CAB Corpus
The evaluation has been performed on the tem-
poral annotations of I-CAB (I-CAB-temp) cre-
ated as part of the three-year project ONTOTEXT7
funded by the Provincia Autonoma di Trento.
I-CAB consists of 525 news documents
taken from the local newspaper L?Adige
(http://www.adige.it). The selected news sto-
ries belong to four different days (September, 7th
and 8th 2004 and October, 7th and 8th 2004) and
are grouped into five categories: News Stories,
Cultural News, Economic News, Sports News
and Local News. The corpus consists of around
182,500 words (on average 347 words per file).
The total number of annotated temporal expres-
sions is 4,553; the average length of a temporal
expression is 1.9 words.
The annotation of I-CAB has been carried out
adopting the standards developed within the ACE
program (Automatic Content Extraction8) for the
Time Expressions Recognition and Normalization
7http://tcc.itc.it/projects/ontotext
8http://www.nist.gov/speech/tests/ace
5
tasks, which allows for a semantically rich and
normalized annotation of different types of tempo-
ral expressions (for further details on the TIMEX2
annotation standard for English see (Ferro et al,
2005)).
The ACE guidelines have been adapted to
the specific morpho-syntactic features of Italian,
which has a far richer morphology than English.
In particular, some changes concerning the exten-
sion of the temporal expressions have been in-
troduced. According to the English guidelines,
in fact, definite and indefinite articles are consid-
ered as part of the textual realization of an entity,
while prepositions are not. As the annotation is
word-based, this does not account for Italian artic-
ulated prepositions, where a definite article and a
preposition are merged. Within I-CAB, this type
of preposition has been included as possible con-
stituents of an entity, so as to consistently include
all the articles.
An assessment of the inter-annotator agreement
based on the Dice coefficient has shown that the
task is a well-defined one, as the agreement is
95.5% for the recognition of temporal expressions.
4.2 Evaluation process
The evaluation of the automatic extension of
TERSEO to Italian has been performed in three
steps. First of all, the system has been evaluated
both against the training and the test corpora with
two main purposes:
 Determining if the recall obtained in the eval-
uation of the training part of the corpus is a
bit higher than the one obtained in the eval-
uation of the test part of I-CAB, due to the
fact that in the TE collection phase of the ex-
tension, temporal expressions were extracted
from this part of the corpus.
 Determining the performance of the automat-
ically extended system without any manual
revision of both the Italian translations and
the resolution rules automatically related to
the expressions.
Secondly, we were also interested in verifying
if the performance of the system in terms of pre-
cision could be improved through a manual revi-
sion of the automatically translated temporal ex-
pressions.
Finally, a comparison with a state of the art sys-
tem for Italian has been carried out in order to es-
timate the real potentialities of the proposed ap-
proach. All the evaluation results are compared
and presented in the following sections using the
same metrics adopted at the TERN2004 confer-
ence.
4.2.1 Evaluation of Ita-TERSEO
In the automatic extension of the system, a to-
tal of 1,183 Italian temporal expressions have been
stored in the database. As shown in Table 5, these
expressions have been obtained from the different
resources available:
 ENG ITA: This group of expressions has
been obtained from the automatic translation
into Italian of the English Temporal Expres-
sions stored in the knowledge DB.
 ESP ITA: This group of expressions has been
obtained from the automatic translation into
Italian of the Spanish Temporal Expressions
stored in the knowledge DB.
 CORPUS: This group of expressions has
been extracted directly from the training part
of the I-CAB corpus.
Source N %
ENG ITA 593 50.1
ESP ITA 358 30.3
CORPUS 232 19.6
TOTAL TEs 1183 100.0
Table 5: Italian TEs in the Knowledge DB.
Both the training part and the test part of I-CAB
have been used for evaluation. The results of pre-
cision (P), recall (R) and F-Measure (F) are pre-
sented in Table 6, which provides details about the
system performance over the general recognition
task (timex2), and the different normalization at-
tributes used by the TIMEX2 annotation standard.
As expected, recall performance over the train-
ing corpus is slightly higher. However, although
the temporal expressions have been extracted from
such corpus, in the automatic process of obtain-
ing the normalization rules for these expressions,
some errors could have been introduced.
Comparing these results with those obtained by
the automatic extension of TERSEO to English
and taking into account the recognition task (see
Table 4), precision (P) is slightly better for En-
glish (77% Vs. 72%) whereas recall (R) is better
in the Italian extension (62% Vs. 83%). This is
6
Ita-TERSEO: TRAINING Ita-TERSEO: TEST Chronos: TEST
Tag P R F P R F P R F
timex2 0.694 0.848 0.763 0.726 0.834 0.776 0.925 0.908 0.917
anchor dir 0.495 0.562 0.526 0.578 0.475 0.521 0.733 0.636 0.681
anchor val 0.464 0.527 0.493 0.516 0.424 0.465 0.495 0.462 0.478
set 0.308 0.903 0.459 0.182 1.000 0.308 0.616 0.5 0.552
text 0.265 0.324 0.292 0.258 0.296 0.276 0.859 0.843 0.851
val 0.581 0.564 0.573 0.564 0.545 0.555 0.636 0.673 0.654
Table 6: Results obtained over I-CAB by Ita-TERSEO and Chronos.
due to the fact that in the Italian extension, more
temporal expressions have been covered with re-
spect to the English extension. In this case, in
fact, Ita-TERSEO is not only using the temporal
expressions translated from the English or Spanish
knowledge database, but also the temporal expres-
sions extracted from the training part of I-CAB.
4.2.2 Manual revision of the acquired TEs
A manual revision of the Italian TEs stored in
the Knowledge DB has been done in two steps.
First of all, the incorrectly translated expressions
(from Spanish and English to Italian) were re-
moved from the database. A total of 334 expres-
sions were detected as wrong translated expres-
sions. After this, another revision was performed.
In this case, some expressions were modified be-
cause the expressions have some minor errors in
the translation. 213 expressions were modified in
this second revision cycle. Moreover, since pattern
constituents in Italian might have different ortho-
graphical features (e.g. masculine/feminine, ini-
tial vowel/consonant, etc.), new patterns had to be
introduced to capture such variants. For exam-
ple, as months? names in Italian could start with
a vowel, the temporal expression pattern ?nell?-
MONTH? has been inserted in the Knowledge
DB. After these changes, the total amount of ex-
pressions stored in the DB are shown in Table 7.
Source N %
ING ITA 416 47.9
ESP ITA 201 23.1
CORPUS 232 26.7
REV MAN 20 2.3
TOTAL TEs 869 100.0
Table 7: Italian TEs in the Knowledge DB after
manual revision.
In order to evaluate the system after this manual
revision, the training and the test part of I-CAB
have been used. However, the results of preci-
sion (PREC), recall (REC) and F-Measure were
exactly the same as presented in Table 6. That
is not really surprising. The existence of wrong
expressions in the knowledge database does not
affect the final results of the system, as they will
never be used for recognition or resolution. This
is because these expressions will not appear in real
documents, and are redundant as the correct ex-
pression is also stored in the Knowledge DB.
4.2.3 Comparing Italian TERSEO with a
language-specific system
Finally, in order to compare Ita-TERSEO with
a state of the art system specifically designed for
Italian, we chose Chronos (Negri and Marseglia,
2004), a multilingual system for the recognition
and normalization of TEs in Italian and English.
Like all the other state of the art systems address-
ing the recognition/normalization task, Chronos
is a rule-based system. From a design point of
view, it shares with TERSEO a rather similar ar-
chitecture which relies on different sets of rules.
These are regular expressions that check for spe-
cific features of the input text, such as the pres-
ence of particular word senses, lemmas, parts
of speech, symbols, or strings satisfying specific
predicates. Each set of rules is in charge of deal-
ing with different aspects of the problem. In
particular, a set of around 350 rules is designed
for TE recognition and is capable of recogniz-
ing with high Precision/Recall rates both explicit
and implicit TEs. Other sets of regular expres-
sions, for a total of around 700 rules, are used
in the normalization phase, and are in charge of
handling a specific TIMEX2 attribute (i.e. VAL,
SET, ANCHOR VAL, and ANCHOR DIR). The
results obtained by the Italian version of Chronos
over the test part of I-CAB are shown in the last
three columns of Table 6.
As expected, the distance between the results
obtained by the two systems is considerable. How-
ever, the following considerations should be taken
into account. First, there is a great difference, both
7
in terms of the required time and effort, in the de-
velopment of the two systems. While the imple-
mentation of the manual one took several months,
the porting procedure of TERSEO to Italian is a
very fast process that can be accomplished in less
than an hour. Second, even if an annotated corpus
for a new language is not available, the automatic
porting procedure we present still remains feasi-
ble. In fact, most of the TEs for a new language
that are stored in the Knowledge DB are the result
of the translation of the Spanish/English TEs into
such a target language. In our case, as shown in
Table 5, more than 80% of the acquired Italian TEs
result from the automatic translation of the expres-
sions already stored in the DB. This makes the pro-
posed approach a viable solution which allows for
a rapid porting of the system to other languages,
while just requiring an on-line translator (note that
the Altavista Babel Fish translator9 provides trans-
lations from English to 12 target languages). In
light of these considerations, the results obtained
by Ita-TERSEO are encouraging.
5 Conclusions
In this paper we have presented an automatic ex-
tension of a rule-based approach to TEs recogni-
tion and normalization. The procedure is based
on building temporal models for new languages
starting from previously defined ones. This proce-
dure is able to fill the gap left by machine learning
systems that, up to date, are still far from provid-
ing acceptable performance on this task. As re-
sults illustrate, the proposed methodology (even
though with a lower performance with respect to
language-specific systems) is a viable and effec-
tive solution for a rapid and automatic porting of
an existing system to new languages.
References
B. Carpenter. 2004. Phrasal Queries with LingPipe
and Lucene. In 13th Text REtrieval Conference,
NIST Special Publication. National Institute of Stan-
dards and Technology.
L. Ferro, L. Gerber, I. Mani, B. Sundheim, and G. Wil-
son. 2005. TIDES 2005 Standard for the annotation
of temporal expressions. Technical report, MITRE.
E. Filatova and E. Hovy. 2001. Assigning time-stamps
to event-clauses. In ACL, editor, Proceedings of the
2001 ACL Workshop on Temporal and Spatial Infor-
mation Processing, pages 88?95, Toulouse, France.
9http://world.altavista.com/
A. Ittycheriah, L.V. Lita, N. Kambhatla, N. Nicolov,
S. Roukos, and M. Stys. 2003. Identifying and
Tracking Entity Mentions in a Maximum Entropy
Framework. In ACL, editor, Proceedings of the
NAACL Workshop WordNet and Other Lexical Re-
sources: Applications, Extensions and Customiza-
tions.
G. Katz and F. Arosio. 2001. The annotation of tem-
poral information in natural language sentences. In
ACL, editor, Proceedings of the 2001 ACL Work-
shop on Temporal and Spatial Information Process-
ing, pages 104?111, Toulouse, France.
A. Lavelli, B. Magnini, M. Negri, E. Pianta, M. Sper-
anza, and R. Sprugnoli. 2005. Italian Content An-
notation Bank (I-CAB): Temporal expressions (v.
1.0.): T-0505-12. Technical report, ITC-irst, Trento.
T. Moia. 2001. Telling apart temporal locating adver-
bials and time-denoting expressions. In ACL, editor,
Proceedings of the 2001 ACL Workshop on Tempo-
ral and Spatial Information Processing, Toulouse,
France.
M. Negri and L. Marseglia. 2004. Recognition and
normalization of time expressions: Itc-irst at TERN
2004. Technical report, ITC-irst, Trento.
E. Saquete, P. Mart??nez-Barco, and R. Mun?oz. 2004.
Evaluation of the automatic multilinguality for time
expression resolution. In DEXA Workshops, pages
25?30. IEEE Computer Society.
E. Saquete, R. Mun?oz, and P. Mart??nez-Barco. 2005.
Event ordering using terseo system. Data and
Knowledge Engineering Journal, page (To be pub-
lished).
E. Saquete. 2005. Temporal information Resolution
and its application to Temporal Question Answer-
ing. Phd, Departamento de Lenguages y Sistemas
Informa?ticos. Universidad de Alicante, June.
F. Schilder and C. Habel. 2001. From temporal expres-
sions to temporal information: Semantic tagging of
news messages. In ACL, editor, Proceedings of the
2001 ACL Workshop on Temporal and Spatial Infor-
mation Processing, pages 65?72, Toulouse, France.
A. Setzer and R. Gaizauskas. 2002. On the impor-
tance of annotating event-event temporal relations
in text. In LREC, editor, Proceedings of the LREC
Workshop on Temporal Annotation Standards, 2002,
pages 52?60, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria,Spain.
P. Vossen. 2000. EuroWordNet: Building a Multilin-
gual Database with WordNets in 8 European Lan-
guages. The ELRA Newsletter, 5(1):9?10.
G. Wilson, I. Mani, B. Sundheim, and L. Ferro. 2001.
A multilingual approach to annotating and extract-
ing temporal information. In ACL, editor, Pro-
ceedings of the 2001 ACL Workshop on Temporal
and Spatial Information Processing, pages 81?87,
Toulouse, France.
8
