  
A Study of Automatic Pitch Tracker Doubling/Halving ?Errors? 
 
Kathleen Murray 
Department of CIS 
Moore School Building 
200 South 33rd St. 
19104 Philadelphia, PA US  
kmurray@voicenet.com 
 
 
Abstract  
Manually verified pitch data were compared 
with output from a commonly used pitch-
tracking algorithm. The manual pitch data 
made statistically significantly better ?final 
rise? predictions than the automatic pitch 
data, in spite of great similarity between the 
two sets of measurements. Pitch Tracking 
doubling/halving errors are described.  
Introduction 
Automatically captured prosodic information is 
relevant to both automatic speech recognition 
and speech synthesis. Pitch information, though 
regarded as highly relevant, has not been 
scrutinized in detail as with respect to automatic 
pitch trackers. This study presents a comparison 
of hand-verified pitch measurements (?hand?) 
with measurements from a commonly used pitch 
tracking algorithm (?automatic?), Talkin (1995). 
For this paper pitch will be defined as the aurally 
perceived information that loosely correlates 
with the fundamental frequency of a section of a 
speech waveform. The organization of this paper 
is as follows: First, the corpus used is described 
and justified. The next section describes 
comparisons of the hand-corrected pitch 
measurements and the automatic pitch tracker 
output. Next, results are presented with respect 
to the detection of utterance-final rises and falls. 
Lastly, the future work section connects 
conclusions from this specific study to related 
work on pitch and perception, and describes 
discourse-related applications that could benefit 
from a study of this kind. 
1 Corpus Description 
The 1992 and the 1993 dialogs from the 
TRAINS corpus Heeman and Allen (1995) were 
developed to facilitate the study of collaborative 
dialogs. In these dialogs, one person guided a 
?user? through a railroad freight system 
transportation task, and a monitor recorded the 
speech without interruption. Trained 
phoneticians labeled a subset of this speech with 
ToBI information Beckman and Ayers 
1994/1997.  Around 26 minutes of speech from 
a subset of these dialogs were analysed with 
respect to pitch. "Wedw" software was used 
Bunnell et al (1992) by a linguistically trained 
annotator first in automatic mode. Hand 
consistency checks then examined glottal pulse 
locations in a wideband spectrogram. Wedw's 
wideband spectrogram displays an extremely 
darkened region where the glottis closes, 
approximating glottal pulse locations. Hess 
(1983) recommended use of a wideband 
spectrogram for manual verification of pitch 
tracks, but he conceded that wideband 
spectrograms do not provide sufficient 
resolution for the eye.  In addition to use of a 
wideband spectrogram, the annotator carefully 
regarded the shape of the signal waveform, to be 
sure that glottal pulse locations were labeled 
consistently with respect to local peaks in the 
actual speech waveform. These dialogues were 
chosen for future in-depth investigations of what 
intonation-based features could be integrated 
into an automated dialogue system for 
determining user intentions and generating 
appropriate system responses. 
2 Pitch Tracking Comparison 
One concern in automatic pitch tracking is how 
to handle occasional events where an octave 
halving appears in the speech signal, but is not  
readily perceived by a human listener. The 
algorithm in Talkin (1995) addresses this issue 
with special constraints on dynamic 
programming cleanup of the pitch tracker 
  
output. Figure 1 below illustrates difficulties in 
making comparisons between pitch trackers in 
terms of doubling errors. Figure 1 plots a 
manually annotated pitch track that ranges from 
75 Hz to 189 Hz, and an automatically generated 
pitch track that ranges from 74 Hz to 102 Hz, for 
the interval [1.37,1.98] of a 2.5 second 
utterance. The words of the utterance are ?and 
pick up three boxcars how long is that?. A final 
rise can be heard at the end of the utterance, 
indicating a user?s request for information from 
the system. The complete ToBI string associated 
with the utterance is ?H* L-L% L* H-H%?. 
 
The last voiced section of utt10 shows the 
speaker vacillating between one octave and 
another, but the last ToBI string associated with 
the utterance is ?H-H%?, meaning a high phrase 
accent followed by a high boundary tone. It 
would be surprising for the speaker to be 
speaking in the 90-100 Hz range reported by the 
pitch tracker, because the previous section of 
speech is actually an octave higher, in the 200-
235 Hz range. An octave pitch drop would not 
make sense in the context of a combination of 
high ToBI labels. The speaker is female. Initial 
comparisons are difficult because neither 
method precisely specifies the pitch information, 
so no pitch gold standard could be produced 
without significant manual verification of 
context-dependent doubling rules. When a 
section of speech appears to be halved in pitch, 
that halving could be a perceptually significant 
drop, or it could be a pitch tracker error. 
  
For the 320 utterances used in the evaluation 
(see Section 3), it was determined that roughly 
40,419 10 ms frames had occurred where both 
methods predicted a voiced frame. When the 
ratio was taken of X/Y, where X was the 
automatic measurement, and Y, the hand 
measurement, it was the case that 96% of the 
time, this ratio was between .8 and 1.2, meaning 
that the automatic measurement was 20% off the 
hand measurement for 96% of the relevant 
cases. The distance of 20% can be used as a goal 
for past comparisons of pitch tracker outputs 
with a ?gold standard?, although some studies 
have reported an allowance of 30 Hz Niemann 
et. al (1994). Using the 20% distance, these two 
methods of pitch look very similar. 
 
For determining halving amounts, one can 
consider the percentage of time that the ratio of 
the hand measurement to the automatic 
measurement was between 1.7 and 2.2.  For the 
roughly 40,000 10 ms voicing-coincident 10 ms 
frames, .5% of them could be counted as a 
halving by the automatic pitch tracker for the 
female speakers, and .4% of the male speech 
was halved in pitch. One speaker, ?JT?, female, 
comprised half of the female pitch 
measurements, and had a 1% pitch halving rate. 
One reason these proportions are so small is that 
the hand-verified data still has some halved data 
in it, as Figure 1 shows. For some 
measurements, pitch halvings are not ?errors? at 
all, because they can directly reflect the 
information in the speech signal. When speech 
from the speaker ?JT? of Figure 1 was correc ted 
for halving, 36% of the ratios between the hand-
verified and the automatic data were between 
1.7 and 2.2. 
3 Detection of ?Rise?/?Falls? 
This section reports the results of applying a 
simple classification rule with respect to the 
different pitch methods. The idea comes from 
Daly (1994). Often, the last label in a ToBI-
labeled utterance is a final boundary tone. For 
320 utterances, this was the case, and an 
association was made between the ?H%? (high) 
boundary tone and a ?Rise? and the ?L%? (low) 
boundary tone and a ?Fall?. When the author 
listened to these utterances, thirteen were ruled 
out as not contributing a readily perceived tone. 
This coarse classification is a first 
approximation towards a perceptually based 
evaluation of pitch trackers that focuses on a 
section of an utterance considered linguistically 
special Pierrehumbert and Hirschberg (1990). 
The last part of an utterance can signal a user?s 
intention, such as asking a question. 
 
For classifying final tones, firstly the average 
pitch value for the last voiced region was 
calculated, ?avgL?, and the average pitch value 
of the remaining voiced regions was calculated, 
avgR?. Next, the longest slope for the last voiced 
section was calculated, ?slopeL?. Where ?avg L? 
was greater than ?avgR?, or ?slope L? was 
positive, a final high tone was classified. Where 
?avgL? was less than ?avgR?, or ?slopeL? was 
negative, a final low tone was classified.  
  
 
This combination of slope calculations and 
simple comparisons were an improvement over 
the method used in Murray (2001). No other 
study of this magnitude (the hand labelings  
yielded roughly 100,000 data points) has been 
published that combines wideband spectrograms 
and signal shape to hand measure pitch tracks of 
conversational speech. Section 2 showed that for 
many cases, the outputs of the methods are 
similar. The hand-verified data could be used to 
closely examine contexts where a pitch tracker  
predicts a subharmonic of the perceived pitch. 
More sophisticated tone classification rules 
besides this preliminary one could be developed 
once the accuracy of pitch measurement on 
conversational speech has been improved.  
 
Table 1 below shows results of this simple 
classification with respect to hand-verified pitch 
measurements and automatic ones, and pvalues 
from a paired t-test. Overall, the hand verified 
measurements performed better in predicting 
rises and falls at a p<.001 level of significance.  
The preliminary classification rule used slightly 
favored female speech over male speech. 
4 Future and Related Work 
A further step would be to coordinate 
descriptions of pitch tracking errors with respect 
to categorizations of laryngealization, such as 
that of Batliner et al (1993). A pitch value that 
is in a ?subharmonic? or a ?diplophonic? 
laryngealization, (from M?SLI) may need to be 
doubled, and context-dependent doubling rules 
could make use of the M?SLI classification. 
Different kinds of final tone classification can be 
investigated, once the post-processing of pitch 
measurements has been better established. 
Murray (2001) used automatic doubling rules, 
and a different classification scheme, resulting in 
lower performance than this study.  
 
Shriberg (1999) mentions laryngealizations in 
the context of "cut-off" words, ie, those words 
that a speaker did not complete. In a corpus of 
human-computer dialogues on air travel 
planning (ATIS), cut-off words had a form of 
laryngealization corresponding to creaky voice 
usually on the last 20-50 ms of the word. Better 
recognition of glottal pulses may lead to 
improved recognition of cut-off words, which 
are difficult phenomena for an ASR system. 
Br?ndsted (1997) reported that for a specific 
dialect of Danish, the presence of a glottal 
consonant ?st?d? can cause a pitch tracker to 
incorrectly report a halved value. Further use of 
wideband spectrograms to facilitate conventions 
of locations of glottal pulses and their influence 
on perceived pitch could assist dialogue research 
for other languages that have glottalized 
consonants. Black and Campbell (1995) 
presented a model for generating intonation 
patterns based on high-level discourse features 
automatically extracted from dialogue speech. 
One particular discourse act label, the so-called 
"d-yu-Q" label, w as reported to rise up to 
significantly higher pitch values than other 
discourse act labels. Once pitch halvings and 
doublings are better understood, additional 
relationships between pitch changes and 
discourse acts might be discovered. Lastly, it 
would be useful to compare this data to outputs 
of other pitch trackers, such as that of Praat, Paul 
Boersma and David Weenink. (2001), or an 
updated version of ?EDWave? Bunnell  (2001). 
More sophisticated mathematical models would 
be interesting to use for the final tone 
classification, especially with respect to different 
kinds of pitch tracking algorithms.  
5 Conclusions 
A task-oriented conversational speech database 
was manually annotated for pitch, but work 
remains to make the database precise enough for 
intonation research. This work focussed on 
potential halving and doubling errors of pitch 
trackers, and on evaluation of pitch trackers with 
respect to a final boundary tone classification. 
Statistically significantly better classification 
results were achieved with manual verification 
of pitch data based on wideband spectrograms 
and speech waveform information. These results 
were achieved even though the hand 
measurements appeared to be very similar to the 
automatic measurements. Based on the very 
preliminary results of this study, the following 
two conclusions can be made at this time: one, 
that automatic pitch measurements still might 
not be as accurate as needed in order to make 
generalizations about intonation contours in 
conversational speech; and secondly, that the 
combination of a wideband spectrogram and 
signal shape is a useful starting point for 
  
creating large-scale hand-verified pitch tracks of 
conversational speech. 
Acknowledgements 
My thanks go to James Allen and Lucian 
Galescu for their support of the corpus 
annotations. This material is based upon work 
partially supported by the National  Science 
Foundation grant number IRI-9711009. Any 
opinions, findings, and conclusions or 
recommendations expressed in this material are 
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect 
the views of the National Science Foundation. 
References  
A. Batliner et. al. (1993) M?SLI: A Classification 
Scheme For Laryngealizations. In D. House and P. 
Touati, editors, Working Papers, Prosody 
Workshop, pp. 176-179, Sweden. 
Beckman, M.E. & Ayers Elam, G. (1994/1997) 
?Guide to ToBI Labelling ? Version 3.0?, 
electronic text and accompanying audio example 
files available at 
http://ling.ohiostate.edu/Phonetics/E_ToBI/etobi_h
omepage.html. 
Black, A. and Campbell, N. (1995) ?Predicting the 
intonation of discourse segments from examples in 
dialogue speech?, ESCA workshop on spoken 
dialogue systems, Denmark. 
Paul Boersma and David Weenink. (2001)  Praat 
Tool, Institute of Phonetics Sciences of the 
University of Amsterdam.  
Br?ndsted T. (1997) "Intonation Contours "distorted" 
by Tone Patterns of Stress Groups and Word 
Accent", Intonation: Theory, Models and 
Applications,  Athens (Athanasopoulos).  
Bunnell H. T., and Mohammed O. (1992) "EDWave - 
A PC-based Program for Interactive Graphical 
Display, Measurement and Editing of Speech and 
Other Signals." Software presented at the 66th 
Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of 
America. 
Bunnell  (2001) ?Wedw? pitch tracking software, 
http://www.asel.udel.edu/speech/Spch_proc/softwa
re.html. 
Daly N. (1994) ?Acoustic-Phonetic and Linguistic 
Analyses of Spontaneous Speech: Implications for 
Speech Understanding?, PhD thesis, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 
A. Hagen, S. Shattuck-Hufnagel and E. Noeth, 
(1999) "A Study on Glottalizations and their 
Automatic Detection".  ICPhS  Workshop on Non-
Modal Vocal-Fold Vibration an d Voice Quality 
Poster Session, San Francisco.  
 Heeman P.A. and J.F. Allen (1995) The Trains 
spoken dialog corpus. CD-ROM, Linguistics Data 
Consortium. 
Hess W. (1983) Pitch determination of speech signals 
: algorithms and devices. New York: Springer-
Verlag. 
Murray K. (2001)  A Corpus-Based Approach 
T owards Automatic Correction of Pitch Tracker 
Errors, Proceedings of the NAACL Workshop on 
Adaptation in Dialogue Systems, Pittsburgh, PA.  
N?th E. et. al. (2000) Verbmobil: The Use of Prosody 
in the Linguistic Components of a Speech 
Understanding System. TransSAP, 8(5):519-532. 
H. Niemann et. al. (1994). Pitch Determination 
Considering Laryngealization Effects in Spoken 
Dialogs , Proceedings of ICNN, Vol.  7: 4457-4461 
Orlando.  
Pierrehumbert, Janet, and Julia Hirschberg.  (1990)   
The meaning of intonational contours in discourse.  
In Philip R. Cohen, Jerry Morgan, and Martha E. 
Pollack (eds.), Intentions in Communicat ion.  
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Shriberg E. (1999). Phonetic Consequences of 
Speech Disfluency. Symposium on The Phonetics 
of Spontaneous Speech (S. Greenberg and P. 
Keating, organizers), Proc. International Congress 
of Phonetic Sciences, Vol. 1: 619-622, San 
Francisco. 
Talkin D. (1995) ?A Robust Algorithm for Pitch 
Tracking (RAPT)?, from Speech Coding and 
Synthesis, Kleijn, W.B., Paliwal, K.K. ed. 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Elsevier,  495-518. 
 
Table 1: Final Rise/Falls: %Correct,  pvalues 
 
Figure 1: Pitch Plot of Utt10/d93-20.1, X axis is 
time in seconds, Y axis is frequency in Hz, squares 
are automatic measurements, diamonds, hand 
measurements, time ranges from 1.34 ? 1.98 s 
Type (Total) Hand Automatic pvalue 
Male (258) 76 68 0.01 
Female (49) 82 69 0.06 
Overall (307) 77 68 0.001 
