Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics, pages 344?351,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
GLEU: Automatic Evaluation of Sentence-Level Fluency
Andrew Mutton? Mark Dras? Stephen Wan?,? Robert Dale?
?Centre for Language Technology ?Information and Communication Technologies
Macquarie University CSIRO
NSW 2109 Australia NSW 2109 Australia
madras@ics.mq.edu.au
Abstract
In evaluating the output of language tech-
nology applications?MT, natural language
generation, summarisation?automatic eval-
uation techniques generally conflate mea-
surement of faithfulness to source content
with fluency of the resulting text. In this
paper we develop an automatic evaluation
metric to estimate fluency alone, by examin-
ing the use of parser outputs as metrics, and
show that they correlate with human judge-
ments of generated text fluency. We then de-
velop a machine learner based on these, and
show that this performs better than the indi-
vidual parser metrics, approaching a lower
bound on human performance. We finally
look at different language models for gener-
ating sentences, and show that while individ-
ual parser metrics can be ?fooled? depending
on generation method, the machine learner
provides a consistent estimator of fluency.
1 Introduction
Intrinsic evaluation of the output of many language
technologies can be characterised as having at least
two aspects: how well the generated text reflects
the source data, whether it be text in another lan-
guage for machine translation (MT), a natural lan-
guage generation (NLG) input representation, a doc-
ument to be summarised, and so on; and how well it
conforms to normal human language usage. These
two aspects are often made explicit in approaches
to creating the text. For example, in statistical MT
the translation model and the language model are
treated separately, characterised as faithfulness and
fluency respectively (as in the treatment in Jurafsky
and Martin (2000)). Similarly, the ultrasummarisa-
tion model of Witbrock and Mittal (1999) consists
of a content model, modelling the probability that a
word in the source text will be in the summary, and
a language model.
Evaluation methods can be said to fall into two cate-
gories: a comparison to gold reference, or an appeal
to human judgements. Automatic evaluation meth-
ods carrying out a comparison to gold reference tend
to conflate the two aspects of faithfulness and flu-
ency in giving a goodness score for generated out-
put. BLEU (Papineni et al, 2002) is a canonical ex-
ample: in matching n-grams in a candidate transla-
tion text with those in a reference text, the metric
measures faithfulness by counting the matches, and
fluency by implicitly using the reference n-grams as
a language model. Often we are interested in know-
ing the quality of the two aspects separately; many
human judgement frameworks ask specifically for
separate judgements on elements of the task that cor-
respond to faithfulness and to fluency. In addition,
the need for reference texts for an evaluation metric
can be problematic, and intuitively seems unneces-
sary for characterising an aspect of text quality that
is not related to its content source but to the use of
language itself. It is a goal of this paper to provide
an automatic evaluation method for fluency alone,
without the use of a reference text.
One might consider using a metric based on lan-
guage model probabilities for sentences: in eval-
344
uating a language model on (already existing) test
data, a higher probability for a sentence (and lower
perplexity over a whole test corpus) indicates bet-
ter language modelling; perhaps a higher probability
might indicate a better sentence. However, here we
are looking at generated sentences, which have been
generated using their own language model, rather
than human-authored sentences already existing in
a test corpus; and so it is not obvious what language
model would be an objective assessment of sentence
naturalness. In the case of evaluating a single sys-
tem, using the language model that generated the
sentence will only confirm that the sentence does
fit the language model; in situations such as com-
paring two systems which each generate text using
a different language model, it is not obvious that
there is a principled way of deciding on a fair lan-
guage model. Quite a different idea was suggested
in Wan et al (2005), of using the grammatical judge-
ment of a parser to assess fluency, giving a measure
independent of the language model used to gener-
ate the text. The idea is that, assuming the parser
has been trained on an appropriate corpus, the poor
performance of the parser on one sentence relative
to another might be an indicator of some degree of
ungrammaticality and possibly disfluency. In that
work, however, correlation with human judgements
was left uninvestigated.
The goal of this paper is to take this idea and de-
velop it. In Section 2 we look at some related work
on metrics, in particular for NLG. In Section 3, we
verify whether parser outputs can be used as esti-
mators of generated sentence fluency by correlating
them with human judgements. In Section 4, we pro-
pose an SVM-based metric using parser outputs as
features, and compare its correlation against human
judgements with that of the individual parsers. In
Section 5, we investigate the effects on the various
metrics from different types of language model for
the generated text. Then in Section 6 we conclude.
2 Related Work
In terms of human evaluation, there is no uniform
view on what constitutes the notion of fluency, or its
relationship to grammaticality or similar concepts.
We mention a few examples here to illustrate the
range of usage. In MT, the 2005 NIST MT Evalu-
ation Plan uses guidelines1 for judges to assess ?ad-
equacy? and ?fluency? on 5 point scales, where they
are asked to provide intuitive reactions rather than
pondering their decisions; for fluency, the scale de-
scriptions are fairly vague (5: flawless English; 4:
good English; 3: non-native English; 2: disfluent
English; 1: incomprehensible) and instructions are
short, with some examples provided in appendices.
Zajic et al (2002) use similar scales for summari-
sation. By contrast, Pan and Shaw (2004), for their
NLG system SEGUE tied the notion of fluency more
tightly to grammaticality, giving two human evalu-
ators three grade options: good, minor grammatical
error, major grammatical/pragmatic error. As a fur-
ther contrast, the analysis of Coch (1996) was very
comprehensive and fine-grained, in a comparison of
three text-production techniques: he used 14 human
judges, each judging 60 letters (20 per generation
system), and required them to assess the letters for
correct spelling, good grammar, rhythm and flow,
appropriateness of tone, and several other specific
characteristics of good text.
In terms of automatic evaluation, we are not aware
of any technique that measures only fluency or sim-
ilar characteristics, ignoring content, apart from that
of Wan et al (2005). Even in NLG, where, given the
variability of the input representations (and hence
difficulty in verifying faithfulness), it might be ex-
pected that such measures would be available, the
available metrics still conflate content and form.
For example, the metrics proposed in Bangalore et
al. (2000), such as Simple Accuracy and Generation
Accuracy, measure changes with respect to a refer-
ence string based on the idea of string-edit distance.
Similarly, BLEU has been used in NLG, for example
by Langkilde-Geary (2002).
3 Parsers as Evaluators
There are three parts to verifying the usefulness of
parsers as evaluators: choosing the parsers and the
metrics derived from them; generating some texts
for human and parser evaluation; and, the key part,
getting human judgements on these texts and corre-
lating them with parser metrics.
1http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/TIDES/
Translation/TranAssessSpec.pdf
345
3.1 The Parsers
In testing the idea of using parsers to judge fluency,
we use three parsers, from which we derive four
parser metrics, to investigate the general applicabil-
ity of the idea. Those chosen were the Connexor
parser,2 the Collins parser (Collins, 1999), and the
Link Grammar parser (Grinberg et al, 1995). Each
produces output that can be taken as representing
degree of ungrammaticality, although this output is
quite different for each.
Connexor is a commercially available dependency
parser that returns head?dependant relations as well
as stemming information, part of speech, and so on.
In the case of an ungrammatical sentence, Connexor
returns tree fragments, where these fragments are
defined by transitive head?dependant relations: for
example, for the sentence Everybody likes big cakes
do it returns fragments for Everybody likes big cakes
and for do. We expect that the number of fragments
should correlate inversely with the quality of a sen-
tence. For a metric, we normalise this number by
the largest number of fragments for a given data set.
(Normalisation matters most for the machine learner
in Section 4.)
The Collins parser is a statistical chart parser that
aims to maximise the probability of a parse using dy-
namic programming. The parse tree produced is an-
notated with log probabilities, including one for the
whole tree. In the case of ungrammatical sentences,
the parser will assign a low probability to any parse,
including the most likely one. We expect that the
log probability (becoming more negative as the sen-
tence is less likely) should correlate positively with
the quality of a sentence. For a metric, we normalise
this by the most negative value for a given data set.
Like Connexor, the Link Grammar parser returns in-
formation about word relationships, forming links,
with the proviso that links cannot cross and that in
a grammatical sentence all links are indirectly con-
nected. For an ungrammatical sentence, the parser
will delete words until it can produce a parse; the
number it deletes is called the ?null count?. We ex-
pect that this should correlate inversely with sen-
tence quality. For a metric, we normalise this by
the sentence length. In addition, the parser produces
2http://www.connexor.com
another variable possibly of interest. In generating
a parse, the parser produces many candidates and
rules some out by a posteriori constraints on valid
parses. In its output the parser returns the number of
invalid parses. For an ungrammatical sentence, this
number may be higher; however, there may also be
more parses. For a metric, we normalise this by the
total number of parses found for the sentence. There
is no strong intuition about the direction of correla-
tion here, but we investigate it in any case.
3.2 Text Generation Method
To test whether these parsers are able to discriminate
sentence-length texts of varying degrees of fluency,
we need first to generate texts that we expect will be
discriminable in fluency quality ranging from good
to very poor. Below we describe our method for gen-
erating text, and then our preliminary check on the
discriminability of the data before giving them to hu-
man judges.
Our approach to generating ?sentences? of a fixed
length is to take word sequences of different lengths
from a corpus and glue them together probabilisti-
cally: the intuition is that a few longer sequences
glued together will be more fluent than many shorter
sequences. More precisely, to generate a sentence of
length n, we take sequences of length l (such that l
divides n), with sequence i of the form wi,1 . . . wi,l,
where wi, is a word or punctuation mark. We start
by selecting sequence 1, first by randomly choos-
ing its first word according to the unigram probabil-
ity P (w1,1), and then the sequence uniformly ran-
domly over all sequences of length l starting with
w1,1; we select subsequent sequences j (2 ? j ?
n/l) randomly according to the bigram probability
P (wj,1 |wj?1,l). Taking as our corpus the Reuters
corpus,3 for length n = 24, we generate sentences
for sequence sizes l = 1, 2, 4, 8, 24 as in Figure 1.
So, for instance, the sequence-size 8 example was
constructed by stringing together the three consecu-
tive sequences of length 8 (There . . . to; be . . . have;
to . . . .) taken from the corpus.
These examples, and others generated, appear to
be of variable quality in accordance with our intu-
ition. However, to confirm this prior to testing them
3http://trec.nist.gov/data/reuters/
reuters.html
346
Extracted (Sequence-size 24)
Ginebra face Formula Shell in a sudden-death playoff on Sun-
day to decide who will face Alaska in a best-of-seven series for
the title.
Sequence-size 8
There is some thinking in the government to be nearly as dra-
matic as some people have to be slaughtered to eradicate the
epidemic.
Sequence-size 4
Most of Banharn?s move comes after it can still be averted the
crash if it should again become a police statement said.
Sequence-size 2
Massey said in line with losses, Nordbanken is well-placed to
benefit abuse was loaded with Czech prime minister Andris
Shkele, said.
Sequence-size 1
The war we?re here in a spokesman Jeff Sluman 86 percent jump
that Spain to what was booked, express also said.
Figure 1: Sample sentences from the first trial
Description Correlation
Small 0.10 to 0.29
Medium 0.30 to 0.49
Large 0.50 to 1.00
Table 1: Correlation coefficient interpretation
out for discriminability in a human trial, we wanted
see whether they are discriminable by some method
other than our own judgement. We used the parsers
described in Section 3.1, in the hope of finding a
non-zero correlation between the parser outputs and
the sequence lengths.
Regarding the interpretation of the absolute value of
(Pearson?s) correlation coefficients, both here and in
the rest of the paper, we adopt Cohen?s scale (Co-
hen, 1988) for use in human judgements, given in
Table 1; we use this as most of this work is to do with
human judgements of fluency. For data, we gener-
ated 1000 sentences of length 24 for each sequence
length l = 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 24, giving 7000 sentences
in total. The correlations with the four parser out-
puts are as in Table 2, with the medium correlations
for Collins and Link Grammar (nulled tokens) indi-
cating that the sentences are indeed discriminable to
some extent, and hence the approach is likely to be
useful for generating sentences for human trials.
3.3 Human Judgements
The next step is then to obtain a set of human judge-
ments for this data. Human judges can only be ex-
pected to judge a reasonably sized amount of data,
Metric Corr.
Collins Parser 0.3101
Connexor -0.2332
Link Grammar Nulled Tokens -0.3204
Link Grammar Invalid Parses 0.1776
GLEU 0.4144
Table 2: Parser vs sequence size for original data set
so we first reduced the set of sequence sizes to be
judged. To do this we determined for the 7000
generated sentences the scores according to the (ar-
bitrarily chosen) Collins parser, and calculated the
means for each sequence size and the 95% confi-
dence intervals around these means. We then chose
a subset of sequence sizes such that the confidence
intervals did not overlap: 1, 2, 4, 8, 24; the idea was
that this would be likely to give maximally discrim-
inable sentences. For each of these sequences sizes,
we chose randomly 10 sentences from the initial set,
giving a set for human judgement of size 50.
The judges consisted of twenty volunteers, all native
English speakers without explicit linguistic training.
We gave them general guidelines about what consti-
tuted fluency, mentioning that they should consider
grammaticality but deliberately not giving detailed
instructions on the manner for doing this, as we were
interested in the level of agreement of intuitive un-
derstanding of fluency. We instructed them also that
they should evaluate the sentence without consider-
ing its content, using Colourless green ideas sleep
furiously as an example of a nonsensical but per-
fectly fluent sentence. The judges were then pre-
sented with the 50 sentences in random order, and
asked to score the sentences according to their own
scale, as in magnitude estimation (Bard et al, 1996);
these scores were then normalised in the range [0,1].
Some judges noted that the task was difficult be-
cause of its subjectivity. Notwithstanding this sub-
jectivity and variation in their approach to the task,
the pairwise correlations between judges were high,
as indicated by the maximum, minimum and mean
values in Table 3, indicating that our assumption
that humans had an intuitive notion of fluency
and needed only minimal instruction was justified.
Looking at mean scores for each sequence size,
judges generally also ranked sentences by sequence
size; see Figure 2. Comparing human judgement
347
Statistic Corr.
Maximum correlation 0.8749
Minimum correlation 0.4710
Mean correlation 0.7040
Standard deviation 0.0813
Table 3: Data on correlation between humans
Figure 2: Mean scores for human judges
correlations against sequence size with the same cor-
relations for the parser metrics (as for Table 2, but on
the human trial data) gives Table 4, indicating that
humans can also discriminate the different generated
sentence types, in fact (not surprisingly) better than
the automatic metrics.
Now, having both human judgement scores of some
reliability for sentences, and scoring metrics from
three parsers, we give correlations in Table 5. Given
Cohen?s interpretation, the Collins and Link Gram-
mar (nulled tokens) metrics show moderate correla-
tion, the Connexor metric almost so; the Link Gram-
mar (invalid parses) metric correlation is by far the
weakest. The consistency and magnitude of the first
three parser metrics, however, lends support to the
idea of Wan et al (2005) to use something like these
as indicators of generated sentence fluency. The aim
of the next section is to build a better predictor than
the individual parser metrics alone.
Metric Corr.
Humans 0.6529
Collins Parser 0.4057
Connexor -0.3804
Link Grammar Nulled Tokens -0.3310
Link Grammar Invalid Parses 0.1619
GLEU 0.4606
Table 4: Correlation with sequence size for human
trial data set
Metric Corr.
Collins Parser 0.3057
Connexor -0.3445
Link-Grammar Nulled Tokens -0.2939
Link Grammar Invalid Parses 0.1854
GLEU 0.4014
Table 5: Correlation between metrics and human
evaluators
4 An SVM-Based Metric
In MT, one problem with most metrics like BLEU
is that they are intended to apply only to document-
length texts, and any application to individual sen-
tences is inaccurate and correlates poorly with
human judgements. A neat solution to poor
sentence-level evaluation proposed by Kulesza and
Shieber (2004) is to use a Support Vector Machine,
using features such as word error rate, to estimate
sentence-level translation quality. The two main in-
sights in applying SVMs here are, first, noting that
human translations are generally good and machine
translations poor, that binary training data can be
created by taking the human translations as posi-
tive training instances and machine translations as
negative ones; and second, that a non-binary metric
of translation goodness can be derived by the dis-
tance from a test instance to the support vectors. In
an empirical evaluation, Kulesza and Shieber found
that their SVM gave a correlation of 0.37, which
was an improvement of around half the gap between
the BLEU correlations with the human judgements
(0.25) and the lowest pairwise human inter-judge
correlation (0.46) (Turian et al, 2003).
We take a similar approach here, using as features
the four parser metrics described in Section 3. We
trained an SVM,4 taking as positive training data
the 1000 instances of sentences of sequence length
24 (i.e. sentences extracted from the corpus) and
as negative training data the 1000 sentences of se-
quence length 1. We call this learner GLEU.5
As a check on the ability of the GLEU SVM to dis-
tinguish these ?positive? sentences from ?negative?
ones, we evaluated its classification accuracy on a
(new) test set of size 300, split evenly between sen-
tences of sequence length 24 and sequence length 1.
4We used the package SVM-light (Joachims, 1999).
5For GrammaticaLity Evaluation Utility.
348
This gave 81%, against a random baseline of 50%,
indicating that the SVM can classify satisfactorily.
We now move from looking at classification accu-
racy to the main purpose of the SVM, using distance
from support vector as a metric. Results are given
for correlation of GLEU against sequence sizes for
all data (Table 2) and for the human trial data set
(Table 4); and also for correlation of GLEU against
the human judges? scores (Table 5). This last indi-
cates that GLEU correlates better with human judge-
ments than any of the parsers individually, and is
well within the ?moderate? range for correlation in-
terpretation. In particular, for the GLEU?human cor-
relation, the score of 0.4014 is approaching the min-
imum pairwise human correlation of 0.4710.
5 Different Text Generation Methods
The method used to generate text in Section 3.2 is
a variation of the standard n-gram language model.
A question that arises is: Are any of the metrics de-
fined above strongly influenced by the type of lan-
guage model used to generate the text? It may be the
case, for example, that a parser implementation uses
its own language model that predisposes it to favour
a similar model in the text generation process. This
is a phenomenon seen in MT, where BLEU seems to
favour text that has been produced using a similar
statistical n-gram language model over other sym-
bolic models (Callison-Burch et al, 2006).
Our previous approach used only sequences of
words concatenated together. To define some new
methods for generating text, we introduced varying
amounts of structure into the generation process.
5.1 Structural Generation Methods
PoStag In the first of these, we constructed a
rough approximation of typical sentence grammar
structure by taking bigrams over part-of-speech
tags.6 Then, given a string of PoS tags of length
n, t1 . . . tn, we start by assigning the probabilities
for the word in position 1, w1, according to the con-
ditional probability P (w1 | t1). Then, for position j
(2 ? j ? n), we assign to candidate words the value
P (wj | tj)?P (wj |wj?1) to score word sequences.
6We used the supertagger of Bangalore and Joshi (1999).
So, for example, we might generate the PoS tag tem-
plate Det NN Adj Adv, take all the words corre-
sponding to each of these parts of speech, and com-
bine bigram word sequence probability with the con-
ditional probability of words with respect to these
parts of speech. We then use a Viterbi-style algo-
rithm to find the most likely word sequence.
In this model we violate the Markov assumption of
independence in much the same way as Witbrock
and Mittal (1999) in their combination of content
and language model probabilities, by backtracking
at every state in order to discourage repeated words
and avoid loops.
Supertag This is a variant of the approach above,
but using supertags (Bangalore and Joshi, 1999) in-
stead of PoS tags. The idea is that the supertags
might give a more fine-grained definition of struc-
ture, using partial trees rather than parts of speech.
CFG We extracted a CFG from the ?10% of the
Penn Treebank found in the NLTK-lite corpora.7
This CFG was then augmented with productions de-
rived from the PoS-tagged data used above. We then
generated a template of length n pre-terminal cate-
gories using this CFG. To avoid loops we biased the
selection towards terminals over non-terminals.
5.2 Human Judgements
We generated sentences according to a mix of the
initial method of Section 3.2, for calibration, and
the new methods above. We again used a sentence
length of 24, and sequence lengths for the initial
method of l = 1, 8, 24. A sample of sentences gen-
erated for each of these six types is in Figure 3.
For our data, we generated 1000 sentences per gen-
eration method, giving a corpus of 6000 sentences.
For the human judgements we also again took 10
sentences per generation method, giving 60 sen-
tences in total. The same judges were given the same
instructions as previously.
Before correlating the human judges? scores and
the parser outputs, it is interesting to look at how
each parser treats the sentence generation methods,
and how this compares with human ratings (Ta-
ble 6). In particular, note that the Collins parser rates
the PoStag- and Supertag-generated sentences more
7http://nltk.sourceforge.net
349
Extracted (Sequence-size 24)
After a near three-hour meeting and last-minute talks with Pres-
ident Lennart Meri, the Reform Party council voted overwhelm-
ingly to leave the government.
Sequence-size 8
If Denmark is closely linked to the Euro Disney reported a net
profit of 85 million note: the figures were rounded off.
Sequence-size 1
Israelis there would seek approval for all-party peace now com-
plain that this year, which shows demand following year and 56
billion pounds.
POS-tag, Viterbi-mapped
He said earlier the 9 years and holding company?s government,
including 69.62 points as a number of last year but market.
Supertag, Viterbi-mapped
That 97 saying he said in its shares of the market 74.53 percent,
adding to allow foreign exchange: I think people.
Context-Free Grammar
The production moderated Chernomyrdin which leveled gov-
ernment back near own 52 over every a current at from the said
by later the other.
Figure 3: Sample sentences from the second trial
sent. type s-24 s-8 s-1 PoS sup. CFG
Collins 0.52 0.48 0.41 0.60 0.57 0.36
Connexor 0.12 0.16 0.24 0.26 0.25 0.43
LG (null) 0.02 0.06 0.10 0.09 0.11 0.18
LG (invalid) 0.78 0.67 0.56 0.62 0.66 0.53
GLEU 1.07 0.32 -0.96 0.28 -0.06 -2.48
Human 0.93 0.67 0.44 0.39 0.44 0.31
Table 6: Mean normalised scores per sentence type
highly even than real sentences (in bold). These
are the two methods that use the Viterbi-style algo-
rithm, suggesting that this probability maximisation
has fooled the Collins parser. The pairwise correla-
tion between judges was around the same on average
as in Section 3.3, but with wider variation (Table 7).
The main results, determining the correlation of the
various parser metrics plus GLEU against the new
data, are in Table 8. This confirms the very vari-
able performance of the Collins parser, which has
dropped significantly. GLEU performs quite consis-
tently here, this time a little behind the Link Gram-
mar (nulled tokens) result, but still with a better
correlation with human judgement than at least two
Statistic Corr.
Maximum correlation 0.9048
Minimum correlation 0.3318
Mean correlation 0.7250
Standard deviation 0.0980
Table 7: Data on correlation between humans
Metric Corr.
Collins Parser 0.1898
Connexor -0.3632
Link-Grammar Nulled Tokens -0.4803
Link Grammar Invalid Parses 0.1774
GLEU 0.4738
Table 8: Correlation between parsers and human
evaluators on new human trial data
Metric Corr.
Collins Parser 0.2313
Connexor -0.2042
Link-Grammar Nulled Tokens -0.1289
Link Grammar Invalid Parses -0.0084
GLEU 0.4312
Table 9: Correlation between parsers and human
evaluators on all human trial data
judges with each other. (Note also that the GLEU
SVM was not retrained on the new sentence types.)
Looking at all the data together, however, is where
GLEU particularly displays its consistency. Aggre-
gating the old human trial data (Section 3.3) and the
new data, and determining correlations against the
metrics, we get the data in Table 9. Again the SVM?s
performance is consistent, but is now almost twice
as high as its nearest alternative, Collins.
5.3 Discussion
In general, there is at least one parser that correlates
quite well with the human judges for each sentence
type. With well-structured sentences, the probabilis-
tic Collins parser performs best; on sentences that
are generated by a poor probabilistic model lead-
ing to poor structure, Link Grammar (nulled tokens)
performs best. This supports the use of a machine
learner taking as features outputs from several parser
types; empirically this is confirmed by the large ad-
vantage GLEU has on overall data (Table 9).
The generated text itself from the Viterbi-based gen-
erators as implemented here is quite disappoint-
ing, given an expectation that introducing structure
would make sentences more natural and hence lead
to a range of sentence qualities. In hindsight, this
is not so surprising; in generating the structure tem-
plate, only sequences (over tags) of size 1 were used,
which is perhaps why the human judges deemed
them fairly close to sentences generated by the origi-
350
nal method using sequence size 1, the poorest of that
initial data set.
6 Conclusion
In this paper we have investigated a new approach to
evaluating the fluency of individual generated sen-
tences. The notion of what constitutes fluency is
an imprecise one, but trials with human judges have
shown that even if it cannot be exactly defined, or
even articulated by the judges, there is a high level
of agreement about what is fluent and what is not.
Given this data, metrics derived from parser out-
puts have been found useful for measuring fluency,
correlating up to moderately well with these human
judgements. A better approach is to combine these
in a machine learner, as in our SVM GLEU, which
outperforms individual parser metrics. Interestingly,
we have found that the parser metrics can be fooled
by the method of sentence generation; GLEU, how-
ever, gives a consistent estimate of fluency regard-
less of generation type; and, across all types of gen-
erated sentences examined in this paper, is superior
to individual parser metrics by a large margin.
This all suggests that the approach has promise, but
it needs to be developed further for pratical use. The
SVM presented in this paper has only four features;
more features, and in particular a wider range of
parsers, should raise correlations. In terms of the
data, we looked only at sentences generated with
several parameters fixed, such as sentence length,
due to our limited pool of judges. In future we would
like to examine the space of sentence types more
fully. In particular, we will look at predicting the flu-
ency of near-human quality sentences. More gener-
ally, we would like to look also at how the approach
of this paper would relate to a perplexity-based met-
ric; how it compares against BLEU or similar mea-
sures as a predictor of fluency in a context where ref-
erence sentences are available; and whether GLEU
might be useful in applications such as reranking of
candidate sentences in MT.
Acknowledgements
We thank Ben Hutchinson and Mirella Lapata for discussions,
and Srinivas Bangalore for the TAG supertagger. The sec-
ond author acknowledges the support of ARC Discovery Grant
DP0558852.
References
Srinivas Bangalore and Aravind Joshi. 1999. Supertagging:
An approach to almost parsing. Computational Linguistics,
25(2):237?265.
Srinivas Bangalore, Owen Rambow, and Steve Whittaker.
2000. Evaluation metrics for generation. In Proceedings of the
First International Natural Language Generation Conference
(INLG2000), Mitzpe Ramon, Israel.
E. Bard, D. Robertson, and A. Sorace. 1996. Magnitude esti-
mation and linguistic acceptability. Language, 72(1):32?68.
Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne, and Philipp Koehn.
2006. Re-evaluating the Role of Bleu in Machine Translation
Research. In Proceedings of EACL, pages 249?256.
Jose? Coch. 1996. Evaluating and comparing three text-
production strategies. In Proceedings of the 16th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING?96), pages
249?254.
J. Cohen. 1988. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral
sciences. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, US.
Michael Collins. 1999. Head-Driven Statistical Models for
Natural Language Parsing. Ph.D. thesis, University of Penn-
sylvania.
Dennis Grinberg, John Lafferty, and Daniel Sleator. 1995. A
robus parsing algorithm for link grammars. In Proceedings of
the Fourth International Workshop on Parsing Technologies.
Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Making Large-Scale SVM Learning
Practical. MIT Press.
Daniel Jurafsky and James Martin. 2000. Speech and Lan-
guage Processing: An Introduction to Natural Languge Pro-
cessing, Computational Linguistics, and Speech Recognition.
Prentice-Hall.
Alex Kulesza and Stuart Shieber. 2004. A learning approach to
improving sentence-level MT evaluation. In Proceedings of the
10th International Conference on Theoretical and Methodolog-
ical Issues in Machine Translation, Baltimore, MD, US.
Irene Langkilde-Geary. 2002. An empirical verification of cov-
erage and correctness for a general-purpose sentence generator.
In Proceedings of the International Natural Language Genera-
tion Conference (INLG) 2002, pages 17?24.
Shimei Pan and James Shaw. 2004. Segue: A hybrid case-
based surface natural language generator. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Natural Language Generation
(INLG) 2004, pages 130?140.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing
Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a Method for Automatic Evaluation of Ma-
chine Translation. Technical Report RC22176, IBM.
Joseph Turian, Luke Shen, and I. Dan Melamed. 2003. Evalua-
tion of Machine Translation and its evaluation. In Proceedings
of MT Summit IX, pages 23?28.
Stephen Wan, Robert Dale, Mark Dras, and Ce?cile Paris. 2005.
Searching for grammaticality: Propagating dependencies in the
Viterbi algorithm. In Proceedings of the 10th European Natural
Language Processing Wworkshop, Aberdeen, UK.
Michael Witbrock and Vibhu Mittal. 1999. Ultra-
summarization: A statistical approach to generating highly con-
densed non-executive summaries. In Proceedings of the 22nd
International Conference on Research and Development in In-
formation Retrieval (SIGIR?99).
David Zajic, Bonnie Dorr, and Richard Schwartz. 2002. Au-
tomatic headline generation for newspaper stories. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL-2002 Workshop on Text Summarization
(DUC2002), pages 78?85.
351
