Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Building Educational Applications Using NLP,
pages 29?36, Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005
Automatic Essay Grading with Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis
Tuomo Kakkonen, Niko Myller, Jari Timonen, and Erkki Sutinen
Department of Computer Science, University of Joensuu
P.O. Box 111, FI-80101 Joensuu, FINLAND
firstname.lastname@cs.joensuu.fi
Abstract
Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis
(PLSA) is an information retrieval tech-
nique proposed to improve the problems
found in Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA).
We have applied both LSA and PLSA in
our system for grading essays written in
Finnish, called Automatic Essay Assessor
(AEA). We report the results comparing
PLSA and LSA with three essay sets from
various subjects. The methods were found
to be almost equal in the accuracy mea-
sured by Spearman correlation between
the grades given by the system and a hu-
man. Furthermore, we propose methods
for improving the usage of PLSA in essay
grading.
1 Introduction
The main motivations behind developing automated
essay assessment systems are to decrease the time in
which students get feedback for their writings, and
to reduce the costs of grading. The assumption in
most of the systems is that the grades given by the
human assessors describe the true quality of an es-
say. Thus, the aim of the systems is to ?simulate?
the grading process of a human grader and a sys-
tem is usable only if it is able to perform the grad-
ing as accurately as human raters. An automated as-
sessment system is not affected by errors caused by
lack of consistency, fatigue or bias, thus it can help
achieving better accuracy and objectivity of assess-
ment (Page and Petersen, 1995).
There has been research on automatic essay grad-
ing since the 1960s. The earliest systems, such as
PEG (Page and Petersen, 1995), based their grad-
ing on the surface information from the essay. For
example, the number of words and commas were
counted in order to determine the quality of the es-
says (Page, 1966). Although these kinds of sys-
tems performed considerably well, they also re-
ceived heavy criticism (Page and Petersen, 1995).
Some researchers consider the use of natural lan-
guage as a feature for human intelligence (Hearst
et al, 2000) and writing as a method to express
the intelligence. Based on that assumption, tak-
ing the surface information into account and ignor-
ing the meanings of the content is insufficient. Re-
cent systems and studies, such as e-rater (Burstein,
2003) and approaches based on LSA (Landauer et
al., 1998), have focused on developing the methods
which determine the quality of the essays with more
analytic measures such as syntactic and semantic
structure of the essays. At the same time in the
1990s, the progress of natural language processing
and information retrieval techniques have given the
opportunity to take also the meanings into account.
LSA has produced promising results in content
analysis of essays (Landauer et al, 1997; Foltz et
al., 1999b). Intelligent Essay Assessor (Foltz et
al., 1999b) and Select-a-Kibitzer (Wiemer-Hastings
and Graesser, 2000) apply LSA for assessing essays
written in English. In Apex (Lemaire and Dessus,
2001), LSA is applied to essays written in French. In
addition to the essay assessment, LSA is applied to
other educational applications. An intelligent tutor-
ing system for providing help for students (Wiemer-
29
Hastings et al, 1999) and Summary Street (Stein-
hart, 2000), which is a system for assessing sum-
maries, are some examples of other applications of
LSA. To our knowledge, there is no system utilizing
PLSA (Hofmann, 2001) for automated essay assess-
ment or related tasks.
We have developed an essay grading system, Au-
tomatic Essay Assessor (AEA), to be used to ana-
lyze essay answers written in Finnish, although the
system is designed in a way that it is not limited to
only one language. It applies both course materials,
such as passages from lecture notes and course text-
books covering the assignment-specific knowledge,
and essays graded by humans to build the model for
assessment. In this study, we employ both LSA and
PLSA methods to determine the similarities between
the essays and the comparison materials in order to
determine the grades. We compare the accuracy of
these methods by using the Spearman correlation be-
tween computer and human assigned grades.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 ex-
plains the architecture of AEA and the used grading
methods. The experiment and results are discussed
in Section 3. Conclusions and future work based on
the experiment are presented in Section 4.
2 AEA System
We have developed a system for automated assess-
ment of essays (Kakkonen et al, 2004; Kakkonen
and Sutinen, 2004). In this section, we explain the
basic architecture of the system and describe the
methods used to analyze essays.
2.1 Architecture of AEA
There are two approaches commonly used in the es-
say grading systems to determine the grade for the
essay:
1. The essay to be graded is compared to the
human-graded essays and the grade is based on
the most similar essays? grades; or
2. The essay to be graded is compared to the essay
topic related materials (e.g. textbook or model
essays) and the grade is given based on the sim-
ilarity to these materials.
In our system, AEA (Kakkonen and Sutinen, 2004),
we have combined these two approaches. The rel-
evant parts of the learning materials, such as chap-
ters of a textbook, are used to train the system with
assignment-specific knowledge. The approaches
based on the comparison between the essays to be
graded and the textbook have been introduced in
(Landauer et al, 1997; Foltz et al, 1999a; Lemaire
and Dessus, 2001; Hearst et al, 2000), but have been
usually found less accurate than the methods based
on comparison to prescored essays. Our method
attempts to overcome this by combining the use
of course content and prescored essays. The es-
says to be graded are not directly compared to the
prescored essays with for instance k-nearest neigh-
bors method, but prescored essays are used to deter-
mine the similarity threshold values for grade cat-
egories as discussed below. Prescored essays can
also be used to determine the optimal dimension for
the reduced matrix in LSA as discussed in Kakko-
nen et al (2005).
Figure 1: The grading process of AEA.
Figure 1 illustrates the grading process of our sys-
tem. The texts to be analyzed are added into word-
by-context matrix (WCM), representing the number
of occurrences of each unique word in each of the
contexts (e.g. documents, paragraphs or sentences).
In WCM M , cell Mij contains the count of the word
i occurrences in the context j. As the first step in an-
alyzing the essays and course materials, the lemma
of each word form occurring in the texts must be
found. We have so far applied AEA only to essays
written in Finnish. Finnish is morphologically more
complex than English, and word forms are formed
by adding suffixes into base forms. Because of that,
30
base forms have to be used instead of inflectional
forms when building the WCM, especially if a rel-
atively small corpus is utilized. Furthermore, sev-
eral words can become synonyms when suffixes are
added to them, thus making the word sense disam-
biguation necessary. Hence, instead of just stripping
suffixes, we apply a more sophisticated method,
a morphological parser and disambiguator, namely
Constraint Grammar parser for Finnish (FINCG) to
produce the lemmas for each word (Lingsoft, 2005).
In addition, the most commonly occurring words
(stopwords) are not included in the matrix, and only
the words that appear in at least two contexts are
added into the WCM (Landauer et al, 1998). We
also apply entropy-based term weighting in order to
give higher values to words that are more important
for the content and lower values to words with less
importance.
First, the comparison materials based on the rel-
evant textbook passages or other course materials
are modified into machine readable form with the
method described in the previous paragraph. The
vector for each context in the comparison materials
is marked with Yi. This WCM is used to create the
model with LSA, PLSA or another information re-
trieval method. To compare the similarity of an es-
say to the course materials, a query vector Xj of the
same form as the vectors in the WCM is constructed.
The query vector Xj representing an essay is added
or folded in into the model build with WCM with the
method specific way discussed later. This folded-
in query X?j is then compared to the model of each
text passage Y?i in the comparison material by using a
similarity measure to determine the similarity value.
We have used the cosine of the angle between (X?j ,
Y?i), to measure the similarity of two documents. The
similarity score for an essay is calculated as the sum
of the similarities between the essay and each of the
textbook passages.
The document vectors of manually graded es-
says are compared to the textbook passages, in
order to determine the similarity scores between
the essays and the course materials. Based on
these measures, threshold values for the grade cat-
egories are defined as follows: the grade categories,
g1, g2, . . . , gC , are associated with similarity value
limits, l1, l2, . . . , lC+1, where C is the number of
grades, and lC+1 = ? and normally l1 = 0 or
??. Other category limits li, 2 ? i ? C, are de-
fined as weighted averages of the similarity scores
for essays belonging to grade categories gi and gi?1.
Other kinds of formulas to define the grade category
limits can be also used.
The grade for each essay to be graded is then de-
termined by calculating the similarity score between
the essay and the textbook passages and comparing
the similarity score to the threshold values defined in
the previous phase. The similarity score Si of an es-
say di is matched to the grade categories according
to their limits in order to determine the correct grade
category as follows: For each i, 1 ? i ? C,
if li < Si ? li+1 then di ? gi and break.
2.2 Latent Semantic Analysis
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) (Landauer et al,
1998) is a corpus-based method used in informa-
tion retrieval with vector space models. It provides
a means of comparing the semantic similarity be-
tween the source and target texts. LSA has been
successfully applied to automate giving grades and
feedback on free-text responses in several systems
as discussed in Section 1. The basic assumption
behind LSA is that there is a close relationship be-
tween the meaning of a text and the words in that
text. The power of LSA lies in the fact that it is able
to map the essays with similar wordings closer to
each other in the vector space. The LSA method is
able to strengthen the similarity between two texts
even when they do not contain common words. We
describe briefly the technical details of the method.
The essence of LSA is dimension reduction based
on the singular value decomposition (SVD), an al-
gebraic technique. SVD is a form of factor analy-
sis, which reduces the dimensionality of the origi-
nal WCM and thereby increases the dependency be-
tween contexts and words (Landauer et al, 1998).
SVD is defined as X = T0S0D0T , where X is the
preprocessed WCM and T0 and D0 are orthonormal
matrices representing the words and the contexts. S0
is a diagonal matrix with singular values. In the di-
mension reduction, the k highest singular values in
S0 are selected and the rest are ignored. With this
operation, an approximation matrix X? of the origi-
nal matrix X is acquired. The aim of the dimension
reduction is to reduce ?noise? or unimportant details
and to allow the underlying semantic structure to be-
31
come evident (Deerwester et al, 1990).
In information retrieval and essay grading, the
queries or essays have to be folded in into the model
in order to calculate the similarities between the doc-
uments in the model and the query. In LSA, the fold-
ing in can be achieved with a simple matrix multipli-
cation: X?q = XTq T0S?10 , where Xq is the term vec-
tor constructed from the query document with pre-
processing, and T0 and S0 are the matrices from the
SVD of the model after dimension reduction. The
resulting vector X?q is in the same format as the doc-
uments in the model.
The features that make LSA suitable for auto-
mated grading of essays can be summarized as fol-
lows. First, the method focuses on the content of
the essay, not on the surface features or keyword-
based content analysis. The second advantage is that
LSA-based scoring can be performed with relatively
low amount of human graded essays. Other meth-
ods, such as PEG and e-rater typically need several
hundred essays to be able to form an assignment-
specific model (Shermis et al, 2001; Burstein and
Marcu, 2000) whereas LSA-based IEA system has
sometimes been calibrated with as few as 20 essays,
though it typically needs more essays (Hearst et al,
2000).
Although LSA has been successfully applied in
information retrieval and related fields, it has also re-
ceived criticism (Hofmann, 2001; Blei et al, 2003).
The objective function determining the optimal de-
composition in LSA is the Frobenius norm. This
corresponds to an implicit additive Gaussian noise
assumption on the counts and may be inadequate.
This seems to be acceptable with small document
collections but with large document collections it
might have a negative effect. LSA does not define
a properly normalized probability distribution and,
even worse, the approximation matrix may contain
negative entries meaning that a document contains
negative number of certain words after the dimen-
sion reduction. Hence, it is impossible to treat LSA
as a generative language model and moreover, the
use of different similarity measures is limited. Fur-
thermore, there is no obvious interpretation of the
directions in the latent semantic space. This might
have an effect if also feedback is given. Choosing
the number of dimensions in LSA is typically based
on an ad hoc heuristics. However, there is research
done aiming to resolve the problem of dimension se-
lection in LSA, especially in the essay grading do-
main (Kakkonen et al, 2005).
2.3 Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis
Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis (PLSA)
(Hofmann, 2001) is based on a statistical model
which has been called the aspect model. The aspect
model is a latent variable model for co-occurrence
data, which associates unobserved class variables
zk, k ? {1, 2, . . . , K} with each observation. In our
settings, the observation is an occurrence of a word
wj , j ? {1, 2, . . . , M}, in a particular context di,
i ? {1, 2, . . . , N}. The probabilities related to this
model are defined as follows:
? P (di) denotes the probability that a word oc-
currence will be observed in a particular con-
text di;
? P (wj |zk) denotes the class-conditional proba-
bility of a specific word conditioned on the un-
observed class variable zk; and
? P (zk|di) denotes a context specific probability
distribution over the latent variable space.
When using PLSA in essay grading or information
retrieval, the first goal is to build up the model. In
other words, approximate the probability mass func-
tions with machine learning from the training data,
in our case the comparison material consisting of as-
signment specific texts.
Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm can be
used in the model building with maximum likeli-
hood formulation of the learning task (Dempster et
al., 1977). In EM, the algorithm alternates between
two steps: (i) an expectation (E) step where posterior
probabilities are computed for the latent variables,
based on the current estimates of the parameters, (ii)
a maximization (M) step, where parameters are up-
dated based on the loglikelihood which depends on
the posterior probabilities computed in the E-step.
The standard E-step is defined in equation (1).
P (zk|di, wj) =
P (wj |zk)P (zk|di)
?K
l=1 P (wj |zl)P (zl|di)
(1)
The M-step is formulated in equations (2) and (3)
as derived by Hofmann (2001). These two steps
32
are alternated until a termination condition is met,
in this case, when the maximum likelihood function
has converged.
P (wj |zk) =
?N
i=1 n(di, wj)P (zk|di, wj)
?M
m=1
?N
i=1 n(di, wm)P (zk|di, wm)
(2)
P (zk|di) =
?M
j=1 n(di, wj)P (zk|di, wj)
?M
m=1 n(di, wm)
(3)
Although standard EM algorithm can lead to good
results, it may also overfit the model to the train-
ing data and perform poorly with unseen data. Fur-
thermore, the algorithm is iterative and converges
slowly, which can increase the runtime seriously.
Hence, Hofmann (2001) proposes another approach
called Tempered EM (TEM), which is a derivation of
standard EM algorithm. In TEM, the M-step is the
same as in EM, but a dampening parameter is intro-
duced into the E-step as shown in equation (4). The
parameter ? will dampen the posterior probabilities
closer to uniform distribution, when ? < 1 and form
the standard E-step when ? = 1.
P (zk|di, wj) =
(P (wj |zk)P (zk|di))?
(
?K
l=1 P (wj |zl)P (zl|di)
)? (4)
Hofmann (2001) defines the TEM algorithm as
follows:
1. Set ? := 1 and perform the standard EM with
early stopping.
2. Set ? := ?? (with ? < 1).
3. Repeat the E- and M-steps until the perfor-
mance on hold-out data deteriorates, otherwise
go to step 2.
4. Stop the iteration when decreasing ? does not
improve performance on hold-out data.
Early stopping means that the optimization is not
done until the model converges, but the iteration is
stopped already once the performance on hold-out
data degenerates. Hofmann (2001) proposes to use
the perplexity to measure the generalization perfor-
mance of the model and the stopping condition for
the early stopping. The perplexity is defined as the
log-averaged inverse probability on unseen data cal-
culated as in equation (5).
P = exp
(
?
?
i,j n?(di, wj) log P (wj |di)
?
i,j n?(di, wj)
)
, (5)
where n?(di, wj) is the count on hold-out or training
data.
In PLSA, the folding in is done by using TEM
as well. The only difference when folding in a new
document or query q outside the model is that just
the probabilities P (zk|q) are updated during the M-
step and the P (wj |zk) are kept as they are. The sim-
ilarities between a document di in the model and a
query q folded in to the model can be calculated with
the cosine of the angle between the vectors contain-
ing the probability distributions (P (zk|q))Kk=1 and
(P (zk|di))Kk=1 (Hofmann, 2001).
PLSA, unlike LSA, defines proper probability
distributions to the documents and has its basis in
Statistics. It belongs to a framework called Latent
Dirichlet Allocations (Girolami and Kaba?n, 2003;
Blei et al, 2003), which gives a better grounding for
this method. For instance, several probabilistic sim-
ilarity measures can be used. PLSA is interpretable
with its generative model, latent classes and illus-
trations in N -dimensional space (Hofmann, 2001).
The latent classes or topics can be used to determine
which part of the comparison materials the student
has answered and which ones not.
In empirical research conducted by Hof-
mann (2001), PLSA yielded equal or better results
compared to LSA in the contexts of information
retrieval. It was also shown that the accuracy of
PLSA can increase when the number of latent
variables is increased. Furthermore, the combina-
tion of several similarity scores (e.g. cosines of
angles between two documents) from models with
different number of latent variables also increases
the overall accuracy. Therefore, the selection of the
dimension is not as crucial as in LSA. The problem
with PLSA is that the algorithm used to computate
the model, EM or its variant, is probabilistic and can
converge to a local maximum. However, according
to Hofmann (2001), this is not a problem since the
differences between separate runs are small. Flaws
in the generative model and the overfitting problem
33
Set Field Training Test Grading Course Comp. mat. No. No.
No. essays essays scale materials division type Passages Words
1 Education 70 73 0?6 Textbook Paragraphs 26 2397
2 Education 70 73 0?6 Textbook Sentences 147 2397
3 Communications 42 45 0?4 Textbook Paragraphs 45 1583
4 Communications 42 45 0?4 Textbook Sentences 139 1583
5 Soft. Eng. 26 27 0?10 *) Paragraphs 27 965
6 Soft. Eng. 26 27 0?10 *) Sentences 105 965
Table 1: The essay sets used in the experiment. *) Comparison materials were constructed from the course
handout with teacher?s comments included and transparencies represented to the students.
have been discussed in Blei et al (2003).
3 Experiment
3.1 Procedure and Materials
To analyze the performance of LSA and PLSA in
the essay assessment, we performed an experiment
using three essay sets collected from courses on edu-
cation, marketing and software engineering. The in-
formation about the essay collections is shown in Ta-
ble 1. Comparison materials were taken either from
the course book or other course materials and se-
lected by the lecturer of the course. Furthermore, the
comparison materials used in each of these sets were
divided with two methods, either into paragraphs or
sentences. Thus, we run the experiment in total with
six different configurations of materials.
We used our implementations of LSA and PLSA
methods as described in Section 2. With LSA, all
the possible dimensions (i.e. from two to the num-
ber of passages in the comparison materials) were
searched in order to find the dimension achieving
the highest accuracy of scoring, measured as the
correlation between the grades given by the system
and the human assessor. There is no upper limit
for the number of latent variables in PLSA mod-
els as there is for the dimensions in LSA. Thus,
we applied the same range for the best dimension
search to be fair in the comparison. Furthermore, a
linear combination of similarity values from PLSA
models (PLSA-C) with predefined numbers of la-
tent variables K ? {16, 32, 48, 64, 80, 96, 112, 128}
was used just to analyze the proposed potential of
the method as discussed in Section 2.3 and in (Hof-
mann, 2001). When building up all the PLSA mod-
els with TEM, we used 20 essays from the training
set of the essay collections to determine the early
stopping condition with perplexity of the model on
unseen data as proposed by Hofmann (2001).
3.2 Results and Discussion
The results of the experiment for all the three meth-
ods, LSA, PLSA and PLSA-C are shown in Table 2.
It contains the most accurate dimension (column
dim.) measured by machine-human correlation in
grading, the percentage of the same (same) and adja-
cent grades (adj.) compared to the human grader and
the Spearman correlation (cor.) between the grades
given by the human assessor and the system.
The results indicate that LSA outperforms both
methods using PLSA. This is opposite to the re-
sults obtained by Hofmann (2001) in information
retrieval. We believe this is due to the size of the
document collection used to build up the model. In
the experiments of Hofmann (2001), it was much
larger, 1000 to 3000 documents, while in our case
the number of documents was between 25 and 150.
However, the differences are quite small when using
the comparison materials divided into sentences. Al-
though all methods seem to be more accurate when
the comparison materials are divided into sentences,
PLSA based methods seem to gain more than LSA.
In most cases, PLSA with the most accurate
dimension and PLSA-C perform almost equally.
This is also in contrast with the findings of Hof-
mann (2001) because in his experiments PLSA-C
performed better than PLSA. This is probably also
due to the small document sets used. Neverthe-
less, this means that finding the most accurate di-
mension is unnecessary, but it is enough to com-
34
Set LSA LSA LSA LSA PLSA PLSA PLSA PLSA PLSA-C PLSA-C PLSA-C
No. dim. same adj. cor. dim. same adj. cor. same adj. cor.
1 14 39.7 43.9 0.78 9 31.5 32.9 0.66 34.2 35.6 0.70
2 124 35.6 49.3 0.80 83 37.0 37.0 0.76 35.6 41.1 0.73
3 8 31.1 28.9 0.54 38 24.4 35.6 0.41 17.7 24.4 0.12
4 5 24.4 42.3 0.57 92 35.6 31.1 0.59 22.2 35.6 0.47
5 6 29.6 48.2 0.88 16 18.5 18.5 0.78 11.1 40.1 0.68
6 6 44.4 37.1 0.90 55 33.3 44.4 0.88 14.8 40.7 0.79
Table 2: The results of the grading process with different methods.
bine several dimensions? similarity values. In our
case, it seems that linear combination of the simi-
larity values is not the best option because the sim-
ilarity values between essays and comparison mate-
rials decrease when the number of latent variables
increases. A topic for a further study would be to
analyze techniques to combine the similarity values
in PLSA-C to obtain higher accuracy in essay grad-
ing. Furthermore, it seems that the best combina-
tion of dimensions in PLSA-C depends on the fea-
tures of the document collection (e.g. number of
passages in comparison materials or number of es-
says) used. Another topic of further research is how
the combination of dimensions can be optimized for
each essay set by using the collection specific fea-
tures without the validation procedure proposed in
Kakkonen et al (2005).
Currently, we have not implemented a version of
LSA that combines scores from several models but
we will analyze the possibilities for that in future
research. Nevertheless, LSA representations for dif-
ferent dimensions form a nested sequence because
of the number of singular values taken to approxi-
mate the original matrix. This will make the model
combination less effective with LSA. This is not true
for statistical models, such as PLSA, because they
can capture a larger variety of the possible decom-
positions and thus several models can actually com-
plement each other (Hofmann, 2001).
4 Future Work and Conclusion
We have implemented a system to assess essays
written in Finnish. In this paper, we report a new
extension to the system for analyzing the essays
with PLSA method. We have compared LSA and
PLSA as methods for essay grading. When our re-
sults are compared to the correlations between hu-
man and system grades reported in literature, we
have achieved promising results with all methods.
LSA was slightly better when compared to PLSA-
based methods. As future research, we are going to
analyze if there are better methods to combine the
similarity scores from several models in the context
of essay grading to increase the accuracy (Hofmann,
2001). Another interesting topic is to combine LSA
and PLSA to compliment each other.
We used the cosine of the angle between the prob-
ability vectors as a measure of similarity in LSA and
PLSA. Other methods are proposed to determine the
similarities between probability distributions pro-
duced by PLSA (Girolami and Kaba?n, 2003; Blei
et al, 2003). The effects of using these techniques
will be compared in the future experiments.
If the PLSA models with different numbers of
latent variables are not highly dependent on each
other, this would allow us to analyze the reliability
of the grades given by the system. This is not pos-
sible with LSA based methods as they are normally
highly dependent on each other. However, this will
need further work to examine all the potentials.
Our future aim is to develop a semi-automatic
essay assessment system (Kakkonen et al, 2004).
For determining the grades or giving feedback to
the student, the system needs a method for compar-
ing similarities between the texts. LSA and PLSA
offer a feasible solution for the purpose. In order
to achieve even more accurate grading, we can use
some of the results and techniques developed for
LSA and develop them further for both methods. We
are currently working with an extension to our LSA
model that uses standard validation methods for re-
ducing automatically the irrelevant content informa-
35
tion in LSA-based essay grading (Kakkonen et al,
2005). In addition, we plan to continue the work
with PLSA, since it, being a probabilistic model, in-
troduces new possibilities, for instance, in similarity
comparison and feedback giving.
References
D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. 2003. La-
tent Dirichlet Allocation. J. of Machine Learning Re-
search, 3:993?1022.
J. Burstein and D. Marcu. 2000. Benefits of modularity
in an automated scoring system. In Proc. of the Work-
shop on Using Toolsets and Architectures to Build NLP
Systems, 18th Int?l Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics, Luxembourg.
J. Burstein. 2003. The e-rater scoring engine: Auto-
mated essay scoring with natural language process-
ing. In M. D. Shermis and J. Burstein, editors, Auto-
mated essay scoring: A cross-disciplinary perspective.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ.
S. Deerwester, S. T. Dumais, G. W. Furnas, T. K. Lan-
dauer, and R. Harshman. 1990. Indexing By Latent
Semantic Analysis. J. of the American Society for In-
formation Science, 41:391?407.
A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin. 1977.
Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the em
algorithm. J. of the Royal Statistical Society, 39:1?38.
P. W. Foltz, D. Laham, and T. K. Landauer. 1999a. Au-
tomated Essay Scoring: Applications to Educational
Technology. In Proc. of Wolrd Conf. Educational Mul-
timedia, Hypermedia & Telecommunications, Seattle,
USA.
P. W. Foltz, D. Laham, and T. K. Landauer. 1999b.
The Intelligent Essay Assessor: Applications to
Educational Technology. Interactive Multime-
dia Electronic J. of Computer-Enhanced Learning,
1. http://imej.wfu.edu/articles/1999/
2/04/index.asp (Accessed 3.4.2005).
M. Girolami and A. Kaba?n. 2003. On an Equivalence be-
tween PLSI and LDA. In Proc. of the 26th Annual Int?l
ACM SIGIR Conf. on Research and Development in In-
formaion Retrieval, pages 433?434, Toronto, Canada.
ACM Press.
M. Hearst, K. Kukich, M. Light, L. Hirschman, J. Burger,
E. Breck, L. Ferro, T. K. Landauer, D. Laham, P. W.
Foltz, and R. Calfee. 2000. The Debate on Automated
Essay Grading. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 15:22?37.
T. Hofmann. 2001. Unsupervised Learning by Proba-
bilistic Latent Semantic Analysis. Machine Learning,
42:177?196.
T. Kakkonen and E. Sutinen. 2004. Automatic As-
sessment of the Content of Essays Based on Course
Materials. In Proc. of the Int?l Conf. on Information
Technology: Research and Education, pages 126?130,
London, UK.
T. Kakkonen, N. Myller, and E. Sutinen. 2004. Semi-
Automatic Evaluation Features in Computer-Assisted
Essay Assessment. In Proc. of the 7th IASTED Int?l
Conf. on Computers and Advanced Technology in Ed-
ucation, pages 456?461, Kauai, Hawaii, USA.
T. Kakkonen, N. Myller, E. Sutinen, and J. Timonen.
2005. Comparison of Dimension Reduction Methods
for Automated Essay Grading. Submitted.
T. K. Landauer, D. Laham, B. Rehder, and M. E.
Schreiner. 1997. How well can passage meaning be
derived without using word order? A comparison of
Latent Semantic Analysis and humans. In Proc. of the
19th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
Mawhwah, NJ. Erlbaum.
T. K. Landauer, P. W. Foltz, and D. Laham. 1998. In-
troduction to latent semantic analysis. Discourse Pro-
cesses, 25:259?284.
B. Lemaire and P. Dessus. 2001. A System to Assess the
Semantic Content of Student Essays. J. of Educational
Computing Research, 24:305?320.
Lingsoft. 2005. http://www.lingsoft.fi/ (Ac-
cessed 3.4.2005).
E. B. Page and N. S. Petersen. 1995. The computer
moves into essay grading. Phi Delta Kappan, 76:561?
565.
E. B. Page. 1966. The imminence of grading essays by
computer. Phi Delta Kappan, 47:238?243.
M. D. Shermis, H. R. Mzumara, J. Olson, and S. Harring-
ton. 2001. On-line Grading of Student Essays: PEG
goes on the World Wide Web. Assessment & Evalua-
tion in Higher Education, 26:247.
D. Steinhart. 2000. Summary Street: an LSA Based Intel-
ligent Tutoring System for Writing and Revising Sum-
maries. Ph.D. thesis, University of Colorado, Boulder,
Colorado.
P. Wiemer-Hastings and A. Graesser. 2000. Select-a-
Kibitzer: A computer tool that gives meaningful feed-
back on student compositions. Interactive Learning
Environments, 8:149?169.
P. Wiemer-Hastings, K. Wiemer-Hastings, and
A. Graesser. 1999. Approximate natural lan-
guage understanding for an intelligent tutor. In
Proc. of the 12th Int?l Artificial Intelligence Research
Symposium, pages 172?176, Menlo Park, CA, USA.
36
