Recognition Assistance 
Treating Errors in Texts Acquired from Various Recognition Processes 
 
G?bor PR?SZ?KY 
MorphoLogic  
K?sm?rki u. 8 
1118 Budapest, Hungary 
proszeky@morphologic.hu 
M?ty?s NASZ?DI 
MorphoLogic  
K?sm?rki u. 8 
1118 Budapest, Hungary 
naszodim@morphologic.hu 
Bal?zs KIS 
MorphoLogic  
K?sm?rki u. 8 
1118 Budapest, Hungary 
kis@morphologic.hu 
 
Abstract  
Texts acquired from recognition sources?conti-
nuous speech/handwriting recognition and 
OCR?generally have three types of errors re-
gardless of the characteristics of the source in 
particular. The output of the recognition process 
may be (1) poorly segmented or not segmented at 
all; (2) containing underspecified symbols (where 
the recognition process can only indicate that the 
symbol belongs to a specific group), e.g. shape 
codes; (3) containing incorrectly identified sym-
bols. The project presented in this paper addresses 
these errors by developing of a unified linguistic 
framework called the MorphoLogic Recognition 
Assistant that provides feedback and corrections 
for various recognition processes. The framework 
uses customized morpho-syntactic and syntactic 
analysis where the lexicons and their alphabets 
correspond to the symbol set acquired from the 
recognition process. The successful framework 
must provide three services: (1) proper disambi-
guated segmentation, (2) disambiguation for un-
derspecified symbols, (3) correction for incorr-
ectly recognized symbols. The paper outlines the 
methods of morpho-syntactic and syntactic 
post-processing currently in use. 
Introduction 
Recognition processes produce a sequence of dis-
crete symbols that usually do not entirely corre-
spond to characters of printed text. Further on, we 
refer to this sequence as an input sequence.1 A 
                                                   
1 This framework is actually a second tier of the data 
flow. The user receives a black box providing linguis-
tically sound and correctly recognized text. Inside the 
black box, the first tier performs the actual recognition, 
and the second tier carries out linguistic corrections and 
disambiguation. 
unified linguistic framework must perform a trans-
formation where (1) the symbols from the recogni-
tion process are converted into characters of written 
text, and (2) the correlation between the original 
analog source and the result is the closest possible. 
A post-processing framework must not simply 
perform a symbol-to-symbol conversion. A direct 
conversion is either impossible (phonetic symbols 
of any kind do not directly correspond to printed 
characters) or insufficient (source symbols are un-
derspecified or incorrectly recognized). Mor-
pho-lexical and syntactic models can help this pro-
cess as they recognize elements of the language, 
extracting meaningful passages from the input se-
quence. 
Lexical databases with fully inflected forms are 
fairly standard for speech recognition, mainly 
where a small closed vocabulary is used, and new, 
unknown or ad hoc word formations are not re-
quired (Gibbon et al, 1997). This procedure is 
convenient in languages with very small inflection-
al paradigms. An example of a language with few 
inflections is English, where, in general, three 
forms exist for nouns and four for verbs. English is 
therefore not a good example for illustrating in-
flectional morphology.  
Agglutinative languages such as Turkish, Fin-
nish or Hungarian, however, have complex inflec-
tional and derivational morphology, with signifi-
cantly more endings on all verbs, nouns, adjectives 
and pronouns. The number of endings increase the 
size of a basic vocabulary by a factor of thousands. 
Algorithmic morphological techniques have been 
developed for efficient composition of inflected 
forms and to avoid a finite but unmanageable explo-
sion of lexicon size. Still, according to Althoff et al 
(1996), these techniques have not been applied to 
any significant extent in speech technology.  
In this paper, we describe the application of a 
new method based on morphology and partial 
parsing. This method uses a unified error model 
with flexible symbol mapping, facilitating the use 
of any linguistic module with traditional ortho-
graphic lexicons?for any recognition process 
(OCR, handwriting, speech recognition), even for 
highly inflectional languages. The integrated sys-
tem uses our existing morpho-syntactic modules 
and lexicons. 
1 The error model  
The linguistic correction framework must be a-
ware of three classes of error sources occurring in 
the input sequence: (1) poor or nonexistent seg-
mentation, (2) underspecified symbols, (3) in-
correctly recognised symbols. 
The input sequence does not appear in the form 
of written text. It comprises of complex symbol 
codes in a normalized format, where the codes 
closely correspond to the signals recognized by the 
particular recognition process. In the case of OCR 
or handwriting recognition, this can be a shape 
code such as <lower> indicating a group of char-
acters. With speech recognition, this is rather a 
phoneme code such as <e:>. (Here we use the 
notation of the proposed framework.) Standard 
orthographic characters may also appear in the in-
put sequence. 
With all types of recognition processes, there 
exists no one-to-one mapping between the sym-
bols of the input sequence (the input alphabet) and 
the orthographic alphabet of the written text. The 
number of identified phonemes/phoneme comp-
lexes or characters/character complexes does not 
provide information about the number of charac-
ters to be used in the output text. 2  Unlike in 
two-level-morphology, the framework must pro-
vide n-to-m character (symbol) mapping, where n 
? m. Mapping between speech and text chunks of 
different length makes the system able to offer, for 
example, consonant sequences instead of affricates 
usually represented by single characters: 
me{ts,ts?}  metsz, metssz  
(?engraves,slits,cuts? in affirmative and 
imperative) 
                                                   
2 An example: in OCR outputs, the letter ?m? often oc-
curs in place of the ?rn? sequence. The correction mo-
dule must be able to transform single ?m?-s into ?rn?. 
With continuous speech recognition (and, though 
less frequently, continuous handwriting recogni-
tion) it is even possible that a written segment 
boundary?such as the end of a word or a 
sentence?occurs within a symbol. The framework 
must be aware of these schemes as well. 
The following sections present each error class 
with Hungarian examples to show the complexity 
of the linguistic model required by some languages. 
2 The basics: symbol mapping 
Atomic segments of input sequences are assumed to 
consist of (underspecified) symbols (phone-
mes/phoneme complexes, characters/character 
complexes). The correction framework must have a 
database of complex symbols?either phoneme 
codes or shape codes representing the classes of 
underspecified characters. An obvious approach to 
acquire a database of phonetic description of stems 
and suffixes (for morphological processing) is 
converting the existing (orthographical) lexicon. 
However, this conversion is very complicated and 
may result in an extremely large database. With 
speech recognition, for example, all orthographic 
representations must be converted into as many 
phonetic allomorphs as possible, on the basis of a 
grapheme-sequence-to-phoneme-sequence conver-
sion. This set contains every allomorph where the 
first or the last phoneme of which is subject to 
contextual change. E.g. k?t (?two?) is converted to 
{ke?t, ke?ty}, because of palatalization before cer-
tain words, like nyu?l (?rabbit?). 
ke?t
y
n
y
u?l  k?t ny?l (?two rabbits?) 
As the above method has some obvious disadvan-
tages, we decided to separate the symbol mapping 
from the linguistic processes. We have created a 
database mapping the recognized symbols to all 
possible orthographical characters/character se-
quences. In this scheme, the framework creates se-
veral possible orthographical sequences from the 
input sequence (implemented internally as a direc-
ted acyclic graph for performance reasons). The 
correction framework then segments and validates 
each sequence using ?traditional? linguistic modu-
les with the original orthographical lexicons. The 
conversion database uses a unified entry format 
suitable for all types of recognition processes. Ex-
ample: 
<ccs> ((<t>|((c|)c<s>)|)(c(<s>|)c<s>|ts)) 
This is a phoneme conversion entry. On the left 
side, a phonetic code is listed in the unified inter-
nal representation of the framework. (Note that 
this input symbol is the result of a mapping from 
the output of the recognition module.) On the right 
side, there is a directed acyclic graph (more or less 
a regular expression) describing all possible or-
thographic representations of the single phonetic 
entity. 
This is the core idea of the framework: the se-
parate conversion process provides for an open 
architecture where the framework can be attached 
to any recognition process, and even the linguistic 
modules are replaceable. 
3 Morpho-lexical segmentation 
For the simplest example, let us assume that the 
input sequence consists of phonetic symbols with 
no segmentation: however, pauses are indicated by 
the recognition process. The input sequence is 
processed symbol by symbol, and when the seg-
menter encounters a potential segment boundary, 
registers it and checks if the phonetic processor 
saw any pause, stress or other sign of segmentation 
at that particular position in the original speech 
signal. This might require some interaction with 
speech recognizer, but for the sake of simplicity, 
now we describe the operation of the linguistic 
subsystem only. 
The original architecture design devises the 
framework as a feedback service, one requesting 
further information from the recognition source. In 
the current implementation, however, the correction 
framework can be separated from the recognition 
process, and provide corrected and disambiguated 
text without feedback to the recognition module. 
In the analysis process of the unsegmented sig-
nal (see Figure 1), for example, the input slice 
vonate?r has three morpho-lexically equally likely 
segmentations: von a t?r, vonat ?r, vonat?r. Either 
the acoustic signal contains information confirming 
or rejecting any of them; or all of them will be 
temporarily kept, and the segmentation process 
itself will filter them out later on. In Figure 1, after 
reading some further symbols from the input, it 
becomes clear that the only orthographically correct 
word boundary is between vonat and ?rkezik . 
4 Underspecified forms 
It is quite common that the recognition process 
cannot perfectly identify segments in the original 
signal source. These are the cases of underspeci-
fication. Let us assume that a speech recognition 
Non-segmented phonetic input Proposed orthographic segmentation 
v 
vo 
von ...............................................................................von 
vona..............................................................................von a 
vonat.............................................................................vonat 
vonate? ..........................................................................vonat? 
vonate?r .........................................................................von a t?r, vonat ?r, vonat?r 
vonate?rk 
vonate?rke 
vonate?rkez 
vonate?rkezi ..................................................................vonat ?rkezi 
vonate?rkezik ................................................................vonat ?rkezik 
vonate?rkezika...............................................................vonat ?rkezik a 
vonate?rkezikam 
vonate?rkezikama? 
vonate?rkezikama?s ? ? .................................................................vonat ?rkezik a m?s 
vonate?rkezikama?s ? ?o 
vonate?rkezikama?s ? ?od ................................................................ vonat ?rkezik a m?sod 
vonate?rkezikama?s ? ?odi ............................................................... vonat ?rkezik a m?sodi 
vonate?rkezikama?s ? ?odik ............................................................ vonat ?rkezik a m?sodik 
vonate?rkezikama?s ? ?odikv 
vonate?rkezikama?s ? ?odikva? 
vonate?rkezikama?s ? ?odikva?g .................................................... vonat ?rkezik a m?sodik v?g 
vonate?rkezikama?s ? ?odikva?ga? 
vonate?rkezikama?s ? ?odikva?ga?ny ............................................ vonat ?rkezik a m?sodik v?g?ny 
vonate?rkezikama?s ? ?odikva?ga?nyr 
vonate?rkezikama?s ? ?odikva?ga?nyra......................................... vonat ?rkezik a m?sodik v?g?nyra 
Figure 1. Morpho-lexical segmentation of a Hungarian phonetic string 
process is unable to identify the value of the binary 
feature VOICED. In these cases, the linguistic 
subsystem attempts to find orthographically 
well-formed morpho-lexical constructions for both 
voiced and voiceless variants of the phoneme in 
question. In fact, underspecified forms of the input 
signal are represented either by lists of possible 
characters?like set representations in two-level 
morphology (Koskenniemi, 1983): 
vona{t,d}e?rkezikama?s? ?odi{g,k}{v,f}a?ga?nyra 
(?train is arriving to the second platform?) 
or by underspecified feature complexes: 
vonaDe?rkezikama?s? ?odiGVa?ga?nyra 
where D, G and V are d, g and v, respectively, but 
not specified as voiced or voiceless. 
5 Using higher-level linguistic processes 
The linguistic correction framework operates ra-
ther inefficiently if it uses morpho-lexical proces-
sing only. This results in extreme ambiguity: nu-
merous overgenerated orthographic patterns ap-
pear with grammatically incorrect segmentation. 
Thus the process must be improved by adding 
higher level linguistic analysis. Currently, the 
framework uses partial syntax similar to the me-
chanism applied in the Hungarian grammar che-
cker module. This partial syntax describes parti-
cular syntactic phenomena in order to identify in-
correct grammar beyond the word boundaries. 
A more efficient post-processing filter is being 
developed by applying the HumorESK parser mo-
dule (Pr?sz?ky, 1996). Figure 2 shows the possible 
segmentations of the morphology-only system. In 
this figure, an asterisk marks syntactically non-mo-
tivated word sequences filtered out by the partial 
syntax or the full parser?operating as a higher-le-
vel segmenter. 
In the first 10 segmentations, the personal pro-
noun ti (2nd person, pl.) does not agree with either 
the verb ?r (3rd person, sing.) or the verb ?rok (1st 
person, sing.). Syntactically the last two 
segmentations can be accepted (but semantically 
and according to topic-focus articulation, Nr. 11 is 
bizarre). In most cases it is true that the 
segmentation containing the longest matches in the 
input sequence is the best orthographical candidate. 
6 Further development 
Morpho-lexical and syntactic segmentation and 
correction can be very useful in improving the 
quality of ?traditional? recognition sources. How-
ever, it is important to emphasize that the proposed 
framework would only support existing recognition 
methods (e.g. likelihood-based mechanisms in 
speech recognition) rather than replacing them. The 
current breakdown of the framework makes no as-
sumptions on the operation of the underlying re-
cognition process, and does not prefer any methods 
to any other. In terms of architecture, the correction 
framework?s operation is separated from the rec-
ognition module. 
One of the aims of this project is, however, a 
better interaction between the linguistic and the re-
cognition subsystem. As the first step, it requires a 
standard feedback interface (yet to be developed). 
Because the current implementation of the Mor-
phoLogic Recognition Assistant framework does 
not make assumptions of the recognition subsys-
tem, it cannot influence its operation. A standard 
feedback interface consists of a formalism for de-
scribing the interaction between a recognition 
source and the correction framework, regardless of 
the characteristics of the recognition subsystem. 
Stub modules must be developed to communicate 
with existing recognition systems. 
An example for the dialogue between a phonetic 
and linguistic subsystem: first, a superficial acous-
tic-phonetic analysis offers some sequence of 
underspecified feature complexes, then the lin-
guistic subsystem attempts to transform them into 
potential orthographically correct units with surface 
word boundaries. Finally, the phonetic system 
Input: nyelve?setitsik?eti?rok 
1. *nyel v?sz e ti cikket ?r ok 
2. *nyel v?sz e ti cikket ?rok 
3. *nyel v?sze ti cikket ?r ok 
4. *nyel v?sze ti cikket ?rok 
5. *nyelv ?sz e ti cikket ?r ok 
6. *nyelv ?sz e ti cikket ?rok 
7. *nyelv?sz e ti cikket ?r ok 
8. *nyelv?sz e ti cikket ?r ok 
9. *nyelv?sze ti cikket ?r ok 
10. *nyelv?sze ti cikket ?rok  
11. nyelv?szeti cikket ?r ok  
12. nyelv?szeti cikket ?rok 
(?I am writing a linguistic paper.?) 
Figure 2. Syntactic filtering 
controls whether which of the offered segmen-
tation points can be confirmed acoustically. 
7 Implementation 
The first version of the MorphoLogic Recognition 
Assistant framework has been implemented along 
with a demonstration interface. This application 
takes symbolic codes of different recognized 
symbols (phonemes, OCR-read characters etc.), 
and provides orthographical output. It has been 
programmed in C++ using MS Visual Studio 6.0, 
and runs on 32-bit Windows systems. As service 
modules, the framework incorporates the Humor 
(morphological analyser), the Helyesebb (gram-
matical validator), and the HumorESK (full parser) 
technologies. With a standard programming in-
terface, it is ready to be integrated with existing 
recognition systems. 
Conclusion 
This paper has introduced a framework for treating 
common error classes occurring in the output of 
various recognition sources. We have shown that 
different types of recognition sources share the 
same error types: namely, (1) poor or nonexistent 
segmentation, (2) underspecified and (3) incor-
rectly recognized symbols. 
Our proposed solution is a post-processing 
phase performed on the output of the recognition 
source, where morpho-lexical and syntactic mod-
els validate (either accept or reject) different 
orthographical candidates derived from a single 
recognized symbol sequence. 
The system is language independent and com-
pletely data-driven: by replacing the databases, the 
MorphoLogic Recognition Assistant is imme-
diately ready to work with a different language. 
For the Humor system, descriptions exist for sev-
eral languages (Hungarian, English, German, 
Spanish, Czech, Polish and Romanian). Syntax 
descriptions are under development for Hungarian 
and English (prototypes exist). 
The proposed framework seems promising for 
continuous recognition systems. Its main advan-
tage is the ease of application of any linguistic 
module, thanks to the separate symbol mapping 
process and the open architecture. However, we 
must emphasize again that the MorphoLogic Re-
cognition Assistant supports existing recognition 
systems rather than replacing them.  
Acknowledgements 
This research was carries out within the framework 
of the IKTA-063/2000 Project supported by the 
Hungarian Ministry of Education. 
References  
Althoff, F., G. Drexel, H. L?ngen, M. Pampel & C. 
Schillo (1996). The treatment of compounds in a 
morphological component for speech recog-
nition. In: D. Gibbon (ed.) Natural language 
processing and speech technology, 71-76, 
Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, New York  
Gibbon, D., R. Moore, R. Winski, eds. (1997). 
Handbook of Standards and Resources for 
Spoken Language Systems. Walter de Gruyter 
Publishers, Berlin & New York  
Koskenniemi, K. (1983) Two-level morphology: A 
general computational model for word-form 
recognition and production. University of Hel-
sinki, Department of General Linguistics, Hel-
sinki, Finland  
Nakayama, T. (1994). Modeling Content Identi-
fication from Document Images. Proceedings of 
the 4th Applied Natural Language Processing 
Conference, 22-27, Stuttgart, Germany 
Pr?sz?ky, G. (1994). Industrial Applications of 
Unification Morphology Proceedings of the 4th 
Conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing, 157?159, Stuttgart, Germany  
Pr?sz?ky, G. (1996).  Humor: a Morphological 
System for Corpus Analysis First TELRI 
Seminar on Language Resources and Language 
Technology, 149?158, Tihany, Hungary 
Pr?sz?ky, G. (1996). Syntax As Meta-morphology 
Proceedings of COLING-96, Vol.2, 1123?1126, 
Copenhagen, Denmark 
Pr?sz?ky, G. & B. Kis (1999). Agglutinative and 
Other (Highly) Inflectional Languages. Pro-
ceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, 
261?268. College Park, Maryland, USA  
Sibun, P. & Spitz, A. L. (1994). Language Deter-
mination: Natural Language Processing from 
Scanned Document Images. Proceedings of the 
4th Applied Natural Language Processing 
Conference, 15-21,Stuttgart, Germany 
