Resolving Individual and Abstract Anaphora in Texts and
Dialogues
Costanza Navarretta
Center for Sprogteknologi, University of Copenhagen
Njalsgade 80
2300 Copenhagen S
costanza@cst.dk
Abstract
This paper describes an extension of the
dar-algorithm (Navarretta, 2004) for re-
solving intersentential pronominal anaphors
referring to individual and abstract enti-
ties in texts and dialogues. In dar indi-
vidual entities are resolved combining mod-
els which identify high degree of salience
with high degree of givenness (topicality)
of entities in the hearer?s cognitive model,
e.g. (Grosz et al, 1995), with Hajic?ova? et
al.?s (1990) salience account which assigns
the highest degree of salience to entities
in the focal part of an utterance in Infor-
mation Structure terms, which often intro-
duce new information in discourse. Anaph-
ors referring to abstract entities are resolved
with an extension of the algorithm pre-
sented by Eckert and Strube (2000). The
extended dar-algorithm accounts for differ-
ences in the resolution mechanisms of differ-
ent types of Danish pronouns. Manual tests
of the algorithm show that dar performs
better than other resolution algorithms on
the same data.
1 Introduction
Although most pronominal anaphora resolu-
tion algorithms only account for anaphors re-
ferring to individual entities, anaphors re-
ferring to abstract entities evoked by verbal
phrases, clauses or discourse segments (hence-
forth APAs) are quite common in English see
i.a. (Byron and Allen, 1998) and even more
in Danish (Navarretta, 2004). Recently, two
algorithms for resolving APAs and individ-
ual pronominal anaphors (henceforth IPAs) in
specific English dialogues have been proposed
Eckert and Strube?s (2000) es00 and Byron?s
(2002) phora. Furthermore Strube and Mu?ller
(Strube and Mu?ller, 2003) have presented a
machine learning approach for resolving APAs
in spoken dialogues.1 Both es00 and phora
1We do not discuss this approach further in this pa-
per.
recognise IPAs and APAs on the basis of se-
mantic constraints on the argument position oc-
cupied by the anaphors and account for differ-
ences in reference between personal and demon-
strative pronouns. In es00 demonstrative pro-
nouns preferentially refer to abstract entities,
while personal pronouns preferentially refer to
individual ones. es00 resolves IPAs applying
Strube?s (1998) algorithm. In phora the an-
tecedents of personal pronouns are searched for
looking at their degree of salience which is im-
plemented by word order as in (Grosz et al,
1995). Demonstratives, instead, are searched
for in the list of activated entities (Gundel et al,
1993) containing non NP antecedents, which are
assumed to be less salient. In phora demon-
stratives can also refer to Kinds.
es00 requires that the structure of dialogues
has been marked. Byron?s phora-algorithm
does not rely on predefined dialogue structure,
but only searches for abstract antecedents of
APAs in the sentence preceding the anaphor.
Thus it does not account for APAs referring to
larger discourse segments. phora relies on both
semantic knowledge and a model of speech acts
and accounts for more phenomena than es00.
Differing from es00, phora has been imple-
mented.
To resolve IPAs and APAs in Danish texts
and dialogues Navarretta (2004) has proposed
the so-called dar-algorithm (Navarretta, 2004).
In dar APAs are resolved following the es00
strategy, but dar accounts for the Danish ab-
stract anaphors which occur in much more con-
texts than the English ones. Individual anaph-
ors are resolved in dar following a novel strat-
egy which combines models which identify high
degree of salience with high degree of givenness
(topicality) of entities in the hearer?s cognitive
model, e.g. (Grosz et al, 1995), with Hajic?ova?
et al?s (1990) salience account which assigns the
highest degree of salience to entities in the focal
part of an utterance in Information Structure
terms. These entities often introduce new in-
formation in discourse.
In the present paper we describe an extended
version of the dar-algorithm accounting for dif-
ferences in the reference of various types of Dan-
ish demonstratives which we found analysing
the uses of pronouns in three text collections
(computer manuals, novels and newspaper ar-
ticles) and three corpora of recorded naturally-
occurring dialogues (the sl (Duncker and Her-
mann, 1996), the bysoc (Gregersen and Peder-
sen, 1991) and the pid corpora (Jensen, 1989)).
In the following we first discuss the background
for our proposal (section 2) then we describe
the extended dar-algorithm (section 3). In sec-
tion 4 we evaluate it and compare its perfor-
mance with that of other known algorithms. Fi-
nally we make some concluding remarks.
2 Background for DAR
In most applied approaches resolving pronom-
inal anaphors mainly consists in the following
steps: 1: determining the anaphoric antecedent
domain; 2: choosing the most prominent or
salient antecedent among possible candidates.
Thus determining the degree of salience of dis-
course elements, henceforth DEs, is essential to
anaphor resolution. Although there is not al-
ways an identity relation between linguistic an-
tecedents and referents, we also follow this strat-
egy, well aware that it is particularly problem-
atic for resolving APAs (se especially (Webber,
1991)). Nearly all salience-based algorithms
identify high degree of salience with high de-
gree of givenness of DEs. In fact, although dif-
ferent criteria are used for ranking DEs, such as
linear order, hierarchy of grammatical roles, in-
formation structure, Prince?s Familiarity Scale
(Prince, 1981), all algorithms assign the highest
prominence to the DEs which are most topi-
cal, known, bound, familiar and thus given, e.g.
(Grosz et al, 1995; Brennan et al, 1987; Strube,
1998). Analysing the Danish data we found a
restricted number of cases where high degree of
salience did not correspond to high degree of
topical ity, as it is the case in example (1). (1)
A: hvem...hvem arbejdede [din mor]
i
med?
(with whom... whom did [your mother]
i
work)
B: [Hun]
i
arbejdede med [vores nabo]
k
([She]
i
worked with [our neighbour]
k
)
[Hun]
k
var enke ... havde tre s?nner [bysoc]
([She]
k
was a widow... had three sons) In (1)
the antecedent of the second occurrence of the
pronoun hun (she) is the object vores nabo (our
neighbour) which provides the information re-
quested in the preceding question. This nominal
is assigned lower prominence than the subject
pronoun hun (she) in most salience models.
The only salience model which departs from
the givenness2 assumption has been proposed
by Hajic?ova? et al (1990). Hajic?ova? et al, in
fact, assign the highest degree of salience to DEs
in the focal part of an utterance in information
structure terms (Sgall et al, 1986). These enti-
ties often represent new information. Hajic?ova?
et al?s approach is original and can account for
the data in (1), but it is problematic from an
applied point of view. In the first place it is
difficult to determine the information structure
of all utterances. Secondly, focal candidate an-
tecedents are ranked highest in Hajic?ova? et al?s
model, but they still compete with given can-
didate antecedents in their system. Finally the
data does not confirm that all entities in the fo-
cal part of an utterance have the highest degree
of accessibility.
We agree with Hajic?ova??s insight, but in or-
der to operationalise the influence of focality in
a reliable way propose the following. Accessi-
bility by default is connected with givenness as
assumed in most algorithms. However, when
speakers explicitly change the degree of accessi-
bility of entities in discourse by marking them
as salient with information structure related de-
vices, these entities get the highest degree of
salience and are proposed as the preferred an-
tecedents of anaphors. In cases of explicit focus
marking the shift of focus of attention is as co-
herent as continuing speaking about the same
entities, because it is preannounced to the ad-
dressee. On the basis of the data we propose
a list of identifiable constructions in which ex-
plicit focus marking occurs.3 Examples from
the list are the following:
a: Entities referred to by NPs which in Danish
are focally marked structurally (clefts, existen-
tial and topicalised constructions).
b: Entities referred to by NPs that follow fo-
cusing adverbs.
c: Entities focally marked by the prosody (if
this information is available) and/or entities
providing information requested in questions, as
in (1).
2Giveness subsumes here concepts such as topicality
and familiarity.
3Many of these constructions are also studied in the
Information Structure and in some anaphora resolution
literature, e.g. (Sidner, 1983).
Givenness preference in Danish can be mod-
elled by the hierarchy of verbal complements.
In addition to salience preferences we found
that parallelism can account for numerous uses
of Danish anaphors.4 Inspired by the work of
(Kameyama, 1996) we have defined a prefer-
ence interaction model to be used in resolution.
Our model is given in figure 1.5 The interac-
Parallel. ? Focality ? Pronom. chain? Givenness
Figure 1: Interaction of preferences
tion model states that givenness preferences are
overridden by focality preference, when in con-
flict, and that they all are overridden by paral-
lelism.
dar also accounts for reference differences be-
tween Danish demonstrative and personal pro-
nouns. Weak (cliticised and unstressed) pro-
nouns usually refer to the most salient entity in
the utterance. Strong (stressed and demonstra-
tive) pronouns emphasise or put in contrast the
entities they refer to and/or indicate that their
antecedents are not the most expected ones.6
Demonstratives preferentially refer to abstract
entities, while personal pronouns preferentially
refer to individual entities in ambiguous con-
texts. All these differences are also accounted
for in the literature on anaphora. However we
also found more language-specific peculiarities
in our data. Two examples of these pecular-
ities are the following. The Danish demon-
stratives denne/dette/disse (this common gen-
der/this neuter gender/these) never corefer with
a subject antecedent intrasententially. In the
few cases where they have a subject antecedent
in a preceding clause, there are no other an-
tecedent competitors. The abstract anaphor
dette, furthermore, is often used to refer to the
last mentioned situation in the previous sen-
tence, often expressed in a subordinated clause,
and not to the whole sentence or to an abstract
anaphor in the preceding sentence. The partic-
4According to parallelism in adjacent utterances with
parallel grammatical complements, the preferred an-
tecedent of an anaphor in the second utterance is the
linguistic expression in the first utterance with the same
grammatical function.
5Commonsense preferences which override all the
other preferences are not implemented.
6The most frequent Danish third person singular gen-
der pronoun det can both be a personal pronoun (cor-
responding to it) and a demonstrative pronoun (corre-
sponding to this/that). In the latter case it is always
stressed.
ular phenomena are also accounted for in dar.
Approx. half of the APA occurrences in our
dialogues refer to entities evoked by larger dis-
course segments (more turn takings). Thus we
follow Eckert and Strube?s approach of mark-
ing the structure of dialogues and searching for
APA antecedents in the right frontier of the dis-
course tree (Webber, 1991). dar presupposes
different discourse structures for texts and dia-
logues. dar follows the es00 and phora strat-
egy of discriminating between IPAs and APAs
by rules looking at the semantic constraints on
the predication contexts in which the anaphors
occur. dar relies on more discriminating rules
than es00, which were defined on the basis of
large amounts of data and of the encodings of a
large computational lexicon.
dar uses language-specific rules to account
for Danish APAs. These occur in much more
contexts than in English where elliptical con-
structions or other anaphors such as too and so
are used. Examples of Danish-specific uses of
abstract anaphors are given in (2)-(3).
(2) Han var sulten. Det var jeg ikke. [pid]
(lit. He was hungry. That was I not)
(My friends were hungry. I wasn?t.)
(3) Han kunne sv?mme, men det kunne hun
ikke
(lit. He could swim, but it could she not)
(He could swim, but she couldn?t)
A language-specific rule recognising APAs is
the following: constructions with modal verbs
and an object, such as x skal man (lit. x shall
one) (one shall), x vil man (lit. x will one) (one
will).
3 The DAR Algorithm
3.1 Search Space and DE lists
dar presupposes the discourse structure de-
scribed by Grosz and Sidner (1986). The min-
imal discourse unit is the utterance U . Para-
graphs correspond to discourse segments in
texts. In dialogues discourse segments were
manually marked (se section 4). The dialogues
were structured with Synchronising Units (SU)
according to the definitions in ES00.
The immediate antecedent search space of a
pronoun x in utterance U
n
is the previous utter-
ance, U
n?1
. If U
n
is the first component in SU
m
in dialogues the immediate search space for x is
SU
m?1
. dar assumes two antecedent domains
depending on whether the pronoun has or has
not been recognised as an IPA. The antecedent
domain for IPAs is first U
n?1
and then the pre-
ceding utterances in the right frontier of the dis-
course tree searched for in recency order.7 The
antecedent domain for APAs or anaphors which
can both be IPAs and APAs is U
n?1
.
dar operates on two lists of DEs, the Ilist
and the Alist. The Ilist contains the NPs re-
ferred to in U
n?1
ranked according to their de-
gree of salience and enriched with information
on gender, number, animacy and other sim-
ple semantic types necessary to implement se-
lectional restrictions. In the Ilist information
about the grammatical role of nominals is pro-
vided and strongly focally marked elements are
indicated. The leftmost element in the Ilist is
the most salient one. Givenness and focality
preferences are accounted for in the Ilist, as il-
lustrated in figure 2. Focally marked entities
are put in front of the list while the remaining
DEs are ordered according to verbal comple-
ment order. Inside verbal complements nomi-
nals are ordered according to their occurrence
order as illustrated in the second row of the fig-
ure. The abstract entities which are referred to
by an APA in U
n?1
or SU
m?1
are encoded in
the Alist. They are removed from the list af-
ter a new utterance (SU in dialogues) has been
processed if they have not been mentioned in it.
The context ranking for abstract entities is that
proposed by Eckert and Strube (2000).
3.2 The Algorithm and Its Functions
dar consists of two different functions Re-
solveDet and ResolveIpa. The former is ap-
plied if the actual pronoun x is third person
singular neuter, while the latter is applied in all
the remaining cases:
if x is singular & neuter
then go to ResolveDet(x)
else go to ResolveIpa(x)
The main steps of ResolveIpa are given in
figure 3. The ResolveIpa approach of indi-
cating possible reference ambiguities resembles
that proposed by Kameyama (1996). The main
structure of the function ResolveDet is in-
spired by es00. ResolveDet tests the pro-
noun x using the IPA and APA discriminating
rules discussed in section 2. ResolveDet is
simplified in figure 4. ResolveIpa-neu is like
ResolveIpa except that it returns if no NP an-
tecedents are found in U
n?1
(case A) so that
ResolveApa can be applied. ResolveApa
7The search space in es00 is the preceding utterance
for all pronouns.
distinguishes between types of pronoun. If x
is weak, the preferred antecedent is searched
for among the elements indicated in the con-
text ranking, unless it is the object of the verb
g?re (do), modals, have (have) or the abstract
subject in copula constructions. In these cases
the pronoun is resolved to the VP of the ele-
ment in the A-list or in the context ranking.
If x is strong ResolveApa attempts to resolve
or classify it as vague depending on the type
of pronoun. This part of the algorithm is spe-
cific to Danish and accounts for the fact that
different strong pronouns preferentially refer to
different abstract entities in the data. Resolved
APAs are inserted into the Alist. In case of fail-
ure ResolveApa returns so that ResolveIpa-
neu can be applied. If both functions fail, the
pronoun is classified as vague.
3.3 Some Examples
In the following we look at the resolution of ex-
ample (1) from section 2. The simplified Ilists
and Alists after each utterance has been pro-
cessed are given in figure 5. (1) contains three
SUs. U
2
is an I/A thus it belongs to two syn-
chronising units (SU
1
and SU
2
). The Ilist after
U
1
has been processed, contains one element,
din mor (your mother). In U
2
the personal
pronoun hun (she) occurs, thus ResolveIpa is
applied. It resolves hun to the compatible NP
in the Ilist, din mor. After U
2
has been pro-
cessed the Ilist contains two elements in this
order: the focal marked entity vores nabo (our
neighbour) and the pronoun hun (= din mor).
ResolveIpa resolves the occurrence of the pro-
noun hun (she) in U
3
to the most salient can-
didate NP in the Ilist, vores nabo. Here fo-
cal preference overrides pronominal chain pref-
erence. Example (4) contains the APA det.
SU
1
: U
1
(I) U
2
(I/A):
U
1
: hvem...hvem arbejdede din mor med?
(with whom... whom did your mother work)
Ilist: [din mor]
Alist:[]
??????????????????
SU
2
: U
2
(I/A)
U
2
: Hun arbejdede med vores nabo
(She worked with our neighbour)
Ilist: [vores nabo,hun=din mor]
Alist: []
??????????????????
SU
3
: U
3
(I)
U
3
: Hun var enke ... havde tre s?nner
(She was a widow... had three sons)
Ilist: [hun=vores nabo,tre s?nner]
Alist: []
Figure 5: Ilists and Alists for example (1)
(4): Du har sv?rt ved at se musemark?ren p?a
sk?rmen. Hvordan klarer du det? [edb]
(You have difficulties seing the mouse-cursor
FOCAL MARKED > SUBJECT > OBJECT/PrepOBJECT > OBJECT 2 > OTHER COMPLS > ADJUNCTS
????????????????????????????????????????????????-
NCOMPL
1
>
prec
NCOMPL
2
>
prec
. . .>
prec
NCOMPL
n
Figure 2: Order of DEs in the Ilist
antecedent in Ilist
for U
n?1
or S
m?1
?
no antecedent 1 anteced. more anteced.
look in prec.
Ilists apply preferences
(1) parallelism?
ant. found ant. not found return it yes no
return it x =inferable return y = return y =
parallel leftmost
candidate and cand. in Ilist
candid. list and c. list
x is weak?
yes no
return y return second
and candidate and
list ambig. list ambig.
Figure 3: ResolveIpa
(common-gend) on the screen (common-gend).
How do you manage it/this (neuter gender))?
The simplified Ilists and Alists after the two
utterances in (4) have been processed are pre-
sented in figure 6. After U
1
has been pro-
U
1
: Du har sv?rt ved at se musemark?ren p?a sk?rmen.
Ilist: [musemark?ren, sk?rmen]
Alist:[]
??????????????????????
U
2
: Hvordan klarer du det?
Ilist:[]
Alist:[det=U
1
]
Figure 6: Ilists and Alists for example (4)
cessed there are two common gender singular
NPs in the Ilist, musemark?ren (the mouse
cursor) and sk?rmen (the screen). In U
2
the
singular neuter gender pronoun det (it) occurs,
thus ResolveDet is applied. The pronoun
is neither IPA nor APA according to the dis-
criminating rules. ResolveDet attempts to
find an individual antecedent of the weak pro-
noun, applying the function ResolveIpa-neu.
ResolveIpa-neu fails because the two DEs in
the Ilist do not agree with the pronoun. Then
the function ResolveApa resolves x looking at
the context ranking. Being the Alist empty, U
1
,
is proposed as antecedent. The resolved APA
is added to the Alist.
4 Tests and Evaluation
We have manually tested dar on randomly cho-
sen texts and dialogues from our collections.
The performance of dar on dialogues has been
compared with that of es00. The function
for resolving IPAs (ResolveIpa) has similarly
been tested on texts, where APAs were ex-
cluded. We have compared the obtained re-
sults with those obtained by testing bfp (Bren-
nan et al, 1987) and str98 (Strube, 1998).
In all tests the intrasentential anaphors have
been manually resolved and expletive and cat-
aphoric uses of pronouns have been marked and
excluded from the test. Dialogue act units were
marked and classified by three annotators fol-
lowing (Eckert and Strube, 2000). The relia-
bility for the two annotation tasks (?-statistics
(Carletta, 1996)) was of 0.94 and 0.90 respec-
tively. Pronominal anaphors were marked, clas-
sified and resolved by two annotators. The ?-
statistics for the pronoun classification was 0.86.
In few cases (one in the texts and two in the dia-
logues) where the annotators did not agree upon
resolution, the pronouns were marked as am-
biguous and were excluded from the test. The
results obtained for bfp and str98 are given in
table 1, while the results of dar?s ResolveIpa
are given in table 2. In the tables CR stands for
?correctly resolved?, HR stands for ?resolved
by humans?, RA stands for ?resolved over all?,
P stands for precision and R stands for recall.
Because dar both classifies and resolves anaph-
ors, both precision and recall (respect to hu-
man resolution) are given in table 2. The re-
sults indicate that ResolveIpa performs sig-
nificantly better than bfp and str98 on the
type of x?
IPA APA IPA/APA?
ResolveIPA-new ResolveAPA x weak?
x weak? yes no
yes no ResolveIpa-new ResolveApa
look in Alist x = det x = dette x = det her
resolve look in Alist look in Alist mark
as es00 as es00 prefer subclause as vague
Figure 4: ResolveDet
Danish texts. The better performance of dar
was due to the account of focal and parallelism
preferences, of the different reference mecha-
nisms of personal and demonstrative pronouns
and to the enlarged resolution scope. Further-
more dar recognises some generic pronouns and
inferable pronouns and excludes them from res-
olution, but often fails to recognise antecedent-
less and inferable plural pronouns, because it
finds a plural nominal in the preceding discourse
and proposes it as antecedent. The lack of com-
monsense knowledge explains many incorrectly
resolved anaphors. The results of the test of
algorithm CR HR P
bfp 513 645 79.53
str98 524 645 81.24
Table 1: Results of bfp and str98 on texts
CR RA HR P R
575 651 645 88.33 89.14
Table 2: Results of ResolveIpa on texts
the dar algorithm on written texts are in ta-
ble 3. These results are good compared with the
results of the function ResolveIpa (table 2).
The discriminating rules identify correctly IPAs
and APAs in the large majority of the cases.
Recognition failure often involves pronouns in
contexts which are not covered by the discrim-
inating rules. In particular dar fails to resolve
singular neuter gender pronouns with distant
antecedents and to identify vague anaphors, be-
cause it always ?finds? an antecedent in the con-
text ranking. Correct resolution in these cases
requires a deep analysis of the context. The
results of applying dar and es00 on Danish di-
alogues are reported in table 4.8 The results of
the tests indicate that dar resolves IPAs sig-
nificantly better than es00 (which uses str98).
8We extended es00 with the Danish-specific identifi-
cation rules before applying it.
resolution IPA
CR RA HR P R
560 651 645 86.02 86.82
resolution APA
CR RA HR P R
68 87 77 78.16 88.31
Table 3: Results of dar on texts
dar correctly resolves more Danish demonstra-
tive pronouns than es00, because it accounts
for language-specific particularities. In general,
however, the resolution results for APAs are
similar to those obtained for es00. This is not
surprising, because dar uses the same resolu-
tion strategy on these pronouns. dar performs
better on texts than on dialogues. This reflects
the more complex nature of dialogues. The re-
sults indicate that the IPA/APA discriminat-
ing rules also work well on dialogues. The cases
of resolution failure were the same as for the
texts. As an experiment we applied dar on the
resolution IPA
Algorithm CR RA HR P R
ES00 258 411 414 62.77 62.31
DAR 289 386 414 74.87 68.81
resolution APA
Algorithm CR RA HR P R
ES00 179 286 269 62.59 66.54
DAR 199 277 269 71.84 73.98
Table 4: Results of es00 and dar on dialogues
dialogues without relying on the predefined di-
alogue structure. In this test the recognition of
IPAs and APAs was still good, however the suc-
cess rate for IPAs was of 60.1 % and for APAs
was of only 39.3%. Many errors were due to
the fact that antecedents were searched for in
the preceding discourse in linear order and that
ungrounded utterances were included in the dis-
course model.
5 Concluding Remarks
In this paper we presented dar, an algorithm
for resolving IPAs and APAs in Danish texts
and dialogues. In dar differences between the
referential characteristics of Danish weak and
strong pronouns are accounted for and a novel
strategy for resolving individual anaphors is
proposed. This strategy combines givenness
with focality preferences to model salience and
also accounts for parallelism preferences. dar
performs significantly better on IPAs than al-
gorithms which only rely on givenness-based
salience models.
dar extends the es00 strategy of classify-
ing and resolving (some types of) APAs. The
tests of dar indicate that the es00?s approach
of recognising APAs is also promising for texts
and other languages than English.
dar has not been compared with phora
which is the only abstract anaphora algorithm
implemented. We find the algorithm very inter-
esting because it addresses many of the same
phenomena, but with different strategies. It
would be useful to combine some of these strate-
gies with the approaches proposed in dar and
es00 to improve the still problematic resolution
of abstract anaphors.
References
S. F. Brennan, M. W. Friedman, and C. J. Pol-
lard. 1987. A Centering Approach to Pro-
nouns. In Proceedings of the ACL?87, pages
155?162, CA.
D. Byron and J. Allen. 1998. Resolving demon-
strative pronouns in the trains93 corpus. In
Proceedings of DAARC 2, pages 68?81.
D. K. Byron. 2002. Resolving Pronominal Ref-
erence to Abstract Entities. In Proceedings of
the ACL 2002.
J. Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on clas-
sification tasks. The kappa statistic. In Com-
putational Linguistics, 22(2):249?254.
D. Duncker and J. Hermann. 1996. Patien-
tord og l?geord - s?rord eller f?llesord?
M?anedsskrift for Praktisk L?gegerning, pages
1019?1030.
M. Eckert and M. Strube. 2000. Dialogue acts,
synchronising units and anaphora resolution.
Journal of Semantics, 17:51?89.
F. Gregersen and I. L. Pedersen, editors. 1991.
The Copenhagen study in urban sociolinguis-
tics. Reitzel.
B. J. Grosz and C. L. Sidner. 1986. Attention,
Intentions, and the Structure of Discourse.
Computational Linguistics, 12(3):175?284.
B. Grosz, A. K. Joshi, and S. Weinstein. 1995.
Centering:A Framework for Modeling the Lo-
cal Coherence of Discourse. Computational
Linguistics, 21(2):203?225.
J. K. Gundel, N. Hedberg, and R. Zacharski.
1993. Cognitive status and the form of re-
ferring expressions in discourse. Language,
69(2):274?307.
E. Hajic?ova?, P. Kubon?, and V. Kubon?. 1990.
Hierarchy of Salience and Discourse Analy-
sis and Production. In H. Karlgren, editor,
Proceedings of COLING?90, volume III, pages
144?148, Helsinki.
K. A. Jensen. 1989. Projekt invandrerdansk.
Technical report, Copenhagen University.
M. Kameyama. 1996. Indefeasible Semantics
and Defeasible Pragmatics. In M. Kanazawa,
C. Pin?on, and H. de Stwart, editors, Quanti-
fiers, Deduction and Context, pages 111?138.
CSLI, Stanford, CA.
C. Navarretta. 2002. Combining Informa-
tion Structure and Centering-based Mod-
els of Salience for Resolving Intersenten-
tial Pronominal Anaphora. In A. Branco,
T. McEnery, and R.Mitkov, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the 4th DAARC, pages 135?140.
Edic?oes Colibri.
C. Navarretta. 2004. . In Proceedings of Refer-
ence Resolution and Its Applications Work-
shop at ACL 2004, Barcelona, Spain.
E. F. Prince. 1981. Toward a taxonomy of
given-new information. In P. Cole, editor,
Radical Pragmatics, Academic Press, pages
223?255.
C. Sidner. 1983. Focusing in the Comprehen-
sion of Definite Anaphora. In M. Brady and
R. Berwick, editors, Computational Models of
Discourse, MIT Press, pages 267?330.
P. Sgall, E. Hajic?ova?, and J. Panevova?. 1986.
The Meaning of the Sentence in its Semantic
and Pragmatic Aspects. Reidel, Dordrecht.
M. Strube. 1998. Never Look Back: An Al-
ternative to Centering. In Proceedings of
COLING-ACL?98, II, pages 1251?1257.
M. Strube and C. Mu?ller. 2003. A ma-
chine learning approach to pronoun resolu-
tion in spoken dialogue. In Proceedings of the
ACL?03, pages 168?175.
B. L. Webber. 1991. Structure and Osten-
sion in the Interpretation of Discourse Deixis.
Natural Language and Cognitive Processes,
6(2):107?135, January.
Abstract Anaphora Resolution in Danish 
Costanza  Navar re t ta  
Center for Sprogteknologi 
Njalsgade 80 
2300 Kcbenhavn S 
costanza@cst.ku.dk 
Abst rac t  
In this paper 1 I describe the use 
of Danish pronouns and deictics 
in dialogues. Then I present an 
adaptation to Danish of Eckert 
and Strube's algorithm for resolv- 
ing anaphora referring to individ- 
ual NPs and abstract objects in En- 
glish dialogues (Eckert and Strube, 
1999b; Eckert and Strube, 1999a). 
The adapted algorithm is tested on 
four Danish dialogues from two dia- 
logue collections and the results ob- 
tained are evaluated. 
.1 In t roduct ion  
Many natural language processing applica- 
tions involve the complex task of resolving 
anaphora. Different strategies for anaphora 
resolution have been proposed, some exclu- 
sively relying on the syntactic structure of 
discourse, some including semantic and prag- 
matic constraints, some based on statisti- 
cal methods. One of the most popular ap- 
proaches to anaphora resolution is center- 
ing (Grosz et al, 1995), henceforth GJW95, 
which accounts for the relation between the 
saliency of entities in discourse and the use 
of referring expressions, incorporating syn- 
tax, semantics and pragmatics. Centering fits 
into Grosz and Sidner's model of discourse 
structure (Grosz and Sidner, 1986). In this 
model a discourse is composed of segments 
which exhibit global coherence. A discourse 
1This work has been carried out under Staging, 
an on-going Danish project funded by the Danish Re- 
search Councils. 
segment, on the other hand, is composed of 
a sequence of utterances which exhibit local 
coherence. This latter phenomenon is ac- 
counted for by centering theory. Centering 
predicts that there is a connection between 
the coherence of a referring expression and 
the inference load necessary to resolve it. Al- 
though Grosz, Joshi and Weinstein recognize 
that many factors determine the prominence 
of entities in an utterance, in GJW95 this 
prominence is established simply by the linear 
order of the entities in the utterance. Differ- 
ent centering algorithms have been presented, 
spelling out the strategy described in GJW95, 
extending the theory to more linguistic phe- 
nomena or specifying the concept of promi- 
nence of discourse ntities. Strube and Hahn 
(Strube, 1998; Strube and H~.hn, 1999) in par- 
ticular, calculate prominence considering the 
information structure of the utterances (func- 
tional centering). 2 The prominence ranking 
they adopt does not exclusively rely on word 
order, which is language dependent. More- 
over GJW95 only dealt with intersentential 
anaphora, while Strnbe and Hahn account 
for both intrasentential nd intersentential, 
pronominal and nominal anaphora,  
Centering-based algorithms have been 
tested on written texts. Recently they have 
also been applied to written dialogues. Byron 
and Stent (1998), in particular, test center- 
ing on multi-party dialogues. They conclude 
that centering seems to be a valid theory also 
in this case, but it must be extended to ac- 
2In (Strube and Hah~ 1996) a functional-based 
prominence ranking has been proposed. 
SAn other extension of the centering framework 
to intrasentential anaphora has been proposed by 
Kameyama (1998). 
56 
count for dialogne-specific aspects uch as the 
definition of utterance boundaries, the speci- 
fication of a strategy for tackling partial ut- 
terances and including discourse participants 
in the list of relevant discourse ntities. 
Eckert and Strube (1999a; 1999b), hence- 
forth ES99, describe an algorithm for resolv- 
ing anaphors referring to individual NPs and 
abstract objects in English dialogues. The al- 
gorithm is based on rules for discriminating 
among the two types of anaphor based on the 
predicative contexts in which the anaphors 
occur. The individual anaphors are then re- 
solved by the functional centering algorithm 
described in (Strube, 1998), while abstract 
anaphors are resolved with a different algo- 
rithm. ES99 test the approach on selected 
dialogues and obtain a precision of 63,6% 
for discourse deictics and 66,2% for individ- 
ual anaphors. They report that most errors 
are due to the inability to distinguish be- 
tween discourse deictics and pronouns which 
vaguely refer to concepts in the preceding dis- 
course (vague anaphors). Another cause of er- 
ror is the lack of information about abstract 
nominals. I believe that the strategy followed 
by ES99 is a good starting point for inves- 
tigating how far one can go in resolving in- 
dividual and abstract anaphors in dialogues 
on the basis of the local contexts in which the 
anaphors occur. I have adapted the algorithm 
so it accounts for Danish data and have ap- 
plied it to Danish dialogues. 4 
In section 2 I shortly present he original 
centering framework and functional centering 
as described in (Strube, 1998), $98. In sec- 
tion 3 Eckert and Strube's algorithm is in- 
troduced and in 4 the Danish personal and 
demonstrative prononn~ are described with 
focus on discourse deictics in dialogues. In 
section 5 1 present my adaptation of the ES99- 
algorithm to Danish data. Section 6 con- 
talus an evaluation of the results obtained by 
manually testing the adapted ES99-algorithm 
on randomly selected ialogues from the col- 
lection "Samtale hos Leegen" (Conversation 
at the doctor's) (SL) and "ProjektIndvaudr- 
4Centering-based algorithms have recently been 
tested on Danish discourse (Navarretta, 2000). 
erdansk" (Project Immigrant Danish) (PID), 
collected by researchers at the Department of 
General and Applied Linguistics of the Uni- 
versity of Copenhagen. In section 7 I outline 
future work for improving the results of the al- 
gorithm and make some concluding remarks. 
2 Center ing  
In GJW95 the entities which link an utterance 
Un to the others in the same discourse seg- 
ment are the centers of that utterance. Each 
utterance is assigned a set of forward-looking 
centers, Cf, and, with the exception of the 
initial utterance of the segment, a backward- 
looking center, Cb. The Cb of an utterance Un 
connects with one of the forward-looking cen- 
ters of the preceding utterance Un-1 while the 
forward-looking centers only depend on the 
expressions in Un. The forward-looking cen- 
ters are partially ordered to reflect relative 
prominence. GJW95 recognize three types of 
transition relation across pairs of utterances: 
continue, retain and shift (see table 1). 
Center movement and realization are con- 
strained by two rules: 
Rule I: If any element of CCf(U~-i) is real- 
ized by a pronoun in Un, then Cb(Un) 
must also be realized by a pronoun 
Rule 2: Center continuation is preferred to 
center etaining which is preferred to cen- 
ter shifting 
2.1 Functional Centering 
In $98 the functions of the backward-looking 
center and the transitions in the centering 
theory are replaced by the order of elements 
in a list of salient discourse ntities, the S- 
list. The ranking criteria for the elements in 
the S-list are based on (Prince, 1981), where 
discourse entities are classified into hearer- 
old (OLD), mediated (MED) and hearer-new 
(NEW). The two tuples (x, Uttx, posx) and 
(y, utty, posy) in the S-list indicate that the 
entity x is evoked in utterance uttx at posi- 
tion posx and that y is evoked in utterance 
utty at position posy respectively. Given that 
Uttx and utty refer to Un or Un-1, the follow- 
57 
Table 1: Transition States 
OR no Cb(U.-1) 
CONTINUE 
RETAIN 
SHIFT  
ing ranking constraints on the S-list entities 
are valid (Strube, 1998)\[p.1253\]: s 
1. i f xEOLDandyEMED,  thenx~y 
if x E OLD and y E NEW, then x --< y 
i fx  E MED and y E NEW, then x ~ y 
2. if x,y  E OLD or x,y  E MED or x,y E 
NEW, 
then if uttx > Utty then x ~ y 
if utt~ = utty and posz < posy then x -~ y 
The S98-algorithm Consists in testing a re- 
ferring expression against he elements in the 
S-list from left to right until the test suc- 
ceeds. The S-list is then updated so that new 
elements are inserted according to the S-list 
ranking criteria. When the analysis of an ut- 
terance is finished all the entities which were 
not realized in the utterance axe removed from 
the S-list. 
3 Ecker t  and  St rube 's  A lgor i thm 
ES99 propose a new algorithm for resolving 
anaphors with abstract object antecedents. 
Analyzing a collection of telephone conversa- 
tions they distinguish the following anaphor 
types: individual anaphors, discourse deic- 
tics, inferrable-evoked anaphors 6 and vague 
anaphors. Other types of pronoun are not 
taken into consideration. 
Predicates that are preferentially associ- 
ated with abstract objects are marked as I- 
incompat ib le  (*I) while predicates that are 
preferentially associated with individual ob- 
jects are marked as A - incompat ib le  (*A). 
5I mark ranking precedence with ~. 
61nferrable-evoked anaphors refe~ to the use of the 
plttral pronoun they indirectly co-specifying with a 
singular NP which indicates a country or an institu- 
tion. 
ES99 define the following *I predicates 
(Eckert and Strube, 1999b)\[p. 40\]: 
Equating constructions where a pronom- 
inal referent is equated with an abstract 
object, e.g., x is making it easy, x is a 
suggestion. 
Copula constructions whose adjectives 
can only be applied to abstract entities, 
e.g., x is true, x ks false, x is correct, x is 
right, x isn't right. 
Arguments of verbs describing 
propositional attitude which take 
S'-complements, e.g., assume. 
Object of do. 
Predicate or anaphoric referent is a "rea- 
son", e.g., x is because I like her, x is why 
he's late. 
Predicates that are preferentially associ- 
ated with individual objects are the following 
(Eckert and Strube, 1999b)\[p. 40\]: 
Equating constructions where a pronom- 
inal referent is equated with a concrete 
individual referent, e.g., x is a ear. 
Copula constructions with adjectives 
which can only be applied to concrete n- 
tities, e.g., x is expensive, x is tasty, x is 
loud. 
Arguments of verbs describing physi- 
cal contact/stimulation, which cannot be 
used anaphorically, e.g., break x, smash z, 
eat x, drink x, smell x but NOT *see x 
Grounded acts are used as domain for the 
anaphor resolution algorithms in dialogues. 
58 
In particular two dialogue acts, In i t iat ions 
(Is) and Acknowledgments  (As) are rec- 
ognized. Is have semantic ontent, while As 
are only used to ground the preceding I. Ac- 
knowledgments / In i t ia t ions  (A/ Is)  are di- 
alogue acts that have both the function of 
grounding the preceding I and that of estab- 
lishing a new I. An I and the correspond- 
ing A, together with longer Is in the same 
turn-taking which do not need to be acknowl- 
edged, constitute a Synchroniz ing Uni t  
(SU). Short Is which are not acknowledged 
are ignored by the resolution algorithms. 
ES99 follow i.a. (Webber, 1991) in assum- 
ing that anaphoric discourse deictic reference 
involves reference coercion and that only dis- 
course sections adjacent to the anaphor or, 
using Webber's terminology, sections on the 
right frontier of the discourse structure tree, 
are available for discourse-deictic reference. 
Like (Asher, 1993) they assume that the type 
of abstract object is determined by the con- 
text in which the anaphor occurs. Anaphora 
referring to abstract objects are resolved us- 
ing a list, the A-list. The A-list is only filled 
when discourse deictics occur and its elements 
remain for one I. The parts of the linguistic 
contexts are accessed in the following order: 
1. the A-list; 2. in the same I the clause to the 
left of the clause which contains the anaphor; 
3. within the previous I the rightmost main 
clause and subordinated clauses to its right; 
4. within previous Is the rightmost complete 
sentence, if previous I is an incomplete sen- 
tence. 
The anaphora resolution algorithm for 
third person singular neuter personal pro- 
nouns is the following (Eckert and Strube, 
1999a): 
case  PRO is I - incompat ib le  
if resolveDiscourseDeictic(P RO ) 
then  classify as discourse deictic 
else classify as vague pronoun; 
case  PRO is A - incompat ib le  
if  resolveIndividual (PRO ) 
then  classify as individual pronoun 
else classify as vague pronoun; 
case  PRO is ambiguous 
if  resolveIndividual(PRO ) 
then  classify as individual pronoun 
else i f  resolveDiscourseDeictic(PRO) 
then  classify as discourse deictic 
else classify as vague pronoun; 
The same algorithm is used for demon- 
stratives, with the exception that the last 
two if constructions in the algorithm for pro- 
nouns are reversed reflecting the preference 
for demonstratives to be discourse deictics 
(Webber, 1991). 
4 Dan ish  Data  
In this section I shortly describe Danish third 
person personal and possessive pronouns and 
demonstrative pronouns. The description fo- 
cuses on the discourse deictic use of these pro- 
nouns based on occurrences in three Danish 
dialogue collections, Bysoc, 7 SL and P ID .  
My description is also based on (Allan et al, 
1995). The third person singular personal and 
possessive pronouns can be found in table 2, 
while the third person plural personal and 
possessive pronouns can be found in table 3. s 
Den, det and de are also used as defi- 
nite articles (the) and demonstrative deter- 
miners (this/that and these/those). In spo- 
ken language the demonstratives are always 
stressed. 9 Den, det, de are demonstratives 
if followed by the adverbials her and der in 
which case they correspond to the English 
this/these and that/those respectively. Fur- 
thermore, the demonstratives denne, dette 
(this) and disse (these) exist. 
Femjnlne and masculine pronouns generally 
co-refer 1? with persons, but can also refer to 
pets as in English. Common gender pronouns 
refer to common gender nouns which do not 
denote humans. Common gender nouns de- 
noting humans are neutral as to the sex of 
the person they refer to. Thus the gender of 
7The Bysoc corpus has been collected by re- 
searchers at Copenhagen University under "Projekt 
Bysociolingvistik" (Project Urban Sociolinguistics). 
SThe Danish reflexive pronouns are used differently 
than the English ones, see i.a. (Neville, 1998). 
9Because I do not have access to phonetic infor- 
mation about the considered ialogues I cannot ac- 
count for important phenomena such as intonation 
and prosody, see i.a. (Vallduv~ and Engdahl, 1995). 
1?From now on I will simply write "refer to". 
59 
Table 2: Third person singular pronouns 
gender  sub jec t  ob jec t  ref lexive possess ive pos.ref l .  
feminine hun she hende her sig herself hendes hers si-nJtJne hers 
masculine 
COmmOn 
neuter 
han he 
den it 
det it 
ham him sig himself 
den it sig itself 
det it sig itself 
hans his si-nftfne his 
dens its si-n/tfne its 
dets its si-n/t/ne its 
Table 3: Third person plural pronouns 
Lsubject I ?b Jeer Lre exive IP? I 
de they dem them sig themselves deres their / theirs 
the referring pronoun corresponds to the sex 
of the person the noun refers to. 
Neuter gender pronouns are used to refer 
to neuter nouns. They can also refer to a 
few common person nouns in neuter gender, 
such as barn (child) and menneske (person) 
if the sex of the person is unknown or irrel- 
evant (syntactic agreement). In case the sex 
is known or relevant, the appropriate femi- 
nine or masculine pronouns are used (seman- 
tic agreement). The two cases are illustrated 
in the following examples: 
barnet var pd millimeter sd stort 
det skulle v,~re i l,~ngden og i hov- 
edstcrrelsen og... 
(the child was precisely as high as it 
ought to be and its head was as big 
as it ought to and...  ) 
sd ch... jeg kunne gd ud \]or jeg 
havde mit barnebarn reed pd tre et 
halvt dr sd..., kunne jeg jo bare holde 
hami  hdnden 
(so oh... I could leave because I was 
together with my three and half year 
old grandchild so..., I could just hold 
his hand) 
Both den and det can refer to collective 
nouns. In this case the choice between the 
singular den or det and plural de depends on 
whether the speaker focuses on the collective 
meaning or on the individuals. Det and in 
few idiomatic expressions den are also used 
as expletives. 
In Danish the most frequently used dis- 
course deictic is det which corresponds to it, 
this or that. Other discourse deictics are det 
her (this) and det der (that). These two deic- 
tics can be used in most of the same contexts 
as det, although there seems to be a prefer- 
ence for using them to refer to several clauses. 
The neuter demonstrative dette (this) has also 
a discourse deictic use, but is mostly used in 
written language. I did not found any occur- 
rences of it in the three dialogue collections. 
As discourse deictic det refers to an infini- 
tive or a clause, as it is the case in the follow- 
ing examples: 
At ryge er \]arligt og det er ogsd dyrt 
(Smoking is dangerous and it is also 
expensive) 
A: Du skal rage en blodprcve 
(You have to take a blood test) 
B: Hvorffor det? 
(Why that.*) 
Det is also used as the subject complement 
of vmre (be) and blive (become) in answers. 
A: Blev du ff,~rdig reed opgaven? 
(Were you done with the task?) 
B: Ja, det blev jeg 
(lit. Yes, that was I) 
(Yes, I was) 
Det refers to a verb phrase when it is used 
as the object complement for the verb have 
(have), gCre (do) and modal verbs as in 
60 
Alle faldt, men det gjorde jeg ikke 
(lit. All fell, but that did I not) 
(All fell, but I did not) 
Det refers to a clause in constructions with 
attitude verbs and other verbs which take 
clausal complements, uch as synes (think), 
fro (believe) and vide (know), sige (say), hdbe 
(hope): 
A: Det begynder snart at regne. 
(It will soon begin to rain) 
B: Det hdber jeg ikke 
(lit. That hope I not) 
(I hope not) 
In the latter three cases the pronoun det is 
often topicalized, i.e. it appears before the 
main verb, in the place that usually is occu- 
pied by the subject 11. 
Det can also refer to more clauses, or to 
something that can vaguely be inferred from 
the discourse. 
A: barnets .far chin ... 
(the baby's father uhm ...) 
B: ja 
(yes) 
A: havde alvorlig, 
ch. . . spmdbcrnsgulsot da han 
blev fcdt 
(had serious, uh ... infant icterus 
when he was born) 
B: ja 
(yes) 
A: og fik sd ogs~ skirter sit blod ikke 
ogs~ 
(and then he also got a blood 
transfusion, didn't he) 
B: mmh 
A: det havde hans storebror ogs~i 
(lit. that had his brother too) 
(his brother had it too) 
B: ja 
(yes) 
A: og er blevet hjerneskadet afdet 
(and he got brain damage from it) 
B: ja 
11This position is called fundamentfelt (actualiza- 
tion field) by (Diderichsen, 1984 1946). 
(yes) 
A: altsd jeg red ikke om deter  noget 
jeg skal, om deL skal skrives nogen 
steder eller gCres noget red 
(so I don't know whether it is 
something I should do, whether it 
should be written somewhere or 
something should be done) 
In the above example the deictics in the 
last utterance do not refer to a single clause 
or predicate, but to the whole family history 
of icterus. 
To conclude, Danish deictics are used in 
more contexts than the English ones. Espe- 
cially noticeable is the Danish use of discourse 
deictics in cases where elliptical constructions 
are normal in English. 12 
5 The Adapted ES99-algorithm 
On the basis of the deictics in the two Danish 
dialogue corpora, SL and P ID  I have estab- 
lished the following *I predicates for Danish: 
constructions where a pronoun is equated 
with an abstract object, e.g., x er et 
forslag (x is a suggestion) 
copula constructions with adjectives 
which can only be applied to abstract en- 
tities, such as x er sandt (x is true), x er 
usandt (x is untrue), x er rigtigt (x is 
correct) 
arguments of verbs which take S'- 
complements, e.g., fro (believe), antage 
(ass-me), mene (think), sige (say) 
anaphoric referent in constructions such 
as x er /ordi du er holdt op reed at ryge 
(x is because you have stopped smoking) 
x er pd grund af at duer  gravid (x is 
because you are pregnant) 
? object of g#re (do) 
* subject complement with vmre (be) and 
blive (become) in answers 
12I have not included in the description cataphoric 
deictic pronouns. 
61 
? object of have (have) if" the verb was not 
used as a main verb in the previous clause 
? object of modal verbs 
The last four predicates are specific for 
Danish. I have assumed the following *A 
predicates, which are mainly' translations of 
the English ones: 
? constructions where a pronominal refer- 
ent is equated with a concrete individual 
referent, such as x er en legemsdel (x is 
a body part), x er et barn (x is a baby) 
? copula constructions with adjectives 
which can only be applied to concrete n- 
tities, such as x er rcdt (x is red) 
? arguments of verbs describing physical 
contact/stimulation, which cannot be 
used anaphorically, e.g. spise x (eat x), 
drikke x (drink x) 
As Eckert and Strube notice for English, 
also in Danish there are cases where the con- 
texts of an anaphor can allow both an in- 
dividual NP and an abstract object. Some 
examples are copula constructions like x er 
godt /ddr l ig t  (x is good/bad), and objects of 
verbs such as elske (love), hade (hate), fore- 
traekke (prefer). To partially accomodate his, 
I have added the following condition to the 
algorithm: in the above cases the anaphor is 
classified as A* incompatible unless the pre- 
vious clause contain.~ a raising adjective con- 
struction in which case it is considered I* in- 
compatible. Consider the fi)llowing two ex- 
amples: 
Peter  boede ie t  r~dt hus. Det 
hadede han. 
(Peter lived in a red house. He 
hated it.) 
Deter  dcdsygt at sidde pd et vaskeri. 
Det hader jeg. 
(It is boring to be in a laundry. I 
hate it) 
In the first example the algorithm chooses 
et r~dt hus (a red house) as the antecedent 
of det, while in the second example the algo- 
rithm chooses at sidde pd et vaskeri (being in 
a laundry) instead of et vaskeri. There are 
cases, similar to the first example, where it is 
impossible, without a deeper analysis of the 
discourse to determine whether an anaphor 
refers to an individual NP or an abstract ob- 
ject. 
In the test I have taken into account the 
metaphorical uses of verbs encoded in a se- 
mantic lexicon, the Danish SIMPLE lexicon 
(Pedersen and Nimb, 2000). 
From the analysis of anaphors in the con- 
sidered ialogue collections I found that many 
individual anaphors refer back to entities 
which have not been evoked in the immedi- 
ately preceding utterances (SUs) and thus 
they would not be on the S-list (the enti- 
ties which are not evoked in the current SU 
are removed from the list). Thus I have ex- 
tended the scope of resolution for all individ- 
ual anaphors except the neutral singular. If 
an antecedent to an individual NP cannot be 
resolved by looking at the actual S-list, the 
elements on the S-lists for the preceding SUs 
are considered. 13
6 Eva luat ion  o f  the  A lgor i thm 
I have applied the modified ES99-algorithm to
three randomly selected SL dialogues (6,305 
words) and to one of the dialogues between 
native Danes recorded in the P ID  collection 
(5,367 words). It must be noted that in my 
test only one annotator (the author) iden- 
tiffed dialogue acts, classified the anaphors 
in the dialogues, marked NPs and anaphor 
antecedents. In (Eckert and Strube, 1999a) 
these tasks have been accomplished by two 
annotators. 
In dividing the three SL dialogues into dis- 
course segments I have mainly used a parti- 
tion made by two researchers at the Univer- 
sity of Copenhagen i an independent project. 
The discrimination criteria were topic shift 
and a few linguistic clues. I have then ap- 
IsI have followed the cache model described in 
(Walker, 1998). In the present est it was necessary to 
go back maximally seven SUs to find an antecedent 
to an individual pronominal anaphor. 
62 
plied the same discrimination criteria to the 
dialogue from the PID collection. 
I have defined dialogue units syntactically 
following (Eckert and Strube, 1999a). 14 
Because it is not always possible to dis- 
tinguish between den, det, de used as per- 
sonal or demonstrative pronouns without hav- 
ing access to stress information, I have classi- 
fied them as personal pronouns unless they 
are topicalized, or occur in syntactic con- 
structions where demonstratives are normally 
used. The manual classification of pronouns 
and demonstratives in the four dialogues can 
be found in table 4. 
The results of the individual anaphora reso- 
lution algorithm can be found in table 5, while 
the results of the discourse deictics resolution 
algorithm are given in table 6. 
The results obtained are better than those 
reposed in (Eckert and Strube, 1999a), but I 
have used more background information than 
ES99 and extended the scope of resolution for 
individual anaphors (without this extension 
the precision of the individual resolution al- 
gorithm was of 64.5). Furthermore the Dan- 
ish deictic det occurs in more contexts than 
the English it, this and that, thus there are 
more I* predicates in the Danish version of 
the algorithm than in the original one. The 
fact that only one annotator divided the dia- 
logues into SUs may also have influenced the 
results. 
The algorithm classifies anaphors and re- 
solves some of them, thus there are two types 
of error, classification errors and resolution er- 
rors. Most of the instances of wrongly classi- 
fied anaphors are due to the fact that the al- 
gorithm classifies vague anaphors as discourse 
deictics and then resolves the anaphor to a 
preceding predicate or clause. Few errors are 
due to the fact, already noticed by ES99, that 
the defined I* and A* predicates do not con- 
tain information about nominals referring to 
abstract objects. 15 These errors resulted in 
most cases in resolution errors. 
Some errors are due to the inability to find 
14The dialogue collections have been tagged. 
15The semantic lexicon I used did not contain the 
relevant nominals. 
an individual NP antecedent to the pronoun 
det, when this refers generally to an NP of dif- 
ferent gender 16 and to wrongly resolved plu- 
ral pronouns with complex NP antecedents or
with no antecedent. Correctly classified, but 
wrongly resolved discourse deictics are, i.a., 
due to the fact that I did not mark in any 
particular way parenthetical utterances. The 
latter kind of errors are chaining errors. In 
table 7 the occurrences of each type of error 
are reported. 
7 Conc lud ing  Remarks  
The adapted ES99-algorithm has been tested 
on two kinds of dialogue, that have been clas- 
sifted by one annotator. Although the types 
of dialogue in the Danish test is quite different 
from that used by ES99, the results reported 
in the previous section (6) indicate that the 
algorithm performs as well for Danish as for 
Enghsh. Because the use of Danish pronouns, 
especially those referring to abstract objects, 
is different from the English one, these results 
provide an interesting evaluation of the algo- 
rithm. 
As noticed by ES99, adding more lexical 
knowledge to the algorithm could improve its 
performance. I also beheve that the con- 
texts of abstract anaphors hould be studied 
in more dialogues, and that more attention 
should be given to the connection between 
discourse deictics and the relations that \]in~ 
pieces of discourse to each other (Webber, 
1991; Fraurud, 1992; Asher, 1993; Kehler, 
1997). 
Further work will thus consist in analyzing 
the occurrences of discourse deictics in both 
written texts and dialogues and paying 
additional attention to the relations linking 
pieces of discourse to each other (i.a. (Hobbs, 
1979; Mann and Thompson, 1987; Polanyi, 
1988) 
leThe use of especially generic plural pronouns in 
Swedish is discussed in (Fraurud, 1992). 
63 
Table 4: Classification of Pronouns and Demonstratives 
A5 AA10 AAl l  TR3'  ~ 
Individual Pro 39 43 34 51 167 
Discourse Deictics Pro 25 16 17 34 92 
Vague Pro 4 6 0 2 12 
Inferrable Evoked 1 0 0 2 3 
Individual Dem 1 5 0 4 10 
Discourse Deictics Dem 27 20 19 28 94 
Vague Dem 2 5 3 3 13 
Table 5: Results of the Individual Anaphora Resolution Algorithm 
A5 AA10 AAl l  TR1 
No. resolved correctly 31 40 23 40 134 
No. of Individual Pro 41 48 34 57 I 180 
Precision 0.756 0.833 0.676 0.701~0.744 
Table 6: Results of the Discourse Deictics Resolution Algorithm 
No. resolved correctly 
No. of Discourse Deictics 
Precision 
A5 AA10 AAl l  TR1 
43 25 33 49 147 
58 47 39 67 211 
0.741 0.489 0.846 0.716 0.696 
Table 7: Wrongly resolved anaphors 
DD-vague 10 
wrongly resolved plural 13 
generic det 7 
abstract nomina|~ 5 
individual anaphora instead of DD (% abstract nominals) 6 
~rrong!y resolved DD 28 
wrongly resolved individual anaphora (singular) 2 
chaining errors 39 
64 
References  
Robin Allan, Philip Holmes, and Tom Lundsk~er- 
Nielsen. 1995. Danish - A Comprehensive 
Grammar. Routledge, London. 
Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract 
Objects in Discourse, volume 50 of Studies in 
Linguistics and Philosophy. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Dordrecht, he Netherlands. 
D. Byron and A. Stent. 1998. A Preliminary 
Model of Centering in Dialog. In Proceedings 
of the 36th Annual Meeting, volume II, pages 
1475-1477. Association for Computational Lin- 
guistics. 
Paul Diderichsen. 1984-1946. Elementa;r Dansk 
Grammatik. Gyldendal, Copenhagen. 
Miriam Eckert and Michael Strube. 1999a. Dia- 
logue Acts, Syncchronising Units and Anaphora 
Resolution. In Jan van Kuppevelt, Robert van 
Leusen, Robert van Rooy, and Henk Zeevat, 
editors , Amstelogue '99 Proceedings - Workshop 
on the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue. 
Miriam Eckert and Michael Strube. 1999b. Re- 
solving Discourse Deictic Anaphora in Dia- 
logues. In Proceedings of the 9th Conference 
of the European Chapter of the Association of 
Computational Linguistics, pages 37--44. 
Kari Fraurud. 1992. Processing Noun Phrases in 
Natural Discourse. Department ofLinguistics - 
" Stockholm University. 
Barbara Grosz and Candace Sidner. 1986. Atten- 
tion, Intentions, and the Structure of Discourse. 
Computational Linguistics, 12(3):175-284. 
Barbara Grosz, Aravind K. Joshi, and Scott Wein- 
stein. 1995. Centering:A Framework for Mod- 
eling the Local Coherence of Discourse. Com- 
putational L inguistics~ 21(2):203-225. 
Jerry R. Hobbs. 1979. Coherence and Corefer- 
ence. Cognitive Science, 3(1):67-90. 
Megumi Kameyama. 1998. Intrasentential cen- 
tering: A case study. In Marilyn A. Walker, 
Aravind K. Joshi, and Ellen F Prince, editors, 
Centering Theory in Discourse, pages 89--112. 
Oxford University Press. 
Andrew Kehler. 1997. Current Theories of 
Centering for Pronoun Interpretation: A crit- 
ical Evaluation. Computational Linguistics, 
23 (3) :467-475. 
William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 
1987. Rhetorical Structure Theory: De- 
scription and Construction ofText Structures. 
In Gerard Kempen, editor, Natural Language 
Generation, number 135 in NATO ASI, pages 
85-95. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. 
Costanza Navarretta. 2000. Centering-based 
Anaphora Resolution in Danish. In Petr Sojka, 
Ivan Kopecek, and Karel Pala, editors, Pro- 
ceedings of the Third International Workshop 
on Text, Speech, Dialogue - TSD 2000, pages 
345-350, Brno, Czech Republic. 
Anne Neville. 1998. Subject-orientedness andEx- 
empt Anaphors. In Proceedings of the Xth Con- 
ference of Nordic and General Linguistics Uni- 
versity of Iceland, Reykjavik. 
Bolette S. Pedersen and Sanni Nimb. 2000. Se- 
mantic Encoding of Danish Verbs in SIMPLE - 
Adapting a verb-framed model to a satellite- 
framed language. In Proceeding from Sec- 
ond International Conference on Language Re- 
sources and Evaluation - LREC 2000, Athens. 
Livia Polanyi. 1988. A Formal Model of the 
Structure of Discourse. Journal of Pragmatics, 
12(5/6):601-638. 
Ellen F. Prince. 1981. Toward a taxonomy of 
given-new information. In Peter Cole, editor, 
Radical Pragmatics, pages 223-255. Academic 
Press. 
Michael Strube and Udo Hahn. 1996. Functional 
Centering. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual 
Meeting, pages 270-277. Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics. 
Michael Strube and Udo Hahn. 1999. Functional 
Centering - Grounding Referential Coherence 
in Information Structure. Computational Lin- 
guistics, 25(3):309-344. 
Michael Strube. 1998. Never Look Back: An Al- 
ternative to Centering. In Praeeedings of the 
36th Annual Meeting, volume II, pages 1251- 
1257. Association for Computational Linguis- 
tics. 
Enric Vallduv~ and Elisabet Engdahl. 1995. The 
linguistic realization of information packaging. 
Linguistics, 34(3):459-519. 
Marilyn A. Walker. 1998. Centering, Anaphora 
Resolution, and Discourse Structure. In Mari- 
lyn A. Walker, Aravind K. Joshi, and Ellen F. 
Prince, editors, Centering Theory in Discourse. 
Oxford University Press. 
Bonnie L. Webber. 1991.  Structure and 
Ostension in the Interpretation of Discourse 
Deixis. Natural Language and Cognitive Pro- 
cesses, 6(2):107-135. 
65 
An Algorithm for Resolving Individual and Abstract Anaphora in
Danish Texts and Dialogues
Costanza Navarretta
Center for Sprogteknologi
Njalsgade 80,
2300 Copenhagen S
costanza@cst.dk
Abstract
This paper describes the dar-algorithm for re-
solving intersentential pronominal anaphors re-
ferring to individual and abstract entities in
Danish texts and dialogues. Individual enti-
ties are resolved combining models which iden-
tify high degree of salience with high degree of
givenness (topicality) of entities in the hearer?s
cognitive model, e.g. (Grosz et al, 1995), with
Hajic?ova? et al?s (1990) salience account which
assigns the highest degree of salience to entities
in the focal part of an utterance in Information
Structure terms. These focal entities often in-
troduce new information in discourse. Anaph-
ors referring to abstract entities are resolved
with an extension of the algorithm presented
by Eckert and Strube (2000). Manual tests of
the dar-algorithm and other well-known reso-
lution algorithms on the same data show that
dar performs significantly better on most types
of anaphor.
1 Introduction
Most intersentential anaphor resolution al-
gorithms exclusively account for pronominal
anaphors with individual nominal antecedents
(henceforth IPAs) in texts. Less attention
has been given to pronominal anaphors which
refer to abstract entities evoked by verbal
phrases, clauses or discourse segments (hence-
forth APAs). However APAs are quite com-
mon in English dialogues, see i.a. (Byron and
Allen, 1998). Recently two algorithms for re-
solving APAs and IPAs in specific English dia-
logues have been proposed: Eckert and Strube?s
(2000) es00, Byron?s (2002) phora. APAs
are also frequent in Danish. We found that
15% of all pronominal anaphors in our texts
were APAs, while they constituted 48% of the
anaphors in the analysed dialogues. Further-
more third-person singular pronouns in neuter
gender which can be IPAs or APAs were APAs
in two-third of the cases in both texts and dia-
logues.
In this paper we describe an algorithm, called
dar, for resolving intersentential IPAs and
APAs in Danish.1 Unlike es00 and phora,
dar applies to both texts and dialogues.
Differing from most resolution algorithms,
dar correctly accounts for the resolution of pro-
nouns referring to newly introduced informa-
tion, as it is the case in examples (1) and (2).
(1) [Chefen]i fik kun [en s?n]k og [han]k gad
i hvert fald ikke videref?re familieforetagendet.
[pid]
([The boss]i had only [one son]k and [he]k surely
did not want to carry on the family business.)
(2) A: hvem...hvem arbejdede [din mor]i med?
(with whom... whom did [your mother]i work)
B: [Hun]i arbejdede med [vores nabo]k
([She]i worked with [our neighbour]k)
[Hun]k var enke ... havde tre s?nner [bysoc]
([She]k was a widow... had three sons)
In (1) the antecedent of the pronoun han
(he) is the indefinite object and not the more
?given? definite subject. In (2) the antecedent
of the second occurrence of the pronoun hun
(she) is the object vores nabo (our neighbour)
which provides the information requested in the
preceding question. This nominal is assigned
lower prominence than the subject pronoun hun
(she) in most salience models. To account for
this type of data the dar-algorithm proposes a
novel strategy combining two apparently con-
trasting accounts of salience of entities (Navar-
retta, 2002a). The first account, e.g. (Grosz et
al., 1995), assigns the highest degree of salience
to the most known (topical) entities in the dis-
course model, the second assigns the highest de-
gree of salience to entities in the focal part of ut-
terances in Information Structure terms which,
often, represent new information (Hajic?ova? et
1dar presupposes that intrasentential anaphors are
correctly resolved. At present no resolution algorithm
accounts for all uses of Danish intrasentential pronouns.
al., 1990).
dar was developed on the basis of the uses
of pronouns in three text collections and three
corpora of naturally-occurring dialogues. The
texts comprise computer manuals, henceforth
edb, novels and newspaper articles. The dia-
logue collections are sl (Duncker and Hermann,
1996), consisting of recorded conversations be-
tween GPs and their patients, the bysoc cor-
pus (Gregersen and Pedersen, 1991) and the pid
corpus (Jensen, 1989) both containing recorded
conversations about everyday subjects.
In the paper we first present related work
(section 2) then we discuss the background for
our proposal (section 3). In section 4 the dar-
algorithm is described. In section 5 we present
some tests of the algorithm, evaluate it and
compare its performance with the performance
of other known algorithms. Finally, in section 6,
we make some concluding remarks.
2 Related Work
The two algorithms for resolving IPAs and
APAs in English dialogues, es00 and phora,
recognise IPAs and APAs on the basis of se-
mantic constraints on the argument position oc-
cupied by the anaphors. Both algorithms ac-
count for differences in reference between per-
sonal and demonstrative pronouns. In es00
demonstrative pronouns preferentially refer to
abstract entities, while personal pronouns pref-
erentially refer to individual ones. es00 re-
solves IPAs applying Strube?s (1998) algorithm.
In phora the antecedents of personal pro-
nouns are searched for looking at their degree
of salience which is implemented by word order
as in (Grosz et al, 1995). Demonstratives, in-
stead, are searched for in the list of activated
entities (Gundel et al, 1993) containing non
NP antecedents, which are assumed to be less
salient. In phora demonstratives can also refer
to Kinds.
es00 requires that the structure of dialogues
has been marked. Byron?s phora-algorithm
does not rely on predefined dialogue structure,
but only searches for abstract antecedents of
APAs in the sentence preceding the anaphor.
Thus it does not account for APAs referring to
larger discourse segments. phora relies on both
semantic knowledge and a model of speech acts
and accounts for more phenomena than es00.
Differing from es00, phora has been imple-
mented. A very different strategy for resolv-
ing IPAs and APAs in spoken dialogues is pro-
posed in (Strube and Mu?ller, 2003). We will not
further discuss this proposal, but Strube and
Mu?ller?s machine learning approach is an inter-
esting attempt to automatically resolve anaph-
ors without relying on any domain specific re-
source or preannotated data.
3 Background for DAR
In most applied approaches pronominal anaph-
ora resolution is equivalent to determining
the antecedent domain and choosing the most
prominent or salient antecedent among possi-
ble candidates. Although there is not always an
identity relation between linguistic antecedents
and referents, we also follow this strategy, well
aware that it is particularly problematic for
APAs. In fact, the same linguistic expression
can evoke different abstract objects depending
on the context in which the APA occurs, see
(Webber, 1991).
Determining the degree of salience of dis-
course elements, henceforth DEs, is essential to
anaphor resolution because personal pronouns
refer to the most salient candidate antecedent
that matches the given predication (Sidner,
1983). Nearly all salience-based models iden-
tify high degree of salience with high degree of
givenness of DEs. In fact, although the vari-
ous algorithms use different criteria for ranking
DEs such as linear order, hierarchy of grammat-
ical roles, information structure, Prince?s Famil-
iarity Scale (Prince, 1981), they all assign the
highest prominence to the DEs which are most
topical, known, bound, familiar and thus given,
i.a. (Grosz et al, 1995; Brennan et al, 1987;
Strube and Hahn, 1996; Strube, 1998). Grosz et
al. (1995) also suggest that continuing speaking
about the same elements in a discourse segment
is perceived as more coherent than shifting the
focus of attention. They implement this by the
following ranking of transition states:
continue > retain > shift.
One salience model departs from the given-
ness2 assumption. It has been proposed by
Hajic?ova? et al (1990) and assigns the highest
degree of salience to DEs in the focal part of an
utterance in information structure terms (Sgall
et al, 1986). These entities often represent new
information. Hajic?ova? et al?s approach is orig-
inal and can account for the data in (1) and
(2). However, it is problematic from an applied
point of view. In the first place it is difficult to
2Here givenness subsumes concepts such as topicality
and familiarity.
determine the information structure of all ut-
terances. Secondly, focal candidate antecedents
are ranked highest in Hajic?ova? et al?s model,
but they still compete with given candidate an-
tecedents in their system. Finally the data does
not confirm that all entities in the focal part of
an utterance have the highest degree of accessi-
bility.
We agree with Hajic?ova??s insight, but in order
to operationalise the role of focality in resolu-
tion in a reliable way we propose the following.
Accessibility by default is connected with given-
ness as assumed in most resolution algorithms.
However, speakers can explicitly change the de-
gree of accessibility of entities in discourse by
marking them as salient with information struc-
ture related devices. These entities represent
the main focus of an utterance, have the high-
est degree of salience and are, in the majority
of cases, the preferred antecedents of anaphors.
In these cases the shift of focus of attention is,
in our opinion, as coherent as continuing speak-
ing about the same entities, because it is prean-
nounced to the addressee. On the basis of the
data we propose a list of identifiable construc-
tions in which explicit focus marking occurs and
the focalDEs have the highest degree of salience
in our data.3 Examples from the list are the fol-
lowing:
a: Entities referred to by NPs which are focally
marked structurally. In Danish this marking
occurs in clefts, existential and topicalised con-
structions.4
b: Entities referred to by NPs that follow fo-
cusing adverbs, as in (1).
c: Entities focally marked by the prosody (if
this information is available) and/or entities
providing the information requested in ques-
tions, as in (2).
The hierarchy of verbal complements can
model givenness preference in Danish. As in
English pronouns have high givenness degree
(pronominal chain preference). In addition to
salience preferences we found that parallelism
can account for numerous uses of Danish anaph-
ors. According to parallelism in adjacent utter-
ances with parallel grammatical complements,
the preferred antecedent of an anaphor in the
second utterance is the linguistic expression in
3Many of these constructions are also studied in the
Information Structure literature and in some studies on
anaphora.
4Nominals in clefts are also assigned high salience in
e.g. (Sidner, 1983).
the first utterance with the same grammatical
function. Inspired by the work of (Kameyama,
1996) we have defined a preference interaction
model to be used in resolution. Our model is
given in figure 1.5 The interaction model states
that givenness preferences are overridden by fo-
cality preference, when in conflict, and that they
all are overridden by parallelism. Also in Dan-
Parallelism ? Focality ? Pronominal chain ?
Givenness
Figure 1: Interaction of preferences
ish demonstrative and personal pronouns refer
to entities with different status in the discourse
model. Weak (cliticised and unstressed) pro-
nouns usually refer to the most salient entity in
the utterance. Strong (stressed and demonstra-
tive) pronouns emphasise or put in contrast the
entities they refer to and/or indicate that their
antecedents are not the most expected ones.6
Demonstratives preferentially refer to abstract
entities, while personal pronouns preferentially
refer to individual entities in ambiguous con-
texts. All these differences are implemented in
dar.
Approx. half of the APA occurrences in our
dialogues refer to entities evoked by larger dis-
course segments (more turn takings). Thus we
follow Eckert and Strube?s approach of mark-
ing the structure of dialogues and searching for
APA antecedents in the right frontier of the dis-
course tree (Webber, 1991). dar presupposes
different discourse structures for texts and dia-
logues.
dar follows the es00 and phora strategy
of discriminating between IPAs and APAs by
rules looking at the semantic constraints on
the predication contexts in which the anaphors
occur. dar relies on many more discriminat-
ing rules than es00. These rules were defined
analysing large amounts of data and using the
encodings of the Danish parole computational
lexicon (Braasch et al, 1998; Navarretta, 1997).
dar uses language-specific rules to account
5The interaction model was defined on the basis of
the data and the results of a survey of pronominal uses.
Commonsense preferences which override all the other
preferences (see inter alia (Hobbs, 1983) are not imple-
mented.
6The most frequent Danish third person singular gen-
der pronoun det can both be a personal pronoun (cor-
responding to it) and a demonstrative pronoun (corre-
sponding to this/that). In the latter case it is always
stressed.
for Danish APAs. These occur in much more
contexts than in English where elliptical con-
structions or other anaphors such as too and so
are used. Examples of Danish-specific uses of
abstract anaphors are given in (3) and (4).
(3) Han var sulten. Det var jeg ikke. [pid]
(lit. He was hungry. That was I not.)
(My friends were hungry. I wasn?t.)
(4) Han kunne sv?mme, men det kunne hun
ikke.
(lit. He could swim, but it could she not.)
(He could swim, but she couldn?t.)
A language-specific rule recognising APAs is
the following: constructions with modal verbs
and an object, such as x skal man (lit. x shall
one) (one shall), x vil man (lit. x will one) (one
will).
An example of a rule identifying IPAs is the
following: adjectival constructions in which the
prepositional complement only subcategorises
for concrete entities such as let for x (easy for
x), fuld af x (full of x).
4 The DAR-algorithm
4.1 Search Space and DE lists
dar presupposes the discourse structure de-
scribed by Grosz and Sidner (1986). The min-
imal discourse unit is the utterance U . Para-
graphs correspond to discourse segments in
texts. Discourse segments in dialogues were
manually marked. The dialogues were struc-
tured with Synchronising Units (SU) according
to the definitions in es00.
The immediate antecedent search space of a
pronoun x in utterance Un is the previous utter-
ance, Un?1. If Un is the first component in SUm
in dialogues the immediate search space for x is
SUm?1. dar assumes two antecedent domains
depending on whether the pronoun has or has
not been recognised as an IPA. The antecedent
domain for IPAs is first Un?1 and then the pre-
ceding utterances in the right frontier of the dis-
course tree searched for in recency order.7 The
antecedent domain for APAs or anaphors which
can both be IPAs and APAs is Un?1.
dar operates on two lists of DEs, the Ilist
and the Alist. The Ilist contains the NPs re-
ferred to in Un?1 ranked according to their de-
gree of salience and enriched with information
on gender, number, animacy and other sim-
ple semantic types necessary to implement se-
lectional restrictions. In the Ilist information
7The search space in es00 is the preceding utterance
for all pronouns.
1 A-list
2 within same U , I in dialogues,: clause to the
left of the clause containing the anaphor
3 within previous U (I): rightmost main clause
and subordinate clauses to its right
4 within previous Us (Is): rightmost complete
sentence
Figure 3: The es00 context ranking
about the grammatical role of nominals is pro-
vided and strongly focally marked elements are
indicated. The leftmost element in the Ilist is
the most salient one. Givenness and focality
preferences are accounted for in the Ilist, as il-
lustrated in figure 2. Focally marked entities
are put in front of the list while the remaining
DEs are ordered according to verbal comple-
ment order. Inside verbal complements nom-
inals are ordered according to their occurrence
order as illustrated in the second row of figure 2.
The abstract entities which are referred to by
an APA in Un?1 or SUm?1 are encoded in the
Alist. They are removed from the list after a
new utterance (SU in dialogues) has been pro-
cessed if they have not been mentioned in it.
The context ranking for abstract entities is that
proposed by Eckert and Strube (2000) and is
given in figure 3.
4.2 The Algorithm
dar consists of two different functions Re-
solveDet and ResolveIpa. The former is ap-
plied if the actual pronoun x is third person
singular neuter, while the latter is applied in all
the remaining cases:
if x is singular & neuter
then go to ResolveDet(x)
else go to ResolveIpa(x)
ResolveIpa takes the IPA x as argument and
looks for possible antecedents in the Ilist for
the preceding Un?1 or Sm?1, after having ap-
plied syntactic constraints and selectional re-
strictions on the elements of the list. Three dif-
ferent cases are considered: (A) no antecedent
has been found in the immediate search space;
(B) one antecedent has been found; (C) more
antecedents have been found.
If no antecedent has been found (case A),
ResolveIpa looks for the highest ranked an-
tecedent in recency order in the Ilists of the
preceding discourse. If an antecedent is found
the algorithm returns it. If no antecedent is
FOCAL MARKED > SUBJECT > OBJECT/PrepOBJECT > OBJECT 2 > OTHER
COMPLS > ADJUNCTS
???????????????????????????????????????
NCOMPL1 >prec NCOMPL2 >prec . . .>prec NCOMPLn
Figure 2: Order of DEs in the Ilist
found, x is classified as inferable.8 If one an-
tecedent is found (case B), it is returned. If
more candidate antecedents are found (case C),
ResolveIpa performs tests, implementing the
preference interaction model described in sec-
tion 3, as follows. If Un and Un?1 are paral-
lel9 and one of the candidate antecedents has
the same grammatical role in Un?1 as x in Un,
this ?parallel? antecedent is marked. In the re-
maining cases the algorithm marks the highest
ranked candidate in the Ilist. Pronouns are pre-
ferred, unless there are focally marked candi-
date antecedents. At this point the algorithm
individuates the preferred antecedent on the ba-
sis of x?s type. If x is weak the marked candi-
date proposed in the preceding steps is returned
together with the list of the remaining candi-
date antecedents (possible ambiguity). If x is
strong the highest ranked candidate antecedent
which was not marked in the preceding steps
is returned together with the list of candidate
antecedents.10 The approach of marking ambi-
guities resembles that proposed by Kameyama
(1996).
The main structure of the function Re-
solveDet is inspired by es00. ResolveDet
tests the pronoun x using the IPA and APA
discriminating rules discussed in section 3. If
x is IPA, the function ResolveIpa-neu is ap-
plied. If x is APA the function ResolveApa is
applied. Finally, if the pronoun is neither IPA
nor APA, ResolveDet looks at its type. If x
is strong the algorithm attempts to find an ab-
stract antecedent (ResolveApa), while if it is
weak dar tries to find an individual antecedent
(ResolveIpa-neu). ResolveIpa-neu is like
ResolveIpa except that it returns if no NP an-
tecedents are found in Un?1 (case A) so that
ResolveApa can be applied.
8In dar inferables comprise pronouns whose an-
tecedents must be inferred by the context, plural pro-
nouns with complex antecedents and generic uses of det
(it).
9Parallelism is investigated in coordinated, adjacent
or explicitly contrasted utterances.
10A special rule in dar is applied to the demonstra-
tives dette/denne/disse (this/these) which never corefer
with subject candidates.
ResolveApa distinguishes between types of
pronoun. If x is weak, the preferred antecedent
is searched for among the elements indicated in
the context ranking, unless it is the object of the
verb g?re (do), modals, have (have) or the ab-
stract subject in copula constructions. In these
cases the pronoun is resolved to the VP of the
element in the A-list or in the context ranking.
If x is strong ResolveApa attempts to resolve
or classify it as vague depending on the type
of pronoun. This part of the algorithm is spe-
cific to Danish and accounts for the fact that
different strong pronouns preferentially refer to
different abstract entities in the data.
Resolved APAs are inserted into the Alist.
In case of failure ResolveApa returns so that
ResolveIpa-neu can be applied. If both func-
tions fail, the pronoun is classified as vague.
4.3 Some Examples
In the following we look at the resolution of ex-
ample (2) from section 3 and the example in
(5).
(5): Du har sv?rt ved at se musemark?ren p?a
sk?rmen. Hvordan klarer du det? [edb]
(You have difficulties seing the mouse-cursor
(common-gend) on the screen (common-gend).
How do you manage it/this (neuter gender))?
The simplified Ilists and Alists after each ut-
terance has been processed in example (2) are
given in figure 4. (2) contains three SUs. U2
is an I/A thus it belongs to two synchronising
units (SU1 and SU2). The Ilist after U1 has
been processed, contains one element, din mor
(your mother). In U2 the personal pronoun hun
(she) occurs, thus ResolveIpa is applied. It
resolves hun to the compatible NP in the Ilist,
din mor. After U2 has been processed the Ilist
contains two elements in this order: the focal
marked entity vores nabo (our neighbour) and
the pronoun hun (= din mor). ResolveIpa re-
solves the occurrence of the pronoun hun (she)
in U3 to the most salient candidate NP in the
Ilist, vores nabo. Here focal preference over-
rides pronominal chain preference. The simpli-
fied Ilists and Alists after the two utterances in
(5) have been processed are given in figure 5.
After U1 has been processed there are two com-
SU1: U1 (I) U2 (I/A):
U1: hvem...hvem arbejdede din mor med?
(with whom... whom did your mother work)
Ilist: [din mor]
Alist :[]
??????????????????
SU2: U2 (I/A)
U2: Hun arbejdede med vores nabo
(She worked with our neighbour)
Ilist: [vores nabo,hun=din mor]
Alist : []
??????????????????
SU3: U3 (I)
U3: Hun var enke ... havde tre s?nner
(She was a widow... had three sons)
Ilist: [hun=vores nabo,tre s?nner]
Alist : []
Figure 4: Ilists and Alists for example (2)
U1: Du har sv?rt ved at se musemark?ren p?a
sk?rmen.
Ilist : [musemark?ren, sk?rmen]
Alist :[]
????????????????????
??
U2: Hvordan klarer du det?
Ilist :[]
Alist :[det=U1]
Figure 5: Ilists and Alists for example (5)
mon gender singular NPs in the Ilist, muse-
mark?ren (the mouse cursor) and sk?rmen (the
screen). In U2 the singular neuter gender pro-
noun det (it) occurs, thus ResolveDet is ap-
plied. The pronoun is neither IPA nor APA
according to the discriminating rules. Then
ResolveDet attempts to find an individual
antecedent of the weak pronoun, applying the
function ResolveIpa-neu. ResolveIpa-neu
fails because the two DEs in the Ilist do not
agree with the pronoun. Then the function
ResolveApa resolves x looking at the context
ranking. Being the Alist empty, U1, is proposed
as antecedent. The resolved APA is added to
the Alist.
5 Tests and Evaluation
We have manually tested dar on randomly cho-
sen texts and dialogues from our collections.
The performance of dar on dialogues has been
compared with that of es00. The function
for resolving IPAs (ResolveIpa) has similarly
been tested on texts, where APAs were ex-
cluded. We have compared the obtained re-
sults with those obtained by testing bfp (Bren-
nan et al, 1987) and str98 (Strube, 1998). In
all tests the intrasentential anaphors have been
manually resolved. Expletive and cataphoric
uses of pronouns have been marked and ex-
cluded from the tests. Dialogue act units were
marked and classified by three persons following
the strategy proposed in (Eckert and Strube,
2000). The reliability for the two annotation
tasks (?-statistics (Carletta, 1996)) was of 0.94
and 0.90 respectively. Pronominal anaphors
were marked, classified and resolved by two
annotators. The ?-statistics for the pronoun
classification was 0.86. When the annotators
did not agree upon resolution, the pronoun was
marked as ambiguous and excluded from evalu-
ation. The results obtained for bfp and str98
are given in table 1, while the results of dar?s
ResolveIpa are given in table 2. Because dar
both classifies and resolves anaphors, both pre-
cision and recall are given in table 2. Precision
indicates the proportion of the resolved pro-
nouns which are correctly resolved, while recall
indicates the proportion of all pronouns resolved
by humans which are correctly resolved by the
algorithm.
The results indicate that ResolveIpa per-
forms significantly better than bfp and str98
on the Danish texts. The better performance of
dar was due to the account of focal and par-
allelism preferences and of the different refer-
ence mechanisms of personal and demonstrative
pronouns. Furthermore dar recognises some
generic pronouns and inferable pronouns and
excludes them from resolution, but often fails
to recognise antecedentless and inferable plural
pronouns, because it often finds a plural nom-
inal in the preceding discourse and proposes it
as antecedent. The lack of commonsense knowl-
edge explains many incorrectly resolved anaph-
ors. The results of the test of the dar algo-
algorithm corr.resolved res.human precision
bfp 513 645 79.53
str98 524 645 81.24
Table 1: Results of bfp and str98 on texts
corr.res. res.overall res.hum. precis recall
575 651 645 88.33 89.14
Table 2: Results of ResolveIpa on texts
rithm on written texts are in table 3. These
results are good compared with the results of
the function ResolveIpa (table 2). The dis-
criminating rules identify correctly IPAs and
resolution IPA
Algorithm correctly resolved resolved overall human resolution precision recall f-meaure
es00 258 411 414 62.77 62.31 62.48
dar 289 386 414 74.87 68.81 71.71
resolution APA
Algorithm correctly resolved resolved overall human resolution precision recall f-measure
es00 179 286 269 62.59 66.54 64.5
dar 194 277 269 70.04 72.19 69.13
Table 4: Results of es00 and dar on dialogues
APAs in the large majority of the cases. Recog-
nition failure often involves pronouns in con-
texts which are not covered by the discriminat-
ing rules. In particular dar fails to resolve sin-
gular neuter gender pronouns with distant an-
tecedents and to identify vague anaphors, be-
cause it always ?finds? an antecedent in the con-
text ranking. Correct resolution in these cases
requires a deep analysis of the context. The
resolution IPA
corr.res. res.overall res.hum. precis recall
560 651 645 86.02 86.82
resolution APA
corr.res. res.overall res.hum. precis recall
63 87 77 72.41 81.82
Table 3: Results of dar on texts
results of applying dar and es00 on Danish di-
alogues are reported in table 4.11 In the last
colum the overall performance of the two algo-
rithms is given as f-measure (F) which is defined
as 1
? 1P +(1??)
1
R
where P is precision, R is recall
and ? is the weight of P and R. We have as-
signed the same weight to P and R (? = 0.5)
and thus F = 2PRP+R . The results of the tests in-
dicate that dar resolves IPAs significantly bet-
ter than es00 (which uses str98). The better
performance of dar is also due to the enlarged
resolution scope respect to the one used in es00.
dar correctly resolves more Danish demonstra-
tive pronouns than es00, because it accounts
for language-specific particularities. In general,
however, the resolution results for APAs are
similar to those obtained for es00. This is not
surprising, because dar uses the same resolu-
tion strategy on these pronouns. dar performs
better on texts than on dialogues. This reflects
the more complex nature of dialogues. The re-
sults indicate that the IPA/APA discriminat-
11We extended es00 with the Danish-specific identifi-
cation rules before applying it.
ing rules also work well on dialogues. The cases
of resolution failure were the same as for the
texts. As an experiment we applied dar on the
dialogues without relying on the predefined di-
alogue structure. In this test the recognition
of IPAs and APAs was still good, however the
success rate for IPAs was 60.1 % and for APAs
was only 39.3%. Many errors were due to the
fact that antecedents were searched for in the
preceding discourse in linear order and that un-
grounded utterances were included in the dis-
course model.
6 Concluding Remarks
In this paper we presented dar, an algorithm
for resolving IPAs and APAs in Danish texts
and dialogues. In dar differences between the
referential characteristics of Danish weak and
strong pronouns are accounted for and a novel
strategy for resolving individual anaphors is
proposed. This strategy combines givenness
with focality preferences to model salience and
also accounts for parallelism preferences. dar
performs significantly better on IPAs than al-
gorithms which only rely on givenness-based
salience models. The strategy and the general
assumptions behind dar should be tested on
other languages.
Differing from es00 and phora, dar has
been developed for and tested on both texts and
dialogues. dar extends the es00 strategy of
classifying and resolving (some types of) APAs.
The tests of dar indicate that the es00?s ap-
proach of recognising APAs is also promising
for texts and other languages than English.
dar has not been compared with phora
which is the only abstract anaphora algorithm
implemented. We find the algorithm very inter-
esting because it addresses many of the same
phenomena, but with different strategies. It
would be useful to combine some of these strate-
gies with the approaches proposed in dar and
es00 to improve the still problematic resolution
of abstract anaphors.
References
A. Braasch, C. Navarretta, and N.H. S?rensen.
1998. Danish lexicon documentation. Techni-
cal Report LE-PAROLE. WP3.3-CST, CST.
S. F. Brennan, M. W. Friedman, and C. J. Pol-
lard. 1987. A Centering Approach to Pro-
nouns. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL?87), pages 155?162, Cali-
fornia, USA. Stanford University.
D. Byron and J. Allen. 1998. Resolving Demon-
strative Pronouns in the TRAINS93 corpus.
In Proceedings of the Second Colloquium on
Discourse Anaphora and Anaphor Resolution
(DAARC 2), pages 68?81.
D. K. Byron. 2002. Resolving Pronominal Ref-
erence to Abstract Entities. In Proceedings of
the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2002).
J. Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on clas-
sification tasks. the kappa statistic. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 22(2):249?254.
D. Duncker and J. Hermann. 1996. Pa-
tientord og l?geord - s?rord eller f?lle-
sord? M?anedsskrift for Praktisk L?gegern-
ing - Tidsskrift for Praktiserende L?gers
Efteruddannelse, pages 1019?1030.
M. Eckert and M. Strube. 2000. Dialogue acts,
synchronising units and anaphora resolution.
Journal of Semantics, 17:51?89.
F. Gregersen and I. L. Pedersen, editors. 1991.
The Copenhagen study in urban sociolinguis-
tics. Reitzel.
B. J. Grosz and C. L. Sidner. 1986. Attention,
Intentions, and the Structure of Discourse.
Computational Linguistics, 12(3):175?284.
B. Grosz, A. K. Joshi, and S. Weinstein. 1995.
Centering:A Framework for Modeling the Lo-
cal Coherence of Discourse. Computational
Linguistics, 21(2):203?225.
J. K. Gundel, N. Hedberg, and R. Zacharski.
1993. Cognitive status and the form of re-
ferring expressions in discourse. Language,
69(2):274?307.
E. Hajic?ova?, P. Kubon?, and V. Kubon?. 1990.
Hierarchy of Salience and Discourse Analysis
and Production. In H. Karlgren, editor, Pro-
ceedings of the 13th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics (COLING?90),
volume III, pages 144?148, Helsinki.
J. R. Hobbs. 1983. Why Is Discourse Coher-
ent? In Fritz Neubauer, editor, Coherence In
Natural-Language Texts, volume 38 of Papers
in Textlinguistics, pages 29?70. Helmut Buske
Verlag Hamburg.
K. A. Jensen. 1989. Projekt invandrerdansk.
Technical report, Copenhagen University.
M. Kameyama. 1996. Indefeasible Semantics
and Defeasible Pragmatics. In M. Kanazawa,
C. Pin?on, and H. de Stwart, editors, Quanti-
fiers, Deduction and Context, pages 111?138.
CSLI, Stanford, CA.
C. Navarretta. 1997. Encoding Danish Verbs in
the PAROLE Model. In R. Mitkov, N. Ni-
colov, and N. Nikolov, editors, Proceedings
of RANLP?97.Recent Advances in Natural
Language Processing, pages 359?363, Tzigov
Chark, Bulgaria.
C. Navarretta. 2002a. Combining Informa-
tion Structure and Centering-based Mod-
els of Salience for Resolving Intersenten-
tial Pronominal Anaphora. In A. Branco,
T. McEnery, and R.Mitkov, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the 4th Discourse Anaphora and
Anaphora Resolution Colloqium, pages 135?
140. Edic?oes Colibri.
E. F. Prince. 1981. Toward a taxonomy of
given-new information. In P. Cole, editor,
Radical Pragmatics, pages 223?255. Aca-
demic Press.
P. Sgall, E. Hajic?ova?, and J. Panevova?. 1986.
The Meaning of the Sentence in its Semantic
and Pragmatic Aspects. Reidel, Dordrecht.
C. Sidner. 1983. Focusing in the Comprehen-
sion of Definite Anaphora. In M. Brady and
R. Berwick, editors, Computational Models of
Discourse, pages 267?330. MIT Press.
M. Strube and U. Hahn. 1996. Functional Cen-
tering. In Proceedings of the 34th Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL?96), pages 270?277, Ca.
M. Strube and C. Mu?ller. 2003. A ma-
chine learning approach to pronoun resolu-
tion in spoken dialogue. In Proceedings of the
ACL?03, pages 168?175.
M. Strube. 1998. Never Look Back: An Al-
ternative to Centering. In Proceedings of
the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 17th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (COLING-ACL?98), volume II,
pages 1251?1257.
B. L. Webber. 1991. Structure and Osten-
sion in the Interpretation of Discourse Deixis.
Natural Language and Cognitive Processes,
6(2):107?135, January.
Proceedings of the ACL 2010 Conference Short Papers, pages 318?324,
Uppsala, Sweden, 11-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Classification of Feedback Expressions in Multimodal Data
Costanza Navarretta
University of Copenhagen
Centre for Language Technology (CST)
Njalsgade 140, 2300-DK Copenhagen
costanza@hum.ku.dk
Patrizia Paggio
University of Copenhagen
Centre for Language Technology (CST)
Njalsgade 140, 2300-DK Copenhagen
paggio@hum.ku.dk
Abstract
This paper addresses the issue of how lin-
guistic feedback expressions, prosody and
head gestures, i.e. head movements and
face expressions, relate to one another in
a collection of eight video-recorded Dan-
ish map-task dialogues. The study shows
that in these data, prosodic features and
head gestures significantly improve auto-
matic classification of dialogue act labels
for linguistic expressions of feedback.
1 Introduction
Several authors in communication studies have
pointed out that head movements are relevant to
feedback phenomena (see McClave (2000) for an
overview). Others have looked at the application
of machine learning algorithms to annotated mul-
timodal corpora. For example, Jokinen and Ragni
(2007) and Jokinen et al (2008) find that machine
learning algorithms can be trained to recognise
some of the functions of head movements, while
Reidsma et al (2009) show that there is a depen-
dence between focus of attention and assignment
of dialogue act labels. Related are also the stud-
ies by Rieks op den Akker and Schulz (2008) and
Murray and Renals (2008): both achieve promis-
ing results in the automatic segmentation of dia-
logue acts using the annotations in a large multi-
modal corpus.
Work has also been done on prosody and ges-
tures in the specific domain of map-task dialogues,
also targeted in this paper. Sridhar et al (2009)
obtain promising results in dialogue act tagging
of the Switchboard-DAMSL corpus using lexical,
syntactic and prosodic cues, while Gravano and
Hirschberg (2009) examine the relation between
particular acoustic and prosodic turn-yielding cues
and turn taking in a large corpus of task-oriented
dialogues. Louwerse et al (2006) and Louwerse
et al (2007) study the relation between eye gaze,
facial expression, pauses and dialogue structure
in annotated English map-task dialogues (Ander-
son et al, 1991) and find correlations between the
various modalities both within and across speak-
ers. Finally, feedback expressions (head nods and
shakes) are successfully predicted from speech,
prosody and eye gaze in interaction with Embod-
ied Communication Agents as well as human com-
munication (Fujie et al, 2004; Morency et al,
2005; Morency et al, 2007; Morency et al, 2009).
Our work is in line with these studies, all of
which focus on the relation between linguistic
expressions, prosody, dialogue content and ges-
tures. In this paper, we investigate how feedback
expressions can be classified into different dia-
logue act categories based on prosodic and ges-
ture features. Our data are made up by a collec-
tion of eight video-recorded map-task dialogues in
Danish, which were annotated with phonetic and
prosodic information. We find that prosodic fea-
tures improve the classification of dialogue acts
and that head gestures, where they occur, con-
tribute to the semantic interpretation of feedback
expressions. The results, which partly confirm
those obtained on a smaller dataset in Paggio and
Navarretta (2010), must be seen in light of the
fact that our gesture annotation scheme comprises
more fine-grained categories than most of the stud-
ies mentioned earlier for both head movements
and face expressions. The classification results
improve, however, if similar categories such as
head nods and jerks are collapsed into a more gen-
eral category.
In Section 2 we describe the multimodal Dan-
ish corpus. In Section 3, we describe how the
prosody of feedback expressions is annotated, how
their content is coded in terms of dialogue act, turn
and agreement labels, and we provide inter-coder
agreement measures. In Section 4 we account for
the annotation of head gestures, including inter-
318
coder agreements results. Section 5 contains a de-
scription of the resulting datasets and a discussion
of the results obtained in the classification experi-
ments. Section 6 is the conclusion.
2 The multimodal corpus
The Danish map-task dialogues from the Dan-
PASS corpus (Gr?nnum, 2006) are a collection
of dialogues in which 11 speaker pairs cooper-
ate on a map task. The dialogue participants
are seated in different rooms and cannot see each
other. They talk through headsets, and one of them
is recorded with a video camera. Each pair goes
through four different sets of maps, and changes
roles each time, with one subject giving instruc-
tions and the other following them. The material
is transcribed orthographically with an indication
of stress, articulatory hesitations and pauses. In
addition to this, the acoustic signals are segmented
into words, syllables and prosodic phrases, and an-
notated with POS-tags, phonological and phonetic
transcriptions, pitch and intonation contours.
Phonetic and prosodic segmentation and anno-
tation were performed independently and in paral-
lel by two annotators and then an agreed upon ver-
sion was produced with the supervision of an ex-
pert annotator, for more information see Gr?nnum
(2006). The Praat tool was used (Boersma and
Weenink, 2009).
The feedback expressions we analyse here are
Yes and No expressions, i.e. in Danish words like
ja (yes), jo (yes in a negative context), jamen (yes
but, well), nej (no), n?h (no). They can be single
words or multi-word expressions.
Yes and No feedback expressions represent
about 9% of the approximately 47,000 running
words in the corpus. This is a rather high pro-
portion compared to other corpora, both spoken
and written, and a reason why we decided to use
the DanPASS videos in spite of the fact that the
gesture behaviour is relatively limited given the
fact that the two dialogue participants cannot see
each other. Furthermore, the restricted contexts
in which feedback expressions occur in these di-
alogues allow for a very fine-grained analysis of
the relation of these expressions with prosody and
gestures. Feedback behaviour, both in speech and
gestures, can be observed especially in the person
who is receiving the instructions (the follower).
Therefore, we decided to focus our analysis only
on the follower?s part of the interaction. Because
of time restrictions, we limited the study to four
different subject pairs and two interactions per
pair, for a total of about an hour of video-recorded
interaction.
3 Annotation of feedback expressions
As already mentioned, all words in DanPASS are
phonetically and prosodically annotated. In the
subset of the corpus considered here, 82% of the
feedback expressions bear stress or tone informa-
tion, and 12% are unstressed; 7% of them are
marked with onset or offset hesitation, or both.
For this study, we added semantic labels ? includ-
ing dialogue acts ? and gesture annotation. Both
kinds of annotation were carried out using ANVIL
(Kipp, 2004). To distinguish among the various
functions that feedback expressions have in the di-
alogues, we selected a subset of the categories de-
fined in the emerging ISO 24617-2 standard for
semantic annotation of language resources. This
subset comprises the categories Accept, Decline,
RepeatRephrase and Answer. Moreover, all feed-
back expressions were annotated with an agree-
ment feature (Agree, NonAgree) where relevant.
Finally, the two turn management categories Turn-
Take and TurnElicit were also coded.
It should be noted that the same expression may
be annotated with a label for each of the three se-
mantic dimensions. For example, a yes can be an
Answer to a question, an Agree and a TurnElicit at
the same time, thus making the semantic classifi-
cation very fine-grained. Table 1 shows how the
various types are distributed across the 466 feed-
back expressions in our data.
Dialogue Act
Answer 70 15%
RepeatRephrase 57 12%
Accept 127 27%
None 212 46%
Agreement
Agree 166 36%
NonAgree 14 3%
None 286 61%
Turn Management
TurnTake 113 24%
TurnElicit 85 18%
None 268 58%
Table 1: Distribution of semantic categories
319
3.1 Inter-coder agreement on feedback
expression annotation
In general, dialogue act, agreement and turn anno-
tations were coded by an expert annotator and the
annotations were subsequently checked by a sec-
ond expert annotator. However, one dialogue was
coded independently and in parallel by two expert
annotators to measure inter-coder agreement. A
measure was derived for each annotated feature
using the agreement analysis facility provided in
ANVIL. Agreement between two annotation sets
is calculated here in terms of Cohen?s kappa (Co-
hen, 1960)1 and corrected kappa (Brennan and
Prediger, 1981)2. Anvil divides the annotations in
slices and compares each slice. We used slices of
0.04 seconds. The inter-coder agreement figures
obtained for the three types of annotation are given
in Table 2.
feature Cohen?s k corrected k
agreement 73.59 98.74
dial act 84.53 98.87
turn 73.52 99.16
Table 2: Inter-coder agreement on feedback ex-
pression annotation
Although researchers do not totally agree on
how to measure agreement in various types of an-
notated data and on how to interpret the resulting
figures, see Artstein and Poesio (2008), it is usu-
ally assumed that Cohen?s kappa figures over 60
are good while those over 75 are excellent (Fleiss,
1971). Looking at the cases of disagreement we
could see that many of these are due to the fact
that the annotators had forgotten to remove some
of the features automatically proposed by ANVIL
from the latest annotated element.
4 Gesture annotation
All communicative head gestures in the videos
were found and annotated with ANVIL using a
subset of the attributes defined in the MUMIN an-
notation scheme (Allwood et al, 2007). The MU-
MIN scheme is a general framework for the study
of gestures in interpersonal communication. In
this study, we do not deal with functional classi-
fication of the gestures in themselves, but rather
1(Pa? Pe)/(1? Pe).
2(Po ? 1/c)/(1 ? 1/c) where c is the number of cate-
gories.
with how gestures contribute to the semantic in-
terpretations of linguistic expressions. Therefore,
only a subset of the MUMIN attributes has been
used, i.e. Smile, Laughter, Scowl, FaceOther for
facial expressions, and Nod, Jerk, Tilt, SideTurn,
Shake, Waggle, Other for head movements.
A link was also established in ANVIL between
the gesture under consideration and the relevant
speech sequence where appropriate. The link was
then used to extract gesture information together
with the relevant linguistic annotations on which
to apply machine learning.
The total number of head gestures annotated is
264. Of these, 114 (43%) co-occur with feedback
expressions, with Nod as by far the most frequent
type (70 occurrences) followed by FaceOther as
the second most frequent (16). The other tokens
are distributed more or less evenly, with a few oc-
currences (2-8) per type. The remaining 150 ges-
tures, linked to different linguistic expressions or
to no expression at all, comprise many face ex-
pressions and a number of tilts. A rough prelim-
inary analysis shows that their main functions are
related to focusing or to different emotional atti-
tudes. They will be ignored in what follows.
4.1 Measuring inter-coder agreement on
gesture annotation
The head gestures in the DanPASS data have been
coded by non expert annotators (one annotator
per video) and subsequently controlled by a sec-
ond annotator, with the exception of one video
which was annotated independently and in parallel
by two annotators. The annotations of this video
were then used to measure inter-coder agreement
in ANVIL as it was the case for the annotations
on feedback expressions. In the case of gestures
we also measured agreement on gesture segmen-
tation. The figures obtained are given in Table 3.
feature Cohen?s k corrected k
face segment 69.89 91.37
face annotate 71.53 94.25
head mov segment 71.21 91.75
head mov annotate 71.65 95.14
Table 3: Inter-coder agreement on head gesture
annotation
These results are slightly worse than those ob-
tained in previous studies using the same annota-
tion scheme (Jokinen et al, 2008), but are still sat-
320
isfactory given the high number of categories pro-
vided by the scheme.
A distinction that seemed particularly difficult
was that between nods and jerks: although the
direction of the two movement types is different
(down-up and up-down, respectively), the move-
ment quality is very similar, and makes it difficult
to see the direction clearly. We return to this point
below, in connection with our data analysis.
5 Analysis of the data
The multimodal data we obtained by combining
the linguistic annotations from DanPASS with the
gesture annotation created in ANVIL, resulted into
two different groups of data, one containing all Yes
and No expressions, and the other the subset of
those that are accompanied by a face expression
or a head movement, as shown in Table 4.
Expression Count %
Yes 420 90
No 46 10
Total 466 100
Yes with gestures 102 90
No with gestures 12 10
Total with gestures 114 100
Table 4: Yes and No datasets
These two sets of data were used for automatic
dialogue act classification, which was run in the
Weka system (Witten and Frank, 2005). We exper-
imented with various Weka classifiers, compris-
ing Hidden Naive Bayes, SMO, ID3, LADTree
and Decision Table. The best results on most of
our data were obtained using Hidden Naive Bayes
(HNB) (Zhang et al, 2005). Therefore, here we
show the results of this classifier. Ten-folds cross-
validation was applied throughout.
In the first group of experiments we took into
consideration all the Yes and No expressions (420
Yes and 46 No) without, however, considering ges-
ture information. The purpose was to see how
prosodic information contributes to the classifica-
tion of dialogue acts. We started by totally leav-
ing out prosody, i.e. only the orthographic tran-
scription (Yes and No expressions) was consid-
ered; then we included information about stress
(stressed or unstressed); in the third run we added
tone attributes, and in the fourth information on
hesitation. Agreement and turn attributes were
used in all experiments, while Dialogue act anno-
tation was only used in the training phase. The
baseline for the evaluation are the results provided
by Weka?s ZeroR classifier, which always selects
the most frequent nominal class.
In Table 5 we provide results in terms of preci-
sion (P), recall (R) and F-measure (F). These are
calculated in Weka as weighted averages of the re-
sults obtained for each class.
dataset Algor P R F
YesNo ZeroR 27.8 52.8 36.5
HNB 47.2 53 46.4
+stress HNB 47.5 54.1 47.1
+stress+tone HNB 47.8 54.3 47.4
+stress+tone+hes HNB 47.7 54.5 47.3
Table 5: Classification results with prosodic fea-
tures
The results indicate that prosodic information
improves the classification of dialogue acts with
respect to the baseline in all four experiments with
improvements of 10, 10.6, 10.9 and 10.8%, re-
spectively. The best results are obtained using
information on stress and tone, although the de-
crease in accuracy when hesitations are introduced
is not significant. The confusion matrices show
that the classifier is best at identifying Accept,
while it is very bad at identifying RepeatRephrase.
This result if not surprising since the former type
is much more frequent in the data than the latter,
and since prosodic information does not correlate
with RepeatRephrase in any systematic way.
The second group of experiments was con-
ducted on the dataset where feedback expressions
are accompanied by gestures (102 Yes and 12 No).
The purpose this time was to see whether ges-
ture information improves dialogue act classifica-
tion. We believe it makes sense to perform the
test based on this restricted dataset, rather than the
entire material, because the portion of data where
gestures do accompany feedback expressions is
rather small (about 20%). In a different domain,
where subjects are less constrained by the techni-
cal setting, we expect gestures would make for a
stronger and more widespread effect.
The Precision, Recall and F-measure of the Ze-
roR classifier on these data are 31.5, 56.1 and 40.4,
respectively. For these experiments, however, we
used as a baseline the results obtained based on
stress, tone and hesitation information, the com-
bination that gave the best results on the larger
321
dataset. Together with the prosodic information,
Agreement and turn attributes were included just
as earlier, while the dialogue act annotation was
only used in the training phase. Face expression
and head movement attributes were disregarded
in the baseline. We then added face expression
alone, head movement alone, and finally both ges-
ture types together. The results are shown in Ta-
ble 6.
dataset Algor P R F
YesNo HNB 43.1 56.1 46.4
+face HNB 43.7 56.1 46.9
+headm HNB 44.7 55.3 48.2
+face+headm HNB 49.9 57 50.3
Table 6: Classification results with head gesture
features
These results indicate that adding head ges-
ture information improves the classification of di-
alogue acts in this reduced dataset, although the
improvement is not impressive. The best results
are achieved when both face expressions and head
movements are taken into consideration.
The confusion matrices show that although the
recognition of both Answer and None improve, it
is only the None class which is recognised quite
reliably. We already explained that in our annota-
tion a large number of feedback utterances have an
agreement or turn label without necessarily having
been assigned to one of our task-related dialogue
act categories. This means that head gestures
help distinguishing utterances with an agreement
or turn function from other kinds. Looking closer
at these utterances, we can see that nods and jerks
often occur together with TurnElicit, while tilts,
side turns and smiles tend to occur with Agree.
An issue that worries us is the granularity of
the annotation categories. To investigate this, in
a third group of experiments we collapsed Nod
and Jerk into a more general category: the distinc-
tion had proven difficult for the annotators, and we
don?t have many jerks in the data. The results, dis-
played in Table 7, show as expected an improve-
ment. The class which is recognised best is still
None.
6 Conclusion
In this study we have experimented with the au-
tomatic classification of feedback expressions into
different dialogue acts in a multimodal corpus of
dataset Algor P R F
YesNo HNB 43.1 56.1 46.4
+face HNB 43.7 56.1 46.9
+headm HNB 47 57.9 51
+face+headm HNB 51.6 57.9 53.9
Table 7: Classification results with fewer head
movements
Danish. We have conducted three sets of experi-
ments, first looking at how prosodic features con-
tribute to the classification, then testing whether
the use of head gesture information improved the
accuracy of the classifier, finally running the clas-
sification on a dataset in which the head move-
ment types were slightly more general. The re-
sults indicate that prosodic features improve the
classification, and that in those cases where feed-
back expressions are accompanied by head ges-
tures, gesture information is also useful. The re-
sults also show that using a more coarse-grained
distinction of head movements improves classifi-
cation in these data.
Slightly more than half of the head gestures in
our data co-occur with other linguistic utterances
than those targeted in this study. Extending our in-
vestigation to those, as we plan to do, will provide
us with a larger dataset and therefore presumably
with even more interesting and reliable results.
The occurrence of gestures in the data stud-
ied here is undoubtedly limited by the technical
setup, since the two speakers do not see each other.
Therefore, we want to investigate the role played
by head gestures in other types of video and larger
materials. Extending the analysis to larger datasets
will also shed more light on whether our gesture
annotation categories are too fine-grained for au-
tomatic classification.
Acknowledgements
This research has been done under the project
VKK (Verbal and Bodily Communication) funded
by the Danish Council for Independent Research
in the Humanities, and the NOMCO project, a
collaborative Nordic project with participating re-
search groups at the universities of Gothenburg,
Copenhagen and Helsinki which is funded by the
NOS-HS NORDCORP programme. We would
also like to thank Nina Gr?nnum for allowing us to
use the DanPASS corpus, and our gesture annota-
tors Josephine B?dker Arrild and Sara Andersen.
322
References
Jens Allwood, Loredana Cerrato, Kristiina Jokinen,
Costanza Navarretta, and Patrizia Paggio. 2007.
The MUMIN Coding Scheme for the Annotation of
Feedback, Turn Management and Sequencing. Mul-
timodal Corpora for Modelling Human Multimodal
Behaviour. Special Issue of the International Jour-
nal of Language Resources and Evaluation, 41(3?
4):273?287.
Anne H. Anderson, Miles Bader, Ellen Gurman Bard,
Elizabeth Boyle, Gwyneth Doherty, Simon Garrod,
Stephen Isard, Jacqueline Kowtko, Jan McAllister,
Jim Miller, Catherine Sotillo, Henry S. Thompson,
and Regina Weinert. 1991. The HCRC Map Task
Corpus. Language and Speech, 34:351?366.
Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-Coder
Agreement for Computational Linguistics. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 34(4):555?596.
Paul Boersma and David Weenink, 2009. Praat: do-
ing phonetics by computer. Retrieved May 1, 2009,
from http://www.praat.org/.
Robert L. Brennan and Dale J. Prediger. 1981. Co-
efficient Kappa: Some uses, misuses, and alterna-
tives. Educational and Psychological Measurement,
41:687?699.
Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement
for nominal scales. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 20(1):37?46.
Joseph L. Fleiss. 1971. Measuring nominal scale
agreement among many raters. Psychological Bul-
lettin, 76(5):378?382.
Shinya Fujie, Y. Ejiri, K. Nakajima, Y Matsusaka, and
Tetsunor Kobayashi. 2004. A conversation robot
using head gesture recognition as para-linguistic in-
formation. In Proceedings of the 13th IEEE Inter-
national Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive
Communication, pages 159 ? 164, september.
Agustin Gravano and Julia Hirschberg. 2009. Turn-
yielding cues in task-oriented dialogue. In Pro-
ceedings of SIGDIAL 2009: the 10th Annual Meet-
ing of the Special Interest Group in Discourse and
Dialogue, September 2009, pages 253?261, Queen
Mary University of London.
Nina Gr?nnum. 2006. DanPASS - a Danish pho-
netically annotated spontaneous speech corpus. In
N. Calzolari, K. Choukri, A. Gangemi, B. Maegaard,
J. Mariani, J. Odijk, and D. Tapias, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the 5th LREC, pages 1578?1583, Genoa,
May.
Kristiina Jokinen and Anton Ragni. 2007. Cluster-
ing experiments on the communicative prop- erties
of gaze and gestures. In Proceeding of the 3rd.
Baltic Conference on Human Language Technolo-
gies, Kaunas, Lithuania, October.
Kristiina Jokinen, Costanza Navarretta, and Patrizia
Paggio. 2008. Distinguishing the communica-
tive functions of gestures. In Proceedings of the
5th MLMI, LNCS 5237, pages 38?49, Utrecht, The
Netherlands, September. Springer.
Michael Kipp. 2004. Gesture Generation by Imita-
tion - From Human Behavior to Computer Charac-
ter Animation. Ph.D. thesis, Saarland University,
Saarbruecken, Germany, Boca Raton, Florida, dis-
sertation.com.
Max M. Louwerse, Patrick Jeuniaux, Mohammed E.
Hoque, Jie Wu, and Gwineth Lewis. 2006. Mul-
timodal communication in computer-mediated map
task scenarios. In R. Sun and N. Miyake, editors,
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, pages 1717?1722, Mah-
wah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Max M. Louwerse, Nick Benesh, Mohammed E.
Hoque, Patrick Jeuniaux, Gwineth Lewis, Jie Wu,
and Megan Zirnstein. 2007. Multimodal communi-
cation in face-to-face conversations. In R. Sun and
N. Miyake, editors, Proceedings of the 29th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pages
1235?1240, Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Evelyn McClave. 2000. Linguistic functions of head
movements in the context of speech. Journal of
Pragmatics, 32:855?878.
Louis-Philippe Morency, Candace Sidner, Christopher
Lee, and Trevor Darrell. 2005. Contextual Recog-
nition of Head Gestures. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Multi-modal Interfaces.
Louis-Philippe Morency, Candace Sidner, Christopher
Lee, and Trevor Darrell. 2007. Head gestures for
perceptual interfaces: The role of context in im-
proving recognition. Artificial Intelligence, 171(8?
9):568?585.
Louis-Philippe Morency, Iwan de Kok, and Jonathan
Gratch. 2009. A probabilistic multimodal ap-
proach for predicting listener backchannels. Au-
tonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 20:70?
84, Springer.
Gabriel Murray and Steve Renals. 2008. Detecting
Action Meetings in Meetings. In Proceedings of
the 5th MLMI, LNCS 5237, pages 208?213, Utrecht,
The Netherlands, September. Springer.
Harm Rieks op den Akker and Christian Schulz. 2008.
Exploring features and classifiers for dialogue act
segmentation. In Proceedings of the 5th MLMI,
pages 196?207.
Patrizia Paggio and Costanza Navarretta. 2010. Feed-
back in Head Gesture and Speech. To appear in Pro-
ceedings of 7th Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC-2010), Malta, May.
323
Dennis Reidsma, Dirk Heylen, and Harm Rieks op den
Akker. 2009. On the Contextual Analysis of Agree-
ment Scores. In Michael Kipp, Jean-Claude Mar-
tin, Patrizia Paggio, and Dirk Heylen, editors, Multi-
modal Corpora From Models of Natural Interaction
to Systems and Applications, number 5509 in Lec-
ture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 122?137.
Springer.
Vivek Kumar Rangarajan Sridhar, Srinivas Bangaloreb,
and Shrikanth Narayanan. 2009. Combining lexi-
cal, syntactic and prosodic cues for improved online
dialog act tagging. Computer Speech & Language,
23(4):407?422.
Ian H. Witten and Eibe Frank. 2005. Data Mining:
Practical machine learning tools and techniques.
Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, second edition.
Harry Zhang, Liangxiao Jiang, and Jiang Su. 2005.
Hidden Naive Bayes. In Proceedings of the Twen-
tieth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
pages 919?924.
324
