Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Interactive Presentation Sessions, pages 9?12,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
LeXFlow: a System for Cross-fertilization of Computational Lexicons 
Maurizio Tesconi and Andrea Marchetti 
CNR-IIT 
Via Moruzzi 1, 56024 Pisa, Italy 
{maurizio.tesconi,andrea.marchetti}@iit.cnr.it 
Francesca Bertagna and Monica Monachini and Claudia Soria and Nicoletta Calzolari 
CNR-ILC 
Via Moruzzi 1, 56024 Pisa, Italy 
{francesca.bertagna,monica.monachini, 
claudia.soria,nicoletta.calzolari}@ilc.cnr.it 
 
  
Abstract 
This demo presents LeXFlow, a work-
flow management system for cross-
fertilization of computational lexicons. 
Borrowing from techniques used in the 
domain of document workflows, we 
model the activity of lexicon manage-
ment as a set of workflow types, where 
lexical entries move across agents in the 
process of being dynamically updated. A 
prototype of LeXFlow has been imple-
mented with extensive use of XML tech-
nologies (XSLT, XPath, XForms, SVG) 
and open-source tools (Cocoon, Tomcat, 
MySQL). LeXFlow is a web-based ap-
plication that enables the cooperative and 
distributed management of computational 
lexicons. 
1 Introduction 
LeXFlow is a workflow management system 
aimed at enabling the semi-automatic manage-
ment of computational lexicons. By management 
we mean not only creation, population and vali-
dation of lexical entries but also integration and 
enrichment of different lexicons.  
A lexicon can be enriched by resorting to 
automatically acquired information, for instance 
by means of an application extracting informa-
tion from corpora. But a lexicon can be enriched 
also by resorting to the information available in 
another lexicon, which can happen to encode 
different types of information, or at different lev-
els of granularity. LeXFlow intends to address 
the request by the computational lexicon com-
munity for a change in perspective on computa-
tional lexicons: from static resources towards 
dynamically configurable multi-source entities, 
where the content of lexical entries is dynami-
cally modified and updated on the basis of the 
integration of knowledge coming from different 
sources (indifferently represented by human ac-
tors, other lexical resources, or applications for 
the automatic extraction of lexical information 
from texts). 
This scenario has at least two strictly related 
prerequisites: i) existing lexicons have to be 
available in or be mappable to a standard form 
enabling the overcoming of their respective dif-
ferences and idiosyncrasies, thus making their 
mutual comprehensibility a reality; ii) an archi-
tectural framework should be used for the effec-
tive and practical management of lexicons, by 
providing the communicative channel through 
which lexicons can really communicate and 
share the information encoded therein. 
For the first point, standardization issues obvi-
ously play the central role. Important and exten-
sive efforts have been and are being made to-
wards the extension and integration of existing 
and emerging open lexical and terminological 
standards and best practices, such as EAGLES, 
ISLE, TEI, OLIF, Martif (ISO 12200), Data 
Categories (ISO 12620), ISO/TC37/SC4, and 
LIRICS. An important achievement in this re-
spect is the MILE, a meta-entry for the encoding 
of multilingual lexical information (Calzolari et 
al., 2003); in our approach we have embraced the 
MILE model.  
As far as the second point is concerned, some 
initial steps have been made to realize frame-
works enabling inter-lexica access, search, inte-
gration and operability. Nevertheless, the general 
impression is that little has been made towards 
the development of new methods and techniques 
9
for the concrete interoperability among lexical 
and textual resources. The intent of LeXFlow is 
to fill in this gap.  
2 LeXFlow Design and Application 
LeXFlow is conceived as a metaphoric extension 
and adaptation to computational lexicons of 
XFlow, a framework for the management of 
document workflows (DW, Marchetti et al, 
2005).  
A DW can be seen as a process of cooperative 
authoring where the document can be the goal of 
the process or just a side effect of the coopera-
tion. Through a DW, a document life-cycle is 
tracked and supervised, continually providing 
control over the actions leading to document 
compilation In this environment a document 
travels among agents who essentially carry out 
the pipeline receive-process-send activity.  
Each lexical entry can be modelled as a docu-
ment instance (formally represented as an XML 
representation of the MILE lexical entry), whose 
behaviour can be formally specified by means of 
a document workflow type (DWT) where differ-
ent agents, with clear-cut roles and responsibili-
ties, act over different portions of the same entry 
by performing different tasks.  
Two types of agents are envisaged: external 
agents are human or software actors which per-
form activities dependent from the particular 
DWT, and internal agents are software actors 
providing general-purpose activities useful for 
any DWT and, for this reason, implemented di-
rectly into the system. Internal agents perform 
general functionalities such as creat-
ing/converting a document belonging to a par-
ticular DWT, populating it with some initial data, 
duplicating a document to be sent to multiple 
agents, splitting a document and sending portions 
of information to different agents, merging du-
plicated documents coming from multiple agents, 
aggregating fragments, and finally terminating 
operations over the document. An external agent 
executes some processing using the document 
content and possibly other data, e.g. updates the 
document inserting the results of the preceding 
processing, signs the updating and finally sends 
the document to the next agent(s). 
The state diagram in Figure 1 describes the 
different states of the document instances. At the 
starting point of the document life cycle there is 
a creation phase, in which the system raises a 
new instance of a document with information 
attached.  
Figure 1. Document State Diagram. 
 
The document instance goes into pending 
state. When an agent gets the document, it goes 
into processing state in which the agent compiles 
the parts under his/her responsibility. If the 
agent, for some reason, doesn?t complete the in-
stance elaboration, he can save the work per-
formed until that moment and the document in-
stance goes into freezing state. If the elaboration 
is completed (submitted), or cancelled, the in-
stance goes back into pending state, waiting for a 
new elaboration. 
Borrowing from techniques used in DWs, we 
have modelled the activity of lexicon manage-
ment as a set of DWT, where lexical entries 
move across agents and become dynamically 
updated.  
3 Lexical Workflow General Architec-
ture 
As already written, LeXFlow is based on XFlow 
which is composed of three parts: i) the Agent 
Environment, i.e. the agents participating to all 
DWs; ii) the Data, i.e. the DW descriptions plus 
the documents created by the DW and iii) the 
Engine. Figure 2 illustrates the architecture of the 
framework. 
Figure 2. General Architecture. 
 
The DW environment is the set of human and 
software agents participating to at least one DW. 
10
The description of a DW can be seen as an ex-
tension of the XML document class. A class of 
documents, created in a DW, shares the schema 
of their structure, as well as the definition of the 
procedural rules driving the DWT and the list of 
the agents attending to it. Therefore, in order to 
describe a DWT, we need four components:  
? a schema of the documents involved in the 
DWT; 
? the agent roles chart, i.e. the set of the ex-
ternal and internal agents, operating on the 
document flow. Inside the role chart these 
agents are organized in roles and groups in 
order to define who has access to the 
document. This component constitutes the 
DW environment; 
? a document interface description used by 
external agents to access the documents. 
This component also allows checking ac-
cess permissions to the document; 
? a document workflow description defining 
all the paths that a document can follow in 
its life-cycle, the activities and policies for 
each role.  
The document workflow engine constitutes the 
run-time support for the DW, it implements the 
internal agents, the support for agents? activities, 
and some system modules that the external agents 
have to use to interact with the DW system. 
Also, the engine is responsible for two kinds of 
documents useful for each document flow: the 
documents system logs and the documents system 
metadata. 
4 The lexicon Augmentation Workflow 
Type 
In this section we present a first DWT, called 
?lexicon augmentation?, for dynamic augmenta-
tion of semantic MILE-compliant lexicons. This 
DWT corresponds to the scenario where an entry 
of a lexicon A becomes enriched via basically 
two steps. First, by virtue of being mapped onto 
a corresponding entry belonging to a lexicon B, 
the entry(A) inherits the semantic relations avail-
able in the mapped entry(B). Second, by resorting 
to an automatic application that acquires infor-
mation about semantic relations from corpora, 
the acquired relations are integrated into the en-
try and proposed to the human encoder. 
In order to test the system we considered the 
Simple/Clips (Ruimy et al, 2003) and ItalWord-
Net (Roventini et al, 2003) lexicons.  
An overall picture of the flow is shown in Fig-
ure 3, illustrating the different agents participat-
ing to the flow. Rectangles represent human ac-
tors over the entries, while the other figures 
symbolize software agents: ovals are internal 
agents and octagons external ones. The function-
ality offered to human agents are: display of 
MILE-encoded lexical entries, selection of lexi-
cal entries, mapping between lexical entries be-
longing to different lexicons1, automatic calcula-
tions of new semantic relations (either automati-
cally derived from corpora and mutually inferred 
from the mapping) and manual verification of the 
newly proposed semantic relations.  
5 Implementation Overview 
Our system is currently implemented as a web-
based application where the human external 
agents interact with system through a web 
browser. All the human external agents attending 
the different document workflows are the users 
of system. Once authenticated through username 
and password the user accesses his workload 
area where the system lists all his pending docu-
ments (i.e. entries) sorted by type of flow. 
The system shows only the flows to which the 
user has access. From the workload area the user 
                                                 
1 We hypothesize a human agent, but the same role could be 
performed by a software agent. To this end, we are investi-
gating the possibility of automatically exploiting the proce-
dure described in (Ruimy and Roventini, 2005). 
Figure 3. Lexicon Augmentation Workflow. 
 
11
can browse his documents and select some op-
erations  
 
Figure 4. LeXFlow User Activity State Diagram. 
 
such as: selecting and processing pending docu-
ment; creating a new document; displaying a 
graph representing a DW of a previously created 
document; highlighting the current position of 
the document. This information is rendered as an 
SVG (Scalable Vector Graphics) image. Figure 5 
illustrates the overall implementation of the sys-
tem. 
5.1 The Client Side: External Agent Inter-
action 
The form used to process the documents is ren-
dered with XForms. Using XForms, a browser 
can communicate with the server through XML 
documents and is capable of displaying the 
document with a user interface that can be de-
fined for each type of document. A browser with 
XForms capabilities will receive an XML docu-
ment that will be displayed according to the 
specified template, then it will let the user edit 
the document and finally it will send the modi-
fied document to the server. 
5.2 The Server Side 
The server-side is implemented with Apache 
Tomcat, Apache Cocoon and MySQL. Tomcat is 
used as the web server, authentication module 
(when the communication between the server 
and the client needs to be encrypted) and servlet 
container. Cocoon is a publishing framework that 
uses the power of XML. The entire functioning 
of Cocoon is based on one key concept: compo-
nent pipelines. The pipeline connotes a series of 
events, which consists of taking a request as in-
put, processing and transforming it, and then giv-
ing the desired response. MySQL is used for 
storing and retrieving the documents and the 
status of the documents. 
Each software agent is implemented as a web-
service and the WSDL language is used to define 
its interface.  
References 
Nicoletta Calzolari, Francesca Bertagna, Alessandro 
Lenci and Monica Monachini, editors. 2003. Stan-
dards and Best Practice for Multilingual Computa-
tional Lexicons. MILE (the Multilingual ISLE 
Lexical Entry). ISLE Deliverable D2.2 & 3.2. Pisa. 
Andrea Marchetti, Maurizio Tesconi, and Salvatore 
Minutoli. 2005. XFlow: An XML-Based Docu-
ment-Centric Workflow. In Proceedings of WI-
SE?05, pages 290- 303, New York, NY, USA. 
Adriana Roventini, Antonietta Alonge, Francesca 
Bertagna, Nicoletta Calzolari, Christian Girardi, 
Bernardo Magnini, Rita Marinelli, and Antonio 
Zampolli. 2003. ItalWordNet: Building a Large 
Semantic Database for the Automatic Treatment of 
Italian. In Antonio Zampolli, Nicoletta Calzolari, 
and Laura Cignoni, editors, Computational Lingui-
stics in Pisa, Istituto Editoriale e Poligrafico Inter-
nazionale, Pisa-Roma, pages 745-791. 
Nilda Ruimy, Monica Monachini, Elisabetta Gola, 
Nicoletta Calzolari, Cristina Del Fiorentino, Marisa 
Ulivieri, and Sergio Rossi. 2003. A Computational 
Semantic Lexicon of Italian: SIMPLE. In Antonio 
Zampolli, Nicoletta Calzolari, and Laura Cignoni, 
editors, Computational Linguistics in Pisa, Istituto 
Editoriale e Poligrafico Internazionale, Pisa-Roma, 
pages 821-864. 
Nilda Ruimy and Adriana Roventini. 2005. Towards 
the linking of two electronic lexical databases of 
Italian. In  Proceedings of L&T'05 - Language 
Technologies as a Challenge for Computer Science 
and Linguistics, pages 230-234, Poznan, Poland.
Figure 5. Overall System Implementation. 
12
Senseval-3: The Italian All-words Task 
Marisa ULIVIERI 
ILC-CNR 
Via Moruzzi 1  
Pisa, Italy, 56124 
marisa.ulivieri@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Francesca BERTAGNA 
ILC-CNR 
Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56124 
francesca.bertagna@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Elisabetta GUAZZINI 
ILC-CNR 
Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56124 
elisabetta.guazzini@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Nicoletta CALZOLARI 
ILC-CNR 
Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56124 
glottolo@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes the Italian all-words 
sense disambiguation task for Senseval-3. The 
annotation procedure and criteria together with 
the encoding of multiwords are presented. 
1 Introduction 
This paper describes the Italian all-words sense 
disambiguation task for Senseval-3: about 5000 
words were manually disambiguated according to 
the ItalWordNet (IWN) word senses. The first 
section briefly describes of the corpus and the 
lexical reference resource. The second section 
contains some general criteria adopted for the 
annotation of the corpus and illustrated by a series 
of examples. Issues connected to the treatment of 
phenomena typically found in corpora, e.g. 
abbreviations, foreign words, jargon, locutions are 
discussed. Furthermore, the encoding of 
compounds, metaphorical usages, and multiword 
units is described. Problems connected with i) the 
high granularity of sense distinctions in the lexical 
resource and ii) unsolvable ambiguities of the 
contexts are dealt with. Finally, it is evidenced how 
the annotation exercise can be of help in updating 
or tuning IWN, by adding missing senses and/or 
entries. 
2 The Corpus and the Lexical Resource 
The Italian all-words corpus consists of about 
13600 word tokens, extracted from the SI-TAL 1, 
Italian Syntactic Semantic Treebank (ISST). The 
                                                     
1 SI-TAL (Integrated System for the Automatic 
treatment of Language)  was a National Project devoted 
to the creation of large linguistic resources and software 
tools for Italian written and spoken language processing. 
ISST (Montemagni et al 2003) consists of i) a 
generic corpus of about 215,000 tokens, extracted 
from different periodicals and newspaper articles 
(La Repubblica, Il Corriere della Sera) and ii) a 
specialised corpus of about 90,000 tokens, with 
texts belonging to the financial domain (Il Sole-
24Ore). The annotated corpus consists of about 
5000 words and comprises a selection of Italian 
newspaper articles about various topics: politics, 
sport, news, etc. The common data format is XML. 
The reference lexical resource used for the 
Senseval-3 sense tagging task is the lexical-
semantic database IWN, developed within the 
framework of two different research projects: 
EuroWordNet (Vossen 1999) and SI-TAL, during 
which IWN was extended by the insertion of 
adjectives, adverbs and a subset of proper nouns. 
The IWN database contains about 64,000 word 
senses corresponding to about 50,000 synsets. It 
has inherited the EWN linguistic model (Alonge et 
al., 1998) which provides a rich set of semantic 
relations, and the first nucleus of verbs and nouns. 
IWN was structured around the notion of synset, a 
set of synonymous word meanings, and the 
information is encoded in the form of lexical-
semantic relations between pairs of synsets. The 
IWN database comprises also an Interlingual Index 
(ILI), based on the Princeton WordNet 1.5 used to 
link wordnets of different languages so that it is 
possible to go from the Italian words to similar 
words in English language. IWN has also inherited 
from EWN the Top Ontology (TO), a hierarchical 
structure of language-independent concepts, 
reflecting fundamental semantic distinctions. Via 
the ILI, all the concepts in the wordnet are linked 
to the Top Ontology. 
                                             Association for Computational Linguistics
                        for the Semantic Analysis of Text, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004
                 SENSEVAL-3: Third International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems
3 Annotation Procedure and Criteria 
For the Italian all-words task , the annotation 
was carried out manually, word by word following 
the text. For each word, annotators were supplied 
with information about The tagging operation 
consisted in the assignment of a sense number to 
each full word or sequence of words corresponding 
to a single unit of sense, such as compounds, 
idioms, metaphorical usages, etc. The sense 
number which refers to a specific synset was 
assigned by the annotators according to the lexical 
resource IWN. The assignment of a sense number 
allows tagged words to inherit a series of semantic 
information ranging from meronymy, synonymy, 
hyperonymy, etc. up to the fundamental semantic 
distinctions of the Top Ontology. 
The annotation of the corpus was restricted to 
nouns (2583), verbs (1858), adjectives (748), a 
group of multiword expressions (97 ? verb phrases, 
adjectival phrases and noun phrases) and a set of 
general proper nouns (163). Two linguists 
disambiguated the texts. The annotators made 
every effort to match a text word to a IWN sense, 
but sometimes this could not be done, since the 
required sense was not present in the reference 
resource. Cases of difficult sense attribution and of 
disagreement between annotators were marked and 
left to further discussion and refinement. 
Frequently, a tight interaction between the IWN 
developers and the annotators was needed. By the 
way, this collaboration produced a double-sided 
effect: on the one side, the lexical resource gained 
in coverage, being enlarged through the addition of 
missing entries and/or senses and, on the other 
side, the corpus encoding has been made possible. 
3.1 Non-annotated cases 
Notwithstanding this, some cases have been left 
?empty?. They are in particular terms with not 
standard meaning, often absent from dictionaries2 
as, for example: i) abbreviations (C.T. 
Commissario Tecnico, Technical Officer); ii) 
foreign words (e.g. off limits); iii) jargon (e.g. 
fumantino adj. una persona fumantina, an irascible 
person); iv) terms semantically modified through 
evaluative suffixation (e.g. vetturetta, small car); 
v) locutions (e.g. per carit?!, for goodness? sake!; 
ci mancherebbe, that?s all we need); vi) words, or 
sequences of words, indicating human association 
groups (Caschi blu, the Blue Berets, Croce Rossa, 
Red Cross, etc.), vii) nicknames (Scarpa d'oro, lit. 
Gold Shoe ? to say a good football player, Primula 
                                                     
2 Some of them are very technical-specialistic terms 
or expressions extracted, in particular, from the soccer 
domain, e.g. andare in percussione/in sovrapposizione 
(lit. to go in percussion/in overlapping). 
Rossa, the Scarlet Pimpernel, a mafioso boss, etc.); 
viii) neologisms (e.g. komeinista berlusconiano, 
concerning Khomeini, Berlusconi). 
This type of specific neologisms or idiomatic 
expressions have a high frequency in corpora. 
Corpus texts are extracted from newspaper articles 
about politics, sports, news, etc. in which a high 
number of words currently used in the everyday 
language of media appear. Rarely a lexical 
resource contains this new-born expressions hence 
not completely meeting the requirements of 
semantic annotation. 
3.2 Fully-compositional Expressions 
It may be the case that annotators had to deal 
with complex expressions where the meaning is 
compositional, e.g. Ministero della Difesa 
(Department of Defence). Even if this sequence of 
words could be perceived by native speakers as a 
single multiword expression, the reference lexical 
resource did not present it as an independent entry. 
This is a case of fully compositional expression, 
whose interpretation depends functionally on the 
interpretation of its constituents. They were, 
therefore, decomposed and annotated according to 
their parts. 
3.3 Metaphorical Usages 
Figurative and metaphorical usages were hard to 
map to the correct sense: sometimes, it has been 
necessary to accept for them, at least, a 
compromise solution. Consider the following 
context (where bold marks the figurative usage): 
 
due lavoratori su tre sono a casa = essere 
disoccupato 
 
out of three workers, two are at home = to be 
unemployed) 
 
The interpretation of the context presupposes an 
extra-linguistic knowledge, which cannot be 
encoded at the lexical-semantic level of 
description, even if the collocation with lavoratori 
(workers) allows to correctly disambiguate. In this 
case a (at home) represents an instance of a non 
lexicalised metaphor, therefore it was not possible 
to assign the appropriate figurative sense. A 
compromise solution was adopted and the 
individual components of the phrase were 
annotated, even if the correct semantic contribution 
of the multiword expression was lost. 
Another interesting case is provided by the 
occurrences of some metaphoric uses of verbs. 
Consider these examples: 
 
? ? andata male in Spagna e non si ? 
qualificata alle ?, lit. in Spain it went badly and 
did not qualify for the 
 
? il rapporto and? avanti fino alle nozze, lit. 
the relationship went ahead until wedding 
In the first example, even if the verb is 
frequently used with this meaning, it was not 
possible to attribute a correct sense number, since 
it was not accounted for in the lexical resource. 
In the second case, the verbal locution andare 
avanti was not present in IWN. In this context, 
andare has been annotated with andare11, ?to 
progress?, which incorporates the meaning 
provided by andare plus the adverb avanti (to go 
ahead). 
All the above mentioned cases of non-annotation 
or compromise annotation evidence the 
divergences between lexicon encoding, on the one 
hand, in which senses are by necessity 
?decontextualised? to be able to capture 
generalizations (Calzolari et al 2002) and corpus 
annotation, on the other, where ?contextualization? 
plays a predominant role and, consequently, 
figurative senses, idioms, metaphorical usages, 
multiwords, are highly frequent. 
3.4 High granularity of sense distinctions 
One of the main reasons for disagreement 
between annotators could arise from the high IWN 
granularity in sense distinction. Often, when 
deciding a sense, too subtle distinctions could turn 
out to be a disadvantage for the annotators. 
Consider the verb sentire (to hear): IWN makes a 
very fine-grained distinction, where exactly 17 
senses are available. Some of them overlap or are 
so close each other to be undistinguishable for 
human annotators and may be problematic for 
systems. In the following example: 
Passano pochissimi secondi e qualcuno sente un 
urlo= ? and someone hears a cry 
 
In IWN, two senses of the verb are overlapping: 
 
sentire 1 ? percepire con l'orecchio (to hear) 
 
sentire 2 ? essere in grado di percepire suoni con 
l'orecchio (to be able to hear sounds) 
 
These distinctions are too subtle to be used in 
corpus annotation. The annotator has chosen 
sense1, but (in order to allow for the coarse-
grained scoring of automatic annotation) a 
sensemap of words, a table where the overlapping 
senses are accounted for, was provided. 
3.5 Context Ambiguity 
Corpus annotation strategy allowed to handle 
cases where synsets are numerous and present fine-
grained distinctions, not easily mappable to the 
corpus contexts or cases in which the context could 
raise a double interpretation. Annotators were not 
forced to make a totally subjective choice and 
could assign multiple senses (?and? operator). 
Lo Zaire ? uno dei paesi pi? pericolosi di tutta 
l'Africa = The Zaire is one of the most dangerous 
countries of Africa 
 
In IWN, sense distinctions are as follows: 
 
Paese1?  territorio con un governo sovrano e una 
propria organizzazione politica e amministrativa, 
(territory with its own political and administrative 
organization) 
 
Paese3? insieme di individui legati da stesse 
tradizioni storiche, lingua, costumi, (group of 
people with same historical traditions, languages 
and customs) 
 
Since annotators could not achieve a satisfactory 
disambiguation, they take into account both senses, 
sense1 and sense3. It was not clear, indeed, if the 
dangerousness refers to the country (sense1) or to 
the people (sense3). During the annotation, 
multiple senses have been assigned to about 90 
lemmas, that appeared arbitrary or impossible to 
disambiguate. 
3.6 Multiwords annotation 
The main difference between Senseval-3 and 
Senseval-2 is that in the all-words annotation task 
annotators are faced with complex lexical items 
coined, generally, with many technical terms, 
collocations, idioms, compounds, frozen 
expressions or multiwords, which were not present 
in the lexical-sample task. With the term 
multiwords we refer to all sequences of words 
whose meaning cannot be built compositionally 
from the meanings of its component words. The 
semantic contribution of individual components if 
annotated separately does not give reason of the 
final meaning of the expression which can be 
considered a sort of ?new concept?, e.g. farla 
franca (to get away with it), prendere parte (to 
take part), muro a secco (dry-stone wall). 
In IWN a set of lexicalised expressions were 
already included and the correct sense to assign 
was, hence, available: perdere i sensi (to faint), 
fare fuoco (to fire), passare in rivista (to review) 
etc. Many multiword expressions found in the 
corpus were added to IWN as semantically 
complex units, e.g. vedersela brutta (to have a 
narrow escape), essere in corso (to be in progress) 
etc. The annotation task has given, hence, the 
opportunity to establish a strong interaction 
between annotators and lexicographers in deciding 
what kind of sequences were real multiword 
expressions and, above all, which were worthwhile 
from a linguistic point of view to introduce in the 
lexical resource. 
The multiword expressions (about 60) were 
annotated with the following information: 
multiword ID; Part_of_Speech lemma; function of 
the components words: head, satellite. 
The individuation of the headword of the 
sequence has been made on the basis of a lexical 
criterion: for noun-phrases, the head of the 
sequence was considered the noun, the adjective 
for adjectival?phrases, the verb for verb-phrases. 
Once recognized the head, the other constituents 
play the role of satellites and the whole sequence 
receives the part-of-speech of the head. 
Here is an example encoded in XML: 
 
<head id="cs.morph074.mw_704" 
sats="cs.morph074.mw_706 
cs.morph074.mw_707"> 
uscita</head>clamorosamente 
<sat id="cs.morph074.mw_706">di</sat> 
<sat id="cs.morph074.mw_707">scena</sat> 
<answer head="cs.morph074.mw_704" 
senseid="uscire di scena.V.1"/> 
 
Our intention was only to provide an 
examplification of the methodology we adopted 
when trying to handle multiword expressions. 
Even if the recognition and treatment of poly- 
lexical units is obviously one of the most important 
issues emerging in the process of context 
interpretation, in this paper we did not address 
theoretical issues concerning their exact 
identification. 
References  
Alonge Antonietta, Nicoletta Calzolari, Piek 
Vossen, Laura Bloksma, Irene Castellon, Maria 
Antonia Marti and Wim Peters. 1998. The 
Linguistic Design of the EuroWordNet Database. 
Special Issue on EuroWordNet. Computers and 
the Humanities, Vol.32, N. 2-3: pag.91-115. 
Calzolari Nicoletta, Claudia Soria, Francesca 
Bertagna and Francesco Barsotti. 2002. 
Evaluating Lexical Resources Using Senseval. 
Journal of Natural Language Engineering, 
Special Issue of Senseval-2, vol.VIII(4), pag. 
375-390. 
Kilgarriff Adam, Rosenzweig Joseph. 2000. 
English Senseval: Report and Results. Proc. 
Second Conf on Language Resources and 
Evaluation Athens,  pag. 1239-1244. 
Montemagni Simonetta, Barsotti Francesco, 
Battista Marco Calzolari Nicoletta, Corazzari 
Ornella, Lenci Alessandro, Pirrelli Vito, 
Zampolli Antonio, Fanciulli Francesca; 
Massetani Maria, Raffaelli Remo, Basili 
Roberto, Pazienza Maria Teresa, Saracino Dario, 
Zanzotto Fabio, Mana Nadia, Pianesi Fabio, 
Delmonte Rodolfo. 2003. The syntactic-semantic 
Treebank of Italian. An Overview. Linguistica 
Computazionale a Pisa vol. I, pag.461-492. 
Vossen Piek (ed.) 1999. EuroWordNet General 
Document. The EWN CD-ROM (see also: 
http://www.hum.uva.nl/ ). 
 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Multilingual Language Resources and Interoperability, pages 17?24,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Towards Agent-based Cross-lingual Interoperability of Distributed    
Lexical Resources 
Claudia Soria* Maurizio Tesconi? Andrea Marchetti?
Francesca Bertagna* Monica Monachini*
Chu-Ren Huang?    Nicoletta Calzolari*
*CNR-ILC and ?CNR-IIT 
Via Moruzzi 1, 56024 Pisa 
Italy 
{firstname.lastname@ilc.cnr.it} 
{firstname.lastname@iit.cnr.it} 
?Academia Sinica  
Nankang, Taipei  
Taiwan 
churen@gate.sinica.edu.tw 
 
  
 
Abstract 
In this paper we present an application 
fostering the integration and interopera-
bility of computational lexicons, focusing 
on the particular case of mutual linking 
and cross-lingual enrichment of two wor-
dnets, the ItalWordNet and Sinica BOW 
lexicons. This is intended as a case-study 
investigating the needs and requirements 
of semi-automatic integration and inter-
operability of lexical resources. 
1 Introduction 
In this paper we present an application fostering 
the integration and interoperability of computa-
tional lexicons, focusing on the particular case of 
mutual linking and cross-lingual enrichment of 
two wordnets. The development of this applica-
tion is intended as a case-study and a test-bed for 
trying out needs and requirements posed by the 
challenge of semi-automatic integration and en-
richment of practical, large-scale multilingual 
lexicons for use in computer applications. While 
a number of lexicons already exist, few of them 
are practically useful, either since they are not 
sufficiently broad or because they don?t cover 
the necessary level of detailed information. 
Moreover, multilingual language resources are 
not as widely available and are very costly to 
construct: the work process for manual develop-
ment of new lexical resources or for tailoring 
existing ones is too expensive in terms of effort 
and time to be practically attractive.  
The need of ever growing lexical resources for 
effective multilingual content processing has 
urged the language resource community to call 
for a radical change in the perspective of lan-
guage resource creation and maintenance and the 
design of a ?new generation? of LRs: from static, 
closed and locally developed resources to shared 
and distributed language services, based on open 
content interoperability standards. This has often 
been called a ?change in paradigm? (in the sense 
of Kuhn, see Calzolari and Soria, 2005; Calzolari 
2006). Leaving aside the tantalizing task of 
building on-site resources, the new paradigm 
depicts a scenario where lexical resources are 
cooperatively built as the result of controlled co-
operation of different agents, adopting the para-
digm of accumulation of knowledge so success-
ful in more mature disciplines, such as biology 
and physics (Calzolari, 2006).  
According to this view (or, better, this vision), 
different lexical resources reside over distributed 
places and can not only be accessed but choreo-
graphed by agents presiding the actions that can 
be executed over them. This implies the ability to 
build on each other achievements, to merge re-
sults, and to have them accessible to various sys-
tems and applications. 
At the same time, there is another argument in 
favor of distributed lexical resources: language 
resources, lexicons included, are inherently dis-
tributed because of the diversity of languages 
distributed over the world. It is not only natural 
that language resources to be developed and 
maintained in their native environment. Since 
language evolves and changes over time, it is not 
possible to describe the current state of the lan-
17
guage away from where the language is spoken. 
Lastly, the vast range of diversity of languages 
also makes it impossible to have one single uni-
versal centralized resource, or even a centralized 
repository of resources. 
Although the paradigm of distributed and in-
teroperable lexical resources has largely been 
discussed and invoked, very little has been made 
in comparison for the development of new meth-
ods and techniques for its practical realization. 
Some initial steps are made to design frame-
works enabling inter-lexica access, search, inte-
gration and operability. An example is the Lexus 
tool (Kemps-Snijders et al, 2006), based on the 
Lexical Markup Framework (Romary et al, 
2006), that goes in the direction of managing the 
exchange of data among large-scale lexical re-
sources. A similar tool, but more tailored to the 
collaborative creation of lexicons for endangered 
language, is SHAWEL (Gulrajani and Harrison, 
2002). However, the general impression is that 
little has been made towards the development of 
new methods and techniques for attaining a con-
crete interoperability among lexical resources. 
Admittedly, this is a long-term scenario requiring 
the contribution of many different actors and ini-
tiatives (among which we only mention stan-
dardisation, distribution and international coop-
eration).  
Nevertheless, the intent of our project is to 
contribute to fill in this gap, by exploring in a 
controlled way the requirement and implications 
posed by new generation multilingual lexical 
resources. The paper is organized as follows: 
section 2 describes the general architectural de-
sign of our project; section 3 describes the mod-
ule taking care of cross-lingual integration of 
lexical resources, by also presenting a case-study 
involving an Italian and Chinese lexicons. Fi-
nally, section 4 presents our considerations and 
lessons learned on the basis of this exploratory 
testing. 
2 An Architecture for Integrating Lexi-
cal Resources 
 LeXFlow (Soria et al, 2006) was developed 
having in mind the long-term goal of lexical re-
source interoperability. In a sense, LeXFlow is 
intended as a proof of concept attempting to 
make the vision of an infrastructure for access 
and sharing of linguistic resources more tangible. 
LeXFlow is an adaptation to computational 
lexicons of XFlow, a cooperative web applica-
tion for the management of document workflows 
(DW, Marchetti et al, 2005). A DW can be seen 
as a process of cooperative authoring where a 
document can be the goal of the process or just a 
side effect of the cooperation. Through a DW, a 
document life-cycle is tracked and supervised, 
continually providing control over the actions 
leading to document compilation. In this envi-
ronment a document travels among agents who 
essentially carry out the pipeline receive-process-
send activity.  
There are two types of agents: external agents 
are human or software actors performing activi-
ties dependent from the particular Document 
Workflow Type; internal agents are software 
actors providing general-purpose activities useful 
for many DWTs and, for this reason, imple-
mented directly into the system. Internal agents 
perform general functionalities such as creat-
ing/converting a document belonging to a par-
ticular DW, populating it with some initial data, 
duplicating a document to be sent to multiple 
agents, splitting a document and sending portions 
of information to different agents, merging du-
plicated documents coming from multiple agents, 
aggregating fragments, and finally terminating 
operations over the document. External agents 
basically execute some processing using the 
document content and possibly other data; for 
instance, accessing an external database or 
launching an application.  
LeXFlow was born by tailoring XFlow to 
management of lexical entries; in doing so, we 
have assumed that each lexical entry can be 
modelled as a document instance, whose behav-
iour can be formally specified by means of a 
lexical workflow type (LWT). A LWT describes 
the life-cycle of a lexical entry, the agents al-
lowed to act over it, the actions to be performed 
by the agents, and the order in which the actions 
are to be executed. Embracing the view of coop-
erative workflows, agents can have different 
rights or views over the same entry: this nicely 
suits the needs of lexicographic work, where we 
can define different roles (such as encoder, anno-
tator, validator) that can be played by either hu-
man or software agents. Other software modules 
can be inserted in the flow, such as an automatic 
acquirer of information from corpora or from the 
web. Moreover, deriving from a tool designed 
for the cooperation of agents, LeXFlow allows to 
manage workflows where the different agents 
can reside over distributed places.  
LeXFlow thus inherits from XFlow the gen-
eral design and architecture, and can be consid-
ered as a specialized version of it through design 
18
of specific Lexical Workflow Types and plug-in 
of dedicated external software agents. In the next 
section we briefly illustrate a particular Lexical 
Workflow Type and the external software agents 
developed for the purpose of integrating different 
lexicons belonging to the same language. Since it 
allows the independent and coordinated sharing 
of actions over portions of lexicons, LeXFlow 
naturally lends itself as a tool for the manage-
ment of distributed lexical resources. 
Due to its versatility, LeXFlow is both a gen-
eral framework where ideas on automatic lexical 
resource integration can be tested and an infra-
structure for proving new methods for coopera-
tion among lexicon experts. 
2.1 Using LeXFlow for Lexicon Enrichment 
In previous work (Soria et al, 2006),  the LeX-
Flow framework has been tested for integration 
of lexicons with differently conceived lexical 
architectures and diverging formats. It was 
shown how interoperability is possible between 
two Italian lexicons from the SIMPLE and 
WordNet families, respectively, namely the 
SIMPLE/CLIPS (Ruimy et al, 2003) and Ital-
WordNet (Roventini et al, 2003) lexicons.  
In particular, a Lexical Workflow Type was 
designed where the two different monolingual 
semantic lexicons interact by reciprocally enrich-
ing themselves and moreover integrate informa-
tion coming from corpora. This LWT, called 
?lexicon augmentation?, explicitly addresses dy-
namic augmentation of semantic lexicons. In this 
scenario, an entry of a lexicon A becomes en-
riched via basically two steps. First, by virtue of 
being mapped onto a corresponding entry be-
longing to a lexicon B, the entryA inherits the 
semantic relations available in the mapped en-
tryB. Second, by resorting to an automatic appli-
cation that acquires information about semantic 
relations from corpora, the acquired relations are 
integrated into the entry and proposed to the hu-
man encoder. 
B
An overall picture of the flow is shown in 
Figure 1, illustrating the different agents partici-
pating in the flow. Rectangles represent human 
actors over the entries, while the other figures 
symbolize software agents: ovals are internal 
agents and octagons external ones. The two ex-
ternal agents involved in this flow are the ?rela-
tion calculator? and the ?corpora extractor?. The 
first is responsible for the mapping between the 
sets of semantic relations used by the different 
lexicons. The ?corpora extractor? module in-
vokes an application that acquires information 
about part-of relations by identifying syntactic 
constructions in a vast Italian corpus. It then 
takes care of creating the appropriate candidate 
semantic relations for each lemma that is pro-
posed by the application. 
Figure 1. Lexicons Augmentation Workflow 
Type. 
A prototype of LeXFlow has been imple-
mented with an extensive use of XML technolo-
gies (XML Schema, XSLT, XPath, XForms, 
SVG) and open-source tools (Cocoon, Tomcat, 
mySQL). It is a web-based application where 
human agents interact with the system through 
an XForms browser that displays the document 
to process as a web form whereas software 
agents interact with the system via web services. 
3 Multilingual WN Service 
In the Section above we have illustrated the gen-
eral architecture of LeXFlow and showed how a 
Lexical Workflow Type can be implemented in 
order to enrich already existing lexicons belong-
ing to the same language but realizing different 
models of lexicon encoding. In this section we 
move to a cross-lingual perspective of lexicon 
integration. We present a module that similarly 
addresses the issue of lexicon augmentation or 
enrichment focusing on mutual enrichment of 
two wordnets in different languages and residing 
at different sites. 
This module, named ?multilingual WN Ser-
vice? is responsible for the automatic cross-
lingual fertilization of lexicons having a Word-
19
Net-like structure. Put it very simply, the idea 
behind this module is that a monolingual word-
net can be enriched by accessing the semantic 
information encoded in corresponding entries of 
other monolingual wordnets.  
Since each entry in the monolingual lexicons 
is linked to the Interlingual Index (ILI, cf. Sec-
tion 3.1), a synset of a WN(A) is indirectly 
linked to another synset in another WN(B). On 
the basis of this correspondence, a synset(A) can 
be enriched by importing the relations that the 
corresponding synset(B) holds with other syn-
sets(B), and vice-versa. Moreover, the enrich-
ment of WN(A) will not only import the relations 
found in WN(B), but it will also propose target 
synsets in the language(A) on the basis of those 
found in language(B). 
The various WN lexicons reside over distrib-
uted servers and can be queried through web ser-
vice interfaces. The overall architecture for mul-
tilingual wordnet service is depicted in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. Multilingual Wordnet Service Archi-
tecture. 
 
Put in the framework of the general LeXFlow 
architecture, the Multilingual wordnet Service 
can be seen as an additional external software 
agent that can be added to the augmentation 
workflow or included in other types of lexical 
flows. For instance, it can be used not only to 
enrich a monolingual lexicon but to bootstrap a 
bilingual lexicon. 
3.1 Linking Lexicons through the ILI  
The entire mechanism of the Multilingual WN 
Service is based on the exploitation of Interlin-
gual Index (Peters et al, 1998), an unstructured 
version of WordNet used in EuroWordNet 
(Vossen et al, 1998) to link wordnets of different 
languages; each synset in the language-specific 
wordnet is linked to at least one record of the ILI 
by means of a set of equivalence relations 
(among which the most important is the 
EQ_SYNONYM, that expresses a total, perfect 
equivalence between two synsets).  
Figure 6 describes the schema of a WN lexical 
entry. Under the root ?synset? we find both in-
ternal relations (?synset relations?) and ILI Rela-
tions, which link to ILI synsets. 
Figure 3 shows the role played by the ILI as 
set of pivot nodes allowing the linkage between 
concepts belonging to different wordnets.  
 
 
Figure 3. Interlingual Linking of Language-
specific Synsets. 
 
In the Multilingual WN Service, only equiva-
lence relations of type EQ_SYNONYM and 
EQ_NEAR_SYNONYM have been taken into ac-
count, being them the ones used to represent a 
translation of concepts and also because they are 
the most exploited (for example, in IWN, they 
cover about the 60% of the encoded equivalence 
relations). The EQ_SYNONYM relation is used to 
realize the one-to-one mapping between the lan-
guage-specific synset and the ILI, while multiple 
EQ_NEAR_SYNONYM relations (because of their 
nature) might be encoded to link a single lan-
guage-specific synset to more than one ILI re-
cord. In Figure 4 we represented the possible 
relevant combinations of equivalence relations 
that can realize the mapping between synsets 
belonging to two languages. In all the four cases, 
a synset ?a? is linked via the ILI record to a syn-
set ?b? but a specific procedure has been fore-
seen in order to calculate different ?plausibility 
scores? to each situation. The procedure relies on 
different rates assigned to the two equivalence 
relations (rate ?1? to EQ_NEAR_SYNONYM rela-
tion and rate ?0? to the EQ_SYNONYM). In this 
way we can distinguish the four cases by assign-
ing respectively a weight of ?0?, ?1?, ?1? and 
?2?. 
20
  
Figure 4. Possible Combinations of Relations 
between two Lexicons A and B and the ILI. 
 
The ILI is a quite powerful yet simple method 
to link concepts across the many lexicons be-
longing to the WordNet-family. Unfortunately, 
no version of the ILI can be considered a stan-
dard and often the various lexicons exploit dif-
ferent version of WordNet as ILI 1 . This is a 
problem that is handled at web-service level, by 
incorporating the conversion tables provided by 
(Daud? et al, 2001). In this way, the use of dif-
ferent versions of WN does not have to be taken 
into consideration by the user who accesses the 
system but it is something that is resolved by the 
system itself2. This is why the version of the ILI 
is a parameter of the query to web service (see 
Section below). 
3.2 Description of the Procedure 
On the basis of ILI linking, a synset can be en-
riched by importing the relations contained in the 
corresponding synsets belonging to another 
wordnet. 
In the procedure adopted, the enrichment is 
performed on a synset-by-synset basis. In other 
words, a certain synset is selected from a word-
net resource, say WN(A). The cross-lingual mod-
ule identifies the corresponding ILI synset, on 
the basis of the information encoded in the syn-
set. It then sends a query to the WN(B) web ser-
vice providing the ID of ILI synset together with 
the ILI version of the starting WN. The WN(B) 
web service returns the synset(s) corresponding 
to the WN(A) synset, together with reliability 
scores. If WN(B) is based on a different ILI ver-
sion, it can carry out the mapping between ILI 
versions (for instance by querying the ILI map-
ping web service). The cross-lingual module then 
analyzes the synset relations encoded in the 
                                                 
1 For example, the Chinese and the Italian wordnets consid-
ered as our case-study use respectively versions 1.6 and 1.5. 
2 It should be noted, however, that the conversion between 
different WN versions could not be accurate so the mapping 
is always proposed with a probability score.
WN(B) synset and for each of them creates a 
new synset relation for the WN(A) synset. 
If the queried wordnets do not use the same set 
of synset relations, the module must take care of 
the mapping between different relation sets. In  
our case-study no mapping was needed, since the 
two sets were completely equivalent.   
Each new relation is obtained by substituting 
the target WN(B)  synset  with the corresponding 
synset WN(A), which again is found by querying 
back the WN(A) web service (all these steps 
through the ILI). The procedure is formally de-
fined by the following formula: 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Finding New Relations. 
 
Every local wordnet has to provide a web ser-
vice API  with the following methods: 
 
1. GetWeightedSynsetsByIli(ILIid, ILIversion) 
2. GetSynsetById(sysnsetID) 
3. GetSynsetsByLemma(lemma) 
 
21
The returned synsets of each method must be 
formatted in XML following the schema de-
picted in Figure 6: 
 
Figure 6. Schema of Wordnet Synsets Returned 
by WN Web Services. 
 
The scores returned by the method ?Get-
WeightedSynsetsByIli? are used by our module 
to calculate the reliability rating for each new 
proposed relation. 
3.3 A Case Study: Cross-fertilization be-
tween Italian and Chinese Wordnets. 
We explore this idea with a case-study involving 
the ItalianWordNet (Roventini et al, 2003) and 
the Academia Sinica Bilingual Ontological 
Wordnet (Sinica BOW, Huang et al, 2004).  
The BOW integrates three resources: Word-
Net, English-Chinese Translation Equivalents 
Database (ECTED), and SUMO (Suggested Up-
per Merged Ontology). With the integration of 
these three key resources, Sinica BOW functions 
both as an English-Chinese bilingual wordnet 
and a bilingual lexical access to SUMO. Sinica 
Bow currently has two bilingual versions, corre-
sponding to WordNet 1.6. and 1.7. Based on 
these bootstrapped versions, a Chinese Wordnet 
(CWN, Huang et al 2005) is under construction 
with handcrafted senses and lexical semantic re-
lations. For the current experiment, we have used 
the version linking to WordNet 1.6. 
ItalWordNet was realized as an extension of 
the Italian component of EuroWordNet. It com-
prises a general component consisting of about 
50,000 synsets and terminological wordnets 
linked to the generic wordnet by means of a spe-
cific set of relations. Each synset of ItalWordNet 
is linked to the Interlingual-Index (ILI). 
The two lexicons refer to different versions of 
the ILI (1.5 for IWN and 1.6 for BOW), thus 
making it necessary to provide a mapping be-
tween the two versions. On the other hand, no 
mapping is necessary for the set of synset rela-
tions used, since both of them adopt the same set. 
For the purposes of evaluating the cross-
lingual module, we have developed two web-
services for managing a subset of the two re-
sources.  
The following Figure shows a very simple ex-
ample where our procedure discovers and pro-
poses a new meronymy relation for the Italian 
synset {passaggio,strada,via}. This synset is 
equivalent to the ILI ?road,route? that is ILI-
connected with BOW synset ???,? ,?? (da-
o_lu, dao, lu) (Figure 7, A) . The Chinese synset 
has a meronymy relation with the synset ???
??? (wan) (B). This last  synset is equivalent 
to the ILI ?bend, crook, turn? that is ILI-
connected with Italian WordNet synset ?curva-
tura, svolta, curva? (C). Therefore the procedure 
will propose a new candidate meronymy relation 
between the two Italian WordNet synsets (D). 
 
 
Figure 7. Example of a New Proposed Mero-
nymy Relation for Italian. 
3.4 Considerations and Lessons Learned 
Given the diversity of the languages for which 
wordnets exist, we note that it is difficult to im-
plement an operational standard across all typo-
logically different languages. Work on enriching 
and merging multilingual resources presupposes 
that the resources involved are all encoded with 
the same standard. However, even with the best 
efforts of the NLP community, there are only a 
small number of language resources encoded in 
any given standard. In the current work, we pre-
suppose a de-facto standard, i.e. a shared and 
conventionalized architecture, the WordNet one. 
Since the WordNet framework is both conven-
tionalized and widely followed, our system is 
22
able to rely on it without resorting to a more sub-
stantial and comprehensive standard. In the case, 
for instance, of integration of lexicons with dif-
ferent underlying linguistic models, the availabil-
ity of the MILE (Calzolari et al, 2003) was an 
essential prerequisite of our work. Nevertheless, 
even from the perspective of the same model, a 
certain degree of standardization is required, at 
least at the format level. 
From a more general point of view, and even 
from the perspective of a limited experiment 
such as the one described in this paper, we must 
note that the realization of the new vision of dis-
tributed and interoperable language resources is 
strictly intertwined with at least two prerequi-
sites. On the one side, the language resources 
need to be available over the web; on the other, 
the language resource community will have to 
reconsider current distribution policies, and to 
investigate the possibility of developing an 
?Open Source? concept for LRs. 
4 Conclusion 
Our proposal to make distributed wordnets inter-
operable has the following applications in proc-
essing of lexical resources: 
 
? Enriching existing resources: informa-
tion is often not complete in any given 
wordnet: by making two wordnets inter-
operable, we can bootstrap semantic rela-
tions and other information from other 
wordnets. 
? Creation of new resources: multilingual 
lexicons can be bootstrapped by linking 
different language wordnets through ILI. 
? Validation of existing resources: seman-
tic relation information and other synset 
assignments can be validated when it is re-
inforced by data from a different wordnet. 
In particular, our work can be proposed as a 
prototype of a web application that would sup-
port the Global WordNet Grid initiative 
(www.globalwordnet.org/gwa/gwa_grid.htm).  
Any multilingual process, such as cross-
lingual information retrieval, must involve both 
resources and tools in a specific language and 
language pairs. For instance, a multilingual query 
given in Italian but intended for querying Eng-
lish, Chinese, French, German, and Russian 
texts, can be send to five different nodes on the 
Grid for query expansion, as well as performing 
the query itself. In this way, language specific 
query techniques can be applied in parallel to 
achieve best results that can be integrated in the 
future. As multilingualism clearly becomes one 
of the major challenges of the future of web-
based knowledge engineering, WordNet emerges 
as one leading candidate for a shared platform 
for representing a lexical knowledge model for 
different languages of the world. This is true 
even if it has to be recognized that the wordnet 
model is lacking in some important semantic in-
formation (like, for instance, a way to represent 
the semantic predicate). However, such knowl-
edge and resources are distributed. In order to 
create a shared multi-lingual knowledge base for 
cross-lingual processing based on these distrib-
uted resources, an initiative to create a grid-like 
structure has been recently proposed and pro-
moted by the Global WordNet Association, but 
until now has remained a wishful thinking. The 
success of this initiative will depend on whether 
there will be tools to access and manipulate the 
rich internal semantic structure of distributed 
multi-lingual WordNets. We believe that our 
work on LeXFlow offers such a tool to provide 
inter-operable web-services to access distributed 
multilingual WordNets on the grid. 
This allows us to exploit in a cross-lingual 
framework the wealth of monolingual lexical 
information built in the last decade. 
5 References 
Nicoletta Calzolari, Francesca Bertagna, Alessandro 
Lenci and Monica Monachini, editors. 2003. Stan-
dards and Best Practice for Multilingual Computa-
tional Lexicons. MILE (the Multilingual ISLE 
Lexical Entry). ISLE CLWG Deliverable D2.2 & 
3.2. Pisa. 
Nicoletta Calzolari and Claudia Soria. 2005. A New 
Paradigm for an Open Distributed Language Re-
source Infrastructure: the Case of Computational 
Lexicons. In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Sym-
posium ?Knowledge Collection from Volunteer 
Contributors (KCVC05)?, pages 110-114, Stan-
ford, CA. 
Nicoletta Calzolari. 2006. Technical and Strategic 
issues on Language Resources for a Research In-
frastructure In Proceedings of the International 
Symposium on Large-scale Knowledge Resources 
(LKR2006), pages 53-58, Tokyo, Tokyo Institute 
of Technology. 
Jordi Daud?, Lluis Padr? and German Rigau. 2001. A 
Complete WN1.5 to WN1.6 Mapping. In Proceed-
ings of NAACL Workshop "WordNet and Other 
Lexical Resources: Applications, Extensions and 
23
Customizations", pages 83-88, Pittsburg, PA, USA, 
Association for Computational Linguistics.  
Greg Gulrajani and David Harrison. 2002. SHAWEL: 
Sharable and Interactive Web-Lexicons. In Pro-
ceedings of the LREC2002 Workshop on Tools and 
Resources in Field Linguistics, pages 1-4, Las 
Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain. 
Chu-Ren Huang, Ru-Yng Chang,  and Shiang-Bin 
Lee. 2004. Sinica BOW (Bilingual Ontological 
Wordnet): Integration of Bilingual WordNet and 
SUMO. In Proceedings of LREC2004, pages 1553-
1556, Lisbon, Portugal. 
Chu-Ren Huang, Chun-Ling Chen, Cui-Xia Weng, 
Hsiang-Ping Lee, Yong-Xiang Chen and Keh-jiann 
Chen. 2005. The Sinica Sense Management Sys-
tem: Design and Implementation. Computational 
Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing. 
10(4): 417-430. 
Marc Kemps-Snijders, Mark-Jan Nederhof, and Peter 
Wittenburg. 2006. LEXUS, a web-based tool for 
manipulating lexical resources. Accepted for publi-
cation in Proceedings of LREC2006, Genoa, Italy. 
Andrea Marchetti, Maurizio Tesconi, and Salvatore 
Minutoli. 2005. XFlow: An XML-Based Docu-
ment-Centric Workflow. In Proceedings of 
WISE?05, pages 290-303, New York, NY, USA. 
Wim Peters, Piek Vossen, Pedro Diez-Orzas, and 
Geert Adriaens. 1998. Cross-linguistic Alignment 
of Wordnets with an Inter-Lingual-Index. In Nancy 
Ide, Daniel Greenstein, and Piek Vossen, editors, 
Special Issue on EuroWordNet, Computers and the 
Humanities, 32(2-3): 221-251. 
Laurent Romary, Gil Francopoulo, Monica Monachi-
ni, and Susanne Salmon-Alt 2006. Lexical Markup 
Framework (LMF): working to reach a consensual 
ISO standard on lexicons. Accepted for publication 
in Proceedings of LREC2006, Genoa, Italy. 
Adriana Roventini, Antonietta Alonge, Francesca 
Bertagna, Nicoletta Calzolari, Christian Girardi, 
Bernardo Magnini, Rita Marinelli, and Antonio 
Zampolli. 2003. ItalWordNet: Building a Large 
Semantic Database for the Automatic Treatment of 
Italian. In Antonio Zampolli, Nicoletta Calzolari, 
and Laura Cignoni, editors, Computational Lingui-
stics in Pisa, IEPI, Pisa-Roma, pages 745-791. 
Nilda Ruimy, Monica Monachini, Elisabetta Gola, 
Nicoletta Calzolari, Cristina Del Fiorentino, Marisa 
Ulivieri, and Sergio Rossi. 2003. A Computational 
Semantic Lexicon of Italian: SIMPLE. In Antonio 
Zampolli, Nicoletta Calzolari, and Laura Cignoni, 
editors, Computational Linguistics in Pisa, IEPI, 
Pisa-Roma, pages 821-864. 
Claudia Soria, Maurizio Tesconi, Francesca Bertagna, 
Nicoletta Calzolari, Andrea Marchetti, and Monica 
Monachini. 2006. Moving to Dynamic Computa-
tional Lexicons with LeXFlow. Accepted for pu-
blication in Proceedings of LREC2006, Genova, I-
taly.  
Piek Vossen. 1998. Introduction to EuroWordNet. In 
Nancy Ide, Daniel Greenstein, and Piek Vossen, 
editors, Special Issue on EuroWordNet, Computers 
and the Humanities, 32(2-3): 73-89. 
 
 
 
 
24
Broadening the Scope of the EAGLES/ISLE Lexical 
Standardization Initiative 
 
Nicoletta CALZOLARI 
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR  
Area della Ricerca, Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56100 
glottolo@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Alessandro LENCI 
Dipartimento di Linguistica, Universit? di Pisa 
Via S. Maria 36 
Pisa, Italy, 56100 
alessandro.lenci@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Francesca BERTAGNA 
Dipartimento di Linguistica, Universit? di Pisa 
Via S. Maria 36 
Pisa, Italy, 56100 
francesca.bertagna@ilc.cnr.it 
Antonio ZAMPOLLI 
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR  
Area della Ricerca, Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56100 
pisa@ilc.cnr.it 
Abstract  
ISLE is a continuation of the long standing EAGLES initiative and it is supported by EC and NSF under the 
Human Language Technology (HLT) programme. Its objective is to develop widely agreed and urgently 
demanded standards and guidelines for infrastructural language resources, tools, and HLT products. 
EAGLES itself is a well-known trademark and point of reference for HLT projects and products and its 
previous results have already become de facto widely adopted standards. Multilingual computational 
lexicons, natural interaction and multimodality, and evaluation are the three areas targeted by ISLE. In the 
first section of the paper we describe the overall goals and methodology of EAGLES/ISLE, in the second 
section we focus on the work of the Computational Lexicon Working Group, introducing its work strategy 
and the preliminary guidelines of a standard framework for multilingual computational lexicons, based on a 
general schema for the ?Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry? (MILE). 
 
1 Introducing EAGLES/ISLE 
ISLE (International Standards for Language 
Engineering) is a continuation of the long 
standing European EAGLES (Expert Advisory 
Group for Language Engineering Standards) 
initiative (Calzolari et al, 1996), carried out 
through a number of subsequent projects 
funded by the European Commission (EC) 
since 1993. ISLE is an initiative under the 
Human Language Technology (HLT) 
programme within the EU-US International 
Research Co-operation with the aim to develop 
and promote widely agreed and urgently 
demanded HLT standards, common guidelines 
and best practice recommendations for 
infrastructural language resources (Zampolli, 
1998), (Calzolari, 1998), tools that exploit 
them, and language engineering products.  
Object of EAGLES/ISLE are large-scale 
language resources (such as text corpora, 
computational lexicons, speech corpora, 
multimodal resources), means of manipulating 
such knowledge via computational linguistic 
formalisms, mark-up languages and various 
software tools and means of assessing and 
evaluating  resources, tools and products 
(EAGLES EWG final report, 1996). 
EAGLES was set up to determine which 
aspects of our field are open to short-term de 
facto  standardisation and to encourage the 
development of such standards for the benefit 
of consumers and producers of language 
technology, through bringing together 
representatives of major collaborative 
European R&D projects, and of HLT industry, 
in relevant areas. In this respect, more than 150 
leading industrial and academic players in the 
HLT field have actively participated in the 
definition of this initiative and have lent 
invaluable support to its execution.  
Successful standards are those which respond 
to commonly perceived needs or aid in 
overcoming common problems. In terms of 
offering workable, compromise solutions, they 
must be based on some solid platform of 
accepted facts and acceptable practices.  
The current ISLE project1 targets the three 
areas of : 
-multilingual computational lexicons2, 
-natural interaction and multimodality 
(NIMM)3,  
-evaluation of HLT systems4.  
For multilingual computational lexicons, ISLE 
goals are: i) extending EAGLES work on 
lexical semantics, necessary to establish inter-
language links; ii) designing and proposing 
standards for multilingual lexicons; iii) 
developing a prototype tool to implement 
lexicon guidelines and standards; iv) creating 
exemplary EAGLES-conformant sample 
lexicons and tagging exemplary corpora for 
validation purposes; v) developing 
standardised evaluation procedures for 
lexicons.  
For NIMM, ISLE work is targeted to develop 
guidelines for: i) the creation of NIMM data 
resources; ii) interpretative annotation of 
NIMM data, including spoken dialogue in 
NIMM contexts; iii) metadata descriptions for 
large NIMM resources; iv) annotation of 
discourse phenomena.  
For evaluation, ISLE is working on: i) quality 
models for machine translation systems; ii) 
maintenance of previous guidelines - in an ISO 
based framework (ISO 9126, ISO 14598). 
Three Working Groups, and their sub-groups, 
carry out the work, according to the EAGLES 
                                                 
1 Coordinated by A. Zampolli for EU and M. Palmer for 
US, see 
http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/isle/ISLE_Home_Pag
e.htm. 
2 EU chair: N. Calzolari; US chairs: M. Palmer and R. 
Grishman.  
3 EU chair: N. O. Bernsen; US chair: M. Liberman. 
4 EU chair: M. King; US chair: E. Hovy. 
methodology, with experts from both the EU 
and US, acting as a catalyst in order to pool 
concrete results coming from major 
international/national/industrial projects. 
Relevant common practices or upcoming 
standards are being used where appropriate as 
input to EAGLES/ISLE work. Numerous 
theories, approaches, and systems are being 
taken into account as any recommendation for 
harmonisation must take into account the needs 
and nature of the different major contemporary 
approaches.  
Results are widely disseminated, after due 
validation in collaboration with EU and US 
HLT R&D projects, National projects, and 
industry.  
In the following we concentrate on the 
Computational Lexicon Working Group 
(CLWG), trying to describe its specific 
methodology and its goal of establishing a 
general and consensual standardized 
environment for the development and 
integration of multilingual resources. The 
general vision adheres to the idea of enhancing 
the sharing and reusability of multilingual 
lexical resources, by promoting the definition 
of a common parlance for the community of 
multilingual HLT and computational lexicon 
developers. The CLWG pursues this goal by 
proposing a general schema for the encoding of 
multilingual lexical information, the MILE 
(Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry). This has to 
be intended as a meta-entry, acting as a 
common representational layer for multilingual 
lexical resources.  
We describe the preliminary proposals of 
guidelines for the MILE, highlighting some 
methodological principles applied in previous 
EAGLES. 
2 The Computational Lexicon 
Working Group 
Existing EAGLES results in the Lexicon and 
Corpus areas are currently adopted by an 
impressive number of European - and recently 
also National ? projects and has became the 
?de-facto standard? for LR in Europe. This is a 
very good measure of the impact ? and of the 
need ? of such a standardisation initiative in 
the HLT sector. To mention just a few key 
examples:  
- the LE PAROLE/SIMPLE resources 
(morphological/syntactic/semantic  lexicons 
and corpora for 12 EU languages (Zampolli, 
1997) (Ruimy et al, 1998) (Lenci et al, 
1999) (Bel et al, 2000) rely on EAGLES 
results (Sanfilippo et al, 1996) (Sanfilippo 
et al, 1999), and are now being enlarged to 
real-size lexicons through many National 
Projects, thus building a really large 
infrastructural platform of harmonised 
lexicons in Europe, sharing the same model;   
- the ELRA Validation Manuals for Lexicons 
(Underwood and Navarreta, 1997) and 
Corpora (Burnard et al, 1997) are based on 
EAGLES guidelines;  
- morpho-syntactic encoding of lexicons and 
tagging of corpora in a very large number of 
EU, international and national projects ? and 
for more than 20 languages ? is conformant 
to EAGLES recommendations (Monachini 
and Calzolari, 1996) (Monachini and 
Calzolari, 1999) (Leech and Wilson, 1996).  
Standards must emerge from state -of-the-art 
developments. The process of standardisation, 
although by its own nature not intrinsically 
innovative, must ? and actually does ? proceed 
shoulder to shoulder with the most advanced 
research. Since ISLE involves many bodies 
active in EU-US NLP and speech projects, 
close collaboration with these projects is 
assured and, significantly, free manpower has 
been contributed by the projects, as a sign of 
both their commitment and of the crucial 
importance they place on reusability issues. 
Lexical semantics has always represented a 
sort of wild frontier in the investigation of 
natural language. In fact, the number of open 
issues in lexical semantics both on the 
representational, architectural and content level 
might induce an actually unjustified negative 
attitude towards the possibility of designing 
standards in this difficult territory. Rather to 
the contrary, standardisation must be conceived 
as enucleating and singling out the areas in the 
open field of lexical semantics, that already 
present themselves with a clear and high 
degree of stability, although this is often 
hidden behind a number of formal differences 
or representational variants, that prevent the 
possibility of exploiting and enhancing the 
aspects of commonality and the already 
consolidated achievements.  
With no intent of imposing any constraints on 
investigation and experimentation, the ISLE 
CLWG rather aims at selecting mature areas 
and results in computational lexical semantics 
and in multilingual lexicons, which can also be 
regarded as stabilised achievements, thus to be 
used as the basis for future research. Therefore, 
consolidation of a standards proposal must be 
viewed, by necessity, as a slow process 
comprising, after the phase of putting forward 
proposals, a cyclical phase involving ISLE 
external groups and projects with: i) careful 
evaluation and testing of recommendations in 
concrete applications; ii) application, if 
appropriate, to a large number of European 
languages; iii) feedback on and readjustment of 
the proposals until a stable platform is reached; 
dissemination and promotion of consensual 
recommendations. 
The process of standard definition undertaken 
by CLWG represents an essential interface 
between advanced research in the field of 
multilingual lexical semantics, and the 
practical task of developing resources for HLT 
systems and applications. It is through this 
interface that the crucial trade-off between 
research practice and applicative needs will 
actually be achieved. 
In what follows we briefly describe the two-
step strategy adopted in the journey towards 
standards design: a first activity of survey of 
existing multilingual resources both in the 
European and American research and industrial 
scenarios. A second ongoing phase aiming at 
individuating hot areas on the domains of 
multilingual lexical resources, which call ? and 
de facto  can access to ? a process of 
standardisation. 
2.1 Preliminary Step: the Survey Phase 
Following the well established EAGLES 
methodology, the first priority was to do a 
wide-range survey of bilingual/multilingual (or 
semantic monolingual) lexicons, so as to reach 
a fair level of coverage of existing lexical 
resources. With respect to this target, one of 
the first objectives is to discover and list the 
(maximal) set of (granular) basic notions 
needed to describe the multilingual level. The 
Survey of existing lexicons (Calzolari, 
Grishman and Palmer, 2001) has been 
accompanied by the analysis of the 
requirements of a few multilingual 
applications, and by the parallel analysis of 
typical cross-lingually complex phenomena5. 
The main issue is how to state in the most 
proper way the translation correspondences 
among entries in the multilingual lexicon. The 
passage from source language (SL) to target 
language (TL) makes it necessary to express 
very complex and articulated transfer 
conditions , which have to take into account as 
difficult and pervasive phenomena as argument 
switching, multi-word expressions, 
collocational patterns, etc.  
The function of an entry in a multilingual 
lexicon is to supply enough information to 
allow the system to identify a distinct sense of 
a word or phrase in SL, in many different 
contexts, and reliably associate each context 
with the most appropriate translation. The first 
step is to determine, of all the information that 
can be associated with SL lexical entries, what 
is the most relevant to a particular task. We 
decided to focus the work of survey and 
subsequent recommendations around two 
major broad categories of application: Machine 
Translation and Cross-Language Information 
Retrieval. They have partially 
different/complementary needs, and can be 
considered to represent the requirements of 
other application types. It is necessary in fact 
to ensure that any guidelines meet the 
requirements of industrial applications and that 
they are implementable. 
In the Survey, some Korean and Japanese 
examples were present in the case study 
dedicated to relevant cross-linguistic 
phenomena, (e. g. sense distinctions according 
to variation in syntactic frames/semantic type/ 
                                                 
5 Contributors are: Atkins, Bel, Bertagna, Bouillon, 
Calzolari, Dorr, Fellbaum, Grishman, Habash, Lange, 
Lehmann, Lenci, McCormick, McNaught, Ogonowski, 
Palmer, Pentheroudakis, Richardson, Thurmair, 
Vanderwende, Villegas, Vossen, Zampolli.   
domain information, differences in predicate 
argument structure, argument incorporation, 
conflation, head switching etc). 
2.2 Towards the Recommendation Phase: 
designing the MILE Architecture  
Since the architecture of the PAROLE-
SIMPLE lexicons has been selected to provide 
the necessary bootstrapping basis for the 
stepwise refinement cycle leading to MILE, we 
briefly provide here some information about 
these resources. The design of the SIMPLE 
lexicons (Bel et al, 2000) complies with the 
EAGLES Lexicon/Semantics Working Group 
guidelines (Sanfilippo et al, 1999), and the set 
of recommended semantic notions. 
The SIMPLE lexicons are built as a new layer 
connected to the PAROLE syntactic layer, and 
encode structured ?semantic types? and 
semantic (subcategorization) frames. They 
cover 12 languages (Catalan, Danish, Dutch, 
English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, 
Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish). The 
common model is designed to facilitate future 
cross-language linking: they share the same 
core ontology and the same set of semantic 
templates.  
The ?conceptual core? of the lexicons consists 
of the basic structured set of ?semantic types? 
(the SIMPLE ontology) and the basic set of 
notions to be encoded for each Semantic Unit 
(SemU): domain information, lexicographic 
gloss, argument structure, selectional 
restrictions/preferences on the arguments, 
event type, links of the arguments to the 
syntactic subcategorization frames as 
represented in the PAROLE lexicons, ?qualia? 
structure, following the Generative Lexicon 
(Pustejovsky, 1995), semantic relations, etc.. 
SIMPLE and PAROLE lexicons are layered 
resources, with links between the 
morphological and syntactic layers expressed 
in PAROLE and the semantic information 
present in SIMPLE. 
In its general design, also MILE is envisaged 
as a highly modular and layered architecture as 
described in Calzolari et al (2001). Modularity 
concerns the ?horizontal? MILE organization, 
in which independent and yet linked modules 
target different dimensions of lexical entries. 
On the other hand, at the ?vertical? level, a 
layered organization is necessary to allow for 
different degrees of granularity of lexical 
descriptions, so that both ?shallow? and ?deep? 
representations of lexical items can be 
captured. This feature is particularly crucial in 
order to stay open to the different styles and 
approaches to the lexicon adopted by existing 
multilingual systems. 
At the top level, MILE includes two main 
modules, mono-MILE, providing monolingual 
lexical representations, and multi-MILE, where 
multilingual correspondences are defined. With 
this design choice the ISLE-CLWG intends 
also to address the particularly complex and 
yet crucial issue of multilingual resource 
development through the integration of 
monolingual computational lexicons. As in the 
reference model, PAROLE/SIMPLE, Mono-
MILE is organized into independent modules, 
respectively providing morphological, 
syntactic and semantic descriptions. The latter 
surely represents the core and the most 
challenging part of the ISLE-CLWG activities, 
together with the two other crucial topics of 
collocations and multi-word expressions, 
which have often remained outside 
astandardization initiatives, and nevertheless 
have a crucial role at the multilingual level. 
This bias is motivated by the necessity of 
providing an answer to the most urgent needs 
and desiderata of next generation HLT, as also 
expressed by the industrial partners 
participating to the project. With respect to the 
issue of the representation of multi-word 
expressions in computational lexicons, the 
ISLE-CLWG is actively cooperating with the 
NSF sponsored XMELLT project (Calzolari et 
al.,  2002). 
Multi-MILE specifies a formal environment 
for the characterization of multilingual 
correspondences between lexical items. In 
particular, source and target lexical entries can 
be linked by exploiting (possibly combined) 
aspects of their monolingual descriptions. 
Moreover, in multi-MILE both syntactic and 
semantic lexical representations can also be 
enriched, so as to achieve the granularity of 
lexical description required to establish proper 
multilingual correspondences, and which is 
possibly lacking in the original monolingual 
lexicons. 
According to the ISLE approach, monolingual 
lexicons can thus be regarded as pivot lexical 
repositories, on top of which various language-
to-language multilingual modules can be 
defined, where lexical correspondences are 
established by partly exploiting and partly 
enriching the monolingual descriptions. This 
architecture guarantees the independence of 
monolingual descriptions while allowing for  
the maximum degree of flexibility and 
consistency in reusing existing monolingual 
resources to build new bilingual lexicons.  
The MILE architecture is intended to provide 
the common representational environment 
needed to implement such an approach to 
multilingual resource development, with the 
goal of maximizing the reuse, integration and 
extension of existing monolingual 
computational lexicons. 
In the process of specifying the various 
components of MILE, the ISLE-CLWG has 
adopted a two-track strategy:  
1) identifying the lexical dimensions and 
the various types of information which 
are relevant to establish multilingual 
correspondences; 
2) idefining a suitable formal data model 
to encode this information as well as 
the operations required at the 
multilingual level. 
To tackle point 1) the survey of the available 
computational lexicons (see section 2.1) has 
been complemented with a more 
lexicographic-based effort, to identify the types 
of information used in bilingual dictionaries to 
establish translation equivalents. To this 
purpose, the CLWG has organized two ?task 
forces? with the responsibility respectively of 
creating a sample of lexical entries and 
investigating the use of the so-called sense 
indicators in traditional bilingual dictionaries. 
The work on sense indicators has been carried 
out mainly by S. Atkins and P. Bouillon: sense 
indicators are the  ?clues? given by the 
lexicographer to the bilingual dictionary users 
in order to guide them to the most appropriate 
choice of equivalence in the foreign language. 
The source word with its syntactic category, 
the target words and the sense indicators were 
automatically extracted from an English-
French dictionary and then the sense indicators 
have been classified on the basis of lexical 
relevant facts (cf. Atkins et al, 2002). 
The aim of these activities has been twofold: 
on one hand, we wanted to be able to highlight 
the various types of information useful to 
determine the transfer conditions; on the other, 
we had to explore and evaluate the full 
expressive potentialities provided by the 
reference computational model (i.e. the 
PAROLE-SIMPLE architecture). 
3.2 The MILE Data Structure and 
Lexicographic Environment 
 
The CLWG is setting up a lexicographic 
environment consisting of the following four 
main components: i) the MILE Entry Skeleton, 
ii)  the MILE Lexical Data Categories, iii) the 
MILE Shared Lexical Objects, iv) the ISLE 
Lexicographic Station. 
The MILE Entry Skeleton, formalized as an 
XML DTD, is an Entity Relationship model 
that will define the general constraints for the 
construction of multilingual entries, as well as 
the grammar to build the whole array of lexical 
elements needed for a given lexical 
description. 
The MILE Lexical Data Categories will 
provide the lexical objects (syntactic and 
semantic features, semantic relations, syntactic 
constructions, predicates and arguments etc..) 
that are the basic components of MILE-
conformant lexical entries. Lexical Data 
Categories will be organized in a hierarchy and 
will be defined using RDF schema (Brickley 
and Guha, 2000) to formalize their properties 
and make their ?semantics? explicit. 
The MILE Shared Lexical Objects will 
instantiate the MILE Lexical Data Categories, 
to be used to build in an easy and 
straightforward way lexical entries. These will 
include main syntactic constructions, basic 
operations and conditions to establish 
multilingual links, macro-semantic objects, 
such as lexical conceptual templates acting as 
general constraints for the encoding of 
semantic units. 
For instance, at the multilingual level it is 
possible to identify a first set of basic 
operations that are at the basis of multilingual 
transfer tests and actions. This would include: 
i) adding to a monolingual lexical entry a new 
syntactic position (required for a given 
translation correspondence); ii) adding to a 
monolingual semantic description a new 
semantic feature (required for a given 
transla tion correspondence); iii) constraining 
the source-target correspondence to apply only 
if an existing syntactic position is realized by a 
certain type of phrase, etc. 
Lexical  objects will be identified by an URI 
and will act as a common resources for lexical 
representation, to be in turn described by RDF 
metadata. The defined lexical objects will be 
used by the lexicon (or applications) 
developers  to build and target lexical data at a 
higher level of abstraction. Thus, they have to 
be seen as a step in the direction of simplifying 
and improving the usability of the MILE 
recommendations. 
The ISLE Lexicographic Station is a 
development platform used to automatically 
generate a prototype tool starting from the 
MILE DTD. The aim of this prototype tool is 
to i) exemplify the MILE entry ii)  make 
extensive use of already existing monolingual 
resources, and iii) eventually test the guidelines 
in a real scenario. This situation led us to 
define a lexicographic station development 
platform that guarantees the portability of the 
final prototype to the final specifications as 
well as to existing monolingual resources 
which will serve as the basic data for MILE  
(for a detailed description, cf. Villegas and Bel, 
2002). 
Both at monolingual and multilingual level 
(but with particular emphasis on the latter), 
ISLE intends to start up the incremental 
definition of a more Object-Oriented layer for 
lexical description and to foster the vision of 
open and distributed lexicons, with elements 
possibly residing in different sites of the web.  
3 Enlargement to Asian Languages  
An enlargement of the group to involve also 
Asian languages is going on and 
representatives of Chinese, Japanese, Korean, 
and Thai languages have contributed to ISLE 
work and participated in some ISLE 
workshops.  
The cooperation between Asia and Europe has 
to be pursued also through new common 
initiatives, as the expression of interest for the 
creation of an Open Distributed Lexical 
Infrastructure that has been submitted to the 
European Commission for the 6th Framework 
Programme for Research.  
This expression of interest is supported by 
many non-EU participants, as the newly 
formed Asian Federation of Natural Language 
Processing Associations (AFNLPA), the 
Department of Computer Science of the 
University of Tokyo, the Korean KAIST and 
KORTERM, the Taiwanese Institute of 
Linguistics of the Academia Sinica. 
The Open Distributed Lexical Infrastructure, a 
natural development of the ISLE model, can be 
seen as a new paradigm of distributed lexicon 
creation and maintenance and it would be a 
step of great importance for the fulfilment of 
the vision of the Semantic Web (Berners-Lee, 
1998). The creation of such infrastructure has 
to be consensual and in this regard needs the 
collaboration of a group of languages as large 
as possible (for example the AFNLPA brings 
into the initiative many Asian languages, such 
as Chinese, Hindi, Indonesian, Japanese, 
Korean, Malay, Tamil, Thai and Urdu). A 
prerequisite in order to reach interoperability is 
the existence of best practices and standards 
that have been consensually agreed on or have 
been submitted to the international community 
as de-facto  standards. 
 
4 Conclusions 
In this paper we presented overall goals and 
methodological principles of the 
standardization activity of EAGLES/ISLE. In 
particular, we describe the work of the 
Computational Lexicon Working Group and its 
effort towards recommendations, focussing on 
the MILE, the multilingual lexical meta-entry 
proposed as the standard representational 
format for multilingual computational lexical 
resources. Lexical representation is articulated 
over different information layers, each 
factoring out different, but possibly inter-
related, linguistic facets of information, 
relevant in order to establish multilingual 
lexical links. We also pointed out the necessity 
to involve a broader group of languages in 
order to ensure the achievement of a real 
consensual standard. 
Acknowledgements 
We thank all the members of the ISLE CLWG 
for their active participation and contribution to 
this enterprise. 
References 
Atkins S., Bel N., Bertagna F., Bouillon P., 
Calzolari N., Fellbaum C., Grishman R., 
Lenci A., MacLeod C., Palmer M., Thurmair 
R., Villegas M., Zampolli A. (2002) From 
Resources to Applications. Designing The 
Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry. In 
Proceedings of LREC 2002, Las Palmas, 
Canary Islands, Spain. 
Bel N., Busa, F., Calzolari, N., Gola, E., Lenci, 
A., Monachini, M., Ogonowski, A., Peters, 
I., Peters, W., Ruimy, N., Villegas, M., 
Zampolli A. (2000) Simple: A General 
Framework for the Development of 
Multilingual Lexicons. In: LREC 
Proceedings. Athens. 
Berners-Lee T. (1998) Semantic Web road 
map. Personal note. Available at: 
http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/Semantic.ht
ml. 
Burnard L., Baker P., McEnery A., Wilson A. 
(1997) An analytic framework for the 
validation of language corpora. Report of 
the Elra Corpus Validation Group.  
Calzolari N (1998)  An Overview of Written 
Language Resources in Europe: a few 
Reflections, Facts, and a Vision. In: Rubio, 
A., Gallardo, N., Castro, R., Tejada A. (eds.) 
Proceedings of the First International 
Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation. Granada 217-224. 
Calzolari N., Grishman R., Palmer M. (eds.) 
(2001)  Survey of major approaches towards  
Bilingual/Multilingual Lexicons. ISLE 
Deliverable D2.1-D3.1. Pisa  
Calzolari N., Fillmore C.J., Grishman R., Ide 
N., Lenci A., MacLeod C., Zampolli A. 
(2002)  Towards Best Practice for Multiword 
Expressions in Computational Lexicons. In 
Proceedings of LREC 2002, Las Palmas, 
Canary Islands, Spain. 
Calzolari N., Lenci A., Zampolli A., Bel N., 
Villegas M., Thurmair G. (2001)  The ISLE 
in the Ocean. Transatlantic Standards for 
Multilingual Lexicons (with an eye to 
Machine Translation). In Proceedings of 
Machine Translation Summit VIII, Santiago 
de Compostela, Spain. 
Calzolari N., Mc Naught J., Zampolli A (1996)  
Eagles Final Report: Eagles Editors? 
Introduction. Pisa.  
Eagles (1996)  Evaluation of Natural Language 
Processing Systems. Final Report. CST, 
Copenhagen. Also at http://issco-
www.unige.ch/projects/ewg96/ewg96.html. 
Brickley D., Guha R. (2000) Resource 
Description Framework (RDF) Schema 
Specification 1.0, W3C Candidate 
Recommendation. Available online at 
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema. 
Leech G., Wilson A. (1996) Recommendations 
for the morphosyntactic annotation of 
corpora.  Lancaster. 
Lenci A., Busa F., Ruimy N., Gola E., 
Monachini M., Calzolari N., Zampolli A. 
(1999)  Linguistic Specifications. Simple 
Deliverable D2.1. ILC and University of 
Pisa. 
Monachini M., Calzolari N. (1996)  Synopsis 
and comparison of morphosyntactic 
phenomena encoded in lexicons and corpora. 
A common proposal and applications to 
European languages. ILC-CNR, Pisa. 
Monachini M., Calzolari N. (1999)  
Standardization in the Lexicon. In: H. van 
Halteren (ed.): Syntactic Wordclass Tagging. 
Kluwer, Dordrecht 149-173. 
Pustejovsky J. (1995)  The Generative Lexicon. 
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press. 
Ruimy N., Corazzari O., Gola E., Spanu A., 
Calzolari N., Zampolli A. (1998) The 
European LE-Parole Project: The Italian 
Syntactic Lexicon. In: Proceedings of the 
First International Conference on Language 
resources and Evaluation. Granada 241-248. 
Sanfilippo A. et al (1996) Eagles 
Subcategorization Standards. See 
http://www.icl.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/syntax/s
yntax.html 
Sanfilippo A. et al (1999) Eagles 
Recommendations on Semantic Encoding.. 
See http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/rep2  
Underwood N., Navarretta C. (1997) A Draft 
Manual for the Validation of Lexica. Final 
ELRA Report. Copenhagen. 
Villegas M., Bel N. (2002) From DTDs to 
relational dBs. An automatic generation of a 
lexicographical station out off ISLE 
guidelines. In Proceedings of LREC 2002, 
Las Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain. 
Zampolli A. (1997) The PAROLE project in 
the general context of the European actions 
for Language Resources. In: 
Marcinkeviciene, R., Volz, N. (eds.): Telri 
Proceedings of the Second European 
Seminar: Language Applications for a 
Multilingual Europe. IDS/VDU, 
Manheim/Kaunas. 
Zampolli A. (1998) Introduction of the 
General Chairman. In: Rubio, A., Gallardo, 
N. Castro, R., Tejada A. (eds.): Proceedings 
of the First International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation. 
Granada, Spain. 
 
Encoding information on adjectives in a lexical-semantic net 
for computational applications 
Antonietta ALONGE 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale, CNR 
Area della Ricerca di Pisa 
Via Alfieri 1, Loc. S. Cataldo 
Ghezzano 56010 (PI) - ITALY 
antoalonge@libero.it 
Francesca BERTAGNA 
Consorzio Pisa Ricerche 
Via S. Maria 40 
Pisa 56100 - ITALY 
F.Bertagna@ilc.pi.cnr.it 
Nicoletta CALZOLARI 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale, CNR 
Area della Ricerca di Pisa 
Via Alfieri 1, Loc. S. Cataldo 
Ghezzano 56010 (PI) - ITALY 
glottolo@ilc.pi.cnr.it 
Adriana ROVENTINI 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale, CNR 
Area della Ricerca di Pisa 
Via Alfieri 1, Loc. S. Cataldo 
Ghezzano 56010 (PI) - ITALY 
adriana@ilc.pi.cnr.it 
Antonio ZAMPOLLI 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale, CNR 
Area della Ricerca di Pisa 
Via Alfieri 1, Loc. S. Cataldo 
Ghezzano 56010 (PI) - ITALY 
pisa@ilc.pi.cnr.it 
Abstract 
The goal of this paper is to describe how the 
EuroWordNet framework for representing 
lexical meaning is being modified within an 
Italian National Project in order to include 
information on adjectives. The focus is on 
the 'new' semantic relations being encoded 
and on the revisions we have made to the 
EuroWordNet Top Ontology structure. We 
also briefly discuss the utility of the 
information which is being encoded for 
computational pplications. 
Int roduct ion 
The Princeton WordNet (henceforth WN) is a 
lexical semantic network in which the meanings 
of words are represented in terms of their 
conceptual and lexical relations to other words. 
The basic notion around which it is developed is
that of a synset (synonyms et), i.e. a set of 
words with the same Part-of-Speech (PoS) that 
can be interchanged in a certain context. Various 
conceptual and lexical relations are then 
encoded between synsets of the same PoS: e.g., 
hyponymy, antonymy, meronymy, etc. (Miller et 
al. 1990; Fellbaum 1998b). 
Within the EuroWordNet (henceforth EWN) 
project I a similar (multilingual) lexical resource 
was developed, retaining the basic underlying 
design of WN, but enriching the set of lexical- 
semantic relations to be encoded for nouns and 
verbs in various ways 2, in order to obtain a 
maximally re-usable resource for computational 
applications. Thus, a) cross-PoS (xPos) relations 
were added so that different surface realizations 
of similar concepts within and across languages 
could be matched (e.g., the noun research and 
the verb to research could be linked as 
1 EWN was a project in the EC Language 
Engineering (LE-4003 and LE-8328) programme. In 
a first phase, the partners involved were the 
University of Amsterdam (coordinator); the Istituto 
di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR, Pisa; the 
Fundacion Universidad Empresa (a cooperation of 
UNED, Madrid, Politecnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, 
and the University of Barcelona); the University of 
Sheffield; and Novell Linguistic Development 
(Antwerp), changed to Lemout & Hauspie during the 
project. In a further phase, the database was extended 
with German, French, Estonian and Czech. Complete 
information on EWN can be found at its web site: 
http://www.hum.uva.nl/~ewn/. 
2 Adjectives and adverbs were encoded in EWN only 
as targets of relations from nouns and verbs. 
&9 42
'XPOS NEAR__SYNONYMS' in EWN); b) some 
relations were identified which provide detailed 
information on semantic omponents lexicalized 
within word roots (e.g., to hammer could be 
linked to the noun hammer by means of an 
'INVOLVED_INSTRUMENT' relation); c) some 
labels were distinguished which could be added 
to relations to make their semantic entailments 
more explicit and precise (cf. Alonge et al 
1998). The links among the wordnets of 
different languages were realized by means of an 
Interlingual-Index (ILI), constituted by an 
unstructured list of the Princeton WN (version 
1.5) synsets. In addition, a hierarchy of 
language-independent concepts, reflecting 
fundamental semantic distinctions (e.g., Object 
and Substance, Dynamic and Static, Cause, 
Manner, etc.), was built: the Top Ontology 
(TO). The TO consists of language-independent 
features which may (or may not) be lexicalized 
in various ways, or according to different 
patterns, in different languages (Rodriguez et al 
1998). Via the ILI, all the concepts in the 
monolingual wordnets are directly or indirectly 
linked to the TO. The following picture shows 
the EWN data structure (see also Vossen 1999): 
While in WN all PoSs are represented, in EWN 
detailed information was encoded only for nouns 
and verbs and no analysis was carried out with 
respect to lexical-semantic relations which could 
be used to describe the semantics of adjectives 
and adverbs. In an Italian National Project we 
are building a large wordnet, ltalWordNet 
(henceforth IWN) 3, by extending the network 
built for Italian in EWN. Thus, we are both 
increasing the coverage for nouns and verbs and 
adding adjectives and some adverbs 4.To be able 
to encode information on adjectives we have 
enriched the set of the EWN lexical-semantic 
relations, aiming at encoding data which can be 
useful for computational applications. Moreover, 
we have revised the TO in order to account for 
the semantics of the new lexical categories being 
encoded. 
In this paper we describe the main changes made 
to the EWN framework in order to encode 
information on adjectives in IWN. Firstly, we 
provide a brief overview of the WN treatment of 
adjectives. Then, we discuss the set of relations 
being encoded for this category in IWN. Finally, 
we show the integration made to the EWN TO. 
We then conclude the paper by adding some 
remarks on the utility of the data being encoded 
for computational applications. 
1 Adjectives in WN 
In WN adjectives are divided into two major 
classes: descriptive adjectives and relational 
adjectives. A descriptive adjective is "one that 
ascribes a value of an attribute to a noun" 
(Fellbaum et al 1993:27). Descriptive adjectives 
combine with nouns to express ome qualities of 
the thing, person or concept they designate. 
Typically, in this group we find adjectives that 
designate the physical dimension of an object, 
its weight, abstract values etc. Besides these 
referent-modifying adjectives, we also find 
reference-modifying adjectives (cf. Bolinger 
1967; Chierchia & McConnel-Ginet 1990 name 
them intensional adjectives). Typical examples 
of the latter are former, future, present. 
3 ItalWordNet will be the reference l xical resource 
among various integrated language resources and 
software tools for the automatic treatment of he 
Italian written and spoken language which are being 
developed within the SI-TAL ('Integrated System for 
the Automatic Treatment of Language') National 
Project. 
4 Actually, we shall only encode adverbs derived 
from adjectives by adding the suffix -mente, for 
which a derivation relation with an adjective will be 
encoded. 
43
Relational adjectives, on the other hand, mean 
something like "relating/pertaining to, associated 
with", and usually have a morphologically 
strong link with a noun. Typical examples are 
musical, atomic, chemical 5. 
Synonymy is the basic relation encoded for all 
the PoSs (since it is used to build synsets). 
While in WN the noun and verb networks are 
then mainly developed around the superordinate 
(hyper/hyponymy) relationship, the organization 
of descriptive adjectives can "be visualized in 
terms of barbell-like structures, with a direct 
antonym in the centre of each disk surrounded 
by its semantically similar adjectives (which 
constitute the indirect antonyms of the adjectives 
in the opposed disk)" (Fellbaum 1998a: 212). 
The main relation encoded for these adjective 
synsets is antonymy, claimed to be the most 
prominent relation, both from a psycholinguistic 
point of view and from a more strictly lexical- 
semantic one, in the definition of the semantics 
of descriptive adjectives. Hyponymy is 
substituted by a 'similarity' relation. 
Relational adjectives, on the contrary, are not 
organized in this way, because their semantics 
cannot be described by using these relations. 
Indeed, they only point to the noun to which 
they pertain (e.g. atomic is linked to atom). 
Finally, information on the selectional 
preferences of both descriptive and relational 
adjectives is sometimes encoded (e.g., between 
high and degree), by using an 'is_attribute_of' 
relation. 
2 The IWN relations for adjectives 
As for the other lexical categories, also in IWN 
the basic relation encoded for adjectives is 
synonymy, on the basis of which synsets are 
built. Following EWN, we also encode a 
NEAR._SYNONYMY relation when two synsets are 
very close in meaning but their members cannot 
be put in the same synset (and no other relation 
results appropriate to link them; see Alonge et 
s Note that some adjectives have both a descriptive 
sense and a relational one. For example, musicale 
(musical) can modify the noun voce (voice) when we 
want to say that a voice is sweet-sounding and 
melodious, but can also be combined with the noun 
strumento (instrument) when we want to indicate that 
an instrument can be used to produce music. 
al. 1998 for a discussion of this relation, and 
Alonge et al, in prep., for a complete and 
detailed discussion of the linguistic design of 
IWN). Then, we encode a number of additional 
relations, which have been identified by taking 
into consideration i) theoretical works; ii) the 
EAGLES recommendations on semantic 
encoding (cf. Sanfilippo et al 1999); iii) the data 
available in our sources; iv) possible use of data 
encoded in computational pplications. 
2.1 Hyponymy 
Together with synonymy, the hyponymy relation 
constitutes the 'bone structure' of both WN and 
EWN. However, as we have seen, in WN the 
possibility of encoding hyponymy for adjectives 
is denied and the basic relation encoded for 
adjectives is antonymy, while EWN did not 
really deal with adjectives and a complete 
network for them was not built. 
Within IWN we have reconsidered the 
possibility of encoding hyponymy for adjectives. 
By analysing data coming from machine- 
readable dictionaries we find subsets of 
adjectives which have a genus + differentia 
definition, like nouns or verbs. That is, these 
adjectives seem to be organised into classes 
sharing a superordinate. This is the case, e.g., of 
adjectives indicating a 'containing' property 
(acquoso - watery; alcalino - alkaline), or a 
'suitable-for' property (difensivo - defensive; 
educativo - educational), etc. In IWN we have 
decided, therefore, to encode hyponymy also for 
these sets of adjectives. The taxonomies which 
can be built on the basis of this relation are 
different from those built for nouns or verbs, 
since they are generally very flat, consisting 
almost always of two levels only (an exception 
is the color adjectives taxonomy). However, by 
encoding a hyponymy relation for these 
adjectives, we obtain classes for which it will be 
possible to make various inferences. For 
instance, it will be possible to infer semantic 
preferences of certain classes: e.g., all the 
adjectives occurring in the taxonomy of 
contenente (containing) will occur as attributes 
of concrete nouns; adjectives found in the 
taxonomy of affetto (affected by an illness) will 
never be predicated of nouns referring to 
objects, etc. Furthermore, it will also be possible 
to infer information on syntactic haracteristics 
/I/11 44
of adjectives found in the same taxonomy: e.g., 
the hyponyrns of atto (suitable for) are always 
found in predicative position (and do not accept 
any complements); the hyponyms of privo 
(lacking) may occur both in attributive and in 
predicative position (and may take certain 
prepositional complements), etc. 
As it was done for all the relations identified in 
EWN, we have built substition tests or 
diagnostic frames based on normality 
judgements (cf. Cruse 1986). Inserting two 
words in the test sentences built evokes a 
'normality'/ 'abnormality' judgement on the 
basis of which each relation can be determined. 
These tests are used by encoders both to verify 
the existence of relations between synsets and to 
encode them in a consistent way (for a complete 
lists of the tests built see Alonge et al, in prep.) 
2.2 Antonymy 
As in WN, also in IWN the antonymy relation 
remains an important relation to describe the 
semantics of various adjectives. Following 
theoretical work (Lyons 1977; Cruse 1986), we 
have further distinguished between 
COMPLEMENTARY ANTONYMY and GRADABLE 
ANTONYMY 6. The former relation links 
adjectives referring to opposing properties/ 
concepts: when one holds the other is excluded 
(alive~dead). The latter relation is used for those 
antonym pairs which refer to gradable properties 
(long~short). In case it is not clear if two 
opposing adjectives refer to complementary or
gradable properties, we can still use an 
underspecified ANTONYMY relation. Also this 
information can be useful for computational 
applications ince word pairs presenting one of 
the two kinds of opposition may occur in 
different contexts (cf. Cruse 1986). 
2.3 Other  relations 
In WN a relation between adjectives and nouns 
is encoded for relational adjectives which point 
to a noun to which they 'pertain': atomic~atom, 
industrial~industry, etc. This relation will be 
encoded also in IWN, by using the label 
PERTAINS TO. 
Another relation 'inherited' from WN can be 
useful to distinguish both adjective senses and 
their semantic preferences7: 
altol (tall) IS A VALUE OF statura (stature) 
alto2 (high) IS_A_VALUEOF altezza (height). 
Other relations are then being encoded which are 
not in WN, but are encoded for nouns and verbs 
in EWN. In WN each PoS forms a separate 
system of language-internal relations and 
conceptually close concepts are totally separated 
only because they differ in PoS. In EWN, instead 
of using as main classificatory criterion the 
traditional distinction among PoSs, drawn upon 
heterogeneous criteria, a purely semantic 
distinction was adopted (following Lyons 1977). 
Thus, a distinction was drawn among I st order 
entities (loes - referred to by concrete nouns), 
2 "d order entities (2oes - referred to by verbs, 
adjectives or nouns indicating properties, states, 
processes or events), and 3 rd order entities (3oes 
referred to by abstract nouns indicating 
propositions existing independently of time and 
space). By drawing this distinction it was 
possible to relate lexical items that, either within 
a language or across different languages, refer to 
close concepts, although they belong to different 
PoSs. Thus, as said above, the possibility to 
encode 'near-synonymy' between synsets of the 
same order (but different PoSs) was provided. 
Furthermore, other cross-PoS relations were 
identified which allow to obtain a better 
description of word meanings. In IWN we 
maintain the same distinction among semantic 
orders and encode for adjectives ome relations 
which can be encoded for the other 2oes. In 
particular, we encode the 'INVOLVED' and 
'CAUSE' relations. 
The INVOLVED relation links a 2oes with a loe  
or 3oe referring to a concept incorporated within 
6 A similar distinction is also made within the 
SIMPLE EC project (LE-8346), whose goal is adding 
semantic information to the set of harmonized 
lexicons built within the PAROLE project for twelve 
European languages. Of course, the sub-classification 
ofantonymy can also be used for nouns and verbs. 
7 Furthermore, these relations being encoded between 
an adjectival synset and a nominal or verbal one are 
also useful to distinguish adjective classes as 
described by Dixon (1991), and reported in 
Sanfilippo et al (1999). Indeed, such classes are 
often indicated by the nouns linked to adjectives. 
45 45
the meaning of the 2oe 8. Examples for adjectives 
are given in the following: 
filoso (= pieno di fili) (thready, filamentous) 
HAS_HYPERONYM pieno (full) 
INVOLVED filo (thread) 
imberbe (= privo di barba) (beardless) 
HAS_HYPERONYM privo (lacking) 
INVOLVED barba (beard). 
Another relation which can be encoded is the 
CAUSE relation: 
depuratorio (= atto a depurare) (depurative, 
purifying) 
HAS_HYPERONYM atto, adatto 
(suitable for) 
CAUSES non-factive 9 depurare 
(to purify) 
compensativo (= che serve a compensare) 
(compensatory) 
HAS._HYPERONYM alto, adatto 
(suitable for) 
CAUSES non-factive compensare 
(to compensate) 
A new relation, not present either in WN or in 
EWN, will be encoded for a class of adjectives 
indicating the possibility of some events 
occurring: 
giudicabile (= che pub essere giudicato) (triable) 
LIABLE_TO giudicare (to judge) 
inaccostabile, inavvicinabile (= che non pub essere 
avvicinato) (which cannot be approached) 
LIABLETO awicinare, accostare 
(to approach) negative. 
8 E.g., to lapidate has as INVOLVED_INSTRUMENT 
stone; to work has as INVOLVED_AGENT worker (see 
Alonge et al 1998). 
9 As said above, in EWN various features were 
encoded to make implications of relations explicit: 
conjunction and disjunction (for multiple relations of 
the same kind encoded for a synset); non-factivity (to 
indicate that a causal relation does not necessarily 
apply); intention (added to a cause relation to indicate 
intention to cause a certain result); negation (to 
explicitly encode the impossibility of a relation 
occurring). These features are also used in IWN. 
The table below gives an overview of the main 
relations being encoded for adjectives in IWN 
(for the other relations being encoded for 
adjectives ee Alonge et al, in prep.): 
GRAD ANTONYMY 
COMP ANTONYMY 
HYPONYMY 
PERTAINS TO 
IS A VALUE_OF 
INVOLVED 
CAUSE 
LIABLE_TO 
adj/adj 
adj/adj 
adj/adj 
adj/noun 
adj/noun 
adj/noun 
adj/verb; 
adj/noun 
adj/verb; 
adj/noun 
beautiful/u~ly 
alive/dead 
watery/containing 
chemical/chemistry 
tail/stature 
dental/tooth 
depurative/ 
to depurate 
triable/to judge 
3 The IWN Top Ontology 
In the EWN TO all the entities belonging to the 
2 nd order have been organized into two different 
classification schemes, which represent the first 
division below 2 nd Order Entity: 
? Situation Type: the event-structure or 
Aktionsart (or lexical aspect) of a situation; 
? Situation Components: the most salient 
semantic components that characterize 
situations. 
The Situation Types provide a classification of 
2oes in terms of the event-structure (or 
Aktionsart) of the situation they refer to: a basic 
distinction was drawn between Static and 
Dynamic. The Situation Components represent a 
more conceptual and intuitive classification of 
word meanings because they can be viewed like 
the most salient semantic components of a 
concept. Examples of Situation Components 
are: Manner, Existence, Communication, Cause. 
Situation Type represents disjoint features that 
cannot be combined, whereas it is possible to 
assign any combination of Situation 
Components to a word meaning. Here below the 
Top Concepts identified for 2oes are shown: 
46 46
2 ND ORDER ENTITY 
SITUATION COMPONENT 
Cause 
Communication 
Condition 
Existence 
Experience 
Location 
Manner 
Mental 
Modal 
Physical 
Possession 
Purpose 
Quantity 
Social 
Time 
SITUATION TYPE 
Dynamic 
BoundedEvent 
UnboundedEvent 
Static 
Property 
Relation 
In order to be able to draw generalizations on 
adjective meanings by using the TO, we 
partially modified this scheme. First of all, we 
moved the PROPERTY and RELATION nodes 
under the SITUATION COMPONENT node. This 
was done for two interconnected reasons: first of 
all, because this distinction is not directly linked 
to Aktionsart (lexical aspect), while the 
distinctions under SITUATION TYPE are 
Aktionsart distinctions, i.e. they are connected 
with the "the procedural characteristics (i.e. the 
'phasal structure', time extension' and 'manner 
of development') ascribed to any given situation 
referred to by a verb phrase" (Bache 1982: 70) ~?. 
Secondly, adjectives may refer to PROPERTIES or 
RELATIONS, but they may be either stative or not 
(cfr. e.g. Lakoff 1966; Quirk et al 1985; Peters 
et al 1999). Thus, in our system it has to be 
possible to specify that an adjective xpresses a 
PROPERTY while being DYNAMIC. In any case, 
since many adjectives may have both a 
DYNAMIC sense and a STATIC one, we have also 
the possibility to under-specify this information 
Io Of course, in EWN all 2oes (and therefore also 
nouns or adjectives) can be classified according to 
their Aktionsart. 
by linking adjectives directly to the SITUATION 
TYPE node. 
Adjectives may indicate many different types of 
properties: temporal (passeggiata mattutina -
morning walk), psychological (canzone triste - 
sad song), social (uomo ricco - rich man), 
physical (superficie legnosa - wooden surface), 
physiological (bambino magro - thin child), 
perceptive (minestra calda hot soup), 
quantitative (magra r icompensa - poor reward) 
and intensity properties (vino for te  - strong 
wine). In the EWN TO there are already nodes 
which may be used to represent these 
distinctions (TIME, MENTAL, SOCIAL, PHYSICAL, 
QUANTITY) but we needed to better specify or 
also add some features. For example, we have 
added, under the already present node 
PHYSICAL, the node MATERIAL, to represent, 
among others, some Italian adjectives ending in 
-oso  (for example legnoso - wooden, acquoso -
watery) which indicate the property of 
containing a certain material. Moreover, we 
added the node PHYSIOLOGICAL (to classify 
adjectives corresponding to tired, hungry, sick, 
etc.) under PHYSICAL. For adjectives denoting an 
intensity, we then added the node INTENSITY 
directly under the SITUATION COMPONENT node. 
One of the main problem we had was that no 
Top Concept in the EWN TO could be used to 
classify the reference-modifying adjectives (cf. 
above). These are a very particular kind of 
adjectives, because they do not indicate a 
property of the referent of the noun they modify. 
So, aiming at showing the distinction between 
referent-modifiers and reference-modifiers, we 
created two new Top Concepts under the node 
PROPERTY: ATTRIBUTE and FUNCTIONAL, where 
the latter can be used for reference-modifying 
adjectives (according to the definition provided 
by Chierchia & McConnel-Ginet 1990 for the 
category referred to by these adjectives: "a 
function f rom propert ies to properties"). 
Like all descriptive adjectives, also the 
reference-modifiers classified under the node 
FUNCTIONAL can be linked to other SITUATION 
COMPONENTS. Functional adjectives for which 
the temporal aspect prevails (ex former, 
presente - present) can be classified under the 
node TIME; adjectives referring to some 
'epistemological' property (potenziale 
potential, necessario - necessary) can be linked 
&7 47
tO MODAL 11; etc. A particular case of functional 
adjectives are the 'argumental' ones. They 
introduce a comparison between different 
entities (e.g., simile - similar, diverso - different, 
etc.). A comparison presupposes a relation 
between different entities o these adjectives can 
be linked to both PROPERTY and RELATION. 
Since in the EWN TO these two Top Concepts 
were two different kinds of SITUATION TYPE, 
they were mutually exclusive; now, in the IWN 
revised TO they can be conjoined. 
Here below the IWN Top Concepts for 2 "a Order 
Entities are shown: 
2 N? ORDER ENTITY 
SITUATION COMPONENT 
Cause 
Communication 
Condition 
Existence 
Experience 
Location 
Manner 
Mental 
Modal 
Physical 
Material 
Physiological 
Possession 
Purpose 
Quantity 
Social 
Time 
Intensity 
Property 
Attribute 
Functional 
Relation 
SITUATION TYPE 
Dynamic 
BoundedEvent 
UnboundedEvent 
Static 
Concluding remarks 
Although the ANTONYMY, PERTAINS_TO, and 
ISATTRIBUTEOF relations, already encoded in 
the Princeton WN, are fundamental relations to 
describe the adjective semantics, and they can be 
11 Since this node is used for situations involving the 
possibility or likelihood of other situations. 
useful for computational applications which 
exploit our resource, we believe that the 'new' 
relations being encoded may provide equally 
relevant information, especially because many 
adjectives cannot be defined by means of the 
WN relations. Let's take into consideration just 
a few examples. 
The adjective depresso is ambiguous in that it 
has (at least) three readings: 
1) which has been lowered, flattened (said of a 
land); 
2) being in bad physical or moral conditions (said 
of an area, a country); 
3) affected by depression (said of a person). 
For these three senses of the adjective we would 
encode different relations, extractable from our 
sources: 
depressol IS_CAUSEDBY deprimere (to lower) 
IS A VALUE_OF terreno (land) 
depresso2 
depress% 
HAS_HYPERONYM colpito (affected) 
IS_CAUSEDBY depressionel 
(depression - economic sense) 
HAS_HYPERONYM affetto 
(affected, suffering from sthg.) 
IS_CAUSED_BY depressione2 
(depression - medical sense) 
The relations encoded could, e.g., help 
disambiguate he occurrences of the adjective in 
contexts uch as: Gianni era depresso (Gianni 
was depressed) or Quella regione ~ depressa 
(That area is depressed). Indeed, by checking the 
semantic information encoded for the two senses 
of depressione linked to depresso, it's possible 
to provide the right interpretation for the 
sentences under analysis; on the other hand, the 
first sense of the adjective would be excluded 
because of the IS A VALUE OF relation 
encoded. In this case, also the TO links could be 
helpful: actually, depresso2 would be linked to 
SOCIAL and CONDITION, while depresso3 would 
be linked to MENTAL and EXPERIENCE. 
Many adjectives found in our sources do not 
seem to have (lexicalized) antonyms, nor cannot 
be defined by using the PERTAINS_TO or 
IS A VALUE OF relations. These are often 
linked to nouns or verbs, by various relations: 
/ IQ  48
piumato = coperto di piume (plumed = covered with 
plumage) 
HAS HYPERONYM coperto 
INVOLVED piuma 
distillabile =che pub essere distillato (distillable = 
which can be distilled) 
LIABLE TO distillare. 
For these and many other adjectives the 'new' 
relations identified in IWN are necessary, given 
that we often cannot encode other relations for 
them. The relations encoded provide 
fundamental semantic information on them, 
which can, for instance, be used to infer 
semantic preferences (e.g., only certain loes can 
be modified by piumato, etc.). The inclusion of 
this information in a large database which is 
mainly intended for computational pplications 
can be very useful, mainly because it may help 
in resolving ambiguities and may be used to 
draw inferences of different nature. 
References 
Alonge A., Calzolari N., Vossen P., Bloksma L., 
CasteUon I., Marti T., Peters W. (1998) The 
Linguistic Design of the EuroWordNet Database. 
In "Special Issue on EuroWordNet. Computers and 
the Humanities" N. Ide, D. Greenstein, P. Vossen 
(eds.), 32, 2-3, pp. 91-115. 
Alonge A., Bertagna F., Calzolari N., Magnini B., 
Roventini A. (in prep.) ItalWordNet: a Large 
Semantic Database for Italian. 
Bache C. (1982) Aspect and Aktionsart: towards a 
Semantic Distinction. Journal of Linguistics, 18, 1. 
Bolinger D. (1967)Adjectives in English: Attribution 
and Predication. Lingua, 18, pp. 1-34. 
Chierchia G. and McConnel-Ginet S. (1990) An 
Introduction to Semantics. The MIT Press, 
Cambridge. 
Cruse D. A. (1986) Lexical Semantics. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Dixon R. M. W. (1991) A new Approach to English 
Grammar on Semantic Principles. Clarendon 
Press, Oxford. 
Fellbaum C. (1998a) A Semantic Network of English: 
the Mother of all WordNets. In "Special Issue on 
EuroWordNet. Computers and the Humanities" N. 
Ide, D. Greenstein, P. Vossen (eds.), 32, 2-3, pp. 
209-220. 
Fellbaum C. (1998b) WordNet, An Electronic Lexical 
Database, The MIT Press, Cambridge. 
Fellbaum C., Gross D., Miller K.J. (1993)Adjectives 
in WordNet, Five Papers on WordNet. 
Lakoff G. (1966) Stative Adjectives and Verbs in 
English. Computation Laboratory, Harvard 
University Report No. NSF-17. 
Lyons J. (1977) Semantics. Cambridge University 
Press, London. 
Miller G., Beckwith R., Fellbaum C., Gross D., 
Miller K.J (1990) Introduction to WordNet: An On- 
line Lexical Database. International Journal of 
Lexicography, Vol 3, No.4, pp. 235-244. 
Quirk R., Greenbaum S., Leech G. Svartvik J. (1985) 
A Comprehensive Grammar of the English 
Language. Longman, London. 
Peters I., Peter W. and Gaizauskas R. (1999) The 
Representation f Adjectives in SIMPLE. Ms. 
Richardson S. D., Dolan W. B., Vanderwende L. 
(1998) MindNet : Acquiring and Structuring 
Semantic Information from Text. In "COLING- 
ACL Proceedings", Montreal, pp. 1098-1102. 
Rodriguez H., Climent S., Vossen P., Bloksma L., 
Roventini A., Bertagna F., Alonge A., Peters W. 
(1998) The Top-Down Strategy for Building 
Euro WordNet: Vocabulary Coverage, Base 
Concepts and Top Ontology. In "Special Issue on 
EuroWordNet. Computers and the Humanities", N. 
Ide, D. Greenstein, P. Vossen (eds.), 32, 2-3, pp. 
117-152. 
Vossen P. (ed.) (1999) EuroWordNet General 
Document. In "The EWN CD-Rom" (see also: 
http://www.hum.uva.nl/~ewn). 
Sanfilippo A., Calzolari N., Ananiadou S., 
Gaizauskas R., Saint-Dizier P., Vossen P. (eds.) 
(1999) Preliminary Recommendations  Lexical 
Semantic Encoding. EAGLES LE3-4244 Final 
Report. 
49 49
