Domain-Specific Query Translation for Multilingual Information Access
using Machine Translation Augmented With Dictionaries
Mined from Wikipedia
Gareth J. F. Jones, Fabio Fantino, Eamonn Newman, Ying Zhang
Centre for Digital Video Processing
Dublin City University
Dublin 9, Ireland
{gjones,enewman,yzhang}@computing.dcu.ie
Abstract
Accurate high-coverage translation is a vi-
tal component of reliable cross language in-
formation access (CLIA) systems. While
machine translation (MT) has been shown
to be effective for CLIA tasks in previous
evaluation workshops, it is not well suited
to specialized tasks where domain specific
translations are required. We demonstrate
that effective query translation for CLIA can
be achieved in the domain of cultural her-
itage (CH). This is performed by augment-
ing a standard MT system with domain-
specific phrase dictionaries automatically
mined from the online Wikipedia. Exper-
iments using our hybrid translation system
with sample query logs from users of CH
websites demonstrate a large improvement
in the accuracy of domain specific phrase de-
tection and translation.
1 Introduction
Reliable translation is a key component of effective
Cross Language Information Access (CLIA) sys-
tems. Various approaches to translation have been
explored at evaluation workshops such as TREC1,
CLEF2 and NTCIR3. Experiments at these work-
shops have been based on laboratory collections
consisting of news articles or technical reports with
?TREC? style queries with a minimum length of a
1trec.nist.gov
2http://www.clef-campaign.org/
3http://research.nii.ac.jp/ntcir/
full sentence. Test collection design at these work-
shops often ensures that there are a reasonable num-
ber of relevant documents available for each query.
In such cases general purpose translation resources
based on bilingual dictionaries and standard ma-
chine translation (MT) have been shown to be ef-
fective for translation in CLIA. However, this is less
likely to be the case when translating the very short
queries typically entered by general users of search
engines, particularly when they are seeking informa-
tion in a specific domain.
Online cultural heritage (CH) content is currently
appearing in many countries produced by organisa-
tions such as national libraries, museums, galleries
and audiovisual archives. Additionally, there are in-
creasing amounts of CH relevant content available
more generally on the World Wide Web. While
some of this material concerns national or regional
content only of local interest, much material relates
to items involving multiple nations and languages,
for example concerning events or groups encom-
passing large areas of Europe or Asia. In order to
gain a full understanding of such things, including
details contained in different collections and explor-
ing different cultural perspectives, often requires ef-
fective multilingual search technologies.
CH content encompasses various different media,
including of course text documents, but also im-
ages, videos, and audio recordings which may only
be described by very limited metadata labels. Such
metadata may include simple factual details such as
date of creation, but also descriptive details relat-
ing to the contents of the item and interpretation
and contextualization of the content. Multilingual
searching using metadata content requires that ei-
ther the metadata be translated into a language with
which the user is able to search or that the search
query be translated into the language of the meta-
data. This alternative of document or query trans-
lation is a well rehearsed argument in CLIA, which
has generally concerned itself with full text docu-
ment searching. However, the features of metadata
require a more careful analysis. Metadata is typi-
cally dense in search terms, while lacking the lin-
guistic structure and information redundancy of full
text documents. The absence of linguistic struc-
ture makes precise translation of content problem-
atic, while the lack of redundancy means that accu-
rate translation of individual words and phrases be-
tween the query and document is vital to minimize
mismatch between query and document terms. De-
veloping reliable and robust approaches to transla-
tion for metadata search is thus an important com-
ponent of search for many CH archives.
The EU FP6 MultiMatch4 project is concerned
with information access for multimedia and multi-
lingual content for a range of European languages.
In this paper we report on the MultiMatch query
translation methods we are developing to deal with
domain-specific language in the CH domain. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of these techniques
using example query logs from CH sites in English,
Spanish and Italian. We translate the queries and ex-
amine the quality of these translations using human
annotation. We show how a domain-specific phrase
dictionary can be used to augment traditional gen-
eral MT systems to improve the coverage and relia-
bility of translation of these queries. We also show
how retrieval performance on CH image metadata is
improved with the use of these improved, domain-
specific translations.
The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows: Section 2 introduces the translation resources
used for this study, Section 3 describes our experi-
mental setup and results, Section 4 summarizes our
conclusions, and Section 5 gives details of our on-
going work.
4www.multimatch.org
2 Query Translation Techniques
The MT approach to query translation for CLIA
uses an existing MT system to provide automatic
translation. Using MT systems for query transla-
tion is widely used in CLIA when such a system
is available for the particular language pair under
consideration. Results reported at the standard re-
trieval evaluation workshops have often shown it
to be competitive with other translation methods.
However, while MT systems can provide reasonable
translations for general language expressions, they
are often not sufficient for domain-specific phrases
that contain personal names, place names, techni-
cal terms, titles of artworks, etc. In addition, cer-
tain words and phrases hold special meanings in a
specific domain. For example, the Spanish phrase
?Canto general? is translated into English as ?gen-
eral song?, which is arguably correct. However, in
the CH domain, ?Canto general? refers to a book ti-
tle from Pablo Neruda?s book of poems and should
be translated directly into English as the phrase
?Canto general?. Multiple-word phrases are more
information-bearing and more unambiguously rep-
resented than single words. They are often domain-
specific and typically absent from static lexicons.
Effective translation of such phrases is therefore par-
ticularly critical for short queries that are typically
entered by non-expert users of search engines.
The focus of the research reported in this paper
is a method to improve translation effectiveness of
phrases previously untranslated or inappropriately
translated by a standard MT system. In this work we
combine an MT system with domain-specific phrase
dictionaries mined from the online Wikipedia. The
next sections describe the construction of our dictio-
naries and their combination with the MT system.
2.1 Phrase Dictionary Construction
Our phrase translation system uses domain-specific
phrase dictionaries built by mining the online
Wikipedia5. As a multilingual hypertext medium,
Wikipedia has been shown to be a valuable new
source of translation information (Adafre and de
Rijke, 2005; Adafre and de Rijke, 2006; Bouma
et al, 2006; Declerck et al, 2006). Wikipedia is
structured as an interconnected network of articles,
5http://wikipedia.org
Figure 1: An example of Italian?English query translation.
in particular, wikipedia page titles in one language
are often linked to a multilingual database of cor-
responding terms. Unlike the web, most hyper-
links in wikipedia have a more consistent pattern
and meaningful interpretation. For example, the En-
glish wikipedia page http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Cupid_and_Psyche hyperlinks to its counter-
part written in Italian http://it.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Amore_e_Psiche, where the basenames of
these two URLs (?Cupid and Psyche? and ?Amore e
Psiche?) are an English?Italian translation pair. The
URL basename can be considered to be a term (sin-
gle word or multiple-word phrase) that should be
translated as a unit.
Utilizing the multilingual linkage feature of
Wikipedia, we implement a three-stage automatic
process to mine wikipedia pages as a translation
source and construct phrase dictionaries in the cul-
ture heritage domain.
1. First, we performed a web crawl from the En-
glish wikipedia, Category: Culture. This cate-
gory contains links to articles and subcategories
concerning arts, religions, traditions, entertain-
ment, philosophy, etc. The crawl process is re-
stricted to the category of culture including all
of its recursive subcategories. In total, we col-
lected 458, 929 English pages.
2. For each English page obtained, we extracted
the hyperlinks to each of the query languages
(Italian and Spanish).
3. We then selected the basenames of each
pair of hyperlinks (English?Italian, English?
Spanish) as translations and added them into
our domain-specific dictionaries. The multiple-
word phrases were added into the phrase dictio-
nary for each language. These phrase dictionar-
ies are later used for dictionary-based phrase
identification.
The dictionaries we compiled contain about 90, 000,
70, 000, and 80, 000 distinct multiple-word phrases
in English, Italian, and Spanish respectively. The
majority of the phrases extracted are CH domain-
specific named entities and the rest of them are
general noun-based phrases, such as ?Music of Ire-
land? and ?Philosophy of history?. We did not ap-
ply any classifier to filter out the general noun-based
phrases, since such phrases play an equally impor-
tant role in the query translation process as domain-
specific named entities.
2.2 Improved MT-based Translation
Figure 1 shows our query translation process which
proceeds as follows:
Lexical rule-based phrase identification Given a
query, the first task is to locate phrases. Three meth-
ods of multiple-word phrase identification have been
commonly used: lexical rule-based (Ballesteros and
Croft, 1997; Hull and Grefenstette, 1996), statisti-
cal (Coenen et al, 2007; Gao et al, 2001), and syn-
tactical methods (Sharma and Raman, 2003; Gel-
bukh et al, 2004; Van de Cruys and Villada Moiro?n,
2007). The lexical rule-based approach with max-
imum forward matching was adopted in our query
translation process due to its robust performance and
computational simplicity. The query is sequentially
scanned to match the phrase dictionary. The longest
matched subsequence is taken as a phrase and trans-
lated via a domain-specific dictionary lookup. This
process is recursively invoked on the remaining part
of the query until no matches are found. The per-
formance of this approach depends strongly on the
completeness of the coverage of the adopted dictio-
nary. Our experimental results showed that at least
one phrase is detected in 90% of the testing queries,
for example, personal names, geographic locations,
and titles of various types of artworks. This indicates
that the phrase dictionaries we compiled can be used
to accurately identify phrases in web queries.
WorldLingo machine translation We translate
the original query into the target language using the
WorldLingo6 MT system. WorldLingo was selected
for the MultiMatch project because it generally pro-
vides good translation between English, Spanish,
Italian, and Dutch ? the languages relevant to the
Multimatch project. In addition, it provides a useful
API that can be used to translate queries in real-time
via HTTP transfer protocol.
Phrase translation validation For each of the
phrases previously recognized, we again pass it to
the MT system and the translation Tmt of this phrase
is returned by WorldLingo. Tmt is then replaced in
theWorldLingo translation of the query by the trans-
lations(s) Tdict from our domain-specific dictionary,
if Tmt 6= Tdict. This allows us to correct unreliable
phrase translations generated by the MT system.
3 Experimental Investigation
The goal of our experiments was to evaluate the
usefulness and the accuracy of the domain-specific
translation dictionaries. Instead of using queries
from a standard information retrieval test collection,
we experimented with queries explicitly seeking CH
information from real query log data provided by
CH organisations.
3.1 Query Log
The query log data used in this investigation was
provided by three European CH organisations par-
6http://worldlingo.com
# Detected # Untranslated
Proportionby dictionaries by WorldLingo
EN?IT 14 11 79%
EN?ES 19 11 58%
IT?EN 83 33 40%
ES?EN 74 33 45%
Table 1: Number of detected phrases using the
domain-specific dictionaries.
Total
# Exactly # + Extra # + Minor
correct translations noise
EN?IT 14 13 1 0
EN?ES 19 17 1 1
IT?EN 83 40 43 0
ES?EN 74 37 5 32
Table 2: Correctness of the translations of detected
domain-specific phrases.
ticipating in the MultiMatch project, and is taken
from their archives of real user queries. The data
consists of 100 English, 1048 Italian, and 1088
Spanish distinct web queries and the number of hits
of each query. The top 200 most popular multiple-
word queries in Italian and Spanish were selected as
the queries for testing. Due to the smaller size of
the English query log, we only obtained English 53
phrasal queries.
We used two methods of evaluation: first, the dic-
tionary usefulness and the translation effectiveness
are judged extrinsically by human assessment; and
second, evaluation using a parallel Italian?English
metadata document set explored how translation af-
fects the retrieval performance of an information re-
trieval system.
3.2 Human Judgement Evaluation
The WorldLingo MT system was used to translate
Spanish and Italian queries into English and vice
versa. Our domain-specific dictionaries were used
to translate phrases within the queries into the same
target languages. It should be noted that it is not pos-
sible to directly compare the lexical coverage of our
domain-specific dictionaries and the built-in phrase
dictionaries of WorldLingo since we don?t have ac-
cess to the internal WorldLingo dictionaries.
To evaluate the usefulness of our dictionaries, we
observed the proportion of domain-specific phrases
in the various query sets that can be translated us-
ing our domain-specific dictionaries mined from the
web, but are incorrectly translated by WorldLingo.
Original Query WorldLingo Translation Improved Machine Translation
EN?IT
turner east sussex Turner Sussex orientale Turner East Sussex
still life flowers fiori di vita tranquilla fiori di Natura morta
francis bacon Francis Bacon Francesco Bacone
pop art arte di schiocco Pop art
m c escher escher di m. c Maurits Cornelis Escher
american 60?s americano 60?s americano Anni 1960
EN?ES
vanessa bell campana del vanessa Vanessa Bell
turner east sussex Turner sussex del este Turner East Sussex
henry moore moore del Henrio Henry Moore
still life flowers flores de la vida inmo?vil flores de Bodego?n
guerrilla girls muchachas del guerrilla Guerrilla Girls
IT?EN
leonardo da vinci leonardo from you win Da Vinci, Leonardo da Vinci,
Leonardo daVinci, Leonardo de Vinci
duomo di milano dome of Milan Cathedral of Milan, Duomo di Milan,
Duomo di Milano, Duomo of Milan, Milan Cathedral
beni culturali cultural assets Cultural heritage
arte povera poor art Arte povera
san lorenzo saint lorenzo Lawrence of Rome, Saint Lawrence, St Lawrence,
gentile da fabriano kind from fabriano Gentile da Fabriano
statua della liberta statue of the freedom Statue of Liberty
aldo rossi aldo red Aldo Rossi
arnaldo pomodoro arnaldo tomato Arnaldo Pomodoro
la cattura di cristo di caravaggio the capture of caravaggio Christ The Taking of Christ caravaggio
ES?EN
lope de vega lope of fertile valley Lope de Vega
literatura infantil infantile Literature Children?s book, Children?s books,Children?s literature
cantar de mio cid to sing of mine cid Cantar de mio Cid, Lay of the Cid, The Lay of the Cid
el quijote de la mancha quijote of the spot quijote of La Mancha
dulce maria loynaz candy Maria loynaz Dulce Mar??a Loynaz
andres bello andres beautiful Andre?s Bello
filosofia del derecho philosophy of the right Philosophy of law
elogio de la locura praise of madness In Praise of Folly, Praise of Folly, The Praise of Folly
la regenta it runs it La Regenta
cristobal colon cristobal colon Christopher Colombus, Christopher Columbus,
Cristopher Columbus
Table 3: Some examples of improved translations using the domain-specific dictionaries. (The corrected
phrase translations are in italic.)
Namely, we tested the ability of our system to
detect and correct the presence of unreliable MT
translations for domain-specific phrases. Translated
phrases for these queries can generally be judged
unambiguously as correct or incorrect by a bilin-
gual speaker of the languages involved, and so we
are confident that assessment of translation accuracy
here does not involve significant degrees of subjec-
tivity.
As shown in Table 1, we can see that 79%, 58%,
40%, and 45% of incorrect MT-translated phrases
were able to be corrected using the domain-specific
dictionaries mined from wikipedia, in EN?IT, EN?
ES, IT?EN, and ES?EN translation tasks, respec-
tively. Our system leads to a large improvement in
MT translation for domain-specific phrases. Some
examples of improved query translations are shown
in Table 3.
We also conducted an investigation on the cor-
rectness of the translation mined from wikipedia,
as shown in Table 2. Exact correct translation is
strictly-correct single translation. Extra translation
refers to strictly-correct multiple translations, for
example, ?Cathedral of Milan, Duomo di Milan,
Duomo di Milano, Duomo of Milan, Milan Cathe-
dral? (Italian: Duomo di Milano). It is interesting to
observe that about 50% of Italian phrases are found
to have multiple correct English translations due to
multiple English wikipedia pages being redirected
to the same Italian pages. Some minor noise is ob-
served when the correct translation contains some
related additional words, such as ?Alfonso XII of
Spain? (Spanish: Alfonso XII). When used for in-
formation retrieval, this additional information can
sometimes improve effectiveness.
We are not able to manually evaluate the accuracy
of all translation pairs in our bilingual dictionaries
due to limited resources. However, our results for
sample queries from user logs demonstrate that our
translations are generally highly accurate.
3.3 Intrinsic Evaluation Using IR System
Our information retrieval experiments were per-
formed on a database of metadata associated with a
collection of 5000 CH photographs. The metadata to
describe each artifact in the collection is available in
English and in Italian. Each photograph is described
identically in both languages. We formed a separate
search index for English and Italian. Search was car-
ried out using the Lucene search engine7. We carried
out an evaluation based on this collection which pro-
ceeded as follows:
1. Submit the original queries to the index and
record the ranked list of references returned.
2. Submit the translated queries to the appropriate
index and record the ranked list of references
returned.
3. Find the correlation between the lists returned
for the native language queries and the queries
translated to that language.
4. The better translation will have the stronger
correlation with the native language list.
Due to the fact that the corpus was only complete
in the Italian and English versions, we were unable
to include the Spanish queries in this part of the eval-
uation. Also, while this collection is based in the CH
domain, some of the queries yield no relevant docu-
ments due to their specialist nature. The collection
of queries for which meaningful retrieval results are
7http://lucene.apache.org/
returned is too small to allow for a quantitative anal-
ysis of retrieval effectiveness. Therefore, we present
a qualitative analysis of some of the more interesting
cases.
3.3.1 Italian?English translations
The Italian queries cover a wide range of Italian
interests in CH. We present here a sample of some
of the more interesting results.
Arnaldo Pomodoro This refers to an Italian artist,
but the name ?Pomodoro? is translated to ?Tomato?
in English by WorldLingo. While there were no
references to the artist in the collection, all docu-
ments returned contained the term ?tomato? (refer-
ring to the vegetable) which are irrelevant to the
query. The dictionary-based translation recognized
the name and therefore left it untranslated. It is
preferable to retrieve no documents rather than to
retrieve irrelevant ones.
Amore e Psiche This refers to the sculpture en-
titled ?Cupid and Psyche? in English. This phrase
was matched in our phrase dictionary and translated
correctly. The MT system translated this as ?Love,
Psyche?. The dictionary translation was observed
to retrieve relevant documents with greater precision
since it matched against the more specific term ?Cu-
pid?, as opposed to the more general term ?Love?.
David Michaelangelo This query provided a
counterexample. The phrase dictionary added the
term ?statue? to the translated query. This led to re-
trieval of a large number of non-relevant documents.
3.3.2 English?Italian translations
As with the Italian queries, there was not much
overlap between the query log and the document col-
lection. Some of the interesting translations include:
pop art This phrase was recognized by our
domain-specific dictionary, and so was left in its
original form for searching in Italian. Interestingly,
this led to an improvement in search accuracy for the
query compared to that in the English language col-
lection. For the English index, this phrase matched
many non-relevant documents which contained the
word ?art?. However, when searching in the Italian
index, where ?art? is not a word encountered in the
general vocabulary, the phrase retrieves only 7 doc-
uments, of which 5 were relevant.
Turner East Sussex The place name ?East Sus-
sex? was correctly recognized and translated by our
phrase dictionary. However the MT system again
failed to recognise it and translated the partial term
?East? to ?Orientale?. The presence of the term
?Orientale? in the translated query resulted in many
non-relevant documents being retrieved, reducing
the precision of the query.
The examples given in this section provide anec-
dotal evidence to support the view that the auto-
matically mined domain-specific phrase dictionary
improves the performance of the retrieval system.
Query sets and relevance judgements are being cre-
ated for the MultiMatch document set by domain ex-
perts who compiled the original collections. Thus
we will be able to ensure that the query sets are a
good representative sample of the information needs
of the typical user. These test collections will allow
us to conduct full quantitative analysis of our sys-
tem.
4 Conclusions
We have presented an automatic mining system de-
veloped for construction of domain-specific phrase
dictionaries. Phrases not translated by a general
MT system are shown to be translated effectively
using these dictionaries. The extracted translations
were evaluated by human assessment and shown to
be highly accurate. We have also demonstrated a
way to combine these dictionaries with MT for top-
ical phrases in the culture heritage domain. Our ex-
perimental results show that we were able to detect
and correct a large proportion of domain-specific
phrases unsuccessfully translated by MT, and thus
improve information retrieval effectiveness and fa-
cilitate MLIA.
5 Ongoing Work
In our ongoing work we plan to further extend the
coverage of our dictionaries by exploring the min-
ing of other translations pairs from within the linked
Wikipedia pages. While the method described in this
paper has been shown to be effective for query trans-
lation, we have so far only demonstrated its behav-
ior for a very small number of queries to our CLIA
system. We are currently developing test collections
based on several CH data sets to evaluate the effec-
tiveness of our hybrid query translation method.
Acknowledgement
Work partially supported by European Community
under the Information Society Technologies (IST)
programme of the 6th FP for RTD ? project Mul-
tiMATCH contract IST?033104. The authors are
solely responsible for the content of this paper. It
does not represent the opinion of the European Com-
munity, and the European Community is not respon-
sible for any use that might be made of data appear-
ing therein.
References
Sisay Fissaha Adafre and Maarten de Rijke. 2005. Dis-
covering missing links in Wikipedia. In Proceedings
of the 3rd International Workshop on Link Discovery,
pages 90?97, Chicago, Illinois, United States. ACM
Press.
Sisay Fissaha Adafre and Maarten de Rijke. 2006. Find-
ing similar sentences across multiple languages in
Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 11th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 62?69, Trento, Italy.
Lisa Ballesteros and W. Bruce Croft. 1997. Phrasal
translation and query expansion techniques for cross-
language information retrieval. In Proceedings of the
20th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
pages 84?91, Philadelphia, PA, USA. ACM Press.
Gosse Bouma, Ismail Fahmi, Jori Mur, Gertjan van No-
ord, Lonneke van der Plas, and Jorg Tiedemann. 2006.
The University of Groningen at QA@CLEF 2006 us-
ing syntactic knowledge for QA. In Working Notes
for the Cross Language Evaluation Forum 2006 Work-
shop, Alicante, Spain.
Frans Coenen, Paul H. Leng, Robert Sanderson, and
Yanbo J. Wang. 2007. Statistical identification of key
phrases for text classification. In Machine Learning
and Data Mining in Pattern Recognition, volume 4571
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 838?853.
Springer.
Thierry Declerck, Asuncio`n Go`mez Pe`rez, Ovidiu Vela,
Zeno Gantner, and David Manzano-Macho. 2006.
Multilingual lexical semantic resources for ontology
translation. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
Genoa, Italy. ELDA.
Jianfeng Gao, Jian-Yun Nie, Endong Xun, Jian Zhang,
Ming Zhou, and Changning Huang. 2001. Improv-
ing query translation for cross-language information
retrieval using statistical models. In Proceedings of the
24th Annual International ACM SIGIR conference on
Research and Development in information retrieval,
pages 96?104, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States.
ACM Press.
Alexander F. Gelbukh, Grigori Sidorov, Sang-Yong Han,
and Erika Herna?ndez-Rubio. 2004. Automatic syn-
tactic analysis for detection of word combinations. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Pro-
cessing, volume 2945 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 243?247. Springer.
David A. Hull and Gregory Grefenstette. 1996. Query-
ing across languages: a dictionary-based approach to
multilingual information retrieval. In Proceedings of
the 19th Annual International ACM SIGIR Confer-
ence on Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval, pages 49?57, Zurich, Switzerland. ACM Press.
Rupali Sharma and S. Raman. 2003. Phrase-based text
representation for managing the web documents. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Infor-
mation Technology: Computers and Communications,
page 165, Washington, DC, USA. IEEE Computer So-
ciety.
Tim Van de Cruys and Begon?a Villada Moiro?n. 2007.
Semantics-based multiword expression extraction. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on A Broader Perspec-
tive on Multiword Expressions, pages 25?32, Prague,
Czech Republic, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Proceedings of the Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage Data (LaTeCH 2007), pages 81?88,
Prague, 28 June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Multilingual Search for Cultural Heritage Archives via Combining Multiple
Translation Resources
Gareth J. F. Jones, Ying Zhang, Eamonn Newman, Fabio Fantino
Centre for Digital Video Processing
Dublin City University
Dublin 9, Ireland
{gjones,yzhang,enewman,ffantino}
@computing.dcu.ie
Franca Debole
ISTI-CNR
Pisa
Italy
franca.debole
@isti.cnr.it
Abstract
The linguistic features of material in Cul-
tural Heritage (CH) archives may be in var-
ious languages requiring a facility for ef-
fective multilingual search. The specialised
language often associated with CH content
introduces problems for automatic transla-
tion to support search applications. The
MultiMatch project is focused on enabling
users to interact with CH content across
different media types and languages. We
present results from a MultiMatch study ex-
ploring various translation techniques for
the CH domain. Our experiments ex-
amine translation techniques for the En-
glish language CLEF 2006 Cross-Language
Speech Retrieval (CL-SR) task using Span-
ish, French and German queries. Re-
sults compare effectiveness of our query
translation against a monolingual baseline
and show improvement when combining a
domain-specific translation lexicon with a
standard machine translation system.
1 Introduction
Online Cultural Heritage (CH) content is being pro-
duced in many countries by organisations such as
national libraries, museums, galleries and audiovi-
sual archives. Additionally, there are increasing
amounts of CH relevant content available more gen-
erally on the World Wide Web. While some of this
material concerns national or regional content only
of local interest, much material relates to items in-
volving multiple nations and languages, for exam-
ple concerning events in Europe or Asia. In order to
gain a full understanding of such events, including
details contained in different collections and explor-
ing different cultural perspectives requires effective
multilingual search technologies. Facilitating search
of this type requires translation tools to cross the lan-
guage barrier between users and the available infor-
mation sources.
CH content encompasses various different media,
including of course text documents, images, videos,
and audio recordings. Search of text documents be-
tween languages forms the focus of cross-language
information retrieval (CLIR) research, while search
for images is the concern of content-based image re-
trieval. However, whatever the media of the items
they are accompanied by metadata. Such metadata
may include simple factual details such as date of
creation, but also descriptive details relating to the
contents of the item. Multilingual searching using
metadata content requires that either the metadata
be translated into a language with which the user is
able to search or that the search query be translated
into the language of the metadata. This alternative
of document or query translation is a well rehearsed
argument in CLIR, which has generally concerned
itself with full text document searching. However,
the features of metadata require a more careful anal-
ysis. Metadata is typically dense in search terms,
while lacking the linguistic structure and informa-
tion redundancy of full text documents. The absence
of linguistic structure makes precise translation of
content problematic, while the lack of redundancy
means that accurate translation of individual words
81
and phrases is vital to minimise mismatch between
query and document terms. Furthermore, CH con-
tent is typically in specialised domains requiring do-
main specific resources for accurate translation. De-
veloping reliable and robust approaches to transla-
tion for metadata search is thus an important com-
ponent of search for many CH archives.
The EU FP6 MultiMatch1 project is concerned
with information access for multimedia and multi-
lingual content for a range of European languages.
In the investigation reported in this paper we intro-
duce the first stage multilingual search functional-
ity of the MultiMatch system, and describe its use
in an investigation for multilingual metadata search.
Since at present we do not have a search test collec-
tion specifically developed for MultiMatch we use
data from the CLEF 2006 Cross-Language Speech
Retrieval (CL-SR) task for our experiments (Oard et
al., 2006).
The remainder of this paper is organised as fol-
lows: Section 2 gives an overview of the MultiMatch
search architecture, Section 3 outlines the experi-
mental search task, Section 4 describes the trans-
lation resources used for this study, Section 5 and
6 concern our experimental setup and results, and
finally Section 7 summarises our conclusions and
gives details of our ongoing work.
2 MultiMatch Search System
The MultiMatch search system is centered on the
MILOS Multimedia Repository system (Amato et
al., 2004) which incorporates free-text search using
Lucene (Hatcher and Gospodnetic, 2004) and im-
age search using an open source image retrieval sys-
tem GIFT (Mu?ller et al, 2001). In order to support
multilingual searching a number of translation tools
are being developed based on standard online ma-
chine translation tools and dictionaries augmented
with domain-specific resources gathered from the
WWW and elsewhere. In this section we briefly in-
troduce the relevant details of MILOS and Lucene.
Since this paper focuses on text search within Mul-
tiMatch, we do not describe the multimedia features
of the MultiMatch system.
1www.multimatch.org
2.1 MILOS: Multimedia Repository
MILOS (Multimedia dIgital Library for On-line
Search) is a repository system conceived to support
the distributed storage and retrieval of multimedia
objects. This Multimedia Content Management Sys-
tem (MCMS) is able to manage not only structured
data, as in databases, but also textual data (using
information retrieval technologies), semi-structured
data (typically in XML), mixed-mode data, and mul-
timedia data. In MultiMatch, we use MILOS as a
metadata repository to enable querying on the struc-
ture of the data stored.
MILOS has a three-tier architecture composed of
three main components:
1. the XML Search Engine (XMLSE) component
which manages the metadata;
2. the MultiMedia Server (MMS) component
which manages the documents; and
3. the MultiMedia Digital Library service
(MMDLS) component MMDLS which pro-
vides application developers with a uniform
and integrated way of accessing MMS and
XMLSE.
Each of these components is implemented using
solutions providing flexibility, scalability, and effi-
ciency.
2.1.1 XMLSE
XMLSE is an enhanced native XML
database/repository system with special features
for digital library applications. This is especially
justified by the well known and accepted advantages
of representing metadata as XML documents.
Metadata represented with XML can have arbitrary
complex structures, which allows it to handle with
complex metadata schemas, and can easily be
exported and imported. Our XML database can
store and retrieve any valid XML document. No
metadata schema or XML schema definition is
needed before inserting an XML document, except
optional index definitions for performance boosting.
Once an arbitrary XML document has been inserted
in the database it can be immediately retrieved using
XQuery. This allows digital library applications to
use arbitrary (XML encoded) metadata schemas
82
and to deal with heterogeneous metadata, without
any constraint on schema design and/or overhead
due to metadata translation. Thus, the native XML
database/repository system is simpler than a general
purpose XML database system, but offers signif-
icant improvements in specific areas: it supports
standard XML query languages such as XPath and
XQuery, and offers advanced search and indexing
functionality on arbitrary XML documents. It
supports high performance search and retrieval on
heavily structured XML documents, relying on
specific index structures.
Moreover XMLSE provides the possibility of us-
ing particular indexes. For example, using the con-
figuration file of XMLSE the system administrator
can associate the <abstract> elements of a doc-
ument with a full-text index and to the MPEG-7
<VisualDescriptor> elements can be associated
with a similarity search index. XMLSE uses Apache
Lucene2 to provide partial (or approximate) text
string matching, effectively providing information
retrieval functionality within MILOS. This allows
XMLSE to use the ranked searching and wildcard
queries of Lucene to solve queries like ?find all the
articles whose title contains the word XML? and
so on. This application allows users to interrogate
the dataset combining full text, and exact or partial
match search. For example the user can look for
documents whose <metadata> element contains the
word ?Switzerland?. MILOS generates and submits
to XMLSE the following XQuery query:
for $a in /document where
$a//metadata ? ?Switzerland?
return
<result>
{$a//title}, {$a//author}
</result>
The query will return a list of results which con-
sist of the title and author of all documents whose
metadata contains the term ?Switzerland?.
2.2 Lucene
Full text search in MILOS is provided by using
Lucene as a plugin. Ranked retrieval uses the
standard tf ? idf vector-space method provided in
Lucene (Hatcher and Gospodnetic, 2004). Lucene
also provides additional functionality to improve re-
2http://lucene.apache.org
trieval effectiveness by providing various query ex-
pansion services using techniques such as relevance
feedback, although these are not used in the current
investigation. Documents and search requests are
preprocessed to remove stop words and stemming is
applied using the standard resources supplied with
Lucene.
3 Evaluation Task
The MultiMatch system will enable search from a
number of CH repository sources including formally
published documents, images and video, as well
as material gathered from relevant WWW sources.
However, in order to explore metadata search is-
sues and evaluate our approaches to addressing re-
lated translation problems, a test collection includ-
ing sample user search topics and relevance judge-
ments is required. Since MultiMatch does not yet
have such a collection available, for our current ex-
periments we made use of the data provided for the
CLEF 2006 CL-SR track (Oard et al, 2006).
The document collection comprises 8104 En-
glish documents that are manually-determined
topically-coherent segments taken from 272 in-
terviews with Holocaust survivors, witnesses and
rescuers, totaling 589 hours of speech. Sev-
eral automatic speech recognition transcripts are
available for these interviews. However, for this
study we focus on the metadata fields provided
for each document: two sets of 20 automati-
cally assigned keywords (<AUTOKEYWORD2004A1>
and <AUTOKEYWORD2004A2>) determined using two
different kNN classifiers, denoted by AKW1 and
AKW2 respectively; a set of a varying number of
manually-assigned keywords (<MANUALKEYWORD>),
denoted by MKW; and a manual three-sentence
summary written by an expert in the field
(<SUMMARY>), denoted by SUMMARY.
The CLEF collection includes a set of 33 search
topics in standard TREC format created in English,
and translated into Czech, German, French, and
Spanish by native speakers. Since we wish to in-
vestigate topics with minimal redundancy, for our
experiments we used only the topic Title fields as
our search request. Relevance judgments were gen-
erated using a search guided procedure and standard
pooling methods were also provided with the collec-
83
tion. Full details of the this collection can be found
in (Oard et al, 2006; White et al, 2005).
To explore metadata field search, we used various
methods, described in the next section, to automati-
cally translate the French, German, and Spanish top-
ics into English3.
4 Translation Techniques
The MultiMatch translation resources are based on
the WorldLingo machine translation system aug-
mented with domain-specific dictionary resources
gathered automatically from the WWW. This section
briefly reviews WorldLingo4, and then describes
construction of our augmentation translation lexi-
cons and their application for query translation in
multilingual metadata search.
4.1 Machine translation system
There are a number of commercial machine transla-
tion systems currently available. After evaluation of
several candidate systems, WorldLingo was selected
for the MultiMatch project because it generally gives
good translation well between the English, Spanish,
Italian, and Dutch, languages relevant to the Mul-
timatch project5. In addition, it provides a useful
API that can be used to translate queries on the fly
via HTTP transfer protocol. The usefulness of such
a system is that it can be integrated into any appli-
cation and present translations in real-time. It al-
lows users to select the source/target languages and
specify the text format (e.g. plain text file or html
file) of their input files. The WorldLingo translation
system also provides various domain-specific dictio-
naries that can be integrated with translation system.
A particularly useful feature of WorldLingo with re-
spect to for MultiMatch, and potentially applications
within CH in general, is that to improve the qual-
ity of translations, additional locally developed cus-
tomized dictionaries can be uploaded. This enables
the WorldLingo dictionaries to be extended to con-
tain special terms for a specific domain.
3Due to a lack of translation resources, we did not use the
Czech translations in these experiments
4http://www.worldlingo.com/
5Additionally, it translates well between French and En-
glish, as used in this paper
4.2 Translation lexicon construction
To extend the standard dictionaries provided with
WorldLingo we used the current online wikipedia.
Wikipedia6 is the largest multilingual free-content
encyclopedia on the Internet. As of March 21 2007,
there are approximately 6.8 million articles written
in 250 languages available on the web, according
to Wiki Stats7. Wikipedia is structured as an in-
terconnected network of articles. Each wikipedia
page can hyperlink to several other wikipedia pages.
Wikipedia page titles in one language are also linked
to a multilingual database of corresponding terms.
Unlike the web, most hyperlinks in wikipedia have
a more consistent and semantically meaningful in-
terpretation and purpose. The comprehensive liter-
ature review presented by Adafre and Rijke (2005)
describes the link structure of wikipedia. As a mul-
tilingual hypertext medium, wikipedia presents a
valuable new source of translation information. Re-
cently, researchers have proposed techniques to ex-
ploit this opportunity. Adafre and Rijke (2006) de-
veloped a technique to identify similar text across
multiple languages in wikipedia using page content-
based features. Boumaet et al (2006) utilized
wikipedia for term recognition and translation in
order to enhance multilingual question answering
systems. Declerck et al (2006) showed how the
wikipedia resource can be used to support the su-
pervised translation of ontology labels.
In order to improve the effectiveness of multilin-
gual metadata search, we mine wikipedia pages as
a translation source and construct translation lex-
icons that can be used to reduce the errors intro-
duced by unknown terms (single words and multi-
word phrases) during query translation. The major
difference in our proposal is that the translations are
extracted on the basis of hyperlinks, meta keywords,
and emphasized concepts ? e.g. anchor text, bold-
face text, italics text, and text within special punc-
tuation marks ? appearing in the first paragraph of
wikipedia articles.
Meta keywords Wikipedia pages typically contain
meta keywords assigned by page editors. This
meta keywords can be used to assist in the iden-
6http://www.wikipedia.org/
7http://s23.org/wikistats/wikipedias
html.php?sort=good desc
84
tification of the associated terms on the same
topic.
Emphasized concepts In common with standard
summarization studies, we observed that the
first paragraph of a wikipedia document is usu-
ally a concise introduction to the article. Thus,
concepts emphasized in the introductory sec-
tion are likely to be semantically related to the
title of the page.
In our study we seek to use these features from
multilingual wikipedia pages to compile a domain-
specific word and phrase translation lexicon. Our
method in using this data is to augment the queries
with topically related terms in the document lan-
guage through a process of post-translation query
expansion. This procedure was performed as fol-
lows:
1. An English vocabulary for the domain of the
test collection was constructed by performing a
limited crawl of the English wikipedia8, Cate-
gory:World War II. This category contains links
to pages and subcategories concerning events,
persons, places, and organizations pertaining
to war crimes or crimes against humanity es-
pecially during WWII. It should be noted that
this process was neither an exhaustive crawl
nor a focused crawl. The purpose of our cur-
rent study is to explore the effect of translation
expansion on metadata retrieval effectiveness.
In total, we collected 7431 English web pages.
2. For each English wikipedia page, we extracted
its hyperlinks to German, Spanish, and French.
The basename of each hyperlink is considered
as a term (single word or multi-word phrase
that should be translated as a unit). This pro-
vided a total of 4446 German terms, 3338
Spanish terms, and 4062 French terms. As an
alternative way of collecting terms in German,
Spanish, and French, we are able to crawl the
wikipedia in a specific language. However, a
page with no link pointing to its English coun-
terpart will not provide enough translation in-
formation.
8en.wikipedia.org
RUN ID
Augmented lexicon using all terms
appearing in the following fields
Title Meta Emphasized
terms keywords concepts
RUNmt+t
?
? ?
RUNmt+m ?
?
?
RUNmt+c ? ?
?
RUNmt+m+c ?
? ?
Table 1: Run descriptions.
3. For each of the German, Spanish, and French
terms obtained, we used the title term, the meta
keywords, and the emphasized concepts ob-
tained from the same English wikipedia page
as its potential translations.
For example, consider an English page titled as
?World War II?9. The title term, the meta keywords,
the emphasized concepts in English, and the hyper-
links (to German, Spanish, and French) associated
are shown in Figure 1. We first extract the base-
names ?Zweiter Weltkrieg? (in German), ?Segunda
Guerra Mundial? (in Spanish), and ?Seconde Guerre
mondiale? (in French) using the hyperlink feature.
To translate these terms into English, we replace
them using the English title term, all the English
meta keywords and/or all the English emphasized
concepts occurring in the same English wikipedia
page. This is a straightforward approach to au-
tomatic post-translation query expansion by using
meta keywords and/or emphasized concepts as ex-
panded terms. The effects of the features described
above are investigated in this work, both separately
and in combination, as shown in Table 1,
5 Experimental Setup
In this section we outline the design of our exper-
iments. We established a monolingual reference
(RUNmono) against which we can measure multilin-
gual retrieval effectiveness. To provide a baseline
for our multilingual results, we used the standard
WorldLingo to translate the queries (RUNmt). We
then tested the MT integrated with different lexicons
compiled using wikipedia. Results of these experi-
ments, shown in Table 1, enable us gauge the effect
of each of our additional translation resources gen-
erated using wikipedia.
9http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World War
II
85
Title: World War II
Hyperlink to German: http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zweiter_Weltkrieg
Hyperlink to Spanish: http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Segunda_Guerra_Mundial
Hyperlink to French: http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seconde_Guerre_mondiale
Meta keywords:
World War II, WWII history by nation, WWII history by nation, 101st Airborne 
Division, 11th SS Volunteer Panzergrenadier Division Nordland, 15th Army Group,
1937, 1939, 1940
Emphasized concepts:
World War II (abbreviated WWII), or the Second World War, was a worldwide conflict
which lasted from 1939 to 1945. World War II was the amalgamation of two 
conflicts, one starting in Asia as the Second Sino-Japanese War, and the other 
beginning in Europe with the Invasion of Poland. The war was caused by the 
expansionist and hegemonic ambitions of Germany, Italy, and Japan and economic 
tensions between all major powers.
Figure 1: Title, hyperlinks, meta keywords, and emphasized concepts (underlined terms) extracted from the
English wikipedia page http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World War II.
The focus of this paper is not on optimising ab-
solute retrieval performance, but rather to explore
the usefulness of our translation resources. Thus
we do not apply retrieval enhancement techniques
such as relevance feedback which would make it
more difficult to observe the impact of differences
in behaviour of the translation resources. The ex-
periments use the SUMMARY field, as an exam-
ple of concise natural language descriptions of CH
objects; and the AKW1 and AKW2 fields as exam-
ples of automatically assigned keyword labels with-
out linguistic structure, with the MKW field provid-
ing similar manually assigned for keyword labels.
Retrieval effectiveness is evaluated using standard
TREC mean average precision (MAP) and the pre-
cision at rank 10 (P@10).
6 Results and Discussion
The results of our query translation experiments are
shown in Table 2, 3, 4, and 5. For search using SUM-
MARY and MKW fields, the lexicon compiled us-
ing title terms provided an improvement of 7? 9%,
7 ? 19%, and 20 ? 30%, in German?English,
Spanish?English, and French?English retrieval task,
respectively. These improvements are statistically
significant at the 95% confidence level, and empha-
size the importance of a good domain-specific trans-
lation lexicon.
The addition of meta keywords or emphasized
concepts also improves results in most cases relative
to the RUNmt results. However, we can see that re-
trieval performance degrades when the query is ex-
panded to contain terms from both meta keywords
and emphasized concepts. This occurs despite the
fact that the additional terms are often closely re-
lated to the original query terms. While the addition
of all these terms generally produces an increase in
the number of retrieved documents, there is little or
no increase in the number of relevant documents re-
trieved, and the combination of the two sets of terms
in the queries leads on average to a slight reduce in
the rank of relevant documents.
The results show that RUNmt+t runs provide the
best results when averaged across a query set. How-
ever, when analysed at the level of individual queries
different combined translation resources are more
effective for different queries, examples of this ef-
fect are shown in Table 6. This suggests that it may
be possible to develop a more sophisticated transla-
tion expansion methods to select the best terms from
different lexicons. At the very least, it should be pos-
sible to use ?context-sensitive filtering? and ?com-
bination of evidence? (Smets, 1990) approaches to
improve the overall translation quality. We plan to
explore this method in further investigations.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
This paper reports experiments with techniques de-
veloped for domain-specific lexicon construction to
facilitate multilingual metadata search for a CH re-
86
RUN ID German?English Spanish?English French?EnglishMAP P@10 MAP P@10 MAP P@10
RUNmt 0.0750 0.1233 0.0756 0.1250 0.0652 0.1152
RUNmt+t 0.0815 0.1516 0.0899 0.1545 0.0783 0.1333
RUNmt+m 0.0775 0.1266 0.0797 0.1364 0.0690 0.1030
RUNmt+c 0.0669 0.1000 0.0793 0.1303 0.0770 0.1152
RUNmt+m+c 0.0668 0.0968 0.0737 0.1212 0.0646 0.0970
RUNmono MAP = 0.1049 P@10 = 0.1818
Table 2: Results for SUMMARY field search. (RUNmt+t run provides the best results in all cases.)
RUN ID German?English French?English Spanish?EnglishMAP P@10 MAP P@10 MAP P@10
RUNmt 0.1158 0.1750 0.1000 0.1677 0.0903 0.1677
RUNmt+t 0.1235 0.2100 0.1071 0.2031 0.1171 0.2194
RUNmt+m 0.1171 0.1393 0.1023 0.2000 0.0983 0.1903
RUNmt+c 0.1084 0.1500 0.0958 0.1636 0.1089 0.1667
RUNmt+m+c 0.1069 0.1600 0.0947 0.1727 0.0940 0.1742
RUNmono MAP = 0.1596 P@10 = 0.2812
Table 3: Results for MKW field search. (RUNmt+t run provides the best results in all cases.)
RUN ID German?English French?English Spanish?EnglishMAP P@10 MAP P@10 MAP P@10
RUNmt 0.0264 0.0731 0.0247 0.0548 0.0316 0.0767
RUNmt+t 0.0273 0.0828 0.0274 0.0656 0.0406 0.0867
RUNmt+m 0.0268 0.0633 0.0258 0.0606 0.0357 0.0613
RUNmt+c 0.0266 0.0667 0.0266 0.0636 0.0383 0.0839
RUNmt+m+c 0.0259 0.0633 0.0260 0.0606 0.0328 0.0677
RUNmono MAP = 0.0388 P@10 = 0.1000
Table 4: Results for AKW1 field search. (RUNmt+t run provides the best results in all cases.)
RUN ID German?English French?English Spanish?EnglishMAP P@10 MAP P@10 MAP P@10
RUNmt 0.0279 0.0375 0.0347 0.0625 0.0205 0.0483
RUNmt+t 0.0279 0.0481 0.0351 0.0680 0.0238 0.0433
RUNmt+m 0.0302 0.0448 0.0361 0.0556 0.0223 0.0484
RUNmt+c 0.0275 0.0414 0.0332 0.0593 0.0268 0.0548
RUNmt+m+c 0.0299 0.0448 0.0351 0.0536 0.0273 0.0581
RUNmono MAP = 0.0420 P@10 = 0.0821
Table 5: Results for AKW2 field search. (The best results are in bold.)
trieval tasks. The results show that our techniques
can provide a statistically significant improvement
in the retrieval effectiveness. Using a tailored trans-
lation lexicon enables us to achieve (77%, 78%),
(86%, 67%) and (75%, 63%) of the monolingual ef-
fectiveness in German?English, Spanish?English,
and French?English multilingual metadata SUM-
MARY, MKW field search tasks. In addition, the
multilingual wikipedia proved to be a rich resource
of translations for domain-specific terms.
Intuitively, document translation is superior to
query translation. Documents provide more context
for resolving ambiguities (Oard, 1998) and the trans-
lation of source documents into all the languages
supported by the retrieval system effectively reduces
CLIR to a monolingual IR task. Furthermore, it has
the added advantage that document content is acces-
sible to users in their native languages. In our future
work, we will compare the effectiveness of these two
approaches to metadata search in a multilingual en-
vironment.
87
Query ID
MT Augmented lexicon using all terms appearing in the following fields
WorldLingo Title terms Meta keyword Emphasized concepts Meta keyword +Emphasized concepts
German?English 1133 0.6000 0.6000 0.6195 0.6092 0.6400
1325 0.0000 0.0003 0.0020 0.0020 0.0018
1623 0.2210 0.2210 0.3203 0.0450 0.0763
3007 0.0000 0.0003 0.0025 0.0047 0.0054
3012 0.0087 0.0087 0.0073 0.0073 0.0097
3025 0.0052 0.0052 0.0060 0.0052 0.0060
Spanish?English 1623 0.0063 0.0063 0.1014 0.0084 0.0334
3007 0.0000 0.0004 0.0028 0.0048 0.0057
French?English 1133 0.6000 0.6000 0.6195 0.6092 0.6400
1345 0.0600 0.0667 0.0809 0.0495 0.0420
1623 0.0750 0.0798 0.1810 0.0228 0.0528
3005 0.0200 0.0232 0.0226 0.2709 0.1063
3007 0.0003 0.0003 0.0024 0.0025 0.0037
3025 0.0173 0.0173 0.0178 0.0173 0.0178
Table 6: Examples of MAP values obtained using different translation combinations for SUMMARY field
search. (The best results are in bold.)
Acknowledgement
Work partially supported by European Community
under the Information Society Technologies (IST)
programme of the 6th FP for RTD - project Mul-
tiMATCH contract IST- 033104. The authors are
solely responsible for the content of this paper. It
does not represent the opinion of the European Com-
munity, and the European Community is not respon-
sible for any use that might be made of data appear-
ing therein.
References
Sisay Fissaha Adafre and Maarten de Rijke. 2005. Discovering
missing links in wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 3rd inter-
national workshop on Link discovery, pages 90?97, Chicago,
Illinois. ACM Press.
Sisay Fissaha Adafre and Maarten de Rijke. 2006. Finding
similar sentences across multiple languages in wikipedia. In
Proceedings of the 11th Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 62?
69, Trento, Italy.
Giuseppe Amato, Claudio Gennaro, Fausto Rabitti, and
Pasquale Savino. 2004. Milos: A multimedia content man-
agement system for digital library applications. In Proceed-
ings of the 8th European Conference on Research and Ad-
vanced Technology for Digital Libraries, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 14?25. Springer-Verlag.
Gosse Bouma, Ismail Fahmi, Jori Mur, Gertjan van Noord, Lon-
neke van der Plas, and Jorg Tiedemann. 2006. The univer-
sity of groningen at QA@CLEF 2006 using syntactic knowl-
edge for QA. In Working Notes for the Cross Language
Evaluation Forum 2006 Workshop, Alicante, Spain.
Thierry Declerck, Asuncio`n Go`mez Pe`rez, Ovidiu Vela, Zeno
Gantner, and David Manzano-Macho. 2006. Multilingual
lexical semantic resources for ontology translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, Genoa, Italy.
Erik Hatcher and Otis Gospodnetic. 2004. Lucene in Action (In
Action series). Manning Publications Co., Greenwich, CT,
USA.
Henning Mu?ller, Wolfgang Mu?ller, and David McG. Squire.
2001. Automated benchmarking in content-based image re-
trieval. In Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE International Con-
ference on Multimedia and Expo, Tokyo, Japan. IEEE Com-
puter Society.
Douglas W. Oard, Jianqiang Wang, Gareth J. F. Jones, Ryen W.
White, Pavel Pecina, Dagobert Soergel, Xiaoli Huang, and
Izhak Shafran. 2006. Overview of the CLEF-2006 cross-
language speech retrieval track. In Working Notes for the
Cross Language Evaluation Forum 2006 Workshop, Ali-
cante, Spain.
Douglas W. Oard. 1998. A comparative study of query
and document translation for cross-language information re-
trieval. In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference of the Associ-
ation for Machine Translation in the Americas on Machine
Translation and the Information Soup, pages 472?483, Lon-
don, UK. Springer-Verlag.
Philippe Smets. 1990. The combination of evidence in the
transferable belief model. IEEE Transaction on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 12(5):447?458.
Ryen W. White, Douglas W. Oard, Gareth J. F. Jones, Dagobert
Soergel, and Xiaoli Huang. 2005. Overview of the CLEF-
2005 cross-language speech retrievaltrack. In Carol Pe-
ters, Fredric C. Gey, Julio Gonzalo, Henning Mu?ller, Gareth
J. F. Jones, Michael Kluck, Bernardo Magnini, and Maarten
de Rijke, editors, CLEF, volume 4022 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 744?759. Springer.
88
