PLASER: Pronunciation Learning via Automatic Speech Recognition
Brian Mak, Manhung Siu, Mimi Ng, Yik-Cheung Tam?, Yu-Chung Chan?
Kin-Wah Chan, Ka-Yee Leung, Simon Ho, Fong-Ho Chong, Jimmy Wong, and Jacqueline Lo
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Department of Computer Science, and
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering
{bmak, eemsiu, ssmimi}@ust.hk
Abstract
PLASER is a multimedia tool with instant
feedback designed to teach English pronunci-
ation for high-school students of Hong Kong
whose mother tongue is Cantonese Chinese.
The objective is to teach correct pronunciation
and not to assess a student?s overall pronuncia-
tion quality. Major challenges related to speech
recognition technology include: allowance for
non-native accent, reliable and corrective feed-
backs, and visualization of errors.
PLASER employs hidden Markov models
to represent position-dependent English
phonemes. They are discriminatively trained
using the standard American English TIMIT
corpus together with a set of TIMIT utterances
collected from ?good? local English speakers.
There are two kinds of speaking exercises:
minimal-pair exercises and word exercises.
In the word exercises, PLASER computes
a confidence-based score for each phoneme
of the given word, and paints each vowel or
consonant segment in the word using a novel
3-color scheme to indicate their pronunciation
accuracy. PLASER was used by 900 students
of grade 7 and 8 over a period of 2?3 months.
About 80% of the students said that they pre-
ferred using PLASER over traditional English
classes to learn pronunciation. A pronunciation
test was also conducted before and after they
used PLASER. The result from 210 students
shows that the students? pronunciation skill
was improved. (The statistics is significant at
the 99% confidence level.)
?Mr. Tam is now a graduate student at the Department of
Computer Science at Carnegie Mellon University.
?Mr. Chan is now working at SpeechWorks Inc.
1 Introduction
The phenomenal advances in automatic speech recogni-
tion (ASR) technologies in the last decade led to the re-
cent employment of the technologies in computer-aided
language learning (CALL) 1. One example is the LIS-
TEN project (Mostow et al, 1994). However, one has
to bear in mind that the goal of ASR in most other com-
mon classification applications (such as automated call
centers, dictation, etc.) is orthogonal to that in CALL:
while the former requires ASR in general to be forgiv-
ing to allophonic variations due to speaker idiosyncrasies
or accent, pronunciation learning demands strict distinc-
tion among different sounds though the extent of strict-
ness could be very subjective with a human teacher. As
a result, technologies developed for mainstream ASR ap-
plications may not work satisfactorily for pronunciation
learning.
In the area of pronunciation learning, ASR has been
used in CALL for two different purposes: teaching
correct pronunciation of a foreign language to stu-
dents (Kawai and Hirose, 2000), and assessing the pro-
nunciation quality of a speaker speaking a foreign lan-
guage (Witt and Young, 2000; Neumeyer et al, 2000;
Franco et al, 2000). The former asks for accurate and
precise phoneme recognition while the latter may toler-
ate more recognition noises. The judgment for the for-
mer task is comparatively more objective than that for
the latter which, on the other hand, is usually required to
correlate well with human judges. In this paper, we de-
scribe a multimedia tool we built for high-school students
in Hong Kong to self-learn American English pronuncia-
tion. Their mother tongue is Cantonese Chinese. The ob-
jective is to teach correct pronunciation of basic English
phonemes (possibly with local accent), and not to assess
a student?s overall pronunciation quality. Although there
1CALL applies many different technologies to help lan-
guage learning, but this paper concerns only the one area of
pronunciation learning in CALL.
exist commercial products for the purpose, they have two
major problems: First, they are not built for Cantonese-
speaking Chinese; and, second, the feedback from these
products does not pinpoint precisely which phonemes are
poorly pronounced and which phonemes are well pro-
nounced. As a matter of fact, most of these systems only
provide an overall score for a word or utterance. As the
feedback is not indicative, students would not know how
to improve or correct their mistakes. One reason is the
relatively poor performance of phoneme recognition ?
the best phoneme recognition accuracy is about 75% for
the TIMIT corpus.
We took a pragmatic view and designed a multimedia
learning tool called PLASER ? Pronunciation Learning
via Automatic SpEech Recognition ? according to our
following beliefs and guidelines:
1. It is an illusive goal for average students to learn
to speak a second language without local accent.
Therefore, PLASER should be tolerant to mi-
nor Cantonese accents, lest the students become
too frustrated from continually getting low scores.
For example, there is no ?r? sound in Cantonese
and consequently Cantonese usually speaks the ?r?
phoneme with weak retroflexion.
2. Performance of phoneme recognition over a long
continuous utterance is still far from being satisfac-
tory for pedagogical purpose.
3. PLASER?s performance must be reliable even at the
expense of lower accuracy.
4. To be useful for correcting mistakes, PLASER must
provide meaningful and indicative feedbacks to pin-
point which parts of an utterance are wrongly pro-
nounced and to what extent.
5. The knowledge of IPA symbols is not a pre-requisite
to learning pronunciation.
This paper is organized as follows: in the next Section,
we first present the overall system design of PLASER.
This is followed by a discussion of our acoustic models
in Section 3. Section 4 gives a detailed description of
our confidence-based approach in pronunciation scoring,
and the related feedback visualization is given in Section
5. Both quantitative and qualitative evaluation results are
given in Section 6. Finally, we summarize the lessons we
learned in building PLASER and point out some future
works in Section 7.
Table 1: Phonemes that are taught in PLASER (written
in TIMIT-bet)
Lesson# Phoneme Pair Lesson# Phoneme Pair
1 iy ih 11 k g
2 eh ey 12 s z
3 ae ah 13 sh zh
4 aa ao 14 ch jh
5 ax er 15 f v
6 ow uh 16 th dh
7 uw ay 17 m n
8 oy aw 18 ng h
9 p b 19 l r
10 t d 20 w y
2 PLASER: System Design
PLASER runs under Microsoft Windows (98, NT, 2000)
with an easy-to-use web-like interface requiring only
standard utilities such as the Internet Explorer and Media
Player. PLASER consists of 20 lessons, and each lesson
teaches two American English phonemes as shown in Ta-
ble 1. The two phonemes in a lesson are usually the most
confusable pair among the 40 phonemes. PLASER con-
tains a lot of word examples and for each word there are
its English spelling, its Chinese translation, a picture, and
a pronunciation video-clip (PVC) which a native Amer-
ican English speaker helped record. A user may read
and listen to the materials of each word as many times
as he likes at his own pace. Besides descriptive materials,
PLASER uses four types of exercises to teach pronunci-
ation:
Read-Along Exercise: Basic pronunciation drills with
no assessment.
Minimal-Pair Listening Exercise: This is used to train
users? ear. Words from one minimal pairs are ran-
domly embedded in a sentence that makes perfect
sense with either word in the pair. A user listens to
recordings of such sentences and chooses between
the two words.
Minimal-Pair Speaking Exercise: Similar to the
Minimal-Pair Listening Exercise except that now
only minimal pairs are given and a user is asked to
say them. A student may pick any one of the two
words to say but not to mix up with its counterpart
in the pair. It is a two-class classification problem.
Word-List Speaking Exercise: A student may pick any
word from a list to say, and PLASER has to decide
how well each phoneme in the word is pronounced.
Figure 1: A snapshot of PLASER running its word exer-
cise
Fig. 1 shows a snapshot of PLASER running the Word-
List Speaking Exercise in the lesson teaching the two
phonemes: ?ih? and ?iy?. The user has selected the word
?cheese? to practise. The top left panel tells how to pro-
duce the phoneme ?iy? with the help of an animated GIF
that shows a cross-sectional view of the vocal tract dur-
ing the phoneme?s production. At the bottom right panel
are the word?s spelling, its Chinese translation, its pic-
ture, plus a recording button and a playback button. The
word?s PVC is shown at the top right panel. The mid-
dle panel in the screen is reserved for feedbacks. The
feedback for Word-List Speaking Exercise consists of an
overall score for the practising word (?cheese? here) as
well as a confidence score for each individual phoneme
in the word using a novel 3-color scheme. Confidence
scores are derived from a log-likelihood ratio between the
desired target and some reference. Garbage rejection is
also implemented in a similar manner. Refer Section 4
and 5 for more details.
As a self-learning as well as a teaching aid, the length
of each lesson is designed to take about 25?30 minutes
to complete. Students? performance is recorded for later
reviews by students themselves if PLASER is used as
a learning tool, or by teachers if PLASER is used as a
teaching aid.
3 Acoustic Modelling
For the development of PLASER?s acoustic models, addi-
tional speech data were collected from local high-school
students:
HKTIMIT: A set of TIMIT utterances collected from
a group of 61 local (Cantonese) high-school stu-
dents who spoke ?good? English to the local stan-
dard. There are 29 females and 32 males, and each
recorded 250 TIMIT sentences. The data were di-
vided into a training set of 9,163 utterances from 17
females and 20 males, and a test set of 6,015 utter-
ances from 12 females and 13 males.
MP-DATA: A superset of words used in PLASER?s
minimal-pair exercises recorded by eight high-
school students, 4 males and 4 females, each speak-
ing ?300 words for a total of 2,431 words.
WL-DATA: A superset of words used in PLASER?s
word exercises by the same eight students who
recorded the MP-DATA for a total of 2,265 words.
All data were recorded with the same conditions as those
of TIMIT. In addition, all utterances of MP-DATA and
WL-DATA were phonetically transcribed.
The standard American English TIMIT corpus to-
gether with the HKTIMIT corpus were used to develop
Cantonese-accented English phoneme HMMs. The com-
mon 13 mel-frequency cepstral coefficients and their first
and second order derivatives were used for acoustic repre-
sentation. All phoneme HMMs have three real states, and
there are an additional 3-state silence model and a 1-state
short-pause HMM. Three kinds of modelling techniques
were investigated:
Context-Independent Modelling: Context-
independent HMMs (CIHMM) were trained
for the 40 phonemes taught in PLASER. Including
the silence and short-pause models, there are totally
42 HMMs.
Position-Dependent HMM (PDHMM): Due to con-
cerns of limited computing resources in local pub-
lic schools, a restricted form of context-dependent
modelling was chosen. Since PLASER will only
perform phoneme recognition on isolated words, we
postulate that it may be important to capture the
word-boundary effect of a phoneme. Thus, three
variants of each phoneme are modelled depending
on whether it appears at the beginning, in the mid-
dle, or at the end of a word.
(MCE) Discriminative Training: With the goal of min-
imizing classification errors in a development data-
set which is WL-DATA in our case, word-based
MCE/GPD algorithm (Juang and Katagiri, 1992;
Chou, 2000) was applied to improve the EM-trained
acoustic models.
We started with a baseline system using 40 mono-
phones with 24 mixtures per state. It gives a phoneme
recognition accuracy of 39.9% on the HKTIMIT test set.
The low accuracy perhaps indicates an unexpected lower
Modelling Technique Classification
Acc. of MP-DATA
CIHMM, 24 mixtures 81.50
CIHMM, 24 mixtures + MCE 84.48
PDHMM, 20 mixtures 82.83
PDHMM, 20 mixtures + MCE 85.29
Table 2: Investigation of various modelling techniques on
minimal-pair classification
English proficiency of local students as well as a large
deviation of local English from native American English.
We then investigated PDHMM and MCE training, and
gauged our progress by the classification accuracy of
minimal pairs in the MP-DATA set. The results are tabu-
lated in Table 2.
By using PDHMMs, the inventory of models is only
increased by three times, requiring little additional com-
putational resources. Yet they result in a relative error
reduction of 7.2%. MCE discriminative training gives an
additional relative improvement of about 14?16%.
4 Confidence-based Phoneme Assessment
The assessment of pronunciation accuracy is cast as a
phoneme verification problem. The posterior probabil-
ity of a phoneme is used as the Goodness of Pronunci-
ation measure (GOP), which has been shown in many
works (Witt and Young, 2000; Franco et al, 2000) that it
is a good measure. PLASER computes both a GOP score
and a normalized GOP score for two types of feedback as
will be discussed in Section 5.
When a student runs a PLASER word exercise, s/he
will randomly pick a word from a list and watches its
pronunciation video-clip (PVC). When s/he feels com-
fortable to try s/he records her/his voice speaking the
word. PLASER then computes a confidence-based GOP
for each phoneme in the word as follows.
STEP 1: PLASER consults its dictionary for the stan-
dard phonemic transcription of the word which
should be the same as that of its PVC.
STEP 2: Based on the transcription, forced alignment is
performed on the student?s speech.
STEP 3: For each acoustic segment Xu of phoneme yu
(where u denotes the phoneme index), PLASER
computes its GOP(yu), su, as its posterior probabil-
ity by the following log-likelihood ratio normalized
by its duration Tu:
su = logProb(yu|Xu)
? 1Tu ? log
[
p(Xu|yu)p(yu)?N
k=1 p(Xu|yk)p(yk)
]
(1)
? 1Tu ? log
[ p(Xu|yu)
p(Xu|yjmax)
]
(2)
where N is the number of phonemes, and jmax is
the phoneme model that gives the highest likelihood
of the given segment. This GOP is used with some
thresholds to decide if the phoneme is pronounced
correctly.
In practice, the denominator in Equation 2 is re-
placed by the Viterbi likelihood of the segment given
by a phone loop. Notice that the Viterbi path of
a segment may contain more than one phoneme
model.
STEP 4: Besides the raw GOP score, GOP(yu) = su
computed in STEP 3, a normalized GOP score is
also computed by normalizing the GOP score to the
range [0.0 .. 1.0] using a sigmoid function. That is,
the normalized GOP for the phoneme yu is given by
sigmoid(su) = 11 + exp (??su + ?) (3)
where the parameters ? and ? are empirically found.
The current PLASER implementation has some mod-
ifications due to practical reasons: The phone loop for
computing the denominator of Equation 2 uses only the
middle-position PDHMM of each phoneme plus the si-
lence and short pause models for faster computation. For
greater computation savings, the phone loop may also be
replaced by a single Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM)
trained by all phoneme segments in the training data. In
our experience, a GMM with 32 mixtures suffices with a
slight degradation in performance.
5 Visualization of Recognition Results
Two kinds of feedback of different resolutions are given
for the word exercise:
? an overall phoneme score of the whole word; and,
? a phoneme-by-phoneme assessment by a 3-color
scheme.
5.1 Overall Phoneme Score of a Word
The use of posterior probability as the GOP score for as-
sessing the accuracy of a phoneme segment allows us to
readily define an overall phoneme score (PS) for a word
as a weighted sum of the normalized GOPs of its com-
posing phonemes:
PS(word) =
N?
k=1
wk ? normalized-GOP(phonemek) (4)
where wk is the weighting of the k-th phoneme among
the N phonemes composing the word. In the current
PLASER, all phonemes in a word are equally weighted.
5.2 A 3-Color Feedback Scheme for Phoneme
Confidence
The usefulness of an overall confidence for a word may
be limited as it does not pinpoint the pronunciation accu-
racy of each phoneme in the word, and thus, the user still
does not know how to correct his mistakes when the score
is not good. Any attempt to report phoneme confidence
score has to face the following two problems:
? unless users can read phonemic transcriptions, it
is not clear how to report the confidence scores at
phoneme level; and,
? unless the phoneme confidence scores are highly re-
liable, reporting its precise value may be too risky.
Our solution is a visual feedback that gives a color to
the letters in the word spelling to indicate the pronuncia-
tion accuracy of their associated phonemes. To do that,
STEP 1: We first designed a rule-based algorithm to
map each phoneme in the transcription of a
word to its spelling letters. For example, for
the word ?beat? with the phonemic transcrip-
tion ?/b/ /iy/ /t/?, the three phonemes are
mapped to the letters ?b?, ?ea? and ?t? respec-
tively. On the other hand, for the word ?eve? with
the phonemic transcription ?/iy/ /v/?, the two
phonemes are mapped to the letters ?e? and ?v? re-
spectively while the last letter ?e? is not mapped to
any phoneme.
STEP 2: A novel 3-color scheme was devised to reduce
the preciseness of phoneme confidence scores. Two
thresholds were found for each phoneme to label its
confidence as good, fair, or bad. If the confidence
score of a phoneme is good/fair/bad, its correspond-
ing spelling letter(s) is/are painted in blue/green/red
respectively. Two examples are shown in Fig. 2. The
use of colors is also more appealing to users.
To find the two thresholds in the 3-color scheme, we
treated the problem as a bi-threshold verification prob-
lem. The detailed algorithm is beyond the scope of this
paper and will only be briefly described here. For details,
please refer to (Ho and Mak, 2003).
Firstly, one has to decide how forgiving one wants to
be and specifies the following two figures:
? the false acceptance rate (FA) for an incorrectly pro-
nounced phoneme; and,
? the false rejection rate (FR) for a correctly pro-
nounced phoneme.
If one sets FA very low, it will be hard to get ?blue?
scores; on the other hand, if one sets FR very low, it may
be too forgiving and ?red? scores will rarely show up.
Due to its bi-threshold nature, it turns out that in such cir-
cumstances, simple method to determine the two thresh-
olds will results in dominating ?green? scores with little
?blue? or ?red? scores. The more complicated algorithm
in (Ho and Mak, 2003) tries to avoid that.
Furthermore, due to scarcity of training data in the
development data set, the phonemes were grouped into
9 phoneme classes in PLASER, and class-dependent
thresholds were determined from the development data
set. The 9 phoneme classes are: affricates, diphthongs,
fricatives, nasals, semi-vowels, stops, back vowels, mid
vowels, and front vowels.
b e a t
bad
goodfair
(a) beat
e
unused
goodfair
v e
(b) eve
Figure 2: A three-color scheme for showing phoneme
confidence (The figure has to be read with color print-
outs, or electronically on a color display. The letters
marked with ?bad?, ?fair?, ?good?, and ?unused? are
painted in red, green, blue, and gray respectively.)
6 Evaluation
A beta version of PLASER was tested by 900 students of
Grade Seven and Eight over a period of about 3 months
in twelve high schools. Both quantitative and qualitative
evaluations were conducted to gauge the effectiveness of
using PLASER to learn English pronunciation.
6.1 Quantitative Evaluation
A pronunciation test consisting of speaking 60 words
was conducted once before a student even started to
use PLASER and once after they finished the 3-month
PLASER trial. The recordings from 210 students were
successfully collected. Recordings were not obtained
from the rest of students for various reasons:
? Some schools did not have time to do the evaluation
recordings due to schedule problems.
? Some recordings were poorly administered; e.g.
parts of utterances were missing in the files.
? Some schools accidently erased or lost the recorded
speech files in their computers.
At the end, recordings from 210 students were found to
be good enough for evaluation. Their recordings were
transcribed and compared with the correct transcriptions
to find their pronunciation accuracies. The two his-
tograms in Fig. 3 summarize their pronunciation accura-
cies of the 60 words before and after they practiced with
PLASER. Here are some detailed statistics:
? 73% of the students had their pronunciation accu-
racy improved by an average of (absolute) 4.53%.
? The remaining 27% of the students got worse for
unknown reasons by an average of 2.68%.
? Collectively we observe an obvious improvement:
the mean accuracy after the use of PLASER is
greater than that before using PLASER, and the
mean difference is statistically significant at the 99%
confidence level.
6.2 Qualitative Evaluation
In addition, a questionnaire survey was conducted to get
comments and suggestions from teachers and students af-
ter they finished the study. Some figures are worth men-
tioning:
? 77% of the students believed that their pronuncia-
tion skill was improved after using PLASER while
91% of school teachers believed their students? pro-
nunciation had improved.
? 77% of the students like to use PLASER to learn
English pronunciation.
? 53% of the students preferred using PLASER to the
traditional classroom teaching method to learn En-
glish pronunciation while 73% of the teachers would
prefer their students using PLASER to self-learn
pronunciation.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0-0.499 0.5-0.549 0.55-0.599 0.6-0.649 0.65-0.699 0.7-0.749 0.75-0.799 0.8-0.849 0.85-0.99Pronunciation Correctness (min. = 0.0; max = 1.0)
N
u
m
b
e
r
 
o
f
 
S
t
u
d
e
n
t
s
before using PLASER
after using PLASER
Figure 3: Results of the pronunciation evaluation test
? All teachers would recommend their students to use
PLASER to learn English pronunciation.
7 Discussion & Future Works
More work is being planned to further improve
PLASER?s performance. Robustness is the key problem.
In the school environment, one simply cannot expect the
students to use learning tools quietly. In addition, about
forty students use a language laboratory at the same time.
Since the headset microphones available in all schools are
not uni-directional, recordings from neighboring students
are picked up on top of the user?s. This kind of ?bab-
ble noise? hurts PLASER?s performance to a great ex-
tent: not only does it affect the accuracy of our phoneme
recognizer, various thresholds used in our confidence-
based scoring and noise rejection are affected too. Var-
ious well-known robust techniques such as spectral sub-
traction (Boll, 1979), MLLR adaptation (Leggetter and
Woodland, 1995), parallel model combination (Gales and
Young, 1996), and stochastic matching (Sankar and Lee,
1996), etc. are being investigated.
To further improve phoneme discrimination, we are
trying to build statistical models to test the presence of
articulatory features in each phoneme (Leung and Siu,
2003). The outcome of the test will be a posterior prob-
ability of an articulatory feature which will then be com-
bined with the score from the acoustic models with the
hope to give even better accuracy.
Finally, the recognizer has to be optimized for the
slower machines used in many local schools.
8 Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Hong Kong Quality Edu-
cation Fund under the grant number QEF99/00.EG01.
References
S.F. Boll. 1979. Suppression of Acoustic Noise in
Speech Using Spectral Subtraction. IEEE Transac-
tions on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing,
24:113?120.
W. Chou. 2000. Discriminant-Function-Based Mini-
mum Recognition Error Rate Pattern-Recognition Ap-
proach to Speech Recognition. Proceedings of the
IEEE, 88(8):1201?1223, August.
H. Franco, L. Neumeyer, V. Digalakis, and O. Ronen.
2000. Combination of Machine Scores for Automatic
Grading of Pronunciation Quality. Speech Communi-
cations, 30(2?3):121?130, Feb.
M.J.F. Gales and S.J. Young. 1996. Robust Continuous
Speech Recognition Using Parallel Model Combina-
tion. IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Pro-
cessing, 4(5):352?359, September.
Simon Ho and Brian Mak. 2003. English Pronuncia-
tion Evaluation as a Bi-threshold Phoneme Verification
Problem. In Proceedings of the European Conference
on Speech Communication and Technology, (submit-
ted).
B.H. Juang and S. Katagiri. 1992. Discriminative Train-
ing for Minimum Error Classification. IEEE Transac-
tion on Signal Processing, 40(12):3043?3054, Dec.
G. Kawai and K. Hirose. 2000. Teaching the Pro-
nunciation of Japanese Double-mora Phonemes using
Speech Recognition Technology. Speech Communica-
tions, 30(2?3):83?93, Feb.
C.J. Leggetter and P.C. Woodland. 1995. Maximum
Likelihood Linear Regression for Speaker Adaptation
of Continuous Density Hidden Markov Models. Jour-
nal of Computer Speech and Language, 9(2):171?185,
April.
K. Y. Leung and M. H. Siu. 2003. Phone Level
Confidence Measure Using Articulatory Features. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing.
J. Mostow, S. Roth, A. G. Hauptmann, and M. Kane.
1994. A Prototype Reading Coach that Listens. In
Proceedings of the Twelfth National Conference on Ar-
tificial Intelligence (AAAI-94), American Association
for Artificial Intelligence, pages 785?792.
L. Neumeyer, H. Franco, V. Digalakis, and M. Weintraub.
2000. Automatic Scoring of Pronunciation Quality.
Speech Communications, 30(2?3):83?93, Feb.
A. Sankar and C.H. Lee. 1996. A Maximum-Likelihood
Approach to Stochastic Matching for Robust Speech
Recognition. IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio
Processing, 4(3):190?202.
S.M. Witt and S.J. Young. 2000. Phone-level Pronuncia-
tion Scoring and Assessment for Interactive Language
Learning. Speech Communications, 30(2?3):95?108,
Feb.
