Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP 2005 Demonstration Abstracts, page 1,
Vancouver, October 2005.
Automatic Detection of Translation Errors: The State of the Art
Graham Russell and Ngoc Tran Nguyen
IIT?ILT, National Research Council Canada
RALI-DIRO, Universite? de Montre?al?
{russell,nguyentt}@iro.umontreal.ca
George Foster
IIT?ILT, National Research Council Canada?
george.foster@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca
1 Background
The demonstration presents TransCheck, a transla-
tion quality-assurance tool developed jointly by the
RALI group at the University of Montreal and the
Interactive Language Technologies section of the
Canadian National Research Council?s Institute for
Information Technology.
The system differs from other similar tools in
the range of error-types targeted, and the underly-
ing mechanisms employed. The demonstration il-
lustrates the operation of the system and gives the
rationale for its design and capabilities. The version
demonstrated accepts input in English and French.
2 System Overview
A modular architecture promotes flexibility (ease
of adaptation to new domains, client requirements
and language pairs) and extensibility (incorporation
of new error-detector components as they become
available).
In a transparent preprocessing stage, source and
target texts are read and aligned. The resulting
stream of alignment regions is passed to a set of in-
dependent error-detection modules, each of which
records errors in a global table for subsequent report
generation. Certain of the error-detection compo-
nents make use of external data in the form of lexical
and other language resources.
3 Translation Errors
The difficulty of general-case translation error detec-
tion is discussed. Several classes of feasible errors
?C.P. 6128, succ. Centre-ville, Montre?al QC, Canada H3C 3J7
?University of Quebec en Outaouais, Lucien Brault Pavilion,
101 St-Jean-Bosco Street, Gatineau QC, Canada K1A 0R6
are identified, and the technological capabilities re-
quired for their successful detection described.
Detection of incorrect terminology usage, for ex-
ample, requires the ability to recognize correspon-
dences between source and target language expres-
sions, and to generalize over different realizations of
a given term; inflection, coordination and anaphora
combine to render inadequate solutions based solely
on simple static lists of term pairs. ?Negative termi-
nology?, covering false friends, deceptive cognates,
Anglicisms, etc., is rather more challenging, and
can benefit from a more precise notion of transla-
tional correspondence. Proper names pose a range of
problems, including referential disambiguation and
varying conventions regarding transliteration, while
a broad class of paralinguistic phenomena (num-
bers, dates, product codes, etc.) raise yet others in
the area of monolingual analysis and translational
equivalence. Omissions and insertions constitute a
final error class; these present particular difficulties
of recognition and interpretation, and are best ad-
dressed heuristically.
The current TransCheck system targets the error
types mentioned above. Each is exemplified and
discussed, together with the elements of language
technology which permit their detection: dictionar-
ies, shallow parsing, alignment, translation models,
etc.
Experience gained in preliminary user trials is
briefly reported and a variety of usage scenarios con-
sidered. Finally, some comparisons are made with
other translation tools, including other proposals for
translation error detection.
1
