Proceedings of the ACL Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions,
pages 69?72, Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Word Alignment and Cross-Lingual Resource Acquisition ?
Carol Nichols and Rebecca Hwa
Department of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
{cln23,hwa}@cs.pitt.edu
Abstract
Annotated corpora are valuable resources
for developing Natural Language Process-
ing applications. This work focuses on
acquiring annotated data for multilingual
processing applications. We present an
annotation environment that supports a
web-based user-interface for acquiring word
alignments between English and Chinese as
well as a visualization tool for researchers
to explore the annotated data.
1 Introduction
The performance of many Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) applications can be improved through
supervised machine learning techniques that train
systems with annotated training examples. For ex-
ample, a part-of-speech (POS) tagger might be in-
duced from words that have been annotated with
the correct POS tags. A limitation to the super-
vised approach is that the annotation is typically
performed manually. This poses as a challenge in
three ways. First, researchers must develop a com-
prehensive annotation guideline for the annotators
to follow. Guideline development is difficult because
researchers must be specific enough so that different
annotators? work will be comparable, but also gen-
eral enough to allow the annotators to make their
own linguistic judgments. Reported experiences of
previous annotation projects suggest that guideline
development is both an art and a science and is itself
?This work has been supported, in part, by CRA-
W Distributed Mentor Program. We thank Karina Iva-
netich, David Chiang, and the NLP group at Pitt for
helpful feedbacks on the user interfaces; Wanwan Zhang
and Ying-Ju Suen for testing the system; and the anony-
mous reviewers for their comments on the paper.
a time-consuming process (Litman and Pan, 2002;
Marcus et al, 1993; Xia et al, 2000; Wiebe, 2002).
Second, it is common for the annotators to make
mistakes, so some form of consistency check is nec-
essary. Third, the entire process (guideline develop-
ment, annotation, and error corrections) may have
to be repeated with new domains.
This work focuses on the first two challenges: help-
ing researchers to design better guidelines and to col-
lect a large set of consistently labeled data from hu-
man annotators. Our annotation environment con-
sists of two pieces of software: a user interface for
the annotators and a visualization tool for the re-
searchers to examine the data. The data-collection
interface asks the users to make lexical and phrasal
mappings (word alignments) between the two lan-
guages. Some studies suggest that supervised word
aligned data may improve machine translation per-
formance (Callison-Burch et al, 2004). The inter-
face can also be configured to ask the annotators
to correct projected annotated resources. The idea
of projecting English annotation resources across
word alignments has been explored in several studies
(Yarowsky and Ngai, 2001; Hwa et al, 2005; Smith
and Smith, 2004). Currently, our annotation inter-
face is configured for correcting projected POS tag-
ging for Chinese. The visualization tool aggregates
the annotators? work, takes various statistics, and vi-
sually displays the aggregate information. Our goal
is to aid the researchers conducting the experiment
to identify noise in the annotations as well as prob-
lematic constructs for which the guidelines should
provide further clarifications.
Our longer-term plan is to use this framework to
support active learning (Cohn et al, 1996), a ma-
chine learning approach that aims to reduce the num-
ber of training examples needed by the system when
it is provided with more informative training exam-
69
ples. We believe that through a combination of an in-
tuitive annotation interface, a visualization tool that
checks for style and quality consistency, and appro-
priate active learning techniques, we can make su-
pervised training more effective for developing mul-
tilingual applications.
2 Annotation Interface
One way to acquire annotations quickly is to appeal
to users across the Internet. First, we are more likely
to find annotators with the necessary qualifications.
Second, many more users can work simultaneously
than would be feasible to physically host in a lab.
Third, having many users annotate the same data
allows us to easily identify systematic problems as
well as spurious mistakes. The OpenMind Initiative
(Stork, 2001) has had success collecting information
that could not be obtained from data mining tools
or with a local small group of annotators.
Collecting data from users over the Internet in-
troduces complications. Since we cannot ascertain
the computer skills of the annotators, the interface
must be easy to use. Our interface is a JAVA ap-
plet on a webpage so that it is platform indepen-
dent. An online tutorial is also provided (and re-
quired for first-time users). Another problem of so-
liciting unknown users for data is the possibility of
receiving garbage data created by users who do not
have sufficient knowledge or are maliciously entering
random input. Our system minimizes this risk in
several ways. First, new users are required to work
through the tutorial, which also serves as a short
guide to reduce stylistic differences between the an-
notators. Second, we require the same data to be
labeled by multiple people to ensure reliability, and
researchers can use the visualization tool (see Section
3) to compare the agreement rates between annota-
tors. Finally, our program is designed with a filter for
malicious users. After completing the tutorial, the
user is given a randomly selected sample sentence
(for which we already have verified alignments) to
annotate. The user must obtain an F-measure agree-
ment of 60% with the ?correct? alignments in order
to be allowed to annotate sentences.1
Because word alignment annotation is a useful re-
source for both training and testing, quite a few in-
terfaces have already been developed. The earliest
1The correct alignments were performed by two
trained annotators who had an average agreement rate
of about 85%. We chose 60% to be the figure of merit
because this level is nearly impossible to obtain through
random guessing but is lenient enough to allow for the in-
experience of first time users. Automatic computer align-
ments average around 50%.
is the Blinker Project (Melamed, 1998); more re-
cent systems have been released to support more lan-
guages and visualization features (Ahrenberg et al,
2003; Lambert and Castell, 2004). 2 Our interface
does share some similarities with these systems, but
it is designed with additional features to support our
experimental goals of guideline development, active
learning and resource projection. Following the ex-
perimental design proposed by Och and Ney (2000),
we instruct the annotators to indicate their level of
confidence by choosing sure or unsure for each align-
ment they made. This allows researchers to identify
areas where the translation may be unclear or diffi-
cult. We provide a text area for comments on each
sentence so that the annotator may explain any as-
sumptions or problems. A hidden timer records how
long each user spends on each sentence in order to
gauge the difficulty of the sentence; this information
will be a useful measurement of the effectiveness of
different active learning algorithms. Finally, our in-
terface supports cross projection annotation. As an
initial study, we have focused on POS tagging, but
the framework can be extended for other types of
resources such as syntactic and semantic trees and
can be configured for languages other than English
and Chinese. When words are aligned, the known
and displayed English POS tag of the last English
word involved in the alignment group is automati-
cally projected onto all Chinese words involved, but
a drop-down menu allows the user to correct this if
the projection is erroneous. A screenshot of the in-
terface is provided in Figure 1a.
3 Tools for Researchers
Good training examples for NLP learning systems
should have a high level of consistency and accuracy.
We have developed a set of tools for researchers to
visualize, compare, and analyze the work of the an-
notators. The main interface is a JAVA applet that
provides a visual representation of all the alignments
superimposed onto each other in a grid.
For the purposes of error detection, our system
provides statistics for researchers to determine the
agreement rates between the annotators. The metric
we use is Cohen?s K (1960), which is computed for ev-
ery sentence across all users? alignments. Cohen?s K
is a measure of agreement that takes the total prob-
ability of agreement, subtracts the probability the
agreement is due to chance, and divides by the max-
imum agreement possible. We use a variant of the
2Rada Mihalcea maintains an alignment resource
repository (http://www.cs.unt.edu/~rada/wa) that
contains other downloadable interface packages that do
not have companion papers.
70
 
 
(a) (b)
Figure 1: (a) A screenshot of the word alignment user-interface. (b) A screenshot of the visualization tool
for analyzing multiple annotators? alignments.
equation that allows for having three or more judges
(Davies and Fleiss, 1982). The measurement ranges
from 0 (chance agreement) to 1 (perfect agreement).
For any selected sentence, we also compute for each
annotator an average pair-wise Cohen?s K against all
other users who aligned this sentence.3 This statistic
may be useful in several ways. First, someone with a
consistently low score may not have enough knowl-
edge to perform the task (or is malicious). Second,
if an annotator received an unusually low score for
a particular sentence, it might indicate that the per-
son made mistakes in that sentence. Third, if there is
too much disagreement among all users, the sentence
might be a poor example to be included.
In addition to catching individual annotation er-
rors, it is also important to minimize stylistic incon-
sistencies. These are differences in the ways different
annotators (consistently) handle the same phenom-
ena. A common scenario is that some function words
in one language do not have an equivalent counter-
part in the other language. Without a precise guide-
line ruling, some annotators always leave the func-
tion words unaligned while others always group the
function words together with nearby content words.
Our tool can be useful in developing and improving
style guides. It highlights the potential areas that
need further clarifications in the guidelines with an
at-a-glance visual summary of where and how the an-
notators differed in their work. Each cell in the grid
represents an alignment between one particular word
in the English sentence and one particular word in
the Chinese sentence. A white cell means no one pro-
posed an alignment between the words. Each colored
cell has two components: an upper green portion in-
3not shown in the screenshot here.
dicating a sure alignment and a lower yellow portion
indicating an unsure alignment. The proportion of
these components indicates the ratio of the number
of people who marked this alignment as sure to those
who were unsure (thus, an all-green cell means that
everyone who aligned these words together is sure).
Moreover, we use different saturation in the cells to
indicate the percentage of people who aligned the
two words together. A cell with faint colors means
that most people did not chose to align these words
together. Furthermore, researchers can elect to view
the annotation decisions of a particular user by click-
ing on the radio buttons below. Only the selected
user?s annotation decisions would be highlighted by
red outlines (i.e., only around the green portions of
those cells that the person chose sure and around the
yellow portions of this person?s unsure alignments).
Figure 1b displays the result of three annotators?
alignments of a sample sentence pair. This sentence
seems reasonably easy to annotate. Most of the col-
ored cells have a high saturation, showing that the
annotators agree on the words to be aligned. Most
of the cells are only green, showing that the anno-
tators are sure of their decisions. Three out of the
four unsure alignments coincide with the other an-
notators? sure alignments, and even in those cases,
more annotators are sure than unsure (the green ar-
eas are 2/3 of the cells while the yellow areas are
1/3). The colored cells with low saturation indicate
potential outliers. Comparing individual annotator?s
alignments against the composite, we find that one
annotator, rh, may be a potential outlier annota-
tor since this person generated the most number of
lightly saturated cells. The person does not appear
to be malicious since the three people?s overall agree-
ments are high. To determine whether the conflict
71
arises from stylistic differences or from careless mis-
takes, researchers can click on the disputed cell (a
cross will appear) to see the corresponding English
and Chinese words in the text boxes in the top and
left margin.
Different patterns in the visualization will indicate
different problems. If the visualization patterns re-
veal a great deal of disagreement and unsure align-
ments overall, we might conclude that the sentence
pair is a bad translation; if the disagreement is local-
ized, this may indicate the presence of an idiom or
a structure that does not translate word-for-word.
Repeated occurrences of a pattern may suggest a
stylistic inconsistency that should be addressed in
the guidelines. Ultimately, each area of wide dis-
agreement will require further analysis in order to
determine which of these problems is occurring.
4 Conclusion and Future Work
In summary, we have presented an annotation envi-
ronment for acquiring word alignments between En-
glish and Chinese as well as Part-Of-Speech tags for
Chinese. The system is in place and the annotation
process is underway.4
Once we have collected a medium-sized corpus, we
will begin exploring different active learning tech-
niques. Our goal is to find the best way to assign
utility scores to the as-of-yet unlabeled sentences in
order to obtain the greatest improvement in word
alignment accuracy. Potential information useful for
this task includes various measurements of the com-
plexity of the sentence such as the rate of (auto-
matic) alignments that are not one-to-one, the num-
ber of low-frequency words, and the number of po-
tential language divergences (for example, many En-
glish verbs are nominalized in Chinese), and the co-
occurrence of word pairs deemed to be unsure by the
annotators in other contexts. Furthermore, we be-
lieve that the aggregate visualization tool will also
help us uncover additional characteristics of poten-
tially informative training examples.
References
Lars Ahrenberg, Magnus Merkel, and Michael Petterst-
edt. 2003. Interactive word alignment for language en-
gineering. In Proceedings from EACL 2003, Budapest.
Christopher Callison-Burch, David Talbot, and Miles Os-
borne. 2004. Statistical machine translation with
4The annotation interface is
open to public. Please visit
http://flan.cs.pitt.edu/~hwa/align/align.html
word- and sentence-aligned parallel corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, July.
J. Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nominal
scales. Educational and Psychological Meas., 20:37?46.
David A. Cohn, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Michael I. Jor-
dan. 1996. Active learning with statistical models.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 4:129?145.
M. Davies and J. Fleiss. 1982. Measuring agreement for
multinomial data. Biometrics, 38:1047?1051.
Rebecca Hwa, Philip Resnik, Amy Weinberg, Clara
Cabezas, and Okan Kolak. 2005. Bootstrapping
parsers via syntactic projection across parallel texts.
Journal of Natural Language Engineering. To appear.
Patrik Lambert and Nuria Castell. 2004. Alignment
of parallel corpora exploiting asymmetrically aligned
phrases. In Proc. of the LREC 2004 Workshop on the
Amazing Utility of Parallel and Comparable Corpora,
May.
Diane Litman and S. Pan. 2002. Desiging and evaluating
an adaptive spoken dialogue system. User Modeling
and User-adapted Interaction, 12(2/3):111?137.
Mitchell Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated cor-
pus of English: the Penn Treebank. Computational
Linguistics, 19(2):313?330.
I. Dan Melamed. 1998. Annotation style guide for the
blinker project. Technical Report IRCS 98-06, Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2000. Improved sta-
tistical alignment models. In Proceedings of the 38th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 440?447.
David A. Smith and Noah A. Smith. 2004. Bilingual
parsing with factored estimation: Using english to
parse korean. In Proceedings of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
David G Stork. 2001. Toward a computational theory
of data acquisition and truthing. In Proceedings of
Computational Learning Theory (COLT 01).
J. Wiebe. 2002. Instructions for annotating opinions
in newspaper articles. Technical Report TR-02-101,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Fei Xia, Martha Palmer, Nianwen Xue, Mary Ellen
Ocurowski, John Kovarik, Fu-Dong Chiou, Shizhe
Huang, Tony Kroch, and Mitch Marcus. 2000. Devel-
oping guidelines and ensuring consistency for chinese
text annotation. In Proceedings of the Second Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference, Athens,
Greece, June.
David Yarowsky and Grace Ngai. 2001. Inducing multi-
lingual pos taggers and np bracketers via robust pro-
jection across aligned corpora. In Proceedings of the
Second Meeting of the North American Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 200?207.
72
