Improving SMT quality with morpho-syntactic analysis 
Sonja Nief lcn and Hcrmann Ney 
Lehrstuhl  fiir hf lbr lnatik VI 
Computer  Science Department  
RWTH University of Technology Aachen 
D-52056 Aachen, Germany 
Email: n iessen@in?ormat ik ,  rwth -aachen,  de 
Abst ract  
In the framework of statistical machine transla- 
tion (SMT), correspondences between the words 
in the source and the target language are 
learned from bilingual corpora on the basis of 
so-called alignment mode, Is. Many of the sta- 
tistical systems use little or no linguistic know- 
ledge to structure the underlying models. In 
this paper we argue that training data is typical- 
ly not large enough to sutficiently represent the 
range of different phenomena in natural angua- 
ges and that SMT can take advantage of the ex- 
plicit introduction of some knowledge about the 
lmlgnages under consideration. The improve- 
ment of the translation results is demonstrated 
on two ditferent German-English corpora. 
1 I n t roduct ion  
In this pal)er, we address the question of how 
morl)hological and syntactic analysis can help 
statistical machine translation (SMT). In our 
apl)roach, we introduce several transtbrmations 
to the source string (in our experiments the 
source language is German) to demonstrate how 
linguistic knowledge can improve translation re- 
suits especially in the cases where, the token- 
type ratio (nmnber of training words versus 
nmnber of vocabulary entries) is unthvorable. 
After reviewing the statistical approach to 
machine translation, we first explain our mo- 
tivation for examining additional knowledge 
sources. We then present our approach in detail. 
Ext)erimental results on two bilingual German- 
English tasks are reported, namely the VERB- 
MOBIL  and the EUTRANS task. Finally, we give 
an outlook on our fllture work. 
2 Stat i s t i ca l  Mach ine  Trans la t ion  
The goal of the translation process in statistical 
machine translation can l)e fornmlated as tbl- 
lows: A source language string .f~ = f l . . .  f.! 
is to be translated into a target language string 
c\[ =- e l . . .  el. In the experiments reported in 
this paper, the source language is German and 
the target language is English. Every English 
string is considered as a possible translation for 
the intmt. If we assign a probability P'r(e\[lfi/) 
to each pair of strings (el, fi/), then according to 
Bayes' decision rule, we have to choose the En- 
glish string that maximizes the I)roduct of the 
English language model Pr(c{) and the string 
translation model r'r(fff\[e{). 
Many existing systems tbr SMT (Wang and 
Waibel, 1997; Niefien et al, 1.(/98; Och and We- 
ber, 1998) make use of a special way of structur- 
ing the string translation model (Brown et al, 
1993): 'l?he correspondence b tween the words 
in the source and the target string is described 
by aligmuents that assign one target word posi- 
tion to each source word position. The prob- 
ability of a certain English word to occur in 
the target string is assumed to depend basically 
only on the source word aligned to it. It is clear 
that this assumption is not always valid tbr the 
translation of naturM languages. It turns out 
that even those approaches that relax the word- 
by-word assumption like (Och et al, 1999) have 
problems with lnany phenomena typical of nat- 
ural languages in general and German in par- 
titular like 
? idiomatic expressions; 
? colnpound words that have to be translated 
by more than one word; 
? long range dependencies like prefixes of 
verbs placed at the end of the sentence; 
? ambiguous words with different meanings 
dependent on the context. 
1081 
Tile parameters of the statistical knowledge 
sources nlentioned above are trained on bi- 
lingual corpora. Bearing ill mind that more 
than 40% of the word tbrms have only been seen 
once in training (see q~,bles 1 and 4), it is obvi- 
ous that the phenomena listed above can hardly 
be learned adequately from the data and that 
the explicit introduction of linguistic knowledge 
is expected to improve translation quality. 
The overall architecture of the statistical 
translation approach is depicted in Figure 1. hi 
this figure we already anticipate the t'aet that 
we will transtbrm the source strings in a certain 
manner. If necessary we can also apply the in- 
verse of these transfbrmations on the produced 
output strings. Ill Section 3 we explain in detail 
which kinds of transtbrmations we apply. 
Source Language Text 
1 
QTransformation ) 
1' fl 
Global Search: 
maximize Pr(el). Pr(f~ lel) 
over e I 
1 I 
l 
Target Language Text 
l J I ~ Lexicon Model Pr(l 1 \]e,) \[ 
Alignment Model \] 
Language Model 
Figure 1.: Architecture of the translation 31)- 
preach based on Bwes' decision rule. 
3 Ana lys is  and  Trans format ion  of  
the Input  
As already pointed ouL we used the inethod 
of transforming the inl)ut string in our experi- 
ments. The advantage of this approach is that 
existing training and search procedures did not 
have to be adapted to new nlodels incorporat- 
ing the information under consideration. On the 
other hand, it would be more elegant to leave 
the decision between different readings, tbr in- 
stance, to the overall decision process in search. 
Tile transtbrmation method however is nlore 3(t- 
equate tbr the preliminary identification of those 
phenonmna relevant br improving the transla- 
tion results. 
3.1 Analysis 
We used GERTWOL,  a German Morphologi- 
cal Analyser (Haapalainen and M~@)rin, 1995) 
and the Constraint Grammar Parser Ibr Ger- 
man GERCG tbr lexical analysis and inorpho- 
logical and syntactic dismnbiguation. For a de- 
scription of the Constraint Grammar approach 
we refer the reader to (Karlsson, 1990). Some 
prel)rocessing was necessary to meet the input 
format requirements of the tools, hi the cases 
where the tools returned lnore thalt one reading, 
either simple heuristics based on domain spe- 
cific pretbrence ruh;s where at)plied or a nlore 
general, non-mnbiguous analysis was used. 
In the following subsections we list some 
transtbrmations we have tested. 
3.2 Separated German Verbprefixes 
Sortie verbs in German consist of a main part 
and a detachable prefix which can be shifted 
to the end of the clause, e.g. "losfahren" ("to 
leave") in the sentence "Ich fahre morgen los.". 
We extr~cted all word forms of separable verbs 
fl:om th.e training corl)us. The resulting list con- 
tains entries of the tbrm prefixlmain. The en- 
try "los\[t:'ahre" indicates, fi)r exalnple, that the 
prefix "los" (:an l)e detached flom the word tbrm 
"fahre". In all clauses containing a word match- 
ing a main part and a word matching the corre- 
sponding prefix part occuring at the end of the 
clause, the prefix is prepended to the beginning 
of the main part, as in "Ich losfahre morgen." 
a.a German Compound Words 
German comt)(mnd words pose special 1)roblems 
to the robustness of a translation method, be- 
cause the word itself must be represented in the 
training data: the occurence of each of the coin- 
t)onents is not enough. The word "I~'iichtetee" 
tbr example can not be translated although its 
coml)onents "Friichte" and "Tee" appear in the 
training set of EUTRANS. Besides, even if the 
coml)ound occurs in training, tile training algo- 
r ithm may not be capable of translating it prop- 
erly as two words (in the nlentioned case the 
words "fl'uit" and "tea") due to the word align- 
ment assumption mentioned in Section 2. We 
1082 
therefore split the COml)ound words into their 
(:Oml)onents. 
3,,4 Annotat ion  w i th  POS Tags  
()he way of hell)|rig the disanfl)iguation of gill- 
t)Jguous words is to annotate them with their 
t)m:l; of Sl)eech (POS) inl'()rmation. We (:hose l;he 
tbllowing very ti'equent short words that often 
(:;rased errors in translation fi)r VERBMO\]3IL: 
"aber"  can 1)e adverb or (:onjun('tion. 
"zu"  can l)e adverb, pret)osition , sepnrated 
verb prefix or infinitive marker. 
%ler' ,  "die" and "das" cnn 17e definite m:ti- 
CIos el' \])1"Ol1Ol111S. 
'.\['he difficulties due to l;hese aml)iguities m:e 
i l lustrated by the fi)lh)wing exmnt)les: The sen- 
tence "Das wiird(' mir sehr gut 1)~ssen. '' is often 
trnnslnted 1)y "Th, e would suit me very well." 
iltsl;e;~(l ()\[ "5l'h,at would suit me very well." and 
"Das win: zu s(:lmcll." is trnnsl;~ted by "Th~Lt 
was to t'~lsl;." instea,(t of "Theft; was too f;~st;.". 
We alTpended the POS l;~g in training a,mt 
t(;st corpus fiTr the VERBMOBII, task (see 4.\]). 
3.5 Merg ing  Phrases  
Some multi-word phrases as ~ whole rel)r(;sent 
a distine(; synta.7"tie rob; in (;he s(mtenT:e. The 
17hra.se "irgend ('.t;w;ls" (%nything")  for exa,m- 
t)1(; m~y form ('it, l,('a: a.n in(h'tinit;('. (h'.t;('.rmino.r 
():c an in(lelinil;e pronoun. Like 2\] other mull;i- 
word tThrases "irg(:nd-et;wa.s" is merged in order 
t;o form one single voca,bulary ('nl;ry. 
3.6 Treatment  o f  Unseen Words  
l"or sl;atist;i(::fl ma(:hin(; tr;mslation it is difficult 
1;() handle woi'ds not seen in training. \]~br m> 
kllOWll i)l;O1)el; ll&llIeS~ i\[; is normally ('(TrreT't to 
t)bme the word un(;h~mge(t into th(; transl~fl;ion. 
We have t)(;(;n working on the l;17ea~l;nlenI; of 1111- 
kll()Wll words of other types. As ~flr(;~dy men- 
l;ioned in Se(:l;ion 3.3, the st)litting of eomt)ound 
words cml reduce |;he nmnber of unknown Cl(:r- 
man words. 
In addit ion, we have examined methods of r(> 
pl~('ing a word \['ullform l)y ~ more ;O)stra('l; word 
form nnd (-heek whether this fi)rm is kn()wn and 
(:;~m l)e I;ranslnted. Th(' l;rmlslat, ioll of the sin> 
|)lifted word tbrm is generally not the precis(' 
trmlslai;ion of the original on(', 17ul; sometimes 
the intended semantics is conveyed, e.g.: 
"ka l tes"  is ~m adjective in the singular neuter 
fOl;lll &lid. c3~11 be  t,l'a, nst:'ornled to the less 
specilic form "kalt" ("cold"). 
"Jahre" ("years") (:~m be replaced by the sin- 
gulm: form "J~fln:". 
"bene idest "  (%o envy" in tirst person singu- 
lar): if the infinitive tbnn "beneiden" is not 
known, it might hell).just, to remove tim 
leading t)artiele "be". 
4 Trans la t ion  Resu l ts  
We use the SSER (sul)jectivc sentence error 
rat(') (Ni('fien et al, 2000) as evaluation cri- 
t('rion: E~wh translated senten(:e is judged by 
~ tmmmi exmniner according 1;(7 nn error scale 
ti'om 0.0 (semantical ly and syntaeti(:~flly co l  
reef) to 1.0 ((:onlt)h;l;ely wrong). 
4.1 Trans la t ion  Resu l ts  for VEm~MOmL 
Th(, VEI{BM()BII, corpus consists of st)onttme- 
ously spoken dialogs in t;he al)t)oint;ment sch(> 
(hfling domain (Wtflflster, 1993). German sen- 
t;ences ;~re l;ra.nsl;~lx;d inl;o English. The output  
of the st)ee('h re(:ognizer (Ibr example th(; single- 
best hyl)othesis ) is used as int)ut to the tr;ms- 
lation moduh',s. For resem:eh tmri/oses the orig- 
inal l;(;xt st)oken 1)y th(, users can t)7, t)r(;sented 
t() the translal;ion system t;(7 ev~flm~te the MT 
(:omponent set)er~ti;ely from l;hc, re(:ognizT~r. 
'l'h('. tra.ining set (:onsist;s (Tf d5 680 s(;nl;o.n(:e 
pairs. Testing was carried out on ~t seper~te 
set of 14:7 senl;enees l;h~fl; (to not contain any 
mlseen words, hi Table 1 l;he ehara('teristics of 
the training sets are summarized for l;he original 
eort)ns and after l;he ai)plication of the des(:rit)ed 
tr~Lnsfornlat;ion.s on t;he Gerlll}~tll part of l;he co l  
pus. \[l.'he tM)le shows that  on t;his cou)us Ill(', 
splitting of (:Oml)OUll(ts iinl)roves l;hc l;oken-tyl)e 
rntio t iom 59.7 t(7 65.2, lint th(', mmfl)er of singh;- 
tons (words s(;en only on('e in tt'nhfing) does not 
go down by more than 2.8%. '.l'he oth.er trans- 
fi)rm~tions (i)r(;1)ending separated verb 1)refixe,~ 
"t)ref"; mineral;ion wi|;h 1)OS t~gs "i)os"; merg- 
ing of phrases "merge") do not at\[bet hese co> 
pus st;,l;isl;ies much. 
The translntion l)erformmme results are given 
in rl2~fi)le 2 tbr tra.nslat;ion of text and in 'l~fi)le 
3 for translation of t;he single-best hyl)oth(!sis 
given t)y a sl)eech recognizer (a('(:m:a.('y 69%). 
For t)oth cases, l;r;mslation on text ml(t on 
st)ee(:h int)ut , st)litting (:oml)oml(t words does 
1083 
Table 1: Corpus statistics: VERBMOBIL train- 
ing ( "baseline" =no preprocessing). 
preprocessing 
English 465 143 
Gerlnan 
baseline 
verb prefixes 
split compounds 
pos 
pos+merge 
pos+merge+pref 
no. of no. of single- 
tokens types tons 
4382 37.6% 
437968 7335 44.8% 
435 686 7370 44.3% 
442938 6794 42.0% 
437972 7 344 44.8% 
437330 7363 44.7% 
435055 7397 44.2% 
not iml)rove translation quality, but it is not 
harmful either. The treatment of separable pre- 
fixes helps as does annotating some words with 
part of speech inibrmation. Merging of 1)hrases 
does not improve the quality much further. The 
best translations were adfieved with the combi- 
nation of POS-annotation, phrase merging and 
prepending separated verb prefixes. This holds 
tbr t)oth translation of text and of speech input. 
Table 2: Results on VERBMOBIL text intmt. 
preprocessing SSER \[%\] 
baseline 
verb prefixes 
split compounds 
pos 
pos+merge 
pos+merge+pref 
20.3 
19.4 
20.3 
19.7 
19.5 
18.0 
The fact that these hard-coded transtbrma- 
tions are not only hclpflfl on text input, but 
also on speech input is quite encouraging. As 
an example makes clear this cannot be taken 
for granted: The test sentence "Dann fahren 
wir dann los." is recognized as "Dam1 fahren wir 
dann uns." and the tact that separable verbs do 
not occur in their separated form in the train- 
ing data is mffavorable in this case. The fig- 
ures show that in generM the speech recognizer 
output contains enough information for helpflfl 
preprocessing. 
Table 3: Results on VERBMOBIL speech inlmt. 
preprocessing 
baseline 
verb prefixes 
split compounds 
split+pref 
pos+merge+pref 
ssEa \[%1 
43.4 
41.8 
43.1 
42.3 
41.1 
4.2 Translat ion Results for EUTRANS 
The EUTRANS corpus consists of different 
types of German-English texts belonging to the 
tourism domain: web pages of hotels, touris- 
tic brochures and business correspondence. The 
string translation and language model parame- 
ters were trained on 27 028 sentence pairs. The 
200 test sentences contain 150 words never seen 
in training. 
Table 4 summarizes the corpus statistics of 
the training set for the original corpus, af- 
ter splitting of compound words and after ad- 
ditional prepending of seperated verb prefixes 
("split+prefixes"). The splitting of compounds 
improves the token-type ratio flom 8.6 to 12.3 
and the nmnber of words seen only once in train- 
ing reduces by 8.9%. 
Table 4: Corpus statistics: EUTRANS. 
preprocessing no. of 
tokens 
English 562 264 
German 
baseline 
split compounds 
split+prefixes 
499 217 
535 505 
534 676 
no. of single- 
types tons 
33 823 47.1% 
58317 58.9% 
43 405 50.0% 
43 407 49.8% 
Tile mlmber of words in the test sentences 
never seen in training reduces from 150 to 81 by 
compound splitting and can further be reduced 
to 69 by replacing the unknown word forms by 
more general forms. 80 unknown words are en- 
countered when verb prefixes are treated in ad- 
dition to compound splitting. 
Experiments for POS-annotation have not 
been pertbrmed on this corpus because no small 
set of ambiguous words causing many of the 
1084 
translation errors on this |;ask can be identified: 
Comt)ared to |;it(', VERBMOBIL task, this tort)us 
is less homogeneous. Merging of 1)hrases did not 
help much on VEI/,BMOBIL and is theretbre not 
tested here. 
Tal)le 5 shows that the splitting of comt)ound 
words yields an improvement in the subjective 
sentence rror rate of 4.5% and the treatment 
of unknown words ("unk") improves the trans- 
lation quality by an additional 1%. Treating 
SOl)arable verb 1)refixes in addition to splitting 
compounds gives the be, st result so far with an 
improvement of 7.1% absolute COml)ared to the 
l)aseline. 
Table 5: Results on EUTRANS. 
1)ret)rocessing SSER \[%\] 
1)aseline 57.4 
split comi)ounds 52.9 
sl) l it+lmk 51.8 
split+prefixes 50.3 
5 Conclusion and Future Work  
In this paper, we have presented some methods 
of providing morphological im syntactic intbr- 
mat|on tbr improving the 1)ertbrmance of sta- 
tistical machine trallslation. First ext)eriments 
prove their general aplflicalfility to reMistic and 
comI)lex tasks such as spontaneously spoken di- 
alogs. 
We are. 1)lamfing to integrate the al)t)roach 
into the search process. We are also working 
on language models and translation models that 
use mort)hological categories for smoothing in 
the case  of unseen events. 
Acknowledgement. This work was partly 
supported by the German FederM Ministry of 
Education, Science, Research and Technology 
under the Contract Number 01 IV 701 q_'4 
(VERBMOBIL) and as part of the EUTRANS 
project by the European Comnmnity (ESPRIT 
project number 30268). 
The authors would like to thank Gregor 
Leusch tbr his support in implementation. 
References 
P.F. Brown, S.A. Della Pietra, V.J. 
Della Pietra, and ILL. Mercer. 1993. 
Mathematics of Statistical Machine %'ansla- 
tion: Parameter Estimation. Computational 
Linguistics, 19(2):263 311. 
Mariikka Haapalainen and Ari Majorin. 1995. 
GERTWOL und Morphologische Disambi- 
guierung fiir das Deutsche. URL: 
www.lingsoft.fi/doc/gercg/NODALIDA-poster.html. 
Fred Karlsson. 1990. Constraint Grmnmar as 
a Frainework tbr Parsing Running Text. In 
PTvecedings of th, e 13th, hzternational Confer- 
cnce on Computational Linguistics, volume 3, 
pages 168-173, Helsinki, Finland. 
Sonja Niefien, Stephan Vogel, Hermann Ney, 
and Christoph Tilhnann. 1998. A DP based 
Search Algorithm tbr Statistical Machine 
Translation. In Proceedings of the 36th An- 
nual Con:ferencc of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics and the 17th Interna- 
tional Conference on Computational Linguis- 
ties, pages 960 967, Montrdal, P.Q., Canada, 
August. 
Sonja Niefien, Franz loser Oeh, Gregor Leusch, 
and Hermaml Ney. 2000. An Ewfluation Tool 
tbr Machine %'anslation: Fast Evaluation 
for MT Research. In Proceedings of the 2nd 
International Conference on Language Rc- 
so'arccs and Evaluation, pages 39 45, Athens, 
Greece, May. 
Franz .losef Och and Hans Weber. 1998. hn- 
t)roving Statistical Natural Language ~:ans- 
lation with Categories and Rules. In Pro- 
eccdings of the 36th Annual Con.fcrcncc of 
th, e Association for Computational Linguis- 
tics and the 17th international Conference on 
Computational Linguistics, pages 985-989, 
Montrdal, P.Q., Canada, August. 
Iq:anz ,loser Och, Christol)h Tillmmm, aim Her- 
maml Ney. 1999. hnproved Alignment Mod- 
els tbr Statistical Machine Translation. In 
Proceedings of the Co~:ference on Empirical 
Methods in Natu~nl Language Processing and 
Very Large Corpora, pages 20-28, University 
of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, June. 
Wolfgang Wahlster. 1993. Verl)mobih Transla- 
lion of Face-to-Face Dialogs. In Proceedings 
of the MT Summit IV, pages 127-135, Kobe, 
Japan. 
Ye-Yi Wang and Alex Waibel. 1997. Decod- 
ing Algorithm in Statistical %'anslation. In 
Proceedings of the A CL/EA CL '97, Madrid, 
Spain, pages 366 372, July. 
1085 
c? 2004 Association for Computational Linguistics
Statistical Machine Translation with
Scarce Resources Using Morpho-syntactic
Information
Sonja Nie?en? Hermann Ney?
RWTH Aachen RWTH Aachen
In statistical machine translation, correspondences between the words in the source and the
target language are learned from parallel corpora, and often little or no linguistic knowledge is
used to structure the underlying models. In particular, existing statistical systems for machine
translation often treat different inflected forms of the same lemma as if they were independent of one
another. The bilingual training data can be better exploited by explicitly taking into account the
interdependencies of related inflected forms. We propose the construction of hierarchical lexicon
models on the basis of equivalence classes of words. In addition, we introduce sentence-level
restructuring transformations which aim at the assimilation of word order in related sentences.
We have systematically investigated the amount of bilingual training data required to maintain
an acceptable quality of machine translation. The combination of the suggested methods for
improving translation quality in frameworks with scarce resources has been successfully tested:
We were able to reduce the amount of bilingual training data to less than 10% of the original
corpus, while losing only 1.6% in translation quality. The improvement of the translation results
is demonstrated on two German-English corpora taken from the Verbmobil task and the Nespole!
task.
1. Introduction
The statistical approach to machine translation has proved successful in various com-
parative evaluations since its revival by the work of the IBM research group more
than a decade ago. The IBM group dispensed with linguistic analysis, at least in its
earliest publications. Although the IBM group finally made use of morphological and
syntactic information to enhance translation quality (Brown et al 1992; Berger et al
1996), most of today?s statistical machine translation systems still consider only surface
forms and use no linguistic knowledge about the structure of the languages involved.
In many applications only small amounts of bilingual training data are available
for the desired domain and language pair, and it is highly desirable to avoid at least
parts of the costly data collection process. The main objective of the work reported in
this article is to introduce morphological knowledge in order to reduce the amount
of bilingual data necessary to sufficiently cover the vocabulary expected in testing.
This is achieved by explicitly taking into account the interdependencies of related
inflected forms. In this work, a hierarchy of equivalence classes at different levels of
abstraction is proposed. Features from those hierarchy levels are combined to form
hierarchical lexicon models, which can replace the standard probabilistic lexicon used
? Lehrstuhl fu?r Informatik VI, Computer Science Department, RWTH Aachen?University of Technology,
D-52056 Aachen, Germany. E-mail: sonja.niessen@gmx.de; ney@cs.rwth-aachen.de.
182
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
in most statistical machine translation systems. Apart from the improved coverage,
the proposed lexicon models enable the disambiguation of ambiguous word forms by
means of annotation with morpho-syntactic tags.
1.1 Overview
The article is organized as follows. After briefly reviewing the basic concepts of the
statistical approach to machine translation, we discuss the state of the art and related
work as regards the incorporation of morphological and syntactic information into
systems for natural language processing. Section 2 describes the information provided
by morpho-syntactic analysis and introduces a suitable representation of the analyzed
corpus. Section 3 suggests solutions for two specific aspects of structural difference,
namely, question inversion and separated verb prefixes. Section 4 is dedicated to hi-
erarchical lexicon models. These models are able to infer translations of word forms
from the translations of other word forms of the same lemma. Furthermore, they use
morpho-syntactic information to resolve categorial ambiguity. In Section 5, we describe
how disambiguation between different readings and their corresponding translations
can be performed when no context is available, as is typically the case for conven-
tional electronic dictionaries. Section 6 provides an overview of our procedure for
training model parameters for statistical machine translation with scarce resources.
Experimental results are reported in Section 7. Section 8 concludes the presentation
with a discussion of the achievements of this work.
1.2 Statistical Machine Translation
In statistical machine translation, every target language string eI1 = e1 ? ? ? eI is assigned
a probability Pr(eI1) of being a valid word sequence in the target language and a
probability Pr(eI1|f
J
1) of being a translation for the given source language string f
J
1 =
f1 ? ? ? fJ. According to Bayes? decision rule, the optimal translation for f J1 is the target
string that maximizes the product of the target language model Pr(eI1) and the string
translation model Pr(f J1 |eI1). Many existing systems for statistical machine translation
(Garc??a-Varea and Casacuberta 2001; Germann et al 2001; Nie?en et al 1998; Och,
Tillmann, and Ney 1999) implement models presented by Brown, Della Pietra, Della
Pietra, and Mercer (1993): The correspondence between the words in the source and
the target strings is described by alignments that assign target word positions to each
source word position. The probability that a certain target language word will occur
in the target string is assumed to depend basically only on the source words aligned
with it.
1.3 Related Work
1.3.1 Morphology. Some publications have already dealt with the treatment of mor-
phology in the framework of language modeling and speech recognition: Kanevsky,
Roukos, and Sedivy (1997) propose a statistical language model for inflected languages.
They decompose word forms into stems and affixes. Maltese and Mancini (1992) re-
port that a linear interpolation of word n-grams, part of speech n-grams, and lemma
n-grams yields lower perplexity than pure word-based models. Larson et al (2000)
apply a data-driven algorithm for decomposing compound words in compounding
languages as well as for recombining phrases to enhance the pronunciation lexicon
and the language model for large-vocabulary speech recognition systems.
As regards machine translation, the treatment of morphology is part of the analysis
and generation step in virtually every symbolic machine translation system. For this
purpose, the lexicon should contain base forms of words and the grammatical category,
183
Nie?en and Ney SMT with Scarce Resources
subcategorization features, and semantic information in order to enable the size of the
lexicon to be reduced and in order to account for unknown word forms, that is, word
forms not present explicitly in the dictionary.
Today?s statistical machine translation systems build upon the work of P. F. Brown
and his colleagues at IBM. The translation models they presented in various papers
between 1988 and 1993 (Brown et al 1988; Brown et al 1990; Brown, Della Pietra, Della
Pietra, and Mercer 1993) are commonly referred to as IBM models 1?5, based on the
numbering in Brown, Della Pietra, Della Pietra, and Mercer (1993). The underlying
(probabilistic) lexicon contains only pairs of full forms. On the other hand, Brown
et al (1992) had already suggested word forms be annotated with morpho-syntactic
information, but they did not perform any investigation on the effects.
1.3.2 Translation with Scarce Resources. Some recent publications, like Al-Onaizan
et al (2000), have dealt with the problem of translation with scarce resources. Al-
Onaizan et al report on an experiment involving Tetun-to-English translation by dif-
ferent groups, including one using statistical machine translation. Al-Onaizan et al
assume the absence of linguistic knowledge sources such as morphological analyzers
and dictionaries. Nevertheless, they found that the human mind is very well capable
of deriving dependencies such as morphology, cognates, proper names, and spelling
variations and that this capability was finally at the basis of the better results produced
by humans compared to corpus-based machine translation. The additional information
results from complex reasoning, and it is not directly accessible from the full-word-
form representation in the data.
This article takes a different point of view: Even if full bilingual training data
are scarce, monolingual knowledge sources like morphological analyzers and data for
training the target language model as well as conventional dictionaries (one word
and its translation[s] per entry) may be available and of substantial usefulness for
improving the performance of statistical translation systems. This is especially the case
for more-inflecting major languages like German. The use of dictionaries to augment
or replace parallel corpora has already been examined by Brown, Della Pietra, Della
Pietra, and Goldsmith (1993) and Koehn and Knight (2001), for instance.
2. Morpho-syntactic Information
A prerequisite for the methods for improving the quality of statistical machine trans-
lation described in this article is the availability of various kinds of morphological
and syntactic information. This section describes the output resulting from morpho-
syntactic analysis and explains which parts of the analysis are used and how the
output is represented for further processing.
2.1 Description of the Analysis Results
For obtaining the required morpho-syntactic information, the following analyzers for
German and English were applied: gertwol and engtwol for lexical analysis and gercg
and engcg for morphological and syntactic disambiguation. For a description of the
underlying approach, the reader is referred to Karlsson (1990). Tables 1 and 2 give
examples of the information provided by these tools.
2.2 Treatment of Ambiguity
The examples in Tables 1 and 2 demonstrate the capability of the tools to disambiguate
among different readings: For instance, they infer that the word wollen is a verb in the
indicative present first-person plural form. Without any context taken into account,
184
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
Table 1
Sample analysis of a German sentence. Input: Wir wollen nach dem
Abendessen nach Essen aufbrechen. (In English: We want to start for Essen
after dinner.)
Original Base form Tags
Wir wir personal-pronoun plural first nominative
wollen wollen verb indicative present plural first
nach nach preposition dative
dem das definite-article singular dative neuter
Abendessen Abend#essen noun neuter singular dative
nach nach preposition dative
Essen Essen noun name neuter singular dative
Esse noun feminine plural dative
Essen noun neuter plural dative
Essen noun neuter singular dative
aufbrechen auf|brechen verb separable infinitive
Table 2
Sample analysis of an English sentence. Input: Do we have to reserve
rooms?.
Original Base form Tags
Do do verb present not-singular-third finite auxiliary
we we personal-pronoun nominative plural first subject
have have verb infinitive not-finite main
to to infinitive-marker
reserve reserve verb infinitive not-finite main
rooms room noun nominative plural object
wollen has other readings. It can even be interpreted as derived from an adjective
with the meaning ?made of wool.? The inflected word forms on the German part of
the Verbmobil (cf. Section 7.1.1) corpus have on average 2.85 readings (1.86 for the
English corpus), 58% of which can be eliminated by the syntactic analyzers on the
basis of sentence context.
Common bilingual corpora normally contain full sentences, which provide enough
context information for ruling out all but one reading for an inflected word form. To
reduce the remaining uncertainty, preference rules have been implemented. For in-
stance, it is assumed that the corpus is correctly true-case-converted beforehand, and
as a consequence, non-noun readings of uppercase words are dropped. Furthermore,
indicative verb readings are preferred to subjunctive or imperative. In addition, some
simple domain-specific heuristics are applied. The reading ?plural of Esse? for the
German word form Essen, for instance, is much less likely in the domain of appoint-
ment scheduling and travel arrangements than the readings ?proper name of the town
Essen? or the German equivalent of the English word meal. As can be seen in Table 3,
the reduction in the number of readings resulting from these preference rules is fairly
small in the case of the Verbmobil corpus.
The remaining ambiguity often lies in those parts of the information which are
not used or which are not relevant to the translation task. For example, the analyzers
cannot tell accusative from dative case in German, but the case information is not
essential for the translation task (see also Table 4). Section 2.4 describes a method
185
Nie?en and Ney SMT with Scarce Resources
Table 3
Resolution of ambiguity on the Verbmobil corpus.
Number of readings per word form
Disambiguation German English
None 2.85 1.86
By context 1.20 1.02
By preference 1.19 1.02
By selecting relevant tags 1.06 1.01
By resorting to unambiguous part 1.00 1.00
for selecting morpho-syntactic tags considered relevant for the translation task, which
results in a further reduction in the number of readings per word form to 1.06 for
German and 1.01 for English. In these rare cases of ambiguity it is admissible to resort
to the unambiguous parts of the readings, that is, to drop all tags causing mixed
interpretations. Table 3 summarizes the gradual resolution of ambiguity.
The analysis of conventional dictionaries poses some special problems, because
they do not provide enough context to enable effective disambiguation. For handling
this special situation, dedicated methods have been implemented; these are presented
in Section 5.1.
2.3 The Lemma-Tag Representation
A full word form is represented by the information provided by the morpho-syntactic
analysis: from the interpretation gehen verb indicative present first singular, that
is, the base form plus part of speech plus the other tags, the word form gehe can be
restored. It has already been mentioned that the analyzers can disambiguate among
different readings on the basis of context information. In this sense, the information
inherent in the original word forms is augmented by the disambiguating analyzer.
This can be useful for choosing the correct translation of ambiguous words. Of course,
these disambiguation clues result in an enlarged vocabulary. The vocabulary of the new
representation of the German part of the Verbmobil corpus, for example, in which full
word forms are replaced by base form plus morphological and syntactic tags (lemma-
tag representation), is one and a half times as large as the vocabulary of the original
corpus. On the other hand, the information in the lemma-tag representation can be
accessed gradually and ultimately reduced: For example, certain instances of words
can be considered equivalent. This fact is used to better exploit the bilingual training
data along two directions: detecting and omitting unimportant information (see Section
2.4) and constructing hierarchical translation models (see Section 4). To summarize,
the lemma-tag representation of a corpus has the following main advantages: It makes
context information locally available, and it allows information to be explicitly accessed
at different levels of abstraction.
2.4 Equivalence Classes of Words with Similar Translation
Inflected word forms in the input language often contain information that is not rel-
evant for translation. This is especially true for the task of translating from a more
inflecting language like German into English, for instance: In parallel German/English
corpora, the German part contains many more distinct word forms than the English
part (see, for example, Table 5). It is useful for the process of statistical machine trans-
lation to define equivalence classes of word forms which tend to be translated by
the same target language word: The resulting statistical translation lexicon becomes
186
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
Table 4
Candidates for equivalence classes.
Part of speech Candidates
Noun Gender (masculine, feminine, neuter)
and case (nominative, dative, accusative)
Verb Number (singular, plural) and person (first, second, third)
Adjective Gender, case, and number
Number Case
smoother, and the coverage is considerably improved. Such equivalence classes are
constructed by omitting those items of information from morpho-syntactic analysis
which are not relevant for translation.
The lemma-tag representation of the corpus helps to identify the unimportant
information. The definition of relevant and unimportant information, respectively, de-
pends on many factors like the languages involved, the translation direction, and the
choice of the models. We detect candidates for equivalence classes of words automat-
ically from the probabilistic lexicon trained for translation from German to English.
For this purpose, those inflected forms of the same base form which result in the same
translation are inspected. For each set of tags T, the algorithm counts how often an
additional tag t1 can be replaced with a certain other tag t2 without effect on the trans-
lation. As an example, let T = ?blau-adjective?, t1 =?masculine? and t2 =?feminine?.
The two entries (?blau-adjective-masculine?|?blue?) and (?blau-adjective-feminine?|?blue?)
are hints for detecting gender as nonrelevant when translating adjectives into English.
Table 4 lists some of the most frequently identified candidates to be ignored while
translating: The gender of nouns is irrelevant for their translation (which is straight-
forward, as the gender of a noun is unambiguous), as are the cases nominative, dative,
accusative. (For the genitive forms, the translation in English differs.) For verbs the
candidates number and person were found: The translation of the first-person singular
form of a verb, for example, is often the same as the translation of the third-person
plural form. Ignoring (dropping) those tags most often identified as irrelevant for
translation results in the building of equivalence classes of words. Doing so results in
a smaller vocabulary, one about 65.5% the size of the vocabulary of the full lemma-
tag representation of the Verbmobil corpus, for example?it is even smaller than the
vocabulary of the original full-form corpus.
The information described in this section is used to improve the quality of statis-
tical machine translation and to better exploit the available bilingual resources.
3. Treatment of Structural Differences
Difference in sentence structure is one of the main sources of errors in machine trans-
lation. It is thus promising to ?harmonize? the word order in corresponding sentences.
The presentation in this section focuses on the following aspects: question inversion
and separated verb prefixes. For a more detailed discussion of restructuring for statis-
tical machine translation the reader is referred to Nie?en and Ney (2000, 2001).
3.1 Question Inversion
In many languages, the sentence structure of questions differs from the structure in
declarative sentences in that the order of the subject and the corresponding finite verb
is inverted. From the perspective of statistical translation, this behavior has some dis-
187
Nie?en and Ney SMT with Scarce Resources
advantages: The algorithm for training the parameters of the target language model
Pr(eI1), which is typically a standard n-gram model, cannot deduce the probability
of a word sequence in an interrogative sentence from the corresponding declarative
form. The same reasoning is valid for the lexical translation probabilities of multiword-
phrase pairs. To harmonize the word order of questions with the word order in declar-
ative sentences, the order of the subject (including the appendant articles, adjectives
etc.) and the corresponding finite verb is inverted. In English questions supporting
dos are removed. The application of the described preprocessing step in the bilingual
training corpus implies the necessity of restoring the correct forms of the translations
produced by the machine translation algorithm. This procedure was suggested by
Brown et al (1992) for the language pair English and French, but they did not re-
port on experimental results revealing the effect of the restructuring on the translation
quality.
3.2 Separated Verb Prefixes
German prefix verbs consist of a main part and a detachable prefix, which can be
shifted to the end of the clause. For the automatic alignment process, it is often dif-
ficult to associate one English word with more than one word in the corresponding
German sentence, namely, the main part of the verb and the separated prefix. To solve
the problem of separated prefixes, all separable word forms of verbs are extracted
from the training corpus. The resulting list contains entries of the form prefix|main.
In all clauses containing a word matching a main part and a word matching the cor-
responding prefix part occurring at the end of the clause, the prefix is prepended to
the beginning of the main part.
4. Hierarchical Lexicon Models
In general, the probabilistic lexicon resulting from training the translation model con-
tains all word forms occurring in the training corpus as separate entries, not taking
into account whether or not they are inflected forms of the same lemma. Bearing in
mind that typically more than 40% of the word forms are seen only once in training
(see, for example, Table 5), it is obvious that for many words, learning the correct
translations is difficult. Furthermore, new input sentences are expected to contain un-
known word forms, for which no translation can be retrieved from the lexicon. This
problem is especially relevant for more-inflecting languages like German: Texts in Ger-
man contain many more distinct word forms than their English translations. Table 5
also reveals that these words are often generated via inflection from a smaller set of
base forms.
4.1 A Hierarchy of Equivalence Classes of Inflected Word Forms
As mentioned in Section 2.3, the lemma-tag representation of the information from
morpho-syntactic analysis makes it possible to gradually access information with dif-
ferent grades of abstraction. Consider, for example, the German verb form ankomme,
which is the indicative present first-person singular form of the lemma ankommen and
can be translated into English by arrive. The lemma-tag representation provides an
?observation tuple? consisting of
? the original full word form (e.g., ankomme),
? morphological and syntactic tags (part of speech, tense, person, case, . . . )
(e.g., verb, indicative, present tense, 1st person singular), and
188
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
? the base form (e.g., ankommen).
In the following, ti0 = t0, . . . , ti denotes the representation of a word where the base
form t0 and i additional tags are taken into account. For the example above, t0 =
ankommen, t1 = verb, and so on. The hierarchy of equivalence classes F0, . . . ,Fn is as
follows:
Fn = F(tn0) = ankommen verb indicative present singular 1
Fn?1 = F(tn?10 ) = ankommen verb indicative present singular
Fn?2 = F(tn?20 ) = ankommen verb indicative present
...
F0 = F(t0) = ankommen
where n is the maximum number of morpho-syntactic tags. The mapping from the
full lemma-tag representation back to inflected word forms is generally unambigu-
ous; thus Fn contains only one element, namely, ankomme. Fn?1 contains the forms
ankomme, ankommst, and ankommt; in Fn?2 the number (singular or plural) is ig-
nored, and so on. The largest equivalence class contains all inflected forms of the
base form ankommen.1 Section 4.2 introduces the concept of combining information at
different levels of abstraction.
4.2 Log-Linear Combination
In modeling for statistical machine translation, a hidden variable aJ1, denoting the
hidden alignment between the words in the source and target languages, is usually
introduced into the string translation probability:
Pr(f J1 |eI1) =
?
aJ1
Pr(f J1, a
J
1|eI1) =
?
aJ1
Pr(aJ1|eI1) ? Pr(f
J
1 |a
J
1, e
I
1) (1)
In the following, Tj =
(
tn0
)
j denotes the lemma-tag representation of the jth word in
the input sentence. The sequence TJ1 stands for the sequence of readings for the word
sequence f J1 and can be introduced as a new hidden variable:
Pr(f J1 |a
J
1, e
I
1) =
?
TJ1
Pr(f J1, T
J
1|a
J
1, e
I
1) (2)
which can be decomposed into
Pr(f J1 |a
J
1, e
I
1) =
?
TJ1
J
?
j=1
Pr(fj, Tj|f j?11 , T
j?1
1 , a
J
1, e
I
1) (3)
1 The order of omitting tags can be defined in a natural way depending on the part of speech. In
principle this decision can also be left to the maximum-entropy training, when features for all possible
sets of tags are defined, but this would cause the number of parameters to explode. As the experiments
in this work have been carried out only with up to three levels of abstraction as defined in Section 4.2,
the set of tags of the intermediate level is fixed, and thus the priority of the tags needs not be specified.
The relation between this equivalence class hierarchy and the suggestions in Section 2.4 is clear:
Choosing candidates for morpho-syntactic tags not relevant for translation amounts to fixing a level in
the hierarchy. This is exactly what has been done to define the intermediate level in Section 4.2.
189
Nie?en and Ney SMT with Scarce Resources
Let T (fj) be the set of interpretations which are regarded valid readings of fj by the
morpho-syntactic analyzers on the basis of the whole-sentence context f J1. We assume
that the probability functions defined above yield zero for all other readings, that is,
when Tj ? T (fj). Under the usual independence assumption, which states that the
probability of the translation of words depends only on the identity of the words
associated with each other by the word alignment, we get
Pr(f J1 |a
J
1, e
I
1) =
?
TJ1
Tj ? T (fj)
J
?
j=1
p(fj, Tj|eaj) (4)
As has been argued in Section 2.2, the number of readings |T (fj)| per word form can
be reduced to one for the tasks for which experimental results are reported here.
The elements in equation (4) are the joint probabilities p(f , T|e) of f and the read-
ings T of f given the target language word e. The maximum-entropy principle rec-
ommends choosing for p the distribution which preserves as much uncertainty as
possible in terms of maximizing the entropy, while requiring p to satisfy constraints
which represent facts known from the data. These constraints are encoded on the basis
of feature functions hm(x), and the expectation of each feature hm over the model p is
required to be equal to the observed expectation. The maximum-entropy model can
be shown to be unique and to have an exponential form involving a weighted sum
over the feature functions hm (Ratnaparkhi 1997). In equation (5), the notation tn0 is
used again for the lemma-tag representation of an input word (this was denoted by T
in equations (2)?(4) for notational simplicity):
p(f , T|e) = p?(f , tn0 |e) =
exp
[
?
m
?mhm(e, f , tn0)
]
?
f? ,?tn0
exp
[
?
m
?mhm(e, f? , t?n0)
] (5)
where ? = {?m} is the set of model parameters with one weight ?m for each feature
function hm. These model parameters can be trained using converging iterative training
procedures like the ones described by Darroch and Ratcliff (1972) or Della Pietra, Della
Pietra, and Lafferty (1995).
In the experiments presented in this article, the sum over the word forms f? and
the readings t?n0 in the denominator of equation (5) is restricted to the readings of word
forms having the same base form and partial reading as a word form f ?? aligned at
least once to e.
The new lexicon model p?(f , tn0 |e) can now replace the usual lexicon model p(f |e),
over which it has the following main advantages:
? The decomposition of the modeled events into feature functions allows
meaningful probabilities to be provided for word forms that have not
occurred during training as long as the feature functions involved are
well-defined. (See also the argument later in the article and the definition
of first-level and second-level feature functions presented in
Section 4.2.1.)
? Introducing the hidden variable T = tn0 and constraining the lexicon
probability to be zero for interpretations considered nonvalid readings of
190
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
f (that is, for tn0 ? T (f )) amounts to making context information from the
complete sentence f J1 locally available: The sentence context was taken
into account by the morpho-syntactic analyzer, which chose the valid
readings T (f ).
4.2.1 Definition of Feature Functions. There are numerous possibilities for defining
feature functions. We do not need to require that they all have the same parametric
form or that the components be disjoint and statistically independent. Still, it is nec-
essary to restrict the number of parameters so that optimizing them is practical. We
used the following types of feature functions, which have been defined on the basis
of the lemma-tag representation (see Section 2.3):
First level: m = {L, e?}, where L is the base form:
h1L,?e(e, f , t
n
0) =
{
1 if e = e? and t0 = L and f ? F(tn0) (?)
0 otherwise
Second level: m = {T, L, e?}, with subsets T of cardinality ? n of morpho-syntactic
tags considered relevant (see Section 2.4 for a description of the detection
of relevant tags):
h2T,L,?e(e, f , t
n
0) =
{
1 if (?) and T ? tn1 (??)
0 otherwise
Third level: m = {F, T, L, e?}, with the fully inflected original word form F:
h3F,T,L,?e(e, f , t
n
0) =
{
1 if (??) and F = f
0 otherwise
In terms of the hierarchy introduced in Section 4.1, this means that information at three
different levels in the hierarchy is combined. The subsets T of relevant tags mentioned
previously fix the intermediate level.2 This choice of the types of features as well as
the choice of the subsets T is reasonable but somewhat arbitrary. Alternatively one
can think of defining a much more general set of features and applying some method
of feature selection, as has been done, for example, by Foster (2000), who compared
different methods for feature selection within the task of translation modeling for
statistical machine translation. Note that the log-linear model introduced here uses one
parameter per feature. For the Verbmobil task, for example, there are approximately
162, 000 parameters: 47,800 for the first-order features, 55,700 for the second-order
features, and 58,500 for the third-order features. No feature selection or threshold was
applied: All features seen in training were used.
4.2.2 Training Procedure. The overall process of training and testing with hierarchical
lexicon models is depicted in Figure 1. This figure includes the possibility of using
restructuring operations as suggested in Section 3 in order to deal with structural dif-
ferences between the languages involved. This can be especially advantageous in the
case of multiword phrases which jointly fulfill a syntactic function: Not merging them
2 Of course, there is not only one set of relevant tags, but at least one per part of speech. In order to
keep the notation as simple as possible, this fact is not accounted for in the formulas and the textual
descriptions.
191
Nie?en and Ney SMT with Scarce Resources
training of
alignment
restructuring
training of
language model
language
model
alignment
model
alignment
extract 
event counts
lexicon
model
ME training
source
sentence
search for 
optimal translation
output
sentence
analyze
annotation
all readings
of vocabulary
restructuring
restructuring inverse
restructuring
annotation
vocabulary 
supported in test
annotation
source
part
target
part
training corpus
Figure 1
Training and test with hierarchical lexicon. ?(Inverse) restructuring,? ?analyze,? and
?annotation? all require morpho-syntactic analysis of the transformed sentences.
would raise the question of how to distribute the syntactic tags which have been asso-
ciated with the whole phrase. In Section 5.2 we describe a method of learning multi-
word phrases using conventional dictionaries. The alignment on the training corpus
is trained using the original source language corpus containing inflected word forms.
This alignment is then used to count the co-occurrences of the annotated ?words? in
the lemma-tag representation of the source language corpus with the words in the tar-
get language corpus. These event counts are used for the maximum-entropy training
of the model parameters ?.
The probability mass is distributed over (all readings of) the source language
word forms to be supported for test (not necessarily restricted to those occurring dur-
ing training). The only precondition is that the firing features for these unseen events
are known. This ?vocabulary supported in test,? as it is called in Figure 1, can be a
predefined closed vocabulary, as is the case in Verbmobil, in which the output of a
speech recognizer with limited output vocabulary is to be translated. In the easiest
case it is identical to the vocabulary found in the source language part of the training
corpus. The other extreme would be an extended vocabulary containing all automati-
cally generated inflected forms of all base forms occurring in the training corpus. This
vocabulary is annotated with morpho-syntactic tags, ideally under consideration of all
possible readings of all word forms.
192
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
To enable the application of the hierarchical lexicon model, the source language
input sentences in test have to be analyzed and annotated with their lemma-tag rep-
resentation before the actual translation process. So far, the sum over the readings in
equation (4) has been ignored, because when the techniques for reducing the amount
of ambiguity described in Section 2.2 and the disambiguated conventional dictionaries
resulting from the approach presented in Section 5.1 are applied, there remains almost
always only one reading per word form.
5. Conventional Dictionaries
Conventional dictionaries are often used as additional evidence to better train the
model parameters in statistical machine translation. The expression conventional dictio-
nary here denotes bilingual collections of word or phrase pairs predominantly collected
?by hand,? usually by lexicographers, as opposed to the probabilistic lexica, which are
learned automatically. Apart from the theoretical problem of how to incorporate ex-
ternal dictionaries in a mathematically sound way into a statistical framework for
machine translation (Brown, Della Pietra, Della Pietra, and Goldsmith 1993) there are
also some pragmatic difficulties: As discussed in Section 2.2, one of the disadvantages
of these conventional dictionaries as compared to full bilingual corpora is that their
entries typically contain single words or short phrases on each language side. Conse-
quently, it is not possible to distinguish among the translations for different readings
of a word. In normal bilingual corpora, the words can often be disambiguated by
taking into account the sentence context in which they occur. For example, from the
context in the sentence Ich werde die Zimmer buchen, it is possible to infer that Zimmer
in this sentence is plural and has to be translated by rooms in English, whereas the
correct translation of Zimmer in the sentence Ich ha?tte gerne ein Zimmer is the singular
form room. The dictionary used by our research group for augmenting the bilingual
data contains two entries for Zimmer: (?Zimmer?|?room?) and (?Zimmer?|?rooms?).
5.1 Disambiguation without Context
The approach described in this section is based on the observation that in many of the
cases of ambiguous entries in dictionaries, the second part of the entry?that is, the
other-language side?contains the information necessary to decide upon the interpre-
tation. In some other cases, the same kind of ambiguity is present in both languages,
and it would be possible and desirable to associate the (semantically) corresponding
readings with one another. The method proposed here takes advantage of these facts
in order to disambiguate dictionary entries.
Figure 2 sketches the procedure for the disambiguation of a conventional dictio-
nary D. In addition to D, a bilingual corpus C1 of the same language pair is required
to train the probability model for tag sequence translations. The word forms in C1
need not match those in D. C1 is not necessarily the training corpus for the translation
task in which the disambiguated version of D will be used. It does not even have to
be taken from the same domain.
A word alignment between the sentences in C1 is trained with some automatic
alignment algorithm. Then the words in the bilingual corpus are replaced by a reduced
form of their lemma-tag representation, in which only a subset of their morpho-syntactic
tags is retained?even the base form is dropped. The remaining subset of tags, in
the following denoted by Tf for the source language and Te for the target language,
consists of tags considered relevant for the task of aligning corresponding readings.
This is not necessarily the same set of tags considered relevant for the task of translation
which was used, for example, to fix the intermediate level for the log-linear lexicon
193
Nie?en and Ney SMT with Scarce Resources
merge phrases
learn phrases
conventional
dictionary
analyze
annotation
all readings
of entries
align corresponding
readings
tag translation
probabilities
disambiguated
dictionary
training of
alignmentalignment
count tag
co-occurences
annotation
bilingual corpus
Figure 2
Disambiguation of conventional dictionaries. ?Learn phrases,? ?analyze,? and ?annotation?
require morpho-syntactic analysis of the transformed sentences.
combination in Section 4.2.1. In the case of the Verbmobil corpus, the maximum length
of a tag sequence is five.
The alignment is used to count the frequency of a certain tag sequence tf in the
source language to be associated with another tag sequence te in the target language
and to compute the tag sequence translation probabilities p(tf |te) as relative frequen-
cies. For the time being, these tag sequence translation probabilities associate readings
of words in one language with readings of words in the other language: Multiword
sequences are not accounted for.
To alleviate this shortcoming it is possible and advisable to automatically detect
and merge multiword phrases. As will be described in Section 5.2, the conventional
bilingual dictionary itself can be used to learn and validate these phrases. The resulting
multiword phrases Pe for the target language and Pf for the source language are
afterwards concatenated within D to form entries consisting of pairs of ?units.?
The next step is to analyze the word forms in D and generate all possible readings
of all entries. It is also possible to ignore those readings that are considered unlikely
for the task under consideration by applying the domain-specific preference rules
proposed in Section 2.2. The process of generating all readings includes replacing word
forms with their lemma-tag representation, which is thereafter reduced by dropping
all morpho-syntactic tags not contained in the tag sets Tf and Te.
Using the tag sequence translation probabilities p(tf |te), the readings in one lan-
guage are aligned with readings in the other language. These alignments are applied to
the full lemma-tag representation (not only tags in Tf and Te) of the expanded dictio-
nary containing one entry per reading of the original word forms. The highest-ranking
aligned readings according to p(tf |te) for each lemma are preserved.
194
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
The resulting disambiguated dictionary contains two entries for the German word
Zimmer: (?Zimmer-noun-sg.?|?room-noun-sg.?) and (?Zimmer-noun-pl.?|?room-noun-
pl.?). The target language part is then reduced to the surface forms: (?Zimmer-noun-sg.?|
?room?) and (?Zimmer-noun-pl.?|?rooms?). Note that this augmented dictionary, in the
following denoted by D?, has more entries than D as a result of the step of generating
all readings. The two entries (?beabsichtigt?|?intends?) and (?beabsichtigt?|?intended?),
for example, produce three new entries: (?beabsichtigt-verb-ind.-pres.-sg.-
3rd?|?intends?), (?beabsichtigt-verb-past-part.?|?intended?), and (?beabsichtigt-
adjective-pos.?|?intended?).
5.2 Multiword Phrases
Some recent publications deal with the automatic detection of multiword phrases (Och
and Weber 1998; Tillmann and Ney 2000). These methods are very useful, but they have
one drawback: They rely on sufficiently large training corpora, because they detect
the phrases from automatically learned word alignments. In this section a method for
detecting multiword phrases is suggested which merely requires monolingual syntactic
analyzers and a conventional dictionary.
Some multiword phrases which jointly fulfill a syntactic function are provided
by the analyzers. The phrase irgend etwas (?anything?), for example, may form either
an indefinite determiner or an indefinite pronoun. irgend=etwas is merged by the
analyzer in order to form one single vocabulary entry. In the German part of the Verb-
mobil training corpus 26 different, nonidiomatic multiword phrases are merged, while
there are 318 phrases suggested for the English part. In addition, syntactic informa-
tion like the identification of infinitive markers, determiners, modifying adjectives (for
example, single room), premodifying adverbials (more comfortable), and premodifying
nouns (account number) are used for detecting multiword phrases. When applied to
the English part of the Verbmobil training corpus, these hints suggest 7,225 different
phrases.
Altogether, 26 phrases for German and about 7,500 phrases for English are detected
in this way. It is quite natural that there are more multiword phrases found for English,
as German, unlike English, uses compounding. But the experiments show that it is not
advantageous to use all these phrases for English. Electronic dictionaries can be useful
for detecting those phrases which are important in a statistical machine translation
context: A multiword phrase is considered useful if it is translated into a single word
or a distinct multiword phrase (suggested in a similar way by syntactic analysis) in
another language. There are 290 phrases chosen in this way for the English language.
6. Overall Procedure for Training with Scarce Resources
Taking into account the interdependencies of inflected forms of the same base form
is especially relevant when inflected languages like German are involved and when
training data are sparse. In this situation many of the inflected word forms to account
for in test do not occur during training. Sparse bilingual training data also make ad-
ditional conventional dictionaries especially important. Enriching the dictionaries by
aligning corresponding readings is particularly useful when the dictionaries are used
in conjunction with a hierarchical lexicon, which can access the information neces-
sary to distinguish readings via morpho-syntactic tags. The restructuring operations
described in Section 3 also help in coping with the data sparseness problem, because
they make corresponding sentences more similar. This section proposes a procedure
for combining all these methods in order to improve the translation quality despite
sparseness of data. Figure 3 sketches the proposed procedure.
195
Nie?en and Ney SMT with Scarce Resources
learn phrases
disambiguated
dictionary D?
conventional
dictionary D
bil. corpus
C1
disambiguate
dictionary
restructuring restructuring
monolingual
corpus
LM
training
language
model
restructuring
annotation
train 
alignment
combined
corpus
train hierarch.
lexicon alignment
on combined
corpus
alignment
model
lexicon
model
bil. corpus
C2
Figure 3
Training with scarce resources. ?Restructuring,? ?learn phrases,? and ?annotation? all require
morpho-syntactic analysis of the transformed sentences.
Two different bilingual corpora C1 and C2, one monolingual target language cor-
pus, and a conventional bilingual dictionary D can contribute in various ways to the
overall result. It is important to note here that C1 and C2 can, but need not, be dis-
tinct, and that the monolingual corpus can be identical to the target language part of
C2. Furthermore these corpora can be taken from different domains, and C1 can be
(very) small. Only C2 has to represent the domain and the vocabulary for which the
translation system is built, and only the size of C2 and the monolingual corpus have
a substantial effect on the translation quality. It is interesting to note, though, that
a basic statistical machine translation system with an accuracy near 50% can be built
without any domain-specific bilingual corpus C2, solely on the basis of a disambiguated
dictionary and the hierarchical lexicon models, as Table 9 shows.
? In the first step, multiword phrases are learned and validated on the
dictionary D in the way described in Section 5.2. These multiword
phrases are concatenated in D. Then an alignment is trained on the first
bilingual corpus C1. On the basis of this alignment, the tag sequence
translation probabilities which are needed to align corresponding
readings in the dictionary are extracted, as proposed in Section 5.1. The
result of this step is an expanded and disambiguated dictionary D?. For
this purpose, C1 does not have to cover the vocabulary of D. Besides C1
196
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
can be comparatively small, given the limited number of tag sequence
pairs (tf |te) for which translation probabilities must be provided: In the
Verbmobil training corpus, for example, there are only 261 different
German and 110 different English tag sequences.
? In the next step, the second bilingual corpus C2 and D? are combined,
and a word alignment A for both is trained. C2, D?, and A are presented
as input to the maximum-entropy training of a hierarchical lexicon
model as described in Section 4.2.
? The language model can be trained on a separate monolingual corpus.
As monolingual data are much easier and cheaper to compile, this
corpus might be (substantially) larger than the target language part of C2.
7. Experimental Results
7.1 The Tasks and the Corpora
Tests were carried out on Verbmobil data and on Nespole! data. As usual, the sentences
from the test sets were not used for training. The training corpora were used for
training the parameters of IBM model 4.
7.1.1 Verbmobil. Verbmobil was a project for automatic translation of spontaneously
spoken dialogues. A detailed description of the statistical translation system within
Verbmobil is given by Ney et al (2000) and by Och (2002). Table 5 summarizes the
characteristics of the English and German parallel corpus used for training the param-
eters of IBM model 4. A conventional dictionary complements the training corpus (see
Table 6 for the statistics). The vocabulary in Verbmobil was considered closed: There
are official lists of word forms which can be produced by the speech recognizers. Such
lists exist for German and English (see Table 7). Table 8 lists the characteristics of the
two test sets Test and Develop taken from the end-to-end evaluation in Verbmobil, the
development part being meant to tune system parameters on a held-out corpus dif-
ferent from the training as well as the test corpus. As no parameters are optimized on
the development set for the methods described in this article, most of the experiments
were carried out on a joint set containing both test sets.
Table 5
Statistics of corpora for training: Verbmobil and Nespole! Singletons are types occurring only
once in training.
Verbmobil Nespole!
English German English German
Number of sentences 58,073 58,073 3,182 3,182
Number of distinct sentences 57,731 57,771 1,758 1,767
Number of running word forms 549,921 519,523 15,568 14,992
Number of running word forms without punctuation 453,612 418,974 12,461 11,672
Number of word forms 4,673 7,940 1,034 1,363
Number of singleton word forms 1,698 3,453 403 641
Number of base forms 3,639 6,063 1,072 870
Number of singleton base forms 1,236 2,546 461 326
197
Nie?en and Ney SMT with Scarce Resources
Table 6
Conventional dictionary used to complement the
training corpus.
English German
Number of entries 10,498 10,498
Number of running word forms 15,305 12,784
Number of word forms 5,161 7,021
Number of base forms 3,666 5,479
Table 7
The official vocabularies in Verbmobil.
English German
Number of word forms 6,871 10,157
Number of base forms 3,268 6,667
Table 8
Statistics for the test sets for German to English translation: Verbmobil
Eval-2000 (Test and Develop) and Nespole!
Verbmobil Nespole!
Test Develop
Number of sentences 251 276 70
Number of running word forms in German part 2,628 3,159 456
Number of word forms in German part 429 434 180
Trigram LM perplexity of reference translation 30.5 28.1 76.9
7.1.2 Nespole!. Nespole! is a research project that ran from January 2000 to June 2002.
It aimed to provide multimodel support for negotiation (Nespole! 2000; Lavie et al
2001). Table 5 summarizes the corpus statistics of the Nespole! training set. Table 8
provides the corresponding figures for the test set used in this work.
7.2 The Translation System
For testing we used the alignment template translation system, described in Och,
Tillmann, and Ney (1999). Training the parameters for this system entails training of
IBM model 4 parameters in both translation directions and combining the resulting
alignments into one symmetrized alignment. From this symmetrized alignment, the
lexicon probabilities as well as the so-called alignment templates are extracted. The
latter are translation patterns which capture phrase-level translation pairs.
7.3 Performance Measures
The following evaluation criteria were used in the experiments:
BLEU (Bilingual Evaluation Understudy): This score, proposed by Papineni et
al. (2001), is based on the notion of modified n-gram precision, with
n ? {1, . . . , 4}: All candidate unigram, bigram, trigram, and four-gram
counts are collected and clipped against their corresponding maximum
reference counts. The reference n-gram counts are calculated on a corpus
198
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
of reference translations for each input sentence. The clipped candidate
counts are summed and normalized by the total number of candidate n-
grams. The geometric mean of the modified precision scores for a test
corpus is calculated and multiplied by an exponential brevity penalty fac-
tor to penalize too-short translations. BLEU is an accuracy measure, while
the others are error measures.
m-WER (multireference word error rate): For each test sentence there is a set of
reference translations. For each translation hypothesis, the edit distance
(number of substitutions, deletions, and insertions) to the most similar
reference is calculated.
SSER (subjective sentence error rate): Each translated sentence is judged by a
human examiner according to an error scale from 0.0 (semantically and
syntactically correct) to 1.0 (completely wrong).
ISER (information item semantic error rate): The test sentences are segmented
into information items; for each of these items, the translation candidates
are assigned either ?OK? or an error class. If the intended information
is conveyed, the translation of an information item is considered correct,
even if there are slight syntactic errors which do not seriously deteriorate
the intelligibility.
For evaluating the SSER and the ISER, we have used the evaluation tool EvalTrans
(Nie?en and Leusch 2000), which is designed to facilitate the work of manually judging
evaluation quality and to ensure consistency over time and across evaluators.
7.4 Impact of the Corpus Size
It is a costly and time-consuming task to compile large texts and have them translated
to form bilingual corpora suitable for training the model parameters for statistical
machine translation. As a consequence, it is important to investigate the amount of
data necessary to sufficiently cover the vocabulary expected in testing. Furthermore,
we want to examine to what extent the incorporation of morphological knowledge
sources can reduce this amount of necessary data. Figure 4 shows the relation between
the size of a typical German corpus and the corresponding number of different full
forms. At the size of 520,000 words, the size of the Verbmobil corpus used for training,
this curve still has a high growth rate.
To investigate the impact of the size of the bilingual corpus available for train-
ing, on translation quality three different setups for training the statistical lexicon on
Verbmobil data have been defined:
? using the full training corpus as described in Table 5, comprising 58,000
sentences
? restricting the corpus to 5,000 sentences (approximately every 11th
sentence)
? using no bilingual training corpus at all (only a bilingual dictionary; see
subsequent discussion)
The language model is always trained on the full English corpus. The argument for
this is that monolingual corpora are always easier and less expensive to obtain than
bilingual corpora. A conventional dictionary is used in all three setups to complement
199
Nie?en and Ney SMT with Scarce Resources
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0 100 200 300 400 500
corpus size [1000 words]
vo
ca
bu
la
ry
 s
ize
 [1
00
0 w
ord
 fo
rm
s]
Figure 4
Impact of corpus size (measured in number of running words in the corpus) on vocabulary
size (measured in number of different full-form words found in the corpus) for the German
part of the Verbmobil corpus.
the bilingual corpus. In the last setup, the lexicon probabilities are trained exclusively
on this dictionary
As Table 9 shows, the quality of translation drops significantly when the amount
of bilingual data available during training is reduced: When the training corpus is
restricted to 5,000 sentences, the SSER increases by about 7% and the ISER by about
3%. As could be expected, the translations produced by the system trained exclusively
on a conventional dictionary are very poor: The SSER jumps over 60%.
7.5 Results for Log-Linear Lexicon Combination
7.5.1 Results on the Verbmobil Task. As was pointed out in Section 4, the hierarchi-
cal lexicon is expected to be especially useful in cases in which many of the inflected
word forms to be accounted for in test do not occur during training. To systematically
investigate the model?s generalization capability, it has been applied on the three dif-
ferent setups described in Section 7.4. The training procedure was the one proposed
in Section 6, which includes restructuring transformations in training and test. Table 9
summarizes the improvement achieved for all three setups.
Training on 58,000 sentences plus conventional dictionary: Compared to the ef-
fect of restructuring, the additional improvement achieved with the hier-
archical lexicon is relatively small in this setup. The combination of all
methods results in a relative improvement in terms of SSER of almost
13% and in terms of information ISER of more than 16% as compared to
the baseline.
Training on 5,000 sentences plus conventional dictionary: Restructuring alone
can improve the translation quality from 37.3% to 33.6%. The benefit from
the hierarchical lexicon is larger in this setup, and the resulting in SSER is
31.8%. This is a relative improvement of almost 15%. The relative improve-
ment in terms of ISER is almost 22%. Note that by applying the methods
200
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
Table 9
Results for hierarchical lexicon models and translation with scarce resources.
?Restructuring? entails treatment of question inversion and separated verb prefixes as
well as merging of phrases in both languages. A conventional dictionary is available in
all three setups. The language model is always trained on the full monolingual English
corpus. Task: Verbmobil. Testing on 527 sentences (Test and Develop).
Number of sentences
for training BLEU m-WER SSER ISER
58,000 Baseline 53.7% 34.1% 30.2% 14.1%
Restructuring 56.3 32.5 26.6 12.8
+ dictionary disambiguated
+ hierarchical lexicon 57.1 31.8 26.3 11.8
5,000 Baseline 47.4 38.0 37.3 17.4
Restructuring 52.1 34.7 33.6 15.2
+ dictionary disambiguated
+ hierarchical lexicon 52.9 33.9 31.8 13.7
0 Baseline 23.3 53.6 60.4 29.8
Restructuring 29.1 50.2 57.8 30.0
+ dictionary disambiguated
+ hierarchical lexicon 32.6 48.0 52.8 24.1
proposed here, the corpus for training can be reduced to less than 10%
of the original size while increasing the SSER only from 30.2% to 31.8%
compared to the baseline when using the full corpus.
Training only on conventional dictionary: In this setup the impact of the hierar-
chical lexicon is clearly larger than the effect of the restructuring methods,
because here the data sparseness problem is much more important than
the word order problem. The overall relative reduction in terms of SSER
is 13.7% and in terms of ISER 19.1%. An error rate of about 52% is still
very poor, but it is close to what might be acceptable when only the gist
of the translated document is needed, as is the case in the framework of
document classification or multilingual information retrieval.
Examples taken from the Verbmobil Eval-2000 test set are given in Table 10.
Smoothing the lexicon probabilities over the inflected forms of the same lemma en-
ables the translation of sind as would instead of are. The smoothed lexicon contains the
translation convenient for any inflected form of bequem. The comparative more conve-
nient would be the completely correct translation. The last two examples in the table
demonstrate the effect of the disambiguating analyzer, which on the basis of the sen-
tence context identifies Zimmer as plural (it has been translated into the singular form
room by the baseline system) and das as an article to be translated by the instead of a
pronoun which would be translated as that. The last example demonstrates that over-
fitting on domain-specific training can be problematic in some cases: Generally, because
is a good translation for the co-ordinating conjunction denn, but in the appointment-
scheduling domain, denn is often an adverb, and it often occurs in the same sentence
as dann, as in Wie wa?re es denn dann?. The translation for this sentence is something
like How about then?. Because of the frequency of this domain-specific language use,
the word form denn is often aligned to then in the training corpus. The hierarchical
201
Nie?en and Ney SMT with Scarce Resources
Table 10
Examples of the effect of the hierarchical lexicon.
Input sind Sie mit einem Doppelzimmer einverstanden?
Baseline are you agree with a double room?
Hierarchical lexicon would you agree with a double room?
Input mit dem Zug ist es bequemer.
Baseline by train it is UNKNOWN-bequemer.
Hierarchical lexicon by train it is convenient.
Input wir haben zwei Zimmer.
Baseline we have two room.
Hierarchical lexicon we have two rooms.
Input ich wu?rde das Hilton vorschlagen denn es ist das beste.
Baseline I would suggest that Hilton then it is the best.
Hierarchical lexicon I would suggest the Hilton because it is the best.
lexicon distinguishes the adverb reading and the conjunction reading, and the correct
translation because is the highest-ranking one for the conjunction.
7.5.2 Results on the Nespole! Task. We were provided with a small German-English
corpus from the Nespole! project (see Section 7.1 for a description). From Table 5 it
is obvious that this task is an example of very scarce training data, and it is thus
interesting to test the performance of the methods proposed in this article on this
task. The same conventional dictionary as was used for the experiments on Verbmobil
data (cf. Table 6) complemented the small bilingual training corpus. Furthermore, the
(monolingual) English part of the Verbmobil corpus was used in addition to the English
part of the Nespole! corpus for training the language model. Table 11 summarizes the
results. Information items have not been defined for this test set. An overall relative
improvement of 16.5% in the SSER can be achieved.
8. Conclusion
In this article we have proposed methods of incorporating morphological and syntactic
information into systems for statistical machine translation. The overall goal was to
improve translation quality and to reduce the amount of parallel text necessary to
Table 11
Results for hierarchical lexicon model Nespole!
?Restructuring? entails treatment of question
inversion and separated verb prefixes as well as
merging of phrases in both languages. The same
conventional dictionary was used as in the
experiments the Verbmobil. The language model
was trained on a combination of the English parts
of the Nespole! corpus and the Verbmobil corpus.
BLEU m-WER SSER
Baseline 31.6% 50.2% 41.1%
Restructuring 33.7 45.9 38.1
+ hierarchical lexicon 36.5 44.1 34.3
202
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
train the model parameters. Substantial improvements on the Verbmobil task and the
Nespole! task were achieved.
Some sentence-level restructuring transformations have been introduced which
are motivated by knowledge about the sentence structure in the languages involved.
These transformations aim at the assimilation of word orders in related sentences.
A hierarchy of equivalence classes has been defined on the basis of morpholog-
ical and syntactic information beyond the surface forms. The study of the effect of
using information from either degree of abstraction led to the construction of hier-
archical lexicon models, which combine different items of information in a log-linear
way. The benefit from these combined models is twofold: First, the lexical coverage is
improved, because the translation of unseen word forms can be derived by consider-
ing information from lower levels in the hierarchy. Second, category ambiguity can be
resolved, because syntactical context information is made locally accessible by means
of annotation with morpho-syntactic tags. As a side effect of the preparative work for
setting up the underlying hierarchy of morpho-syntactic information, those pieces of
information inherent in fully inflected word forms that are not relevant for translation
are detected.
A method for aligning corresponding readings in conventional dictionaries con-
taining pairs of fully inflected word forms has been proposed. The approach uses
information deduced from one language side to resolve category ambiguity in the
corresponding entry in the other language. The resulting disambiguated dictionar-
ies have proven to be better suited for improving the quality of machine translation,
especially if they are used in combination with the hierarchical lexicon models.
The amount of bilingual training data required to achieve an acceptable quality of
machine translation has been systematically investigated. All the methods mentioned
previously contribute to a better exploitation of the available bilingual data and thus
to improving translation quality in frameworks with scarce resources. Three setups for
training the parameters of the statistical lexicon on Verbmobil data have been exam-
ined: (1) Using the full 58,000 sentences comprising the bilingual training corpus, (2)
restricting the corpus to 5,000 sentences, and (3) using only a conventional dictionary.
For each of these setups, a relative improvement in terms of subjective sentence error
rate between 13% and 15% as compared to the baseline could be obtained using combi-
nations of the methods described in this article. The amount of bilingual training data
could be reduced to less than 10% of the original corpus, while losing only 1.6% in
accuracy as measured by the subjective sentence error rate. A relative improvement of
16.5% in terms of subjective sentence error rate could also be achieved on the Nespole!
task.
Acknowledgments
This work has been partially supported as
part of the Verbmobil project (contract
number 01 IV 701 T4) by the German
Federal Ministry of Education, Science,
Research and Technology and as part of the
EuTrans project (project number 30268) by
the European Union. For the provision of
the Nespole! data we thank the Nespole!
consortium, listed on the project?s home
page (Nespole! 2000). Special thanks to
Alon Lavie, Lori Levin, Stephan Vogel, and
Alex Waibel (in alphabetical order).
References
Al-Onaizan, Yaser, Ulrich Germann, Ulf
Hermjakob, Kevin Knight, Philipp Koehn,
Daniel Marcu, and Kenji Yamada. 2000.
Translating with scarce resources. In
Proceedings of the 17th National Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pages
672?678, Austin, TX, August.
Berger, Adam L., Peter F. Brown, Stephen A.
Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della Pietra, J. R.
Gillett, and A. S. Kehler. 1996. Language
translation apparatus and method of
using context-based translation models.
United States Patent, Patent Number
5510981, April.
203
Nie?en and Ney SMT with Scarce Resources
Brown, Peter F., Stephen A. Della Pietra,
Vincent J. Della Pietra, and M. J.
Goldsmith. 1993. But dictionaries are data
too. In Proceedings of the ARPA Human
Language Technology Workshop ?93, pages
202?205, Princeton, NJ, March.
Brown, Peter F., John Cocke, Stephen A.
Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della Pietra,
Frederick Jelinek, John D. Lafferty,
Robert L. Mercer, and Paul S. Roossin.
1990. A statistical approach to machine
translation. Computational Linguistics,
16(2):79?85.
Brown, Peter F., John Cocke, Stephen A.
Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della Pietra,
Frederick Jelinek, Robert L. Mercer, and
Paul S. Roossin. 1988. A statistical
approach to language translation. In
Proceedings of COLING 1988: The 12th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pages 71?76, Budapest,
August.
Brown, Peter F., Stephen A. Della Pietra,
Vincent J. Della Pietra, John D. Lafferty,
and Robert L. Mercer. 1992. Analysis,
statistical transfer, and synthesis in
machine translation. In Proceedings of TMI
1992: Fourth International Conference on
Theoretical and Methodological Issues in MT,
pages 83?100, Montreal, Quebec, Canada,
June.
Brown, Peter F., Stephen A. Della Pietra,
Vincent J. Della Pietra, and Robert L.
Mercer. 1993. Mathematics of statistical
machine translation: Parameter
estimation. Computational Linguistics,
19(2):263?311.
Darroch, J. N. and D. Ratcliff. 1972.
Generalized iterative scaling for log-linear
models. Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
43:1470?1480.
Della Pietra, Stephen A., Vincent J.
Della Pietra, and John D. Lafferty. 1995.
Inducing features of random fields. Tech-
nical Report CMU-CS-95-144, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
Foster, George. 2000. A maximum
entropy/minimum divergence translation
model. In Proceedings of ACL 2000: The 38th
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 37?44,
Hong Kong, October.
Garc??a-Varea, Ismael and Francisco
Casacuberta. 2001. Search algorithms for
statistical machine translation based on
dynamic programming and pruning
techniques. In Proceedings of the MT
Summit VIII, pages 115?120, Santiago de
Compostela, Spain, September.
Germann, Ulrich, Michael Jahr, Kevin
Knight, Daniel Marcu, and Kenji Yamada.
2001. Fast decoding and optimal decoding
for machine translation. In Proceedings of
ACL-EACL 2001: The 39th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (joint with EACL 2001), pages
228?235, Toulouse, France, July.
Kanevsky, Dimitri, Salim Roukos, and Jan
Sedivy. 1997. Statistical language model
for inflected languages. United States
Patent, Patent Number 5835888.
Karlsson, Fred. 1990. Constraint grammar as
a framework for parsing running text. In
Proceedings of COLING 1990: The 13th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, volume 3, pages 168?173,
Helsinki, August.
Koehn, Philipp and Kevin Knight. 2001.
Knowledge sources for word-level
translation models. In Lillian Lee and
Donna Harman, editors, Proceedings of
EMNLP 2001: Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 27?35, Pittsburgh, PA, June.
Larson, Martha, Daniel Willett, Joachim
Ko?hler, and Gerhard Rigoll. 2000.
Compound splitting and lexical unit
recombination for improved performance
of a speech recognition system for
German parliamentary speeches. In
Proceedings ICSLP 2000: Sixth International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing,
volume 3, pages 945?948, Beijing,
February.
Lavie, Alon, Chad Langley, Alex Waibel,
Fabio Pianesi, Gianni Lazzari, Paolo
Coletti, Loredana Taddei, and Franco
Balducci. 2001. Architecture and design
considerations in NESPOLE! A speech
translation system for e-commerce
applications. In James Allan, editor,
Proceedings of HLT 2001: First International
Conference on Human Language Technology
Research, pages 31?39, San Diego, March.
Maltese, G., and F. Mancini. 1992. An
automatic technique to include
grammatical and morphological
information in a trigram-based statistical
language model. In Proceedings of ICASSP
1992: International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing, pages
157?160, San Francisco, March.
NESPOLE! (NEgotiating through SPOken
Language in e-commerce). 2000 Project
homepage. Available at http://
nespole.itc.it/.
Ney, Hermann, Sonja Nie?en, Franz Josef
Och, Hassan Sawaf, Christoph Tillmann,
and Stephan Vogel. 2000. Algorithms for
statistical translation of spoken language.
IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio
Processing, 8(1):24?36.
204
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 2
Nie?en, Sonja and Gregor Leusch. 2000.
EvalTrans, a tool for semi-automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In
Proceedings of LREC 2000, Athens. Tool is
available at http://www-i6.Informatik.
RWTH-Aachen.DE/?niessen/Evaluation/.
Nie?en, Sonja and Hermann Ney. 2000.
Improving SMT quality with
morpho-syntactic analysis. In Proceedings
of COLING 2000: The 18th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 1081?1085, Saarbru?cken, Germany,
July.
Nie?en, Sonja and Hermann Ney. 2001.
Morpho-syntactic analysis for reordering
in statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of MT Summit VIII, pages
247?252, Santiago de Compostela, Spain,
September.
Nie?en, Sonja, Stephan Vogel, Hermann
Ney, and Christoph Tillmann. 1998. A DP
based search algorithm for statistical
machine translation. In Proceedings of
COLING-ACL 1998: The 36th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 17th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 960?967, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada, August.
Och, Franz Josef. 2002. Machine Translation:
From Single-Word Models to Alignment
Templates. Ph.D. thesis, Computer Science
Department, RWTH?University of
Technology, Aachen, Germany.
Och, Franz Josef, Christoph Tillmann, and
Hermann Ney. 1999. Improved alignment
models for statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings of EMNLP 1999: Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 20?28, University of
Maryland, College Park, June.
Och, Franz Josef and Hans Weber. 1998.
Improving statistical natural language
translation with categories and rules. In
Proceedings of COLING-ACL 1998: The 36th
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 17th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pages 985?989, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada, August.
Papineni, Kishore, Salim Roukos, Todd
Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2001. Bleu: A
method for automatic evaluation of
machine translation. Technical Report
RC22176 (W0109-022), IBM Research
Division, Yorktown Heights, NY,
September.
Ratnaparkhi, Adwait. 1997. A simple
introduction to maximum entropy models
for natural language processing. Technical
Report 97?08, Institute for Research in
Cognitive Science, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, May.
Tillmann, Christoph and Hermann Ney.
2000. Word re-ordering and DP-based
search in statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings of COLING 2000: The 18th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pages 850?856, Saarbru?cken,
Germany, August.
Toward hierarchical models for statistical machine translation of
inflected languages
Sonja Nie?en and Hermann Ney
Lehrstuhl fu?r Informatik VI,
Computer Science Department
RWTH Aachen - University of Technology
D-52056 Aachen, Germany
 
niessen,ney  @informatik.rwth-aachen.de
Abstract
In statistical machine translation, cor-
respondences between the words in
the source and the target language are
learned from bilingual corpora on the
basis of so called alignment models.
Existing statistical systems for MT of-
ten treat different derivatives of the
same lemma as if they were indepen-
dent of each other. In this paper we
argue that a better exploitation of the
bilingual training data can be achieved
by explicitly taking into account the in-
terdependencies of the different deriva-
tives. We do this along two direc-
tions: Usage of hierarchical lexicon
models and the introduction of equiv-
alence classes in order to ignore in-
formation not relevant for the trans-
lation task. The improvement of the
translation results is demonstrated on a
German-English corpus.
1 Introduction
The statistical approach to machine translation
has become widely accepted in the last few years.
It has been successfully applied to realistic tasks
in various national and international research pro-
grams. However in many applications only small
amounts of bilingual training data are available
for the desired domain and language pair, and it
is highly desirable to avoid at least parts of the
costly data collection process.
Some recent publications have dealt with the
problem of translation with scarce resources.
(Brown et al, 1994) describe the use of dictio-
naries. (Al-Onaizan et al, 2000) report on an ex-
periment of Tetun-to-English translation by dif-
ferent groups, including one using statistical ma-
chine translation. They assume the absence of
linguistic knowledge sources such as morphologi-
cal analyzers and dictionaries. Nevertheless, they
found that human mind is very well capable of
deriving dependencies such as morphology, cog-
nates, proper names, spelling variations etc., and
that this capability was finally at the basis of the
better results produced by humans compared to
corpus based machine translation. The additional
information results from complex reasoning and it
is not directly accessible from the full word form
representation of the data.
In this paper, we take a different point of
view: Even if full bilingual training data is scarce,
monolingual knowledge sources like morpholog-
ical analyzers and data for training the target lan-
guage model as well as conventional dictionar-
ies (one word and its translation per entry) may
be available and of substantial usefulness for im-
proving the performance of statistical translation
systems. This is especially the case for highly in-
flected languages like German.
We address the question of how to achieve a
better exploitation of the resources for training the
parameters for statistical machine translation by
taking into account explicit knowledge about the
languages under consideration. In our approach
we introduce equivalence classes in order to ig-
nore information not relevant to the translation
process. We furthermore suggest the use of hi-
erarchical lexicon models.
The paper is organized as follows. After re-
viewing the statistical approach to machine trans-
lation, we first explain our motivation for exam-
ining the morphological characteristics of an in-
flected language like German. We then describe
the chosen output representation after the analysis
and present our approach for exploiting the infor-
mation from morpho-syntactic analysis. Experi-
mental results on the German-English Verbmobil
task are reported.
2 Statistical Machine Translation
The goal of the translation process in statisti-
cal machine translation can be formulated as fol-
lows: A source language string   		 

is to be translated into a target language string


 


 		



. In the experiments reported in this
paper, the source language is German and the tar-
get language is English. Every English string is
considered as a possible translation for the input.
If we assign a probability  
    to each pair
of strings  
     , then according to Bayes? de-
cision rule, we have to choose the English string
that maximizes the product of the English lan-
guage model  
    and the string translation
model  