Addressee Identification in Face-to-Face Meetings
Natasa Jovanovic, Rieks op den Akker and Anton Nijholt
University of Twente
PO Box 217 Enschede
The Netherlands
{natasa,infrieks,A.Nijholt}@ewi.utwente.nl
Abstract
We present results on addressee identifica-
tion in four-participants face-to-face meet-
ings using Bayesian Network and Naive
Bayes classifiers. First, we investigate
how well the addressee of a dialogue
act can be predicted based on gaze, ut-
terance and conversational context fea-
tures. Then, we explore whether informa-
tion about meeting context can aid classi-
fiers? performances. Both classifiers per-
form the best when conversational context
and utterance features are combined with
speaker?s gaze information. The classifiers
show little gain from information about
meeting context.
1 Introduction
Addressing is an aspect of every form of commu-
nication. It represents a form of orientation and
directionality of the act the current actor performs
toward the particular other(s) who are involved in
an interaction. In conversational communication
involving two participants, the hearer is always the
addressee of the speech act that the speaker per-
forms. Addressing, however, becomes a real issue
in multi-party conversation.
The concept of addressee as well as a vari-
ety of mechanisms that people use in addressing
their speech have been extensively investigated
by conversational analysts and social psycholo-
gists (Goffman, 1981a; Goodwin, 1981; Clark and
Carlson, 1982).
Recently, addressing has received consider-
able attention in modeling multi-party interac-
tion in various domains. Research on au-
tomatic addressee identification has been con-
ducted in the context of mixed human-human
and human-computer interaction (Bakx et al,
2003; van Turnhout et al, 2005), human-human-
robot interaction (Katzenmaier et al, 2004), and
mixed human-agents and multi-agents interaction
(Traum, 2004). In the context of automatic anal-
ysis of multi-party face-to-face conversation, Ot-
suka et al (2005) proposed a framework for
automating inference of conversational structure
that is defined in terms of conversational roles:
speaker, addressee and unaddressed participants.
In this paper, we focus on addressee identifica-
tion in a special type of communication, namely,
face-to-face meetings. Moreover, we restrict our
analysis to small group meetings with four partic-
ipants. Automatic analysis of recorded meetings
has become an emerging domain for a range of
research focusing on different aspects of interac-
tions among meeting participants. The outcomes
of this research should be combined in a targeted
application that would provide users with useful
information about meetings. For answering ques-
tions such as ?Who was asked to prepare a presen-
tation for the next meeting?? or ?Were there any
arguments between participants A and B??, some
sort of understanding of dialogue structure is re-
quired. In addition to identification of dialogue
acts that participants perform in multi-party dia-
logues, identification of addressees of those acts is
also important for inferring dialogue structure.
There are many applications related to meeting
research that could benefit from studying address-
ing in human-human interactions. The results
can be used by those who develop communicative
agents in interactive intelligent environments and
remote meeting assistants. These agents need to
recognize when they are being addressed and how
they should address people in the environment.
This paper presents results on addressee identi-
169
fication in four-participants face-to-face meetings
using Bayesian Network and Naive Bayes classi-
fiers. The goals in the current paper are (1) to
find relevant features for addressee classification
in meeting conversations using information ob-
tained from multi-modal resources - gaze, speech
and conversational context, (2) to explore to what
extent the performances of classifiers can be im-
proved by combining different types of features
obtained from these resources, (3) to investigate
whether the information about meeting context
can aid the performances of classifiers, and (4) to
compare performances of the Bayesian Network
and Naive Bayes classifiers for the task of ad-
dressee prediction over various feature sets.
2 Addressing in face-to-face meetings
When a speaker contributes to the conversation, all
those participants who happen to be in perceptual
range of this event will have ?some sort of partic-
ipation status relative to it?. The conversational
roles that the participants take in a given conversa-
tional situation make up the ?participation frame-
work? (Goffman, 1981b).
Goffman (1976) distinguished three basic kinds
of hearers: those who overhear, whether or not
their unratified participation is unintentional or en-
couraged; those who are ratified but are not specif-
ically addressed by the speaker (also called unad-
dressed recipients (Goffman, 1981a)); and those
ratified participants who are addressed. Ratified
participants are those participants who are allowed
to take part in conversation. Regarding hearers?
roles in meetings, we are focused only on ratified
participants. Therefore, the problem of addressee
identification amounts to the problem of distin-
guishing addressed from unaddressed participants
for each dialogue act that speakers perform.
Goffman (1981a) defined addressees as those
?ratified participants () oriented to by the speaker
in a manner to suggest that his words are particu-
larly for them, and that some answer is therefore
anticipated from them, more so than from the other
ratified participants?. According to this, it is the
speaker who selects his addressee; the addressee is
the one who is expected by the speaker to react on
what the speaker says and to whom, therefore, the
speaker is giving primary attention in the present
act.
In meeting conversations, a speaker may ad-
dress his utterance to the whole group of partici-
pants present in the meeting, or to a particular sub-
group of them, or to a single participant in partic-
ular. A speaker can also just think aloud or mum-
ble to himself without really addressing anybody
(e.g.?What else do I want to say?? (while try-
ing to evoke more details about the issue that he is
presenting)). We excluded self-addressed speech
from our study.
Addressing behavior is behavior that speakers
show to express to whom they are addressing their
speech. It depends on the course of the conver-
sation, the status of attention of participants, their
current involvement in the discussion as well as
on what the participants know about each others?
roles and knowledge, whether explicit addressing
behavior is called for. Using a vocative is the ex-
plicit verbal way to address someone. In some
cases the speaker identifies the addressee of his
speech by looking at the addressee, sometimes ac-
companying this by deictic hand gestures. Ad-
dressees can also be designated by the manner of
speaking. For example, by whispering, a speaker
can select a single individual or a group of people
as addressees. Addressees are often designated by
the content of what is being said. For example,
when making the suggestion ?We all have to de-
cide together about the design?, the speaker is ad-
dressing the whole group.
In meetings, people may perform various group
actions (termed as meeting actions) such as pre-
sentations, discussions or monologues (McCowan
et al, 2003). A type of group action that meeting
participants perform may influence the speaker?s
addressing behavior. For example, speakers may
show different behavior during a presentation than
during a discussion when addressing an individ-
ual: regardless of the fact that a speaker has
turned his back to a participant in the audience
during a presentation, he most probably addresses
his speech to the group including that participant,
whereas the same behavior during a discussion, in
many situations, indicates that that participant is
unaddressed.
In this paper, we focus on speech and gaze as-
pects of addressing behavior as well as on con-
textual aspects such as conversational history and
meeting actions.
3 Cues for addressee identification
In this section, we present our motivation for fea-
ture selection, referring also to some existing work
170
on the examination of cues that are relevant for ad-
dressee identification.
Adjacency pairs and addressing - Adjacency
pairs (AP) are minimal dialogic units that con-
sist of pairs of utterances called ?first pair-part?
(or a-part) and the ?second pair-part? (or b-part)
that are produced by different speakers. Examples
include question-answers or statement-agreement.
In the exploration of the conversational organiza-
tion, special attention has been given to the a-parts
that are used as one of the basic techniques for se-
lecting a next speaker (Sacks et al, 1974). For ad-
dressee identification, the main focus is on b-parts
and their addressees. It is to be expected that the
a-part provides a useful cue for identification of
addressee of the b-part (Galley et al, 2004). How-
ever, it does not imply that the speaker of the a-part
is always the addressee of the b-part. For example,
A can address a question to B, whereas B?s reply
to A?s question is addressed to the whole group. In
this case, the addressee of the b-part includes the
speaker of the a-part.
Dialogue acts and addressing When designing
an utterance, a speaker intends not only to per-
form a certain communicative act that contributes
to a coherent dialogue (in the literature referred
to as dialogue act), but also to perform that act to-
ward the particular others. Within a turn, a speaker
may perform several dialogue acts, each of those
having its own addressee ( e.g. I agree with you
[agreement; addressed to a previous speaker] but
is this what we want [information request; ad-
dressed to the group]). Dialogue act types can
provide useful information about addressing types
since some types of dialogue acts -such as agree-
ments or disagreements- tend to be addressed to
an individual rather than to a group. More infor-
mation about the addressee of a dialogue can be
induced by combining the dialogue act informa-
tion with some lexical markers that are used as ad-
dressee ?indicators? (e.g. you, we, everybody, all
of you) (Jovanovic and op den Akker, 2004).
Gaze behavior and addressing Analyzing
dyadic conversations, researchers into social
interaction observed that gaze in social inter-
action is used for several purposes: to control
communication, to provide a visual feedback, to
communicate emotions and to communicate the
nature of relationships (Kendon, 1967; Argyle,
1969).
Recent studies into multi-party interaction em-
phasized the relevance of gaze as a means of ad-
dressing. Vertegaal (1998) investigated to what ex-
tent the focus of visual attention might function as
an indicator for the focus of ?dialogic attention? in
four-participants face-to-face conversations. ?Di-
alogic attention? refers to attention while listening
to a person as well as attention while talking to
one or more persons. Empirical findings show that
when a speaker is addressing an individual, there
is 77% chance that the gazed person is addressed.
When addressing a triad, speaker gaze seems to be
evenly distributed over the listeners in the situa-
tion where participants are seated around the ta-
ble. It is also shown that on average a speaker
spends significantly more time gazing at an indi-
vidual when addressing the whole group, than at
others when addressing a single individual. When
addressing an individual, people gaze 1.6 times
more while listening (62%) than while speaking
(40%). When addressing a triad the amount of
speaker gaze increases significantly to 59%. Ac-
cording to all these estimates, we can expect that
gaze directional cues are good indicators for ad-
dressee prediction.
However, these findings cannot be generalized
in the situations where some objects of interest are
present in the conversational environment, since
it is expected that the amount of time spent look-
ing at the persons will decrease significantly. As
shown in (Bakx et al, 2003), in a situation where
a user interacts with a multimodal information sys-
tem and in the meantime talks to another person,
the user looks most of the time at the system, both
when talking to the system (94%) and when talk-
ing to the user (57%). Also, another person looks
at the system in 60% of cases when talking to the
user. Bakx et al (2003) also showed that some im-
provement in addressee detection can be achieved
by combining utterance duration with gaze.
In meeting conversations, the contribution of
the gaze direction to addressee prediction is also
affected by the current meeting activity and seat-
ing arrangement (Jovanovic and op den Akker,
2004). For example, when giving a presentation,
a speaker most probably addresses his speech to
the whole audience, although he may only look at
a single participant in the audience. A seating ar-
rangement determines a visible area for each meet-
ing participant. During a turn, a speaker mostly
looks at the participants who are in his visible area.
171
Moreover, the speaker frequently looks at a sin-
gle participant in his visual area when addressing
a group. However, when he wants to address a sin-
gle participant outside his visual area, he will often
turn his body and head toward that participant.
In this paper, we explored not only the effec-
tiveness of the speaker?s gaze direction, but also
the effectiveness of the listeners? gaze directions
as cues for addressee prediction.
Meeting context and addressing As Goff-
man (1981a) has noted, ?the notion of a conver-
sational encounter does not suffice in dealing with
the context in which words are spoken; a social
occasion involving a podium event or no speech
event at all may be involved, and in any case, the
whole social situation, the whole surround, must
always be considered?. A set of various meet-
ing actions that participants perform in meetings is
one aspect of the social situation that differentiates
meetings from other contexts of talk such as ordi-
nary conversations, interviews or trials. As noted
above, it influences addressing behavior as well
as the contribution of gaze to addressee identifi-
cation. Furthermore, distributions of addressing
types vary for different meeting actions. Clearly,
the percentage of the utterances addressed to the
whole group during a presentation is expected to
be much higher than during a discussion.
4 Data collection
To train and test our classifiers, we used a small
multimodal corpus developed for studying ad-
dressing behavior in meetings (Jovanovic et al,
2005). The corpus contains 12 meetings recorded
at the IDIAP smart meeting room in the research
program of the M41 and AMI projects2. The
room has been equipped with fully synchronized
multi-channel audio and video recording devices,
a whiteboard and a projector screen. The seating
arrangement includes two participants at each of
two opposite sides of the rectangular table. The
total amount of the recorded data is approximately
75 minutes. For experiments presented in this pa-
per, we have selected meetings from the M4 data
collection. These meetings are scripted in terms of
type and schedule of group actions, but content is
natural and unconstrained.
The meetings are manually annotated with dia-
logue acts, addressees, adjacency pairs and gaze
1http://www.m4project.org
2http://www.amiproject.org
direction. Each type of annotation is described
in detail in (Jovanovic et al, 2005). Additionally,
the available annotations of meeting actions for the
M4 meetings3 were converted into the corpus for-
mat and included in the collection.
The dialogue act tag set employed for the cor-
pus creation is based on the MRDA (Meeting
Recorder Dialogue Act) tag set (Dhillon et al,
2004). The MRDA tag set represents a modifi-
cation of the SWDB-DAMSL tag set (Jurafsky et
al., 1997) for an application to multi-party meet-
ing dialogues. The tag set used for the corpus cre-
ation is made by grouping the MRDA tags into 17
categories that are divided into seven groups: ac-
knowledgments/backchannels, statements, ques-
tions, responses, action motivators, checks and po-
liteness mechanisms. A mapping between this tag
set and the MRDA tag set is given in (Jovanovic
et al, 2005). Unlike MRDA where each utterance
is marked with a label made up of one or more
tags from the set, each utterance in the corpus is
marked as Unlabeled or with exactly one tag
from the set. Adjacency pairs are labeled by mark-
ing dialogue acts that occur as their a-part and b-
part.
Since all meetings in the corpus consist of four
participants, the addressee of a dialogue act is la-
beled as Unknown or with one of the following
addressee tags: individual Px, a subgroup of par-
ticipants Px,Py or the whole audience Px,Py,Pz.
Labeling gaze direction denotes labeling gazed
targets for each meeting participants. As the only
targets of interest for addressee identification are
meeting participants, the meetings were annotated
with the tag set that contains tags that are linked to
each participant Px and the NoTarget tag that is
used when the speaker does not look at any of the
participants.
Meetings are annotated with a set of six meet-
ing actions described in (McCowan et al, 2003):
monologue, presentation, white-board, discussion,
consensus, disagreement and note-taking.
Reliability of the annotation schema As re-
ported in (Jovanovic et al, 2005), gaze annota-
tion has been reproduced reliably (segmentation
80.40% (N=939); classification ? = 0.95). Table
1 shows reliability of dialogue act segmentation
as well as Kappa values for dialogue act and ad-
dressee classification for two different annotation
3http://mmm.idiap.ch/
172
groups that annotated two different sets of meeting
data.
Group Seg(%) N DA(?) ADD(?)
B&E 91.73 377 0.77 0.81
M&R 86.14 367 0.70 0.70
Table 1: Inter-annotator agreement on DA and ad-
dressee annotation: N- number of agreed segments
5 Addressee classification
In this section we present the results on addressee
classification in four-persons face-to-face meet-
ings using Bayesian Network and Naive Bayes
classifiers.
5.1 Classification task
In a dialogue situation, which is an event which
lasts as long as the dialogue act performed by the
speaker in that situation, the class variable is the
addressee of the dialogue act (ADD). Since there
are only a few instances of subgroup addressing in
the data, we removed them from the data set and
excluded all possible subgroups of meeting par-
ticipants from the set of class values. Therefore,
we define addressee classifiers to identify one of
the following class values: individual Px where
x ? {0,1,2,3} and ALLPwhich denotes the whole
group.
5.2 Feature set
To identify the addressee of a dialogue act we
initially used three sorts of features: conversa-
tional context features (later referred to as contex-
tual features), utterance features and gaze features.
Additionally, we conducted experiments with an
extended feature set including a feature that con-
veys information about meeting context.
Contextual features provide information about
the preceding utterances. We experimented with
using information about the speaker, the addressee
and the dialogue act of the immediately preceding
utterance on the same or a different channel (SP-
1, ADD-1, DA-1) as well as information about
the related utterance (SP-R, ADD-R, DA-R). A re-
lated utterance is the utterance that is the a-part of
an adjacency pair with the current utterance as the
b-part. Information about the speaker of the cur-
rent utterance (SP) has also been included in the
contextual feature set.
As utterance features, we used a subset of lex-
ical features presented in (Jovanovic and op den
Akker, 2004) as useful cues for determining
whether the utterance is single or group addressed.
The subset includes the following features:
? does the utterance contain personal pronouns ?we? or
?you?, both of them, or neither of them?
? does the utterance contain possessive pronouns or pos-
sessive adjectives (?your/yours? or ?our/ours?), their
combination or neither of them?
? does the utterance contain indefinite pronouns such as
?somebody?, ?someone?, ?anybody?, ?anyone?, ?ev-
erybody? or ?everyone??
? does the utterance contain the name of participant Px?
Utterance features also include information about
the utterance?s conversational function (DA tag)
and information about utterance duration i.e.
whether the utterance is short or long. In our ex-
periments, an utterance is considered as a short ut-
terance, if its duration is less than or equal to 1
sec.
We experimented with a variety of gaze fea-
tures. In the first experiment, for each participant
Px we defined a set of features in the form Px-
looks-Py and Px-looks-NT where x,y ? {0,1,2,3}
and x 6= y; Px-looks-NT represents that partici-
pant Px does not look at any of the participants.
The value set represents the number of times that
speaker Px looks at Py or looks away during the
time span of the utterance: zero for 0, one for 1,
two for 2 and more for 3 or more times. In the
second experiment, we defined a feature set that
incorporates only information about gaze direction
of the current speaker (SP-looks-Px and SP-looks-
NT) with the same value set as in the first experi-
ment.
As to meeting context, we experimented with
different values of the feature that represents the
meeting actions (MA-TYPE). First, we used a full
set of speech based meeting actions that was ap-
plied for the manual annotation of the meetings in
the corpus: monologue, discussion, presentation,
white-board, consensus and disagreement. As the
results on modeling group actions in meetings pre-
sented in (McCowan et al, 2003) indicate that
consensus and disagreements were mostly mis-
classified as discussion, we have also conducted
experiments with a set of four values for MA-
TYPE, where consensus, disagreement and dis-
cussion meeting actions were grouped in one cat-
egory marked as discussion.
173
5.3 Results and Discussions
To train and test the addressee classifiers, we used
the hand-annotated M4 data from the corpus. Af-
ter we had discarded the instances labeled with
Unknown or subgroup addressee tags, there were
781 instances left available for the experiments.
The distribution of the class values in the selected
data is presented in Table 2.
ALLP P0 P1 P2 P3
40.20% 13.83% 17.03% 15.88% 13.06%
Table 2: Distribution of addressee values
For learning the Bayesian Network structure,
we applied the K2 algorithm (Cooper and Her-
skovits, 1992). The algorithm requires an ordering
on the observable features; different ordering leads
to different network structures. We conducted ex-
periments with several orderings regarding feature
types as well as with different orderings regarding
features of the same type. The obtained classifi-
cation results for different orderings were nearly
identical. For learning conditional probability dis-
tributions, we used the algorithm implemented in
theWEKA toolbox4 that produces direct estimates
of the conditional probabilities.
5.3.1 Initial experiments without meeting
context
The performances of the classifiers are mea-
sured using different feature sets. First, we mea-
sured the performances of classifiers using utter-
ance features, gaze features and contextual fea-
tures separately. Then, we conducted experiments
with all possible combinations of different types of
features. For each classifier, we performed 10-fold
cross-validation. Table 3 summarizes the accura-
cies of the classifiers (with 95% confidence inter-
val) for different feature sets (1) using gaze infor-
mation of all meeting participants and (2) using
only information about speaker gaze direction.
The results show that the Bayesian Network
classifier outperforms the Naive Bayes classifier
for all feature sets, although the difference is sig-
nificant only for the feature sets that include con-
textual features.
For the feature set that contains only informa-
tion about gaze behavior combined with infor-
mation about the speaker (Gaze+SP), both clas-
sifiers perform significantly better when exploit-
ing gaze information of all meeting participants.
4http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ ml/weka/
In other words, when using solely focus of visual
attention to identify the addressee of a dialogue
act, listeners? focus of attention provides valuable
information for addressee prediction. The same
conclusion can be drawn when adding informa-
tion about utterance duration to the gaze feature
set (Gaze+SP+Short), although for the Bayesian
Network classifier the difference is not significant.
For all other feature sets, the classifiers do not per-
form significantly different when including or ex-
cluding the listeners gaze information. Even more,
both classifiers perform better using only speaker
gaze information in all cases except when com-
bined utterance and gaze features are exploited
(Utterance+Gaze+SP).
The Bayesian network and Naive Bayes clas-
sifiers show the same changes in the perfor-
mances over different feature sets. The re-
sults indicate that the selected utterance fea-
tures are less informative for addressee predic-
tion (BN:52.62%, NB:52.50%) compared to con-
textual features (BN:73.11%; NB:68.12%) or fea-
tures of gaze behavior (BN:66.45%, NB:64.53%).
The results also show that adding the informa-
tion about the utterance duration to the gaze fea-
tures, slightly increases the accuracies of the clas-
sifiers (BN:67.73%, NB:65.94%), which confirms
findings presented in (Bakx et al, 2003). Com-
bining the information from the gaze and speech
channels significantly improves the performances
of the classifiers (BN:70.68%; NB:69.78%) in
comparison to performances obtained from each
channel separately. Furthermore, higher accura-
cies are gained when adding contextual features to
the utterance features (BN:76.82%; NB:72.21%)
and even more to the features of gaze behavior
(BN:80.03%, NB:77.59%). As it is expected, the
best performances are achieved by combining all
three types of features (BN:82.59%, NB:78.49%),
although not significantly better compared to com-
bined contextual and gaze features.
We also explored how well the addressee can be
predicted excluding information about the related
utterance (i.e. AP information). The best perfor-
mances are achieved combining speaker gaze in-
formation with contextual and utterance features
(BN:79.39%; NB:76.06%). A small decrease in
the classification accuracies when excluding AP
information (about 3%) indicates that remaining
contextual, utterance and gaze features capture
most of the useful information provided by AP.
174
Baysian Networks Naive Bayes
Feature sets Gaze All Gaze SP Gaze All Gaze SP
All Features 81.05% (?2.75) 82.59% (?2.66) 78.10% (?2.90) 78.49% (?2.88)
Context 73.11% (?3.11) 68.12% (?3.27)
Utterance+SP 52.62% (?3.50) 52.50% (?3.50)
Gaze+SP 66.45% (?3.31) 62.36% (?3.40) 64.53% (?3.36) 59.02% (?3.45)
Gaze+SP+Short 67.73% (?3.28) 66.45% (?3.31) 65.94% (?3.32) 61.46% (?3.41)
Context+Utterance 76.82% (?2.96) 72.21% (?3.14)
Context+Gaze 79.00% (?2.86) 80.03% (?2.80) 74.90% (?3.04) 77.59% (?2.92)
Utterance+Gaze+SP 70.68% (?3.19) 70.04% (?3.21) 69.78% (?3.22) 68.63% (?3.25)
Table 3: Classification results for Bayesian Network and Naive Bayes classifiers using gaze information
of all meeting participants (Gaze All) and using speaker gaze information (Gaze SP)
Error analysis Further analysis of confusion
matrixes for the best performed BN and NB clas-
sifiers, show that most misclassifications were be-
tween addressing types (individual vs. group):
each Px was more confused with ALLP than with
Py. A similar type of confusion is observed be-
tween human annotators regarding addressee an-
notation (Jovanovic et al, 2005). Out of all mis-
classified cases for each classifier, individual types
of addressing (Px) were, in average, misclassified
with addressing the group (ALLP) in 73% cases
for NB, and 68% cases for BN.
5.3.2 Experiments with meeting context
We examined whether meeting context informa-
tion can aid the classifiers? performances. First,
we conducted experiments using the six values
set for the MA-TYPE feature. Then, we exper-
imented with employing the reduced set of four
types of meeting actions (see Section 5.2). The
accuracies obtained by combining the MA-TYPE
feature with contextual, utterance and gaze fea-
tures are presented in Table 4.
Bayesian Networks Naive Bayes
Features Gaze All Gaze SP Gaze All Gaze SP
MA-6+All 81.82% 82.84% 78.74% 79.90%
MA-4+All 81.69% 83.74% 78.23% 79.13%
Table 4: Classification results combining MA-
TYPE with the initial feature set
The results indicate that adding meeting con-
text information to the initial feature set improves
slightly, but not significantly, the classifiers? per-
formances. The highest accuracy (83.74%) is
achieved using the Bayesian Network classifier by
combining the four-values MA-TYPE feature with
contextual, utterance and the speaker?s gaze fea-
tures.
6 Conclusion and Future work
We presented results on addressee classification
in four-participants face-to-face meetings using
Bayesian Network and Naive Bayes classifiers.
The experiments presented should be seen as pre-
liminary explorations of appropriate features and
models for addressee identification in meetings.
We investigated how well the addressee of a di-
alogue act can be predicted (1) using utterance,
gaze and conversational context features alone as
well as (2) using various combinations of these
features. Regarding gaze features, classifiers? per-
formances are measured using gaze directional
cues of the speaker only as well as of all meeting
participants. We found that contextual informa-
tion aids classifiers? performances over gaze in-
formation as well as over utterance information.
Furthermore, the results indicate that selected ut-
terance features are the most unreliable cues for
addressee prediction. The listeners? gaze direc-
tion provides useful information only in the situa-
tion where gaze features are used alone. Combina-
tions of features from various resources increases
classifiers? performances in comparison to perfor-
mances obtained from each resource separately.
However, the highest accuracies for both classi-
fiers are reached by combining contextual and ut-
terance features with speaker?s gaze (BN:82.59%,
NB:78.49%). We have also explored the ef-
fect of meeting context on the classification task.
Surprisingly, addressee classifiers showed little
gain from the information about meeting actions
(BN:83.74%, NB:79.90%). For all feature sets,
the Bayesian Network classifier outperforms the
Naive Bayes classifier.
In contrast to Vertegaal (1998) and Otsuka et
al. (2005) findings, where it is shown that gaze
can be a good predictor for addressee in four-
participants face-to-face conversations, our results
175
show that in four-participants face-to-face meet-
ings, gaze is less effective as an addressee indi-
cator. This can be due to several reasons. First,
they used different seating arrangements which is
implicated in the organization of gaze. Second,
our meeting environment contains attentional ?dis-
tracters? such as whiteboard, projector screen and
notes. Finally, during a meeting, in contrast to an
ordinary conversation, participants perform vari-
ous meeting actions which may influence gaze as
an aspect of addressing behavior.
We will continue our work on addressee identi-
fication on the large AMI data collection that is
currently in production. The AMI corpus con-
tains more natural, scenario-based, meetings that
involve groups focused on the design of a TV re-
mote control. Some initial experiments on the
AMI pilot data show that additional challenges for
addressee identification on the AMI data are: roles
that participants play in the meetings (e.g. project
manager or marketing expert) and additional at-
tentional ?distracters? present in the meeting room
such as, the task object at first place and laptops.
This means that a richer feature set should be ex-
plored to improve classifiers? performances on the
AMI data including, for example, the background
knowledge about participants? roles. We will also
focus on the development of new models that bet-
ter handle conditional and contextual dependen-
cies among different types of features.
Acknowledgments
This work was partly supported by the European
Union 6th FWP IST Integrated Project AMI (Aug-
mented Multi-party Interaction, FP6-506811, pub-
lication AMI-153).
References
M. Argyle. 1969. Social Interaction. London: Tavis-
tock Press.
I. Bakx, K. van Turnhout, and J. Terken. 2003. Facial
orientation during multi-party interaction with infor-
mation kiosks. In Proc. of INTERACT.
H. H. Clark and B. T. Carlson. 1982. Hearers and
speech acts. Language, 58:332?373.
G. Cooper and E. Herskovits. 1992. Bayesian method
for the induction of probabilistic networks from
data. Machine Learning, 9:309?347.
R. Dhillon, S. Bhagat, H. Carvey, and E. Shriberg.
2004. Meeting recorder project: Dialogue act label-
ing guide. Technical report, ICSI, Berkeley, USA.
M. Galley, K. McKeown, J. Hirschberg, and
E. Shriberg. 2004. Identifying agreement and
disagreement in conversational speech: Use of
bayesian networks to model pragmatic dependen-
cies. In Proc. of 42nd Meeting of the ACL.
E. Goffman. 1976. Replies and responses. Language
in Society, 5:257?313.
E. Goffman. 1981a. Footing. In Forms of Talk, pages
124?159. University of Pennsylvania Press.
E. Goffman. 1981b. Forms of Talk. University of
Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.
C. Goodwin. 1981. Conversational Organiza-
tion: Interaction Between Speakers and Hearers.
NY:Academic Press.
N. Jovanovic and R. op den Akker. 2004. Towards
automatic addressee identification in multi-party di-
alogues. In Proc of the 5th SIGDial.
N. Jovanovic, R. op den Akker, and A. Nijholt. 2005.
A corpus for studying addressing behavior in face-
to-face meetings. In Proc. of the 6th SIGDial.
D. Jurafsky, L. Shriberg, and D. Biasca. 1997. Switch-
board swbd-damsl shallow-discourse-function an-
notation coders manual, draft 13. Technical report,
University of Colorado, Institute of Cognitive Sci-
ence.
M. Katzenmaier, R. Stiefelhagen, and T. Schultz. 2004.
Identifying the addressee in human-human-robot in-
teractions based on head pose and speech. In Proc.
of ICMI.
A. Kendon. 1967. Some functions of gaze direction in
social interaction. Acta Psychologica, 32:1?25.
I. McCowan, S. Bengio, D. Gatica-Perez, G. Lathoud,
F. Monay, D. Moore, P. Wellner, and H. Bourlard.
2003. Modeling human interactions in meetings. In
Proc. IEEE ICASSP.
K. Otsuka, Y. Takemae, J. Yamato, and H. Murase.
2005. A probabilistic inference of multiparty-
conversation structure based on markov-switching
models of gaze patterns, head directions, and utter-
ances. In Proc. of ICMI.
H. Sacks, E. A. Schegloff, and G. Jefferson. 1974.
A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-
taking for conversation. Language, 50:696?735.
D. Traum. 2004. Issues in multi-party dialogues. In
F. Dignum, editor, Advances in Agent Communica-
tion, pages 201?211. Springer-Verlag.
K. van Turnhout, J. Terken, I. Bakx, and B. Eggen.
2005. Identifying the intended addressee in
mixed human-human and human-computer interac-
tion from non-verbal features. In Proc. of ICMI.
R. Vertegaal. 1998. Look who is talking to whom.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Twente, September.
176
Dialogue Act Recognition with Bayesian Networks for Dutch Dialogues
Simon Keizer, Rieks op den Akker and Anton Nijholt
Department of Computer Science
University of Twente
P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands
{skeizer,infrieks,anijholt}@cs.utwente.nl
Abstract
This paper presents work on using
Bayesian networks for the dialogue act
recognition module of a dialogue sys-
tem for Dutch dialogues. The Bayesian
networks can be constructed from the
data in an annotated dialogue corpus.
For two series of experiments - using
different corpora but the same anno-
tation scheme - recognition results are
presented and evaluated.
1 Introduction
In several papers (Nijholt, 2000; Luin et al, 2001;
Nijholt et al, 2001) we reported on our virtual
music centre - the VMC - a virtual environment
inhabited by (embodied) agents and on multi-
modal interaction between human users and these
agents. Of these agents Karin is an embodied
agent users can ask for information about theatre
performances (see Figure 1).
A second agent is the navigation agent. Nav-
igation is a) way finding - the user knows where
he wants to go but doesn?t know how to go there;
or b) exploring the environment - the user walks
through the environment to obtain an overview of
the building and the objects, locations, rooms that
are in it. Related to these navigation tasks the nav-
igation assistant has the task to assist the visitor
in a) explaining how to go from his current loca-
tion to a location he is looking for and b) to give
the agent information about objects, and locations
in the environment. The navigation agent is not
present as an avatar in the environment. The user
sees the environment from a first person perspec-
tive and interacts with the agents by means of a
Dutch dialogue. The user has two views of the
environment: a) a first person view of the visible
part of the 3D virtual theatre and b) an abstract
2D map of the floor of the building the user is
visiting. This map is shown in a separate win-
dow. In a multi-modal interaction the user can
point at locations or objects on the 2D map and
either ask information about that object or loca-
tion or he can ask the assistant to bring him to the
location pointed at.
Figure 1: Karin in the VMC.
An important part of our dialogue systems for
natural language interaction with agents is the
module for recognition of the dialogue acts per-
formed by the human user (visitor). This pa-
per discusses the construction of and experiments
with Bayesian networks as implementation of this
module.
Various other work has been presented on us-
ing statistical techniques for dialogue act classi-
fication (Andernach, 1996; Stolcke et al, 2000),
and even some first efforts on using Bayesian net-
works for this task (Pulman, 1996; Keizer, 2001).
Other work on using Bayesian networks in dia-
logue systems aims more at interaction and user
modelling (Paek and Horvitz, 2000) and does not
specifically involve linguistic aspects.
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2
       Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 88-94.  Association for Computational Linguistics.
                  Proceedings of the Third SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue,
provides some necessary and general background
about the use of Bayesian networks for speech act
recognition. In Section 3 we discuss experiments
with a Bayesian network for dialogue act classi-
fication based on a dialogue corpus for the Karin
agent. In Section 4 we discuss our current ex-
periments with a network for the navigation dia-
logue system that was automatically created from
a small corpus. Section 5 reflects on our findings
and presents plans for the near future.
2 Bayesian Networks and Speech Act
Recognition
Since Austin and Searle deliberately producing a
linguistic utterance (?locutionary act?) is perform-
ing a speech act (?illocutionary act?). Many re-
searchers have contributed in distinguishing and
categorising types of speech acts we can perform.
See (Traum, 2000) for a valuable discussion on
dialogue act taxonomies and an extensive bibli-
ography.
A dialogue system needs a user model. The
better the user model the better the system is able
to understand the user?s intentions from the locu-
tionary act. We consider the human participant
in a dialogue as a source of communicative ac-
tions. Actions can be some verbal dialogue act
or some non-verbal pointing act (the act of point-
ing at some object). We assume the user is ra-
tional: there is a dependency between the action
performed and the intentional state of the user. If
we restrict to communicative acts that are realized
by uttering (speaking or typing) a sentence we
can model the user by a probability distribution
P (U = u|DA = da): the probability that the user
produces an utterance u (the stochastic variable U
has value u) given that he performs a dialogue act
da ( DA has the value da). Or - maybe better: the
confidence we can have in believing that the user
uses utterance u if we know that the dialogue act
he performs is da. Since there are many distinct
wordings u for performing a given dialogue act
da and on the other hand there are distinct dia-
logue acts that can be performed by the same ut-
terance, we need more than superficial linguistic
information to decide upon the intended dialogue
act given an utterance. The task of the dialogue
act recognition (DAR) module of a dialogue sys-
tem is to answer the question: what is the most
likely dialogue act da intended by the user given
the system has observed the utterance u in a dia-
logue context c. (Notice that we have equated the
utterance produced by the user with the utterance
recognised by the system: there is no information
loss between the module that records the utter-
ance and the input of the dialogue act recognition
module.)
To make this problem tractable we further re-
strict the model by assuming that a) the user en-
gaged in a dialogue can only have the intention
to perform one of a finite number of possible di-
alogue acts; b) each of the possible natural lan-
guage utterances u produced by the user and ob-
served by the system can be represented by a fi-
nite number of feature value pairs (fi = vi); and
c) the dialogue context can be represented by a
finite number of feature value pairs (gi = ci).
Given these restrictions the DAR problem be-
comes to find that value da of DA that maximises
P ( DA = da | f1 = v1, . . . , fn = vn,
g1 = c1, . . . , gm = cm ).
For the probabilistic model from which this can
be computed we use a Bayesian network (Pearl,
1988). A Bayesian network is a directed acyclic
graph in which the nodes represent the stochastic
variables considered, while the structure (given
by the arcs between the nodes) constitutes a set
of conditional independencies among these vari-
ables: a variable is conditionally independent of
its non-descendants in the network, given its par-
ents in the network. Consider the network in Fig-
ure 2: it contains one node representing the di-
alogue act (DA), 3 nodes representing utterance
features (NumWrds, CanYou and IWant) and
a node representing a context feature (PrevDA).
From the network structure follows that for ex-
ample variable DA is conditionally independent
of variable NumWrds, given variable CanYou.
The conditional independencies make the
model computationally more feasible: finding a
specification of the joint probability distribution
(jpd) for the model reduces to finding the condi-
tional probability distributions of each of the vari-
ables given their network parents. In our example
network, the following jpd specification holds:
P (DA, NumWrds,CanYou, IWant,PrevDA) =
P (IWant) ? P (PrevDA|DA) ? P (CanYou) ?
DA
PrevDA
IWant
CanYou
NumWrds
Figure 2: A Bayesian Network for Dialogue Act
Recognition.
? P (DA|CanYou, IWant) ?
? P (NumWrds|CanYou,PrevDA)
The construction of a Bayesian network hence
amounts to choosing a network structure (the con-
ditional independencies) and choosing the condi-
tional probability distributions. In practice, the
probabilities will have to be assessed from em-
pirical data by using statistical techniques. The
structure can generated from data too, but another
option is to choose it manually: the arcs in the
network can be chosen, based on the intuition that
they represent a causal or temporal relationship
between two variables. Strictly spoken however,
a Bayesian network only represents informational
relationships between variables.
Notice that the machine learning technique
known as Naive Bayes Classifier (see for instance
(Mitchell, 1997)) assumes that all variables are
conditionally independent of each other given
the variable that has to be classified. A Naive
Bayes classifier can be seen as a special case of
a Bayesian network classifier, where the network
structure consists of arcs from the class variable
to all variables representing the features: see Fig-
ure 3.
DA
IWant CanYou NumWrdsPrevDA
Figure 3: Naive Bayes classifier as Bayesian Net-
work.
Naive Bayes classifiers will perform as good
as the Bayesian network technique only if indeed
all feature variables are conditionally indepen-
dent, given the class variable. The problem is
of course how do we know that they are condi-
tionally independent? If we don?t have complete
analytical knowledge about the (in)dependencies,
only analysing the data can give an answer to this
question. The advantage of using Bayesian net-
works is that methods exist to construct the net-
work structure as well as the conditional proba-
bilities. Moreover Bayesian networks are more
flexible in their use: unlike Bayesian classifiers
we can retrieve the posterior probabilities of all
the network variables without re-computation of
the model. The same advantage do Bayesian net-
works have over Decision Tree learning methods
like C4.5 that output a decision tree for classi-
fying instances with respect to a given selected
class variable. Experiments have shown that
Naive Bayesian classifiers give results that are as
good as or even better than those obtained by
decision tree classification techniques. Hence,
there are theoretical as well as practical reasons
to use Bayesian networks. However, since there
is hardly any experience in using Bayesian net-
works for dialogue act classification we have to
do experiments to see whether this technique also
performs better than the alternatives mentioned
above for this particular application.
The next two sections describe experiments
with 1) the SCHISMA corpus - elaborating on pre-
vious work described in (Keizer, 2001) - and 2) a
preliminary small corpus of navigation dialogues.
We motivate our choice of dialogue acts and fea-
tures and present some first results in training a
Bayesian network and testing its performance.
3 Experiments with the Schisma corpus
3.1 Dialogue acts and features
The current dialogue system for interacting with
Karin is based on analyses of the SCHISMA cor-
pus. This is a corpus of 64 dialogues, obtained
through Wizard of Oz experiments. The interac-
tion between the wizard - a human simulating the
system to be developed - and the human user was
established through keyboard-entered utterances,
so the dialogues are textual. The task at hand
is information exchange and transaction: users
are enabled to make inquiries about theatre per-
formances scheduled and if desired, make ticket
reservations.
We have manually annotated 20 dialogues
from the SCHISMA corpus, using two layers
of the DAMSL multi-layer annotation scheme
(Allen and Core, 1997), a standard for annotat-
ing task-oriented dialogues in general. The layer
of Forward-looking Functions contains acts that
characterise the effect an utterance has on the
subsequent dialogue, while acts on the layer of
Backward-looking Functions indicate how an ut-
terance relates to the previous dialogue. Because
DAMSL does not provide a refined set of dia-
logue acts concerning information-exchange, we
have added some new dialogue acts. For example,
ref-question, if-question and alts-
question were added as acts that further spec-
ify the existing info-request.
For the experiments, we selected a subset of
forward- and backward-looking functions from
the hierarchy that we judged as the most impor-
tant ones to recognise: those are listed in Table
1. In Figure 4, a fragment of an example dia-
logue between S (the server) and C (the client) is
given, in which we have indicated what forward-
and backward-looking functions were performed
in each utterance.
Forward-looking
Functions
assert
open-option
request
ref-question
if-question
alts-question
action-directive
offer
commit
conventional
expressive
otherff
Backward-looking
Functions
accept
approve
reject
disapprove
hold
acknowledge
not-understood
positive answer
negative answer
feedback
otherbf
Table 1: Dialogue Acts for SCHISMA.
The user utterances have also been tagged man-
ually with linguistic features. We have distin-
guished the features in Table 2, assuming they can
be provided for by a linguistic parser.
The dialogue context features selected include
the backward-looking function of the last system
utterance and the forward-looking function of the
previous user utterance. In the experiment with
S: Hello, how can I help you?
conventional
C: When can I see Herman Finkers?
ref-question; otherbf
S: On Saturday the 12th at 20h.
assert; pos-answer
C: I would like 2 tickets please.
action-directive; otherbf
S: Do you have a discount card?
if-question; hold
. . .
Figure 4: Dialogue fragment with forward- and
backward-looking functions.
Sentence Type
declarative
yn-question
wh-question
imperative
noun phrase
adverbial
adjective
number
interjective
continuation
Subject Type
first person
second person
third person
Punctuation
period
question mark
exclam. mark
comma
none
Table 2: Utterance features for SCHISMA.
the SCHISMA dialogues we have constructed a
network structure (see Figure 5) by hand and then
used the data of the annotated dialogues to train
the required conditional probabilities.
PBFS
FFC
SeTp
SuTp
Punct
PFFC
Figure 5: Bayesian network for DAR to be trained
with the SCHISMA dialogues.
The choice of structure is based on the in-
tuition that the model reflects how a client de-
cides which communicative action to take; al-
though the arcs themselves have no explicit
meaning - they only contribute to the set of
conditional independencies - they can be seen
here as a kind of temporal or causal relation-
ships between the variables (as mentioned ear-
lier in Section 2): given the dialogue context -
defined by the previous forward-looking function
of the client (PFFC) and the previous backward-
looking function of the server (PBFS), the client
decides which forward-looking function to per-
form (FFC); from this decision he/she formulates
a natural language utterance with certain features
including the sentence type (SeTp) the subject
type (SuTp) and punctuation (Punct).
Recalling the notion of conditional indepen-
dence in Bayesian networks described in Section
2, it follows that by choosing the network struc-
ture of Figure 5, we have made the (admittedly,
disputable) assumption that, given the forward-
looking function of the client, the three utterance
features are conditionally independent of each
other.
3.2 Results and evaluation
For assessing the conditional probability distribu-
tions, we have used the Maximum A Posteriori
(MAP) learning technique - see e.g. (Heckerman,
1999). For training we have used 330 data sam-
ples which is 75% of the available data; the re-
maining samples have been used for testing. We
have measured the performance of the network
in terms of the accuracy of estimating the cor-
rect forward-looking function for different cases
of available evidence, varying from having no ev-
idence at all to having evidence on all features.
This resulted in an average accuracy of 43.5%.
Adding complete evidence to the network for ev-
ery test sample resulted in 38.7% accuracy.
As the amount of data from the SCHISMA cor-
pus currently available is rather small, the results
cannot expected to be very good and more data
have to be collected for further experiments. Still,
the testing results show that the accuracy is signif-
icantly better than an expected accuracy of 8.3%
in the case of guessing the dialogue act randomly.
A tighter baseline commonly used is the relative
frequency of the most frequent dialogue act. For
the data used here, this gives a baseline of 32.5%,
which is still less than our network?s accuracy.
4 Experiments with the navigation
corpus
4.1 Dialogue acts and features
A small corpus of dialogues was derived from the
first implementation of a dialogue system for in-
teraction with the navigation agent. For the ex-
periments with the navigation corpus we also use
the DAMSL layers of Forward- and Backward-
looking functions. On each of these two lay-
ers we only distinguish dialogue acts on the first
level of the hierarchies (see Table 3 for the di-
alogue acts used); a more refined subcategorisa-
tion should be performed by a second step in the
DAR module. The dialogue acts in Table 1 can
be found at the deeper levels of the DAMSL hi-
erarchy, e.g. a request is a special case of a
infl addr fut act and an acknowledge
is a special case of an understanding. The
dialogue act recogniser may also use more ap-
plication specific knowledge in further identifi-
cation of the user intention. Information that
may be used is dialogue information concerning
topic/focus.
Forward-looking
Functions
statement
infl addr fut act
info request
comm sp fut act
conventional
expl performative
exclamation
Backward-looking
Functions
agreement
understanding
answer
Table 3: Dialogue Acts for Navigation.
For the navigation dialogues, we have chosen
a set of surface features of what will eventually
be spoken utterances, in contrast to the typed di-
alogues in the SCHISMA corpus. Therefore, we
don?t use a textual feature like punctuation. For
each utterance, the feature values are found au-
tomatically using a tagger (the features in the
SCHISMA dialogues were tagged manually). In
Table 4 we have listed the features with their pos-
sible values we initially consider relevant.
The dialogue context features include the
backward- and forward-looking function of the
previous dialogue act. This is always a dialogue
act performed by the system. The possible dia-
logue acts performed by the system are the same
as those performed by the user.
The network is generated from data that were
obtained by manually annotating the user ut-
terances in the navigation corpus following the
DAMSL instructions as close as possible. As
with every categorisation there are problematic
Features Values
lenq one, few, many
iswh true, false
not in prev true, false
startsWithCanYou true, false
startsWithCanI true, false
startsWithIWant true, false
containsPositive true, false
containsNegative true, false
containsOkay true, false
containsLocativePrep true, false
containsLocativeAdverb true, false
containsTell true, false
containsDo true, false
Table 4: Surface features of user utterances and
their possible values.
border cases, e.g. when to annotate with in-
direct speech acts. We used the criterion that
such an act should be recognised without task-
specific considerations. Therefore the utterance
?I want to make a phone-call? is annotated as a
statement although eventually it should be in-
terpreted as an info request (?where can I
find a phone??) in the context of a navigation di-
alogue.
After the dialogue act has been recognised the
navigation agent will make a plan for further ac-
tions and perform the planned actions. We will
not discuss that here.
4.2 Results and evaluation
In this experiment the data are used for learning
both structure and conditional probabilities of a
Bayesian network. We have used an implementa-
tion of the K2 algorithm (Cooper and Herskovits,
1992) to generate the network structure and then
- like in the SCHISMA experiment - used MAP to
assess the conditional probability distributions.
Starting from the small corpus of navigation
dialogues, a procedure has been planned to iter-
atively enlarge the corpus: given the annotated
corpus, derive a network, use the network in a
dialogue system, test the network and add these
dialogues - with the corrected backward- and
forward-looking functions - to the corpus. This
results in a more extended set of annotated dia-
logues. And we start again. After each of the
cycles we compare the results (in terms of accu-
racies) with the results of the previous cycle. This
should give more insight in the usefulness of the
features and values chosen for the Bayesian net-
work. After deciding to adapt the set of features
we automatically annotate the corpus; we derive
a new network and we test again.
The current corpus is too small to expect good
results from a generated network, especially if the
data are used for learning both the structure and
the probability distributions. From the initial cor-
pus of 81 utterances 75% was used for generating
a Bayesian network. Testing on the remaining
25% resulted in accuracy of 57.1% for classify-
ing the forward-looking function and 81.0% for
classifying the backward-looking function. Af-
ter this first cycle, new data have been generated
interactively, following the procedure described
above. The Bayesian network trained from this
new data set resulted in the improved accuracies
of 76.5% and 88.2% for classifying the forward-
and backward-looking function respectively. Fol-
lowing this training and testing procedure, we
hope to develop Bayesian networks with increas-
ing performance.
5 Discussion and conclusions
In this paper we have discussed the use of
Bayesian networks for dialogue act recognition in
a natural language dialogue system. We have de-
scribed the construction of such networks from
data in two cases: 1) using annotated dialogues
from the SCHISMA corpus - information ex-
change and transaction - and 2) using a small cor-
pus of annotated navigation dialogues.
As the amount of data currently available is
rather small (especially the navigation corpus),
the network performances measured are not too
impressive. In order to get more data, we have de-
veloped a testing environment which at the same
time enables us to enlarge the corpus. With the
increasing amount of data we hope to construct
Bayesian networks with increasing performance.
As for the SCHISMA corpus, there are 44 dia-
logues that remain to be annotated, also resulting
in more data.
One of the first and most important questions
to be answered concerns the selection of a set of
features (and their values) that set up the model.
We started with a set of features selected on in-
tuition. Then the dialogue corpus was annotated.
As a result of experiments we may conclude that
some of the features have no selective value, so
we can leave them out of the model.
In the future we would like to compare the
approach of using Bayesian networks with other
classifiers that can also be constructed from data,
e.g. decision trees or Bayesian classifiers. Figure
5 shows the accuracies of three different classi-
fiers that were generated from the current set of
navigation data.
Class Bayesian Decision Naive
variable network tree Bayes
forw funct 76.5% 50.0% 55.9%
backw funct 88.2% 64.7% 61.8%
Table 5: Accuracies of three different classi-
fiers for classifying the forward-looking func-
tion (forw funct) and backward-looking function
(backw funct), where all classifiers have been
built from the same set of navigation data.
In our future experiments we will take into ac-
count more refined performance measures like
precision and recall and confusion matrices in
which classification results for individual dia-
logue act types are shown. Such results can help
us make decisions w.r.t. the selected dialogue act
types and features.
Furthermore, non-verbal communicative ac-
tions like pointing at objects in the virtual envi-
ronment could be relevant in recognising dialog
acts and should therefore be made available as
possible features in our Bayesian network clas-
sifiers.
Acknowledgement
We would like to thank the referees for their com-
ments on our paper; these have been very useful
to us in preparing this final version.
References
J. Allen and M. Core. 1997. Draft of
DAMSL: Dialog Act Markup in Several Lay-
ers. URL: http://www.cs.rochester.
edu/research/trains/annotation.
T. Andernach. 1996. A machine learning approach to
the classification and prediction of dialogue utter-
ances. In Proceedings of the Second International
Conference on New Methods in Language Process-
ing (NeMLaP-2), pages 98?109, Ankara, Turkey.
G. F. Cooper and E. Herskovits. 1992. A Bayesian
method for the induction of probabilistic networks
from data. Machine Learning, 9:309?347.
D. Heckerman. 1999. A tutorial on learning with
Bayesian networks. In M. Jordan, editor, Learning
in Graphical Models. MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
S. Keizer. 2001. A Bayesian approach to dialogue
act classification. In P. Ku?hnlein, H. Rieser, and
H. Zeevat, editors, BI-DIALOG 2001: Proc. of the
5th Workshop on Formal Semantics and Pragmatics
of Dialogue, pages 210?218.
J. van Luin, R. op den Akker, and A. Nijholt. 2001.
A dialogue agent for navigation support in virtual
reality. In J. Jacko and A. Sears, editors, ACM
SIGCHI Conf. CHI 2001: Anyone. Anywhere, pages
117?118, Seattle. Association for Computing Ma-
chinery.
T.M. Mitchell. 1997. Machine Learning. Computer
Science Series. McGraw-Hill.
A. Nijholt, J. Zwiers, and B. van Dijk. 2001. Maps,
agents and dialogue for exploring a virtual world.
In N. Callaos, S. Long, and M. Loutfi, editors, 5th
World Multiconference on Systemics, Cybernetics
and Informatics (SCI 2001), volume VII of Human
Information and Education Systems, pages 94?99,
Orlando, July.
A. Nijholt. 2000. Multimodal interactions with
agents in virtual worlds. In N. Kasabov, editor,
Future Directions for Intelligent Systems and Infor-
mation Science, Physica-Verlag: Studies in Fuzzi-
ness and Soft Computing, chapter 8, pages 148?
173. Springer.
T. Paek and E. Horvitz. 2000. Conversation as action
under uncertainty. In 16th Conference on Uncer-
tainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI-2000), pages
455?464, San Francisco, CA, June. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers.
J. Pearl. 1988. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent
Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. Morgan
Kaufmann.
S.G. Pulman. 1996. Conversational games, belief re-
vision and Bayesian networks. In J. Landsbergen,
J. Odijk, K. van Deemter, and G. Veldhuijzen van
Zanten, editors, Computational Linguistics in the
Netherlands.
A. Stolcke et al 2000. Dialogue act modelling for au-
tomatic tagging and recognition of conversational
speech. Computational Linguistics, 26(3):339?
374.
D.R. Traum. 2000. 20 questions on dialogue act tax-
onomies. Journal of Semantics, 17(1):7?30.
