Component-based multimodal dialog interfaces for
mobile knowledge creation
Georg Niklfeld
Telecommunications Research
Center Vienna (ftw.)
Maderstr. 1/9
1040 Vienna, Austria
niklfeld@ftw.at
Robert Finan
mobilkom austria AG
Obere Donaustrasse 29
1020 Vienna, Austria
r.finan@mobilkom.at
Michael Pucher
Telecommunications Research
Center Vienna (ftw.)
Maderstr. 1/9
1040 Vienna, Austria
pucher@ftw.at
Abstract
This paper addresses two related top-
ics: Firstly, it presents building-blocks
for flexible multimodal dialog inter-
faces based on standardized compo-
nents (VoiceXML, XML) to indicate
that thanks to well-supported standard-
izations, mobile multimodal interfaces
to heterogeneous data sources are be-
coming ready for mass-market deploy-
ment, provided that adequate modular-
ization is respected. Secondly, this is
put in the perspective of a discussion of
knowledge management in firms, and
the paper argues that multimodal dia-
log systems and the naturalized mobile
access to company data they offer will
trigger a new knowledge management
practice of importance for knowledge-
intensive companies.
1 Introduction
Knowledge management is concerned with pro-
moting the creation and dissemination of knowl-
edge in organizations. A variety of technologies,
in particular information technologies can support
this process. One way in which information tech-
nology has contributed to knowledge manage-
ment is through computer networks, which have
provided individuals with easy access to informa-
tion not stored in their own office. The knowledge
worker was now able to remain seated at her desk
and share data and information with other indi-
viduals seated at desks thousands of kilometers
away. Mobile data communication technology
brings another improvement, as access to the en-
try points to the network is no longer confined to
the office: networking anytime, anywhere, as the
slogan goes. The next step in this process of re-
moving access restrictions to information should
target the user interface of the entry points, viz.
the information interfaces. For historical reasons
their design is still inspired partly by the com-
munication needs of machines, and certainly by
the office-bound scenario featuring large com-
puter screens and keyboards. Human beings in
movement however use speech for the exchange
of information along with visual representations
such as text and graphics. To bring such mul-
timodal communication to mobile computer de-
vices is an important issue for naturalizing in-
formation access. However, this paper argues
that much beyond such principled considerations,
multimodal interfaces are imperative for infor-
mation access from mobile devices. The paper
presents building-blocks and constraints for the
development of such multimodal interfaces and
systems, and describes the emerging knowledge
management scenario that companies should un-
derstand well in order to be prepared for this new
strategic technology.
Section 2 develops the case for multimodal in-
terfaces to mobile data services, e.g. in the ap-
proaching 3G telecommunication infrastructures.
Section 3 presents our view on what are the
building-blocks for a technological infrastructure
that will foster ubiquitous multimodal interfaces
to large numbers of data services in the business
environment. Section 4 is more technically spe-
cific and describes our proposal for a general soft-
ware architecture that provides for easy imple-
mentation of multimodal dialog interfaces. Sec-
tion 5 discusses the question of how the multi-
modal interfaces can be mapped to heterogeneous
data sources. With the technical picture in place,
section 6 reviews the management theory concept
of knowledge management practices, to prepare
the ground for section 7, which considers whether
multimodal interface techniques will trigger new
knowledge management practices in companies.
2 The importance of multimodality
Human face-to-face communication is multi-
modal, combining the acoustic channel with vi-
sual and occasionally tactile channels. Human be-
ings are therefore well equipped to communicate
multimodally, and multimodal communication is
perceived as natural. In human computer inter-
action, the use of spoken or written natural lan-
guage poses complexities that have led to a dom-
inance of visual interfaces consisting of text and
usually 2D graphics. Visual interfaces are very
efficient under some circumstances: written text
allows rapid information uptake; visual interfaces
on large screens allow to present large amounts
of information simultaneously, with users able to
focus on bits that interest them without having to
process all the rest in-depth; finally, visual inter-
faces are preferred consistently for input and out-
put of spatial information (Oviatt et al, 1997). In
visual interfaces, text output can be used for in-
formation for which graphical metaphors are not
available, and text input can be used for unre-
stricted content or inherently linguistic informa-
tion such as names.
Yet, considering data services on 3G mobile
devices, the following factors constitute obstacles
for relying solely on visual interfaces, and imply
a real usefulness of added speech interface capa-
bilities:
 The terminal devices where 3G data services
run will have small displays in terms of size
and resolution, although a significant im-
provement over current WAP phones is ex-
pected. Still, it will not be possible to mir-
ror the user experience of today?s commer-
cial web-sites in terms of the amount of in-
formation that can be presented simultane-
ously. (Note also that the speed disadvantage
of TTS is less problematic for small amounts
of information.)
 Although 3G terminals will be produced in
a variety of form-factors, many devices will
be too small to provide comfortable alphanu-
meric keyboards, relying instead on pointing
devices such as a pen/touch-screen combi-
nation. Without a keyboard, text input be-
comes cumbersome, even when handwriting
recognition is provided. Speech input is a
logical alternative. The input dilemma of
3G devices is made yet more severe where
even a pointing device is lacking, as in cur-
rent mobile phones. This WAP-like scenario
makes data services without speech support
so unattractive that we consider it unlikely
that large numbers of 3G devices intended
for data access will be in this category.
 In mobile usage situations, visual access to
the display may be impossible in certain sit-
uations, such as when driving a car. Also,
even where pointing-device and keyboard
are provided, access to them is not possible
when a user has her hands busy for other ac-
tivities. A speech interface may still be us-
able in such situations.
We contend that the combination of these consid-
erations takes the case for multimodal interfaces
for 3G services beyond a nice-to-have status to
that of a significant building-block that needs to
be put in place for successful deployment scenar-
ios of 3G infrastructures to emerge. This is also
the motivation for application oriented research
like the one described here, which attempts to
identify development models for multimodal in-
terfaces that are feasible both technically and eco-
nomically.
3 Building-blocks for multimodal dialog
interfaces
It is our belief that a successful scenario where
multimodal dialog interfaces become common-
place in the business and consumer environments
requires that the development of a multimodal in-
terface for an existing data service must be ac-
complishable by software developers without a
specialized background in speech or natural lan-
guage processing. Developers that have such a
specialized background will likely be too hard to
come by for small run-of-the-mill projects.
In 1999, the EU-sponsored DISC project un-
dertook a comparison of seven toolkits for dia-
log management in spoken dialog systems (DISC,
1999). The dialog management component is the
central part of a dialog system and of particular
importance in a discussion about streamlined de-
velopment processes for multimodal interfaces,
because it is the bridge between the intelligent
interface technologies and the underlying appli-
cation logic of application servers and databases.
The DISC-survey finds platforms that offer rapid
prototyping support, partly via integrated devel-
opment environments. As most of the toolkits
are shipped together with speech recognition and
speech synthesis engines, this frees application
developers to focus, firstly, on the dialog design,
and secondly, on interfacing to the application
core.
In May 2000, the VoiceXML Forum, a multi-
party industry organization, submitted version 1.0
of the VoiceXML standard to the W3C (W3C,
2000c). VoiceXML is a specification language for
spoken dialogs including functional requirements
on the platforms that implement the standard. The
work done on the VoiceXML standard represents
a major step forward from the state of affairs re-
ported in the DISC-study for two reasons. Firstly,
being an internet standard, VoiceXML goes be-
yond manufacturer-specific toolkits that are not
compatible with each other by providing a cred-
ible set of target interfaces for all players in the
industry. Second, it chooses XML and the as-
sociated web-programming technology both as a
format for specification of the voice dialogs, and
for interfacing to the application logic. The two
most important aspects for a standardized com-
ponent framework for dialog systems have thus
been brought in line with web technology, which
is what was needed to create that promise of a
platform for speech-enabled applications that is
easily accessible to developers with a general, and
not speech processing specific, background.
Today one can add that VoiceXML has received
important support from major players in the in-
dustry who have made development platforms for
VoiceXML-based applications available to devel-
opers free of charge. The only potential downside
of recent developments is that the platform manu-
facturers have also included some proprietary el-
ements in their implementations, making direct
transfer of VoiceXML applications from one plat-
form to another again impossible.
While an early requirements document for
VoiceXML explicitly treats multimodality in the
context of the discussion on the inclusion of
DTMF input in the standard (W3C, 1999), the
standard is not written to cover general mul-
timodal applications. Subsequently, W3C has
drafted a requirements document for a multi-
modal dialog language (W3C, 2000b) and cur-
rently a new working group on that topic is be-
ing assembled. At present however, the standard
provides no intentional support for general mul-
timodal systems. The most important drawback
that we found in our attempts to nevertheless build
a multimodal architecture around VoiceXML, is
that it is not possible to make an active voice di-
alog running in a VoiceXML browser aware of
events that occur outside the voice browser, e.g. at
a visual interface: VoiceXML neither allows for
linking in Java applets that could receive pushed
notifications, nor does it provide any other inter-
face for external events. Our architecture for mul-
timodal dialog systems based on VoiceXML is
considerably influenced by this fact.
With VoiceXML, a standard for voice compo-
nents is available which seems ready for the mass-
market. What is needed in addition is a simple
reference architecture that shows how functional-
ity supported by VoiceXML can be integrated into
a system architecture for multimodal dialog inter-
faces.
4 Architecture
In a project at our institution that follows the
longer term goal to develop architectures for mul-
timodal dialog systems for 3G telecommunica-
tions infrastructures, for the benefit of our sup-
porting partner companies from the telecommu-
nications industry, we are currently developing an
architecture that shall: use mainstream technolo-
gies and standards as far as possible, to test their
capabilities and limitations; be general enough to
scale from our first small prototypes to larger sys-
tems that are close to market-readiness; provide
the basis for usability research on multimodal in-
terfaces.
The architecture shall support a multimodal in-
terface that shall combine a visual interface via
HTML and Java applets in a visual web browser
with a voice interface built using VoiceXML.
Communication between the visual browser and
the voice browser is mediated via a central appli-
cation server that is built using Java servlet tech-
nology in combination with a web server.
In (W3C, 2000b), three types of multimodal in-
put are distinguished:
1. sequential multimodal input is the simplest
type, where at each step of the interaction,
either one or the other input modality is ac-
tive, but never more than one simultane-
ously;
2. uncoordinated, simultaneous multimodal in-
put allows concurrent activation of more
than one modality. However, should the user
provide input on more than one modality,
these informations are not integrated but will
be processed in isolation, in random order;
3. coordinated, simultaneous multimodal input
exploits multimodality to the full, providing
for the integration of complementary input
signals from different modalities into joint
events, based on timestamping.
Because we cannot send events about the visual
interface to the dialogs in the voice browser (cf.
section 3), we maintain that only the sequential
multimodal input pattern can be properly realized
with the current version of the VoiceXML stan-
dard: The other patterns require that even while
the voice interface is active, e.g. listening for user
speech, it must be possible for the multimodal di-
alog to change state based on inputs received from
the visual interface. In the sequential mode on the
other hand, it is possible to deactivate the visual
interface whenever voice input is activated.
In this case then, the choice of multimodal
interaction pattern is determined by features of
the components used. In many realistic applica-
tion development efforts, the interaction pattern
will be determined by user-level requirements that
have to be met. Anyhow, the choice of multi-
modal interaction pattern will certainly be a di-
mension in which variation occurs. For the pur-
poses of the demonstrator development in our
project, it was important to find a software archi-
tecture that can remain stable across different pat-
terns and across interface types.
This can be accomplished by a modular or
object-oriented design which separates the central
application server into the following functions:
visual communicator: a modular handler for the
visual interface;
voice communicator: a modular handler for the
voice interface;
transaction module: encapsulates the transac-
tion needed for the application logic;
multimodal integrator: handles all message
flows between the interface modules, and
between the interface modules and the
transaction module.
The resulting system architecture is shown in
Fig. 1.
 visual browser
 (html, applet)
 voice browser
 (VoiceXML)
application server
(servlet)
 visual
 communicator
 voice
 communicator
   multimodal
   integrator
   transaction
   module
 database
visual IF vo
ic
e 
IF
H
T
T
P
 
I
P
C HT
T
P
Figure 1: Multimodal Architecture
Both the visual and the voice user interface are
realized by standardized components in line with
general web technologies (visual web browser
and VoiceXML browser). Within the application
server, the architecture stipulates a specialized in-
terface handler for each modality.
For example in our prototype, the voice com-
municator prepares VoiceXML documents which
it puts on a web server that is associated to the ap-
plication server. Once the VoiceXML interpreter
of the voice browser has been started (after a user-
triggered event, e.g. an incoming phone call),
each of the VoiceXML documents processed by
the interpreter is programmed so as to terminate
with a load of a successor document from the web
server. Our voice communicator simply prepares
these successor documents based on messages it
receives from the multimodal integrator. When
the voice interface is not active, the prepared doc-
uments contain just an idle loop that terminates
after some time, e.g. 0.5 seconds. When the mul-
timodal integrator decides (based on user input)
that a chunk of the interaction shall be performed
via voice, it sends a message indicating field la-
bels and data-types (e.g. the range of an enumer-
ation) to the voice communicator, which instead
of an idle VoiceXML document now produces a
VoiceXML dialog document that executes the re-
spective voice dialog with the user and returns re-
sults to the multimodal integrator.
The visual communicator is designed similarly
to prepare HTML pages and applets for the visual
browser. In our prototype, the visual interface in-
cludes controls that allow the user to explicitly
activate the voice interface for a group of input
fields. When this is done, the visual communica-
tor deactivates all control elements on the visual
interface, and sends a message with the user re-
quest for voice dialog to the multimodal integra-
tor.
The multimodal integrator is the only part in
the proposed architecture where information from
more than one modality is processed. The way
this processing is done then defines the multi-
modal interaction pattern. To change the pattern,
the architecture envisages that one implementa-
tion of the multimodal integrator would simply be
replaced by another, without any changes to other
parts of the systems. This of course presupposes
that the interfaces between the multimodal inte-
grator and the interface handlers have been been
defined so generally that all occurring multimodal
interaction patterns are covered. A description of
this interface is for further study.
In our view, these preliminary results show that
VoiceXML can be used to build simple, but nev-
ertheless useful multimodal interfaces for typical
data services for mobile access. Once first im-
plementations of the voice communicator and the
multimodal integrator are available, it should be-
come quite easy for the general web programmer
to generate further multimodal interfaces for ex-
isting data services.
A simple working example for a multimodal
interface (not in the domain of knowledge man-
agement) that we have already implemented is
an interface to existing route-finder applications
in the web for the city of Vienna. It would be
hard to enter street names without a keyboard, so
we provide the choice to use speech for any of
the input fields, but results of route-queries are
inherently graphical, and therefore are displayed
visually. We have developed the multimodal in-
terface without access to the route-finder applica-
tions themselves, but just by replicating the CGI
requests sent to the applications from their pro-
vided visual browser interfaces, which demon-
strates the potential of a modular architecture for
easy multimodal interface development.
One drawback of the modularity of the
VoiceXML standard itself is the resulting lack
of support for some types of interface adaptiv-
ity. Information about environment characteris-
tics that is easily obtainable in speech recogni-
tion, such as the level of ambiance noise and con-
fidence scores in speech recognition, are kept lo-
cal in the speech recognition component used by
the VoiceXML browser (as part of the implemen-
tation platform, which is not further considered
by the standard). They are not accessible in the
VoiceXML browser, and therefore neither in the
voice communicator, nor in the multimodal in-
tegrator, where they could be used to influence
modality selection. This shortcoming should be
addressed in future versions of VoiceXML.
5 Mapping data to speech using XML
To further illustrate the web-oriented technology
framework for multimodal dialog interfaces that
we advocate, this section briefly reviews the use
of the XML family of technologies for the map-
ping of data to representations at a speech inter-
face, although we do not have much new to say
on this.
XML (W3C, 2000a) is a markup language that
can be used to represent data and data schemata in
text files. Processors for XML-files are available
in common web-browsers and servers. There ex-
ist also associated transformation languages (e.g.
XSLT) and style sheet languages (e.g. XSL) that
make it possible to associate presentation formats
to data that follows a defined schema. Note that
VoiceXML itself is just one XML-schema, with
defined semantics.
XML technologies are widely used to represent
data that comes from databases or applications in
a format that is universally interpretable in web
infrastructures. A possible implementation of the
voice communicator of our architecture would be
an XML-based translator that takes general XML-
representations and produces VoiceXML dialogs
that play or query these data. Such an approach
would reduce the development of a multimodal
dialog interface to selection of a multimodal inter-
action pattern and provision of the respective mul-
timodal integrator. It has to be said that automatic
generation of good voice interfaces from arbitrary
data is certainly not easy. However, if the com-
plexity of each of the voice dialogs is kept low
(in multimodal dialogs this is easier than in voice-
only dialogs), the goal appears within reach.
6 Knowledge Management Practices
Within management theory literature, discussions
of knowledge management have often focused on
the discussion of different types of knowledge,
such as ?tacit? vs. ?explicit? knowledge, and the
possibilities to convert between the types in order
to maximize usefulness to organizations (Polanyi,
1958; Nonaka, 1994). When the knowledge man-
agement of individual organizations is studied, it
is however difficult to identify and classify the
knowledge held by an organization.
This among others is the motivation for the
proposal to study knowledge management prac-
tices (KMPs) instead (Coombs and Hull, 1998b;
Coombs and Hull, 1998a). KMPs in a firm are
regular activities by which knowledge is pro-
cessed in some way, and which play an impor-
tant role in shaping the knowledge base of the firm
and making it available in the innovation process.
They are distinctive ways in which a firm deals
with knowledge, and can be established by ques-
tionnaire or interview studies with employees.
Coombs and Hull (1998a) distinguish five
groups of KMPs: KMPs located in the formal
R&D management process; KMPs for managing
intellectual property positions; KMPs for ?map-
ping? knowledge relationships; KMPs for serial
transfer of project experience; and KMPs contin-
gent on information technology applications. In
the latter group the authors distinguish KMPs that
are supported by IT, but have a strong indepen-
dent existence (e.g. electronic patent watch bul-
letins) from others that are triggered by innova-
tions in IT, as is the case with across-site cluster
building among research staff that is triggered by
the ease of communication using email or intranet
solutions.
The question that arises is whether mobile ac-
cess to information is a new, IT-triggered KMP.
This requires that such activities, presumably per-
formed by employees that perform a significant
part of their work off-site, plays a significant
rather than just anecdotal role in shaping the
knowledge base of firms and their innovative po-
tential. Here are some thoughts on this topic:
 The mobile information access of today is
mainly notebook-based. Employees access
their company email while traveling and
read company news on the intranet via se-
cure internet connections. This is essen-
tially a quantitative improvement of intra-
company networking.
 Field engineers can feed data observed at
a customer installation to corporate appli-
cation servers and use results immediately
to make changes to the customer installa-
tion. This is a quantitative improvement of
response times.
 Professional mobile speech communication
is a ubiquitous phenomenon, which makes
groups whose individual members are highly
mobile more cohesive. A minor qualification
here could be that topics of mobile speech
calls are usually administrative and do not
touch the core of the firms? innovative pro-
cesses.
It seems that mobile access intensifies data and
information use and the associated creation and
sharing of knowledge, but that qualitatively new
practices are restricted to the IT departments that
have to plan and manage the supporting applica-
tions. These activities may be significant enough
to constitute new KMPs. The next section con-
siders the same issue for mobile multimodal in-
terfaces.
7 Outlook on mobile multimodal
interfaces
We assume that by 2004, business users will have
smart phones for 3G telecommunication networks
that will include speech input/output capabilities
like on a telephone, and also colour displays of
approx. 6x6cm size and 320x320 dots resolution,
with touch-screen functionality. Most users will
not have a comfortable keyboard for their device
when mobile, although some handwriting recog-
nition technology will be available.
We imagine that the following use cases are re-
alistic:1
 At a working lunch, a researcher discusses
work with a colleague. He is reminded of
a relevant paper, but cannot recall the au-
thors. Handling knife, fork and 3G device in
turns, he queries the library database of his
institution, entering keywords for the search
by voice and browsing through the results
list using sometimes voice, sometimes the
touch-screen.
 Driving back to the airport on the highway
after a meeting, a sales manager starts work-
ing on a report, alternately dictating notes
and voice-navigating through web-pages,
and checking back on data on internal-access
pages of his company. He checks the screen
of his smart-phone occasionally for a quick
glance to check progress.
 During the train ride home from work, a
project manager has been working on a re-
source plan on her notebook, which has a
mobile internet connection. When she has to
get off and walk over to the bus stop, the plan
is nearly finished, so she decides to continue
1Although further progress in ASR in noisy environ-
ments is a precondition. This is an important challenge for
mobile voice interfaces in general.
work using the multimodal interface to the
corporate project planning application on her
smart phone. She uploads the project plan to
the multimodal interface server of her com-
pany and packs up the notebook. She then
connects to the multimodal interface server
from her smart phone and enters the remain-
ing commands via voice while walking, and
via the visual interface once she has entered
the bus and found a seat (being reluctant to
use voice control in crowded places).
What these imaginary examples demonstrate
are firstly, new situations in which work which
requires access to data and information resources
is possible (intensifying knowledge creation), and
secondly, a reliance on multimodal interfaces
for tasks that probably would be performed via
purely visual interfaces in more office-like sit-
uations. This suggests a need for the general
component-based multimodal interface develop-
ment model presented earlier, to enable the IT de-
partment of e.g. the firm in the last example to
tailor multimodal interfaces for each of the appli-
cations offered on the company network.
Accordingly, we see a new KMP for multi-
modal interfaces within the IT management func-
tion of firms. This new KMP is concerned with
supporting knowledge creation through the plan-
ning and provision of multimodal interfaces to
company data and information resources. It re-
quires decision-making on the following ques-
tions:
1. What types of mobile access to company re-
sources should be supported via telephone
speech, and what types via data services?
2. Of the data services, what services should be
supported at notebooks, and what services
at visual-only interfaces, speech-only inter-
faces, and multimodal dialog interfaces at
smart phones, respectively?
3. Which multimodal interfaces can be devel-
oped in-house, preferably using component-
based methods, and what interfaces need to
be procured externally?
Companies for which knowledge creation
by mobile employees is strategically important
should consider these questions carefully.
8 Conclusions
Using VoiceXML and XML technologies, the
development of simple multimodal interfaces to
company applications is today possible without
involvement of significant speech and natural lan-
guage processing expertise, by following archi-
tecture models like the one proposed in this pa-
per. It is important for knowledge-intensive com-
panies to define a stance on how to deal with this
technology, because given the parameters of mo-
bile data access, multimodal interfaces and the re-
sulting improvements to mobile data and informa-
tion access, which foster knowledge creation, will
likely become competitively relevant.
Future work of our group will elaborate the
proposed reference architecture, by providing
prototype implementations of the visual commu-
nicator, voice communicator, and multimodal in-
tegrator for different multimodal interaction pat-
terns, and by describing general interfaces be-
tween them.
The standardization work for a multimodal di-
alog language to supersede VoiceXML will bring
further improvements to the development models
for multimodal interfaces.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported within the Austrian
competence center program Kplus, and by the
companies Alcatel, Connect Austria, Kapsch,
Mobilkom Austria, and Nokia.
References
Coombs, R. and R. Hull. 1998. ?Knowledge Manage-
ment Practices? and path-dependency in innovation.
Research Policy, 27(3):237?253.
Coombs, R. and R. Hull. 1998. Knowledge manage-
ment practices for innovation: an audit tool for im-
provement. Technical report, CRIC, Univ. Manch-
ester.
DISC. 1999. Deliverable d2.7a: State-of-the-art sur-
vey of dialogue management tools. Technical re-
port, Esprit Long-Term Research Concerted Action
No. 24823.
Nonaka, I. 1994. A dynamic theory of organiza-
tional knowledge creation. Organization Science,
5(1):14?17.
Oviatt, S.L., A. DeAngeli, and K. Kuhn. 1997. Inte-
gration and synchronization of input modes during
multimodal human-computer interaction. In Proc.
of CHI97, pages 415?422, New York. ACM Press.
Polanyi, M. 1958. Personal Knowledge. Univ.
Chicago Press, Chicago.
W3C. 1999. Dialog requirements for voice
markup languages. Working draft 23 dec 1999.
http://www.w3.org/TR/voice-dialog-reqs/.
W3C. 2000a. Extensible Markup Language (XML)
1.0 (Second Edition). Recommendation 6 oct 2000.
http://www.w3.org/TR/2000/REC-xml-20001006.
W3C. 2000b. Multimodal requirements for voice
markup languages. Working draft 10 jul 2000.
http://www.w3.org/TR/multimodal-reqs.
W3C. 2000c. Voice eXtensible Markup
Language (VoiceXML) version 1.0.
http://www.w3.org/TR/2000/NOTE-voicexml-
20000505/.
