An Empirical Study on
Multiple LVCSR Model Combination by Machine Learning
Takehito Utsuro? Yasuhiro Kodama? Tomohiro Watanabe??
Hiromitsu Nishizaki?? Seiichi Nakagawa??
?Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan
?Sony Corporation ??Toyohashi University of Technology ??University of Yamanashi
Abstract
This paper proposes to apply machine learn-
ing techniques to the task of combining out-
puts of multiple LVCSR models. The proposed
technique has advantages over that by voting
schemes such as ROVER, especially when the
majority of participating models are not reli-
able. In this machine learning framework, as
features of machine learning, information such
as the model IDs which output the hypothe-
sized word are useful for improving the word
recognition rate. Experimental results show
that the combination results achieve a relative
word error reduction of up to 39 % against the
best performing single model and that of up to
23 % against ROVER. We further empirically
show that it performs better when LVCSR mod-
els to be combined are chosen so as to cover as
many correctly recognized words as possible,
rather than choosing models in descending or-
der of their word correct rates.
1 Introduction
Since current speech recognizers? outputs are far from
perfect and always include a certain amount of recogni-
tion errors, it is quite desirable to have an estimate of con-
fidence for each hypothesized word. This is especially
true for many practical applications of speech recogni-
tion systems such as automatic weighting of additional,
non-speech knowledge sources, keyword based speech
understanding, and recognition error rejection ? confir-
mation in spoken dialogue systems. Most of previous
works on confidence measures (e.g., (Kemp and Schaaf,
1997) ) are based on features available in a single LVCSR
model. However, it is well known that a voting scheme
such as ROVER (Recognizer output voting error reduc-
tion) for combining multiple speech recognizers? outputs
can achieve word error reduction (Fiscus, 1997; Ever-
mann and Woodland, 2000). Considering the success of
a simple voting scheme such as ROVER, it also seems
quite possible to improve reliability of previously stud-
ied features for confidence measures by simply exploit-
ing more than one speech recognizers? outputs. From this
observation, we experimentally evaluated the agreement
among the outputs of multiple Japanese LVCSR models,
with respect to whether it is effective as an estimate of
confidence for each hypothesized word.
Our previous study reported that the agreement be-
tween the outputs with two different acoustic models can
achieve quite reliable confidence, and also showed that
the proposed measure of confidence outperforms previ-
ously studied features for confidence measures such as
the acoustic stability and the hypothesis density (Kemp
and Schaaf, 1997). We also reported evaluation results
with 26 distinct acoustic models and identified the fea-
tures of acoustic models most effective in achieving high
confidence (Utsuro et al, 2002). The most remarkable
results are as follows: for the newspaper sentence ut-
terances, nearly 99% precision is achieved by decreas-
ing 94% word correct rate of the best performing single
model by only 7%. For the broadcast news speech, nearly
95% precision is achieved by decreasing 72% word cor-
rect rate of the best performing single model by only 8%.
Based on those results of our previous studies, this pa-
per proposes to apply machine learning techniques to the
task of combining outputs of multiple LVCSR models.
As a machine learning technique, the Support Vector Ma-
chine (SVM) (Vapnik, 1995) learning technique is em-
ployed. A Support Vector Machine is trained for choos-
ing the most confident one among several hypothesized
words, where, as features of SVM learning, information
such as the model IDs which output the hypothesized
word, its part-of-speech, and the number of syllables are
useful for improving the word recognition rate.
Model combination by high performance machine
learning techniques such as SVM learning has advantages
over that by voting schemes such as ROVER and oth-
ers (Fiscus, 1997; Evermann and Woodland, 2000), espe-
cially when the majority of participating models are not
reliable. In the model combination techniques based on
voting schemes, outputs of multiple LVCSR models are
combined according to simple majority vote or weighted
majority vote based on confidence of each hypothesized
word such as its likelihood. The results of model com-
bination by those voting techniques can be harmed when
the majority of participating models have quite low per-
formance and output word recognition errors with high
confidence. On the other hand, in the model combination
by high performance machine learning techniques such
as SVM learning, among those participating models, re-
liable ones and unreliable ones are easily discriminated
through the training process of machine learning frame-
work. Furthermore, depending on the features of hypoth-
esized words such as its part-of-speech and the number
of syllables, outputs of multiple models are combined in
an optimal fashion so as to minimize word recognition
errors in the combination results.
Experimental results show that model combination by
SVM achieves the followings: i.e., for the newspaper sen-
tence utterances, a relative word error reduction of 39 %
against the best performing single model and that of 23
% against ROVER; for the broadcast news speech, a rel-
ative word error reduction of 13 % against the best per-
forming single model and that of 8 % against ROVER.
We further empirically show that it performs better when
LVCSR models to be combined are chosen so as to cover
as many correctly recognized words as possible, rather
than choosing models in descending order of their word
correct rates1.
2 Specification of Japanese LVCSR
Systems
2.1 Decoders
As decoders of Japanese LVCSR systems, we use the one
named Julius, which is provided by IPA Japanese dicta-
tion free software project (Kawahara and others, 1998),
as well as the one named SPOJUS (Kai et al, 1998),
which has been developed in Nakagawa lab., Toyohashi
Univ. of Tech., Japan. Both decoders are composed of
two decoding passes, where the first pass uses the word
bigram, and the second pass uses the word trigram.
2.2 Acoustic Models
The acoustic models of Japanese LVCSR systems are
based on Gaussian mixture HMM. We evaluate phoneme-
based HMMs as well as syllable-based HMMs.
2.2.1 Acoustic Models with the Decoder JULIUS
As the acoustic models used with the decoder Julius,
we evaluate phoneme-based HMMs as well as syllable-
based HMMs. The following four types of HMMs are
evaluated: i) triphone model, ii) phonetic tied mixture
1Compared with our previous report (Utsuro et al, 2003),
the major achievement of the paper is this empirical result.
Utsuro et al (2003) examined the correlation between each
word?s confidence and the word?s features, and then introduced
the framework of combining outputs of multiple LVCSR mod-
els by SVM learning.
(PTM) triphone model, iii) monophone model, and iv)
syllable model. Every HMM phoneme model is gender-
dependent (male). For each of the four models above,
we evaluate both HMMs with and without the short pause
state, which amount to 8 acoustic models in total.
2.2.2 Acoustic Models with the Decoder SPOJUS
The acoustic models used with the decoder SPOJUS are
based on syllable HMMs, which have been developed
in Nakagawa laboratory, Toyohashi University of Tech-
nology, Japan (Nakagawa and Yamamoto, 1996). The
acoustic models are gender-dependent (male) syllable
unit HMMs. Among various combinations of features of
acoustic models2, we carefully choose 9 acoustic models
so that they include the best performing ones as well as
a sufficient number of minimal pairs which have differ-
ence in only one feature. Then, for each of the 9 models,
we evaluate both HMMs with and without the short pause
states, which amount to 18 acoustic models in total.
2.3 Language Models
As the language models, the following two types of word
bigram / trigram language models for 20k vocabulary
size are evaluated: 1) the one trained using 45 months
Mainichi newspaper articles, 2) the one trained using 5
years Japanese NHK (Japan Broadcasting Corporation)
broadcast news scripts (about 120,000 sentences).
2.4 Evaluation Data Sets
The evaluation data sets consist of newspaper sentence
utterances, which are relatively easier for speech recog-
nizers, and rather harder broadcast news speech: 1) 100
newspaper sentence utterances from 10 male speakers
consisting of 1,565 words, selected by IPA Japanese dic-
tation free software project (Kawahara and others, 1998)
from the JNAS (Japanese Newspaper Article Sentences)
speech data (Itou and others, 1998), 2) 175 Japanese
NHK broadcast news (June 1st, 1996) speech sentences
consisting of 6,813 words, uttered by 14 male speakers
(six announcers and eight reporters).
2.5 Word Recognition Rates
Word correct and accuracy rates of the individual LVCSR
models for the above two evaluation data sets are mea-
sured, where for the recognition of the newspaper sen-
tence utterances, the language model used is the one
trained using newspaper articles, and for the recognition
of the broadcast news speech, the language model used
is the one trained using broadcast news scripts. Word
recognition rates for the above two evaluation data sets
are summarized as below:
2Sampling frequencies, frame shift lengths, feature param-
eters, covariance matrices, and self loop transition / duration
control.
(a) Newspaper Sentence
(b) Broadcast News
Figure 1: Comparison among Combination by SVM /
(Weighted) Majority Votes / Individual Models
newspaper sentence utterances
decoder word correct (%) word accuracy (%)
Julius 93.0(max) to 72.7(min) 90.4(max) to 69.4(min)
SPOJUS 90.2(max) to 78.1(min) 85.3(max) to 51.0(min)
broadcast news speech
decoder word correct (%) word accuracy (%)
Julius 71.7(max) to 49.0(min) 68.8(max) to 39.7(min)
SPOJUS 70.7(max) to 55.4(min) 62.8(max) to 36.2(min)
3 Combining Outputs of Multiple LVCSR
Models by SVM
This section describes the results of applying SVM learn-
ing technique to the task of combining outputs of multiple
LVCSR models considering the confidence of each word.
We divide each of the data sets described in Section 2.4
into two halves3, where one half is used for training and
the other half for testing. A Support Vector Machine
is trained for choosing the most confident one among
several hypothesized words from the outputs of the 26
LVCSR models4. As features of the SVM learning, we
use the model IDs which output the word, the part-of-
speech of the word, and the number of syllables 5. As
3It is guaranteed that the two halves do not share speakers.
4We used SVM light (http://svmlight.joachims.
org/) as a tool for SVM learning. We compared linear and
quadratic kernels and the linear kernel performs better.
5Contribution of the parts-of-speech and the numbers of syl-
lables was slight. We also evaluated the effect of acoustic and
(a) Newspaper Sentence
(b) Broadcast News
Figure 2: Comparing Methods for Combining Outputs of
n (3 ? n ? 26) Models
classes of the SVM learning, we use whether each hy-
pothesized word is correct or incorrect. Since Support
Vector Machines are binary classifiers, we regard the dis-
tance from the separating hyperplane to each hypothe-
sized word as the word?s confidence. The outputs of the
26 LVCSR models are aligned by Dynamic Time Warp-
ing, and the most confident one among those competing
hypothesized words is chosen as the result of model com-
bination. We also require the confidence of hypothesized
words to be higher than a certain threshold, and choose
the ones with the confidence above this threshold as the
result of model combination.
The results of the performance evaluation against the
test data are shown in Figure 1. All the results in Fig-
ure 1 are the best performing ones among those for com-
bining outputs of n (3 ? n ? 26) models. The results
of model combination by SVM are indicated as ?SVM?.
As a baseline performance, that of the best performing
single model with respect to word correct rate (?Individ-
ual Model with Max Cor?) is shown. (Note that their
word recognition rates are those for the half of the whole
data set, and thus different from those in Section 2.5.)
For both speech data, model combination by SVM sig-
language scores of each hypothesized word as features of SVM,
where their contribution to improving the overall performance
was very little.
(a) Newspaper Sentence
(b) Broadcast News
Figure 3: Comparison between Maximizing Recall of
Union / Descending Order of Word Correct Rates
nificantly outperforms the best performing single model.
In terms of word accuracy rate, relative word error re-
duction are 39 % for the newspaper sentence utterances
and 13 % for the broadcast news speech. Figure 1 also
shows the performance of ROVER (Fiscus, 1997) as an-
other baseline, where ?Majority Vote? shows the perfor-
mance of the strategy of outputting no word at a tie, while
?Weighted Majority Vote? shows the performance when,
for each individual model, word correct rate for each sen-
tence is estimated and used as the weight of hypothesized
words. Model combination by SVM mostly outperforms
ROVER for both speech data. In terms of word accuracy
rate, relative word error rate reduction are 23 % for the
newspaper sentence utterances and 8 % for the broadcast
news speech6.
Figure 2 plots the changes of word accuracy rates
against the increasing number of models which partici-
pate in LVCSR model combination. Here, LVCSR mod-
els to be combined are chosen so as to cover as many cor-
rectly recognized words as possible, rather than choosing
models in descending order of their word correct rates.
(As we show later, the former outperforms the latter.) It
6Remarkable improvements are achieved especially in word
accuracy rates. This is due to the strategy of requiring the confi-
dence of hypothesized words to be higher than a certain thresh-
old, where insertion error words tend to be discarded.
is quite clear from this result that the difference of model
combination by SVM and (weighted) majority votes be-
comes much larger as more and more models participate
in model combination. This is because the majority of
participating models become unreliable in the second half
of the curves in Figure 2.
Figure 3 compares the model selection procedures, i.e.,
choosing models so as to cover as many correctly recog-
nized words as possible (indicated as ?Maximizing Recall
of Union?), and choosing models in descending order of
their word correct rates (indicated as ?Descending Order
of Word Correct Rates?). The former performs better in
the first half of the curves. This result indicates that, even
if recognition error words increase in the outputs of mod-
els participating in LVCSR model combination, it is bet-
ter to cover as many correctly recognized words as pos-
sible. This is because, in the model combination by high
performance machine learning techniques such as SVM
learning, reliable and unreliable hypothesized words are
easily discriminated through the training process.
4 Concluding Remarks
This paper proposed to apply the SVM learning technique
to the task of combining outputs of multiple LVCSR
models. The proposed technique has advantages over that
by voting schemes such as ROVER, especially when the
majority of participating models are not reliable.
References
G. Evermann and P. Woodland. 2000. Posterior probability
decoding, confidence estimation and system combination. In
Proc. NIST Speech Transcription Workshop.
J. G. Fiscus. 1997. A post-processing system to yield reduced
word error rates: Recognizer output voting error reduction
(ROVER). In Proc. ASRU, pages 347?354.
K. Itou et al 1998. The design of the newspaper-based
Japanese large vocabulary continuous speech recognition
corpus. In Proc. 5th ICSLP, pages 3261?3264.
A. Kai, Y. Hirose, and S. Nakagawa. 1998. Dealing with out-
of-vocabulary words and speech disfluencies in an n-gram
based speech understanding system. In Proc. 5th ICSLP,
pages 2427?2430.
T. Kawahara et al 1998. Sharable software repository for
Japanese large vocabulary continuous speech recognition. In
Proc. 5th ICSLP, pages 3257?3260.
T. Kemp and T. Schaaf. 1997. Estimating confidence using
word lattices. In Proc. 5th Eurospeech, pages 827?830.
S. Nakagawa and K. Yamamoto. 1996. Evaluation of segmen-
tal unit input HMM. In Proc. 21st ICASSP, pages 439?442.
T. Utsuro, T. Harada, H. Nishizaki, and S. Nakagawa. 2002.
A confidence measure based on agreement among multiple
LVCSR models ? correlation between pair of acoustic mod-
els and confidence ?. In Proc. 7th ICSLP, pages 701?704.
T. Utsuro, Y. Kodama, T. Watanabe, H. Nishizaki, and S. Nak-
agawa. 2003. Confidence of agreement among multiple
LVCSR models and model combination by SVM. In Proc.
28th ICASSP, volume I, pages 16?19.
V. N. Vapnik. 1995. The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory.
Springer-Verlag.
