Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 9?12,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Multimedia Blog Creation System using Dialogue  
with Intelligent Robot 
Akitoshi Okumura, Takahiro Ikeda, Toshihiro Nishizawa, Shin-ichi Ando, 
and Fumihiro Adachi 
Common Platform Software Research Laboratries,  
NEC Corporation 
1753 Shimonumabe Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki-city, Kanagawa 211-8666 JAPAN 
{a-okumura@bx,nishizawa@bk,s-ando@cw,f-adachi@aj}.jp.nec.com 
 
Abstract 
A multimedia blog creation system is de-
scribed that uses Japanese dialogue with an 
intelligent robot. Although multimedia 
blogs are increasing in popularity, creating 
blogs is not easy for users who lack high-
level information literacy skills. Even 
skilled users have to waste time creating 
and assigning text descriptions to their 
blogs and searching related multimedia 
such as images, music, and illustrations. To 
enable effortless and enjoyable creation of 
multimedia blogs, we developed the system 
on a prototype robot called PaPeRo. Video 
messages are recorded and converted into 
text descriptions by PaPeRo using continu-
ous speech recognition. PaPeRo then 
searches for suitable multimedia contents 
on the internet and databases, and then, 
based on the search results, chooses appro-
priate sympathetic comments by using 
natural language text retrieval. The re-
trieved contents, PaPeRo's comments, and 
the video recording on the user's blog is 
automatically uploaded and edited. The 
system was evaluated by 10 users for creat-
ing travel blogs and proved to be helpful 
for both inexperienced and experienced us-
ers. The system enabled easy multimedia-
rich blog creation and even provided users 
the pleasure of chatting with PaPeRo. 
1 Introduction 
Blogs have become popular and are used in a vari-
ety of settings not only for personal use, but are 
also used in the internal communications of or-
ganizations. A multimedia blog, which contains 
videos, music, and illustrations, is increasing in 
popularity because it enables users to express their 
thoughts creatively. However, users are unsatisfied 
with the current multimedia blog creation methods. 
Users have three requirements. First, they need 
easier methods to create blogs. Most multimedia 
blogs are created in one of two ways: 1) A user 
creates audio-visual contents by cameras and or 
some other recording devices, and then assigns a 
text description to the contents as indexes. 2) A 
user creates a text blog, and then searches for mul-
timedia contents on the internet and databases to 
attach them to his blog. Both methods require 
high-level information literacy skills. Second, they 
would like to reduce their blog-creation time. Even 
skilled users have to waste time assigning text de-
scription and searching related multimedia con-
tents. Third, they like to be encouraged by other 
peoples? comments on their blogs. Although some 
users utilize pet-type agents making automatic 
comments to their blogs, the agents do not always 
satisfy them because the comments do not consider 
users' moods. To meet the three requirements, we 
developed a multimedia blog creation system using 
Japanese dialogue with an intelligent robot. The 
system was developed on a prototype robot called 
PaPeRo (Fujita, 2002), which has the same CPU 
and memory as a mobile PC. In this paper, we de-
scribe the multimedia blog creation method and 
the evaluation results in a practical setting. 
2 Multimedia Blog Creation 
2.1 Outline of system processes 
The system has four sequential processes: video 
message recording, continuous speech recognition, 
natural language text retrieval, and blog coordina-
9
tion. The first process is activated when a user be-
gins a conversation with PaPeRo. The process 
stores a video message recorded on PaPeRo's mi-
crophones and CCD cameras, and the second 
process converts the speech contents of the video 
message into a text description to extract important 
keywords. Then, the third process searches for 
suitable multimedia contents on pre-specified web 
sites and databases based on the text description. 
The first three processes can simplify multimedia 
blog creation and reduce creation costs. The last 
process detects a user?s mood, such as delight, an-
ger, sorrow, and pleasure, by extracting typical 
expressions from the text description, and then 
chooses appropriate sympathetic comments to en-
courage the user. Finally, the last process coordi-
nates uploading the recorded video message, the 
text description, the extracted keywords, the 
searched contents, and the sympathetic comments 
on the user's blog. 
2.2 Continuous Speech Recognition 
The system converts the speech content of the 
video message into text descriptions and extracts 
important keywords based on their lexical infor-
mation. The system should, therefore, be equipped 
with a large-vocabulary continuous speech recog-
nition engine capable of dealing with spontaneous 
speech. This is because blog messages usually con-
tain various kinds of words and expressions. As 
this kind of engine needs a large amount of mem-
ory and computational resources, it is generally 
difficult to install the engine on small intelligent 
robots because the robot requires its own computa-
tional resources for their own intelligent operations, 
such as image recognition and movement control. 
To solve this problem, we used a compact and 
scalable large-vocabulary continuous speech rec-
ognition framework, which has been shown to 
work on low-power devices, such as PDAs (Isotani 
et al,2005). The framework achieves compact and 
high-speed processing by the following techniques: 
 - Efficient reduction of Gaussian components us-
ing MDL criterion (Shinoda, et al, 2002) 
- High-speed likelihood calculation using tree-
structured probability density functions (Wata-
nabe, et al, 1995) 
- Compaction of search algorithm using lexical 
prefix tree and shared usage of calculated lan-
guage model scores (Isotani et al, 2005) 
The framework we developed contained a Japanese 
lexicon of 50,000 words typically used in travel 
conversations based on a speech translation system 
(Isotani, et al, 2002). We were able to evaluate the 
developed system by making a travel blog using 
Japanese dialogue with PaPeRo.  
2.3 Natural Language Text Retrieval 
The system generates a query sentence from a 
text description converted using the above-
mentioned framework. As few multimedia contents 
contain retrieval keywords, the system matches the 
query to text in web pages and documents contain-
ing multimedia contents. The system then chooses 
multimedia contents located adjacent to the highly-
matched text as retrieval results. To achieve high 
precision for avoiding user interaction with the 
retrieved results, the system is enhanced using the 
Okapi BM25 model (Robertson, et al, 1995) by 
the following techniques (Ikeda, et al, 2005): 
(1) Utilization of syntactic relationships 
The system needs to distinguish illustrations 
based on the context. For example, an illustration 
of fish to be eaten in a restaurant should be differ-
ent from that of fish to be seen in an aquarium. To 
achieve this, the system utilizes the syntactic rela-
tionships between a pair of words. The system 
produces a higher score for text containing the 
same syntactic relationship as that of a pair of 
words in a query sentence when calculating the 
matching score.  
(2) Distinction of negation and affirmation 
The system needs to distinguish negative and af-
firmative expressions because their meanings are 
clearly opposite. To achieve this, the system 
checks adjuncts attached to the expressions when 
matching a query sentence and text. 
(3) Identification of synonyms  
As different expressions have the same meaning, 
the system normalizes expressions by using a 
synonym dictionary containing 500 words before 
matching a query sentence and text. 
2.4 Blog Coordination 
The system detects users? mood to choose en-
couraging comments. Users? moods are sometimes 
detected by the expressions used and the manner in 
which the utterances are spoken. Although speak-
ing manner can clearly detect emotions, such as 
laughing or crying, some emotions are not always 
indicated. Expressions that clearly identify a per-
10
son?s mood can be indicated (Nakamura, 1993). 
By studying moods that are easily detectable from 
expressions, including modality, we developed a 
database of 10 moods (delight, anger, sorrow, 
pleasure, desire, fear, shame, relief, surprise, and 
normal) individually linked with 100 kinds of spe-
cific expressions. The database is searched based 
on the above-mentioned natural language text re-
trieval, which considers syntactic relationships, 
negative and affirmative responses, and synonyms. 
The database is also linked to PaPeRo?s response 
to convey the most appropriate sympathy for each 
mood. The response includes verbal comments, 
such as ?I'm happy for you? and ?It's really too 
bad?, and gestures, such as dancing and crying de-
picted using GIF animation files. Responses are 
chosen based on the mood detected. Finally, the 
system coordinates uploading a recorded video 
message, the text description, the extracted impor-
tant keywords, the searched multimedia contents, 
and PaPeRo?s responses on the user's blog. 
3 Example Use in Practical Setting 
We developed a prototype system for creating a 
travel blog on PaPeRo, which can retrieve 2000 
web pages containing 1500 illustrations and 550 
songs. PaPeRo is activated by hearing the phrase, 
?can you help me make my blog please??, as listed 
in Table. 1, and creates a blog, as shown in Figure 
1. Figure 1 shows a screen shot of a video message 
attached to the blog, a text description converted 
by the speech recognition and a button for playing 
the video message (A). Keywords, in this case Yo-
semite, Las Vegas, and Roulette, extracted from 
the text description are displayed (B). Three illus-
trations searched based on a query using the text 
description are displayed (C). A button for playing 
a searched song is available (D). PaPeRo?s com-
ments, such as ?I hope that happens?, are displayed 
(E). The user?s mood is detected as desire from her 
saying ?I would like to go there again.? The com-
ment is displayed together with the appropriate 
PaPeRo?s response.  
Table 1. Dialogue example (Excerpt) 
A user  : Can you help me make my blog please? 
PaPeRo: Yes, please push the button on my head. 
A user  : I went to Yosemite for my winter vacation. 
 I played the roulette for the first time in Las 
Vegas. I would like to go there again. 
PaPeRo: Ok, now your blog is ready for viewing. 
B
C
E
A
D
?????
????
 
Figure 1. Example of Created Blog  
4 Evaluation and Discussion 
4.1  Evaluation 
The system needs to be evaluated from two per-
spectives. The first is to individually evaluate the 
performance of each process mentioned in section 
2. The second is to evaluate total performance, in-
cluding the users? subjective opinions. As per-
formance has been evaluated using different appli-
cation systems, such as an automatic speech trans-
lation system (Isotani, et al, 2002) and a speech-
activated text retrieval system (Ikeda, et al, 2005), 
we concentrated on evaluating the total perform-
ance based on surveying users? opinions about the 
blogs they created using the developed system. The 
survey results were analyzed in terms of speech 
recognition accuracy and users? blog making ex-
perience to improve the system.  
4.2 Results and Discussion 
The system was evaluated by 10 users. Half had 
blog making experiences, and the other half had 
no experience at all. All users input 20 sentences, 
and half of the sentences input were on travel is-
sues, but the other half were unrelated because we 
needed opinions based on the results from low 
speech recognition accuracy. Users were inter-
viewed on their automatically created blogs. 
Their opinions are listed in Table 2. The first row 
contains opinions about blogs created based on 
speech recognition results that had high word ac-
curacy (85-95%). The second row contains opin-
ions that had low accuracy (50-84%). The third 
row shows opinions regardless of the accuracy. 
11
The left column contains opinions of users with 
blog-making experience. The middle column con-
tains opinions of inexperienced users. The right 
column shows opinions regardless of the experi-
ence. The table leads to the following discussion: 
(1) Expectations for multimedia blog creation 
Users were satisfied with the system when high 
speech recognition accuracy was used regardless 
of their blog-making experience. Some users ex-
pected that the system could promote spread of 
multimedia contents with index keywords, even 
though few multimedia contents currently have 
indexes for retrieval. 
(2) Robustness and tolerability for low accuracy 
Users understood the results when low speech 
recognition accuracy was used because the mul-
timedia content search is still fairly successful 
when keywords are accurately recognized, even 
though the total accuracy is not high. Users can 
appreciate the funny side of speech recognition 
errors and unexpected multimedia contents from 
PaPeRo?s mistakes. However, as the errors do not 
always lead to amusing results, an edit interface 
should be equipped to improve keywords, illus-
trations and the total blog page layout. 
(3) More expectations of dialogue with PaPeRo 
Users would like to more enjoy themselves with 
PaPeRo, regardless of the speech recognition ac-
curacy. They expect PaPeRo to give them more 
information, such as track-back and comments, 
based on dialogue history. As PaPeRo stores all 
the messages in himself, he has the ability to gen-
erate more sophisticated comments and track-
back messages with users. Also, when the dia-
logue scenario is improved, he can ask the users 
some encouraging questions to make their blog 
more interesting and attractive while recording 
their video messages. 
5 Conclusion  
We developed a multimedia blog creation system 
using Japanese dialogue with an intelligent robot. 
The system was developed on PaPeRo for creating 
travel blogs and was evaluated by 10 users. Results 
showed that the system was effective for inexperi-
enced and experienced users. The system enabled 
easy and simple creation of multimedia-rich blogs, 
while enabling users the pleasure of chatting with 
PaPeRo. We plan to improve the system by sup-
porting the edit interface and enhancing the dia-
logue scenario so that users can enjoy themselves 
with more sophisticated and complex interaction 
with PaPeRo.  
Table 2. Survey of Users? Opinions 
References 
Yoshihiro Fujita. 2002. Personal Robot PaPeRo. Jour-
nal of Robotics and Mechatronics, 14(1): 60?63. 
Takahiro Ikeda, at al. 2005. Speech-Activated Text Re-
trieval System for Cellular Phones with Web Brows-
ing Capability. In Proceedings of PACLIC19, 265?
272. 
Ryosuke Isotani, et al 2002. An Automatic Speech 
Translation System on PDAs for Travel Conversation. 
In Proceedings of ICMI2002, 211?216. 
Ryosuke Isotani, et al 2005. Basic Technologies for 
Spontaneous Speech Recognition and Its Applica-
tions. In IPSJ-SIGNL, 2005-NL-169, 209?116 (in 
Japanese). 
Akira Nakamura (ed.). 1993. Kanjo hyogen jiten (Emo-
tional Expressions Dictionary). Tokyodo Shuppan, 
Tokyo (in Japanese). 
Stephen E. Robertson, et al 1995. Okapi at TREC-3. In 
Proceedings of TREC-3, 109?126. 
Koichi Shinoda and et al 2002. Efficient Reduction of 
Gaussian Components Using MDL Criterion for 
HMM-based Speech Recognition, In Proceedings of 
ICASSP-2002, 869?872. 
Takao Watanabe, et al 1995. High Speed Speech Rec-
ognition Using Tree-Structured Probability Density 
Function. In Proceedings of ICASSP-1995, 556?559. 
Blog-making experience  
Experienced Inexperienced Either 
Hi
gh
 
-This system 
makes multi-
media con-
tents more 
searchable on 
the internet. 
-I would like to 
create blogs with 
PaPeRo. 
-Easy to create 
blog only by 
chatting. 
-PaPeRo?s 
comments are 
nice. 
Lo
w 
-Keywords, 
searched con-
tents, and the 
total lay-out of 
blogs should 
be edited. 
-Searched con-
tents are good. 
-Even unexpect-
edly searched 
contents because 
of recognition 
errors are funny. 
-PaPeRo could 
be allowed for 
his mistake. 
- Unexpected 
texts tempt users 
to play the 
video.  
Sp
ee
ch
 re
co
gn
itio
n a
cc
ura
cy
 
Ei
the
r 
-PaPeRo?s 
track-back is 
wanted as well 
as more dia-
logue varia-
tion. 
-PaPeRo should 
talk on reasons 
of his choosing a 
song. 
-PaPeRo should 
consider a his-
tory of recorded 
messages and his 
comments. 
12
