Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 61?64,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Joint Statistical Model for Simultaneous Word Spacing and 
 Spelling Error Correction for Korean 
Hyungjong Noh* Jeong-Won Cha** Gary Geunbae Lee* 
*Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Pohang University of Science & Technology (POSTECH) 
San 31, Hyoja-Dong, Pohang, 790-784, Republic of Korea 
 
** Changwon National University 
Department of Computer information & Communication 
9 Sarim-dong, Changwon Gyeongnam, Korea 641-773  
 
nohhj@postech.ac.kr jcha@changwon.ac.kr gblee@postech.ac.kr 
Abstract 
This paper presents noisy-channel based 
Korean preprocessor system, which cor-
rects word spacing and typographical errors. 
The proposed algorithm corrects both er-
rors simultaneously. Using Eojeol transi-
tion pattern dictionary and statistical data 
such as Eumjeol n-gram and Jaso transition 
probabilities, the algorithm minimizes the 
usage of huge word dictionaries. 
1 Introduction 
With increasing usages of messenger and SMS, we 
need an efficient text normalizer that processes 
colloquial style sentences. As in the case of general 
literary sentences, correcting word spacing error 
and spelling error is the very essential problem 
with colloquial style sentences. 
In order to correct word spacing errors, many 
algorithms were used, which can be divided into 
statistical algorithms and rule-based algorithms. 
Statistical algorithms generally use character n-
gram (Eojeol 1  or Eumjeol 2  n-gram in Korean) 
(Kang and Woo, 2001; Kwon, 2002) or noisy-
channel model (Gao et. al., 2003). Rule-based al-
gorithms are mostly heuristic algorithms that re-
flect linguistic knowledge (Yang et al, 2005) to 
solve word spacing problem. Word spacing prob-
lem is treated especially in Japanese or Chinese, 
                                                 
1 Eojeol is a Korean spacing unit which consists of one or 
more Eumjeols (morphemes). 
2 Eumjeol is a Korean syllable. 
which does not use word boundary, or Korean, 
which is normally segmented into Eojeols, not into 
words or morphemes. 
The previous algorithms for spelling error cor-
rection basically use a word dictionary. Each word 
in a sentence is compared to word dictionary en-
tries, and if the word is not in the dictionary, then 
the system assumes that the word has spelling er-
rors. Then corrected candidate words are suggested 
by the system from the word dictionary, according 
to some metric to measure the similarity between 
the target word and its candidate word, such as 
edit-distance (Kashyap and Oommen, 1984; Mays 
et al, 1991). 
But these previous algorithms have a critical li-
mitation: They all corrected word spacing errors 
and spelling errors separately. Word spacing algo-
rithms define the problem as a task for determining 
whether to insert the delimiter between characters 
or not. Since the determination is made according 
to the characters, the algorithms cannot work if the 
characters have spelling errors. Likewise, algo-
rithms for solving spelling error problem cannot 
work well with word spacing errors. 
To cope with the limitation, there is an algo-
rithm proposed for Japanese (Nagata, 1996). Japa-
nese sentence cannot be divided into words, but 
into chunks (bunsetsu in Japanese), like Eojeol in 
Korean. The proposed system is for sentences rec-
ognized by OCR, and it uses character transition 
probabilities and POS (part of speech) tag n-gram. 
However it needs a word dictionary and takes long 
time for searching many character combinations. 
61
We propose a new algorithm which can correct 
both word spacing error and spelling error simulta-
neously for Korean. This algorithm is based on 
noisy-channel model, which uses Jaso3  transition 
probabilities and Eojeol transition probabilities to 
create spelling correction candidates. Candidates 
are increased in number by inserting the blank cha-
racters on the created candidates, which cover the 
spacing error correction candidates. We find the 
best candidate sentence from the networks of Ja-
so/Eojeol candidates. This method decreases the 
size of Eojeol transition pattern dictionary and cor-
rects the patterns which are not in the dictionary. 
The remainder of this paper is as follows: Sec-
tion 2 describes why we use Jaso transition prob-
ability for Korean. Section 3 describes the pro-
posed model in detail. Section 4 provides the ex-
periment results and analyses. Finally, section 5 
presents our conclusion. 
2 Spelling Error Correction with Jaso 
Transition4 Probabilities 
We can use Eumjeol transition probabilities or Jaso 
transition probabilities for spelling error correction 
for Korean. We choose Jaso transition probabilities 
because there are several advantages. Since an 
Eumjeol is a combination of 3 Jasos, the number of 
all possible Eumjeols is much larger than that of all 
possible Jasos. In other words, Jaso-based 
language model is smaller than Eumjeol-based 
language model. Various errors in Eumjeol (even if 
they do not appear as an Eumjeol pattern in a 
training corpus) can be corrected by correction in 
Jaso unit. Also, Jaso transition probabilities can be 
extracted from relatively small corpus. This merit 
is very important since we do not normally have 
such a huge corpus which is very hard to collect, 
since we have to pair the spelling errors with 
corresponding corrections.  
We obtain probabilities differently for each 
case: single Jaso transition case, two Jaso?s transi-
tion case, and more than two Jasos transition case. 
In single Jaso transition case, the spelling errors 
are corrected by only one Jaso transition (e.g. 
??????? / ???). The case of correcting 
by deleting Jaso is also one of the single Jaso tran-
                                                 
3 Jaso is a Korean character. 
4 ?Transition? means the correct character is changed to other 
character due to some causes, such as typographical errors. 
sition case (??????? / ??X5). The Jaso 
transition probabilities are calculated by counting 
the transition frequencies in a training corpus. 
In two Jaso?s transition case, the spelling errors 
are corrected by adjacent two Jasos transition 
(????? / ???X?). In this case, we treat 
two Jaso?s as one transition unit. The transition 
probability calculation is the same as above. 
In more than two Jaso?s transition case, the spel-
ling errors cannot be corrected only by Jaso transi-
tion (????). In this case, we treat the whole 
Eojeols as one transition unit, and build an Eojeol 
transition pattern dictionary for these special cases. 
3 A Joint Statistical Model for Word 
Spacing and Spelling Error Correction 
3.1 Problem Definition 
Given a sentence T  which includes both word 
spacing errors and spelling errors, we create 
correction candidates C  from T , and find the best 
candidate that has the highest transition 
probability from C . 
'C
).|(maxarg' TCPC C=               (1) 
3.2 Model Description 
A given sentence T  and candidates  consist of 
Eumjeol  and the blank character . 
C
is ib
nnbsbsbsbsT ...332211= . 
....332211 nnbsbsbsbsC =                (2) 
(n is the number of Eumjeols) 
Eumjeol  consists of 3 Jasos, Choseong (on-
set), Jungseong (nucleus), and Jongseong (coda). 
The empty Jaso is defined as ?X?.  is ?
is
ib B ? when 
the blank exists, and ?? ? when the blank does not 
exist. 
321 iiii jjjs = .                        (3) 
( : Choseong, : Jungseong, : Jongseong) 1ij 2ij 3ij
Now we apply Bayes? Rule for : 'C
)|(maxarg' TCPC C=  
).()|(maxarg
)(/)()|(maxarg
CPCTP
TPCPCTP
C
C
=
=
             (4) 
                                                 
5 ?X? indicates that there is no Jaso in that position. 
62
)(CP  can be obtained using trigrams of Eum-
jeols (with the blank character) that  includes. C
?
=
??=
n
i
iii cccPCP
1
21 )|()( ,  or b .    (5) sc =
And  can be written as multiplication 
of each Jaso transition probability and the blank 
character transition probability. 
)|( CTP
)|()|(
1
'?
=
=
n
i
ii ssPCTP  
.)]|()|()|()|([
1
''
33
'
22
'
11?
=
=
n
i
iiiiiiii bbPjjPjjPjjP  
(6) 
We use logarithm of  in implementa-
tion. Figure 1 shows how the system creates the 
Jaso candidates network. 
)|( TCP
 
Figure 1: An example6 of Jaso candidate network. 
 
In Figure 1, the topmost line is the sequence of 
Jasos of the input sentence. Each Eumjeol in the 
sentence is decomposed into 3 Jasos as above, and 
each Jaso has its own correction candidates. For 
example, Jaso ??? at 4th column has its candidates 
???, ??? and ?X?. And two jaso?s ?X?? at 13th 
and 14th column has its candidates ????, 
????, ????, ????, and ????. The undermost 
gray square is an Eojeol (which is decomposed into 
Jasos) candidate ???X?????X? created 
from ???X??X?. Each jaso candidate has its 
own transition probability, 7)|(log 'ikik jjP , that is 
used for calculating . )|( TCP
In order to calculate , we need Eumjeol-
based candidate network. Hence, we convert the 
above Jaso candidate network into Eumjeol/Eojeol 
candidate network. Figure 2 shows part of the final 
)(CP
                                                 
6 The example sentence is ??????????????. 
7 In real implementation, we used ?a*logP(jik|j?ik) + b? by 
determining constants a and b with parameter optimization  
(a = 1.0, b = 3.0). 
network briefly. At this time, the blank characters 
? B ? and ? ? ? are inserted into each Eum-
jeol/Eojeol candidates. To find the best path from 
the candidates, we conduct viterbi-search from 
leftmost node corresponding to the beginning of 
the sentence. When Eumjeol/Eojeol candidates are 
selected, the algorithm prunes the candidates ac-
cording to the accumulated probabilities, doing 
beam search. Once the best path is found, the sen-
tence corrected by both spacing and spelling errors 
is extracted by backtracking the path. In Figure 2, 
thick squares represent the nodes selected by the 
best path.  
 
Figure 2: A final Eumjeol/Eojeol candidate network8
4  Experiments and Analyses 
4.1  Corpus Information 
 Table 1: Corpus information 
 
Table 1 shows the information of corpus which is 
used for experiments. All corpora are obtained 
from Korean web chatting site log. Each corpus 
has pair of sentences, sentences containing errors 
and sentences with those errors corrected. Jaso 
transition patterns and Eojeol transition patterns 
are extracted from training corpus. Also, Eumjeol 
n-grams are also obtained as a language model. 
                                                 
8 The final corrected sentence is ??? ??? ??? 
??? ???. 
 Training Test 
Sentences 60076 6006 
Eojeols 302397 30376 
Error Sentences (%) 15335  (25.53) 
1512 
 (25.17) 
Error Eojeols (%) 31297 (10.35) 
3111 
(10.24) 
63
4.2  Experiment Results and Analyses 
 We used two separate Eumjeol n-grams as lan-
guage models for experiments. N-gram A is ob-
tained from only training corpus and n-gram B is 
obtained from all training and test corpora. All ac-
curacies are measured based on Eojeol unit. 
Table 2 shows the results of word spacing error 
correction only for the test corpus. 
 Table 2: The word spacing error correction results 
 
The results of both word spacing error and spell-
ing error correction are shown in Table 3. Error 
containing test corpus (the blank characters are all 
deleted) was applied to this evaluation. 
 Table 3: The joint model results 
 
Table 4 shows the results of the same experi-
ment, without deleting the blank characters in the 
test corpus. The experiment shows that our joint 
model has a flexibility of utilizing already existing 
blanks (spacing) in the input sentence. 
 Table 4: The joint model results without deleting the 
exist spaces 
  
As shown above, the performance is dependent 
of the language model (n-gram) performance. Jaso 
transition probabilities can be obtained easily from 
small corpus because the number of Jaso is very 
small, under 100, in contrast with Eumjeol. 
 Using the existing blank information is also an 
important factor. If test sentences have no or few 
blank characters, then we simply use joint algo-
rithm to correct both errors. But when the test sen-
tences already have some blank characters, we can 
use the information since some of the spacing can 
be given by the user. By keeping the blank charac-
ters, we can get better accuracy because blank in-
sertion errors are generally fewer than the blank 
deletion errors in the corpus. 
5 Conclusions 
 We proposed a joint text preprocessing model 
that can correct both word spacing and spelling 
errors simultaneously for Korean. To our best 
knowledge, this is the first model which can handle 
inter-related errors between spacing and spelling in 
Korean. The usage and size of the word dictionar-
ies are decreased by using Jaso statistical prob-
abilities effectively. 
6 Acknowledgement 
This work was supported in part by MIC & IITA 
through IT Leading R&D Support Project. 
References 
 Jianfeng Gao, Mu Li and Chang-Ning Huang. 2003. 
Improved Source-Channel Models for Chinese Word 
Segmentation. Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meet-
ing of the ACL, pp. 272-279 
Seung-Shik Kang and Chong-Woo Woo. 2001. Auto-
matic Segmentation of Words Using Syllable Bigram 
Statistics. Proceedings of 6th Natural Language Proc-
essing Pacific Rim Symposium, pp. 729-732 
R. L Kashyap, B. J. Oommen. 1984. Spelling Correc-
tion Using Probabilistic Methods. Pattern Recogni-
tion Letters, pp. 147-154 
Oh-Wook Kwon. 2002. Korean Word Segmentation and 
Compound-noun Decomposition Using Markov 
Chain and Syllable N-gram. The Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of Korea, pp. 274-283.  
Mu Li, Muhua Zhu, Yang Zhang and Ming Zhou. 2006. 
Exploring Distributional Similarity Based Models for 
Query Spelling Correction. Proceedings of the 21st 
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics and 44th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pp. 1025-
1032 
Eric Mays, Fred J. Damerau and Robert L. Mercer. 
1991. Context Based Spelling Correction. IP&M, pp. 
517-522.  
Masaaki Nagata. 1996. Context-Based Spelling Correc-
tion for Japanese OCR. Proceedings of the 16th con-
ference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 806-811 
Christoper C. Yang and K. W. Li. 2005. A Heuristic 
Method Based on a Statistical Approach for Chinese 
Text Segmentation. Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science and Technology, pp. 1438-
1447. 
 n-gram A n-gram B 
Accuracy 91.03% 96.00% 
System n-gram A n-gram B
Basic joint model 88.34% 93.83%
System n-gram A n-gram B
Baseline 89.35% 89.35%
Basic joint model with keep-
ing the blank characters 90.35% 95.25%
64
Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2011: the 12th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 344?346,
Portland, Oregon, June 17-18, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
POMY: A Conversational Virtual Environment for Language Learning 
in POSTECH 
 
Hyungjong 
 Noh 
Kyusong  
Lee 
Sungjin  
Lee 
 
Gary Geunbae 
Lee 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Pohang University of Science & Technology, Pohang, South Korea 
{nohhj, kyusonglee, junion, gblee}@postech.ac.kr 
  
 
 
Abstract 
This demonstration will illustrate an inter-
active immersive computer game, POMY, 
designed to help Korean speakers learn 
English. This system allows learners to ex-
ercise their visual and aural senses, receiv-
ing a full immersion experience to increase 
their memory and concentration abilities to 
a greatest extent. In POMY, learners can 
have free conversations with game charac-
ters and receive corrective feedback to their 
errors. Game characters show various emo-
tional expressions based on learners? input 
to keep learners motivated. Through this 
system, learners can repeatedly practice 
conversations in everyday life setting in a 
foreign language with no embarrassment. 
1 Introduction 
The needs for computer-based methods for learn-
ing language skills and components are increasing. 
One of the ultimate goals of computer-assisted 
language learning is to provide learners with an 
immersive environment that facilitates acquiring 
communicative competence. According to Second 
Language Acquisition (SLA) theories, there are 
some essential factors for improving learners? con-
versational skills: 1) comprehensible inputs and 
outputs, 2) corrective feedback, and 3) motivation 
and attitude. SLA theories imply that providing 
learners with the opportunity to have free conver-
sations with someone who can correct their errors 
is very important for successful acquisition of for-
eign languages. Moreover, motivation is another 
crucial factor; therefore a good CALL system 
should have elements which can interest learners 
[1]. 
Considering these requirements, we have devel-
oped a conversational English education frame-
work, POMY (POstech iMmersive English studY). 
The program allows users to exercise their visual 
and aural senses to receive a full immersion expe-
rience to develop into independent English as a 
Foreign Language (EFL) learners and increase 
their memory and concentration abilities to a 
greatest extent [2].  
 
 
Figure 1: Example screenshots of POMY: path-finding, post office, and market 
344
2 Demonstrated System 
In order to provide learners with immersive world, 
we have developed a virtual reality environment 
using the Unity 3D game engine1. For the domains 
that learners are exposed to, we select such do-
mains as path-finding, market, post office, library, 
and movie theater (Figure 1) to ensure having 
learners practice conversations in everyday life 
setting. To keep learners motivated and interested 
during learning sessions, learners are encouraged 
to accomplish several missions. For example, the 
first mission in the post office is to send a camera 
to one?s uncle in England. The package must be 
insured and delivered by the next week. In order to 
send the package, a learner must talk to Non-
Player Characters (NPCs) to fill in the zip-code 
properly.  
All NPCs can perceive the utterances of learners, 
especially Korean learners of English. Korean 
learners? production of the sound is different from 
those of native speakers, resulting in numerous 
pronunciation errors. Therefore, we have collected 
a Korean-English corpus to train acoustic models. 
In addition, since language learners commit nu-
merous grammatical errors, we should consider 
this to understand their utterances. Thus, we statis-
tically infer the actual learners' intention by taking 
not only the utterance itself but also the dialog con-
text into consideration, as human tutors do [1]. 
While free conversation is invaluable to the 
acquisition process, it is not sufficient for learners 
to fully develop their L2 proficiency. Corrective 
feedback to learners? grammatical errors is 
necessary for improving accuracy in their 
interlanguage. For this purpose, we designed a 
                                                          
1 http://unity3d.com/ 
special character, Ghost Tutor, which plays the 
role of English tutor and helps learners to use more 
appropriate words and expressions during the game. 
When a learner produces ungrammatical utterances, 
the Ghost Tutor provides both implicit and explicit 
negative and positive feedback in a form of 
elicitation or recast, which was manifested as 
effective ways in the second language acquisition 
processes [3].  To provide corrective feedback on 
grammatical errors, we use a method which con-
sists of two sub-models: the grammaticality check-
ing model and the error type classification model 
[4]. Firstly, we automatically generate grammatical 
errors that learners usually commit [5-6], and con-
struct error patterns based on the articulated errors. 
Then the grammaticality checking model classifies 
the recognized user speech based on the similarity 
between the error patterns and the recognition re-
sult using confidence scores. After that, the error 
type classification model chooses the error type 
based on the most similar error pattern and the er-
ror frequency extracted from a learner corpus. 
Finally, the human perception of NPC?s emo-
tional expressions plays a crucial role in human 
computer interaction. Thus, all NPCs are provided 
with a number of communicative animations such 
as talking, laughing, waving, crying, thinking, and 
getting angry (Figure 2).The total number of ani-
mations is over thirty from which the system can  
select one based on the response of a learner. The 
system generates positive expressions such as 
clapping and laughing when the learner answers 
correctly, and negative expressions such as crying 
and getting angry for incorrect answers.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Various character animations 
345
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by the Industrial Strate-
gic technology development program, 10035252, 
development of dialog-based spontaneous speech 
interface technology on mobile platform, funded 
by the Ministry of Knowledge Economy (MKE, 
Korea), and by Basic Science Research Program 
through the National Research Foundation of Ko-
rea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, 
Science and Technology (2010-0019523). 
References  
Lee, S., Noh, H., Lee, J., Lee, K., Lee, G. G., Sagong, S., 
Kim, M. 2011. On the Effectiveness of Robot-
Assisted Language Learning, ReCALL Journal, 
Vol.23(1). 
Lee, S., Noh, H., Lee, J., Lee, K., Lee, G. G. 2010. 
POSTECH Approaches for Dialog-based English 
Conversation Tutoring. Proceedings of the APSIPA 
annual summit and conference, Singapore. 
Long, M. H., Inagaki, S., Ortega, L. 1998. The Role of 
Input and Interaction in Second Language Acquisi-
tion. The Modern Language Journal, 82, 357-371.  
Lee, S., Noh, H., Lee, K., Lee, G. G. 2011. Grammatical 
error detection for corrective feedback provision in 
oral conversations. Proceedings of the 25th AAAI 
conference on artificial intelligence (AAAI-11), San 
Francisco. 
Lee, S., Lee J., Noh, H., Lee, K., Lee, G. G, 2011. 
Grammatical Error Simulation for Computer-
Assisted Language Learning, Knowledge-Based Sys-
tems (to be published). 
Lee, S. and Lee, G. G. 2009. Realistic grammar error 
simulation using markov logic. Proceedings of the 
ACL, Singapore. 
 
346
