Multiple Discourse Marker Occurrence: 
Creating Hierarchies for Natural Language Generation 
Sarah Louise Oates* 
University of Brighton. 
Sarah.Oates@itri.brighton.ac.uk 
Abst ract  
Most studies on discourse markers implicitly as- 
sume that only one marker or discourse relation 
will occur in a sentence. In reality, more than 
one relation may hold between text spans and 
may be cued by multiple discourse markers. We 
describe here a method for hierarchically organ- 
ising discourse markers. The hierarchies are in- 
tended for use by a generation system to enable 
the selection and placement of more than one 
marker in a single text span. 
1 In t roduct ion  
The majority of studies on discourse markers 
implicitly assume that only one marker or dis- 
course relation will occur in a sentence or that 
the presence of multiple markers will not af- 
fect the choice and placement of others. How- 
ever, in reality, more than one relation may 
hold between text spans which may be cued 
by multiple markers. The available rules de- 
scribing the occurrence, choice and placement 
of a given marker do not account for multiple 
marker occurrence (Grote et al, 1995; Webber 
and Joshi, 1998; Power et al, 1999, e.g.,). We 
have found that the choice and placement of dis- 
course markers is greatly affected, not only by 
the presence and number of other markers, but 
also by the style of the text and the strength 
of other markers in the text span. We describe 
here a method for hierarchically organising dis- 
course markers which takes account of these fac- 
tors. The hierarchies are intended for use by a 
generation system to enable the selection and 
placement of multiple markers. 
* The author would like to thank the Engineering and 
Physical Sciences Research Council for funding 
2 Defining Discourse Markers  
Although precise definitions of discourse mark- 
ers differ between studies, it is generally ac- 
cepted that their role is to signal how one propo- 
sition should be interpreted given the other(s) in 
the discourse (Millis et al, 1995; Moore and Pol- 
lack, 1992). Most researchers in this field also 
agree that the relation between these propo- 
sitions may exist regardless of whether a dis- 
course marker is used (Scott and de Souza, 1990; 
Knott, 1995): a discourse marker is simply an 
explicit signal of a specific relation between two 
or more propositions. The non-occurrence of a 
marker does not mean that a discourse relation 
is absent: 
(1) no marker, 1 relation: The museum does not 
intend to sponsor a particular aspect of 
modern art; it intends to make a report o the 
public by offering material for study and 
comparison. 
By the same token, the presence of more than 
one discourse marker does not always signal a 
multitude of relations: 
(2) P markers, 1 relation: The museum does not 
intend to sponsor a particular aspect of 
modern art, but rather to make a report o 
the public by offering material for study and 
comparison. (BNC) 1 
Previous studies have accounted for a wide 
range of phenomena, from choosing between 
similar discourse markers (Fraser, 1998; Sanders 
et al, 1992) to abstracting away from discourse 
markers and using syntax to signal underlying 
discourse relations (Delin et al, 1996). How- 
ever, the issue of multiple markers, like those 
in the example above, is only now beginning 
1British National Corpus (Leech et al, 1994) 
41 
to be addressed. Recent work in computa- 
tional linguistics has provided possible solutions 
for the use of correlative markers (Webber and 
Joshi, 1998) and embedded clauses (Power et 
al., 1999). However, these solutions are incom- 
plete and further esearch is needed if we are to 
account for all examples of multiple discourse 
markers. 
3 Mu l t ip le  Markers  
The present project focuses on all cases of mul- 
tiple discourse markers, in other words, all cases 
where more than one marker occurs within two 
spans of text which are expressed either (a) 
within the same text sentence (Nunberg, 1990) 
covering one or more discourse relations (e.g., 
examples 3 and 4); 
(3) Having said that,  if you weigh only 60 kg 
(1321b) and yet still manage to sit your 90 kg 
(1981b) opponent down with a solid thump to 
his mid-section, then the refereeing panel 
may well applaud your fervour with a full 
point. (BNC) 
(4) Since the question turns on the meaning of 
the word "appropriate" in section 1(1) of the 
Act of 1968, the problem is therefore one of 
statutory interpretation. (BNC) 
or (b) in different ext sentences but cover- 
ing only one relation, the so-called correlative 
markers (Quirk et al, 1985) (e.g., example 5): 
(5) The job of being an Acorn Project leader is an 
unenviable one. For a start, they don't get 
paid, though they do receive a petrol 
allowance; for another thing, it's a bit like 
being in a group of unruly children for the 
week... (BNC) 
The work described here focuses solely on 
multiple discourse markers cueing a single re- 
lation, paying attention, when possible, to em- 
bedded iscourse relations and their markers. 
4 S ing le  Re la t ions  Mu l t ip le  
Markers  
Preliminary tests using the British National 
Corpus (BNC) and Knott's (1995) taxonomy of 
discourse markers suggested that the order of 
multiple markers cueing a single relation is af- 
fected by their position in the taxonomy; those 
higher in the taxonomy always precede those 
lower in the taxonomy (see figure 1 and exam- 
ples 6-7); 
(6) This blood-line was particularly helpful to the 
early breeders because the line was in-bred, 
his parents being brother and sister of 
excellent breeding and so consequently true 
to type. (BNC) 
(7) The difficulty is that the sites which have been 
extensively excavated, and so produced the 
largest quantities of pottery, such a Corbridge 
and Newstead, are multi-period, and the 
stratification of the excavations early in the 
century, consequently suspect. (BNC) 
However, since Knott's taxonomy only allows 
us to view hierarchies of markers of a single re- 
lation, improvements were necessary in order to 
account for multiple markers. Using the BNC, 
a list of at least 350 English discourse markers 
and Mann and Thompson's (1988) original 23 
rhetorical relations, we created a database on 
the number and type of relations each marker 
can cue (see figure 2). From this a hierarchy 
was built, similar to Knott's (1995), but bene- 
fiting from a wider range of markers and allow- 
ing more than one relation to be expressed at 
a time, thus reducing the redundancy present 
in Knott's taxonomy. Furthermore, in contrast 
to Knott's study in which examples were fab- 
ricated, all examples of discourse marker usage 
in our database are taken from the British Na- 
tional Corpus (BNC). Thus, all of our exam- 
ples are taken from real, natural texts and are, 
therefore, representative of discourse marker oc- 
currence in natural anguage. 
5 Const ruct ing  the  H ierarchy  
Our hierarchies are constructed on the assump- 
tion that (a) some discourse markers may be 
used to cue more than one relation and (b) when 
more than one marker is needed, the number of 
relations a marker can cue will affect the choice 
and position of that marker. In our hierarchy, 
those discourse markers which can cue many 
relations appear at the top and those mark- 
ing only a single relation occur at the bottom. 
Markers may also have additional constraints on 
their usage depending upon the text style, other 
relations being marked simultaneously and the 
content of the related propositions. 
6 S t rong  ~ Weak  Markers  
Figure 3 is an example of our hierarchy for 
the family of contrastive relations. Here we 
see that 'but' can mark four discourse relations 
42 
IT FOLLOWS THAT 
THIS IMPLIES THAT 
HENCE 
THUS 
I AND t 
I I 
. -, -I . . . .  
I so I 
I 
THEREFORE i 
CONSEQUENTLY 
. . . .  Not in Knott's (1995) 
taxonomy 
In Knott's (1995) 
taxonomy 
' I ) PLAINLY IN SO DOING OBVIOUSLY IN DOING THIS  ACCORDINGLY AT THAT AT ONCE 
I AS A RESULT I 
AS A CONSEQUENCE 
J r / \ - - - - -  THEREBY INSTANTLY 
Figure 1: Example of Knott's (1995) Taxonomy 
DISCOURSE CATEGORY DISCOURSE SAT/ EXAMPLE IN USE 
MARKER RELATION NUC* 
so subordinator vol-cause (n) He had no chance of winning SO he pretended he wasn't rying (BNC) 
non-vol-cause (n) 
non-vol-result 
enablement 
evaluation 
justify 
sequence 
purpose 
(s) 
(n) 
(s) 
(n) 
multi- 
nuclear 
(s) 
While deciding to stay as independent aspossible, I contacted ACET who 1 
knew provided practical care at home. I had previously spent about 2 years 
asking local services and friends for help and not having it happen. SO my 
flat had become pretty run down. (BNC) 
While wanting to dismiss the stereotyping and silly superstition, the snag 
remains that within all the ballyhoo there are elements of truth. SO instead 
of being outraged, one is left with a resigned smirk. (BNC) 
Loosen the cord SO you can remove the curtains easily. (BNC) 
Nor is this feeling only provoked by the sight or the thought of art, he wrote. 
I also experienced it when I signed the marriage register aswell as when I
saw the pig slaughtered...a feeling of the heart leaping and the blood 
pemping.....SO, wrote Harsnet, there is continuity as well as discontinuity. 
(BNC) 
I f  you went on strike they didn't pay you off. You got sacked and you just 
didn't get any money. So people had no other option but to work. (BNC) 
..... that's what I guessed so I said "no", I said they're fine, SO she said 
"oh, I'm ever so sorry". I said "don't be". (BNC) 
He'll remind her SO she'll remember. (BNC) 
*SAT/NUC = The text span upon which the discourse marker occurs - SAT(satellite), NUC(nucleus). 
Figure 2: Extract from Database of Discourse Markers & Relations 
(contrast, antithesis, concession and exception) 
without constraint. When discourse markers 
can be used for a large number of relations, we 
refer to them as 'weak' markers ince there is 
only a weak correlation between the marker and 
the relation being signalled. In contrast, when 
a discourse marker can only cue a single rela- 
tion, we refer to it as a 'strong' marker, since 
there is a strong correlation between the relation 
and the explicit lexical cue. In the hierarchy 
'notwithstanding that' is a highly constrained, 
strong discourse marker since it can only mark 
one relation (concession) and occur only when 
the text is formal, legal or both. 
Our tests on the BNC show that the choice 
and placement of a marker will be affected by 
its strength or weakness; the weakest markers 
always precede the stronger ones. We find that 
this rule not only applies to single relations cued 
by multiple markers: 
43 
CONTRAST 
CONCESSION 
ANTITHESIS 
EXCEPTION 
but 
not thzt..tx~t 
_\] comaAsT  
- \[ ~m-rHEs=s \[ 
notwithsumding 
while, whibt 
at the s~u~ ume 
meanwhile 
in \[l~or/..,i~ pr~t~e 
~ one s~de..oca the c tb~ 
~ tb~ oth?= haad 
hero, theirs  
all me same, st~l~ 
in ma)'c~c 
tho' 
~-6s NL ISN 
~,BI ~4 at\] 
<+ SUPRISING N 
eve. though, Fv~ so 
dcsp~ ~ 
in iplte of even whetl 
atkat  
e~m if. only if, if 
~vet~ly  
aol oaiy...bm also 
iQ fact in reality \ ia actuLI f~r~t 
at f'k,~t ~ghl  
E X ~  I =ave, tar 
~ \ ]  = RELATIONS MARKER CAN CUE ~ =PREFERENCES POR OCCURRENCE 
Figure 3: Hierarchy of Contrastive Family of Relations 
non~thstsadlng thai 
.) 
) a ( .E~o~T~oN ..... 
a~ay, anyh?~ 
) 
) 
cvea 
albeit 
(s) (a) The pores in the skin are a classic 
example: they can not become perceptible to 
us by themselves, but yet (b) their presence 
in the skin can be deduced from sweat. (BNC) 
but also, to a certain extent, to embedded rela- 
tions cued by two markers in the same text span. 
In the following example, we have two relations 
and two markers of contrast. The superordi- 
hate relation, marked by 'however', holds be- 
tween proposition (a) and propositions (b) and 
(c), whilst the subordinate relation, marked by 
'whereas', holds between propositions (b) and 
(c); 
(9) Indeed, (a) so strong have the differential 
views on advantageous locat ions become that 
one recent assessment of the total stock of 
foreign capital in developing countries 
suggests that it is less today than it was in 
1900. However, whereas (b) the G-5 
countries now account for 75 per cent of the 
world's FDI flow, (c) their position as the five 
major exporters is a much less concentrated 
45 per cent.(BNC) 
In both cases, the weakest marker precedes 
the stronger marker and neither could be re- 
versed and remain grammatical. Thus, working 
through the hierarchy from the weakest to the 
strongest markers, a generation system can de- 
termine which discourse marker should occur in 
a particular position on the basis that the weak- 
est markers always precede the stronger ones. 
44  
Decisions are based on the relation(s) to be 
marked, any other relation(s) already present, 
the style of the text, the content of the text 
spans, and the strength or weakness of other 
discourse markers present. 
7 Conc lus ions  
Thus far, we have developed hierarchies for the 
family of contrastive relations in English and 
French and the family of causal relations in En- 
glish. Ultimately, we intend to establish a com- 
plete hierarchy of all the markers of discourse 
relations; this will not only allow us to choose 
between different markers, regardless of whether 
one or more are used, but will also help to de- 
termine their order when multiple markers are 
necessary. In the final version of the hierar- 
chy, we intend to provide the generation system 
with statistical information on the likelihood of 
one marker following another. Such informa- 
tion will take account of the fact that certain 
markers tend to occur together more often than 
others. These statistics are currently being de- 
rived from tests on the International Corpus of 
English (Nelson, 1995). 
References 
J. Delin, D. R. Scott, and A. Hartley. 1996. 
Language Specific Mappings from Semantics 
to Syntax. In Proceedings of the 16th Inter- 
national Conference on Computational Lin- 
guistics, pages 292-297. COLING96. 
B. Fraser. 1998. Contrastive Discourse Mark- 
ers in English. In A. H. Jucker and Y. Ziv, 
editors, Discourse Markers: Descriptions and 
Theory, pages 301-326. John Benjamins, Am- 
sterdam. 
B. Grote, N. Lenke, and M. Stede. 1995. 
Ma(r)king Concessions in English and Ger- 
man. In Proceedings of the 5th European 
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, 
pages 11-32, Leiden, May. Leiden University. 
A. Knott. 1995. A Data-Driven Methodology 
\]or Motivating a Set o.f Coherence Relations. 
Ph.D. thesis, University of Edinburgh. 
G. Leech, R. Garside, and M. Bryant. 1994. 
CLAWS4: The tagging of the British Na- 
tional Corpus. In Proceedings of the 15th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING), pages 622-628, Ky- 
oto, Japan. 
W. Mann and S. Thompson. 1988. Rhetorical 
structure theory: Toward a functional theory 
of text organisation. Text, 8:243-281. 
K. K. Millis, J. M. Golding, and G. Barker. 
1995. Causal Connectives Increase Inference 
Generation. Discourse Processes, 20(1):29- 
50. 
J. D. Moore and M. E. Pollack. 1992. A Prob- 
lem for RST: The need for multi-level dis- 
course analysis. Computational Linguistics, 
18(4):537-544. 
G Nelson. 1995. The International Corpus of 
English: Markup & Transcription. In G. N. 
Leech, G. Myers, and J. A. Thomas, ed- 
itors, Spoken English on Computer: Tran- 
scription, mark-up and application, pages 
220-223. Longman, London. 
G. Nunberg. 1990. The Linguistics of Punctu- 
ation. CSLI Lecture Notes, no.18. Center for 
the study of Language and information, Stan- 
ford. 
R. Power, D. Scott, and C. Doran. 1999. Gen- 
erating Embedded Discourse Markers from 
Rhetorical Structure. In Proceedings from 
the European Workshop on Natural Lan- 
guage Generation EWNLG'g9, pages 30-38, 
Toulouse. 
R. Quirk, S. Greenbaum, S. Leech, and 
J. Svartvik. 1985. A Comprehensive Gram- 
mar of the English Language. Longman, Lon- 
don. 
T. Sanders, W. Spooren, and L. Noordman. 
1992. Toward a Taxonomy of Coherence Re- 
lations. Discourse Processes, 15:1-35. 
D.R. Scott and C.S. de Souza. 1990. Getting 
the Message Across in RST-based Text Gen- 
eration. In R. Dale, C. Mellish, and M. Zock, 
editors, Current Research in Natural Lan- 
guage Generation, pages 47-73. Academic 
Press, London. 
B. L. Webber and A. K. Joshi. 1998. An- 
choring a Lexicalised Tree-Adjoining Gram- 
mar for Discourse. In M. Stede, L. Warner, 
and E. Hovy, editors, Discourse Relations 
and Discourse Markers. Proceedings from the 
Workshop. COLING-A CL'98, pages 86-92, 
Montreal. 
45 
