The Semantics of Metaphor in the Game Theoretic Semantics
 with at Least Two Coordination Equilibria
Chiaki Ohkura
Division of Information Science
Graduate School of Science and Technology
Chiba University
1-33 Yayoicho, Inageku, Chiba 263-8522 Japan
cohkura@cogsci.L.chiba-u.ac.jp
Abstract
The objective of this paper is to present a
new dimension of Game Theoretic Se-
mantics (GTS) using the idea of the coor-
dination problem game to explain the
semantics of metaphor. A metaphorical
expression
1
 such as ?man is a wolf? is a
contradictory statement that insists all
objects in the set of ?man? also falls under
?wolf?. The study of metaphorical expres-
sion should be on intentions of such con-
tradictory language use, their intended
effect, and the conditions to lead to the ef-
fects. This is the tradition of Rhetoric
since Aristotle. It may be natural to char-
acterize this approach as pragmatic in the
tradition of the late 20th century paradigm
of linguistics, which is the trichotomy of
syntax, semantics and pragmatics. How-
ever the pragmatic approach cannot ex-
plain what Richards (1936) called
?tension? between two thoughts in a meta-
phorical expression. GTS has been devel-
                                                           
1
 In this paper, I say ?metaphorical expression? rather
than ?metaphor?. ?Metaphor? is commonly used as a
topic, but it is used at word level in traditional rhetoric
and at sentence level after Black. Also, ?metaphor? is
used for both metaphorical expression and a kind of
trope. So I use ?metaphorical expression? to refer lin-
guistic expression which is commonly called ?metaphor?.
oped as a possible substitute to the Tar-
skian truth conditional semantics. This
paper explores a new possibility of GTS
in the coordination problem game intro-
duced by Lewis (1961) for a semantics,
which admits the plurality of meanings.
1 Introduction
The objective of this paper is to present a new di-
mension of Game Theoretic Semantics (GTS) us-
ing the idea of the coordination problem game in a
search for the semantics of metaphor:
(ex.1) ?Man is a human being.?
(ex.2) ?Man is a wolf.?
If being ?man? presupposes being ?human be-
ing?, then what (ex.1) means is that all objects
falling under the category (or the set) of ?man? also
fall under ?human being?, so (ex.1) must be true a
priori. In the same way, (ex.2) means that all ob-
jects falling under ?man? also fall under ?wolf?, and
this must be false, a contradictory expression. But
we can easily imagine some situations where (ex.2)
would be meaningful.
EXAMPLE: Sue went to a party. Her friend,
Pam introduced Ian to her because she knew
Sue had broken up recently, and she had a be-
lief that Sue should have a new partner. Sue
enjoyed the conversation with him and found
him very attractive. Ian appeared to feel the
same way. When Sue took her leave, Ian of-
fered a lift for her. Pam, who was watching out
for them, winked and said ?Sue, ??man is a
wolf??, you know?.
In this example, Pam?s uttering ?man is a wolf?
does not seem contradictory. It is very natural and
looks meaningful even though it may admit several
interpretations. Therefore, this kind of sentence can
be meaningful in our everyday usage.
But uttering a contradictory expression is a de-
viation from our general understanding about lan-
guage use. The utterer?s intentions as to why such
a deviation is made, its intended effects and the
conditions to materialize the intended effects: these
have been the objective of the study of metaphor in
the tradition of rhetoric.
Metaphor has been regarded as a part of rheto-
ric. But if we focus on the fact that it uses ?utterer?
and ?use? as its items, it may be natural to regard
rhetoric as a part in pragmatics in the trichotomy of
syntax, semantics and pragmatics in the late 20th
century linguistic paradigm. In the first section, I
will examine the pragmatic approach, Aristotle and
Davidson, and make clear that these are not
enough to present what metaphor means, and we
need to choose a semantic approach.
Richards, who opened the new path to seman-
tics, introduced the idea of ?tension?. In the tradi-
tion of rhetoric, metaphor had been thought to have
?two thoughts in a sentence?
2
 (Richards). Richards
explained the special property that metaphorical
expression has and normal expression does not, is
in the tension, which is born between these two
thoughts in one expression. What Richards calls
?tension? is the interaction of meanings between
literal meaning and metaphorical meaning in an
expression. This ?tension?, which cannot be ex-
plained by a pragmatic approach, is the foundation
of the semantic approach lead by Richards and
Black.
                                                           
2
 What Richards means by ?thoughts? is not clear, but I
assume it is literal meaning and metaphorical meaning.
Partly he seems to admit two meanings and partly he
seems to admit only one meaning in metaphorical ex-
pression. Sometimes he seems to mean comparison ob-
jects as in comparison theory. However what is
important is not what he meant, but what he suggests.
However, even semantic approach had failed to
explain ?tension? completely. It is because major
semantics based on the Tarskian truth definition
state the meaning of a sentence is only one. ?Ten-
sion? needs to have more than two meanings in a
sentence by definition.
Existing GTS uses mainly zero-sum games. The
equilibrium is corresponded to the meaning of a
sentence, so each sentence has one meaning. This
does not meet the condition of meaning that we
demand for the semantics of metaphor in the line
of Richards? idea.
The coordination problem game is a type of
game which Lewis analyses as a part of this theory
of convention (Lewis, 1961). There must be at
least more than two equilibria in the game by defi-
nition. If we apply this game as a model of mean-
ing in GTS, those equilibria can correspond to the
plural meanings in a metaphorical expression. This
conclusion promises us a simple model of the
complex state of meanings in figurative language.
2 From Pragmatic Approach to Semantic
Approach
In this section, I criticize Aristotle and Davidson as
representatives of the pragmatic approach to the
study of metaphor and show that the semantic ap-
proach is necessary for the study of metaphorical
expressions. Afterwards, I analyze Richard and
Black?s semantic approaches and point out that
pragmatic elements are still left in their approaches.
A more abstract semantic approach is needed.
2.1 Aristotle and Traditional Rhetoric
Aristotle?s ??Poetics?? and ??Rhetoric?? have been
the foundation of rhetorical studies for more than
2300 years. Aristotle regards metaphor as transfer-
ence and this thought has lasted as the core idea in
the tradition of rhetoric.
Metaphor is the application of an alien name by
transference either from genus to species, or
from species to genus, or from species to spe-
cies, or by analogy, that is, proportion. (1457b)
According to Aristotle, expression ?the twilight
of gods? is a transference between ?twilight? and
?last? which have similarity (end of something). By
similarity, words are connected and can have the
other?s meaning. In other words, similarity lets
words have other meanings (metaphorical mean-
ings) that the words originally do not have. Black
calls it the substitution view of metaphor (1962).
Substitution theory insists that the reason for
metaphorical expression is in its psychological ef-
fects to hearers. Here, metaphor is studied in terms
of how it is used and what the effect is of language
use. This let us categorize substitution theory as a
part in pragmatics. Pragmatics is the study about
how and why language is used, using user and use
as the terms. So does substitution theory.
2.2 Davidson?s Pragmatics
Davidson is regarded as one of the leading phi-
losophers in the pragmatic approaches. He denies
metaphorical meaning in metaphorical expression,
which has never been doubted without much ar-
gument. Metaphorical expressions have literal
meaning only. We realize an expression is meta-
phorical though a purely pragmatic process. An
utterance is made and the conditions bring us to
realize that the meaning of the utterance is not lit-
eral (Davidson, 1978).
 What Davidson explains is only this realization
of non-literal meaning. Metaphorical meaning it-
self is denied and he makes it clear that there is no
such thing as metaphorical meaning, a special kind
of mental, cognitive property. This is remarkable
progress from Aristotelian substitution theory in
terms of avoiding problems of paraphrasing which
I will criticize in the next sub-section in detail. Da-
vidson says; ?If this is right, what we attempt in
?paraphrasing? a metaphor cannot be to give its
meaning, for that lies on the surface; rather we at-
tempt to evoke what the metaphor brings to our
attention.? (Davidson, 1978)
What paraphrasing attempts is not similarity
between literal meaning and metaphorical meaning.
Since Davidson denies metaphorical meaning itself,
he does not need to compare two meanings.
There are at least two points to criticize David-
son. Firstly, to pursue what is the meaning of
metaphor itself is a very important question and
Davidson?s reply is just an escape from the prob-
lem, though it is quite a remarkable escape. One
says ?he is a pumpkin? and if another does not un-
derstand the utterance and asks what it means,
paraphrasing (?it means he is very stupid?) is a pos-
sible answer and the paraphrasing does have sense.
Paraphrasing may not be able to have exactly the
same mental content that the original metaphorical
expression has, but it does have a part of it. Other-
wise the hearer cannot be persuaded.
Secondly, insisting there is no such thing as
metaphorical meaning is a revolution and very in-
spiring, but it might be too unnatural since we can
talk and wonder about it. In this field of study, re-
ality has a special sense because what we argue
about is mainly abstract objects that do not need to
exist. However, we should stick to our reality, our
sense of naturalness, not to recreate our language
understanding to fit our theories. What matters to
us with metaphorical expressions are not only the
utterer?s intention, but also the meaning of the ex-
pressions.
2.3 Problems in Substitution Theory
The first two of the following points are major
criticisms of substitution theory. Firstly, the meta-
phorical meanings of a metaphorical expression do
not substitute all of the literal meaning. The second
point reflects my idea of understanding meanings.
Substitution theory says that similarity makes a
metaphor, similarity in the meanings of two com-
pared ideas (literal meaning and metaphorical
meaning) makes a metaphorical expression. But
this is complete opposite.
The first objection, that metaphorical meanings
in a metaphorical expression do not substitute all
the literal meanings of the expression, is, in other
words: paraphrasing of a metaphorical expression
cannot present all the meanings that the original
metaphorical expression has.
(ex.3) She is a lily of valley.
(ex.4) She is a dewy red rose.
These expressions can be paraphrased;
(ex.5) She is beautiful.
It is apparent that (ex.5) hold a part of the mean-
ings that (ex.3) and (ex.4) have, but not all of them,
because the same person may not use (ex.3) and
(ex.4) to the same woman with the same sense of
values. Repetition of paraphrasing may increase
the richness of the explanation and lead to better
understanding, but it will never reach the full
meaning of the original expression.
The second objection claims that similarity
does not make metaphor, but metaphor makes us
realize the similarity. As Eisenstein created the
?flow? of story by montage sequence in his film
??Battleship Potemkin??, people try to find seman-
tic connection when some information is given in a
line. Especially, if it is presented as a sentence, we
almost automatically try to find ?meaning? in it.
?Colorless green ideas sleep furiously? is a famous
meaningless sentence written by Chomsky. He
made up this sentence as nonsensical sentence, but
he himself admits that it can be interpreted as a
metaphor. It can be a headline of newspaper that
tells Greenpeace members who lost their liveliness
to stop their political activities.
Those objections above to pragmatic approach
3
to metaphor suggest that there are elements in the
study of metaphor that are to be left for the seman-
tic approach. In the next sub-section, I will revise
the semantic approach in Richards and Black.
2.4 Richards? Interaction Theory
Richards introduces interaction theory that insists
the meaning of metaphor is the tension between
two thoughts (literal meaning and metaphorical
meaning) in a sentence. Before him, metaphor had
been studied at word level. Richards brought the
viewpoint of semantics which focus on meaning at
sentence level.
Another character of his theory is to demand
unlikeliness between literal meaning and meta-
phorical meaning. This unlikeliness is the source of
the tension, literal, artistic value that the metaphor
has. Richards says, ??as the two things put together
are more remote, the tension created is, of course,
greater??.
2.5 Black?s Interaction Theory
Black develops interaction theory to more rigid
theory that covers not only figurative language but
the whole of language. He introduces the idea of
?focus? and ?frame?. For Black, metaphorical ex-
pression ?Man is a wolf? is an expression that has a
                                                           
3
 Here, I would like to state what I mean by ?pragmatics?.
I interpreted Aristotle as a pragmatist. In Aristotle, lan-
guage use is judged as rhetoric when the use is under-
stood. It is a context-conscious theory. Semantics
carries a different task. It should give the foundation of
meaning. It should give other property different from
the condition of language use.
focus ?a wolf? in a linguistic frame of ?man is?.
This frame is literal, but it will be contradictory
when ?a wolf? is also literal (principal subject). We
realize this categorical mistake and find ?focus?
metaphorical meaning (subsidiary subject) led by
association of commonplaces. Associated com-
monplaces enable us to share the same metaphori-
cal meaning for the same expression. Literal
meaning is inferred first, then after realizing its
categorical mistake, metaphorical meaning is in-
ferred. This inference model is often used in the
semantic approach after Black.
2.6 Problems in Interaction Theory
In the two previous sub-sections, I have revised the
main characters of Richards and Black?s interac-
tion theory. These are more sophisticated than
Aristotelian substitution theory for admitting the
dynamics of meaning. However some problems
also remain in interaction theory.
Firstly, Black succeeds to explain why we un-
derstand the so-called ?dead metaphor? in the same
way, why we see similarities in metaphor by intro-
ducing the idea of ?associated commonplaces?. But
this also weakens the creativity of new metaphori-
cal expressions. If ?associated commonplaces?
gives us stable understanding of meanings, this
also prevent us not to have a new metaphorical
meaning out of the system.
Secondly, although Black strongly insists the
necessity of semantics in his study of metaphor,
Black?s theory uses the inference model which is
very pragmatic. What he tries to express in his se-
mantics was the meaning which is understood in
context. Therefore he needs inference model and
associated commonplaces. I do not deny the infer-
ence model. We use our inference in our language
use to determine one meaning for an expression.
But semantics, which gives the foundation of
meanings to language use, should avoid such a
pragmatic process. We should separate semantics
and pragmatics as clearly as possible.
3 Tasks for the Semantics of Metaphor
In the previous section, we have overlooked some
major theories for metaphor. I sorted them into two
types, the pragmatic approach and the semantic
approach. What is characteristic in the pragmatic
approach is that what matters in a metaphor is its
use and effect. In Davidson, he even denies meta-
phorical meaning and replaces it with the psy-
chological effect of literal meaning. The semantic
approach like Black criticizes Aristotelian para-
phrasing and admits metaphorical meaning deliv-
ered though inference. This also means that
metaphorical meaning is subsidiary meaning.
These two are very complex and we cannot see
a clear confrontation between them. The pragmatic
approach cannot avoid referring to metaphorical
meaning when we consider the reason of meta-
phorical language use. The semantic approach also
cannot evade using inference model, which may
belong to pragmatics.
Let?s be naive, and remember how we read a
new metaphorical expression.
(ex.6)
?She was a swan floating on the sea;
alone swan on the sea of sorrow
blue sea, nor blue sky could not hold her.?
Do we think about their literal meanings? No
4
. We
understand the metaphorical meaning of ?sea of
sorrow? before thinking of its literal meaning. And
when we enjoy its literal value, we read (or hear) it
again and again, may think about its metaphorical
meaning and literal meaning. We do enjoy these
two thoughts in an expression, and the tension that
those thoughts create. In this account, I follow in-
teraction theory that Richards insists.
What I have argued in this section are;
1. A metaphorical expression has some mean-
ings including literal meaning and metaphori-
cal meaning.
2. Metaphorical meaning cannot be paraphrased.
Repeating paraphrasing cannot give the
original metaphorical meaning.
3. Semantics is a description of language ex-
pression, not language interpretation, so it
                                                           
4
 I have received some inspiring commentary on this
point. Some argue that they gain mental image of a lit-
eral sea immediately after reading it. My answer to this
claim is what they gained is actually a metaphorical
meaning of the expression. Literal ?sea? has a contra-
diction to ?of sorrow?. The image may resemble to its
literal meaning though.
should exclude the inference process as a part
of it.
The four theorists we have reviewed cannot
satisfy these three conditions. To meet the demand,
we need to have a semantics, which allows the plu-
rality of meanings in an expression.
4 GTS with the Idea of Coordination
Problem Game
GTS (Game Theoretic Semantics) has been devel-
oped as an alternative semantics where major se-
mantics have been based on Tarski?s definition of
truth. As the name shows, GTS is a semantics that
models the idea of game theory. Most GTS theo-
rists use zero-sum games between two players,
Myself (Verifier) and Nature (Falsifier) for in Hin-
tikka, for example. Verifier tries to make a sen-
tence true and Falsifier does the opposite. Whether
the sentence is true or false is known by knowing
who will win the game. It is to state one meaning
for a sentence, and the meaning is compared with
an equilibrium in a game. However, if we keep
using zero-sum games, we cannot represent more
than two meanings in a sentence.
4.1 Coordination Problem Game
Coordination problem game, which is analyzed
and defined by Lewis (1961), is a game with at
least two equilibria. Suppose we are talking on the
telephone and in the middle of the conversation,
the line is suddenly cut off. I will wonder whether I
should call back because if you call me while I call
you, the line will be busy and we cannot reach
each other. At the same time, you must be won-
dering if you should call me. This is a problem.
In this telephone line case, it can be a problem
because there are at least two equilibria in this
situation; one is the caller calls back and the re-
ceiver waits, and another is the caller waits and the
receiver calls back. Which to choose is not a prob-
lem. The important thing is that there are two
equilibria, which are indifferent for the caller to
choose, so they wonder. Lewis calls this kind of
problem ?coordination problems?, and equilibrium
?coordination equilibrium?. Players of these games
wish to coordinate according to their expectations
about what the other is going to do to gain a better
outcome comparing to not coordinating.
The coordination problem games have at least
two coordination equilibria by definition. There-
fore using GTS with a coordination problem game,
we can represent a sentence having more than two
meanings.
A metaphorical sentence corresponds to a coor-
dination problem game which has two equilibria
that correspond to literal meaning and metaphori-
cal meaning. Since both coordination equilibria are
same in its role as equilibrium, none of the mean-
ings is superior or inferior (Figure 1).
Coordination
Equilibrium
Literal
Meaning
Coordination
Equilibrium
Metaphorical
Meaning
Figure 1
Interestingly, this coordination problem game
also has ?tension?. A player of this game has to
make a choice which will be meaningless if his
choice differs from another?s. We do not wonder
when we have only one choice. We have to take it.
But the players in coordination problem game have
at least two choices. This presence of two choices
itself is the ?tension? of the metaphorical expres-
sion. Being of one affects the other. They interact.
The reason of enjoyable uneasiness of metaphori-
cal expression is in this interaction in this
polysemy.
With GTS extended by coordination problem
game, we gain the following three points.
Firstly, semantics that allows more than two
meanings for a sentence is possible. The semantics
also promises us to find both literal and metaphori-
cal meanings in a sentence.
As a result of the first point, metaphorical
meaning does not remain in its subsidiary position
inferred from primary meaning. It is a meaning as
important as literal meaning.
The being of two equilibria represents ?tension?
that Richards insists as the character of the mean-
ing of metaphorical expressions.
4.2 Difference from Hintikka?s GTS
This coordination problem game is very different
from what Hintikka and his followers use. In Hin-
tikka?s GTS, game directs the logical operation of
logic of a sentence in order to state truth and false-
hood of the sentence. It is because the meaning of
the expression is to be one.
On the contrary, coordination problem game it-
self cannot be operated as Hintikka?s does because
the game has two equilibria and this is the point of
the game.
However Lewis starts his analysis from the
game and ends in convention. According to Lewis,
people in the ill telephone line area start making
convention that one of them (caller or receiver)
should call back. After the convention spreads over
the area, the game has a unique equilibrium and the
residents find the problem solved
5
.
In the process of building up convention, the
elements to determine which equilibrium to fall in
are out of the game. In the case of metaphor, I let
them belong to the area of pragmatics. Though
context, we use our inference system to determine,
to grasp what is meant by the expression when it is
polysemous. We may know what is the subject,
what is the intention of the utterer, which meaning
should be appropriate in the time and place when it
is expressed. These are the problems to be left in
the consideration of the inference process.
4.3 Problem of ?Dead Metaphor?
What makes the difference between literal meaning
and metaphorical meaning? I think this is just a
matter of frequency of use.
?Dead metaphor? is a type of metaphor of which
metaphorical meaning is rigid and most of us un-
derstand it in same way so that often we find its
metaphorical meaning in dictionary. On the other
hand, we have very new, poetic metaphors that
may be understood in various ways. Also there are
metaphors of which metaphorical meaning became
its literal meaning and do not have original literal
meaning as you see in ?leg of chair?.
                                                           
5
 It may remain as a coordination problem game because
any new resident moves to the area, they may have
same problem until he finds out the convention or is told
by someone. The potential possibility of the problem is
always there.
The differences between those types of meta-
phors are matter of frequency of use. If a very new
metaphorical expression is used, its metaphorical
meaning may be ambiguous, can be paraphrased
but possibly misunderstood. But as the expression
is used again and again, its metaphorical meaning
grows to gain common interpretation in the used
language. As the metaphorical meaning becomes
common understanding of the expression, the
metaphorical expression starts loosing its tension
between literal meaning and metaphorical meaning.
This is how a metaphorical expression is born and
dies.
This is still just a suggestion of the life of a
metaphorical expression. One of the biggest prob-
lems to this account is that it does not explain how
we understand very new metaphorical expression
which we had never heard of. We need the study of
other level of meaning to explain it. But still, if we
understand those different types of metaphorical
expressions are on a same line, continuous being, it
may be fruitful of the semantics of metaphorical
expression.
5 Why More Than Two Meanings?
In this section, I will spread my idea of the mean-
ings in metaphorical expressions through some
observations of the usage.
5.1 Meanings in a Polysemous Expression
One of the main points of this paper is that it is
aiming to express the state of meaning of an ex-
pression, not the meaning that is understood. In
everyday conversation, we often assure what is the
meaning of the expression that we use with phases
like ?you know what I mean.? ?the meaning of this
term is...?. This is necessary when we come across
some polysemous expression.
If the meaning of the sentence is clear in its
context, then utterer does not need to assure its
meaning, but when the utterer assure its meaning
with other words. Here, we see two characters of
polysemous expression. Firstly, a polysemous ex-
pression has more than two meanings. Secondly, a
polysemous expression need to be defined its
meaning in the usage by context.
5.2 Metaphorical Meanings in an Expression
Let?s go back to our familiar example.
(ex.2) ?Man is a wolf?
This is often understood as a metaphor to express
man?s hunger and brutality. However ?wolf? has
different aspects in its image. In Mongolia, wolf is
the divine animal and the Mongolian hero, Ching-
gis Khan is called ?blue wolf?. Other East Asian
myths regard Sirius as wolf and attributes loneli-
ness and rationality to the star. In this context,
?man is a wolf? may means ?man is a creature
which has clear eyes to see and judge with his own
evaluation, holds his own view even others are
against him?. This image may also be found in
?lone wolf? in English.
What I intend to do here is not insisting multi-
culturalism. What I do is to insist that metaphorical
expressions are polysemous expressions. And as I
wrote above, the meaning of polysemous expres-
sion is determined in its context (if it is successful).
As the name ?polysemy? tells, we attribute more
than two meanings to an expression. Why can?t we
do same treatment to metaphors?
The ?man is a wolf? expression has at least one
literal meaning which is a false expression in our
world, and two metaphorical meanings. When we
say we understand the meaning of an expression,
this means that we choose a meaning of the ex-
pression successfully. The meaning of a meta-
phorical expression is inferred and one of them is
chosen.
Metaphorical expressions are often found in
poetical expressions.
(ex.7) ?my love wears forbidden colors?
What is ?forbidden colors?? How ?love? wears
color? As the expression is newer, we consider
what is really meant and try to grasp its metaphori-
cal meaning through its literal meaning, we come
and go between those two meanings
6
. In this proc-
ess, we see both meanings in a metaphorical ex-
pression. When we ?taste? a poetic expression, we
often go through this process and this process itself
is a part of the ?tasting? of the poem. When we en-
joy poems, we enjoy how the literal meaning and
                                                           
6
?grasp its metaphorical meaning through its literal
meaning? sounds as if I admit to use the inference model
for semantics. But here, I am talking about how we un-
derstand, not about semantics.
metaphorical meaning are related. This is what
Richards called ?tension? and this is the meaning of
metaphorical expression. In order to express this
?tension?, we should admit both literal and meta-
phorical meanings in a sentence.
5.3 The Meanings of ?meaning?
The semantics with coordination problem game
have different meaning of ?meaning? from the one
in traditional understanding of metaphor.
When they ask ?what metaphor mean??, they
have a presupposition that there is a semantic
property that corresponds to a metaphorical ex-
pression. With coordination problem game, what
corresponds to a metaphorical expression is a game
that has two equilibria. The meaning of a meta-
phorical expression is a game that has two ?mean-
ings?, which are two choices with the tension
caused by the coexistence of the two meanings.
6 Conclusion
Metaphor is an expression in which there is both
literal meaning and metaphorical meaning. This is
my answer to the question, ?What is metaphor??.
Metaphorical meaning is one of the meanings that
a metaphorical expression has. It may be clear by
its context. But it is not inferred from logical con-
tradiction when we understand the expression with
its literal meaning.
Some, important problems are still left unsolved.
I mention one of them as my next task to do im-
mediately: GTS extended with coordination prob-
lem game allows us to have more than two
meanings in an expression or a sentence. However,
we cannot distinguish these two meanings in this
GTS. Since we can distinguish which is literal and
which is metaphorical, we should be able to do the
same thing in our semantics.
References
Aristotle The Poetics, Translated by S. H. Butcher, The
Internet Classics Archive by Daniel C. Stevenson,
Web Atomics.
URL=http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/poetics.mb.txt
Aristotle 1954. Rhetoric, translated by W. Rhys Roberts,
hypertextual resource compiled by Lee Honeycutt
URL=http://www.public.iastate.edu/~honeyl/Rhetori
c/index.html
Black, Max 1978. in Sacks 1978.
Black, Max 1962. Models and Metaphors: Studies in
Language and Philosophy, Cornell University Press
Davidson, Donald 1978 in Sacks 1978.
Hintikka, Jaakko and Kulas, Jack 1983. The Game of
Language: Studies in Game-Theoretical Semantics
and Its Applications (Synthese Language Library;
v.22), D. Reidel Publishing Company
Hintikka, Jaakko and Kulas, Jack 1985. Anaphora and
Definite Descriptions: Two Applications of Game-
Theoretical Semantics (Synthese Language Library;
v.26), D. Reidel Publishing Company
Hintikka, Jaakko and Sandu, Gabriel 1997. in Handbook
of Logic and Language, ed. by J. van Benthem and A.
ter Meulen, Elsevier Science B. V.
Hodges, Wilfrid 2001. Logic and Games, The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Fall 2001 Edition, ed.
Edward Zalta,
URL=http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2001/entri
es/logic-games/
Lewis, David K. 1969. Convention | A Philosophical
Study, Harverd University Press.
Ortony, Andrew, ed. 1979. Metaphor and Thought,
Cambridge University Press
Richards, I.A. 1936. The Philosophy of Rhetoric, Ox-
ford University Press
Sacks, Sheldon. ed. 1978. On Metaphor, The University
of Chicago Press
