Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 771?778,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Compiling a Lexicon of Cooking Actions for Animation Generation
Kiyoaki Shirai Hiroshi Ookawa
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
1-1, Asahidai, Nomi, 923-1292, Ishikawa, Japan
{kshirai,h-ookawa}@jaist.ac.jp
Abstract
This paper describes a system which gen-
erates animations for cooking actions in
recipes, to help people understand recipes
written in Japanese. The major goal of this
research is to increase the scalability of the
system, i.e., to develop a system which can
handle various kinds of cooking actions.
We designed and compiled the lexicon of
cooking actions required for the animation
generation system. The lexicon includes
the action plan used for animation genera-
tion, and the information about ingredients
upon which the cooking action is taken.
Preliminary evaluation shows that our lex-
icon contains most of the cooking actions
that appear in Japanese recipes. We also
discuss how to handle linguistic expres-
sions in recipes, which are not included
in the lexicon, in order to generate anima-
tions for them.
1 Introduction
The ability to visualize procedures or instruc-
tions is important for understanding documents
that guide or instruct us, such as computer manuals
or cooking recipes. We can understand such docu-
ments more easily by seeing corresponding figures
or animations. Several researchers have studied
the visualization of documents (Coyne and Sproat,
2001), including the generation of animation (An-
dre and Rist, 1996; Towns et al, 1998). Such ani-
mation systems help people to understand instruc-
tions in documents. Among the various types of
documents, this research focuses on the visualiza-
tion of cooking recipes.
Many studies related to the analysis or genera-
tion of cooking recipes have been done (Adachi,
1997; Webber and Eugenio, 1990; Hayashi et al,
2003; Shibata et al, 2003). Especially, several
researchers have proposed animation generation
systems in the cooking domain. Karlin, for exam-
ple, developed SEAFACT (Semantic Analysis For
the Animation of Cooking Tasks), which analyzed
verbal modifiers to determine several features of
an action, such as the aspectual category of an
event, the number of repetitions, duration, speed,
and so on (Karlin, 1988). Uematsu developed
?Captain Cook,? which generated animations from
cooking recipes written in Japanese (Uematsu et
al., 2001). However, these previous works did
not mention the scalability of the systems. There
are many linguistic expressions in the cooking do-
main, but it is uncertain to what extent these sys-
tems can convert them to animations.
This paper also aims at developing a system to
generate animations from cooking recipes written
in Japanese. We especially focused on increasing
the variety of recipes that could be accepted. After
presenting an overview of our proposed system in
Subsections 2.1 and 2.2, the more concrete goals
of this paper will be described in Subsection 2.3.
2 Proposed System
2.1 Overview
The overview of our animation generation sys-
tem is as follows. The system displays a cooking
recipe in a browser. As in a typical recipe, cooking
instructions are displayed step by step, and sen-
tences or phrases representing a cooking action in
the recipe are highlighted. When a user does not
understand a certain cooking action, he/she can
click the highlighted sentence/phrase. Then the
system will show the corresponding animation to
help the user understand the cooking instruction.
Note that the system does not show all proce-
dures in a recipe like a movie, but generates an
animation of a single action on demand. Further-
more, we do not aim at the reproduction of recipe
sentences in detail. Especially, we will not prepare
object data for many different kinds of ingredients.
For example, suppose that the system has object
data for a mackerel, but not for a sardine. When
a user clicks the sentence ?fillet a sardine? to see
the animation, the system will show how to fillet a
?mackerel? instead of ?sardine?, with a note indi-
cating that the ingredient is different. We believe
771
Animation 
Generator 
Action Plan 
Animation 
Lexicon of Cooking Actions 
(ex.  chop an onion finely) 
Input sentence 
Action Matcher Basic Action 1
    ``fry''
Basic Action 2 
    ``chop finely'' 
action plan 
action plan 
Figure 1: System Architecture
that the user will be more interested in ?how to fil-
let? than in the specific ingredient to be filleted.
In other words, the animation of the action will be
equally helpful as long as the ingredients are simi-
lar. Thus we will not make a great effort to prepare
animations for many kinds of ingredients. Instead,
we will focus on producing the various kinds of
cooking actions, to support users in understanding
cooking instructions in recipes.
2.2 System Architecture
Figure 1 illustrates the architecture of the proposed
system. First, we prepare the lexicon of cooking
actions. This is the collection of cooking actions
such as ?fry?, ?chop finely?, etc. The lexicon has
enough knowledge to generate an animation for
each cooking action. Figure 2 shows an exam-
ple of an entry in the lexicon. In the figure, ?ex-
pression? is a linguistic expression for the action;
?action plan? is a sequence of action primitives,
which are the minimum action units for animation
generation. Roughly speaking, the action plan in
Figure 2 represents a series of primitive actions,
such as cutting and rotating an ingredient, for the
basic action ?chop finely?. The system will gen-
erate an animation according to the action plan in
the lexicon. Other features, ?ingredient examples?
and ?ingredient requirement?, will be explained
later.
The process of generating an animation is as
follows. First, as shown in Figure 1, the system
compares an input sentence and expression of the
entries in the lexicon of cooking actions, and finds
the appropriate cooking action. This is done by the
module ?Action Matcher?. Then, the system ex-
tracts an action plan from the lexicon and passes it
to the ?Animation Generator? module. Finally An-
imation Generator interprets the action plan and
produces the animation.
2.3 Goal
The major goals of this paper are summarized as
follows:
G1. Construct a large-scale lexicon of cooking ac-
tions
In order to generate animations for various
kinds of cooking actions, we must prepare a
lexicon containing many basic actions.
G2. Handle a variety of linguistic expressions
Various linguistic expressions for cooking ac-
tions may occur in recipes. It is not realistic
to include all possible expressions in the lex-
icon. Therefore, when a linguistic expression
in an input sentence is not included in the lex-
icon, the system should calculate the similar-
ity between it and the basic action in the lex-
icon, and find an equivalent or almost similar
action.
G3. Include information about acceptable ingre-
dients in the lexicon
Even though linguistic expressions are the
same, cooking actions may be different ac-
cording to the ingredient upon which the ac-
tion is taken. For example, ?cut into fine
strips? may stand for several different cook-
ing actions. That is, the action of ?cut
cucumber into fine strips? may be differ-
ent than ?cut cabbage into fine strips?, be-
cause the shapes of cucumber and cabbage
are rather different. Therefore, each entry in
the lexicon should include information about
what kinds of ingredients are acceptable for a
certain cooking action.
As mentioned earlier, the main goal of this re-
search is to increase the scalability of the system,
i.e., to develop an animation generation system
that can handle various cooking actions. We hope
that this can be accomplished through goals G1
and G2.
In the rest of this paper, Section 3 describes
how to define the set of actions to be compiled
into the lexicon of cooking actions. This concerns
goal G1. Section 4 explains two major features
in the lexicon, ?action plan? and ?ingredient re-
quirement?. The feature ingredient requirement is
772
Basic Action 2
expression ???????? (chop finely)
action plan cut(ingredient,utensil,location, 2)
rotate(ingredient,location, x, 90)
cut(ingredient,utensil,location,20)
rotate(ingredient,location, z, 90)
cut2(ingredient,utensil,location, 10)
cut(ingredient,utensil,location, 20)
ingredient examples ??? (okra),???? (shiitake mushroom)
ingredient requirement kind=vegetable|mushroom
Figure 2: Example of an Entry in the Lexicon of Cooking Actions
related to goal G3. Section 5 reports a preliminary
survey to construct the module Action Matcher in
Figure 1, which is related to goal G2. Finally, Sec-
tion 6 concludes the paper.
3 Defining the Set of Basic Actions
In this and the following sections, we will explain
how to construct the lexicon of cooking actions.
The first step in constructing the lexicon is to de-
fine the set of basic actions. As mentioned earlier
(goal G1 in Subsection 2.3), a large-scale lexicon
is required for our system. Therefore, the set of ba-
sic actions should include various kinds of cook-
ing actions.
3.1 Procedure
We referred to three cooking textbooks or man-
uals (Atsuta, 2004; Fujino, 2003; Takashiro and
Kenmizaki, 2004) in Japanese to define the set of
basic actions. These books explain the fundamen-
tal cooking operations with pictures, e.g., how to
cut, roast, or remove skins/seeds for various kinds
of ingredients. We extracted the cooking opera-
tions explained in these three textbooks, and de-
fined them as the basic actions for the lexicon. In
other words, we defined the basic actions accord-
ing to the cooking textbooks. The reasons why we
used the cooking manuals as the standard for the
basic actions are summarized as follows:
1. The aim of cooking manuals used here is to
comprehensively explain basic cooking oper-
ations. Therefore, we expect that we can col-
lect an exhaustive set of basic actions in the
cooking domain.
2. Cooking manuals are for beginners. The
aim of animation generation system is to
help people, especially novices, to under-
stand cooking actions in recipes. The lexicon
of cooking actions based on the cooking text-
books includes many cooking operations that
novices may not know well.
3. The definition of basic actions does not de-
pend on the module Animation Generator.
One of the standards for the definition of ba-
sic actions is animations generated by the
system. That is, we can define basic cook-
ing actions so that each cooking action cor-
responds to an unique animation. This ap-
proach seems to be reasonable for an anima-
tion generation system; however, it depends
on the module Animation Generator in Fig-
ure 1. Many kinds of rendering engines are
now available to generate animations. There-
fore, Animation Generator can be imple-
mented in various ways. When changing the
rendering engine used in Animation Genera-
tor, the lexicon of cooking actions must also
be changed. So we decided that it would not
be desirable to define the set of basic actions
according to their corresponding animations.
In our framework, the definition of basic ac-
tions in the lexicon does not depend on Ani-
mation Generator. This enables us to use any
kind of rendering engine to produce an ani-
mation. For example, when we use a poor en-
gine and want to design the system so that it
generates the same animation for two or more
basic actions, we just describe the same ac-
tion plan for these actions.
We manually excerpted 267 basic actions from
three cooking textbooks. Although it is just a col-
lection of basic actions, we refer it as the initial
773
Table 1: Examples of Basic Actions
expression ingredient examples
?????? (fillet) ?? (mackerel)
???? (boil)
?? (boil)
????????
(cut into a comb shape)
??? (tomato),
????? (potato)
????????
(cut into a comb shape)
???? (pumpkin)
????????
(cut into a comb shape)
??
(turnip)
lexicon of cooking actions. Table 1 illustrates sev-
eral examples of basic actions in the initial lexi-
con. In the cooking manuals, every cooking op-
eration is illustrated with pictures. ?Ingredient ex-
amples? indicates ingredients in pictures used to
explain cooking actions.
3.2 Preliminary Evaluation
A preliminary experiment was conducted to eval-
uate the scalability of our initial lexicon of ba-
sic actions. The aim of this experiment was to
check how many cooking actions appearing in real
recipes are included in the initial lexicon.
First, we collected 200 recipes which are avail-
able on web pages 1. We refer to this recipe corpus
as R
a
hereafter. Next, we analyzed the sentences
in R
a
and automatically extracted verbal phrases
representing cooking actions. We used JUMAN 2
for word segmentation and part-of-speech tagging,
and KNP 3 for syntactic analysis. Finally, we
manually checked whether each extracted verbal
phrase could be matched to one of the basic ac-
tions in the initial lexicon.
Table 2 (A) shows the result of our survey. The
number of basic actions was 267 (a). Among these
actions, 145 (54.3%) actions occurred in R
a
(a1).
About half of the actions in the initial lexicon did
not occur in the recipe corpus. We guessed that
this was because the size of the recipe corpus was
not very large.
The number of verbal phrases in R
a
was 3977
(b). We classified them into the following five
cases: (b1) the verbal phrase corresponded with
one of the basic actions in the initial lexicon, and
1http://www.bob-an.com/
2http://www.kc.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp/
nl-resource/juman.html
3http://www.kc.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp/
nl-resource/knp.html
its linguistic expression was the same as one in the
lexicon; (b2) the verbal phrase corresponded with
a basic action, but its linguistic expression differed
from one in the lexicon; (b3) no corresponding ba-
sic action was found in the initial lexicon, (b4) the
extracted phrase was not a verbal phrase, caused
by error in analysis, (b5) the verbal phrase did not
stand for a cooking action. Note that the cases in
which verbal phrases should be converted to ani-
mations were (b1), (b2) and (b3). The numbers in
parentheses (...) indicate the ratio of each case to
the total number of verbal phrases, while numbers
in square brackets [...] indicate a ratio of each case
to the total number of (b1), (b2) and (b3).
We expected that the verbal phrases in (b1) and
(b2) could be handled by our animation generation
system because the initial lexicon contained the
corresponding basic actions. On the other hand,
our system cannot generate animations for verbal
phrases in (b3), which was 42.3% of the verbal
phrases our system should handle. Thus the appli-
cability of the initial lexicon was poor.
3.3 Adding Basic Actions from Recipe
Corpus
We have examined what kinds of verbal phrases
were in (b3). We found that there were many gen-
eral verbs, such as ???? (add)?, ???? (put
in)?, ???? (heat)?, ???? (attach)?, ???
? (put on)?, etc. Such general actions were not
included in the initial lexicon, because we con-
structed it by extracting basic actions from cook-
ing textbooks, and such general actions are not ex-
plained in these books.
In order to increase the scalability of the lexicon
of cooking actions, we selected verbs satisfying
the following conditions: (1) no corresponding ba-
sic action was found in the lexicon for a verb; (2)
a verb occurred more than 10 times in R
a
. In all,
31 verbs were found and added to the lexicon as
new basic actions. It is undesirable to define basic
actions in this way, because the lexicon may then
depend on a particular recipe corpus. However, we
believe that the new basic actions are very general,
and can be regarded as almost independent of with
the corpus from which they were extracted.
In order to evaluate the new lexicon, we pre-
pared another 50 cooking recipes (R
b
hereafter).
Then we classified the verbal phrases in R
b
in
the same way as in Subsection 3.2. The results
are shown in Table 2 (B). Notice that the ratio
774
Table 2: Result of Preliminary Evaluation
(A) Survey on R
a
(a) # of basic actions 267
(a1) basic actions occurred in R
a
145 (54.3%)
(b) # of verbal phrases 3977
(b1) basic action(same) 974 (24.5%) [28.0%]
(b2) basic action(dif.) 1031 (25.9%) [29.7%]
(b3) not basic action 1469 (36.9%) [42.3%]
(b4) analysis error 180 ( 4.5%)
(b5) not cooking action 323 ( 8.1%)
(B) Survey on R
b
(a) 298
(a1) 106 (35.6%)
(b) 959
(b1) 521 (54.3%) [62.2%]
(b2) 262 (27.3%) [31.3%]
(b3) 55 ( 5.7%) [6.6%]
(b4) 45 ( 4.7%)
(b5) 76 ( 7.9%)
of the number of verbal phrases contained in the
lexicon to the total number of target verb phrases
was 94.5% ((b1)62.2% + (b2)31.3%). This is
much greater than the ratio in Table 2 (A) (57.7%).
Therefore, although the size of test corpus is small,
we hope that the scalability of our lexicon is large
enough to generate animations for most of the ver-
bal phrases in cooking recipes.
4 Compilation of the Lexicon of Basic
Actions
After defining the set of basic actions for the lexi-
con, the information of each basic action must be
described. As shown in Figure 2, the main fea-
tures in our lexicon are expression, action plan,
ingredient examples and ingredient requirement.
The term expression stands for linguistic expres-
sions of basic actions, while ingredient examples
stands for examples of ingredients described in the
cooking manuals we referred to when defining the
set of basic actions. As shown in Table 1, these
two features have already been included in the ini-
tial lexicon created by the procedure in Section 3.
This section describes the compilation of the rest
of the features: action plan in Subsection 4.1 and
ingredient requirement in Subsection 4.2.
4.1 Action Plan
For each basic action in the lexicon, the action
plan to generate the corresponding animation is
described. Action plan is the sequence of action
primitives as shown in Figure 2. Of the 298 basic
actions in the lexicon, we have currently described
action plans for only 80 actions. Most of them are
actions to cut something.
We have also started to develop Animation Gen-
erator (see Figure 1), which is the module that in-
terprets action plans and generates animations. We
Figure 3: Snapshot of Generated Animation
used VRML for animation generation. Figure 3
is a snapshot of the animation for the basic ac-
tion ????????? (chop finely)? generated
by our system.
Our current focus has been on the design and
development of the lexicon of cooking actions,
rather than on animation generation. Implementa-
tion of the complete Animation Generator as well
as a description of the action plans for all basic
actions in the lexicon are important future works.
4.2 Ingredient Requirement
Several basic actions have the same expression in
our lexicon. For instance, in Figure 1, there are
three basic actions represented by the same lin-
guistic expression ????????? (cut into
a comb shape)?. These three actions stand for dif-
ferent cooking actions. The first one stands for the
action used to cut something like a ?tomato? or
?potato? into a comb shape. The second stands for
the following sequence of actions: first cut some-
thing in half, remove its core or seeds, and cut it
into a comb shape. This action is taken on pump-
kin, for instance. The third action represents the
cooking action for ?turnip?: remove the leaves of
the turnip and cut it into a comb shape. In other
words, there are different ways to cut different in-
775
gredients into a comb shape. Differences among
these actions depend on what kinds of ingredients
are to be cut.
As described in Section 2.2, the module Action
Matcher accepts a sentence or phrase for which a
user wants to see the animation, then finds a cor-
responding basic action from the lexicon. In or-
der to find an appropriate basic action for a recipe
sentence, the lexicon of cooking actions should in-
clude information about what kinds of ingredients
are acceptable for each basic action. Note that the
judgment as to whether an ingredient is suitable
or not highly depends on its features such as kind,
shape, and components (seed, peel etc.) of the in-
gredient. Therefore, the lexicon should include in-
formation about what features of the ingredients
must be operated upon by the basic actions.
For the above reason, ingredient requirement
was introduced in the lexicon of cooking actions.
In this field, we manually describe the required
features of ingredients for each basic action. Fig-
ure 4 illustrates the three basic actions of ??
?????? (chop into a comb shape) in the
lexicon 4. The basic action a1, ?kind=vegetable,
shape=sphere? in ingredient requirement, means
that only a vegetable whose shape is spherical is
acceptable as an ingredient for this cooking action.
On the other hand, for the basic action a2, only a
vegetable whose shape is spherical and contain-
ing seeds is acceptable. For a3, ?instance=??
(turnip)? means that only a turnip is suitable for
this action. In our lexicon, such specific cooking
actions are also included when the reference cook-
books illustrate special cooking actions for certain
ingredients. In this case, a cookbook illustrates
cutting a turnip into a comb shape in a different
way than for other ingredients.
4.2.1 Feature Set of Ingredient Requirement
Here are all the attributes and possible values
prepared for the ingredient requirement field:
? kind
This attribute specifies kinds of ingredients.
The possible values are:
vegetable, mushroom, fruit, meat,
fish, shellfish, seafood, condiment
?Seafood? means seafood other than fish or
shellfish, such as ?? (squid), ??? (cod
roe) and so on.
4action plan is omitted in Figure 4.
? veg
This attribute specifies subtypes of veg-
etables. Possible values for this attribute
are ?green?, ?root? and ?layer?. ?Green?
stands for green vegetables such as ???
?? (spinach) and ?? (Chinese cabbage).
?Root? stands for root vegetables such as
????? (potato) and ??? (burdock).
?Layer? stands for vegetables consisting of
layers of edible leaves such as ??? (let-
tuce) and???? (cabbage).
? shape
This attribute specifies shapes of ingredients.
The possible values are:
sphere, stick, cube, oval, plate, filiform
? peel, seed, core
These attributes specify various components
of ingredients. Values are always 1. For ex-
ample, ?peel=1? stands for ingredients with
peel.
? instance
This specifies a certain ingredient, as shown
in basic action a3 in Figure 4.
The information about ingredient requirements
was added for 186 basic actions out of the 298 ac-
tions in the lexicon. No requirement was needed
for the other actions, i.e., these actions accept any
kind of ingredients.
4.2.2 Lexicon of Ingredients
In addition to the lexicon of cooking actions, the
lexicon of ingredients is also required for our sys-
tem. It includes ingredients and their features such
as kind, shape and components. We believe that
this is domain-specific knowledge for the cooking
domain. Thesauri or other general-purpose lan-
guage resources would not provide such informa-
tion. Therefore, we newly compiled the lexicon
of ingredients, which consists of only those ingre-
dients appearing in the ingredients example in the
lexicon of cooking actions. The number of ingre-
dients included in the lexicon is 93. For each entry,
features of the ingredient are described. The fea-
ture set used for this lexicon is the same as that
for the ingredient requirement described in 4.2.1,
except for the ?instance? attribute.
776
Basic Action a1
expression ???????? (cut into a comb shape)
ingredient examples ??? (tomato),????? (potato)
ingredient requirement kind=vegetable, shape=sphere
Basic Action a2
expression ???????? (cut into a comb shape)
ingredient examples ???? (pumpkin)
ingredient requirement kind=vegetable, shape=sphere, seed=1
Basic Action a3
expression ???????? (cut into a comb shape)
ingredient examples ?? (turnip)
ingredient requirement instance=?? (turnip)
Figure 4: Three Basic Actions of ????????? (cut into a comb shape)?
The current lexicon of ingredients is too small.
Only 93 ingredients are included. A larger lexicon
is required to handle various recipe sentences. In
order to enlarge the lexicon of ingredients, we will
investigate a method for the automatically acqui-
sition of new ingredients with their features from
a collection of recipe documents.
5 Matching between Actions in a Recipe
and the Lexicon
Action Matcher in Figure 1 is the module which
accepts a recipe sentence and finds a basic action
corresponding to it from the lexicon. One of the
biggest difficulties in developing this module is
that linguistic expressions in a recipe may differ
from those in the lexicon. So we have to consider
a flexible matching algorithm between them.
To construct Action Matcher, we refer to the
verbal phrases classified in (b2) in Table 2. Note
that the linguistic expressions of these verbal
phrases are inconsistent with the expressions in the
lexicon. We examined the major causes of incon-
sistency for these verbal phrases. In this paper, we
will report the result of our analysis, and suggest
some possible ways to find the equivalent action
even when the linguistic expressions in a recipe
and the lexicon are different. The realization of
Action Matcher still remains as future work.
Figure 5 shows some examples of observed in-
consistency in linguistic expressions. In Figure 5,
the left hand side represents verbal phrases in
recipes, while the right hand side represents ex-
pressions in the lexicon of cooking actions. A
slash indicates word segmentation. Causes of in-
consistency in linguistic expressions are classified
as follows:
? Inconsistency in word segmentation
Word segmentation of verbal phrases in
recipes, as automatically given by a morpho-
logical analyzer, is different from one of the
basic actions in the lexicon, as shown in Fig-
ure 5 (a).
In order to succeed in matching, we need an
operation to concatenate two or more mor-
phemes in a phrase or to divide a morpheme
into to two or more, then try to check the
equivalence of both expressions.
? Inconsistency in case fillers
Verbs in a recipe and the lexicon agree, but
their case fillers are different. For instance,
in Figure 5 (b), the verb ??? (sprinkle)? is
the same, but the accusative case fillers ???
? (chili)? and ?? (salt)? are different. In this
case, we can regard both as representing the
same action: to sprinkle a kind of condiment.
In this case, the lexicon of ingredients (see
4.2.2) would be helpful for matching. That
is, if both ??? (chili) and ? (salt) have
the same feature ?kind=condiment? in the
lexicon of ingredients, we can judge that
the phrase ????/?/?? (sprinkle chili)?
corresponds to the basic action ??/?/??
(sprinkle salt)?.
? Inconsistency in verbs
Disagreement between verbs in a recipe and
the lexicon is one of the major causes of in-
consistency. See Figure 5 (c), for instance.
777
Expressions in Recipes Expressions in Lexicon
(a) ??
(divide)
/???
(loosen)
? ? ?break (egg) ?????
(break)
? ? ?break (egg)
(b) ???
(chili)
/ ?
(ACC)
/ ??
(sprinkle)
? ? ?sprinkle chili ?
(salt)
/ ?
(ACC)
/ ??
(sprinkle)
? ? ?sprinkle salt
(c) ???
(Spewing sand)
/ ?
(ACC)
/??
(do)
? ? ?make (shellfish)
spew out sand
??
(salt water)
/ ?
(LOC)
/???
(dip)
? ? ?dip it into
salt water
Figure 5: Inconsistency in Linguistic Expressions
These two phrases represent the same ac-
tion 5, but the linguistic expressions are to-
tally different.
In this case, the matching between them is
rather difficult. One solution would be to de-
scribe all equivalent expressions for each ac-
tion in the lexicon. Since it is not realistic to
list equivalent expressions exhaustively, how-
ever, we want to automatically collect pairs
of equivalent expressions from a large recipe
corpus.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we have described the basic idea for
a system to generate animations for cooking ac-
tions in recipes. Although the system is not yet
complete and much work still remains to be done,
the main contribution of this paper is to show the
direction for improving the scalability of the sys-
tem. First, we designed a lexicon of cooking ac-
tions including information about action plans and
ingredient requirements, which are needed to gen-
erate the appropriate cooking animations. We also
showed that our lexicon covers most of the cook-
ing actions appearing in recipes. Furthermore, we
analyzed the recipe corpus and investigated how
to match actions in a recipe to the corresponding
basic action in the lexicon, even when they have
different linguistic expressions. Such a flexible
matching method would also increase the scala-
bility of the system.
References
Hisahiro Adachi. 1997. GCD: A generation method
of cooking definitions based on similarity between
a couple of recipes. In Proceedings of the Natural
Language Processing Pacific Rim Symposium, pages
135?140.
5Note that it is required to dip shellfish into salt water in
order to make it spew out sand.
Elisabeth Andre and Thomas Rist. 1996. Coping
with temporal constraints in multimedia presenta-
tion planning. In Proceedings of the National Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 142?147.
Yoko Atsuta. 2004. How to cut vegetables (in
Japanese). Syu?eisha.
Bob Coyne and Richard Sproat. 2001. WordsEye: An
automatic text-to-scene conversion system. In Pro-
ceedings of the SIGGRAPH, pages 487?496.
Yoshiko Fujino. 2003. New Fundamental Cooking (in
Japanese). SS Communications.
Eri Hayashi, Suguru Yoshioka, and Satoshi Tojo. 2003.
Automatic generation of event structure for Japanese
cooking recipes (in Japanese). Journal of Natural
Language Processing, 10(2):3?17.
Robin F. Karlin. 1988. Defining the semantics of ver-
bal modifiers in the domain of cooking tasks. In
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 61?67.
Tomohide Shibata, Daisuke Kawahara, Masashi
Okamoto, Sadao Kurohashi, and Toyoaki Nishida.
2003. Structural analysis of instruction utterances.
In Proceedings of the Seventh International Con-
ference on Knowledge-Based Intelligent Information
and Engineering Systems (KES2003), pages 1054?
1061.
Junko Takashiro and Satomi Kenmizaki. 2004.
Standard Cooking: Fundamentals of Cooking (in
Japanese). Sho?gakukan.
Stuart G. Towns, Charles B. Callaway, and James C.
Lester. 1998. Generating coordinated natural lan-
guage and 3D animations for complex spatial expla-
nations. In Proceedings of the National Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, pages 112?119.
Hideki Uematsu, Akira Shimazu, and Manabu Oku-
mura. 2001. Generation of 3D CG animations
from recipe sentences. In Proceedings of the Nat-
ural Language Processing Pacific Rim Symposium,
pages 461?466.
Bonnie Lynn Webber and Barbara Di Eugenio. 1990.
Free adjuncts in natural language instructions. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 395?400.
778
