Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007), pages 59?63,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
SemEval-2007 Task 12: Turkish Lexical Sample Task 
Zeynep Orhan 
Department of  
Computer Engineering,  
Fatih University 34500, 
B?y?k?ekmece,  
Istanbul, Turkey 
zorhan@fatih.edu.tr 
Emine ?elik 
Department of  
Computer Engineering,  
Fatih University 34500, 
B?y?k?ekmece,  
Istanbul, Turkey 
eminemm@gmail.com 
Neslihan Demirg?? 
Department of  
Computer Engineering,  
Fatih University 34500, 
B?y?k?ekmece,  
Istanbul, Turkey 
nesli_han@hotmail.com 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents the task definition, re-
sources, and the single participant system 
for Task 12: Turkish Lexical Sample Task 
(TLST), which was organized in the Se-
mEval-2007 evaluation exercise. The 
methodology followed for developing the 
specific linguistic resources necessary for 
the task has been described in this context. 
A language-specific feature set was defined 
for Turkish. TLST consists of three pieces 
of data: The dictionary, the training data, 
and the evaluation data. Finally, a single 
system that utilizes a simple statistical 
method was submitted for the task and 
evaluated. 
1 Introduction 
Effective parameters for word sense disambigua-
tion (WSD) may vary for different languages and 
word types. Although, some parameters are com-
mon in many languages, some others may be lan-
guage specific. Turkish is an interesting language 
that deserves being examined semantically. Turk-
ish is based upon suffixation, which differentiates 
it sharply from the majority of European languages, 
and many others. Like all Turkic languages, Turk-
ish is agglutinative, that is, grammatical functions 
are indicated by adding various suffixes to stems. 
Turkish has a SOV (Subject-Object-Verb) sentence 
structure but other orders are possible under certain 
discourse situations. As a SOV language where 
objects precede the verb, Turkish has postpositions 
rather than prepositions, and relative clauses that 
precede the verb. Turkish, as a widely-spoken lan-
guage, is appropriate for semantic researches. 
TLST utilizes some resources that are explained 
in Section 2-5. In Section 6 evaluation of the sys-
tem is provided. In section 7 some concluding re-
marks and future work are discussed.  
2 Corpus 
Lesser studied languages, such as Turkish suffer 
from the lack of wide coverage electronic re-
sources or other language processing tools like on-
tologies, dictionaries, morphological analyzers, 
parsers etc. There are some projects for providing 
data for NLP applications in Turkish like METU 
Corpus Project (Oflazer et al, 2003). It has two 
parts, the main corpus and the treebank that con-
sists of parsed, morphologically analyzed and dis-
ambiguated sentences selected from the main cor-
pus, respectively. The sentences are given in XML 
format and provide many syntactic features that 
can be helpful for WSD. This corpus and treebank 
can be used for academic purposes by contract. 
The texts in main corpus have been taken from 
different types of Turkish written texts published 
in 1990 and afterwards. It has about two million 
words. It includes 999 written texts taken from 201 
books, 87 papers and news from 3 different Turk-
ish daily newspapers. XML and Text Encoding 
Initiative (TEI) style annotation have been used. 
The distribution of the texts in the Treebank is 
similar to the main corpus. There are 6930 sen-
tences in this Treebank. These sentences have been 
parsed, morphologically analyzed and disambigu-
ated. In Turkish, a word can have more than one 
analysis, so having disambiguated texts is very 
important.  
59
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: XML file structure of the Treebank 
 
Words 
Main English  
translation 
# 
Senses MFS 
Train 
size 
Test 
size 
Total #of  
instances 
Nouns             
ara distance, break, interval, look for 7 53 192 63 255 
ba? head, leader, beginning, top, main, principal 5 34 68 22 90 
el hand, stranger, country 3 75 113 38 151 
g?z eye, glance, division, drawer 3 48 92 27 119 
k?z girl, virgin, daughter, get hot, get angry 2 72 96 21 117 
?n front, foreground, face, breast, prior, preliminary anterior 5 21 72 23 95 
s?ra queue, order, sequence, turn, regularity, occasion desk 7 30 85 28 113 
?st upper side, outside, clothing 7 20 69 23 92 
yan side, direction, auxiliary, askew, burn, be on fire be alight 5 21 65 31 96 
yol way, road, path, method, manner, means 6 17 68 29 97 
Average  5 39 92 31 123 
Verbs             
al take, get,  red 24 180 963 125 1088 
bak look, fac, examine 4 136 207 85 292 
?al?? work, study, start 4 33 103 61 164 
??k climb, leave, increase 6 45 138 87 225 
ge? pass,happen, late 11 51 164 90 254 
gel come, arrive, fit, seem 20 154 346 215 561 
gir enter, fit, begin, penetrate 6 88 163 84 247 
git go, leave, last, be over, pass 13 130 214 120 334 
g?r see, understand, consider 5 155 206 68 274 
konu?  talk, speak 6 42 129 63 192 
Average   9.9 101.4 263.3 99.8 363.1 
Others             
b?y?k big, extensive, important, chief, great, elder 6 34 97 26 123 
do?ru straight, true, accurate, proper, fair, line towards, around 6 29 81 38 119 
k???k little, small, young, insignificant, kid 4 14 45 14 59 
?yle such, so, that 4 20 51 23 74 
son last, recent, final 2 76 86 18 104 
tek single, unique, alone 2 38 40 10 50 
Average   4 35.2 66.7 21.5 88.2 
Table 1: Target words in the SEMEVAL-1 Turkish Lexical Sample task 
  
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="windows-1254" ?>  
- <Set sentences="1"> 
 - <S No="1"> 
   <W IX="1" LEM="" MORPH="" IG="[(1,"so?uk+Adj")(2,"Adv+Ly")]" 
REL="[2,1,(MODIFIER)]">So?uk?a</W>  
   <W IX="2" LEM="" MORPH="" IG="[(1,"yan?tla+Verb+Pos+Past+A1sg")]" 
REL="[3,1,(SENTENCE)]">yan?tlad?m</W>  
   <W IX="3" LEM="" MORPH="" IG="[(1,".+Punc")]" REL="[,( )]">.</W>  
       </S> 
     </Set> 
60
Frequencies of the words have been found as it 
is necessary to select appropriate ambiguous words 
for WSD. There are 5356 different root words and 
627 of these words have 15 or more occurrences, 
and the rest have less. 
The XML files contains tagging information in 
the word (morphological analysis) and sentence 
level as a parse tree as shown in Figure 1. In the 
word level, inflectional forms are provided. And in 
the sentence level relations among words are 
given. The S tag is for sentence and W tag is for 
the word. IX is used for index of the word in the 
sentence, LEM is left as blank and lemma is given 
in the MORPH tag as a part of it with the morpho-
logical analysis of the word. REL is for parsing 
information. It consists of three parts, two numbers 
and a relation. For example REL="[2, 1, (MODI-
FIER)]" means this word is modifying the first in-
flectional group of the second word in the sen-
tence. The structure of the treebank data was de-
signed by METU. Initially lemmas were decided to 
be provided as a tag by itself, however, lemmas are 
left as blank. This does not mean that lemmas are 
not available in the treebank; the lemmas are given 
as a part of ?IG? tag. Programs are available for 
extracting this information for the time being. All 
participants can get these programs and thereby the 
lemmas easily and instantly. 
The sense tags were not included in the treebank 
and had to be added manually. Sense tagging has 
been checked in order to obtain gold standard data. 
Initial tagging process has been finished by a sin-
gle tagger and controlled. Two other native speaker 
in the team tagged and controlled the examples. 
That is, this step was completed by three taggers. 
Problematic cases were handled by a commission 
and the decision was finalized when about 90% 
agreement has been reached. 
3 Dictionary 
The dictionary is the one that is published by 
TDK 1  (Turkish Language Foundation) and it is 
open to public via internet. This dictionary lists the 
senses along with their definitions and example 
sentences that are provided for some senses. The 
dictionary is used only for sense tagging and 
enumeration of the senses for standardization. No 
specific information other than the sense numbers 
                                                 
1
 http://tdk.org.tr/tdksozluk/sozara.htm 
is taken from the dictionary; therefore there is no 
need for linguistic processing of the dictionary. 
4 Training and Evaluation Data 
In Table 1 statistical information about the final 
training and testing sets of TLST is summarized. 
The data have been provided for 3 words in the 
trial set and 26 words in the final training and test-
ing sets (10 nouns, 10 verbs and 6 other POS for 
the rest of POS including adjectives and adverbs). 
It has been tagged about 100 examples per word, 
but the number of samples is incremented or dec-
remented depending on the number of senses that 
specific word has. For a few words, however, 
fewer examples exist due to the sparse distribution 
of the data. Some ambiguous words had fewer ex-
amples in the corpus, therefore they were either 
eliminated or some other examples drawn from 
external resources were added in the same format. 
On the average, the selected words have 6.7 
senses, verbs, however, have more. Approximately 
70% of the examples for each word were delivered 
as training data, whereas approximately 30% was 
reserved as evaluation data. The distribution of the 
senses in training and evaluation data has been 
kept proportional. The sets are given as plain text 
files for each word under each POS. The samples 
for the words that can belong to more than one 
POS are listed under the majority class. POS is 
provided for each sample. 
We have extracted example sentences of the tar-
get word(s) and some features from the XML files. 
Then tab delimited text files including structural 
and sense tag information are obtained. In these  
files each line has contextual information that are 
thought to be effective (Orhan and Altan, 2006; 
Orhan and Altan, 2005) in Turkish WSD about the 
target words. In the upper level for each of them 
XML file id, sentence number and the order of the 
ambiguous word are kept as a unique key for that 
specific target. In the sentence level, three catego-
ries of information, namely the features related to 
the previous words, target word itself and the sub-
sequent words in the context are provided.  
61
Feature Example 
File id 00002213148.xml 
Sentence number 9 
Order 0 
Previous related word root/lemma tap 
Previous related word POS(corrected) verb 
Previous related word onthology level1  abstraction 
Previous related word onthology level2 attribute 
Previous related word onthology level3  emotion 
Previous related word POS verb 
Previous related word POS(derivation) adv 
Previous related word case marker ? 
Previous related word possessor fl 
Previous related word-target word relation mod?f?er 
Target word root/lemma sev 
Target  word POS verb 
Target  word POS(derivation) noun 
Target  word case marker abl 
Target  word possessor tr 
Target  word-subsequent word relation object 
Subsequent related word root/lemma s?k?l 
Subsequent related word POS(corrected) verb 
Subsequent related word onthology level1  abstraction 
Subsequent related word onthology level2 attribute 
Subsequent related word onthology level3  emotion 
Subsequent related word POS verb 
Subsequent related word POS(derivation) verb 
Subsequent related word case marker ? 
Subsequent related word possessor fl 
Subsequent related word-target word relation sentence 
Fine-grained sense number 2 
Coarse-grained sense number 2 
Sentence 
#ne   tuhaf   ?ey   ;   de?il   mi   ?    
iyi   olmamdan   ;   onu   taparcas?na   
sevmemden   s?k?ld?   .# 
Table 2: Features and example 
In the treebank relational structure, there can be 
more than one word in the previous context related 
to the target, however there is only a single word in 
the subsequent one. Therefore the data for all 
words in the  previous context is provided sepa-
rately. The features that are employed for previous 
and the subsequent words are the same and they 
are the root word, POS(corrected), tags for ontol-
ogy level 1, level 2 and level 3, POS, inflected 
POS, case marker, possessor and relation. How-
ever for the target word only the root word, POS, 
inflected POS, case marker, possessor and relation 
are taken into consideration. Fine and coarse-
grained (FG and CG respectively) sense numbers 
and the sentence that has the ambiguous word have 
been added as the last three feature. FG senses are 
the ones that are decided to be the exact senses. 
CG senses are given as a set that are thought to be 
possible alternatives in addition to the FG sense. 
Table 2 demonstrates the whole list of features 
provided in a single line of data files along with an 
example. The ??? in the features shows the missing 
values. This is actually corresponding to the fea-
tures that do not exist or can not be obtained from 
the treebank due to some problematic cases. The 
62
line that corresponds to this entry will be the fol-
lowing line (as tab delimited):  
00002213148.xml 9 0 tap verb abstraction 
attribute emotion verb adv ? fl mod?f?er sev verb 
noun abl tr object s?k?l verb abstraction attribute 
emotion verb verb ? fl sentence 2 2 #ne tuhaf ?ey ; 
de?il mi ?iyi olmamdan ; onu taparcas?na 
sevmemden s?k?ld? .# 
5 Ontology 
A small scale ontology for the target words and 
their context was constructed. The Turkish Word-
Net developed at Sabanc? University2 is somehow 
insufficient. Only the verbs have some levels of 
relations similar to English WordNet. The nouns, 
adjectives, adverbs and other words that are fre-
quently used in Turkish and in the context of the 
ambiguous words were not included. This is not a 
suitable resource for fulfilling the requirements of 
TLST and an ontology specific to this task was 
required. The ontology covers the examples that 
are selected and has three levels of relations that 
are supposed to be effective in the disambiguation 
process. We tried to be consistent with the Word-
Net tags; additionally we constructed the ontology 
not only for nouns and verbs but for all the words 
that are in the context of the ambiguous words se-
lected. Additionally we tried to strengthen the rela-
tion among the context words by using the same 
tags for all POS in the ontology. This is somehow 
deviating from WordNet methodology, since each 
word category has its own set of classification in it. 
6 Evaluation 
WSD is a new area of research in Turkish. The 
sense tagged data provided in TLST are the first 
resources for this specific domain in Turkish. Due 
to the limited and brand new resources available 
and the time restrictions the participation was less. 
We submitted a very simple system that utilizes 
statistical information. It is similar to the Na?ve 
Bayes approach. The features in the training data 
was used individually and the probababilities of 
the senses are calculated. Then in the test phase the 
probabilities of each sense is calculated with the 
given features and the three highest-scored senses 
are selected as the answer. The average precision 
and recall values for each word category are given 
                                                 
2
 http://www.hlst.sabanciuniv.edu/TL/ 
in Table 3. The values are not so high, as it can be 
expected. The size of the training data is limited, 
but the size is the highest possible under these cir-
cumstances, but it should be incremented in the 
near future. The number of senses is high and pro-
viding enough instances is difficult.  The data and 
the methodology for WSD will be improved by the 
experience obtained in SemEval evaluation exer-
cise. 
The evaluation is done only for FG and CG 
senses. For FG senses no partial points are as-
signed and 1 point is assigned for a correct match. 
On the other hand, the CG senses are evaluated 
partially. If the answer tags are matching with any 
of the answer tags they are given points. 
 
FG CG 
 Words 
  P R P R 
Nouns 0,15 0,50 0,65 0,43 
Verbs 0,10 0,38 0,56 0,50 
Others 0,13 0,50 0,57 0,44 
Average 0,13 0,46 0,59 0,46 
Table 3: Average Precision and Recall values  
7 Conclusion 
In TLST we have prepared the first resources for 
WSD researches in Turkish. Therefore it has sig-
nificance in Turkish WSD studies. Although the 
resources and methodology have some deficien-
cies, a valuable effort was invested during the de-
velopment of them. The resources and the method-
ology for Turkish WSD will be improved by the 
experience obtained in SemEval and will be open 
to public in the very near future from 
http://www.fatih.edu.tr/~zorhan/senseval/senseval.htm.  
References 
Orhan, Z. and Altan, Z. 2006. Impact of Feature Selec-
tion for Corpus-Based WSD in Turkish, LNAI, 
Springer-Verlag, Vol. 4293: 868-878  
Orhan Z. and Altan Z. 2005. Effective Features for Dis-
ambiguation of Turkish Verbs, IEC'05, Prague, Czech 
Republic: 182-186  
Oflazer, K., Say, B., Tur, D. Z. H. and Tur, G. 2003. 
Building A Turkish Treebank, Invited Chapter In 
Building And Exploiting Syntactically-Annotated 
Corpora, Anne Abeille Editor, Kluwer Academic 
Publishers. 
63
Proceedings of the ACL 2011 Workshop on Relational Models of Semantics (RELMS 2011), pages 11?18,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June 23, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Extraction of Semantic Word Relations in Turkish from Dictionary 
Definitions 
?erbet?i Ay?e Orhan Zeynep Pehlivan ?lknur 
Computer Engineering 
Department 
Computer Engineering 
Department 
 
firstnoor@gmail.com 
Fatih University Fatih University  
34500 
Buyukcekmece, Istanbul, 
 Turkey 
34500 
Buyukcekmece, Istanbul, 
Turkey 
 
aserbetci@fatih.edu.tr zorhan@fatih.edu.tr  
  
  
 
Abstract 
Many recent studies have been dedicated to the 
extraction of semantic connections between 
words. Using such information at semantic 
level is likely to improve the performance of 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) systems, 
such as text categorization, question answering, 
information extraction, etc. The scarcity of such 
resources in Turkish, obstructs new 
improvements. There are many examples of 
semantic networks for English and other 
widely-used languages to lead the way for 
studies in Turkish. In this study, developing a 
semantic network for Turkish is aimed by using 
structural and string patterns in a dictionary. 
The results are promising, so that 
approximately two relations can be extracted 
from 3 definitions. The overall accuracy is 86% 
if we consider the correct sense assignment, 
94% without considering word sense 
disambiguation. 
1 Introduction 
Nowadays, the internet is the primary media, 
people use for communicating with each other and 
sharing their ideas with the rest of the world. 
Therefore, a massive amount of data is available 
but it is not understandable to computers. Wide 
usage of the web brings some requirements to 
make this data more beneficial for people. 
Understanding text from a foreign language or 
accessing relevant ones among millions of 
documents has become crucially important.  
However, due to the large size of data, it is very 
difficult for human to maintain these tasks without 
rapid computer processing. Automatic text 
summarization, information extraction and text 
categorization are all important NLP areas, which 
aim to help humans benefit from computer systems 
to perform these tasks.  
The process of obtaining robust computer 
systems capable of handling these tasks involves 
supporting machines with semantic knowledge. 
The type of necessary knowledge depends on the 
target system. Nevertheless, the information of 
what kinds of relations exist between the words 
can be very useful for many purposes especially 
for NLP applications. Starting with the WordNet 
project in 1985, semantic networks or lexical 
databases have been among the important study 
areas in NLP up to the present. WordNet project 
(http://wordnet.princeton.edu/wordnet/download/). 
Obtaining a semantic network for Turkish 
language is the goal of this study. Since this study 
is an initial step of developing a semantic network 
in Turkish, basic relationship of hyponymy and 
synonymy are primarily handled. For this purpose, 
the investigation of dictionary definitions and the 
morphological richness of Turkish language are 
utilized. Different types of relationships are shown 
in Table 1. Since these relationships are very basic, 
they are likely to be used in various kinds of NLP 
11
tasks. 
Various patterns are extracted from dictionary 
by using both syntax and string features of the 
definitions. Each definition represents particular 
sense of a word, so they can be considered as 
different words. For more accurate semantic 
analysis, the connection between words should be 
established between appropriate senses of the 
words. To be more concrete, an example can be 
given on the semantically ambiguous word as; y?z 
?face? or ?hundred?. When a has-a relation is 
detected between the words v?cut ?body? and y?z, 
the appropriate sense for y?z should be selected as 
?face?, instead of ?hundred?. 
 
Relationship Example 
Is-a(hyponymy) flower-plant 
Synonym-of initial-first 
Antonym-of quick-slow 
Member-of academician-academy 
Amount-of kg-weight 
Group-of forest-tree 
Has-a office-computer 
 
Table 1: Basic word relationships 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 discusses the previous work in this field. 
Section 3 explains the implementation methods, 
details and approaches to some NLP problems, like 
morphology or word sense ambiguity. This section 
also gives some statistics about the results. The 
future work to be performed for both improving 
and extending the network is also discussed in this 
section. Section 4 evaluates the overall system. 
2 Previous Work 
Cyc (http://www.opencyc.org) project is one of the 
first attempts of obtaining computer accessible 
world knowledge. Many other studies have been 
performed for constructing large lexical databases 
or semantic networks by extracting the semantic 
connections between words.  
In fact, both the number and types of the 
possible relationships are not clearly identified in 
this area. However, there are some widely accepted 
basic relationships, which can be considered as the 
backbone of semantic networks. No matter which 
method is followed for extracting these 
connections, most of the studies including 
WordNet (Miller, 1995; Fellbaum, 1998) and 
ConceptNet(Havasi et al, 2007) are based on this 
set of specific relationships such as hyponymy, 
synonymy, meronymy etc. These are the most 
basic but also the most informative ones among the 
common relation types. 
Some manual work has been performed at the 
beginning for constructing this kind of semantic 
networks, including but not limited with Wordnet. 
Nowadays, however, semi or fully automatic 
systems capable of performing these processes are 
worked on. Different methods have been used from 
collecting online data to corpus analysis and from 
defining syntactical rules to string patterns. 
ConceptNet collects its data from Open Mind 
Common Sense Project 
(http://commons.media.mit.edu/en/), which is a 
web-based collaboration (Havasi et al, 2007). 
Over 15,000 authors enter sentences to contribute 
to the project. Users can answer questions via the 
web interface, which aim to fill the gaps in the 
project. However, in the study of Nakov and 
Hearts (2008), the whole web is treated like a 
corpus and the occurrences of the noun pairs 
together are converted into feature vectors to 
perform a classification for semantic relations. 
There are various methods under the subject of 
string or structural patterns that represent specific 
semantic relations. Barriere(1997) investigates 
some syntactical rules in her study and matches the 
dictionary definitions to these rules for figuring out 
the relations. Also, in some languages in which 
prepositions are used frequently, some relations 
can be extracted depending on the prepositions, 
like in the study of Celli and Nessim (2009). 
In addition, there are some studies which aim to 
extract some patterns for each relation for the 
purpose of finding new instances.  
Turney?s study (2006) is a good example, 
which uses a corpus based method for finding high 
quality patterns. It searches the noun pairs through 
the corpus to extract some row patterns. The 
patterns are ranked by a ranking algorithm in order 
to determine the most qualified patterns for the 
further steps. Espresso (Pantel and Pennacchiotti, 
2006) is also concerned in finding patterns to 
represent relations. It starts with a few reliable seed 
of relations and iteratively learns the surface 
patterns in a given corpus. 
There is a lot of work to be done for Turkish in 
this area. Except one project (Bilgin et al, 2004), 
12
which was performed and limited within the scope 
of BalkaNet project, there is no significant work in 
this area for Turkish.  
BalkaNet project is valuable in the sense of 
being one of the first attempts for developing 
Turkish Wordnet. It differs from our study in its 
methodology, which involves translation of basic 
concepts in EuroWordNet and then using some 
string patterns to extend the network. In addition, 
target relationships and obtained results are quite 
different and will be handled in the following 
sections.  
 Another work (?nder, 2009) which aimed to 
extract the relations from dictionary definitions by 
using string patterns but was not completed, 
constructs the basics of our study.  
3 Experimental Setup 
In this section, the implementation process is 
discussed in the following order of sub topics: 
? Data 
? Morphological features of Turkish 
? Extracted patterns  
? Morphological analysis and disambiguation 
? Word sense disambiguation 
? Stop word removal 
? Results 
 
Using a dictionary can ease the process of 
extracting semantic relations in a language in many 
aspects. First of all, every word occurs in the 
dictionary at least once, hence the probability of 
missing a word decreases. Secondly, it consists of 
definitions of the words, which are relatively 
informative. Lastly, the sentences in a dictionary 
are generally simple and similar to each other. 
Therefore, they generally follow a set of syntactic 
patterns. This enables to perform easy detection of 
relations. 
 For all the reasons listed above, a dictionary of 
Turkish Language Association (TLA) is used in 
this study. There are 63110 words and 88268 
senses in this dictionary. This concludes that nearly 
25000 of the words are ambiguous. In Table 2, the 
distributions of these words among the most 
frequent parts of speech are given.  
The first step is investigating the dictionary 
definitions manually in order to explore some 
patterns which are likely to keep a particular 
semantic relation inside. The patterns should be 
general enough for obtaining a reasonable recall. In 
addition, they should be specific enough not to 
cause low precision. After a rough analysis, the 
dictionary is scanned for some row patterns to 
evaluate the results in terms of both accuracy and 
comprehensiveness. According to the results, 
either patterns are reorganized or some additional 
features are determined to be used for increasing 
the number of matches and decreasing the error 
rate. Different kinds of features in the dictionary 
definitions and the words being explained are used. 
Morphological structures, noun clauses, clue words 
and the order of the words in the sentence are the 
examples of these features. 
 
Part of Speech Number 
Noun 56400 
Adjective 14554 
Adverb 3011 
Pronoun 104 
Verb 11408 
 
Table 2: The distributions of words in TLA dictionary 
 
Turkish is an agglutinative language which 
results in a rich but rather complex morphological 
structure. Thus, the words do keep a very 
important part of the sense. They can be converted 
from one part of speech into another by adding 
derivational suffixes. For example, from the verb 
gelmek ?to come? the adjective gelen ?the one who 
comes? can be derived. This feature of Turkish 
constructs the most important effect of increasing 
the number of matches between patterns and 
definitions. In addition, indefinite noun phrases are 
detected with the help of morphological analysis 
and lots of relations are extracted as a result. These 
are only a few examples of where morphology is 
used when extracting the relations. 
Some clue words in the definitions are also 
searched for. In dictionaries, some similar words 
are explained by using the same words and they 
can represent some specific relations. To be more 
concrete, the adjectives that represent the opposite 
of another adjective can be considered. These types 
of words are usually defined by using the words 
olmayan ?not? and kar??t? ?opposite of?. For 
example, in the definition of the word fantasik 
?fantastic? there exists the phrase ger?ek olmayan 
13
?not real?. An antonymy relation can be established 
between the word fantastic ?fantastic? and ger?ek 
?real? as a result. For some other types of relations, 
different words are detected and handled. For 
example, for member-of relation, s?n?f?ndan ?from 
the class of?; for is-a relation, t?r? ?type of? are 
selected. 
Additionally, noun clauses, which are defined 
in the dictionary, are investigated. Most of the time 
a noun phrase represents an ?is-a? relation. The 
word bal?k ?fish? and k?l?? bal??? ?sword fish? are 
both in the dictionary and k?l?? bal??? ?sword fish? 
is a noun phrase that has bal?k ?fish? in it. It is 
obvious that there is a connection between the 
words k?l?? bal??? ?sword fish? and  bal?k ?fish?. 
Various patterns are obtained by using at least 
one of the above features. The obtained patterns 
for each type of relation are shown in Table 3. 
When analyzing the table, the representatives to be 
considered are as follows: X and Y are used for 
representing the words being connected to each 
other, punc represents one of the specified 
punctuations like comma or full stop, w* 
represents zero or more sequential words, w*no_punct 
represents zero or more sequential words without 
any punctuation inside, wx is a word which keeps a 
specific part of speech x, depending on the pattern. 
The extracted relations for the provided word 
definitions are not limited with those mentioned in 
the table. If possible, two or more relations can be 
extracted from a single definition. For instance, 
besides the ?member-of? relation between ?akal 
?jackal? and etoburlar ?carnivora?, a ?kind-of? 
relation is extracted also for ?akal ?jackal? with 
hayvan ?animal?, since the definition matches with 
the fourth pattern of ?kind-of? relation. Although 
only the relation between pinhan ?latent? and sakl? 
?hidden? is given, another synonymy relation is 
also obtained from this pattern between pinhan 
?latent? and gizli ?ulterior?.  
The morphological structures of the words are 
obtained by using Zemberek project 
(http://code.google.com/p/zemberek), which is an 
open source morphological analyzer for Turkish. 
The analysis result of the word atan ?be assigned? 
or ?your ancestor? or ?the one who throws? is 
displayed with Figure 1.  
The morphological ambiguity is handled with 
two different methods. Firstly, as a pre-processing 
step, some suffixes are determined, which cannot 
occur in the dictionary, such as time suffixes. The 
analyses are pruned from those results that include 
one or more of these suffixes. Secondly, according 
to the pattern requirements, the convenient result is 
selected as the correct one. For example, if a word 
is required to have a particular chain of suffixes, 
the first result providing this necessity is selected. 
If there is no assumption, the first result is selected 
by default. 
The relations are established between the exact 
senses of the words in order to obtain a reliable 
network. Therefore, word sense disambiguation 
should also be performed. One of the words is not 
ambiguous, since one of its particular senses 
(definition) is already being handled for most of 
the relations. On the other hand, for the purpose of 
determining the correct sense of the remaining 
word, simplified Lesk algorithm is used(Lesk, 
1986). Simplified Lesk algorithm benefits from the 
similarity measurements between each sense of the 
ambiguous word and the concept. The algorithm is 
given in Figure 2 and the details are provided in 
the http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lesk_algorithm. 
In order to obtain more accurate results, 
stemming and stop word removal is applied for 
both relation extraction and word sense 
disambiguation. A connection can be established 
only if both of the words are not stop words. Stop 
words are dictionary specific and obtained by 
counting the occurrences of word stems in the 
dictionary. Not all frequent stems are assumed to 
be stop words but the useless ones among the all 
stems whose occurrences are above an upper limit 
are ignored. There are 22 stop words specified, 
including i?in ?for?, ba?ka ?another? and en ?the 
most?. 
The system was evaluated by manual 
calculation of the accuracy. Equal number of 
samples is chosen randomly from each pattern. 
Two types of accuracy were obtained, which are 
with and without consideration of correct sense 
assignment. 
The obtained results are given in Table 4. The 
first accuracy column represents the accuracy 
percentage by considering whether the correct 
sense could be matched or not. The second column 
ignores the senses and evaluates the results in 
terms of the correct word relation only. 
14
  
Relation  P no Pattern specification Example 
Hyponymy 
1 
X: (w*) (wadj) (w*) Y punc (w*). 
where X is noun, Y is a noun root. 
(X-Y) 
g?l: ?nceden denizken kurumalar, ?ekilmeler 
 y?z?nden g?l durumuna gelmi? yer.(g?l-yer) 
lake: a piece of land, previously existing as sea and 
becoming dry due to droughts,  turns into a small 
body of water(lake-land) 
2 
X: (w*) (wadv) (w*no_punct) (Y) punc (w*) 
where X is verb, wadv is a derived adverb, Y is a 
verb. 
(X-Y) 
hicvetmek: Alay yoluyla yermek.(hicvetmek-
yermek) 
satirize: To criticize by mocking(satirize-criticize) 
3 
X Y : w*. 
where X and Y is an indefinite noun phrase 
(X Y-Y) 
ada ?ay?: Bu bitkiden yap?lan s?cak i?ecek.(ada ?ay?-
?ay) 
sage tea: The tea that is made of this plant(sage tea-
tea) 
4 
X: w* wnoun Y punc w*. 
where wnoun and Y compose a noun phrase. 
(X-Y) 
post : T?yl? hayvan derisi. (post-deri) 
fur : Hairy animal skin.(fur-skin) 
5 
X : w* Y t?r?(kind of) | tipi(type of) | ?e?idi(sort 
of). 
where X and Y nouns 
(X-Y) 
limuzin: ??inde her t?rl? donan?m bulunan l?ks, uzun 
ve geni? otomobil t?r?.(limuzin-otomobil) 
limousine: The type of long, wide and luxury 
automobile in which there exist various 
equipment(limousine- automobile) 
Synonymy 
1 
X : w* punc Y 
where X and Y are nouns, adverbs, or adjectives 
(X-Y) 
pinhan: Gizli, sakl?, gizlenmi?.(pinhan-sakl?) 
latent: Ulterior, hidden, covert. (latent-hidden) 
2 
Z : w* punc X, Y punc w* 
where X, Y have equal chain of suffixes and they 
are verbs, adjectives or nouns 
(X-Y) 
raz?: Uygun bulan, benimseyen, isteyen, kabul eden 
(benimsemek-istemek) 
willing : The one who approves, embraces, wants, 
agrees on sth.(embrace-want) 
Group-of 1 
X: w* Y b?t?n?(whole of) | toplulu?u(group of) | 
t?m?(all of) | k?mesi(set of) | s?r?s?(flock of) | 
birli?i(union of) w* 
where X and Y are nouns. 
(X-Y) 
?lem: Hayvan veya bitkilerin b?t?n?.(alem - bitki) 
kingdom : The whole of plants or animals.(kingdom-
plant)  
Antonym 1 
X: w* Y olmayan(not) | kar??t?(the opposite of). 
where X and Y are nouns or adjectives. 
(X-Y) 
ac?: Baz? maddelerin dilde b?rakt??? yak?c? duyu, tatl? 
kar??t?. (ac?-tatl?) 
bitter: The feeling of pain which some matters leave 
on tongue, the opposite of sweet. (bitter-sweet) 
Member-of 
1 
X: w* Y s?n?f?(class of) | ?yesi(member of) | 
tak?m?(set of). 
where X and Y are nouns 
(X-Y) 
senat?r: Senato ?yesi.(senat?r-senato) 
senator: Member of senate.(senator-senate) 
2 
X :  Ygillerden(from the family of Y) | 
Ylerden(from the family of Y) w*. 
where X and Y nouns. 
(X-Y) 
?akal: Etoburlardan, s?r? h?linde ya?ayan, kurttan 
k???k bir yaban hayvan?.(?akal-etobur) 
jackal: From carnivora, a kind of wild animal 
smaller than wolf, which lives in flocks.(jackal-
carnivora) 
Amount-of 1 
X: w* Y miktar?(amount-of) | ?l??s?(measure-of) | 
birimi(unit-of) . 
where X and Y are nouns 
(X-Y) 
amper: Elektrik ak?m?nda ?iddet birimi.(amper-
?iddet) 
amper: The unit of intensity in electrical 
current.(amper- intensity) 
Has-a 1 
X: w* Y [wnoun] punc w*. 
where Y has the suffix of ?LI?,  X and Y are nouns 
(X-Y) 
sof : Bir ?e?it sert?e, ince y?nl? kuma?. (sof,y?n) 
alpaca : A kind of hard, thin, wooled cloth. (alpaca, 
wool) 
 
Table 3: The obtained patterns for each type of relation 
15
1. {Icerik:atan Kok:ata tip:FIIL} Ekler:FIIL_KOK+FIIL_EDILGENSESLI_N 
{Content : be assigned Root : assign Pos: Verb} Suffixes : Verb Root + Passive 
2. {Icerik:atan Kok:ata tip:ISIM}  Ekler:ISIM_KOK+ISIM_SAHIPLIK_SEN_IN 
{Content : your ancestor Root : ancestor Pos: Noun} Suffixes : Noun Root + Possesive_you 
3. {Icerik:atan Kok:at tip:FIIL}  Ekler:FIIL_KOK+ FIIL_DONUSUM_EN 
{Content : the one throws Root : throw Pos: Verb} Suffixes : Verb Root + Participle 
 
Figure 1: The morphological analysis result of the word atan(be assigned | your ancestor | the one who throws) 
function SIMPLIFIED LESK(word,sentence) returns best sense of word  
best-sense <- most frequent sense for word 
max-overlap <- 0 
context <- set of words in sentence 
for each sense in senses of word do  
signature <- set of words in the gloss and examples of sense 
overlap <- COMPUTEOVERLAP (signature,context) 
if overlap > max-overlap then  
max-overlap <- overlap 
best-sense <- sense 
end return (best-sense) 
 
Figure 2: Simplified Lesk algorithm 
 Relation Pattern Number of Relations Accuracy % Accuracy(ambiguous) % 
Hyponymy 
1 20566 84 94 
2 1448 84 89 
3 5127 84 90 
4 3502 74 95 
5 387 90 96 
Synonymy 1 2313 76 88 2 22518 96 100 
Group-of 1 435 87 97 
Antonym 1 380 99 100 
Member-of 1 128 92 97 2 634 100 100 
Amount-of 1 119 81 92 
Has a 1 2430 82 89 
Total   59987 86,85 94,38 
NET   58125     
 
Table 4: The number of relations and the accuracy results for each relation and each pattern rule 
  
16
It should be considered that the number of 
relations extracted per pattern is counted 
individually in order to show the performance of 
each pattern separately. Some of the relations can 
be extracted by different patterns of that relation 
type, so the net total, which is cleaned from the 
repetitions, is less than overall total. 
The results are promising in terms of both the 
comprehensiveness and the accuracy. If some more 
effort can be spent on word sense disambiguation, 
the accuracy may rise to a considerable ratio. The 
comprehensiveness is intended to be increased 
with further work, which is discussed in the 
following section. 
The numbers of relation instances are quite 
greater when compared to BalkaNet project. There 
are nearly 34,000 relation instances in the project, 
including the synonym relations among synset 
members. In this study 58,000 relations are 
available. Also, it is more likely to be extendible, 
since not only string patterns but also structural 
patterns are benefitted from, which will be 
increased with future work. 
4 Conclusion 
The semantic relations between the words are 
extracted in order to develop a semantic network. 
Some basic relation types such as is-a, group-of, 
synonym-of, etc. are targeted to obtain an initial 
network to be extended with further work.  
The words are investigated according to their 
definition in the TLA dictionary. Some row 
patterns which consist of morphological features of 
the words, parts of speech or strings in some 
specific positions and compound words are 
defined. After that, the dictionary is scanned for 
searching the definitions that matches one of these 
patterns. Depending on the results, patterns are 
reformed and additional features are inserted with 
the purpose of increasing pattern quality and 
number of matches. Exact senses of the words are 
tried to be matched by applying a word sense 
disambiguation algorithm. 
The study has shown that, by taking advantage 
of the morphological richness of Turkish language 
and using some structural patterns, it is possible to 
construct a reasonable semantic network. This 
study can pave the way for more complex NLP 
applications and can be used for improving 
ordinary processes such as word sense 
disambiguation. The network can be converted into 
a knowledge base by inserting more accurate 
relationships and investigating larger and more 
comprehensive corpora as the future work. 
5 Future Work 
There is a set of processes to do both for 
improving and extending the network. Firstly, in 
order to eliminate erroneous connections from the 
obtained network, statistical information such as 
co-occurrence of the words can be investigated. 
The assumption here is that if two words are 
related to each other, the possibility of their being 
together in a corpus increases. The existing 
connections can be verified or ranked in terms of 
their reliability by using such information. 
In addition, to remove erroneous sense 
determination, word sense disambiguation method 
can be improved. After obtaining a reliable, small 
network, which will serve as seed, new patterns 
can be extracted by following Turney (2006) and 
by using these patterns more instances can be 
extracted from larger corpora. As an alternative, 
the words can be first tagged with concrete or 
abstract labels automatically. This information can 
limit the types of connections a word can 
contribute. For example, an abstract word cannot 
connect to another word with a part-whole relation. 
For this task, a pre-processing step should be 
applied to classify the words as concrete or 
abstract.  
In addition, with the purpose of improving the 
network, some other resources will be benefitted 
from. The existing patterns will be applied to 
Wikipedia (http://www.wikipedia.org/) entries, by 
selecting only the definitions of the concepts. An 
advantage of this process is that it can be re-
performed periodically to keep the network up-to-
date and dynamic. Also, the number of relation 
types will be increased. Currently, only the nouns, 
noun phrases consisting from two words, 
adjectives and verbs are handled. Also, only the 
relationships within the same type of words are 
extracted that is, a noun can be connected only to 
another noun, not an adjective or a verb. Finer 
grained relationships can establish connections 
among different parts of speech.  
17
References 
Barri?re Caroline. 1997. From a children?s first 
dictionary to a lexical knowledge base of 
conceptual graphs. PhD thesis. Simon Fraser 
University, Canada.  
Bilgin Orhan, ?etino?lu ?zlem, and Oflazer 
Kemal. 2004. Morphosemantic Relations In and 
Across Wordnets: A Preliminary Study Based 
on Turkish. Proceedings of the Global WordNet 
Conference. Masaryk, Czech Republic.  
 http://people.sabanciuniv.edu/~oflazer/balkanet/
twn_tr.htm 
Celli Fabio, Nissim Malvina. 2009. Automatic 
identification of semantic relations in Italian 
complex nominals. Proceedings of the 8th 
International Conference on Computational 
Semantics, Tilburg. pp. 45-60. 
Fellbaum, Christiane. 1998. WordNet: An 
Electronic Lexical Database. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
Havasi Catherina, Speer Robert, and Alonso B. 
Jason.  2007. ConceptNet 3: a Flexible, 
Multilingual Semantic Network for Common 
Sense Knowledge. Proceedings of the 22nd 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 
Lesk, E. Micheal. 1986. Automatic sense 
disambiguation using machine readable 
dictionaries: how to tell a pine cone from an ice 
cream cone. In SIGDOC '86: Proceedings of the 
5th annual international conference on Systems 
documentation, pages 24-26, New York, NY, 
USA. ACM. 
Miller, George A. 1995. WordNet: A Lexical 
Database for English. Communications of the 
ACM Vol. 38, No. 11: 39-41. 
Nakov Preslav, Hearts A. Marti. 2008. Solving 
Relational Similarity Problems Using the Web 
as a Corpus, Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA. pp. 452?460. 
Pantel Patrick, Pennacchiotti Marco. 2006. 
Espresso: Leveraging Generic Patterns for 
Automatically Harvesting Semantic Relations, 
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual 
Meeting of the ACL. Sydney, Australia. pp. 
113-120.  
Turney D. Peter. 2006. Expressing implicit 
semantic relations without supervision. 
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual 
Meeting of the ACL. Sydney, Australia. pp. 
313-320. 
?nder P?nar. 2009. Design and Implementation of 
the semantic Turkish Language and Dialects 
Dictionary. MS thesis. Fatih University, 
?stanbul. 
18
