A MORPHOLOGICAL, SYNTACTIC AND SEMANTIC 
SEARCH ENGINE  FOR  HEBREW TEXTS. 
 
UZZI  ORNAN 
Visiting Professor, Computer Science, Technion ? I.I.T. 
Scientific Director, Multitext, Multidimensional Publishing Systems 
ornan@cs.technion.ac.il,  uornan@actcom.net.il 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
Abstract 
     This article describes the construction 
of a morphological, syntactic and semantic 
analyzer to operate a high-grade search 
engine for Hebrew texts. A good search 
engine must be complete  and accurate. In 
Hebrew or Arabic script most of the 
vowels are not written, many particles are 
attached to the word without space, a 
double consonant is written with one 
letter, and some letters signify both vowels 
and consonants. Thus, almost every string 
of characters may designate many words 
(the average in Hebrew is almost three 
words). As a consequence, deciphering a 
word necessitates reading the whole 
sentence. Our model is Fillmore?s 
framework of an expression with a verb as 
its center. The engine eliminates readings 
of words unsuited to the syntax or the 
semantic structure of the sentence. In 
every verbal entry of our conceptual 
dictionary the features of the noun phrases 
(NP?s)  required by the verb are included. 
When all the correct readings of all the 
strings of characters in the sentence have 
been identified, the program chooses the 
proper occurrences of the searched word 
in the text. Approximately 95% of the 
results by our search engine match those 
in the query. 
 
1.Introduction 
 It is easy to construct a search engine that, 
in a given text, will find all the 
occurrences of the string of characters 
specified in the query. In Hebrew script, 
however, the string of characters that 
makes up a word may also be interpreted 
as designating other words. Almost every 
word in Hebrew script can be read as one 
of an average of three words. This is 
because Hebrew script is fundamentally 
defective: (1) Most vowels in a given 
word have no sign in the script. (2) 
Particles are attached with no intervening 
space to the string of characters that makes 
up the following word. (3) A geminated 
consonant is written as one letter, like a 
not-geminated consonant. (4) Several 
letters serve as both vowels and 
consonants. Threfore, it is impossible to 
identify the word stated in the query by its 
form: if we try to do so, we would obtain 
all the occurrences which are written in 
the same way but are, in fact, different 
words. Since only 20-30% of the words so 
obtained are actually occurrences of the 
required word, the users have to check 
every word in the result obtained in order 
to decide whether it is actually the one 
they want.1  In order to solve this problem, 
some systems recommend that every 
query should contain some other words 
that are often found close to the stipulated 
word.2 But such a search may lead to a 
loss of important occurrences of the 
required word. Neither a frequency list of 
words nor another statistical device can be 
an ultimate answer in our search of 
accurate and full device. A  statistical 
approach ensures that some mistakes or 
                                                          
1 This happened in the case of the programs of 
Pador, Taqdin, Dinim and others, who offer a  
search engine for legal texts. It is well known 
that many lawyers have stopped using them, 
and prefer to conduct a manual search. 
 
2   For example, the Contahal company 
suggested conducting a cross-check. 
 
  
omissions will always exist.  Also, 
eliminating certain readings by an 
examination of the words in the short 
context will not ensure completeness, nor 
will it ensure accuracy, since a large 
number of the strings that appear in the 
result will not be relevant to the question. 
(Choueka and Lusignan, 1985; Choueka, 
1990).  We can obtain a correct reading of 
a word only if we can make a correct 
reading of the whole sentence. In order to 
do this, we must eliminate all the 
unsuitable readings of every string of 
characters in the sentence, and leave only 
one reading. To this end, we had to go 
through the following stages: 
1. First, we adopted a phonemic script, a 
method of writing Hebrew in Latin 
characters, in which each vowel has its 
character, the particles are separated 
from the following word, geminated  
consonants are represented by two 
identical letters, and vowels and 
consonants are given  completely 
distinct letters .3 
2. Now we are able to carry out a 
morphological analysis revealing all 
the word?s components. By examining 
the results, the correct reading could 
be clearly seen. This would be 
impossible in Hebrew script.   We 
constructed a complete, exact 
morphological analyzer for Hebrew  
words, which also identifies inflections 
and attached particles.  
3. Having perfected the 
morphological analyzer, which 
provides a complete set of details 
for the analysis of any possible 
reading of a string of characters, 
we could write a program  
                                                          
3 The phonemic script contains four diacritics: 
??, ?, ?, ?, also ? (or `) and ? (or ?). See ISO-
259-3 (available in http://www.cs.technion.ac.il/ 
~ornan/ papers). Several programs for analysis of 
Hebrew morphology use the regular Hebrew 
script also for the output. See Bentor et al1992, 
Segal, 1999, Carmel and Maarek, 1999 (a 
statistical filter based on Bentor et al. The 
problem is that in this way one can show the 
diverse readings only with the traditional 
Hebrew dots and points, many of them 
superfluous. Our method is clearer since we use 
Latin characters through the whole work.  
 
which checks every suggested reading 
of a word, and eliminates readings 
unsuitable to the syntax of the possibly 
required sentence. 
4. Even a syntactic reading does not 
ensure that each of the strings in 
the sentence is indeed a proper 
reading of the relevant word. 
Syntactic elimination may leave 
many words that do not suit a 
meaningful sentence. Further 
semantic eliminating is required. 
5. For this purpose we compiled a 
complete conceptual dictionary of the 
Hebrew language. It is based on 
Fillmore?s ideas about case grammar 
(Fillmore, 1968), according to which 
the verb is the center of the expression: 
it is a function whose arguments are 
the noun phrases.  In every conceptual 
entry in our dictionary of verbs there 
appear the semantic, syntactic and 
morphological features demanded by 
the verb to exist in the NP?s of the 
sentence, -- including the prepositions, 
which precede them.  Since the 
dictionary includes also the features of 
the arguments (NP?s) in the sentence, it 
eliminates readings of words that are 
suitable syntactically but not 
semantically. Semantic check enables 
us to discriminate both between 
different readings of same string of 
Hebrew characters as well as between 
the different meanings of each of the 
readings. 
             In this way we completed the 
necessary basis for the production of an 
excellent search engine: it will respond 
to any question only with the 
occurrences which bear the stipulated 
meaning, even though the same reading 
of the characters may have several 
meanings. The contents of the article 
are as follows: 
 
     In section 2 we shall explain how we 
establish all possible readings of a string 
of characters. Section 3 shows how we use 
syntactic features to eliminate readings 
that do not fit the syntactic context; then 
we describe our conceptual dictionary.  
Section 4 shows how we can eliminate 
readings that are possible syntactically but 
not semantically. Finally, in section 5 we 
  
shall explain how we choose the 
appropriate meaning of the word by using 
the dictionary. Section 6 concludes the 
article. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. The morphological stage 
 
Our algorithm consists of three stages: 
morphological, syntactic and semantic. 
Here we shall describe the first stage, the 
morphological.     The strings of characters 
are taken from the Hebrew text in Hebrew 
script, and every string is analyzed. As 
was mentioned above, Hebrew script 
containsonly some of the vowels4 attaches 
particles to the following word, and does 
not use double characters to specify 
geminated letters (see Ornan, 1991); also, 
some of the characters serve either as 
vowels or as consonants.  It is advisable to 
be able to read the text in a script that does 
not have these disadvantages51. We use the 
phonemic script of ISO (FDIS 259-3). 
Thus, for instance, the Hebrew word 
HRKBT can be read in any of the 
following ways:  
        
         hirkabta,    hirkabt, harkabat    
         ha-rakkebt,   h-rakabt,   h-rakabta 
 
In the morphological stage, each of these 
possibilities is written at the beginning of 
a separate line, followed by all the 
grammatical details of the reading: 
 
hrkbt    V  hirkib     ,-,-,ta ,p,2,+,#,s -,-,-,-,-  
hrkbt    V  hirkib     ,-,-,t   ,p,2,#,+,s  -,-,-,-,- 
hrkbt    N  harkaba  ,c,-,t   ,-,3,#,+,s  -,-,-,-,- 
hrkbt    N  rakkebt  ,a,-,-   ,-,3,#,+,s   -,-,-,-,- ha- 
hrkbt    V  rakab     ,-,-,t   ,p,-,#,+,s   -,-,-,-,-  h- 
hrkbt    V  rakab     ,-,-,ta ,p,-,+,#,s   -,-,-,-,-  h- 
                                                          
4 Ide and V?ronis (1998:2) mention this as a 
cause of the need to ?disambiguate? Semitic 
languages. I would have been more correct for 
them to refer in their article to the system of 
writing rather then the languages. 
5  See Ornan, 1987, Ornan and Katz, 1994. See 
note 3. 
 
lq?nwh V  laqax     ,-,-,nu ,p,1,+,+,p   3,#,+,s,h 
 
     The given Hebrew word is the first 
column. The second column is the 
category. The third column is the lexical 
entry.  The following column gives the 
status of the word (construct, inflected or 
absolute). Next come the prefix and suffix 
of the word, the tense (for a verb), person, 
gender (masc., fem. or both) and number 
(s or p), and then details about person, 
gender and number of the attached 
pronoun (see the last example lq?nwh), 
and the attached pronoun itself. The last 
column specifies attached particles. 
     This morphological analysis is based 
on a program which uses a complete 
lexicon6, based on a comprehensive 
grammar of all possible Hebrew word-
patterns ? including, of course, all 
inflections, regular and irregular.  
 
3. The syntactic stage 
 
Each of these lines presents one possible 
reading of the given word. But usually 
only one reading is acceptable in any given 
sentence. Therefore, we must eliminate 
those readings, which are morphologically 
correct, but incorrect in the given context.7 
The first elimination is syntactic, and it is 
done in the realm of one ?Syntactic Unit?, 
i.e., a clause which includes one verb and 
is bounded by a ?sign of separation?, 
mainly subordinating or certain 
coordinating particles.8 At this stage all 
possible analyses of the strings of 
characters are displayed. Now, the program 
attempts to combine each line of every 
word with every one of the lines of all 
other words. The correctness of the 
combination is checked with all possible 
                                                          
6 In general, we used Even-Shoshan, 1994, 
which is still considered to be the best. 
 
7 An interesting attempt to decipher a text in 
Hebrew script - Nirenburg and Ben Asher, 
1984. 
 
8 ?Short context rules? are not a satisfactory 
solution, while our full syntactic analysis is 
easily derived from the Conceptual Dictionary, 
as explained in what follows.  
 
  
sequences of other words. Practically, only 
a small number of these combinations 
make a sentence that is syntactically 
correct.9 How is the syntactic test 
performed? 
      The program computes every 
combination of possible strings of words. 
For example, giving the sentence HBWQR 
ZR?H ?M? ?MH (in Hebrew script ? "hot 
sun rose this morning") will render the 
following analysis of all readings of the 
words of this sentence: 
 
hbwqr N boqr        ,a,-,-   ,-,3,+,#,s  -,-,-,-,- ha- 
hbwqr N boqer      ,a,-,-   ,-,3,+,#,s  -,-,-,-,- ha- 
zr?h    N zar?a       ,a,-,-   ,-,3,#,+,s   -,-,-,-,-     
zr?h    N zer?         ,i,-,-    ,-,3,+,#,s  3,#,+,s,h     
zr?h    V zara?       ,-,-,h   ,p,3,#,+,s -,-,-,-,-     
?m?     N ?amma? ,a,-,-    ,-,3,+,#,s  -,-,-,-,-     
?m?     N ?amma? ,c,-,-    ,-,3,+,#,s -,-,-,-,-     
?m?     N ?em?      ,a,-,-    ,-,3,#,+,s -,-,-,-,-     
?m?     N ?em?      ,c,-,-    ,-,3,#,+,s -,-,-,-,-     
?m?     A ?amma? ,a,-,-    ,-,-,+,#,s  -,-,-,-,-     
?m?     V ?imme?  ,-,-,-    ,i,2,+,#,s  -,-,-,-,-     
?m?     V ma?        ,-,-,-   ,p,3,+,#,s -,-,-,-,- ?e- 
?m?     V ma?        ,-,-,-   ,r,-,+,#,s  -,-,-,-,- ?e- 
?mh    N ?ema      ,a,-,-   ,-,3,#,+,s -,-,-,-,-     
?mh    A ?amma   ,a,-,-   ,-,-,#,+,s -,-,-,-,-   
?mh    N ?amma   ,a,-,-   ,-,-,#,+,s -,-,-,-,-    
   This short expression provides 144 
sentences to be checked: 2x3x8x3=144. 
The syntactic stage will eliminate the great 
majority of invalid sequences of possible 
readings. We shall not discuss them all 
here ? only make some remarks about a 
few clear cases for elimination. For 
example, the readings boqr, boqer cannot 
function syntactically as the subject of the 
sentence, since they are masculine, and no 
verb in the rest of the sentence which is 
not preceded by subordinating ?e- (?that?) 
is masculine (agreement is needed). 
Similarly, the second word cannot be 
zar?a: a feminine noun, and no verb agrees 
with zar?a (as subject) in the analyses of 
the other words. 
                                                          
9 There has been much research on syntactic 
analysis by means of a computer program; for 
instance, Wintner and Ornan, 1995. Herz and 
Rimon, 1992, also deal mainly with syntactic 
problems. Levinger et al, 1995 demonstrate 
methods of eliminating syntactically incorrect 
morphological readings. See, too, Levinger, 
1992. 
 
     First, the program looks for a verb. 
When a verb is identified, the program 
checks possible nouns that can be the 
syntactic subject. It then checks other NP?s 
and PP?s, possible adjectives and adverbs. 
Mainly because the order of words in 
Hebrew is rather free, the syntactic stage 
usually leaves a few possible sentences 
that may be accepted as proper readings of 
the input sentence from the syntactic point 
of view. But some of these possibly 
correct syntactic readings may possess 
improper semantic!! features, which 
should not be accepted. 
     We have a special treatment for 
sentences without a verb (this may occur 
in Hebrew and other languages, especially 
Semitic): if the program does not identify 
a verb in the input sentence,  it adds the 
verb haya (?to be?) in the appropriate 
gender, number and person, and the review 
process is repeated. Our dictionary of 
verbs is described below. Here we may 
remark that the verb haya appears in more 
than one lexical entry. One of them should 
be accepted. We shall preface the 
description of the stage of semantic 
elimination with an account of its 
fundamental characteristics. 
 
 
 
 
4. The conceptual approach  
 
4.1 Introduction 
 
     Every natural language is a means of 
describing the world. It contains symbols 
of concepts (concrete, abstract or 
imaginary). Speakers of the language use 
these symbols in order to designate these 
concepts as they occur in the world.10 
                                                          
10  See Ostler, 1995:221, who emphasizes the 
world-outlook common to all languages: 
?? there is a fair degree of comparability 
among the units engaged by each language, 
just as there is a fair degree of similarity 
between the features of the human condition 
that they describe. We all have the same sense-
organs, live in modern Western societies with 
other human beings, confront the same tasks of 
providing food, clothing and shelters for 
  
     It is true that most of the words in 
every natural language are symbols of 
concepts, of actions, and of the 
relationships between them. But, as was 
pointed out above, every natural language 
also contains other, organizing elements, 
which do not symbolize concepts or 
actions and do not refer to the extra- 
linguistic world. These elements organize 
the other words around them: this is the 
difference between organizing elements 
and symbolic terms. By ?Organizing 
Elements? we are not referring only to 
what are called ?grammatical words?, such 
as ki in Hebrew, or ?that? in English ? 
words which do not refer to any entity in 
the world outside the language, but give 
information about the other words in the 
expression; these words (such as  ki, 
?that?, ?ello, ?whose?) inform us,  for 
instance, that  what follows them is 
intended to provide details of whatever 
preceded them, or  to  describe it in a 
particular way. ?Organizing Elements? 
also include morphological details which 
have a linguistic meaning, such as 
indications of gender (bianco ? bianca in 
Spanish), of number, (boy ? boys in 
English), or person (vide ? videsti in 
Italian) a hint to the definiteness of what 
follows (a ? the in English), case endings 
which indicate the syntactic function of  
the concept symbolized by a noun in 
relation to an operation in the world 
indicated by a verb in the expression (in 
Arabic, baytuun as subject ? baytaan as 
object), and so forth. All of these are 
morphological means, which serve to 
organize conceptual symbols.  
     In contrast to the conceptual elements, 
the organizing elements in the expression 
differ as between languages not only in 
their external form, but also in their 
nature. Languages differ from each other 
in their systems of organizing symbols. 
Thus, what is unique in every natural 
language is concentrated in the organizing 
                                                                            
ourselves and our families, are confronted or 
aided by much the same degree of technical 
progress and so on.?  See also Whorf  
1956:138ff. Both authors speak of Western 
societies. 
 
elements, and far less in the lexical sphere. 
The dictionary that we constructed is 
based on these assumptions. It is first and 
foremost a ?dictionary of human 
concepts?; but we also had to include the 
organizing elements in it. We shall now 
describe this dictionary.  
4.2  The two parts of the 
conceptual dictionary 
     Standard dictionaries are arranged in 
alphabetical order, with the category of 
each lexical entry noted. Our dictionary is 
divided from the first into two main 
dictionaries: one for nouns, and one for 
verbs. This will shortly be discussed in 
detail; but, first, we may observe that since 
the same Hebrew word frequently serves 
to symbolize several concepts (whether 
this be a  homograph, polysemy or 
homonym), we add an index number to the 
lexical entry: for instance, cir1 
(?delegate?) is a different concept from 
cir2 (?hinge, pivot?), even though in 
Hebrew both of these concepts are 
symbolized by the same word, cir. 
Similarly, ?eq ?1  means low barometric 
pressure, whereas ?eq ?2 means an 
electrical wall-plug: both concepts are 
symbolized by ?eq ?. In both of these 
instances, we introduced two different 
entries.  
4.3 Dictionary of noun concepts 
An entry in the dictionary of noun 
concepts consists of a list of the essential 
features of the concept. Here are some 
examples: The conceptual entries of bayt 
read as follows:  
bayt1: {construct}{site}{receptacle} 
                {concrete}{property}. 
bayt2: {site} {receptacle}{intimate} 
                {family}.  
bayt3: {word}{information} 
                {work of art}{poetry}. 
 
   The words in curly brackets indicate 
features of the concept (in our dictionary 
  
they are in Hebrew, but have been 
translated for this article). We began the 
work with an arbitrary list of about 130 
features of concepts, but eventually more 
were added in the course of work in order 
to define new concepts, and we now have 
about 170 features.11 The reader will see 
that the concept bayt1 refers to the English 
word ?house?, bayt2 to ?home?, and bayt3 
to ?stanza?. 
         The idea of a conceptual dictionary 
was conceived as a means of constructing 
an infrastructure for comprehensive 
processing of the Hebrew language, and 
not only for the construction of an efficient 
search engine. This base has already 
served in the construction of a Hebrew 
?Reading Machine? for the blind12. Recall 
that in order to read a Hebrew text the 
whole sentence must be read. Sometimes a 
shorter context is sufficient. The 
conceptual dictionary is intended to enable 
the sentence containing the given word to 
be read accurately by using a sophisticated 
procedure that takes into account all the 
possible readings of every word in the 
sentence and by reading the whole 
sentence, and not simply word by word. 
We must now describe the dictionary of 
verbs. 
 
 
 
4.3   The dictionary of verbs 
 
         The dictionary of noun concepts by 
itself cannot activate the algorithm 
required for correct reading of the Hebrew 
sentence. A dictionary of verbal concepts 
is also required.13 C.C. Fillmore (1968) 
                                                          
11 Miller?s WordNet is a mine of features, 
many of them but not all have been used in our 
engine. See especially Miller, 1993. 
 
12 In the years 1996-98 an Israeli company 
(Eastek) developed a ?reading machine? for 
the use of the blind in Israel, using this base in 
its first version. 
 
13   Stern?s Verb Dictionary, 1994, is not a 
conceptual dictionary. Although it includes in 
every lexical entry the particles to be found in 
expressions in which the verbal entry is 
central, it does not relate to thematic 
arguments and their semantic features.  
opened new linguistic horizons by putting 
the verb in the center of the expression, 
and showing how all the other parts of the 
sentence should obey the demands of the 
verb. (Tesni?re should be mentioned here 
as the ?father?figure?, as Somers 1987, 
p.1 emphasizes, but note what follows on 
the same page, as well as in Ch.2.) We 
exploit this concept to the full, and extend 
it to build a dictionary of conceptual 
entries related to actions in the world.14  
        Therefore, the dictionary of verbs 
contains in the entry of every single verb 
everything that that particular verb 
requires to be included in the sentence. 
First of all, the verb?s entry includes the 
answer to the question: what specific 
thematic functions are required in the 
sentence to which this particular verb is 
central,15 and what semantic features must 
the noun phrases which perform these 
thematic functions possess.16 2 The 
thematic functions themselves are 
common to all men: for example, the 
thematic function ?agent? or ?experiencer? 
exists in most sentences in various 
languages. This also applies to the 
thematic functions ?theme? and 
?instrument?. 
       In our dictionary, however, the verbal 
entry also contains organizing elements: in 
the first instance, the prepositions that the 
verb requires or allows to be placed before 
the noun  phrases.  We included the 
prepositions in the verb dictionary in order 
to solve the problem of the prepositions 
individually and rigorously. Basically, a 
preposition is an organizing element: it 
springs not from reality, but from the 
conventions appropriate to each particular 
language, and relates to reality only partly 
and, in general, quite vaguely. In 
                                                                            
 
14 In honor of Fillmore my students call our 
conceptual dictionary ?Fillmore Dictionary?. 
 
15 The same ides is sometimes called, less 
clearly, ?selectional restrictions? (Chomsky, 
1965,1984). 
 
16 Compare some examples of entries, or ?case 
frames?, suggested by various authors in 
computational linguistics in  Somers, 1987 
illuminating book, mainly in Ch.11.  
 
  
organizing the material in this way, there 
is no need to deal with the problem of 
classifying ?types? of verbs (see the 
discussion in Somers 1987: 70-74, and 
283 et seq.), or to categorize them 
according to ?selectional restrictions? (see 
note 15). 
        Secondly, some adverbs must appear 
in the verb?s entry in the dictionary: some 
as optional elements; others, occasionally, 
as necessary elements. In every case they 
are labeled as fulfilling a secondary 
thematic function, to which we give the 
variable code NP3 or NP4 (NP1 agrees in 
person, number and gender to the verb, 
i.e., it is the subject, NP2 is usually the 
theme). Round brackets show that the 
occurrence of this element is optional. But 
there are also ?external? adverbs, which 
cannot be included in the lexical entry of 
the verb even though they may appear 
frequently in many input sentences. In the 
main, they indicate the time or place of the 
action, or function as ?sentential adverbs? 
which describe the external circumstances 
of the event. When such an adverb appears 
in an input sentence (it may appear as an 
unidentified element in a sentence for 
analysis) we give it the symbol of a noun 
phrase (NP), with a special index number: 
NP8 or NP9. In various systems of 
linguistic analysis it is usual to mark 
adverbs PP. However, this symbol seems 
superfluous and we have preferred to mark 
this element as NP, with a preposition 
preceding it (in our system, a preposition 
may also be ? ?). A similar problem may 
arise with adjectives. They, too, are not 
included among the requirements of the 
verbs but, of course, they occur in the 
input sentences. We built a separate 
dictionary for adjectives. It constitutes a 
separate section of the noun dictionary, 
and its entries may be added to the noun 
(with the organizational and semantic 
limitations of their lexical entries) or 
function independently as separate NP?s. 
        Thirdly, in many conceptual entries 
extra details are sometimes included, for 
example, special modifications of gender 
or number, the addition of epithets 
appropriate to one of the required noun 
combinations, idioms, etc. Another 
example of elements that are not 
connected with a concept arising from 
reality is to be found in verbs expressing 
thought or speech. They require a 
subordinate clause which is characterized 
by the feature ?{contents}?, but the 
content is unrestricted (in Arabic grammar 
these are known as ?verbs of the heart?).  
This is a syntactic condition, and may, 
therefore, differ among  languages. As can 
be seen, the conceptual dictionary is not 
purely semantic. It also contains many 
syntactic elements, and even some 
morphological details. In our dictionary 
we have formulated approximately  ten 
thousand verb entries. The noun dictionary 
at the moment consists of thirty five 
thousand entries. 
         Here are some examples of 
conceptual verb entries as they appear in 
our dictionary, followed by some 
explanatory notes. 
 
Pitte?1    [= develop a film] 
    NP1 AGENT  {human, role, org} 
    NP2  THEME  "et" {printed matter, 
                                              picture} 
 
pitte?2  [= open a knot] 
    NP1 AGENT  {human, role, org} 
    NP2  THEME  "et" {knot, "?gor"} 
 
pitte?3173 [= carve] 
    NP1 AGENT  {human, role} 
    NP2 THEME  "et " {writing, word,                                              
                                            picture } 
   (NP3) INSTRUMENT "b-" {tool, 
                                   sharp, acute} 
   (NP4) INSTRUMENT  "?al" {solid, 
                               platform, article} 
 
As can be seen, the Hebrew verb pitte? 
signifies three conceptual entries, which in 
other languages could well be expressed 
by three completely different and 
dissimilar words. 
       In the following examples there are 
also limitations of organizing elements. 
Here we should add some remarks about 
special symbols and explanations of the 
names of the thematic functions: % 
indicates that the succeeding word  
signifies a syntactic structure, and not a 
thematic function. Double quotation marks 
                                                          
17 There are some other meanings to this verb, 
but in order to explain our approach these three 
suffice. 
 
  
(?  ?) indicate Hebrew words, particularly 
prepositions (such as  ?et?, ?b-?, ? ?al?) 
which are required by the verb or are parts 
of idioms. Round brackets   
?(  )? denote an optional function which is 
not obligatory to the sentence to be 
analyzed. A diagonal stroke   ?/? indicates 
another possibility, shown in the 
expression which follows it. 
 
hebin            [= understand] 
   NP1 EXPERIENCER {human, role, 
                                                    org} 
   NP2  "?e-" %SENTENCE 
 / NP2 ?et? AIMED-AT {abstract, 
                                                   info} 
 
?imme?1       [= serve ] 
   NP1  INFLUENCER {-} 
   NP2  THEME  {human, org} 
   (NP3) {"l-"/"k-"} GOAL {action} 
 
 
?imme?2       [= be used as ]     
   NP1 THEME {human, instrument, 
                              site, construction} 
   NP2 "btor"  FUNCTION { human,  
             instrument, site, construction} 
  
?arak1            [= set a table] 
   NP1 AGENT {human, role} 
   NP2 "et" THEME {"?ulxan"}[=table, 
                                            an idiom] 
 
 ?arak2            [= organize ]  
   NP1 AGENT {human, org.} 
   NP2  "et" THEME {act, happening} 
 
 ?arak3            [= edit ] 
   NP1 AGENT {human, org.} 
   NP2  "et" THEME {printed_matter,  
                                       work of art} 
 
zarax              [= rise (sun) ] 
   NP1   THEME  {source_of_light,  
                    source_of_heat, strong} 
 
rakab              [= ride ] 
   NP1 AGENT {human} 
  (NP2) "?al" THEME {four_legged_ 
                                animal, vehicle} 
  (NP3) "l-" TO-LOC {site, place, 
                            happening, human} 
  (NP4) "mi-" FROM- LOC {site,  
                  place, happening, human} 
 
       The Hebrew preposition et  is 
sometimes rendered  as "  " (especially 
when it precedes an entry noun without a 
definite article); but, since this is always 
so, it is not worth printing " "  separately 
for each entry; so this possibility is 
included in the program. 
        Another example: the expression 
maca` xenn is an idiom, and it seems as if 
one could treat the combination as one 
word. But since there could also be an 
expression in which the two words of the 
idiom were separated, and in view of the 
morphological difficulties to which such a 
solution could lead, we prefer to formulate 
it as a simple one-word verb, located in a 
special lexical entry maca`1. This verb 
requires obligatory completion in this 
expression ? ?xenn?, with NP2 status. 
 
maca`1            [="NP3 likes NP1"] 
   NP1  AIMED-AT  { }   
   NP2    THEME  {"xenn"}   
   NP3  "b-?einei" AGENT {human, 
                                       animate}  
 
    After our description of the conceptual 
dictionary, we shall now describe the 
process of semantic elimination. 
 
5. The semantic stage 
 
It will be recalled that we first identified a 
verb among the readings of the words, and 
then dealt with the elimination of 
syntactically improper readings. We now 
turn to the conceptual dictionaries to see 
whether the NP's accord with the expected 
thematic role of the proposed verb, and 
whether the NP?s contain the appropriate 
semantic features. This procedure is 
repeated for each possible reading of a 
string as a verb in order to discover all 
possible interpretations of the sentence. 
The final results usually contain one 
interpretation only, the intended one. But 
sometimes more than one interpretation is 
received. This is for one of two reasons: 
either the program discovers a true and 
appropriate reading that a human being did 
not think of, or the interpretation does not 
fit conditions in the real world. To include 
some means of checking knowledge of the 
world in the program would, of course, be 
a formidable problem.  But these results 
are quite rare, and presented in the results 
only as another possibility, besides the 
correct one. 
  
 
 
6. Conclusion 
 
The analysis and identification of correct 
readings of words in Hebrew script is far 
from being a simple task. The correct 
reading of any word  is achieved only as  a   
result of reading the rest of the words of 
the complete  clause and  sentence. We 
had  
to invest much work to solve this problem 
and to build a complex system of 
programs before we could have achieved a 
high-grade search engine, which is far 
better than other existing suggestions. See 
appendix for comparison. 
     As noted above we succeeded in 
producing this engine only on the 
assumption that a Hebrew word must be 
read not on its own but in accordance with 
the reading of a complete sentence. We 
found that we achieved a powerful 
program, constituting a comprehensive 
infrastructure, for processing the Hebrew 
language for the computer. This 
infrastructure has already produced other 
results (the reading machine for the blind, 
see note 12), and it enables us to begin to 
work on automatic translation from 
Hebrew to other languages -? a task which 
has never yet been attempted.184  It seems 
that this method of translation by 
computer may be suitable to any language, 
and could be a contribution to translations 
from other languages. 
 
 
7.  References 
Bentor,E., A.Angel, D.Ben-Ari-Segev and    
    A.Lavie. 1992. Computerized Analysis of    
   Hebrew Words in Hebrew Computational   
   Linguistics, ed. by U. Ornan, G.Arieli and   
   E.Doron, Ministry of  Science and   
   Technology, pages  36-38.(Hebrew). 
Carmel, David and Yoelle Maarek. 1999.    
    Morphological disambiguation for Hebrew.   
    In Proceedings of the 4th International  
    Workshop NGIT-99, Lecture notes in  
    computer science 1649. Springer Verlag, 
    pages 312-325. 
                                                          
18 We are not referring to computerized 
bilingual dictionaries, but to a full translation. 
 
Chomsky, N. 1965. Aspects of the Theory of   
    Syntax.  MIT Press. 
Chomsky, N. Lectures on Government and   
     Binding.. . Foris Pub. 
Choueka, Y. and Serge Lusignan.1985 .  
    Disambiguation by Short Contexts. In  
   Computers And Humanities Vol 19:147-  
    157.         
Choueka Yaacov.1990. Responsa: An   
    Operational Full-Text Retrieval System.  
     In Computers in  Literary and Linguistic  
     Research. edited by J .Hamesse and A. 
     Zampoli. Champion-Slatkine Paris-Geneve .
   Pages 94-102 
Even-Shoshan, Avraham.1987. The New  
    Dictionary. (Hebrew). 
Fillmore,C.C.1968. The Case for Case.  
    In Universals in Linguistic Theory . 
    Edited By E.Bach and  R.Harmes.   
    Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New  
    York,  Academic Press. Pages 59-81. 
Herz,Y. and M.Rimon.1992. Diminishing  
    Ambiguity by Short-Context  
    Automaton.  In Hebrew Computational  
    Linguistics .Edited by U. Ornan,  
    G.Arieli and E. Doron.  Ministry of  
    Science and  Technology. Pages  
    74-87.(Hebrew). 
Ide, Nancy and Jean V?ronis.1998.  
    Introduction to the Special Issue on Word    
  Sense Disambiguation: The State of the  
    Art. Compuational Linguistics  24:140 . 
ISO 259-3.1999 .Conversion of Hebrew  
    Characters  Into Latin Characters. Part  
    3: Phonemic  Conversion.   
    ISO/TC46/SC2. 
Levinger, Moshe. 1992. Morphological   
    Disambiguation in Hebrew. Research  
    Thesis for MSc in Computer Science.  
    Technion. Haifa (Hebrew). 
Levinger,Moshe, Uzzi Ornan and Itai Alon.  
     1995. Learning Morpho-Lexical  
     Probabilities from an Untagged Corpus  
     with an Application to Hebrew.   
     Computational Linguistics  21:383404 . 
Miller, George A.1993. Nouns in WordNet. 
      Web file. 
Nirenburg, Sergei and Y. Ben Asher.  
     1984.  HUHU :Hebrew University  
     Hebrew Understander. Journal of    
     Computational Linguistics  
     Vol.9:161-182.  
 
Ornan, Uzzi. 1987. Hebrew Text Processing 
Based on Unambiguous Script. .Mishpatim 
17:15-24.(Hebrew) 
Ornan, Uzzi.1991. Theoretical Gemination in     
    Israeli Hebrew. Semitic Studies in honor of  
    Wolf Lwslau. Edited by Alan S, Kaye. Otto    
    Harrassowitz, Weisbaden. Pages  
  
    1158-1168.  
Ornan, Uzzi and Michael Katz. 1994. A  
     New  Program for Hebrew Index Based  
     on the Phonemic Script .TR #LCL 94-7  
     (revised).  Technion - I.I.T. 
Ostler, Nicholas. 1995. Perception   
    Vocabulary in five Languages  ?  
    Towards an Analysis Using Frame  
    Elements. In Steffens Petra (editor)  
    Machine Translation and the  
    Lexicon. Springer Verlag. Pages  
    219-23. 
Segal, Erel,1999. Hebrew Morphological  
    Analyzer for Hebrew undotted   
    Analysis. Thesis for MSc in Computer  
    Science. Technion. Haifa (Hebrew). 
Somers, H.L. 1987.Valency and Case in  
    Computational Linguistics. Edinburg  
    University Press. 
Stern, Naftali. 1994. The Verb Dictionary.  
    Bar-Ilan  University. (Hebrew). 
Wintner, Shuly and Uzzi Ornan. 1995.  
    Syntactic Analysis of Hebrew Sentence.   
    Natural Lnaguage Engineering  
     1:261-288. 
Whorf, Benjamin Lee. 1956. The  
     Relation of Habitual Thought and  
     Behavior to Language. In  Leslie Spier  
     (editor) Language, Culture and  
     Reality , essays in memory of Edward  
     Sapir.1941. Pages 75-93. Reprinted in  
    John B. Carrol  (editor) Language,  
     Thought and Reality. M.I.T. Press.  
     Pages 134-159
 
 
                                                          
 
.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
  
Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Social Dynamics and Personal Attributes in Social Media, pages 94?97,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, 27 June 2014. c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
  
  
 
Innovation of Verbs in Hebrew 
 
Uzzi Ornan 
Hebrew University f Jerusalem 
Hebrew Linguistics 
Technion, I.I.T. Haifa 
Computer Science 
Technion City, Haifa, 32000, Israel 
ornanu@gmail.com,  ornan@cs.technion.ac.il 
 
 
 Absract 
 
     In modern time a lot of 
connections   developed among 
various nations, and     people 
became acquainted with several 
languages. New conceptions 
move from their origin in a 
certain language to another 
surrounding. Hebrew also 
adopted many new words from 
foreign origin, but there is a 
difficulty to adopt foreign verbs 
in Hebrew, since a Hebrew verb 
must be in a certain pattern. This 
short paper explains how a 
special device has developed in 
the Hebrew grammar to cope 
with this need.   
 
 
 
1   Hebrew words in array 
Most Hebrew words are arranged in a "root 
pattern array". Each line contains a root, 
which is a sequence of three or more 
consonants, and each column contains a 
pattern built as a sequence of vowels, 
sometimes accompanied by one consonant 
or two. Each pattern also contains three or 
four slots in which the consonants of the 
root should enter (Figure 1). 
Thus a word appears in each square 
containing the consonants of the root 
interwoven into the pattern (Figure 2). There 
are several thousands roots, and 100 ? 120 
patterns of nouns but only seven patterns of 
verbs. Nouns may be of foreign origins, but 
verbs should be in the seven patterns only.  
  2   Empty squares for innovations 
Many      squares   in   the   array    are actually 
empty.  They   may   become   full   if     new    
words     are     needed    to    be introduced into 
the language. Usually it happens if a speaker 
does not find a word that expresses his/her 
idea. He/She chooses a proper root, and by 
looking for proper pattern, a new word is 
produced and from here it shifts into the 
dictionary (described in Figure 2). 
 
3  Verbal and nominal expressions 
Languages have both verbal and nominal 
expressions. Speakers sometimes need both. 
In order to express an idea which contains 
both a noun and a verb, it is possible to use a 
"general purpose" verb, which expresses a 
general meaning of doing, such as do, make, 
or act etc., and relate it to the noun. Here are 
some expressions in Hebrew: First, general 
purpose Hebrew verbs: 
 
lip?ol= to act,  
le-bacce? =to perform,  
la-?sot= to do, to make. 
    
 And some examples of actual use: 
 la-??ot  ma`ama??im = to make efforts,  
le-harim telepon = to pick up a 
telephone,  
li?loa? mibraq = to send a telegram,   
la-?rok biqqur = to pay a visit. 
 
 
4   Same root for both 
It is very common that both the verbal and 
the nominal expressions be of the same root, 
such as:  
94
  
  
 liktob miktab = to write a letter  
(root:   k't'b' ) 
  lsapper sippur = to tell a story  
 (root:  s'p'r'). 
 
 Such use of expression is specially 
significant in Hebrew for a need to add an 
adjective to the noun while the real meaning 
is to add an adverbial description to the verb. 
E.g., by the nominal phrase "important 
decision" such as in Hebrew : le-ha?li? 
ha?la?a ?a?uba (root: ? ' l ' ? ' ) = to decide 
an  important decision. Here  both noun and 
verb are of the same root. Sometimes the 
verbal expression itself includes the idea of 
the nominal expression, such as,  
 
    le-habriq = li?lo? mibraq (to telegraph, 
or to   send a telegram),   
    le-hi?takker= li?tot le-?okra (to drink up 
to   toxication),    
    le-hitraggez =  le-habbi?  rogez ( to  
    express  anger). 
 
5   Foreign nouns need "squeezing"    
But  what about  foreign nouns?   Modern 
world offers a lot of contacts for  speakers of  
various  languages, and   Hebrew  also   got  
a lot of  foreign  nouns   from    many  
languages. These nouns are not   included in 
the  array.  and what  is more important, they  
do   not  have   roots, while  Hebrew 
speakers   are   used   to   connect    nouns 
and   verbs, preferably through common 
roots. A special procedure developed in 
Hebrew grammar, which produces roots 
from foreign    nouns. This procedure is 
"squeezing": We squeeze the noun and get 
its vowels out1. What remain is its 
consonants only.  
   This sequence of consonants is considered 
to be used as a new root. The new root is put 
in a new line in the list of roots at the 
root-pattern array, and of course on the spot a 
lot of new empty squares appear along the 
line of the new root. Some of them are verbal 
patterns.   Now   one   can   choose   a   proper 
verbal pattern   and   here   a new Hebrew 
verb appears. 
 
 
                                               
1
   See, Ornan 1976 (in Hebrew), Ornan 1990 
p. 88. 
6  Root  is  sequence  of consonants 
For example, a new instrument is invented 
somewhere in a foreign country and has been 
brought to the Hebrew speakers  together  
with  its  name: It  is  the telephone. We have 
mentioned it above in the first appearance in 
the idiom  le-harim telepon,  but sometimes 
after  that  we find another word which 
conveys the same meaning, i.e., le- talpen =  
to phone. This verb  may appear of course in 
various verbal structures, such as  
 
          tilpanti = I phoned, 
          talpenu elay = please phone me,  etc.  
 
   The   verb   appeared   as   a   result   of    the 
squeezing process. From telephone we got the 
sequence of consonants t l p n . and that was 
enough to add a new line in the root lines of 
the root-pattern array. ( [p] and [f] relate to the 
same phoneme /p/ even in Modern Hebrew.)  
 
7   Squeezing is original procedure 
This procedure of squeezing has been active 
even in ancient times. It can be seen in the 
Greek word which entered into Hebrew as 
well as to many languages ? basis. We have a 
Hebrew verb based on the root b s s , which 
was squeezed from basis in ancient time and 
is being used since Mishnaic Hebrew until 
modern time. 
 
8   Squeezing in Hebrew increased 
In Modern time squeezing seems to increase. 
Many new ideas appeared in the wide world, 
and Hebrew did not stay behind. Beside other 
ways of innovation of new words from wide 
world origin, we find a lot of new words, 
especially verbs, which have been coined by 
squeezing. See for example what happened to 
English words such as compilation, debug, 
format, fax, discuss, Pascal, Pasteur, Rentgen. 
They all passed through squeezing, even if 
some of them are not necessarily nouns. For 
example, 
le-qampel = to compile (code), 
le-dabbeg = to debug, 
le-farmet = to format, 
le-faqses= to send a  fax note 
le-dasqes = to discuss, to talk 
le-fasqel = run a Pascal code, 
le-faster = pasterize, 
           le-rantgen = to X-ray. 
95
  
  
     9   Squeezing of Hebrew words 
Next development of the squeezing 
procedure is that it began to work also on 
Hebrew words. It happened whenever a 
speaker feels that the old root does not 
satisfy his/her needs. A good example is 
the noun mispar which exists in the root-
pattern array, with the root s'p'r' and 
pattern mi?a-. Its meaning is "a 
number", and the verb sapar means "to 
count". Now what happens when you 
need to express the idea of giving  
numbers to a bunch  of  pages or names in 
a long queue. The verb sapar "count" is 
not proper. So the noun mispar has been 
squeezed and a new root,  m ' s ' p ' r '   
appeared in a new line at the array, 
producing a new verb le-masper = to 
give numbers. Another example is him?iz. 
Its root m ? z  squeezed from ma?ze = 
stage play, a noun of root ? ' z ' y '  (The m 
is from the pattern). The procedure is so 
strong that even a sequence of two  
adjacent  words  may  be  squeezed  such 
as "?ad ka`n" which means "up to the 
present". This idiom was squeezed, and 
we got a new root: ? ' d ' k ' n ' , from 
which a verb as well as an adjective 
appeared:  
  
    le-?adken et ha-?ada?ot = to  update 
the   news, or  
    ha-ti``ur lo` m?udkan = the 
description is  not uptodate.2 
                                               
2
 The squeezing procedure suggestion 
explains the connection between verbs and 
their origin much easier and nicer than the 
efforts done by Outi Bat-El, 1994. She speaks 
about "extracting", which is the exact 
"squeezing" described in Ornan, 1976 and 
Ornan, 1990 (without mentioning them), but 
tries to adopt it to another theory based on 
four elements (by McCarthy 1981) which 
includes adding vowels in a separate 
procedure, without including any formative 
consonant to a pattern, while the suggested 
approach here is based on two elements 
(pattern and root) only, and we include 
patterns which may contain consonants.  
Some needed procedures for correcting 
References 
 
Bat-El Outi, 1994. Stem Modification and Cluster 
Transfer in Modern Hebrew. Natural Language 
and a LinguisticTheory 12, pp. 571-596 
  
Bolozky, Shmuel 1978. Word Formation Strategies 
in the Hebrew Verb System, Denominative Verbs. 
Afroasiatic Linguistics 5:3 pp. 111-136.  
 
McCarthy, John. J., 1981. A Prosodic Theory of 
Nonconcatenative Morphology. Linguistic Inquiry 
12. pp. 373-418. 
  
Ornan, Uzzi. 1976.  ?? ????? ?????? ????? (on 
generating new roots). Leshonenu- la-?am,  
Academy of Hebrew Language, Jerusalem,  Vol 
27, pp 254-267. 
 
Ornan, Uzzi. 1983.  ????? ?????  ?????? ???? (How 
do we build a Hebrew word). Bar-Asher et al. 
(editors), Studies in Hebrew dedicated to Ze`ev 
Ben-Haiim, Magnes Press, Jerusalem, pp. 13-42. 
 
Ornan, Uzzi. 1990. Machinery for Hebrew Word 
Formation, Martin Charles Golumbic (ed), 
Advances in Artificial Intelligence, Springer-
Verlag, pp. 75-93. 
 
Ornan, Uzzi. 2003.  ????? ??????? (The Final 
Word), University of Haifa pub, pp. 103-126. 
 
                                                                    
various new roots are dealt with in Ornan, 2003 pp. 
110-116.   
96
  
  
   
  
 
pattern 
root 
_a_a_ _i__e_ ma__e_ hit_a__e- __a_ ta__u_a hi__i_ 
psq pasaq pisseq mapseq hitpasseq psaq - hipsiq 
gmr gamar gimmer - - gmar - - 
?br ?abar ?ibber ma?ber hit?abber - ta?bura - 
?bd ?abad ?ibbed - - - - hi?bid 
prsm - pirsem - hitparsem - - - 
?lgrp - ?ilgrep - - - - - 
         
 Figure 1:   Part of Root-Pattern Array 
                                             
         
                                                  
                           
                               list of patterns: 
                                               ma?a- 
             list of roots:                ti?o-t                 phonemic word:        actual word: 
                   gmr                              
                   ?ny                            
                   h'l'k'                MAhlAk              /mahlak/              [mahalax] 
 
                                                                                            
                                                                                                
 
 Figure 2: Illustrating part of the generating algorithm 
 
 
 
 
97
