Building Dialogue Corpora for Nursing Activity Analysis
Hiromi itoh Ozaku, Akinori Abe,
Noriaki Kuwahara, Futoshi Naya,
Kiyoshi Kogure
ATR Intelligent Robotics and Communication Labs
H ikaridai 2-2-2 , Keihannna Science C ity,
Kyoto , 619-0288
{romi,ave,kuwahara,naya,kogure}@atr.jp
Kaoru Sagara
Seinan Jo G akuin University
Ihori 1-3-5 , Kokura K ita-ku , K itakyusyu C ity,
Fukuoka, 803-0835
sagara@seinan-jo.ac.jp
Abstract
In th is paper, w e in troduce our corpora
under developm ent, w hich are recorded
in a real environm ent. These corpora
com prise dialogues collected in hospi-
tals w ith the aim of developing a nurs-
ing serv ice support system through a
com prehensive understanding of nurs-
ing activ ities. We use the corpora to
analyze how nurses perform their nurs-
ing duties and how they express the per-
form ance of their tasks. To understand
nursing activ ities, w e investigated nurs-
ing serv ices and the relevant m edical
charts by using the corpora. In the pa-
per, w e show features and prom ising
applications of the corpora.
1 Introduction
Recently, m edical m alpractice has becom e a seri-
ous social problem (Kohn, Corrlgan and Donald-
son , 1999). The Japanese M inistry of H ealth , La-
bor and Welfare has reported that nursing team s
are m ost frequently involved in m edical accidents
in hospitals(H ealthcare Safety Prom otion N et-
work Project, 2001). The Japanese Nursing A sso-
ciation also states in its guidelines that nurses are
encouraged to m ake nursing reports and to ana-
lyze the cause of accidents, w hich is helpfu l to
prevent their recurrence. H owever, it is very dif-
ficult for nurses to m ake a detailed record during
their working hours.
We have been developing a nursing serv ice
support system based on nurses using w earable
com puters. The system is designed to record
nursing activ ities and to give warnings when nec-
essary. We w ill analyze the collected data to an-
alyze the sequence of their tasks and to quantify
their workload for the purpose of preventing m ed-
ical accidents. To create such a support system ,
w e need to acquire in-depth know ledge of nursing
activ ities closely. A s a first step , w e are collecting
nurses? d ialogues in hospitals, bu ild ing dialogue
corpora, and analyzing the term s in the corpora
used to carry out nursing work .
We have already collected data on nursing tasks
in a specific hospital by using special devices to
record voice data. A s a next step , w e transcribed
conversation recorded by the devices. S ince then ,
w e have been build ing dialogue corpora in actual
work sites. The corpora include various conversa-
tions w ith doctors, nurses, patien ts, and so on. We
generally exchange inform ation , update inform a-
tion , and share know ledge by conversation . We
believe that som e m edical accidents m ight occur
due to m iscommunication . That is, nurses typi-
cally exchange patien ts? inform ation during con-
versation in clin ical m eetings, w hile at the sam e
tim e taking care of patien ts and other nursing ac-
tiv ities.
O n the other hand, huge corpora have been
41
built from various voice data and text data(Kyoto
Text Corpus, ; K . M aekawa, 2003). Furtherm ore,
m any types of tags have been developed for effec-
tive using of huge corpora(H . Koiso et al, 2000;
M A raki, et al, 1999). H owever, since the trad i-
tional d ialogue corpora w ere m ostly recorded on
a trial basis, their top ics w ere usually fixed in the
corpora, and word usage and m eaning of term s
w ere only defined clearly in one of them . In the
real field , word usage, topics, and the m eaning of
term s could not easily be fixed. Furtherm ore, the
corpora have differen t features from those of the
real field data. For exam ple, actual conversations
include m any types of m iscommunications, m is-
understanding , a reso lu tion of the m isunderstand-
ing , and so on. Consequently, corpora built from
such actual conversations can be reflected by m is-
communication or m isunderstanding . Therefore,
it is d ifficult to analyze the real field data by ru les
built from the trad itional corpora.
In th is paper, w e focus on the corpora of the
voice data recorded by the special devices, and to
analyze the voice data to understand nursing ac-
tiv ities. For developing a nursing serv ice support
system , w e checked the corpora and other infor-
m ation such as m edical charts, describe features
of the corpora and their availab ility.
2 Corpora Collection
2.1 E-nightingale Project
In m edical sites, h igher levels of know ledge and
w ider experience are needed for using sophisti-
cated m edical devices and , in turn , for accom -
m odating a diverse aging society. It is said that
insufficien t know ledge and experience both in-
fluence the perform ance of m edical professionals
and causes m alpractice. O n the other hand, by
prom oting the use of w earable sensors and envi-
ronm ent sensors, it is possib le to collect a huge
am ount of data on actions in the real world . A c-
cord ingly, som e attem pts have been m ade to uti-
lize know ledge obtained by analyzing daily ac-
tions in the course of developing sensors for edu-
cation and accident prevention .
If im portan t inform ation could be obtained
by analyzing nursing activ ities autom atically
recorded by w earable com puters, it would be pos-
sib le to autom atically and m ore correctly m ake
nursing reports. Furtherm ore, if the nursing re-
ports could be objectively analyzed , the cost of in-
vestigating nursing practices could be kept down
and more effective survey research on nursing
activ ities could be conducted . Furtherm ore, it
would be possib le to pro tect nurses from m alprac-
tice claim s by distinguish ing betw een nursing ac-
tiv ities during norm al situations and during em er-
gencies.
To explo it th is potential, w e launched the ?E -
nightingale pro ject? to share and construct know l-
edge obtained by analyzing the daily actions and
experiences of nurses. This pro ject aim s to de-
velop the fo llow ing technologies:
1. To observe and understand daily nursing
activities.
2. To build a knowledge base through under-
standing these activities.
3. To utilized the necessary knowledge when
it?s actually needed.
2.2 Obtained Voice Data of Nurses?
Activities
We have recorded various action data by w earable
com puters designed to analyze nursing activ ities
in hospitals(N . Kuwahara, et al, 2003; N . Kuwa-
hara, et al, 2004). Wearable com puters can col-
lect various types of data such as location , pas-
som eter resu lts, and posture inclination . In our
previous research , w e used passom eter, location ,
and cue words to grasp nursing activ ities. We
could understand the nursing activ ities of a partic-
u lar nurse but could not understand the relations
and inform ation flow among staff in a hospital.
D ialogues betw een nurses are very im portan t
in the perform ance of nursing activ ities and m ain-
tain ing staff relations. D ialogues betw een nurses
42
and other people, such as patien ts, doctors, and
patien ts? fam ily, are also im portan t for obtain ing a
variety of conversation behaviors m ore efficien tly.
We believe that w e can understand not only nurs-
ing activ ities but also conversation m echanism s
by developing and analysing corpora of nurses?
d ialogues.
Therefore, w e have conducted experim ents to
collect voice data of nurses talk ing during their
activ ities. O ur reasons and aim s for focusing on
voice data are as fo llow s:
? To more effectively m ake lengthy record-
ings than sensors w ith consum er m odel IC
recorders
? To obtain m any data, such as m edical charts,
in addition to voice data
? To collect and unify term s of nursing activ i-
ties for developing a support system
? To collect natural d ialogue data for clarifica-
tion of conversation m echanism s and infor-
m ation flow s
? To exam ine the appropriate sensors for un-
derstanding voice data
? To comprehend problem s in actual field
record ing
In the fo llow ing section , features of voice data
collected in experim ents are explained in detail.
2.2.1 Voice Data during Clinical Meetings
During nurses? sh ift changes, they hold clin-
ical m eetings to discuss patien t inform ation , in
the process m odify ing and confirm ing th is infor-
m ation . Furtherm ore, if problem s occur in their
work area, they hold brief conferences to so lve
the problem s by discussing their experiences.
We have recorded nurses d ialogues in clin ical
m eetings and brief conferences by using special
devices. A t the sam e tim e, w e have obtained
such inform ation as who participated in the clin i-
cal m eetings and brief conferences.
In the hospital w here w e carried out our exper-
im ents, clin ical m eetings are held in the m orning
and the evening tim e for about 20 m inutes to one
hour. The brief conferences are held at lunch tim e
for about 30 m inutes. Collected data w ere 80 tri-
als for a one-w eek experim ent. The entire record-
ing tim e was about 20 hours. We m ade transcrip-
tions of the collected data. Som e sam ple data are
shown in tab le 1 1
The transcrip tion was m ade by four staff m em -
bers, including an experienced specialist in m ak-
ing transcrip tions, a nurse who had worked in
hospitals for three years or longer, a pharm acist,
and a part-tim e em ployee, and it w as assum ed that
the latter three had no experience working in the
field of transcrip tion .
2.2.2 Event-driven Voice Data
To understand nursing activ ities, a one-day
schedule of nursing activ ities should be recorded
and analyzed . H owever, it is d ifficult to transcribe
all such recorded data. Therefore, w e recorded
the voice data of nursing activ ities along w ith
clues annotated by nurses using the special de-
v ices.
To obtain voice data in hospitals, w e devel-
oped an IC -recorder, a m icrophone w ith an event
button , and an in term ediate contro l box w ith a
buzzer. The event button is used for explicit vo ice
annotation when nurses start or com plete a task .
W hen the button is pushed , the buzzer sounds
once and its sound is recorded , and then nurses
record their tasks at the m om ent by speaking short
sen tences. The buzzer is also set to sound periodi-
cally (every 10 m inutes) to prom pt nurses to m ake
voice input about their ongoing tasks. S im ple
signal processing can extract and classify event-
driven and periodic voice records, as w ell as nurse
call rings.
Event-driven voice data record ing is very use-
1Tim e indicated elapsed tim e from the tim e when the ex-
perim ent starts. N urseID indicates the nurses participating
in the conversation . In th is tab le, there are two nurses in the
conversation . U tterance is the transcrip tion of voice data .
43
Table. 1 : D ialogue Transcrip tion Exam ple
Tim e Nurse ID U tterance
00:57:19 A The drip infusion is still being given , isn?t it? N ot yet?
00:57:20 B Yes. It?s still d ripping now.
00:57:22 A Ah, until w hen?
00:57:24 B Until tom orrow. Until 6 o?clock .
fu l for accurately record ing nursing activ ities. In
addition , th is approach can record nursing activ i-
ties at the desired tim e. A s a resu lt, tim e inform a-
tion can be easily observed , and w e can collect
objective data on nursing activ ities. Therefore,
our approach im proves the efficiency of research
on tim e utilization .
In one departm ent of a hospital, w e have con-
ducted experim ents on collecting data of nurs-
ing work through voice annotations. The nurses
work in three shifts, assigned to prim ary patien ts
of each ward . A ll nurses w ere given instructions
on the usage of our devices. The entire record ing
tim e was about 500 hours. Collected data w ere
gathered from 39 trials for a one-w eek experim ent
involv ing 15 nurses using our devices. We also
m ade transcrip tions of the collected data. Som e
sam ple transcrip tions are shown in Table.2 . The
transcrip tion was also m ade by four staff m em -
bers as m entioned above in 2 .2 .1 .
3 Features of the Corpora
As discussed in the previous sections, w e focus on
dialogue data such as natural conversations col-
lected in daily life or work . We can observe the
fo llow ing features in the corpora.
? People in the conversations com e from vari-
ous levels of social status.
? Conversations are conducted in various
places or situations.
? There are certain relationships or dependen-
cies betw een the curren t conversation and
the previous conversations.
? Conversations on sim ilar topics are repeated .
For exam ple, nurses engage in conversation not
only w ith other nurses but also w ith patien ts, fam -
ilies of patien ts, and doctors. N aturally, they be-
have accord ing to their social ro le . A s a resu lt,
features of conversation w ill be differen t. Exam -
ples of such differences are shown as fo llow s:
? Conversations betw een doctors and nurses
include form al and m any m edical term s.
? Among nurses at m eetings, form al and m any
abbreviated expressions of m edical term s.
? Among nurses, inform al and m any abbrevi-
ated expressions of m edical term s.
? With patien ts, fam ilies of patien ts and
nurses, form al and m any words expressing
m edical term s in sim ple words.
N urses exchange and share inform ation on
their patien ts depending on their work situations.
The conversations are m ade in nurse stations,
beside a patien t?s bed , in a clin ic , and so on.
Som etim es conversation begins from necessity
and other tim es it begin when nurses happen to
encounter.
Inform ation on patien ts should sm ooth ly be
transferred from one shift nurse to the next sh ift
nurse. A s a resu lt, conversations dealing w ith the
sam e or sim ilar m atter should have certain rela-
tionships and dependencies. For exam ple, top ics
related to the sam e patien t and the sam e opera-
tion patterns of a certain disease repeated ly ap-
peared in our corpora. For exam ple, ?to test b lood
sugar levels?, in Table 2 , appeared whenever the
patien ts finished a m eal.
44
Table. 2 : Transcrip tion Exam ple for N ursing A ctiv ities
Tim e U tterance
11:28:11 I?m going to prepare a set of drip infusion for A be-san .
11:32:01 I?ve finished preparing the drip for A be-san .
11:32:04 I?m going to test b lood sugar levels of N aya-san and Kuwahara-san .
11:33:48 I?ve finished testing blood sugar levels of N aya-san and Kuwahara-san .
4 Applicability of the Corpora as
Spoken Language Corpora
In th is section , w e discuss the applicability of the
obtained corpora as spoken language corpora and
a strategy to build a set of onto logies from them .
We have already m anually generated around 30
hours of corpora for event-driven data and 4 hours
of d ialogue corpora at clin ical m eetings.
To understand nursing activ ities from event-
driven data, w e used tags to understand situations.
We assum ed that key inform ation to evaluate a sit-
uation included tim e, p lace, m edication , d isease
and the person?s nam e. Therefore, w e extracted
the person?s nam e, m edication and disease from
our corpora by using a nam ed entity recognition
tool.
N am ed entity recognition is usefu l for extract-
ing such inform ation as the person?s nam e, com -
pany nam e, date, and place nam e. N am ed en-
tity recognition tools have been developed in re-
search on inform ation extraction , m achine trans-
lation , and so on. There are two types of nam ed
entity recognition : ru le-based recognition and
statistics-based recognition . We believe that som e
connections w ith personal nam e, for exam ple ?
??, ??, ?? (M r/M s)?, are determ ined at
som e level, and our target is data that can be ex-
p lo ited to m ake hand-crafted ru les such as m ed-
ical charts, attendance sheets and so on. There-
fore, w e studied how to extract personal nam e,
m edication and disease using a ru le-based nam ed
entity recognition tool. NExT is a w ell-known
tool in Japan for ru le-based nam ed entity recog-
n ition . We used the NExT version 0 .82 (NExT a
Nam ed Entity Extraction Tool, 2002), w hich can
be download from the M ie University w eb site .
The NExT tool u tilizes Chasen version 2 .3 .3 for
m orphological analysis and ipadic version 2 .7 .0
as a dictionary(M orphological A nalysis System
ChaSen, 2003). The dictionary includes m any
m edicine nam es, d iseases, personal nam es, and
place nam es.
4.1 Tags in the Corpora
Next, w e extracted personal nam es, m edication ,
and diseases from the corpora and tagged the cor-
pora to better understand situations. For exam ple,
the W HO tag m eans a speaker, in th is case a nurse
as a subject using our special device, the W HOM
tag m eans a hearer, the PT tag m eans the person
or patien t nam e m entioned , and the PLACE tag
m eans the place where the communication is con-
ducted . The T IM E tag indicates the absolu te tim e
calcu lated from the IC recorder?s elaped tim e and
the experim ent?s start tim e. The M ED tag m eans
m edication , and the D IS tag indicates the disease
nam e. Table 3 show s a sam ple of the corpora.
We m anually extracted the person nam e for
W HO , W HOM , and PT from the transcrip tion
w ith m edical charts. Person nam es w ere also
extracted by a nam ed entity recognition tool to
check the NExT accuracy. A lso , w e evaluated
PLACE by am bience sounds of voice data and
schedule of nursing activ ities. In addition , w e
m anually extracted m edication and disease for
M ED and D IS .
It should be noted that w e are analyzing words
specialized to nursing activ ities in the prim itive
corpora. N ursing term s include daily used term s
for expressing work that supports patien ts? daily
45
Table. 3 : Corpora Exam ple
E lapsed Tim e TIM E PLACE U tterance
11:28:11 18:28:11 Nurse S tation ? W HO=nurseID ? I ?/W HO ??m going to prepare
a set of drip ? MED ? in fusion ?/M ED ? for ? PT ? Abe-san ?/PT ?.
11 :32:01 18:32:01 Nurse S tation ? W HO=nurseID ? I ?/W HO ??ve finished preparing
the drip for ? PT ? Abe-san ?/PT ?.
11 :32:04 18:32:04 Room 401 ? W HO=nurseID ? I ?/W HO ??m going to test b lood sugar
levels of ? PT ? Naya-san ?/PT ? and ? PT ? Kuwahara-san ?/PT ?.
11 :33:48 18:33:48 Room 401 ? W HO=nurseID ? I ?/W HO ??ve finished testing blood sugar
levels of ? PT ? Naya-san ?/PT ? and ? PT ? Kuwahara-san ?/PT ?.
lives as w ell as m edical term s specialized for the
particu lar m edical situation . Furtherm ore, som e
m edicine and disease nam es are differen t from the
expressions used in from dictionaries, since our
corpora include colloquial expressions. M ore-
over, it is d ifficult to tag som e expressions that
have the sam e m eaning .
4.2 Nursing Terms Featured in the Corpora
In th is section , w e describe som e expressions that
express controversial features for tagging .
For instance, in general ????? (sengan)?
m eans ??? (w ashing face),? but if it is narrated
before surgery in ophthalm ology, it m eans ???
(w ashing eye).? ????? (jiritsu-suru)? m eans
?standing walk? if it is narrated in a conversation
am ong nurses, but it m eans ?to earn one?s liv ing
by oneself ? in general, as w hen it is narrated in
a conversation betw een a nurse and a patien t?s
fam ily. Thus som e words have m ultip le m ean-
ings accord ing to the situation . A s a resu lt, som e-
tim es nurses, especially novice nurses, experi-
ence m isunderstanding in their communications.
A nother exam ple is ????? (horyu)?, w hich
m eans ?suspend giv ing m edicine? or ?keep a sting
stung?. Therefore, w e th ink w e w ill be able to
gather m any words that have m ultip le m eanings
when w e check the collected corpora. This w ill
allow us to build or extend the contents of a dic-
tionary of m ultip le-m eaning expressions.
In our studies. w e also observed the fo llow ing
cases:
? multip le expressions
? ?? (sek i)? and ????gaisou?? m ean
tussis and coughing
? ?? (nyou)? and ???? (harun)?, and ?
?????oshikko)??mean urine and
pee
? ??? (tounyou)? and ????? (d i-
abe)? and ?DM ??mean sugar d iabetes
(d iabetic m ellitus)
These types of expressions are used to hide
the real m eaning from patien ts, and they?re
som etim es used because the expression is
curren tly fash ionable.
? abbreviated expressions
? ????an?? ? means am pule
? ????m iri)? m eans m illiliter or m il-
lig ram
? ???? (bun-n i)? m eans half or two
tim es
? ?????? (nobo-aaru)? m eans No-
volin R , which is a m edication for d ia-
betes
These types of expressions seem to be used
for quick communication . In particu lar,
m edications are som etim e shortened in to
shorter words, such as Novolin R into R
only.
These expressions are relatively frequently
used and som etim es seem to cause nursing acci-
dents or incidents due to m iscommunication .
We think w e w ill be able to obtain m any con-
cepts that have m ultip le expressions and abbre-
46
viated expressions by checking the collected cor-
pora. Then w e could build or extend contents of
a m ultip le-expression concept d ictionary and an
abbreviated-expression dictionary.
To develop a support system for nursing ac-
tiv ities, w e should standard ize technical nursing
term s. H owever, there are m any types of term s
used in typical nurses? d ialogues. For exam ple,
nurses uses
? adm ission to a hospital expressed as ?AD?
? ?AD? orig inates from ?adm ission? in En-
glish
? discharge from hospital expressed as ???
? (en to)?
? ???? (en to)? orig inates from entlassen in
G erm an
Furtherm ore, there are m any new m edicines
used in hospitals. It is d ifficult to uniform ly m an-
age these new words. The standard ization of
nursing term s thus has m any problem s.
We think that even am biguous words can be
understood if w e recognize nurses? working sit-
uations by using the inform ation of m any types
of sensors. This would require using a position
sensor to identify nurses? working locations as
w ell as w ho is participating in conversations. We
could supplem ent m issing inform ation and com -
plete or correct am biguous inform ation by refer-
ring to such inform ation from sensors.
4.3 Feature as Spoken Language Corpora
A chronological relationship or dependency m ap
am ong nurses can be accurately obtained by refer-
ring to nursing records and m edical charts. Con-
ventional d ialogue corpora can only offer one-to-
one conversations, perm itting only a sim ple anal-
ysis. In addition , it is easy to m ake a w rong anal-
ysis.
O n the other hand, if w e analyze our corpora
w ith a chronological relationship or dependency
am ong nurses, w e can discover true features of
conversation phenom ena. For instance, person A
exchanges inform ation w ith person B , but person
B m isunderstands person A?s inform ation . Person
B conveys the inform ation to person C . Then C re-
alizes B ?s m isunderstanding and inform s B so that
B can correct the inform ation . Thus w e can obtain
communication patterns betw een m ore than two
persons who do not know each other?s situation .
To utilize the dictionaries obtained from our
corpora and sensor inform ation , w e can build a
set of onto logies for conversations betw een m ul-
tip le persons. In build ing a set of onto logies, the
m echanism of conversations can be clarified , and
a m ethod for finding poin ts of m istakes given am -
biguous expressions can be exam ined .
In th is paper, w e focus on nursing vocabularies
and nursing activ ities. O f course they are sligh tly
differen t from general term s and general situa-
tions, but these corpora and dictionary-build ing
techniques can be applied to general term s and
situations betw een ? spoken language and w rit-
ten language.
In finish ing the transcrip tion of the clin ical
m eetings and event-driven data, w e are build ing
the corpora. H ere w e note that it is d ifficult to tag
M ED and D IS because there are m ultip le expres-
sions and abbreviated expressions. We need to
develop a way to designate standard expressions
from the m ultip le and abbreviated expressions.
5 Conclusion
In th is paper, w e in troduced our E -nightingale
pro ject. We also show ed voice data collection in
a real workplace such as a hospital and discussed
the im portance and potential of generating cor-
pora from this data.
In the next step , all of the collected voice
data w ill be m ade in to corpora, and tags w ill be
m ade to construct know ledge based on experi-
ences from conversation corpora. Furtherm ore,
w e w ill develop m ethods to build corpora from
collected data autom atically. F rom this corpora,
w e w ill develop a system to analyze actual d ia-
47
logues and activ ities in a real nursing situations
by utiliz ing m ulti-sensor inform ation .
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the nurses involved in
th is study for their cooperation in our experim ent.
This research is funded by the N ational Institu te
of Inform ation and Communications Technology.
References
L . T. Kohn, J. M . Corrlgan and M . S . D onaldson .
1999. To Err Is Human:Building a Safer Health
System. The N ational A cadem ic Press, N ov. 1999.
H ealthcare Safety Prom otion N etwork Project.
h ttp ://www.m hlw.go .jp /top ics/2001/0110/tp1030-
1 .h tm l#2-1 . (in Japanese).
Kyoto Text Corpus. h ttp ://www.kc.t.u -tokyo.ac.jp /n l-
resource/corpus-e.h tm l.
K . M aekawa. 2003. Corpus of Spontaneous
Japanese: Its design and evaluation. P roceedings
of the ISCA & IEEE workshop on Spontaneous
Speech Processing and Recognition . SSPR2003.
H . Koiso , N . T suchiya, Y. M abuchi, M . Saito , T.
K agom iya, H . K ikuchi, and K . M aekawa. 2000.
Transcription Criteria for the Corpus of Sponta-
neous Japanese. Special In terest G roup of Sponken
Language Processing . Vol. 34-30 , pp . 173-178. in
Japanese.
M . A raki, T Itoh , T. Kum agai, and M . Ish izaki. 1999.
Proposal of a Standard Utterance-Unit Tagging
Scheme. Transcrip tion of the Japanese Society for
A rtificial In telligence Vol. 14 , N o. 2 , pp . 251-260.
in Japanese.
N . Kuwahara, H . N om a, N . Tetsu tan i, N . H agita , K .
Kogure, and H . Iseki. 2003 Auto-event-recording
for Nursing Operations by Using Wearable Sensors.
In form ation Processing Society of Japan Vol. 44 ,
N o. 11 , pp . 2638-2548. in Japanese.
N . Kuwahara, K . Kogure, N . H agita , and H . Iseki
2004. Ubiquitous and Wearable Sensing for Mon-
itoring Nurses? Activities. Transcrip tion of the
Japanese Society for A ritificial In telligence Proc.
of SC I2004, pp . 281-285.
NExT ? Nam ed Entity Extraction Tool.
h ttp ://www.ai.in fo .m ie-u .ac.jp /n?ex t/next en .h tm l.
ChaSen ? Morphological A nalysis System .
http ://chasen .naist.jp /h ik i/ChaSen/
48
 
		ff