Alternative Phrases and Natural Language Information
Retrieval
Gann Bierner
Division of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
gbierner@cogsci.ed.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper presents a formal analysis for
a large class of words called alternative
markers, which includes other(than),
such(as), and besides. These words
appear frequently enough in dialog to
warrant serious attention, yet present
natural language search engines perform
poorly on queries containing them. I
show that the performance of a search
engine can be improved dramatically by
incorporating an approximation of the
formal analysis that is compatible with
the search engine?s operational seman-
tics. The value of this approach is that as
the operational semantics of natural lan-
guage applications improve, even larger
improvements are possible.
1 Introduction
Consider the following examples discovered in a
corpus of queries submitted to the Electric Knowl-
edge search engine12, the successor of the On
Point natural language search system described in
Cooper (1997). Each consists of a query, a re-
sponse (not shown), and then a follow-up query.
(1) What is the drinking age in Afghanistan?
What is the drinking age in other countries?
(2) Where can I find web browsers for download?
Where can I find other web browsers than
Netscape for download?
(3) Where can I find a list of all the shoe manu-
facturers in the world?
Where can I find shoes made by Buffalino,
such as the Bushwackers?
(4) Where are online auctions indexed?
Are there other auction search engines be-
sides BidFind?
1formerly known as The Electric Monk
2http://www.electricknowledge.com
In each case, particular words are used to con-
strain the space of appropriate answers: e.g.
such (as), other (than), and besides. I call these
words, and others like them, alternative mark-
ers, and alternative markers along with their syn-
tactic argument (e.g. other countries), I call al-
ternative phrases. Alternative phrases that are
closely bound to the noun phrase to which they
refer, like those above, I call connected alterna-
tive phrases (modeled after similar terminology in
Hoeksema (1995)). There are also free alternative
phrases, such as Other than Fido, every dog likes
going for walks, which are not discussed here but
are discussed in depth in Bierner (2001). I have
found queries containing all these forms despite
the fact that no current NLIR system can han-
dle them, either ignoring the alternative phrase
or, worse, treating the queries as if the alternative
marker were absent.
The fact that these phrases define the space of
correct answers makes it absolutely necessary to
correctly interpret them in an IR application. The
user requires countries that are not Afghanistan,
web browsers that are not Netscape, shoes with
similar properties to Bushwackers, and auction
search engines that are not BidFind. Answers that
do not conform are wrong.
Another feature of alternative markers are their
presuppositions. Through these presuppositions,
alternative markers can provide a rich source of
knowledge about the world, as Hearst (1992) has
already recognized. For example, these queries im-
ply that Afghanistan is a country, Netscape is a
web browser, Bushwackers are shoes, and BidFind
is an auction search engine. Anaphoric resolu-
tion can sometimes be critical for these inferences.
In (1), for instance, other countries anaphorically
depends on Afghanistan in the previous query.
While not as obviously important to natural lan-
guage information retrieval, this property of al-
ternative phrases can be used to improve future
queries (see Section 4.1).
The purpose of this paper is, first, to briefly
provide a well-founded semantic analysis for al-
ternative phrases that is amenable to computa-
tion. The main thrust is then to show that a
motivated approximation of this analysis can dra-
matically improve the results of a practical natu-
ral language application?in particular, a natural
language search engine. The value of this two-
step approach is that as the operational semantics
of practical applications are gradually extended,
progressively more extensive approximations can
be transparently incorporated.
2 Previous Work
Work on alternative phrases has previously been
limited to Hearst?s work in connection with knowl-
edge base construction and formal semantics by
Hoeksema and von Fintel. Hearst (1992) demon-
strates cases where pattern matching can be used
to extract knowledge from some constructions
with alternative phrases and gives the patterns in
(5) as examples.
(5) a. such NP as {NP,}* {or|and} NP
b. NP {, NP}* {,} {or|and} other NP
c. NP {,} including {NP,}* {or|and} NP
d. NP {,} especially {NP,}* {or|and} NP
This technique is adequate for the purpose of
acquiring hyponyms from large corpora because
the goal is to take advantage of easily available
information, not to handle a wide variation of lin-
guistic phenomena. Handling a full range of nat-
ural language queries requires a deeper approach.
For example, pattern matching alone cannot ac-
count for anaphoric reference such as in (1) or ex-
amples where discourse knowledge invalidates the
hyponym relation as in (6).
(6) John?s pet dog, Fido, was sick.
So John and the other dogs went for a walk.
In contrast, von Fintel (1993) and
Hoeksema (1995) provide in-depth semantic
analyses of a limited class of alternative phrases;
namely they focus entirely on exceptive phrases
(ways of referring to exceptions) illustrated by the
lexical items but and except (for). The thrust
of their analyses is directed towards how these
words interact with quantifiers to determine the
final set of entities. Since in queries, quantifiers
rarely interact with alternative phrases in the
manner discussed in Hoeksema and von Fintel?s
work, their analyses have not been carried over
into the present work.
3 Analysis
I present a formal approach to alternative phrases
that is wider in scope than the alternatives re-
viewed in Section 2 (although less detailed in some
respects than von Fintel and Hoeksema?s work).
3.1 Presupposition and Assertion
In my analysis of alternative phrases, I make
use of the pragmatic view of presuppositions
explored by Lewis (1979) and Stalnaker (1974)
which, stated loosely, sees them as proposi-
tions that must be true for an utterance to
make sense. (For an overview of presup-
position, see Beaver (1997).) The semantics
of lexical entries are separated into assertion
and presupposition as in Stalnaker (1974) and
Karttunen and Peters (1979). The idea is also
used in Webber et al (1999) to capture anaphoric
(non-structural) links between discourse con-
nectives and material derivable from previous
discourse, and in Stone and Doran (1997) and
Stone and Webber (1998) for natural language
generation.
Lexical entries are written in the following
form, where the semantic parameters scope both
the assertion and presuppositions:
word `
?
??
??
syn : syntactic category
sem : ?...
{
assert : proposition
presup : proposition*
3.2 Alternative Sets
The concept of alternative sets plays an impor-
tant role in the semantics of alternative phrases.
An alternative set is a set of propositions which
differ with respect to how one or more argu-
ments are filled. For example, the alternative
set {like(mary, jen), like(mary, bob), ...} repre-
sents the entities that Mary likes. An early
discussion of these structures is provided in
Karttunen and Peters (1979) where an analysis is
given for the focus particle even. Alternative sets
are also used by Rooth (1985) and Rooth (1992)
to develop a detailed account of focus, particularly
with the focus particle only.
My analysis approximates this set of proper-
ties as a pair consisting of a set of entities (e.g.
{jen, bob, ...}) and the property they share (e.g.
?x.like(mary, x)). My analyses of alternative
phrases uses the relation alts(p, q) which, intu-
itively, specifies that the two sets of entities de-
noted by p and q can be found together in at least
one alternative set in the knowledge base. The
description component of the alternative set (i.e.
the property) need not be known. It is important
to note that although here I focus on unifying such
structures, I also make use of the fact that alts is
a relation that is symmetric and reflexive, but not
transitive.
The alternative phrases I have analyzed fall into
two classes: those that assemble a set from ele-
ments and those that excise a set from a larger
set (as in exceptive phrases). In either case, one
particular set of elements is of interest, the fig-
ure. With assembly words, the figure is either
admitted into the set or combined with a com-
plement to form a set. With excision, the figure
is explicitly excluded from the ground. The figure
may derive from structurally-related constituents
(as with besides), or it may be presupposed (as
with other).
3.3 A Grammar Formalism
I implement my analyses with Combinatory Cat-
egorial Grammar (Steedman, 1996; Steedman,
2000). CCG is a lexicalized grammar that encodes
both the syntactic and semantic properties of a
word in the lexicon. For the analyses presented in
this paper, standard Categorial Grammar suffices.
A minor variation is that rather than having
the basic categories N and NP, I simply use NP.
Noun phrases with and without determiners are
distinguished with the bare feature.
3.4 An Example
In this section, I provide an analysis of one syntac-
tic form of other in order to illustrate the semantic
technique described above. Discussion of alternate
syntactic forms and other alternative markers can
be found in Bierner (2001).
The semantic analysis below defines other as
an excision word that excludes the figure from the
ground. The figure is a free variable that must be
provided from the common ground or discourse,
as is the case in (1).
other `
?
?
?
?
?
syn : NPcomp+,eq?/NPbare+
sem : ?g
?
?
?
assert : ?x.g(x) ? ?f(x)
presup : ?x.f(x)? g(x)
alts(f, ?x.g(x) ? ?f(x))
The analysis allows the derivation in Figure 1.
other countries
NP/NP : ?g?x.g(x) ? ?f(x) NP : country
>
NP : ?x.country(x) ? ?f(x)
presupposition set:
{
?x.f(x)? country(x)
alts(f, ?x.country(x) ? ?f(x))
Figure 1: Derivation for other countries
At this point, the semantics is dependent on the
free variable f , the figure. This is reflected by the
fact that, in isolation, other countries does not
make sense. Although such anaphoric reference is
difficult to resolve, in some constructions we can
identify the figure without bringing full resolution
techniques to bear?as we would have to in (1).
Some of these constructions, as in Figure 2, are
those that contain the word than, whose analysis
is given below.
than `
?
??
??
syn : NP\NPeq?,comp+/NP
sem : ?x?y
{
assert : y
presup : alts(x, y)
The presupposition set in Figure 2 is the union
of the presuppositions of other and than, as
bound during the derivation. The remaining
variable, f , can be determined solely from the
derivation?s presupposition set using the old AI
planning heuristic ?use existing objects? (Sacer-
doti, 1977) to avoid inventing new objects when
others are already available. In particular, we
can unify alts(f, ?x.browser(x) ? ?f(x)) and
alts(netscape, ?x.browser(x)??f(x)), discover-
ing that f , the figure, is netscape. This then
instantiates the remaining presupposition, yield-
ing ?x.netscape(x)? browser(x): i.e. Netscape
is a browser. Unifying logical forms to instantiate
variables in this way follows the ?interpretation as
abduction? paradigm (Hobbs et al, 1993), where
this merging is performed to exploit redundancy
for ?getting a minimal, and hence a best, inter-
pretation.?
Similar analyses in terms of alternative sets have
been developed for many other alternative phrases
in Bierner (2001).
In the next section I show that practical applica-
tions such as natural language search engines can
benefit from appropriate approximations of this
kind of analysis.
4 Natural Language IR
There are a variety of techniques for allowing nat-
ural language queries in information retrieval sys-
tems. The simplest approach is simply to re-
move the ?function words? from the query and
use the remaining words in a standard keyword
search (Alta Vista). In more complex approaches,
pattern matching (the EK search engine), pars-
ing (Ask Jeeves), and machine learning (Zelle and
Mooney, 1993) techniques can support the associ-
ation of more appropriate keywords with a query.
I will concentrate on the pattern matching tech-
nique of the Electric Knowledge search engine and
other web browsers than Netscape
NPcomp+/NP : NPcomp? : (NP\NPcomp+)/NP : NP :
?g?x.g(x) ? ?f(x) browser ?x?y.y netscape
> >
NPcomp+ : ?x.browser(x) ? ?f(x) NP\NPcomp+ : ?y.y
<
NP : ?x.browser(x) ? ?f(x)
presupposition set:
?
?
?
?x.f(x)? browser(x)
alts(f, ?x.browser(x) ? ?f(x))
alts(netscape, ?x.browser(x) ? ?f(x))
Figure 2: Derivation for other web browsers than Netscape
shown how a theory of alternative phrases can
drastically improve results.
4.1 The EK search engine?s Operational
Semantics
The Electric Knowledge search engine uses pat-
tern recognition to transform a natural language
question into a series of increasingly more general
Boolean queries that can be used with standard
back-end retrieval techniques. The question is fil-
tered through a hierarchy of regular expressions,
and hand-crafted rules are used to extract infor-
mation from the question into Boolean expres-
sions. The regular expression matching is aided
by an ISA hierarchy such that generalizations of
keywords can be captured. As mentioned in Sec-
tion 1, the fact that the presuppositions of alterna-
tive phrases encode hyponym information can be
useful in augmenting this aspect of systems like
the EK search engine.
This technique suffers from the fact that, in or-
der to be tractable, this set of patterns is limited
and important information in the query can be
lost. In particular, the Electric Knowledge search
engine does not have patterns that attempt to as-
sociate alternative phrases with appropriate pieces
of boolean query.
To overcome this, an appropriate approxima-
tion of the semantic result of my analysis that is
compatible with the back end search system must
be found. For the Electric Knowledge search en-
gine (similar approaches are certainly possible for
other NLIR systems), a hybrid query has been in-
troduced to account for alternative phrases, which
combines a natural language query with further
restrictions added in a system-specific language.
The syntax is shown in (7).
(7) Query : | : ANSWER NOT NEAR (| word list)
(8) What are some web browsers? : | : ANSWER
NOT NEAR (| netscape)
The natural language query is separated from
the restrictions by the : | : symbol. The restrictions
specify that the answer to the query must not be
near to certain words.
The hybrid query in (8), for example, is a trans-
formation of the original query What are some
other web browsers than Netscape?. The EK search
engine uses the natural language part of the query
to initially locate possible answering documents.
The rest of the query is used when gathering evi-
dence for including a document in the final results.
The EK search engine finds a location in the docu-
ment that should answer the query and then com-
pares it against the criteria appended to the end of
the query. If it does not meet the criteria (that it
not be near the word Netscape), another location
is tried. If there are no more possible answers, the
document is rejected.
This is, of course, not exactly what the
original query meant. However, it is su-
perior to queries like ??browsers?? AND NOT
??netscape?? which rejects all pages containing
Netscape, even if they also contain other browsers.
The evaluation in Section 5 shows that this op-
erational semantics is sufficient to dramatically
improve the results for queries with alternative
phrases.
4.2 The Algorithm
Instead of using the EK search engine?s pattern
matching on the initial question, the algorithm
does a post-analysis of the syntactic structure pro-
duced by parsing the question with my analysis.
The algorithm recursively descends the deriva-
tion, searching for semantic forms that result from
alternative phrases. The information from the al-
ternative phrase is removed and then appended to
the end of the hybrid query in a different form. In
Figure 2, for example, the information other than
Netscape is removed, leaving only web browsers,
to form the hybrid query in (8).
Physics EE Total
Stud Tut Stud Tut
in addition to 0 0 0 3 3
besides 1 3 0 2 6
another 56 124 10 38 228
especially 0 1 0 0 1
except 0 17 1 1 19
other 107 484 36 59 686
in particular 0 6 0 0 6
such 2 18 3 10 33
unlike 0 0 0 1 1
Total 166 653 50 114 983
Alternative Phrases per Dialog
Dialogs 203 203 66 66 269
AP/dialog 0.82 3.22 0.76 1.73 3.65
Alternative Phrases in Queries per Dialog
Query APs 51 261 16 86 414
per dialog 0.25 1.29 0.24 1.3 1.54
Table 1: Frequency of Alternative Phrases in Di-
alog
5 Evaluation
5.1 Frequency of Alternative Phrases
First, it is useful to determine how many queries
contain alternative phrases in order to judge how
large a problem this really is. Unfortunately, this
is complicated by the fact that users, in general,
know that such constructions are not understood
by search engines, so they avoid them. In fact,
even in NLIR systems, users often use keywords
even though doing so performs worse than asking
natural language questions. They do this because
they do not trust the system. Work will be neces-
sary to improve users? awareness of NL capabili-
ties through advertising and by implementing new
user interfaces. Work will also be needed to take
more account of the fact that search is often an
iterative and even interactive process. As noted
by Lewis and Sparck-Jones (1996), the results of
large-scale document-retrieval competitions such
as the Text Retrieval Conference (TREC, 2000) do
not necessarily reflect the experience many users
have with retrieval systems.
In the meantime, I have attempted to find a
baseline for this number by considering two cor-
pora of human/human dialogs. The corpora are
both from tutorial situations where a mentor helps
a student through problems in the subject of
Physics for one corpus (VanLehn et al, 1998; Van-
Lehn et al, in press), and Basic Electricity and
Electronics (Rose et al, 1999), for the other. Tu-
toring dialogs are an ideal place to look for data
relevant to NLIR because they consist entirely of
one party attempting to elicit information from
the other. In some cases, it is the tutor eliciting
information from the student, and in others it is
the other way around.
Table 1 shows the frequencies of some alterna-
tive phrases. A more illuminating statistic is how
often alternative phrases appear in a single dialog.
I consider a dialog to be a single session between
the student and tutor where the discussion of each
problem is considered a separate session. The ta-
ble shows that in 269 total dialogs, each dialog
contained, on average, 3.65 alternative phrases. If
one only considers alternative phrases that occur
in the context of a question, there are, on average,
1.54 alternative phrases per dialog. I consider an
alternative phrase to be in a question context if it
is in the same dialog turn as a question. Because
tutors ask questions in order to lead the student to
the answer, it is perhaps better to consider just the
student data, where a quarter of the dialogs con-
tained question contexts with alternative phrases.
This data is not meant to be considered a rig-
orous result, but it is a strong indication that any
query-answering system is likely to confront an al-
ternative phrase during the course of interacting
with a user. Furthermore, the data shows that
during the course of the interaction it will be ap-
propriate for the system to respond using an al-
ternative phrase, which is important when con-
sidering more responsive search engines than are
available today.
It is also interesting to note that a wide vari-
ety of alternative phrases occur in this data. (9)
contains some examples. Because excision words,
especially other, are by far the most frequent, I
have only considered them in the evaluation pre-
sented here.
(9) a. The battery is the green cylinder
right? I don?t see anything negative
other than #5.
b. And what do you have in addition to
voltage?
c. Are there any other forces on that
knob besides that one you?ve labeled
W1?
5.2 Potential Improvement
Of interest is the potential for improving various
search engines through a better way of treating
alternative phrases. To start with, given a set of
queries containing alternative phrases, it is impor-
tant to see how well these systems perform with-
out enhancement. Table 2 shows the performance
of Alta Vista, Ask Jeeves, and the EK search en-
gine on eight excision examples taken from the
AV Jeeves Monk
Cancer 2/9, 6 2/5, 3 2/3, 0
BidFind 2/7, 5 1/6, 0 0/0, 0
Jobs 2/9, 0 2/5, 0 3/9, 6
Warts 0/9, 6 1/4, 2 0/1, 1
Drinking 4/10, 0 0/5, 1 0/2, 0
Browsers 2/8, 6 3/5, 2 0/9, 8
Witches 0/10, 10 0/5, 4 0/0, 0
Hondo 0/7, 6 1/6, 3 0/0, 0
Avr. Precision 17% 25% 20%
Avr. % false
positives due to
searching for the
figure
67% 53% 58%
Table 2: Potential Improvement for NLIR Systems
corpus of EK search engine queries. For a data
entry ?x/y, z?, y is the total number of returned
documents and x are those which contain an an-
swer to the query. z are the number of answers
that are wrong because they are about the subject
that was explicitly being excluded in the query.
As the data shows, none of the search engines
fare particularly well. The precision for all three
is around 20%. That is, only about one in five of
the responses contain an answer to the query. Fur-
thermore, from a half to two thirds of the incorrect
responses were specifically about the subject the
query wanted to exclude, displaying little or no
understanding of excision alternative phrases.
The point is not to draw any conclusions about
the relative merits of the search engines from this
test. Rather, it is that each NLIR system shows
room for improvement. Since I will demonstrate
that improvement only for the Electric Knowledge
search engine, next, this shows that that improve-
ment is not due to exceptionally bad prior perfor-
mance by the EK search engine.
5.3 Enhancing the EK search engine
Table 3 shows the results of asking the EK search
engine questions in three different forms: without
an alternative phrase, with an alternative phrase
that has not been translated, and with the alterna-
tive phrase translated as described in Section 4.2.
The first row of the table, for instance, refers to
the questions in (10). The remaining sentences
can be found in Bierner (2001). Although an im-
plementation exists that is capable of performing
the translation in Section 4.2, this was done by
hand for this evaluation to abstract away from
parsing issues.
(10) What are some works by Edgar Allan Poe?
What are some works by Edgar Allan Poe
other than the Raven?
What are some works by Edgar Allan Poe?
: | : ANSWER NOT NEAR (| raven)
Unfortunately, at the time of this evaluation,
Electric Knowledge had taken down their public
portal in favor of providing search for the web
pages of specific clients. This means that the large
index used to process the queries in Table 2 was
no longer available, and I therefore used different
indices and different queries for this evaluation.
I used indices of pages about American history
and literature?each about 11,000 pages. These
new, more specialized, indices have the benefit
of abstracting this evaluation away from coverage
issues (explaining the differences in precision be-
tween Table 2 and Table 3).
I created the questions in two ways. For sev-
eral, I began by asking a question without an
alternative phrase. I then added an alterna-
tive phrase in order to remove some responses
I was not interested in. For example, when
I asked Who are the romantic poets?, all re-
sponses were about female romantic poets. I
therefore used the query Who are the romantic
poets not including women? in the evaluation.
Some queries were made without first trying the
non-alternative phrase version: What are some
epics besides Beowulf?, for example. This
variation reflects the fact that it is unclear which is
more common, excluding clutter from a set of re-
sponses or a priori excluding cases that the ques-
tioner is not interested in. The queries also vary in
their syntactic structure, information requested,
and alternative phrase used. The purpose of vary-
ing the queries in these ways is to ensure that the
results do not simply reflect a quirk in the EK
search engine?s implementation.
For each query, Table 3 shows total, the number
of documents returned; good, the number of true
positives; and top 5, the number of true positives
in the top five returned documents. A true pos-
itive was given to a document if it contained an
answer to the question, and half a point was given
to a document that contained an obvious link to
a document with an answer to the question. Pre-
cision is computed for all documents and for the
top five. It is important to note that the scores
for the queries without alternative phrases are still
computed with respect to the alternative phrase.
That is, documents only about the ?Raven? are
considered false positives. In this way, we can view
these scores as a baseline?what would have hap-
pened had the system simply removed the alter-
native phrase. This should be taken with a grain
Baseline Original Query Hybrid
Tot Good Top 5 Tot Good Top 5 Tot Good Top 5
Poe 12 6.5 3 10 0.5 0.5 10 5.5 2.5
Romantics 10 0 0 15 0 0 10 3 3
Witch Hunts 10 8 3 14 2 1 10 8 5
US Wars 15 12 2 0 0 0 16 13 4
Sonnets 15 10 5 10 2 0 10 8 4
Presidents 15 2 2 15 0 0 15 2 2
Epics 10 7 4 10 5 3 10 7 4
Dec of Ind 10 2 0 0 0 0 10 5.5 2
Avr. Precision 48% 47.5% 14.9% 15% 58% 66.3%
Table 3: Evaluation of Improvement for NLIR Systems
of salt because, in many cases, I chose the query
because there were documents to remove (as in
the Romantics example). However, a concern was
that the transformed query would cause numerous
false negatives. This is not the case as seen by the
fact that the precision of the transformed query is
not lower than the baseline. In fact, in no exam-
ple was the precision less than the baseline, and
at worse, the precision remained the same.
Performance on questions containing alterna-
tive phrases was quite poor, with an average of
15% precision. This is significantly worse than
the transformed query, and even the baseline. The
performance drop is due to the fact that the com-
plex syntax of the query confuses the EK search
engine?s analysis. The EK search engine is forced
to reduce the query to a simple set of keywords in-
cluding the figure, which we were trying to avoid.
Thus as predicted in the discussion of poten-
tial improvement, not accounting for alternative
phrases can greatly increase the number of false
positives containing the figure (FPF), the very
thing the query is attempting to exclude. Table 4
shows that in the baseline case, where there is no
alternative phrase, on average for 28% of the re-
turned documents the only answer was the one we
wanted to exclude. Adding the alternative phrase
has the opposite of the intended effect as the per-
centage of FPFs increases to 44% for reasons de-
scribed above. Transforming the query, on the
other hand, causes the desired effect, more than
halving the percentage of FPFs of the baseline.
6 Conclusions
In this paper, I briefly presented a formal anal-
ysis for a large class of words called alterna-
tive markers. The analysis elegantly captures
the desired phenomena by separating assertion
and presupposition and making use of alternative
phrases and the ?use existing objects? heuristic.
A simple pattern matching approach would fail to
capture examples requiring knowledge and those
with anaphora. Furthermore, sophisticated noun
phrase detection would be required for many ex-
amples.
I then show that alternative phrases appear fre-
quently enough in dialog to warrant serious atten-
tion, yet present natural language search engines
perform poorly on queries containing alternative
phrases. However, by approximating my seman-
tic analysis into a form understood by a natural
language search engine, I showed that the perfor-
mance of that search engine improved dramati-
cally. As the operational semantics of natural lan-
guage applications improves, even larger improve-
ments are possible.
Further improvement is also possible by ap-
proaching the problem from the other direction.
Alternative phrases can be used to help charac-
terize documents beyond the simple word indices
used in many current systems. This richer data
can be used in the retrieval process to more effec-
tively identify appropriate documents.
References
David Beaver. 1997. Presupposition. In Johan
van Benthem and Alice ter Meulen, editors,
Handbook of Logic and Language, pages 939?
1008. North Holland, Amsterdam.
Gann Bierner. 2001. Alternative phrases: theoret-
ical analysis and practical applications. Ph.D.
thesis, Division of Informatics, University of Ed-
inburgh.
Edwin Cooper. 1997. The On Point sys-
tem: A natural language search engine for the
world wide web. Master?s thesis, University of
Chicago.
Marti Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hy-
ponyms from large text corpora. In Proceed-
ings of the Fourteenth International Conference
Baseline Original Query Hybrid
FPF FPF/Tot FPF FPF/Tot FPF FPF/Tot
Poe 1 .08 1 .1 1 .1
Romantics 8 .8 15 1 2 .2
Witch Hunts 2 .2 1 .07 0 0
US Wars 3 .2 3 .19
Sonnets 5 .33 8 .8 2 .2
Presidents 5 .33 10 .67 2 .13
Epics 0 0 0 0 0 0
Dec of Ind 3 .3 2 .2
28.1% 44% 12.8%
Table 4: False Positives Containing Figure
on Computational Linguistics, Nantes, France,
July.
Jerry R. Hobbs, Mark E. Stickel, Douglas E. Ap-
pelt, and P. Martin. 1993. Interpretation as ab-
duction. Artificial Intelligence, 63(1?2):69?142,
October.
Jacob Hoeksema. 1995. The semantics of ex-
ception phrases. In Jaap van der Does and
Jan van Eijck, editors, Quantifiers, Logic, and
Language, chapter 6, pages 145?177. Cambridge
University Press.
Lauri Karttunen and Stanley Peters. 1979. Con-
ventional implicature. In Choon-Kyu Oh and
David Dinneen, editors, Syntax and Semantics
11: Presupposition. New York, Academic Press.
David Lewis and Karen Sparck-Jones. 1996. Nat-
ural language processing for information re-
trieval. In Communications of the ACM, vol-
ume 39, pages 92?101, January.
David Lewis. 1979. Scorekeeping in a language
game. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 8:339?
359.
Mats Rooth. 1985. Association with Focus. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Mats Rooth. 1992. A theory of focus interpreta-
tion. Natural Language Semantics, 1:75?116.
C. P. Rose, B. Di Eugenio, and J. D. Moore. 1999.
A dialogue based tutoring system for basic elec-
tricity and electronics. In Proceedings of AI in
Education.
Earl Sacerdoti. 1977. A Structure for Plans
and Behavior. Elsevier/North-Holland, Ams-
terdam.
Robert Stalnaker. 1974. Pragmatic presupposi-
tions. Semantics and Philosophy, pages 129?
214.
Mark Steedman. 1996. Surface Structure and In-
terpretation. MIT Press, Cambridge Mass. Lin-
guistic Inquiry Monograph, 30.
Mark Steedman. 2000. The Syntactic Process.
The MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
Matthew Stone and Christine Doran. 1997. Sen-
tence planning as description using tree adjoin-
ing grammar. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 8th Conference of the Eu-
ropean Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Madrid, July, pages 198?205.
Matthew Stone and Bonnie Webber. 1998. Tex-
tual economy through close coupling of syntax
and semantics. In International Workshop on
Natural Language Generation, pages 178?187,
Niagara-on-the-Lake, Canada, August.
TREC. 2000. http://trec.nist.gov/.
K. VanLehn, S. Siler, C. Murray, and W.B.
Baggett. 1998. What makes a tutorial event ef-
fective? In M. A. Gernsbacher and S. Derry, ed-
itors, Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Con-
ference of the Cognitive Science Society, pages
1084?1089, Hillsdale, NJ.
K. VanLehn, S. Siler, C. Murray, T. Yamauchi,
and W.B. Baggett. in press. Human tutoring:
Why do only some events cause learning? Cog-
nition and Instruction.
Kai von Fintel. 1993. Exceptive constructions.
Natural Language Semantics, 1(2):123?148.
Bonnie Webber, Alistair Knott, Matthew Stone,
and Aravind Joshi. 1999. Discourse relations:
A structural and presuppositional account using
lexicalised tag. In Proceedings of the 37th Con-
ference of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 41?48, College Park, MD.
John M. Zelle and Raymond J. Mooney. 1993.
Learning semantic grammars with constructive
inductive logic programming. In Proceedings of
the 11th National Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence, pages 817?823, Menlo Park, CA, USA.
AAAI Press.
