Proceedings of the Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of Computational Language Acquisition, pages 65?72,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007 c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Rethinking the syntactic burst in young children 
Christophe Parisse 
INSERM-Modyco 
Paris X Nanterr
CNR
@vjf
 
 
es. The procedure is 
tested using the large Manchester corpus in 
t database. The results 
constraints on the grammar of the human 
languages and the human mind (Pinker, 1984; 
Wexler, 1982). This report uses an iterative 
procedure to demonstrate that what appears to be 
near magical could result mostly from mechanisms 
that do not require the existence of innate 
principles of grammar, as they are based on 
children?s inherent capacities for perception, 
7; 
Saffran, Johnson, Aslin, & Newport, 1999). The 
mmar 
 
paci-
tie
tion (words produced in part 1), along with other 
words nev ever produced 
at part 1), a that children use 
to spe  from chil-
dren?s input; this ated by the children?s 
knowledge of isolated words. These multi-word 
utteran od by chil-
e University 
S 
.cnrs.fr 
showed that young children grammatical 
capabilities (before age three) could be the 
results of simple mechanisms and that 
complex linguistic mastery does not need 
to be available so early in the course of lan-
guage development. 
1 Introduction 
Between the ages of two and three, most children 
go through a syntactic burst. In other words, they 
progress from uttering one word at a time to 
constructing utterances with a mean length of more 
than three words, and frequently longer, and they 
do this without any negative evidence and with 
limited input data (Ritchie & Bhatia, 1999). This 
represents quite a mystery, which is often 
explained by postulating the existence of innate 
memory and association (Jusczyk & Hohne, 199
parisse
Abstract 
A testing procedure is proposed to re-
evaluate the syntactic burst in children over 
age two. The experimentation is based on 
the children?s capacities in perception, 
memory, association and cognition, and 
does not presuppose any specific innate 
grammatical capaciti
he CHILDES 
acquisition of complex ?across the board? gra
does not appear to be necessary to explain 
children?s behavior before age three or more. At 
that age, much more complex and structured input 
data will be available to children, thereby 
increasing their learning capacities and reducing 
the limitations on knowledge they may acquire. 
2 A testing procedure in three parts 
The testing procedure for grammatical 
development that will be implemented in this 
report is made of three parts.
The goal of the first and the second part is to de-
termine the basic elements that children use to con-
struct language. Two assumptions are made about 
young children?s perceptive and mnemonic ca
s: anything they have once produced, they can 
produce again; and, when their language exactly 
reproduces an adult?s, this can be explained as a 
simple copy of their input.  
Part 1: All single-word utterances produced by 
children are meaningful to them; they are directly 
derived from adults? output. They are the basic 
elements that children use to build language. 
Part 2: Children?s multi-word utterances con-
taining only one word already produced in isola-
er produced in isolation (n
re also basic elements 
ak. They are also directly derived
 is facilit
ces are manipulated and understo
65
dren as single blocks, just as isolated words are. 
Th
 account for the children?s multiword utter-
an
events them from producing aberrant 
ut
f unfinished 
ut
e been carried out in order to answer this 
question. 
3 
 token (SD = 9,653) and 1,913 in type (SD 
= 
nt 
co
, 
L-
ed from the adult?s output (list L-adult 
ab
 do not include ut-
te
ey may also be called frozen forms. 
The goal of the third part is to check whether the 
basic elements identified in part 1 and 2 are suffi-
cient to
ces. 
Part 3: Children link utterances produced at 
parts 1 and 2 to produce multi-word utterances 
with more than one word already produced in iso-
lation (words produced in part 1). They do this us-
ing a simple concatenation mechanism and the fact 
that the utterances they create have a pertinent 
meaning pr
terances. 
Since the productions of children and their adult 
partners are easy to record, it is possible to test 
whether the testing procedure has sufficient gen-
erative power to account for all children?s produc-
tions. However, some points could make such a 
demonstration more difficult than it appears. First 
of all, the assumption made in part 1 is not always 
true, as it is quite possible for a child to reproduce 
any sequence of sounds while playing with lan-
guage. This uncertainty about part 1 is only impor-
tant in conjunction with part 2, as isolated words 
are the key used to parse the elements of part 2. To 
decide that a word has meaning in isolation for a 
child, it has been assumed that it must first have 
meaning in isolation for an adult. Words in the 
categories of determiner and auxiliary produced in 
isolation have been considered as not having 
meaning in isolation and have therefore been re-
moved from the elements gathered at part 1. 
Analysis of language data demonstrated that this 
assumption is quite reasonable, as the use of these 
words in isolation is often the result o
terances, with incomplete prosody.  
Measuring the generative power of the testing 
procedure implies evaluating the accuracy of the 
assumptions made in parts 1, 2 and 3. These as-
sumptions are quite easy to accept for very young 
children, at the time of the first multi-word utter-
ances, i.e. before age two. The question is: to what 
extent is this true and until what age? Two experi-
ments hav
Experiment 1 
The experiment 1 used a corpus extracted from 
the CHILDES database (MacWhinney, 2000). It is 
referred to as the Manchester corpus (Theakston, 
Lieven, Pine, & Rowland, 1999) and consists of 
recordings of 12 children from the age of 1;10 to 
2;9. Their mean length of utterance varies from 1.5 
to 2.9 words. Each child was seen 34 times and 
each recording lasted one hour. This results in a 
total production of 537,811 words in token and 
7,840 in type. For each child, the average is 44,817 
words in
372). 
The testing procedure was run in three steps in 
an iterative way. Each step from the experime
rresponds to one of the parts described above. 
Step 1: For each transcript, the child?s single-
word utterances are extracted and added to a cumu-
lative list of words uttered in isolation, referred to 
as L1. It is possible to measure at this point 
whether the words on L1 can be derived from the 
adult?s output. In order to do this, a cumulative list
adult, of all adult utterances is also maintained. 
Step 2: For each multi-word utterance in the 
transcript, the number of words previously uttered 
in isolation is computed using list L1. Multi-word 
utterances with only one word uttered in isolation 
are added to a list called L2. It is possible to meas-
ure at this point whether the utterances on L2 can 
be deriv
ove). 
Step 3: the remaining utterances (list L3), which 
contain more than one word previously uttered in 
isolation, are used to test the final step of the algo-
rithm. The test consists in trying to reconstruct 
these utterances using a catenation of the utter-
ances from lists L1 and L2 only. Two measure-
ments can be obtained: the percentage of utter-
ances on list L3 that can be fully reconstructed (re-
ferred to below as the ?percentage of exact recon-
struction?) and the percentage of words in the ut-
terances on list L3 that contribute to a reconstruc-
tion (referred to below as the ?percentage of recon-
struction covering?). For example, for the utterance 
?The boy has gone to school?, if L1 and L2 contain 
?the boy? and ?has gone? but not ?to school?, only 
?the boy has gone? can be reconstructed, thus lead-
ing to a percentage of reconstruction covering of 
66%. Thus, the percentage of exact reconstruction 
is the percentage of utterances with a 100% recon-
struction covering. The percentages of list L3 that 
are reconstructed or recovered
rances from L1 and L2 lists. 
66
The testing procedure is iterative because it is 
performed in turn for each of the transcripts of the 
corpus. List L1, L2 and L-adult are cumulative, 
which means that the list obtained with transcript 1 
are used as a starting point for the analysis of tran-
script 2, and so on. This presupposes that children 
ca
ercentage of elements of L2 present in adult 
t does not evolve much, 
varying between 6 and 8.  
n reuse data they heard only once a long time 
after they heard it. 
In Step 1 it was found that the percentage of 
words on L1 present in adult speech has a mean 
value of 91% (SD = 0.03). Step 2 revealed that the 
speech has a mean value of 67% (SD = 0.05). 
These two results are stable across ages?even 
though lists L1, L2 and L-adult are growing con-
tinuously. After two transcripts, for all 12 children, 
lists L1 + L2 represent 11,979 words in token and 
L-adult contains 82,255 words in token. After 17 
transcripts, these totals are 89,479 and 688,802, 
respectively. After 34 transcripts, they total 
167,149 and 1,370,565. The ratio comparing the 
size of L1 + L2 and L-adul
p
 
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Children's age
All corpora
Mean % per child
'+1' SD
'-1' SD
1;10 2;9
 
igure 1: Percentage of utterances exactly reconstructed F
 
70%
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
100%
Children's age
All corpora
Mean % per child
'+1' SD
'-1' SD
1;10 2;9
 
igure 2: Percentage of reconstruction covering in all utterances 
 
F
67
The results for Step 3 are presented in Figures 1 
and 2. Each point in the series corresponds to the 
nth iteration performed with the nth transcript. The 
mean value is the mean of the percentage for all 
children considered as individuals (reconstruction 
between a child?s corpus and his/her parents? 
corpus only). The algorithm is also applied to all 
corpora: for each point in the series of recordings, 
the 12 files corresponding to 12 children are 
gathered into a single file used to run the nth 
iteration of the algorithm. Percentages for all 
corpora are shown with a bold line. The 
percentages are clearly higher for the aggregated 
corpora, although the number of unknown 
utterances (list L3) increased more than the 
number of known utterances (lists L1 and L2). 
After two transcripts, there are half as many 
elements in list L3 as in L1 + L2. But after 17 
transcripts, L3 is 42% larger than L1 + L2, and 
after 34 transcripts, it is 127% larger. As children 
grow older, there is a decrease in the scores for 
exact reconstruction and reconstruction covering. 
This decrease is greater in individuals than for the 
children as a group, which suggests a size effect. 
4 Experiment 2 
The second experiment uses the same corpus and 
reproduces the same tests but assumes that children 
have knowledge of the syntactic categories Noun 
and Verb. The conditions of step 2 and step 3 are 
more easily fulfilled if the children have a certain 
amount of syntactic class knowledge. As described 
by Maratsos and Chalkley (1980), it is possible for 
children to learn syntactic classes from the con-
texts in which words occur. However, knowledge 
of part of speech is unlikely in very young children 
on the basis of syntactic distribution. Semantic 
knowledge can also help to construct syntactic 
knowledge (Bloom, 1999) for classes such as 
common nouns, proper nouns and verbs, and per-
haps also adjectives and adverbs. To simulate the 
fact that children are able to construct the classes 
of common nouns, proper nouns and non-auxiliary 
verbs, it suffices to substitute every occurrence of 
common or proper nouns in the Manchester corpus 
by the symbol ?noun? and every occurrence of non-
auxiliary verbs by the symbol ?verb?. This is easy 
to realize because the Manchester corpus has been 
fully tagged for part of speech, as described in the 
MOR section of the CHILDES manual 
(MacWhinney, 2000). The result is that list L1 now 
includes all nouns, all verbs plus all words occur-
ring in isolation, as in the first experiment. In list 
L2, in utterances that include a word from the 
categories Noun or Verb, this word is substituted 
by the symbol ?noun? or ?verb?. These utterances 
now form rule-like productive patterns known as 
formulaic frames (Peters, 1995) or slot-and-frame 
structures (Lieven, Pine, & Baldwin, 1997) ? for 
example, ?my + NOUN?. 
When we reproduce the first experiment under 
these conditions, the new results obtained at steps 
2 and 3 should be better, in the sense that they 
should correspond more closely to the adult input, 
and should hold up longer on the age scale.  
The results for Step 1 and Step 2 are indeed bet-
ter than before. The percentage of utterances on L2 
present in adult speech has a mean value of 91% 
(SD = 0.02). 
The results for Step 3 are presented in Figure 3 
(for exact reconstruction) and Figure 4 (for recon-
struction covering). In each of these figures, two 
results are presented for the whole Manchester 
corpus: one assuming no category knowledge, and 
one assuming the knowledge of the three catego-
ries proper noun, common noun and verb. The per-
centages of reconstruction become markedly 
higher, as any combination that contains some of 
three categories proper noun, common noun and 
verb is known for all occurrences of words from 
these categories. The mean for exact reconstruction 
with ?no category? knowledge is 67% (SD = 5.7) 
and 87% (SD = 2.0) for reconstruction covering. 
These values increase to 83% (SD = 5.2) and 95% 
(SD = 2.6) for ?noun and verb? knowledge. 
 
 
68
70%
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
100%
Children's age
No category
Noun & Verb
2;91;10
 
Figure 3: Percentage of utterances exactly reconstructed, depending on the degree of knowledge of noun 
and verb categories 
 
85%
90%
95%
100%
Children's age
No category
Noun & Verb
1;10 2;9
 
Figure 4: Percentage of reconstruction covering in all utterances, depending on the degree of knowledge 
of noun and verb categories 
 
5 Experiment 3 
A limit of experiments 1 and 2 is that nothing indi-
cates how long the three-step mechanisms would 
remain efficient and appropriate. We supposed that 
these mechanisms would remain operational at an 
older age. This can be checked using other material 
from the CHILDES database with recordings 
spanning a longer period. The corpus chosen for 
the test is Brown?s (1973) Sarah corpus, which 
ranges from age 2;3 to age 5;1; with its 139 differ-
ent transcripts, it follows the development of the 
child?s language quite well and is well suited for 
the purposes of this study, which requires lengthy 
corpora. The mean length of utterance varies from 
1.47 to 4.85 words. This results in a total produc-
tion of 99,918 words in token and 3,990 in type. 
Step 1 found the percentage of words on L1 pre-
sent in adult speech to have a mean value of 77% 
(SD = 14.5). Step 2 revealed that the percentage of 
elements of L2 present in adult speech had a mean 
value of 38% (SD = 11.5). These two results are 
69
stable across ages. With the assumption of a 
knowledge of the Noun and Verb categories, re-
sults for Step 1 and 2 are, respectively, 83% (SD = 
13.8) and 55% (SD = 16.6). 
The results for Step 3 are presented in Figure 5 
(for exact reconstruction) and Figure 6 (for recon-
struction covering). In each of these figures, two 
results are presented: one assuming no category 
knowledge and one assuming knowledge of the 
three categories Proper Noun, Common Noun and 
Verb. The mean for exact reconstruction with ?no 
category? knowledge is 54% (SD = 17.6) and 84% 
(SD = 6.6) for reconstruction covering. These val-
ues increase 72% (SD = 11.9) and 93% (SD = 4.0) 
for ?Noun and Verb? knowledge. 
 
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Children's age
No category
Noun & Verb
2;3 5;1
 
Figure 5: Percentage of utterances in the Sarah corpus exactly reconstructed, depending on the degree of 
knowledge of vocabulary and syntactic categories 
 
70%
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
100%
Children's age
No category
Noun & Verb
2;3 5;1
 
Figure 6: Percentage of reconstruction covering in all utterances in the Sarah corpus, depending on the 
degree of knowledge of vocabulary and syntactic categories 
 
70
The average percentages of reconstruction are 
lower for the Sarah corpus than for the Manchester 
corpus. Comparing Figures 3 and 6 and Figures 4 
and 7, one can see that there is a drop in the recon-
struction performances in the third year. The per-
centages for Sarah in her second year were as high 
as those for the Manchester corpus children. Part 
of this drop in performance may be attributed to 
the smaller corpus. Indeed, comparing Figures 1 
and 3 and Figures 2 and 4, it appears that the drop 
in performance that became visible when single 
child corpora were used was not in evidence when 
all the corpora were amalgamated into one big cor-
pus. It is also possible that the drop in performance 
found in the Sarah corpus reflects a progressive 
decrease in the systematic use of a simple concate-
nation procedure by the child. 
6 Discussion 
The testing procedure does not achieve a full 100% 
reconstruction in the test conditions described 
above, where the database consists of only 34 one-
hour recordings for each of the 12 children in the 
corpus. This corresponds globally to a pseudo-
corpus of 408 hours, which amounts to 8 to 10 
weeks of speech. With a larger corpus, the results 
would probably be better, as indicated by the 
increase in percentage of recovery when one 
moves from children in isolation to children as a 
group (see Figures 1 and 2). In addition, there are 
bound to be words that children utter for the first 
time in multi-word utterances even though they 
could have been produced as isolated utterances. 
The percentage of reconstruction, however, is still 
quite high, as was the case for results obtained 
using a similar methodology with Hungarian 
children (MacWhinney, 1975). With the 
assumption of a benefit from the use of the Noun 
and Verb categories, which somewhat circumvents 
the limited size of the corpus, the results are very 
high. 
A problem with the second experiment is that it 
is not sure that children can have a knowledge of 
part of speech (even very general part of speech 
such as noun and verb) with semantic knowledge 
only. However, the experiment 2 is interesting as it 
can be viewed as a way to extend artificially a lim-
ited corpus. Instead of saying that children have 
the knowledge of part of speech, we propose that 
noun and verb as so common in adult speech that 
an extended corpus will contain all basic utterances 
with a single content word and the appropriate 
grammatical context. In other words, list L2 will 
contain all the most basic syntactic constructions. 
Although this will not be the case in reality, it is 
indeed possible that a full corpus covering all ut-
terances produced by adults will contains a very 
large number of L2 structures. In this way, exper-
irment 2 provides a measure of the upper limit that 
can be reached by the crude mechanism presented 
in this article (L3 constructions). 
The testing procedure does not cover all lan-
guage acquisition processes before the age of three. 
Its rather crude mechanisms would, on their own, 
produce many aberrant utterances if they were not 
regulated by other mechanisms. The first of these 
regulatory mechanisms is semantics, as children 
produce language that, for them, makes sense. 
They will articulate thoughts with two or three 
elements that complement each other logically and 
thus create utterances interpretable by adults. 
Strange utterances may be produced on occasion 
but none will sound alien. Secondly, even though 
children sometimes join words or groups of words 
randomly when very young, they soon start to fol-
low a systematic order probably copied from 
adults? utterances (Sinclair & Bronckart, 1972). To 
do this, they merely have to concentrate on the 
words or groups of words that they already master, 
having previously uttered them as single words. 
Indeed, form-function mapping is easier with sin-
gle-word utterances than with multi-word utter-
ances and this helps to manipulate single-word 
forms consciously. Thus, single-word utterances 
are better candidates than most to become the first 
elements in a combinatorial system and to undergo 
representational redescription (Karmiloff-Smith, 
1992). Their semantic values allow one to perform 
semantic combinations. By the age of two, associa-
tions words or frozen forms may be sufficient to 
allow children to produce and control language. 
The fact that children can learn to produce com-
plex speech patterns quickly without complex 
grammatical knowledge casts a whole new light on 
the problem of the acquisition of syntax. The test-
ing procedure relies heavily on semantics because 
it is assumed that what children understand, they 
will remember and manipulate. This does not nec-
essarily contradict all the theories that claim that 
there are some innate principles specific to gram-
mar acquisition (Pinker, 1984; Wexler, 1982). If 
71
children acquire high-level grammatical rules at a 
later period of their development than is usually 
admitted in these theories, then the structure of 
their input?the couple ?base phrase marker? plus 
?surface sentence? (Wexler, 1982) ? will be more 
complex. The more complex these structures, the 
lower the innate conditions on grammars. It would 
then be possible to progress from a simple system 
such as the association of frozen elements to a 
more complex one. Late grammatical acquisition is 
a very important notion as it goes a long way to-
wards explaining why there do not seem to be any 
neuronal structures specific to language or gram-
mar (Elman et al, 1996; Muller, 1996). Late 
grammatical acquisition is also highly compatible 
with constructivist proposals such as Tomasello?s 
(2003) and Goldberg?s (2006). 
It has often been said that children already mas-
ter syntax by the age of three, which is quite re-
markable considering the complexity of what they 
are acquiring. This report suggests that some sim-
ple generative mechanisms can explain the explo-
sive acquisition of an apparent mastery of language 
observed in young children. It demonstrates once 
again that, as already shown for other linguistic 
developmental features (Elman et al, 1996), an 
apparently complex output may be the product of a 
simple system. The need for large-scale corpora to 
better tackle the problem of language acquisition 
with improved tools is also highlighted here. 
References 
Bloom, P. (1999). Theories of word learning: Rational-
ist alternatives to associationism. In W. C. Ritchie & 
T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of language acquisi-
tion . San Diego: Academic Press. 
Elman, J. L., Bates, E., Johnson, M., Karmiloff-Smith, 
A., Parisi, D., & Plunkett, K. (1996). Rethinking in-
nateness: A connectionist perspective on develop-
ment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books. 
Goldberg, A. (2006). Constructions at Work: the nature 
of generalization in language. Oxford University 
Press. 
Jusczyk, P. W., & Hohne, E. A. (1997). Infants' memory 
for spoken words [see comments]. Science, 
277(5334), 1984-6. 
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1992). Beyond modularity: a de-
velopmental perspective on cognitive science. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: MIT Press/Bradford Books. 
Lieven, E. V., Pine, J. M., & Baldwin, G. (1997). Lexi-
cally-based learning and early grammatical develop-
ment. Journal of Child Language, 24(1), 187-219. 
MacWhinney, B. (1975). Rules, rote, and analogy in 
morphological formations by Hungarian children. 
Journal of Child Language, 2, 65-77. 
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project : Tools 
for analyzing talk (3rd). Hillsdale, N.J, Lawrence 
Erlbaum. 
Maratsos, M. P., & Chalkley, M. A. (1980). The internal 
language of children's syntax:  The ontogenesis and 
representation of syntactic categories. In K. E. Nel-
son (Ed.), Children's language. Vol: 2 . New York, 
NY: Gardner Press. 
Muller, R.-A. (1996). Innateness, autonomy, universal-
ity? Neurobiological approaches to language. Behav-
ioral and Brain Sciences, 19(4), 611-675. 
Peters, A. M. (1995). Strategies in the acquisition of 
syntax. In P. Fletcher & B. MacWhinney (Eds.), The 
handbook of child language . Oxford, UK: Black-
well. 
Pinker, S. (1984). Language learnability and language 
development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
Ritchie, W. C., & Bhatia, T. K. (1999). Child language 
acquisition: Introduction, foundations, and overview. 
In W. C. Ritchie & T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of 
language acquisition . San Diego: Academic Press. 
Saffran, J. R., Johnson, E. K., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, 
E. L. (1999). Statistical learning of tone sequences by 
human infants and adults. Cognition, 70(1), 27-52. 
Sinclair, H., & Bronckart, J. P. (1972). S.V.O. A lin-
guistic universal? A study in developmental psycho-
linguistics. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 
14(3), 329-348. 
Theakston, A. L., Lieven, E. V. M., Pine, J. M., & Row-
land, C. F. (1999). The role of performance limita-
tions in the acquisition of 'mixed' verb-argument 
structure at stage 1. In M. Perkins & S. Howard 
(Eds.), New directions in language development and 
disorders : Plenum Press. 
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: A us-
age-based theory of language acquisition. Cam-
bridge: MA, Harvard. 
Wexler, K. (1982). A principle theory for language ac-
quisition. In E. Wanner & L. R. Gleitman (Eds.), 
Language acquisition - the state of the art. New 
York: Cambridge University Press. 
72
