Automatic Text Categorization using the Importance of Sentences
Youngjoong Ko, Jinwoo Park, and Jungyun Seo
Department of Computer Science,
Sogang University
1 Sinsu-dong, Mapo-gu
Seoul, 121-742, Korea
{kyj,jwpark}@nlpzodiac.sogang.ac.kr, seojy@ccs.sogang.ac.kr
Abstract
Automatic text categorization is a problem
of automatically assigning text documents to
predefined categories. In order to classify
text documents, we must extract good
features from them. In previous research, a
text document is commonly represented by
the term frequency and the inverted
document frequency of each feature. Since
there is a difference between important
sentences and unimportant sentences in a
document, the features from more important
sentences should be considered more than
other features. In this paper, we measure the
importance of sentences using text
summarization techniques. Then a document
is represented as a vector of features with
different weights according to the
importance of each sentence. To verify our
new method, we conducted experiments on
two language newsgroup data sets: one
written by English and the other written by
Korean. Four kinds of classifiers were used
in our experiments: Na?ve Bayes, Rocchio,
k-NN, and SVM. We observed that our new
method made a significant improvement in
all classifiers and both data sets.
Introduction
The goal of text categorization is to classify
documents into a certain number of pre-defined
categories. Text categorization is an active
research area in information retrieval and
machine learning. A wide range of supervised
learning algorithms has been applied to this
problem using a training data set of categorized
documents. For examples, there are the Na?ve
Bayes (McCallum et al, 1998; Ko et al, 2000),
Rocchio (Lewis et al, 1996), Nearest Neighbor
(Yang et al, 2002), and Support Vector
Machines (Joachims, 1998).
A text categorization task consists of a
training phase and a text classification phase.
The former includes the feature extraction
process and the indexing process. The vector
space model has been used as the conventional
method for text representation (Salton et al,
1983). This model represents a document as a
vector of features using Term Frequency (TF)
and Inverted Document Frequency (IDF). This
model simply counts TF without considering
where the term occurs. But each sentence in a
document has different importance for
identifying the content of the document. Thus,
by assigning a different weight according to the
importance of the sentence to each term, we can
achieve better results. For this problem, several
techniques have been studied. First, term
weights were differently weighted by the
location of a term, so that the structural
information of a document was applied to term
weights (Murata et al, 2000). But this method
supposes that only several sentences, which are
located at the front or the rear of a document,
have the important meaning. Hence it can be
applied to only documents with fixed form such
as articles. The next technique used the title of a
document in order to choose the important terms
(Mock et al, 1996). The terms in the title were
handled importantly. But a drawback of this
method is that some titles, which do not contain
well the meaning of the document, can rather
increase the ambiguity of the meaning. This case
often comes out in documents with a informal
style such as Newsgroup and Email. To
overcome these problems, we have studied text
summarization techniques with great interest.
Among text summarization techniques, there are
statistical methods and linguistic methods
(Radev et al, 2000; Marcu et al, 1999). Since
the former methods are simpler and faster than
the latter methods, we use the former methods to
be applied to text categorization. Therefore, we
employ two kinds of text summarization
techniques; one measures the importance of
sentences by the similarity between the title and
each sentence in a document, and the other by
the importance of terms in each sentence.
In this paper, we use two kinds of text
summarization techniques for classifying
important sentences and unimportant sentences.
The importance of each sentence is measured by
these techniques. Then term weights in each
sentence are modified in proportion to the
calculated sentence importance. To test our
proposed method, we used two different
newsgroup data sets; one is a well known data
set, the Newsgroup data set by Ken Lang, and
the other was gathered from Korean UseNet
discussion group. As a result, our proposed
method showed the better performance than
basis system in both data sets.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows.
Section 1 explains the proposed text
categorization system in detail. In section 2, we
discuss the empirical results in our experiments.
Section 3 is devoted to the analysis of our
method. The final section presents conclusions
and future works.
1. The Proposed Text Categorization
System
The proposed system consists of two modules as
shown in Figure 1: one module for training
phase and the other module for text
classification phase. The each process of Figure
1 is explained in the following sections.


	








? 
	

		




	




