An Algorithm for Anaphora Resolution in 
Spanish Texts 
Manuel Palomar* 
University of Alicante 
Lidia Moreno t
Valencia University of Technology 
Jesfis Peral* 
University of Alicante 
Rafael Mufioz* 
University of Alicante 
Antonio Ferr~indez* 
University of Alicante 
Patricio Martinez-Barco* 
University of Alicante 
Maximiliano Saiz-Noeda* 
University of Alicante 
This paper presents an algorithm for identifying noun phrase antecedents ofthird person personal 
pronouns, demonstrative pronouns, reflexive pronouns, and omitted pronouns (zero pronouns) 
in unrestricted Spanish texts. We define a list of constraints and preferences for different ypes 
of pronominal expressions, and we document in detail the importance of each kind of knowledge 
(lexical, morphological, syntactic, and statistical) in anaphora resolution for Spanish. The paper 
also provides a definition for syntactic onditions on Spanish NP-pronoun oncoreference using 
partial parsing. The algorithm has been evaluated on a corpus of 1,677 pronouns and achieved 
a success rate of 76.8%. We have also implemented four competitive algorithms and tested their 
performance in a blind evaluation on the same test corpus. This new approach could easily be 
extended to other languages uch as English, Portuguese, Italian, or Japanese. 
1. Introduction 
We present an algorithm for identifying noun phrase antecedents of personal pro- 
nouns, demonstrative pronouns, reflexive pronouns, and omitted pronouns (zero pro- 
nouns) in Spanish. The algorithm identifies both intrasentential and intersentential 
antecedents and is applied to the syntactic analysis generated by the slot unifica- 
t ion parser (SUP) (Ferr~ndez, Palomar, and Moreno 1998b). It also combines different 
forms of knowledge by distinguishing between constraints and preferences. Whereas 
constraints are used as combinations of several kinds of knowledge (lexical, mor- 
phological, and syntactic), preferences are defined as a combination of heuristic rules 
extracted from a study of different corpora. 
We present he following main contributions in this paper: 
? an algorithm for anaphora resolution in Spanish texts that uses different 
kinds of knowledge 
* Department of Software and Computing Systems, Alicante, Spain. E-mail: (Palomar) 
mpalomar@dlsi.ua.es, (F rr~ndez) antonio@dlsi.ua.es, (Martfnez-Barco) patricio@dlsi.ua.es, (Peral) 
jperal@dlsi.ua.es, (Saiz-Noeda) max@dlsi.ua.es, (Mufioz) rafael@dlsi.ua.es 
t Department of Information Systems and Computation, Valencia, Spain. E-mail: hnoreno@dsic.upv.es 
@ 2001 Association for Computational Linguistics 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
? an exhaustive study of the importance of each kind of knowledge in 
Spanish anaphora resolution 
? a proposal concerning syntactic onditions on NP-pronoun 
noncoreference in Spanish that can be evaluated on a partial parse tree 
? a proposal regarding preferences that are appropriate for resolving 
anaphora in Spanish and that could easily be extended to other 
languages 
? a blind test of the algorithm 
? a comparison with other approaches to anaphora resolution that we have 
applied to Spanish texts using the same blind test 
In Section 2, we show the classification scheme we used to identify the different ypes 
of anaphora that we would be resolving. In Section 3, we present he algorithm and 
discuss its main properties. In Section 4, we evaluate the algorithm. In Section 5, we 
compare our algorithm with several other approaches to anaphora resolution. Finally, 
we present our conclusions. 
2. Our Classification Scheme for Pronominal Expressions in Spanish 
In this section, we present our classification scheme for identifying the different ypes 
of anaphora that we will be resolving. Personal pronouns (PPR), demonstrative pro- 
nouns (DPR), reflexive pronouns (RPR), and omitted pronouns (OPa) are some of the 
most frequent ypes of anaphoric expressions found in Spanish and are the main 
subject of this study. Personal and demonstrative pronouns are further classified ac- 
cording to whether they appear within a prepositional phrase (PP) or whether they 
are complement personal pronouns (clitic pronouns1). We present examples for each 
of the four types of common anaphora. Each example is presented in three forms: as a 
Spanish sentence, as a word-to-word translation into English, and correctly translated 
into English. 2
2.1 Clitic Personal Pronouns (CPPR) 
In the case of clitic personal pronouns, I0, la, le 'him, her, it' and los, las, les 'them', we 
consider that the third person personal pronoun plays the role of the complement. 
(1) Ana abre \[la verja\]i y lai cierra tras de si. 
Ana opens \[the gate\]/ and it/ closes after herself 
'Ana opens the gate and closes it after herself.' 
2.2 Personal Pronouns Not Included in a PP (PPanotPP) 
We include in this class the personal pronouns ~l, ella, ello 'he, she, it' and ellas, ellos 
'they'. 
(2) Andr6si es mi vecino, t~li vive en el segundo piso. 
Andr6si is my neighbor Hei lives on the second floor 
'Andr6s is my neighbor. He lives on the second floor.' 
1 According to Mathews (1997), aclitic pronoun is a pronoun that is treated as an independent word in 
syntax but that forms a phonological unit with the verb that precedes or follows it. 
2 Coindexing indicates coreference b tween anaphor and antecedent. 
546 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
2.3 Personal Pronouns Included in a PP (PPRinPP) 
We include in this class the personal pronouns dl, ella, ello 'him, her, it' and ellas, ellos 
'them'. 
(3) Juan/ debe asistir pero Pedro lo har~i por 61i. 
Juani must attend but Pedro it will do for himi 
'Juan must attend but Pedro will do it for him.' 
2.4 Demonstrative Pronouns Not Included in a PP (DPRnotPP) 
We include in this class the demonstrative pronouns ~ste, dsta, esto 'this'; ~stos, ~stas 
'these'; dse, ~sa, aqu~l, aqu~lla 'that'; and dsos, dsas, aqu~llos, aqudllas 'those'. 
(4) E1 Ferrarii gan6 al Ford. t~stei es el mejor. 
the Ferrarii beat the Ford This/ is the best 
'The Ferrari beat the Ford. This is the best.' 
2.5 Demonstrative Pronouns Included in a PP (DPRinPP) 
We include in this class the demonstrative pronouns ~ste, ~sta, esto 'this'; ~stos, ~stas 
'these'; dse, ~sa, aqudl, aqudlla 'that'; and dsos, ~sas, aqu~llos, aqudllas 'those'. 
(5) Ana vive con Pacoi y cocina para 6stei diariamente. 
Ana lives with Pacoi and cooks for this/ every day 
'Ana lives with Paco and cooks for him every day.' 
2.6 Reflexive Pronouns (RPR) 
We include in this class the reflexive pronouns e, sL si mismo 'himself, herself, itself' 
and consigo, consigo mismo 'themselves'. 
(6) Anai abre la verja y la cierra tras de sfi. 
Anai opens the gate and it closes after herself/ 
'Ana opens the gate and closes it after herself.' 
2.7 Omitted Pronouns (Zero Pronouns OPa) 
The omitted pronoun is the most frequent ype of anaphoric expression in Spanish, as 
we will show in Section 4.2. Omitted pronouns occur when the pronominal subject is 
omitted. This kind of pronoun also occurs in other languages, such as Portuguese or 
Japanese; in these languages, it can also appear in object position, whereas in Spanish 
or Italian, it can appear only in subject position. In the following example, the omission 
is represented by the symbol 13 (the symbol does not appear in the correct ranslation 
into English). 
(7) Anai abre la verja y (~i la cierra tras de sf. 
Anai opens the gate and Oi it closes after herself 
'Ana opens the gate and she closes it after herself.' 
3. Anaphora Resolution Algorithm 
In the algorithm, all the types of anaphora are identified from left to right as they 
appear in the sentence. The most important proposals for anaphora resolution--such 
as those of Baldwin (1997), Lappin and Leass (1994), Hobbs (1978), or Kennedy and 
Boguraev (1996)--are based on a separation between constraints and preferences. 
547 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
Constraints discard some of the candidates, whereas preferences simply sort the re- 
maining candidates. A constraint defines a property that must be satisfied in order 
for any candidate to be considered as a possible solution of the anaphor. For example, 
pronominal anaphors and antecedents must agree in person, gender, and number. 3 
Otherwise, the candidate is discarded as a possible solution. A preference is a charac- 
teristic that is not always satisfied by the solution of an anaphor. The application of 
preferences usually involves the use of heuristic rules in order to obtain a ranked list 
of candidates. 
Each type of anaphora has its own set of constraints and preferences, although 
they all follow the same general algorithm: constraints are applied first, followed by 
preferences. 
Based on the preceding description, our algorithm contains the following main 
components: 
? identification of the type of pronoun 
? constraints 
- -  morphological greement (person, gender, and number) 
- -  syntactic onditions on NP-pronoun oncoreference 
? preferences 
In order to apply this algorithm to unrestricted texts, it has been necessary to use 
partial parsing. In our partial-parsing scheme, as presented in Ferr~ndez, Palomar, and 
Moreno (1999), we only parse coordinated NPs and PPs, verbal chunks, pronouns, and 
what we have called free conjunctions (i.e., conjunctions that do not join coordinated 
NPs or PPs). Words that do not appear within these constituents are simply ignored. 
The NP constituents include coordinated adjectives, relative clauses, coordinated PPs, 
and appositives as modifiers. 
With this partial-parsing scheme, we divide a sentence into clauses by parsing first 
the free conjunction and then the verbs, as in the following example: 
(8) Pedro compr6 un regalo y se lo dio a Ana. 
Pedro bought a gift and her it gave to Ana 
'Pedro bought a gift and gave it to Ana.' 
In this example, we have parsed the following constituents: np(Pedro), v(comprO), np(un 
regalo),freeconj(y), pron(se), pron(lo), v(dio), pp(a Ana). We are able to divide this sentence 
into two clauses because it contains the free conjunction y 'and' and the two verbs 
compr6 'bought' and clio 'gave'. 
3.1 Identification of the Kind of Pronoun 
The algorithm uses partial-parse trees to automatically identify omitted pronouns by 
employing the following steps: 
? The sentence is divided into clauses (by parsing the free conjunction 
followed by the verbs). 
3 In our implementation, thismorphological information is extracted from the part-of-speech tagger. 
548 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
An NP or pronoun is sought for each clause by analyzing the clause 
constituents on the left-hand side of the verb, unless the verb is 
imperative or impersonal. The chosen NP or pronoun must agree in 
person and number with the clausal verb. (In evaluating this algorithm, 
Ferr~ndez and Peral \[2000\] achieved a success rate of 88% for detecting 
omitted pronouns.) 
The remaining pronouns are identified based on part-of-speech (POS) tagger out- 
puts. 
3.2 Morphological Agreement 
Person, gender, and number agreement are checked in order to discard potential an- 
tecedents. For example, in the sentence 
(9) Juanj vio a Rosa/. Ella/ estaba muy feliz. 
Juanj saw to Rosa/ Shei was very happy 
'Juan saw Rosa. She was very happy.' 
there are two possible antecedents for ella 'she', whose slot structures 4 are 
np (conc (sing, masc), X, Juan) 
np (conc (sing, fem), Y, Rosa) 
whereas the slot structure of the pronoun is 
pron (conc (sing, fem), Z, ella). 
In order to decide between the two antecedents, he unification of both slot struc- 
tures (pronoun and candidate) is carried out by the slot unification parser (Ferr~ndez, 
Palomar, and Moreno 1999). In this example, the candidate Juan is rejected by this 
morphological greement constraint. 
3.3 Syntactic Conditions on NP-Pronoun Noncoreference 
These conditions are based on c-command and minimal-governing-category constraints 
as formulated by Reinhart (1983) and on the noncoreference conditions of Lappin and 
Leass (1994). They are of great importance in any anaphora resolution system that 
does not use semantic information, as is the case with our proposal. In such systems, 
recency is important in selecting the antecedent of an anaphor. That is to say, the 
closest NP to the anaphor has a better chance of being selected as the solution. One 
problem, however, is that such constraints are formulated using full parsing, whereas 
if we want to work with unrestricted texts we should be using partial parsing, as 
previously defined. 
We have therefore proposed a set of noncoreference onditions for Spanish, using 
partial parsing, although they could easily be extended to other languages such as En- 
glish. In our system, the following types of pronouns are noncoreferential with a noun 
phrase (NP) under the conditions noted (noncoindexing indicates that a candidate is
rejected by these conditions). 
4 The term slot structure is defined in Ferr~ndez, Palomar, and Moreno (1998b). The slot structure stores 
morphological and syntactic information related to the different constituents of a sentence. 
549 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
. 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
. 
(a) 
Reflexive pronouns are noncoreferential when: 
(b) 
(10) 
the NP is included in another constituent (e.g., the NP is 
included in a PP) 
Ante Luisj sei frot6 con la toalla. 
in front of Luisj himself/ rubbed with the towel 
'He rubbed himself with the towel in front of Luis.' 
In this sentence, we would have obtained the following sequence 
of constituents after our partial-parsing scheme: pp(prep(ante), 
np(Luis )) , pron(se) , v(frot6 ) , pp(prep( con) , np(la toalla) . Following 
the above-stated condition, the NP Luis cannot corefer with the 
reflexive pronoun se since Luis is included in a PP (ante Luis). 
the NP is in a different clause or sentence 
(11) Anaj trajo un cuchillo y Eva/ sei cort6. 
Anaj brought a knife and Eva/ herself/ cut 
'Ana brought a knife and Eva cut herself.' 
the NP appears after the verb and there is another NP in the 
same clause before the verb 
(12) 
(13) 
Juan/ sei cort6 con el cuchilloj. 
Juan/ himself/ cut with the knifej 
'Juan cut himself with the knife.' 
Under these conditions, coreference is allowed between the NP 
and the reflexive pronoun, since both are in the same clause. For 
example: 
Juan/ queria verlo por s~ mismoi. 
Juan/ wanted see it for himself/ 
'Juan wanted to see it for himself.' 
In this example, Juan and the reflexive pronoun si mismo 
'himself' corefer since Juan is in the same clause as the anaphor, 
it is not included in another constituent, and it appears before 
the verb. 
Clitic pronouns are noncoreferential when: 
the NP is included in a PP (except hose headed by the 
preposition a 'to') 
(14) Con Juan/ loj compr6. 
with Juan/ itj bought 
'I bought it with Juan.' 
the NP is located more than three constituents before the clitic 
pronoun in the same clause 
(15) En casai \[el martillo\]j no se loj di. 
at home/ \[the hammer\]j not him itj gave 
'I didn't give him the hammer at home.' 
550 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
. 
(a) 
(17) 
(b) 
In this example, the direct object el martillo 'the hammer '  has 
been moved from its common position after the verb, and it is 
necessary to fill the resulting gap with the pronoun lo 'it' even 
though it does not appear in the English translation. This 
phenomenon 5 can be considered an exception to the c-command 
constraints as formulated by Reinhart when applied to Spanish 
clitic pronouns. 
Moreover, if the last two conditions are not fulfilled by the NP and the 
verb is in the first or second person, then this NP will necessarily be the 
solution of the pronoun: 
(16) \[El boligrafo\]i 1Oi comprar~s en esa tienda. 
\[The pen\]/ iti will buy in that shop 
'You will buy the pen in that shop.' 
Personal and demonstrative (nonclitic) pronouns are noncoreferential 
when the NP is in the same clause as the anaphor, and: 
the pronoun comes before the verb (in full parsing, this would 
mean that it is the subject of its clause) 
Ante Luisi 61j salud6 a Pedrok. 
in front of Luisi hey greeted to Pedrok 
'He greeted Pedro in front of Luis.' 
the pronoun comes after the verb (in full parsing, this would 
mean that it is the object of the verb) and the NP is not included 
in another NP 
(18) \[El padre de Juanj\]i le venci6 a 41j. 
\[Juanj's father\]/ him beat to himj 
'Juan's father beat him.' 
In this example, the pronoun ~I 'him' cannot corefer with the NP 
el padre de Juan 'Juan's father', but it can corefer with Juan since it 
is a modifier of the NP el padre de Juan. 
It should be mentioned that the clitic pronoun le is another 
form of the pronoun dl 'him'. This is a typical phenomenon i
Spanish, where clitic pronouns occupy the object position. 
Sometimes both the clitic pronoun and the object appear in the 
same clause, as occurs in the previous example and in the 
following one: 
(19) A Pedro/ yo lei vi ayer. 
to Pedroj I himi saw yesterday 
'I saw Pedro yesterday.' 
This example also illustrates the previously mentioned exception 
of c-command constraints for Spanish clitic pronouns. In this 
case, the direct object a Pedro 'to Pedro' has been moved before 
the verb, and the clitic pronoun le 'him' has been added. It 
should also be remarked that, as noted earlier, the clitic pronoun 
does not appear in the English translation. 
5 Mathews (1997) calls this phenomenon "clitic doubling" and defines it as the use of a clitic pronoun 
with the same referent and in the same syntactic function as another element in the same clause. 
551 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
(c) the pronoun is included in a PP that is not included in another 
constituent and the NP is not included in another constituent 
(NP or PP) 
(20) \[El padre de Luisj\]i juega con 61j. 
\[Luisj's father\]/ plays with himj 
'Luis's father plays with him.' 
In this example, the pronoun ~I 'him' is included in a PP (which 
is not included in another constituent) and the NP el padre de 
Luis is not included in another NP or PP. Therefore, the NP 
cannot corefer with the pronoun. However, the NP Luis can 
corefer because it is included in the NP el padre de Luis. 
(d) the pronoun is included in an NP, so that the NP in which the 
pronoun is included cannot corefer with the pronoun 
(21) Pedro/ vio \[al hermano de ~li\] j. 
Pedro/ saw \[the brother of himi\]j 
'Pedro saw his brother.' 
(e) the pronoun is coordinated with other NPs, so that the other 
coordinated NPs cannot corefer with the pronoun 
(22) Juan/, \[el tio de Ana\]j, y 61k fueron de pesca. 
Juan/, \[Ana's uncle\]j, and hek went fishing 
'He, Juan, and Ana's uncle went fishing.' 
(f) the pronoun is included in a relative clause, and the following 
condition is met: 
. 
(24) 
i. the NP in which the relative clause is included does not 
corefer with the pronoun 
(23) Pedroj vio a \[un amigo que juega con 41j\]i. 
Pedroj saw to \[a friend that plays with himj\]i 
'Pedro saw a friend that he plays with.' 
ii. the NPs that are included in the relative clause follow 
the previous conditions 
iii. the remaining NPs outside the relative clause could 
corefer with the pronoun 
Personal and demonstrative (nonclitic) pronouns are noncoreferential 
when the NP is not in the same clause as the pronoun. (In this case, the 
NP can corefer with the pronoun, except when this NP also appears in 
the same sentence and clause as the pronoun, in which case it will have 
been discarded by the previous noncoreference onditions.) 
Anaj y Evai son amigas. Evai lej ayuda mucho. 
Anay and Evai are friends Evai herj helps a lot 
'Ana and Eva are friends. Eva helps her a lot.' 
It is important o note that the above-mentioned conditions refer to those coor- 
dinated NPs and PPs that have been partially parsed. Moreover, as previously men- 
tioned, NPs can include relative clauses, appositives, coordinated PPs, and adjectives. 
552 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
We should also remark that we consider aconstituent A to be included in a constituent 
B if A modifies the head of B. Let us consider the following NP: 
(25) \[el hombre que ama a \[una mujer que lei ama\]j\]i 
\[the man who loves to \[a woman who him/ loveslj\]i 
'the man who loves a woman who loves him.' 
We consider that the pronoun le 'him' is included in the relative clause that mod- 
ifies the NP una mujer que le ama 'a woman who loves him', which then cannot corefer 
with it due to noncoreference ondition 3(f)i. Under condition 3(f)iii, however, the 
pronoun le 'him' could corefer with the entire NP el hombre que area a una mujer que le 
area 'the man who loves a woman who loves him'. 
Another example might be the following: 
(26) Eva/ tiene \[un tio que lei toma el pelo\]j. 
Evai has \[an uncle that heri teases\]j 
'Eva has an uncle who teases her.' 
In this example, the pronoun is included within the relative clause that modifies un 
tio 'an uncle', and therefore cannot corefer with it. But, following condition 3(f)iii, it 
can corefer with Eva. 
3.4 Preferences 
To obtain the different sets of preferences, we utilized the training corpus to identify 
the importance of each kind of knowledge that is used by humans when tracking 
down the NP antecedent of a pronoun. Our results are shown in Table 1. For our 
analysis, the antecedents for each pronoun in the text were identified, along with their 
configurational characteristics with reference to the pronoun. Thus, the table shows 
how often each configurational characteristic is valid for the solution of a particular 
pronoun. For example, the solution of a reflexive pronoun is a proper noun 53% of the 
time. The total number of pronoun occurrences in the study was 575. Thus, we were 
able to define the different patterns of Spanish pronoun resolution and apply them in 
order to obtain the evaluation results that are presented in this paper. The order of 
importance was determined by first sorting the preferences according to the percentage 
of each configurational characteristic; that is, preferences with higher percentages were 
applied before those with lower percentages. After several experiments on the training 
corpus, an optimal order--the one that produced the best performance--was obtained. 
Since in this evaluation phase we processed texts from different genres and by different 
authors, we can state that the final set of preferences obtained and their order of 
application can be used with confidence on any Spanish text. 
Based on the results presented in Table 1, we have extracted a set of preferences for 
each type of anaphora (listed below). We have distinguished between those pronouns 
that are included within PPs and those that are not. That is because when a pronoun 
is included in a PP, the preposition of this PP sets a preference. 
Preferences of omitted pronouns (OPR): 
1. NPs that are not of time, direction, quantity, or abstract type; that is to 
say, inanimate candidates are rejected (e.g., hal~past en, Market Street, 
three pounds, or a thing) 
2. NPs in the same sentence as the omitted pronotm 
553 
Computat ional  Linguistics Volume 27, Number  4 
Table 1 
Percentage validity of types of pronouns for different configuration characteristics of the 
training corpus (n = 575). 
CPPR RPR OPR PPRinPP DPRinPP PPRnotPP DPRnotPP 
Intrasentential 66 97 57 70 100 60 75 
Intersentential 34 3 43 30 0 40 25 
NPSentAnt ~ 9 3 4 16 50 9 38 
AntPPin b 7 9 14 27 50 20 25 
AntProper c 57 53 63 35 0 43 0 
AntIndef a 13 0 7 0 0 6 13 
AntRepeaff 72 66 79 65 50 71 50 
AntWithVerb f 14 94 20 24 0 26 25 
EqualPP g 100 100 100 78 100 97 100 
EqualPosVerb h 79 84 89 46 0 86 38 
BeforeVerb i 83 91 89 65 50 86 13 
NoTime d 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 
NoQuant i ty  k 100 100 100 100 100 97 100 
NoDirect ion I 100 100 100 97 100 100 100 
NoAbstract m 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 
NoCompany n 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 
a If the NP 
b If the NP 
c If the NP 
d If the NP 
e If the NP 
f If the NP 
g If the NP 
h If the NP 
i If the NP 
j If the NP 
k If the NP 
1 If the NP 
m If the NP 
n If the NP 
is included in another NP 
is included in a PP with the preposition en 'in' 
is a proper noun 
is an indefinite NP 
has been repeated more than once in the text 
has appeared with the verb of the anaphor more than once in the text 
has appeared in a PP more than once in the text 
occupies the same position with reference to the verb as the anaphor (before or after) 
appears before its verb 
is not a time-type 
is not a quantity-type 
is not a direction-type 
is not an abstract-type 
is not a company-type 
3. NPs  that  are in the same sentence  as the  anaphor  and  are also the  
so lu t ion  for  another  omi t ted  pronotm 
4. NPs  that  are in the prev ious  sentence  
5. NPs  that  are not  inc luded  in another  NP  (e.g., when they  appear  ins ide  
a re la t ive  c lause  or  appos i t i ve )  
6. NPs  that  are not  inc luded  in a PP or  are  inc luded  in a PP  when its 
p repos i t ion  is a ' to '  or  de ' o f '  
7. NPs  that  appear  be fore  the  verb  
8. NPs  that  have  been  repeated  more  than  once  in the  text  
Preferences of clitic personal pronouns (CPPR): 
1. NPs  that  are not  of  t ime,  d i rect ion ,  quant i ty ,  or  abst ract  type  
2. NPs  that  are in  the  same sentence  as the  anaphor  
554 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
3. NPs that are in the previous sentence 
4. NPs that are not included in another NP (e.g., when they appear inside 
a clause or appositive) 
5. NPs that are not included in a PP or are included in a PP when its 
preposit ion is a 'to' or de 'of '  
6. NPs that have appeared with the verb of the anaphor more than once 
Preferences of personal and demonstrative pronouns that are included in a PP 
(PPRinPP and DPRinPP): 
1. NPs that are not of time, direction, quantity, or abstract ype; moreover, 
in the case of personal pronouns, the NP cannot be a company type 
2. NPs that are in the same sentence as the anaphor 
3. NPs that are in the previous sentence 
4. NPs that are not included in another NP (e.g., when they appear inside 
a relative clause or appositive) 
5. NPs that have been repeated more than once in the text 
6. NPs that are included in a PP 
7. NPs that occupy the same position (before or after) with respect o the 
verb as the anaphor 
Preferences of personal and demonstrative pronouns that are not included in a PP 
and of reflexive pronouns (PPRnotPP, DPRnotPP, and RPR): 
1. NPs that are not of time, direction, quantity, or abstract ype; moreover, 
in the case of personal pronouns, the NP cannot be a company type 
2. NPs that are in the same sentence as the anaphor 
3. NPs that are in the previous sentence 
4. NPs that are not included in another NP (e.g., when they appear inside 
a relative clause or appositive) 
5. NPs that are not included in a PP or that are included in a PP when its 
preposit ion is a 'to' or de 'of '  
6. For the case of personal pronouns (PPRnotPP), NPs that are not 
included in a PP with the preposit ion en ' in' 
7. NPs that appear before their verbs (i.e., the verb of the sentence in 
which the NP appears) 
3.5 Resolution Procedure 
The resolution procedure consists of the following steps: 
1. Identify the type of anaphora: pronominal  (PPRinPP or PPRnotPP), 
demonstrat ive (DPRinPP or DPRnotPP), reflexive (RPR), or omitted 
(oPR). 
555 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
2. Identify the NP candidate antecedents of a pronoun in order to create a 
list L. The list created will depend on the type of anaphor and the 
anaphoric accessibility space (empirically obtained from a deep study 
of the training corpus) and will be developed according to the 
following criteria: 
? For pronominal anaphora, demonstrative anaphora, and 
omitted pronouns, NP candidates will appear in the same 
sentence as the anaphor and in the four previous sentences. 
? For reflexive anaphora, NP candidates will appear in the same 
sentence as the anaphor. 
3. Apply constraints to L to obtain LI: 
(a) morphological agreement 
(b) syntactic onditions on NP-pronoun noncoreference 
4. If the number of elements of L1 - 1, then the solution is that element. 
5. If the number of elements of L1 = 0, then the solution is an exophor. 
6. If the number of elements of L1 > 1, then apply preferences to L1 to 
obtain L2. Depending on the type of anaphora, a different set and order 
of preferences will be applied (see Section 3.4). 
7. If the number of elements of L2 = 1, then the solution is that element. 
8. If the number of elements of L2 > 1, then apply the following three 
basic preferences in the order shown until only one candidate remains 
(these three preferences are common to all the pronouns): 
? NPs most repeated in the text 
? NPs that have appeared most with the verb of the anaphor 
? the first candidate of the remaining list (the closest one to the 
anaphor) 
After applying these basic preferences, the antecedent is obtained. 
4. Empirical Evaluation 
4.1 Description of Corpora 
We have tested the algorithm on both technical manuals and literary texts. In the first 
instance, we used a portion of the Spanish edition of the Blue Book corpus. 6 This 
corpus contains the handbook of the International Telecommunications Union CCITT, 
published in English, French, and Spanish; it is one of the most important collections of 
telecommunications texts available and contains 5,000,000 words automatically tagged 
by the Xerox tagger. In the second instance, the algorithm was tested on Lexesp, a 
corpus 7 that contains Spanish literary texts from different genres and by different 
6 CRATER (Proyecto CRATER 1994-1995) Corpus Resources and Terminology Extraction Project. Project 
supported by the European Community Commission (DG-XIII). Computational Linguistics Laboratory, 
Faculty of Philosophy and Fine Arts, Autonomous University of Madrid, Spain. 
7 The Lexesp corpus belongs to the project of the same name carried out by the Psychology Department 
of the University of Oviedo and developed by the Computational Linguistics Group of the University 
of Barcelona, with the collaboration fthe Language Processing Group of the Catalonia University of 
Technology, Spain. 
556 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
Table 2 
Pronoun occurrences in two types of texts. 
Total BB Corpus Lexesp Corpus 
Number of pronoun occurrences 
in the training corpus 575 123 
Number of pronoun occurrences 
in the test corpus 1,677 375 
452 
1,302 
authors. These texts were mainly obtained from newspapers and were automatically 
tagged by a different agger than the one used to tag the Blue Book. The portion of 
the Lexesp corpus that we processed contained various stories, related by a narrator, 
and written by different authors. As was the case for the Blue Book corpus, this 
corpus also contained 5,000,000 words. Since we worked on texts from different genres 
and by different authors, the applicability of our proposal to other kinds of texts is 
assured. 
We selected a subset of the Blue Book corpus and another subset of the Lex- 
esp corpus, and both were annotated with respect o coreference. One portion of the 
coreferentially tagged corpus (training corpus) was used for improving the rules for 
anaphora resolution (constraints and preferences), and another portion was reserved 
for test data (Table 2). 
The annotation phase was accomplished in the following manner: (1) two annota- 
tors were selected, (2) an agreement was reached between the annotators with regard 
to the annotation scheme, (3) each annotator annotated the corpus, and, finally, (4) a 
reliability test (Carletta et al 1997) was done on the annotation in order to guaran- 
tee the results. The reliability test used the kappa statistic that measures agreement 
between the annotations of two annotators in making judgments about categories. In 
this way, the annotation is considered a classification task consisting of defining an ad- 
equate solution among the candidate list. According to Vieira (1998), the classification 
task when tagging anaphora resolution can be reduced to a decision about whether 
each candidate is the solution or not. Thus, two different categories are considered 
for each anaphor: one for the correct antecedent and another for nonantecedents. Our 
experimentation showed one correct antecedent among an average of 14.5 possible 
candidates per anaphor after applying constraints. For computing the kappa statistic 
(k), see Siegel and Castellan (1988). 
According to Carletta et al (1997), a k measurement such as 0.68 < k < 0.8 allows 
us to draw encouraging conclusions, and a measurement k > 0.8 means there is to- 
tal reliability between the results of the two annotators. In our tests, we obtained a 
kappa measurement of k = 0.81. We therefore consider the annotation obtained for the 
evaluation to be totally reliable. 
4.2 Experimental Work 
We conducted a blind test over the entire test corpus of unrestricted Spanish texts by 
applying the algorithm to the partial syntactic structure generated by the slot unifica- 
tion parser. 
Over these corpora, our algorithm attained a success rate for anaphora resolution 
of 76.8%. We define "success rate" as the number of pronouns successfully resolved, 
divided by the total number of resolved pronouns. The total number of resolved pro- 
nouns was 1,677, including personal, demonstrative, reflexive, and omitted pronouns. 
557 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
Table 3 
Results of blind test. 
CPPR RPR OPR PPRinPP DPRinPP PPRnotPP DPRnotPP Total 
Num. of 
pronoun 
occurrences 228 80 1,099 107 20 94 49 1,677 
Num. of 
cases 
correctly 162 74 868 70 17 64 34 1,289 
resolved 
Success 
rate 71.0% 92.5% 78.9% 65.4% 85.0% 68.0% 69.3% 76.8% 
All of them were in the third person, with a noun phrase that appeared before the 
anaphor as their antecedent. Our algorithm's "recall percentage," defined as the num- 
ber of pronouns correctly resolved, divided by the total number of pronouns in the 
text, was therefore 76.8%. A breakdown of success rate results for each kind of pro- 
noun is also shown in Table 3. The pronouns were classified so as to provide the 
option of applying different kinds of knowledge to resolve each category of pronoun. 
One of the factors that affected the results was the complexity of the Lexesp corpus, 
due mainly to its complex narratives. On average, 16 words per sentence and 27 
candidates per anaphor were found in this corpus. 
In our experiment, a "successful resolution" occurred if the head of the solution 
offered by our algorithm was the same as that offered by two human experts. We 
adopted this definition of "success" because it allowed the system to be totally auto- 
matic: solutions given by the annotators were stored in a file and were later automat- 
ically compared with the solutions given by our system. Since semantic information 
was not used at all, PP attachments were not always correctly disambiguated. Hence, 
at times the differences imply corresponded to different subconstituents. 
After the evaluation process, we tested the results in order to identify the lim- 
itations of the algorithm with respect to the resolution process. We identified the 
following: 
? There were some mistakes in the POS tagging (causing an error rate of 
around 3%). 
? There were some mistakes in the partial parsing with respect o the 
identification of complex noun phrases (causing an error rate of around 
7%) (Palomar et al 1999). 
? Semantic information was not considered (causing an error rate of 
around 32%). An example of this type of error can be seen in the 
following text extracted from the Lexesp corpus: 
(27) Recuerdo, pot ejemplo, \[un pequefio claro en un bosque en 
medio de las montafias canadienses\]i, con tres lagunas diminutas 
que, a causa de los sedimentos del agua. tenfan distintos y chocantes 
colores. Esta rareza habia hecho del sitioi un espacio sagrado al que 
peregrinaron los indios durante siglos y seguramente antes los 
pobladores paleolfticos. Y eso se notaba. 
558 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
(28) 
Canad~i es un pals muy hermoso, y aqu41i no era, ni mucho 
rnenos, el lugar m~s bello: pero guardaba tranquilamente d ntro de sf 
toda su arrnonfa, como los melocotones guardan dentro de sf el duro 
hueso. 
'1 remember, for example, \[a small clearing in the woods in the 
middle of the Canadian mountains\]/, with three tiny lagoons that, 
due to the water sediments, had different and astonishing colors. 
This peculiarity had made the place/into a sacred site, to which the 
Indians made pilgrimages over the centuries, and surely even the 
Paleolithic Indians before them. And you could feel it. 
'Canada is a very beautiful country and that one/was by no 
means the most beautiful place: but it calmly kept within itself all of 
its harmony, like peaches that keep the hard seeds within.' 
In this text, the demonstrative pronoun aqudl 'that one' corefers with the 
antecedent un peque~o claro en un bosque n medio de las monta~as canadienses 
'a small clearing in the woods in the middle of the Canadian mountains', 
which is also linked to the definite noun phrase el sitio 'the place'. Our 
algorithm identified the proper noun Canadd, which is in the same 
sentence, as the anaphor, since the proper noun could only have been 
discarded by means of semantic information. 
As an example of an anaphor that was correctly resolved by the 
algorithm, we present he following sentence xtracted from the Blue 
Book corpus. In this case, the antecedent los sistemas de transmisidn 
analdgica 'the systems of analogue transmission' was correctly chosen for 
the personal pronoun ellos 'them': ' 
En las conexiones largas o de Iongitud media, es probable que la 
fuente principal de ruido de circuito estribe en \[los sistemas de 
transmisi6n anal6gica\]i, ya queen ellosi la potencia de ruido suele 
set proporcional  la Iongitud del circuito. 
'In long or medium connections, it is probable that the main source of 
circuit noise comes from \[the systems of analogue transmission\]/, 
since in them/the noise capacity is usually proportional to the length 
of the circuit.' 
The remainder of the errors were due to split antecedents (10%), 
cataphora (2%), exophora (3%), or exceptions in the application of 
preferences (43%). 
5. Comparison with Other Approaches to Anaphora Resolution 
5.1 Anaphora Resolution Approaches 
Common among all languages i the fact that the anaphora phenomenon requires im- 
ilar strategies for its resolution (e.g., pronouns or definite descriptions). All languages 
employ different kinds of knowledge, but their strategies differ only in the manner by 
which this knowledge is coordinated. For example, in some strategies just one kind 
of knowledge becomes the main selector for identifying the antecedent, with other 
kinds of knowledge being used merely to confirm or reject the proposed antecedent. 
In such cases, the typical kind of knowledge used as the selector is that of discourse 
structure. Centering theory, as employed by Strube and Hahn (1999) or Okumura and 
Tamura (1996), uses this type of approach. Other approaches, however, give equal 
559 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
importance to each kind of knowledge and generally distinguish between constraints 
and preferences (Baldwin 1997; Lappin and Leass 1994; Carbonell and Brown 1988). 
Whereas constraints tend to be absolute and therefore discard possible antecedents, 
preferences tend to be relative and require the use of additional criteria (e.g., the use of 
heuristics that are not always satisfied by all antecedents). Nakaiwa and Shirai (1996) 
use this sort of resolution model, which involves the use of semantic and pragmatic 
constraints, such as constraints based on modal expressions, or constraints based on 
verbal semantic attributes or conjunctions. 
Our approach to anaphora resolution belongs in the latter category, since it com- 
bines different kinds of knowledge and no knowledge based on discourse structure 
is included. We choose to ignore discourse structure because obtaining this kind of 
knowledge requires not only an understanding of semantics but also knowledge about 
world affairs and the ability to almost perfectly parse any text under discussion (Az- 
zam, Humphreys, and Gaizauskas 1998). 
Still other approaches to anaphora resolution are based either on machine learn- 
ing techniques (Connolly, Burger, and Day 1994; Yamamoto and Sumita 1998; Paul, 
Yamamato, and Sumita 1999) or on the principles of uncertainty reasoning (Mitkov 
1995). 
Computational processing of semantic and domain information is relatively expen- 
sive when compared with other kinds of knowledge. Consequently, current anaphora 
resolution methods rely mainly on constraint and preference heuristics, which employ 
morpho-syntactic information or shallow semantic analysis (see, for example, Mitkov 
\[1998\]). Such approaches have performed notably well. Lappin and Leass (1994) de- 
scribe an algorithm for pronominal anaphora resolution that achieves a high rate of 
correct analyses (85%). Their approach, however, operates almost exclusively on syn- 
tactic information. More recently, Kennedy and Boguraev (1996) proposed an algorithm 
for anaphora resolution that is actually a modified and extended version of the one 
developed by Lappin and Leass (1994). It works from the output of a POS tagger and 
achieves an accuracy rate of 75%. 
There are other approaches based on POS tagger outputs as well. For example, 
Mitkov and Stys (1997) propose a knowledge-poor approach to resolving pronouns 
in technical manuals in both English and Polish. The knowledge mployed in these 
approaches i limited to a small noun phrase grammar, a list of terms, and a set of 
antecedent indicators (definiteness, term preference, lexical reiteration, etc.). 
Still other approaches are based on statistical information, including the work of 
Dagan and Itai (1990, 1991) and Ge, Hale, and Charniak (1998), all of whom present a 
probabilistic model for pronoun resolution. 
We have adopted their ideas and adapted their algorithms to partial parsing and 
to Spanish texts in order to compare our results with their approaches. 
With reference to the differences between English and Spanish anaphora resolu- 
tion, we have made the following observations: 
Syntactic parallelism has played a more important role in English texts 
than in Spanish texts, since Spanish sentence structure is more flexible 
than English sentence structure. Spanish is a free-word-order language 
and has different syntactic onditions, which increases the difficulty of 
resolving Spanish pronouns (hence, the greater accuracy rate for English 
texts). 
? A greater number of possible antecedents was observed for Spanish 
pronouns than for English pronouns, due mainly to the greater average 
560 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
length of Spanish sentences (which also makes the resolution of Spanish 
pronouns more difficult). 
Spanish pronouns usually bear more morphological information. One 
result is that this constraint tends to discard more candidates in Spanish 
than in English. 
For comparison purposes, we implemented the following approaches on the same 
Spanish texts that were tested and described in Section 4.1. 
5.2 Hobbs's Algorithm 
Hobbs's algorithm (Hobbs 1978) is applied to the surface parse trees of sentences in 
a text. A surface parse tree represents the grammatical structure of a sentence. By 
reading the leaves of the parse tree from left to right, the original English sentence is
formed. The algorithm parses the tree in a predefined order and searches for a noun 
phrase of the correct gender and number. Hobbs tested his algorithm for the pronouns 
he, she, it, and they, using 100 examples taken from three different sources. Although 
the algorithm is very simple, it was successful 81.8% of the time. 
We implemented a version of Hobbs's algorithm for slot unification grammar for 
Spanish texts. Since full parsing was not done, our specifications for the algorithm 
were adjusted, as follows: 
? NPs were tested from left to right, as they were parsed in the sentence. 
? Afterward, the NPs that were included in an NP (breadth-first) were 
tested. 
? This test was interrupted when an NP agreed in gender and number 
with the anaphor. 
The problems we encountered in implementing Hobbs's algorithm are similar to 
those found in implementing other approaches: the adaptation to partial parsing, and 
the inherent difficulty of the Spanish language (i.e., its free-word-order characteristics). 
The results of our test of this version of Hobbs's algorithm on the test corpus 
appear in Table 4. 
5.3 Approaches Based on Constraints and Proximity Preference 
Our approach as also been compared with the typical baseline approach consisting of 
constraints and proximity preference; that is, the antecedent that appears closest o the 
anaphor is chosen from among those that satisfy the constraints. For this comparison, 
the same constraints that were used previously (i.e., morphological greement and 
syntactic onditions) were applied here. Then the antecedent a the head of the list of 
antecedents was proposed as the solution of the anaphor. These results are also listed 
in Table 4. As can be seen from the table, success rates were lower than those obtained 
through the joint application of all the preferences. 
5.4 Lappin and Leass's Algorithm 
An algorithm for identifying the noun phrase antecedents of third person pronouns 
and lexical anaphors (reflexive and reciprocal) is presented in Lappin and Leass (1994); 
this algorithm has exhibited a high rate (85%) of correct analyses in English texts. It 
relies on measures of salience that are derived from syntactic structures and on simple 
dynamic models of attentional state to select he antecedent oun phrase of a pronoun 
from a list of candidates. 
561 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
We have implemented a version of Lappin and Leass's algorithm for Spanish texts. 
The original formulation of the algorithm proposes a syntactic filter on NP-pronoun 
coreference. This filter consists of six conditions for NP-pronoun oncoreference within 
any sentence (Lappin and Leass 1994, page 537). In applying this algorithm to Span- 
ish texts, we changed these conditions o as to capture the appropriate context. As 
mentioned previously, our algorithm does not have access to full syntactic knowledge. 
Accordingly, we employed partial parsing over the text in our application of Lappin 
and Leass's algorithm. The salience parameters were weighted (weight appears in 
parentheses) and applied in the following way: 
? Sentence recency (100): Applied when the NP appeared in the same 
sentence as the anaphor. 
? Subject emphasis (80): Applied when the NP was located before the 
verb of the clause in which it appeared. This heuristic was necessary 
because of our algorithm's lack of syntactic knowledge. It should be 
noted, however, that since Spanish is a nearly free-word-order language 
and the exchange of subject and object positions within Spanish 
sentences i common, the heuristic is often invalid. For example, the two 
Spanish sentences Pedro compr6 un regalo 'Pedro bought a present' and Un 
regalo compr6 Pedro 'A present bought Pedro' are equivalent to one 
another and to the English sentence Pedro bought a present. 
? Existential emphasis (70): In this instance, we applied the parameter in 
the same way as Lappin and Leass, since the entire NP was fully parsed, 
which allowed us to tell when it was a definite or an indefinite NP. 
? Accusative emphasis (50): Applied when the NP appeared after the verb 
of the clause in which it appeared and the NP did not appear inside 
another NP or PP. For example, in the sentence Pedro encontr6 el libro de 
Juana 'Pedro found Juana's book', a value was assigned to el libro de Juana 
'Juana's book' but not to Juana. Once again, it should be noted that this 
heuristic was necessary because of our algorithm's lack of syntactic 
knowledge. 
? Indirect object and oblique complement emphasis (40): Applied when 
the NP appeared in a PP with the Spanish preposition a 'to', which 
usually preceded the indirect object of its sentence. 
? Head noun emphasis (80): Applied when the NP was not contained in 
another NP. 
? Nonadverbial emphasis (50): Applied when the NP was not contained 
in an adverbial PP. In this case, its application depended on the kind of 
preposition in which the NP was included. 
? Parallelism reward (35): Applied when the NP occupied the same 
position as the anaphor with reference to the verb of the sentence (before 
or after the verb). 
Finally, we followed Lappin and Leass in assigning the additional salience value 
to NPs in the current sentence and in degrading the salience of NPs in preceding 
sentences. 
Our results exhibited some similarities with Lappin and Leass's experiments. 
For example, anaphora was strongly preferred over cataphora, and both approaches 
562 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
preferred intrasentential NPs to intersentential ones. These results can be seen in 
Table 4. 
5.5 Centering Approach 
The centering model proposed by Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1983, 1995) provides 
a framework for modeling the local coherence of discourse. The model has two con- 
structs, a list of forward-looking centers and a backward-looking center, that can be 
assigned to each utterance Ui. The list of forward-looking centers Cf(Ui) ranks dis- 
course entities within the utterance Ui. The backward-looking center Cb(Ui+l) con- 
stitutes the most highly ranked element of Cf(Ui) that is finally realized in the next 
utterance Ui+l. In this way, the ranking imposed over Cf(Ui) must reflect he fact that 
the preferred center Cp(U/) (i.e., the most highly ranked element of Cf(Ui)) is most 
likely to be Cb(Ui+l). 
The ranking criteria used by Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995) order items in 
the Cf list using grammatical roles. Thus, entities with a subject role are preferred to 
entities with an object role, and objects are preferred to others (adjuncts, etc.). 
Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995) state that if any element of Cf(Ui) is realized 
by a pronoun in Ui+l, then Cb(Ui+l) must also be realized by a pronoun. 
Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard (1987) applied the centering model to pronoun 
resolution. They based their algorithm on the fact that centering transition relations 
will hold across adjacent utterances. 
Moreover, one crucial point in centering is the ranking of the forward-looking 
centers. Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995) state that Cf may be ordered using different 
factors, but they only use information about grammatical roles. However, both Strube 
(1998) and Strube and Hahn (1999) point out that it is difficult to define grammatical 
roles in free-word-order languages like German or Spanish. For languages like these, 
they propose other anking criteria dependent upon the information status of discourse 
entities. They claim that information about familiarity is crucial for the ranking of 
discourse ntities, at least in free-word-order languages. 
According to Strube's ranking criteria, two different sets of expressions, hearer- 
old discourse ntities (OLD) and hearer-new discourse ntities (NEW), can be distin- 
guished. OLD discourse ntities consist of evoked entities---coreferring resolved ex- 
pressions (pronominal and nominal anaphora, previously mentioned proper names, 
relative pronouns, appositives)--and unused entities (proper names and titles). The re- 
maining entities are assigned to the NEW set. The basic ranking criteria for pronominal 
anaphora resolution prefer OLD entities over NEW entities. 8 
Strube (1998) thus proposes the following adaptation to the centering model: 
The Cf list is replaced by the list of salient discourse ntities (S-list) 
containing discourse ntities that are realized in the current and previous 
utterance. 
? The elements of the S-list are ranked according to the basic ranking 
criteria and position information: 
If X E OLD and y C NEW, then x precedes y. 
If x, y ~ OLD or x, y E NEW, 
8 To resolve functional naphora,  third set, MED, which includes inferable information, must be added 
between the OLD and the NEW sets. However, this set is not needed to resolve pronominal naphora 
(Strube and Hahn 1999). 
563 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
Table 4 
Comparative r sults of blind test. 
Total CPPR RPR OPR PPRinPP DPRinPP PPRnotPP DPRnotPP 
Num. of 
pronoun 1,677 228 80 1,099 107 20 94 49 
occurrences 
Hobbs's 
algorithm 62.7% 61% 85% 62% 62% 50% 66% 52% 
Lappin & 
Leass's 67.4% 66% 86% 67% 65% 60% 67% 60% 
algorithm 
Proximity 52.9% 55% 86% 47% 65% 85% 61% 65% 
Centering 
approach 62.6% 60% 85% 62% 61% 60% 62% 58% 
Our 
algorithm 76.8% 71% 92% 79% 65% 85% 68% 69% 
then if utterance(y) precedes utterance(x), then x precedes y, 
if utterance(y) = utterance(x) and pos(x) < pos(y), then x precedes y. 
Since there is not a clear definition of what an utterance is, the following 
criteria are assumed: tensed clauses are defined as utterances on their 
own and untensed clauses are processed with the main clause in order to 
constitute only one utterance. 
Incorporating these adaptations, Strube (1998) then proposes the following algo- 
rithm: 
1. If a referring expression is encountered, 
(a) if it is a pronoun, test the elements of the S-list in order until the 
test succeeds; 
(b) update the S-list using information about this referring 
expression. 
2. If the analysis of utterance U is finished, remove all discourse ntities 
from the S-list that are not realized in U. 
The evaluation of this algorithm was performed in Strube (1998) and obtained a 
precision of 85.4% for English, improving upon the results of the centering algorithm 
by Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard (1987), which achieved only 72.9% precision when 
it was applied to the same corpus. 
Consequently, in adapting the centering model to Spanish anaphora resolution, we 
followed Strube's indications. The success rate of the algorithm was not satisfactory, 
as can be seen in Table 4. 
6. Conclus ions 
In this paper, we have presented an algorithm for identifying noun phrase antecedents 
of third person personal pronouns, demonstrative pronouns, reflexive pronouns, and 
564 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
omitted pronouns in Spanish. The algorithm is applied to the syntactic structure gen- 
erated by the slot unification parser--see Ferrdndez, Palomar, and Moreno (1998a, 
1998b, 1999)--and coordinates different kinds of knowledge (lexical, morphological, 
and syntactic) by distinguishing between constraints and preferences. 
The main contribution ofthis paper is the introduction ofan algorithm for anaphora 
resolution for Spanish. In our work, we have undertaken an exhaustive study of the 
importance of each kind of knowledge in anaphora resolution for Spanish. Moreover, 
we have developed a definition of syntactic onditions of NP-pronoun noncorefer- 
ence in Spanish with partial parsing. We have also adapted our anaphora resolution 
algorithm to the problem of partial syntactic knowledge, that is to say, when partial 
parsing of the text is accomplished. 
For unrestricted texts, our approach is somewhat less accurate, since semantic 
information is not taken into account. For such texts, we are dealing with the output 
of a POS tagger, which does not provide this sort of knowledge. In order to test our 
approach with texts of different genres by different authors, we have worked with 
two different Spanish corpora, literary texts (the Lexesp corpus) and technical texts 
(the Blue Book), containing a total of 1,677 pronoun occurrences. 
The algorithm successfully identified the antecedent of the pronoun for 76.8% 
of these pronoun occurrences. Other algorithms usually work with different kinds 
of knowledge, different texts, and different languages. In order to make a more valid 
comparison of our algorithm with others, we adapted the other algorithms so that they 
would operate using only partial-parsing knowledge. In this evaluation, our algorithm 
has always obtained better esults. 
Moreover, based on the results on our study of the importance of each kind 
of knowledge, we can emphasize that constraints are very important for resolving 
anaphora successfully, since they considerably reduce the number of possible candi- 
dates. 
In future studies, we will attempt to evaluate the importance of semantic informa- 
tion in unrestricted texts for anaphora resolution in Spanish texts (Saiz-Noeda, Su~rez, 
and Peral 1999). This information will be obtained from a lexical tool (e.g., Spanish 
WordNet), which can be automatically consulted (since the tagger does not provide 
this information). 
Acknowledgments 
The authors wish to thank Ferran Pla, 
Natividad Prieto, and Antonio Molina for 
contributing their tagger (Pla 2000); and 
Richard Evans, Mikel Forcada, and Rafael 
Carrasco for their helpful revisions of the 
ideas presented in this paper. We are also 
grateful to several anonymous reviewers of 
Computational Linguistics for helpful 
comments on earlier drafts of this paper. 
Our work has been supported by the 
Spanish government (CICYT) with Grant 
TIC97-0671-C02-01/02. 
References 
Azzam, Saliha, Kevin Humphreys, and 
Robert Gaizauskas. 1998. Evaluating a
focus-based approach to anaphora 
resolution. In Proceedings ofthe 36th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics and 17th International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING-ACL'98), pages 74-78, Montreal 
(Canada). 
Baldwin, Breck. 1997. CogNIAC: High 
precision coreference with limited 
knowledge and linguistic resources. In
Proceedings of the ACL/EACL Workshop on 
Operational Factors in Practical, Robust 
Anaphora Resolution for Unrestricted Texts, 
pages 38--45, Madrid (Spain). 
Brennan, Susan E., Marilyn W. Friedman, 
and Carl J. Pollard. 1987. A centering 
approach to pronouns. In Proceedings ofthe 
25th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL'87), pages 
155-162, Stanford, CA (USA). 
Carbonell, Jaime G. and Ralf D. Brown. 
1988. Anaphora resolution: A
multi-strategy approach. In Proceedings of
the 12th International Conference on 
565 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
Computational Linguistics (COLING'88), 
pages 96-101, Budapest (Hungary). 
Carletta, Jean, Amy Isard, Stephen Isard, 
Jacqueline C. Kowtko, Gwyneth 
Doherty-Sneddon, and Anne H. 
Anderson. 1997. The reliability of a 
dialogue structure coding scheme. 
Computational Linguistics, 23(1):13-32. 
Connolly, Dennis, John D. Burger, and 
David S. Day. 1994. A machine learning 
approach to anaphoric reference. In
Proceedings ofthe International Conference on 
New Methods in Language Processing 
(NEMLAP'94), pages 255-261, Manchester 
(UK). 
Dagan, Ido and Alon Itai. 1990. Automatic 
processing of large corpora for the 
resolution of anaphora references. In
Proceedings ofthe 13th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING'90), pages 330-332, Helsinki 
(Finland). 
Dagan, Ido and Alon Itai. 1991. A statistical 
filter for resolving pronoun references. In
Yishai A. Feldman and Alfred Bruckstein, 
editors, Artificial Intelligence and Computer 
Vision. Elsevier Science Publishers B. V. 
(North-Holland), Amsterdam, pages 
125-135. 
Ferrlindez, Antonio, Manuel Palomar, and 
Lidia Moreno. 1998a. A computational 
approach to pronominal anaphora, 
one-anaphora and surface count 
anaphora. In Proceedings ofthe Second 
Colloquium on Discourse Anaphora nd 
Anaphora Resolution (DAARC'98), pages 
117-128, Lancaster (UK). 
Ferr~ndez, Antonio, Manuel Palomar, and 
Lidia Moreno. 1998b. Anaphora 
resolution in unrestricted texts with 
partial parsing. In Proceedings ofthe 36th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics and 17th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING-ACL'98), pages 
385-391, Montreal (Canada). 
Ferr~fndez, Antonio, Manuel Palomar, and 
Lidia Moreno. 1999. An empirical 
approach to Spanish anaphora resolution. 
Machine Translation, 14(3/4):191-216. 
Ferr~indez, Antonio and Jestis Peral. 2000. A 
computational pproach to zero-pronouns 
in Spanish. In Proceedings ofthe 38th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL'O0), pages 
166-172, Hong Kong (China). 
Ge, Niyu, John Hale, and Eugene Charniak. 
1998. A statistical approach to anaphora 
resolution. In Proceedings ofthe Sixth 
Workshop on Ven d Large Corpora, pages 
161-170, Montreal (Canada). 
Grosz, Barbara, Aravind Joshi, and Scott 
Weinstein. 1983. Providing a unified 
account of definite noun phrases in 
discourse. In Proceedings ofthe 21st Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (ACL'83), pages 44-50, 
Cambridge, MA (USA). 
Grosz, Barbara, Aravind Joshi, and Scott 
Weinstein. 1995. Centering: A framework 
for modeling the local coherence of 
discourse. Computational Linguistics, 
21(2):203-225. 
Hobbs, Jerry R. 1978. Resolving pronoun 
references. Lingua, 44:311-338. 
Kennedy, Christopher and Branimir 
Boguraev. 1996. Anaphora for everyone: 
Pronominal anaphora resolution without 
a parser. In Proceedings ofthe 16th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING'96), pages 113-118, 
Copenhagen (Denmark). 
Lappin, Shalom and Herbert Leass. 1994. 
An algorithm for pronominal anaphora 
resolution. Computational Linguistics, 
20(4):535-561. 
Mathews, Peter H. 1997. The Concise Oxford 
Dictionary of Linguistics. Oxford University 
Press, Oxford (UK). 
Mitkov, Ruslan. 1995. An uncertainty 
reasoning approach to anaphora 
resolution. In Proceedings ofthe Natural 
Language Pacific Rim Symposium (NLPRS 
"95), pages 149-154, Seoul (Korea). 
Mitkov, Ruslan. 1998. Robust pronoun 
resolution with limited knowledge. In 
Proceedings ofthe 36th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics and 
17 th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics 
(COLING-ACL'98), pages 869-875, 
Montreal (Canada). 
Mitkov, Ruslan and Malgorzata Stys. 1997. 
Robust reference resolution with limited 
knowledge: High precision genre-specific 
approach for English and Polish. In 
Proceedings ofthe International Conference on 
Recent Advances in Natural Language 
Processing (RANLP'97), pages 74-81, 
Tzigov Chark (Bulgaria). 
Nakaiwa, Hiromi and Satoshi Shirai. 1996. 
Anaphora resolution of Japanese zero 
pronouns with deictic reference. In
Proceedings ofthe 16th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING'96), pages 812-817, Copenhagen 
(Denmark). 
Okumura, Manabu and Kouji Tamura. 1996. 
Zero pronoun resolution in Japanese 
discourse based on centering theory. In 
Proceedings ofthe 16th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics 
566 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
(COLING'96), pages 871-876, Copenhagen 
(Denmark). 
Palomar, Manuel, Antonio Ferra'ndez, Lidia 
Moreno, Maximiliano Saiz-Noeda, Rafael 
Mu~oz, Patricio Martfnez-Barco, Jestis 
Peral, and Borja Navarro. 1999. A robust 
partial parsing strategy based on the slot 
unification grammars. In Proceedings ofthe 
6th Conference on Natural Language 
Processing (TALN'99), pages 263-272, 
Corsica (France). 
Paul, Michael, Kazuhide Yamamoto, and 
Eiichiro Sumita. 1999. Corpus-based 
anaphora resolution towards antecedent 
preference. In Proceedings ofthe ACL 
Workshop on Coreference and Its Applications, 
pages 47-52, College Park, MD (USA). 
Pla, Ferran. 2000. Etiquetado Ldxico y Andlisis 
Sintdctico Super~'cial Basado en Modelos 
Estadfsticos. Ph.D. thesis, Valencia 
University of Technology, Valencia 
(Spain). 
Proyecto CRATER. 1994-1995. Corpus 
Resources And Terminology ExtRaction. 
MLAP-93/20. http: //www.lllf.uam.es / 
proyectos/crater.html (page visited on 
04/17/01). 
Reinhart, Tanya. 1983. Anaphora nd Semantic 
Interpretation. Croom Hehn Linguistics 
series. Croom Helm Ltd., Beckenham, 
Kent (UK). 
Saiz-Noeda, Maximiliano, Armando Sudrez, 
and Jestis Peral. 1999. Propuesta de 
incorporacidn de informaci6n sem~ntica 
desde Wordnet alandlisis sintdctico 
parcial orientado a la resoluci6n de la 
an~ffora. Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, 
25:167-173. 
Siegel, Sidney and John N. Castellan. 1988. 
Nonparametric Statistics for the Behavioral 
Sciences. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY 
(USA), 2nd edition. 
Strube, Michael. 1998. Never look back: An 
alternative to centering. In Proceedings of
the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics and 17th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING-ACL'98), pages 
1251-1257, Montreal (Canada). 
Strube, Michael and Udo Hahn. 1999. 
Functional centering: Grounding 
referential coherence in information 
structure. Computational Linguistics, 
25(3):309-344. 
Vieira, Renata. 1998. Processing of Definite 
Descriptions in Unrestricted Texts. Ph.D. 
thesis, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh (UK). 
Yamamoto, Kazuhide and Eiichiro Sumita. 
1998. Feasibility study for ellipsis 
resolution in dialogues by 
machine-learning technique. In 
Proceedings ofthe 36th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics and 
17th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics 
(COLING-ACL'98), pages 385-391, 
Montreal (Canada). 
567 

A Computational Approach to Zero-pronouns in
Spanish
Antonio Ferr?ndez and Jes?s Peral
Dept. Languages and Information Systems, University of Alicante
Carretera San Vicente S/N
03080 ALICANTE, Spain
{antonio, jperal}@dlsi.ua.es
Abstract
In this paper, a computational approach for
resolving zero-pronouns in Spanish texts is
proposed. Our approach has been evaluated
with partial parsing of the text and the
results obtained show that these pronouns
can be resolved using similar techniques that
those used for pronominal anaphora.
Compared to other well-known baselines on
pronominal anaphora resolution, the results
obtained with our approach have been
consistently better than the rest.
Introduction
In this paper, we focus specifically on the
resolution of a linguistic problem for Spanish
texts, from the computational point of view:
zero-pronouns in the ?subject? grammatical
position. Therefore, the aim of this paper is not
to present a new theory regarding zero-
pronouns, but to show that other algorithms,
which have been previously applied to the
computational resolution of other kinds of
pronoun, can also be applied to resolve zero-
pronouns.
The resolution of these pronouns is
implemented in the computational system called
Slot Unification Parser for Anaphora resolution
(SUPAR). This system, which was presented in
Ferr?ndez et al (1999), resolves anaphora in
both English and Spanish texts. It is a modular
system and currently it is being used for
Machine Translation and Question Answering,
in which this kind of pronoun is very important
to solve due to its high frequency in Spanish
texts as this paper will show.
We are focussing on zero-pronouns in
Spanish texts, although they also appear in other
languages, such as Japanese, Italian and
Chinese. In English texts, this sort of pronoun
occurs far less frequently, as the use of subject
pronouns is generally compulsory in the
language. While in other languages, zero-
pronouns may appear in either the subject?s or
the object?s grammatical position, (e.g.
Japanese), in Spanish texts, zero-pronouns only
appear in the position of the subject.
In the following section, we present a
summary of the present state-of-the-art for zero-
pronouns resolution. This is followed by a
description of the process for the detection and
resolution of zero-pronouns. Finally, we present
the results we have obtained with our approach.
1 Background
Zero-pronouns have already been studied in
other languages, such as Japanese, (e.g. Nakaiwa
and Shirai (1996)). They have not yet been
studied in Spanish texts, however. Among the
work done for their resolution in different
languages, nevertheless, there are several points
that are common for Spanish. The first point is
that they must first be located in the text, and
then resolved. Another common point among,
they all employ different kinds of knowledge
(e.g. morphologic or syntactic) for their
resolution. Some of these works are based on the
Centering Theory (e.g. Okumura and Tamura
(1996)). Other works, however, distinguish
between restrictions and preferences (e.g.
Lappin and Leass (1994)). Restrictions tend to
be absolute and, therefore, discard any possible
antecedents, whereas preferences tend to be
relative and require the use of additional criteria,
i.e. heuristics that are not always satisfied by all
anaphors. Our anaphora resolution approach
belongs to the second group.
In computational processing, semantic and
domain information is computationally
inefficient when compared to other kinds of
knowledge. Consequently, current anaphora
resolution methods rely mainly on restrictions
and preference heuristics, which employ
information originating from morpho-syntactic
or shallow semantic analysis, (see Mitkov
(1998) for example). Such approaches,
nevertheless, perform notably well. Lappin and
Leass (1994) describe an algorithm for
pronominal anaphora resolution that achieves a
high rate of correct analyses (85%). Their
approach, however, operates almost exclusively
on syntactic information. More recently,
Kennedy and Boguraev (1996) propose an
algorithm for anaphora resolution that is actually
a modified and extended version of the one
developed by Lappin and Leass (1994). It works
from a POS tagger output and achieves an
accuracy rate of 75%.
2 Detecting zero-pronouns
In order to detect zero-pronouns, the sentences
should be divided into clauses since the subject
could only appear between the clause
constituents. After that, a noun-phrase (NP) or a
pronoun that agrees in person and number with
the clause verb is sought, unless the verb is
imperative or impersonal.
As we are also working on unrestricted texts
to which partial parsing is applied, zero-
pronouns must also be detected when we do not
dispose of full syntactic information. In
Ferr?ndez et al (1998), a partial parsing strategy
that provides all the necessary information for
resolving anaphora is presented. That study
shows that only the following constituents were
necessary for anaphora resolution: co-ordinated
prepositional and noun phrases, pronouns,
conjunctions and verbs, regardless of the order
in which they appear in the text.
H1 Let us assume that the beginning of a new clause has
been found when a verb is parsed and a free conjunction
is subsequently parsed.
When partial parsing is carried out, one
problem that arises is to detect the different
clauses of a sentence. Another problem is how to
detect the zero-pronoun, i.e. the omission of the
subject from each clause. With regard to the first
problem, the heuristic H1 is applied to identify a
new clause.
 (1)John y Jane llegaron tarde al trabajo porque ?1 se
durmieron (John and Jane were late for work because
[they]? over-slept)
                                                     
1
 The symbol ? will always show the position of the
In this particular case, a free conjunction
does not imply conjunctions2 that join co-
ordinated noun and prepositional phrases. It
refers, here, to conjunctions that are parsed in
our partial parsing scheme. For instance, in
sentence (1), the following sequence of
constituents is parsed:
np(John and Jane), verb(were), freeWord3(late), pp(for
work), conj(because), pron(they), verb(over-slept )
Since the free conjunction porque (because)
has been parsed after the verb llegaron (were),
the new clause with a new verb durmieron
(over-slept) can be detected.
With reference to the problem about
detecting the omission of the subject from each
clause with partial parsing, it is solved by
searching through the clause constituents that
appear before the verb. In sentence (1), we can
verify that the first verb, llegaron (were), does
not have its subject omitted since there appears a
np(John and Jane). However, there is a zero-
pronoun, (they)?, for the second verb durmieron
(over-slept).
(2) Pedroj vio a Anak en el parque. ?k Estaba muy guapa
(Peterj saw Annk in the park. [She]?k was very beautiful)
When the zero-pronoun is detected, our
computational system inserts the pronoun in the
position in which it has been omitted. This
pronoun will be resolved in the following
module of anaphora resolution. Person and
number information is obtained from the clause
verb. Sometimes in Spanish, gender information
of the pronoun can be obtained when the verb is
copulative. For example, in sentence (2), the
verb estaba (was) is copulative, so that its
subject must agree in gender and number with
its object whenever the object can have either a
masculine or a feminine linguistic form (guapo:
masc, guapa: fem). We can therefore obtain
information about its gender from the object,
guapa (beautiful in its feminine form) which
automatically assigns it to the feminine gender
so the omitted pronoun would have to be she
rather than he. Gender information can be
obtained from the object of the verb with partial
                                                                          
omitted pronoun.
2
 For example, it would include punctuation marks
such as a semicolon.
3
 The free words consist of constituents that are not
covered by this partial parsing (e.g. adverbs).
parsing as we simply have to search for a NP on
the right of the verb.
3 Zero-pronoun resolution
In this module, anaphors (i.e. anaphoric
expressions such as pronominal references or
zero-pronouns) are treated from left to right as
they appear in the sentence, since, at the
detection of any kind of anaphor, the appropriate
set of restrictions and preferences begins to run.
The number of previous sentences considered
in the resolution of an anaphora is determined by
the kind of anaphora itself. This feature was
arrived at following an in depth study of Spanish
texts. For pronouns and zero-pronouns, the
antecedents in the four previous sentences, are
considered.
The following restrictions are first applied to
the list of candidates: person and number
agreement, c-command4 constraints and
semantic consistency5. This list is sorted by
proximity to the anaphor. Next, if after applying
the restrictions there is still more than one
candidate, the preferences are then applied, with
the degree of importance shown in Figure 1.
This sequence of preferences (from 1 to 10)
stops whenever only one candidate remains after
having applied a given preference. If after all the
preferences have been applied there is still more
than one candidate left, the most repeated
candidates6 in the text are then extracted from
the list, and if there is still more than one
candidate, then the candidates that have
appeared most frequently with the verb of the
anaphor are extracted from the previous list.
Finally, if after having applied all the previous
preferences, there is still more than one
candidate left, the first candidate of the resulting
list (the closest to the anaphor) is selected.
The set of constraints and preferences
required for Spanish pronominal anaphora
presents two basic differences: a) zero-pronoun
resolution has the restriction of agreement only
                                                     
4
 The usage of c-command restrictions on partial
parsing is presented in  Ferr?ndez et. al. (1998).
5
  Semantic knowledge is only used when working on
restricted texts.
6
 Here, we mean that we first obtain the maximum
number of repetitions for an antecedent in the
remaining list. After that, we extract the antecedents
that have this value of repetition from the list.
in person and number, (whereas pronominal
anaphora resolution requires gender agreement
as well), and b) a different set of preferences.
1 ) C a n d id a te s  in  th e  s a m e  s e n te n c e  a s  th e
a n a p h o r.
2 )  C a n d id a te s  in  th e  p re v io u s  s e n te n c e .
3 ) P re fe re n c e  fo r  c a n d id a te s  in  th e  s a m e
s e n te n c e  a s  th e  a n a p h o r a n d  th o s e  th a t
h a v e  b e e n  th e  s o lu t io n  o f  a  z e ro -p ro n o u n  in
th e  s a m e  s e n te n c e  a s  th e  a n a p h o r.
4 )  P re fe re n c e  fo r  p ro p e r  n o u n s  o r  in d e f in ite
N P s .
5 )  P re fe re n c e  fo r  p ro p e r  n o u n s .
6 )  C a n d id a te s  th a t  h a v e  b e e n  re p e a te d  m o re
th a n  o n c e  in  th e  te x t .
7 )  C a n d id a te s  th a t  h a v e  a p p e a re d  w ith  th e
v e rb  o f  th e  a n a p h o r m o re  th a n  o n c e .
8 )  P re fe re n c e  fo r  n o u n  p h ra s e s  th a t  a re  n o t
in c lu d e d  in  a  p re p o s it io n a l p h ra s e  o r  th o s e
th a t  a re  c o n n e c te d  to  a n  In d ire c t  O b je c t .
9 ) C a n d id a te s  in  th e  s a m e  p o s it io n  a s  th e
a n a p h o r,  w ith  re fe re n c e  to  th e  v e rb  (b e fo re
th e  v e rb ) .
1 0 )  I f  th e  z e ro -p ro n o u n  h a s  g e n d e r
in fo rm a t io n ,  th o s e  c a n d id a te s  th a t  a g re e  in
g e n d e r .
Figure 1. Anaphora resolution preferences.
The main difference between the two sets of
preferences is the use of two new preferences in
our algorithm: Nos. 3 and 10. Preference 10 is
the last preference since the POS tagger does not
indicate whether the object has both masculine
and feminine linguistic forms7 (i.e. information
obtained from the object when the verb is
copulative). Gender information must therefore
be considered a preference rather than a
restriction. Another interesting fact is that
syntactic parallelism (Preference No. 9)
continues to be one of the last preferences,
which emphasizes the unique problem that arises
in Spanish texts, in which syntactic structure is
quite flexible (unlike English).
4 Evaluation
4.1 Experiments accomplished
Our computational system (SUPAR) has been
trained with a handmade corpus8 with 106 zero-
                                                     
7
 For example in: Peter es un genio (Peter is a
genius), the tagger does not indicate that the object
does not have both masculine and feminine linguistic
forms. Therefore, a feminine subject would use the
same form: Jane es un genio (Jane is a genius).
Consequently, although the tagger says that the verb,
es (is), is copulative, and the object, un genio (a
genius) is masculine, this gender could not be used as
a restriction for the zero-pronoun in the following
sentence: ? Es un genio.
8
 This corpus has been provided by our colleagues in
pronouns. This training has mainly supposed the
improvement of the set of preferences, i.e. the
optimum order of preferences in order to obtain
the best results. After that, we have carried out a
blind evaluation on unrestricted texts.
Specifically, SUPAR has been run on two
different Spanish corpora: a) a part of the
Spanish version of The Blue Book corpus, which
contains the handbook of the International
Telecommunications Union CCITT, published
in English, French and Spanish, and
automatically tagged by the Xerox tagger, and b)
a part of the Lexesp corpus, which contains
Spanish texts from different genres and authors.
These texts are taken mainly from newspapers,
and are automatically tagged by a different
tagger than that of The Blue Book. The part of
the Lexesp corpus that we processed contains ten
different stories related by a sole narrator,
although they were written by different authors.
Having worked with different genres and
disparate authors, we feel that the applicability
of our proposal to other sorts of texts is assured.
In Figure 2, a brief description of these corpora
is given. In these corpora, partial parsing of the
text with no semantic information has been used.
Number
of words
Number of
sentences
Words per
sentence
Lexesp corpus Text 1 972 38 25.6
Text 2 999 55 18.2
Text 3 935 34 27.5
Text 4 994 36 27.6
Text 5 940 67 14
Text 6 957 34 28.1
Text 7 1025 59 17.4
Text 8 981 40 24.5
Text 9 961 36 26.7
Text 10 982 32 30.7
The Blue Book corpus 15,571 509 30.6
Figure 2. Description of the unrestricted
corpora used in the evaluation.
4.2 Evaluating the detection of zero-
pronouns
To achieve this sort of evaluation, several
different tasks may be considered. Each verb
must first be detected. This task is easily
                                                                          
the University of Alicante, which were required to
propose sentences with zero-pronouns.
accomplished since both corpora have been
previously tagged and manually reviewed. No
errors are therefore expected on verb detection.
Therefore, a recall9 rate of 100% is
accomplished. The second task is to classify the
verbs into two categories: a) verbs whose
subjects have been omitted, and b) verbs whose
subjects have not. The overall results on this sort
of detection are presented in Figure 3 (success10
rate of 88% on 1,599 classified verbs, with no
significant differences seen between the
corpora). We should also remark that a success
rate of 98% has been obtained in the detection of
verbs whose subjects were omitted, whereas
only 80% was achieved for verbs whose subjects
were not. This lower success rate is justified,
however, for several reasons. One important
reason is the non-detection of impersonal verbs
by the POS tagger. This problem has been partly
resolved by heuristics such as a set of
impersonal verbs (e.g. llover (to rain)), but it has
failed in some impersonal uses of some verbs.
For example, in sentence (3), the verb es (to be)
is not usually impersonal, but it is in the
following sentence, in which SUPAR would
fail:
(3) ? Es hora de desayunar ([It]? is time to have breakfast)
Two other reasons for the low success rate
achieved with verbs whose subjects were not
omitted are the lack of semantic information and
the inaccuracy of the grammar used. The second
reason is the ambiguity and the unavoidable
incompleteness of the grammars, which also
affects the process of clause splitting.
In Figure 3, an interesting fact can be
observed: 46% of the verbs in these corpora
have their subjects omitted. It shows quite
clearly the importance of this phenomenon in
Spanish. Furthermore, it is even more important
in narrative texts, as this figure shows: 61% with
the Lexesp corpus, compared to 26% with the
technical manual. We should also observe that
The Blue Book has no verbs in either the first or
the second person. This may be explained by the
style  of  the   technical   manual,  which  usually
                                                     
9
 By  ?recall rate?, we mean the number of verbs
classified, divided by the total number of verbs in the
text.
10
 By  ?success rate?, we mean the number of verbs
successfully classified, divided by the total number of
verbs in the text.
Verbs with their subject omitted Verbs with their subject no-omitted
First person Second person Third person First person Second person Third person
Total %
Success
Total %
Success
Total %
Success
Total %
Success
Total %
Success
Total %
Success
111 100% 42 100% 401 99% 21 81% 3 100% 328 76%
20% 7% 73% 7% 1% 92%
Lexesp
corpus
554 (61%) (success rate: 99%) 352 (39%) (success rate: 76%)
0 0% 0 0% 180 97% 0 0% 0 0% 513 82%
0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 100%
Blue
Book
corpus
180 (26%) (success rate: 97%) 513 (74%) (success rate: 82%)
734 (46%) (success rate: 98%) 865 (54%) (success rate: 80%)Total
1,599 (success rate: 88%)
Figure 3. Results obtained in the detection of zero-pronouns.
consists of a series of isolated definitions, (i.e.
many paragraphs that are not related to one
another). This explanation is confirmed by the
relatively small number of anaphors that are
found in that corpus, as compared to the Lexesp
corpus.
We have not considered comparing our
results with those of other published works,
since, (as we have already explained in the
Background section), ours is the first study that
has been done specifically for Spanish texts, and
the designing of the detection stage depends
mainly on the structure of the language in
question. Any comparisons that might be made
concerning other languages, therefore, would
prove to be rather insignificant.
4.3 Evaluating anaphora resolution
As we have already shown in the previous
section, (Figure 3), of the 1,599 verbs classified
in these two corpora, 734 of them have zero-
pronouns. Only 581 of them, however, are in
third person and will be resolved. In Figure 4,
we present a classification of these third person
zero-pronouns, which have been conveniently
divided into three categories: cataphoric,
exophoric and anaphoric. The first category is
comprised of those whose antecedent, i.e. the
clause subject, comes after the verb. For
example, in sentence (4) the subject, a boy,
appears after the verb compr? (bought).
(4) ?k Compr? un ni?ok en el supermercado (A boyk bought
in the supermarket)
This kind of verb is quite common in
Spanish, as can be seen in this figure (49%).
This fact represents one of the main difficulties
found in resolving anaphora in Spanish: the
structure of a sentence is more flexible than in
English. These represent intonationally marked
sentences, where the subject does not occupy its
usual position in the sentence, i.e. before the
verb. Cataphoric zero-pronouns will not be
resolved in this paper, since semantic
information is needed to be able to discard all of
their antecedents and to prefer those that appear
within the same sentence and clause after the
verb. For example, sentence (5) has the same
syntactic structure than sentence (4), i.e. verb,
np, pp, where the subject function of the np can
only be distinguished from the object by means
of semantic knowledge.
(5) ? Compr? un regalo en el supermercado ([He]? bought
a present in the supermarket)
The second category consists of those zero-
pronouns whose antecedents do not appear,
linguistically, in the text (they refer to items in
the external world rather than things referred to
in the text). Finally, the third category is that of
pronouns that will be resolved by our
computational system, i.e., those whose
antecedents come before the verb: 228 zero-
pronouns. These pronouns would be equivalent
to the full pronoun he, she, it or they.
AnaphoricCataphoric Exophoric
Number Success
Lexesp
corpus
171 (42%) 56 (12%) 174 (46%) 78%
The Blue
Book corpus
113 (63%) 13 (7%) 54 (30%) 68%
Total 284 (49%) 69 (12%) 228 (39%) 75%
Figure 4. Classification of third person zero-
pronouns.
The different accuracy results are also shown
in Figure 4: A success rate of 75% was attained
for the 228 zero-pronouns. By ?successful
resolutions? we mean that the solutions offered
by our system agree with the solutions offered
by two human experts.
For each zero-pronoun there is, on average,
355 candidates before the restrictions are
applied, and 11 candidates after restrictions.
Furthermore, we repeated the experiment
without applying restrictions and the success
rate was significantly reduced.
Since the results provided by other works
have been obtained on different languages, texts
and sorts of knowledge (e.g. Hobbs and Lappin
full parse the text), direct comparisons are not
possible. Therefore, in order to accomplish this
comparison, we have implemented some of
these approaches in SUPAR. Although some of
these approaches were not proposed for zero-
pronouns, we have implemented them since as
our approach they could also be applied to solve
this kind of pronoun. For example, with the
baseline presented by Hobbs (1977) an accuracy
of 49.1% was obtained, whereas, with our
system, we achieved 75% accuracy. These
results highlight the improvement accomplished
with our approach, since Hobbs? baseline is
frequently used to compare most of the work
done on anaphora resolution11. The reason why
Hobbs? algorithm works worse than ours is due
to the fact that it carries out a full parsing of the
text. Furthermore, the way to explore the
syntactic tree with Hobbs? algorithm is not the
best one for the Spanish language since it is
nearly a free-word-order language.
Our proposal has also been compared with
the typical baseline of morphological agreement
and proximity preference, (i.e., the antecedent
                                                     
11
 In Tetreault (1999), for example, it is compared
with an adaptation of the Centering Theory by Grosz
et al (1995), and Hobbs? baseline out-performs it.
that appears closest to the anaphor is chosen
from among those that satisfy the restrictions).
The result is a 48.6% accuracy rate. Our system,
therefore, improves on this baseline as well.
Lappin and Leass (1994) has also been
implemented in our system and an accuracy of
64% was attained. Moreover, in order to
compare our proposal with Centering approach,
Functional Centering by Strube and Hahn (1999)
has also been implemented, and an accuracy of
60% was attained.
One of the improvements afforded by our
proposal is that statistical information from the
text is included with the rest of information
(syntactic, morphologic, etc.). Dagan and Itai
(1990), for example, developed a statistical
approach for pronominal anaphora, but the
information they used was simply the patterns
obtained from the previous analysis of the text.
To be able to compare our approach to that of
Dagan and Itai, and to be able to evaluate the
importance of this kind of information, our
method was applied with statistical
information12 only. If there is more than one
candidate after applying statistical information,
preference, and then proximity preference are
applied. The results obtained were lower than
when all the preferences are applied jointly:
50.8%. These low results are due to the fact that
statistical information has been obtained from
the beginning of the text to the pronoun. A
previous training with other texts would be
necessary to obtain better results.
Regarding the success rates reported in
Ferr?ndez et al (1999) for pronominal
references (82.2% for Lexesp, 84% for Spanish
version of The Blue Book, and 87.3% for the
English version), are higher than our 75%
success rate for zero-pronouns. This reduction
(from 84% to 75%) is due mainly to the lack of
gender information in zero-pronouns.
Mitkov (1998) obtains a success rate of
89.7% for pronominal references, working with
English technical manuals. It should be pointed
out, however, that he used some knowledge that
was very close to the genre13 of the text. In our
                                                     
12
 This statistical information consists of the number
of times that a word appears in the text and the
number of times that it appears with a verb.
13
 For example, the antecedent indicator section
heading preference, in which if a NP occurs in the
heading of the section, part of which is the current
study, such information was not used, so we
consider our approach to be more easily
adaptable to different kinds of texts. Moreover,
Mitkov worked exclusively with technical
manuals whereas we have worked with narrative
texts as well. The difference observed is due
mainly to the greater difficulty found in
narrative texts than in technical manuals which
are generally better written. In any case, the
applicability of our proposal to different genres
of texts seems to have been well proven.
Anyway, if the order of application of the
preferences14 is varied to each different text, an
80% overall accuracy rate is attained. This fact
implies that there is another kind of knowledge,
close to the genre and author of the text that
should be used for anaphora resolution.
Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed the first
algorithm for the resolution of zero-pronouns in
Spanish texts. It has been incorporated into a
computational system (SUPAR). In the
evaluation, several baselines on pronominal
anaphora resolution have been implemented, and
it has achieved better results than either of them
have.
As a future project, the authors shall attempt
to evaluate the importance of semantic
information for zero-pronoun resolutions in
unrestricted texts. Such information will be
obtained from a lexical tool, (e.g.
EuroWordNet), which could be consulted
automatically. We shall also evaluate our
proposal in a Machine Translation application,
where we shall test its success rate by its
generation of the zero-pronoun in the target
language, using the algorithm described in Peral
et al (1999).
References
Ido Dagan and Alon Itai (1990) Automatic
processing of large corpora for the resolution of
anaphora references. In Proceedings of the 13th
                                                                          
sentence, it is considered to be the preferred
candidate.
14
 The difference between  the individual sets of
preferences is  the degree of  importance of the
preferences for proper nouns and syntactic
parallelism.
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, COLING (Helsinki, Finland).
Antonio Ferr?ndez, Manuel Palomar and Lidia
Moreno (1998) Anaphora resolution in unrestricted
texts with partial parsing. In Proceedings of the 36th
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and 17th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics,
COLING - ACL (Montreal, Canada). pp. 385-391.
Antonio Ferr?ndez, Manuel Palomar and Lidia
Moreno (1999) An empirical approach to Spanish
anaphora resolution. To appear in Machine
Translation 14(2-3).
Jerry Hobbs (1977) Resolving pronoun references.
Lingua, 44. pp. 311-338.
Cristopher Kennedy and Bran Boguraev (1996)
Anaphora for Everyone: Pronominal Anaphora
resolution without a Parser. In Proceedings of the
16th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, COLING (Copenhagen, Denmark). pp.
113-118.
Shalom Lappin and Herb Leass (1994) An algorithm
for pronominal anaphora resolution. Computational
Linguistics, 20(4). pp. 535-561.
Ruslan Mitkov (1998) Robust pronoun resolution
with limited knowledge. In Proceedings of the 36th
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and 17th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics,
COLING - ACL (Montreal, Canada). pp. 869-875.
Hiromi Nakaiwa and Satoshi Shirai (1996) Anaphora
Resolution of Japanese Zero Pronouns with Deictic
Reference. In Proceedings of the 16th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics,
COLING (Copenhagen, Denmark). pp. 812-817.
Manabu Okumura and Kouji Tamura (1996) Zero
Pronoun Resolution in Japanese Discourse Based
on Centering Theory. In Proceedings of the 16th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, COLING (Copenhagen, Denmark). pp.
871-876.
Jes?s Peral, Manuel Palomar and Antonio Ferr?ndez
(1999) Coreference-oriented Interlingual Slot
Structure and Machine Translation. In Proceedings
of ACL Workshop on Coreference and its
Applications (College Park, Maryland, USA). pp.
69-76.
Michael Strube and Udo Hahn (1999) Functional
Centering ? Grounding Referential Coherence in
Information Structure. Computational Linguistics,
25(5). pp. 309-344.
An Application of the Interlingua System ISS for Spanish-English 
Pronominal Anaphora Generation, 
Jesfis Peral and Antonio Ferrfindez 
Research Group on Language Processing and Information Systems. 
Department ofSoftware and Computing Systems. University of Alicante. 
03690 San Vicente del Raspeig. Aiicante, Spain. 
{jperal, antonio} @dlsi.ua.es 
Abstract 
In this ~paper, we present he Interlingua 
system ISS to generate the pronominal 
anaphora into the Spanish and English 
languages. We also describe the main 
problems in the pronoun generation into 
both languages such as zero-subject 
constructions and number, gender and 
syntactic differences. Our system improves 
other proposals presented so far due to the 
fact that we are able to solve and generate 
intersentential anaphora, to detect 
coreference chains and to generate Spanish 
zero-pronouns into English, issues that are 
hardly considered by other systems. Finally, 
we provide outstanding results of our system 
on unrestricted corpora. 
Introduction 
One of the main problems of many commercial 
Machine Translation (MT) and experimental 
systems is that they do not carry out a correct 
pronominal anaphora generation. Solving the 
anaphora nd extracting the antecedent are key 
issues in a correct generation into the target 
language. Unfortunately, the majority of MT 
systems do not deal with anaphora resolution 
and their successful operation usually does not 
go beyond the sentence l vel. In this paper, we 
present acomplete approach that allows pronoun 
resolution and generation into the target 
language. 
Our approach works on unrestricted texts 
unlike other systems, like the KANT interlingua 
system (Leavitt et al (1994)), that are designed 
for well-defined omains. Although full parsing 
of these texts could be applied, we have used 
partial parsing of the texts due to the 
unavoidable incompleteness of the grammar. 
This is a main difference with the majority of the 
interlingua systems such as the DLT system 
based on a modification of Esperanto (Witkam 
(1983)), the Rosetta system which is 
experimenting with Montague semantics as the 
basis for an interlingua (Appelo and 
Landsbergen (1986)), the KANT system, etc. as 
they use full parsing of the text. 
After the parsing and solving pronominal 
anaphora, an interlingua representation f the 
whole text is obtained. In the interlingua 
representation no semantic information is used 
as input, unlike some approaches that have as 
input semantic information of the constituents 
(Miyoshi et al (1997), Castell6n et al (1998), 
the DLT system, etc). 
From this interlingua representation, the 
generation of anaphora (including intersentential 
anaphora), the detection of coreference hains of 
the whole text and the generation of Spanish 
zero-pronouns into English have been carried 
out, issues that are hardly considered by other 
systems. Furthermore, this approach can be used 
for other different applications, e.g. Information 
Retrieval, Summarization, etc. 
The paper is organized as follows: In section 1, 
the complete approach that includes Analysis, 
Interlingua and Generation modules will be 
described. These modules will be explained in 
detail in the next three sections. In section 5, the 
Generation module has been evaluated in order 
! This paper has been partly financed by the collaborative r search project between Spain and The United Kingdom 
number HB 1998-0068. 
42 
to measure the efficiency of our proposal. To do 
so, two experiments have been accomplished: 
the generation of Spanish zero-pronouns into 
English (syntactic generation module) and the 
generation of English pronouns into Spanish 
ones (morphological generation module). 
Finally, the conclusions of this work will be 
presented. 
1 System Architecture 
The complete approach that solves and generates 
the anaphor is based on the scheme of Figure 1. 
Translation is carried out in two stages: from the 
source language to the Interlingua, nd from the 
Interlingua into the target language. Modules for 
analysis are independent from modules for 
generation..In this paper, although we have only 
studied the Spanish and English languages, our 
approach is easily extended to other languages, 
i.e. multilingual system, in the sense that any 
analysis module can be linked to any generation 
module. 
1 
I NLPproblem I NLPproblem I i 
\[ Spanish 8enefation \[ \[ English generation I 
Figure 1. System architecture. 
As can be observed in Figure 1, there are 
three independent modules in the process of 
generation: Analysis, Interlingua nd Generation 
modules. 
2 Analysis module 
The analysis is carried out by means of SUPAR 
(Slot Unification Parser for Anaphora 
resolution) system, presented in Femindez et al 
(2000). SUPAR is a computational system 
focused on anaphora resolution. It can deal with 
several kinds of anaphora, such as pronominal 
anaphora, one-anaphora, surface-count anaphora 
and definite descriptions. In this paper, we focus 
on pronominal anaphora resolution and 
generation into the target language. In 
pronominal anaphora resolution in both the 
Spanish and English languages, the system has 
achieved an accuracy of 84% and 87% 
respectively. 
A grammar defined by means of the 
grammatical formalism SUG (Slot Unification 
Grammar) is used as input of SUPAR. A 
translator that transforms SUG rules into Prolog 
clauses has been developed. This translator will 
provide a Prolog program that will parse each 
sentence. SUPAR allows to carry out either a full 
or a partial parsing of the text, with the same 
parser and grammar. Here, partial parsing 
techniques have been used due to the 
unavoidable incompleteness of the grammar and 
the use of unrestricted texts (corpora) as inputs. 
These unrestricted corpora used as input for 
the partial parser contain the words tagged with 
their grammatical categories obtained from the 
output of a part-of-speech (POS) tagger. The 
word, as it appears in the corpus, its lemma nd 
its POS tag (with morphological information) is
supplied for each word in the corpus. The corpus 
is split into sentences before applying the 
parsing. 
The output of the parsing module will be 
the Slot Structure (SS) that stores the necessary 
information 2 for Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) problem resolution. This SS will be the 
input for the following module in which NLP 
problems (anaphora, extraposition, ellipsis, etc.) 
will be treated and solved. 
In Fernindez et al (1998), a partial parsing 3 
strategy that provides all the necessary 
information for resolving anaphora is presented. 
This partial parsing shows that only the 
following constituents are necessary for 
anaphora resolution: co-ordinated prepositional 
and noun phrases, pronouns, conjunctions and 
2 The SS stores for each constituent the following 
information: constituent name (NP, PP, etc.), 
semantic and morphologic information, discourse 
marker (identifier of the entity or discourse object) 
and the SS of its subconstituents. 
3 It is important to emphasize that he system allows 
to carry out a full parsing of the text. In this paper, 
partial parsing with no semantic nformation is used 
in the evaluation ofour approach. 
43 
verbs, regardless of the order in which they 
appear in the text. The free words consist of 
constituents hat are not covered by this partial 
parsing (e.g. adverbs). 
After applying the anaphora resolution 
module, a new Slot Structure (SS') is obtained. 
In this new structure the correct antecedent 
(chosen from the possible candidates) for each 
anaphoric expression will be stored together 
with its morphological and semantic 
information. SS' will be the input for the 
lnterlingua system. 
3 Interl ingua system (ISS) 
As said before, the Interlingua system takes the 
SS of the sentence after applying the anaphora 
resolution module as input. This system, named 
lnterlingua Slot Structure (1SS), generates an 
interlingua representation from the SS of the 
sentence. 
SUPAR generates one SS for each sentence 
from the whole text and it solves intrasentential 
and intersententiai anaphora. Then, 1SS 
generates the interlingua representation f the 
whole text. This is one of the main advantages 
of 1SS because it is possible to generate 
intersentential pronominal naphora. 
To begin with, 1SS splits sentences into 
clauses 4.To identify a new clause when partial 
parsing has been carried out, the following 
heuristic has been applied: 
H1 Let us assume that the beginning of a new 
clause has been found when a verb is parsed 
and a free conjunction is subsequently parsed. 
In this particular case, a free conjunction 
does not imply conjunctions that join co- 
ordinated noun and prepositional phrases. It 
refers, here, to conjunctions that are parsed in 
our partial parsing scheme. 
Once the text has been split into clauses, 
the next stage is to generate the interlingua 
representation for clauses. We have used a 
complex feature structure for each clause. In 
Figure 2 the information of the first clause of the 
example (1) is presented: 
(1) The boys of the mountains were in the 
garden. They were catching flowers. 
4 A clause could be defined as "a group of words 
containing a verb". 
( Verb: be "\] 
1Number: plural 1 
ACTION= .~ Person: third 
1 Tense: past \] 
L Type: impersonalJ 
("Cat: NP "~ 
\]Identifier: X \[ 
I Head: boy \[ 
) Number: plural 
AGENT= ~ Gender: masculine 
I Person: third \[ 
I MODIFIER: of the mountains \[ 
~Sem_Re f: human J 
THEME={} 
f Cat: PP 
Identifier: Y 
Prep: in . ~Cat: NP 
\[Identifier: Z 
MODIFIER= ~ I Head: garden 
L 
..~ Number: singular 
ENTITY= ~ (3ender: masculine 
\[Person: third 
~, Sere Ref: location 
Figure 2. lnterlingua representation fa clause. 
As can be observed in Figure 25 , the 
interlingua is a frame composed of semantic 
roles and features extracted from the SS of the 
clause. Semantic roles that have been used in 
this approach are the following: ACTION, 
AGENT, THEME and MODIFIER that 
correspond to verb, subject, object and 
prepositional phrases of the clause respectively. 
The notation we have used is based on the 
representation used in KANT interlingua. To 
identify these semantic roles when partial 
parsing has been carried out and no semantic 
knowledge is used, the following heuristic has 
been applied: 
H2 Let us assume that the NP parsed before 
the verb is the agent of the clause. In the same 
way, the NP parsed after the verb is the theme 
of the clause. Finally., all the PP found in the 
clause are its modifiers. 
5 Only the relevant attributes of each semantic role 
appear in a simplified way in the picture. Additional 
attributes are added to the semantic roles in order to 
complete all the necessary information for the 
interlingua representation. 
44 
In Figure 2 the following elements have 
been found: ACTION= 'were', AGENT = 'the 
boys of the mountains', THEME= ~ (it has not 
been found any NP after the verb) and 
MODIFIER = 'in the garden'. These elements 
are represented by a simple feature structure. 
Features are represented asattributes with their 
corresponding values. 
The semantic role ACTION has the 
following attributes: Verb with the value of the 
lemma of the verb; Number, Person and Tense 
(grammatical features) and Type with the type of 
the verb: impersonal, transitive, etc. 
'The semantic role AGENT has the 
following fiitributes: Cat that contains the 
syntactic ategory of the constituent; Identifier 
with the value of the discourse marker; Head 
that contains the lemma of the constituent's 
head; Number, Gender and Person contain 
grammatical features of the constituent; 
MODIFIER that contains all the information 
about he modifiers (PP) of the NP, and Sem_Ref 
that contains semantic information about the 
constituent's head if this information is 
available. The semantic role THEME has the 
same attributes as the semantic role AGENT, i.e. 
the difference is that THEME is the object of the 
clause and AGENT is the subject. 
Finally, the semantic role MODIFIER has 
the following attributes: Cat that contains the 
syntactic ategory of the constituent; Identifier 
with the value of the discourse marker; Prep 
with the preposition of the constituent and 
ENTITY, which is the object of the PP and 
contains the same attributes as the THEME. 
One clause can have more than one MODIFIER 
depending on the number of PP that it has. It is 
important to emphasize that all this information 
is extracted from the SS of the constituents 
parsed in the clause. 
As said before, instead of representing the 
clauses independently, we are interested in the 
interlingua representation of the whole input 
text. With the global representation f the input 
text we will be able to generate intrasentential 
and intersentential anaphora. Furthermore, it will 
be possible to solve and generate coreference 
chains. Thereby, the scheme of Figure 2 is 
extended in order to represent all the discourse 
using the clauses as main units of this 
representation. In Figure 3 the interlingua 
representation f the whole text of the example 
(1) can be observed. 
ENITTY I 
Cat: NP 
Identifier: V 
Head: boy 
Numb, Gend, Pers: 
plural, mase, thlrd 
MODIFIER: 
Sem_Ret~ human 
ENI'IIT 2 
Cat:. NP 
Identifier: X 
Head: mountain 
Numb, Gend, Pets: 
pl, fern, third 
Sern_Ref: location 
ENTITY 3 
Cat: NP t Identifier: Y 
Head: garden 
Numb, Oend, Pets: 
sing, masc., third 
Sum Ref: location 
ENIITY 4 
Cat: NP 
Identifier: Z 
Head: flower 
Numb, Gend, Pets: 
plural, fem, third 
Sem_Ref: thing 
CLAUSE 1 
Sentence 1D: 1 
ACTION~ be 
MODIFIER: 
Cat: PP, Id: Q, 
Prep: in 
COREFERENCE 
CHAIN 
Cl.d USE 2 
Sentence ID: 2 
ACTIO/'~ catch 
.THEME: Z 
AGENT: 
\[ Type, Num, Gcnd 
\[ Person, Head 
I ENTITY:V 
Figure 3. Interlingua representation f 
example (1). 
On the left side of Figure 3 the new objects 
or entities of the discourse are represented. 
These objects are named ENTITIES and 
contain the following attributes: Cat, Identifier, 
Head, Number, Gender, Person and Sem_Ref, 
due to they can represent an AGENT, a 
THEME or an object in a MODIFIER. 
On the right side, the CLAUSES of the 
text are represented in a simplified way. They 
contain the semantic role. ACTION with its 
attributes and the semantic roles AGENT, 
THEME and MODIFIER that have appeared 
in the clause. These semantic roles are linked to 
the ENTITIES that they refer to. It also contains 
the identifier of the sentence in which the 
CLAUSE appears (Sentence lD) and the 
Conjunction that joints two or more CLAUSES 
in a sentence. 
45 
In the picture, four ENTITIES and two 
CLAUSES can be distinguished. The 
ENTITIES are as follows: ENTITY 1 ('boy'), 
ENTITY 2 ('mountain), ENTITY 3 ('garden') 
and ENTITY 4 ('flower'). Moreover, a relation 
between two ENTITIES (number 1and number 
2) appears in the picture due to the ENTITY1 
(NP) contains aMODIFIER (PP). 
The CLAUSE 1 contains: Sentence 1D 
(' 1 '), ACTION ('be'), AGENT ('V', the link to 
ENTITY 1) and MODIFIER (which is a PP 
and contains the link to ENTITY 3). The 
CLAUSE 2 contains: Sentence_lD ('2'), 
'ACTION ('catch'), AGENT (which is a 
PRONOUN and contains the link to ENTITY 1) 
and THEME ('Z', the link to ENTITY 4). 
The coreference chain can be identified 
thanks to AGENTS of CLAUSE 1 and 
CLAUSE 2 ('the boys' and 'they') have their 
links to the same ENTITY. As can be seen, 
these links can occur between constituents of 
different clauses or different sentences. Then, 
the global system is able to generate 
intersentential anaphora and identify the 
coreferenee chains of the text. 
4 Generation module 
The Generation module takes the interlingua 
representation f the text as input and generates 
it into the target language. In this paper, we are 
only describing the generation of pronouns. The 
generation phase is split into two modules: 
syntactic generation and morphological 
generation. In the next two subsections they will 
be studied in detail. Although the approach 
presented here is multilingual, we have focused 
on the generation i to the Spanish and English 
languages. 
4.1 Syntactic generation 
In syntactic generation the interlingua 
representation is converted by 'transformational 
rules' into an ordered surface-structure tr e, with 
appropriate labeling of the leaves with target 
language grammatical functions and features. 
The basic task of syntactic generation is to order 
constituents in the correct sequence for the target 
language. However, the aim of this work is only 
the generation of pronominal anaphora into the 
target language, so we have only focused on the 
differences between the Spanish and English 
languages in the generation of the pronoun. 
These differences are what we have named 
discrepancies (a study of Spanish-English- 
Spanish discrepancies is showed in Peral et aL 
(1999)). In syntactic generation the following 
discrepancies can be found: syntactic 
discrepancies and Spanish elliptical zero-subject 
constructions. 
4.1.1 Syntactic discrepancies 
This discrepancy is due to the fact that the 
surface structures of the Spanish sentences are 
more flexible than the English ones. The 
constituents of the Spanish sentences can appear 
without a specific order in the sentence. In order 
to carry out a correct generation i to English, we 
must firstly reorganize the Spanish sentence. 
Nevertheless, in the English-Spanish translation, 
in general, this reorganization is not necessary. 
Let us see an example with the Spanish 
sentence 
(2) A Pedro Io vi ayer. 
(I saw Peter yesterday.) 
In (2), the object of the verb, A Pedro (to 
Peter), appears before the verb (in the position 
of the theoretically subject) and the subject is 
omitted (this phenomena is usual in Spanish and 
it will be explained in the next subsection). The 
PP A Pedro (to Peter) functions as an indirect 
object of the verb (because it has the preposition 
A (to)). We can find out the subject since the 
verb is in first person and singular, so the subject 
would be the pronoun Yo (1). Moreover, there is 
a pronoun, lo (him) that functions as 
complement of the verb vi (saw). This pronoun 
in Spanish refers to the object of the verb, Peter, 
when it is moved from its theoretical place after 
the verb (as it occurs in this sentence). 
As explained before, it is possible to 
identify the semantic roles (AGENT, ACTION, 
etc.) of the previous constituents in the 
CLAUSE applying a series of heuristics. Once 
the semantic roles of the constituents have been 
established, they will be stored in the interlingua 
representation. The generation i to English will 
be a new clause in which the order of the 
constituents i the usual in English: AGENT, 
ACTION, THEME and MODIFIERS. 
46 
4.1.2 Elliptical zero-subject constructions 
(zero-pronouns) 
As commented before, the Spanish language 
allows to omit the pronominal subject of the 
sentences. These omitted pronouns are usually 
named zero-pronouns. While in other languages, 
zero-pronouns may appear in either the subject's 
or the object's grammatical position, (e.g. 
Japanese), in Spanish texts, zero-pronouns only 
appear in the position of the subject. In English 
texts, this sort of pronoun occurs far less 
frequently, as the use of them are generally 
compulsory in the language. Nevertheless, some 
examples can be found: "Ross carefully folded 
his trousers and ~.climbed into bed". (The 
symbol ~ shows the position of the omitted 
pronoun).. Target languages with typical 
elliptical (zero) constructions corresponding to
source English pronouns are Italian, Thai, 
Chinese or Japanese. 
In order to generate Spanish zero-pronouns 
into English, they must first be located in the 
text (ellipsis detection), and then resolved 
(anaphora resolution). At the ellipsis detection 
stage, information about the zero-pronoun (e.g. 
person, gender, and number) must first be 
obtained from the verb of the clause and then 
used to identify the antecedent of the zero- 
pronoun (resolution stage). The detection 
process depends on the knowledge about the 
structure of the language itself, which gives us 
clues to the use of each type of zero-pronoun. 
The resolution of zero-pronouns has been 
implemented in SUPAR. As we may work on 
unrestricted texts to which partial parsing is 
applied, zero-pronouns must also be detected 
when we do not dispose of full syntactic 
information. Once the input text has been split 
into clauses after applying the heuristic H1, the 
next problem consists of the detection of the 
omission of the subject from each clause. 
If partial parsing techniques have been 
applied, we can establish the following heuristic 
to detect he omission of the subject from each 
clause: 
H3 After the sentence has been divided into 
clauses, a noun phrase or a pronoun is sought, 
for each clause, through the clause constituents 
on the left-hand side of the verb, unless it is 
imperative or impersonal. Such a noun phrase 
or pronoun must agree in person and number 
with the verb of the clause. 
Sometimes, gender information of the 
pronoun can be obtained when the verb is 
copulative. For example, in: 
(3) Pedroj vio a Anak en el parque. Ok Estaba 
muy guapa. 
(Peterj saw Annk in the park. Shek was very 
beautiful.) 
In this example, the verb estaba (was) is 
copulative, so that its subject must agree in 
gender and number with its object whenever the 
object can have either a masculine or a feminine 
linguistic form (guapo: masc, guapa: fem). We 
can therefore get information about its gender 
from the object, guapa ("beautiful" in its 
feminine form) which automatically assigns it to 
the feminine gender so the omitted pronoun 
would have to be she rather than he. 
After the zero-pronoun has been detected, 
SUPAR inserts the pronoun (with its information 
of person, gender and number) in the position in 
which it has been omitted. This pronoun will be 
detected and resolved in the following module of 
anaphora resolution. After that, ISS generates the 
interlingua representation f the text. 
In the example (3), two CLAUSES are 
identified. In the second CLAUSE the zero- 
pronoun is detected (third person, singular and 
feminine -she-) and solved (third person, 
singular and feminine -Ann-). So the AGENT of 
this CLAUSE is the PRONOUN she and it has a 
link to the ENTITY Ann (the chosen 
antecedent). 
Now, the generation of Spanish zero- 
pronouns into English is easy because all the 
information that it is needed is located in the 
interlingua representatio.n. The English 
pronoun's information is extracted in the 
following way: number and person information 
are obtained from the PRONOUN and gender 
information is obtained from the Head of its 
antecedent. 
47 
4.2 Morphological generation 
In the morphological generation we mainly have 
to treat and solve number and gender 
discrepancies in the generation of pronouns. 
4.2.1 Number discrepancies 
This problem is generated by the discrepancy 
between words of different languages that 
express the same concept. These words can be 
referred to a singular pronoun in the source 
language and to a plural pronoun in the target 
language. For example, in English the concept 
.people is plural, whereas in Spanish is singular. 
(4) Tile stadium was full of peoplej. They~ were 
very angry withthe referee. 
(5) El estadio estaba /leno de gentei. ~stai 
estaba muy enfadada con el ~rbitro. 
In (4), it can be observed that the name 
people in English has been replaced with the 
plural pronoun they, whereas in Spanish (5) the 
name gente has been replaced with the singular 
pronoun dsta (it). Gender discrepancies also 
exist in the translation of other languages such 
as in the German-English translation. 
In order to take into account number 
discrepancies in the generation of the pronoun 
into the target language a set of morphological 
(number) rules is constructed. 
In the generation of the pronoun They into 
Spanish in the example (4), the interlingua 
representation has a PRONOUN ('they', third 
person and plural) that it is linked to the 
ENTITY ('police', plural). For the correct 
generation into Spanish the following 
morphological rule is constructed: 
pronoun + third..person + plural + antecedent 
(~olice') ~ ~sta (pronoun, third person, 
feminine and singular) 
The left-hand side of the morphological 
rule contains the interlingua representation of
the pronoun and the right-hand side contains the 
pronoun in the target language. 
In the same way, a set of morphological 
rules is constructed in order to generate English 
pronouns. Next, an example of these rules is 
shown: 
pronoun + third_person + singular + antecedent 
('policla~ ~ they (pronoun, third person and 
plural) 
4.2.2 Gender discrepancies 
English has less morphological information than 
Spanish. With reference to plural personal 
pronouns, the pronoun we can be translated into 
nosotros (masculine) or nosotras (feminine), you 
into ustedes (masculine/feminine), vosotros 
(masculine) or vosotras (feminine) and they into 
ellos or elias. Furthermore, the singular personal 
pronoun it can be translated into dl/dste 
(masculine) or ella/dsta (feminine). For 
example: 
(6) Women~ were in the shop. They~ were buying 
gifts for their husbands. 
(7) Las mujeresl estaban en la tienda. Ellasi 
estaban comprando regains pard sus maridos. 
In Spanish, the plural name mujeres 
(women) is feminine and is replaced by the 
personal pronoun elias (plural feminine) (7), 
whereas in English they is valid for masculine as 
well as for feminine (6). ", 
These discrepancies do not always mean 
that Spanish anaphors bear more information 
than English one. For example, Spanish 
possessive adjectives ~ casa) do not carry 
gender information whereas English possessive 
adjectives do (his~her house). 
We can find similar discrepancies among 
other languages. For example, in the 
French-German translation, gender is assigned 
arbitrarily in both languages (although in French 
is not as arbitrarily as in German). The English- 
German translation, like English-Spanish, 
supposes a translation from a language with 
neutral gender into a language that assigns 
gender grammatically. 
As commented, it is important to 
emphasize that the omission of the pronominal 
subject is very usual in Spanish. If we want to 
stress the subject of a clause or distinguish 
between different possible subjects, we will have 
to write the pronominal subject. Otherwise, 
pronominal subject could be omitted. We are 
interested, however, in the correct generation of 
pronouns, and therefore, they will never be 
omitted. 
Thanks to the fact that our system solves 
only personal pronouns in third person, we have 
only studied gender discrepancies in the 
generation of the third person pronouns. The 
48 
study has been divided into pronouns with 
subject role and pronouns with complement role. 
a) Pronouns with subject role. This kind of 
pronouns can be identified in the interlingua 
representation because they have the semantic 
role of AGENT in a CLAUSE. Their 
antecedents are established with the links to the 
ENTITIES. 
The main problem in the pronoun 
generation into English consists of the 
generation of pronoun it. If we have a pronoun 
with the following attributes: masculine, 
singular and third person in the interlingua 
representation, this can be generated into the 
Spanish pron6uns he or it. If the antecedent of
the pronoun refers to a person, we will generate 
it into he. If the antecedent of the pronoun is an 
animal or a thing we will generate it into it. 
These characteristics of the antecedent can be 
obtained from the semantic information stored in 
its attribute Sem_Ref. A similar strategy is used 
to generate the pronouns she or it. With 
reference to plural personal pronouns: 
masculine/feminine, plural and third person, 
they are generated into the English pronoun 
they. 
In Figure 4, the set of morphological rules 
to treat gender discrepancies in English 
generation of pronouns is shown: 
pron + third_person + masculine + sing + antec (person) ~ he 
pmn + thirdperson + masculine + sing + antec (animal or thing) --) it 
pron + thirdperson + feminine + sing + antec (person) ..-) she 
pron + third_person + feminine + sing + antec (animal orthing) ~ it 
pron + thitrlperson + feminine/masculine +plural ~ they 
Figure 4. 
In Spanish generation, the main problem 
consists of the translation of pronoun it The set 
of morphological rules to treat his case is shown 
in Figure 5: 
pron + third_person + sing + antec (animal with masculine gender) ~ ~1 
\[ pron + third_person + sing + antec (thing with masculine gender) .-) dste 
\] pron + third_person + sing + antec (animal with feminine gender) ~ ella 
l pmn + third_person + sing + antec (thing with feminine gender) .-y 6sta 
Figure 5. 
b) Pronouns with complement role. This kind of 
pronouns can be identified in the interlingua 
representation because they have the semantic 
role of THEME or they are in a MODIFIER in 
a CLAUSE. 
In the pronoun generation i to English, the 
set of morphological rules of Figure 6 is 
applied: 
pron + third_parson + sing + antec (person with masculine gander) ~ him 
pron + third_person + sing + antec (person with feminine gender) ~ her 
pron + third_person + sing + antec (animal orthing) ...) it 
pron ? thirdperson + plural + antec (person) ~ them 
Figure 6. 
In the process of generating a pronoun with 
the semantic role of THEME into Spanish, the 
set of morphological rules of Figure 7 is 
applied: 
pron ? third_person ? plural ~ les 
Figure 7. 
On the other hand, if the pronoun is in a 
MODIFIER, the rules of Spanish generation 
will be as shown in Figure 8: 
pron + third_person + sing + antec (masculine gender) ~ ~1 
pron + third_person + sing + antec (feminine gender) ...) ella 
pron + third.person + plural + antec (masculine gender) ~ ellos 
pron + third_person + plural + antec (feminine gender) ~ elias 
Figure 8. 
5 Evaluation 
The syntactic generation and morphological 
generation modules of our approach ave been 
evaluated. To do so, one experiment for each 
module has been accomplished. In the first one, 
the generation of Spanish zero-pronouns into 
English, using the techniques described above in 
subsection 4.1.2, has been evaluated 6. In the 
second one, the generation of English 
pronouns into Spanish ones has been evaluated. 
In this experiment number and gender 
discrepancies and their resolution, described 
above in section 4.2, have been taken into 
account. 
With reference to the first experiment, our 
computational system has been trained with a 
6 Syntactic discrepancies has not been evaluated due 
to the aim of this work is only the pronominal 
anaphora generation i to the target language, so the 
evaluation of the generation of the whole sentence 
into the target language has been omitted. 
49 
handmade corpus 7 that contains 106 zero- 
pronouns. With this training, we have extracted 
the degree of importance of the preferences that 
are used in the anaphora resolution module of 
the system. Furthermore, we have been able to 
check and correct the techniques used in the 
detection and generation of zero-pronouns into 
English. After that, we have carried out a blind 
evaluation on unrestricted texts using the set of 
preferences and the generation techniques 
learned during the training phase. In this case, 
partial parsing of the text with no semantic 
information has been used. 
With regard to unrestricted texts, our 
system has been run on two different Spanish 
corpora: a) a fragment of the Spanish version of 
The Blue Book corpus (15,571 words), which 
contains the handbook of the International 
Telecommunications Union CCITT, and b) a 
fragment of the Lexesp corpus (9,746 words), 
which contains ten Spanish texts from different 
genres and authors. These texts are taken mainly 
from newspapers. These corpora have been 
POS-tagged. Having worked with different 
genres and disparate authors, we feel that the 
applicability of our proposal to other sorts of 
texts is assured. 
To evaluate the generation of Spanish zero- 
pronouns into English three tasks have been 
accomplished: a) the evaluation of the detection 
of zero-pronouns, b) the evaluation of anaphora 
resolution and c) the evaluation of generation. 
a) Evaluating the detection of zero-pronouns. 
To do this, verbs have been classified into 
two categories: 1) verbs whose subjects 
have been omitted, and 2) verbs whose 
subjects have not. We have obtained a 
success rate s of 88% on 1,599 classified 
verbs, with no significant differences seen 
between the corpora. We should also 
remark that a success rate of 98% has been 
obtained in the detection of verbs whose 
subjects were omitted, whereas only 80% 
was achieved for verbs whose subjects 
were not. This lower success rate is 
This corpus contains entences with zero-pronouns 
made by different researchers of our Research Group. 
g By "success rate", we mean the number of verbs 
successfully classified, divided by the total number of 
verbs in the text. 
justified for several reasons. One important 
reason is the non-detection of impersonal 
verbs by the POS tagger. Two other 
reasons are. the lack of semantic 
information and the inaccuracy of the 
grammar used. It is important to note that 
46% of the verbs in these corpora have 
their subjects omitted. It shows quite 
clearly the importance of this phenomenon 
in Spanish. 
b) Evaluating anaphora resolution. In this 
task, the evaluation of zero-pronoun 
resolution is accomplished. Of the 1,599 
verbs classified in these two corpora, 734 
of them have zero-pronouns. Only 228 of 
them 9, however, are in third person and will 
be anaphorically resolved. A success rate of 
75% was attained for the 228 zero- 
pronouns. By "successful resolutions" we 
mean that the solutions offered by our 
system agree with the solutions offered by 
two human experts. 
c) Evaluating zero-pronoun generation. The 
generation of the 228 Spanish zero- 
pronouns into English has been evaluated. 
The following results in the generation 
have been obtained: a success rate of 70% 
in Lexesp and a success rate of 899'o in The 
Blue Book. In general (both corpora) a 
success rate of 75% has been achieved. The 
errors are mainly produced by fails in 
anaphora resolution and fails in the 
generation of pronouns he/she/it (some 
heuristics 10, which have failed sometimes, 
have been applied due to the used corpora 
do not include semantic information). 
In the second experiment, we have 
evaluated the generation of Spanish personal 
pronouns with subject role into the English ones. 
A fragment of the English version of The Blue 
Book corpus (70,319 words) containing 165 
9 The remaining pronouns are not in third person or 
they are cataphoric (the antecedent appears after the 
anaphor) or exophoric (the antecedent does not 
appear, linguistically, inthe text). 
J0 For instance: "all the pronouns in third person and 
singular whose antecedents are proper nouns have 
boon translated into he (antecedent with masculine 
gender) or she (antecedent with feminine gender); 
otherwise they have been translated into it". 
50 
pronouns with subject role has been used in 
order to carry out a blind evaluation. A success 
rate of 85.41% has been achieved. The errors are 
mainly produced by fails in anaphora resolution 
and in the correct choice of the gender of the 
antecedent's Head in Spanish. With reference to 
the choice of the gender of the antecedent's 
Head, an electronic dictionary has been used in 
order to translate the original English word into 
the Spanish one, and subsequently, the gender is 
extracted from the Spanish word. Several 
problems have occurred when using this 
electronic dictionary: 
1) ' the word to be translated does not appear in 
the dic-tionary, and therefore, a heuristic is 
applied to assign the gender 
2) the correct sense of the English word is not 
chosen, and therefore, the gender could be 
assigned incorrectly. 
Conclusion 
In this paper a complete approach to solve and 
generate pronominal anaphora in the Spanish 
and English languages is presented. The 
approach works on unrestricted texts to which 
partial parsing techniques have been applied. 
After the parsing and solving pronominal 
anaphora, an interlingua representation (based 
on semantic roles and features) of the whole text 
is obtained. The representation f the whole text 
is one of the main advantages of our system due 
to several problems, that are hardly solved by 
the majority of MT systems, can be treated and 
solved. These problems are the generation of 
intersentential anaphora, the detection of 
coreference hains and the generation of Spanish 
zero-pronouns into English. Generation of zero- 
pronouns and Spanish personal pronouns has 
been evaluated obtaining a success rate of 75% 
and 85.41% respectively. 
References 
Appelo, L. and Landsbergen, J. (1986) The machine 
translation project Rose. In Proceedings of I. 
International Conference on the State of the Art in 
Machine Translation in America, Asia and Europe, 
1A1-MT'86 (Saarbr0cken). pp. 34-51. 
Castell6n, I.; Fern~Sndez, A.; Mart|, M.A.; Morante, 
R. and V~zquez, G. (1998) An lnterlingua 
Representation Based on the Lexieo-Semantie 
Information. In Proceedings of the Second AMTA 
SIG-1L Workshop on lnterlinguas (Philadelphia, 
USA, 1998). 
Ferrfindez, A.; Palomar, M. and Moreno, L. (1998) 
Anaphora resolution in unrestricted texts with 
partial parsing. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics and 17th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics, COLING - ACL'98 
(Montreal, Canada, 1998). pp. 385-391. 
Ferrfindez, A.; Palomar, M. and Moreno, L. (2000) 
An empirical approach to Spanish anaphora 
resolution. To appear in Machine Translation 
(Special Issue on anaphora resolution in Machine 
Translation). 2000. 
Leavitt, J.R.R.; Lonsdale, D. and Franz, A. (1994) A 
Reasoned Interlingua for knowledge-Based 
Machine Translation. InProceedings of CSCS1-94. 
Miyoshi, H.; Ogino, T. and Sugiyarna, K. (1997) 
EDR's Concept Classification and Description for 
Interlingual Representation. I  Proceedings of the 
First Workshop on lnterlinguas (San Diego, USA, 
1997). 
Peral, J.; Palomar, M. and Ferffmdez, A. (1999) 
Coreference-oriented Interlingual Slot Structure 
and Machine Translation. In Proceedings of ACL 
Workshop on Coreference and its Applications 
(College Park, Maryland, USA, 1999). pp. 69-76. 
Witkam, A.P.M. (1983) Distributed language 
translation: feasibility study of multi!ingual facility 
for videotex information etworks. BSO, Utrecht. 
51 
