Bayesian Nets in Syntactic Categorization of Novel Words 
Leonid Peshkin 
Dept. of Computer Science 
Harvard University 
Cambridge, MA 
pesha@eecs.harvard.edu 
Avi Pfeffer 
Dept. of Computer Science 
Harvard University 
Cambridge, MA 
avi@eecs.harvard.edu 
Virginia Savova 
Dept. of Cognitive Science 
Johns Hopkins University 
Cambridge, MA 
savova@jhu.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents an application of a 
Dynamic Bayesian Network (DBN) to the 
task of assigning Part-of-Speech (PoS) 
tags to novel text. This task is particularly 
challenging for non-standard corpora, 
such as Internet lingo, where a large pro-
portion of words are unknown. Previous 
work reveals that PoS tags depend on a 
variety of morphological and contextual 
features. Representing these dependencies 
in a DBN results into an elegant and  ef-
fective PoS tagger.  
1 Introduction 
Uncovering the syntactic structure of texts is a 
necessary step towards extracting their meaning. In 
order to obtain an accurate parse for an unseen 
text, we need to assign Part-of-Speech (PoS) tags 
to a string of words. This paper covers one aspect 
of our work of PoS tagging with Dynamic Bayes-
ian Networks (DBNs), which demonstrates their 
success at tagging unknown (OoV) words. Please 
refer to the companion paper [Peshkin, 2003] for 
substantial discussion of our method and other de-
tails. Although currently existing algorithms ex-
hibit high word-level accuracy, PoS tagging is not 
a solved problem. First, even a small percentage of 
errors may derail subsequent processing steps. 
Second, the results of tagging are not robust if a 
large proportion of words are unknown, or if the 
testing corpus differs in style from the training 
corpus. At the same time, diverse training corpora 
are lacking and most taggers are trained on a large 
annotated corpus extracted from the Wall Street 
Journal (WSJ). These factors significantly hamper 
the use PoS tagging to extract information from 
non-standard corpora, such as email messages and 
websites. Our work on Information Extraction 
from an email corpus left us searching for a PoS 
tagger that would perform well on Internet texts 
and integrate easily into a large probabilistic rea-
soning system by producing a distribution over 
tags rather than   deterministic answer. Internet 
sources exhibit a set of idiosyncratic characteristics 
not present in the training corpora available to tag-
gers to date.  They are often written in telegraphic 
style, omitting closed-class words, which leads to a 
higher percentage of ambiguous items. Most im-
portantly, as a consequence of the rapidly evolving 
Netlingo, Internet texts are full of new words, mis-
spelled words and one-time expressions. These 
characteristics are bound to lower the accuracy of 
existing taggers. A look at the literature confirms 
that error rates for unknown words are quite high. 
According to several recent publications [Tou-
tanova 2002, Lafferty et al2002] OoV tagging pre-
sents a serious challenge to the field. The 
transformation-based Brill tagger, achieves 96.5% 
accuracy for the WSJ, but a mere 85% on unknown 
words. Existing probabilistic taggers also don?t 
fare well on unknown words. Reported results on 
OoV rarely exceed Brill?s performance by a tiny 
fraction. They are mostly based on (Hidden) 
Markov Models [Brants 2000, Kupiec, 1992]. A 
model based on Conditional Random Fields 
[Lafferty et al] outperforms the HMM tagger on 
unknown words yielding 24% error rate. The best 
result known to us is achieved by Toutanova[2002] 
by enriching the feature representation of the 
MaxEnt approach [Ratnaparkhi, 1996].  
 2 A DBN for PoS Tagging 
Unlike Toutanova[2002], we deliberately base 
our model on the original feature set of Ratna-
parkhi?s MaxEnt. Our Bayesian network includes a 
set of binary features (1-3, below) and a set of vo-
cabulary features (4-6, below). The binary features 
indicate the presence or absence of a particular 
character in the token: 1. does the token contain a 
capital letter; 2. does the token contain a hyphen; 
3. does the token contain a number. We used Rat-
naparkhi?s vocabulary lists to encode the values of 
6458 frequent Words, 3602 Prefixes and 2925 
Suffixes up to 4 letters long. 
A Dynamic Bayesian network (DBN) is a Bayes-
ian network unwrapped in time, such that it can 
represent dependencies between variables at adja-
cent positions (see figure). For a good overview of 
DBNs, see Murphy [2002]. The set of observable 
variables in our network consists of the binary and 
vocabulary features mentioned above. In addition, 
there are two hidden variables: PoS and Memory 
which reflects contextual information about past 
PoS tags. Unlike Ratnaparkhi we do not directly 
consider any information about preceding words 
even the previous one [Toutanova 2002]. However, 
a special value of Memory indicates whether we 
are at the beginning of the sentence. 
Learning in our model is equivalent to collect-
ing statistics over co-occurrences of feature values 
and tags. This is implemented in GAWK scripts 
and takes minutes on the WSJ training corpus. 
Compare this to laborious Improved Iterative Scal-
ing for MaxEnt. Tagging is carried out by the stan-
dard Forward-Backward algorithm (see  e.g. 
Murphy[2002]). We do not need to use specialized 
search algorithms such as Ratnaparkhi?s  "beam 
search". In addition, our method does not require a 
"Development" stage. 
Following established data split we use sections 
(0-22) of WSJ for training and the rest (23-24) as a 
test set. The test sections contain 4792 sentences 
out of about 55600 total sentences in WSJ corpus. 
The average length of a sentence is 23 tokens. In 
addition, we created  two specialized testing cor-
pora (available upon request for comparison pur-
poses). A small Email corpus was prepared from 
excerpts from the MUC seminar announcement 
corpus. ?The Jabberwocky? is a poem by Louis 
Carol where the majority of words are made-up, 
but their PoS tags are apparent to speakers of Eng-
lish. We use ?The Jabberwocky? to illustrate per-
formance on unknown words. Both the Email 
corpus and the Jabberwocky were pre-tagged by 
the Brill tagger then manually corrected. 
We began our experiments by using the original 
set of features and vocabulary lists of Ratnaparkhi 
for the variables Word, Prefix and Suffix. This 
produced a reasonable performance. While investi-
gating the relative contribution of each feature in 
this setting, we discovered that the removal of the 
three binary features from the feature set does not 
significantly alter performance. Upon close exami-
nation, the vocabularies we used turned out to con-
tain a lot of redundant information that is otherwise 
handled by these features. For example, Prefix list 
contained 84 hyphens (e.g. both ?co-? and ?co?), 
530 numbers and 150 capitalised words, including 
capital letters. We proceed, using reduced vocabu-
laries obtained by removing redundant information 
from the original lists. The results are presented in 
Table 1 for various testing conditions. Since Tou-
tanova[2002] report that Prefix information wors-
ens performance, we conducted the second set of 
experiments with a network that contained no in-
formation about prefix. We found no significant 
change in performance.  
Our overall performance is comparable to the 
best result known on this benchmark (e.g. Tou-
tanova[2002]. At the same time, our performance 
on OoV words is significantly better (9.4% versus 
13.3%). We attribute this difference to the purer 
representation of morphologically relevant suffixes 
in our factored vocabulary, which excludes redun-
dant and therefore potentially confusing informa-
tion. Another reason may be that our method puts a 
greater emphasis on the syntactically relevant 
facts, such as morphology and tag sequence infor-
mation by refraining to use word-specific cues. 
Despite our good performance on the WSJ corpus, 
we failed to improve Brill?s tagging on our two 
specialized corpora. Both Brill and our method 
achieved 89% on the Jabberwocky poem. Note, 
however, that Brill uses much more sophisticated 
mechanisms to obtain this result. It was particu-
larly disappointing for us to find out that we did 
not succeed in labeling the Email corpus accurately 
(16.3% versus 14.9% of Brill). However, the rea-
son for this poor performance appears to be partly 
related to a labeling convention of the Penn Tree-
bank, which essentially causes most capitalized 
words to be categorized as NNPs. In our view, 
there is a significant difference between the gram-
matical status of a proper name  ?Virginia 
Savova?, where words can?t be said to modify one 
another, and a name of an institution such as ?De-
partment of Chemical Engineering?, where 
?chemical? clearly modifies ?engineering?. While 
a rule-based system profits from this simplistic 
convention, our method is harmed by it. 
3 Conclusion 
Our approach shows promise as it is both prob-
abilistic and outperforms existing statistical taggers 
on unknown words. We are especially encouraged 
by our performance on the WSJ and take this as 
evidence that our method has the potential to sig-
nificantly improve PoS tagging of non-standard 
texts. In addition, our method has the advantage of 
being conceptually simple, fast, and flexible with 
respect to feature representation.  We are currently 
investigating the performance of other DBN to-
pologies on PoS tagging.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
Brants, T. 2000. TnT -- a statistical part-of-speech 
tagger.  In Proceedings of the 6th ANLP.  
Brill. E. 1995. Transformation-based error-driven 
learning and natural language processing. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 21(4):543--565.  
 Charniak, E., C. Hendrickson, N. Jacobson, and M. 
Perkowitz. 1993. Equations for part-of-speech tag-
ging. In Proceedings of 11th AAAI, 1993  
Jelinek. F. 1985. Markov source modeling of text gen-
eration. In J. K. Skwirzinski, ed., Impact of Process-
ing Techniques on Communication, Dordecht 
Kupiec. J. M. 1992, Robust part-of-speech tagging us-
ing a hidden Markov model. Computer Speech and 
Language, 6:225-242. 
Lafferty J., McCallum A., Pereira F., Conditional Ran-
dom Fields: Probabilistic Models for Segmenting 
and Labeling Sequence Data, Proc. 18th ICML, 2002 
Marcus M., G. Kim, M. Marcinkiewicz, R. MacIntyre, 
A. Bies, M. Ferguson, K. Katz, and B. Schasberger. 
1994. The Penn Treebank: Annotating predicate ar-
gument structure. In ARPA Human Language Tech-
nology Workshop. 
Manning C. and H. Schutze. 1999. Foundations of Sta-
tistical Natural Language Processing. The MIT Press. 
Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Murphy. K. Dynamic Bayesian Networks: Representa-
tion, Inference and Learning. PhD thesis. UC Berke-
ley. 2002. 
Peshkin. L., 2003. Part-of-Speech Tagging with Dy-
namical Bayesian Network. manuscript 
Peshkin. L., Pfeffer, A. 2003. Bayesian Information 
Extraction Network, manuscript, 2003 
Ratnaparkhi. A  A maximum entropy model for part-of-
speech tagging. In Proceedings of EMNLP, 1996.  
Samuelsson. C. Morphological Tagging Based Entirely 
on Bayesian Inference. In 9th Nordic Conference on 
Computational Linguistics, Stockholm University, 
Stockholm, Sweden. 1993. 
Toutanova K and Manning, C. Enriching the Knowl-
edge Sources Used in a Maximum Entropy PoS Tag-
ger. 2002. 
  
Description Average %% OoV Words 
Sentence
Original feature 
set of Ratnaparkhi 6.8 13.2 69.4 
Email corpus 16.3 12.2 79.0 
Jabberwocky 11.0 23.0 65.0 
Trained on WSJ 
tested on Brown 13.1 26.5 73.2 
Factored feature 
Set on random WSJ 3.6 9.8 52.7 
Factored feature  
set on WSJ 23-24 3.6 9.4 51.7 
