Recognizing Expressions of Commonsense Psychology in English Text
Andrew Gordon, Abe Kazemzadeh, Anish Nair and Milena Petrova
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089 USA
gordon@ict.usc.edu, {kazemzad, anair, petrova}@usc.edu
Abstract
Many applications of natural language
processing technologies involve analyzing
texts that concern the psychological states
and processes of people, including their
beliefs, goals, predictions, explanations,
and plans. In this paper, we describe our
efforts to create a robust, large-scale lexi-
cal-semantic resource for the recognition
and classification of expressions of com-
monsense psychology in English Text.
We achieve high levels of precision and
recall by hand-authoring sets of local
grammars for commonsense psychology
concepts, and show that this approach can
achieve classification performance greater
than that obtained by using machine
learning techniques. We demonstrate the
utility of this resource for large-scale cor-
pus analysis by identifying references to
adversarial and competitive goals in po-
litical speeches throughout U.S. history.
1 Commonsense Psychology in Language
Across all text genres it is common to find words
and phrases that refer to the mental states of people
(their beliefs, goals, plans, emotions, etc.) and their
mental processes (remembering, imagining, priori-
tizing, problem solving). These mental states and
processes are among the broad range of concepts
that people reason about every day as part of their
commonsense understanding of human psychol-
ogy. Commonsense psychology has been studied
in many fields, sometimes using the terms Folk
psychology or Theory of Mind, as both a set of be-
liefs that people have about the mind and as a set
of everyday reasoning abilities.
Within the field of computational linguistics,
the study of commonsense psychology has not re-
ceived special attention, and is generally viewed as
just one of the many conceptual areas that must be
addressed in building large-scale lexical-semantic
resources for language processing. Although there
have been a number of projects that have included
concepts of commonsense psychology as part of a
larger lexical-semantic resource, e.g. the Berkeley
FrameNet Project (Baker et al, 1998), none have
attempted to achieve a high degree of breadth or
depth over the sorts of expressions that people use
to refer to mental states and processes.
The lack of a large-scale resource for the analy-
sis of language for commonsense psychological
concepts is seen as a barrier to the development of
a range of potential computer applications that in-
volve text analysis, including the following:
?  Natural language interfaces to mixed-initiative
planning systems (Ferguson & Allen, 1993;
Traum, 1993) require the ability to map ex-
pressions of users? beliefs, goals, and plans
(among other commonsense psychology con-
cepts) onto formalizations that can be ma-
nipulated by automated planning algorithms.
?  Automated question answering systems
(Voorhees & Buckland, 2002) require the abil-
ity to tag and index text corpora with the rele-
vant commonsense psychology concepts in
order to handle questions concerning the be-
liefs, expectations, and intentions of people.
? Research efforts within the field of psychology
that employ automated corpus analysis tech-
niques to investigate developmental and men-
tal illness impacts on language production, e.g.
Reboul & Sabatier?s (2001) study of the dis-
course of schizophrenic patients, require the
ability to identify all references to certain psy-
chological concepts in order to draw statistical
comparisons.
In order to enable future applications, we un-
dertook a new effort to meet this need for a lin-
guistic resource. This paper describes our efforts in
building a large-scale lexical-semantic resource for
automated processing of natural language text
about mental states and processes. Our aim was to
build a system that would analyze natural language
text and recognize, with high precision and recall,
every expression therein related to commonsense
psychology, even in the face of an extremely broad
range of surface forms. Each recognized expres-
sion would be tagged with an appropriate concept
from a broad set of those that participate in our
commonsense psychological theories.
Section 2 demonstrates the utility of a lexical-
semantic resource of commonsense psychology in
automated corpus analysis through a study of the
changes in mental state expressions over the course
of over 200 years of U.S. Presidential State-of-the-
Union Addresses. Section 3 of this paper describes
the methodology that we followed to create this
resource, which involved the hand authoring of
local grammars on a large scale. Section 4 de-
scribes a set of evaluations to determine the per-
formance levels that these local grammars could
achieve and to compare these levels to those of
machine learning approaches. Section 5 concludes
this paper with a discussion of the relative merits
of this approach to the creation of lexical-semantic
resources as compared to other approaches.
2 Applications to corpus analysis
One of the primary applications of a lexical-
semantic resource for commonsense psychology is
toward the automated analysis of large text cor-
pora. The research value of identifying common-
sense psychology expressions has been
demonstrated in work on children?s language use,
where researchers have manually annotated large
text corpora consisting of parent/child discourse
transcripts (Barsch & Wellman, 1995) and chil-
dren?s storybooks (Dyer et al, 2000). While these
previous studies have yielded interesting results,
they required enormous amounts of human effort
to manually annotate texts. In this section we aim
to show how a lexical-semantic resource for com-
monsense psychology can be used to automate this
annotation task, with an example not from the do-
main of children?s language acquisition, but rather
political discourse.
We conducted a study to determine how politi-
cal speeches have been tailored over the course of
U.S. history throughout changing climates of mili-
tary action. Specifically, we wondered if politi-
cians were more likely to talk about goals having
to do with conflict, competition, and aggression
during wartime than in peacetime. In order to
automatically recognize references to goals of this
sort in text, we used a set of local grammars
authored using the methodology described in Sec-
tion 3 of this paper. The corpus we selected to ap-
ply these concept recognizers was the U.S. State of
the Union Addresses from 1790 to 2003. The rea-
sons for choosing this particular text corpus were
its uniform distribution over time and its easy
availability in electronic form from Project Guten-
berg (www.gutenberg. net). Our set of local gram-
mars identified 4290 references to these goals in
this text corpus, the vast majority of them begin
references to goals of an adversarial nature (rather
than competitive). Examples of the references that
were identified include the following:
? They sought to use the rights and privileges
they had obtained in the United Nations, to
frustrate its purposes [adversarial-goal] and
cut down its powers as an effective agent of
world progress. (Truman, 1953)
? The nearer we come to vanquishing [adver-
sarial-goal] our enemies the more we inevita-
bly become conscious of differences among
the victors. (Roosevelt, 1945)
? Men have vied [competitive-goal] with each
other to do their part and do it well. (Wilson,
1918)
? I will submit to Congress comprehensive leg-
islation to strengthen our hand in combating
[adversarial-goal] terrorists. (Clinton, 1995)
Figure 1 summarizes the results of applying our
local grammars for adversarial and competitive
goals to the U.S. State of the Union Addresses. For
each year, the value that is plotted represents the
number of references to these concepts that were
identified per 100 words in the address. The inter-
esting result of this analysis is that references to
adversarial and competitive goals in this corpus
increase in frequency in a pattern that directly cor-
responds to the major military conflicts that the
U.S. has participated in throughout its history.
Each numbered peak in Figure 1 corresponds to
a period in which the U.S. was involved in a mili-
tary conflict. These are: 1) 1813, War of 1812, US
and Britain; 2) 1847, Mexican American War; 3)
1864, Civil War; 4) 1898, Spanish American War;
5) 1917, World War I; 6) 1943, World War II; 7)
1952, Korean War; 8) 1966, Vietnam War; 9)
1991, Gulf War; 10) 2002, War on Terrorism.
The wide applicability of a lexical-semantic re-
source for commonsense psychology will require
that the identified concepts are well defined and
are of broad enough scope to be relevant to a wide
range of tasks. Additionally, such a resource must
achieve high levels of accuracy in identifying these
concepts in natural language text. The remainder of
this paper describes our efforts in authoring and
evaluating such a resource.
3 Authoring recognition rules
The first challenge in building any lexical-semantic
resource is to identify the concepts that are to be
recognized in text and used as tags for indexing or
markup. For expressions of commonsense psy-
chology, these concepts must describe the broad
scope of people?s mental states and processes. An
ontology of commonsense psychology with a high
degree of both breadth and depth is described by
Gordon (2002). In this work, 635 commonsense
psychology concepts were identified through an
analysis of the representational requirements of a
corpus of 372 planning strategies collected from 10
real-world planning domains. These concepts were
grouped into 30 conceptual areas, corresponding to
various reasoning functions, and full formal mod-
els of each of these conceptual areas are being
authored to support automated inference about
commonsense psychology (Gordon & Hobbs,
2003). We adopted this conceptual framework in
our current project because of the broad scope of
the concepts in this ontology and its potential for
future integration into computational reasoning
systems.
The full list of the 30 concept areas identified is
as follows: 1) Managing knowledge, 2) Similarity
comparison, 3) Memory retrieval, 4) Emotions, 5)
Explanations, 6) World envisionment, 7) Execu-
tion envisionment, 8) Causes of failure, 9) Man-
aging expectations, 10) Other agent reasoning, 11)
Threat detection, 12) Goals, 13) Goal themes, 14)
Goal management, 15) Plans, 16) Plan elements,
17) Planning modalities, 18) Planning goals, 19)
Plan construction, 20) Plan adaptation, 21) Design,
22) Decisions, 23) Scheduling, 24) Monitoring, 25)
Execution modalities, 26) Execution control, 27)
Repetitive execution, 28) Plan following, 29) Ob-
servation of execution, and 30) Body interaction.
Our aim for this lexical-semantic resource was
to develop a system that could automatically iden-
tify every expression of commonsense psychology
in English text, and assign to them a tag corre-
sponding to one of the 635 concepts in this ontol-
ogy. For example, the following passage (from
William Makepeace Thackeray?s 1848 novel,
Vanity Fair) illustrates the format of the output of
this system, where references to commonsense
psychology concepts are underlined and followed
by a tag indicating their specific concept type de-
limited by square brackets:
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
1
7
9
0
1
7
9
8
1
8
0
6
1
8
1
4
1
8
2
2
1
8
3
0
1
8
3
8
1
8
4
6
1
8
5
4
1
8
6
2
1
8
7
0
1
8
7
8
1
8
8
6
1
8
9
8
1
9
0
6
1
9
1
4
1
9
2
2
1
9
3
0
1
9
3
9
1
9
4
7
1
9
5
5
1
9
6
3
1
9
7
1
1
9
7
9
1
9
8
7
1
9
9
7
Year
F
e
a
t
u
r
e
s
 
p
e
r
 
1
0
0
 
w
o
r
d
s
1
2
7
6
5
4
3
8
9 10
Figure 1.  Adversarial and competitive goals in the U.S. State of the Union Addresses from 1790-2003
Perhaps [partially-justified-proposition] she
had mentioned the fact [proposition] already to
Rebecca, but that young lady did not appear to
[partially-justified-proposition] have remem-
bered it [memory-retrieval]; indeed, vowed and
protested that she expected [add-expectation] to
see a number of Amelia's nephews and nieces.
She was quite disappointed [disappointment-
emotion] that Mr. Sedley was not married; she
was sure [justified-proposition] Amelia had said
he was, and she doted so on [liking-emotion] lit-
tle children.
The approach that we took was to author (by
hand) a set of local grammars that could be used to
identify each concept. For this task we utilized the
Intex Corpus Processor software developed by the
Laboratoire d'Automatique Documentaire et Lin-
guistique (LADL) of the University of Paris 7 (Sil-
berztein, 1999). This software allowed us to author
a set of local grammars using a graphical user in-
terface, producing lexical/syntactic structures that
can be compiled into finite-state transducers. To
simplify the authoring of these local grammars,
Intex includes a large-coverage English dictionary
compiled by Blandine Courtois, allowing us to
specify them at a level that generalized over noun
and verb forms. For example, there are a variety of
ways of expressing in English the concept of reaf-
firming a belief that is already held, as exemplified
in the following sentences:
1) The finding was confirmed by the new
data. 2) She told the truth, corroborating his
story. 3) He reaffirms his love for her. 4) We
need to verify the claim. 5) Make sure it is true.
Although the verbs in these sentences differ in
tense, the dictionaries in Intex allowed us to recog-
nize each using the following simple description:
(<confirm> by | <corroborate> | <reaffirm> |
<verify> | <make> sure)
While constructing local grammars for each of
the concepts in the original ontology of common-
sense psychology, we identified several conceptual
distinctions that were made in language that were
not expressed in the specific concepts that Gordon
had identified. For example, the original ontology
included only three concepts in the conceptual area
of memory retrieval (the sparsest of the 30 areas),
namely memory, memory cue, and memory re-
trieval. English expressions such as ?to forget? and
?repressed memory? could not be easily mapped
directly to one of these three concepts, which
prompted us to elaborate the original sets of con-
cepts to accommodate these and other distinctions
made in language. In the case of the conceptual
area of memory retrieval, a total of twelve unique
concepts were necessary to achieve coverage over
the distinctions evident in English.
These local grammars were authored one con-
ceptual area at a time. At the time of the writing of
this paper, our group had completed 6 of the origi-
nal 30 commonsense psychology conceptual areas.
The remainder of this paper focuses on the first 4
of the 6 areas that were completed, which were
evaluated to determine the recall and precision per-
formance of our hand-authored rules. These four
areas are Managing knowledge, Memory, Expla-
nations, and Similarity judgments. Figure 2 pre-
sents each of these four areas with a single
fabricated example of an English expression for
each of the final set of concepts. Local grammars
for the two additional conceptual areas, Goals (20
concepts) and Goal management (17 concepts),
were authored using the same approach as the oth-
ers, but were not completed in time to be included
in our performance evaluation.
After authoring these local grammars using the
Intex Corpus Processor, finite-state transducers
were compiled for each commonsense psychology
concept in each of the different conceptual areas.
To simplify the application of these transducers to
text corpora and to aid in their evaluation, trans-
ducers for individual concepts were combined into
a single finite state machine (one for each concep-
tual area). By examining the number of states and
transitions in the compiled finite state graphs, some
indication of their relative size can be given for the
four conceptual areas that we evaluated: Managing
knowledge (348 states / 932 transitions), Memory
(203 / 725), Explanations (208 / 530), and Similar-
ity judgments (121 / 500).
4 Performance evaluation
In order to evaluate the utility of our set of hand-
authored local grammars, we conducted a study of
their precision and recall performance. In order to
calculate the performance levels, it was first neces-
sary to create a test corpus that contained refer-
ences to the sorts of commonsense psychological
concepts that our rules were designed to recognize.
To accomplish this, we administered a survey to
1. Managing knowledge (37 concepts)
He?s got a logical mind (managing-knowledge-ability). She?s very gullible (bias-toward-belief). He?s skepti-
cal by nature (bias-toward-disbelief). It is the truth (true). That is completely false (false). We need to know
whether it is true or false (truth-value). His claim was bizarre (proposition). I believe what you are saying (be-
lief). I didn?t know about that (unknown). I used to think like you do (revealed-incorrect-belief). The assumption
was widespread (assumption). There is no reason to think that (unjustified-proposition). There is some evidence
you are right (partially-justified-proposition). The fact is well established (justified-proposition). As a rule, stu-
dents are generally bright (inference). The conclusion could not be otherwise (consequence). What was the rea-
son for your suspicion (justification)? That isn?t a good reason (poor-justification). Your argument is circular
(circular-justification). One of these things must be false (contradiction). His wisdom is vast (knowledge). He
knew all about history (knowledge-domain). I know something about plumbing (partial-knowledge-domain).
He?s got a lot of real-world experience (world-knowledge). He understands the theory behind it (world-model-
knowledge). That is just common sense (shared-knowledge). I?m willing to believe that (add-belief). I stopped
believing it after a while (remove-belief). I assumed you were coming (add-assumption). You can?t make that
assumption here (remove-assumption). Let?s see what follows from that (check-inferences). Disregard the con-
sequences of the assumption (ignore-inference). I tried not to think about it (suppress-inferences). I concluded
that one of them must be wrong (realize-contradiction). I realized he must have been there (realize). I can?t think
straight (knowledge-management-failure). It just confirms what I knew all along (reaffirm-belief).
2. Memory (12 concepts)
He has a good memory (memory-ability). It was one of his fondest memories (memory-item). He blocked out
the memory of the tempestuous relationship (repressed-memory-item). He memorized the words of the song
(memory-storage). She remembered the last time it rained (memory-retrieval). I forgot my locker combination
(memory-retrieval-failure). He repressed the memories of his abusive father (memory-repression). The widow
was reminded of her late husband (reminding). He kept the ticket stub as a memento (memory-cue). He intended
to call his brother on his birthday (schedule-plan).  He remembered to set the alarm before he fell asleep (sched-
uled-plan-retrieval). I forgot to take out the trash (scheduled-plan-retrieval-failure).
3. Explanations (20 concepts)
He?s good at coming up with explanations (explanation-ability). The cause was clear (cause). Nobody knew
how it had happened (mystery). There were still some holes in his account (explanation-criteria). It gave us the
explanation we were looking for (explanation). It was a plausible explanation (candidate-explanation). It was
the best explanation I could think of (best-candidate-explanation). There were many contributing factors (fac-
tor). I came up with an explanation (explain). Let?s figure out why it was so (attempt-to-explain). He came up
with a reasonable explanation (generate-candidate-explanation). We need to consider all of the possible expla-
nations (assess-candidate-explanations). That is the explanation he went with (adopt-explanation). We failed to
come up with an explanation (explanation-failure). I can?t think of anything that could have caused it (explana-
tion-generation-failure). None of these explanations account for the facts (explanation-satisfaction-failure).
Your account must be wrong (unsatisfying-explanation). I prefer non-religious explanations (explanation-
preference). You should always look for scientific explanations (add-explanation-preference). We?re not going
to look at all possible explanations (remove-explanation-preference).
4. Similarity judgments (13 concepts)
She?s good at picking out things that are different (similarity-comparison-ability). Look at the similarities
between the two (make-comparison). He saw that they were the same at an abstract level (draw-analogy). She
could see the pattern unfolding (find-pattern). It depends on what basis you use for comparison (comparison-
metric). They have that in common (same-characteristic). They differ in that regard (different-characteristic). If
a tree were a person, its leaves would correspond to fingers (analogical-mapping). The pattern in the rug was
intricate (pattern). They are very much alike (similar). It is completely different (dissimilar). It was an analogous
example (analogous).
Figure 2. Example sentences referring to 92 concepts in 4 areas of commonsense psychology
collect novel sentences that could be used for this
purpose.
This survey was administered over the course
of one day to anonymous adult volunteers who
stopped by a table that we had set up on our uni-
versity?s campus. We instructed the survey taker to
author 3 sentences that included words or phrases
related to a given concept, and 3 sentences that
they felt did not contain any such references. Each
survey taker was asked to generate these 6 sen-
tences for each of the 4 concept areas that we were
evaluating, described on the survey in the follow-
ing manner:
? Managing knowledge: Anything about the
knowledge, assumptions, or beliefs that people
have in their mind
? Memory: When people remember things, for-
get things, or are reminded of things
? Explanations: When people come up with pos-
sible explanations for unknown causes
? Similarity judgments: When people find simi-
larities or differences in things
A total of 99 people volunteered to take our
survey, resulting in a corpus of 297 positive and
297 negative sentences for each conceptual area,
with a few exceptions due to incomplete surveys.
Using this survey data, we calculated the preci-
sion and recall performance of our hand-authored
local grammars. Every sentence that had at least
one concept detected for the corresponding concept
area was treated as a ?hit?. Table 1 presents the
precision and recall performance for each concept
area. The results show that the precision of our
system is very high, with marginal recall perform-
ance.
The low recall scores raised a concern over the
quality of our test data. In reviewing the sentences
that were collected, it was apparent that some sur-
vey participants were not able to complete the task
as we had specified. To improve the validity of the
test data, we enlisted six volunteers (native English
speakers not members of our development team) to
judge whether or not each sentence in the corpus
was produced according to the instructions. The
corpus of sentences was divided evenly among
these six raters, and each sentence that the rater
judged as not satisfying the instructions was fil-
tered from the data set. In addition, each rater also
judged half of the sentences given to a different
rater in order to compute the degree of inter-rater
agreement for this filtering task. After filtering
sentences from the corpus, a second preci-
sion/recall evaluation was performed. Table 2 pre-
sents the results of our hand-authored local
grammars on the filtered data set, and lists the in-
ter-rater agreement for each conceptual area among
our six raters. The results show that the system
achieves a high level of precision, and the recall
performance is much better than earlier indicated.
The performance of our hand-authored local
grammars was then compared to the performance
that could be obtained using more traditional ma-
chine-learning approaches. In these comparisons,
the recognition of commonsense psychology con-
cepts was treated as a classification problem,
where the task was to distinguish between positive
Concept area Correct Hits
(a)
Wrong hits
(b)
Total positive
sentences (c)
Total negative
sentences
Precision
(a/(a+b))
Recall
(a/c)
Managing knowledge 205 16 297 297 92.76% 69.02%
Memory 240 4 297 297 98.36% 80.80%
Explanations 126 7 296 296 94.73% 42.56%
Similarity judgments 178 18 296 297 90.81% 60.13%
749 45 1186 1187 94.33% 63.15%
Table 1. Precision and recall results on the unfiltered data set
Concept area Inter-rater
agreement (K)
Correct
Hits (a)
Wrong
hits (b)
Total positive
sentences (c)
Total negative
 sentences
Precision
(a/(a+b))
Recall
(a/c)
Managing knowledge 0.5636 141 12 168 259 92.15% 83.92%
Memory 0.8069 209 0 221 290 100% 94.57%
Explanations 0.7138 83 5 120 290 94.21% 69.16%
Similarity judgments 0.6551 136 12 189 284 91.89% 71.95%
0.6805 569 29 698 1123 95.15% 81.51%
Table 2. Precision and recall results on the filtered data set, with inter-rater agreement on filtering
and negative sentences for any given concept area.
Sentences in the filtered data sets were used as
training instances, and feature vectors for each
sentence were composed of word-level unigram
and bi-gram features, using no stop-lists and by
ignoring punctuation and case. By using a toolkit
of machine learning algorithms (Witten & Frank,
1999), we were able to compare the performance
of a wide range of different techniques, including
Na?ve Bayes, C4.5 rule induction, and Support
Vector Machines, through stratified cross-
validation (10-fold) of the training data. The high-
est performance levels were achieved using a se-
quential minimal optimization algorithm for
training a support vector classifier using polyno-
mial kernels (Platt, 1998). These performance re-
sults are presented in Table 3. The percentage
correctness of classification (Pa) of our hand-
authored local grammars (column A) was higher
than could be attained using this machine-learning
approach (column B) in three out of the four con-
cept areas.
We then conducted an additional study to de-
termine if the two approaches (hand-authored local
grammars and machine learning) could be com-
plimentary. The concepts that are recognized by
our hand-authored rules could be conceived as ad-
ditional bimodal features for use in machine
learning algorithms. We constructed an additional
set of support vector machine classifiers trained on
the filtered data set that included these additional
concept-level features in the feature vector of each
instance along side the existing unigram and bi-
gram features. Performance of these enhanced
classifiers, also obtained through stratified cross-
validation (10-fold), are also reported in Table 3 as
well (column C). The results show that these en-
hanced classifiers perform at a level that is the
greater of that of each independent approach.
5 Discussion
The most significant challenge facing developers
of large-scale lexical-semantic resources is coming
to some agreement on the way that natural lan-
guage can be mapped onto specific concepts. This
challenge is particularly evident in consideration of
our survey data and subsequent filtering. The
abilities that people have in producing and recog-
nizing sentences containing related words or
phrases differed significantly across concept areas.
While raters could agree on what constitutes a
sentence containing an expression about memory
(Kappa=.8069), the agreement on expressions of
managing knowledge is much lower than we
would hope for (Kappa=.5636). We would expect
much greater inter-rater agreement if we had
trained our six raters for the filtering task, that is,
described exactly which concepts we were looking
for and gave them examples of how these concepts
can be realized in English text. However, this ap-
proach would have invalidated our performance
results on the filtered data set, as the task of the
raters would be biased toward identifying exam-
ples that our system would likely perform well on
rather than identifying references to concepts of
commonsense psychology.
Our inter-rater agreement concern is indicative
of a larger problem in the construction of large-
scale lexical-semantic resources. The deeper we
delve into the meaning of natural language, the less
we are likely to find strong agreement among un-
trained people concerning the particular concepts
that are expressed in any given text. Even with
lexical-semantic resources about commonsense
knowledge (e.g. commonsense psychology), finer
distinctions in meaning will require the efforts of
trained knowledge engineers to successfully map
between language and concepts. While this will
certainly create a problem for future preci-
A. Hand authored local
grammars
B. SVM with word level
features
C. SVM with word and
concept features
Concept area Pa K Pa K Pa K
Managing knowledge 90.86% 0.8148 86.0789% 0.6974 89.5592% 0.7757
Memory 97.65% 0.8973 93.5922% 0.8678 97.4757% 0.9483
Explanations 89.75% 0.7027 85.9564% 0.6212 89.3462% 0.7186
Similarity judgments 86.25% 0.7706 92.4528% 0.8409 92.0335% 0.8309
Table 3. Percent agreement (Pa) and Kappa statistics (K) for classification using hand-authored local
grammars (A), SVMs with word features (B), and SVMs with word and concept features (C)
sion/recall performance evaluations, the concern is
even more serious for other methodologies that
rely on large amounts of hand-tagged text data to
create the recognition rules in the first place. We
expect that this problem will become more evident
as projects using algorithms to induce local gram-
mars from manually-tagged corpora, such as the
Berkeley FrameNet efforts (Baker et al, 1998),
broaden and deepen their encodings in conceptual
areas that are more abstract (e.g. commonsense
psychology).
The approach that we have taken in our re-
search does not offer a solution to the growing
problem of evaluating lexical-semantic resources.
However, by hand-authoring local grammars for
specific concepts rather than inducing them from
tagged text, we have demonstrated a successful
methodology for creating lexical-semantic re-
sources with a high degree of conceptual breadth
and depth. By employing linguistic and knowledge
engineering skills in a combined manner we have
been able to make strong ontological commitments
about the meaning of an important portion of the
English language. We have demonstrated that the
precision and recall performance of this approach
is high, achieving classification performance
greater than that of standard machine-learning
techniques. Furthermore, we have shown that
hand-authored local grammars can be used to
identify concepts that can be easily combined with
word-level features (e.g. unigrams, bi-grams) for
integration into statistical natural language proc-
essing systems. Our early exploration of the appli-
cation of this work for corpus analysis (U.S. State
of the Union Addresses) has produced interesting
results, and we expect that the continued develop-
ment of this resource will be important to the suc-
cess of future corpus analysis and human-computer
interaction projects.
Acknowledgments
This paper was developed in part with funds from
the U.S. Army Research Institute for the Behav-
ioral and Social Sciences under ARO contract
number DAAD 19-99-D-0046. Any opinions,
findings and conclusions or recommendations ex-
pressed in this paper are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Depart-
ment of the Army.
References
Baker, C., Fillmore, C., & Lowe, J. (1998) The Ber-
keley FrameNet project. in Proceedings of the
COLING-ACL, Montreal, Canada.
Bartsch, K. & Wellman, H. (1995) Children talk about
the mind. New York: Oxford University Press.
Dyer, J., Shatz, M., & Wellman, H. (2000) Young chil-
dren?s storybooks as a source of mental state infor-
mation. Cognitive Development 15:17-37.
Ferguson, G. & Allen, J. (1993) Cooperative Plan Rea-
soning for Dialogue Systems, in AAAI-93 Fall Sym-
posium on Human-Computer Collaboration:
Reconciling Theory, Synthesizing Practice, AAAI
Technical Report FS-93-05. Menlo Park, CA: AAAI
Press.
Gordon, A. (2002) The Theory of Mind in Strategy
Representations. 24th Annual Meeting of the Cogni-
tive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erl-
baum Associates.
Gordon, A. & Hobbs (2003) Coverage and competency
in formal theories: A commonsense theory of mem-
ory. AAAI Spring Symposium on Formal Theories of
Commonsense knowledge, March 24-26, Stanford.
Platt, J. (1998). Fast Training of Support Vector Ma-
chines using Sequential Minimal Optimization. In B.
Sch?lkopf, C. Burges, and A. Smola (eds.) Advances
in Kernel Methods - Support Vector Learning, Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Reboul A., Sabatier P., No?l-Jorand M-C. (2001) Le
discours des schizophr?nes: une ?tude de cas. Revue
fran?aise de Psychiatrie et de Psychologie M?dicale,
49, pp 6-11.
Silberztein, M. (1999) Text Indexing with INTEX.
Computers and the Humanities 33(3).
Traum, D. (1993) Mental state in the TRAINS-92 dia-
logue manager. In Working Notes of the AAAI Spring
Symposium on Reasoning about Mental States: For-
mal Theories and Applications, pages 143-149, 1993.
Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press.
Voorhees, E. & Buckland, L. (2002) The Eleventh Text
REtrieval Conference (TREC 2002). Washington,
DC: Department of Commerce, National Institute of
Standards and Technology.
Witten, I. & Frank, E. (1999) Data Mining: Practical
Machine Learning Tools and Techniques with Java
Implementations. Morgan Kaufman.
