Proceedings of Ninth Meeting of the ACL Special Interest Group in Computational Morphology and Phonology, pages 126?133,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Dynamic Correspondences: An Object-Oriented Approach to
Tracking Sound Reconstructions
Tyler Peterson
University of British Columbia
E270-1866 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T-1Z1
tylerrp@interchange.ubc.ca
Gessiane Picanc?o
Universidade Federal do Para?
Bele?m ? Para? ? Brasil
CEP 66075-110
picanco.g@hotmail.com
Abstract
This paper reports the results of a re-
search project that experiments with cross-
tabulation in aiding phonemic reconstruc-
tion. Data from the Tup?? stock was used,
and three tests were conducted in order to
determine the efficacy of this application:
the confirmation and challenging of a previ-
ously established reconstruction in the fam-
ily; testing a new reconstruction generated
by our model; and testing the upper limit
of simultaneous, multiple correspondences
across several languages. Our conclusion
is that the use of cross tabulations (imple-
mented within a database as pivot tables) of-
fers an innovative and effective tool in com-
parative study and sound reconstruction.
1 Introduction
In the past decade databases have transitioned from a
useful resource as a searchable repository of linguis-
tic tokens of some type, to an actual tool capable of
not only organising vast amounts of data, but execut-
ing complex statistical functions and queries on the
data it stores. These advances in database technol-
ogy complement those made in computational lin-
guistics, and both have recently begun to converge
on the domain of comparative and historical linguis-
tic research.
This paper contributes to this line of research
through describing the database project Base de Da-
dos para Estudos Comparativos ? Tup?? (BDEC-T)
(Database for Comparative Studies ? Tup??), which
is part of a larger research program investigating
the phonemic reconstruction of the Tup?? languages.
The database component of the BDEC-T is designed
to capitalise on the functionality of cross-tabulation
tables, commonly known as pivot tables, a recent
innovation in the implementation SQL queries in
many database and spreadsheet applications. Pivot
tables can be described as an ?object-oriented? rep-
resentation of SQL statements in the sense that
columns of data are treated as objects, which al-
low the user to create multidimensional views of the
data by ?dragging and dropping? columns into var-
ious sorting arrangements. We have found that this
dynamic, multidimensional manipulation of the data
can greatly aid the researcher in identifying relation-
ships and correspondences that are otherwise diffi-
cult to summarize by other query types.
In this paper we report on the results of an ex-
periment that tests the applicability of pivot tables
to language data, in particular, the comparative and
historical reconstruction of the proto-phonemes in a
language family. In doing this, three tests were con-
ducted:
1. The confirmation and challenging of a ?man-
ual? and/or previously established reconstruc-
tion of a proto-language, Proto-Tup??;
2. The testing of a new reconstruction generated
by our model, and checking it against a manual
reconstruction;
3. The testing the upper limit of simultaneous,
multiple correspondences across several lan-
guages.
126
It is argued that this type of object-oriented im-
plementation of SQL statements using pivot tables,
offers two unique features: the first is the abil-
ity to check several one-to-one and one-to-many
correspondences simultaneously across several lan-
guages; and secondly, the ability to dynamically sur-
vey the language-internal distribution of segments
and their features.
The former feature represents a notable advan-
tage over other ?manual? methods, as the recon-
structed forms may be entered in the database as
proto-languages, which can be continually revised
and tested against all other languages. The latter fea-
ture offers the ability to check the language-internal
distribution of the (proto-)segments which will aid
in preventing possible cases of skewed occurrences,
as is shown below. Basic statistical analyses, such
as numbers of occurrences, can also be reported,
graphed and plotted by the pivot tables, thus provid-
ing further details of individual languages and proto-
languages, and, ultimately, a more quantitatively re-
liable analysis.
The net outcome of this is the presentation of a
practical methodology that is easily and quickly im-
plementable, and that makes use of a function that
many people already have with their database or
spreadsheet.
1.1 The Data
The Tup?? stock of language families is concentrated
in the Amazon river basin of Brazil (and areas
of neighbouring countries) and comprises 10 fam-
ilies of languages: Arike?m, Awet??, Juruna, Mawe?,
Monde?, Munduruku?, Purubora?, Ramarama, Tupar??,
and Tup??-Guaran?? (Rodrigues 1958; revised in Ro-
drigues 1985), totaling approximately 64 languages.
Tup??-Guaran?? is the largest family with more than 40
languages, while the other families range from one
language (e.g. Awet??, Purubora?) to six languages
(e.g. Monde?). From these, the Tup??-Guaran?? family
is the only family that has been mostly analized from
a historical point of view (e.g. Lemle 1971, Jensen
1989, Schleicher 1998, Mello 2000, etc.); there is
also a proposal for Proto-Tupar?? (Tupar?? family), by
Moore and Galu?cio (1993), and Proto-Munduruku?
(Munduruku? family), by Picanc?o (2005). A prelim-
inary reconstruction at level of the Tup?? stock was
proposed by Rodrigues (1995), in which he recon-
structs a list of 67 items for Proto-Tup?? (see further
details below). The BDEC-T also includes these
reconstructed languages, as they allow us to com-
pare the results obtained from the database with the
results of previous, manual historical-comparative
studies.
2 The Application: Design and Method
The BDEC-T was initially developed as repository
database for language data from various Tup?? lan-
guages described above, with the purpose of allow-
ing the user to generate lists of word and phoneme
correspondences through standard boolean search
queries or SQL statements. These lists aided the
researcher in exploring different correspondences in
the course of a proto-phoneme or word reconstruc-
tion. The BDEC-T is implemented within MS Ac-
cess 2003, which provides the user an interface for
entering language data that is then externally linked
to tab-delimited text files in order to preserve its
declarative format.1 This also allowed flexibility in
accessing the data for whatever purpose in the plat-
form or program of the researcher?s choosing.
At present, the BDEC-T for the Tup?? stock con-
tains a glossary of 813 words and up to 3,785 entries
distributed across 15 Tup??an languages. Approxi-
mately 18% of this 813-word list appear to have cog-
nates in the majority of languages entered so far, and
which can be used as reference for a reliable set of
robust cognates across the entire Tup?? stock.2 This
number is continually increasing as more languages
are entered in the database, and at least 50% of the
glossary is filled up for all languages. The average
number of entries for each language varies consid-
erably as it depends largely on available sources;
yet, in general, the average is of approximately 250
words per language (i.e. about 30%).
1The choice of using a proprietary database such as MS Ac-
cess is mostly a practical one: after considering various fac-
tors such as programming, maintenance, distribution and other
practical issues, we decided that a database of this type should
be useable by researchers with little or no programming expe-
rience, as it is fairly easy to learn and modify (see also Bre-
denkamp, Sadler and Spencer (1998: 149) for similar argu-
ments). It should also be noted that all the procedures outlined
here are implementable in open source database and spreadsheet
programs such as OpenOffice Calc and Base (vers. 2.3).
2There is a separate function in the BDEC-T for assessing
and tracking cognates and how they map to semantic sets (see
Peterson 2007a for details).
127
2.1 Data entry and Segmentation
Each of the 65 languages and 4 proto-languages in
BDEC-T is associated with its own data entry form.
Each data entry form is divided into three main
parts:
1. The word entry fields where the word for that
language is entered (along with two other op-
tional features);
2. The comparison viewer that contains fields
which simultaneously display that same word
in the all the other languages in the database;
3. The segmentation section which contains an ar-
rangement fields for recording segment data.
The structure of the stored data is straightforward:
the data entered in these forms is stored in a master
table where all of the languages are represented as
columns. Glosses are the rows, where each gloss
is assigned a unique, autogenerated number in the
master record when it is entered into the database.
This serves as the primary key for all the translations
of that gloss across all of the languages.
The third component of the language data entry
form, the segmentation section (Fig. 1), contains a
linear arrangement of ten columns, S1 to S10, and
three rows, each cell of which corresponds to a field.
The first row of the ten columns are fields where the
user can enter in the segmentation of that particu-
lar word, which contains the segments themselves.
The second and third rows correspond to optional
features (F) that are associated with that segment.
In this particular version F1 is unused, while F2
encodes syllable structure (i.e. ?O? onset, ?N? nu-
cleus).3
For example, Figure 1 is a screenshot of a portion
of the segmentation section in the language data en-
try form for Munduruku?. The word being entered is
?moon?, and the word in Munduruku? is ka?Si. Seg-
ment slots S3 to S6 are used to segment the word.
As a convention, a word will typically be seg-
mented starting with the S3 slot, and not with S1.
The reason for this is to allow for at least two seg-
ment fields (S1 and S2) to accommodate cognates in
3There is no restriction on the kind of information that can
be stored in the two Feature fields. However, in order for them
to be useful, they would need to contain a limited set of compa-
rable features across all the languages.
Figure 1: Screenshot of a portion of the Segmenta-
tion section in the Munduruku? Data entry form.
Segmentation slot S1 S2 S3 S4 S5
Ava?-Canoeiro 1 t 1
Guaja? w 1 t 1
Arawete? i w i t 1
Table 1: Segmentation of ?wind?
other languages that have segments that occur before
S3, but are entered into the database at a later time.
This is done in order to maintain a consistency be-
tween correspondences, regardless of what slot they
are in the data base. In other words, we need to be
prepared to handle cases that are shown in Tables 1
and 2 above. If the Ava? Canoeiro word for ?wind? is
entered first in Table 1, it is prudent to have segment
slots available for languages that are entered later
that may have additional segments occurring before.
Guaja? and Arawete? were entered into the database
after Ava? Canoeiro, and both have additional seg-
ments. Keeping S1 and S2 available as a general
rule can accommodate these cases.
Our purpose in designing the segmentation com-
ponent of the form this way was to give the re-
searcher complete control over how words are seg-
mented. This also allows the researcher to cross-
check their segmentations in real time with those in
the other languages already in the database, which
can be done in the comparison viewer (not shown
due to space limitations). This is essential for more
complicated cases, such as those in Table 2, where
there are not only word edge mismatches, but also
gaps and (grammaticalized) morphological bound-
aries that need to be properly corresponded. The
significance of this will be demonstrated below.4
4Cases where gaps result in languages already entered
would require the user to go back to the other languages entered
and re-segment them to include the corresponding gap. This
would be the case if 1ap was entered without the gap in S3 be-
fore the other languages in Table 2. This is facilitated within the
database: multiple language forms can be open simultaneously,
128
Segmentation slot S1 S2 S3 S4 S5
Ava?-Canoeiro 1 a p
Guaja? u ? 1
Mbya? h ? u P 1
Kamayura? h 1 P 1 p
Table 2: Segmentation of ?arrow?
The data entered in the segmentation section of
a language?s data entry form is stored in language-
specific tables, which has columns for each of the
ten segments, and columns recording the two op-
tional features associated with that segment. All
of the segment data in the language-specific tables
are coordinated by the primary key generated and
kept in the master table. The next subsection de-
scribes how this segmental data can be used in two
specific ways: 1) to track correspondences between
languages for a particular cognate or segment slot;
and 2), for monitoring the language-internal distri-
bution of segments. We propose that this is achieved
through using cross-tabulations of the segment data
recorded in each column, and outline a practical im-
plementation of this is using pivot tables.
2.2 Cross-tabulation: ?Pivot tables?
Access 2003 includes a graphical implementation
of SQL statements in the form of cross tabulations,
or pivot tables, which provide the user an interface
with which they can manipulate multiple columns
of data to create dynamic, multi-dimensional orga-
nizations of the data. There are three basic reasons
for organizing data into a pivot table, all of which
are relevant to the task at hand: first, to summa-
rize data contained in lengthy lists into a compact
format; secondly, to find relationships within that
data that are otherwise hard to see because of the
amount of detail; and thirdly, to organize the data
into a format that is easy to chart. Pivot tables are dy-
namic because columns of data are treated as objects
that can be moved, or literally ?swapped? in, out our
around in relation to other columns. They are multi-
dimensional because column data can be organized
along either axis, yielding different ?snapshots? of
the data. It is this kind of functionality that will
be capitalised on in examining correspondences be-
or switched between by the master switchboard.
tween columns of segment data (S1-10) across any
number of languages in the database.
A cross tabulation displays the joint distribution
of two or more variables. They are usually presented
as a contingency table which describes the distribu-
tion of two or more variables simultaneously. Thus,
cross tabulation allows us to examine frequencies
of observations that belong to specific categories on
more than one variable. By examining these fre-
quencies, we can identify relations between cross-
tabulated variables. Typically, only variables with a
relatively small number of different meaningful val-
ues are cross tabulated. We suggest that phonemes
fit this criteria, as there is a finite and relatively low
number of total unique phonemes that can ever be
potentially cross tabulated.
For example, Figure 2 (below) is a screen shot of
a pivot table generated in the BDEC-T that shows
the distribution of word and morpheme-initial voice-
less stops in Munduruku? in relation to those in the
same position for three other languages: Karitiana,
Gavia?o and Karo. This was achieved in the follow-
ing way: as described above, we assume that the
word-initial segment for most words is S3. The S3
column for Munduruku? is then taken to the ?drop
field? (shaded grey), where all of the values in the
S3 of Munduruku? become dependent variables. The
S3 columns for Karitiana, Gavia?o and Karo become
independent variables, which allow us to monitor
the distribution of voiceless stops in these languages
in relation to the S3 segments in Munduruku?. In
essence, Munduruku? S3 becomes a sort function on
any other S3 columns to the right of it.5
Where this method becomes effective is when
we ?swap? out Munduruku? S3 and replace it with
Gavia?o S3, which is done by pulling the column
header and placing it into the grey ?drop field?.
This is shown in Figure 3 below. What Figure 3
immediately demonstrates is the asymmetric cor-
respondence between Munduruku? and Gavia?o for
S3: broadly speaking, the correspondences between
Munduruku? and Karitiana, Gavia?o and Karo are
more general, whereas the same correspondences for
5Given space considerations, the data in these Tables are just
samples - the voiceless stop series was picked from a separate
list which acts as a filter on the segments in the Munduruku? S3.
Cells where there is a gap ?-? do not represent a gap or lack of
correspondence, but rather the word for that language possibly
hasn?t been segmented yet (gaps are represented by ???)
129
Figure 2: Screenshot of a pivot table for voiceless
stops in Munduruku? (shaded) corresponding with
Karitiana, Gavia?o and Karo in BDEC-T.
Figure 3: Screenshot of a pivot table for voice-
less stops in Gavia?o (shaded) corresponding with
Munduruku?, Karitiana and Karo in BDEC-T.
Gavia?o are more restricted.
There is no restriction on the number of indepen-
dent or dependent variables, and this can be used to
investigate the language-internal distribution of seg-
ments. Figure 4 shows how the segment data in S3
and S4 from the same language can be used in a
pivot table, allowing the user to track the distribu-
tion of certain word or morpheme-initial segments
and the segments that follow them. This arrange-
ment gives us a snapshot of consonant-vowel pat-
terns in Karo, where S3 has been additionally fil-
tered to show the distribution of vowels that follow
the palatals [c] and [j].
One important advantage to this arrangement of
data and the use of pivot tables is the potential
for tracking multiple correspondences across several
languages simultaneously. So far, this is only lim-
ited by processor speed and viewing space. We have
tested up to five segment correspondences (i.e. S3-8)
across three languages, or one correspondence (i.e.
Figure 4: Screenshot of a pivot table for language-
internal distribution of [c] and [j] morpheme and
syllable-initially in Karo.
S3) for as many as ten languages simultaneously.
Given that most words in the Tup?? language family
have on average three to five segments, the former
of these amounts to the ability of corresponding the
segments of entire words simultaneously. Consider-
ing that any segment column can be swapped in and
out dynamically, this adds a substantial amount of
power in tracking single correspondences simultane-
ously across a variety of languages, proto-languages,
and potentially even entire families.
Various statistics can be applied to these pivot ta-
bles, where the results can be graphed and exported.
The analyst may now take these results and proceed
with the appropriate detailed investigation, an exam-
ple of which is presented in the following sections.
3 Proto-Tup?? and Munduruku?
To demonstrate the efficacy of this approach, we
show now the results obtained with the BDEC-T and
the use of pivot tables, and compare them with the
results of a previously established set of sound corre-
spondences and reconstructed proto-phonemes. For
this, we chose Proto-Tup??, for which Rodrigues
(1995) reconstructed 67 lexical proto-forms and es-
tablished a consonant inventory composed of four
complex series of stops, divided into plain, labi-
alized (still uncertain), palatalized, and glottalized
(ejectives), shown Table 3.
Rodrigues based his analysis on various syn-
chronic reflexes found in several Tup??an languages,
130
Plain p t, ? ? k
Labialized (pw) w (kw)
Palatalized tj kj
Glottalized pP, (pPw) tP, ?P ?P kP, (kPw)
Table 3: Proto-Tup?? stop series (Rodrigues 1995)
Rodrigues BDEC-T Rodrigues BDEC-T
P-T Mund. P-T Mund. P-T Mund. P-T Mund.
*p p *p p *? S *? S
? ? ?
ps ? ?
p/b
*pP b *pP b *?P t *?P t
p d d
*t n *t n *? ? *? ?
s ?, ?
? S S
t/n
*tP d *tP d *P P *P P
? ? *VPV V
?
t/d
*k k *k k *kP P *kP P
S
Table 4: The correspondence sets as proposed by
Rodrigues (1995) compared with those generated by
the BDEC-T.
including Munduruku?. Here we compare the cor-
respondence sets postulated by Rodrigues and com-
pare them to those generated by the BDEC-T. The
results of the pivot table analysis are shown in Table
4. Note that the BDEC-T predicts a larger set of
correspondences than those posited by Rodrigues.
However, there are a few cases where both lists
agree; for example, for Proto-Tup?? *? which corre-
sponds to S, ? and ? in both cases.
Another important result obtained with the
BDEC-T is the possibility of relating other types of
segmental information. For example, Munduruku?
exhibits a feature that makes it distinct from any
other Tup??an language: it is the only Tup??an lan-
guage known to make a phonological contrast be-
tween modal and creaky (laryngealised) vowels
(Picanc?o 2005). Munduruku? phonation types are
crucial for any reconstruction at the stock level ?
S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6
Proto-Tup??: *upiPa ? u p i P a
Munduruku?: topsa
?
t o ps ? ? a
?Meke?ns: upia ? u p i ? a
Table 5: *(C)VPV corresponding with (C)V
?
especially in the case of the ejectives proposed by
Rodrigues ? but this was completely ignored in his
proposal. As shown in Table 5 (on the following
page), some Proto-Tup?? sequences *(C)VPV yielded
(C)V
?
sequences (where the tilde underneath a vowel
marks creaky voice on the vowel).
A comparison that considers only a segment-
to-segment correspondence will mistakenly posit
the correspondence set *P/? for both Munduruku?
and Sakirabia? (Meke?ns, Tupar?? family), when the
correspondence is in fact *P/? for Sakirabia? but
*(C)VPV/(C)V
?
for Munduruku?. This is true for
Rodrigues? analysis, which mistakenly established
that ?in Munduruku? [the glottal stop] has dropped?
(1995: 6). The BDEC-T, on the other hand, allows
us to compare features to segments, and to examine
various correspondences of segments in a sequence.
This is a particular advantage as there will be no
missing information. With this, this unique property
of Munduruku?, specifically creaky voice, can be ex-
plained historically in a principled way.
3.1 Language-internal distribution
A major feature offered by the BDEC-T is the pos-
sibility of examining the distribution of segments
within the same language, which allow us to bet-
ter capture the proper environment for correspon-
dences between languages. As Picanc?o (2005)
notes, phonotactic restrictions may, in many cases,
be gaps left behind by historical changes. Table 6
provides an example of the distribution of the pairs
plain-glottalized stops. At least in the case of *p
versus *pP, the only occurrences of the latter is pre-
ceding the high central vowel *1; in this environ-
ment, both consonants appear to contrast as *p also
occurs before *1. In the case of the coronal pairs
*t/*tP and *?/*?P, there is no occurrence of the first
pair before *1, whereas *?/*?P occur mostly in this
environment. As for *? versus *?P, these also ap-
pear to be in complementary distribution. By using
131
p e pP 1 t a? tP a
1 a i
i ?? u
o u?
u
? 1 ?P 1 ? u ?P a
a 1
Table 6: Language-internal distribution of segments
pivot tables, the analyst is able to easily monitor and
track distributional gaps or contrasts and so provide
a more systematic diachronic analysis.
Another case which illustrates the applicabil-
ity of pivot tables in arranging segment data con-
cerns the vowels. Rodrigues? comparison pro-
duced vowel correspondences between Proto-Tup??
and Munduruku?. Again we compare his findings
with those detected by the database: Table 7 com-
pares the oral vowel correspondences as in Ro-
drigues (1995) with those obtained by the pivot ta-
bles in the BDEC-T, supplemented by the total of
words with the respective correspondence.
In Rodrigues? analysis, the correspondences be-
tween proto-Tup?? oral vowels and their reflexes in
Munduruku? are straightforward: it is a one-to-one
correspondence. BDEC-T, however, challenges this
analysis as there appear to be other correspondences
that have not been observed, with the exception of
the correspondence set *e/e, where both methods
achieved the same results. Rodrigues? intuitions are,
nonetheless, relatively close to what the database
produced: the largest number of correspondences
match the ones posited by Rodrigues, indicating that
a ?manual? analysis, although valid, still has the po-
tential to miss details that the database captures.
In sum, we employed the function of cross tab-
ulations in the form of pivot tables to arrange seg-
mented data. The object oriented function of pivot
tables allowed us to dynamically arrange segment
data which aided in tracking phonemic and featural
correspondences. This was tested against a manual
analysis of the data and it was shown to confirm, re-
vise and produce new results.
Rodrigues BDEC-T
P-T Munduruku? P-T Munduruku? Total
? a 1
*a a *a ? 1
a 11
@? 1
o? 1
a
?
2
*e e *e e 5
*i i *i i 2
? 2
*1 i *1 @ 1
i 19
i
?
3
j 1
*o 1 *o ? 1
@?/@ 1
o 2
*u o *u o 7
o? 1
i 1
Table 7: Rodrigues? (1995) oral vowel correspon-
dence sets compared with those generated by the
BDEC-T.
4 Conclusion
The use of spreadsheets and databases is well-
established in linguistic research. However, as far
as we know, the BDEC-T represents the first at-
tempt at harnessing the functionality of pivot ta-
bles and cross-tabulation in historical linguistics. On
this note, the application computational procedures
in the study of sound change and comparison have
made notable advances in the past decade. Rele-
vant to this study, systems such ALINE, a feature-
based algorithm for measuring phonetic similarity,
are capable of automating segmentation and quan-
titatively calculating cognate probabilities without
resorting to a table of systematic sound correspon-
dences (Kondrak 2002). These are valuable mod-
els which test many long-standing hypotheses on the
nature of sound change and methods for investigat-
ing this. While not offering an automated algorithm
of this type, we chose to keep segmentation manual
in order to maintain accuracy and to make adjust-
132
ments where needed in the S1-S10 segmentations
made in the languages. This also offers a measure of
accuracy, as the pivot tables will only yield invalid
results if the segments aren?t aligned properly.6
Although not discussed in this paper, we have
promising results from using the optional feature
fields (F1 and F2) to generate syllable template to
accompany the phonemic correspondences gener-
ated by the pivot tables. Also, the application of
pivot tables in the BDEC-T has also had success in
tabulating mappings between cognate and semantic
sets in the Tup??an languages (Peterson 2007a). Ul-
timately, we would like to explore innovative visu-
alizing techniques to display the interdependent re-
lationships between phonemes at various stages of
reconstruction (through the proto-languages in the
database), and the languages whose inventories they
belong to. Conceptually, this would give us a (scal-
able) two- or three-dimensional plots or ?webs? of
correspondences across the languages, perhaps im-
plemented by recent visualization techniques such
as treemaps or ConeTrees (Fekete & Plaisant 2002).
The purpose of the BDEC-T is ultimately to com-
plement other current computational approaches to
the domain of historical and comparative research
by offering a practical level of interactivity and pro-
ductivity in a research tool. Where automation is not
necessary, the BDEC-T offers a database model that
effectively enhances the functionality of the kinds of
databases that are already widely used.
References
Andrew Bredenkamp, Louisa Sadler and Andrew
Spencer. 1998. Investigating Argument Structure:
The Russian Nominalization Database. Linguistic
Databases, John Nerbonne, (ed.) CSLI Publications
Jean-Daniel Fekete and Catherine Plaisant. 2002. In-
teractive Information Visualization of a Million Items.
Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization, IEEE Computer Society, Wash., DC
Cheryl Jensen. 1989. O desenvolvimento histo?rico da
l??ngua Wayamp??. Master?s Thesis. Campinas: Univer-
sidade Estadual de Campinas.
Grzegorz Kondrak. 2002. Algorithms for Language Re-
construction. Ph.D Thesis, University of Toronto
6We have developed a set of ?diagnostic? pivot tables to help
control against improperly aligned segmentations.
Mirian Lemle. 1971. Internal classification of the
Tup-Guaran linguistic family. Tupi Studies I., David
Bendor-Samuel (ed.), pp. 107-129. Norman: SIL
Augusto S. Mello. 2000. Estudo Histo?rico da Fam??lia
lingu???stica Tup-Guaran??: Aspectos Fonolo?gicos e Lex-
icais. PhD Dissertation. Santa Catarina: UFSC
Denny Moore and Vilacy Galu?cio. 2005. Reconstruction
of Proto-Tupari consonants and vowels. in Survey of
California and Other Indian Languages, Report 8, M.
Langdon and L. Hinton (eds.), pp. 119-137.
John Nerbonne. 1998. Linguistic Databases: Introduc-
tion. John Nerbonne, (ed.) CSLI Publications
Tyler Peterson. 2007a. Analytical Database Design: Ap-
proaches in the Mapping between Cognate and Se-
mantic Sets. Proceedings of the 7th Intl. Workshop
on Computational Semantics, J. Goertzen et al(eds).
Tilburg: Tilburg University, pp. 359?361.
Gessiane L. Picanc?o. 2005. Munduruku?: Phonetics,
Phonology, Synchrony, Diachrony. PhD Dissertation.
Vancouver: University of British Columbia.
Aryon D. Rodrigues. 1958. Die Klassifikation des Tupi-
Sprachstammes. Proceedings of the 32nd Interna-
tional Congress of Americanists, Copenhagen, 1956;
pp. 679-684.
Aryon D. Rodrigues. 1985. Relac?o?es internas na fam??lia
lingu???stica Tup-Guaran??. Revista de Antropologia
27/28, Sa?o Paulo, 1956 pp. 33-53.
Aryon D. Rodrigues. 1995. Glottalized stops in Proto-
Tup??. Paper presented at the SSILA Summer Meeting,
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM.
Charles O. Schleicher. 1998. Comparative and Internal
Reconstruction of Proto-Tup??-Guaran??. PhD Disserta-
tion. Madison: University of Wisconsin.
133
