53
Modelling syntactic development in a cross-linguistic context
Fernand GOBET
Centre for Cognition and Neuroimaging
Department of Human Sciences
Brunel University
Uxbridge UB8 3PH, UK
Fernand.Gobet@Brunel.ac.uk
Daniel FREUDENTHAL
Julian M. PINE
School of Psychology
University of Nottingham
Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK
Daniel.Freudenthal@psyc.nott.ac.uk
Julian.Pine@psyc.nott.ac.uk
Abstract
Mainstream linguistic theory has traditionally
assumed that children come into the world
with rich innate knowledge about language
and grammar. More recently, computational
work using distributional algorithms has
shown that the information contained in the
input is much richer than proposed by the na-
tivist approach. However, neither of these ap-
proaches has been developed to the point of
providing detailed and quantitative predictions
about the developmental data. In this paper,
we champion a third approach, in which com-
putational models learn from naturalistic input
and produce utterances that can be directly
compared with the utterances of language-
learning children. We demonstrate the feasi-
bility of this approach by showing how
MOSAIC, a simple distributional analyser,
simulates the optional-infinitive phenomenon
in English, Dutch, and Spanish. The model ac-
counts for young children?s tendency to use
both correct finites and incorrect (optional) in-
finitives in finite contexts, for the generality of
this phenomenon across languages, and for the
sparseness of other types of errors (e.g., word
order errors). It thus shows how these phe-
nomena, which have traditionally been taken
as evidence for innate knowledge of Universal
Grammar, can be explained in terms of a sim-
ple distributional analysis of the language to
which children are exposed.
1 Introduction
Children acquiring the syntax of their native lan-
guage are faced with a task of considerable com-
plexity, which they must solve using only noisy
and potentially inconsistent input. Mainstream lin-
guistic theory has addressed this ?learnability prob-
lem? by proposing the nativist hypothesis that chil-
dren come into the world with rich innate knowl-
edge about language and grammar (Chomsky,
1981; Piattelli-Palmarini, 2002; Pinker, 1984).
However, there is also strong empirical evidence
that the amount of information present in the input
is considerably greater than has traditionally been
assumed by the nativist approach. In particular,
computer simulations have shown that a distribu-
tional analysis of the statistics of the input can pro-
vide a significant amount of syntactic information
(Redington & Chater, 1997).
One limitation of the distributional approach is
that analyses have rarely been done with naturalis-
tic input (e.g. mothers? child-directed speech) and
have so far not been linked to the detailed analysis
of a linguistic phenomenon found in human data,
(e.g., Christiansen & Chater, 2001). Indeed, neither
the nativist nor the distributional approach has
been developed to the point of providing detailed
and quantitative predictions about the developmen-
tal dynamics of the acquisition of language. In
order to remedy this weakness, our group has re-
cently been exploring a different approach. This
approach, which we think is a more powerful way
of understanding how children acquire their native
language, has involved developing a computational
model (MOSAIC; Model Of Syntax Acquisition In
Children) that learns from naturalistic input, and
produces utterances that can be directly compared
with the utterances of language-learning children.
This makes it possible to derive quantitative pre-
dictions about empirical phenomena observed in
children learning different languages and about the
developmental dynamics of these phenomena.
MOSAIC, which is based upon a simple distri-
butional analyser, has been used to simulate a
number of phenomena in language acquisition.
These include: the verb-island phenomenon (Gobet
& Pine, 1997; Jones, Gobet, & Pine, 2000); nega-
tion errors in English (Croker, Pine, & Gobet,
2003); patterns of pronoun case marking error in
English (Croker, Pine, & Gobet, 2001); patterns of
subject omission error in English (Freudenthal,
Pine, & Gobet, 2002b); and the optional-infinitive
phenomenon (Freudenthal, Pine, & Gobet, 2001,
2002a, 2003). MOSAIC has also been used to
simulate data from three different languages (Eng-
lish, Dutch, and Spanish), which has helped us to
54
understand how these phenomena are affected by
differences in the structure of the language that the
child is learning.
In this paper, we illustrate our approach by
showing how MOSAIC can account in detail for
the ?optional-infinitive phenomenon? in two lan-
guages (English and Dutch) and its quasi-absence
in a third language (Spanish). This phenomenon is
of particular interest as it has generally been taken
to reflect innate grammatical knowledge on the
part of the child (Wexler, 1994, 1998).
We begin by highlighting the theoretical chal-
lenges faced in applying our model to data from
three different languages. Then, after describing
the optional-infinitive phenomenon, we describe
MOSAIC, with an emphasis on the mechanisms
that will be crucial in explaining the empirical
data. We then consider the data from the three lan-
guages, and show to what extent the same model
can simulate these data. When dealing with Eng-
lish, we describe the methods used to collect and
analyse children?s data in some detail. While these
details may seem out of place in a conference on
computational linguistics, we emphasise that they
are critical to our approach: first, our approach re-
quires fine-grained empirical data, and, second, the
analysis of the data produced by the model is as
close as possible to that used with children?s data.
We conclude by discussing the implications of our
approach for developmental psycholinguistics.
2 Three languages: three challenges
The attempt to use MOSAIC to model data in three
different languages involves facing up to a number
of challenges, each of which is instructive for dif-
ferent reasons. An obvious problem when model-
ling English data is that English has an impover-
ished system of verb morphology that makes it
difficult to determine which form of the verb a
child is producing in any given utterance. This
problem militates against conducting objective
quantitative analyses of children?s early verb use
and has resulted in there being no detailed quanti-
tative description of the developmental patterning
of the optional infinitive phenomenon in English
(in contrast to other languages like Dutch). We
have addressed this problem by using exactly the
same (automated) methods to classify the utter-
ances produced by the child and by the model.
These methods, which do not rely on the subjective
judgment of the coder (e.g. on Bloom?s, 1970,
method of rich interpretation) proved to be suffi-
ciently powerful to capture the development of the
optional infinitive in English, and to do so at a
relatively fine level of detail.
One potential criticism of these simulations of
English is that we may have tuned the model?s pa-
rameters in order to optimise the goodness of fit to
the human data. An obvious consequence of over-
fitting the data in this way would be that
MOSAIC?s ability to simulate the phenomenon
would break down when the model was applied to
a new language. The simulations of Dutch show
that this is not the case: with this language, which
has a richer morphology than English, the model
was still able to reproduce the key characteristics
of the optional-infinitive stage.
Spanish, the syntax of which is quite different to
English and Dutch, offered an even more sensitive
test of the model?s mechanisms. The Dutch simula-
tions relied heavily on the presence of compound
finites in the child-directed speech used as input.
However, although Spanish child-directed speech
has a higher proportion of compound finites than
Dutch, children learning Spanish produce optional-
infinitive errors less often than children learning
Dutch. Somewhat counter-intuitively, the simula-
tions correctly reproduce the relative scarcity of
optional-infinitive errors in Spanish, showing that
the model is sensitive to subtle regularities in the
way compound finites are used in Dutch and Span-
ish.
3 The optional-infinitive phenomenon
Between two and three years of age, children
learning English often produce utterances that ap-
pear to lack inflections, such as past tense markers
or third person singular agreement markers. For
example, children may produce utterances as:
(1a) That go there*
(2a) He walk home*
instead of:
(1b) That goes there
(2b) He walked home
Traditionally, such utterances have been inter-
preted in terms of absence of knowledge of the
appropriate inflections (Brown, 1973) or the drop-
ping of inflections as a result of performance limi-
tations in production (L. Bloom, 1970; P. Bloom,
1990; Pinker, 1984; Valian, 1991). More recently,
however, it has been argued that they reflect the
child?s optional use of (root) infinitives (e.g. go) in
contexts where a finite form (e.g. went, goes) is
obligatory in the adult language (Wexler, 1994,
1998).
This interpretation reflects the fact that children
produce (root) infinitives not only in English,
where the infinitive is a zero-marked form, but also
in languages such as Dutch where the infinitive
carries its own infinitival marker. For instance,
55
children learning Dutch may produce utterances
such as:
(3a) Pappa eten* (Daddy to eat)
(4a) Mamma drinken* (Mummy to drink)
instead of:
(3b) Pappa eet (Daddy eats)
(4b) Mamma drinkt (Mummy drinks)
The optional infinitive phenomenon is particu-
larly interesting as it occurs in languages that differ
considerably in their underlying grammar, and is
subject to considerable developmental and cross-
linguistic variation. It is also intriguing because
children in the optional infinitive stage typically
make few other grammatical errors. For example,
they make few errors in their use of the basic word
order of their language: English-speaking children
may say he go, but not go he.
Technically, the optional infinitive phenomenon
revolves around the notion of ?finiteness?. Finite
forms are forms that are marked for Tense and/or
Agreement (e.g. went, goes). Non-finite forms are
forms that are not marked for Tense or Agreement.
This includes the infinitive form (go), the past par-
ticiple (gone), and the progressive participle (go-
ing). In English, finiteness marking increases with
development: as they grow older, children produce
an increasing proportion of unambiguous finite
forms.
4 Description of the model
MOSAIC is a computational model that analyses
the distributional characteristics present in the in-
put. It learns to produce increasingly long utter-
ances from naturalistic (child-directed) input, and
produces output consisting of actual utterances,
which can be directly compared to children?s
speech. This allows for a direct comparison of the
output of the model at different stages with the
children?s developmental data.
The model learns from text-based input (i.e., it is
assumed that the phonological stream has been
segmented into words). Utterances are processed in
a left to right fashion. MOSAIC uses two learning
mechanisms, based on discrimination and generali-
sation, respectively. The first mechanism grows an
n-ary discrimination network (Feigenbaum &
Simon, 1984; Gobet et al, 2001) consisting of
nodes connected by test links. Nodes encode single
words or phrases. Test links encode the difference
between the contents of consecutive nodes. (Figure
1 illustrates the structure of the type of discrimina-
tion net used.) As the model sees more and more
input, the number of nodes and links increases, and
so does the amount of information held in the
nodes, and, as a consequence, the average length of
the phrases it can output. The node creation prob-
ability (NCP) is computed as follows:
NCP = (N / M)L
where M is a parameter arbitrarily set to 70,000 in
the English and Spanish simulations, N = number
of nodes in the net (N  M), and L = length of the
phrase being encoded. Node creation probability is
thus dependent both on the length of the utterance
(longer utterances are less likely to yield learning)
and on the amount of knowledge already acquired.
In a small net, learning is slow. When the number
of nodes in the net increases, the node creation
probability increases and, as a result, the learning
rate also increases. This is consistent with data
showing that children learn new words more easily
as they get older (Bates & Carnavale, 1993).
Figure 1: Illustration of a MOSAIC discrimination
net. The Figure also illustrates how an utterance
can be generated. Because she and he have a gen-
erative link, the model can output the novel utter-
ance she sings. (For simplicity, preceding context
is ignored in this Figure.)
While the first learning mechanism is based on
discrimination, the second is based on generalisa-
tion. When two nodes share a certain percentage
(set to 10% for these simulations) of nodes
(phrases) following and preceding them, a new
type of link, a generative link is created between
them (see Figure 1 for an example). Generative
links connect words that have occurred in similar
contexts in the input, and thus are likely to be of
the same word class. As no linguistic constructs
are given to the model, the development of ap-
proximate linguistic classes, such as those of noun
or verb, is an emergent property of the distribu-
tional analysis of the input. An important feature of
MOSAIC is that the creation and removal of gen-
erative links is dynamic. Since new nodes are con-
stantly being created in the network, the percentage
overlap between two nodes varies over time; as a
56
consequence, a generative link may drop below the
threshold and so be removed.
The model generates output by traversing the
network and outputting the contents of the visited
links. When the model traverses test links only, the
utterances it produces must have been present in
the input. Where the model traverses generative
links during output, novel utterances can be gener-
ated. An utterance is generated only if its final
word was the final word in the utterance when it
was encoded (this is accomplished by the use of an
end marker). Thus, the model is biased towards
generating utterances from sentence final position,
which is consistent with empirical data from lan-
guage-learning children (Naigles & Hoff-Ginsberg,
1998; Shady & Gerken, 1999; Wijnen, Kempen, &
Gillis, 2001).
5 Modelling the optional-infinitive phenome-
non in English
Despite the theoretical interest of the optional-
infinitive phenomenon, there is, to our knowledge,
no quantitative description of the developmental
dynamics of the use of optional infinitives in Eng-
lish, with detail comparable to that provided in
other languages, such as Dutch (Wijnen et al,
2001). The following analyses fill this gap.
5.1 Children?s data: Methods
We selected the speech of two children (Anne,
from 1 year 10 months to 2 years 9 months; and
Becky, from 2 years to 2 years 11 months). These
data were taken from the Manchester corpus
(Theakston, Lieven, Pine, & Rowland, 2001),
which is available in the CHILDES data base
(MacWhinney, 2000). Recordings were made
twice every three weeks over a period of one year
and lasted for approximately one hour per session.
Given that optional-infinitive phenomena are
harder to identify in English than in languages such
as Dutch or German (due to the relatively low
number of unambiguous finite forms), the analysis
focused on the subset of utterances that contain a
verb with he, she, it, this (one), or that (one) as its
subject. Restricting the analysis in this way avoids
utterances such as I go, which could be classified
both as non-finite and finite, and therefore makes it
possible to more clearly separate non-finites, sim-
ple finites, compound finites, and ambiguous utter-
ances.
Identical (automatic) analyses of the data and
model were carried out in a way consistent with
previous work on Dutch (Wijnen et al, 2001). Ut-
terances that had the copula (i.e., forms of the verb
to be) as a main verb were removed. Utterances
that contained a non-finite form as the only verb
were classified as non-finites. Utterances with an
unambiguous finite form (walks, went) were
counted as finite, while those containing a finite
verb form plus a non-finite form (has gone) were
classified as compound finites. The remaining ut-
terances were classified as ambiguous and counted
separately; they contained an ambiguous form
(such as bought in he bought) as the main verb,
which can be classified either as a finite past tense
form or as a (non-finite) perfect participle (in the
phrase he bought, the word has may have been
omitted).
5.2 Children?s data: Results
The children?s speech was partitioned into three
developmental stages, defined by mean length of
utterance (MLU). The resulting distributions, por-
trayed in Figure 2, show that the proportion of non-
finites decreases as a function of MLU, while the
proportion of compound finites increases. There is
also a slight increase in the proportion of simple
finites, although this is much less pronounced than
the increase in the proportion of compound finites.
5.3 Simulations
The model received as input speech from the chil-
dren?s respective mothers. The size of the input
was 33,000 utterances for Anne?s model, and
27,000 for Becky?s model. Note that, while the
analyses are restricted to a subset of the children?s
corpora, the entire mothers? corpora were used as
input during learning. The input was fed through
the model several times, and output was generated
after every run of the model, until the MLU of the
output was comparable to that of the end stage in
the two children. The output files were then com-
pared to the children?s data on the basis of MLU.
The model shows a steady decline in the propor-
tion of non-finites as a function of MLU coupled
with a steady increase in the proportion of com-
pound finites (Figure 3). On average, the model?s
production of optional infinitives in third person
singular contexts drops from an average of 31.5%
to 16% compared with 47% to 12.5% in children.
MOSAIC thus provides a good fit to the develop-
mental pattern in the children?s data (not including
the ?ambiguous? category: r2 = .65, p < .01, RMSD
= 0.096 for Anne and her model; r2 = .88, p < .001,
RMSD = 0.104 for Becky and her model). One
obvious discrepancy between the model?s and the
children?s output is that both models at MLU 2.1
produce too many simple finite utterances. Further
inspection of these utterances reveals that they
contain a relatively high proportion of finite mo-
dals such as can and will and finite forms of the
dummy modal do such as does and did. These
forms are unlikely to be used as the only verb in
children?s early utterances as their function is to
57
a: Data for Anne
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
2.2 3 3.4
MLU
Pr
op
or
tio
n
Non-finites
Simple finites
Compound fin.
Ambiguous
b: Data for Becky
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
2.4 3.1 3.5
MLU
Pr
op
or
tio
n
Non-finites
Simple finites
Compound fin.
Ambiguous
Figure 2: Distribution of non-finites, simple finites,
compound finites, and ambiguous utterances for Anne
and Becky as a function of developmental phase. Only
utterances with he, she, it, that (one), or this (one) as a
subject are included.
a: Model for Anne
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
2.1 2.7 3.4
MLU
Pr
op
or
tio
n Non-finites
Simple finites
Compound fin.
Ambiguous
b: Model for Becky
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
2.1 2.6 3.4
MLU
Pr
op
or
tio
n Non-finites
Simple finites
Compound fin.
Ambiguous
Figure 3: Distribution of non-finites, simple finites,
compound finites, and ambiguous utterances for the
models of Anne and Becky as a function of develop-
mental phase. Only utterances with he, she, it, that
(one), or this (one) as a subject are included.
modulate the meaning of the main verb rather than
to encode the central relational meaning of the sen-
tence.
An important reason why MOSAIC accounts for
the data is that it is biased towards producing sen-
tence final utterances. In English, non-finite utter-
ances can be learned from compound finite ques-
tions in which finiteness is marked on the auxiliary
rather than the lexical verb. A phrase like He walk
home can be learned from Did he walk home?, and
a phrase like That go there can be learned from
Does that go there? As MLU increases, the rela-
tive frequency of non-finite utterances in the out-
put decreases, because the model learns to produce
more and more of the compound finite utterances
from which these utterances have been learned.
MOSAIC therefore predicts that as the proportion
of non-finite utterances decreases, there will be a
complementary increase in the proportion of com-
pound finites.
6 Modelling optional infinitives in Dutch
Children acquiring Dutch seem to use a larger pro-
portion of non-finite verbs in finite contexts (e.g.,
hij lopen, bal trappen) than children learning Eng-
lish. Thus, in Dutch, a very high percentage of
children?s early utterances with verbs (about 80%)
are optional-infinitive errors. This percentage de-
creases to around 20% by MLU 3.5 (Wijnen,
Kempen & Gillis, 2001).
As in English, optional infinitives in Dutch can
be learned from compound finites (auxiliary/modal
+ infinitive). However, an important difference
between English and Dutch is that in Dutch verb
position is dependent on finiteness. Thus, in the
simple finite utterance Hij drinkt koffie (He drinks
coffee) the finite verb form drinkt precedes its ob-
ject argument koffie whereas in the compound fi-
nite utterance Hij wil koffie drinken (He wants cof-
fee drink), the non-finite verb form drinken is re-
stricted to utterance final position and is hence pre-
ceded by its object argument: koffie. Interestingly,
children appear to be sensitive to this feature of
Dutch from very early in development and
MOSAIC is able to simulate this sensitivity. How-
ever, the fact that verb position is dependent on
finiteness in Dutch also means that whereas non-
finite verb forms are restricted to sentence final
position, finite verb forms tend to occur earlier in
the utterance. MOSAIC therefore simulates the
very high proportion of optional infinitives in early
child Dutch as a function of the interaction be-
tween its utterance final bias and increasing MLU.
That is, the high proportion of non-finites early on
is explained by the fact that the model mostly pro-
duces sentence-final phrases, which, as a result of
58
Dutch grammar, have a large proportion of non-
finites.
As shown in Figure 4, the model?s production of
optional infinitives drops from 69% to 28% com-
pared with 77% to 18% in the data of the child on
whose input data the model had been trained. In
these simulations, the input data consisted of a
sample of approximately 13,000 utterances of
child-directed speech. Because of the lower input
size, the M used in the NCP formula was set to
50,000.
a: Data for Peter
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.5 2.2 3.1 4.1
MLU
Pro
po
rtio
n Non-finites
Simple finites
Compound fin.
b: Model for Peter
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.4 2.3 3 4.1
MLU
Pro
po
rtio
n Non-finites
Simple finites
Compound fin.
Figure 4: Distribution of non-finites, simple finites
and compound finites for Peter and his model, as a
function of developmental phase.
7 Modelling optional infinitives in Spanish
Wexler (1994, 1998) argues that the optional-
infinitive stage does not occur in pro-drop lan-
guages, that is, languages like Spanish in which
verbs do not require an overt subject. Whether
MOSAIC can simulate the low frequency of op-
tional-infinitive errors in early child Spanish is
therefore of considerable theoretical interest, since
the ability of Wexler?s theory to explain cross-
linguistic data is presented as one of its main
strengths. Note that simulating the pattern of fi-
niteness marking in early child Spanish is not a
trivial task. This is because although optional-
infinitive errors are much less common in Spanish
than they are in Dutch, compound finites are actu-
ally more common in Spanish child-directed
speech than they are in Dutch child-directed
speech (in the corpora we have used, they make up
36% and 30% of all parents? utterances including
verbs, respectively).
a: Data for Juan
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
2.2 2.8 3.8
MLU
Pro
po
rtio
n Non-finites
Simple finites
Compound fin.
b: Model for Juan
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
2.1 2.7 3.4
MLU
Pro
po
rtio
n Non-finites
Simple finites
Compound fin.
Figure 5: Distribution of non-finites, simple finites
and compound finites for Juan and his model, as a
function of developmental phase.
Figure 5a shows the data for a Spanish child,
Juan (Aguado Orea & Pine, 2002), and Figure 5b
the outcome of the simulations run using
MOSAIC. The parental corpus used as input con-
sisted of about 27,000 utterances. The model?s
production of optional infinitives drops from 21%
to 13% compared with 23% to 4% in the child.
Both the child and the model show a lower propor-
tion of optional-infinitive errors than in Dutch. The
presence of (some rare) optional-infinitive errors in
the model?s output is explained by the same
mechanism as in English and Dutch: a bias towards
learning the end of utterances. For example, the
input ?Quieres beber caf?? (Do you want to drink
coffee?) may later lead to the production of beber
caf?. But why does the model produce so few op-
tional-infinitive errors in Spanish when the Spanish
input data contain so many compound finites? The
answer is that finite verb forms are much more
likely to occur in utterance final position in Span-
ish than they are in Dutch, which makes them
much easier to learn.
59
8 Conclusion
In this paper, we have shown that the same simple
model accounts for the data in three languages that
differ substantially in their underlying structure. To
our knowledge, this is the only model of language
acquisition which simultaneously (1) learns from
naturalistic input (actual child-directed utterances),
where the statistics and frequency distribution of
the input are similar to that experienced by chil-
dren; (2) produces actual utterances, which can be
directly compared to those of children; (3) has a
developmental component; (4) accounts for speech
generativity and increasing MLU; (5) makes quan-
titative predictions; and (6) has simulated phenom-
ena from more than one language.
An essential feature of our approach is to limit
the number of degrees of freedom in the simula-
tions. We have used an identical model for simu-
lating the same class of phenomena in three lan-
guages. The method of data analysis was also the
same, and, in all cases, the model?s and child?s
output were coded automatically and identically.
The use of realistic input was also crucial in that it
guaranteed that cross-linguistic differences were
reflected in the input.
The simulations showed that simple mechanisms
were sufficient for obtaining a good fit to the data
in three different languages, in spite of obvious
syntactic differences and very different proportions
of optional-infinitive errors. The interaction be-
tween a sentence final processing bias and increas-
ing MLU enabled us to capture the reason why
English, Dutch and Spanish offer different patterns
of optional-infinitive errors: the difference in the
relative position of finites and non-finites is larger
in Dutch than in English, and Spanish verbs are
predominantly finite. We suggest that any model
that learns to produce progressively longer utter-
ances from realistic input, and in which learning is
biased towards the end of utterances, will simulate
these results.
The production of actual utterances (as opposed
to abstract output) by the model makes it possible
to analyse the output with respect to several (seem-
ingly) unrelated phenomena, so that the nontrivial
predictions of the learning mechanisms can be as-
sessed. Thus, the same output can be utilized to
study phenomena such as optional-infinitive errors
(as in this paper), evidence for verb-islands (Jones
et al, 2000), negation errors (Croker et al, 2003),
and subject omission (Freudenthal et al, 2002b). It
also makes it possible to assess the relative impor-
tance of factors such as increasing MLU that are
implicitly assumed by many current theorists but
not explicitly factored into their models.
An important contribution of Wexler?s (1994,
1998) nativist theory of the optional-infinitive
stage has been to provide an integrated account of
the different patterns of results observed across
languages, of the fact that children use both correct
finite forms and incorrect (optional) infinitives,
and of the scarcity of other types of errors (e.g.
verb placement errors). His approach, however,
requires a complex theoretical apparatus to explain
the data, and does not provide any quantitative
predictions. Here, we have shown how a simple
model with few mechanisms and no free parame-
ters can account for the same phenomena not only
qualitatively, but also quantitatively.
The simplicity of the model inevitably means
that some aspects of the data are ignored. Children
learning a language have access to a range of
sources of information (e.g. phonology, seman-
tics), which the model does not take into consid-
eration. Also, generating output from the model
means producing everything the model can output.
Clearly, children produce only a subset of what
they can say. Furthermore, any rote-learned utter-
ance that the model produces early on in its devel-
opment will continue to be produced during the
later stages. This inability to unlearn is clearly a
weakness of the model, but one that we hope to
correct in subsequent research.
The results clearly show that the interaction be-
tween a simple distributional analyser and the sta-
tistical properties of naturalistic child-directed
speech can explain a considerable amount of the
developmental data, without the need to appeal to
innate linguistic knowledge. The fact that such a
relatively simple model provides such a good fit to
the developmental data in three languages suggests
that (1) aspects of children?s multi-word speech
data such as the optional-infinitive phenomenon do
not necessarily require a nativist interpretation, and
(2) nativist theories of syntax acquisition need to
pay more attention to the role of input statistics and
increasing MLU as determinants of the shape of
the developmental data.
9 Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Leverhulme
Trust and the Economic and Social Research
Council. We thank Javier Aguado-Orea for sharing
his corpora on early language acquisition in Span-
ish children and for discussions on the Spanish
simulations.
References
Aguado-Orea, J., & Pine, J. M. (2002). Assessing
the productivity of verb morphology in early
child Spanish. Paper presented at the IX Interna-
tional Congress for the Study of Child Lan-
guage, Madison, Wisconsin.
60
Bates, E., & Carnavale, G. F. (1993). New direc-
tions in research on child development. Devel-
opmental Review, 13, 436-470.
Bloom, L. (1970). Language development: Form
and function in emerging grammars. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bloom, P. (1990). Subjectless sentences in child
language. Linguistic Inquiry, 21, 491-504.
Brown, R. (1973). A first language. Boston, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on government and
binding. Dordrecht, NL: Foris.
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2001). Connec-
tionist psycholinguistics: Capturing the empiri-
cal data. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 82-88.
Croker, S., Pine, J. M., & Gobet, F. (2001). Model-
ling children's case-marking errors with
MOSAIC. In E. M. Altmann, A. Cleeremans, C.
D. Schunn & W. D. Gray (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 4th International Conference on Cognitive
Modeling (pp. 55-60). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Croker, S., Pine, J. M., & Gobet, F. (2003). Model-
ling children's negation errors using probabilis-
tic learning in MOSAIC. In F. Detje, D. D?rner
& H. Schaub (Eds.), Proceedings of the Fifth In-
ternational Conference on Cognitive Modeling
(pp. 69-74). Bamberg:Universit?ts-Verlag.
Feigenbaum, E. A., & Simon, H. A. (1984).
EPAM-like models of recognition and learning.
Cognitive Science, 8, 305-336.
Freudenthal, D., Pine, J. M., & Gobet, F. (2001).
Modelling the optional infinitive stage in
MOSAIC: A generalisation to Dutch. In E. M.
Altmann, A. Cleeremans, C. D. Schunn & W.
D. Gray (Eds.), Proceedings of the 4th Interna-
tional Conference on Cognitive Modeling (pp.
79-84). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Freudenthal, D., Pine, J. M., & Gobet, F. (2002a).
Modelling the development of Dutch optional
infinitives in MOSAIC. In W. Gray & C. D.
Schunn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 24th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
322-327). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Freudenthal, D., Pine, J. M., & Gobet, F. (2002b).
Subject omission in children's language: The
case for performance limitations in learning. In
W. Gray & C. D. Schunn (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 24th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Sci-
ence Society (pp. 328-333). Mahwah, NJ: Erl-
baum.
Freudenthal, D., Pine, J. M., & Gobet, F. (2003).
The role of input size and generativity in simu-
lating language acquisition. In F. Schmalhofer,
R. M. Young & G. Katz (Eds.), Proceedings of
EuroCogSci 03: The European Cognitive Sci-
ence Conference 2003 (pp. 121-126). Mahwah
NJ: Erlbaum.
Gobet, F., Lane, P. C. R., Croker, S., Cheng, P. C.
H., Jones, G., Oliver, I., & Pine, J. M. (2001).
Chunking mechanisms in human learning.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 236-243.
Gobet, F., & Pine, J. M. (1997). Modelling the ac-
quisition of syntactic categories. In Proceedings
of the 19th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 265-270). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Jones, G., Gobet, F., & Pine, J. M. (2000). A proc-
ess model of children's early verb use. In L. R.
Gleitman & A. K. Joshi (Eds.), Proceedings of
the Twenty Second Annual Meeting of the Cog-
nitive Science Society (pp. 723-728). Mahwah,
N.J.: Erlbaum.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project:
Tools for analyzing talk (3rd ed.). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Naigles, L., & Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1998). Why are
some verbs learned before other verbs: Effects
of input frequency and structure on children?s
early verb use. Journal of Child Language, 25,
95-120.
Piattelli-Palmarini, M. (2002). The barest essen-
tials. Nature, 416, 129.
Pinker, S. (1984). Language learnability and lan-
guage development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Redington, M., & Chater, N. (1997). Probabilistic
and distributional approaches to language acqui-
sition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 1, 273-279.
Shady, M., & Gerken, L. (1999). Grammatical and
caregiver cue in early sentence comprehension.
Journal of Child Language, 26, 163-176.
Theakston, A. L., Lieven, E. V. M., Pine, J. M., &
Rowland, C. F. (2001). The role of performance
limitations in the acquisition of verb-argument
structure: An alternative account. Journal of
Child Language, 28, 127-152.
Valian, V. (1991). Syntactic subjects in the early
speech of American and Italian children. Cogni-
tion, 40, 21-81.
Wexler, K. (1994). Optional infinitives, head
movement and the economy of derivation in
child grammar. In N. Hornstein & D. Lightfoot
(Eds.), Verb movement. Cambridge, MA: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Wexler, K. (1998). Very early parameter setting
and the unique checking constraint: A new ex-
planation of the optional infinitive stage. Lin-
gua, 106, 23-79.
Wijnen, F., Kempen, M., & Gillis, S. (2001). Root
infinitives in Dutch early child language. Jour-
nal of Child Language, 28, 629-660.
