Proceedings of the Workshop on Multilingual Language Resources and Interoperability, pages 50?59,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
Structural properties of Lexical Systems:
Monolingual and Multilingual Perspectives
 
Alain Polgu?re
 
OLST?D?partement de linguistique et de traduction
Universit? de Montr?al
C.P. 6128, succ. Centre-ville, Montr?al  (Qu?bec)  H3C 3J7  Canada
 
alain.polguere@umontreal.ca
 
Abstract
 
We introduce a new type of lexical struc-
ture called 
 
lexical system
 
, an interopera-
ble model that can feed both monolingual
and multilingual language resources. We
begin with a formal characterization of
lexical systems as ?pure? directed graphs,
solely made up of nodes corresponding to
lexical entities and links. To illustrate our
approach, we present data borrowed from
a lexical system that has been generated
from the French DiCo database. We later
explain how the compilation of the origi-
nal dictionary-like database into a net-like
one has been made possible. Finally, we
discuss the potential of the proposed lexi-
cal structure for designing multilingual
lexical resources.
 
1 Introduction
 
The aim of this paper is to introduce, justify and
exemplify a new type of structure for lexical
resources called 
 
lexical systems
 
. Although lexical
systems are basically monolingual entities, we
believe they are particularly well-suited for the
implementation of interlingual connections.
Our demonstration of the value of lexical sys-
tems is centered around an experiment of lexical
system generation that was performed using data
tables extracted from the DiCo database of
French paradigmatic and syntagmatic lexical
links. This experiment has allowed us to produce
a lexical system that is a richer structure than the
original database it has been derived from.
In section 2, we characterize two main families
of lexical databases presently available: dictio-
nary-like 
 
vs.
 
 net-like lexical databases; we then
proceed with describing the specific structure of
lexical systems. Section 3 illustrates the function-
ing of lexical systems with data borrowed from
the French DiCo database; this will show that lex-
ical systems?that are basically net-like?are
interoperable structures in respect to the informa-
tion they can easily encode and the wide range of
applications for which they can function as lexi-
cal resources. Section 4 describes how the gener-
ation of a lexical system from the French DiCo
database has been implemented. Finally, in
section 5, we address the problem of using lexical
systems for feeding multilingual databases.
 
2 Structure of lexical systems
 
Lexical systems as formal models of natural lan-
guage lexica are very much related to the ?
 
-Net
 
?
generation of lexical databases, whose most well-
known representatives are undoubtedly WordNet
(Fellbaum, 1998) and FrameNet (Baker 
 
et al
 
,
2003). However, lexical systems possess some
very specific characteristics that clearly distin-
guish them from other lexicographic structures.
We will first characterize the two main current
approaches to the structuring of lexical models
and then present lexical systems relative to them.
 
2.1 Dictionary- vs. net-like lexical databases
 
Dictionary-like databases as texts
The most straightforward way of building lexical
databases is to use standard dictionaries (i.e.
books) and turn them into electronic entities. It is
the approach taken by most publishing compa-
nies (e.g. American Heritage (2000)), with vari-
ous degrees of sophistication. Resulting products
50
 can be termed 
 
dictionary-like databases
 
. They
are mainly characterized by two features.
? They are made up of word (word sense)
descriptions, called 
 
dictionary
 
 
 
entries
 
.
? Dictionary entries can be seen as ?texts,?
in the most general sense.
Consequently, dictionary-like databases are
before all huge texts, consisting of a collection of
much smaller texts (i.e. entries).
It seems natural to consider electronic versions
of standard dictionaries as texts. However, formal
lexical databases such as the multilingual XML-
based JMDict (Breen, 2004) are also textual in
nature. There are collections of entries, each
entry consisting of a structured text that ?tells us
something? about a word. Even databases encod-
ing relational models of the lexicon can be 100%
textual, and therefore dictionary-like. Such is the
case of the French DiCo database (Polgu?re,
2000), that we have used for compiling our lexi-
cal system. As we will see later, the original DiCo
database is nothing but a collection of lexico-
graphic records, each record being subdivided
into fields that are basically small texts. Although
the DiCo is built within the framework of Explan-
atory Combinatorial Lexicology (Mel?
 
?
 
uk 
 
et al
 
,
1995) and concentrates on the description of lexi-
cal links, it is clearly not designed as a ?
 
-Net
 
?
database, in the sense of WordNet or FrameNet.
Net-like databases as graphs
Most lexical models, even standard dictionaries,
are relational in nature. For instance, all dictio-
naries define words in terms of other words, use
pointers such as ?Synonym? and ?Antonym.?
However, their structure does not reflect their
relational nature. The situation is totally different
with true net-like databases. They can be charac-
terized as follows.
? They are graphs?huge sets of connected
entities?rather than collections of small
texts (entries).
? They are not necessarily centered around
words, or word senses. They use as nodes
a potentially heterogeneous set of lexical
or, more generally, linguistic entities.
Net-like databases are, for many, the most suit-
able knowledge structures for modeling lexica.
Nevertheless, databases such as WordNet pose
one major problem: they are inherently structured
according to a couple of hierarchizing and/or
classifying principles. WordNet, for instance, is
semantically-oriented and imposes a hierarchical
organization of lexical entities based, first of all,
on two specific semantic relations: synonymy?
through the grouping of lexical meanings within
 
synsets
 
?and hypernymy. Additionally, the part
of speech classification of lexical units creates a
strict partition of the database: WordNet is made
up of four separate synset hierarchies (for nouns,
verbs, adjectives and adverbs). We do not believe
lexical models should be designed following a
few rigid principles that impose a hierarchization
or classification of data. Such structuring is of
course extremely useful, even necessary, but
should be projected ?on demand? onto lexical
models. Furthermore, there should not be a pre-
defined, finite set of potential structuring princi-
ples; data structures should welcome any of them,
and this is precisely one of the main characteris-
tics of lexical systems, that will be presented
shortly (section 2.2).
Texts 
 
vs.
 
 graphs: pros and cons
It is essential to stress the fact that any dictionary-
like database can be turned into a net-like data-
base and vice versa. Of course, dictionary-like
databases that rely on relational models are more
compatible with graph encoding. However, there
are always relational data in dictionaries, and
such data can be extracted and ?reformatted? in
the form of nodes and connecting links.
The important issue is therefore not one of
exclusive choice between the two types of struc-
tures; it concerns what each structure is better at.
In our opinion, the specialization of each type of
structure is as follows.
Dictionary-like structures are tools for editing
(writing) and consulting lexical information. Lin-
guistic intuition of lexicographers or users of lex-
ical models performs best on texts. Both
lexicographers and users need to be able to see
the whole picture about words, and need the entry
format at a certain stage?although other ways of
displaying lexical information, such as tables, are
extremely useful too!
 
1
 
Net-like structures are tools for implementing
dynamic aspects of lexica: wading through lexi-
cal knowledge, adding to it, revising it or infer-
 
1
 
It is no coincidence if WordNet so-called 
 
lexicographer
files
 
 give a textual perspective on lexical items that is quite
dictionary-like. The unit of description is the synset, how-
ever, and not the lexical unit. (See WordNet on-line
documentation on lexicographer files.)
51
 ring information from it. Consequently, net-like
databases are believed by some (and we share this
opinion) to have some form of cognitive validity.
They are compatible with observations made, for
instance, in Aitchison (2003) on the network
nature of the mental lexicon. Last but not least,
net-like databases can more easily integrate other
lexical structures or be integrated by them.
In conclusion, although both forms of struc-
tures are compatible at a certain level and have
their own advantages in specific contexts of use,
we are particularly interested by the fact that net-
like databases are more prone to live an ?organic
life? in terms of evolution (addition, subtraction,
replacement) and interaction with other data
structures (connection with models of other lan-
guages, with grammars, etc.).
 
2.2 Lexical systems: a new type of net-like
lexical databases
 
As mentioned above, most net-like lexical data-
bases seem to focus on the description of just a
few properties of natural language lexica (quasi-
synonymy, hypernymic organization of word
senses, predicative structures and their syntactic
expression, etc.). Consequently, developers of
these databases often have to gradually ?stretch?
their models in order to add the description of
new types of phenomena, that were not of pri-
mary concern at the onset. It is legitimate to
expect that such graft of new components will
leave scars on the initial design of lexical models.
The lexical structures we propose, lexical sys-
tems (hereafter 
 
LS
 
), do not pose this type of prob-
lem for two reasons.
First, they are not oriented towards the model-
ing of just a few specific lexical phenomena, but
originate from a global vision of the lexicon as
central component of linguistic knowledge.
Second, they have a very simple, flat organiza-
tion, that does not impose any hierarchical or
classifying structure on the lexicon. Let us
explain how it works.
The design of any given LS has to follow four
basic principles, that cannot be tampered with:
LSs are 1) pure directed graphs, 2) non-hierarchi-
cal, 3) heterogeneous and 4) equipped for model-
ing fuzziness of lexical knowledge. We will
briefly examine each of these principles.
 
Pure directed graph.
 
 An LS is a directed graph,
and just that. This means that, from a formal
point of view, it is 
 
uniquely
 
 made up of nodes
and oriented links connecting these nodes.
 
Non hierarchical.
 
 An LS is a non-hierarchical
structure, although it can contain sets of nodes
that are hierarchically connected. For instance,
we will see later that the DiCo LS contains nodes
that correspond to a hierarchically organized set
of semantic labels. The hierarchy of DiCo seman-
tic labels can be used to project a structured per-
spective on the LS; but the LS itself is by no
means organized according to one or more spe-
cific hierarchies.
 
Heterogeneous.
 
 An LS is a potentially heteroge-
neous collection of nodes. Three main families of
nodes can be found:
? genuine lexical entities such as lexemes,
idioms, wordforms, etc.;
? quasi-lexical entities, such as colloca-
tions, lexical functions,
 
2
 
 free expressions
worth storing in the lexicon (e.g.
?canned? linguistic examples), etc.;
? lexico-grammatical entities, such as syn-
tactic patterns of expression of semantic
actants, grammatical features, etc.
Prototypical LS nodes are first of all lexical
entities, but we have to expect LSs to contain as
nodes entities that do not strictly belong to the
lexicon: they can belong to the interface between
the lexicon and the grammar of the language.
Such is the case of subcategorization frames,
called 
 
government patterns
 
 in Explanatory Com-
binatorial Lexicology. As rules specifying pat-
terns of syntactic structures, they belong to the
grammar of the language. However, as preassem-
bled constructs on which lexemes ?sit? in sen-
tences, they are clearly closer to the lexical realm
of the language than rules for building passive
sentences or handling agreements, for instance.
 
With fuzziness.
 
 Each component of an LS,
whether node or link, carries a trust value, i.e. a
measure of its validity. Clearly, there are many
ways of attributing and handling trust values in
order to implement fuzziness in knowledge struc-
tures. For instance, in our experiments with the
DiCo LS, we have adopted a simplistic approach,
that was satisfactory for our present needs but
should become more elaborate as we proceed
with developing and using LSs. In our present
implementation, we make use of only three possi-
ble trust values: ?
 
1
 
? means that as far as we can
tell?i.e. trusting what is explicitly asserted in the
DiCo?the information is correct; ?
 
0.5
 
? means
 
2
 
On collocations and lexical functions, see section 3 below.
52
 that the corresponding information is the result of
an inference made from the input data and was
not explicitly asserted by lexicographers; ?
 
0
 
?
means that the information ought to be incor-
rect?for instance, in case we identified a bogus
lexical pointer in data imported from the DiCo.
Fuzziness encoding is an essential feature of
LSs, as structures on which inference can take
place or as structures that are, at least partially,
inferred from others (in case of generation of LSs
from existing lexical databases). Of course, any
trust value is not absolute. ?
 
1
 
? does not mean the
information is valid no matter what, and ?0
 
? that
it is necessarily false. Information in LSs, and the
rating of this information, is no more absolute
than any information that may be stored in some-
one?s mental lexicon. However, if we want to
compute on LSs? content, it is essential to be able
to distinguish between data we have all reasons to
believe to be true and data we have all reasons to
believe to be false. As a matter of fact, this feature
of LSs has helped us in two ways while compil-
ing the DiCo LS: (i) we were able to infer new
descriptions from data contained in the original
DiCo while keeping track of the inferred nature
of this new information (that ought to be vali-
dated); (ii) we kept record of incoherences found
in the DiCo by attributing a trust value of 
 
0
 
 to the
corresponding elements in the LS.
It is now high time to give concrete examples
of LS data. But before we proceed, let us empha-
size the fact that no other formal devices than
those that have just been introduced are allowed
in LSs. Anything else we may want to add must
be relevant to other components of the linguistic
model, to the grammar for instance. Notice, how-
ever, that we do not exclude the need to add a
measure of the relative ?weight? of nodes and
links. This measure, different from the trust
value, would reflect the degree of activation of
each LS element. For instance, the DiCo entry for
 
D?FAITE
 
 ?defeat? lists quite a few support verbs
that take this noun as complement, among which
 
CONNA?TRE
 
 ?to know? and 
 
SUBIR
 
 ?to suffer.?
Weight values could indicate that the former verb
is much less commonly used than the second in
this context. Another advantage of weight is that
it could help optimize navigation through the LS
graph, when several paths can be taken.
 
3 Examples borrowed from the DiCo LS
 
The DiCo is a French lexical database that
focuses on the modeling of paradigmatic and syn-
tagmatic lexical links controlled by lexical units.
Paradigmatic links correspond to so-called
 
semantic derivations
 
 (synonymy, antonymy,
nominalization, verbalization, names for actants
or typical circonstants, etc.). Syntagmatic links
corresponds to collocations controlled by lexical
units (intensifiers, support verbs, etc.). These lex-
ical properties are encoded by means of a system
of metalexical entities known as 
 
lexical functions
 
.
(For a presentation of the system of lexical func-
tions, see Mel?
 
?
 
uk (1996) and Kahane and
Polgu?re (2001).) Although it does not contain
actual definitions, the DiCo partially describes
the semantic content of each lexical unit with two
formal tools: (i) a semantic label, that corre-
sponds to the genus (core component) of the lexi-
cal unit?s definition and (ii) a ?propositional
formula,? which states the predicative nature of
the unit (non-predicative meaning or predicate
with one, two or more arguments). Each entry
also gives the government pattern (roughly, the
subcategorization frame) of the unit and lists idi-
oms (phrasal lexical units) that contain the unit
under description. Finally, each entry contains a
set of examples retrieved from corpora or the
Internet. As one can see, the DiCo covers a fairly
large range of lexical properties; for more infor-
mation on the DiCo, one can refer to Polgu?re
(2000) and Lareau (2002).
Presently, the DiCo is developed as a File-
Maker
 
?
 
 database. Each DiCo entry corresponds
to a record in the database, and the core of each
record is the field that contains lexical function
links controlled by the 
 
headword
 
 (i.e. the lexical
unit described in the entry). Data in (1) below is
one item in the lexical function field of the DiCo
record for Fr. 
 
RANCUNE
 
 (?resentment?):
(1)
 
     /*[X] ?prouver ~*/
{Oper12} avoir, ?prouver, nourrir,
         ressentir
         [ART ~ Pr?p-envers N=Y]
 
We isolate five different types of LS entities in
the above example:
? The expression between curly brackets
 
Oper12
 
 is the name of a lexical function
denoting a type of support verbs.
 
3
 
?
 
{Oper12}
 
 as a whole denotes
Oper12
 
(
 
RANCUNE
 
), the application of
 
3
 
More precisely, 
 
Oper12
 
 denotes support verbs that take
the 1
 
st
 
 actant of the headword as subject, the headword itself
as 1
 
st
 
 complement and the 2
 
nd
 
 actant of the headword as 2
 
nd
 
complement; for instance: 
 
X 
 
feels
 
/
 
has
 
 resentment for Y
 
.
53
 the 
 
Oper12
 
 lexical function to its argu-
ment (the headword of the entry).
? The preceding formula?between the
two /*?*/ symbols?is a gloss for
 
Oper12
 
(
 
RANCUNE
 
). This metalinguistic
encoding of the content of the lexical
function application is for the benefit of
users who do not master the system of
lexical functions.
? Following the name of the lexical func-
tion is the list of values of the lexical
function application, each of which is a
specific lexical entity. In this case, they
are all collocates of the headword, due to
the syntagmatic nature of Oper12
 
.
? Finally, the expression between square
brackets is the description of the syntac-
tic structure controlled by the collocates.
It corresponds to a special case of lexico-
grammatical entities mentioned earlier in
section 2.2. These entities have not been
processed yet in our LS and they will be
ignored in the discussion below.
Data in (1) corresponds to a very small sub-
graph in the generated LS, which is visualized in
Figure 1 below. Notice that graphical representa-
tions we used here have been automatically gen-
erated in GraphML format from the LS and then
displayed with the yEd graph editor/viewer.
Figure 1. LS interpretation of (1)
This graph shows how DiCo data given in (1)
have been modeled in terms of lexical entities and
links. We see that lexical function applications
are lexical entities: something to be communi-
cated, that is pointing to actual means of express-
ing it. The argument (
 
arg
 
 link) of the lexical
function application, the lexical unit 
 
RANCUNE
 
, is
of course also a lexical entity (although of a dif-
ferent nature). The same holds for the values
(
 
value
 
 links). None of these values, however,
has been diagnosed as possessing a correspond-
ing entry in the DiCo. Consequently, the compila-
tion process has given them the (temporary)
status of simple wordforms, with a trust value of
 
0.5
 
, visualized here by boxes with hashed bor-
ders. (Continuous lines for links or boxes indicate
a trust value of 
 
1
 
.) Ultimately, it will be the task
of lexicographers to add to the DiCo entries for
the corresponding senses of 
 
AVOIR
 
, 
 
?PROUVER
 
,
 
NOURRIR
 
 and 
 
RESSENTIR
 
.
One may be surprised to see lexical functions
(such as Oper1
 
) appear as lexical entities in our
LS, because of their very ?abstract? nature. Two
facts justify this approach. First, lexical units too
are rather abstract entities. While wordforms
 
horse
 
 and 
 
horses
 
 could be considered as more
?concrete,? their grouping under a label 
 
HORSE
 
lexical unit
 
 is not a trivial abstraction. Second,
lexical functions are not only descriptive tools in
Explanatory Combinatorial Lexicology. They are
also conceptualized as generalization of lexical
units that play an important role text production,
in general rules of paraphrase for instance.
This first illustration demonstrates how the LS
version of the DiCo reflects its true relational
nature, contrary to its original dictionary-like for-
mat as a FileMaker database. It also shows how
varied lexical entities can be and how trust values
can help keep track of the distinction between
what has been explicitly stated by lexicographers
and what can be inferred from what they stated.
The next illustration will build on the first one
and show how so-called 
 
non-standard lexical
functions
 
 are integrated into the LS. Until now,
we have been referring only to standard lexical
functions, i.e. lexical functions that belong to the
small universal core of lexical relations identified
in Explanatory Combinatorial Lexicology (or,
more generally, in Meaning-Text theory). How-
ever, all paradigmatic and syntagmatic links are
not necessarily standard. Here is an illustration,
borrowed from the DiCo entry for 
 
CHAT
 
 ?cat?.
(2)
 
{Ce qu?on dit
 pour appeler ~} ? Minet ! ?,
                 ? Minou ! ?,
                 ? Petit ! ?
 
Here, a totally non-standard lexical function
 
Ce qu?on dit pour appeler ~
 
 ?What
one says to call ~ 
 
[= a cat]
 
? has been used to con-
nect the headword 
 
CHAT
 
 to expressions such as
 
Minou !
 
 ?Kitty kitty!? As one can see, no gloss
has been introduced, because non-standard lexi-
cal functions are already explicit, non-formal
encoding of lexical relations. The LS interpreta-
tion of (2) is therefore a simpler structure than the
54
 one used in our previous illustration, as shown in
Figure 2.
Figure 2. LS interpretation of (2)
Our last illustration will show how it is possi-
ble to project a hierarchical structuring on the
DiCo LS when, 
 
and only when
 
, it is needed.
The hierarchy of semantic labels used to
semantically characterize lexical units in the
DiCo has been compiled into the DiCo LS
together with the lexical database proper. Each
semantic label is connected to its more generic
label or labels (as this hierarchy allows for multi-
ple inheritance) with an is_a
 
 link. Additionally,
it is connected to the lexical units it labels by
 
label links. It is thus possible to simply pull the
hierarchy of semantic labels out of the LS and it
will ?fish out? all lexical units of the LS, hierar-
chically organized through hypernymy. Notice
that this is different from extracting from the
DiCo all lexical units that possess a specific
semantic label: we extract all units whose
semantic label belongs to a given subhierarchy
in the system of semantic labels. Figure 3 below
is the graphical result of pulling the acces-
soire (?accessory?) subhierarchy.
To avoid using labels on links, we have pro-
grammed the generation of this class of
GraphML structures with links encoded as fol-
lows: is_a links (between semantic labels)
appear as thick continuous arrows and label
links (between semantic labels and lexical units
they label) as thin dotted arrows.
Figure 3. The accessoire (?accessory?) semantic subhierarchy in the DiCo LS
The ?beauty? of LSs? structuring does not lie
in the fact that it allows us to automatically gen-
erate fancy graphical representations. Such repre-
sentations are just a convenient way to make
explicit the internal structure of LSs. What really
interests us is what can be done with LSs once we
consider them from a functional perspective.
The main functional advantage of LSs lies in
the fact that these structures are both cannibal and
prone to be cannibalized. Let us explain the two
facets of this somehow gruesome metaphor.
First, directed graphs are powerful structures
that can encode virtually any kind of information
and are particularly suited for lexical knowledge.
If one believes that a lexicon is before all a rela-
tional entity, we can postulate that all information
present in any form of dictionary and database
can eventually be compiled into LS structures.
The experiment we did in compiling the DiCo
(see details in section 4) demonstrates well
enough this property of LS structures.
Second, because of their extreme simplicity,
LS structures can conversely always be
?digested? by other, more specific types of struc-
tures, such as XML versions of dictionary- or net-
like databases. For instance, we have regenerated
from our LS a DiCo in HTML format, with
hyperlinks for entry cross-references and color-
coding for trust values of linguistic information.
Interestingly, this HTML by-product of the LS
55
contains entries that do not exist in the original
DiCo. They are produced for each value of lexical
function applications that does not correspond to
an entry in the DiCo. The content of these entries
is made up of ?inverse? lexical function relations:
pointers to lexical function applications for which
the lexical entity is a value. These new entries can
be seen as rough drafts, that can be used by lexi-
cographers to write new entries. We will provide
more details of this at the end of the next section.
4 Compiling the DiCo (dictionary-like)
database into a lexical system
The DiCo is presently available both in File-
Maker format and as SQL tables, accessible
through the DiCou?be interface.4 It is these tables
that are used as input for the generation of LSs.5
They present the advantage of being the result of
an extensive processing of the DiCo that splits its
content into elementary pieces of lexicographic
information (Steinlin et al, 2005). It is therefore
quite easy to analyze them further in order to per-
form a restructuring in terms of LS modeling.
The task of inferring new information, infor-
mation that is not explicitly encoded in the DiCo,
is the delicate part of the compilation process,
due to the richness of the database. Until now, we
have only implemented a small subset of all infer-
ences that can be made. For instance, we have
inferred individual lexemes from idioms that
appear inside DiCo records (COUP DE SOLEIL
?sunburn? entails the probable existence of the
three lexemes COUP, DE and SOLEIL). We have
also distinguished lexical entities that are actual
lexical units from their signifiers (linguistic
forms). Signifiers, which do not have to be asso-
ciated with one specific meaning, play an impor-
tant role when it comes to wading through an LS
(for instance, when we want to separate word
access through form and through meaning).
We cannot give here all details of the compila-
tion process. Suffice it to say that, at the present
stage, some important information contained in
the DiCo is not processed yet. For instance, we
have not implemented the compilation of govern-
ment patterns and lexicographic examples. On
the other hand, all lexical function applications
and the semantic labeling of lexical units are
properly handled. Recall that we import together
with the DiCo a hierarchy of semantic labels used
by the DiCo lexicographers, which allows us to
establish hypernymic links between lexical units,
as shown in Figure 3 above.6 Codewise, the DiCo
LS is just a flat Prolog database with clauses for
only two predicates:
entity( <Numerical ID>, <Name>,
        <Type>, <Trust> )
link( <Numerical ID>, <Source ID>,
      <Target ID>, <Type>, <Trust> )
Here are some statistics on the content of the
DiCo LS at the time of writing.
Nodes : 37,808
780 semantic labels; 1,301 vocables (= entries in the ?LS
wordlist?); 1,690 lexical units (= senses of vocables);
6,464 wordforms; 2,268 non lexicalized expressions;
7,389 monolexical signifiers; 948 multilexical signifiers;
3,443 lexical functions; 9,417 lexical function applica-
tions; 4,108 glosses of lexical function applications
Links : 61,714
871 ?is_a,? between semantic labels; 775 ?sem_label,?
between sem. labels and lexical units; 1,690 ?sense,?
between vocables and lexical units corresponding to spe-
cific senses; 2,991 ?basic_form,? between mono- or mul-
tilexical signifiers and vocables or lexical units; 6,464
?signifier,? between wordforms and monolexical signifi-
ers; 4,135 ?used_in,? between monolexical signifiers and
multiliexical signifiers; 9,417 ?lf,? between lexical func-
tions and their application; 6,064 ?gloss,? between lex.
func. appl. and their gloss; 9,417 ?arg,? between lex.
func. appl. and their argument; 19,890 ?value,? between
lex. func. appl. and each of the value elements they return
Let us make a few comments on these numbers
in order to illustrate how the generation of the LS
from the original DiCo database works.
The FileMaker (or SQL) DiCo database that
has been used contained only 775 lexical unit
records (word senses). This is reflected in statis-
tics by the number of sem_label links between
semantic labels and lexical units: only lexical
units that were headwords of DiCo records pos-
sess a semantic labeling. Statistics above show
that the LS contains 1,690 lexical units. So where
do the 915 (1,690 ? 775) extra units come from?
They all have been extrapolated from the so-
called phraseology (ph) field of DiCo records,
where lexicographers list idioms that are formally
built from the record headword. For instance, the
DiCo record for BARBE ?beard? contained (among
others) a pointer to the idiom BARBE ? PAPA ?cot-
ton candy.? This idiom did not possess its own
record in the original DiCo and has been ?reified?
4 http://www.olst.umontreal.ca/dicouebe.
5 The code for compiling the DiCo into an LS, generating
GraphML exports and generating an HTML version of the
DiCo has been written in SWI-Prolog.
6 The hierarchy of semantic labels is developed with the
Prot?g? ontology editor. We use XML exports from Prot?g?
to inject this hierarchy inside the LS. This is another illustra-
tion of the cannibalistic (and not too choosy) nature of LSs.
56
while generating the LS, among 914 other idi-
oms.
The ?wordlist? of our LS is therefore much
more developed than the wordlist of the DiCo it is
derived from. This is particularly true if we
include in it the 6,464 wordform entities. As
explained earlier, it is possible to regenerate from
the LS lexical descriptions for any lexical entity
that is either a lexical unit or a wordform targeted
by a lexical function application, filling word-
form descriptions with inverse lexical function
links. To test this, we have regenerated an entire
DiCo in HTML format from the LS, with a total
of 8,154 (1,690 + 6,464) lexical entries, stored as
individual HTML pages. Pages for original DiCo
headwords contain the hypertext specification of
the original lexical function links, together with
all inverse lexical links that have been found in
the LS; pages for wordforms contain only inverse
links. For instance, the page for METTRE ?to put?
(which is not a headword in the original DiCo)
contains 71 inverse links, such as:7
CausOper1( ? L?ARRI?RE-PLAN# ) ->
Labor12( ACCUSATION#I.2 ) ->
Caus1[1]Labreal1( ANCRE# ) ->
Labor21( ANGOISSE# ) ->
Labreal12( ARMOIRE# ) ->
Of course, most of the entries that were not in
the original DiCo are fairly poor and will require
significant editing to be turned into bona fide
DiCo descriptions. They are, however, a useful
point of departure for lexicographers; addition-
ally, the richer the DiCo will become, the more
productive the LS will be in terms of automatic
generation of draft descriptions.
5 Lexical systems and multilinguality
The approach to multilingual implementation of
lexical resources that LSs allow is compatible
with strategies used in known multilingual data-
bases, such as Papillon (S?rasset and Mangeot-
Lerebours, 2001): it sees multilingual resources
as connections of basically monolingual models.
In this final section, we first argue for a monolin-
gual perspective on the problem of multilingual-
ity. We then make proposals for implementing
interlingual connections by means of LSs.
5.1 Theoretical and methodological pri-
macy of monolingual structures
We see two logical reasons why the issue of
designing multilingual lexical databases should
be tackled from a monolingual perspective.
First, all natural languages can perfectly well
be conceived of in complete isolation. In fact,
monolingual speakers are no less ?true? speakers
of a language than multilingual speakers.
Second, acquisition of multiple languages
commonly takes place in situations where second
languages are acquired as additions to an already
mastered first language. Multiplicity in linguistic
competence is naturally implemented by graft of
a language on top of a preexisting linguistic
knowledge. How multiple lexica are acquired and
stored is a much debated issue (Schreuder and
Weltens, 1993), which is outside the scope of our
research. However, it is now commonly accepted
that even children who are bilingual ?from birth?
develop two linguistic systems, each of which
being quite similar in essence to linguistic sys-
tems of monolingual speakers (de Houwer,
1990). The main issue is thus one of systems?
connectivity.
From a theoretical and practical point of view,
it is thus perfectly legitimate to see the problem
of structuring multilingual resources as one of,
first, finding the most adequate and interoperable
structuring for monolingual resources. This being
said, we do not believe that the issue of structur-
ing monolingual databases has already been dealt
with once and for all in a satisfactory manner. We
hope the concept of LS we introduce here will
stimulate reflection on that topic.
5.2 Multilingual connections between LSs
A multilingual lexical resource based on the LS
architecture should be made up of several fully
autonomous LSs, i.e., LSs that are not specially
tailored for multilingual connections. They
should function as independent modules that can
be connected while preserving their integrity.
Connections between LSs should be imple-
mented as specialized interlingual links between
equivalent lexical entities. There is one exception
however: standard lexical functions (A1, Magn,
AntiMagn, Oper1, etc.). Because they are uni-
versal lexical entities, they should be stored in a
specialized interlingual module; as universals,
they play a central role in interlingual connectiv-
ity (Fontenelle, 1997). However, these are only
?pure? lexical functions. Lexical function appli-
7 We underline hypertext links. Lexical function applica-
tions listed here correspond French collocations that mean,
respectively, to put in the background, to indict someone (lit-
erally in French ?to put someone in accusation?), to anchor a
vessel (literally in French ?to put a vessel at the anchor?), to
put someone in anguish, to keep something in a cupboard.
57
cations, such as Oper12(RANCUNE) above, are
by no means universals and have to be connected
to their counterpart in other languages. Let us
examine briefly this aspect of the question.
One has to distinguish at least two main cases
of interlingual lexical connections in LSs: direct
lexical connections and connections through lexi-
cal function applications.
Direct connections, such as Fr. RANCUNE vs.
Eng. RESENTMENT should be implemented?
manually or using existing bilingual resources?
as simple interlingual (i.e. intermodule) links
between two lexical entities. Things are not
always that simple though, due to the existence of
partial or multiple interlingual connections. For
instance, what interlingual link should originate
from Eng.  SIBLING if we want to point to a
French counterpart? As there is no lexicalized
French equivalent, we may be tempted to include
in the French LS entities such as fr?re ou s?ur
(?brother or sister?). We have two strong objec-
tions to this. First, this complex entity will not be
a proper translation in most contexts: one cannot
translate He killed all his siblings by Il a tu? tous
ses fr?res ou s?urs?the conjunction et ?and? is
required in this specific context, as well as in
many others. Second, and this is more problem-
atic, this approach would force us to enter in the
French LS entities for translation purposes,
which would transgress the original monolingual
integrity of the system.8 We must admit that we
do not have a ready-to-use solution to this prob-
lem, specially if we insist on ruling out the intro-
duction of ad hoc periphrastic translations as
lexical entities in target LSs. It may very well be
the case that a cluster of interrelated LSs cannot
be completely connected for translation purposes
without the addition of ?buffer? LSs that ensure
full interlingual connectivity. For instance, the
buffer French LS for English to French LS con-
nection could contain phrasal lexical entities such
as fr?res et s?urs (?siblings?), ?tre de m?mes
parents and ?tre fr?re(s) et s?ur(s) (?to be sib-
lings?). This strategy can actually be very produc-
tive and can lead us to realize that what appeared
first as an ad hoc solution may be fully justified
from a linguistic perspective. Dealing with the
sibling case, for instance, forced us to realized
that while fr?re(s) et s?ur(s) sounds very normal
in French, s?ur(s) et fr?re(s) will seem odd or, at
least, intentionally built that way. This is a very
strong argument for considering that a lexical
entity (we do not say lexical unit!) fr?re(s) et
s?ur(s) does exist in French, independently from
the translation problem that sibling poses to us.
This phrasal entity should probably be present in
any complete French LS.
The case of connections through lexical func-
tion applications is even trickier. A simplistic
approach would be to consider that it is sufficient
to connect interlinguistically lexical function
applications to get al resulting lexical connec-
tions for value elements. For standard lexical
functions, this can be done automatically using
the following strategy for two languages A and B.
If the lexical entity LA is connected to LB by means of a
?translation? link,
all lexical entities linked to the lexical function applica-
tion f(LA) by the ?value? link should be connected by a
?value translation? link, with a trust value of ?0.5,? to all
lexical entities linked to f(LB) by a ?value? link.
 The distinction between ?translation? and
?value translation? links allow for contextual
interlingual connections: a lexical entity L?B
could happen to be a proper translation of L?A
only if it occurs as collocate in a specific colloca-
tion. But this is not enough. It is also necessary to
filter ?value translation? connections that are sys-
tematically generated using the above strategy.
For instance, each of the specific values given in
(1) section 3 should be associated with its closest
equivalent among values of Oper12(RESENT-
MENT): HAVE, FEEL, HARBOR, NOURISH, etc. At
the present time, we do not see how this can be
achieved automatically, unless we can make use
of already available multilingual databases of col-
locations. For English and French, for instance,
we plan to experiment in the near future with
T. Fontenelle?s database of English-French collo-
cation pairs (Fontenelle, 1997). These colloca-
tions have been extracted from the Collins-Robert
dictionary and manually indexed by means of
lexical functions. We are convinced it is possible
to use this database firstly to build a first version
of a new English LS and, secondly, to implement
the type fine-grained multilingual connections
between lexical function values illustrated with
our RANCUNE vs. RESENTMENT example.
We are well aware that we have probably sur-
faced as many problems as we have offered solu-
tions in this section. However, the above
considerations show at least two things:
8 It is worth noticing that good English-French dictionaries,
such as the Collins-Robert, offer several different transla-
tions in this particular case. Additionally, their translations
do not apply to sibling as such, but rather to siblings or to
expressions such as someone?s siblings, to be siblings, etc. 
58
? LSs have the merit to make explicit the
scale of the problem of interlingual lexi-
cal correspondence, if one want to tackle
this problem in a fine-grained manner;9
? the implementation of multilingual con-
nections over LSs should be approached
using semi-automatic strategies.
6 Conclusions
We have achieved the production of a significant
LS, which can be considered of broad coverage in
terms of the sheer number of entities and links it
contains and the richness of linguistic knowledge
it encodes. We plan to finish the absorption of all
information contained in the dictionary-like DiCo
(including information that can be inferred). We
also want to integrate complementary French
databases into the LS (for instance the Morphalou
database,10 for morphological information) and
start to implement multilingual connections using
T. Fontenelle?s collocation database. Another
development will be the construction of an editor
to access and modify the content of our LS. This
tool could also be used to develop DiCo-style LSs
for other languages than French.
Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the Fonds qu?b?-
cois de la recherche sur la Soci?t? et la culture
(FQRSC). We are very grateful to Sylvain Kah-
ane, Marie-Claude L?Homme, Igor Mel??uk,
Oph?lie Tremblay and four MLRI 2006 anony-
mous reviewers for their comments on a prelimi-
nary version of this paper. A very special thank to
Sylvain Kahane and Jacques Steinlin for their
invaluable work on the DiCo SQL, that made our
own research possible.
References
American Heritage. 2000. The American Heritage
Dictionary of the English Language. Fourth Edi-
tion, CD-ROM, Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA.
Jean Aitchison. 2003. Words in the Mind: An Introduc-
tion to the Mental Lexicon, 3rd edition, Blackwell,
Oxford, UK.
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore and Beau Cronin.
2003. The Structure of the Framenet Database. Int.
Journal of Lexicography, 16(3): 281-296.
James W. Breen. 2004. JMdict: a Japanese-Multilin-
gual Dictionary. Proceedings of COLING Multilin-
gual Linguistic Resources Workshop, Geneva,
Switzerland.
Annick de Houwer. 1990. The Acquisition of Two Lan-
guages from Birth. A Case Study, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, UK.
Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Thierry Fontenelle. 1997. Turning a bilingual dictio-
nary into a lexical-semantic database, Niemeyer,
T?bingen, Germany.
Sylvain Kahane and Alain Polgu?re. 2001. Formal
foundation of lexical functions. Proceedings of
ACL/EACL 2001 Workshop on Collocation, Tou-
louse, France, 8-15.
Fran?ois Lareau. 2002. A Practical Guide for Writing
DiCo Entries. Third Papillon 2002 Seminar, Tokyo,
Japan [http://www.papillon-dictionary.org/Consult-
Informations.po?docid=1620757&docLang=eng].
Igor Mel??uk. 1996. Lexical Functions: A Tool for the
Description of Lexical Relations in the Lexicon. In
Leo Wanner (ed.): Lexical Functions in Lexicogra-
phy and Natural Language Processing, Amsterdam/
Philadelphia: Benjamins, 37-102.
Igor Mel??uk, Andr? Clas and Alain Polgu?re. 1995.
Introduction ? la lexicologie explicative et combi-
natoire, Duculot, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
Igor Mel??uk and Leo Wanner. 2001. Towards a Lexi-
cographic Approach to Lexical Transfer in Machine
Translation (Illustrated by the German-Russian
Language Pair). Machine Translation, 16: 21-87.
Alain Polgu?re. 2000. Towards a theoretically-moti-
vated general public dictionary of semantic deriva-
tions and collocations for French. Proceedings of
EURALEX?2000, Stuttgart, Germany, 517-527.
Robert Schreuder and Bert Weltens (eds.). 1993. The
Bilingual lexicon, Amsterdam, Benjamins.
Gilles S?rasset and Mathieu Mangeot-Lerebours.
2001. Papillon lexical database project: Monolin-
gual dictionaries and interlingual links. Proceed-
ings of the 6th Natural Language Processing Pacific
Rim Symposium, Tokyo, Japan, 119?125.
Jacques Steinlin, Sylvain Kahane and Alain Polgu?re.
2005. Compiling a ?classical? explanatory combi-
natorial lexicographic description into a relational
database. Proceedings of the Second International
Conference on the Meaning Text Theory, Moscow,
Russia, 477-485.
9 For a systematic analysis of interlingual lexical correspon-
dences, see Mel??uk and Wanner (2001).
10 http://actarus.atilf.fr/morphalou/
59
