BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 193?194,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Quantitative Data on Referring Expressions in Biomedical Abstracts
Michael Poprat Udo Hahn
Jena University Language and Information Engineering (JULIE) Lab
Fu?rstengraben 30, 07743 Jena, Germany
{poprat|hahn}@coling-uni-jena.de
Abstract
We report on an empirical study that deals
with the quantity of different kinds of refer-
ring expressions in biomedical abstracts.
1 Problem Statement
One of the major challenges in NLP is the resolu-
tion of referring expressions. Those references can
be established by repeating tokens or by pronom-
inal, nominal and bridging anaphora. Experimen-
tal results show that pronominal anaphora are eas-
ier to resolve than nominal ones because the resolu-
tion of nominal anaphora requires an IS-A-taxonomy
as knowledge source. The resolution of bridging
anaphora, however, proves to be awkward because
encyclopedic knowledge is necessary.1 But in prac-
tice, are all of these phenomena equally important?
A look at the publications reveals that a compre-
hensive overview of the quantity and distribution
of referring expressions in biomedical abstracts is
still missing. Nevertheless, some scattered data can
be found: Castan?o et al (2002) state that 60 of
100 anaphora are nominal anaphora. Sanchez et al
(2006) confirm this proportion (24 pronominal and
50 nominal anaphora in 74 anaphoric expressions).
Kim and Park (2004), however, detect 53 pronomi-
nal and 26 nominal anaphora in 87 anaphoric expres-
sions. But Gawronska and Erlendsson (2005), on the
other hand, claim that pronominal anaphora are rare
and nominal anaphora are predominant. Studies on
bridging anaphora in the biomedical domain are re-
1However, even the resolution of pronouns can benefit from
extra-textual information (Castan?o et al, 2002).
ally still missing. Only Cimiano (2003) states that
10% of definite descriptions are bridging anaphora.
This contradictoriness and the lack of statistics on
referring expressions induced us to collect our own
data in order to obtain a consistent and meaningful
overview. This picture helps to decide where to start
if one wants to build a resolution component for the
biomedical domain.
2 Empirical Study
For our study we selected articles from MEDLINE
for stem cell transplantation and gene regulation.
Out of these articles, 11 stem cell abstracts and 9
gene regulation abstracts (? 12,000 tokens) were an-
notated by a team of one biologist and one computa-
tional linguist. The boundaries for annotations were
neither limited to nominal phrases (NPs) nor on their
heads because NPs in biomedical abstracts are of-
ten complex and hide relations between nouns (e.g.,
a ?p53 protein? is a protein called ?p53?, a ?p53
gene? is a gene that codes the ?p53 protein? and a
?p53 mutation? is a mutation in the ?p53 gene?).
Furthermore, we annotated anaphoric expressions
referring to biomedical entities and to processes.
We distinguished the following referring ex-
pressions: As repetitions, we counted string-
identical, string-variants and abbreviated token se-
quences in NPs, identical in their meaning (e.g.
?Mesenchymal stem cells? - ?MSCs? - ?MSC in-
hibitory effect?). For the time being, modifiers have
not been considered. Anaphora comprise pronom-
inal2, nominal (IS-A relations, e.g., ?B-PLL? IS-
2Without ?we? as it always refers to the authors.
193
Type of Referring Expression Number
Repetitions 388
Pronominal Anaphora 48 (sent. internal)6 (sent. external)
Nominal Anaphora 79
Bridging Anaphora 42
Subgrouping Anaphora 91
all 654
Table 1: Number of Referring Expressions
A ?B-cell malignancy?) and bridging anaphora (all
other semantic relations, e.g., ?G(1) progression?
PART-OF-PROCESS ?M-G(1) transition?). Further-
more, we detected a high number of subgrouping
anaphora that often occur when a group of enti-
ties (e.g., ?Vascular endothelial growth factor re-
ceptors?) are mentioned first and certain subgroups
(e.g., ?VEGFR1? etc.) are discussed later.
In our abstracts we detected 654 referring expres-
sions (see Table 1). Repetitions are predominant
with 59%. Within the group of 266 anaphora, sub-
grouping anaphora contributed with 34%, nominal
anaphora with 30%, pronominal anaphora with 20%
and bridging anaphora with only 16%. The most
common bridging relations were PART-OF-AMOUNT
(14) and PART-OF (11). The remaining 17 are held
by 8 other semantic relations such as RESULTS-
FROM, MUTATED-FROM, etc.
3 Open Issues and Conclusion
In biomedical abstracts we are confronted with nu-
merous repetitions, mainly containing biomedical
entities. Their reference resolution within an ab-
stract seems to be easy at first glance by just com-
paring strings and detecting acronyms. Some exam-
ples will show that this is tricky, though: In ?The
VEGFR3-transfected ECs exhibited high expression
level of LYVE-1.?, this statement on ECs only holds
if the modifier ?VEGFR3-transfected? is taken into
account. Furthermore, transfected ECs are not iden-
tical with non-transfected ECs which would be the
result if considering NP heads only. But not ev-
ery modifier influences an identity relation. For ex-
ample, the purification in ?. . . when priming with
purified CD34(+) cells? has no influence on the
CD34(+) cells and statements about these cells keep
their generality. A classification of such modifiers
adding information with or without influencing the
semantics of the modified expression must be made.
Hence, we have to be careful with assumed repeti-
tions and we have to handle all kinds of modifiers.
In this study we present the first comprehensive
overview of various kinds of referring expressions
that occur in biomedical abstracts. Although our
corpus is still small, we could observe the strong
tendency that repetitions play a major role (20 per
abstract). Anaphora occur less frequently (13 per
abstract). For a sound semantic interpretation, both
types must be handled. For knowledge-intensive
anaphora resolution, the existing biomedical re-
sources must be reviewed for adequacy. To the best
of our knowledge, although dominant in our study,
subgrouping anaphora have not been considered in
any anaphora resolution systems and suitable reso-
lution strategies must be found. The annotation pro-
cess (with more than one annotation team) will be
continued. The main result of this study, however,
is the observation that modifiers play an important
role for referencing. Their treatment for semantic
interpretation requires further investigations.
Acknowledgements: We thank Belinda Wu?rfel for
her annotation work. This study was funded by
the EC (BOOTStrep, FP6-028099), and by the Ger-
man Ministry of Education and Research (StemNet,
01DS001A - 1C).
References
J. Castan?o, J. Zhang, and J. Pustejovsky. 2002. Anaphora
resolution in biomedical literature. In Proc. of the
Symp. on Reference Resolution for NLP.
P. Cimiano. 2003. On the research of bridging refer-
ences within information extraction systems. Diploma
thesis, University of Karlsruhe.
B. Gawronska and B. Erlendsson. 2005. Syntactic,
semantic and referential patterns in biomedical texts:
Towards in-depth comprehension for the purpose of
bioinformatics. In Proc. of the 2nd Workshop on Nat-
ural language Understanding and Cognitive science,
pages 68?77.
J.-J. Kim and J. C. Park. 2004. BioAR: Anaphora reso-
lution for relating protein names to proteome database
entries. In Proc. of the ACL 2004: Workshop on Ref-
erence Resolution and its Applications, pages 79?86.
O. Sanchez, M. Poesio, M. A. Kabadjov, and R. Tesar.
2006. What kind of problems do protein interactions
raise for anaphora resolution? A preliminary analysis.
In Proc. of the 2nd SMBM 2006, pages 109?112.
194
Software Engineering, Testing, and Quality Assurance for Natural Language Processing, pages 31?39,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Building a BIOWORDNET by Using WORDNET?s Data Formats
and WORDNET?s Software Infrastructure ? A Failure Story
Michael Poprat Elena Beisswanger
Jena University Language & Information Engineering (JULIE) Lab
Friedrich-Schiller-Universita?t Jena
D-07743 Jena, Germany
{poprat,beisswanger,hahn}@coling-uni-jena.de
Udo Hahn
Abstract
In this paper, we describe our efforts to build
on WORDNET resources, using WORDNET
lexical data, the data format that it comes with
and WORDNET?s software infrastructure in
order to generate a biomedical extension of
WORDNET, the BIOWORDNET. We began
our efforts on the assumption that the soft-
ware resources were stable and reliable. In
the course of our work, it turned out that this
belief was far too optimistic. We discuss the
stumbling blocks that we encountered, point
out an error in the WORDNET software with
implications for research based on it, and con-
clude that building on the legacy of WORD-
NET data structures and its associated soft-
ware might preclude sustainable extensions
that go beyond the domain of general English.
1 Introduction
WORDNET (Fellbaum, 1998) is one of the most au-
thoritative lexical resources for the general English
language. Due to its coverage ? currently more than
150,000 lexical items ? and its lexicological rich-
ness in terms of definitions (glosses) and semantic
relations, synonymy via synsets in particular, it has
become a de facto standard for all sorts of research
that rely on lexical content for the English language.
Besides this perspective on rich lexicological
data, over the years a software infrastructure has
emerged around WORDNET that was equally ap-
proved by the NLP community. This included,
e.g., a lexicographic file generator, various editors
and visualization tools but also meta tools rely-
ing on properly formated WORDNET data such as
a library of similarity measures (Pedersen et al,
2004). In numerous articles the usefulness of this
data and software ensemble has been demonstrated
(e.g., for word sense disambiguation (Patwardhan
et al, 2003), the analysis of noun phrase conjuncts
(Hogan, 2007), or the resolution of coreferences
(Harabagiu et al, 2001)).
In our research on information extraction and text
mining within the field of biomedical NLP, we sim-
ilarly recognized an urgent need for a lexical re-
source comparable to WORDNET, both in scope and
size. However, the direct usability of the original
WORDNET for biomedical NLP is severely ham-
pered by a (not so surprising) lack of coverage of the
life sciences domain in the general-language English
WORDNET as was clearly demonstrated by Burgun
and Bodenreider (2001).
Rather than building a BIOWORDNET by hand,
as was done for the general-language English
WORDNET, our idea to set up a WORDNET-style
lexical resource for the life sciences was different.
We wanted to link the original WORDNET with
various biomedical terminological resources vastly
available in the life sciences domain. As an obvious
candidate for this merger, we chose one of the ma-
jor high-coverage umbrella systems for biomedical
ontologies, the OPEN BIOMEDICAL ONTOLOGIES
(OBO).1 These (currently) over 60 OBO ontologies
provide domain-specific knowledge in terms of hi-
erarchies of classes that often come with synonyms
and textual definitions for lots of biomedical sub-
domains (such as genes, proteins, cells, sequences,
1http://www.bioontology.org/
repositories.html#obo
31
etc.).2 Given these resources and their software in-
frastructure, our plan was to create a biomedically
focused lexicological resource, the BIOWORDNET,
whose coverage would exceed that of any of its com-
ponent resources in a so far unprecedented man-
ner. Only then, given such a huge combined re-
source advanced NLP tasks such as anaphora res-
olution seem likely to be tackled in a feasible way
(Hahn et al, 1999; Castan?o et al, 2002; Poprat and
Hahn, 2007). In particular, we wanted to make di-
rect use of available software infrastructure such as
the library of similarity metrics without the need for
re-programming and hence foster the reuse of exist-
ing software as is.
We began our efforts on the assumption that the
WORDNET software resources were stable and reli-
able. In the course of our work, it turned out that this
belief was far too optimistic. We discuss the stum-
bling blocks that we encountered, point out an er-
ror in the WORDNET software with implications for
research based on it, and conclude that building on
the legacy of WORDNET data structures and its as-
sociated software might preclude sustainable exten-
sions that go beyond the domain of general English.
Hence, our report contains one of the rare failure sto-
ries (not only) in our field.
2 Software Around WORDNET Data
While the stock of lexical data assembled in the
WORDNET lexicon was continuously growing over
time,3 its data format and storage structures, the so-
called lexicographic file, by and large, remained un-
altered (see Section 2.1). In Section 2.2, we will deal
with two important software components with which
the lexicographic file can be created and browsed.
Over the years, together with the continuous exten-
sion of the WORDNET lexicon, a lot of software
tools have been developed in various programming
languages allowing browsing and accessing WORD-
NET as well as calculating semantic similarities on
it. We will discuss the most relevant of these tools
in Section 2.3.
2Bodenreider and Burgun (2002) point out that the structure
of definitions in WORDNET differ to some degree from more
domain-specialized sources such as medical dictionaries.
3The latest version 3.0 was released in December 2006
2.1 Lexicon Organization of WORDNET and
Storage in Lexicographic Files
At the top level, WORDNET is organized accord-
ing to four parts of speech, viz. noun, verb, adjec-
tive and adverb. The most recent version 3.0 cov-
ers more than 117,000 nouns, 11,500 verbs, 21,400
adjectives and 4,400 adverbs, interlinked by lexical
relations, mostly derivations. The basic semantic
unit for all parts of speech are sets of synonymous
words, so-called synsets. These are connected by
different semantic relations, imposing a thesaurus-
like structure on WORDNET. In this paper, we dis-
cuss the organization of noun synsets in WORDNET
only, because this is the relevant part of WORD-
NET for our work. There are two important seman-
tic relation types linking noun synsets. The hyper-
nym / hyponym relation on which the whole WORD-
NET noun sense hierarchy is built links more spe-
cific to more general synsets, while the meronym /
holonym relation describes partonomic relations be-
tween synsets, such as part of the whole, member of
the whole or substance of the whole.
From its very beginning, WORDNET was built
and curated manually. Lexicon developing experts
introduced new lexical entries into WORDNET,
grouped them into synsets and defined appropriate
semantic and lexical relations. Since WORDNET
was intended to be an electronic lexicon, a data
representation format had to be defined as well.
When the WORDNET project started more than two
decades ago, markup languages such as SGML or
XML were unknown. Because of this reason, a
rather idiosyncratic, fully text-based data structure
for these lexicographic files was defined in a way to
be readable and editable by humans ? and survived
until to-day. This can really be considered as an
outdated legacy given the fact that the WORDNET
community has been so active in the last years in
terms of data collection, but has refrained from
adapting its data formats in a comparable way to
to-day?s specification standards. Very basically,4
each line in the lexicographic file holds one synset
that is enclosed by curly brackets. Take as an
example the synset for ?monkey?:
4A detailed description can be found in the WORDNET
manual wninput(5WN), available from http://wordnet.
princeton.edu/man/wninput.5WN.
32
{ monkey, primate,@ (any of various
long-tailed primates (excluding the
prosimians)) }
Within the brackets at the first position synonyms
are listed, separated by commas. In the exam-
ple, there is only one synonym, namely ?monkey?.
The synonyms are followed by semantic relations to
other synsets, if available. In the example, there is
only one hypernym relation (denoted by ?@?) point-
ing to the synset ?primate?. The final position is
reserved for the gloss of the synset encapsulated in
round brackets. It is important to notice that there
are no identifiers for synsets in the lexicographic file.
Rather, the string expressions themselves serve as
identifiers. Given the fundamental idea of synsets ?
all words within a synset mean exactly the same in
a certain context ? it is sufficient to relate one word
in the synset in order to refer to the whole synset.
Still, there must be a way to deal with homonyms,
i.e., lexical items which share the same string, but
have different meanings. WORDNET?s approach to
distinguish different senses of a word is to add num-
bers from 0 to 15, called lexical identifiers. Hence,
in WORDNET, a word cannot be more than 16-fold
ambiguous. This must be kept in mind when one
wants to build a WORDNET for highly ambiguous
sublanguages such as the biomedical one.
2.2 Software Provided with WORDNET
To guarantee fast access to the entries and their rela-
tions, an optimized index file must be created. This
is achieved through the easy-to-use GRIND software
which comes with WORDNET. It simply consumes
the lexicographic file(s) as input and creates two
plain-text index files,5 namely data and index.
Furthermore, there is a command line tool, WN, and
a graphical browser, WNB, for data visualization that
require the specific index created by GRIND (as all
the other tools that query the WORDNET data do as
well). These tools are the most important (and only)
means of software support for WORDNET creation
by checking the syntax as well as allowing the (man-
ual) inspection of the newly created index.
5Its syntax is described in http://wordnet.
princeton.edu/man/wndb.5WN.
2.3 Third-Party WORDNET Tools
Due to the tremendous value of WORDNET for the
NLP and IR community and its usefulness as a
resource for coping with problems requiring mas-
sive amounts of lexico-semantic knowledge, the
software-developing community was and continues
to be quite active. Hence, in support of WORDNET
several APIs and software tools were released that
allow accessing, browsing and visualizing WORD-
NET data and measuring semantic similarity on the
base of the WORDNET?s lexical data structures.6
The majority of these APIs are maintained well
and kept up to date, such as JAWS7 and JWNL,8
and enable connecting to the most recent ver-
sion of WORDNET. For the calculation of vari-
ous similarity measures, the PERL library WORD-
NET::SIMILARITY initiated and maintained by Ted
Pedersen9 can be considered as a de facto stan-
dard and has been used in various experimental set-
tings and applications. This availability of well-
documented and well-maintained software is defi-
nitely a strong argument to rely on WORDNET as
a powerful lexico-semantic knowledge resource.
3 The BIOWORDNET Initiative
In this section, we describe our approach to extend
WORDNET towards the biomedical domain by in-
corporating terminological resources from the OBO
collection. The most obvious problems we faced
were to define a common data format and to map
non-compliant data formats to the chosen one.
3.1 OBO Ontologies
OBO is a collection of publicly accessible biomed-
ical ontologies.10 They cover terms from
many biomedical subdomains and offer structured,
domain-specific knowledge in terms of classes
(which often come with synonyms and textual defi-
nitions) and class hierarchies. Besides the hierarchy-
defining relation is-a, some OBO ontologies provide
6For a comprehensive overview of available WORDNET
tools we refer to WORDNET?s ?related project? website (http:
//wordnet.princeton.edu/links).
7http://engr.smu.edu/
?
tspell/
8http://jwordnet.sourceforge.net/
9http://wn-similarity.sourceforge.net/
10http://www.bioontology.org/
33
WordNet
Index
{ histoblast, simple_col...
{  laborinth_support ing .. .
{ structural_cell, cell_by...
{  mesangial_phagocyte, . . .
{ ito_cell, perisinusoida_ ...
{  . . .  }
   ...
OBO ontology 
in OWL-format
extracted data BioWordNet
lexicographic
fi le
Step 1 :
data  ex t rac t ion
from OBO
Step 2:  
convers ion to  WordNet
lexicographic f i le
 fo rmat
Step 3:  
bui ld ing WordNet  index 
using ?grind?
WordNet Browser
WordNet APIInformation Retrieval
Similarity MeasuringAnaphora Resolution
Document Clustering
Step 4:  
B ioWordNet
 index can be 
used by var ious 
sof tware  
components  
and APIs . . .
Step 5:  
. . .  and fur ther  be processed 
in  NLP compontents
BioWordNet
index f i le
IR and NLP 
applications
Figure 1: From OBO ontologies to BIOWORDNET? towards a domain-specific WORDNET for biomedicine
additional semantic relation types such as sequence-
of or develops-from to express even more complex
and finer-grained domain-specific knowledge. The
ontologies vary significantly in size (up to 60,000
classes with more than 150,000 synonyms), the
number of synonyms per term and the nature of
terms.
The OBO ontologies are available in various for-
mats including the OBO flat file format, XML and
OWL. We chose to work with the OWL version for
our purpose,11 since for the OWL language also ap-
propriate tools are available facilitating the extrac-
tion of particular information from the ontologies,
such as taxonomic links, labels, synonyms and tex-
tual definitions of classes.
3.2 From OBO to BIOWORDNET
Our plan was to construct a BIOWORDNET by con-
verting, in the first step, the OBO ontologies into a
WORDNET hierarchy of synsets, while keeping to
the WORDNET lexicographic file format, and build-
ing a WORDNET index. As a preparatory step, we
defined a mapping from the ontology to WORDNET
items as shown in Table 1.
The three-stage conversion approach is depicted
in Figure 1. First, domain specific terms and tax-
11http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-semantics/
OBO ontology BIOWORDNET
ontology class synset
class definition synset gloss
class name word in synset
synonym of class name word in synset
Ci is-a Cj Si hyponym of Sj
Cj has-subclass Ci Sj hypernym of Si
Table 1: Mapping between items from OBO and from
BIOWORDNET (Ci and Cj denote ontology classes, Si
and Sj the corresponding BIOWORDNET synsets)
onomic links between terms were extracted sepa-
rately from each of the OBO ontologies. Then
the extracted data was converted according to the
syntax specifications of WORDNET?s lexicographic
file. Finally for each of the converted ontologies the
WORDNET-specific index was built using GRIND.
Following this approach we ran into several prob-
lems, both regarding the WORDNET data structure
and the WORDNET-related software that we used
for the construction of the BIOWORDNET. Con-
verting the OBO ontologies turned out to be cum-
bersome, especially the conversion of the CHEBI
ontology12 (long class names holding many special
characters) and the NCI thesaurus13 (large number
12http://www.ebi.ac.uk/chebi/
13http://nciterms.nci.nih.gov/
34
of classes and some classes that also have a large
number of subclasses). These and additional prob-
lems will be addressed in more detail in Section 4.
4 Problems with WORDNET?s Data
Format and Software Infrastructure
We here discuss two types of problems we found
for the data format underlying the WORDNET lex-
icon and the software that helps building a WORD-
NET file and creating an index for this file. First,
WORDNET?s data structure puts several restrictions
on what can be expressed in a WORDNET lexicon.
For example, it constrains lexical information to a
fixed number of homonyms and a fixed set of rela-
tions. Second, the data structure imposes a number
of restrictions on the string format level. If these
restrictions are violated the WORDNET processing
software throws error messages which differ consid-
erably in terms of informativeness for error tracing
and detection or even do not surface at all at the lex-
icon builder?s administration level.
4.1 Limitations of Expressiveness
The syntax on which the current WORDNET lex-
icographic file is based imposes severe limitations
on what can be expressed in WORDNET. Although
these limitations might be irrelevant for representing
general-language terms, they do affect the construc-
tion of a WORDNET-like resource for biomedicine.
To give some examples, the WORDNET format al-
lows a 16-fold lexical ambiguity only (lexical IDs
that are assigned to ambiguous words are restricted
to the numbers 0-15, see Section 2). This forced us
to neglect some of the OBO ontology class names
and synonyms that were highly ambiguous.14
Furthermore, the OBO ontologies excel in a richer
set of semantic relations than WORDNET can of-
fer. Thus, a general problem with the conversion
of the OBO ontologies into WORDNET format was
that except from the taxonomic is-a relation (which
corresponds to the WORDNET hyponym relation)
and the part-of relation (which corresponds to the
WORDNET meronym relation) all remaining OBO-
specific relations (such as develops-from, sequence-
of, variant-of and position-of ) could not be rep-
14This is a well-known limitation that is already mentioned
in the WORDNET documentation.
resented in the BIOWORDNET. The structure of
WORDNET neither contains such relations nor is
it flexible enough to include them so that we face
a systematic loss of information in BIOWORDNET
compared to the original OBO ontologies. Al-
though these restrictions are well-known, their re-
moval would require extending the current WORD-
NET data structure fundamentally. This, in turn,
would probably necessitate a full re-programming of
all of WORDNET-related software.
4.2 Limitations of Data Format and Software
When we tried to convert data extracted from the
OBO ontologies into WORDNET?s lexicographic
file format (preserving its syntactic idiosyncrasies
for the sake of quick and straightforward reusability
of software add-ons), we encountered several intri-
cacies that took a lot of time prior to building a valid
lexicographic file.
First, we had to replace 31 different charac-
ters with unique strings such as ?(? with ?-LRB-
? and ?+? with ?-PLU-? before GRIND was able
to process the lexicographic file. The reason is
that many of such special characters occurring
in domain specific terms, especially in designa-
tors of chemical compounds such as ?methyl es-
ter 2,10-dichloro-12H-dibenzo(d,g)(1,3)dioxocin-6-
carboxylic acid? (also known as ?treloxinate? with
the CAS registry number 30910-27-1), are reserved
symbols in the WORDNET data formatting syntax.
If these characters are not properly replaced GRIND
throws an exact and useful error message (see Table
2, first row).
Second, we had to find out that we have to replace
all empty glosses by at least one whitespace charac-
ter. Otherwise, GRIND informs the user in terms of
a rather cryptic error message that mentions the po-
sition of the error though not its reason (see Table 2,
second row).
Third, numbers at the end of a lexical item need to
be escaped. In WORDNET, the string representation
of an item is used as its unique identifier. To dis-
tinguish homonyms (words with the same spelling
but different meaning, such as ?cell? as the func-
tional unit of all organisms, on the one hand, and
as small compartment, on the other hand) accord-
ing to the WORDNET format different numbers from
0 to 15 (so-called lexical IDs) have to be appended
35
Problem Description Sample Error Message Usefulness of Er-
ror Message
Problem Solution
illegal use of key characters noun.cell, line 7: Illegal
character %
high replace illegal characters
empty gloss sanity error - actual pos
2145 != assigned pos
2143!
moderate add gloss consisting of at least
one whitespace character
homonyms (different words
with identical strings)
noun.rex, line 5: Syn-
onym ?electrochem-
ical reaction? is not
unique in file
high distinguish word senses by
adding lexical identifiers (use
the numbers 1-15)
lexical ID larger than 15 noun.rex, line 4: ID must
be less than 16: cd25
high quote trailing numbers of
words, only assign lexical
identifiers between 1-15, omit
additional word senses
word with more than 425
characters
Segmentation fault (core
dumped)
low omit words that exceed the max-
imal length of 425 characters
synset with more than 998
direct hyponymous synsets
Segmentation fault (core
dumped)
low omit some hyponymous synsets
or introduce intermediate
synsets with a limited number
of hyponymous synsets
no query result though the
synset is in the index, access
software crashes
none ? not known
Table 2: Overview of the different kinds of problems that we encountered when creating a BIOWORDNET keeping to
the WORDNET data structure and the corresponding software. Each problem description is followed by a sample error
message that GRIND had thrown, a statement about how useful the error message was to detect the source of the error
and a possible solution for the problems, if available. The last row documents a special experience with data viewers
for data from the NCI thesaurus.
to the end of each homonym. If in a lexicographic
file two identical strings occur that have not been as-
signed different lexical identifiers (it does not mat-
ter whether this happens within or across synsets)
GRIND emits an error message that mentions both,
the position and the lexical entry which caused this
error (cf. Table 2, third row).
Numbers that appear at the end of a lexical item as
an integral part of it (such as ?2? in ?IL2?, a special
type of cytokine (protein)) have to be escaped in or-
der to avoid their misinterpretation as lexical identi-
fiers. This, again, is a well-documented shortcoming
of WORDNET?s data specification rules.
In case such numbers are not escaped prior to pre-
senting the lexicographic file to GRIND the word
closing numbers are always interpreted as lexical
identifiers. Closing numbers that exceed the num-
ber 15 cause GRIND to throw an informative error
message (see Table 2, fourth row).
4.3 Undocumented Restrictions and
Insufficient Error Messages
In addition to the more or less documented re-
strictions of the WORDNET data format mentioned
above we found additional restrictions that lack doc-
umentation up until now, to the best of our knowl-
edge.
First, it seems that the length of a word is re-
stricted to 425 characters. If a word in the lexico-
graphic file exceeds this length, GRIND is not able to
create an index and throws an empty error message,
namely the memory error ?segmentation fault? (cf.
Table 2, fifth row). As a consequence of this restric-
tion, some very long CHEBI class names could not
have been included in the BIOWORDNET.
Second, it seems that synsets are only allowed to
group up to 988 direct hyponymous synsets. Again,
GRIND is not able to create an index, if this restric-
tion is not obeyed and throws the null memory er-
36
ror message ?segmentation fault? (cf. Table 2, sixth
row). An NCI thesaurus class that had more than
998 direct subclasses thus could not have been in-
cluded in the BIOWORDNET.
Due to insufficient documentation and utterly
general error messages the only way to locate the
problem causing the ?segmentation fault? errors was
to examine the lexicographic files manually. We had
to reduce the number of synset entries in the lexico-
graphic file, step by step, in a kind of trial and error
approach until we could resolve the problem. This
is, no doubt, a highly inefficient and time consum-
ing procedure. More informative error messages of
GRIND would have helped us a lot.
4.4 Deceptive Results from WORDNET
Software and Third-Party Components
After getting rid of all previously mentioned errors,
valid index files were compiled. It was possible to
access these index files using the WORDNET query-
ing tools WN and WNB, indicating the index files
were ?valid?. However, when we tried to query
the index file that was generated by GRIND for the
NCI thesaurus we got strange results. While WN
did not return any query results, the browser WNB
crashed without any error message (cf. Table 2, sev-
enth row). The same holds for the Java APIs JAWS
and JWNL.
Since a manual examination of the index file re-
vealed that the entries that we were searching for, in
fact, were included in the file, some other, up to this
step unknown error must have prevented the soft-
ware tools from finding the targeted entries. Hence,
we want to point out that although we have exam-
ined this error for the NCI thesaurus only, the risk
is high that this ?no show? error is likely to bias
any other application as well which makes use of
the the same software that we grounded our ex-
periments on. Since the NCI thesaurus is a very
large resource, even worse, further manual error
search is nearly impossible. At this point, we
stopped our attempt building a WORDNET resource
for biomedicine based on the WORDNET formatting
and software framework.
5 Related Work
In the literature dealing with WORDNET and its
structures from a resource perspective (rather than
dealing with its applications), two directions can
be distinguished. On the one hand, besides the
original English WORDNET and the various vari-
ant WORDNETs for other languages (Vossen, 1998),
extensions to particular domains have already been
proposed (for the medical domain by Buitelaar and
Sacaleanu (2002) and Fellbaum et al (2006); for the
architectural domain Bentivogli et al (2004); and
for the technical report domain by Vossen (2001)).
However, none of these authors neither mentions im-
plementation details of the WORDNETs or perfor-
mance pitfalls we have encountered, nor is supple-
mentary software pointed out that might be useful
for our work.
On the other hand, there are suggestions concern-
ing novel representation formats of next-generation
WORDNETs. For instance in the BALKANET
project (Tufis? et al, 2004), an XML schema plus
a DTD was proposed (Smrz?, 2004) and an editor
called CISDIC with basic maintenance functionali-
ties and consistency check was released (Hora?k and
Smrz?, 2004). The availability of APIs or software to
measure similarity though remains an open issue.
So, our approach to reuse the structure and the
software for building a BIOWORDNET was moti-
vated by the fact that we could not find any al-
ternatives coming with a software ensemble as de-
scribed in Section 2. Against all expectations, we
did not manage to reuse the WORDNET data struc-
ture. However, there are no publications that report
on such difficulties and pitfalls we were confronted
with.
6 Discussion and Conclusion
We learnt from our conversion attempt that the cur-
rent WORDNET representation format of WORD-
NET suffers from several limitations and idiosyn-
crasies that cannot be by-passed by a simple, yet
ad hoc work-around. Many of the limitations and
pitfalls we found limiting (in the sense what can be
expressed in WORDNET) are due to the fact that its
data format is out-of-date and not really suitable for
the biomedical sublanguage. In addition, though we
do not take into doubt that the WORDNET software
37
works fine for the official WORDNET release, our
experiences taught us that it fails or gives limited
support in case of building and debugging a new
WORDNET resource. Even worse, we have evidence
from one large terminological resource (NCI) that
WORDNET?s software infrastructure (GRIND) ren-
ders deceptive results.
Although WORDNET might no longerbe the one
and only lexical resource for NLP each year a con-
tinuously strong stream of publications on the use of
WORDNET illustrates its importance for the com-
munity. On this account we find it remarkable that
although improvements in content and structure of
WORDNET have been proposed (e.g., Boyd-Graber
et al (2006) propose to add (weighted) connec-
tions between synsets, Oltramari et al (2002) sug-
gest to restructure WORDNET?s taxonomical struc-
ture, and Mihalcea and Moldovan (2001) recom-
mend to merge synsets that are too fine-grained)
to the best of our knowledge, no explicit proposals
have been made to improve the representation for-
mat of WORDNET in combination with the adaption
of the WORDNET-related software.
According to our experiences the existing WORD-
NET software is hardly (re)usable due to insufficient
error messages that the software throws and limited
documentation. From our point of view it would be
highly preferable if the software would be improved
and made more user-supportive (more meaningful
error messages would already improve the useful-
ness of the software). In terms of the actual rep-
resentation format of WORDNET we found that us-
ing the current format is not only cumbersome and
error-prone, but also limits what can be expressed in
a WORDNET resource.
From our perspective this indicates the need for
a major redesign of WORDNET?s data structure
foundations to keep up with the standards of to-
day?s meta data specification languages (e.g., based
on RFD (Graves and Gutierrez, 2006), XML or
OWL (Lu?ngen et al, 2007)). We encourage the re-
implementation of WORDNET resources based on
such a state-of-the-art markup language (for OWL in
particular a representation of WORDNET is already
available, cf. van Assem et al (2006)). Of course, if
a new representation format is used for a WORDNET
resource also the software accessing the resource has
to be adapted to the new format. This may require
substantial implementation efforts that we think are
worth to be spent, if the new format overcomes the
major problems that are due to the original WORD-
NET format.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the German Ministry
of Education and Research within the STEMNET
project (01DS001A-C) and by the EC within the
BOOTSTREP project (FP6-028099).
References
Luisa Bentivogli, Andrea Bocco, and Emanuele Pianta.
2004. ARCHIWORDNET: Integrating WORDNET
with domain-specific knowledge. In Petr Sojka, Karel
Pala, Christiane Fellbaum, and Piek Vossen, editors,
GWC 2004 ? Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference of the Global WordNet Association, pages
39?46. Brno, Czech Republic, January 20-23, 2004.
Olivier Bodenreider and Anita Burgun. 2002. Character-
izing the definitions of anatomical concepts in WORD-
NET and specialized sources. In Proceedings of the 1st
International Conference of the Global WordNet Asso-
ciation, pages 223?230. Mysore, India, January 21-25,
2002.
Jordan Boyd-Graber, Christiane Fellbaum, Daniel Osh-
erson, and Robert Schapire. 2006. Adding dense,
weighted connections to WORDNET. In Petr Sojka,
Key-Sun Choi, Christiane Fellbaum, and Piek Vossen,
editors, GWC 2006 ? Proceedings of the 3rd Inter-
national WORDNET Conference, pages 29?35. South
Jeju Island, Korea, January 22-26, 2006.
Paul Buitelaar and Bogdan Sacaleanu. 2002. Extend-
ing synsets with medical terms WORDNET and spe-
cialized sources. In Proceedings of the 1st Interna-
tional Conference of the Global WordNet Association.
Mysore, India, January 21-25, 2002.
Anita Burgun and Olivier Bodenreider. 2001. Compar-
ing terms, concepts and semantic classes in WORD-
NET and the UNIFIED MEDICAL LANGUAGE SYS-
TEM. In Proceedings of the NAACL 2001 Workshop
?WORDNET and Other Lexical Resources: Applica-
tions, Extensions and Customizations?, pages 77?82.
Pittsburgh, PA, June 3-4, 2001. New Brunswick, NJ:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jose? Castan?o, Jason Zhang, and James Pustejovsky.
2002. Anaphora resolution in biomedical literature. In
Proceedings of The International Symposium on Ref-
erence Resolution for Natural Language Processing.
Alicante, Spain, June 3-4, 2002.
Christiane Fellbaum, Udo Hahn, and Barry Smith. 2006.
Towards new information resources for public health:
38
From WORDNET to MEDICAL WORDNET. Journal
of Biomedical Informatics, 39(3):321?332.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WORDNET: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Alvaro Graves and Caludio Gutierrez. 2006. Data rep-
resentations for WORDNET: A case for RDF. In Petr
Sojka, Key-Sun Choi, Christiane Fellbaum, and Piek
Vossen, editors, GWC 2006 ? Proceedings of the 3rd
International WORDNET Conference, pages 165?169.
South Jeju Island, Korea, January 22-26, 2006.
Udo Hahn, Martin Romacker, and Stefan Schulz. 1999.
Discourse structures in medical reports ? watch out!
The generation of referentially coherent and valid text
knowledge bases in the MEDSYNDIKATE system. In-
ternational Journal of Medical Informatics, 53(1):1?
28.
Sanda M. Harabagiu, Ra?zvan C. Bunescu, and Steven J.
Maiorano. 2001. Text and knowledge mining for
coreference resolution. In NAACL?01, Language Tech-
nologies 2001 ? Proceedings of the 2nd Meeting of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 1?8. Pittsburgh, PA,
USA, June 2-7, 2001. San Francisco, CA: Morgan
Kaufmann.
Deirdre Hogan. 2007. Coordinate noun phrase disam-
biguation in a generative parsing model. In ACL?07 ?
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation of Computational Linguistics, pages 680?687.
Prague, Czech Republic, June 28-29, 2007. Strouds-
burg, PA: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ales? Hora?k and Pavel Smrz?. 2004. New features of
wordnet editor VisDic. Romanian Journal of Infor-
mation Science and Technology (Special Issue), 7(1-
2):201?213.
Harald Lu?ngen, Claudia Kunze, Lothar Lemnitzer, and
Angelika Storrer. 2007. Towards an integrated
OWL model for domain-specific and general language
WordNets. In Attila Tana?cs, Dora? Csendes, Veronika
Vincze, Christiane Fellbaum, and Piek Vossen, editors,
GWC 2008 ? Proceedings of the 4th Global WORD-
NET Conference, pages 281?296. Szeged, Hungary,
January 22-25, 2008.
Rada Mihalcea and Dan Moldovan. 2001.
EZ.WORDNET: Principles for automatic genera-
tion of a coarse grained WORDNET. In Proceedings
of the 14th International Florida Artificial Intelli-
gence Research Society (FLAIRS) Conference, pages
454?458.
Alessandro Oltramari, Aldo Gangemi, Nicola Guarino,
and Claudio Madolo. 2002. Restructuring WORD-
NET?s top-level. In Proceedings of ONTOLEX 2002
@ LREC 2002.
Siddharth Patwardhan, Satanjeev Banerjee, and Ted Ped-
ersen. 2003. Using measures of semantic related-
ness for word sense disambiguation. In Alexander F.
Gelbukh, editor, CICLing 2003 ? Computational Lin-
guistics and Intelligent Text Processing. Proceedings
of the 4th International Conference, volume 2588 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 241?257.
Mexico City, Mexico, February 16-22, 2003. Berlin
etc.: Springer.
Ted Pedersen, Siddharth Patwardhan, and Jason Miche-
lizzi. 2004. WORDNET::Similarity: Measuring the
relatedness of concepts. In AAAI?04 ? Proceedings
of the 19th National Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence & IAAI?04 ? Proceedings of the 16th Innova-
tive Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference,
pages 1024?1025. San Jose?, CA, USA, July 25-29,
2004. Menlo Park, CA; Cambridge, MA: AAAI Press
& MIT Press.
Michael Poprat and Udo Hahn. 2007. Quantitative data
on referring expressions in biomedical abstracts. In
BioNLP at ACL 2007 ? Proceedings of the Workshop
on Biological, Translational, and Clinical Language
Processing, pages 193?194. Prague, Czech Republic,
June 29, 2007. Stroudsburg, PA: Association for Com-
putational Liguistics.
Pavel Smrz?. 2004. Quality control and checking for
wordnets development: A case study of BALKANET.
Romanian Journal of Information Science and Tech-
nology (Special Issue), 7(1-2):173?181.
D. Tufis?, D. Christea, and S. Stamou. 2004. BALKA-
NET: Aims, methods, results and perspectives. a gen-
eral overview. Romanian Journal of Information Sci-
ence and Technology (Special Issue), 7(1-2):9?43.
Mark van Assem, Aldo Gangemi, and Guus Schreiber.
2006. Conversion of WORDNET to a standard
RDF/OWL representation. In LREC 2006 ? Proceed-
ings of the 5th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation. Genoa, Italy, May 22-28,
2006. Paris: European Language Resources Associa-
tion (ELRA), available on CD.
Piek Vossen, editor. 1998. EUROWORDNET: A Mul-
tilingual Database with Lexical Semantic Networks.
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Piek Vossen. 2001. Extending, trimming and fusing
WORDNET for technical documents. In Proceedings
of the NAACL 2001 Workshop ?WORDNET and Other
Lexical Resources: Applications, Extensions and Cus-
tomizations?. Pittsburgh, PA, June 3-4, 2001. New
Brunswick, NJ: Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
39
