Morphological Interfaces to Dictionaries 
Michael Maxwell 
Linguistic Data Consortium 
3600 Market St, Suite 810 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
Maxwell@ldc.upenn.edu 
William Poser 
Linguistics, University of Pennsylvania 
3600 Market St, Suite 501 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
billposer@alum.mit.edu  
Abstract 
Languages with complex morphologies present difficulties for dictionaries users. One solution to this 
problem is to use a morphological parser for lookup of morphologically complex words, including fully 
inflected words, without the user needing to explicitly know the morphology. We discuss the sorts of 
morphologies which cause the greatest need for such an interface. 
1 Introduction 
When it comes to dictionaries, not all languages 
are created equal. Quite apart from the fact that 
more effort has been put into lexicography for 
some languages than for others, languages vary in 
how they lend themselves to word look up. 
Generations of English-speaking students have 
been told, when they were uncertain how to spell a 
word, to look it up in the dictionary. How one is 
supposed to look up a word when one does not 
already know how to spell it has been the source of 
much distress for those same students. 
For English, the chief obstacle to dictionary 
lookup is the orthography.
1 
But for other 
languages, the structure of the language itself is the 
problem, and in particular the language s 
morphology. Unless the dictionary user is 
explicitly familiar with that morphology, 
determining the citation form of a given word can 
be quite difficult. 
One solution, at least for electronic dictionaries, 
is to create an interface that uses a morphological 
parser to find the root or stem of the full word 
provided by the user, and then automatically look 
up that form (or its citation form), thereby shifting 
the need to explicitly know the morphology (and 
the choice of citation form) from the user to the 
computer. Such interfaces are described in Breidt 
and Feldweg 1997, Pr?sz?ky and Kis 2002, 
Streiter, Knapp, Voltmer et al 2004, etc. 
But building a morphological parser is a non-
trivial task, and a simpler solution where 
                                                     
 
1 
Orthography presents difficulties for dictionary 
lookup is difficult in languages which are not written 
alphabetically, and for which the lexical entries 
therefore cannot be alphabetized. While we do not 
address that issue in this paper, specialized front ends to 
dictionaries have been used for lookup in such 
languages; see e.g. Bilac, Baldwin and Tanaka 2002. 
possible would be preferable. In this paper, we 
discuss the sort of morphology that makes a parser 
interface especially desirable.  
2 Morphology and Citation Forms 
We need to clarify here that we are concerned 
with how difficult dictionary lookup is for 
average users, that is, for users who may not be 
overtly familiar with the morphology of the 
language. Linguists and (usually) language 
teachers are often familiar enough with the 
morphology that they can compute the citation 
form from any arbitrary inflected form, but many 
other users will not be able to do so. 
Certain kinds of morphology can make it 
difficult for average users to find the citation form 
of an inflected word. Usually this is inflectional 
morphology, simply because forms related by 
derivational morphology are often given separate 
listings. However, some languages have productive 
and regular derivational morphology, so that forms 
related by derivational affixation may not in fact be 
listed. Furthermore, in some languages (such as 
Athabaskan languages, see below) the derivational 
and inflectional morphology interact so as to make 
finding a citation form especially difficult. Finally, 
the boundary between inflectional and derivational 
morphology is not always clear whether to a 
linguist or to the end user. 
We now turn to the specifics of how morphology 
can impede dictionary lookup. For languages with 
any degree of morphology, one form of the 
paradigm for a given part of speech is usually 
chosen as the citation form. Problems may arise for 
words which lack the chosen form (e.g. pluralia 
tantum words, such as scissors). In any case, users 
must generally be told what form to look for. 
Of course, for languages with only a small 
amount of productive morphology, it does not take 
much sophistication to come up with a citation 
form from an inflected form. For English, the 
citation form of an inflected verb is generally 
found by stripping off one of a handful of suffixes 
(and sometimes undoing other spelling rules). 
Irregular verbs present complications, but their 
frequency makes them unlikely candidates for 
lookup, except by language learners. At any rate, 
irregular words can be placed in minor entries, 
separately alphabetized from the major entries, and 
cross-referencing the latter. 
In practice, users may not even need to know 
how to remove the suffixes, since when searching 
for walks or walking they will find walk, and 
generally make the connection. 
If a language is exclusively suffixing, not even a 
large amount of inflectional affixation need stand 
in the way of lookup. If the user cannot figure out 
the citation form of a word, he can simply look up 
the first few letters to find the entry. Thus, even 
languages like Turkish or Quechua often pose little 
problem for lookup. (Nevertheless, for some users, 
it may not be obvious that the citation form thus 
found corresponds to the inflected word, see e.g. 
Corris, Manning, Poetsch et al 2004: 47.) 
More problematic for lookup is prefixation.
2 
Since dictionary words are usually alphabetized 
from the beginning of the word to the end (left to 
right in most writing systems), in theory the user 
would have to strip prefixes before doing lookup. 
An obvious work-around would be to alphabetize 
words in (exclusively) prefixing languages from 
right to left. Alternatively, the dictionary could 
provide an index alphabetized from right to left, 
where the user could find the citation form, then 
look up that form in the main part of the 
dictionary. To our knowledge, this solution has not 
been employed, although this may be due to the 
paucity of exclusively prefixing languages. 
The reverse alphabetization solution would not 
work for languages which employ both prefixing 
and suffixing, such as Tzeltal (Mayan). But even 
here the situation is not too bad if the number of 
prefixes is small, as in fact it is in Tzeltal: the 
common prefixes are h-/k-, a-/aw-, and s-/y-, and 
stripping these probably does not present much of 
a problem to most users of the Vocabulario tzeltal 
de Bachajon (Slocum and Gerdel 1965). 
The real problem for languages having both 
prefixes and suffixes arises when the language has 
a large number of prefixes, or when the language 
productively employs compounding or incorpor-
ation, which can have the same effect for 
dictionary lookup as productive prefixation. 
                                                     
 
2 
If the citation form is prefixed, this may also cause 
problems for alphabetization, since many words may 
fall into the same section of the alphabet. This problem 
is well-known, but is not the focus of our discussion. 
German is a notorious example of the difficulties 
occasioned by compounding, and Nahuatl is an 
example of a language having incorporation. 
In Nahuatl, indefinite direct objects can often be 
incorporated into the verb: chi:lkwa to eat chili is 
composed of the verb stem kwa to eat , preceded 
by the incorporated noun chi:l chili . The na?ve 
user may succeed in finding the incorporated noun 
in a printed dictionary, but may be at a loss to 
decipher the rest of the word, since kwa is not a 
noun suffix in Nahuatl.
3 
A greater difficulty for the average dictionary 
user is nonconcatenative morphology, such as 
infixes, partial reduplication, and templatic 
morphology. In Tagalog, for example, there is an 
affix -um- marking actor focus, which is infixed 
following a word-initial consonant (Schachter and 
Otanes 1972). Furthermore, the Tagalog 
imperfective aspect is indicated by partial re-
duplication. Thus the word bumibili is a form of 
the verb root bili to buy , where the reduplication 
is bi-, and the infix -um- is stuck into the middle of 
this reduplicated syllable.  
In some cases, the user can (or should!) be 
expected to understand this and deal with 
converting bumibili, say, to the appropriate citation 
form. And in fact dictionary writers often assist by 
providing partly inflected forms: in the case of 
Tagalog, for instance, citation forms generally 
include the focus affixes. But as the complexity of 
the morphology increases, relying on the user to 
guess the citation form from an inflected form 
becomes less of an option. At the same time, 
explicitly including multiple inflected forms in the 
dictionary becomes cumbersome, even impossible. 
In the following subsections, we detail 
difficulties occasioned by the particular morpho-
logies of Semitic and Athabaskan languages. 
2.1 Semitic Languages 
Arabic, like most other Semitic languages, 
employs templatic morphology, in which affixes 
composed of vowels can be interdigitated between 
consonants of the root. Affixation can also modify 
the root consonants, frequently by gemination. For 
example, a typical Arabic root ktb can appear in 
inflected forms as diverse as katab, kattab, ktatab, 
ktanbab, and kutib (Spencer 1991). Some of this 
morphology is derivational, and some inflectional, 
but it all poses a problem for users.  
Moreover, Arabic is ordinarily written without 
many of the vowels. While this may ease the 
                                                     
3 
In practice, this problem in Nahuatl is ameliorated 
by the fact that incorporation is not highly productive. 
Therefore the most common cases of incorporation 
should arguably be listed in the dictionary. 
problem caused by the interdigitated vowels, it 
means that the dictionary user may have more 
difficulty distinguishing root consonants from 
affixal consonants, since the vowels are not present 
in the written form to help parse the word.  
Traditional Arabic dictionaries have been root 
based; that is, the head word of a lexical entry is 
the root, with all derivational and inflectional 
morphology removed. Listed derived forms appear 
as subentries under a given root (and inflected 
forms which must be listed are generally included 
as variant forms within the subentry for a given 
derived form). Because of the difficulty undoing 
Arabic derivational and inflectional morphology 
poses for the average user, so-called alphabetic 
dictionaries have become increasingly popular. In 
an alphabetic dictionary, derived forms serve as 
headwords, so that alphabetization is done over the 
entire set of lexemes, whether root or stem.  
Root-based dictionaries and alphabetic diction-
aries each have strengths and weaknesses. A root-
based dictionary gathers the information on related 
forms into one place, rather than scattering it 
throughout the dictionary, as is the case for an 
alphabetic dictionary. On the other hand, a root-
based dictionary requires a much more explicit 
understanding of Arabic morphology than many 
users possess. Even so, finding the citation form of 
an irregular plural or an irregular verb in an 
alphabetic dictionary can be a daunting task. 
In summary, Arabic morphology forces the 
dictionary writer to choose between a root-based 
format and an alphabetic format; both approaches 
have their disadvantages. Similar problems obtain 
for other languages with templatic morphologies. 
Fortunately, these problems can be overcome by 
interposing a morphological parser between the 
user and the electronic dictionary. 
2.2 Athabaskan Languages 
The difficulties that Athabaskan languages pose 
for dictionary lookup have been detailed in Poser 
2002; here we give an outline of the problem for 
one such language, Carrier.  
Like other Athabaskan languages, Carrier is 
predominantly prefixing, with verbs carrying 
numerous prefixes. Each verb can have tens or 
even hundreds of thousands of forms. But the sheer 
number of verb forms is not all that different from 
other agglutinative languages such as Finnish or 
Turkish. The real problem is that Carrier prefixes 
are a mixture of inflectional and derivational 
morphemes, with the derivational affixes often 
appearing outside of inflectional affixes.  
Furthermore, it is not infrequently the case that 
there are prefixes which obligatorily combine with 
a root in a certain meaning. In effect, Athabaskan 
languages have discontinuous verb stems.
4 
For 
instance, the Carrier verb to be red consists of 
the root k'un with the valence prefix l- 
immediately preceding the root and the prefix d- 
several positions to the left, giving forms like: 
dilk'un  you (sg.) are red
 
duzk'un  I am red
hudulk'un  they are red
hudutilk'un they will be red
Note that some subject markers follow the d- 
while others precede it. Also notice that the 
allomorphy sometimes collapses two affixes into a 
single segment (s+l  z in duzk'un).  
For dictionaries, the implication is that there is in 
general no contiguous or invariant portion of the 
verb that can serve as the citation form. The 
morphology is primarily prefixal, but the existence 
of extensive stem variation and some suffixation 
means that the stem is not a good citation form, 
and that ordering forms form right-to-left will not 
keep related forms close together. Worse, the 
phonological material that contributes the basic 
meaning of the word is not, in general, contiguous. 
This means that any citation form will not be easily 
extracted by an unsophisticated user.  Moreover, 
no simple sorting will keep related forms together. 
Worse, many verb roots are highly abstract, so 
that a form can only be given an English 
translation on the basis of the root together with 
one or more prefixes. Examples are found in the 
classificatory verbs. For example, the verb root 
meaning to give takes distinct derivational 
affixes depending on the type of object being 
handled: ball-shaped objects, names, houses, non-
count objects, long rigid objects, contents of open 
containers, liquids, fluffy stuff and these 
classifiers may not be adjacent to the root. 
In light of the difficult of dictionary lookup in 
Athabaskan languages, one approach has been to 
list, for each verb, a single form, as in the major 
dictionary of Navajo (Young and William Morgan 
1987). However, this requires the user to be able to 
analyze a verb form and convert it to the citation 
form. This is a non-trivial task even for fluent 
native speakers; it is difficult or impossible for 
language learners. Indeed, the problem of 
dictionary use for Navajo is so acute that the Din? 
(Navajo) College has instituted a one semester 
course Navajo Grammar and Applied 
Linguistics , which is largely devoted to teaching 
                                                     
4 
These are somewhat analogous to English verb-
particle combinations such as bring a matter up , in 
which the verbal inflection (and often a direct object) 
intervenes between the verb root and the particle. But 
the intervening inflectional morphology in Athabaskan 
is vastly more complex than that of English. 
college-level native speakers of Navajo how to use 
the dictionary of their own language. 
The other major approach to dictionary making 
in Athabaskan languages is to list individual 
morphemes. In order to use such a dictionary, the 
user must be able to analyze the word into root and 
affixes. But the root may have many shapes. For 
example, the root meaning to go around in a boat 
takes forms such as , , , , , and . 
Although there is a pattern to these changes, it is 
complex if not irregular. The resulting difficulty 
for dictionary lookup should be obvious. 
A root-based lexicon has been published for 
Navajo (Young, Morgan and Midgette 1992). It 
has the virtue of being comprehensive, and of 
avoiding duplication. For example, the detailed 
meaning of a verb root can be explained only once, 
in the entry for that root, rather than in each of 
many entries for forms derived from that root. 
The problem with this approach is that it requires 
even more grammatical knowledge on the part of 
the user than traditional Athabaskan dictionaries, 
together with an understanding of an elaborate 
process for analyzing forms, looking up their 
components, and constructing the meaning of the 
form from its components. As a result, while 
analytic dictionaries are useful for linguists, but 
most people, including both language learners and 
native speakers, find them very difficult. 
In sum, the morphological structure of 
Athabaskan languages forces difficult choices on 
the dictionary writer, and results in a steep learning 
curve for the user. Again, this is the sort of 
language structure where a morphological interface 
can make a crucial difference. 
3 Conclusion 
We have outlined ways in which the structure of 
languages can make a morphological parser as a 
front end for dictionary lookup attractive. 
There are more uses to such technology than just 
dictionary lookup. If the morphology engine is a 
transducer, it can be used for generation as well as 
for parsing. Such a bidirectional engine can be 
used to generate the paradigm of any stem. While 
this is of little interest to native speakers, it may be 
of great assistance to language learners.  
Another application would be to provide what 
amounts to a virtual interlinear text with 
morpheme glosses for any text in electronic form. 
To be sure, this text would not be disambiguated, 
unless a knowledgeable user put forth the effort, or 
unless an automatic disambiguator (tagger) was 
provided. Nevertheless, interlinear text, even in an 
ambiguous form, could be a useful for linguists 
and perhaps language learners. 
In sum, a morphological transducer connected to 
an electronic dictionary can provide valuable aid 
for both native speakers and language learners. 
4 Acknowledgements 
Our thanks to Tim Buckwalter and Mohamed 
Maamouri of the Linguistic Data Consortium and 
Jonathan Amith for their comments on earlier 
versions of this paper. 
References  
Bilac, S., T. Baldwin, et al (2002). Bringing the 
Dictionary to the User: the FOKS system. 
COLING-2002. 
Breidt, E. and H. Feldweg (1997). "Accessing 
Foreign Languages with COMPASS." 
Machine Translation Journal, special 
issue on New Tools for Human Translators
 
12: 153-174. 
Corris, M., C. Manning, et al (2004). "How Useful 
and Usable are Dictionaries for Speakers 
of Australian Indigenous Languages?" 
International Journal of Lexicography 17: 
33-68. 
Poser, W. J. (2002). Making Athabaskan 
Dictionaries Usable. Proceedings of the 
Athabaskan Languages Conference. G. 
Holton. Fairbanks, Alaska Native 
Language center, University of Alaska: 
136-147. 
Pr?sz?ky, G. and B. Kis (2002). Context-Sensitive 
Electronic Dictionaries. COLING-2002. 
Schachter, P. and F. T. Otanes (1972). Tagalog 
Reference Grammar. Berkeley, University 
of California Press. 
Slocum, M. and F. Gerdel (1965). Vocabulario 
tzeltal de Bachajon. Mexico, Summer 
Institute of Linguistics. 
Spencer, A. (1991). Morphological theory : an 
introduction to word structure in 
generative grammar. Oxford, UK ; 
Cambridge, Mass., Basil Blackwell. 
Streiter, O., J. Knapp, et al (2004). Bridging the 
Gap between Intentional and Incidental 
Vocabulary Acquisition. ALLC/ ACH 
2004, G?teborg University, Sweden. 
Young, R. W., W. Morgan, et al (1992). 
Analytical Lexicon of Navajo. 
Albuquerque, University of New Mexico 
Press. 
Young, R. W. and S. William Morgan (1987). The 
Navajo Language: a Grammar and 
Colloquial Dictionary. Albuquerque, 
University of New Mexico Press.  
