Limited-Domain Speech-to-Speech Translation
between English and Pashto
Kristin Precoda, Horacio Franco, Ascander Dost, Michael Frandsen, John Fry,
Andreas Kathol, Colleen Richey, Susanne Riehemann, Dimitra Vergyri, Jing Zheng
SRI International
333 Ravenswood Ave.
Menlo Park, CA 94025
Christopher Culy
FX Palo Alto Laboratory, Inc.
3400 Hillview Ave., Building 4
Palo Alto, CA 94304
Abstract
This paper describes a prototype system for
near-real-time spontaneous, bidirectional
translation between spoken English and
Pashto, a language presenting many
technological challenges because of its lack of
resources, including both data and expert
knowledge. Development of the prototype is
ongoing, and we propose to demonstrate a
fully functional version which shows the basic
capabilities, though not yet their final depth
and breadth.
1 Introduction
This demonstration will present a prototype system for
bidirectional speech-to-speech translation within a
limited semantic domain, that of first encounters
between a patient and a medical professional. A major
goal of the work is to explore techniques that are
appropriate for languages that are not of great
commercial interest and that consequently are lacking in
data and resources of many kinds. The system has been
developed for American English and Pashto, one of the
major languages of Afghanistan, which presents a
variety of challenges for both data-intensive and
knowledge-based approaches.
It should be noted that the system must be viewed as
one component in a real-time transaction between two
cooperating humans. The ultimate goal of those humans
is to exchange information by whatever means is
effective: not, necessarily, to rely exclusively on the
system?s output, but to use it in combination with other,
non-speech modalities of conveying meaning and with
ordinary world knowledge.
The final system is intended to run on a handheld
device, such as a PDA, with its attendant memory and
speed limitations and restriction to integer-only
computation. Most components of the demonstration
system run in a PocketPC emulation environment on a
Windows laptop, with a few in the full Windows
environment. All aspects of the prototype system are
undergoing active development.
2 Overall Architecture
A simple description of the architecture is as follows.
The system is controlled by the English speaker, who is
expected to have greater technological familiarity and
who has the benefit of visual feedback on the system
performance. Spoken input, in either English or Pashto,
is recognized by SRI?s small-footprint DynaSpeak?
recognizer, and an ordered list of hypotheses is
produced. The most likely hypothesis is input to SRI's
Gemini natural language parser/generator (Dowding et
al. 1993), which attempts to parse the speech
recognition output. Handling of possible errors or
failures will be discussed in Section 3.
When a successful parse is obtained, Gemini creates
a quasi-logical form representing the meaning of the
sentence. In general, multiple quasi-logical forms may
be created, reflecting differing interpretations of the
input sentence. These forms, which are domain
independent and serve here as an interlingua, can be
ordered by heuristically assigning preferences or
dispreferences to the parsing rules applied to create
them. Gemini uses a grammar for the target language to
generate a translation from the most-preferred
interpretation possible, and outputs a textual
representation of the translation.
Theta, a small-footprint concatenative synthesizer
from Cepstral LLC (Cepstral LLC 2004), then produces
synthetic spoken output in the target language from the
textual representation generated by Gemini. The Pashto
voice was created specifically for this project.
An English and a Pashto version of each component
are called by a single application which includes a
graphical user interface. A screen shot of the interface
is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Screen shot of prototype system
interface.
3 Redundancy and Handling Infelicities
As in any complex system, performance can differ from
the ideal in a number of ways, and it is important for the
system to provide alternative ways to support successful
communication. Some kinds of subideal performance
and recovery approaches are described here.
The most likely hypothesis output by the speech
recognizer may not be exactly what was spoken. When
the input speech is English, the English speaker can see
whether the most likely hypothesis (shown in the
"Input" box in Figure 1) is correct or approximately
correct. If the English speaker judges the hypothesis to
not be close enough to the intended text, s/he may either
repeat the utterance or click on the "Guesses?" button
to see an ordered list of the best hypotheses. A sample
list is shown in Figure 2. If the correct text is on this list,
the user may select it to submit for translation. When
the input speech is in Pashto, this functionality is less
useful, as the Pashto speaker is not assumed to be able
to read, even if the hypotheses were displayed in Pashto
script.
Figure 2. Sample ordered list of recognizer
hypotheses.
Once a recognition hypothesis has been submitted
for translation, several possible problems can arise.
Pashto is a moderately inflected, split-ergative Indo-
European language, and for Pashto in particular,
recognition errors may lead to apparent lack of syntactic
agreement between elements of the sentence which
should (and did in fact) agree. As Gemini tries to
generate a full parse of the input, it has the option of
using parse rules that relax agreement requirements.
These rules are dispreferred and a parse built upon them
may be kept only if a full, grammatically correct parse
cannot be completed. Another possible problem is that
unknown words, some grammatical constructions, and
input errors may render any full parse unachievable. In
this case, fallback strategies can be applied to translate
partial parses, fragments, or any known words. Other
strategies are currently in development.
Another class of approaches for assisting
communication allows the English speaker to quickly
perform certain actions or play high-frequency phrases
to the Pashto speaker. If there is background noise or
distractions or the TTS quality is not high enough for
easy comprehension, pressing the "Replay" button will
immediately play back the last translation result. "Ask
for Rep" plays a prerecorded sentence asking the Pashto
speaker to repeat what s/he said. Several other useful
phrases are available by clicking on the "Phrases?"
button and then selecting from the screen shown in
Figure 3.
Figure 3. Prerecorded Pashto phrases which can
be played back with a single click.
4 Sample Interaction
The table below shows an excerpt of a dialog between
an English and a Pashto speaker, both new to this
system, whose interaction was part of an informal trial
run by the MITRE Corporation in February 2004 for the
DARPA CAST program. The English speaker, a doctor,
had just received eighteen minutes of training in how to
use the system and had had no other exposure to it. The
Pashto speaker, playing the role of an injured patient,
had received training in complaints consistent with a
particular injury scenario and had seen others use the
system, but had not interacted with the system himself.
Except as noted, the translations are understandable.
Spoken input System result
I am a doctor, can I help
you?
[failure to translate
because two sentences]
I am a doctor z@ ddAkttar y@m
Can I help you? AyA z@ d@ tA sara
komak kaw@lay S@m
ho, mehrabAni w@krra yes make [partial
translation; full translation
should have been "yes
please do"]
Where are you hurt? [rerecorded after one
misrecognition] t@ cherta
khugx ye
ghwagx aw ugxa [misrecognized
repeatedly; unable to give
meaningful translation;
should have been "ear and
shoulder"]
Can you breathe? AyA t@ sA akhIst@lay
Se
na, mUSkel lar@m no I have the problem
Do you have pain? AyA t@ dard lare
zAyt of much [minor
misrecognition; translation
should have been "much"]
Do you take medications? AyA t@ dawAuna akhle
[incorrect plural form of
dawA, but understood by
Pashto speaker anyway]
na no
Do you want pain
medication?
AyA t@ d@ dard dawA
ghwArre
ho yes
Do you have allergies? AyA t@ hasAsiyatuna lare
ho yes
What are your allergies? stA hasAsiyat ts@ day
antibyutik [misrecognized but
correctly understood by
doctor as "antibiotics"]
5 Challenges
Three main challenges face this project. First,
commercially nonviable languages, such as Pashto,
often offer very few linguistic resources (such as
linguistic descriptions, acoustic data, texts, language
processing tools). The lack of resources makes
development more difficult, and severely constrains the
approaches that are viable: approaches that rely on large
corpora cannot be used. In addition, there is a shortage
of literate speakers who are available to act as
consultants, and a scarcity of basic knowledge about the
language. This impedes progress and renders difficult
approaches that rely on a large body of hand-crafted
translation rules. The challenge of having no single
person who has a deep understanding of both the
language and the technology and who can serve as a
bridge between them is substantial, and causes more
iterative development than is ordinarily the case when
bilingual technologists are available, as newly
discovered phenomena or new understanding cause
revisions of previous work.
A second major challenge is due to the nature of the
domain and the underlying concept of operations. Real
speech occurs in noisy environments, has disfluencies,
and is highly variable (e.g., phrasings, dialect
differences). In addition, the output of a speech
recognizer contains more and qualitatively different
errors than typical text input to automatic translation
systems. While the problems of real speech are not
unique to this project, they are magnified by the fact
that the non-English speakers will largely be
unsophisticated users of technology, who will often be
using the system for the first and only time. The system
must work well from the very first utterance ? there
cannot be much of a learning curve. This applies to the
translation quality and to other aspects of the system,
such as the synthetic speech, as speakers are not familiar
with synthesized Pashto speech. These speakers are also
not expected to be literate, and their understanding will
not be bolstered by the extra redundancy and
capabilities that the display offers to the English
speaker.
A third major challenge is posed by the handheld
device platform with its computational and storage
limitations, and the near-real-time requirement of the
envisioned usage. The restriction to integer-only
computation is most serious for the speech recognition,
as nearly all medium- or large-vocabulary speech
recognizers perform extensive floating-point
computations, and the conversion of a speech recognizer
to use only integer computation required considerable
effort. The severe memory limitations perhaps impact
most the parsing/generation components of the system.
6 Summary
We have described a prototype of a spoken language
translation system for use by English-speaking medical
personnel treating Pashto-speaking patients.  The
system, which is targeted to a handheld device, is being
developed with extremely little Pashto-language data of
any kind.  It builds on medium-vocabulary speaker-
independent HMM-based speech recognition, rule-
based translation and supporting methods, and
concatenative synthesis. While the system is certainly
still under development, it has provided a reasonable
proof of concept in informal trials.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported under SPAWAR contract N66001-
99-D-8504 with funding from DARPA. Many thanks are due
to Mohammad Shahabuddin Khan, David Kale, Robert J.
Podesva, Valerie Wagner, and many Pashto speakers who
worked with us in various capacities.
References
Cepstral, LLC. 2004. Theta: Small footprint text-to-
speech synthesizer, Pittsburgh, PA, http://
www.cepstral.com
J. Dowding, J. M. Gawron, D. E. Appelt, J. Bear, L.
Cherny, R. Moore, and D. B. Moran. 1993. Gemini:
A natural language system for spoken language
understanding.  Proceedings of the Thirty-First
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 54-61.
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers, pages 374?378,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Detection of Agreement and Disagreement in Broadcast Conversations
Wen Wang1 Sibel Yaman2y Kristin Precoda1 Colleen Richey1 Geoffrey Raymond3
1SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Avenue, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA
2IBM T. J. Watson Research Center P.O.Box 218, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
3University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA
fwwang,precoda,colleeng@speech.sri.com, syaman@us.ibm.com, graymond@soc.ucsb.edu
Abstract
We present Conditional Random Fields
based approaches for detecting agree-
ment/disagreement between speakers in
English broadcast conversation shows. We
develop annotation approaches for a variety
of linguistic phenomena. Various lexical,
structural, durational, and prosodic features
are explored. We compare the performance
when using features extracted from au-
tomatically generated annotations against
that when using human annotations. We
investigate the efficacy of adding prosodic
features on top of lexical, structural, and
durational features. Since the training data
is highly imbalanced, we explore two sam-
pling approaches, random downsampling
and ensemble downsampling. Overall, our
approach achieves 79.2% (precision), 50.5%
(recall), 61.7% (F1) for agreement detection
and 69.2% (precision), 46.9% (recall), and
55.9% (F1) for disagreement detection, on the
English broadcast conversation data.
1 Introduction
In this work, we present models for detecting
agreement/disagreement (denoted (dis)agreement)
between speakers in English broadcast conversation
shows. The Broadcast Conversation (BC) genre dif-
fers from the Broadcast News (BN) genre in that
it is more interactive and spontaneous, referring to
free speech in news-style TV and radio programs
and consisting of talk shows, interviews, call-in
programs, live reports, and round-tables. Previous
yThis work was performed while the author was at ICSI.
work on detecting (dis)agreements has been focused
on meeting data. (Hillard et al, 2003), (Galley
et al, 2004), (Hahn et al, 2006) used spurt-level
agreement annotations from the ICSI meeting cor-
pus (Janin et al, 2003). (Hillard et al, 2003) ex-
plored unsupervised machine learning approaches
and on manual transcripts, they achieved an over-
all 3-way agreement/disagreement classification ac-
curacy as 82% with keyword features. (Galley et
al., 2004) explored Bayesian Networks for the de-
tection of (dis)agreements. They used adjacency
pair information to determine the structure of their
conditional Markov model and outperformed the re-
sults of (Hillard et al, 2003) by improving the 3-
way classification accuracy into 86.9%. (Hahn et al,
2006) explored semi-supervised learning algorithms
and reached a competitive performance of 86.7%
3-way classification accuracy on manual transcrip-
tions with only lexical features. (Germesin and Wil-
son, 2009) investigated supervised machine learn-
ing techniques and yields competitive results on the
annotated data from the AMI meeting corpus (Mc-
Cowan et al, 2005).
Our work differs from these previous studies in
two major categories. One is that a different def-
inition of (dis)agreement was used. In the cur-
rent work, a (dis)agreement occurs when a respond-
ing speaker agrees with, accepts, or disagrees with
or rejects, a statement or proposition by a first
speaker. Second, we explored (dis)agreement de-
tection in broadcast conversation. Due to the dif-
ference in publicity and intimacy/collegiality be-
tween speakers in broadcast conversations vs. meet-
ings, (dis)agreement may have different character-
374
istics. Different from the unsupervised approaches
in (Hillard et al, 2003) and semi-supervised ap-
proaches in (Hahn et al, 2006), we conducted su-
pervised training. Also, different from (Hillard et
al., 2003) and (Galley et al, 2004), our classifica-
tion was carried out on the utterance level, instead
of on the spurt-level. Galley et al extended Hillard
et al?s work by adding features from previous spurts
and features from the general dialog context to in-
fer the class of the current spurt, on top of fea-
tures from the current spurt (local features) used by
Hillard et al Galley et al used adjacency pairs to
describe the interaction between speakers and the re-
lations between consecutive spurts. In this prelim-
inary study on broadcast conversation, we directly
modeled (dis)agreement detection without using ad-
jacency pairs. Still, within the conditional random
fields (CRF) framework, we explored features from
preceding and following utterances to consider con-
text in the discourse structure. We explored a wide
variety of features, including lexical, structural, du-
rational, and prosodic features. To our knowledge,
this is the first work to systematically investigate
detection of agreement/disagreement for broadcast
conversation data. The remainder of the paper is or-
ganized as follows. Section 2 presents our data and
automatic annotation modules. Section 3 describes
various features and the CRF model we explored.
Experimental results and discussion appear in Sec-
tion 4, as well as conclusions and future directions.
2 Data and Automatic Annotation
In this work, we selected English broadcast con-
versation data from the DARPA GALE pro-
gram collected data (GALE Phase 1 Release
4, LDC2006E91; GALE Phase 4 Release 2,
LDC2009E15). Human transcriptions and manual
speaker turn labels are used in this study. Also,
since the (dis)agreement detection output will be
used to analyze social roles and relations of an inter-
acting group, we first manually marked soundbites
and then excluded soundbites during annotation and
modeling. We recruited annotators to provide man-
ual annotations of speaker roles and (dis)agreement
to use for the supervised training of models. We de-
fined a set of speaker roles as follows. Host/chair
is a person associated with running the discussions
or calling the meeting. Reporting participant is a
person reporting from the field, from a subcommit-
tee, etc. Commentator participant/Topic participant
is a person providing commentary on some subject,
or person who is the subject of the conversation and
plays a role, e.g., as a newsmaker. Audience par-
ticipant is an ordinary person who may call in, ask
questions at a microphone at e.g. a large presenta-
tion, or be interviewed because of their presence at a
news event. Other is any speaker who does not fit in
one of the above categories, such as a voice talent,
an announcer doing show openings or commercial
breaks, or a translator.
Agreements and disagreements are com-
posed of different combinations of initiating
utterances and responses. We reformulated the
(dis)agreement detection task as the sequence
tagging of 11 (dis)agreement-related labels for
identifying whether a given utterance is initiating
a (dis)agreement opportunity, is a (dis)agreement
response to such an opportunity, or is neither of
these, in the show. For example, a Negative tag
question followed by a negation response forms an
agreement, that is, A: [Negative tag] This is not
black and white, is it? B: [Agreeing Response]
No, it isn?t. The data sparsity problem is serious.
Among all 27,071 utterances, only 2,589 utterances
are involved in (dis)agreement as initiating or
response utterances, about 10% only among all
data, while 24,482 utterances are not involved.
These annotators also labeled shows with a va-
riety of linguistic phenomena (denoted language
use constituents, LUC), including discourse mark-
ers, disfluencies, person addresses and person men-
tions, prefaces, extreme case formulations, and dia-
log act tags (DAT). We categorized dialog acts into
statement, question, backchannel, and incomplete.
We classified disfluencies (DF) into filled pauses
(e.g., uh, um), repetitions, corrections, and false
starts. Person address (PA) terms are terms that a
speaker uses to address another person. Person men-
tions (PM) are references to non-participants in the
conversation. Discourse markers (DM) are words
or phrases that are related to the structure of the
discourse and express a relation between two utter-
ances, for example, I mean, you know. Prefaces
(PR) are sentence-initial lexical tokens serving func-
tions close to discourse markers (e.g., Well, I think
375
that...). Extreme case formulations (ECF) are lexi-
cal patterns emphasizing extremeness (e.g., This is
the best book I have ever read). In the end, we man-
ually annotated 49 English shows. We preprocessed
English manual transcripts by removing transcriber
annotation markers and noise, removing punctuation
and case information, and conducting text normal-
ization. We also built automatic rule-based and sta-
tistical annotation tools for these LUCs.
3 Features and Model
We explored lexical, structural, durational, and
prosodic features for (dis)agreement detection. We
included a set of ?lexical? features, including n-
grams extracted from all of that speaker?s utter-
ances, denoted ngram features. Other lexical fea-
tures include the presence of negation and acquies-
cence, yes/no equivalents, positive and negative tag
questions, and other features distinguishing differ-
ent types of initiating utterances and responses. We
also included various lexical features extracted from
LUC annotations, denoted LUC features. These ad-
ditional features include features related to the pres-
ence of prefaces, the counts of types and tokens
of discourse markers, extreme case formulations,
disfluencies, person addressing events, and person
mentions, and the normalized values of these counts
by sentence length. We also include a set of features
related to the DAT of the current utterance and pre-
ceding and following utterances.
We developed a set of ?structural? and ?dura-
tional? features, inspired by conversation analysis,
to quantitatively represent the different participation
and interaction patterns of speakers in a show. We
extracted features related to pausing and overlaps
between consecutive turns, the absolute and relative
duration of consecutive turns, and so on.
We used a set of prosodic features including
pause, duration, and the speech rate of a speaker. We
also used pitch and energy of the voice. Prosodic
features were computed on words and phonetic
alignment of manual transcripts. Features are com-
puted for the beginning and ending words of an ut-
terance. For the duration features, we used the aver-
age and maximum vowel duration from forced align-
ment, both unnormalized and normalized for vowel
identity and phone context. For pitch and energy, we
calculated the minimum, maximum, range, mean,
standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis values. A
decision tree model was used to compute posteriors
from prosodic features and we used cumulative bin-
ning of posteriors as final features , similar to (Liu et
al., 2006).
As illustrated in Section 2, we reformulated the
(dis)agreement detection task as a sequence tagging
problem. We used the Mallet package (McCallum,
2002) to implement the linear chain CRF model for
sequence tagging. A CRF is an undirected graph-
ical model that defines a global log-linear distribu-
tion of the state (or label) sequence E conditioned
on an observation sequence, in our case including
the sequence of sentences S and the corresponding
sequence of features for this sequence of sentences
F . The model is optimized globally over the en-
tire sequence. The CRF model is trained to maxi-
mize the conditional log-likelihood of a given train-
ing set P (EjS; F ). During testing, the most likely
sequence E is found using the Viterbi algorithm.
One of the motivations of choosing conditional ran-
dom fields was to avoid the label-bias problem found
in hidden Markov models. Compared to Maxi-
mum Entropy modeling, the CRF model is opti-
mized globally over the entire sequence, whereas the
ME model makes a decision at each point individu-
ally without considering the context event informa-
tion.
4 Experiments
All (dis)agreement detection results are based on n-
fold cross-validation. In this procedure, we held
out one show as the test set, randomly held out an-
other show as the dev set, trained models on the
rest of the data, and tested the model on the held-
out show. We iterated through all shows and com-
puted the overall accuracy. Table 1 shows the re-
sults of (dis)agreement detection using all features
except prosodic features. We compared two condi-
tions: (1) features extracted completely from the au-
tomatic LUC annotations and automatically detected
speaker roles, and (2) features from manual speaker
role labels and manual LUC annotations when man-
ual annotations are available. Table 1 showed that
running a fully automatic system to generate auto-
matic annotations and automatic speaker roles pro-
376
duced comparable performance to the system using
features from manual annotations whenever avail-
able.
Table 1: Precision (%), recall (%), and F1 (%) of
(dis)agreement detection using features extracted from
manual speaker role labels and manual LUC annota-
tions when available, denoted Manual Annotation, and
automatic LUC annotations and automatically detected
speaker roles, denoted Automatic Annotation.
Agreement
P R F1
Manual Annotation 81.5 43.2 56.5
Automatic Annotation 79.5 44.6 57.1
Disagreement
P R F1
Manual Annotation 70.1 38.5 49.7
Automatic Annotation 64.3 36.6 46.6
We then focused on the condition of using fea-
tures from manual annotations when available and
added prosodic features as described in Section 3.
The results are shown in Table 2. Adding prosodic
features produced a 0.7% absolute gain on F1 on
agreement detection, and 1.5% absolute gain on F1
on disagreement detection.
Table 2: Precision (%), recall (%), and F1 (%) of
(dis)agreement detection using manual annotations with-
out and with prosodic features.
Agreement
P R F1
w/o prosodic 81.5 43.2 56.5
with prosodic 81.8 44.0 57.2
Disagreement
P R F1
w/o prosodic 70.1 38.5 49.7
with prosodic 70.8 40.1 51.2
Note that only about 10% utterances among all
data are involved in (dis)agreement. This indicates
a highly imbalanced data set as one class is more
heavily represented than the other/others. We sus-
pected that this high imbalance has played a ma-
jor role in the high precision and low recall results
we obtained so far. Various approaches have been
studied to handle imbalanced data for classifications,
trying to balance the class distribution in the train-
ing set by either oversampling the minority class or
downsampling the majority class. In this prelimi-
nary study of sampling approaches for handling im-
balanced data for CRF training, we investigated two
approaches, random downsampling and ensemble
downsampling. Random downsampling randomly
downsamples the majority class to equate the num-
ber of minority and majority class samples. Ensem-
ble downsampling is a refinement of random down-
sampling which doesn?t discard any majority class
samples. Instead, we partitioned the majority class
samples into N subspaces with each subspace con-
taining the same number of samples as the minority
class. Then we train N CRF models, each based
on the minority class samples and one disjoint parti-
tion from the N subspaces. During testing, the pos-
terior probability for one utterance is averaged over
the N CRF models. The results from these two sam-
pling approaches as well as the baseline are shown
in Table 3. Both sampling approaches achieved sig-
nificant improvement over the baseline, i.e., train-
ing on the original data set, and ensemble downsam-
pling produced better performance than downsam-
pling. We noticed that both sampling approaches
degraded slightly in precision but improved signif-
icantly in recall, resulting in 4.5% absolute gain on
F1 for agreement detection and 4.7% absolute gain
on F1 for disagreement detection.
Table 3: Precision (%), recall (%), and F1 (%) of
(dis)agreement detection without sampling, with random
downsampling and ensemble downsampling. Manual an-
notations and prosodic features are used.
Agreement
P R F1
Baseline 81.8 44.0 57.2
Random downsampling 78.5 48.7 60.1
Ensemble downsampling 79.2 50.5 61.7
Disagreement
P R F1
Baseline 70.8 40.1 51.2
Random downsampling 67.3 44.8 53.8
Ensemble downsampling 69.2 46.9 55.9
In conclusion, this paper presents our work on
detection of agreements and disagreements in En-
377
glish broadcast conversation data. We explored a
variety of features, including lexical, structural, du-
rational, and prosodic features. We experimented
these features using a linear-chain conditional ran-
dom fields model and conducted supervised train-
ing. We observed significant improvement from
adding prosodic features and employing two sam-
pling approaches, random downsampling and en-
semble downsampling. Overall, we achieved 79.2%
(precision), 50.5% (recall), 61.7% (F1) for agree-
ment detection and 69.2% (precision), 46.9% (re-
call), and 55.9% (F1) for disagreement detection, on
English broadcast conversation data. In future work,
we plan to continue adding and refining features, ex-
plore dependencies between features and contextual
cues with respect to agreements and disagreements,
and investigate the efficacy of other machine learn-
ing approaches such as Bayesian networks and Sup-
port Vector Machines.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Gokhan Tur and Dilek Hakkani-
Tu?r for valuable insights and suggestions. This
work has been supported by the Intelligence Ad-
vanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) via
Army Research Laboratory (ARL) contract num-
ber W911NF-09-C-0089. The U.S. Government is
authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for
Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copy-
right annotation thereon. The views and conclusions
contained herein are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as necessarily representing the of-
ficial policies or endorsements, either expressed or
implied, of IARPA, ARL, or the U.S. Government.
References
M. Galley, K. McKeown, J. Hirschberg, and E. Shriberg.
2004. Identifying agreement and disagreement in con-
versational speech: Use of bayesian networks to model
pragmatic dependencies. In Proceedings of ACL.
S. Germesin and T. Wilson. 2009. Agreement detection
in multiparty conversation. In Proceedings of Interna-
tional Conference on Multimodal Interfaces.
S. Hahn, R. Ladner, and M. Ostendorf. 2006. Agree-
ment/disagreement classification: Exploiting unla-
beled data using constraint classifiers. In Proceedings
of HLT/NAACL.
D. Hillard, M. Ostendorf, and E. Shriberg. 2003. De-
tection of agreement vs. disagreement in meetings:
Training with unlabeled data. In Proceedings of
HLT/NAACL.
A. Janin, D. Baron, J. Edwards, D. Ellis, D. Gelbart,
N. Morgan, B. Peskin, T. Pfau, E. Shriberg, A. Stolcke,
and C. Wooters. 2003. The ICSI Meeting Corpus. In
Proc. ICASSP, Hong Kong, April.
Yang Liu, Elizabeth Shriberg, Andreas Stolcke, Dustin
Hillard, Mari Ostendorf, and Mary Harper. 2006.
Enriching speech recognition with automatic detec-
tion of sentence boundaries and disfluencies. IEEE
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Pro-
cessing, 14(5):1526?1540, September. Special Issue
on Progress in Rich Transcription.
Andrew McCallum. 2002. Mallet: A machine learning
for language toolkit. http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.
I. McCowan, J. Carletta, W. Kraaij, S. Ashby, S. Bour-
ban, M. Flynn, M. Guillemot, T. Hain, J. Kadlec,
V. Karaiskos, M. Kronenthal, G. Lathoud, M. Lincoln,
A. Lisowska, W. Post, D. Reidsma, and P. Wellner.
2005. The AMI meeting corpus. In Proceedings of
Measuring Behavior 2005, the 5th International Con-
ference on Methods and Techniques in Behavioral Re-
search.
378
