Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Translation
and/or Summarization, pages 1?8, Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Methodology for Extrinsic Evaluation of Text Summarization:
Does ROUGE Correlate?
Bonnie J. Dorr and Christof Monz and Stacy President and Richard Schwartz? and David Zajic
Department of Computer Science and UMIACS
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
{bonnie,christof,stacypre,dmzajic}@umiacs.umd.edu
?BBN Technologies
9861 Broken Land Parkway
Columbia, Maryland 21046
schwartz@bbn.com
Abstract
This paper demonstrates the usefulness of sum-
maries in an extrinsic task of relevance judgment
based on a new method for measuring agree-
ment, Relevance-Prediction, which compares sub-
jects? judgments on summaries with their own judg-
ments on full text documents. We demonstrate that,
because this measure is more reliable than previ-
ous gold-standard measures, we are able to make
stronger statistical statements about the benefits of
summarization. We found positive correlations be-
tween ROUGE scores and two different summary
types, where only weak or negative correlations
were found using other agreement measures. How-
ever, we show that ROUGE may be sensitive to the
choice of summarization style. We discuss the im-
portance of these results and the implications for fu-
ture summarization evaluations.
1 Introduction
People often prefer to read a summary of a text document,
e.g., news headlines, scientific abstracts, movie previews
and reviews, and meeting minutes. Correspondingly, the
explosion of online textual material has prompted ad-
vanced research in document summarization. Although
researchers have demonstrated that users can read sum-
maries faster than full text (Mani et al, 2002) with some
loss of accuracy, researchers have found it difficult to
draw strong conclusions about the usefulness of summa-
rization due to the low level of interannotator agreement
in the gold standards that they have used. Definitive con-
clusions about the usefulness of summaries would pro-
vide justification for continued research and development
of new summarization methods.
To investigate the question of whether text summariza-
tion is useful in an extrinsic task, we examined human
performance in a relevance assessment task using a hu-
man text surrogate (i.e. text intended to stand in the place
of a document). We use single-document English sum-
maries as these are sufficient for investigating task-based
usefulness, although more elaborate surrogates are possi-
ble, e.g., those that span more than one document (Radev
and McKeown, 1998; Mani and Bloedorn, 1998).
The next section motivates the need for develop-
ing a new framework for measuring task-based useful-
ness. Section 3 presents a novel extrinsic measure called
Relevance-Prediction. Section 4 demonstrates that this is
a more reliable measure than that of previous gold stan-
dard methods, e.g., the LDC-Agreement method used for
SUMMAC-style evaluations, and that this reliability al-
lows us to make stronger statistical statements about the
benefits of summarization. We expect these findings to
be important for future summarization evaluations.
Section 5 presents the results of correlation between
task usefulness and the Recall Oriented Understudy for
Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE) metric (Lin and Hovy,
2003).1 While we show that ROUGE correlates with task
usefulness (using our Relevance-Prediction measure), we
detect a slight difference between informative, extractive
headlines (containing words from the full document) and
less informative, non-extractive ?eye-catchers? (contain-
ing words that might not appear in the full document, and
intended to entice a reader to read the entire document).
Section 6 further highlights the importance of this
point and discusses the implications for automatic eval-
uation of non-extractive summaries. To evaluate non-
extractive summaries reliably, an automatic measure may
require knowledge of sophisticated meaning units.2 It is
our hope that the conclusions drawn herein will prompt
investigation into more sophisticated automatic metrics
as researchers shift their focus to non-extractive sum-
maries.
1ROUGE has been previously used as the primary automatic
evaluation metric by NIST in the 2003 and 2004 DUC Evalua-
tions.
2The content units proposed in recent methods (Nenkova
and Passonneau, 2004) are a first step in this direction.
1
2 Background
In the past, assessments of usefulness involved a wide
range of both intrinsic and extrinsic (task-based) mea-
sures (Sparck-Jones and Gallier, 1996). Intrinsic evalu-
ations focus on coherence and informativeness (Jing et
al., 1998) and often involve quality comparisons between
automatic summaries and reference summaries that are
pre-determined to be of high quality. Human intrinsic
measures determine quality by assessing document accu-
racy, fluency, and clarity. Automatic intrinsic measures
such as ROUGE use n-gram scoring to produce rankings
of summarization methods.
Extrinsic evaluations concentrate on the use of sum-
maries in a specific task, e.g., executing instructions, in-
formation retrieval, question answering, and relevance
assessments (Mani, 2001). In relevance assessments, a
user reads a topic or event description and judges rele-
vance of a document to the topic/event based solely on its
summary.3 These have been used in many large-scale ex-
trinsic evaluations, e.g., SUMMAC (Mani et al, 2002)
and the Document Understanding Conference (DUC)
(Harman and Over, 2004). The task chosen for such eval-
uations must support a very high degree of interannota-
tor agreement, i.e., consistent relevance decisions across
subjects with respect to a predefined gold standard.
Unfortunately, a consistent gold standard has not yet
been reported. For example, in two previous studies
(Mani, 2001; Tombros and Sanderson, 1998), users?
judgments were compared to ?gold standard judgments?
produced by members of the University of Pennsylva-
nia?s Linguistic Data Consortium. Although these judg-
ments were supposed to represent the correct relevance
judgments for each of the documents associated with an
event, both studies reported that annotators? judgments
varied greatly and that this was a significant issue for the
evaluations. In the SUMMAC experiments, the Kappa
score (Carletta, 1996; Eugenio and Glass, 2004) for in-
terannotator agreement was reported to be 0.38 (Mani et
al., 2002). In fact, large variations have been found in the
initial summary scoring of an individual participant and a
subsequent scoring that occurs a few weeks later (Mani,
2001; van Halteren and Teufel, 2003).
This paper attempts to overcome the problem of in-
terannotator inconsistency by measuring summary effec-
tiveness in an extrinsic task using a much more consistent
form of user judgment instead of a gold standard. Us-
ing Relevance-Prediction increases the confidence in our
results and strengthens the statistical statements we can
make about the benefits of summarization.
The next section describes an alternative approach to
measuring task-based usefulness, where the usage of ex-
ternal judgments as a gold standard is replaced by the
3A topic is an event or activity, along with all directly re-
lated events and activities. An event is something that happens
at some specific time and place, and the unavoidable conse-
quences.
user?s own decisions on the full text. Following the lead
of earlier evaluations (Oka and Ueda, 2000; Mani et al,
2002; Sakai and Sparck-Jones, 2001), we focus on rele-
vance assessment as our extrinsic task.
3 Evaluation of Usefulness of Summaries
We define a new extrinsic measure of task-based useful-
ness called Relevance-Prediction, where we compare a
summary-based decision to the subject?s own full-text de-
cision rather than to a different subject?s decision. Our
findings differ from that of the SUMMAC results (Mani
et al, 2002) in that using Relevance-Prediction as an al-
ternative to comparision to a gold standard is a more re-
alistic agreement measure for assessing usefulness in a
relevance assessment task. For example, users perform-
ing browsing tasks must examine document surrogates,
but open the full-text only if they expect the document to
be interesting to them. They are not trying to decide if
the document will be interesting to someone else.
To determine the usefulness of summarization, we fo-
cus on two questions:
? Can users make judgments on summaries that are
consistent with their full-text judgments?
? Can users make judgments on summaries more
quickly than on full document text?
First we describe the Relevance-Prediction measure for
determining whether users can make accurate judgments
with a summary. Following this, we describe our exper-
iments and results using this measure, including the tim-
ing results of summaries compared to full documents.
3.1 Relevance-Prediction Measure
To answer the first question above, we define a mea-
sure called Relevance-Prediction, where subjects build
their own ?gold standard? based on the full-text docu-
ments. Agreement is measured by comparing subjects?
surrogate-based judgments against their own judgments
on the corresponding texts. The subject?s judgment is as-
signed a value of 1 if his/her surrogate judgment is the
same as the corresponding full-text judgment, and 0 oth-
erwise. These values were summed over all judgments
for a surrogate type and were divided by the total num-
ber of judgments for that surrogate type to determine the
effectiveness of the associated summary method.
Formally, given a summary/document pair (s, d), if
subjects make the same judgment on s that they did on
d, we say j(s, d) = 1. If subjects change their judg-
ment between s and d, we say j(s, d) = 0. Given a set
of summary/document pairs DSi associated with event i,
the Relevance-Prediction score is computed as follows:
Relevance-Prediction(i) =
?
s,d?DSi
j(s, d)
|DSi|
This approach provides a more reliable comparison
mechanism than gold standard judgments provided by
2
other individuals. Specifically, Relevance-Prediction is
more helpful in illuminating the usefulness of summaries
for a real-world scenario, e.g., a browsing environment,
where credit is given when an individual subject would
choose (or reject) a document under both conditions. To
our knowledge, this subject-driven approach to testing
usefulness has never before been used.
3.2 Experiment Design
Ten human subjects were recruited to evaluate full-text
documents and two summary types.4 The original text
documents were taken from the Topic Detection and
Tracking 3 (TDT-3) corpus (Allan et al, 1999) which
contains news stories and headlines, topic and event de-
scriptions, and a mapping between news stories and their
related topic and/or events. Although the TDT-3 collec-
tion contains transcribed speech documents, our investi-
gation was restricted to documents that were originally
text, i.e., newspaper or newswire, not broadcast news.
For our experiment we selected three distinct events
and related document sets5 from TDT-3. For each event,
the subjects were given a description of the event (writ-
ten by LDC) and then asked to judge relevance of a set
of 20 documents associated with that event (using three
different presentation types to be discussed below).
The events used from the TDT data set were events
from world news occurring in 1998. It is possible that
the subjects had some prior knowledge about the events,
yet we believe that this would not affect their ability to
complete the task. Subjects? background knowledge of an
event can also make this task more similar to real-world
browsing tasks, in which subjects are often familiar with
the event or topic they are searching for.
The 20 documents were retrieved by a search engine.
We used a constrained subset where exactly half (10)
were judged relevant by the LDC annotators. Because all
20 documents were somewhat similar to the event, this
approach ensured that our task would be more difficult
than it would be if we had chosen documents from com-
pletely unrelated events (where the choice of relevance
would be obvious even from a poorly written summary).
Each document was pre-annotated with the headline
associated with the original newswire source. These
headlines were used as the first summary type. We re-
fer to them as HEAD (Headline Surrogate). The average
length of the HEAD surrogates was 53 characters. In ad-
dition, we commissioned human-generated summaries6
of each document as the second summary type; we refer
4We required all human subjects to be native-English speak-
ers to ensure that the accuracy of judgments was not degraded
by language barriers.
5The three event and related document sets contained
enough data points to achieve statistically significant results.
6The human summarizers were instructed to create a sum-
mary no greater than 75 characters for each specified full text
document. The summaries were not compared for writing style
or quality.
to this as HUM (Human Surrogate). The average length
of the HUM surrogates was 72 characters. Although nei-
ther of these summaries was produced automatically, our
experiment allowed us to focus on the question of sum-
mary usefulness and to learn about the differences in pre-
sentation style as a first step toward experimentation with
the output of automatic summarization systems.
Two main factors were measured: (1) differences
in judgments for the three presentation types (HEAD,
HUM, and the full-text document) and (2) judgment time.
Each subject made a total of 60 judgments for each pre-
sentation type since there were 3 distinct events and 20
documents per event. To facilitate the analysis of the data,
the subjects? judgments were constrained to two possibil-
ities, relevant or not relevant.7
Although the HEAD and HUM surrogates were both
produced by humans, they differed in style. The HEAD
surrogates were shorter than the HUM surrogates by
26%. Many of these were ?eye-catchers? designed to en-
tice the reader to examine the entire document (i.e., pur-
chase the newspaper); that is, the HEAD surrogates were
not intended to stand in the place of the full document.
By contrast, the writers of the HUM surrogates were in-
structed to write text that conveyed what happened in the
full document. We observed that the HUM surrogates
used more words and phrases extracted from the full doc-
uments than the HEAD surrogates.
Experiments were conducted using a web browser (In-
ternet Explorer) on a PC in the presence of the experi-
menter. Subjects were given written and verbal instruc-
tions for completing their task and were asked to make
relevance judgments on a practice event set. The judg-
ments from the practice event set were not included in
our experimental results or used in our analyses. The
written instructions were given to aid subjects in deter-
mining requirements for relevance. For example, in an
Election event documents describing new people in of-
fice, new public officials, change in governments or par-
liaments were suggested as evidence for relevance.
Each of the ten subjects made judgments on 20 doc-
uments for each of three different events. After reading
each document or summary, the subjects clicked on a ra-
dio button corresponding to their judgment and clicked
a submit button to move to the next document descrip-
tion. Subjects were not allowed to move to the next sum-
mary/document until a valid selection was made. No
backing up was allowed. Judgment time was computed
as the number of seconds it took the subject to read the
full text document or surrogate, comprehend it, compare
it to the event description, and make a judgment (timed
up until the subject clicked the submit button).
7If we allowed subjects to make additional judgments such
as somewhat relevant, this could possibly encourage subjects to
always choose this when they were the least bit unsure. Previ-
ous experiments indicate that this additional selection method
may increase the level of variability in judgments (Zajic et al,
2004).
3
3.3 Order of Document/Surrogate Presentation
One concern with our evaluation methodology was the
issue of possible memory effects or priming: if the same
subjects saw a summary and a full document about the
same event, their answers might be tainted. Thus, prior to
the full experiment, we conducted pre-experiments (us-
ing 4 participants) with an extreme form of influence: we
presented the summary and full text in immediate suc-
cession. In these experiments, we compared two docu-
ment presentation approaches, termed ?Drill Down? and
?Complete Set.? In the ?Drill Down? document presen-
tation approach all three presentation types were shown
for each document, in sequence: first a single HEAD sur-
rogate, followed by the corresponding HUM surrogate,
followed by the full text document. This process was re-
peated 10 times.
In the ?Complete Set? document-presentation ap-
proach we presented the complete set of documents us-
ing one surrogate type, followed by the complete set us-
ing another surrogate type, and so on. That is, the 10
HEAD surrogates were displayed all at once, followed
by the corresponding 10 HUM surrogates, followed by
the corresponding 10 full-text documents.
The results indicated that there was almost no effect
between the two document-presentation approaches. The
performance varied only slightly and neither approach
consistently allowed subjects to perform better than the
other. Therefore, we determined that the subjects were
not associating a given summary with its corresponding
full-text documents. This may be due, in part, to the fact
that all 20 documents were related to the event?and ac-
cording to the LDC relevance judgments half of these
were actually about the same event.
Given that the variations were insignificant in these
pre-experiments, we selected only the Complete-Set ap-
proach (no Drill-Down) for the full experiment. How-
ever, we still needed to vary the ordering for the two sur-
rogate presentation types associated with each full-text
document. Thus, each 20-document set was divided in
half for each subject. In the first half, the subject saw the
first 10 documents as: (1) HEAD surrogates, then HUM
surrogates and then the full-text document; or (2) HUM
surrogates, then HEAD surrogates, and then the full-text
document. In the second half, the subject saw the alter-
native ordering, e.g., if a subject saw HEAD surrogates
before HUM surrogates in the first half, he/she saw the
HUM surrogates before HEAD surrogates for the sec-
ond half. Either way, the full-text document was always
shown last so as not to introduce judgment effects asso-
ciated with reading the entire document before either sur-
rogate type.
In addition to varying the ordering for the surrogate
type, the ordering of the surrogates and full documents
within the events were also varied. The subjects were
grouped in pairs, and each pair viewed the surrogates and
documents in a different order than the other pairs.
3.4 Experimental Hypotheses
We hypothesized that the summaries would allow sub-
jects to achieve a Relevance-Prediction rate of 70?90%.
Since these summaries were significantly shorter than the
original document text, we expected that the rate would
not be 100% compared to the judgments made on the full
document text. However, we expected higher than a 50%
ratio, i.e., higher than that of random judgments on all of
the surrogates. We also expected high performance be-
cause the meaning of the original document text is best
preserved when written by a human (Mani, 2001).
A second hypothesis is that the HEAD surrogates
would yield a significantly lower agreement rate than that
of the HUM surrogates. Our commissioned HUM surro-
gates were written to stand in place of the full document,
whereas the HEAD surrogates were written to catch a
reader?s interest. This suggests that the HEAD surrogates
might not provide as informative a description of the orig-
inal documents as the HUM surrogates.
We also tested a third hypothesis: that our Relevance-
Prediction measure would be more reliable than that of
the LDC-Agreement method used for SUMMAC-style
evaluations (thus providing a more stable framework for
evaluating summarization techniques). LDC-Agreement
compares a subject?s judgment on a surrogate or full text
against the ?correct? judgments as assigned by the TDT
corpus annotators (Linguistic Data Consortium 2001).
Finally, we tested the hypothesis that using a text sum-
mary for judging relevance would take considerably less
time than using the corresponding full-text document.
4 Experimental Results
Table 1 shows the subjects? judgments using both
Relevance-Prediction and LDC-Agreement for each of
three events. Using our Relevance-Prediction measure,
the HUM surrogates yield averages between 79% and
86%, with an overall average of 81%, thus confirming
our first hypothesis.
However, we failed to confirm our second hypothe-
sis. The HEAD Relevance-Prediction rates were between
71% and 82%, with an overall average of 76%, which
was lower than the rates for HUM, but the difference
was not statistically significant. It appeared that subjects
were able to make consistent relevance decisions from the
non-extractive HEAD surrogates, even though these were
shorter and less informative than the HUM surrogates.
A closer look reveals that the HEAD summaries some-
times contained enough information to judge relevance,
yielding almost the same number of true positives (and
true negatives) as the HUM summaries. For example, a
document about the formation of a coalition government
to avoid violence in Cambodia has the HEAD surrogate
Cambodians hope new government can avoid past mis-
takes. By contrast, the HUM surrogate for this same event
was Rival parties to form a coalition government to avoid
violence in Cambodia. Although the HEAD surrogate
4
Surrogate EVENT 1 EVENT 2 EVENT 3 Overall Avg Avg Time
LDC RP LDC RP LDC RP LDC RP (seconds)
HEAD 67% 76% 66% 71% 70% 82% 67% 76% 4.60
HUM 69% 80% 73% 86% 62% 79% 68% 81% 4.57
DOC ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 13.38
Table 1: Relevance-Prediction (RP) and LDC-Agreement (LDC) Rates for HEAD and HUM Surrogates for each Event
uses words that do not appear in the original document
(hope and mistakes), the subject may infer the relevance
of this surrogate by relating hope to the notion of forming
a coalition government and mistakes to violence.
On the other hand, we found that the lower degree of
informativeness of HEAD surrogates gave rise to over
50% more false negatives than the HUM summaries. This
statistically significant difference will be discussed fur-
ther in Section 6.
As for our third hypothesis, Table 1 illustrates a
substantial difference between the two agreement mea-
sures. For each of the three events, the Relevance-
Prediction rate is at least five percent higher than that
of the LDC-Agreement approach, with an average of
8.8% increase for the HEAD summary and a 13.3% aver-
age increase for the HUM summary. The average rates
across events show a statistically significant difference
between LDC-Agreement and Relevance-Prediction for
both HUM summaries with p<0.01 and HEAD sum-
maries with p<0.05. This significance was determined
through use of a single factor ANOVA statistical analysis.
The higher Relevance-Prediction rate supports our state-
ment that this approach provides a more stable framework
for evaluating different summarization techniques.
Finally, the average timing results shown in Table 1
confirm our fourth hypothesis. The subjects took 4-5 sec-
onds (on average) to make judgments on both the HEAD
and HUM summaries, as compared to about 13.4 seconds
to make judgments on full text documents. This shows
that it takes subjects almost 3 times longer to make judg-
ments on full text documents as it took to make judgments
on the summaries (HEAD and HUM). This finding is not
surprising since text summaries are an order of magnitude
shorter than full-text documents.
5 Correlation with Intrinsic Evaluation
Metric: ROUGE
We now turn to the task of correlating our extrinsic task
performance with scores produced by an intrinsic evalu-
ation measure. We used the Recall Oriented Understudy
for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE) metric version 1.2.1. In
previous studies (Dorr et al, 2004) ROUGE was shown
to have a very low correlation with the LDC-Agreement
measurement results of the extrinsic task. This was at-
tributed to low interannotator agreement in the gold stan-
dard. Our goal was to test whether our new Relevance-
Prediction technique would allow us to induce higher cor-
relations with ROUGE.
5.1 Extrinsic Agreement Data
To reduce the effect of outliers on the correlation between
ROUGE and the human judgments, we averaged over all
judgments for each subject (20 judgments ? 3 events) to
produce 60 data points. These data points were then par-
titioned into either 1, 2, or 4 partitions of equal size. (Par-
titions of size four have 15 data points, partitions of size
two have 30 data points, and partitions of size one have
60 data points per subject?or a total of 600 datapoints
across all 10 subjects). To ensure that the correlation did
not depend on a specific partition, we repeated this same
process using 10,000 different (randomly generated) par-
titions for each of the three partition sizes.
Partitioned data points of size four provided a high de-
gree of noise reduction without compromising the size
of the data set (15 points). Larger partition sizes would
result in too few data points and compromise the statis-
tical significance of our correlation results. In order to
show the variation within a single partition, we used the
partitioning of size 4 with the smallest mean square er-
ror on the human headline compared to the other parti-
tionings as a representative partition. For this represen-
tative partitioning, the individual data points P1?P15 of
that partition are shown for each of the two agreement
measures in Tables 2 and 3. This shows that, across parti-
tions, the maximum and minimum Relevance-Prediction
rates for HEAD (93% and 60%) are higher than the cor-
responding LDC-Agreement rates (85% and 50%). The
same trend is seen with the HUM surrogates: Relevance-
Prediction maximum of 98%, minimum of 68%; and
LDC-Agreement maximum 88%, minimum of 55%.
5.2 Intrinsic ROUGE Score
To correlate the partitioned agreement scores above with
our intrinsic measure, we first ran ROUGE on all 120 sur-
rogates in our experiment (i.e., the HUM and HEAD sur-
rogates for each of the 60 event/document pairs) and then
averaged the ROUGE scores for all surrogates belong-
ing to the same partitions (for each of the three partition
sizes). These partitioned ROUGE values were then used
for detecting correlations with the corresponding parti-
tioned agreement scores described above.
Table 4 shows the ROUGE scores, based on 3 ref-
erence summaries per document, for partitions P1?P15
used in the previous tables.8 For brevity, we include
8We commissioned a total of 180 human-generated refer-
ence summaries (3 for each of 60 documents) (in addition to
the human generated summaries used in the experiment).
5
Surrogate P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10 P11 P12 P13 P14 P15
HEAD 80% 80% 85% 70% 73% 60% 80% 75% 60% 75% 88% 68% 80% 93% 83%
HUM 83% 88% 85% 68% 75% 75% 93% 75% 98% 90% 75% 70% 80% 90% 78%
Table 2: Relevance-Prediction Rates for HEAD and HUM Surrogates (Representative Partition of Size 4)
Surrogate P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10 P11 P12 P13 P14 P15
HEAD 70% 73% 85% 70% 63% 60% 60% 85% 50% 73% 70% 78% 65% 63% 73%
HUM 68% 75% 58% 68% 75% 70% 68% 80% 88% 58% 63% 55% 55% 60% 78%
Table 3: LDC-Agreement Rates for HEAD and HUM Surrogates (Representative Partition of Size 4)
Surrogate P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10 P11 P12 P13 P14 P15 Avg
HEAD .10 .23 .13 .27 .20 .24 .26 .22 .13 .08 .30 .16 .26 .27 .30 .211
HUM .16 .22 .17 .23 .19 .36 .39 .29 .28 .25 .37 .22 .22 .39 .27 .269
Table 4: Average Rouge-1 Scores for HEAD and HUM Surrogates (Representative Partition of Size 4)
only ROUGE 1-gram measurement (R1).9 The ROUGE
scores for HEAD surrogates were slightly lower than
those for HUM surrogates. This is consistent with
our statements earlier about the difference between non-
extractive ?eye-catchers? and informative headlines. Be-
cause ROUGE measures whether a particular summary
has the same words (or n-grams) as a reference summary,
a more constrained choice of words (as found in the ex-
tractive HUM surrogates) makes it more likely that the
summary would match the reference.
A summary in which the word choice is less
constrained?as in the non-extractive HEAD
surrogates?is less likely to share n-grams with the
reference. Thus, we may see non-extractive summaries
that have almost identical meanings, but very different
words. This raises the concern that ROUGE may be
sensitive to the style of summarization that is used.
Section 6 discusses this point further.
5.3 Intrinsic and Extrinsic Correlation
To test whether ROUGE correlates more highly with
Relevance-Prediction than with LDC-Agreement, we cal-
culated the correlation for the results of both techniques
using Pearson?s r (Siegel and Castellan, 1988):
?n
i=1(ri ? r?)(si ? s?)??n
i=1(ri ? r?)
2
??n
i=1(si ? s?)
2
where ri is the ROUGE score of surrogate i, r? is the av-
erage ROUGE score of all data points, si is the agree-
ment score of summary i (using Relevance-Prediction or
LDC-Agreement), and s? is the average agreement score.
Pearson?s statistics is commonly used in summarization
and machine translation evaluation, see e.g. (Lin, 2004;
Lin and Och, 2004).
As one might expect, there is some variability in the
correlation between ROUGE and human judgments for
9We also computed ROUGE 2-gram, ROUGE L and
ROUGE W, but the trend for these did not differ from ROUGE-
1.
Figure 1: Distribution of the Correlation Variation for
Relevance-Prediction on HEAD and HUM
the different partitions. However, the boxplots for both
HEAD and HUM indicate that the first and third quartile
were relatively close to the median (see Figure 1).
Table 5 shows the Pearson Correlations with ROUGE-
1 using Relevance-Prediction and LDC-Agreement. For
Relevance-Prediction, we observed a positive correlation
for both surrogate types, with a slightly higher corre-
lation for HEAD than HUM. For LDC-Agreement, we
observed no correlation (or a minimally negative one)
with ROUGE-1 scores, for both the HEAD and HUM
surrogates. The highest correlation was observed for
Relevance-Prediction on HEAD.
We conclude that ROUGE correlates more highly with
the Relevance-Prediction measurement than the LDC-
Agreement measurement, although we should add that
none of the correlations in Table 5 were statistically sig-
nificant at p < 0.05. The low LDC-Agreement scores are
consistent with previous studies where poor correlations
6
Surrogate P = 1 P = 2 P = 4
HEAD (RP) 0.1270 0.1943 0.3140
HUM (RP) 0.0632 0.1096 0.1391
HEAD (LDC) -0.0968 -0.0660 -0.0099
HUM (LDC) -0.0395 -0.0236 -0.0187
Table 5: Pearson Correlations with ROUGE-1 for
Relevance-Prediction (RP) and LDC-Agreement (LDC),
where Partition size (P) = 1, 2, and 4
were attributed to low interannotator agreement rates.
6 Discussion
Our results suggest that ROUGE may be sensitive to the
style of summarization that is used. As we observed
above, many of the HEAD surrogates were not actually
summaries of the full text, but were eye-catchers. Of-
ten, these surrogates did not allow the subject to judge
relevance correctly, resulting in lower agreement. In ad-
dition, these same surrogates often did not use a high per-
centage of words that were actually from the story, result-
ing in low ROUGE scores. (We noticed that most words
in the HUM surrogates appeared in the corresponding
stories.) There were three consequences of this difference
between HEAD and HUM: (1) The rate of agreement was
lower for HEAD than for HUM; (2) The average ROUGE
score was lower for HEAD than for HUM; and (3) The
correlation of ROUGE scores with agreement was higher
for HEAD than for HUM.
A further analysis supports the (somewhat counterin-
tuitive) third point above. Although the ROUGE scores
of true positives (and true negatives) were significantly
lower for HEAD surrogates (0.2127 and 0.2162) than
for HUM surrogates (0.2696 and 0.2715), the number of
false negatives was substantially higher for HEAD sur-
rogates than for HUM surrogates. These cases corre-
sponded to much lower ROUGE scores for HEAD sur-
rogates (0.1996) than for HUM (0.2586) surrogates.
A summary of this analysis is given in Table 6, where
true positives and negatives are indicated by Rel/Rel
and NonRel/NonRel, respectively, and false positives and
negatives are indicated by Rel/NonRel and NonRel/Rel,
respectively.10 The numbers in parentheses after each
ROUGE score refer to the standard deviation for that
10We also included (average) elapsed times for summary
judgments in each of the four categories. One might expect a
?relevant? judgment to be much quicker than a ?non-relevant?
judgment (since the latter might require reading the full sum-
mary). However, it turned out non-relevant judgments did not
always take longer. In fact, the NonRel/NonRel cases took con-
siderably less time than the Rel/Rel and Rel/NonRel cases. On
the other hand, the NonRel/Rel cases took considerably more
time?almost as much time as reading the full text documents?
an indication that the subjects may have re-read the summary a
number of times, perhaps vacillating back and forth. Still, the
overall time savings was significant, given that the vast major-
ity of the non-relevant judgments were in the NonRel/NonRel
category.
score. This was computed as follows:
Std .-Dev . =
?
?N
i=1(xi ? x?)
2
N
where N is the number of surrogates in a particular judg-
ment category (e.g., N = 245 for the HEAD-based Non-
Rel/Rel judgments), xi is the ROUGE score for the ith
surrogate, and r? is the average of all ROUGE scores in
that category.
Although there were very few false positives (less than
6% for both HEAD and HUM), the number of false nega-
tives (NonRel/Rel) was particularly high for HEAD (50%
higher than for HUM). This difference was statistically
significant at p<0.01 using the t-test. The large number
of false negatives with HEAD may be attributed to the
eye-catching nature of these surrogates. A subject may
be misled into thinking that this surrogate is not related
to an event because the surrogate does not contain words
from the event description and is too broad for the subject
to extract definitive information (e.g., the surrogate There
he goes again!). Because the false negatives were associ-
ated with the lowest average ROUGE score (0.1996), we
speculate that, if a correlation exists between Relevance-
Prediction and ROUGE, the false negatives may be a ma-
jor contributing factor.
Based on this experiment, we conjecture that ROUGE
may not be a good method for measuring the useful-
ness of summaries when the summaries are not extrac-
tive. That is, if someone intentionally writes summaries
that contain different words than the story, the summaries
will also likely contain different words than a reference
summary, resulting in low ROUGE scores. However,
the summaries, if well-written, could still result in high
agreement with the judgments made on the full text.
7 Conclusion
We have shown that two types of human summaries,
HEAD and HUM, can be useful for relevance assessment
in that they help a user achieve 70-85% agreement in rel-
evance judgments. We observed a 65% reduction in judg-
ment time between full texts and summaries. These find-
ings are important in that they establish the usefulness
of summarization and they support research and devel-
opment of additional summarization methods, including
automatic methods.
We introduced a new method for measuring agree-
ment, Relevance-Prediction, which takes a subject?s
full-text judgment as the standard against which the
same subject?s summary judgment is measured. Be-
cause Relevance-Prediction was more reliable than LDC-
Agreement judgments, we encourage others to use this
measure in future summarization evaluations.
Using this new method, we were able to find positive
correlations between relevance assessments and ROUGE
scores for HUM and HEAD surrogates, where only
7
Judgment HEAD HUM
(Surr/Doc) Raw R1-Avg Avg Time Raw R1-Avg Avg Time
Rel/Rel 211 (35%) 0.2127 (?0.120) 4.6 251 (42%) 0.2696 (?0.130) 4.2
Rel/NonRel 27 (5%) 0.2115 (?0.110) 7.1 35 (6%) 0.2725 (?0.131) 4.6
NonRel/Rel 117 (19%) 0.1996 (?0.127) 8.5 77 (13%) 0.2586 (?0.120) 13.8
NonRel/NonRel 245 (41%) 0.2162 (?0.126) 2.5 237 (39%) 0.2715 (?0.131) 1.9
TOTAL 600 (100%) 0.2115 (?0.124) 4.6 600 (100%) 0.2691 (?0.129) 4.6
Table 6: Subjects? Judgments and Corresponding Average ROUGE 1 Scores
negative correlations were found using LDC-Agreement
scores. We found that both the Relevance-Prediction and
the ROUGE-1 scores were higher for human-generated
summaries than for the original headlines. It appears
that most of the difference is induced by surrogates that
are eye-catchers (rather than true summaries), where both
agreement and ROUGE scores are low.
Our future work will include further experimentation
with automatic summarization methods to determine the
level of Relevance-Prediction. We aim to determine how
well automatic summarizers help users complete tasks,
and to investigate which automatic summarizers perform
better than others. We also plan to test for correlations
between ROUGE and human task performance with auto-
matic summaries, to further investigate whether ROUGE
is a good predictor of human task performance.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by DARPA TIDES Cooperative
Agreement N66001-00-2-8910.
References
James Allan, Hubert Jin, Martin Rajman, Charles Wayne,
Daniel Gildea, Victor Lavrenko, Rose Hoberman, and David
Caputo. 1999. Topic-based Novelty Detection. Technical
Report 1999 Summer Workshop at CLSP Final Report, Johns
Hopkins, Maryland.
Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing Agreement on Classification
Tasks: The Kappa Statistic. Computational Lingusitics,
22(2):249?254, June.
Bonnie J. Dorr, Christof Monz, Douglas Oard, Stacy President,
and David Zajic. 2004. Extrinsic Evaluation of Automatic
Metrics for Summarization. Technical report, University of
Maryland, College Park, MD. LAMP-TR-115, CAR-TR-
999, CS-TR-4610, UMIACS-TR-2004-48.
Barbara Di Eugenio and Michael Glass. 2004. Squibs and Dis-
cussions - The Kappa Statistic: A Second Look. Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 95?101.
Donna Harman and Paul Over. 2004. Proceedings of the DUC
2004. Boston, MA.
Hongyan Jing, Regina Barzilay, Kathleen McKeown, and
Michael Elhadad. 1998. Summarization evaluation meth-
ods: Experiments and analysis. In Proceedings of the AAAI
Symposium on Intelligent Summarization, Stanford Univer-
sity, CA, March 23-25.
Chin-Yew Lin and Eduard Hovy. 2003. Automatic Evaluation
of Summaries Using N-gram Co-Occurrence Statistics. In
Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003 Workshop, pages 71?78,
Edmonton Canada, May-June.
Chin-Yew Lin and Franz Joseph Och. 2004. ORANGE: a
Method for Evaluating Automatic Evaluation Metrics for
Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 20th Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING
2004), Geneva, Switzerland, August 23?27.
Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: a Package for Automatic Eval-
uation of Summaries. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Text Summarization Branches Out (WAS 2004), Barcelona,
Spain, July 25?26.
I. Mani and E. Bloedorn. 1998. Summarizing Similarities and
Differences Among Related Documents. Information Re-
trieval, 1(1):35?67.
Inderjeet Mani, Gary Klein, David House, and Lynette
Hirschman. 2002. SUMMAC: a text summarization eval-
uation. Natural Language Engineering, 8(1):43?68.
Inderjeet Mani. 2001. Summarization Evaluation: An
Overview. In Proceedings of the NAACL 2001 Workshop on
Automatic Summarization.
Ani Nenkova and Rebecca J. Passonneau. 2004. Evaluating
Content Selection in Summarization: The Pyramid Method.
In Proceedings of the NAACL 2004, Boston, MA.
Mamiko Oka and Yoshihiro Ueda. 2000. Evaluation of Phrase-
Representation Summarization Based on an Information Re-
trieval Task. In Proceedings of the ANLP/NAACL 2000
Workshop on Automatic Summarization, pages 59?68, New
Brunswick, NJ.
Dragomir Radev and Kathleen McKeown. 1998. Generat-
ing Natural Language Summaries from Multiple On-Line
Sources. Computational Linguistics, pages 469?500.
Tetsuya Sakai and Karen Sparck-Jones. 2001. Generic Sum-
maries for Indexing in Information Retrieval - Detailed Test
Results. Technical Report TR513, Computer Laboratory,
University of Cambridge.
Sidney Siegel and N. John Castellan, Jr. 1988. Nonparametric
Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences. McGraw-Hill, New
York, second edition.
Karen Sparck-Jones and J.R. Gallier. 1996. Evaluating Natu-
ral Language Processing Systems: An Analysis and Review.
Springer, Berlin.
Anastasios Tombros and Mark Sanderson. 1998. Advantages
of query biased summaries in information retrieval. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21st Annual International ACM SIGIR Con-
ference on Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval, pages 2?10.
Hans van Halteren and Simone Teufel. 2003. Examining the
Consensus Between Human Summaries: Initial Experiments
with Factoid Analysis. In Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL
03 Text Summarization Workshop.
David Zajic, Bonnie J. Dorr, Richard Schwartz, and Stacy Presi-
dent. 2004. Headline Evaluation Experiment Results. Tech-
nical report, University of Maryland, College Park, MD.
UMIACS-TR-2004-18.
8
