Robust Knowledge Discovery from Parallel Speech and
Text Sources
F. Jelinek, W. Byrne, S. Khudanpur, B. Hladka?. CLSP, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.
H. Ney, F. J. Och. RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
J. Cur???n. Charles University, Prague, Czech Rep.
J. Psutka. University of West Bohemia, Pilsen, Czech Rep.
1. INTRODUCTION
As a by-product of the recent information explosion, the same
basic facts are often available from multiple sources such as the In-
ternet, television, radio and newspapers. We present here a project
currently in its early stages that aims to take advantage of the re-
dundancies in parallel sources to achieve robustness in automatic
knowledge extraction.
Consider, for instance, the following sampling of actual news
from various sources on a particular day:
CNN: James McDougal, President Bill Clinton?s former business
partner in Arkansas and a cooperating witness in the White-
water investigation, died Sunday while serving a federal prison
term. He was 57.
MSNBC: Fort Worth, Texas, March 8. Whitewater figure James
McDougal died of an apparent heart attack in a private com-
munity hospital in Fort Worth, Texas, Sunday. He was 57.
ABC News: Washington, March 8. James McDougal, a key figure
in Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr?s Whitewater investi-
gation, is dead.
The Detroit News: Fort Worth. James McDougal, a key witness
in Kenneth Starr?s Whitewater investigation of President Clin-
ton and First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton, died of a heart
attack in a prison hospital Sunday. He was 57.
San Jose Mercury News: James McDougal, the wily Arkansas
banking rogue who drew Bill Clinton and Hillary Rodham
Clinton into real estate deals that have come to haunt them,
died Sunday of cardiac arrest just months before he hoped to
be released from prison. He was 57.
The Miami Herald: Washington. James McDougal, the wily
Arkansas financier and land speculator at the center of the
original Whitewater probe against President Clinton, died
Sunday.
.
Story
Alignment
Speech
RecognitionSpeech Sources
Basic Models:
acoustic
lexical
language
Topic specific
acoustic and language
models
stories
Aligned Sentence
retrieval
Ranked
Answers
Query
Text sources
Figure 1: Information Flow in Alignment and Extraction
We propose to align collections of stories, much like the exam-
ple above, from multiple text and speech sources and then develop
methods that exploit the resulting parallelism both as a tool to im-
prove recognition accuracy and to enable the development of sys-
tems that can reliably extract information from parallel sources.
Our goal is to develop systems that align text sources and rec-
ognize parallel speech streams simultaneously in several languages
by making use of all related text and speech. The initial systems
we intend to develop will process each language independently.
However, our ultimate and most ambitious objective is to align text
sources and recognize speech using a single, integrated multilin-
gual ASR system. Of course, if sufficiently accurate automatic ma-
chine translation (MT) techniques ([1]) were available, we could
address multilingual processing and single language systems in the
same way. However MT techniques are not yet reliable enough
that we expect all words and phrases recognized within languages
to contribute to recognition across languages. We intend to develop
methods that identify the particular words and phrases that both can
be translated reliably and also used to improve story recognition.
As MT technology improves it can be incorporated more exten-
sively within the processing paradigm we propose. We consider
this proposal a framework within which successful MT techniques
can eventually be used for multilingual acoustic processing.
2. PROJECT OBJECTIVES
The first objective is to enhance multi-lingual information sys-
tems by exploiting the processing capabilities for resource-rich lan-
guages to enhance the capabilities for resource-impoverished lan-
guage. The second objective is to advance information retrieval and
knowledge information systems by providing them with consider-
ably improved multi-lingual speech recognition capabilities. Our
research plan proceeds in several steps to (i) collect and (ii) align
multi-lingual parallel speech and text sources, (iii) exploit paral-
lelism for improving ASR within a language, and to (iv) exploit
parallelism for improving ASR across languages. The main infor-
mation flows involved in aligning and exploiting parallel sources
are illustrated in Figure 1. We will initially focus on German, En-
glish and Czech language sources. This section summarizes the
major components of our project.
2.1 Parallel Speech and Text Sources
The monolingual speech and text collections that we will use
to develop techniques to exploit parallelism for improving ASR
within a language are readily available. For instance, the North
American News Text corpus of parallel news streams from 16 US
newspapers and newswire is available from LDC. A 3-year period
yields over 350 million words of multi-source news text.
In addition to data developed within the TIDES and other HLT
programs, we are in the process of identifying and creating our own
multilingual parallel speech and text sources.
FBIS TIDES Multilingual Newstext Collection
For the purposes of developing multilingual alignment techniques,
we intend to use the 240 day, contemporaneous, multilingual news
text collection made available for use to TIDES projects by FBIS.
This corpus contains news in our initial target languages of English,
German, and Czech. The collections are highly parallel, in that
much of the stories are direct translations.
Radio Prague Multilingual Speech and Text Corpus
Speech and news text from Radio Prague was collected under the
direction of J. Psutka with the consent of Radio Prague. The col-
lection contains speech and text in 5 languages: Czech, English,
German, French, and Spanish. The collection began June 1, 2000
and continued for approximately 3 months. The text collection con-
tains the news scripts used for the broadcast; the broadcasts more
or less follow the scripts. The speech is about 3 minutes per day
in each language, which should yield a total of about 5 hours of
speech per language.
Our initial analysis of the Radio Prague corpus suggest that only
approximately 5% of the stories coincide in topic, and that there
is little, if any, direct translation of stories. We anticipate that this
sparseness will make this corpus significantly hard to analyze than
another, highly-parallel corpus. However, we expect this is the
sort of difficulty that will likely be encountered in processing ?real-
world? multilingual news sources.
2.2 Story-level Alignment
Once we have the multiple streams of information we must be
able to align them according to story. A story is the description of
one or more events that happened in a single day and that are re-
ported in a single article by a daily news source the next day. We
expect that we will use the same techniques used in the Topic De-
tection (TDT) field ([5]). Independently of the specific details of
the alignment procedure, there is now substantial evidence that re-
lated stories from parallel streams can be identified using standard
statistical Information Retrieval (IR) techniques.
Sentence Alignment As part of the infrastructure needed to in-
corporate cross-lingual information into language models, we are
employing statistical MT systems to generate English/German and
English/Czech alignments of sentences in the FBIS Newstext Col-
lection. For the English/German sentence and single-word based
alignments, we plan to use statistical models ([4]) [3] which gen-
erate both sentence and word alignments. For English/Czech sen-
tence alignment, we will employ the statistical models trained as
part of the Czech-English MT system developed during the 1999
Johns Hopkins Summer Workshop ([2]).
2.3 Multi-Source Automatic Speech
Recognition
The scenario we propose is extraction of information from paral-
lel text followed by repeated recognition of parallel broadcasts, re-
sulting in a gradual lowering the WER. The first pass is performed
in order to find the likely topics discussed in the story and to iden-
tify the topics relevant to the query. In this process, the acoustic
model will be improved by deriving pronunciation specifications
for out-of-vocabulary words and fixed phrases extracted from the
parallel stories. The language model will be improved by extending
the coverage of the underlying word and phrase vocabulary, and by
specializing the model?s statistics to the narrow topic at hand. As
long as a round of recognition yields new information, the corre-
sponding improvement is incorporated into the recognizer modules
and bootstrapping of the system continues.
Story-specific Language Models from Parallel Speech and Text
Our goal is to create language models combining specific but sparse
statistics, derived from relevant parallel material, with reliable but
unspecific statistics obtainable from large general corpora. We will
create special n-gram language models from the available text, re-
lated or parallel to the spoken stories. We can then interpolate
this special model with a larger pre-existing model, possibly de-
rived from training text associated to the topic of the story. Our
recent STIMULATE work demonstrated success in construction of
topic-specific language models on the basis of hierarchically topic-
organized corpora [8].
Unlike building models from parallel texts, the training of story
specific language models from recognized speech is also affected
by recognition errors in the data which will be used for language
modeling. Confidence measures can be used to estimate the cor-
rectness of individual words or phrases on the recognizer output.
Using this information, n-gram statistics can be extracted from the
recognizer output by selecting those events which are likely to be
correct and which can therefore be used to adjust the original lan-
guage model without introducing new errors to the recognition sys-
tem.
Language Models with Cross-Lingual Lexical Triggers
A trigger language model ([6], [7]) will be constructed for the tar-
get language from the text corpus, where the lexical triggers are not
from the word-history in the target language, but from the aligned
recognized stories in the source language. The trigger informa-
tion becomes most important in those cases in which the baseline
n-gram model in the target language does not supply sufficient in-
formation to predict a word. We expect that content words in the
source language are good predictors for content words in the target
language and that these words are difficult to predict using the tar-
get language alone, and the mutual information techniques used to
identify trigger pairs will be useful here.
Once a spoken source-language story has been recognized, the
words found here there will be used as triggers in the language
model for the recognition of the target-language news broadcasts.
3. SUMMARY
Our goal is to align collections of stories from multiple text and
speech sources in more than one language and then develop meth-
ods that exploit the resulting parallelism both as a tool to improve
recognition accuracy and to enable the development of systems that
can reliably extract information from parallel sources. Much like
a teacher rephrases a concept in a variety of ways to help a class
understand it, the multiple sources, we expect, will increase the po-
tential of success in knowledge extraction. We envision techniques
that will operate repeatedly on multilingual sources by incorporat-
ing newly discovered information in one language into the models
used for all the other languages. Applications of these methods ex-
tend beyond news sources to other multiple-source domains such
as office email and voice-mail, or classroom materials such as lec-
tures, notes and texts.
4. REFERENCES
[1] P. F. Brown, S. A. DellaPietra, V. J. D. Pietra, and R. L.
Mercer. The mathematics of statistical translation.
Computational Linguistics, 19(2), 1993.
[2] K. K. et al Statistical machine translation, WS?99 Final
Report, Johns Hopkins University, 1999.
http://www.clsp.jhu.edu/ws99/projects/mt.
[3] F. J. Och and H. Ney. Improved statistical alignment models.
In ACL?00, pages 440?447, 2000.
[4] F. J. Och, C. Tillmann, and H. Ney. Improved alignment
models for statistical machine translation. In EMNLP/VLC?99,
pages 20?28, 1999.
[5] Proceedings of the Topic Detection and Tracking workshop.
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, October 1997.
[6] C. Tillmann and H. Ney. Selection criteria for word trigger
pairs in language modelling. In ICGI?96, pages 95?106, 1996.
[7] C. Tillmann and H. Ney. Statistical language modeling and
word triggers. In SPECOM?96, pages 22?27, 1996.
[8] D. Yarowsky. Exploiting nonlocal and syntactic word
relationships in language models for conversational speech
recognition, a NSF STIMULATE Project IRI9618874, 1997.
Johns Hopkins University.
