Robust Interpretation of User Requests for Text Retrieval in a Multimodal
Environment
Alexandra Klein and Estela Puig-Waldmu?ller
Austrian Research Institute for
Artificial Intelligence
Schottengasse 3
A-1010 Vienna, Austria
falex, stellag@oefai.at
Harald Trost
Department of Medical Cybernetics and
Artificial Intelligence, University of Vienna
Freyung 6/2
A-1010 Vienna, Austria
harald@ai.univie.ac.at
Abstract
We describe a parser for robust and flexible inter-
pretation of user utterances in a multi-modal sys-
tem for web search in newspaper databases. Users
can speak or type, and they can navigate and follow
links using mouse clicks. Spoken or written queries
may combine search expressions with browser com-
mands and search space restrictions. In interpreting
input queries, the system has to be fault-tolerant to
account for spontanous speech phenomena as well
as typing or speech recognition errors which often
distort the meaning of the utterance and are difficult
to detect and correct. Our parser integrates shallow
parsing techniques with knowledge-based text re-
trieval to allow for robust processing and coordina-
tion of input modes. Parsing relies on a two-layered
approach: typical meta-expressions like those con-
cerning search, newspaper types and dates are iden-
tified and excluded from the search string to be sent
to the search engine. The search terms which are
left after preprocessing are then grouped according
to co-occurrence statistics which have been derived
from a newspaper corpus. These co-occurrence
statistics concern typical noun phrases as they ap-
pear in newspaper texts.
1 Introduction
In this paper we describe a parser for robust and
flexible interpretation of user utterances in a web-
based multi-modal text retrieving system. The
parser forms part of a system for web search in Aus-
trian newspaper databases. In this system, users can
formulate queries or navigation commands using ut-
terances in both spontaneous spoken or written lan-
guage, and they can navigate and follow links using
mouse clicks. Users are completely free in formu-
lating their utterances and in the use and combina-
tion of the input modes. Typed and spoken utter-
ances may contain combinations of query expres-
sions, browser commands and search space restric-
tions. Users may search for texts with a specific
date, in a specific newspaper or in a specific sec-
tion of a newspaper. They may give complex con-
text descriptions of the texts and they may refer to
previously found texts. A dialogue manager stores
actions and results from previous states and supplies
information in order to construct fully specified for-
mal queries from underspecified user requests.
In order to allow for this freedom in user be-
haviour, flexible processing modules are needed.
For every utterance, the parser and the dialogue
manager must come up with an adequate interpre-
tation. At the same time, in interpreting the in-
put, they have to be robust and fault-tolerant. They
have to cope with typical phenomena of sponta-
neous speech like hesitation, correction and repe-
tition. There may be typographical errors in written
input or ? even more difficult to deal with ? speech
recognition errors from the spoken queries. Such
errors often distort the meaning of the utterance and
are difficult to detect and correct.
In our interpretation component, shallow pars-
ing techniques and knowledge-based text retrieval
methods are combined to allow for robust process-
ing and coordination of input modes. We employ
a two-layered approach. The first layer serves to
separate structure from content, i.e., parts of utter-
ances referring to browser commands and search re-
strictions (temporal expressions, newspaper types or
sections) are analyzed with a combination of key-
word spotting and pattern recognition. The under-
lying assumption is that users will restrict them-
selves to a rather small vocabulary and a limited
range of expressions in expressing this sort of in-
formation (this assumption is also confirmed by our
Wizard-of-Oz experiments). During this process,
stop words (function words and other words typi-
cally not contributing to the content of the query)
are also removed. The remaining words ? which are
assumed to describe the search content ? are then
grouped according to co-occurrence statistics which
have been derived from a newspaper corpus. While
text retrieval with the help of linguistic process-
ing has become rather common, multimodal inter-
action with textual databases on the web is a fairly
recent application of Natural Language Process-
ing. Experience from text retrieval shows that most
information is expressed in adjective-noun, noun-
preposition-noun, and noun-verb groups (Grefen-
stette, 1992). In our specific domain, the third type
can be neglected, because verbs typically denote the
action ? mostly search ? which is already extracted
in the first layer. Thus, co-occurrence statistics con-
sist of typical noun phrases as they appear in news-
paper texts.
2 Empirical evidence and user
experiments
In order to assess user behaviour, we carried
out Wizard-of-Oz experiments (Fraser and Gilbert,
1991). Speech recognition and text retrieval were
simulated. In different sessions the users interacted
with a number of versions of the system: single in-
put mode versions and versions with combinations
of input modes. Their performance in terms of num-
ber of interactions as well as task completion time
was measured, and their comments regarding the in-
terface and the (simulated) system were collected
in a questionnaire. Users were grouped according
to previous experience with search engines and the
web in general. Our results show that both, be-
ginners and advanced users, preferred multimodal
interaction over single input modes, and beginners
in particular were able to speed up task completion
times significantly with the help of a combination of
spoken and written input with mouse clicks (Klein
et al, 2001).
From these experiments, we also obtained a cor-
pus of written and spoken utterances which were
considered in the further design of the system. The
queries which were posed by the users in spoken
language were recorded. The recorded utterances
were later read to a speech recognition system. This
gave us an impression of the number and type of er-
rors to be expected in dealing with queries in spon-
taneous speech.
3 NL Text or Speech Input: Language
Analysis
Users can access articles with spoken or typed ut-
terances. Web queries may relate to the way some
particular piece of infomation is presented and what
this information refers to. They may also express
browser commands or a combination of browser and
query commands while referring either to structure
(Search for Noll in the previous newspaper) or to
content (Search for Noll in the sports? section).1
Within our application web queries may relate to
the way some particular piece of information is pre-
sented (e.g. the browser?s history about the accessed
pages), and what this information refers to (e.g. the
section a search string belongs to). To successfully
interpret such an utterance, one needs to analyze its
structure to find out which of these command modes
the utterance can be assigned to. This is done in a
two-step process. First, each word is looked up in a
lexicon and assigned a semantic category. Second,
certain rules are applied to strings of these seman-
tic categories. As a result, commands and search
restrictions are recognized and the rest of the utter-
ance is passed to search expression interpretation.
3.1 Keyword Spotting and Semantic
Classification
We will now describe in more detail how the user?s
input is parsed within the Natural Language In-
terface, and structured into either search patterns
? consisting of search strings, sections, dates and
timeranges, that are understood by the search en-
gine of the newspaper ? or commands for the Java
browser. Structure is analyzed by a flexible bottom-
up parser using a rule-based mechanism with simple
syntactic patterns.
In the user?s query input, each word of the utterance
is looked up in a lexicon and - if found - assigned a
corresponding semantic category. This lexicon con-
tains a small list of semantic categories, that we con-
sider important for the interpretation of an utterance
in the domain of searching articles and browsing.
The lexicon assigns semantic classes for closed cat-
egories that are:
 nouns denoting search, newspaper, section, links
like ?Suche? (search) or ?Artikel? (article).
 nouns expressing a specific section like
?Wirtschaft? (economy).
 nouns expressing a specific page like ?Homepage?.
 temporal expressions and temporal prepositions
like ?Monat? (month) and ?vor? (ago).
1We will use the italic font for language expressions and the
typewriter font for meta-language expressions.
 expressions indicating something new like in a
?neue? (new) search.
 adjectives and adverbs indicating direction in time
or space, like in ?letzte? (previous) search or in
?letzte? (last) week.
 cardinal and ordinal numbers used in conjunction
with temporal expressions and link expressions,
like in ?zwei? (two) years ago or when opening the
?ersten? (first) link.
 adverbs and connectives indicating constraints on
search mode, like ?nur? (only) and ?nicht? (not).
 prepositions indicating whether the request was to
browse or to search, cf ?zum Sport? (to the sports?
section) versus ?im Sport? (within the sports? sec-
tion).
 stop words.
All words found within the lexicon are replaced
by their corresponding semantic classes, search ex-
pressions are marked as such, and stop words are
deleted.
We distinguish between semantic atoms and se-
mantic classes: atoms by itself do not have a mean-
ing that can be used for searching or browsing com-
mands. They have to be joined following a given
set of rules to form a semantic class. To yield
such a class, rules are applied in ? mostly ? one to
three steps. However, rules are not always neces-
sary, a word may also be mapped onto a semantic
class right away. Our lexicon has about 30 semantic
atoms, from which about 40 semantic classes can be
formed. Certain patterns of semantic classes which
we obtain through lexical look-up can be assigned
new meanings via rules. So, by composing the indi-
vidual meanings, another more abstract meaning is
defined. This compositional approach to interpreta-
tion is supported by the layered approach. The re-
sult of this process is a list of chunks2, where stress
is laid on the content words. The advantage of con-
centrating on chunks is ? especially within German,
a language with a relatively free word order ? that
the order in which chunks occur is much more flex-
ible than the order of words within chunks. This
approach might be too shallow for a deeper seman-
tic analysis, but is sufficient for our needs. So, e.g.
2According to Abney (1991) a chunk is defined in terms of
major heads where a major head is any content word that does
not appear between a function word f and the content word
f selects, OR a pronoun selected by a preposition. [...] The
typical chunk consists of a single content word surrounded by
a constellation of function words, matching a fixed template.
?letzte? (last) plus a time expression would together
yield the new meaning date -1w. To overcome
ambiguities and avoid potential rule conflicts, rules
spanning larger chunks have a higher priority and
are thus preferred, such that ?zuru?ck zum Sport?
(back to sports) would win over ?zuru?ck? (back).
If no rules can be applied to a semantic class, it will
be ignored in the final interpretation.
Summing up the process of the structure analysis,
the partial analyses are stored, a sequence of partial
analyses from the set of rules is chosen, and then
combined to yield larger structures.
3.2 Search String Filter: Extraction of
Adjective-Noun Pairs
In the next step, the content of the query must be an-
alyzed in more detail. In this chapter we will explain
how content analysis is done in our application.
From a corpus of Austrian newspaper texts,
adjective-noun- and adjective-proper-name pairs
were extracted and counted. These pairs were stored
and consulted in query interpretation. Since the
texts are tagged manually, the lists of adjectives and
nouns/proper names contain a considerable number
of errors. Therefore it is necessary to use large
amounts of text; it may even be useful to eventu-
ally introduce a threshold so that only adjective-
noun/proper-name pairs which appear more than
once or a certain number of times are considered.
This of course can not prevent systematic tagging
errors.
A robust stemming algorithm maps all adjective-
noun/proper-name pairs to an approximate ?stem?,
thus eliminating flectional forms which result in
morphological variation which is typical for the
German language. For the purpose of creating a
repository of co-occurrence pairs, we do not care
about proper stemming. Rather, it is our aim to map
various inflectional forms onto one base form.
Spelling variations, numbers etc. are smoothed
as far as it is possible in automatic processing. For
example, ordinal numbers which are labelled as ad-
jectives are reduced to a placeholder for numbers.
Whenever a word is encountered in processing
which can be considered an adjective, it is kept.
Whenever the following word may be a noun or a
proper name, it is checked whether the adjective-
noun/proper-name combination is contained in the
repository of adjective-noun/proper-name combina-
tions which has previously been extracted from a
corpus. If the adjective-noun/proper-name combi-
nation is found, it is passed on to the search engine
as a query. Whenever the combination has not oc-
curred in the corpus, only the noun or proper name
is considered a key word.
Again, inflectional variations as well as different
spellings etc. are mapped onto base forms as far
as possible. The same stemming algorithm is used
which was employed in creating the repository of
adjective-noun/proper name pairs. The robust (and
rough) stemming and categorization algorithms pro-
duce a certain amount of mistakes in the lists of
pairs as well as in the mapping process, but tak-
ing into account larger text corpora evens out these
problems as more text is processed.
Our approach distinguishes noun phrases which
have a record of co-occurrence from noun phrases
which may be spontaneous expressions or modifica-
tions or even errors created by users. For example,
the phrase ?europa?ische Staaten? (European coun-
tries) would be retained while ?beteiligte Staaten?
(participating countries) would be reduced to the
noun. Some adjectives used in search expressions
serve to qualify the global search expression rather
than the noun or proper name in quesion. For ex-
ample, a search for yesterday?s speech would only
yield articles from the day after a speech, not about
the speech in general.
4 Action History: Integration of the
knowledge sources
Multimodal dialogue requires a unified interpreta-
tion of the involved knowledge sources, all input
modes have to be considered. The information
transmitted needs to be interpreted within discourse
context including previous user actions, possibly
with data coming from other input modes.
After the analysis of the user utterance has been
performed in the pattern-matching and the search-
word-extraction modules, the computed meaning of
the utterance has to been interpreted in the context
of the discourse sitiuation. This concerns mostly
the history of previous queries. Here, it is impor-
tant to consult previous queries in all possible input
modes (spoken, typed, mouse clicks). Therefore, a
record of the action history is kept and consulted.
All typed, written and spoken actions are assigned
an entry in the action history where the main param-
eters and their values are collected.
With this contextual information, the meaning of
the user?s utterance as the sum of the results of the
component analyses is computed in the global dis-
course context. Underspecified queries can be in-
terpreted in the discourse contexts, and parameters
are filled. Thus, the results are combined into one
unambiguous command line.
A powerful interaction control is necessary in or-
der to recognize the user?s intent by comparing it to
what the system knows about the addressed entities
and their relation to each other as well as to the data
which are accessible at the specific moment in the
interaction. The interface language between the lan-
guage analysis module and the controller consists of
a fixed set of parameters, which are assigned appro-
priate values:
 DIRECTION
the direction for browsing (forward, backward)
 SECTION
the section in the newspaper (politics, sports, ...)
 SEARCHSTRING
the string which has to be searched by the newspa-
per search engine
 DATE
the date when the article to be searched has ap-
peared (also intervals)
 ZEITUNG (NEWSPAPER)
the newspaper which is supposed to be searched
 OPENLINK
the link in a document which should be followed in
the browser
 OPENURL
the URL which is supposed to be opened by the
browser
The outcome ? or left-hand side ? of a rule-based
simplification can be divided into three command
types:
 Simple Search Command, New Search Com-
mand: E.g. ?Suche nach Camilleri im Kulturres-
sort? (Search for Camilleri in the cultural section)
or ?Neue Suche beginnen mit Krimis? (Start a new
search on thrillers).
 Complex Search Command: Search using the Ac-
tion history. E.g. ?Suche nach Christie im letzten
Ressort? (Search for Christie in the previous sec-
tion).
 Simple History Browsing Commands: Normal
Browsing using the Accessed Page History. E.g.
?Zur na?chsten Seite gehen? (Go to the next page).
 Complex History Browsing Commands: Browse
using the Action history. E.g. ?Geh zum let-
zten Ressort? (Go to the last ressort) or ?Zuru?ck
zur Suche mit Montalbano gehen? (Go back to the
search containing Montalbano).
 WWW Browsing: E.g. ?Geh zum heutigen Sport-
bereich? (Go to today?s sport section), ?den Stan-
dard lesen? (read the Standard) or ?Geh zur Home-
page? (Go home).
 Opening Link Command: E.g.?den ersten Artikel
o?ffnen? (Open the first article)
The action history browsing command refers to
the timeline and the point of reference of a brows-
ing but also of a search command. For instance,
take an utterance, where someone wants to search
for a topic but within a context that was defined in
the previous search. For our application, we would
first have to locate the user?s point of reference and
then execute her search command. If there is no
given reference, we assume by default that a new
time point is created in our time line.
One such command could look like this: the
utterance ?Ich suche etwas u?ber Highsmith im
letzten Ressort? (I am looking for something
about Highsmith within the previous section) would
be mapped to: DIRECTION 0, SECTION x
(where x is the section of the action with in-
dex -1), SEARCHSTRING Highsmith, TIME
nil, ZEITUNG nil. We are not moving in the
timeline, instead we are adding a new search action,
thus the direction is zero. Anyway, the controller
has to look up the action history to fill the value of
the section. The values of all empty parameters will
be filled with the values of the last actions, so in our
example, these parameters have not been explicitly
filled and remain empty (nil).
5 Result: Translating into Http Request or
Browser Command
After the command has been processed by the con-
trol module, it is either executed by the Java browser
or translated into a GET method through an Http
request to the newspaper?s archive database. The
resulting articles are displayed in the Java browser,
another search can be started by the user.
6 Conclusion
We have presented an interpretation component for
natural language user input in a web-based multi-
modal text retrieval system. By applying well-
known and simple methods from shallow parsing
and knowledge-based text retrieval and integrating
them in a novel way we have succeeded in creating
a robust, flexible and efficient parser for our appli-
cation.
An important feature is the distinction between
those parts of utterances relating to structure and
those relating to content. This is achieved by tak-
ing advantage of the fact that only a limited vocab-
ulary and set of expressions are used for the former.
This allows us to employ simple rule-based tech-
niques for their interpretation. The identification of
the content on the other hand is done with the help
of a co-occurrence repository, at the moment con-
sisting of adjective-noun/proper name pairs. In the
future we will have to investigate whether search re-
sults can be improved by inserting other combina-
tions, like noun-preposition-noun triples.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Austrian Science
Fund (FWF) under project number P-13704. Finan-
cial support for ?OFAI is provided by the Austrian
Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Culture.
References
Steven Abney. 1991. Parsing by chunks. In Robert
Berwick, Steven Abney, and Carol Tenny, editors,
Principle-Based Parsing, Tu?bingen (Germany).
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Norman M. Fraser and G. Nigel Gilbert. 1991.
Simulating speech systems. Computer Speech
and Language, 5(1):81?99.
Gregory Grefenstette. 1992. Use of Syntactic Con-
text to Produce Term Association Lists for Text
Retrieval. In N.J. Belkin, P. Ingwersen, and A.M.
Pejtersen, editors, Proceedings of the 15th An-
nual International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval, pages 89?97, Copenhagen: Denmark.
ACM Press.
Alexandra Klein, Ingrid Schwank, Michel
Ge?ne?reux, and Harald Trost. 2001. Evaluating
Multimodal Input Modes in a Wizard-of-Oz
Study for the Domain of Web Search. In Ann
Blandford, Jean Vanderdonckt, and Phil Gray,
editors, People and Computer XV ? Interaction
without Frontiers: Joint Proceedings of HCI
2001 and IHM 2001, pages 475?483. Springer:
London, September.
