Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 197?200,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Expanding Indonesian-Japanese Small Translation Dictionary
Using a Pivot Language
Masatoshi Tsuchiya? Ayu Purwarianti? Toshiyuki Wakita? Seiichi Nakagawa?
?Information and Media Center / ?Department of Information and Computer Sciences,
Toyohashi University of Technology
tsuchiya@imc.tut.ac.jp, {wakita,ayu,nakagawa}@slp.ics.tut.ac.jp
Abstract
We propose a novel method to expand a
small existing translation dictionary to a
large translation dictionary using a pivot lan-
guage. Our method depends on the assump-
tion that it is possible to find a pivot lan-
guage for a given language pair on con-
dition that there are both a large transla-
tion dictionary from the source language
to the pivot language, and a large transla-
tion dictionary from the pivot language to
the destination language. Experiments that
expands the Indonesian-Japanese dictionary
using the English language as a pivot lan-
guage shows that the proposed method can
improve performance of a real CLIR system.
1 Introduction
Rich cross lingual resources including large trans-
lation dictionaries are necessary in order to realize
working cross-lingual NLP applications. However,
it is infeasible to build such resources for all lan-
guage pairs, because there are many languages in the
world. Actually, while rich resources are available
for several popular language pairs like the English
language and the Japanese language, poor resources
are only available for rest unfamiliar language pairs.
In order to resolve this situation, automatic con-
struction of translation dictionary is effective, but it
is quite difficult as widely known. We, therefore,
concentrate on the task of expanding a small existing
translation dictionary instead of it. Let us consider
three dictionaries: a small seed dictionary which
consists of headwords in the source language and
their translations in the destination language, a large
source-pivot dictionarywhich consists of headwords
in the source language and their translations in the
pivot language, and a large pivot-destination dictio-
nary which consists of headwords in the pivot lan-
guage and their translations in the destination lan-
guage. When these three dictionaries are given, ex-
panding the seed dictionary is to translate words in
the source language that meets two conditions: (1)
they are not contained in the seed dictionary, and (2)
they can be translated to the destination language
transitively referring both the source-pivot dictio-
nary and the pivot-destination dictionary.
Obviously, this task depends on two assumptions:
(a) the existence of the small seed dictionary, and
(b) the existence of the pivot language which meets
the condition that there are both a large source-
pivot dictionary and a large pivot-destination dic-
tionary. Because of the first assumption, it is true
that this task cannot be applied to a brand-new lan-
guage pair. However, the number of such brand-
new language pairs are decreasing while machine-
readable language resources are increasing. More-
over, The second assumption is valid for many lan-
guage pairs, when supposing the English language
as a pivot. From these point of view, we think that
the expansion task is more promising, although it de-
pends more assumptions than the construction task.
There are two different points among the expan-
sion task and the construction task. Previous re-
searches of the construction task can be classified
into two groups. The first group consists of re-
searches to construct a new translation dictionary for
a fresh language pair from existing translation dic-
tionaries or other language resources (Tanaka and
Umemura, 1994). In the first group, information of
the seed dictionary are not counted in them unlike
the expansion task, because it is assumed that there
is no seed dictionary for such fresh language pairs.
The second group consists of researches to translate
197
xs
v(xs) vt(xs)
ys zs u(zs)
Corpus in
the source
Source-Pivot
Dictionary
Pivot-
Destination
Dictionary
Corpus in
the destination
Seed
Dictionary
Select
output
words
Figure 1: Translation Procedure
novel words using both a large existing translation
dictionary and other linguistic resources like huge
parallel corpora (Tonoike et al, 2005). Because al-
most of novel words are nouns, these researches fo-
cus into the task of translating nouns. In the expan-
sion task, however, it is necessary to translate verbs
and adjectives as well as nouns, because a seed dic-
tionary will be so small that only basic words will be
contained in it if the target language pair is unfamil-
iar. We will discuss about this topic in Section 3.2.
The remainder of this paper is organised as fol-
lows: Section 2 describes the method to expand a
small seed dictionary. The experiments presented in
Section 3 shows that the proposed method can im-
prove performance of a real CLIR system. This pa-
per ends with concluding remarks in Section 4.
2 Method of Expanding Seed Dictionary
The proposed method roughly consists of two steps
shown in Figure 1. The first step is to generate a co-
occurrence vector on the destination language cor-
responding to an input word, using both the seed
dictionary and a monolingual corpus in the source
language. The second step is to list translation can-
didates up, referring both the source-pivot dictionary
and the pivot-destination dictionary, and to calculate
their co-occurrence vectors based on a monolingual
corpus in the destination.
The seed dictionary is used to convert a co-
occurrence vector in the source language into a
vector in the destination language. In this paper,
f(wi, wj) represents a co-occurrence frequency of
a word wi and a word wj for all languages. A co-
occurrence vector v(xs) of a word xs in the source
is:
v(xs) = (f(xs, x1), . . . , f(xs, xn)), (1)
where xi(i = 1, 2, . . . , n) is a headword of the
seed dictionary D. A co-occurrence vector v(xs),
whose each element is corresponding to a word in
the source, is converted into a vector vt(xs), whose
each element is corresponding to a word in the des-
tination, referring the dictionary D:
vt(xs) = (ft(xs, z1), . . . , ft(xs, zm)), (2)
where zj(j = 1, 2, . . . ,m) is a translation word
which appears in the dictionary D. The function
ft(xs, zk), which assigns a co-occurrence degree be-
tween a word xs and a word zj in the destination
based on a co-occurrence vector of a word xs in the
source, is defined as follows:
ft(xs, zj) =
n
?
i=1
f(xs, xi) ? ?(xi, zj). (3)
where ?(xi, zj) is equal to one when a word zj is in-
cluded in a translation word set D(xi), which con-
sists of translation words of a word xi, and zero oth-
erwise.
A set of description sentences Ys in the pivot
are obtained referring the source-pivot dictionary
for a word xs. After that, a description sentence
ys ? Ys in the pivot is converted to a set of de-
scription sentences Zs in the destination referring
the pivot-destination dictionary. A co-occurrence
vector against a candidate description sentence zs =
z1sz2s ? ? ? zls, which is an instance of Zs, is calculated
by this equation:
u(zs) =
( l
?
k=1
f(zks , z1) , . . . ,
l
?
k=1
f(zks , zm)
)
(4)
Finally, the candidate zs which meets a certain
condition is selected as an output. Two conditions
are examined in this paper: (1) selecting top-n can-
didates from sorted ones according to each similarity
score, and (2) selecting candidates whose similarity
scores are greater than a certain threshold. In this pa-
per, cosine distance s(vt(xs),u(zs)) between a vec-
tor based on an input word xs and a vector based on
198
a candidate zs is used as the similarity score between
them.
3 Experiments
In this section, we present the experiments of the
proposed method that the Indonesian language, the
English language and the Japanese language are
adopted as the source language, the pivot language
and the destination language respectively.
3.1 Experimental Data
The proposed method depends on three translation
dictionaries and two monolingual corpora as de-
scribed in Section 2.
Mainichi Newspaper Corpus (1993?1995), which
contains 3.5M sentences consist of 140M words, is
used as the Japanese corpus. When measuring simi-
larity between words using co-occurrence vectors, it
is common that a corpus in the source language for
the similar domain to one of the corpus in the source
language is more suitable than one for a different do-
main. Unfortunately, because we could not find such
corpus, the articles which were downloaded from
the Indonesian Newspaper WEB sites1 are used as
the Indonesian corpus. It contains 1.3M sentences,
which are tokenized into 10M words.
An online Indonesian-Japanese dictionary2 con-
tains 10,172 headwords, however, only 6,577 head-
words of them appear in the Indonesian corpus. We
divide them into two sets: the first set which con-
sists of 6,077 entries is used as the seed dictionary,
and the second set which consists of 500 entries is
used to evaluate translation performance. Moreover,
an online Indonesian-English dictionary3, and an
English-Japanese dictionary(Michibata, 2002) are
also used as the source-pivot dictionary and the
pivot-destination dictionary.
3.2 Evaluation of Translation Performance
As described in Section 2, two conditions of select-
ing output words among candidates are examined.
Table 1 shows their performances and the baseline,
1http://www.kompas.com/,
http://www.tempointeraktif.com/
2http://m1.ryu.titech.ac.jp/?indonesia/
todai/dokumen/kamusjpina.pdf
3http://nlp.aia.bppt.go.id/kebi
that is the translation performance when all candi-
dates are selected as output words. It is revealed that
the condition of selecting top-n candidates outper-
forms the another condition and the baseline. The
maximum F?=1 value of 52.5% is achieved when
selecting top-3 candidates as output words.
Table 2 shows that the lexical distribution of head-
words contained in the seed dictionary are quite sim-
ilar to the lexical distribution of headwords con-
tained in the source-pivot dictionary. This obser-
vation means that it is necessary to translate verbs
and adjectives as well as nouns, when expanding this
seed dictionary. Table 3 shows translation perfor-
mances against nouns, verbs and adjectives, when
selecting top-3 candidates as output words. The pro-
posed method can be regarded likely because it is
effective to verbs and adjectives as well as to nouns,
whereas the baseline precision of verbs is consider-
ably lower than the others.
3.3 CLIR Performance Improved by
Expanded Dictionary
In this section, performance impact is presented
when the dictionary expanded by the proposed
method is adopted to the real CLIR system proposed
in (Purwarianti et al, 2007).
NTCIR3 Web Retrieval Task(Eguchi et al, 2003)
provides the evaluation dataset and defines the eval-
uation metric. The evaluation metric consists of four
MAP values: PC, PL, RC and RL. They are cor-
responding to assessment types respectively. The
dataset consists 100GB Japanese WEB documents
and 47 queries of Japanese topics. The Indonesian
queries, which are manually translated from them,
are used as inputs of the experiment systems. The
number of unique words which occur in the queries
is 301, and the number of unique words which are
not contained in the Indonesian-Japanese dictionary
is 106 (35%). It is reduced to 78 (26%), while the
existing dictionary that contains 10,172 entries is ex-
panded to the dictionary containing 20,457 entries
with the proposed method.
Table 4 shows the MAP values achieved by both
the baseline systems using the existing dictionary
and ones using the expanded dictionary. The for-
mer three systems use existing dictionaries, and the
latter three systems use the expanded one. The 3rd
system translates keywords transitively using both
199
Table 1: Comparison between Conditions of Selecting Output Words
Selecting top-n candidates Selecting plausible candidates Baseline
n = 1 n = 2 n = 3 n = 5 n = 10 x = 0.1 x = 0.16 x = 0.2 x = 0.3
Prec. 55.4% 49.9% 46.2% 40.0% 32.2% 20.8% 23.6% 25.8% 33.0% 18.9%
Rec. 40.9% 52.6% 60.7% 67.4% 74.8% 65.3% 50.1% 40.0% 16.9% 82.5%
F?=1 47.1% 51.2% 52.5% 50.2% 45.0% 31.6% 32.1% 31.4% 22.4% 30.8%
Table 2: Lexical Classification of Headwords
Indonesian- Indonesian-
Japanese English
# of nouns 4085 (57.4%) 15718 (53.5%)
# of verbs 1910 (26.8%) 9600 (32.7%)
# of adjectives 795 (11.2%) 3390 (11.5%)
# of other words 330 (4.6%) 682 (2.3%)
Total 7120 (100%) 29390 (100%)
Table 3: Performance for Nouns, Verbs and Adjectives
Noun Verb Adjective
n = 3 Baseline n = 3 Baseline n = 3 Baseline
Prec. 49.1% 21.8% 41.0% 14.7% 46.9% 26.7%
Rec. 65.6% 80.6% 52.3% 84.1% 59.4% 88.4%
F?=1 56.2% 34.3% 46.0% 25.0% 52.4% 41.0%
Table 4: CLIR Performance
PC PL RC RL
(1) Existing Indonesian-Japanese dictionary 0.044 0.044 0.037 0.037
(2) Existing Indonesian-Japanese dictionary and Japanese proper name dictionary 0.054 0.052 0.047 0.045
(3) Indonesian-English-Japanese transitive translation with statistic filtering 0.078 0.072 0.055 0.053
(4) Expanded Indonesian-Japanese dictionary 0.061 0.059 0.046 0.046
(5) Expanded Indonesian-Japanese dictionary with Japanese proper name dictionary 0.066 0.063 0.049 0.049
(6) Expanded Indonesian-Japanese dictionary with Japanese proper name dictionary and
statistic filtering
0.074 0.072 0.059 0.058
the source-pivot dictionary and the pivot-destination
dictionary, and the others translate keywords using
either the existing source-destination dictionary or
the expanded one. The 3rd system and the 6th sys-
tem try to eliminate unnecessary translations based
statistic measures calculated from retrieved docu-
ments. These measures are effective as shown in
(Purwarianti et al, 2007), but, consume a high run-
time computational cost to reduce enormous transla-
tion candidates statistically. It is revealed that CLIR
systems using the expanded dictionary outperform
ones using the existing dictionary without statistic
filtering. And more, it shows that ones using the ex-
panded dictionary without statistic filtering achieve
near performance to the 3rd system without paying
a high run-time computational cost. Once it is paid,
the 6th system achieves almost same score of the 3rd
system. These observation leads that we can con-
clude that our proposed method to expand dictionary
is valuable to a real CLIR system.
4 Concluding Remarks
In this paper, a novel method of expanding a small
existing translation dictionary to a large translation
dictionary using a pivot language is proposed. Our
method uses information obtained from a small ex-
isting translation dictionary from the source lan-
guage to the destination language effectively. Exper-
iments that expands the Indonesian-Japanese dictio-
nary using the English language as a pivot language
shows that the proposed method can improve perfor-
mance of a real CLIR system.
References
Koji Eguchi, Keizo Oyama, Emi Ishida, Noriko Kando, , and
Kazuko Kuriyama. 2003. Overview of the web retrieval task
at the third NTCIR workshop. In Proceedings of the Third
NTCIR Workshop on research in Information Retrieval, Au-
tomatic Text Summarization and Question Answering.
Hideki Michibata, editor. 2002. Eijiro. ALC, 3. (in Japanese).
Ayu Purwarianti, Masatoshi Tsuchiya, and Seiichi Nakagawa.
2007. Indonesian-Japanese transitive translation using En-
glish for CLIR. Journal of Natural Language Processing,
14(2), Apr.
Kumiko Tanaka and Kyoji Umemura. 1994. Construction of
a bilingual dictionary intermediated by a third language. In
Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics.
Masatugu Tonoike, Mitsuhiro Kida, Toshihiro Takagi, Yasuhiro
Sasaki, Takehito Utsuro, and Satoshi Sato. 2005. Trans-
lation estimation for technical terms using corpus collected
from the web. In Proceedings of the Pacific Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 325?331, August.
200
Proceedings of the Workshop on How Can Computational Linguistics Improve Information Retrieval?, pages 1?8,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Indonesian-Japanese CLIR Using Only Limited Resource 
Ayu Purwarianti Masatoshi Tsuchiya Seiichi Nakagawa 
Department of Information and Computer Science, Toyohashi University of Technology 
ayu@slp.ics.tut.ac.jp tsuchiya@imc.tut.ac.jp nakagawa@slp.ics.tut.ac.jp
 
Abstract 
Our research aim here is to build a CLIR 
system that works for a language pair 
with poor resources where the source 
language (e.g. Indonesian) has limited 
language resources. Our Indonesian-
Japanese CLIR system employs the 
existing Japanese IR system, and we 
focus our research on the Indonesian-
Japanese query translation. There are two 
problems in our limited resource query 
translation: the OOV problem and the 
translation ambiguity. The OOV problem 
is handled using target language?s 
resources (English-Japanese dictionary 
and Japanese proper name dictionary). 
The translation ambiguity is handled 
using a Japanese monolingual corpus in 
our translation filtering. We select the 
final translation set using the mutual 
information score and the TF?IDF score. 
The result on NTCIR 3 (NII-NACSIS 
Test Collection for IR Systems) Web 
Retrieval Task shows that the translation 
method achieved a higher IR score than 
the transitive machine translation (using 
Kataku (Indonesian-English) and 
Babelfish/ Excite (English-Japanese) 
engine) result. The best result achieved 
about 49% of the monolingual retrieval. 
1 Introductions 
Due to the various languages used by different 
nations in the world, the CLIR has been an 
interesting research topic. For language pair with 
a rich language resource, the translation in the 
CLIR can be done with a bilingual dictionary - 
based direct translation, machine translation - or 
a parallel corpus - based translation. For a rare 
language pair, there is an attempt to use a pivot 
language (usually English), known as transitive 
translation, because there is no ample bilingual 
dictionary or machine translation system 
available. Some studies have been done in the 
field of transitive translation using bilingual 
dictionaries in the CLIR system such as 
[Ballesteros 2000; Gollins and Sanderson 2001]. 
Ballesteros [2000] translated Spanish queries 
into French with English as the interlingua. 
Ballesteros used Collins Spanish-English and 
English-French dictionaries. Gollins and 
Sanderson [2001] translated German queries into 
English using two pivot languages (Spanish and 
Dutch). Gollins used the Euro Wordnet as a data 
resource. To our knowledge, no CLIR is 
available with transitive translation for a source 
language with poor data resources such as 
Indonesian. 
Translation using a bilingual dictionary 
usually provides many translation alternatives 
only a few of which are appropriate. A transitive 
translation gives more translation alternatives 
than a direct translation. In order to select the 
most appropriate translation, a monolingual 
corpus can be used to select the best translation. 
Ballesteros and Croft [1998] used an English 
corpus to select some English translation based 
on Spanish-English translation and analyzed the 
co-occurrence frequencies to disambiguate 
phrase translations. The occurrence score is 
called the em score. Each set is ranked by em 
score, and the highest ranking set is taken as the 
final translation. Gao et al [2001] used a Chinese 
corpus to select the best English-Chinese 
translation set. It modified the EMMI weighting 
measure to calculate the term coherence score. 
Qu et al [2002] selected the best Spanish-
English and Chinese-English translation using an 
English corpus. The coherence score calculation 
was based on 1) web page count; 2) retrieval 
score; and 3) mutual information score. Mirna 
[2001] translated Indonesian into English and 
used an English monolingual corpus to select the 
best translation, employing a term similarity 
score based on the Dice similarity coefficient. 
Federico and Bertoldi [2002] combined the N-
best translation based on an HMM model of a 
query translation pair and relevant document 
probability of the input word to rank Italian 
documents retrieved by English query. Kishida 
and Kando [2004], used all terms to retrieve a 
document in order to obtain the best term 
combination and chose the most frequent term in 
1
each term translation set that appears in the top 
ranked document.  
In our poor resource language ? Japanese 
CLIR where we select Indonesian as the source 
language with limited resource, we calculate the 
mutual information score for each Japanese 
translation combination, using a Japanese 
monolingual corpus. After that, we select one 
translation combination with the highest TF?IDF 
score obtained from the Japanese IR engine. 
By our experiments on Indonesian-Japanese 
CLIR, we would like to show how easy it is to 
build a CLIR for a restricted language resource. 
By using only an Indonesian (as the source 
language) ? English dictionary we are able to 
retrieve Japanese documents with 41% of the 
performance achieved by the monolingual 
Japanese IR system.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 presents an overview of an Indonesian 
query sentence; Section 3 discusses the method 
used for our Indonesian-Japanese CLIR; Section 
4 describes the comparison methods, and Section 
5 presents our experimental data and the results. 
2 Indonesian Query Sentence 
Indonesian is the official language in Indonesia. 
The language is understood by people in 
Indonesia, Malaysia, and Brunei. The Indonesian 
language family is Malayo-Polynesian 
(Austronesian), which extends across the islands 
of Southeast Asia and the Pacific [Wikipedia]. 
Indonesian is not related to either English or 
Japanese.  
Unlike other languages used in Indonesia 
such as Javanese, Sundanese and Balinese that 
use their own scripts, Indonesian uses the 
familiar Roman script. It uses only 26 letters as 
in the English alphabet. A transliteration module 
is not needed to translate an Indonesian sentence.  
Indonesian language does not have 
declensions or conjugations. The basic sentence 
order is Subject-Verb-Object. Verbs are not 
inflected for person or number. There are no 
tenses. Tense is denoted by the time adverb or 
some other tense indicators. The time adverb can 
be placed at the front or end of the sentence.  
A rather complex characteristic of the 
Indonesian language is that it is an agglutinave 
language. Words in Indonesian, usually verbs, 
can be attached by many prefixes or suffixes. 
Affixes used in the Indonesian language include 
[Kosasih 2003] me(n)-, ber-, di-, ter-, pe(n)-, per-, 
se-, ke-, -el-, -em-, -er-, -kan, -i, -nya, -an, me(n)-
kan, di-kan, memper-i, diper-i, ke-an, pe(n)-an, 
per-an, ber-an, ber-kan, se-nya. Words with 
different affixes might have uniform or different 
translation. Examples of different word 
translation are ?membaca? and ?pembaca?, 
which are translated into ?read? and ?reader?, 
respectively. Examples of same word translation 
are the words ?baca? and ?bacakan?, which are 
both translated into ?read? in English. Other 
examples are the words ?membaca? and ?dibaca?, 
which are translated into ?read? and ?being read?, 
respectively. By using a stop word elimination, 
the translation result of ?membaca? and ?dibaca? 
will give the same English translation, ?read?.  
An Indonesian dictionary usually contains 
words with affixes (that have different 
translations) and base words. For example, ?se-
nya? affix declares a ?most possible? pattern, 
such as ?sebanyak-banyaknya? (as much as 
possible), ?sesedikit-sedikitnya? (less possible), 
?sehitam-sehitamnya? (as black as possible). 
This affix can be attached to many adjectives 
with the same meaning pattern. Therefore, words 
with ?se-nya? affix are usually not included in an 
Indonesian dictionary.  
Query 1 
Saya ingin mengetahui siapa yang telah menjadi peraih 
Academy Awards beberapa generasi secara berturut-turut 
(I want to know who have been the recipients of successive 
generations of Academy Awards) 
Query 2 
Temukan buku-buku yang mengulas tentang novel yang 
ditulis oleh Miyabe Miyuki 
(Find book reviews of novels written by Miyabe Miyuki) 
Figure 1. Indonesian Query Examples 
Indonesian sentences usually consist of 
native (Indonesian) words and borrowed words. 
The two query examples in Figure 1 contain 
borrowed words. The first query contains 
?Academy Awards?, which is borrowed from the 
English language. The second query contains 
?Miyabe Miyuki?, which is transliterated from 
Japanese. To obtain a good translation, the query 
translation in our system must be able to translate 
those words, the Indonesian (native) words and 
the borrowed words. Problems that occur in a 
query translation here include OOV words and 
translation ambiguity. 
3 Indonesian - Japanese Query 
Translation System 
Indonesian-Japanese query translation is a 
component of the Indonesian-Japanese CLIR. 
The query translation system aims to translate an 
2
Indonesian sentence query 
Indonesian sentence query 
Indonesian query sentence(s) into a Japanese 
keyword list. The Japanese keyword list is then 
executed in the Japanese IR system to retrieve 
the relevant document. The schema of the 
Indonesian-Japanese query translation system 
can be seen in Figure 2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Indonesian-Japanese Query 
Translation Schema 
The query translation system consists of 2 
subsystems: the keyword translation and 
translation candidate filtering. The keyword 
translation system seeks to obtain Japanese 
translation candidates for an Indonesian query 
sentence. The translation candidate filtering aims 
to select the most appropriate translation among 
all Japanese translation alternatives. The filtering 
result is used as the input for the Japanese IR 
system. The keyword translation and translation 
filtering process is described in the next section.  
3.1 Indonesian ? Japanese Key Word 
Translation Process  
The keyword translation system is a process used 
to translate Indonesian keywords into Japanese 
keywords. In this research, we do transitive 
translation using bilingual dictionaries as the 
proposed method. Other approaches such as 
direct translation or machine translation are 
employed for the comparison method. The 
schema of our keyword transitive translation 
using bilingual dictionaries is shown in Figure 3.  
The keyword translation process consists of 
native (Indonesian) word translation and 
borrowed word translation. The native words are 
translated using Indonesian-English and English-
Japanese dictionaries. Because the Indonesian 
tag parser is not available, we do the translation 
on a single word and consecutive pair of words 
that exist as a single term in the Indonesian-
English dictionary. As mentioned in the previous 
section dealing with affix combination in 
Indonesian language, not all words with the affix 
combination are recorded in an Indonesian 
dictionary. Therefore, if a search does not reveal 
the exact word, it will search for other words that 
are the basic term of the query word or have the 
same basic term. For example, the Indonesian 
word, ?munculnya? (come out), has a basic term 
?muncul? with the postfix ?-nya?.  Here, the term 
?munculnya? is not available in the dictionary. 
Therefore, the searching will take ?muncul? as 
the matching word with ?munculnya? and give 
the English translation for ?muncul? such as 
?come out? as its translation result. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Indonesian-Japanese Keyword 
Translation Schema 
In Indonesian, a noun phrase has the reverse 
word position of that in English. For example, 
?ozone hole? is translated as ?lubang ozon? 
(ozone=ozon, hole=lubang) in Indonesian. 
Therefore, in English translation, besides word-
by-word translation, we also search for the 
reversed English word pair as a single term in an 
English-Japanese dictionary. This strategy 
reduces the number of translation alternatives.  
The borrowed words are translated using an 
English-Japanese dictionary. The English-
Japanese dictionary is used because most of the 
borrowed words in our query translation system 
come from English. Examples of borrowed 
words in our query are ?Academy Awards?, 
?Aurora?, ?Tang?, ?baseball?, ?Plum?, ?taping?, 
and ?Kubrick?.  
Even though using an English-Japanese 
dictionary may help with accurate translation of 
words, but there are some proper names which 
can not be translated by this dictionary, such as 
?Miyabe Miyuki?, ?Miyazaki Hayao?, ?Honjo 
Manami?, etc. These proper names come from 
Japanese words which are romanized. In the 
Japanese language, these proper names might be 
written in one of the following scripts: kanji 
(Chinese character), hiragana, katakana and 
romaji (roman alphabet). One alphabet word can 
Indonesian ? Japanese 
Keyword Translation 
Candidates for Japanese Translation 
Translation Candidate Filtering 
Japanese Translation 
Indonesian ? English 
Bilingual Dictionary 
Japanese Keyword List 
English ? Japanese 
Bilingual Dictionary 
Translation
Candidates for Japanese Translation 
Japanese Morphological Analyzer (Chasen) 
Japanese Stop Word Elimination 
Indonesian words borrowed words 
? English ? Japanese Bilingual 
Dictionary Translation  
? Japanese Proper Name 
Dictionary Translation 
? Hiragana/Katakana 
Transliteration 
3
be transliterated into more than one Japanese 
words. For example, ?Miyabe? can be 
transliterated into ??, ??, ??? or ???. 
?? and ?? are written in kanji, ??? is 
written in hiragana, and ???  is written in 
katakana. For hiragana and katakana script, the 
borrowed word is translated by using a pair list 
between hiragana or katakana and its roman 
alphabet. These systems have a one-to-one 
correspondence for pronunciation (syllables or 
phonemes), something that can not be done for 
kanji. Therefore, to find the Japanese word in 
kanji corresponding to borrowed words, we use a 
Japanese proper name dictionary. Each term in 
the original proper name dictionary usually 
consists of two words, the first and last names. 
For a wider selection of translation candidates, 
we separate each term with two words into two 
terms. Even though the input word can not be 
found in the original proper name dictionary 
(family name and first name), a match may still 
be possible with the new proper name dictionary. 
Each of the above translation processes also 
involves the stop word elimination process, 
which aims to delete stop words or words that do 
not have significant meaning in the documents 
retrieved. The stop word elimination is done at 
every language step. First, Indonesian stop word 
elimination is applied to a Indonesian query 
sentence to obtain Indonesian keywords. Second, 
English stop word elimination is applied before 
English keywords are translated into Japanese 
keywords. Finally, Japanese stop word 
elimination is done after the Japanese keywords 
are morphologically analyzed by Chasen 
(http://chasen.naist.jp/hiki/ChaSen). 
The keyword transitive translation is used in 
2 systems: 1) transitive translation to translate all 
words in the query, and 2) transitive translation 
to translate OOV (Indonesian) words from direct 
translation using an Indonesian-Japanese 
dictionary. We label the first method as the 
transitive translation using bilingual dictionary 
and the second method as the combined 
translation (direct-transitive).  
3.2 Candidate Filtering Process 
The keyword transitive translation results in 
many more translation candidates than the direct 
translation result. The candidates have a 
translation ambiguity problem which will be 
handled by our Japanese translation candidate 
filtering process, which seeks to select the most 
appropriate translation among the Japanese 
translation candidates. In order to select the best 
Japanese translation, rather than choosing only 
the highest TF?IDF score or only the highest 
mutual information score among all sets, we 
combine both scores. The procedure is as 
follows: 
1. Calculate the mutual information score for 
all term sets. To avoid calculation of all term 
sets, we calculate the mutual information 
score iteratively. First we calculate it for 2 
translation candidate sets. Then we select 
100 sets with the highest mutual information 
score. These sets are joined with the 3rd 
translation candidate sets and the mutual 
information score is recalculated. This step is 
repeated until all translation candidate sets 
are covered.  
For a word set, the mutual information score 
is shown in Equation 1.  
I(t1?tn) =???
= +=
1
1 1
n
i
n
ij
I(ti;tj) 
=???
= +=
1
1 1 )(tlog).(tlog
)t,(tlogn
i
n
ij ji
ji
PP
P
 
 
 
 
 
(1)
I(t1?tn) means the mutual information for a 
set of words t1, t2,?tn. I(ti,tj) means the 
mutual information between two words (ti,tj). 
Here, for a zero frequency word, it will have 
no impact on the mutual information score of 
a word set.  
2. Select 5 sets with highest mutual information 
score and execute them into the IR engine in 
order to obtain the TF?IDF scores. The TF
?IDF score used here is the relevance score 
between the document and the query 
(Equation (2) from Fujii and Ishikawa 
[2003]). 
?
t  
??
??
?
?
??
??
?
?
+ tt,ii
t,i
DF
N.log
TF
avglen
DL
TF
 
 
 
(2)
 
TFt,i denotes the frequency of term t 
appearing in document i. DFt denotes the 
number of documents containing term t. N 
indicates the total number of documents in 
the collection. DLi denotes the length of 
document i (i.e., the number of characters 
contained in i), and avglen the average 
length of documents in the collection. 
3. Select the term set with the highest mutual 
information score among 3 top TF? IDF 
scores 
Figure 4 shows an example of the keyword 
selection process after completion of the 
4
keyword translation process. The translation 
combination and set rankings are for all words (4 
translation sets) in the query. Actually, the 
translation combinations and sets for the query 
example are also ranked for 2 and 3 translation 
sets. All resulting sets (ranked by its mutual 
information score) are executed in the IR system 
in order to obtain the TF?IDF score. The final 
query chosen is the one with the highest TF?
IDF score. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Illustration of Translation Filtering 
Method 
4 Compared Methods 
In the experiment, we compare our proposed 
method with other translation methods. Methods 
for comparing Indonesian-Japanese query 
translation include transitive translation using 
MT (machine translation), direct translation 
using existing Indonesian-Japanese dictionary, 
direct translation using a built-in Indonesian-
Japanese dictionary, transitive translation with 
English keyword selection based on mutual 
information taken from English corpus, and 
transitive translation with Japanese keyword 
selection based on mutual information only.  
4.1 Transitive Translation using Machine 
Translation 
The first method compared is a transitive 
translation using MT (machine translation). The 
Indonesian- Japanese transitive translation using 
MT has a schema similar to Indonesian-Japanese 
transitive translation using a bilingual dictionary.  
However, machine transitive translation does not 
use Indonesian-English and English-Japanese 
dictionaries. Indonesian queries are translated 
into English queries using an online Indonesian-
English MT (Kataku engine, 
http://www.toggletext.com). The English 
translation results are then translated into 
Japanese using 2 online MTs (Babelfish engine, 
http://www.altavista.com/babelfish and Excite 
engine, http://www.excite.co.jp/world). 
4.2 Direct Translation using Existing 
Indonesian-Japanese Bilingual 
Dictionary 
The second method compared is a direct 
translation using an Indonesian-Japanese 
dictionary. This direct translation also has a 
schema similar to the transitive translation using 
bilingual dictionary (Figure 2). The difference is 
that in translation of an Indonesian keyword, 
only 1 dictionary is used, rather than using 2 
dictionaries; in this case, an Indonesian-Japanese 
bilingual dictionary with a fewer words than the 
Indonesian-English and English-Japanese 
dictionaries.  
4.3 Direct Translation using Built-in 
Indonesian-Japanese Dictionary 
We also compare the transitive translation results 
with the direct translation using a built-in 
Indonesian-Japanese dictionary. The Indonesian-
Japanese dictionary is built from Indonesian-
English, English-Japanese and Japanese-English 
dictionaries using ?one-time inverse 
consultation? such as in Tanaka and Umemura 
[1998]. The matching process is similar with that 
in query translation. A Japanese translation is 
searched for an English translation (from every 
Indonesian term in Indonesian-English 
dictionary) as a term in the Japanese-English 
dictionary. If no match can be found, the English 
terms will be normalized by eliminating certain 
stop words (?to?, ?a?, ?an?, ?the?, ?to be?, ?kind 
of?). These normalized English terms will be 
checked again in the Japanese-English dictionary. 
For every Japanese translation, a ?one-time 
inverse consultation? is calculated. If the score is 
Query: 
Saya ingin mengetahui metode untuk belajar 
bagaimana menari salsa (= I wanted to know the 
method of studying how to dance the salsa)  
 
Keyword Selection: 
Metode (method), belajar (to learn, to study, to take 
up), menari (dance), salsa 
 
Japanese Keyword: 
Metode: ????,??,??,?? 
Belajar: ???,??,??,??,??,??,??,
??,???,??,???,??,??,?????
Menari: ??,???,?????,???,??,?
?,?? 
Salsa: ??? 
 
Translation Combination: 
(????,???,??,???) 
(??,???,??,???) 
(??,???,??,???), etc 
 
Rank sets based on Mutual Information Score: 
1. (??, ??,   ??,   ???) 
2. (??, ??,   ??,   ???) 
3. (??, ???, ???, ???) 
4. (??, ???, ???, ???) 
5. (??, ???, ??,   ???) 
 
Select query with highest TF?IDF score 
??, ???, ???, ???
5
more than one (for more than one English term), 
then it is accepted as an Indonesian-Japanese pair. 
If not, the WordNet is used to find its synonym 
and recalculate the ?one-time inverse 
consultation? score so as to compensate for the 
poor quality of Indonesian-English dictionary 
(29054 words). 
5 Experiments 
5.1 Experimental Data  
We measure our query translation performance 
by the IR score achieved by a CLIR system 
because CLIR is a real application and includes 
the performance of key word expansion. For this, 
we do not use word translation accuracy, as for 
the CLIR, since a one-to-one translation rate is 
not suitable, given there are so many 
semantically equivalent words.  
Our CLIR experiments are conducted on 
NTCIR-3 Web Retrieval Task data (100 Gb 
Japanese documents), in which the Japanese 
queries and translated English queries were 
prepared. The Indonesian queries (47 queries) 
are manually translated from English queries. 
The 47 queries contain 528 Indonesian words 
(225 are not stop words), 35 English borrowed 
words, and 16 transliterated Japanese words 
(proper nouns). The IR system (Fujii and 
Ishikawa [2003]) is borrowed from Atsushi Fujii 
(Tsukuba University). External resources used in 
the query translation are listed in Table 1.  
Table 1. External Resource List 
Resource Description 
KEBI Indonesian-English 
dictionary, 29,054 words  
Eijirou English-Japanese dictionary, 
556,237 words 
Kmsmini2000 Indonesian-Japanese 
dictionary, 14,823 words 
ToggleText Kataku Indonesian-English machine 
translation 
Excite  English-Japanese machine 
translation 
Babelfish English-Japanese machine 
translation 
[Fox, 1989] and 
[Zu et al, 2004] 
English stop words (are also 
translated into Indonesian 
stop words) 
Chasen Japanese morphological 
analyzer 
Jinmei Jisho Japanese proper name 
dictionary, 61,629 words 
Mainichi Shinbun 
& Online Yomiuri 
Shinbun 
Japanese newspaper corpus 
5.2 Experimental Result 
In the experiments, we compare the IR score of 
each translation method. The IR scores shown in 
this section are in Mean Average Precision 
(MAP) scores. The evaluation metrics is referred 
to [Fujii and Ishikawa 2003b]. Each query group 
has 4 MAP scores: RL (highly relevant 
document as correct answer with hyperlink 
information used), RC (highly relevant document 
as correct answer), PL (partially relevant 
document as correct answer with hyperlink 
information used), and PC (partially relevant 
document as correct answer). The documents 
hyperlinked from retrieved documents are used 
for relevance assessment. 
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
jp iej-mx iej-mb ijn ij iej ij-iej
PC PL RC RL
Figure 5. Baseline Indonesian-Japanese CLIR 
Figure 5 shows the IR scores of queries 
translated using basic translation methods such 
as the bilingual dictionary or machine translation, 
without any enhanced process. The labels used in 
Figure 5 are:  
? jp (monolingual translation), where ?jp? 
denotes Japanese query 
? iej (transitive translation using bilingual 
dictionary), where ?i?, ?e?, ?j? denote 
Indonesian, English and Japanese, respectively,  
? iej-mx (transitive machine translation using 
Kataku and Excite engines), where ?m? 
denotes machine translation,  
? iej-mb (transitive machine translation using 
Kataku and Babelfish engines), 
? ijn (direct translation using the built in 
Indonesian-Japanese dictionary), 
? ij (direct translation using Indonesian-Japanese 
dictionary), 
? ij-iej (combination of direct (ij) and transitive 
(iej) translation using bilingual dictionary). 
The highest CLIR score in the baseline 
translation (without the enhancement process) 
achieves 30% of the performance achieved by 
the monolingual IR (jp).  
IR results in Figure 6 shows that OOV 
translation does improve the retrieval result. 
Here, our proposed methods (iej and ij-iej) 
achieve lower score than the comparison 
methods. 
6
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
iej-mx iej-mb ijn ij iej ij-iej
PC PL RC RL
 
Figure 6. Indonesian-Japanese CLIR with OOV 
Translation 
0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08
ij-iej-IR-60
ij-iej-IR-50
ij-iej-IR-40
ij-iej-IR-30
ij-iej-IR-20
ij-iej-IR-10
ij-iej-IR-5
ij-iej-I-10
ij-iej-I-5
ij-iej-I-3
ij-iej-I5
ij-iej-I4
ij-iej-I3
ij-iej-I2
ij-iej-I1
iej-IR-30
iej-IR-20
iej-IR-10
iej-IR-5
iej-I-10
iej-I-5
iej-I-3
iej-I5
iej-I4
iej-I3
iej-I2
iej-I1
ij-IR-30
ij-IR-20
ij-IR-10
ij-IR-5
ij-I-10
ij-I-5
ij-I-3
ij-I5
ij-I4
ij-I3
ij-I2
ij-I1
ijn-IR
ijn-I-10
ijn-I-5
ijn-I-3
ijn-I5
ijn-I4
ijn-I3
ijn-I2
ijn-I1
iej-mx-IR
iej-mx-I-
iej-mx-I-5
iej-mx-I-3
iej-mx-I5
iej-mx-I4
iej-mx-I3
iej-mx-I2
iej-mx-I1
iej-mb-IR
iej-mb-I-
iej-mb-I-5
iej-mb-I-3
iej-mb-I5
iej-mb-I4
iej-mb-I3
iej-mb-I2
iej-mb-I1
RL
RC
PL
PC
 
Figure 7. Indonesian-Japanese CLIR with OOV 
Translation and Keyword Filtering 
Figure 7 shows the MAP score on the 
proposed Indonesian-Japanese CLIR. The 
keyword selection description of each query 
label follows: 
? In (n = 1 .. 5): one query candidate based on 
mutual information score; example: I2 means 
the 2nd ranked query by its mutual information 
score. 
? I-n (n = 3,5,10): combination of the n-best 
query candidates based on mutual information 
score; example: iej-3 (disjuncture of the 3-best 
mutual information score candidates).  
? IR: the 1-best query candidate based on 
combination of mutual information score and 
TF? IDF engine score. X in IR-X shows 
number of combinations. For example, IR-5 
means the highest TF? IDF score among 5 
highest mutual information score sets.  
Figure 7 shows that the proposed filtering 
method yields higher IR score on the transitive 
translation. We achieve 41% of the performance 
achieved by the monolingual IR. The proposed 
transitive translation (iej-IR-10) improves the IR 
score of the baseline method of transitive 
translation (iej) from 0.0156 to 0.0512. The t-test 
shows that iej-IR-10 significantly increases the 
baseline method (iej) with a 97% confidence 
level, T(68) = 1.91, p<0.03. t-test also shows that, 
compared to other baseline systems, the 
proposed transitive translation (iej-IR-10) can 
significantly increase the IR score at 85% (T(84) 
= 1.04, p<0.15), 69% (T(86) = 0.49, p<0.31), 
91% (T(83) = 1.35, p<0.09), and 93% (T(70) = 
1.49, p<0.07) confidence level for iej-mb, iej-mx, 
ij and ij-iej, respectively. Another proposed 
method, a combination of direct and transitive 
translation (ij-iej), achieved the best IR score 
among all the translation methods. The proposed 
combination translation method (ijiej-IR-30) 
improves the  IR score of the baseline 
combination translation (ij-iej) from 0.025 to 
0.0629. The t-test showed that the proposed 
combination translation improves IR score of the 
baseline ij-iej with a 98% confidence level, T(69) 
= 2.09, p<0.02. Compared to other baseline 
systems, t-test shows that the proposed 
combination translation method (ijiej-IR-30) 
improves the IR score at 95% (T(83) = 1.66, 
p<0.05), 86% (T(85) = 1.087, p<0.14), 97%, 
(T(82) = 1.91, p<0.03) and 99% (T(67) = 2.38, 
p<0.005) confidence level for iej-mb, iej-mx, ij 
and iej, respectively. 
6 Conclusions 
We present a translation method on CLIR that 
is suitable for language pair with poor resources, 
where the source language has a limited data 
resource. Compared to other translation methods 
7
such as transitive translation using machine 
translation and direct translation using bilingual 
dictionary (the source-target dictionary is a poor 
bilingual dictionary), our transitive translation 
and the combined translation (direct translation 
and transitive translation) achieve higher IR 
scores. The transitive translation achieves a 41% 
performance of the monolingual IR and the 
combined translation achieves a 49% 
performance of the monolingual IR.  
The two important methods in our transitive 
translation are the borrowed word translation and 
the keyword selection method. The borrowed 
word approach can reduce the number of OOV 
from 50 words to 5 words using a pivot-target 
(English-Japanese) bilingual dictionary and 
target (Japanese) proper name dictionary. The 
keyword selection using the combination of 
mutual information score and TF?IDF score has 
improved the baseline transitive translation. The 
other important method, the combination method 
between transitive and direct translation using 
bilingual dictionaries also improves the CLIR 
performance.  
Acknowledgements 
We would like to give our appreciation to Dr. 
Atsushi Fujii (Tsukuba University) to allow us to 
use the IR Engine in our research. This work was 
partially supported by The 21st Century COE 
Program ?Intelligent Human Sensing? 
References 
Adriani, Mirna. 2000. Using statistical term similarity 
for sense disambiguation in cross language 
information retrieval. Information Retrieval: 67-78. 
Agency for The Assessment and Application of 
Technology: KEBI (Kamus Elektronik Bahasa 
Indonesia). http://nlp.aia.bppt.go.id/kebi/. Last 
access: February 2004. 
Babelfish English-Japanese Online Machine 
Translation. http://www.altavista.com/babelfish/. 
Last access:  April 2004. 
Ballesteros, Lisa A. and W. Bruce Croft. 1998. 
Resolving ambiguity for cross-language retrieval. 
ACM Sigir. 
Ballesteros, Lisa A. 2000. Cross Language Retrieval 
via Transitive Translation. Advances in 
Information Retrieval: 203-230. Kluwer Academic 
Publisher. 
Chasen. http://chasen.naist.jp/hiki/ChaSen/. Last 
access: February 2004. 
Chen, Kuang-hua, et,al. 2003. Overview of CLIR Task 
at the Third NTCIR Workshop. Proceedings of the 
Third NTCIR Workshop. 
Excite English-Japanese Online Machine Translation. 
http://www.excite.co.jp/world/. Last access: April 
2004. 
Federico, M. and N. Bertoldi. 2002. Statistical cross 
language information retrieval using n-best query 
translations. Proc. Of 25th International ACM 
Sigir. 
Fox, Christopher. 1989. A stop list for general text. 
ACM Sigir, Vol 24:19-21, Issue 2 Fall 89/Winter 
90. 
Fujii, Atsushi and Tetsuya Ishikawa. 2003. NTCIR-3 
cross-language IR experiments at ULIS. Proc. Of 
the Third NTCIR Workshop. 
Fujii, Atsushi and Katunobu Itou. 2003. Building a 
test collection for speech driven web retrieval. 
Proceedings of the 8th European Conference on 
Speech Communication and Technology. 
Gao, Jianfeng,  et, al. 2001. Improving query 
translation for cross-language information 
retrieval using statistical model. Proc. Sigir.  
Gollins, Tim and Mark Sanderson. 2001. Improving 
cross language information retrieval with 
triangulated translation. Proc. Sigir.  
ToggleText, Kataku Automatic Translation System. 
http://www.toggletext.com/kataku_trial.php. Last 
access: May 2004. 
Information Retrieval Resources for Bahasia 
Indonesia. Informatics Institute, University of 
Amsterdam. http://ilps.science.uva.nl/Resources/. 
Last access: Jan 2005. 
Kishida, Kazuaki and Noriko Kando. 2004. Two-stage 
refinement of query translation in a pivot language 
approach to cross-lingual information retrieval: 
An experiment at CLEF 2003. CLEF 2003, LNCS 
3237: 253-262.  
Kosasih, E. 2003. Kompetensi Ketatabahasaan dan 
Kesusastraan, Cermat Berbahasa Indonesia. 
Yrama Widya. 
Mainichi Shinbun CD-Rom data sets 1993-1995, 
Nichigai Associates Co., 1994-1996. 
Michibata, H., ed.: Eijirou, Alc. Last access:2002. 
Qu, Yan and G. Grefenstette, D. A. Evans. 2002. 
Resolving translation ambiguity using monolingual 
corpora. Advanced in Cross-Language Information 
Retrieval, vol. 2785 of LNCS: 223-241. Springer 
Verlag. 
Sanggar Bahasa Indonesia Proyek: Kmsmini2000. 
http://ml.ryu.titech.ac.jp/~indonesia/tokodai/dokum
en/ kamusjpina.pdf. Last access: May 2004. 
Tanaka, Kumiko and Kyoji Umemura. Construction 
of a bilingual dictionary intermediated by a third 
language. COLING 1994, pages 297-303, Kyoto. 
Wikipedia on Indonesian Language. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Indonesian_language. 
Last access: May 2005. 
WordNet. http://wordnet.princeton.edu/. Last access: 
February 2004. 
Zu, Guowei, et, al. 2004. Automatic Text 
Classification Techniques. IEEJ Trans EIS, Vol. 
124, No. 3. 
8
