Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007), pages 484?487,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
WVALI: Temporal Relation Identification by Syntactico-Semantic Analysis
Georgiana Pus?cas?u??
?Research Group in Computational Linguistics ?Department of Software and Computing Systems
University of Wolverhampton, UK University of Alicante, Spain
georgie@wlv.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper reports on the participation
of University of Wolverhampton and
University of Alicante at the SemEval-2007
TempEval evaluation exercise. TempEval
consisted of three tasks involving the
identification of event-time and event-event
temporal relations. We participated in
all three tasks with TICTAC (Syntactico-
Semantic Temporal Annotation Cluster), a
system comprising both knowledge based
and statistical techniques. Our system
achieved the highest strict and relaxed
scores for tasks A and B, and the highest
relaxed score for task C.
1 Introduction
TempEval comprises novel tasks concerned with the
identification of temporal relations between events
and temporal expressions (TEs). The evaluation
exercise includes three tasks testing the capability
of participating systems to relate an event and a
TE located in the same sentence (task A), an event
and the TE representing the Document Creation
Time (DCT) (task B), and two events located in
neighbouring sentences (task C). We tackle all tasks
with a mix of knowledge based and statistical
techniques incorporated in our system TICTAC.
Our approach for discovering intrasentential
temporal relations relies on sentence-level syntactic
trees and on a bottom-up propagation of the
temporal relations between syntactic constituents,
by employing syntactical and lexical properties of
the constituents and the relations between them.
A temporal reasoning mechanism is afterwards
employed to relate the two targeted temporal entities
to their closest ancestor and then to each other.
Conflict resolution heuristics are also applied.
In establishing a temporal relation between an
event and the Document Creation Time (DCT), the
temporal expressions directly or indirectly linked
to that event are first analysed and, if no relation
is detected, the temporal relation with the DCT is
propagated top-down in the syntactic tree.
Inter-sentence temporal relations are discovered
by first applying several heuristics that involve the
temporal expressions and the tensed verbs of the two
clauses containing the main events to be temporally
related, and then by using statistical data extracted
from the training corpus that revealed the most
frequent temporal relation between two tensed verbs
characterised by the tense information.
This paper presents the techniques employed for
the three TempEval tasks (Sections 2, 3 and 4
correspond to the tasks A, B and C). The evaluation
results are presented and discussed in Section 5.
Conclusions are drawn in the last section.
2 Task A
Task A at TempEval involved the automatic
identification of the temporal relations holding
between events and all temporal expressions
appearing in the same sentence. The events and TEs
were annotated in the source in accordance with the
TimeML standard (Pustejovsky et al, 2003a).
For all tasks, the set of temporal relations to be
predicted includes: OVERLAP, BEFORE, AFTER,
484
BEFORE-OR-OVERLAP, OVERLAP-OR-AFTER
and VAGUE.
Figure 1 depicts the processing stages involved
in the identification of the temporal relation given
the event, the TE and the sentence they are
in. The sentence is first annotated with morpho-
syntactic and functional dependency information by
employing Conexor?s FDG Parser (Tapanainen and
Jaervinen, 1997).
Figure 1: Task A processing stages
A clause splitter previously developed by the
author is then used to detect clause boundaries
and to establish the dependencies between the
resulting clauses by relying on formal indicators
of coordination and subordination and, in their
absence, on the functional dependency relation
predicted by the FDG parser. On the basis of the
morpho-syntactic information we identify in each
clause a set of temporally-relevant constituents (verb
phrase VP, noun phrases NPs, prepositional phrases
PPs, non-finite verbs and adverbial TEs).
The identified constituents and the syntactic tree
of the corresponding clause are afterwards employed
in a recursive bottom-up process of finding the
temporal order between directly linked constituents.
Each constituent is linked only with the constituent it
syntactically depends on with one of the predefined
temporal relations. The temporal relation is decided
on the basis of heuristics that involve parameters
such as: semantic properties of the two constituents?
heads (whether their root forms denote reporting
or aspectual start/end events), the type of the
two constituents, the syntactic relation holding
between them, presence of temporal signals (e.g.
prepositions like before, after, until), the tense of
the clause VP and the temporal relation between any
clause TE and the DCT. This process will result in
a path of temporal relations connecting every clause
constituent with the clause VP.
Each pair of clauses involved in a dependency
relation are then temporally related by means
of their VPs? tenses, of the dependency relation
between them and of their property of being
reporting events or not. The underlying hypothesis
is that the clause binding elements and the tenses
of the two VPs provide a natural way to establish
temporal relations between two syntactically related
clauses. For example, in the case of an if -clause,
its temporal relation with the superordinate clause
is BEFORE. In this way, each syntactic tree branch
connecting a non-root node with its father gets
tagged with a temporal relation (Figure 2).
Figure 2: Temporally tagged parse tree
The final stage involves the detection of the
temporal relation between a certain event and a
certain TE, both situated in the sentence processed
as above. The two entities are first tested to
determine if they comply with world knowledge
axioms that would predict their temporal relation.
For example if the TE refers to a date that is previous
to the DCT, and the event is a Future tensed verb,
then the event-TE temporal relation is obviously
AFTER. If no axiom applies to the two entities, a
temporal reasoning mechanism is employed to relate
the two targeted temporal entities to their closest
ancestor and then to each other. If conflicts occur in
relating one entity to the ancestor, priority is given
to the relation linked to the entity, but if the conflict
is between the event-ancestor and the TE-ancestor
temporal relations, the TE-ancestor relation wins.
485
3 Task B
Task B consisted of the identification of temporal
relations between events and the DCT. The
processing stages for solving task B follow the
course of the ones involved in task A, with the
only difference that the inter-clause and intra-
clause temporal ordering modules no longer order
clauses/constituents with respect to each other and
in a bottom-up manner, but with respect to the
DCT going top-down through the syntactic tree and
employing the knowledge gained at task A about the
relative ordering between same clause constituents.
Whenever establishing a temporal relation
between a constituent and the DCT, the TEs directly
linked to it or situated in the same clause with it are
first analysed and, if no relation can be detected, the
temporal relation with the DCT is propagated top-
down in the syntactic tree using the father node?s
temporal relation with the DCT and the temporal
relation between the two constituents. For clause
VPs, the relation with the DCT is found on the
basis of the VP tense, the superordinate clause?s VP
tense, the syntactic relation connecting the clause
with its superordinate and the relation between the
superordinate clause?s VP and the DCT.
4 Task C
For task C each pair of events signalled by the
main verbs of two consecutive sentences needs to be
temporally linked. This time, besides the events and
TEs, the main verb in the matrix clause (matrix verb)
of each sentence is also annotated in the documents.
Figure 3: Task C processing stages
Figure 3 illustrates the task C processing
flow. The two sentences are first parsed using
Conexor?s FDG Parser and then clause boundaries
are identified. Due to the fact that we have noticed
cases when the annotated matrix verb was not the
central verb of the main clause, we have considered
as matrix verb the tensed verb of the clause including
the annotated matrix verb.
All TEs situated in the same clause with each
matrix verb are investigated and if through these TEs
and the relations between them and the matrix verbs
we are able to predict a temporal relation then this
relation represents the system output.
At the next stage the semantic properties of the
two matrix verbs are checked to detect whether they
denote reporting events or not.
If both matrix verbs are reporting events then their
tense information is used to predict a relation.
If only one matrix verb is a reporting event, then
we look at the TEs linked to the other matrix verb
to see if we can predict the relation to the DCT.
The assumption is that a reporting event is located
temporally simultaneous with the DCT and, if a
relation between the other event and the DCT can
be established by means of surrounding TEs, then
this is the relation providing us the output. If the
non-reporting event can not be positioned in time
with respect to the DCT by analysing surrounding
TEs, then its relation with the DCT will be the one
established by solving task B.
The most complicated case is the one in which
both matrix verbs are non-reporting events. This
case is solved by extracting statistics from the
training documents, statistics involving the number
of occurrences of a certain pair of verb tenses with a
certain predicted temporal relation. The extracted
statistics are then reconciled for tense pairs with
more possible temporal relations, in the sense that
if the first two most frequent possibilities have
very similar frequencies, then the reconciliation is
performed according to Table 1. In this manner a
temporal relation is associated to each tense pair
and, consequently, the temporal relation between the
two matrix verbs is identified.
5 Results
The test corpus consists of 20 articles from
TimeBank (Pustejovsky et al, 2003b). The
performance is assessed with three evaluation
486
Temporal Relation Temporal Relation Reconciled Relation
OVERLAP BEFORE-OR-OVERLAP BEFORE-OR-OVERLAP
OVERLAP BEFORE BEFORE-OR-OVERLAP
OVERLAP OVERLAP-OR-AFTER OVERLAP-OR-AFTER
OVERLAP AFTER OVERLAP-OR-AFTER
BEFORE BEFORE-OR-OVERLAP BEFORE-OR-OVERLAP
AFTER OVERLAP-OR-AFTER OVERLAP-OR-AFTER
VAGUE any relation any relation
Table 1: Reconciliation between temporal relations
metrics (precision, recall, f-measure) and two
scoring schemes (strict, relaxed). The strict scoring
scheme counts only exact matches, while the relaxed
one gives credit to partial semantic matches too.
The following three tables illustrate for each
task the results our team obtained at TempEval,
the baseline, the minimum and maximum values
achieved by participating systems.
For each of the three tasks, the baseline is
established by the most frequent temporal relation
encountered in that task?s training data. In the case
of task A the most frequent temporal relation present
in the training data is OVERLAP, in the case of task
B BEFORE and for task C OVERLAP.
TASK A STRICT SCORE RELAXED SCORE
P R F P R F
WVALI 0.62 0.62 0.62 0.64 0.64 0.64
BASELINE 0.49 0.49 0.49 0.51 0.51 0.51
MIN 0.53 0.25 0.34 0.60 0.30 0.41
MAX 0.62 0.62 0.62 0.64 0.64 0.64
Table 2: Results for task A
Our system achieved the highest strict and relaxed
f-measure scores in tasks A and B, with the task B
results substantially above the baseline (18%).
TASK B STRICT SCORE RELAXED SCORE
P R F P R F
WVALI 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.81 0.81 0.81
BASELINE 0.62 0.62 0.62 0.62 0.62 0.62
MIN 0.73 0.57 0.66 0.74 0.62 0.71
MAX 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.84 0.81 0.81
Table 3: Results for task B
TASK C STRICT SCORE RELAXED SCORE
P R F P R F
WVALI 0.54 0.54 0.54 0.66 0.66 0.66
BASELINE 0.42 0.42 0.42 0.46 0.46 0.46
MIN 0.42 0.42 0.42 0.56 0.56 0.56
MAX 0.55 0.55 0.55 0.66 0.66 0.66
Table 4: Results for task C
Despite the challenges posed by task C, our
system achieved the best relaxed score among all
participants, as well as a high strict score.
6 Conclusion
This paper presented our approach and participation
in the TempEval evaluation exercise involving
the identification of event-time and event-event
temporal relations. We propose an approach
mainly based on syntactical properties, combining
knowledge-based and statistical techniques, all
included in our automatic temporal annotation
system TICTAC. Our system participated in all three
TempEval tasks.
When compared to the other systems participating
in this competition, we have obtained the highest
results both in the strict and relaxed scoring schemes
in the case of tasks A and B, as well as in the
relaxed scoring scheme for task C. Therefore, we
conclude that the proposed approach is appropriate
for the TempEval tasks and we plan to find ways of
improving the system?s performance.
Several future work directions emerge naturally
from a first look and shallow analysis of the results.
Firstly, we would like to carry out an in-depth study
of other possible correlations between syntax and
temporality. Secondly, we aim at exploiting apart
from the syntax of the analysed text, more of its
semantics.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Patricio Martinez
Barco, Andres Montoyo and Constantin Orasan for
their advice and support.
References
J. Pustejovsky, J. Castano, R. Ingria, R. Sauri,
R. Gaizauskas, A. Setzer, and G. Katz. 2003a.
TimeML: Robust Specification of Event and Temporal
Expressions in Text. In Proceedings of the Fifth
International Workshop on Computational Semantics
(IWCS-5).
J. Pustejovsky, P. Hanks, R. Sauri, A. See, R. Gaizuaskas,
A. Setzer, D. Radev, B. Sundheim, D. Day, L. Ferro,
and M. Lazo. 2003b. The TIMEBANK Corpus. In
Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics 2003.
P. Tapanainen and T. Jaervinen. 1997. A non?
projective dependency parser. In Proceedings of
the 5th Conference of Applied Natural Language
Processing, ACL.
487
