The Language of Bioscience:
Facts, Speculations, and Statements in Between
Marc Light
Library and Information Science
Linguistics Department
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
marc-light@uiowa.edu
Xin Ying Qiu
Management Sciences
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
xin-qiu@uiowa.edu
Padmini Srinivasan
Library and Information Science
Management Sciences
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
padmini-srinivasan@uiowa.edu
Abstract
We explore the use of speculative lan-
guage in MEDLINE abstracts. Results
from a manual annotation experiment sug-
gest that the notion of speculative sentence
can be reliably annotated by humans. In
addition, an experiment with automated
methods also suggest that reliable auto-
mated methods might also be developed.
Distributional observations are also pre-
sented as well as a discussion of possible
uses for a system that can recognize spec-
ulative language.
1 Introduction
The scientific process involves making hypotheses,
gathering evidence, using inductive reasoning to
reach a conclusion based on the data, and then mak-
ing new hypotheses. Scientist are often not com-
pletely certain of a conclusion. This lack of definite
belief is often reflected in the way scientists discuss
their work.
In this paper, we focus on expressions of levels of
belief: the expressions of hypotheses, tentative con-
clusions, hedges, and speculations. ?Affect? is used
in linguistics as a label for this topic. This is not a
well-known topic in the field of text processing of
bioscience literature. Thus, we present a large num-
ber of examples to elucidate the variety and nature
of the phenomena. We then return to a discussion
of the goals, importance, and possible uses of this
research.
1.1 Examples
The sentences in the following box contain frag-
ments expressing a relatively high level of specula-
tion. The level of belief expressed by an author is
often difficult to ascertain from an isolated sentence
and often the context of the abstract is needed. All
examples in the paper are from abstracts available at
the Nation Library of Medicine PubMed webpage
(currently http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed/).
The PubMed identifier is provided following each
sentence.
Pdcd4 may thus constitute a useful molecular
target for cancer prevention. (1131400)
As the GT box has also previously been shown
to play a role in gene regulation of other genes,
these newly isolated Sp2 and Sp3 proteins might
regulate expression not only of the TCR gene but
of other genes as well. (1341900)
On the basis of these complementary results, it
has been concluded that curcumin shows very
high binding to BSA, probably at the hydropho-
bic cavities inside the protein. (12870844)
Curcumin down-regulates Ki67, PCNA and mu-
tant p53 mRNAs in breast cancer cells, these
properties may underlie chemopreventive ac-
tion. (14532610)
The next examples contain fragments that are
speculative but probably less so than those above.
(As we will discuss later, it is difficult to agree on
levels of speculation.) The containing sentence does
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                   Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases, pp. 17-24.
                                                HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Biolink 2004,
provide some context but the rest of the abstract if
not the full text is often necessary along with enough
knowledge of field to understand text.
Removal of the carboxy terminus enables ERP
to interact with a variety of ets-binding sites
including the E74 site, the IgH enhancer pi
site, and the lck promoter ets site, suggesting
a carboxy-terminal negative regulatory domain.
(7909357)
In addition, we show that a component of the
Ras-dependent mitogen-activated protein kinase
pathway, nerve growth factor-inducible c-Jun,
exerts its effects on receptor gene promoter ac-
tivity most likely through protein-protein inter-
actions with Sp1. (11262397)
Results suggest that one of the mechanisms of
curcumin inhibition of prostate cancer may be
via inhibition of Akt. (12682902)
The previous examples contain phrases such as
most likely and suggesting, which in these cases, ex-
plicitly mark a level of belief less than 100%. The
next examples are not as explicitly marked: to date
and such as can also be used in purely definite state-
ments.
To date, we find that the signaling pathway
triggered by each type of insult is distinct.
(10556169)
However, the inability of IGF-1, insulin and
PMA to stimulate 3beta-HSD type 1 expression
by themselves in the absence of IL-4 indicates
that the multiple pathways downstream of IRS-1
and IRS-2 must act in cooperation with an IL-
4-specific signaling molecule, such as the tran-
scription factor Stat6. (11384880)
These findings highlight the feasibility of mod-
ulating HO-1 expression during hypothermic
storage to confer tissues a better protection to
counteract the damage characteristic of organ
transplantation. (12927811)
The words may and might were both used to ex-
press speculation in the examples above but are am-
biguous between expressing speculation versus pos-
sibility. The examples above are speculative and the
sentence below expresses a definite statement about
two possibilities.
The level of LFB1 binding activity in adenoid-
cystic as well as trabecular tumours shows some
variation and may either be lower or higher
than in the non-tumorous tissue. (7834800)
The sentence below involves the adjective puta-
tive in an apositive noun phrase modifier, a different
syntactic form that in the previous examples. It also
clearly shows that the speculative portion is often
confined to only a part of the information provided
in a sentence.
We report here the isolation of human zinc finger
2 (HZF2), a putative zinc-finger transcription
factor, by motif-directed differential display of
mRNA extracted from histamine-stimulated hu-
man vein endothelial cells. (11121585)
Of course, definite sentences also come in a vari-
ety. The definite sentences below vary in topic and
form.
Affinity chromatography and coimmunoprecipi-
tation assays demonstrated that c-Jun and T-Ag
physically interact with each other. (12692226)
However, NF-kappaB was increased at 3 h while
AP-1 (Jun B and Jun D) and CREB were in-
creased at 15 h. (10755711)
We studied the transcript distribution of c-jun,
junB and junD in the rat brain. (1719462)
An inclusive model for all steps in the targeting
of proteins to subnuclear sites cannot yet be pro-
posed. (11389536)
We have been talking about speculative fragments
and speculative sentences. For the rest of the paper,
we define a speculative sentence to be one that con-
tains at least one speculative fragment. A definite
sentence contains no speculative fragments. In this
study we only considered annotations at the sentence
level. However, in future work, we plan to work on
sub-sentential annotations.
1.2 Goals of our research on speculative speech
and possible uses
Our general goal is to investigate speculative speech
in bioscience literature and explore how it might be
used in HLT applications for bioscientists. A more
specific goal is to investigate the use of speculative
speech in MEDLINE abstracts because of their ac-
cessibility.
There are a number of reasons supporting the im-
portance of understanding speculative speech:
? it makes up a substantial portion of scientific
prose (we estimate that 11% of sentences in
MEDLINE abstracts contain speculative frag-
ments),
? many researchers are interested in current
trends and directions and speculations are
likely to be relevant,
? even if definite statements are of primary im-
portance, knowing that a statement is not defi-
nite, i.e. speculative, is important.
In the following, we expand upon these points in the
contexts of i) information retrieval, ii) information
extraction, and iii) knowledge discovery.
In the context of information retrieval, an exam-
ple information need might be ?I am looking for
speculations about the X gene in liver tissue.? One
of the authors spoke at a research department of a
drug company and the biologists present expressed
this sort of information need. On the other hand,
one of the authors has also encountered the opposite
need: ?I am looking for definite statements about
transcription factors that interact with NF Kappa B.?
Both these information needs would be easier to ful-
fill if automated annotation of speculative passages
was possible.
In the context of information extraction, a simi-
lar situation exists. For example, extracting tables
of protein-protein interactions would benefit from
knowing which interactions were speculative and
which were definite.
In the context of knowledge discovery (KR), spec-
ulation might play a number of roles. One possibil-
ity would be to use current speculative statements
about a topic of interest as a seed for the automated
knowledge discovery process. For example, terms
could be extracted from speculative fragments and
used to guide the initial steps of the knowledge dis-
covery process. A less direct but perhaps even more
important use is in building test/train datasets for
knowledge discovery systems. For example, let us
assume that in a 1985 publication we find a specu-
lation about two topics/concepts A and C being re-
lated and later in a 1995 document there is a definite
statement declaring that A and C are connected via
B. This pair of statements can then form the basis
of a discovery problem. We may use it to test a KR
system?s ability to predict B as the connecting as-
pect between A and C and to do this using data prior
to the 1995 publication. The same example could
also be used differently: KR systems could be as-
sessed on their ability to make a speculation between
A and C using data up to 1985 excluding the partic-
ular publication making the speculation. In this way
such pairs of temporally ordered speculative-definite
statements may be of value in KR research. Dif-
ferentiating between speculative and definite state-
ments is one part of finding such statement pairs.
2 Related work
We know of no work specifically on speculative
speech in the context of text processing of bio-
science literature. However, some work on informa-
tion extraction from bioscience literature has dealt
with speculative speech. For example, (Friedman et
al., 1994) discusses uncertainty and hedging in ra-
diology reports and their system assigns one of five
levels of certainty to extracted findings.
Text processing systems in general have focused
?factual? language. However, a growing number of
researchers have started work on other aspects of
language such as expressing opinions, style of writ-
ing, etc. For example a human language technology
workshop will be held this Spring entitled ?Explor-
ing Attitude and Affect in Text: Theories and Ap-
plications.? (Qu et al, 2004). Previous work along
these lines includes (Wilson and Wiebe, 2003). This
research focuses on newswire texts and other texts
on the topic of politics and current events.
There has been recent work on classifying sen-
tences from MEDLINE abstracts for the categories
such as object, background, conclusions (McKnight
and Srinivasan, 2003). In addition, early work,
(Liddy, 1988) built text grammars for empirical re-
search abstracts categorized and assigned structure
concerning rhetorical roles of the sentences. How-
ever, none of this work addresses the speculative vs.
definite distinction we are interested in.
There has also been some work on construct-
ing test sets for knowledge discovery. Several re-
searchers have used the discoveries by Swanson and
Smalheiser to test their own algorithms. The two
problems most commonly used in replication stud-
ies (e.g., (Weeber et al, 2001)) are their discov-
ery of a link between Raynauds disease and fish
oils (Swanson, 1986) and their discovery of several
links between migraine and magnesium (Swanson,
1988). The most comprehensive replication to date
is (Srinivasan, 2004) which employs eight Swanson
and Smalheiser discoveries as a test bed.
In the remainder of the paper, we describe a man-
ual annotation experiment we performed, give pre-
liminary results on our attempts to automatically
annotate sentences as containing speculative frag-
ments, and conclude with comments on possible fu-
ture work.
3 Manual annotation experiment
In this experiment, four human annotators manually
marked sentences as highly speculative, low specu-
lative, or definite.
Some of the questions we hoped to answer with
this experiment were: can we characterize what a
speculative sentence is (as demonstrated by good
inter-annotator agreement), can a distinction be-
tween high and low speculation be made, how much
speculative speech is there, where are speculative
sentences located in the abstract, is there variation
across topics?
The annotators were instructed to follow written
annotation guidelines which we provide in appendix
of this paper. We wanted to explore how well the an-
notators agreed on relatively abstract classifications
such as ?requires extrapolation from actual findings?
and thus we refrained from writing instructions such
as ?if the sentence contains a form of suggest, then
mark it as speculative? into the guidelines.
We chose three topics to work on and used the
following Pubmed queries to gather abstracts:
? ?gene regulation? AND ?transcription factor?
AND 1900:2001[edat]
? (crohn?s disease OR crohn disease) AND com-
plications[MeSH Subheading] AND hasab-
stract[text] AND English[Lang] AND (ho-
minidae[MeSH Terms] OR Human[MeSH
Terms])
? turmeric OR curcumin OR curcuma
The first topic is gene regulation and is about
molecular biology research on transcription factors,
promoter regions, gene expression, etc. The second
topic is Crohn?s disease which is a chronic relapsing
intestinal inflammation and has a number of genes
(CARD15) or chromosomal loci associated with it.
The third topic is turmeric (aka curcumin), a spice
widely used in Asia and highly regarded for its cu-
rative and analgesic properties. These include the
treatment of burns, stomach ulcers and ailments, and
various skin diseases. There has been a surge of in-
terest in curcumin over the last decade.
Each abstract set was prepared for annotation as
follows: the order of the abstracts was randomized
and the abstracts were broken into sentences us-
ing Mxterminator (Reynar and Ratnaparkhi, 1997).
The following people performed the annotations:
Padmini Srinivasan, who has analyzed crohns and
turmeric documents for a separate knowledge dis-
cover research task, Xin Ying Qiu, who is com-
pletely new to all three topics, Marc Light, who
has some experience with gene regulation texts (e.g.,
(Light et al, 2003)), Vladimir Leontiev, who is a re-
search scientist in an anatomy and cell biology de-
partment. It certainly would have been preferable to
have four experts on the topics do the annotation but
this was not possible.
The following manual annotations were per-
formed:
a. 63 gene regulation abstracts (all sentences) by
both Leontiev and Light,
b. 47 gene regulation additional abstracts (all sen-
tences) by Light,
c. 100 crohns abstracts (last 2 sentences) by both
Srinivasan and Qiu,
d. 400 crohns abstracts additional (last 2 sen-
tences) by Qiu,
e. 100 turmeric abstracts (all sentences) by Srini-
vasan,
f. 400 turmeric additional abstracts (last 2 sen-
tences) by Srinivasan.
The 63 double annotated gene regulation abstracts
(set a) contained 547 sentences. The additional ab-
stracts (set b) marked by Light1 contained 344 sen-
tences summing to 891 sentences of gene regula-
tion abstracts. Thus, there is an average of almost
9 sentences per gene regulation abstract. The 100
turmeric abstracts (set e) contained 738 sentences.
The other sets contain twice as many sentences as
abstracts since only the last two sentences where an-
notated.
The annotation of each sentence was performed in
the context of its abstract. This was true even when
only the last two sentences where annotated. The
annotation guidelines in the appendix were used by
all annotators. In addition, at the start of the exper-
iment general issues were discussed but none of the
specific examples in the sets a-f.
We worked with three categories Low Specula-
tive, High Speculative, and Definite. All sentences
were annotated with one of these. The general idea
behind the low speculative level was that the authors
expressed a statement in such a way that it is clear
that it follows almost directly from results but not
quite. There is a small leap of faith. A high specu-
lative statement would contain a more dramatic leap
from the results mentioned in the abstract.
Our inter-annotator agreement results are ex-
pressed in the following four tables. The first table
contains values for the kappa statistic of agreement
(see (Siegel and Castellan, 1988)) for the gene regu-
lation data (set a) and the crohns data (set c). Three
values were computed: kappa for three-way agree-
ment (High vs. Low vs. Definite), two-way (Spec-
ulative vs. Definite) and two-way (High vs. Low).
Due to the lack of any sentences marked High in
set c, a kappa value for High vs. low (HvsL) is not
possible. Kappa scores between 0.6 and 0.8 are gen-
erally considered encouraging but not outstanding.
HvsLvsD SvsD HvsL
geneReg 0.53 0.68 0.03
crohns 0.63 0.63 na
1Pun intended.
The following two tables are confusion matrices,
the first for gene regulation data (set a) and the sec-
ond for the crohns data (set c).
H L D
H 5 11 5
L 10 26 19
D 3 12 440
H L D
H 0 0 3
L 0 14 3
D 1 7 170
If we consider one of the annotators as defining
truth (gold standard), then we can compute preci-
sion and recall numbers for the other annotator on
finding speculative sentences. If we choose Leon-
tiev and Srinivasan as defining truth, then Light and
Qiu receive the scores below.
precision recall
Light 0.68 0.78
Qiu 0.70 0.64
As is evident from the confusion matrices, the
amount of data that we redundantly annotated is
small and thus the kappa numbers are at best to be
taken as trends. However, it does seem that the spec-
ulative vs. definite distinction can be made with
some reliability. In contrast, the high speculation vs.
low speculation distinction cannot.
The gene regulation annotations marked by Light
(sets a & b using only Light?s annotations) can
be used to answer questions about the position of
speculative fragments in abstracts. Consider the
histogram-like table below. The first row refers to
speculative sentences and the second to definite. The
columns refer to the last sentence of an abstract, the
penultimate, elsewhere, and a row sum. The num-
ber in brackets is the raw count. Remember that the
number of abstracts in sets a & b together is 100.
last 2nd last earlier total
S 57%(57) 23%(23) 6%(45) 14%(125)
D 43%(43) 77%(75) 94%(648) 86%(766)
It is clear that almost all of the speculations come
towards the end of the abstract. In fact the final sen-
tence contains a speculation more often than not.
In addition, consider the data where all sentences
in an abstract were annotated (sets a & b & e, us-
ing Light?s annotation of a), there were 1456 defini-
tive sentences (89%) and 173 speculative sentence
(11%). Finally, if we consider the last two sen-
tences of all the data (sets a-f), we have 1712 defini-
tive sentences (82%) and 381 speculative sentences
(18.20%).
4 Automatic classifier experiment
We decided to explore the ability of an SVM-
based text classifier to select speculative sentences
from the abstracts. For this the abstracts were
first processed using the SMART retrieval system
(Salton, 1971) in order to obtain representation vec-
tors (term-based). Alternative representations were
tried involving stemming and term weighting (no
weights versus TF*IDF weights). Since results ob-
tained were similar we present only results using
stemming and no weights.
The classifier experiments followed a 10-fold
cross-validation design. We used SV Mlight pack-
age2 with all settings at default values. We ran ex-
periments in two modes. First, we considered only
the last 2 sentences. For this we pooled all hand
tagged sentences from the three topic areas (sets a-f).
Second, we explored classification on all sentences
in the document (sets a,b,e).
If we assume a default strategy as a simple base-
line, where the majority decision is always made,
then we get an accuracy of 82% for the classifica-
tion problem on the last two sentences data set and
89% for the all sentences data set. Another baseline
option is to use a set of strings and look for them as
substrings in the sentences. The following 14 strings
were identified by Light while annotating the gene
regulation abstracts (sets a&b): suggest, potential,
likely, may, at least, in part, possibl, potential, fur-
ther investigation, unlikely, putative, insights, point
toward, promise, propose. The automated system
then looks for these substrings in a sentence and if
found, the sentence is marked as speculative and as
definite if not.
In the table below the scores for the three methods
of annotation are listed as rows. We give accuracy
on the categorization task and precision and recall
numbers for finding speculative sentences. The for-
mat is precision/recall(accuracy), all as percentages.
The Majority method, annotating every sentence as
2http://wwwai.cs.unidortmund.de/ SOFT-
WARE/SVM LIGHT/svm light.html.en
definite, does not receive precision and recall values.
The substring method was run on a subset of the
datasets where the gene regulation data (sets a&b)
was removed. (It performs extremely well on the
gene regulation data due to the fact that it was devel-
oped on that data.)
last2 all
SVM 71/39(85) 84/39(92)
Substr 55/80(87) 55/79(95)
Majority (82) (89)
Again the results are preliminary since the amount
of data is small and the feature set we explored was
limited to words. However, it should be noted that
both the substring and the SVM systems performs
well suggesting that speculation in abstracts is lex-
ically marked but in a somewhat ambiguous fash-
ion. This conclusion is also supported by the fact
that neither system used positional features and yet
the precision and recall on the all sentence data set
is similar to the last two sentences data set.
5 Conclusion and future work
The work presented here is preliminary but promis-
ing. It seems that the notion of speculative sen-
tence can be characterized enabling manual anno-
tation. However, we did not manage to characterize
the distinction between high and low speculation. In
addition, it seems likely that automated systems will
be able to achieve useful accuracy. Finally, abstracts
seem to include a fair amount of speculative infor-
mation.
Future work concerning manual annotation would
include revising the guidelines, throwing out the
High vs. Low distinction, annotating more data, an-
notating sub-sentential units, annotating the focus of
the speculation (e.g., a gene), and annotating full
text articles. We are also ignorant of work in lin-
guistics that almost certainly exists and may be in-
formative. We have started this process by consider-
ing (Hyland, 1998) and (Harris et al, 1989).
Future work concerning automatic annotation in-
cludes expanding the substring system with more
substrings and perhaps more complicated regular ex-
pressions, expanding the feature set of the SVM, try-
ing out other classification methods such as decision
trees.
Finally, we plan on building some of the applica-
tions mentioned: a speculation search engine, tran-
scription factor interaction tables with a specula-
tion/definite column, and knowledge discovery test
sets.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Vladimir Leontiev for his
time and effort annotating gene regulation abstracts.
In addition, we would like to thank David Eich-
mann for his assistance with our database queries.
We would also like to thank Lynette Hirschman for
assistance with the title of this paper. Finally, we
would like to thank the anonymous workshop re-
viewers for their comments.
References
C. Friedman, P. Alderson, J. Austin, J.J. Cimino, and S.B.
Johnson. 1994. A general natural-language text pro-
cessor for clinical radiology. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, 1(2):161?174.
Z. Harris, M. Gottfried, T. Ryckman, P. Mattick, A. Dal-
adier, T.N. Harris, and S. Harris. 1989. The Form of
Information in Science : analysis of an immunology
sublanguage. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
K. Hyland. 1998. Hedging in Scientific Research Arti-
cles. John Benjamins B.V.
E. D. Liddy. 1988. The Discourse-Level Structure of
Natural Language Texts: An Exploratory Study of Em-
pirical Abstracts. Ph.D. thesis, Syracuse University.
M. Light, R. Arens, V. Leontiev, M. Patterson, X. Y. Qiu,
and H. Wang. 2003. Extracting transcription factor in-
teractions from medline abstracts. In Posters from the
11th International Conference on Intelligent Systems
in Molecular Biology. ISCB.
L. McKnight and P. Srinivasan. 2003. Categorization of
sentence types in medical abstracts. In Proceedings of
the 2003 AMIA conference.
Yan Qu, J. Shanahan, and J. M. Wiebe, editors. 2004.
Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Ex-
ploring Attitude and Affect in Text: Theories and Ap-
plications. AAAI. (to appear).
J. Reynar and A. Ratnaparkhi. 1997. A maximum en-
tropy approach to identifying sentence boundaries. In
Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Applied Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 16?19. ACL.
G. Salton, editor. 1971. The SMART Retrieval Sys-
tem: Experiments in Automatic Document Processing.
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
S. Siegel and N.J. Castellan. 1988. Nonparametric
Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences. McGraw-Hill.
P. Srinivasan. 2004. Text mining: Generating hypotheses
from medline. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology. (to appear).
D.R. Swanson. 1986. Fish oil, raynaud?s syndrome, and
undiscovered public knowledge. Perspectives in Biol-
ogy and Medicine, 30:7?18.
D.R. Swanson. 1988. Migraine and magnesium: Eleven
neglected connections. Perspectives in Biology and
Medicine, 31:526?557.
M. Weeber, H. Klein, L. Berg, and R. Vos. 2001. Con-
cepts in literature-based discovery: Simulating swan-
son?s raynaud-fish oil and migraine-magnesium dis-
coveries. Journal of the American Society for Infor-
mation Science, 52(7):548?557.
T. Wilson and J. Wiebe. 2003. Annotating opinions in
the world press. In Proceedings of the 4th SIGdial
Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue (SIGdial-03).
Appendix: Annotation Guidelines
Some target uses for speculative sentence classifi-
cation:
? a speculation search site that enables scientists
and health workers to find speculative state-
ments about a topic of interest,
? a set of starting points for knowledge discovery
systems,
? a test set for knowledge discovery systems.
The purpose of the guidelines below is to instruct
annotators on which sentences should be marked as
speculative.
There are three possible annotations for a sen-
tence: Low Speculative, High Speculative, and Def-
inite. All sentences should annotated with one of
these.
A sentence may be long and contain many sub-
parts:
? if any part of it is High Speculative (HS), it
should be marked as HS,
? if it is not HS but a part of it is Low Speculative
(LS), it should be marked as LS,
? otherwise it should be marked as Definite.
It should also be mentioned that the intent of the
author is what is relevant. The annotator should try
to decide if the author meant the sentence as specu-
lative or definite. E.g., an annotator should not mark
a sentence as speculative, if the author intended the
statement to be definitive.
Below are the definitions for the categories.
? Low Speculative (LS): A sentence fragment is
LS if the author indicates that it receives di-
rect support from the work presented but there
are other possible explanations for the results
(as there always are in science). However,
the proposition (expressed in the sentence frag-
ment) is a plausible if not likely explanation.
? High Speculative (HS): A sentence fragment is
HS if the author indicates that it does not follow
from the work presented but could be extrapo-
lated from it. In other words the work provides
indirect support for the proposition.
? Definite: A sentence fragment is definite if it is
not LS or HS. Observations are generally Def-
inite as are statements about methods, previous
work, etc.
Below are tests that may be helpful for annotating
particular sentences.
? If the sentence fragment implicitly suggests fu-
ture experimentation, then it is likely to be HS.
? Paraphrased the sentence fragment using ?we
conclude?, ?we observe?, or ?we know?. If
a contradiction or cognitive dissonance occurs
then perhaps the fragment is speculative. The
contradiction will be analogous to that in ?we
definitely believe that maybe there is a chance?.
Below are a number of additional considerations.
? Our characterization of speculative speech is
meant to be broad enough to include state-
ments that are not explicitly marked as specula-
tions but are speculations made by the authors
nonetheless. For example, we would consider
a proposal that some statement is true to be a
speculative sentence.
? Mentions of speculations made in previous
work should be considered speculations, e.g.,
?It was recently proposed that ...?.
