Named Entity Learning and Verification:
Expectation Maximization in Large Corpora
Uwe QUASTHOFF, Christian BIEMANN, Christian WOLFF
CS Institute, Leipzig University
Augustusplatz 10/11
Leipzig, Germany, 04109
Abstract
The regularity of named entities is used to learn
names and to extract named entities. Having only
a few name elements and a set of patterns the al-
gorithm learns new names and its elements. A
verification step assures quality using a large
background corpus. Further improvement is
reached through classifying the newly learnt
elements on character level. Moreover, unsuper-
vised rule learning is discussed.
1 Introduction
The task of recognizing person names in text
corpora is well examined in the field of Infor-
mation Extraction. Most of the approaches, us-
ing machine-learning or statistical methods
make excessive use of annotated data or large
gazetteers. We present a method that needs little
input knowledge and performs unsupervised
learning on unlabeled data, restricting ourselves
to person names.
In most languages, named entities form regular
patterns. Usually, a surname has a preceding
first name, which in turn might have a preceding
title or profession. Similar rules hold for differ-
ent kinds of named entities consisting of more
than one word. Moreover, some elements of
such multiwords (like president) are high fre-
quency items, well known and of high signifi-
cance for identifying a named entity. On the
other hand, there are elements that often appear
in named entities, but are not characteristic for
them (like the first name Isra l).
Therefore, a verification step is included in the
learning algorithm.
2 The Algorithm
Our learning algorithm starts with a set of pat-
terns and initial name elements. A large corpus
of more then 10 million sentences [cf. Quasthoff
& Wolff 2000], taken from newspapers of the
last 10 years is used for both, the identification
of candidates for new name elements as well as
for verifying the candidates found. The algo-
rithm stops, if no more new name elements are
found.
The algorithm implements xpectation maximi-
zation (EM) [cf. Dempster, 1977, Collins, 1999]
in the following way: The combination of a
learning step and a verification step are iterated.
If more name elements are found, the recall of
the verification step increases. The key property
of this algorithm is to assure high precision and
stil  get massive recall.
From another point of view our algorithm im-
plements bootstrapping [cf. Riloff 99], as it
starts from a small number of seed words and
uses knowledge found during the run to find
more candidates.
2.1 Patterns and Pattern Rules
In a first step the text to be analysed is tagged in
he ollowing way: We have two types of tags.
The first type is problem dependent. In the case
of persons, we have tags for title or profession
(TI), first name (FN) and surname (LN). The
second tag set is problem independent, but lan-
guage dependent. In our experiments, we
marked words as lower case (LC) or upper case
(UC) depending on the first letter. Punctuation
marks are marked as PM, determiners as DET.
Words can have multiple tags, e.g. UC and FN
at the same time.
The next step is to find tag sequences which are
typical for names, like TI-FN-LN . From here,
we can create rules like
TI-UC-LN ? TI-FN-LN ,
which means that an upper case word between
title and last name is a candidate for a first name.
An overview of handmade start rules is given in
appendix 1.
Looking at the rules, it is possible to argue that a
rule like UC-LN ? FN-LN  is a massive over-
generalization. This would be true if we would
learn new name elements simply by applying
rules. However, the verification step ensures that
false friends are eliminated at high rate.
2.2 The Outer Loop
The algorithm is described as follows:
Load pattern rules.
Let unused name elements = in i tial
             set of name elements
Loop:
   For each unused name entity
Do the learning step and
             collect new cand i dates
   For each new candidate
Do the verification step
   Output verified candidates
   Let unused name elements =
             ver i fied candidates
2.3 The Learning Step: Finding Candi-
dates
Using the pattern rules and the current name
elements, new candidates are searched. Here we
use the corpus.
Search 255 random sentences co n-
taining the unused name entity (or
all, if <255).
Use the pattern rules to identify
new candidates as d escribed above.
2.4 The Verification Step
In a verification step, each candidate is tested
before it is used to generate new candidates. We
test the following property: Does the candidate
appear often enough together with verified name
elements? Again, we use the corpus.
Search 30 random sentences contai n-
ing the name element to be ver i -
fied (or all, if <30).
If the ratio fulfilling at least
one right side of a pattern rule
is above some threshold, the ca n-
didate is a ccepted.
3 The Exhaustion Cycle
The overall performance of the algorithm can be
estimated as follows: For simplicity let us as-
sume that the average number of items (in our
task: name elements) findable by any unused
item equals N. Then the number of items starts
to grow exponentially. Sooner or later, the total
number of unseen entities decreases. Hence,
most of the N items found are known already.
The numbers of new items found in each turn
decreases, until no more items can be reached.
So we discriminate between a phase of growth
and a phase of exhaustion.
The following figures visualize the number of
new items per turn and the accumulated total
number of items for each turn. Data was taken
from an experiment with 19 items of knowledge
(see appendix 2). The test was performed on the
German corpus and designed to find first and
last names only. The phase of growth lasts until
the 5th cycle, then exhaustion takes over, as can
be seen in figure 11.
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1
cycle
it
em
s
New Items Total Items
Figure 1: total and new items vs. cycles2
                                            
1 Additional runs with more start items produced the
same amount of  total items in less cycles.
2 Note that 25'000 name elements are responsible for
the detection of over 150'000 full names.
Natural growth in the number of items takes
place under the following conditions:
? Sufficient size of corpus
? Sufficient frequency of start items
? Suitable relation, e.g. names
If the corpus is not large enough or it is not pos-
sible to find enough candidates from the start
items, exhaustion takes place immediately.
4 Examples
Let us closely examine the learning of items by
example: From the known first name John, the
candidate for being a last name H uberg was
found in the fragment "...by John Hauberg and.."
by the rule FN-UC-LC => FN-LN-LC  and
verified in occurrences like "Robert Hauberg,
...", "Robert Hauberg urges..." using the already
known first name Robert.
Errors occur in the case of words, which are
mainly used in positions which are often occu-
pied by first names. In German, the algorithm
extracts and verifies "?ra" (e ) and "Transport-
panzer" (Army transportation tank) because of
the common usage "?ra Kohl" and the proper
name "Transportpanzer Fuchs" (fox tank). In the
case of "?ra", this false first name supports the
classifications of the proper last names Hinrichs,
Strau?, Bangemann, Albrecht, Gorbatchow,
Jelzin and many more.
5 Precision and Recall
5.1 Precision
Note that precision will be different for the dif-
ferent types of name elements. Usually surnames
are recognized with high precision. First names
may be confused with titles, for instance.
Moreover, precision is language dependent
mainly due to the different usage of capital let-
ters: In German, nouns start with capital letters
and can much easier be confused with names.
For German first names in the run mentioned
above, the algorithm yields a precision of
84.1%. Noise items mainly are titles and profes-
sion names, which are spelled with a capital
letter in German. Using the additional fact that
first names usually do not exceed 10 letters in
length, the precision for first names rose to
92.7%.
For last names, results were excellent with a
precision of more than 99%. The same holds for
titles, as further experiments showed.
The ratio number of first names vs. number of
last names happens to be about 1:3, overall pre-
cision for German scored 97.5%.
Because of the fewer capitalized words in Eng-
lish the precision for English first names is
higher, scoring 92.6% without further filtering.
Overall precision for English first and last names
was 98.7%.
5.2 Recall
Recall mainly depends on the pattern rules used.
The experiments were performed with the 14
handmade rules given in appendix 1, which
surely are not sufficient.
Calculating the recall is not at all straightfor-
ward, because we do not know how many names
are contained in our corpora and experiments on
small corpora fail to show the natural growth of
items described in the previous section. Further,
recall will rise with a growing knowledge size.
So we modified the algorithm in a way that it
takes plain text as input, applies the rules to find
candidates and checks them in the big corpus.
Providing a large set of knowledge items, in an
experiment processing 1000 sentences, 71.4% of
the person names were extracted correctly.
To increase the coverage of the rules it is possi-
ble to add rules manually or start a process of
rule learning as described below.
5.3. Propagation of Errors
During the run the error rate increases due to
finding candidates and verification through mis-
classified items. However, as the "era" example
(see section 4) illustrates, misclassified items
support the classification of goal items.
The amount of deterioration highly depends on
the pattern rules. Strict rules mean low recall but
high precision, whereas general rules have
greater coverage but find too much, resulting in
a trade-off between precision and recall.
Table 1 shows the error rate for first names for
the illustrated run (see section 3) over the course
of time.
From this we conclude that the algorithm is ro-
bust against errors and the quality of the classifi-
cations remains relatively stable during the run
when using appropriate rules.
total items
interval
Precision for
FN without
length filter
Precision for
FN with
length filter
1-1000 87.1% 93.8%
1001-2000 90.0% 95.3%
4001-5000 88.1% 97.1%
9001-10000 83.2% 94.4%
19001-20000 83.7% 91.2%
21001-22000 86.2% 92.4%
24001-25000 83.0% 87.9%
Table 1: Propagation of Errors
6 Classification on character level
In German, most words misclassified as first
names were titles and professions. While they
cannot be distinguished by the rules used, they
differ strongly from the morphological view.
German titles are usually longer because they
are compounds, and parts of compounds are
used very frequently.
In this section, we introduce a m thod to distin-
guish between titles and first names at character
level, using the fact that the formation of words
follows language-dependent rules.
This procedure is implemented in the following
classifier A: Assume the property we are inter-
ested in is visible at the ending of a word (this is
basically true for different word classes in lan-
guages like English, French or German). We
build a decision tree [cf. McCarthy & Lehnert
1995] reading the words character-by-character,
starting from the end. We stop if the feature is
uniquely determined.
Moreover, we could as well start from the be-
ginning of a word (classifier B). Finally, we can
use any connected substring of the word instead
of substrings containing the end or the beginning
(classifier C).
If the training set is large enough and the algo-
rithm of the classifier is appropriate, it will cover
both general rules as well as many exceptions.
Classifier A and B only differ on the direction a
word is analyzed. We build decision trees with
additional default child nodes as follows.
6.1 Classifier A: Considering Prefixes
Step 1:Building the ordinary decision tree:
Given the training word list we construct
a prefix tree [cf. Gusfield 1999, Navarro
2001:38ff]. The leaves in the tree corre-
spond to word endings; here we store the
feature of the corresponding word.
Step 2:Reduction of the decision tree: If all
children of a given node have the same
feature, this feature is lifted to the parent
node and the children are deleted.
Step 3:Insertion of default features: If a node
does not yet have a feature, but one of
the features is very dominant (say, pres-
ent in 80% of the children), this feature
will be assigned as default feature.
For classification, the decision tree is used as
follows:
Step 1:Searching the tree: Reading the given
word from left to right we follow the
tree as far as possible. The reading proc-
ess stops in a certain node N.
Step 2:Classification: If the node N has an as-
signed feature F then return F. Other-
wise return no decision.
Figure 2 shows a part of the decision tree built
using first names Theoardis, Theobald, Theo-
derich, Theodor, Theresa, Therese, ? and the
singular title Theologe (which should be the only
title in our training list starting with Theo). As a
result, all children of Theo will be first names;
hence they get the feature firstname. The node
Theologe gets the feature titl .
This turns out to be singular; hence their parent
Theo gets the default feature firstname. As a
consequence, Theophil will correctly be classi-
fied as firstname, while the exception Theologe
will still be classified as title.
 Theologe 
(TI) 
Theodor 
(FN) 
Theobald 
(FN) 
Theo [default] 
(FN) 
... 
... 
T A Z 
(root) 
Figure 2: Prefix Decision Tree for Proper Names
As mentioned above, algorithm B works the
same way as algorithm A, using suffixes instead
of prefixes for the decision tree.
6.2 Classifier C: Considering Substrings
Instead of concentrating on prefixes or suffixes,
we consider all relevant continuous substrings of
a given word. Unfortunately, there is no natural
tree structure for this set. Hence, we will con-
struct a decision list without default features.
Given is a training list containing pairs (word,
feature):
Construction of the decision list
Step 1:Collect all substring information. We
produce the following list L: For all
pairs (wordN, featureN) from the train-
ing list we generate all possible pairs of
the kind (continuous substring of
wordN, featureN). If wordN has length
n, we have n(n+1)/2 continuous sub-
strings. Finally the list is sorted alpha-
betically and duplicates are removed.
Step 2:Removing contradictions: If a substring
occurs with more then one feature, these
lines are deleted from L.
Step 3:Removing tails: If a certain string now
has a unique feature, all extensions of
this string should have the same feature
and the corresponding entries are re-
moved from L.
For classification, the decision list is used as
follows:
Step 1:Look-up of substrings: For a word to be
classified we generate its continuous
substrings and collect their features from
L.
Step 2:Classification: If all collected features
are equal, then return this feature. Oth-
erwise, return no decision.
6.3 Properties of the classifiers
In the following, we assume that the classifiers
are trained with non-contradictory data. The
classifiers now have the following properties:
? The classifiers reproduce the results given in
the training set. Hence, they can also be
trained with rare exceptions.
? It is necessary to have a training set covering
all aspects of the data, otherwise the deci-
sion tree will be confused.
? It is appropriate to return no decision if the
classifier stops in the decision tree at a point
where children have mixed features.
Bagging [cf. Breiman 1996] the three classifiers,
we achieved a precision of 94.7% with 94.5%
recall, using merely a training set of 1368 exam-
ples on a test set of 683 items, distinguishing
between the three classes:
? First name (FN)
? Title (TI)
? None of these.
This method of postprocessing is applicable to
all features visible by the three classifiers, which
are:
? Features represented by word suffixes or
prefixes like inflection and some word for-
mation rules.
? Words carrying the same feature if they are
similar as strings. Candidates are all kinds of
proper names, as well as distinguishing
parts-of-speech.
? Words of languages for special purposes,
which are often built by combining parts
where some of them are very typical for a
given domain. Examples are chemical sub-
stances, professions and titles, or industrial
goods.
7 Rule Learning
Unlike most tasks in Inductive Logic Program-
ming (ILP) [cf. Dzeroski, 2001], our method
needs rules-of-thumb that find many candidates
like in boosting [cf. Collins, 1999], rather then a
rule precision of 100%.
For automatic rule induction we used a training
set of 236 sentences found automatically by
taking sentences containing known first names
and last names from the corpus. After excessive
annotation, all possible rules were built accord-
ing to the contexts of known items and after-
wards tested on the training set. To avoid rules
too general like UC-UC?FN-UC, the patterns
had to contain at least one problem specific tag
(i.e. FN, LN, TIT). The rules performing above a
certain precision threshold (in our experiments
we used 0.7) were taken as input for our algo-
rithm.
We obtained 106 rules for first names, 67 for
last names and 4 for titles, ranging from very
specific rules like
PM-PM-UC-LN ? PM-PM-FN-LN
to very general ones like
TI-UC ? TI-FN.
In the table below some rules found by auto-
matic induction are shown.
Rule example context
FN-UC-LN
? FN-FN-LN
Herbert Archibald
Miller
FN-LC-FN-UC
? FN-LC-FN-LN
Ilse und Maria Bode-
mann
UC-UC-LN
? UC-FN-LN
Pr?sident Bill Clinton
FN-FN-UC
? FN-FN-LN
Hans Christian A -
derson
TI-PM-UC-UC
? TI-FS-FN-UC
Dr. Helmut Kohl
Table 2: Rules Found by Automatic Induction
Using those rules as input for our algorithm, we
gained both, higher recall as well as higher pre-
cision compared to the handmade rules when
starting with the same knowledge. Table 3
shows precision rates for the three classes of
name elements, data was taken from a run with
19 start elements, the length filter for first names
was applied, and the string classifiers were not.
Due to less strict rules, precision decreases.
total items
interval
Prec. FN Prec. LN Prec.  TIT
1-1000 94,6% 99,6% 100%
1001-2000 94,8% 98,6% 100%
2001-3000 94,7% 98,4% 100%
4001-5000 84,7% 99,1% 100%
9001-10000 86,6% 98,6% 100%
24001-2500074,0% 89,7% 100%
Table 2: Propagation of errors for inferred rules
Percentage of first name items from the number
of total items was 23,3%, last name items made
75,2% of total items and title items yielded only
1,4%, because to the low number of title rules.
8 Future work
Despite of the good results when using inferred
rules as described above for our algorithm, we
hope to improve the method as a whole with
respect to the size of the input knowledge.
Natural growth behaviour can be observed from
some 10 frequent start items, the string classifier
requires a couple of hundred words for training
whereas rule learning needs some 200 fully an-
notated sentences containing names. Experi-
ments with sparsely annotated training sentences
(100 knowledge items) yielded too specific and
too weak rules with poor performance w.r.t.
recall.
Another possibility would be to start with a
small set of seed rules [cf. Riloff 1999] and to
construct-by-example and rate rules during the
classification task.
Another interesting issue is the understanding of
relations suitable for this method from a the-
retical viewpoint.
9 Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Martin L?uter
for providing, implementing and testing the
three string classifiers.
10 References
Apte, C.; Damerau, F.; Weiss, S. M. (1998) Text
Mining with Decision Trees and Decision Rules.
Proc. Conference on Automated Learning and Dis-
covery, Carnegie-Mellon University, June 1998.
Breiman, L. (1996) Bagging Predictors, Machine
Learning, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 123-140
Califf, M. E.; Mooney, R. J. (1997) Relational
Learning of Pattern-match Rules for Information
Extraction. Working Papers of the ACL-97 Work-
shop in NLP, 1997, 6-11.
Collins, M.; Singer, Y. (1999) Unsupervised Models
for Named Entity Classification. In: Proc. Of the
Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and very Large
Corpora.
Dempster, A.P.; Laird, N. M.; Rubin, D.B. (1977)
Maximum Likelihood from Incomplete Data via the
EM Algorithm, Journal of the Royal Statistical So-
ciety, Ser B, 39, 1-38.
Dzeroski, S.; Lavrac, N. (2001) Introduction to In-
ductive Logic Programming. I  Saso Dzeroski and
Nada Lavrac, editors, Relational Data Mining,
pages 48-73. Springer-Verlag, Berlin
Freitag, D. (1998) Multistrategy Learning for Info-
mation Extraction. Proc. 15th International Conf.
on Machine Learning, 161-169.
Gusfield, Dan (1999) Algorithms on Strings, Trees,
and Sequences. Cambridge University Press, UK.
McCarthy, J.; Lehnert, W. (1995) Using Decision
Trees for Coreference Resolution. In: Mellish, C.
(ed.) (1995). Proc. Fourteenth International Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence, 1050-1055.
Nahm, U. Y.; Mooney, R. J. (2002) Text Mining with
Information Extraction. To appear in AAAI 2002
Spring Symposium on Mining Answers from Texts
and Knowledge Bases, Stanford, CA.
Navarro, G. (2001) A guided tour to approximate
string matching. ACM Computing Surveys 33(1)
(2001), 31-88.
Ng, H.; Lee, H. (1996) Integrating Multiple Knowl-
edge Sources to Disambiguate Word Sense: An Ex-
emplar-Based Approach. Proc. of the 34th Annual
Meeting of the ACL, 40-47.
Quasthoff, U.; Wolff, Ch. (2000) An Infrastructure
for Corpus-Based Monolingual Dictionaries. Proc.
LREC-2000. Second International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation. Athens, May
/ June 2000, Vol. I, 241-246.
Riloff, E.; Jones, R. (1999) Learning Dictionaries for
Information Extraction by Multi-Level Bootstrap-
ping. Proceedings of the sixteenth National Con-
ference on Artificial Intellig nce (AAAI-99)
Roth, D. (1998) Learning to Resolve Natural Lan-
guage Ambiguities: A Unified Approach. Pro . of
the American Association of Artificial Intelligence,
806-813.
Witten, I. H.; Frank, E. (1999) Data Mining: Practi-
cal Machine Learning Tools and Techniques with
Java Implementations. San Francisco, CA: Morgan
Kaufman.
Appendix 1: Initial Handmade Rule Set
UC-LN ? FN-LN
PM-FN-PM-UC ? PM-FN-PM-FN
TI-PM-UC-LN ? TI-PM-FN-LN
FN-LN-PM-UC-LN ? FN-LN-PM-FN-LN
FN-UC-PM ? FN-LN-PM
FN-UC-LC ? FN-LN-LC
TI-UC-LC ? TI-LN-LC
TI-PM-UC-LC ? TI-PM-LN-LC
LN-PM-FN-UC-PM ? LN-PM-FN-LN-PM
UC-PM-FN-LN ? TI-PM-FN-LN
UC-PM-LN ? TI-PM-LN
DET-UC-FN-LN ? DET-TI-FN-LN
DET-UC-FN-FN-LN ? DET-TI-FN-FN-LN
DET-UC-LN ? DET-TI-LN
Note that the last three rules are specific for German
because titles are in upper case in this language.
Appendix 2: 19 Start items used in the
experiments
Name elment Class
Schmidt LN
Reuter LN
Wagner LN
Sch?uble LN
Vogts LN
Hoffmann LN
Schulz LN
M?ller LN
Meyer LN
Beck LN
Michael FN
Thomas FN
Klaus FN
Wolfgang FN
Hans FN
Werner FN
Martin FN
Walter FN
Karl FN
Zock/Rapp/Huang (eds.): Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon, pages 46?49,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23, 2014.
Using Significant Word Co-occurences for the Lexical Access Problem
Rico Feist and Daniel Gerighausen and Manuel Konrad and Georg Richter and
Department of Computer Science,
University of Leipzig,
Germany
rf@ricofeist.de, daniel@bioinf.uni-leipzig.de
manuel.konrad, georg.richter @studserv.uni-leipzig.de
Thomas Eckart and Dirk Goldhahn and Uwe Quasthoff
Natural Language Processing Group,
University of Leipzig,
Germany
teckart, dgoldhahn, quasthoff
@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
Abstract
One way to analyse word relations is to examine their co-occurrence in the same context. This
allows for the identification of potential semantic or lexical relationships between words. As
previous studies showed word co-occurrences often reflect human stimuli-response pairs. In this
paper significant sentence co-occurrences on word level were used to identify potential responses
for word stimuli based on three automatically generated text corpora of the Leipzig Corpora
Collection.
1 Introduction
Conventional dictionaries have very limited possibilities for retrieving information. By contrast elec-
tronic dictionaries offer a much wider and more dynamic range of access strategies. One important task
in dictionary lookup is to retrieve a word starting just with the corresponding meaning. For this purpose
the flexibility of electronic dictionaries should be advantageous. In the following the related task of re-
trieving a word based just on a stimulus of five related input words is addressed. Based on the assumption
that word co-occurrences in the same context can be used to analyse word relations and to identify poten-
tial semantic or lexical relationships between words an automatic system is built based on an electronic
dictionary extracted from Web corpora. As previous studies showed word co-occurrences often reflect
human stimuli-response pairs (Spence, 1990; Schulte im Walde, 2008). In this paper significant sentence
co-occurrences on word level were used to identify potential responses for word stimuli based on three
automatically generated text corpora of the Leipzig Corpora Collection (LCC).
2 Used Methods and Resources
2.1 Used Corpora
The text corpora of the Leipzig Corpora Collection (Biemann, 2007; Goldhahn, 2012) were used as
data basis. As the origin of the stimuli data was unknown corpora based on different text material were
exploited:
? eng wikipedia 2010: a corpus based on the English Wikipedia generated in 2010 containing 23
million sentences
? eng news 2008: 49 million sentences from English newspaper articles collected in 2008
? eng web 2002: 57 million sentences of English Web text crawled in 2002
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence. Page numbers and proceedings footer
are added by the organisers. Licence details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
46
All of these corpora were generated by the standard preprocessing toolchain of the LCC. This
toolchain contains different procedures to ensure corpus quality like language identification and pattern
based removal of invalid text material (Goldhahn, 2012). Furthermore all corpora were annotated with
statistical information about word co-occurrences based on co-occurrence in the same sentence or direct
neighbourhood. These word relations were generated by using the log-likelihood ratio (Buechler, 2006)
as measure of significance. Complete sentences were used as co-occurrence window.
2.2 Raw Results Generation
For each of the five stimulus words and every corpus all co-occurrent words were extracted. For extracted
terms that significantly co-occurred with more than one of the stimulus words the significance of co-
occurrence were combined. Based on the sum of the significance values a ranking of the most relevant
terms for every stimulus was created for every corpus. The most significant 15 words were considered
as raw result for every corpus and stimulus 5-tuple.
2.3 Postprocessing
The raw results were combined by replacing the result ranks in the three intermediate result lists l
i
(1 <= i <= 3) with a weight (weight
i
(w) = 16 ? rank
i
(w)). These weights were merged by
generating the combined weight for all three corpora c weight(w) =
3
?
i=1
weight
i
(w). The word with
the highest combined weight was chosen as response for a stimulus tupel.
The same procedure was used in two variations:
? Rankings were generated based on the combination of all inflected terms of the same word stem (by
using the Porter stemmer(Porter, 1980)).
? Stop words were removed from the result lists to reduce the influence of high frequent function
words
1
.
For some stimuli only stop words were extracted as response. Here not only the 15 most significant terms
were extracted from every corpus but the 45 most significant terms. This lead to more useful results in
most cases.
2.4 Results
All three variants were evaluated on the training data set. The evaluation lead to the conclusion that a
stop word filter is a useful preprocessing step, whereas stemming lead to unsatisfactory results (cp. table
1). As a consequence only the stop word filter (without stemming) was used for the test data set where
281 (14.05%) of the responses were correctly predicted.
Used Data Correctly Predicted Percentage
Original corpus data (incl. stop words, unstemmed) 61 3.05%
Removed stop words 262 13.1%
Stemmed 43 2.15%
Table 1: Evaluation of the different approaches based on the training data set
3 Conclusion
It is noteworthy that corpora where solely stop words were removed yielded better results than corpora
where additional stemming took place. One reason for this observation is most likely that by using the
Porter algorithm an overstemming occurred. Some word pairs were reduced to identical word stems
1
For this purpose the stop word list of the database management system MySQL was used
(https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.5/en/fulltext-stopwords.html).
47
Figure 1: Histogramm of the combined weights for the training data set
Figure 2: Histogramm of the combined weights for the test data set
although having no semantic relationship.
The final results also contained a disproportionately high number of specific terms. As an example the
word ?god? was chosen 38 times as response. An analysis of the corpora showed that the word ?god?
was especially frequent in theWeb corpus (330,276 of 56,523,369 sentences (0.59%)) and theWikipedia-
based corpus (58,605 of 22,675,331 sentences (0.26%)). In contrast, the newspaper corpus had only 29
occurrences of the term ?god? (in 48,903,372 sentences (0.00006%)).
The evaluation for both the training (figure 1) and the test data set (figure 2) shows that there is a peak
for the combined weight of 15. This behaviour originates in terms that have the maximum rank in one of
the three corpora but being no significant co-occurrent term in the other two.
4 Further Improvements
The evaluation showed that the used corpora generated results of different quality. This was especially
demonstrated at the example of the term ?god?. As a consequence a stricter selection of the corpus ma-
terial combined with a weighting of the specific results from each corpus could improve the predictions.
48
The used corpora reflect a specific selection of input material (in this case written text material from
different sources of the years 2002 to 2010). A corpus that reflects more of the details of the test data
(most notably being significantly older) would very likely enhance the results. This is especially the case
as words that became prominent over the last decades (like technical terms or words strongly related to
more recent political developments) would not have occurred in the generated results. A deeper analysis
of the input material and the availability of a comparable corpus would have been the prerequisites.
An examination of the results also showed that in many cases a synonym of the correct response was
identified. Hence the usage of a synonym database could also lead to further improvements. Furthermore
using part of speech information could be beneficial for the weighting of intermediate results. The basic
idea is that part of speech of stimulus and response are very likely to be the same. This would have
eliminated parts of the generated result sets. Furthermore a deeper analysis of the ranking procedure
may have reduced the effect which manifests in many terms having a weight of 15 in the results.
References
Chris Biemann, Gerhard Heyer, Uwe Quasthoff, and Matthias Richter. 2007. The Leipzig Corpora Collection -
Monolingual corpora of standard size. Proceedings of Corpus Linguistic 2007, Birmingham, UK.
Marco Buechler. 2006. Flexibles Berechnen von Kookkurrenzen auf strukturierten und unstrukturierten Daten.
Diploma Thesis, University of Leipzig.
Dirk Goldhahn, Thomas Eckart, and Uwe Quasthoff. 2012. Building Large Monolingual Dictionaries at the
Leipzig Corpora Collection: From 100 to 200 Languages. Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012).
Martin F. Porter. 1980. An algorithm for suffix stripping. electronic library and information systems, 14.3 (1980):
130-137.
Donald P. Spence, and Kimberley C. Owens. 1990. Lexical co-occurrence and association strength. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, Volume 19(5):317?330.
Sabine Schulte im Walde, and Alissa Melinger. 2008. An in-depth look into the co-occurrence distribution of
semantic associates. Italian Journal of Linguistics, Special Issue on From Context to Meaning: Distributional
Models of the Lexicon in Linguistics and Cognitive Science.
49
