NewsInEssence: A System For Domain-Independent,
Real-Time News Clustering and Multi-Document
Summarization
Dragomir R. Radev?y, Sasha Blair-Goldensohn?, Zhu Zhang?, Revathi Sundara Raghavany
?School of Information
yDepartment of EECS
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
fradev,sashabg,zhuzhang,rsundarag@umich.edu
1. INTRODUCTION
NEWSINESSENCE is a system for finding, visualizing and sum-
marizing a topic-based cluster of news stories. In the generic sce-
nario for NEWSINESSENCE, a user selects a single news story from
a news Web site. Our system then searches other live sources of
news for other stories related to the same event and produces sum-
maries of a subset of the stories that it finds, according to parame-
ters specified by the user.
2. THE NEWSINESSENCE SYSTEM
NewsInEssence?s search agent, NewsTroll, runs in two phases.
First, it looks for related articles by traversing links from the page
containing the seed article. Using the seed article and any related
articles it finds in this way, the agent then decides on a set of key-
words for further search. In the second phase, it attempts to add
to the cluster of related articles by going to the search engines of
various news websites and using the keywords which it found in
the first phase as search terms.
In both phases, NewsTroll selectively follows hyperlinks with
the aim of reaching pages which contain related stories and/or fur-
ther hyperlinks to related stories pages.
Both general and site-specific rules help NewsTroll determine
which URLs are likely to be useful. Only if NewsTroll determines
that a URL is ?interesting?, will it go to the Internet to fetch the new
page. A more stringent set of rules are applied to determine whether
the URL is likely to be a news story itself. If so, the similarity
of its text to that of the original seed page is computed using an
IDF-weighted vector measure. If the similarity is above a certain
threshold, the page is considered to contain a related article and
added to the cluster. The user may use our web interface (Figure 2)
to adjust the similarity threshold used in a given search.
Using several levels of filtering, NewsTroll is able to screen out
large numbers web pages quite efficiently. The expensive opera-
tion of testing lexical similarity is reserved for the small number of
.
pages which NewsTroll finds interesting. Consequently, the agent
can return useful results in real time.
3. ANNOTATED SAMPLE RUN
The example begins when we find a news article we would like
to read more about. In this case we pick a story is about a break-
ing story regarding one of President-Elect Bush?s cabinet nominees
(see Figure 1).
We input the URL using the web interface of the NEWSINESSENCE
system, then select our search options, click ?Proceed? and wait for
our results (see Figure 2).
In response to the user query, NewsTroll begins looking for re-
lated articles linked from the chosen start page. In a selection from
the agent?s output log in Figure 3, we can see that it extracts and
tests links from the page, and decides to test one which looks like a
news article. We then see that it tests this article and determines it
to be related. This article is added to the initial cluster, from which
the list of top keywords is drawn.
In its secondary phase, NewsTroll inputs its keywords to the
search engines of news sites and lets them do the work of find-
ing stories. Since we have selected good keywords, most of the
links seen by NewsTroll in this part of the search are indeed related
articles (see Figure 4). Upon exiting, NewsTroll reports the num-
ber of links it has considered, followed, tested, and retrieved (see
Figure 4).
The system?s web interface reports its progress to the user in real
time and provides a link to the visualization GUI once the cluster
is complete (Figure 5). Using the GUI, the user can select which of
the articles to summarize (see Figures 6 and 7). Figure 8 shows the
output of the cluster summarizer.
4. FUTURE WORK
We are currently working on the integration of Cross-Document
structure theory (CST) [1] with NEWSINESSENCE. CST is used to
describe relations between textual units in multi-document clusters.
It is used for example to identify which portions of a cluster contain
background information, which sections are redundant, and which
ones contain additional information about an event.
5. REFERENCES
[1] Dragomir Radev. A common theory of information fusion
from multiple text sources, step one: Cross-document
structure. In Proceedings, 1st ACL SIGDIAL Workshop on
Discourse and Dialogue, Hong Kong, October 2000.
Figure 1: Seed article.
Figure 2: User interface.
Figure 3: Run-time log (part I).
Figure 4: Run-time log (part II).
Figure 5: System progress.
Figure 6: Cluster visualization.
Figure 7: Selected articles.
Figure 8: Summarization interface.
