Extracting Molecular Binding Relationships from Biomedical Text 
Thomas C. RINDFLESCH 
National Library of Medicine 
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD, 20894 
tcr@nlm.nih.gov 
Jayant V. RAJAN 
University of Rochester 
Rochester, NY, 14620 
Jayant.Rajan@ mc.rochester.edu 
Lawrence HUNTER 
National Cancer Institute 
7550 Wisconsin Avenue 
Bethesda, MD, 20894 
lhunter@nih.gov 
Abstract 
ARBITER is a Prolog program that extracts 
assertions about macromolecular binding 
relationships from biomedical text. We de- 
scribe the domain knowledge and the under- 
specified linguistic analyses that support he 
identification of these predications. After 
discussing a formal evaluation of 
ARBITER, we report on its application to 
491,000 MEDLINE ~ abstracts, during 
which almost 25,000 binding relationships 
suitable for entry into a database of macro- 
molecular function were extracted. 
Introduction 
Far more scientific information exists in the lit- 
erature than in any structured atabase. Con- 
venient access to this information could signifi- 
cantly benefit research activities in various 
fields. The emerging technology of information 
extraction (Appelt and Israel 1997, Hearst 1999) 
provides a means of gaining access to this in- 
formation. In this paper we report on a project o 
extract biomolecular data from biomedical text. 
We concentrate on molecular binding affinity, 
which provides a strong indication of macro- 
molecular function and is a core phenomenon in 
molecular biology. Our ultimate goal is to auto- 
matically construct a database of binding rela- 
tionships asserted in MEDLINE citations. 
The National Library of Medicine's 
MEDLINE textual database is an online reposi- 
tory of more than 10 million citations from the 
biomedical literature. All citations contain the 
title of the corresponding article along with other 
bibliographic information. In addition, a large 
number of citations contain author-supplied ab- 
stracts. Initial studies indicate that there are ap- 
proximately 500,000 MEDLINE citations rele- 
vant to molecular binding affinity. 
Our decision to apply information extraction 
technology to binding relationships was guided 
not only by the biological importance of this 
phenomenon but also by the relatively straight- 
forward syntactic uing of binding predications 
in text. The inflectional forms of a single verb, 
bind, indicate this relationship n the vast major- 
ity of cases, and our initial work is limited to 
these instances. For example, our goal in this 
project is to extract he binding predications in 
(2) from the text in (1). 
(1) CC chemokine r ceptor 1 (CCR1) is ex- 
pressed in neutrophils, monocytes, lympho- 
cytes, and eosinophils, and binds the leuko- 
cyte chemoattractant d hematopoiesis 
regulator macrophage inflammatory protein 
(MIP)- 1 alpha, as well as several related CC 
chemokines. 
(2) <CC chemokine receptor 1> 
BINDS 
<leukocyte chemoattractant> 
<CC chemokine r ceptor 1> 
BINDS 
<hematopoiesis regulator macrophage 
inflammatory protein- 1alpha> 
<CC chemokine r ceptor 1> 
BINDS 
<related CC chemokine> 
Considerable interest in information extrac- 
tion has concentrated on identifying named enti- 
ties in text pertaining to current events (for ex- 
ample, Wacholder et al 1997, Voorhees and 
Harman 1998, and MUC-7); however, several 
recent efforts have been directed at biomolecular 
data (Blaschke t al. 1999, Craven and Kumlien 
1999, and Rindflesch et al 2000, for example). 
The overall goal is to transform the information 
188
encoded in text into a more readily accessible 
tbrmat, typically a template with slots named for 
the participants in the scenario of interest. The 
template for molecular binding can be thought of 
as a simple predication with predicate "bind" 
and two arguments which participate (sym- 
metrically) in the relationship: BINDS(<X>, 
<Y>). 
Various strategies, both linguistic and statis- 
tical, have been used in information extraction 
efforts. We introduce a Prolog program called 
ARBITER (Assess and Retrieve Binding Termi- 
nology) that takes advantage of an existing do- 
main knowledge source and relies on syntactic 
cues provided by a partial parser in order to 
identify and extract binding relations from text. 
We discuss the syntactic processing used and 
then report on a formal evaluation of ARBITER 
against a test collection of 116 MEDLINE cita- 
tions in which the binding relations were marked 
by hand. Finally, we provide a brief overview of 
the results of applying ARBITER to the 500,000 
MEDLINE citations discussing molecular bind- 
ing affinity. 
1 Extracting Binding Relationships 
from Text 
Our strategy for extracting binding relationships 
from text divides the task into two phases: Dur- 
ing the first phase we identify all potential 
binding arguments, and then in the second phase 
we extract just those binding terms which are as- 
serted in the text as participating in a particular 
binding predication. In support of this proces- 
sing, we rely on the linguistic and domain 
knowledge contained in the National Library of 
Medicine's Unified Medical Language System ~
(UMLS ?) as well an existing tool, the 
SPECIALIST minimal commitment parser (Ar- 
onson et al 1994). 
The UMLS (Humphreys et al 1998) consists 
of several knowledge sources applicable in the 
biomedical domain: the Metathesaums, Seman- 
tic Network, and SPECIALIST Lexicon 
(McCray et al 1994). The Metathesaurus was 
constructed from more than forty controlled vo- 
cabularies and contains more than 620,000 bio- 
medical concepts. The characteristic of the 
Metathesaurus most relevant for this project is 
that each concept is associated with a semantic 
type that categorizes the concept into subareas of 
biology or medicine. Examples pertinent to 
binding terminology include the semantic types 
'Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein' and 'Nucleo- 
tide Sequence'. The SPECIALIST Lexicon 
(with associated lexical access tools) supplies 
syntactic information for a large compilation of 
biomedical and general English terms. 
The SPECIALIST minimal commitment 
parser relies on the SPECIALIST Lexicon as 
well as the Xerox stochastic tagger (Cutting et 
al. 1992). The output produced is in the tradition 
of partial parsing (Hindle 1983, McDonald 
1992, Weischedel et al 1993) and concentrates 
on the simple noun phrase, what Weischedel et 
al. (1993) call the "core noun phrase," that is a 
noun phrase with no modification to the right of 
the head. Several approaches provide similar 
output based on statistics (Church 1988, Zhai 
1997, for example), a finite-state machine (Ait- 
Mokhtar and Chanod 1997), or a hybrid ap- 
proach combining statistics and linguistic rules 
(Voutilainen and Padro 1997). 
The SPECIALIST parser is based on the no- 
tion of barrier words (Tersmette t al. 1988), 
which indicate boundaries between phrases. Af- 
ter lexical look-up and resolution of category la- 
bel ambiguity by the Xerox tagger, complemen- 
tizers, conjunctions, modals, prepositions, and 
verbs are marked as boundaries. Subsequently, 
boundaries are considered to open a new phrase 
(and close the preceding phrase). Any phrase 
containing a noun is considered to be a (simple) 
noun phrase, and in such a phrase, the right-most 
noun is labeled as the head, and all other items 
(other than determiners) are labeled as modifi- 
ers. An example of the output from the 
SPECIALIST parser is given below in (4). The 
partial parse produced serves as the basis for the 
first phase of extraction of binding relationships, 
namely the identification of those simple noun 
phrases acting as potential binding arguments 
(referred to as "binding terms"). 
1.1 Identifying binding terminology 
In order to identify binding terminology in text 
we rely on the approach discussed in (Rindfiesch 
et al 1999). Text with locally-defined acronyms 
expanded is submitted to the Xerox tagger and 
the SPECIALIST parser. Subsequent processing 
concentrates on the heads of simple noun 
1RQ 189
phrases and proceeds in a series of cascaded 
steps that depend on existing domain knowledge 
as well as several small, special-purpose re- 
sources in order to determine whether each noun 
phrase encountered is to be considered a binding 
term. 
As the first step in the process, an existing 
program, MetaMap, (Aronson et al 1994) at- 
tempts to map each simple noun phrase to a con- 
cept in the UMLS Metathesaurus. The semantic 
type for concepts corresponding to successfully 
mapped noun phrases is then checked against a 
small subset of UMLS semantic types referring 
to bindable entities, such as 'Amino Acid, Pep- 
tide, or Protein', 'Nucleotide Sequence', 'Car- 
bohydrate', 'Cell', and 'Virus'. For concepts 
with a semantic type in this set, the correspond- 
ing noun phrase is considered to be a binding 
term. 
The heads of noun phrases that do not map to 
a concept in the Metathesaurus are tested against 
a small set of general "binding words," which 
often indicate that the noun phrase in which they 
appear is a binding term. The set of binding 
words includes such nouns as cleft, groove, 
membrane, ligand, motif, receptor, domain, ele- 
ment, and molecule. 
The head of a noun phrase that did not sub- 
mit to the preceding steps is examined to see 
whether it adheres to the morphologic shape of a 
normal English word. In this context such a 
word is often an acronym not defined locally 
and indicates the presence of a binding term 
(Fukuda et al 1998). A normal English word has 
at least one vowel and no digits, and a text token 
that contains at least one letter and is not a nor- 
real English word functions as a binding word in 
this context. 
The final step in identifying binding terms is 
to join contiguous imple noun phrases qualify- 
ing as binding terms into a single macro-noun 
phrase. Rindflesch et al (1999) use the term 
"macro-noun phrase" to refer to structures that 
include reduced relative clauses (commonly in- 
troduced by prepositions or participles) as well 
as appositives. Two binding terms joined by a 
form of be are also treated as though they 
formed a macro-noun phrase, as in Jel42 is an 
IgG which binds ... 
The results of identifying binding terms (and 
thus potential binding arguments) are given in 
(4) for the sentence in (3). In (4) evidence sup- 
porting identification as a binding term is given 
in braces. Note that in the underspecified syn- 
tactic analysis, prepositional phrases are treated 
as (simple) noun phrases that have a preposition 
as their first member. 
(3) Je142 is an IgG which binds to the small 
bacterial protein, HPr and the structure of the 
complex is known at high resolution. 
(4) \[binding_term(\[ head(Je142)\], 
{ Morphology Shape Rule } 
\[aux0s)\], 
\[det(an), head(IgG)\] { Metathesaurus } 
), 
\[pron(which)\], 
\[verb(binds)\], 
binding_term(\[prep(to), det(the), 
mod(small), mod(bacterial), head(protein), 
punc(,)\], { Metathesaurus } 
\[head(HPr)\] { Morphology Shape Rule } 
), 
\[conj(and)\], 
\[det(the), head(structure)I, 
binding_term(\[prep(of), det(the), 
head(complex)\] { General Binding Word } 
), 
\[aux(is)\], 
\[verb(known)\], 
\[prep(at), mod(high), head(resolution), 
punc(.)l\] 
1.2 Identifying binding terms as 
arguments of relationships 
Before addressing the strategy for determining 
the arguments of binding predications, we dis- 
cuss the general treatment of macro-noun 
phrases during the second part of the processing. 
Although ARBITER attempts to recover com- 
plete macro-noun phrases during the first phase, 
only the most specific (and biologically useful) 
part of a macro-noun phrase is recovered uring 
the extraction of binding predications. Terms re- 
ferring to specific molecules are more useful 
than those referring to general classes of bind- 
able entities, such as receptor, ligand, protein, 
or molecule. The syntactic head of a macro-noun 
phrase (the first simple noun phrase in the list) is 
not always the most specific or most useful term 
in the construction. 
l_qt~ 190
The Specificity Rule for determining the 
most specific part of the list of simple binding 
terms constituting a macro-noun phrase chooses 
the first simple term in the list which has either 
of the following two characteristics: a) The head 
was identified by the Morphology Shape Rule. 
b) The noun phrase maps to a UMLS concept 
having one of the following semantic types: 
'Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein', 'Nucleic 
Acid, Nucleoside, or Nucleotide', 'Nucleotide 
Sequence', 'Immunologic Factor', or 'Gene or 
Genome'. For example, in (5), the second simple 
term, TNF-alpha promoter, maps to the Meta- 
thesaurus with semantic type 'Nucleotide Se- 
quence' and is thus considered to be the most 
specific term in this complex-noun phrase. 
(5) binding_term( 
\[transcriptionally active kappaB motifs\], 
\[in the TNF-alpha promoter\], 
\[in normal cells\]) 
In identifying binding terms as arguments of 
a complete binding predication, as indicated 
above, we examine only those binding relations 
cued by some form of the verb bind (bind, binds, 
bound, and binding). The list of minimal syntac- 
tic phrases constituting the partial parse of the 
input sentence is examined from left to right; for 
each occurrence of a form of binds, the two 
binding terms serving as arguments are then 
sought. (During the tagging process, we force 
bind, binds, and bound to be labeled as "verb," 
and binding as "noun.") 
A partial analysis of negation and coor- 
dination is undertaken by ARBITER, but ana- 
phora resolution and a syntactic treatment of re- 
lativization are not attempted. With the added 
constraint hat a binding argument must have 
been identified as a binding term based on the 
domain knowledge resources used, the partial 
syntactic analysis available to ARBITER sup- 
ports the accurate identification of a large num- 
ber of binding predications asserted in the re- 
search literature. 
1.2.1 Arguments of binding 
It is convenient o categorize binding pred- 
ications into two classes depending on which 
form of bind cues the predication: a) binding and 
b) bind, binds, and bound. In our test collection 
(discussed below), about half of the binding re- 
lationships asserted in the text are cued by the 
gerundive or participial form binding. In this 
syntactic predication, the resources available 
from the underspecified syntactic parse serve 
quite well as the basis for correctly identifying 
the arguments of the binding relationship. 
The most common argument configuration 
associated with binding is for both arguments o 
occur to the right, cued by prepositions, most 
commonly of and to; however, other frequent 
patterns are of-by and to-by. Another method of 
argument cuing for binding is for the subject of 
the predication to function syntactically as a 
modifier of the head binding in the same simple 
noun phrase. The object in this instance is then 
cued by either of or to (to the right). A few other 
patterns are seen and some occurrences of bind- 
ing do not cue a complete predication; either the 
subject is missing or neither argument is expli- 
citly mentioned. However, the examples in (6) 
fairly represent the interpretation f binding. 
(6) These results uggest that 2 amino acids, 
Thr-340 and Ser-343, play important but 
distinct roles in promoting the binding of ar- 
restin to rhodopsin. 
<arrestin> 
BINDS 
<rhodopsin> 
Surprisingly, arrestin binding to phospho- 
rylated T340E did not increase to the level 
observed for wild-type rhodopsin. 
<arrestirt> 
BINDS 
<phosphorylated 340e> 
1.2.2 Arguments of bind 
The arguments of forms of bind other than 
binding invariably occur on either side of the 
cuing verb form. The default strategy for iden- 
tifying both arguments in these instances is to 
choose the closest binding term on either side of 
the verb. In the cases we have investigated, this 
strategy works often enough to be useful for the 
surface object. However, due to predicate coor- 
dination as well as relativization, such a strategy 
often fails to identify correctly the surface sub- 
ject of bind (binds or bound) when more than 
191 
one binding term precedes the verb. We there- 
fore use the strategy summarized in (7) for re- 
covering the surface subject in such instances. 
(7) When more than one binding term precedes a 
form of bind other than binding, choose the 
most specific of these binding terms as the 
surface subject of the predication. 
"Most specific" is determined (recursively) for a 
series of binding terms in the same way that the 
most specific part of a complex binding term is 
determined. 
The input text (8) provides an example of a 
binding predication cued by binds in which the 
arguments appear (immediately) on either side 
of the cuing verb. The two macro-noun phrases 
serving as potential arguments are underlined. 
(8) A transcription factor, Auxin Response Fac- 
tor 1, that binds to tl!e sequence TGTCTC in 
auxin response lements was cloned from 
Arabidopsis by using a yeast one-hybrid sys- 
tem. 
(9) <auxin response factor 1> 
BINDS 
<sequence tgtctc> 
In the extracted binding relationship in (9), 
the Specificity Rule chooses Auxin Response 
Factor 1 from the first macro-noun phrase be- 
cause it maps to the UMLS Metathesaurus with 
semantic type 'Amino Acid, Peptide, or Pro- 
tein'. In the second argument, the sequence 
TGTCTC has a head that submits to the Mor- 
phology Shape Rule and hence is considered to 
be more specific than auxin response lements. 
In (10), the Specificity Rule applies correctly 
to select he surface subject of the binding pred- 
ication when multiple binding terms appear to 
the left of the verb. 
(10) Phosphatidylinositol transfer protein has a 
single lipid-binding site that can reversibly 
bind phosphatidylinositol and phosphatidyl- 
choline and transfer these lipids between 
membrane compartments in vitro. 
<phosphatidylinositol transfer protein> 
BINDS 
<phosphatidylcholine> 
<phosphatidylinositol transfer protein> 
BINDS 
<phosphatidylinositol> 
Both Phosphatidylinositol transfer protein and a 
single lipid-binding site occur to the left of bind 
and have been identified as binding terms by the 
first phase of processing. However, Phos- 
phatidylinositol transfer protein maps to the cor- 
responding Metathesaurus concept with seman- 
tic type 'Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein, thus 
causing it to be more specific than a single lipid- 
binding site. The second predication listed in 
(10) was correctly extracted ue to coordination 
processing. 
ARBITER pursues limited coordination 
identification i the spirit of Agarwal and Bog- 
gess (1992) and Rindflesch (1995). Only bind- 
ing terms are considered as candidates for coor- 
dination. For each conjunction encountered, the 
phrase immediately tothe right is examined; if it 
is a binding term, all contiguous binding terms 
occurring immediately tothe left of the conjunct 
are considered to be coordinate with the right 
conjunct. Coordination inside the simple noun 
phrase is not considered, and therefore structures 
such as The TCR alpha beta or -gamma delta 
chains are not recognized. Nonetheless, as in- 
dicated in (11), this limited approach to noun 
phrase coordination is often effective. 
(11) Purified recombinant NC 1, like authentic 
NC 1, also bound specifically to fibronectin, 
collagen type I, and a laminin 5/6 complex. 
<authentic ncl> 
BINDS 
<laminin 5 / 6 complex> 
<authentic ncl > 
BINDS 
<collagen type i> 
<authentic ncl> 
BINDS 
<fibronectin> 
<purified recombinant cl > 
BINDS 
<laminin 5 / 6 complex> 
<purified recombinant cl> 
BINDS 
<collagen type i> 
<purified recombinant cl > 
BINDS 
<fibronectin> 
192 
Although the particular underspecified syn- 
tactic analysis used in the identification of 
binding predications in the biomedical research 
literature is limited in several important ways, it 
appears adequate to enable this project with a 
useful level of effectiveness, and this is sup- 
ported by evaluation. 
2 Evaluation 
In order to determine ARBITER's effectiveness, 
the program was formally evaluated against a 
gold standard of MEDLINE citations in which 
the binding predications asserted were marked 
by hand. A search of MEDLINE limited to one 
month (June 1997) and based on the text words 
((bind, binds, binding, or bound) and (protein or 
proteins)) retrieved 116 citations with 1,141 sen- 
tences; of these, 346 contained some form of the 
verb bind. 260 binding predications were identi- 
fied in the binding sentences. (The binding sen- 
tences also contained 2,025 simple noun 
phrases, 1,179 of which were marked as being 
binding terms.) 
In processing this test collection, ARBITER 
extracted 181 binding predications, 132 of which 
were correct. Since ARBITER missed 128 
marked binding predications (false negatives) 
and incorrectly identified 49 such relationships, 
recall and precision as measures of effectiveness 
are 51% and 73%, respectively. 
In comparing ARBITER's output against that 
marked in the gold standard, fairly stringent 
matching criteria were used. A binding predica- 
tion extracted from a particular sentence by 
ARBITER had to appear in that same sentence 
in the gold standard (not just the same citation) 
in order to be counted as correct. Further, in the 
gold standard, only the most specific component 
of a macro-noun phrase was marked as being the 
correct argument for a particular binding predi- 
cation. If ARBITER retrieved any other part of a 
macro-noun phrase in identifying the arguments 
of that predication, it was assessed as an error. 
A large number of ARBITER errors are due 
to two phenomena: difficulties in correctly iden- 
tifying binding terms during the first phase of 
processing and syntactic omplexity confound- 
ing argument identification during the second 
phase. An example of the first error type is seen 
in (12), where the failure to identify ran as a 
binding term caused ARBITER to miss the cor- 
rect binding predication asserted in this sentence 
(indicated by "-FN->"). 
(12) Requirement of guanosine triphosphate- 
bound ran for signal-mediated nuclear pro- 
tein export. 
-FN-> <guanosine triphosphate> 
BINDS 
<Ran> 
-FP-> < guanosine triphosphate> 
BINDS 
<signal - mediate nuclear protein 
export> 
This error then led to the false positive error 
("-FP->") when the program wrongly interpreted 
the next noun phrase in the sentence (signal- 
mediated nuclear protein export) as the second 
argument in this predication. 
The interaction of coordination and negation 
in (13) caused ARBITER to partially misinter- 
pret the binding predications in this sentence. 
(13) The nonvisual arrestins, beta-arrestin a d 
arrestin3, but not visual arrestin, bind spe- 
cifically to a glutathione S-transferase- clath- 
rin terminal domain fusion protein. 
<arrestin3> 
BINDS 
<glutathione s-transferase-clathrin terminal 
domain fusion protein> 
<beta rrestin> 
BINDS 
<glutathione s-transferase-clathrin terminal 
domain fusion protein> 
<nonvisual rrestin> 
BINDS 
<glutathione s-transferase-clathrin terminal 
domain fusion protein> 
-FN-> <visual arrestin> 
DOES_NOT_BIND 
<glutathione s-transferase-clathrin 
terminal domain fusion protein> 
Although some of the coordination i  (13) 
was processed properly, resulting in the relation- 
ships listed, the negated coordination associated 
with the noun phrase visual arrestin was not in- 
terpreted correctly, and thus ARBITER failed to 
1Q"2  193
identify the predication marked as a false nega- 
tive. 
3 Application 
As an initial application of ARBITER we ran the 
program on 491,356 MEDLINE citations, which 
were retrieved using the same search strategy re- 
sponsible for the gold standard. During this run, 
331,777 sentences in 192,997 citations produced 
419,782 total binding assertions. Extrapolating 
from the gold standard evaluation, we assume 
that this is about half of the total binding predi- 
cations asserted in the citations processed and 
that somewhat less than three quarters of those 
extracted are correct. 
The initial list of 419,982 binding triples rep- 
resents what ARBITER determined was asserted 
in the text being processed. Many of these as- 
sertions, such as those in (14), while correct, are 
too general to be useful. 
(14) <receptors> 
BINDS 
<Peptides> 
<Erythrocytes> 
BINDS 
<Antibodies> 
Further processing on ARBITER raw output 
extracted specific protein names and genomic 
structures and reduced the number of such 
binding predications to 345,706. From these 
more specific binding predication, we began the 
construction of a database containing binding 
relations asserted in the literature. More detailed 
discussion of this database can be found in (Ra- 
jan et al in prep); however, here we give an ini- 
tial description of its characteristics. 
We submitted the 345,706 more specific 
ARBITER binding predications to a search in 
GenBank (Benson et al 1998) and determined 
that 106,193 referred to a GenBank entry. The 
number of Genbank entries with at least one 
binding assertion is 11,617. Preliminary results 
indicate that the database we are constructing 
will have some of the following characteristics: 
? 10,769 bindings between two distinct Gen- 
bank entries (5,569 unique) 
? 875 more binding assertions found between 
an entry and a specific DNA sequence 
? 27,345 bindings between a Genbank entry 
and a UMLS Metathesaurus concept 
? 5,569 unique relationships among pairs of 
entries (involving 11,617 unique entries) 
Conclusion 
The cooperation of structured omain knowl- 
edge and underspecified syntactic analysis en- 
ables the extraction of macromolecular binding 
relationships from the research literature. Al- 
though our implementation is domain-specific, 
the underlying principles are amenable to 
broader applicability. 
ARBITER makes a distinction between first 
labeling binding terms and then identifying cer- 
tain of these terms as arguments in a binding 
predication. The first phase of this processing is
dependent on biomedical domain knowledge ac- 
cessible from the UMLS. Applying the tech- 
niques we propose in other areas would require 
at least a minimum of semantic lassification of 
the concepts involved. General, automated tech- 
niques that could supply this requirement are be- 
coming increasingly available (Morin and Jac- 
quemin 1999, for example). 
Although we concentrated onthe inflectional 
forms of a single verb, the principles we invoke 
to support argument identification during the 
second phase of processing apply generally to 
English predication encoding strategies (with a 
minimum of effort necessary to address preposi- 
tional cuing of gerundive arguments for specific 
verbs). The approach to noun phrase coordina- 
tion also applies generally, so long as hy- 
pernymic lassification is available for the heads 
of the potential conjuncts. 
Acknowledgements 
We are grateful to John Wilbur for assistance 
with accessing GenBank, to Alan Aronson for 
modifications to MetaMap, and to James Mork 
for providing the distributed system that sup- 
ported the processing of MEDLINE citations. 
References 
Agaxwal R. and Boggess L. (1992) A simple but use- 
ful approach to conjunct identification. Proceed- 
ings of the 30th Annual Meeting of the Associa- 
tion for Computational Linguistics, pp. 15-21. 
194
Ait-Mokhtar S. and Chanod J.-P. (1997) Incremental 
finite-state parsing. Proceedings of the Fifth Con- 
ference on Applied Natural Language Processing, 
pp. 72-9. 
Appelt D. E. and Israel D. (1997) Tutorial on build- 
ing information extraction systems. Fifth Confer- 
ence on Applied Natural Language Processing. 
Aronson A. R., Rindflesch T. C., and Browne A. C. 
(1994) Exploiting a large thesaurus for informa- 
tion retrieval. Proceedings of RIAO 94, pp. 197- 
216. 
Benson D. A., Boguski M. S., Lipman D. J., Ostell J., 
and Ouelette B. F. (1998) GenBank. Nucleic Acids 
Research, 26/1, pp. 1-7. 
Blaschke C., Andrade M. A., Ouzounis C., and Va- 
lencia A. (1999) Automatic extraction of biological 
information from scientific text: protein-protein 
interactions. Intelligent Systems for Molecular Bi- 
ology (ISMB), 7, pp. 60-7. 
Church K. W. (1988) A stochastic parts program and 
noun phrase parser for unrestricted text. Proceed- 
ings of the Second Conference on Applied Natural 
Language Processing, pp. 136-143. 
Craven M. and Kumlien J. (1999) Constructing bio- 
logical knowledge bases by extracting information 
from text sources. Intelligent Systems for Molecu- 
lar Biology (ISMB), 7, pp. 77-86. 
Cutting D. R., Kupiec J., Pedersen J. O., and Sibun P. 
(1992) A practical part-of-speech tagger. Pro- 
ceedings of the Third Conference on Applied Natu- 
ral Language Processing. 
Fukuda F., Tsunoda T., Tamura A., and Takagi T. 
(1998) Toward information extraction: Identifying 
protein names from biological papers. Pacific 
Symposium on Biocomputing (PSB), 3, pp. 705- 
16. 
Hearst M. A. (1999) Untangling text data mining. 
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the As- 
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3-10. 
Hindle D. (1983) Deterministic parsing of syntactic 
non-fluencies. Proceedings of the 21st Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin- 
guistics, pp. 123-8. 
Humphreys B. L., Lindberg D. A. B., Schoolman H. 
M., and Barnett G. O. (1998) The Unified Medical 
language System: An informatics research collabo- 
ration. Journal of the American Medical Informat- 
ics Association, 5/1, pp. 1-13. 
McCray A. T., Srinivasan S., and Browne A. C. 
(1994) Lexical methods for managing variation in 
biomedical terminologies. Proceedings of the 18th 
Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in 
Medical Care, pp. 235-9. 
McDonald D. D. (1992) Robust partial parsing 
through incremental, multi-algorithm processing. 
In "Text-Based Intelligent Systems," P. S. Jacobs, 
ed., pp. 83-99. 
Morin E. and Jacquemin C. Projecting corpus-based 
semantic links on a thesaurus. Proceedings of the 
37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics, pp. 389-96. 
MUC-7. Message Understanding Conference Pro- 
ceedings, http://www.muc.saic.com. 
Rajan J. V., Hunter L., and Rindflesch T. C. (In 
prep.) Mining MEDLINE. 
Rindflesch T. C. (1995) Integrating natural anguage 
processing and biomedical domain knowledge for 
increased information retrieval effectiveness. Pro- 
ceedings of the 5th Annual Dual-Use Technologies 
and Applications Conference, pp. 260-5. 
Rindflesch T. C., Hunter L., and Aronson A. R. 
(1999) Mining molecular binding terminology from 
biomedical text. Proceedings of the AMIA Annual 
Symposium, pp. 127-131. 
Rindflesch T. C., Tanabe L., Weinstein J. N., and 
Hunter L. (2000) EDGAR: Extraction of drug, s, 
genes and relations from the biomedical literature. 
Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing (PSB), 5, pp. 
514-25. 
Tersmette K. W. F., Scott A. F., Moore G.W., Mathe- 
son N. W., and Miller R. E. (1988) Barrier word 
method for detecting molecular biology multiple 
word terms. Proceedings of the 12th Annual Sym- 
posium on Computer Applications in Medical 
Care, pp. 207- 11. 
Voorhees E. M. and Harman D. K. (1998) The Sev- 
enth Text Retrieval Conference. 
Vourtilainen A. and Padro L. (1997) Developing a 
hybrid NP parser. Proceedings of the Fifth Confer- 
ence on Applied Natural Language Processing, pp. 
80-7. 
Wacholder N., Ravin Y., and Choi M. (1997) Disam- 
biguation of proper names in text. Proceedings of 
the Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing, pp. 202-208. 
Weischedel R., Meteer M., Schwartz R., Ramshaw 
L., and Palmucci J. (1993) Coping with ambiguity 
and unknown words through probabilistic models. 
Computational Linguistics, 19/2, pp. 359-382. 
Zhai C. (1997) Fast statistical parsing of noun 
phrases for document indexing. Proceedings of the 
Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing, pp. 312-31. 
195 
