Proceedings of the Third ACL-SIGSEM Workshop on Prepositions, pages 51?56,
Trento, Italy, April 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Multilingual Analysis of the Notion of Instrumentality
Asanee Kawtrakul, Mukda Suktarachan (Kasetsart univ. Bangkok, Thailand),
Bali Ranaivo-Malancon, Pek Kuan Ng, (Univ. Sains Malaysia, Penang, Malaysia),
Achla Raina (IIT Kanpur, India),
Sudeshna Sarkar (IIT Kharagpur, India),
Alda Mari (Enst-Cnrs, Paris, France),
Sina Zarriess (Universita?t Potsdam, Germany),
Elixabete Murguia (Univ. Deusto, Bilbao, Spain),
Patrick Saint-Dizier (Irit-Cnrs, Toulouse, France)
Abstract
Instruments are expressed in language by
various means: prepositions, postposi-
tions, affixes including case marks, nonfi-
nite verbs, etc. We consider here 12 lan-
guages from five families in order to be
able to identify the different meaning com-
ponents that structure instrumentality.
1 Credits
This work has been made possible partly via the
STIC-Asia cooperation framework.
2 Introduction
It is difficult to give a comprehensive definition of
what instrumentality is. In WordNet it is defined
as ?an artifact, or a set of artifacts, that are instru-
mental (i.e. behave as instruments) in accomplish-
ing some end?, i.e. reaching a certain goal. In
this definition, the triple relation agent-instrument-
goal (as in: John cuts the bread with a knife, where
John is agent, knife is instrument that does the cut-
ting, and bread cut is the goal), is left vague in
what concerns the exact involvement of the agent
and the instrument in the action, and the control
the agent has on the instrument and on the action
(Mari and St-Dizier 01).
If almost anything can be an instrument, we can
nevertheless formulate a few criteria that we will
try to elaborate in this paper. First, an instrument
is basically non volitional. When humans play the
role of instruments, they are obviously volitional,
but the action is controlled by another agent who
acts as an ?initiator agent?, taking the initiative of
the action. Instruments cannot be easily associated
with traditional thematic roles, in fact this is not
of much interest, because this is too superficial a
notion and also because instruments are generally
modifiers, not arguments.
In this paper, we address instrumentality as con-
veyed by prepositions or equivalent means (e.g.
postpositions, affixes). Our aim in this study
is twofold: (1) to identify the conceptual facets
of instrumentality so that a conceptual seman-
tics can be defined in the spirit of (Talmy, 01,
03), (Wierzbicka 92, 96) and (2) to elaborate an
accurate enough model for answering questions
about instruments within a cooperative question-
answering system. Instead of focusing on a spe-
cific language to elaborate all possible forms of
instrumentality, we found it more adequate to de-
velop a multilingual approach, considering lan-
guages from various families.
We consider for Europe: German, Spanish,
French, Italian; for India: Kashmiri, Urdu, Hindi
and Bengali; for the far-east: Thai and Malay;
for Northern Africa and the Middle East: Ara-
bic, and Berber dialects (in the group of Amazigh
languages). In this paper, we use the first let-
ter of each language to identify it: Thai, Malay,
Hindi, Urdu, Kashmiri, Bengali, German, Span-
ish, French, Italian, Arabic, BeRber). We have
also more or less adequately transcribed characters
into latin characters. The upper case A is equiva-
lent to aa.
3 An overview of preposition structures
3.1 European languages
German, Spanish, Italian and French, like most
European languages have prepositions that in-
troduce instrumental PPs. The most current
prepositions are:
- German: mit, mit Hilfe von,
mittels, durch, anhand, kraft,
51
dank, per.
- French: avec, par, au moyen de,
gra?ce a`, a` l?aide de, a` travers.
- Spanish: con, en, por, a trave?s de,
mediante, por medio de, a base
de, con la ayuda de, gracias a.
- Italian: con, per mezzo di, tramite,
per, grazie a, con l?aiuto di.
3.2 Arabic and Berber
Arabic essentially has the preposition bi, used as
a prefix of the noun it heads:
Aktoub bi al kalami (I write with a pen).
bi can also be associated with a specific noun
or deverbal form (e.g. ?by applying?) to char-
acterize in more depth the instrumental relation.
This entails generic forms such as bi-tarika,
bi-istemali (by means of, the first form rein-
forces the importance of the instrument, while the
latter is more formal) and bi-fadli (thanks to).
For example, we have a kind of nominal form is-
tikhdam (= using or with the use of, constructed
from the root ?use?) in:
Fasser el massala bi istikhdam mithel (explain a
problem ?with the use of? example). Arabic makes
explicit the metonymy we have in European lan-
guages.
There are a few other prepositions such as min
khilal (through) and min a to express the du-
ality source + instrument of the argument (as in
drink with a bottle, litterally). In the spatial con-
text, au can be used (to reach the top by this trail),
and ala is used to express a channel of commu-
nication.
Berber is composed of a large number of di-
alects, some just spoken in small ?tribes?, others
in larger communities. It is basically dialectal, but
a number of common elements can be identified.
We consider here Berber from the Moroccan Rif,
and the Algerian Kabyle. The main instrumental
preposition is e`g, but prefixes are also used s-,
ge-, th-, kh- which affect the morphology
of the noun they are attached to. The prefix s-
is widely used, with some variants (si, sei,
so in Kabyle), e`g (also realized as g? or ge in
some places), is appropriate only when the action
is under full control of the agent. It is not em-
ployed when the instrument is abstract. In the Rif
area, s- focusses on the instrument contributing to
the action, it makes a kind of fusion between the
action verb and the instrumental noun. ge is only
used in spatial contexts involving means of trans-
portation (travelling by plane), kh is used only in
spatial contexts involving paths.
3.3 The Indic language family
The four languages considered, Kashmiri (Raina,
02), Urdu, Hindi and Bengali, share some simil-
itudes due to their common origins but also
contrasts that result from independent evolutions
which are useful to our analysis. They all have suf-
fixes and postpositions. Case suffixes (vibakhti)
are added to nouns or pronouns, but case suf-
fixes do not correspond strictly to thematic roles
(kAraka). Postpositions may also be used instead
of vibhaktis or in conjunction with them, as a kind
or re-inforcement. Basically, but with some nu-
ances, Hindi, Urdu, Bengali and Kashmiri lan-
guages have the following kernels:
? direct instrument: se (H/U), sity (K), -e/-te,
diye after null, dwArA after -r (B). Example:
H: raam ne chaabi se taala khola (ram - erg.
key with lock open-past= Ram openened the
lock with a key).
? means instrument: me (H/U), ke zariye (U),
manz (K), -e/-te (B). Example: U: raam
gaadi ke zariye daftar gayaa (ram car by
means of office go-past = Ram went to work
by car).
? causal instrument: ke kaaran (H), ki vajah se
(U), kiny (K), kArANe, kripAya (B). Exam-
ple: K: dil chi sayaahat kiny amir (Delhi be-
present tourism with rich = Delhi is rich with
tourism),
B: dillI paryatan-er khAtire samriddha or dillI
paryatan-er kripAya samriddha (Delhi be-
rich-er thanks to tourism)
? agentive instrument: ke dwaraa (H) ke zariye
(U) zariy, desi (K), diye (B) after -ke when
the nominal form is animate and specific,
diye after null when the nominal form is an-
imate and general (B). Example: H: raam ne
shyaam dwara apna kaam karvaaya (ram erg.
shyam by self?s work do-cause-past = Ram
got his work done by Shyam)
? action instrumentalised: kar (H/U), kerith
(K). Example: U: raam kuud kar ghar ke an-
dar daakhil huaa (ram jump participle house
52
into enter-past = Ram entered the house by
jumping in it)
There are less important cases that capture no-
tions like containment, which will be detailed in
section 5. Postpositions may vary also depending
on the semantic type of the NP they head.
In Bengali, case is indicated in several ways.
Vibhaktis are suffixes that are added to the stems
to form surface forms of words. In Bengali the
nominal stems take one of the following suffixes:
null or shunya vibhakti, -e, -te, -r, etc. Case is also
indicated in Bengali by the use of postpositions.
We have, for example: Cut bread with a knife, re-
alized as either:
1. chhuri diye ruti kATa (knife diye bread cut), or:
2. chhuri-te ruti kAta (knife-te bread cut)
Postpositions in Bengali are derived from certain
inflected forms of nouns, and also certain verbs
in participle form. When these words are used
as postpositions they are often not considered in
their original sense but define a specific type of re-
lationship of the noun phrase with the finite verb
phrase in the sentence. These words are appear
in a fixed form (indeclinables) as postpositions.
When a postposition is used to denote the case,
the nominal word preceding the postposition takes
on a vibhakti that is determined by the particu-
lar postposition. ?diye? is used after null vibhakti,
?dwArA? after -r vibhakti, etc.
3.4 Thai and Malay
Thai and Malay, although spoken in neighbour
countries, are substantially different.
Thai, from the Thai-Kadai family, has 6 prepo-
sitions (Silapasarn, 98) to denote instruments, the
most common being doi and duai which are
used for concrete instruments, means of trans-
portation, instruments close to manners, etc. kap
is used when the instrument is a part of the body,
while thang is used for means of transportation
only. tam characterizes control of the agent, and
chak is restricted to the instruments that convey
an idea of source. Examples:
khian - duai - din so (Write - with - pencil)
pai - pa ris - doi - khrueang bin (Go - Paris - by -
plane)
These semantic distinctions are, however, often vi-
olated in colloquial Thai.
Malay, from the Malayo-polynesian family, has
three ways to introduce instruments: preposition +
NP, affixes and compounding. Affixed words are
built from stems which are instrumental nouns,
this allows for the construction of the equivalent
of PPs, based on the prototypical use of the instru-
mental noun. The most common being: prefixes:
beR- (from kuda, horse, berkuda, on horseback),
meN- (from kunci, key, mengunci, lock with key),
prefix + suffix: meN- + -kan (from paku, nail,
memakukan, to fasten with nails), and with suffix
-i (from ubat, medicine, mengubati, by means of
medicine). Prepositions occur as the head of PPs,
and in verb particle constructions. PPs may also
be subject complements, avoiding the use of verbs
(dia di rumah, she at home). Besides affixes,
Malay has 6 prepositions that denote instrumen-
tality: dengan, melalui, mengikut,
menerusi, dengan menggunakan,
secara.
A simple example is:
berhubung - melalui - telefon (communicate - by -
telephone).
4 The meaning components of
instrumentality
Let us now consider the different meaning compo-
nents that emerge from our multilingual analysis.
The results presented below are still exploratory
due to the complexity of the notion. The distinc-
tions made (e.g. between concrete and abstract in-
struments) may seem arbitrary: they are just meant
to structure the presentation.
4.1 Concrete instruments
All languages studied have at least one basic in-
strumental mark operating over concrete objects
(T: duai, M: dengan, H: se, U: se, K: sity, B: diye,
-e, -te, G: mit, S: con, F: avec, A: bi, BR: e`g). Sev-
eral refinements are identified, for specific types of
NPs, or to denote a specific intention:
? the instrument is a recipient (S: en) or, more
generally, conveys an idea of container (e.g.
spoon) (B: -e kare), the idea behing is that
the container is used to carry the object along
a certain trajectory,
? the instrument is a part of the body (e.g.
hand): T: kap. In this case, the instrument
is not strictly artifactual.
? the goal is difficult to reach, it requires some
efforts from the agent (S: a base de),
53
? the focus can be emphasized by using ded-
icated marks (G: mit Hilfe (von), Mittels
(more fomal: Das Gericht hat mittels einst-
weiliger Verfu?gung den Drogenhandel unter-
sagt (the court has with provisional ordinance
the drug traffic prohibited))).
The second major difficulty is prototypicality
(Rosch, 78). When the instrument used is not very
prototypical of the action, several languages re-
inforce the instrumental prepositions to, sort of,
coerce the type of the noun so that it can become
an acceptable instrument. We have examples in S:
por medio de, B: sAhAjye, sahojoge,
I: per mezzo di, F: au moyen de, par
le biais de (biais= bias which directly ex-
presses this idea), as in:
F: Il a ouvert la porte au moyen d?un cric (he
opened the door by means of a jack).
At a conceptual level, it is quite difficult to
characterize what is a prototypical instrument
for a given action (characterized by subject-verb-
object: John opens the door). Each event has its
own prototypical instrument, making corpus stud-
ies extremely large, probably unfeasable. When
searching on the web, we find an incredible variety
of instruments to open a door, almost impossible
to classify. Next, prototypicality is not a boolean
notion: instruments are more or less prototypical.
Since the instrument is very much dependent on
the verb and on the object, we cannot foresee any
form of incorporation in the verb that would give
us indications. A direction could be to assume
Qualia structures (Pustejovsky 91) associated with
each potential instrument that describes the func-
tion of the object in the telic role. For example,
key(X) would have open(X, door), with door be-
ing quite generic. This approach could work via a
large lexical development for concrete nouns, it is
much more risky when terms are abstract.
4.2 Abstract instruments
Abstract instruments (theorems, regulations, ex-
amples, etc.) are realized identically to concrete
instruments, but with some typical marks such
as: T: tam, H: dwAra, K: zariyi, B: dwArA,
M. mengikut. At this stage, it is difficult to ex-
plain why marks are different from concrete in-
struments. An hypothesis could be that abstract in-
struments are closer to causes (see 5.5), or to more
formal situations for which specific terms were de-
veloped (e.g. for G: kraft).
There are additional marks dedicated to partic-
ular fields: B: sahajoge, and A: min khilal
when instruments are of type ?example? (explain
with an example). U: -ke zariye, S: por
medio de and G: Anhand, Kraft are more
formal, stronger for Kraft and apply particularly
to areas like juridical or psychological domains.
People and organizations can be seen as appro-
priate intermediaries for reaching a goal. They
may be conceived as metaphorical instruments.
Investigations show that people can get controlled
much in the same way as concrete objects:
F: Elle a informe? Paul de son de?part par Pauline
(She informed Paul of her leaving ?by? Pauline).
If we now consider: S: Juan env??o este paquete
por correo (John sent this parcel ?by? post)
Since post is the by-default medium to send pack-
ages, por is the only choice. Using more precise
services, like FedEx, is considered to be an alter-
native way, in that case F: par, avec S: por,
con are both acceptable.
4.3 Metaphorical instruments
Both concrete and abstract objects can be used
metaphorically as instruments. Examples abound
in the literature and on the Web. In 5.6 we ex-
amine the path metaphor which is very produc-
tive. Besides this case, we have a number of
metaphors, such as: write with your heart, fight
with your head, etc. These are not essentially dif-
ferent from metaphors observed in other situations
(Lakoff and Johnson 99).
4.4 The overlap instrument-manner
In a number of cases, it is not very easy to make
a distinction between instrument and manner. It
seems there is a continuum between these two no-
tions or even some form of overlap, where the ob-
ject is both an instrument and a manner at various
degrees, which may depend on context. A vari-
ety of marks contribute to characterize this over-
lap, manners at stake being quite diverse, but we
will not go into the study of manners. Specific
marks dealing with the manner/instrument am-
biguity are: T: doi, G: durch (which is also
used for metaphorical spatial uses), M: dengan
menggunakan, S: en, con, a as in S: es-
cribir en/con rojo (write in red),
T: khian - duai - muek - daeng (write - with - red -
ink)
BR: te`te s-e?fe`ssen (She-eats with-hands).
54
4.5 Causality
It is clear that, a priori, instruments can be viewed
at various degrees as causes of an event. There is
a kind of overlap between these two notions. In-
struments are not volitional, so they are under the
partial or full control of an agent (humans playing
the role of instruments are also controlled by an
agent). Typically I: a causa di, F: a cause
de, S: a causa de signal that the instrument
has brought about an event:
I : Il castello e distrutto a causa di un violento in-
cendio. (The castle has been destroyed ?because
of? a violent fire.)
Causality (e.g. Talmy, 01) being a complex no-
tion, it is not surprising that instruments, viewed
as intermediaries at various degrees, share some
features with causes. For example in cut the bread
with a knife, the cause of the bread being cut is
the action of the agent, but also the use of a pro-
totypical property of the knife: the knife does the
cutting. In (Talmy 01), the instrument is embed-
ded into the causing event:
(caused event) RESULTS FROM (causing event)
where the causing event has the structure:
Instrument ACTON object, where object is bound
or related in some way to the object in the caused
event.
As analyzed in (Mari and Saint-Dizier, 01), in-
strumentality is the convergence of several factors:
? the degree of involvement of the instrument
in the action, therefore, the fact that the in-
strument causes the action or is just a means
managed by the agent who is the main cause,
? the type of control the agent has on the instru-
ment for the action at stake, from full control
to lack of control,
? the control the agent has over the action as a
whole.
Indic languages and Thai are particular explicit on
these matters. They have specific marks for two
major cases:
1. agentive instrument, action not controlled by
the agent: H: ke dwAra, U: ke zariye
K: zariy, desi, T: doi,
2. causal instrument that does most of the ac-
tion, under the control of the agent: H ke
kAran, U: ki vajah se, K. kiny, T:
duai,
Berber allows e`g only when the agent controls the
instrument. The other cases are expressed by non
prepositional forms.
4.6 Instruments and paths
Another productive situation is the use of spatial
metaphors to express instrumentality. The use of
F: par and other marks (e.g. in B., U.), show
that there is a close link between instrumentality
and path descriptions (spatial as well as temporal
paths). This is a kind of metaphorical use of paths
viewed as instruments (as can be seen in (Lakoff
et al 99): ?action is motion, goals are paths, actors
are travellers?). Using an instrument parallels the
use of paths in the domain of space.
Marks denoting paths or sources are of much
interest. Some have really restricted uses, whereas
others are more flexible. We observe the following
main components:
? paths: T: tam, A: min khilal, S: por, a trave?s
de(por correo, by post), de, G: durch, F:
a` travers, note the distinctions, e.g. in M:
melalui (metaphorical paths: M : berhubung
melalui telefon (communicate by telephone)),
menerusi (channel of transmission), H, U:
me, se, T: thang. In B, -e and -te denote
paths where the agent that does the action has
no control, whereas diye and dhare involve at
least a partial control from the agent. In M,
metaphorical passages require melalui.
? sources: F: a`, A: min a, T: chak (for con-
crete and abstract sources). Example: A:
Achroubou mina Karoura (I am drinking with
bottle), which is also a kind of manner.
The duality path/instrument is particularly visi-
ble in, e.g.:
K: raam vot tshochi vati kiny gari (ram reach-past
short route via home = Ram reached home by the
short route).
Another interesting phenomenon occurs when
an argument is both an instrument and a path,
as in look at the moon in a telescope. Tele-
scope is indeed the instrument used and also
the path through which one looks, or which the
light traverses. This double facet of the argu-
ment is visible in surface realizations, where the
preposition used is ambiguous between instrument
(first preposition) and path (second one) readings:
G: mit, durch, S: con, por, M: dengan,
melalui, F: avec, dans. When one wants
55
to strongly stress the path interpretation, then a
more path-oriented preposition is used, e.g. S: a
trave`s de.
4.7 Means of transportation as instruments
Means of transportation (trains, spoons, boxes, en-
velopes, etc.), sometimes viewed as containers,
and mediums of transportation (by air) receive a
special treatment in a number of languages: T:
doi, thang, M: menerusi, melalui (for metaphorical
mediums and passages), H: me, U: ke zariye, K:
manz, zariy, B: kare, -e kare, -ya kare, A: ala, BR:
ge-, kh-, G: per, S: por, en, F: par. We have, for ex-
ample: U: raam gaadi ke zariye daftar gayaa (ram
car by means of office go-past = ram went to post
office by car)
T: pai - pa ris - doi - khrueang bin (Go to - Paris -
by - plane)
B: Nouko-ya kare phuketa jAo or Nouko-ya
phuketa jAo (boat-e kare phuket go or boat-e
phuket go = go by boat to Phuket)
A distinction is made between the medium and
the means as for: M: secara, which is used for
means of communication such as email or letters.
If the agent has effective control over the means,
then, for example, S uses con.
4.8 Language levels
Some marks are proper to formal discourse: G:
Mittels, Kraft, Anhand, H: dwAra.
4.9 Positive or negative orientation
The languages we studied also abound in positive-
oriented marks that express in a certain way the
idea of ?thanks to?: T: khop khun (+kah for fem-
inime and krup for masculine), H: ke kAran, U:
ki vajah, K: kiny, B: -er khAtire, (-er) kripAya, G:
dank, S: gracias a, F: gra?ce a`.
There are also several negative-oriented marks
such as the following prepositional compounds:
F: de la faute de, I: per colpa di, S:
por colpa de (by the fault of), where the term
?fault? conveys a negative orientation.
4.10 Metonymies
In most languages, the prototypical action denoted
by the instrument is implicit, it is analyzed as a
metonymy: object for action. Action is inferred
from the instrument and the verb in the given con-
text. In a number of situations, A and M need
to make explicit the action. For particular cases,
gerundive forms may be prefered to PPs (but not
to be confused with manners, e.g. ?by swim-
ming?), so that the verb that lexicalizes the action
is present.
For example, in M, ?by the trail? in to reach the
top of a mountain by the trail requires to make ex-
plicit how the trail is used: dengan mengikuti de-
nai itu (litt.: with follow trail DET (same cases
in Arabic and German)). Another case is: G:
Mit Flugzeugen la?sst sich Geld verdienen, (With
planes you can money earn), where a concrete ob-
ject replaces the whole procedure.
The metonymy could be reconstructed, for sim-
ple cases, by the Generative Lexicon (Pustejovsky
86), whose role is precisely to make explicit pro-
totypical functions of objects via their telic role, as
advocated above.
References
Dowty, D., 1989, On the Semantic Content of the No-
tion of Thematic Role, in G. Cherchia, B. Partee,
R. Turner (eds), Properties, Types and meaning,
Kluwer Academic.
Dowty, D., 1991, Thematic Proto-roles and Argument
Selection, Language, vol. 67-3.
Lakoff G., JohnsonM., 1999. Philosophy in the Flesh.
Basic books, NY, USA.
Mari, A., Saint-Dizier, P., 2001, A Conceptual Se-
mantics for Prepositions Denoting Instrumentality,
in proc. 1st workshop on prepositions, Toulouse, and
in Syntax and semantics of prepositions, P. Saint-
Dizier (ed), Kluwer academic, 2006.
Pustejovsky, J., 1991, The Generative Lexicon, Com-
putational Linguistics, vol. 17, MIT Press.
Raina, Achla M., 2002. The Verb Second Phe-
nomenon, O.N. Koul and K Wali (eds.), Topics in
Kashmiri Linguistics. Creative Books, New Delhi,
India.
Rosch, E., 1978. Principles of Categorization. In E.
Rosch and B.B. Lloyd (eds.), Cognition and Catego-
rization. Hillsdale : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Publishers.
Sinlapasarn, Upakitt. 1998. Thai Grammar. Thai
Watthana Panich, Bangkok, Thailand.
Talmy L., 2001, 2003. Towards a Cognitive Seman-
tics, vol. 1 and 2. MIT Press.
Wiezbicka, A.,1996. Semantics primes and universals.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wierzbicka, A., 1992, Semantic Primitives and Se-
mantic Fields, in A. Lehrer and E.F. Kittay (eds.),
Frames, Fields and Contrasts. Hillsdale: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, pp. 208-227.
56
Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 294?299,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Context-Dependent Multilingual Lexical Lookup for Under-Resourced
Languages
Lian Tze Lim*?
*SEST, KDU College Penang
Georgetown, Penang, Malaysia
liantze@gmail.com
Lay-Ki Soon and Tek Yong Lim
?FCI, Multimedia University
Cyberjaya, Selangor, Malaysia
{lksoon,tylim}@mmu.edu.my
Enya Kong Tang
Linton University College
Seremban, Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia
enyakong1@gmail.com
Bali Ranaivo-Malan?on
FCSIT, Universiti Malaysia Sarawak,
Kota Samarahan, Sarawak, Malaysia
mbranaivo@fit.unimas.my
Abstract
Current approaches for word sense dis-
ambiguation and translation selection typ-
ically require lexical resources or large
bilingual corpora with rich information
fields and annotations, which are often
infeasible for under-resourced languages.
We extract translation context knowledge
from a bilingual comparable corpora of a
richer-resourced language pair, and inject
it into a multilingual lexicon. The multilin-
gual lexicon can then be used to perform
context-dependent lexical lookup on texts
of any language, including under-resourced
ones. Evaluations on a prototype lookup
tool, trained on a English?Malay bilingual
Wikipedia corpus, show a precision score
of 0.65 (baseline 0.55) and mean recip-
rocal rank score of 0.81 (baseline 0.771).
Based on the early encouraging results,
the context-dependent lexical lookup tool
may be developed further into an intelligent
reading aid, to help users grasp the gist of
a second or foreign language text.
1 Introduction
Word sense disambiguation (WSD) is the task of
assigning sense tags to ambiguous lexical items
(LIs) in a text. Translation selection chooses target
language items for translating ambiguous LIs in a
text, and can therefore be viewed as a kind of WSD
task, with translations as the sense tags. The trans-
lation selection task may also be modified slightly
to output a ranked list of translations. This then re-
sembles a dictionary lookup process as performed
by a human reader when reading or browsing a text
written in a second or foreign language. For conve-
nience?s sake, we will call this task (as performed
via computational means) context-dependent lexi-
cal lookup. It can also be viewed as a simplified
version of the Cross-Lingual Lexical Substitution
(Mihalcea et al, 2010) and Cross-Lingual Word
Sense Disambiguation (Lefever and Hoste, 2010)
tasks, as defined in SemEval-2010.
There is a large body of work around WSD and
translation selection. However, many of these ap-
proaches require lexical resources or large bilin-
gual corpora with rich information fields and an-
notations, as reviewed in section 2. Unfortunately,
not all languages have equal amounts of digital re-
sources for developing language technologies, and
such requirements are often infeasible for under-
resourced languages.
We are interested in leveraging richer-resourced
language pairs to enable context-dependent lexical
lookup for under-resourced languages. For this pur-
pose, we model translation context knowledge as a
second-order co-occurrence bag-of-words model.
We propose a rapid approach for acquiring them
from an untagged, comparable bilingual corpus
of a (richer-resourced) language pair in section 3.
This information is then transferred into a multilin-
gual lexicon to perform context-dependent lexical
lookup on input texts, including those in an under-
resourced language (section 4). Section 5 describes
a prototype implementation, where translation con-
text knowledge is extracted from a English?Malay
bilingual corpus to enrich a multilingual lexicon
with six languages. Results from a small experi-
ment are presented in 6 and discussed in section 7.
The approach is briefly compared with some related
work in section 8, before concluding in section 9.
2 Typical Resource Requirements for
Translation Selection
WSD and translation selection approaches may be
broadly classified into two categories depending
294
on the type of learning resources used: knowledge-
and corpus-based. Knowledge-based approaches
make use of various types of information from
existing dictionaries, thesauri, or other lexical re-
sources. Possible knowledge sources include defi-
nition or gloss text (Banerjee and Pedersen, 2003),
subject codes (Magnini et al, 2001), semantic net-
works (Shirai and Yagi, 2004; Mahapatra et al,
2010) and others.
Nevertheless, lexical resources of such rich con-
tent types are usually available for medium- to rich-
resourced languages only, and are costly to build
and verify by hand. Some approaches therefore
turn to corpus-based approaches, use bilingual cor-
pora as learning resources for translation selection.
(Ide et al, 2002; Ng et al, 2003) used aligned cor-
pora in their work. As it is not always possible to
acquire parallel corpora, comparable corpora, or
even independent second-language corpora have
also been shown to be suitable for training pur-
poses, either by purely numerical means (Li and Li,
2004) or with the aid of syntactic relations (Zhou
et al, 2001). Vector-based models, which capture
the context of a translation or meaning, have also
been used (Sch?tze, 1998; Papp, 2009). For under-
resourced languages, however, bilingual corpora of
sufficient size may still be unavailable.
3 Enriching Multilingual Lexicon with
Translation Context Knowledge
Corpus-driven translation selection approaches typ-
ically derive supporting semantic information from
an aligned corpus, where a text and its translation
are aligned at the sentence, phrase and word level.
However, aligned corpora can be difficult to ob-
tain for under-resourced language pairs, and are
expensive to construct.
On the other hand, documents in a comparable
corpus comprise bilingual or multilingual text of
a similar nature, and need not even be exact trans-
lations of each other. The texts are therefore un-
aligned except at the document level. Comparable
corpora are relatively easier to obtain, especially
for richer-resourced languages.
3.1 Overview of Multilingual Lexicon
Entries in our multilingual lexicon are organised as
multilingual translation sets, each corresponding to
a coarse-grained concept, and whose members are
LIs from different languages {L1, . . . , LN} con-
veying the same concept. We denote an LI as
?item?, sometimes with the 3-letter ISO language
code in underscript when necessary: ?item?eng. A
list of 3-letter ISO language codes used in this pa-
per is given in Appendix A.
For example, following are two translation sets
containing different senses of English ?bank? (?fi-
nancial institution? and ?riverside land?):
TS 1 = {?bank?eng, ?bank?msa, ????zho, . . .}
TS 2 = {?bank?eng, ?tebing?msa, ???zho, . . .}.
Multilingual lexicons with under-resourced lan-
guages can be rapidly bootstrapped from simple
bilingual translation lists (Lim et al, 2011). Our
multilingual lexicon currently contains 24371 En-
glish, 13226 Chinese, 35640 Malay, 17063 French,
14687 Thai and 5629 Iban LIs.
3.2 Extracting Translation Context
Knowledge from Comparable Corpus
We model translation knowledge as a bag-of-words
consisting of the context of a translation equiva-
lence in the corpus. We then run latent seman-
tic indexing (LSI) (Deerwester et al, 1990) on a
comparable bilingual corpora. A vector is then ob-
tained for each LI in both languages, which may
be regarded as encoding some translation context
knowledge.
While LSI is more frequently used in informa-
tion retrieval, the translation knowledge acquisi-
tion task can be recast as a cross-lingual indexing
task, following (Dumais et al, 1997). The underly-
ing intuition is that in a comparable bilingual cor-
pus, a document pair about finance would be more
likely to contain English ?bank?eng and Malay
?bank?msa (?financial institution?), as opposed to
Malay ?tebing?msa (?riverside?). The words ap-
pearing in this document pair would then be an
indicative context for the translation equivalence
between ?bank?eng and ?bank?msa. In other words,
the translation equivalents present serve as a kind
of implicit sense tag.
Briefly, a translation knowledge vector is ob-
tained for each multilingual translation set from a
bilingual comparable corpus as follows:
1. Each bilingual pair of documents is merged
as one single document, with each LI tagged
with its respective language code.
2. Pre-process the corpus, e.g. remove closed-
class words, perform stemming or lemmati-
sation, and word segmentation for languages
without word boundaries (Chinese, Thai).
295
3. Construct a term-document matrix (TDM), us-
ing the frequency of terms (each made up by
a LI and its language tag) in each document.
Apply further weighting, e.g. TF-IDF, if nec-
essary.
4. Perform LSI on the TDM. A vector is then
obtained for every LI in both languages.
5. Set the vector associated with each translation
set to be the sum of all available vectors of its
member LIs.
4 Context-Dependent Lexical Lookup
Given an input text in language Li (1 ? i ? N ),
the lookup module should return a list of multilin-
gual translation set entries, which would contain
L1, L2, . . . , LN translation equivalents of LIs in
the input text, wherever available. For polysemous
LIs, the lookup module should return translation
sets that convey the appropriate meaning in context.
For each input text segment Q (typically a sen-
tence), a ?query vector?, VQ is computed by taking
the vectorial sum of all open class LIs in the in-
put Q. For each LI l in the input, the list of all
translation sets containing l, is retrieved into TS l.
TS l is then sorted in descending order of
CSim(Vt, VQ) = Vt ? VQ|Vt| ? |VQ|
(i.e. the cosine similarity between the query vector
VQ and the translation set candidate t?s vector) for
all t ? TS l.
If the language of input Q is not present in
the bilingual training corpus (e.g. Iban, an under-
resourced language spoken in Borneo), VQ is then
computed as the sum of all vectors associated with
all translation sets in TS l. For example, given the
Iban sentence ?Lelaki nya tikah enggau emperaja
iya, siko dayang ke ligung? (?he married his sweet-
heart, a pretty girl?), VQ would be computed as
VQ =
?
V (lookup(?lelaki?iba))
+
?
V (lookup(?tikah?iba))
+
?
V (lookup(?emperaja?iba))
+
?
V (lookup(?dayang?iba))
+
?
V (lookup(?ligung?iba))
where the function lookup(w) returns the transla-
tion sets containing LI w.
5 Prototype Implementation
We have implemented LEXICALSELECTOR, a pro-
totype context-dependent lexical lookup tool in
Java, trained on a English?Malay bilingual cor-
pus built from Wikipedia articles. Wikipedia ar-
ticles are freely available under a Creative Com-
mons license, thus providing a convenient source
of bilingual comparable corpus. Note that while
the training corpus is English?Malay, the trained
lookup tool can be applied to texts of any language
included in the multilingual dictionary.
Malay Wikipedia articles1 and their correspond-
ing English articles of the same topics2 were first
downloaded. To form the bilingual corpus, each
Malay article is concatenated with its correspond-
ing English article as one document.
The TDM constructed from this corpus con-
tains 62 993 documents and 67 499 terms, includ-
ing both English and Malay items. The TDM is
weighted by TF-IDF, then processed by LSI using
the Gensim Python library3. The indexing process,
using 1000 factors, took about 45 minutes on a
MacBook Pro with a 2.3 GHz processor and 4 GB
RAM. The vectors obtained for each English and
Malay LIs were then used to populate the transla-
tion context knowledge vectors of translation set
in a multilingual lexicon, which comprise six lan-
guages: English, Malay, Chinese, French, Thai and
Iban.
As mentioned earlier, LEXICALSELECTOR can
process texts in any member languages of the mul-
tilingual lexicon, instead of only the languages of
the training corpus (English and Malay). Figure 1
shows the context-depended lexical lookup out-
puts for the Iban input ?Lelaki nya tikah enggau
emperaja iya, siko dayang ke ligung?. Note that
?emperaja? is polysemous (?rainbow? or ?lover?),
but is successfully identified as meaning ?lover? in
this sentence.
6 Early Experimental Results
80 input sentences containing LIs with translation
ambiguities were randomly selected from the Inter-
net (English, Malay and Chinese) and contributed
by a native speaker (Iban). The test words are:
? English ?plant? (vegetation or factory),
1http://dumps.wikimedia.org/mswiki/
2http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:
Export
3http://radimrehurek.com/gensim/
296
Figure 1: LEXICALSELECTOR output for Iban input ?Lelaki nya tikah enggau emperaja iya, siko dayang
ke ligung?. Only top ranked translation sets are shown.
? English ?bank? (financial institution or river-
side land),
? Malay ?kabinet? (governmental Cabinet or
household furniture),
? Malay ?mangga? (mango or padlock),
? Chinese ??? (g?, valley or grain) and
? Iban ?emperaja? (rainbow or lover).
Each test sentence was first POS-tagged auto-
matically based on the Penn Treebank tagset. The
English test sentences were lemmatised and POS-
tagged with the Stanford Parser.4 The Chinese test
sentences segmented with the Stanford Chinese
Word Segmenter tool.5 For Malay POS-tagging,
we trained the QTag tagger6 on a hand-tagged
Malay corpus, and applied the trained tagger on our
test sentences. As we lacked a Iban POS-tagger,
the Iban test sentences were tagged by hand. LIs
of each language and their associated vectors can
then be retrieved from the multilingual lexicon.
The prototype tool LEXICALSELECTOR then
computes the CSim score and ranks potential trans-
lation sets for each LI in the input sentences
(ranking strategy wiki-lsi). The baseline strat-
egy (base-freq) selects the translation set whose
members occur most frequently in the bilingual
Wikipedia corpus.
As a comparison, the English, Chinese and
Malay test sentences were fed to Google Trans-
late7 and translated into Chinese, Malay and En-
glish. (Google Translate does not support Iban
currently.) The Google Translate interface makes
available the ranked list of translation candidates
for each word in an input sentence, one language
4http://www-nlp.stanford.edu/software/
lex-parser.shtml
5http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/segmenter.
shtml
6http://phrasys.net/uob/om/software
7http://translate.google.com on 3 October 2012
at a time.The translated word for each of the input
test word can therefore be noted. The highest rank
of the correct translation for the test words in En-
glish/Chinese/Malay are used to evaluate goog-tr.
Two metrics were used in this quick evaluation.
The first metric is by taking the precision of the first
translation set returned by each ranking strategy,
i.e. whether the top ranked translation set contains
the correct translation of the ambiguous item. The
precision metric is important for applications like
machine translation, where only the top-ranked
meaning or translation is considered.
The results may also be evaluated similar to a
document retrieval task, i.e. as a ranked lexical
lookup for human consumption. This is measured
by the mean reciprocal rank (MRR), the average
of the reciprocal ranks of the correct translation set
for each input sentence in the test set T :
MRR = 1|T |
|T |?
i=1
1
ranki
The results for the three ranking strategies are
summarised in Table 1. For the precision metric,
wiki-lsi scored 0.650 when all 80 input sen-
tences are tested, while the base-freq baseline
scored 0.550. goog-tr has the highest precision
at 0.797. However, if only the Chinese and Malay
inputs ? which has less presence on the Inter-
net and ?less resource-rich? than English ? were
tested (since goog-tr cannot accept Iban inputs),
wiki-lsi and goog-tr actually performs equally
well at 0.690 precision.
In our evaluation, the MRR score of wiki-lsi
is 0.810, while base-freq scored 0.771.
wiki-lsi even outperforms goog-tr when
only the Chinese and Malay test sentences are
considered for the MRR metric, as goog-tr
297
Table 1: Precision and MRR scores of context-
dependent lexical lookup
Incl. Eng. & Iban W/o Eng. & Iban
Strategy Precision MRR Precision MRR
wiki-lsi 0.650 0.810 0.690 0.845
base-freq 0.550 0.771 0.524 0.762
goog-tr 0.797 0.812 0.690 0.708
did not present the correct translation in its list
of alternative translation candidates for some
test sentences. This suggests that the LSI-based
translation context knowledge vectors would be
helpful in building an intelligent reading aid.
7 Discussion
wiki-lsi performed better than base-freq for
both the precision and the MRR metrics, although
further tests is warranted, given the small size of
the current test set. While wiki-lsi is not yet
sufficiently accurate to be used directly in an MT
system, it is helpful in producing a list of ranked
multilingual translation sets depending on the input
context, as part of an intelligent reading aid. Specif-
ically, the lookup module would have benefited if
syntactic information (e.g. syntactic relations and
parse trees) was incorporated during the training
and testing phase. This would require more time
in parsing the training corpus, as well as assuming
that syntactic analysis tools are available to pro-
cess test sentences of all languages, including the
under-resourced ones.
Note that even though the translation context
knowledge vectors were extracted from an English?
Malay corpus, the same vectors can be applied on
Chinese and Iban input sentences as well. This
is especially significant for Iban, which otherwise
lacks resources from which a lookup or disambigua-
tion tool can be trained. Translation context knowl-
edge vectors mined via LSI from a bilingual com-
parable corpus, therefore offers a fast, low cost and
efficient fallback strategy for acquiring multilin-
gual translation equivalence context information.
8 Related Work
Basile and Semeraro (2010) also used Wikipedia
articles as a parallel corpus for their participation
in the SemEval 2010 Cross-Lingual Lexical Sub-
stitution task. Both training and test data were for
English?Spanish. The idea behind their system
is to count, for each potential Spanish candidate,
the number of documents in which the target En-
glish word and the Spanish candidate occurs in
an English?Spanish document pair. In the task?s
?best? evaluation (which is comparable to our ?Preci-
sion? metric), Basile and Semeraro?s system scored
26.39 precision on the trial data and 19.68 preci-
sion on the SemEval test data. This strategy of
selecting the most frequent translation is similar to
our base-freq baseline strategy.
Sarrafzadeh et al (2011) also tackled the prob-
lem of cross-lingual disambiguation for under-
resourced language pairs (English?Persian) using
Wikipedia articles, by applying the one sense per
collocation and one sense per discourse heuristics
on a comparable corpus. The authors incorporated
English and Persian wordnets in their system, thus
achieving 0.68 for the ?best sense? (?Precision?)
evaluation. However, developing wordnets for new
languages is no trivial effort, as acknowledged by
the authors.
9 Conclusion
We extracted translation context knowledge from a
bilingual comparable corpus by running LSI on the
corpus. A context-dependent multilingual lexical
lookup module was implemented, using the cosine
similarity score between the vector of the input
sentence and those of candidate translation sets to
rank the latter in order of relevance. The precision
and MRR scores outperformed Google Translate?s
lexical selection for medium- and under-resourced
language test inputs. The LSI-backed translation
context knowledge vectors, mined from bilingual
comparable corpora, thus provide an fast and af-
fordable data source for building intelligent reading
aids, especially for under-resourced languages.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Multimedia University and Uni-
versiti Malaysia Sarawak for providing support and
resources during the conduct of this study. We also
thank Panceras Talita for helping to prepare the
Iban test sentences for context-dependent lookup.
A 3-Letter ISO Language Codes
Code Language Code Language
eng English msa Malay
zho Chinese fra French
tha Thai iba Iban
298
References
Satanjeev Banerjee and Ted Pedersen. 2003. Extended
gloss overlaps as a measure of semantic relatedness.
In Proceedings of the 18th International Joint Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 805?810.
Pierpaolo Basile and Giovanni Semeraro. 2010. UBA:
Using automatic translation and Wikipedia for cross-
lingual lexical substitution. In Proceedings of the
5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation
(SemEval 2010), pages 242?247, Uppsala, Sweden.
Scott C. Deerwester, Susan T. Dumais, Thomas K. Lan-
dauer, George W. Furnas, and Richard A. Harshman.
1990. Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Jour-
nal of the American Society for Information Science,
41(6):391?407.
Susan T. Dumais, Michael L. Littman, and Thomas K.
Landauer. 1997. Automatic cross-language re-
trieval using latent semantic indexing. In AAAI97
Spring Symposium Series: Cross Language Text and
Speech Retrieval, pages 18?24, Stanford University.
Nancy Ide, Tomaz Erjavec, and Dan Tufis?. 2002.
Sense discrimination with parallel corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of the SIGLEX/SENSEVAL Workshop on
Word Sense Disambiguation: Recent Successes and
Future Directions, pages 54?60, Philadelphia, USA.
Els Lefever and V?ronique Hoste. 2010. SemEval-
2010 Task 3: Cross-lingual word sense disambigua-
tion. In Proceedings of the 5th International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2010), Upp-
sala, Sweden.
Hang Li and Cong Li. 2004. Word translation disam-
biguation using bilingual bootstrapping. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 30(1):1?22.
Lian Tze Lim, Bali Ranaivo-Malan?on, and Enya Kong
Tang. 2011. Low cost construction of a multilingual
lexicon from bilingual lists. Polibits, 43:45?51.
Bernardo Magnini, Carlo Strapparava, Giovanni Pez-
zulo, and Alfio Gliozzo. 2001. Using domain
information for word sense disambiguation. In
Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on
Evaluating Word Sense Disambiguation Systems
(SENSEVAL-2), pages 111?114, Toulouse, France.
Lipta Mahapatra, Meera Mohan, Mitesh M. Khapra,
and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2010. OWNS: Cross-
lingual word sense disambiguation using weighted
overlap counts and Wordnet based similarity mea-
sures. In Proceedings of the 5th International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2010), Upp-
sala, Sweden.
Rada Mihalcea, Ravi Sinha, and Diana McCarthy.
2010. SemEval-2010 Task 2: Cross-lingual lexical
substitution. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2010),
Uppsala, Sweden.
Hwee Tou Ng, Bin Wang, and Yee Seng Chan. 2003.
Exploiting parallel texts for word sense disambigua-
tion: An empirical study. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 455?462, Sapporo, Japan.
Gyula Papp. 2009. Vector-based unsupervised word
sense disambiguation for large number of contexts.
In V?clav Matou?ek and Pavel Mautner, editors,
Text, Speech and Dialogue, volume 5729 of Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science, pages 109?115.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Bahareh Sarrafzadeh, Nikolay Yakovets, Nick Cercone,
and Aijun An. 2011. Cross-lingual word sense dis-
ambiguation for languages with scarce resources. In
Proceedings of the 24th Canadian Conference on
Advances in Artificial Intelligence, pages 347?358,
St. John?s, Canada.
Hinrich Sch?tze. 1998. Automatic word sense discrim-
ination. Computational Linguistics, 24(1):97?123.
Kiyoaki Shirai and Tsunekazu Yagi. 2004. Learn-
ing a robust word sense disambiguation model us-
ing hypernyms in definition sentences. In Proceed-
ings of the 20th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics (COLING 2004), pages 917?
923, Geneva, Switzerland. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Ming Zhou, Yuan Ding, and Changning Huang. 2001.
Improviging translation selection with a new transla-
tion model trained by independent monolingual cor-
pora. Computational Linguistics and Chinese lan-
guage Processing, 6(1):1?26.
299
