An Integrated Framework for Archiving, Processing and Developing 
Learning Materials for an Endangered Aboriginal Language in Tai-
wan
Meng-Chien Yang 
Department of Computer and 
Communication Engineering 
Providence University, Taiwan 
mcyang2@pu.edu.tw
D. Victoria Rau 
Department of English Language, Lit-
erature and Linguistics 
Providence University, Taiwan 
dhrau@pu.edu.tw
Abstract
Preservation of an endangered language is an 
important and difficult task. The preservation 
project should include documentation, archiv-
ing and development of shared resources for the 
endangered language. In addition, the project 
will consider how to revitalize this endangered 
language among the younger generation. In this 
paper, we propose an integrated framework that 
will connect the three different tasks: language 
archiving, language processing and creating 
learning materials. We are using this framework 
to document one Taiwanese aboriginal lan-
guage: Yami.  The proposed framework should 
be an effective tool for documenting other en-
dangered languages in Asia.
1 Introduction 
The impact of globalization and urbanization 
has caused many aboriginal languages on our 
planet to go extinct. This language death process 
not only reduces the number of native languages 
but also wipes out the cultural heritage con-
nected with those languages (Xu 2001). There-
fore, preservation and archiving of these 
endangered native languages is vital and critical. 
Many projects around the world are seeking to 
preserve these endangered native languages (e.g., 
Lublinskaya 2002; Psutka 2002).  
The attempt to preserve an endangered lan-
guage includes several steps: documenting and 
recording the oral and written literature, compil-
ing the grammar and a dictionary of the lan-
guage, and annotating the documentation related 
to this language. It is also important to find an 
effective approach to teach the endangered lan-
guage to the ethnic group using the language, 
particularly to members of the younger genera-
tion, who often live in urban areas without any 
connection to their place of origin. 
According to a study by Whaley (2003), the 
factors required to help an endangered language 
survive include: 
1. a well developed preservation and 
maintenance program for the language; 
2. use of information technology in the 
preserving project; 
3. a new world order, especially economic 
and political shifts; 
4. an environment for learning and explor-
ing the language. 
Based on the above discussion, it is impor-
tant that an endangered language preservation 
and documentation project should be compre-
hensive and carefully planned. This project 
needs to take advantage of state-of-the-art tech-
nologies and establish an environment for learn-
ing.
In order to successfully document and pre-
serve a Batanic language, Yami, we propose an 
approach of archiving and development of an 
environment that fosters learning of the lan-
guage. The Yami language, used by the Yami 
tribe on Orchid Island, is an oral language in 
which most of the content is closely connected 
to the traditional life style and cultural heritage. 
However, many Yami people have moved to 
cities in Taiwan and have lost their connection 
to the Yami society on Orchid Island. The death 
32
of the older generation has hastened the decline 
of the Yami language.  According to Rau?s 
(1995) sociolinguistic survey on Orchid Island, 
Iraralay is the only community of the six vil-
lages on the island where children still use some 
Yami for daily interaction.  Although Yami has 
been offered as an elective in elementary school 
since 1998, Yami is gradually being replaced by 
Mandarin Chinese.  Among the junior high 
school students on the island, 60% either be-
lieved Yami would die eventually or were un-
certain about the fate of the language. 
The approach proposes a comprehensive se-
ries of steps to collect and record the Yami lan-
guage. In addition, the work includes 
development of a learning method that will be 
effective with Yami youngsters who live in ur-
ban areas. Although the complete work of 
documentation will take many years, the Yami 
language is in danger of being lost due to rapid 
urbanization. Therefore, we have developed a 
strategy to make language items available in 
learning materials as soon as they have been 
collected, taking advantage of information tech-
nology and computer networking. Using these 
technologies we have developed an integrated 
platform for documenting, processing and learn-
ing that will help both Yami youngsters and 
other students taking Yami as a second language.   
The integrated platform is built on a main 
web server with several supporting servers. The 
main server is designed as the server for re-
source management and the supporting servers 
are designed for different purposes. The purpose 
of this design is to effectively edit the oral re-
cording of the Yami language and to make the 
language learning materials. The proposed plat-
form includes three subsystems: 
1. a subsystem to manage and edit the 
digital archiving of the Yami language, 
2. a subsystem to handle the workflow of 
collecting oral recordings of the Yami 
language,
3. a subsystem to create and manage the 
Yami language learning materials. 
Each subsystem is installed on one or two serv-
ers. All these subsystems will be described in 
detail in Section 3. 
Although most ideas in the proposed inte-
grated framework has been used for other lan-
guage documentation and learning, the proposed 
framework is an initiative for archiving and 
teaching an endangered language.  The attempt 
of our study is not only to use technologies to 
preserve an endangered language but also to 
develop a well-accepted platform for this lan-
guage. Hence, people can learn and appreciate 
this language and its cultural heritage. 
The proposed framework is used in an ongo-
ing grant-supported project for archiving and 
documenting the Yami language (ELDP, 
MDP0114).  The collection of Yami language 
materials began in 1994. Currently, we are im-
plementing the computer systems and database 
in this integrated framework. In the later section, 
we will report on our current progress. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as 
follows. Section 2 is a description of the process 
of collecting the material for archiving. Section 
3 shows the proposed integrated framework and 
a brief description of related methodologies. 
Section 4 illustrates the current development of 
the system, followed by conclusion and future 
directions in Section 5. 
2 Materials to be Documented 
In addition to digitally archiving the 20 nar-
ratives, reference grammar, trilingual dictionary 
with 2000 entries (Rau & Dong, 2005), and mul-
timedia pedagogical materials (Rau et al 2005), 
we also collaborated with local consultants to 
document daily conversations, business transac-
tions, festivals, and ceremonies.  
The topics were selected based on consulta-
tion of previous research on Yami ethnography, 
and are designed to meet the standards stipulated 
by the R.O.C. Ministry of Education for devel-
oping Austronesian teaching materials in Tai-
wan. The topics are closely related to those 
selected for inclusion in four volumes of Yami 
multimedia teaching materials the second author 
is currently developing. 
3 Integrated Framework 
In this section, we will describe our design 
and the theoretical framework behind the design. 
The project is divided into four major steps:  
33
(1) field recording: recording the oral 
sound data of the Yami language,  
(2) archiving: editing the sound data and 
annotating the data using the metadata,  
(3) multimedia transformation: analyzing 
the original data and creating a multi-
media Yami dictionary and text descrip-
tion,
(4) e-Learning: creating online Yami lan-
guage learning materials.
The framework is designed to meet two re-
quirements of our Yami language archiving pro-
ject:
(1) to build a complete and original archiv-
ing database for Yami language includ-
ing speech of various genres, grammar, 
vocabulary and cultural artifacts.
(2) to create learning materials in an easy-
to-learn environment via internet and 
computer. 
3.1 Field Recording 
First of all, the existing records collected by 
the research team since 1994 will be organized 
and digitalized, along with new field recordings. 
In our project, we will develop an oral speech 
archiving database to store these oral recordings. 
Each recording will be scanned to find the basic 
sound characteristics and transferred to digital 
data. The sound characteristics are used for 
comparing and tracking these recordings. Fol-
lowing a study by Chen (1996) about tone and 
stress patterns in Asian languages, we will ex-
tract information on intonation and stress from 
the field recording. This information will later 
be used to create the learning material. The field 
recordings are arranged by segments, ranging 
from words in isolation to ?idea units? or ?tone 
units? (Chafe 1979) in continuous speech. 
Once a segment of the field recording has 
been completed, the original data is stored in the 
computer and two different types of digital data 
are created. These include MP3 data that will be 
used for creating the learning materials and the 
annotated digital data in which the recordings 
are separated into phrases with Chinese and 
English translations. All these data are stored in 
a relational database with the recording date 
used as the searching key. 
The processing of field recordings is consid-
ered to be the preparation and preprocessing 
stage of the Yami language documentation pro-
ject. The voice database is used to create the 
archived data and learning materials. 
3.2 Archiving
The archiving step begins with editing the 
voice database and construction of the OLAC 
metadata for each entity in the voice database. 
The original sound tracks in the field recording 
database are edited to improve clarity of the 
sound by using sampling techniques (Kientzle 
1998). The edited sounds are stored as the new 
sound records in the voice database.  
  The metadata used for describing Yami lan-
guage is the OLAC metadata, an extended Dub-
lin Core set with basic elements of language 
resources. To meet the requirement of the lin-
guistic community, certain new extension ele-
ments are put in the OLAC set following DCMI 
guidelines (DCMI 2000). To build a proper 
OLAC metadata for the Yami language, we 
have chosen to adopt the OLAC set proposed by 
Bird and Simons (Bird et al 2001, Bird & 
Simons 2003) for this project.  Because Yami is 
primarily an oral language, we use a subset of 
this OLAC set. The OLAC elements used in this 
project are: {Title, Creator, Subject, Subject 
language, Description, Publisher, Contributor, 
Date, Type, Format, Identifier, Source, Lan-
guage, Relation, Rights}. The reason for select-
ing these elements is to create a common 
description of the Yami language. Furthermore, 
after reviewing the field study materials, we can 
show that the above OLAC subset can meet the 
basic requirement for describing the Yami lan-
guage. The rules to apply these OLAC elements 
to each recording of  the Yami language are: 
(1) Each OLAC element can be optional and 
repeatable;
(2) Each OLAC element can describe only 
one single identification or one single 
range;
(3) Data format of each OLAC element fol-
lows the rules in DCMI (DCMI 2002). 
Each OLAC element used in describing the 
Yami language is given following the OLAC 
and ELDP guidelines. Suppose there is a Yami 
language sound track to be described, the OLAC 
34
element set of this sound track is shown as fol-
lows:
Title: the Chinese name of the Yami language 
sound track. A second Title element is 
used to store English translation. 
Creator: the Yami speaker who uttered this 
speech. A second Creator element is used 
to store his/her Chinese name. 
Subject: the keyword used to classify the content 
of the Yami language sound track. The 
keywords and controlled vocabularies are 
being collected. 
Subject language: the Chinese linguistic descrip-
tion of the Yami language. A second ele-
ment is the corresponding English 
description.
Description: the usage and the multimedia data 
related to this Yami language sound track. 
Some multimedia data are collected using 
the Multimedia Transformation step de-
scribed in Section 3.3. 
Publisher: the research teams and the sponsoring 
institutions.
Contributor: the research teams and the person 
who recorded this sound track. 
Date: the date this sound track was recorded and 
the date the archiving process was com-
pleted.
Type: the genre of the content of the Yami lan-
guage sound track. We are transferring 
many Yami language linguistic and an-
thropological terms into DC-type. These 
DC-type terms will be used as the Type 
element. 
Format: the digital data type of the Yami lan-
guage sound track. 
Identifier: the ELDP identifier for this Yami 
language sound track. We will follow 
ELDP guidelines to create identifiers for 
the archived sound track. 
Source: the location of the archiving database 
and the location for storing the field study 
draft.
Language: English and Chinese (traditional and 
simplified characters)  
Relation: the related Yami language sound 
tracks.
Rights: copyright information of this sound 
track.
In the archiving step we will also consider 
how to build a database of the controlled vo-
cabularies for the Yami language. We will use 
three sources for the controlled vocabulary in 
this project: lexicon, primary text and language 
description.
The table of OLAC metadata is created in 
two forms, one XML text table format and one 
relational table format. The voice database from 
the first step is edited and connected to the 
metadata table.  
Another goal of this step is to build a Yami 
language online phrase dictionary. The OLAC 
metadata are used for parsing and editing with 
the voice database to create a Yami language 
online phrase dictionary. We will develop an 
auto dictionary-generating program that can 
process the OLAC metadata and find suitable 
terms. In addition, we use the grammar and 
course materials of Yami language multimedia 
courseware created by Rau et al (2005) to build 
our on-line multimedia Yami language phrase 
dictionary. 
When the metadata of a set of the Yami lan-
guage sound tracks are completed, the results 
will be published online on our web site. This 
year, our focus is aligning the OLAC metadata 
of the Yami language sound tracks with the mul-
timedia courseware by Rau et al (2005). Later, 
we will try to use ontology to determine rules 
for creating metadata automatically and to de-
velop an automatic metadata generator for the 
Yami language. 
3.3 Multimedia Transformation 
The Yami language is basically a spoken 
language, although an orthography is being de-
veloped and standardized as texts are collected. 
To preserve the Yami language, we will use an 
image database to annotate the language. In ad-
dition, each word in Yami is annotated with its 
orthography stored in a sound database. The 
purpose of this transformation is to build an im-
age for each Yami word. Therefore, the meaning 
of the word can be related directly to a picture. 
The reasons why we have chosen to use this ap-
proach to annotate the Yami language are as 
follows:
35
(1) The Yami language, like all other lan-
guages, has culture-specific words and 
expressions, of which pictures are direct 
representations. 
(2) The annotated pictures help learners un-
derstand the traditional lifestyle on Or-
chid Island and give them more incentive 
to learn the language. 
(3) The pictures include many Yami cultural 
artifacts. The annotated pictures can thus 
preserve descriptions of their cultural 
heritage.
The steps for multimedia transformation of 
the Yami language are as follows: 
(1) Collect suitable images for building the 
annotated image database. We will con-
sult many other research teams to borrow 
Yami images and video recordings.  
(2) Design criteria to choose the images. We 
will select appropriate images and de-
velop possible connections between 
Yami expressions and a set of pictures.  
(3) Build a special annotated database and 
use the Yami language to annotate the 
image data. The annotated algorithms are 
based on the fuzzy logic style (Kecman 
2001) or the Coherent Language model 
(Jin 2004). 
(4) Build a corresponding mapping relation 
between a Yami expression and a set of 
annotated images. The mapping relations 
are a set of contexts and symbolic tables 
similar to a set of induction rules. 
(5) Build a sound connection between each 
Yami word and its phonetic symbols by 
using the fuzzy logic learning algorithm. 
 The results of multimedia transformation 
can be used as a foundation for creating online 
learning material. The results are stored in a re-
lational multimedia database as well as the XML 
pages.
3.4 e-Learning
The final task of our project is to find an effec-
tive way to teach the Yami language to urban 
Yami youngsters and other learners of Yami as a 
second language. To build an open and self-
learning environment, the computer-based learn-
ing or the webs for learning is our choice. There 
have been various discussions about how to use 
information technologies and the web to learn a 
different language. Gerbault (2002) showed that 
it is viable to set up a proper multimedia envi-
ronment for leaning a language without a 
teacher?s participation. Fujii et al (2000) dem-
onstrated a project using the Internet as a tool 
for the teacher to post course materials and cre-
ate an online learning environment.  In addition, 
Lamb (2005) suggested rethinking pedagogical 
models for e-learning from the what, the why 
and the how. e-Learning consists of self-access, 
reference sources, discussion forum, and virtual 
learning classrooms.  The main motives for in-
troducing e-learning include improving student 
multimedia learning experience, enhancing 
learner autonomy and widening participation.  
Finally, e-learning can be controlled primarily 
by tutors or students, depending on objectives, 
contents, learning tasks, length/time/place of 
study, or choice of assessment activities.   
As mentioned in a study by Leung (2003), 
the computer-based learning environment is 
very important as a way to help students learn 
effectively. In order to provide an effective 
learning environment, Leung (2003) suggested 
that four contextual issues should be considered 
in design and implementation of computer-based 
learning. These issues are topic selection, au-
thenticity, complexity, and multiple perspectives. 
The design of the web-based computer-assisted 
learning program for the Yami language takes 
these four issues into consideration. We outline 
our design as follows.  
The learning environment in this project is a 
virtual classroom without teacher participation. 
Students can select the Yami language learning 
materials prepared by the second author. If a 
student asks for clues or explanation of a spe-
cific Yami word or expression, a suitable image 
or video clip is retrieved from the multimedia 
database. If a student is not familiar with a spe-
cific Yami sound, a similar phonetic symbol is 
provided to him/her. The learning materials are 
arranged in three different settings, scenario set-
ting, easy-to-difficult condition setting and 
learner?s choice setting. The scenario setting 
uses related scenes in Yami society such as the 
flying fish festival as a main theme of the learn-
ing materials. The easy-to-difficult condition 
36
setting allows the learner to select different lev-
els of the Yami language materials. The levels 
are based on word frequencies and complexity 
of grammar. The learner can arrange his/her 
learning materials in the learner?s chosen setting. 
The learning system will give detailed guide-
lines to explain how to choose the learning ma-
terials. If a student wants to learn the Yami 
language, he/she can choose different learning 
materials based on his/her interest. The learning 
materials are designed as theme units with exer-
cises and rubrics for self-assessment. The design 
of these Yami language exercises is based on a 
study about the reactions of students to using a 
web-based system for learning Chinese in Tai-
wan (Yang, 2001).
We use the annotated image database as a 
tool to help the learners understand the meaning 
of Yami words or expressions. To make the pic-
torial explanation more understandable, an ani-
mation clip combined with several images is 
created to explain them. 
A study by Aist (2002) showed that different 
designs of the oral-reading interactions can help 
students understand the language more. The 
learning system will provide several reading 
modes for students to listen and practice. These 
modes include: to read the entire sentence with-
out interruption, to read the entire sentence by 
isolating each word, to read a word slowly syl-
lable-by-syllable, recue the whole sentence and 
recue the selected words. 
The interface of the proposed learning envi-
ronment is built on a web server with a dynamic 
web page. To establish a more efficient learning 
environment, all the learning materials are ed-
ited into reusable learning objects. The user in-
terface is developed as an adaptive style 
following Mich et al?s (2004) PARLING sys-
tem. 
The proposed framework is illustrated in 
Figure 1. 
Figure 1: The integrated framework for the 
Yami Language preservation project 
4 Implementation of the proposed 
Framework  
We implement the proposed framework as a 
hybrid system with many different proc-
esses including: 
(1) Data collection and formulation: to col-
lect the original Yami language data and 
to build the metadata and the table for 
digital archiving. 
(2) System design and analysis: to design 
and develop suitable computer systems 
and servers to accommodate the pro-
posed framework. 
(3) Research and construction of proposed 
framework: to develop each subsystem 
or database shown in Figure 1, such as 
the OLAC metadata database, the anno-
tated image database and the Yami lan-
guage learning materials. 
(4) Assessment and evaluation: to test the ef-
fectiveness of the proposed learning ma-
37
terials and to evaluate whether the pro-
ject goals were accomplished. 
Currently, we are collecting the Yami lan-
guage materials and building the system 
server for the proposed framework. We will 
use a SQL server as the main sever to man-
age the workflow and the documentation 
logs. A PHP web server with mySQL server 
is used as a server for multimedia transfor-
mation. Another SQL server is used as the 
archiving server. The system diagram of the 
proposed framework is shown in Figure 2. 
Figure 2 Diagram for the proposed frame-
work
5 Conclusion and future studies 
This paper describes an integrated framework 
for archiving and processing the Yami language. 
In addition, the framework includes the process 
for developing online learning materials for the 
endangered language. We use this framework 
for the Yami language preservation project. The 
project is continuously developing. We hope 
that this project can serve as a model for other 
endangered language preservation projects in 
Asia.
References
Aist, G. (2002) Helping Children Learn Vocabulary 
during Computer-Assisted Oral Reading, Educa-
tional Technology & Society 5(2). 
Bird, S. Simons, G. Huang, C.-R. (2001) The Open 
Language Archives Community and Asian Lan-
guage Resources, NLPRS 2001, pp. 31-38.  
Bird, S. & Simons, G. (2003) Extending Dublin Core 
Metadata to support Description and Discovery of 
Language Resources, Computers and Humanities, 
No. 37, pp. 378-388. 
Chafe, W. L. (1979) The flow of thought and the 
flow of language. In T. Giv?n (ed.), Syntax and 
Semantics 12: Discourse and Syntax. New York: 
Academic Press, pp. 159-181. 
Chen, S. & Fu, M. (1996) Computer Assisted Lan-
guage Learning in Teacher Education: Training of 
Tones and Stress Patterns in Asian Languages, 
IEEE International Conference on Multimedia 
Engineering Education, pp. 435-443. 
DCMI (2000), Dublin Core Qualifiers,. 
[http://dublinecore.org/documents/2000/07/11/de
memsqualifiers/] 
DCMI (2002), DCMI Elements and Element Re-
finements ? a current list.. 
[http://dublinecore.org/usage/terms/dc/current-
elements/] 
Fujii, S. Iwata, J. hattori, M., Iijima, M. & Mizuno, T. 
(2000) ?Web-Call?: a language learning support 
system using internet, Seventh International Con-
ference on Parallel and Distributed systems, pp. 
326-331. 
Gerbault, J. (2002) Information technology and for-
eign language learning: what happens when no 
teacher is around?, International Conference on 
Computers in Education, pp. 394-398. 
Jin, R. Chai, J. and Si, L. (2004) Effective Automatic 
Image Annotation via a coherent language model 
and active learning, MM 2004, pp. 892-899. 
Kecman, V. (2001) Learning and soft computing: 
support vector machines, neural networks, and 
fuzzy logic model, MIT press. 
Kientzle, T. (1998) A programmer?s Guide to Sound, 
Addison-Wesley. 
Lamb, T. (2005) Rethinking predagogical models for 
e-learning.  Paper presented at AILA 2005, the 
14th World Congress of Applied Linguistics. July 
24-29, Madison, Wisconson. 
Leung, A.C.K. (2003), Contextual Issues in the Con-
struction of Computer-Based Learning Programs, 
J. Computer Assisted Learning, Vol. 19, 2003, pp. 
501-516. 
Lublinskaya, M. & Sherstinova, T. (2002) Audio 
Collections of Endangered Arctic Languages in 
the Russian Federation, TSD 2002, LNAI 2448, 
pp. 347-353. 
Mich, O. Betta, E. & Giuliani, D. PARLING: e-
Literature for Supporting Children Learning Eng-
lish as a Second Language, IUI 2004, pp. 283-285. 
38
Psutka, J., et al (2002) Automatic Transcription of 
Czech Language Oral History in the MALACH 
project: Resources and Initial Experiments, TSD 
2002, LNAI 2448, pp. 253-260. 
Rau, D. V., Dong, M.-N., Lin, M-Y, Chang, H.-H., & 
Hsu, Y-C, (2005) Multimedia Materials of Yami 
Language, Technical Report, Department of  Eng-
lish Language, Literature and Linguistics, Provi-
dence University. 
Rau, D. V. & Dong, M.-N. (2005). Yami Texts with 
Reference Grammar and Vocabulary, Language 
and Linguistics.  A-10. 
Rau, D. V. (1995) Yami Vitality. NSC report 
(NSC84-2411-H-126-001), presented at the Sym-
posium on Language Use and Ethnic Identity, In-
stitute of Ethnology, Academia Sinica (1995/5/16). 
Whaley, L. (2003) The future of native languages, 
FUTURES 35, pp. 961-973. 
Xu, S. X. (2001) Study on Language Endangerment. 
Beijing: Central Ethnic University. 
Yang, S. C. (2001) Integrating computer-mediated 
tools into the language curriculum, J. Computer 
Assisted Learning, Vol. 17, 2001, pp. 85-93. 
39
A Semantic Study on Yami Ontology in Traditional Songs
    Yin-Sheng Tai                D. Victoria Rau               Meng-Chien Yang
     Providence University,          Providence University,        Providence University,  
                     Taiwan                                  Taiwan                                Taiwan 
             wratp2@msn.com                dhrau@pu.edu.tw            mcyang2@pu.edu.tw
Abstract
The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  provide  an 
example of how to build a Yami ontology from 
traditional  songs  by  employing  Prot?g?,  an 
open-source  tool for  editing  and  managing 
ontologies developed  by  Stanford  University. 
Following  Conceptual  Blending  Theory 
(Fauconnier  and Turner, 1998),  we found that 
Yami  people use the  conceptual  metaphor  of 
?fishing? in traditional songs when praising the 
host?s diligence  in  a ceremony  celebrating the 
completion  of  a  workhouse.  The  process  of 
building ontologies  is explored and illustrated. 
The  proposed construction of  an ontology for 
Yami  traditional  songs  can  serve  as  a 
fundamental  template,  using  the corpus 
available online from the Yami documentation 
website  (http://yamiproject.cs.pu.edu.tw/yami) 
to build ontologies for other domains.  
1 Introduction
Yami is an endangered Austronesian language, 
spoken on  Orchid  Island (Lanyu),  46  kilometers 
southeast  of  the  main  island  of  Taiwan. For  the 
purposes of  language  documentation and 
preservation, an on-line Yami dictionary1 has been 
developed to facilitate language learning. Although 
each  lexical  entry contains  basic  meanings  of 
words  (in  both  English  and  Chinese), 
pronunciations,  and  roots  and  affixes, no 
information  on  lexical  semantics,  such  as 
synonyms, hyponyms, or metaphors is available. If 
information  on  lexical  relationships could  be 
incorporated into  the Yami dictionary,  this online 
tool would be even more useful for Yami language 
learners.
In  the  present  study,  we  focused  on  the 
metaphors in Yami lyrics. Knight (2005) considers 
that,  from a Yami native speaker?s point of  view, 
1  Available from the following IP address:
http://yamiproject.cs.pu.edu.tw/elearn/search.php
?Raods? (traditional songs) play an important role 
in culture because they subsume features such as 
archaism, metaphors, puns and polite contradiction. 
In  addition,  Yami  traditonal  songs  reflect  Yami 
values, such as love and honoring hard work (e.g. 
fishing or farm work), and cultural events, such as 
completion  of  hard  work  and  special  festivals. 
Thus,  we  would  like  to  build  an  ontology  using 
Yami traditional songs, adapting the taxonomies in 
WordNet and SUMO, which can serve as a point of 
departure  for  further  mapping  of other  Yami 
ontologies. In  this  paper,  we  will  report  our 
preliminary  results,  giving  one  example  at  this 
early stage of the research project on constructing 
Yami  ontology,  led  by  the  second  and  third 
authors. 
2  Literature Review
2.1 Conceptual Metaphor Theory
The original Conceptual Metaphor Theory was 
proposed  by  Lakoff  and  Johnson (1980).  They 
identify metaphor as a transfer between the source 
domain and  the  target domain.  This  has  become 
known as the ?two-domain theory? of metaphor. 
2.2 Conceptual Blending Theory
Conceptual  Blending Theory (Fauconnier  and 
Turner, 1998; 2002) is a framework for interpreting 
cognitive  linguistic  phenomena  such  as  analogy, 
metaphor, etc. According to Conceptual  Blending 
Theory, the input structures, generic structures, and 
blend structures in the network are mental spaces. 
In  Figure  1,  the  frame  structure  recruited  to  the 
mental  space  is  represented  as  a  rectangle  either 
outside or iconically inside the circle.
Figure 1. Conceptual Blending Theory
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
81
2.3  Prot?g?
In this study, we are building a Yami ontology 
based  on  traditional  songs  using  Prot?g?2,  which 
not  only provides a rich set  of basic knowledge-
modeling structures and a way to enter  data,  but 
can also  be customized to create new domains in 
knowledge models. 
As  demonstrated  in  previous  studies  (e.g., 
Dodds,  2005;  Lin  2006),  Prot?g? has  been 
successfully applied to construction of ontology in 
specific domains. Therefore, the present study used 
Prot?g? to  construct  an  ontology  of Yami 
traditional songs. 
3. Methodology
3.1 Data Collection
The  main  data  resource  came  from  Dong?s 
monograph (1994)  ?In  Praise of Taro,? which 
contains a total of 250 songs. This study is based 
on  one  song  which  contains  many  fishing 
metaphors.  Seven metaphorical  tokens  were 
extracted from this song. 
3.2 Data Analysis
First of all, the question of the use of metaphor 
in  Yami  was  analyzed  by  Lakoff  &  Johnson?s 
Conceptual  Metaphor  Theory  (1980)  and 
Fauconnier and  Turner?s  Conceptual  Blending 
Theory  (1998).  Secondly,  two taxonomic tenors 
were  identified  using WordNet (Fellbaum,  1999) 
and Yami  Texts  with  Reference  Grammar  and  
Dictionary (Rau & Dong,  2006).  Based on these 
taxonomic tenors, Yami words were classified into 
?Verbs? and ?Nouns?.
4.  Results and Discussion
4.1 Conceptual Blending
In the following discussion, we begin with an 
analysis of a traditional Yami song celebrating the 
completion of a workhouse with a harvest of taro. 
It  mostly  praises  the  host?s  achivement and hard 
work.  After  praising  the  host?s  achivement,  the 
guests take all the host?s taros and cover the roof of 
the workhouse with them. Finally, the guests sing 
songs with the host in turn. 
The lyric is illustrated as follows: 
1 oya   rana    minangyid  siapen      rarakeh
this already  reached_the_harbor grandfather old 
2  Prot?g? is a free, open source ontology editor and 
knowledge-base framework. The IP address of 
Prot?g? is: http://protege.stanford.edu/.
?Now, the old man reached the harbor.?
2 ji    na       minatokod Jicamongan  ta
NEG already  reached     PLN       because
?He didn?t paddle to Jicamongan.?
3 kalagarawan     am   paneneneban  o     ...
 fingerling_place  TOP  shallow_sea   NOM  ...
?He moved in the shallow sea where only fingerling 
fish live.? 
4 to    na      rana  avavangi   sia  ta
AUX 3.S.GEN already row a boat there because
?He could only row his boat there?
5 ji   na      rana    voaz  o    kakaod
 NEG 3.S.GEN already  row  NOM  paddle 
?Because he had already lost strength to row.?     
Seven metaphorical tokens  related to ?fishing? 
were detected from the lyric. They are marked in 
bold  case.  In  Line  1, minangyid ?reached  the 
harbor?  was  identified  as  metaphorical  because 
although  it  literally  describes  going  back  home 
after finishing one?s fishing, its intended meaning 
is  ?to  rest  and  hold  a  ceremony  celebrating the 
completion of a workhouse.? Using the Conceptual 
Metaphor  Theory (1980),  we  compared  the 
cognitive  activities  in  the  lyrics  and  the  mental 
space (Table 1). The entities, quality, and functions 
in the domain of fishing were analyzed.
Table 1. Reached the harbor vs. Holding a 
ceremony celebrating the completion of a 
workhouse
Table 1 shows that Yami people prefer to use 
?fishing? as a metaphor for the intended meanings 
of  building  a  house  or  farming.  We  further 
employed the Conceptual  Blending  Theory (1998) 
to interpret the ?harbor? example (see Figure 2).
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
82
Figure 2. ?Reached the harbor? vs. ?Holding a 
ceremony celebrating the completion of a 
workhouse?
The  concept  of ?reached  the  harbor?  is 
categorized  into  Input  space  I,  and  ?holding a 
ceremony  celebrating the  completion  of  a 
workhouse? is categorized into Input space II. Both 
Inputs  have certain similarities as well as distinct 
features. From Input Space I, ?fisherman,? ?boat,? 
?fish,? ?harbor,?  and ?to  share  his  achievements 
and  honor  with  his  friends  and  relatives?  are 
respectively  mapped  into  ?host/builder,? ?new 
workhouse,? ?taro,? ?yard,?  and  ?to  share  his 
achievements  and  honor  with  his  friends  and 
relatives,?  in  Input  Space  II.  The  Inputs  might 
share some cross-mapping properties, which can be 
listed in the Generic space. The structure from the 
two input mental spaces is projected into the Blend 
space.  Essentially,  which elements  from  Input 
space II should be selected and projected onto the 
blend space  are determined by the contents of  the 
lyric. Thus, in the blend space, all elements remain 
separate from their corresponding counterparts, but 
the relations among  the features in Input  space I 
determines the relations  between corresponding 
counterparts. That is to say, the running structure in 
the  blend  space  partially  projected  from  Input 
space I determines the existing relations among the 
elements  in  the  blend.  In  Input space I, a 
?fisherman? needs a ?boat? to fish in the ocean, so 
the relation between ?fisherman? and ?boat? is  a 
kind  of  ?earning a  living.?  In  addition,  what  a 
?fisherman?  works for  is  ?fish.?  After  the 
fisherman finishes his work,  he has to  go back to 
the harbor. Such relations also operate among those 
elements projected from Input space II. As a result, 
?the  host  of  the  completion  ceremony  of  a 
workhouse? is  the  ?fisherman? of  the  ?workhouse 
ceremony;? the relation between ?the host? and the 
?workhouse ceremony? is that of ?finishing a time-
consuming job.?  Additionally,  ?taros? in the yard 
are  compared  with ?fish? at  the harbor,  which 
await to be ?shared with friends and relatives.?
4.2  Taxonomy 
Yami verbs subsume dynamic verbs and stative 
verbs (Rau and Dong, 2006). Based on the notions 
from  WordNet, we  further  divided  verbs  into 
Bodily  Function  and Care  Verbs, Change Verbs, 
Communication Verbs, Competition Verbs, 
Consumption  Verbs,  Contact  Verbs,  Cognition 
Verbs,  Creation Verbs,  Motion Verbs,  Emotion or 
Psych  Verbs,  Stative  Verbs,  Perception  Verbs, 
Possession  Verbs, Social  Interaction  Verbs,  and 
Weather  Verbs.  Since  Yami  does  not  possess  a 
distinctive  adjective word  class,  both  descriptive 
and relational adjectives are in this study classified 
under  stative  verbs  in  WordNet.  Descriptive 
adjectives subsume  antonymy,  gradation, 
markedness, polysemy and selectional preferences, 
reference-modifying  adjectives,  color  adjectives, 
quantifiers,  and  participial  adjectives.  Relational 
adjectives include  two  domains,  ?pertaining? or 
?relating to? (Fellbaum 1999: 63).  The coding of 
adjectives  in  this  file  is  different  from  that  of 
descriptive adjectives. Rather than being part of a 
cluster, each synset is entered individually, so that 
the  interface  will  present  the  adjective  with  its 
related noun and information about the sense of the 
noun. 
For the aspect of Yami Nouns, we categorized 
the nouns into 10 basic noun  categories following 
WordNet (Fellbaum,  1999:  30),  including  entity, 
abstraction,  psycho-feature,  natural  phenomena, 
activity,  event,  group,  location,  possession, and 
state.
4.3  Example from the Yami Lyric
The  following  example  illustrates  how  we 
extracted the metaphorical words of ?fishing? from 
the lyric and classfied them into their domains. 
Firstly, minangyid ?reached the harbor,?  avavangi 
?row, sail something? and  voaz ?row something,? 
were  classified  as Motion  Verbs.  Secondly, 
Jicamongan ?a  place  name  of  deep water,? 
kalagarawan ?a place where fingerling fish swim? 
and  paneneneban ?shallow place,? were 
categorized under  the  main  section  Location  and 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
83
the sub-section Sea. Finally, kakaod ? paddle? was 
classified in the main section Entity and the sub-
section Artifact, as shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4.
Figure 3. An example of four Yami nouns in the 
ontology of Yami lyrics 
Figure 4. An example of three Yami verbs in the 
ontology of Yami lyrics
4.4  Mapping metaphorical words
   To  classify  Yami  metaphor,  we  made  links 
(equivalent  classes)  between  the  literal  meaning 
and the metaphorical meaning using Prot?g?. Since 
Input space I usually works as the source domain 
and Input space II as  the  target domain, we found 
that, at least in this case, this is a one-sided network 
of  metaphor mapping. We  thus  employed  the 
property  ?mappings?  to  define  the  relationship 
between ?reached the harbor? and ?to hold a new 
workhouse celebration.? Moreover, in order to set 
up the restrictions for searching words, we added 
the property ?hasConceptOf?. We then named the 
class expression of ?reached the harbor? with the 
following restriction: 
has_concept_of some3 (harbor and4 fish and 
fisherman and boat and share)   
Similarly, we also provided the phrase ?to hold 
a new workhouse celebration? with the following 
restriction: 
has_concept_of some (host and builder and
workhouse and share and taro and yard)
Finally, for  the  sake  of  correctly  linking 
3  This refers to the existential quantifier ( ) in OWL 
syntax, which can be read as at least one, or some. 
4 An intersection class is described by combining two or
more classes using the AND operator ( ).
meanings of each word, the ontology builder can 
check  the  ontology  with  the  DL  Query  Tab  in 
Prot?g?.
In summary,  the  connection between the  two 
items minangyid, ?reached the harbor? and ?to hold 
a new workhouse celebration,? shown in shadow in 
Figure  4,  is  solely  based  on  the  structure  of  the 
inputs,  since  each  of  them  are  from  a  different 
domain of verbs. This structure is in harmony with 
Yami custom and contextual structure.
5  Conclusion
This paper has provided an example of how to 
construct  an  ontology  of Yami  using  traditional 
songs.  We  hope  this  approach  will  serve  as  a 
fundamental  template for further  mappings  with 
more texts to produce other Yami ontologies.
 
References
Dodds, D. 2005. Qualitative geospatial
processing, ontology and spatial metaphor.
presented at the GML and Geo-Spatial Web
Services. 
Dong, M. N. 1995. In Praise of Taro. Dao-Xiang
Publisher.
Fauconnier, G. & Turner,M. 1998. Conceptual
Integration Networks. Cognitive Science, 22
(2), 133-187.
Fellbaum,C. 1999. WordNet:an Electronic
Lexical Database. Cambridge,Mass.: MIT
Press.
Knight, P., & Lu Y. H.. 2005. Music heritage of
the oral traditions by meykaryag of the Tao 
tribe. Paper presented at the 2005
International Forum of Ethnomusicology in
Taiwan: Interpretation and Evolutionof
Musical Sound. Taipei: Soochow University.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. 1980. Metaphors We
Live By. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Lin, J.H. 2006. Using formal concept analysis
to construct the computer virus
characteristics domain ontology. MA thesis,
National Yunlin University of Science &
Technology, Taiwan.
Rau, D.Victoria & Dong, M. N. 2006 Yami Texts
with Reference Grammar and Vocabulary.
Language and Linguistics, Academia Sinica, 
Taipei, Monograph A-10.
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
84
