Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Important Unresolved Matters, pages 17?24,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Person Name Entity Recognition for Arabic 
Khaled Shaalan 
Institute of Informatics 
The British University in Dubai 
P O Box 502216, Dubai, UAE 
Khaled.shaalan@buid.ac.ae 
Hafsa Raza 
Institute of Informatics 
The British University in Dubai 
P O Box 502216, Dubai, UAE 
hafsa.raza@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract 
Named entity recognition (NER) is nowa-
days an important task, which is responsi-
ble for the identification of proper names in 
text and their classification as different 
types of named entity such as people, loca-
tions, and organizations. In this paper, we 
present our attempt at the recognition and 
extraction of the most important proper 
name entity, that is, the person name, for 
the Arabic language. We developed the 
system, Person Name Entity Recognition 
for Arabic (PERA), using a rule-based ap-
proach. The system consists of a lexicon, in 
the form of gazetteer name lists, and a 
grammar, in the form of regular expres-
sions, which are responsible for recogniz-
ing person name entities. The PERA sys-
tem is evaluated using a corpus that is 
tagged in a semi-automated way. The sys-
tem performance results achieved were sat-
isfactory and confirm to the targets set 
forth for the precision, recall, and f-
measure. 
1 Introduction 
The recognition and classification of proper names 
in text (e.g. persons, locations, and organizations) 
has recently become considered of major impor-
tance in Natural Language Processing (NLP) as it 
plays a significant role in various types of NLP 
applications, especially in Information Extraction, 
Information Retrieval, Machine Translation, Syn-
tactic Parsing/Chunking, Question-Answering, 
among others. The valuable information in text is 
usually located around proper names, to collect this 
information it should be found first (Abuleil, 2004; 
Chinchor, 1998). In our presentation, we will con-
centrate on the role of NER in Information Extrac-
tion (IE). IE is the NLP task that retrieves relevant 
information from unstructured texts and produces 
as a result a structured set of data. 
This paper describes work on recognizing and 
extracting the most important entities, that is, per-
son names for the Arabic language. We have 
adopted the rule-based approach using linguistic 
grammar-based techniques to develop PERA. This 
approach provides flexibility and adaptability fea-
tures in our system and it can be easily configured 
to work with different languages, NLP applications, 
and domains. In order to determine the best rules 
for recognition of person names, various Arabic 
text corpora were analyzed. Phrases containing 
person names were retrieved, the underlying pat-
tern was learned and person indicators such as ti-
tles were identified. Apart from this, person names 
were extracted from the available corpora and 
other resources to build up a lexicon, in the form of 
gazetteer name lists, or gazetteer for short. The 
various Arabic naming conventions and the person 
indicators identified helped in deriving fine rules 
that gave high-quality recognition of person names 
in Arabic text. The recognition was done in two 
cycles using first the gazetteer and then the gram-
mar rules. The PERA system is evaluated using a 
reference corpus that is tagged with person names 
in a semi-automated way. The achieved system 
performance results were satisfactory and confirm 
17
to the targets set forth for the precision, recall, and 
f-measure. 
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 
presents the related work. Section 3 describes the 
naming conventions of person names used in Ara-
bic language. Section 4 presents methods of data 
collection used. Section 5 explains the system ar-
chitecture and implementation. Section 6 presents 
the experiment performed to evaluate the system 
and finally Section 7 concludes the paper,     
summarizes our achievements, and highlights our 
plans for future work.. 
    
Larkey et al (2003) have conducted a study that 
showed the importance of the proper names com-
ponent in cross language tasks involving searching, 
tracking, retrieving, or extracting information. In 
particular, they have concluded that a combination 
of static proper name (English-Arabic) translation 
plus transliteration provides a successful solution.  2 Related Work 
As in other NLP techniques, there are two main 
approaches to NER (Toral, 2005). One is based on 
linguistic knowledge, in particular grammar rules 
and hence called rule-based, while the other is 
based on machine learning techniques. The re-
quired resources for the knowledge approach are 
usually gazetteers and rules whereas the learning 
approach needs an annotated (tagged) corpus. The 
linguistic knowledge-based model achieve better 
results in specific domains, as the gazetteers can be 
adapted very precisely, and it is able to detect 
complex entities, as the rules can be tailored to 
meet nearly any requirement. However, if we deal 
with an unrestricted domain, it is better to choose 
the machine learning approach, as it would be inef-
ficient to acquire and/or derive rules and gazetteers 
in this case. 
Name identification has been worked on quite 
intensively for the past few years, and has been 
incorporated into several products. Many research-
ers have attacked this problem in a variety of lan-
guages but only a few limited researches have fo-
cused on NER for Arabic text. This is due to the 
lack of resources for Arabic NE and the limited 
amount of progress made in Arabic NLP in gen-
eral. 
Maloney and Niv (1998) developed TAGARAB 
an Arabic name recognizer that uses a pattern-
recognition engine integrated with morphological 
analysis. The role of the morphological analyzer is 
to decide where a name ends and the non-name 
context begins. The decision depends on the part-
of-speech of the Arabic word and/or its inflections. 
Abuleil (2004) presented a technique to extract 
proper names from text to build a database of 
names along with their classification that can be 
used in question-answering systems. This work 
was done in three main stages: 1) marking the 
phrases that might include names, 2) building up 
graphs to represent the words in these phrases and 
the relationships between them, and 3) applying 
rules to generate the names, classify each of them, 
and saves them in a database. 
Pouliquen et al (2005) developed a tool for mul-
tilingual person name recognition that focuses on 
the "Who" part of the analysis of large news text. 
As multilingual NER is concerned, the translitera-
tion of the NE has included alternative spelling 
variants where the origin language of the name is 
usually not known. Several variants could also be 
found in the same language. 
Samy et al (2005) has used parallel corpora in 
Spanish, and Arabic and an NE tagger in Spanish 
to tag the names in the Arabic corpus. For each 
sentence pair aligned together, they use a simple 
mapping scheme to transliterate all the words in 
the Arabic sentence and return those matching with 
NEs in the Spanish sentence as the NEs in Arabic. 
While they report high precision and recall, it 
should be noted that their approach is applicable 
only when a parallel corpus is available. 
Zitouni et al (2005) has adopted a statistical ap-
proach for the entity detection and recognition 
(EDR). In this work, a mention can be either 
named (e.g. John Mayor), nominal (the president) 
or pronominal (she, it). An entity is the aggregate 
of all the mentions (of any level) which refer to 
one conceptual entity. This extended definition of 
the entity has proved the suitability of the ap-
proach. 
3 Components of an Arabic Full Name 
Arabic has well-defined naming practices. The 
Arabic name elements may be divided into five 
main categories, Ibn Auda (2003): 
1. An ism (pronounced IZM, as the final syllable 
in the word dogmatism), a personal, proper 
name given shortly after birth, i.e. the given 
name. Examples of such names are Muham-
18
mad [Mohammed], Musa [Moses], Ibrahim 
[Abraham].  
2. A kunya (pronounced COON-yah), an honor-
ific name or surname, as the father or mother 
of someone; e.g., abu Da'ud [the father of 
David], umm Salim [the mother of Salim]. It is 
meant as a prefix of respect or reverence. Mar-
ried persons (especially married ladies) are, as 
a general rule, simply called by their kunya 
(abu or umm + the name of their first-born 
child). When using a person's full name, the 
kunya precedes the personal (given) name: Abu 
Yusuf Hasan [the father of Joseph, Hasan], 
Umm Ja?far Aminah [the mother of Ja?far, 
Aminah].  
3. By a nasab (pronounced NAH-sahb), a pedi-
gree, as the son or daughter of someone; e.g., 
ibn 'Umar [the son of Omar], bint 'Abbas [the 
daughter of Abbas]. The nasab follows the ism 
in usage: Hasan ibn Faraj [Hasan the son of 
Faraj], Sumayya bint Khubbat [Sumayya the 
daughter of Khubbat]. Many historical person-
ages are more familiar to us by their nasab 
than by their ism: e.g., the historian ibn 
Khaldun, the traveler ibn Battuta, and the phi-
losopher ibn Sina [Avicenna].  
 Nasabs may be extended for several genera-
tions, as may be noted in the example below 
containing two generations nasab: 
Abu al-Qasim Mansur ibn al-Zabriqan ibn 
Salamah al-Namari 
4. A laqab (pronounced LAH-kahb), a combina-
tion of words into a byname or epithet, usually 
religious, relating to nature, a descriptive, or of 
some admirable quality the person had (or 
would like to have); e.g., al-Rashid [the 
Rightly-guided], al-Fadl [the Prominent]. 
Laqabs follow the ism: Harun al-Rashid 
[Aaron the Rightly-guided]. 
5. A nisba (pronounced NISS-bah), a name de-
rived from a person's: trade or profession, 
place of residence or birth, religious affiliation, 
among others; e.g. al-Hallaj [the dresser of 
cotton], Al Msri [The Egyptian], Islami [Is-
lamic]. Nisbas follow the ism or, if the name 
contains a nasab (of however many genera-
tions), generally follow the nasab.  
4 Data Collection 
The development of the system PERA depends on 
collecting dictionaries of proper nouns and their 
related indicators. Techniques used for acquiring 
such data to build the dictionaries include: 
1. Automatic collection of person names from 
annotated corpus. The person entities in the 
ACE1 and Treebank corpus2 were recognized 
and extracted using regular expression patterns 
coded within Python scripts. Python is a strong 
string processing language and widely used in 
developing NLP applications and tools. 
2. Identification of person indicators. Apart from 
extracting the person names, these corpora 
were used also to extract noun phrases contain-
ing the person names. The surrounding se-
quence of words around person names was 
analyzed to identify indicators of person 
names. A dictionary of these indicators was 
formed which represented contextual cues of 
person names. 
3. Name Database provided by government or-
ganization. The person name dictionary was 
also build from names collected from some or-
ganizations including Immigration Depart-
ments, Educational bodies, and Brokerage 
companies.  
4. Internet Resources. Names were retrieved fur-
ther from various websites3 containing lists of 
Arabic names. Some of these names are Ro-
manized (written using the Latin alphabet) and 
had to be transliterated from English to Arabic. 
This was done using the online translation 
software ?Tarjim? provided by Sakhr Software 
Company. Notice that the variations in Roman-
ized Arabic due to the lack of one to one corre-
spondence between Arabic letters and Roman 
letters have also been reflected in the translit-
eration, in reverse, from Romanized Arabic to 
Arabic Script. 
The raw data received had to be further proc-
essed to make it suitable for building gazetteers to 
                                                 
1 ACE reference: http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/ace/ 
2 Treebank Corpus reference: 
http://www.ircs.upenn.edu/arabic/ 
Both software are available to BUiD under license agreement. 
3 Web sites include: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Arabic_names , 
http://www.islam4you.info/contents/names/fa.php,  and 
http://www.mybabynamessite.com/list.php?letter=a 
19
be incorporated within the system. Some of the 
automated preprocessing performed on these data 
includes: 
? Removing extra whitespaces between first 
and last names, or beginning and end of 
names for the efficient processing of the 
main gazetteer (dictionary) of complete 
person names. 
? Creating separate dictionaries (i.e. first, 
last and middle names) without redun-
dancy because the full names had to be 
parsed. The extraction of each of these in-
dividual components from full person 
names was based on Python code and 
common sense. 
4.1 Typographic Variants 
In order to be able to recognize variant Arabic 
name entities, we added extra expressions in rules 
and lexicon entries which lead to recognizing 
named entities and their typographic variants. Ex-
amples of typographic variants include: 
? The drop of hamza initially, medially, and 
finally (e.g. ?????  vs ????? - [Ehessan]) ?
????
 ????? ?? ???
? Two dots inserted on aleph maqsura, and 
two dots removed from yaa (e.g.  ????? vs 
-[Mousa]) 
? Dropping the madda from the aleph (e.g.  
  vs  ????? - [Al Khalifa]) 
? Hamza insertion below vs. above aleph 
(e.g. ????? vs ?????-[Essraa]) 
? Two dots inserted on final haa, and two 
dots removed from taa marbouta (e.g.  ?????? 
vs ?????-[Fatma]) 
? Diacritics: partial, full, or none. In the cur-
rent version we remove diacritics. 
? Typing hamza followed by aleph maqsura 
separately vs. together (e.g.  ?????? vs  ?????-
[Hani]). 
4.2 Dictionaries 
The following dictionaries (gazetteers) are derived 
using the aforementioned data collection tech-
niques. A total of 472617 entries were collected. 
? A dictionary of full person names (263598 
entries) 
? A dictionary of first names (78956 entries) 
? A dictionary of middle names (67595 en-
tries) 
? A dictionary of last names (33517 entries) 
? A dictionary of job titles (19245 entries) 
? A dictionary of honorifics used before 
names (173 entries) 
? A dictionary of country names including 
variations in spellings (923 entries) 
? A dictionary of nick names and laqabs  
(8169 entries) 
? A dictionary of  person titles (20 entries) 
? a dictionary of words and phrases that act 
as person indicators such as ? ????????
 ????????? (The sports supervisor) (421 en-
tries) 
5 System Architecture and Implementa-
tion 
Figure 1 shows the architecture of the PERA sys-
tem. Our system has two major components: the 
gazetteers and the Grammar. A filtration mecha-
nism is employed that enables revision capabilities 
in the system. 
 
 
Figure 1: Architecture of the System 
5.1 Gazetteers 
The main gazetteer (dictionary) of complete person 
names plays the role of a fixed static dictionary of 
full person names. It recognizes person name enti-
Dictionaries 
Acquisition from ACE 
& Treebank corpus 
Arabic 
script 
Internet Resources
Names Databases
Annotated 
Text 
Rule-based System 
    Whitelist   
     Dictionary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   Blacklist  
                                  Dictionary 
Text 
(3) Filter 
(2) Grammar 
Configuration  
(1) Gazetteer 
Data Collection 
20
ties by being applied as a Whitelist mechanism that 
accepts matches which are reported as a result of 
an intersection between the dictionary and the in-
put text. A Whitelist is a list of strings that must be 
recognized independent of the rules. It contains 
entries in the following format: 
????????? ???? ????????|Abdulrahman Qasim 
Mohammed Alshirawi 
 
Since the system being developed can be incor-
porated in various applications independent of lan-
guage constraints, the English transliterations of 
the Arabic names are included in the dictionary as 
meta data. 
5.2 Grammar 
The grammar performs recognition and extraction 
of person entities from the input text based on 
combinations of regular expression patterns. This 
rule definition is particularly challenging for the 
Arabic language due to reasons such as: 
? Arabic writing systems do not exhibit dif-
ferences in orthographic case, such as ini-
tial capitalized letters to indicate the pres-
ence of a proper name. This lack of spe-
cific internal structure in the Arabic lan-
guage poses great challenge for recogniz-
ing person entities. 
? Arabic is a highly inflected language 
which entails a requirement of understand-
ing of its morphological nature. The in-
flected Arabic word maybe composed of 
prefixes such as prepositions and suffixes 
such as pronouns. These affixes need to be 
addressed to ensure recognition of person 
names alone. 
Due to the above complexities in the Arabic 
language a deep contextual analysis of various 
Arabic scripts was performed using Python scripts 
to build grammar rules based on keywords or trig-
ger words forming a window around a person 
name.  
 
An Example Rule: 
The following rule recognizes a person name com-
posed of a first name followed by optional middle 
and last names based on a preceding person indica-
tor pattern.  
 
 
 
Description: 
? The names should be verified against their 
respective dictionaries (i.e. first, middle, 
and last names). 
? The indicator pattern is composed of an 
honorific such as "?????" [The king] fol-
lowed by an optional Nisba derived from a 
location name such as "???????" [Jordanian]. 
These act as trigger words to recognize the 
person name and should be verified against 
their respective dictionaries of honorific 
and locations. 
? The rule also matches an optional ordinal 
number appearing at the end of some 
names such as "??????" [II]. 
? The Arabic suffix letters "??" and "?" used 
in the above pattern parses the inflections 
attached to Nisba derived from locations 
that are commonly found in Arabic text.  
 
Implementation: 
 
 
 
 
 
Writing conventions: 
(($honorific$ws*($location 
(\x{064A}|\x{0629})*$ws*)?)+ 
$firsts_v(($ws*$middle_vv)| 
($ws*$lasts_v))?$ws*($number)?) 
? $: reference to a slave schema. 
? Firsts_v: dictionary of first names. 
? Middle_vv: dictionary of middle names. 
? Lasts_v: dictionary of last names. 
? Ws: whitespace. 
? Honorific:  dictionary of honorifics ap-
pearing before names. 
? Location: dictionary of locations. 
? Number: Arabic ordinal numbers. 
 
Example: 
The following name would be recognized by the 
above rule: 
 ???  ???? ??????????????????   
[The Jordanian king Abdullah II] 
 
Apart from contextual cues, the typical Arabic 
naming elements were used to formulate rules such 
as nasab, kunya, etc. Thereby the rules resulted in a 
good control over critical instances by recognizing 
complex entities. ((honorfic+ws(location(?|??)+ws)?) 
+firsts_v((ws+middle_vv)| 
(ws+lasts_v))?ws+(number)?) 
21
5.3 Filter 
A filtration mechanism is used in the form of a 
Blacklist (rejecter) within the grammar configura-
tion to filter matches that appear after person titles 
but are invalid person names. In the following ex-
ample: 
 ? ?????? ????? ????? ??????????? ??? ? [The Iraqi Foreign 
Minister the Secretary-General] 
 
The sequence of words ????? ???????? ???????? [The 
Iraqi Foreign Minister] acts as a person indicator 
and the word immediately following it is usually a 
valid person name. However, in this example, the 
words following the person indicator that is, ? ??????
?????? (the Secretary-General) is not a valid person 
name. Hence the role of the blacklist comes into 
play by rejecting the incorrect matches recognized 
by certain rules. 
5.4 The Implementation Platform 
The PERA system was implemented through in-
corporation into the FAST ESP framework, 
(FAST,_). FAST ESP is an integrated software 
application that provides searching and filtering 
services. It is a distributed system that enables in-
formation retrieval from any type of information, 
combining real-time searching, advanced linguis-
tics, and a variety of content access options into a 
modular, scalable product suite. 
The document processing stage within FAST 
ESP system provides support for Entity Extraction. 
PERA is implemented through the customizable 
document processing pipelines within FAST ESP, 
which consists of multiple document processing 
stages. A new search pipeline was created and 
stages containing the grammar configuration and 
gazetteers were added to this pipeline. Figure 2 
indicates the functionality of the PERA system 
incorporated in the pipeline within FAST ESP for 
recognizing and tagging person entity in text. 
6 The Experiment 
In evaluating the PERA system we follow the 
standard practice in the IE field of comparing sys-
tem output against a reference corpus and measur-
ing the performance of the Arabic person named 
entity. 
 
 
Figure 2: PERA incorporated into FAST ESP pipe-
line to produce Tagged text 
 
6.1 Reference Corpus 
The text within the ACE and Treebank corpus was 
used for creating the entity tagged reference corpus 
for evaluating PERA. The text was chosen ran-
domly from files with ?sgm? extension (containing 
the Arabic script) within ACE & Treebank corpus. 
The tagging was automatically performed with a 
Python script and further a post manual check was 
performed to correct any invalid tags or identify 
the missing ones. The end product was an anno-
tated text corpus in the xml format with the UTF-8 
encoding. This was divided into a 46 test sets and 
each evaluated individually with hurricane. The 
total size of the reference corpus build is around 
4MB. The size and content of the corpus is such 
that it contains a representative amount of occur-
rences of the person entity. 
6.2 Evaluation Method 
We have adopted the evaluation measures that are 
standard in the IE community (De Sitter et al, 
2004), to evaluate and compare the results (preci-
sion, recall and F-measures): 
correct entities recognized 
Precision= total entities recognized 
PIPELINE
Politics of Ukraine 
In July 1994, Leonid Kuchma was elected as Ukraine's second president in 
free and fair elections. Kuchma was reelected in November 1999 to 
another five-year term, with 56 percent of the vote. International observers 
criticized aspects of the election, especially slanted media coverage; 
however, the outcome of the vote was not called into question. In March 
2002, Ukraine held its most recent parliamentary elections, which were 
characterized by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe 
(OSCE) as flawed, but an improvement over the 1998 elections. The pro-
presidential For a United Ukraine bloc won the largest number of seats, 
followed by the reformist Our Ukraine bloc of former Prime Minister Viktor 
Yushchenko, and the Communist Party. There are 450 seats in parliament, 
with half chosen from party lists by proportional vote and half from individ-
ual constituencies 
Person Person 
Person 
22
correct entities recognized 
Recall= total correct entities 
2 x recall x precision 
F-measure= recall + precision 
Precision indicates how many of the extracted 
entities are correct. Recall indicates how many of 
the entities that should have been found, are effec-
tively extracted. Usually there is a trade off of re-
call against precision. Therefore, often an average 
accuracy is reported in the form of the F-measure, 
a harmonic mean which weights recall and preci-
sion equally. It was introduced to provide a single 
figure to compare different systems? performances. 
The PERA system implemented within the FAST 
ESP pipeline was evaluated using an Information 
Extraction testing tool called ?hurricane? that ap-
plies these standard measures. 
6.3 Results 
Figure 3 is a snapshot of the evaluation performed 
by hurricane in terms of the above mentioned 
measure. 
 
Figure 3: An Extraction from Hurricane Evaluation 
 
The extraction quality of the pipeline created for 
the person name extractor confirms to the initial 
target set. The required degree of precision (80%) 
and recall (70%), for the Person name extractor, 
has been achieved with the hurricane evaluation. 
Some of the entries within the gazetteers were ex-
tracted from the same corpus used also for creating 
the reference corpus for evaluation. However, the 
results achieved are accurate since they indicated 
recognition of person entities not included in the 
gazetteers but being recognized by the grammar 
rules.  
Table1 indicates the performance figures pro-
duced by 6 out of the 46 sets used for Hurricane 
evaluation.  
The average Precision and Recall for the total 46 
sets in recognizing person names is 85.5% and 
89%, respectively. And the average f-measure is 
87.5%. 
 
Test Set Precision Recall F-measure 
Treebank set 1 91.2 90.3 90.7 
Treebank set 2 94 96.3 95.1 
Treebank set  3  84.2 84.7 84.4 
ACE set 1 89.6 96.8 93.1 
ACE set 2 88.4 94.2 91.2 
ACE set 3  86.7 89 87.8 
Table 1: Evaluation result for 6 test sets. 
 
The missing accuracy can be overcome in the 
following ways: 
? Expanding the dictionary of person 
names further. 
? More Arabic text/corpus can be analyzed 
to identify strings that act as person indi-
cators. 
? Reducing negative effects on evaluation 
results (true positive being treated as 
false positives) caused due to incomplete 
annotation of the test corpus. The refer-
ence corpus can be further fine tuned to 
tag all person entities completely. 
? Enhancing quality of transliterated 
names used. 
? Using Arabic text with error free spell-
ing. 
? Including all possible spelling variations 
used for names in Arabic written text. 
7 Conclusion and Future Work 
The work done in this project is an attempt to 
broaden the coverage for entity extraction by in-
corporating the Arabic language, thereby paving 
the path towards enabling search solutions to the 
Arabian market.  
Various data collection techniques were used for 
acquiring gazetteer name lists. The rule-based ap-
proach employed with great linguistic expertise 
provided a successful implementation of the PERA 
system. Rules are capable of recognizing inflected 
23
forms by breaking them down into stems and af-
fixes. A filtration mechanism is employed in the 
form of a rejecter within the grammar configura-
tion that helps in deciding where a name ends and 
the non-name context begins. We have evaluated 
our system performance using a reference corpus 
that is tagged in a semi-automated way. The aver-
age Precision and Recall achieved for recognizing 
person names was 85.5% and 89%, respectively. 
Suggestions for improving the system performance 
were provided. 
This work is part of a new system for Arabic 
NER. It has several ongoing activities, all con-
cerned with extending our research to recognize 
and categorize other entity Arabic named entities 
such as locations, organization. 
Acknowledgement 
This work is funded by the "Named Entity Rec-
ognition for Arabic" joint project between The 
British Univ. in Duabi, Dubai, UAE and FAST 
search & Transfer Inc., Oslo, Norway. We thank 
the FAST team. In particular, we would like to 
thank Dr. Petra Maier and Dr. J?rgen Oesterle for 
their technical support. 
Any opinions, findings and conclusions or rec-
ommendations expressed in this material are the 
authors, and do not necessarily reflect those of the 
sponsor. 
References 
Saleem Abuleil 2004. Extracting Names from Arabic 
Text for Question-Answering Systems, In Proceed-
ings of Coupling approaches, coupling media and 
coupling languages for information retrieval (RIAO 
2004), Avignon, France. pp. 638- 647. 
Da'ud Ibn Auda. 2003. Period Arabic Names and Nam-
ing Practices, In Proceedings of the Known World 
Heraldic Symposium (SCA: KWHS Proceedings, 
2003), pp. 42-56, St. Louis, USA. 
FAST ESP   
http://www.fastsearch.com/thesolution.aspx?m=376 
Nancy Chinchor 1998. Overview of MUC-7. In Pro-
ceedings of the Seventh Message Understanding 
Conference (MUC-7). Available at: 
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iaui/894.02/related_projects/
muc/  
Leah S. Larkey, Nasreen Abdul Jaleel, Margaret Con-
nell. 2003. What's in a Name?: Proper Names in 
Arabic Cross Language Information Retrieval CIIR 
Technical Report IR-278. Available at 
http://ciir.cs.umass.edu/pubfiles/ir-278.pdf 
John Maloney and Michael Niv. 1998. TAGARAB: A 
Fast, Accurate Arabic Name Recogniser Using High 
Precision Morphological Analysis. In Proceedings of 
the Workshop on Computational Approaches to Se-
mitic Languages. Montreal, Canada. August, pp. 8-
15.   
Bruno Pouliquen, Ralf Steinberger, Camelia Ignat, Irina 
Temnikova, Anna Widiger, Wajdi Zaghouani, and 
Jan Zizka. 2005. Multilingual person name recogni-
tion and transliteration. Journal CORELA-Cognition, 
Repr?sentation, Langage, Vol. 2,  ISSN 1638-5748. 
Available at http://edel.univ-poitiers.fr/corela/ 
Doaa Samy, Antonio Moreno and Jose M. Guirao. 2005. 
A Proposal for an Arabic Named Entity Tagger Lev-
eraging a Parallel Corpus, International Conference 
RANLP, Borovets, Bulgaria, pp. 459-465. 
An De Sitter, Toon Calders, and Walter Daelemans. 
2004. A Formal Framework for Evaluation of Infor-
mation Extraction, University of Antwerp,  Dept. of 
Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical Re-
port, TR 2004-0. Available at 
http://www.cnts.ua.ac.be/Publications/2004/DCD04 
Antonio Toral. 2005. DRAMNERI: a free knowledge 
based tool to Named Entity Recognition. In Proceed-
ings of the 1st Free Software Technologies Confer-
ence. A Coru?a, Spain. pp. 27-32. 
Imed Zitouni, Jeffrey Sorensen, Xiaoqiang Luo and 
Radu Florian, 2005 The Impact of Morphological 
Stemming on Arabic Mention Detection and 
Coreference Resolution, In the Proceedings of the 
ACL workshop on Computational Approaches to Se-
mitic Languages, 43rd Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation of Computational Linguistics (ACL05). June, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA, pp. 63-70. 
24
