Proceedings of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 191?196,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Panel Session: Discourse Annotation
Manfred Stede
Dept. of Linguistics
University of Potsdam
stede@ling.uni-potsdam.de
Janyce Wiebe
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
wiebe@cs.pitt.edu
Eva Hajic?ova?
Faculty of Math. and Physics
Charles University
hajicova@ufal.ms.mff.cuni.cz
Brian Reese
Dept. of Linguistics
Univ. of Texas at Austin
bjreese@mail.utexas.edu
Simone Teufel
Computer Laboratory
Univ. of Cambridge
sht25@cl.cam.uk
Bonnie Webber
School of Informatics
Univ. of Edinburgh
bonnie@inf.ed.ac.uk
Theresa Wilson
Dept. of Comp. Science
Univ. of Pittsburgh
twilson@cs.pitt.edu
1 Introduction
The classical ?success story? of corpus annotation
are the various syntax treebanks that provide struc-
tural analyses of sentences and have enabled re-
searchers to develop a range of new and highly suc-
cessful data-oriented approaches to sentence pars-
ing. In recent years, however, a number of corpora
have been constructed that provide annotations on
the discourse level, i.e. information that reaches be-
yond the sentence boundaries. Phenomena that have
been annotated include coreference links, the scope
of connectives, and coherence relations. Many of
these are phenomena on whose handling there is
not a general agreement in the research community,
and therefore the question of ?recycling? corpora by
other people and for other purposes is often diffi-
cult. (To some extent, this is due to the fact that dis-
course annotation deals ?only? with surface reflec-
tions of underlying, abstract objects.) At the same
time, the efforts needed for building high-quality
discourse corpora are considerable, and thus one
should be careful in deciding how to invest those ef-
forts. One aspect of providing added-value with an-
notation projects is that of shared corpora: If a vari-
ety of annotation efforts is executed on the same pri-
mary data, the series of annotation levels can yield
insights that the creators of the individual levels had
not explicitly planned for. A clear case is the rela-
tionship between coherence relations and connective
use: When both levels are marked individually and
with independent annotation guidelines, then after-
wards the correlations between coherence relations,
cue usage (and possibly other factors, if annotated)
can be studied systematically. This conception of
multi-level annotation presupposes, of course, that
the technical problems of setting annotation levels
in correspondence to one another be resolved.
The panel on discourse annotation is organized
by Manfred Stede and Janyce Wiebe. It aims at
surveying the scene of discourse corpora, exploring
chances for synergy, and identifying desiderata for
future corpus creation projects. In preparation for
the panel, the participants have provided the follow-
ing short descriptions of the various copora in whose
construction they have been involved.
2 Prague Dependency Treebank
(Eva Hajic?ova?, Prague)
One of the maxims of the work on the Prague De-
pendency Treebank is that one should not overlook,
disregard and thus lose what the sentence structure
offers when one attempts to analyze the structure of
discourse, thus moving from ?the trees? to ?the for-
est?. Therefore, we emphasize that discourse anno-
tation should make use of every possible detail the
annotation of the component parts of the discourse,
namely the sentences, puts at our disposal. This
is, of course, not only true for the surface shape of
the sentence (i.e., the surface means of expression),
but (and most importantly) for the underlying repre-
sentation of sentences. The panel contribution will
introduce the (multilayered) annotation scenario of
the Prague Dependency Treebank and illustrate the
point using some of the particular features of the un-
derlying structure of sentences that can be made use
of in planning the scenario of discourse ?treebanks?.
191
3 SDRT in Newspaper Text
(Brian Reese, Austin)
We are currently working under the auspices of
an NSF grant to build and train a discourse parser
and codependent anaphora resolution program to
test discourse theories empirically. The training re-
quires the construction of a corpus annotated with
discourse structure and coreference information. So
far, we have annotated the MUC61 corpus for dis-
course structure and are in the process of annotating
the ACE22 corpus; both corpora are already anno-
tated for coreference. One of the goals of the project
is to investigate whether using the right frontier con-
straint improves the system?s performance in resolv-
ing anaphors. Here we detail some experiences we
have had with the discourse annotation process.
An implementation of the extant SDRT (Asher and
Lascarides, 2003) glue logic for building discourse
structures is insufficient to deal with open domain
text, and we cannot envision an extended version
at the present time able to deal with the problem.
Thus, we have opted for a machine learning based
approach to discourse parsing based on superficial
features, like BNL. To build an implementation to
test these ideas, we have had to devise a corpus of
texts annotated for discourse structure in SDRT.
Each of the 60 texts in the MUC6 corpus, and now
18 of the news stories in ACE2, were annotated by
two people familiar with SDRT. The annotators then
conferred and agreed upon a gold standard. Our
annotation effort took the hierarchical structure of
SDRT seriously and built graphs in which the nodes
are discourse units and the arcs represent discourse
relations between the units. The units could either be
simple (elementary discourse units: EDUs) or they
could be complex. We assumed that in principle the
units were recursively generated and could have an
arbitrary though finite degree of complexity.
4 Potsdam Commentary Corpus
(Manfred Stede, Potsdam)
Construction of the Potsdam Commentary Corpus
(PCC) began in 2003 and is still ongoing. It is a
1The Message Understanding Conference, www-nlpir.
nist.gov/related projects/muc/.
2The Automated Content Extraction program,
www.nist.gov/speech/tests/ace/.
genre-specific corpus of German newspaper com-
mentaries, taken from the daily papers Ma?rkische
Allgemeine Zeitung and Tagesspiegel. One central
aim is to provide a tool for studying mechanisms
of argumentation and how they are reflected on the
linguistic surface. The corpus on the one hand is a
collection of ?raw? data, which is used for genre-
oriented statistical explorations. On the other hand,
we have identified two sub-corpora that are subject
to a rich multi-level annotation (MLA).
The PCC176 (Stede, 2004) is a sub-corpus that
is available upon request for research purposes. It
consists of 176 relatively short commentaries (12-
15 sentences), with 33.000 tokens in total. The
sentences have been PoS-tagged automatically (and
manually checked); sentence syntax was anno-
tated semi-automatically using the TIGER scheme
(Brants et al, 2002) and Annotate3 tool. In addition,
we annotated coreference (PoCos (Krasavina and
Chiarcos, 2007)) and rhetorical structure according
to RST (Mann and Thompson, 1988). Our anno-
tation software architecture consists of a variety of
standard, external tools that can be used effectively
for the different annotation types. Their XML output
is then automatically converted to a generic format
(PAULA, (Dipper, 2005)), which is read into the lin-
guistic database ANNIS (Dipper et al, 2004), where
the annotations are aligned, so that the data can be
viewed and queried across annotation levels.
The PCC10 is a sub-corpus of 10 commentaries
that serves as ?testbed? for further developing the
annotation levels. On the one hand, we are apply-
ing recent guidelines on annotation of information
structure (Go?tze et al, 2007). On the other hand,
based on experiences with the RST annotation, we
are replacing the rhetorical trees with a set of dis-
tinct, simpler annotation layers: thematic structure,
conjunctive relations (Martin, 1992), and argumen-
tation structure (Freeman, 1991); these are comple-
mented by the other levels mentioned above for the
PCC176. The primary motivation for this step is the
high degree of arbitrariness that annotators reported
when producing the RST trees (see (Stede, 2007)).
By separating the thematic from the intentional in-
formation, and accounting for the surface-oriented
3www.coli.uni-saarland.de/projects/
sfb378/negra-corpus/annotate.html
192
conjunctive relations (which are similar to what is
annotated in the PDTB, see Section 6), we hope to
? make annotation easier: handling several ?sim-
ple? levels individually should be more effec-
tive than a single, very complex annotation
step;
? end up with less ambiguity in the annotations,
since the reasons for specific decisions can be
made explicit (by annotations on ?simpler? lev-
els);
? be more explicit than a single tree can be: if a
discourse fulfills, for example, a function both
for thematic development and for the writer?s
intention, they can both be accounted for;
? provide the central information that a ?tradi-
tional? rhetorical tree conveys, without loosing
essential information.
5 AZ Corpus
(Simone Teufel, Cambridge)
The Argumentative Zoning (AZ) annotation scheme
(Teufel, 2000; Teufel and Moens, 2002) is con-
cerned with marking argumentation steps in scien-
tific articles. One example for an argumentation step
is the description of the research goal, another an
overt comparison of the authors? work with rival ap-
proaches. In our scheme, these argumentation steps
have to be associated with text spans (sentences or
sequences of sentences). AZ?Annotation is the la-
belling of each sentence in the text with one of these
labels (7 in the original scheme in (Teufel, 2000)).
The AZ labels are seen as relations holding between
the meanings of these spans, and the rhetorical act
of the entire paper. (Teufel et al, 1999) reports on
interannotator agreement studies with this scheme.
There is a strong interrelationship between the ar-
gumentation in a paper, and the citations writers use
to support their argument. Therefore, a part of the
computational linguistics corpus has a second layer
of annotation, called CFC (Teufel et al, 2006) or
Citation Function Classification. CFC? annotation
records for each citation which rhetorical function it
plays in the argument. This is following the spirit of
research in citation content analysis (e.g., (Moravc-
sik and Murugesan, 1975)). An example for a ci-
tation function would be ?motivate that the method
used is sound?. The annotation scheme contains
12 functions, clustered into ?superiority?, ?neutral
comparison/contrast?, ?praise or usage? and ?neu-
tral?.
One type of research we hope to do in the future
is to study the relationship between these rhetori-
cal phonemena with more traditional discourse phe-
nomena, e.g. anaphoric expressions.
The CmpLg/ACL Anthology corpora consist of
320/9000 papers in computational linguistics. They
are partially annotated with AZ and CFC markup. A
subcorpus of 80 parallelly annotated papers (AZ and
CFF) can be obtained from us for research (12000
sentences, 1756 citations). We are currently port-
ing both schemes to chemistry in the framework
of the EPSRC-sponsored project SciBorg. In the
course of this work a larger, more general AZ an-
notation scheme was developed. The SciBorg effort
will result in an AZ/CFC?annotated chemistry cor-
pus available to the community in 2009.
In terms of challenges, the most time-consuming
aspects of creating this annotated corpus were for-
mat conversions on the corpora, and cyclic adapta-
tions of scheme and guidelines. Another problem is
the simplification of annotating only full sentences;
sometimes, annotators would rather mark a clause
or sometimes even just an NP. However, we found
these cases to be relatively rare.
6 Penn Discourse Treebank
(Bonnie Webber, Edinburgh)
The Penn Discourse TreeBank (Miltsakaki et al,
2004; Prasad et al, 2004; Webber, 2005) anno-
tates discourse relations over the Wall Street Jour-
nal corpus (Marcus et al, 1993), in terms of dis-
course connectives and their arguments. Following
the approach towards discourse structure in (Webber
et al, 2003), the PDTB takes a lexicalized approach,
treating discourse connectives as the anchors of the
relations and thus as discourse-level predicates tak-
ing two Abstract Objects as their arguments. An-
notated are the text spans that give rise to these ar-
guments. There are primarily two types of connec-
tives in the PDTB: explicit and implicit, the latter
being inserted between adjacent paragraph-internal
sentence pairs not related by an explicit connective.
193
Also annotated in the PDTB is the attribution of
each discourse relation and of its arguments (Dinesh
et al, 2005; Prasad et al, 2007). (Attribution itself
is not considered a discourse relation.) A prelimi-
nary version of the PDTB was released in April 2006
(PDTB-Group, 2006), and is available for download
at http://www.seas.upenn.edu/?pdtb. This release only has
implicit connectives annotated in three sections of
the corpus. The annotation of all implicit connec-
tives, along with a hierarchical semantic classifica-
tion of all connectives (Miltsakaki et al, 2005), will
appear in the final release of the PDTB in August
2007.
Here I want to mention three of the challenges we
have faced in developing the PDTB:
(I) Words and phrases that can function as con-
nectives can also serve other roles. (Eg, when can be
a relative pronoun, as well as a subordinating con-
junction.) It has been difficult to identify all and
only those cases where a token functions as a dis-
course connective, and in many cases, the syntactic
analysis in the Penn TreeBank (Marcus et al, 1993)
provides no help. For example, is as though always a
subordinating conjunction (and hence a connective)
or do some tokens simply head a manner adverbial
(eg, seems as though . . . versus seems more rushed
as though . . . )? Is also sometimes a discourse con-
nective relating two abstract objects and other times,
an adverb that presupposes that a particular property
holds of some other entity? If so, when one and
when the other? In the PDTB, annotation has erred
on the side of false positives.
(II) In annotating implicit connectives, we discov-
ered systematic non-lexical indicators of discourse
relations. In English, these include cases of marked
syntax (eg, Had I known the Queen would be here,
I would have dressed better.) and cases of sentence-
initial PPs and adjuncts with anaphoric or deictic
NPs such as at the other end of the spectrum, adding
to that speculation. These cases labelled ALTLEX,
for ?alternative lexicalisation? have not been anno-
tated as connectives in the PDTB because they are
fully productive (ie, not members of a more eas-
ily annotated closed set of tokens). They comprise
about 1% of the cases the annotators have consid-
ered. Future discourse annotation will benefit from
further specifying the types of these cases.
(III) The way in which spans are annotated as ar-
guments to connectives also raises a challenge. First,
because the PDTB annotates both structural and
anaphoric connectives (Webber et al, 2003), a span
can serve as argument to >1 connective. Secondly,
unlike in the RST corpus (Carlson et al, 2003) or the
Discourse GraphBank (Wolf and Gibson, 2005), dis-
course segments are not separately annotated, with
annotators then identifying what discourse relations
hold between them. Instead, in annotating argu-
ments, PDTB annotators have selected the minimal
clausal text span needed to interpret the relation.
This could comprise an embedded, subordinate or
coordinate clause, an entire sentence, or a (possi-
bly disjoint) sequence of sentences. As a result,
there are fairly complex patterns of spans within and
across sentences that serve as arguments to differ-
ent connectives, and there are parts of sentences that
don?t appear within the span of any connective, ex-
plicit or implicit. The result is that the PDTB pro-
vides only a partial but complexly-patterned cover
of the corpus. Understanding what?s going on and
what it implies for discourse structure (and possibly
syntactic structure as well) is a challenge we?re cur-
rently trying to address (Lee et al, 2006).
7 MPQA Opinion Corpus
(Theresa Wilson, Pittsburgh)
Our opinion annotation scheme (Wiebe et al, 2005)
is centered on the notion of private state, a gen-
eral term that covers opinions, beliefs, thoughts, sen-
timents, emotions, intentions and evaluations. As
Quirk et al (1985) define it, a private state is a state
that is not open to objective observation or verifica-
tion. We can further view private states in terms of
their functional components ? as states of experi-
encers holding attitudes, optionally toward targets.
For example, for the private state expressed in the
sentence John hates Mary, the experiencer is John,
the attitude is hate, and the target is Mary.
We create private state frames for three main types
of private state expressions (subjective expressions)
in text:
? explicit mentions of private states, such as
?fears? in ?The U.S. fears a spill-over?
? speech events expressing private states, such as
?said? in ?The report is full of absurdities,?
194
Xirao-Nima said.
? expressive subjective elements, such as ?full of
absurdities? in the sentence just above.
Frames include the source (experiencer) of the
private state, the target, and various properties such
as polarity (positive, negative, or neutral) and inten-
sity (high, medium, or low). Sources are nested. For
example, for the sentence ?China criticized the U.S.
report?s criticism of China?s human rights record?,
the source is ?writer, China, U.S. report?, reflecting
the facts that the writer wrote the sentence and the
U.S. report?s criticism is the target of China?s criti-
cism. It is common for multiple frames to be created
for a single clause, reflecting various levels of nest-
ing and the type of subjective expression.
The annotation scheme has been applied to a
corpus, called the ?Multi-Perspective Question An-
swering (MPQA) Corpus,? reflecting its origins in
the 2002 NRRC Workshop on Multi-Perspective
Question Answering (MPQA) (Wiebe et al, 2003)
sponsored by ARDA AQUAINT (it is also called
?OpinionBank?). It contains 535 documents and a
total of 11,114 sentences. The articles in the cor-
pus are from 187 different foreign and U.S. news
sources, dating from June 2001 to May 2002. Please
see (Wiebe et al, 2005) and Theresa Wilson?s forth-
coming PhD dissertation for further information, in-
cluding the results of inter-coder agreement studies.
References
Nicholas Asher and Alex Lascarides. 2003. Logics
of Conversation. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge.
Sabine Brants, Stefanie Dipper, Silvia Hansen, Wolfgang
Lezius, and George Smith. 2002. The TIGER tree-
bank. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Treebanks
and Linguistic Theories, Sozopol.
Lynn Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and Mary Ellen Okurowski.
2003. Building a discourse-tagged corpus in the
framework of rhetorical structure theory. In J. van
Kuppevelt & R. Smith, editor, Current Directions in
Discourse and Dialogue. Kluwer, New York.
Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi
Prasad, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie Webber. 2005. At-
tribution and the (non-)alignment of syntactic and dis-
course arguments of connectives. In ACL Workshop
on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation, Ann Arbor MI.
Stefanie Dipper, Michael Go?tze, Manfred Stede, and Till-
mann Wegst. 2004. Annis: A linguistic database for
exploring information structure. In Interdisciplinary
Studies on Information Structure, ISIS Working papers
of the SFB 632 (1), pages 245?279.
Stefanie Dipper. 2005. XML-based stand-off represen-
tation and exploitation of multi-level linguistic annota-
tion. In Rainer Eckstein and Robert Tolksdorf, editors,
Proceedings of Berliner XML Tage, pages 39?50.
James B. Freeman. 1991. Dialectics and the
Macrostructure of Argument. Foris, Berlin.
Michael Go?tze, Cornelia Endriss, Stefan Hinterwimmer,
Ines Fiedler, Svetlana Petrova, Anne Schwarz, Stavros
Skopeteas, Ruben Stoel, and Thomas Weskott. 2007.
Information structure. In Information structure in
cross-linguistic corpora: annotation guidelines for
morphology, syntax, semantics, and information struc-
ture, volume 7 of ISIS Working papers of the SFB 632,
pages 145?187.
Olga Krasavina and Christian Chiarcos. 2007. Potsdam
Coreference Scheme. In this volume.
Alan Lee, Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, Nikhil Dinesh,
and Bonnie Webber. 2006. Complexity of dependen-
cies in discourse. In Proc. 5th Workshop on Treebanks
and Linguistic Theory (TLT?06), Prague.
William Mann and Sandra Thompson. 1988. Rhetorical
structure theory: Towards a functional theory of text
organization. TEXT, 8:243?281.
Mitchell Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large scale anno-
tated corpus of English: The Penn TreeBank. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 19:313?330.
James R. Martin. 1992. English text: system and struc-
ture. John Benjamins, Philadelphia/Amsterdam.
Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, and
Bonnie Webber. 2004. Annotating discourse connec-
tives and their arguments. In NAACL/HLT Workshop
on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation, Boston.
Eleni Miltsakaki, Nikhil Dinesh, Rashmi Prasad, Ar-
avind Joshi, and Bonnie Webber. 2005. Experiments
on sense annotation and sense disambiguation of dis-
course connectives. In 4t Workshop on Treebanks and
Linguistic Theory (TLT?05), Barcelona, Spain.
Michael J. Moravcsik and Poovanalingan Murugesan.
1975. Some results on the function and quality of ci-
tations. Soc. Stud. Sci., 5:88?91.
The PDTB-Group. 2006. The Penn Discourse TreeBank
1.0 annotation manual. Technical Report IRCS 06-01,
University of Pennsylvania.
195
Rashmi Prasad, Eleni Miltsakaki, Aravind Joshi, and
Bonnie Webber. 2004. Annotation and data mining
of the Penn Discourse TreeBank. In ACL Workshop
on Discourse Annotation, Barcelona, Spain, July.
Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Aravind Joshi,
and Bonnie Webber. 2007. Attribution and its annota-
tion in the Penn Discourse TreeBank. TAL (Traitement
Automatique des Langues.
Randolph Quirk, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffry Leech, and
Jan Svartvik. 1985. A Comprehensive Grammar of the
English Language. Longman, New York.
Manfred Stede. 2004. The Potsdam commentary corpus.
In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Discourse An-
notation, pages 96?102, Barcelona.
Manfred Stede. 2007. RST revisited: disentangling nu-
clearity. In Cathrine Fabricius-Hansen and Wiebke
Ramm, editors, ?Subordination? versus ?coordination?
in sentence and text ? from a cross-linguistic perspec-
tive. John Benjamins, Amsterdam. (to appear).
Simone Teufel and Marc Moens. 2002. Summaris-
ing scientific articles ? experiments with relevance
and rhetorical status. Computational Linguistics,
28(4):409?446.
Simone Teufel, Jean Carletta, and Marc Moens. 1999.
An annotation scheme for discourse-level argumenta-
tion in research articles. In Proceedings of the 9th Eu-
ropean Conference of the ACL (EACL-99), pages 110?
117, Bergen, Norway.
Simone Teufel, Advaith Siddharthan, and Dan Tidhar.
2006. An annotation scheme for citation function. In
Proceedings of SIGDIAL-06, Sydney, Australia.
Simone Teufel. 2000. Argumentative Zoning: Infor-
mation Extraction from Scientific Text. Ph.D. thesis,
School of Cognitive Science, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK.
Bonnie Webber, Matthew Stone, Aravind Joshi, and Al-
istair Knott. 2003. Anaphora and discourse structure.
Computational Linguistics, 29:545?587.
Bonnie Webber. 2005. A short introduction to the Penn
Discourse TreeBank. In Copenhagen Working Papers
in Language and Speech Processing.
Janyce Wiebe, Eric Breck, Chris Buckley, Claire Cardie,
Paul Davis, Bruce Fraser, Diane Litman, David Pierce,
Ellen Riloff, Theresa Wilson, David Day, and Mark
Maybury. 2003. Recognizing and organizing opinions
expressed in the world press. In Working Notes of the
AAAI Spring Symposium in New Directions in Ques-
tion Answering, pages 12?19, Palo Alto, California.
Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, and Claire Cardie. 2005.
Annotating expressions of opinions and emotions
in language. Language Resources and Evaluation,
39(2/3):164?210.
Florian Wolf and Edward Gibson. 2005. Representing
discourse coherence: A corpus-based study. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 31:249?287.
196
