Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Approaches to Figurative Language, pages 5?12,
Rochester, NY, April 26, 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Corpus-driven Metaphor Harvesting
Astrid Reining
Institute of Romance Languages
University of Hamburg
20146 Hamburg, Germany
astrid.reining@uni-hamburg.de
Birte Lo?nneker-Rodman
International Computer Science Institute
1947 Center Street, Suite 600
Berkeley, CA 94704, USA
loenneke@icsi.berkeley.edu
Abstract
The paper presents a corpus-based method
for finding metaphorically used lex-
emes and prevailing semantico-conceptu-
al source domains, given a target domain
corpus. It is exemplified by a case study
on the target domain of European politics,
based on a French 800,000 token corpus.
1 Introduction
This investigation is situated within the frame-
work of the Hamburg Metaphor Database1 (HMD)
(Lo?nneker and Eilts, 2004), which collects manual
annotations of metaphors in context. HMD anno-
tation terminology refers to cognitive linguistic ac-
counts of metaphor. These suggest that abstract
?target? concepts are often thought and talked of in
terms of less abstract ?source? concepts (Section 2).
On these accounts, the paper presents a method for
finding metaphorically used lexical items and char-
acterizing the conceptual source domains they be-
long to, given a target domain corpus.
After mentioning related work on metaphor an-
notation (Section 3), we exemplify our method by a
case study on the target domain of European pol-
itics, for which a French 800,000 token corpus is
prepared and imported into a corpus manager (Sec-
tion 4). Using corpus manager functions, a small
set of highly salient collocates of Europe are classi-
fied as candidates of metaphorical usages; after as-
sessing their metaphoricity in context, these lexemes
1http://www1.uni-hamburg.de/metaphern
are grouped into semantico-conceptual domains for
which, in a final step, additional lexical instanti-
ations are searched (Section 5). Two important
source domains (BUILDING and MOTION) are de-
tected, which are supported by over 1,000 manual
corpus annotations. The domains can be charac-
terized as small networks of EuroWordNet synsets
(nodes) and lexical as well as conceptual relations
(Section 6). Section 7 concludes the paper.
2 Theoretical Aspects
The Conceptual Theory of Metaphor (CTM) worked
out originally by (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980) claims
that conceptual metaphors such as GOOD IS UP
and TIME IS MONEY structure the way we think
and influence the way we use language. Concep-
tual metaphors are mappings between conceptual
domains, for example between the target domain
GOOD and the less abstract source domain UP, or
between TIME (target) and MONEY (source).
Conceptual metaphors are rarely directly referred
to in speech or writing: Whereas time is money is a
standing expression in English, this is much less so
for many other conceptual mappings (cf. ?good is
up). Consequently, corpus analysis cannot have as a
goal finding conceptual mappings as such. Rather, it
can find their manifestations through non-literal us-
ages of lexical items ? i.e., contexts in which source
domain words are used to refer to elements in the
target domain.
For example, high (a word from the UP source do-
main) means ?good? in the expression high marks;
and spend or save, used in the source domain to re-
fer to actions involving money, refer to actions in the
5
target domain of TIME when used in contexts such as
spend time or save time.
Adopting a broad notion of metaphor based on
CTM, we refer to such non-literal usages (though
often conventionalized) as lexical metaphors in this
paper. Prominent conceptual metaphors are illus-
trated by a larger number of lexical metaphors,
which support the systematicity of their mapping.
3 Related Work
Earlier projects annotating metaphor in corpora in-
clude (Martin, 1994) and (Barnden et al, 2002). In
what follows, we give two examples of recent work.
Gedigian et al (2006) annotated a subset of the
Wall Street Journal for the senses of verbs from
Motion-related, Placing, and Cure frames which
were extracted from FrameNet (Fillmore et al,
2003). The annotation shows that more than 90%
of the 4,186 occurrences of these verbs in the corpus
data are lexical metaphors in the above sense. Gedi-
gian et al (2006) conclude that in the domain of eco-
nomics, Motion-related metaphors are used conven-
tionally to describe market fluctuations and policy
decisions. A classifier trained on the annotated cor-
pus can discriminate between literal and metaphori-
cal usages of the verbs.
Lee (2006) compiled a 42,000 word corpus of
transcribed doctor-patient dialogues, exhaustively
hand-annotated for stretches of metaphorical lan-
guage. These are provided with conceptual labels
enabling the author to identify prevalent and inter-
related metaphorical mappings used as part of com-
municative strategies in this domain.
4 The European Constitution Corpus
Exploration and annotation of a corpus to find infor-
mation regarding its predominant conceptual source
domains is most productive when applied to an ab-
stract and novel target domain. Abstractness calls
for ways to make the topic cognitively accessible,
and novelty entails a certain openness about the par-
ticular source domains that might be activated for
this purpose.
Abstractness and novelty are criteria fulfilled by
the target domain selected for our study: European
Constitutional politics. The domain is represented
by the public discourse on the possible introduction
of a European Constitution and on the corresponding
French referendum (29 May 2005). The referendum
allowed voters to accept or refuse the proposed Con-
stitution text (the result being refusal). The remain-
der of this section describes the sources of the corpus
(4.1), its acquisition (4.2), and pre-processing (4.3).
4.1 Sources
The corpus consists of two sub-corpora, collected
from online versions of two French dailies, Le
Monde and Le Figaro. The site lemonde.fr con-
tains each article published in the printed version of
the socialist-liberal newspaper Le Monde, whereas
lefigaro.fr contains articles from the conser-
vative newspaper Le Figaro.
4.2 Collection
From 27 April to 5 June, 2005, the above men-
tioned web sites were screened for articles on Eu-
rope and the European Constitution on a daily basis.
For the case study presented in this paper, only arti-
cles dealing with the Constitution and discussing the
referendum are retained. Each of these articles is a
document of the European Constitution corpus and
contains information on its publication date, author,
and newspaper section (e.g. editorial). The selection
of relevant articles is performed manually. This is
labor-intensive but keeps noise to a minimum. As a
guideline for distinguishing between ?general? Eu-
ropean topics and the referendum on the European
Constitution, key words including (European) Con-
stitution and referendum are used.
4.3 Preprocessing
The collected documents are converted into text for-
mat and annotated with a simple SGML tagset rep-
resenting document meta data (in the header), para-
graph boundaries, and sentence boundaries. Sen-
tence detection is performed reusing TreeTagger
scripts2 because we POS-tag and lemmatize the
texts using the TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994) and its
French parameter file (Stein and Schmid, 1995). Fi-
nally, the corpus is verticalized for use with the
Manatee/Bonito corpus manager (Rychly? and Smrz?,
2Tokenizer perl script for modern French, available on
Achim Stein?s web page, http://www.uni-stuttgart.
de/lingrom/stein/forschung/resource.html
[accessed 4 September 2006].
6
2004), run in single platform mode on a Linux com-
puter.
Table 1 gives an overview of the two sub-corpora.
When collecting the corpus, relevance to the topic
had been our only criterion. Interestingly, the two
newspaper corpora are very similar in size. This
means that the selected topic was assigned equal im-
portance by the different newspaper teams. Tables 2
and 3 show absolute frequencies of the top ten lem-
mas, filtered by a list of 725 French stop words3 but
still including oui - ?yes? and non - ?no?, buzz-words
during the political debate on the European Consti-
tution. The frequent words also give an impression
of the domain centeredness of the corpus.
Le Monde Le Figaro
Size (tokens) 411,066 396,791
Distinct word forms 23,112 23,516
Distinct lemmas 13,093 13,618
Documents 410 489
Paragraphs 7,055 6,175
Subdocuments 59 n.a.
Sentences 17,421 17,210
Table 1: Size of the European Constitution corpus.
5 Lexical Metaphors and Source Domains
Our aim is to determine empirically salient
metaphorical source domains used in the target do-
main of European politics, combined with the prac-
tical interest in speeding up the detection and anno-
tation of lexical metaphors. In Subsection 3 above,
two approaches to corpus annotation for metaphor
were mentioned. Due to the size of the corpus
and limited annotator resources, we cannot follow
the full-text annotation approach adopted by Lee
(2006). Neither do we proceed as Gedigian et al
(2006), because that approach pre-selects source do-
mains and lemmas. In our approach, we search for
metaphorically used lexical items from initially un-
known source domains, so interesting lemmas can-
not be listed a priori.
Therefore, we developed a new method which
makes efficient use of existing corpus manager func-
tions. The only constant is the representation of the
target domain, predefined at a high level by the se-
lection of our corpus. We fixed the lemma Europe
3Developed by Jean Ve?ronis: http://www.up.
univ-mrs.fr/veronis/data/antidico.txt [ac-
cessed 4 September 2006].
Lemma Occurrences
1. europe?en - ?European? 2,033
2. non - ?no? 2,306
3. Europe - ?Europe? 1,568
4. politique - ?political; politics? 1,159
5. oui - ?yes? 1,124
6. France - ?France? 1,110
7. constitution - ?Constitution? 1,099
8. traite? - ?treaty? 906
9. monsieur - ?mister? 872
10. mai - ?May? 781
Table 2: Frequent words in the Monde sub-corpus.
Lemma Occurrences
1. europe?en - ?European? 2,148
2. non - ?no? 1,690
3. Europe - ?Europe? 1,646
4. France - ?France? 1,150
5. politique - ?political; politics? 969
6. constitution - ?Constitution? 921
7. oui - ?yes? 917
8. ministre - ?minister? 885
9. traite? - ?treaty? 856
10. devoir - ?have to; obligation? 817
Table 3: Frequent words in the Figaro sub-corpus.
as a low-level anchor of the target domain.4 The in-
vestigation proceeds in three steps:
1. Statistically weighted lists of collocates of the
target domain lemma Europe are calculated and
screened for candidates of metaphorical lan-
guage use (5.1).
2. For the obtained candidate collocates, the cor-
pus is concordanced in order to discriminate us-
ages and assign a source domain to each collo-
cate (5.2).
3. The source domains are extended lexically,
making use of EuroWordNet synsets and rela-
tions (5.3).
Corpus data drives the discovery of relevant lemmas
in step 1. In steps 2 and 3, the corpus is used to
increasingly refine and evaluate findings regarding
relevant lemmas and source domains.
5.1 Collocate analysis
At this stage, it is necessary to set a range (span)
within which candidate lemmas are to appear, mea-
4We could have started with a larger set of target domain
lemmas, e.g. europe?en - ?European?, Bruxelles - ?Brussels?, UE
- ?EU? etc. However, the results for Europe quickly proved to
be sufficient in number and variety to illustrate the method.
7
sured in lemma counts starting with the anchor word
Europe. Sample concordances show that Europe is
often preceded by an article and sometimes by an
additional preposition. Based on this insight, we
heuristically restrict the context range for collocates
to four (i.e. three words are allowed to occur be-
tween it and Europe). For example, me`re ?mother?
in Example (1) is retained as a collocate:
(1) Parce qu?elle a e?te? la me`re4 fondatrice3 de2
l1?Europe unie. (?Because she [i.e. France]
has been the founding mother of the unified
Europe.?)
The minimum absolute frequency of the collocate
within the specified context range is set to 3, which
ensures results of at least three example sentences
per co-occurring lemma. Intentionally, no restriction
is applied to the part of speech of the collocate.
For both sub-corpora, lists of the top 100 collo-
cate lemmas for Europe are calculated in the Man-
atee/Bonito corpus manager. We use the MI-score
for ranking; it is based on the relative frequency of
the co-occurring lemmas. Choosing MI-score over
T-score is driven by an interest in salient collocates
of Europe, whether or not they are common in the
entire corpus. (T-score would tend to prefer collo-
cates that occur frequently throughout the corpus.)
The top collocates and their MI-scores are given in
Tables 4 and 5.
MI-scores of the 100 top-ranked collocates are be-
tween 7.297 and 4.575 in the Monde corpus and be-
tween 7.591 and 4.591 in the Figaro corpus. Em-
pirically, a threshold of MI >= 6 retains the most
salient collocates of Europe in both corpora. These
Lemma MI Abs. f
1. panne - ?breakdown? 7.297 6
2. uni - ?unified? 7.275 13
3. re?veil - ?awakening; alarm clock? 7.034 3
4. unification - ?unification? 6.864 4
5. paradoxe - ?paradox? 6.812 3
6. construire - ?construct? 6.799 31
7. re?solument - ?decidedly? 6.619 3
8. otage - ?hostage? 6.619 3
9. utopie - ?utopia? 6.619 3
10. de?fier - ?defy, challenge? 6.619 3
. . . . . . . . . . . .
26. re?volte - ?revolt? 6.034 3
. . . . . . . . . . . .
100. maintenant - ?now? 4.575 6
Table 4: Collocates of Europe in Le Monde.
Lemma MI Abs. f
1. oriental - ?oriental, east? 7.591 8
2. unifier - ?unify? 7.498 6
3. Forum - ?Forum? 7.176 3
4. occidental - ?occidental, west? 7.065 5
5. panne - ?breakdown? 6.913 8
6. ouest - ?west? 6.691 3
7. prospe`re - ?prosperous? 6.591 4
8. bouc - ?goat? 6.498 3
9. patrie - ?fatherland, home coun-
try?
6.498 3
10. ruine - ?ruin? 6.498 3
. . . . . . . . . . . .
20. doter - ?endow? 6.006 8
. . . . . . . . . . . .
100. attacher - ?attach? 4.591 3
Table 5: Collocates of Europe in Le Figaro.
are 26 collocate lemmas from Le Monde and 20 from
Le Figaro.
These highly salient collocates are evaluated for
the potential of being used metaphorically in the tar-
get domain. The guideline underlying this evalua-
tion is as follows: Those lexemes which, in at least
one of their usages, designate entities belonging to
domains more concrete than POLITICS (for exam-
ple, BUILDING or FAMILY) are likely to be used
metaphorically in the corpus. Specifically, among
those collocates with MI >= 6, we identify the
following metaphor candidates:
Le Monde panne - ?breakdown?, re?veil - ?awak-
ening; alarm clock?, construire - ?construct?,
otage - ?hostage?, ba?tir - ?build?, me`re -
?mother?, re?volte - ?revolt?;
Le Figaro panne, bouc - ?goat?, ruine - ?ruin?, tra-
verser - ?traverse?, racine - ?root?, visage -
?face?, reconstruire - ?reconstruct?.
Merging the lists yields 13 distinct candidate words,
which are now evaluated based on contexts from
within the corpus. There are a total of 112 occur-
rences of these lemmas co-occurring with Europe in
a range of 4, the setting used to calculate collocate
lists. Each of them is inspected in a context of at
least one sentence. An annotator decides whether
the usage is metaphorical, and confirms this in al-
most all of the cases (cf. Table 6).
5.2 Source domain identification
While disambiguating the 13 candidate lemmas in
context, the annotator also assigns a source domain
8
Monde Figaro Total Metaphor
construire 31 13 44 44
reconstruire 0 3 3 3
ba?tir 5 1 6 6
ruine 0 3 3 0 or 3
panne 5 7 12 12
traverser 2 7 9 9
me`re 3 1 4 4
racine 2 5 7 7
visage 2 5 7 7
re?veil 3 0 3 3
re?volte 3 0 3 3
otage 3 2 5 5
bouc 3 3 6 6
Total 62 50 112 109 or 112
Table 6: Co-occurrences of candidate lemmas.
label to each occurrence. Actually, to hold the sta-
tus of source domain in a conceptual mapping, a
conceptual domain should be instantiated systemat-
ically by a number of lexical metaphors. Therefore,
as long as this systematicity has not been verified,
the assigned source domains are tentative.
Four tentative source domains are postulated,
two of which might need to be split into subdo-
mains. The general domains are BUILDING, MO-
TION, FIGHT, and LIVING BEING. Verbs (.V) and
nouns (.N) instantiating them are listed in Table 7.
The table also contains further (though still ambigu-
ous) lemmas from the Top-100 collocate list sup-
porting the source domains. Observations regarding
the source domains, based on the 112 annotated lex-
ical metaphors, are summarized in what follows.
The BUILDING source domain has the highest
Domain Disambiguated Futher collocates
Lemmas (Top 100)
1. BUILDING construire.V, maison.N - ?house?,
reconstruire.V, fonder.V - ?found?
ba?tir.V, ruine.N ?
2. MOTION
? FORWARD panne.N, progresser.V - ?pro-
MOTION traverser.V gress?, avancer.V
- ?advance?
? MOTOR panne.N moteur.N - ?motor?
VEHICLE
3. FIGHT otage.N, re?volte.N lutter.V - ?fight?
4. LIVING BEING
? PROCRE- me`re.N, racine.N pe`re.N - ?father?,
ATION na??tre.V - ?be born?
? BODY visage.N dos.N - ?back?,
coeur.N - ?heart?
? REST re?veil.N ?
Table 7: Tentative source domains.
number of lexical metaphor instantiations. The am-
biguity of ruine - ?ruin?, however, is unresolvable:
The texts talk about ?ruins of Europe? after World
War II; if understood as ?ruins of cities/buildings in
Europe,? all of these occurrences are literal, but if
interpreted as ?ruins of the European political sys-
tem,? all of them are metaphorical. The ambiguity
might be deliberate.
Also the MOTION domain has been assigned to
a large number of disambiguated occurrences. The
noun panne - ?breakdown? might instantiate a sub-
domain, such as (MOTION IN A) MOTORIZED VEHI-
CLE; in some cases, it has been assigned MACHINE
as source domain, purposely underspecified as to its
motion-relatedness.
The LIVING BEING source domain is multi-
faceted, comprising PROCREATION, BODY, and
REST, obviously personifying Europe. However, the
frequency of lexical metaphors in these domains is
in large part due to recurring quotations: For ex-
ample, me`re - ?mother? is used exclusively within
the expression la me`re fondatrice de l?Europe - ?the
founding mother of Europe,? attributed to J. L. Ro-
driguez Zapatero; and re?veil - ?awakening; alarm
clock? (pointing to an action of a living being) oc-
curs only as part of the expression sonner le re?veil
de l?Europe - ?ring the awakening/alarm of Europe,?
coined by Ph. de Villiers. Finally, bouc - ?goat? is
always part of the idiom le bouc e?missaire - ?scape-
goat?. Although it could be grouped under LIVING
BEING, this expression is based on particular cul-
tural knowledge rather than on systematic exploita-
tion of general world knowledge about the source
domain.
The FIGHT domain has the lowest count of lexical
metaphors in the annotated co-occurrences of Eu-
rope. Also, the noun otage - ?hostage? occurs three
times out of five within the expression (ne pas) pren-
dre l?Europe en otage - ?(not) take Europe hostage,?
coined by N. Sarkozy and quoted as such.
To summarize, we observe that the most salient
lexical metaphors co-occurring with Europe in the
European Constitution corpus either refer to the
source domains of BUILDING or MOTION, well-
known source domains of conventional metaphors,
or the lexical metaphors are sparse, referring to
much less clearly delimited source domains such as
LIVING BEING or FIGHT. Within the second group,
9
there are a number of newly coined expressions,
?one shot rich image metaphors,? (Lakoff, 1987)
which evoke entire scenes but do not necessarily
contribute to a wide-spread systematic exploitation
of the source domain.
5.3 Lexical extension
Corpus annotation is now extended to a larger list
of lemmas from the source domains of BUILDING
and MOTION. The challenge here is finding addi-
tional lemmas that might exploit the postulated map-
pings, given a small set of disambiguated lemmas
and ambiguous collocates (cf. Table 7). A lexical
resource for French containing information on con-
ceptual domains would be helpful here. EuroWord-
Net (EWN) could go in this direction. It defines
many relation types, including the synonym relation
inside synsets, as well as hyponym, near-antonym
and meronym relations between synsets. Apart from
these lexical relations, EWN also recognizes a fam-
ily of semantico-conceptual INVOLVED relations,
which relate a verb synset Y to a noun synset X if
?X is the one/that who/which is typically involved
in Ying? (Vossen, 1999) (our emphasis). Unfortu-
nately, there are almost no actual instantiations of
INVOLVED relations in the French part of EWN.
Taking our previously identified collocates of Eu-
rope as seeds, we extend our lemma list resorting to
EuroWordNet synsets, as follows:
? lemmas in synsets lexically related by EWN re-
lations to synsets containing our seed lemmas
(hypo-, hyper-, anto-, mero- and synonyms);
? lemmas in synsets lexically related across
part of speech to synsets containing our seed
lemmas, by adding missing XPOS NEAR-
SYNONYM and XPOS NEAR ANTONYM
relations ourselves;
? lemmas in synsets that are conceptually related
to the seed synsets, by adding INVOLVED re-
lations ourselves.
A reiteration of these steps (using encountered
lemmas as new seeds) could lead very soon to gen-
eral or peripheral lemmas. Ideally, one would set
up a limit of reiteration per operation and consider
all encountered lemmas as possible keywords of the
domain. However, annotator resources being lim-
ited, we reduced the list of key lemmas to about 20
per domain (22 for BUILDING and 19 for MOTION),
using human judgment.
At this stage, the restriction on the keyword of
being a collocate of Europe is lifted. This results
in search, disambiguation, and annotation being per-
formed on the entire corpus. The annotator finds 663
lexical metaphors among the 1,237 occurrences of
22 BUILDING keywords, and 409 lexical metaphors
among the 1,307 occurrences of 19 MOTION key-
words. Each key lemma contributes positively to the
count of lexical metaphors. Two consequences fol-
low from these figures:
1. Both postulated source domains are systemati-
cally exploited by lexical metaphors.
2. Every second or third investigated occurrence
is a lexical metaphor.5 Collection and annota-
tion of metaphors can thus proceed consider-
ably faster on the key lemmas than it would on
full text or randomly selected sentences.
For each lexical metaphor, the annotator provides
EuroWordNet synset information. For the actual
meaning in context, the synset belonging to the tar-
get domain is encoded. Additionally, the synset con-
taining the metaphorically used lexeme in its source
domain sense is indicated (?source synset?).
6 Source domain structure
The information on source synsets underlies con-
ceptual maps of the two source domains. This is
exemplified here by Figure 1, which represents the
MOTION domain. Lexical metaphors are prefixed
by M ; those word senses not encoded in EWN are
marked with an asterisk at the end. Synsets shaded
gray in Figure 1 contain at least one lemma that is
exploited as a lexical metaphor, and as such attested
in the European Constitution corpus. Ovals rep-
resent verb synsets, boxes show noun synsets, and
hexagons depict events.
Relations between synsets illustrate the internal
structure of the domain. Solid lines represent rela-
tions encoded in EuroWordNet. For legibility rea-
sons, labels of hyponym relations have been omitted.
5In the vicinity of Europe, the ratio continues to be higher,
with at least three quarters of the contexts being metaphorical.
10
M_progresser:2
M_avancer:4
?advance?
d?placer:5 bouger:2 ?move?
changer de place:1 se d?placer:2
?get around?
se d?placer:1 se mouvoir:1 M_aller:3
?move, go?
HAS_HYPONYM
moyen de transport:1
v?hicule:1
?means of
transportation?
INVLVD_INSTR
route:4
M_voie:2
?route?
INVLVD_DIRECTION
passer:16
?pass?
M_traverser:5
M_parcourir:3
?pass through?
M_traverser:4
?traverse?
M_continuer:2 M_poursuivre:5
M_avancer:12
?continue, pursue?
M_avancer:8
traverser:3
?advance?
M_passage:9
M_chemin:3
M_parcours:1*
?passage?
INVLVD_LOCATION
v?hicule:2
?vehicle?
vaisseau:2 M_bateau:2
avion:2
?vessel?
v?hicule ? moteur:1
?motor vehicle?
transports
en commun:1
?public transportation?
M_train:2
?train?
M_chemin:1
M_direction:1
?path?
M_direction:6
M_cours:2
?direction?
passer ? travers:1
M_franchir:2
M_traverser:2
?trespass?
M_poursuite:5 pers?cution:2
?pursuit?
XPOS_NEAR_SYN
faire une pause:1 s?arreter:4
?pause?
NEAR_ANT
M_route:2 M_chemin:4
?way?
M_bateau:1
?boat?
M_boussole:1*
?compass?
HAS_MEROPART
moteur ? combustion interne:1 M_moteur:2*
?internal combustion engine?
HAS_MEROPART
M_ancrer:2 mouiller l?ancre:1
mouiller:2
?moor; anchor?
RELATION?CAUSES
moteur thermique:1
?combustion engine?
M_moteur:1
?motor?
panne de moteur:1 M_panne:1*
?engine failure, breakdown?
INVLVD_PATIENT
M_arr?t:2 immobilisation:1
?immobilization?
CAUSES
souffler:1 reprendre haleine:1
?catch one?s breath?
M_arr?t:6 stop:1
?halt?
XPOS_NEAR_SYN
Figure 1: The MOTION source domain with corpus-specific highlights.
Dotted lines stand for relations that we added. These
were labeled using EWN relation types (Vossen,
1999), where possible. As obvious from Figure 1,
the domain graph would be separate partitions with-
out our additional relations, especially those of
the INVOLVED type. Conceptual relations (?typi-
cally. . . ?) are thus a necessary addition to lexical re-
lations (?necessarily. . . ?) in order to represent con-
ceptual source domains.
The map representing the source domain is a re-
sult of our corpus investigation of this specific tar-
get domain corpus. The structure of the source do-
main is not intended to be a general representation of
this domain, nor does it imply fixed domain bound-
aries. Rather, the network shows the elements of the
source domain that mapped onto the target domain
from corpus attestations. If the same source domain
were to be mapped onto some other target domain,
other synsets might be used. A lexico-conceptual re-
source encoding general information on this source
domain would thus have to contain more synsets and
relations than those displayed in Figure 1.
The choice of source domains as well as of cer-
tain lexical items from within a source domain has
the effect of ?highlighting and hiding? certain as-
pects of the target domain. For example, among
the numerous hyponyms of the central ?move? synset
{se de?placer:1 se mouvoir:1 aller:3}?most of which
are not displayed in Figure 1?, the European Con-
stitution corpus shows a tendency towards lexi-
cal metaphors in synsets containing the verb tra-
verser - ?traverse?. This profiles the path compo-
nent of the motion event. The path itself is fur-
ther emphasized by lexical metaphors related to
the ?move? synset by INVOLVED LOCATION and
INVOLVED DIRECTION. Also vehicles as instru-
ments play a role in the conceptualization, but not
all vehicles have metaphorical attestations in the cor-
pus: only train - ?train? and bateau - ?boat? are found
during a cross-check. Finally, synsets referring to
11
the contrary of ?move? are contained within the map
of the source domain. Even the ?motor? (as a vehi-
cle part) and its ?breakdown? (causing ?immobiliza-
tion?) are thus lexically and conceptually integrated
in the MOTION domain derived from our corpus.
All these highlightings and hidings can be inter-
preted with respect to the situation of Europe before
the referendum on its Constitution: Europe is made
cognitively accessible as a multi-passenger vehicle
in motion on a path, which has not yet arrived but is
facing obstacles to its motion, possibly resulting in
being stopped.
7 Conclusion and Outlook
A method for quickly finding large amounts of lex-
ical metaphors and characterizing their source do-
mains has been exemplified, given a target domain
corpus. The method makes use of collocate explo-
ration of a target domain keyword, in order to iden-
tify the most promising source domains. Over 1,000
manual annotations have been obtained and will be
integrated into the Hamburg Metaphor Database.
This outnumbers by far the results of previous stud-
ies filed within HMD, which originated under simi-
lar conditions but did not resort to a corpus manager.
Our method is different from automated work on
metaphor recognition such as (Mason, 2004) and
(Gedigian et al, 2006) in that it includes nouns as
parts of speech. Implementing it in an automated
system would require more sophisticated lexical-
conceptual resources, representing information on
concrete domains (possible source domains). In par-
ticular, the addition of lexical and conceptual links
between verb and noun synsets is crucial for estab-
lishing a connected source domain graph.
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Patrick Hanks, Jana Klawitter, and three
anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments. ?
This work was supported by a fellowship within the
Postdoc-Programme of the German Academic Ex-
change Service (DAAD), granted to the second au-
thor.
References
John A. Barnden, Sheila Glasbey, Mark Lee, and Alan M.
Wallington. 2002. Reasoning in metaphor under-
standing: The ATT-Meta approach and system. In
Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING 2002), pages
1188?1193, Taipei, Taiwan.
Charles J. Fillmore, Christopher R. Johnson, and Miriam
R. L. Petruck. 2003. Background to FrameNet. Inter-
national Journal of Lexicography, 16(3):235?250.
Matt Gedigian, John Bryant, Srini Narayanan, and Bran-
imir Ciric. 2006. Catching metaphors. In Proceedings
of the 3rd Workshop on Scalable Natural Language
Understanding, pages 41?48, New York City.
George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors we
live by. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
George Lakoff. 1987. Women, fire, and dangerous
things: what categories reveal about the mind. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Mark Lee. 2006. Methodological issues in build-
ing a corpus of doctor-patient dialogues annotated for
metaphor. In Cognitive-linguistic approaches: What
can we gain by computational treatment of data? A
Theme Session at DGKL-06/GCLA-06, pages 19?22,
Munich, Germany.
Birte Lo?nneker and Carina Eilts. 2004. A current re-
source and future perspectives for enriching WordNets
with metaphor information. In Proceedings of the 2nd
International Conference of the Global WordNet Asso-
ciation, pages 157?162, Brno, Czech Republic.
James H. Martin. 1994. MetaBank: A knowledge-base
of metaphoric language conventions. Computational
Intelligence, 10(2):134?149.
Zachary J. Mason. 2004. CorMet: A computational,
corpus-based conventional metaphor extraction sys-
tem. Computational Linguistics, 30(1):23?44.
Pavel Rychly? and Pavel Smrz?. 2004. Manatee, Bonito
and Word Sketches for Czech. In Proceedings of the
Second International Conference on Corpus Linguis-
tics, pages 124?132, Saint-Petersburg.
Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech tag-
ging using decision trees. In International Conference
on New Methods in Language Processing, Manchester,
UK.
Achim Stein and Helmut Schmid. 1995. Etiquetage
morphologique de textes franc?ais avec un arbre de
de?cisions. Traitement automatique des langues, 36(1-
2):23?35.
Piek Vossen. 1999. EuroWordNet General Document.
Version 3. Technical report, University of Amsterdam.
12
