Activity detection for information access
to oral communication
Klaus Ries and Alex Waibel?
{ries|ahw}@cs.cmu.edu
Interactive Systems Labs, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA
Interactive Systems Labs, Universita?t Karlsruhe, Fakulta?t fu?r Informatik, 76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
http://www.is.cs.cmu.edu/ http://werner.ira.uka.de
ABSTRACT
Oral communication is ubiquitous and carries important in-
formation yet it is also time consuming to document. Given
the development of storage media and networks one could
just record and store a conversation for documentation. The
question is, however, how an interesting information piece
would be found in a large database. Traditional informa-
tion retrieval techniques use a histogram of keywords as the
document representation but oral communication may offer
additional indices such as the time and place of the rejoinder
and the attendance. An alternative index could be the ac-
tivity such as discussing, planning, informing, story-telling,
etc. This paper addresses the problem of the automatic de-
tection of those activities in meeting situation and everyday
rejoinders. Several extensions of this basic idea are being
discussed and/or evaluated: Similar to activities one can
define subsets of larger database and detect those automati-
cally which is shown on a large database of TV shows. Emo-
tions and other indices such as the dominance distribution
of speakers might be available on the surface and could be
used directly. Despite the small size of the databases used
some results about the effectiveness of these indices can be
obtained.
Keywords
activity, dialogue processing, oral communication, speech,
information access
?We would like to thank our lab, especially Klaus Zechner,
Alon Lavie and Lori Levin for their discussions and support.
We would also like to thank our sponsors at DARPA. Any
opinions, findings and conclusions expressed in this material
are those of the authors and may not reflect the views of
DARPA, or any other party.
.
1. INTRODUCTION
Information access to oral communication is becoming an
interesting research area since recording, storing and trans-
mitting large amounts of audio (and video) data is feasible
today. While written information is often available elec-
tronically (especially since it is typically entered on com-
puters) oral communication is usually only documented by
constructing a new document in written form such as a tran-
script (court proceedings) or minutes (meetings). Oral com-
munications are therefore a large untapped resource, espe-
cially if no corresponding written documents are available
and the cost of documentation using traditional techniques
is considered high: Tutorial introductions by a senior staff
member might be worthwhile to attend by many newcomers,
office meetings may contain informations relevant for oth-
ers and should be reproducable, informal and formal group
meetings may be interesting but not fully documented. In
essence the written form is already a reinterpretation of the
original rejoinder. Such a reinterpretation are used to
? extract and condense information
? add or delete information
? change the meaning
? cite the rejoinder
? relate rejoinders to each other
Reinterpretation is a time consuming, expensive and op-
tional step and written documentation is combining reinter-
pretation and documentation step in one 1. If however rein-
terpretation is not necessary or unwanted a system which
is producing audiovisual records is superior. If reinterpreta-
tion is wanted or needed a system using audiovisual records
may be used to improve the reinterpretation by adding all
audiovisual data and the option to go back to the unaltered
original. Whether reinterpretation is done or not it is cru-
cial to be able to navigate effectively within an audiovisual
document and to find a specific document.
1The most important exception is the literal courtroom
transcript, however one could argue that even transcripts
are reinterpretations since they do not contain a number of
informations present in the audio channel such as emotions,
hesitations, the use of slang and certain types of hetereglos-
sia, accents and so forth. This is specifically true if tran-
scription machines are used which restrict the transcriber
to standard orthography.
Willie is sickNeed new coding schemePersonal stuff
Setting up the new hard drive
Data collection, last WednesdayDialogue detection, with HansLanguage modeling tutorial for Tim
MeetingsTV showsLecturesSpeechesMeeting
Database
Segment
Figure 1: Information access hierarchy: Oral com-
munications take place in very different formats and
the first step in the search is to determine the
database (or sub-database) of the rejoinder. The
next step is to find the specific rejoinder. Since re-
joinders can be very long the rejoinder has to seg-
mented and a segment has to be selected.
While keywords are commonly used in information ac-
cess to written information the use of other indices such as
style is still uncommon (but see Kessler et al (1997); van
Bretan et al (1998)). Oral communication is richer than
written communication since it is an interactive real time
accomplishment between participants, may involve speech
gestures such as the display of emotion and is situated in
space and time. Bahktin (1986) characterizes a conversa-
tion by topic, situation and style. Information access to
oral communication can therefore make use of indices that
pertain to the oral nature of the discourse (Fig. 2). In-
dices other than topic (represented by keywords) increase
in importance since browsing audio documents is cumber-
some which makes the common interactive retrieval strategy
?query, browse, reformulate? less effective. Finally the topic
may not be known at all or may not be that relevant for the
query formulation, for example if one just wants to be re-
minded what was being discussed last time a person was
met. Activities are suggested as an alternative index and
are a description of the type of interaction. It is common
to use ?action-verbs? such as story-telling, discussing, plan-
ning, informing, etc. to describe activities 2. Items similar
to activities have been shown to be directly retrievable from
autobiographic memory (Herrmann, 1993) and are therefore
indices that are available to participants of the conversation.
Other indices may be very effective but not available: The
frequency of the word ?I? in the conversation, the histogram
of word lengths or the histogram of pitch per participant.
In Fig. 1 the information access hierarchy is being intro-
duced which allows to understand the problem of informa-
tion access to oral communication at different levels. In
Ries (1999) we have shown that the detection of general di-
2 The definition of activities such as planning may vary
vastly across general dialogue genres, for example compare
a military combat situation with a mother child interaction.
However it is often possible to develop activities and dia-
logue typologies for a specific dialogue genre. The related
problem of general typologies of dialogues is still far from
being settled and action-verbs are just one potential catego-
rization (Fritz and Hundschnur, 1994).
SpeakerTimeLocation
Related rejonders
Parts of speechEmotion
Overlap between speakers
Semantics / pragmaticsKeywords
SituationStyle
Topic
Figure 2: Bahktin?s characterization of dialogue:
Bahktin (1986) describes a discourse along the three
major properties style, situation and topic. Current
information retrieval systems focus on the topical as-
pect which might be crucial in written documents.
Furthermore, since throughout text analysis is still a
hard problem, information retrieval has mostly used
keywords to characterize topic. Many features that
could be extracted are therefore ignored in a tradi-
tional keyword based approach.
alogue genre (database level in Fig. 1) can be done with
high accuracy if a number of different example types have
been annotated; in Ries et al (2000) we have shown that it
is hard but not impossible to distinguish activities in per-
sonal phone calls (segment level in Fig. 1) . In this paper
we will address activities in meetings and other types of di-
alogues and show that these activities can be distinguished
using certain features and a neural network based classifier
(Sec. 2, segment level in Fig. 1). The concept of information
retrieval assessment using information theoretic measures is
applied to this task (Sec. 3). Additionally we will introduce
a level somewhat below the database level in Fig. 1 that we
call ?sub-genre? and we have collected a large database of
TV-shows that are automatically classified for their show-
type (Sec. 4). We also explore whether there are other in-
dices similar to activities that could be used and we are
presenting results on emotions in meetings (Sec. 5).
2. ACTIVITY DETECTION
We are interested in the detection of activities that are
described by action verbs and have annotated those in two
databases:
meetings have been collected at Interactive Systems Labs at
CMU (Waibel et al, 1998) and a subset of 8 meetings
has been annotated. Most of the meetings are by the
data annotation group itself and are fairly informal in
style. The participants are often well acquainted and
meet each other a lot besides their meetings.
Santa Barbara (SBC) is a corpus released by the LDC
and 7 out of 12 rejoinders have been annotated.
The annotator has been instructed to segment the rejoin-
ders into units that are coherent with respect to their topic
Activity SBC Meeting
Discussion 35 58
Information 25 23
Story-telling 24 10
Planning 7 19
Undetermined 5 8
Advising 5 17
Not meeting 3 2
Interrogation 2 1
Evaluation 1 0
Introduction 0 1
Closing 0 1
Table 1: Distribution of activity types: Both
databases contain a lot of discussing, informing and
story-telling activities however the meeting data
contains a lot more planning and advising.
and activity and annotate them with an activity which fol-
lows the intuitive definition of the action-verb such as dis-
cussing, planning, etc. Additionally an activity annotation
manual containing more specific instructions has been avail-
able (Ries et al, 2000; Thyme?-Gobbel et al, 2001) 3. The
list of tags and the distribution can be seen in Tab. 1. The
set of activities can be clustered into ?interactive? activities
of equal contribution rights (discussion,planning), one per-
son being active (advising, information giving, story-telling),
interrogations and all others.
Measure Meeting SBC CallHome
all inter all inter Spanish
? 0.41 0.51 0.49 0.56 0.59
Mutual inf. 0.35 0.25 0.65 0.32 0.61
Table 2: Intercoder agreement for activities: The
meeting dialogues and Santa Barbara corpus have
been annotated by a semi-naive coder and the first
author of the paper. The ?-coefficient is determined
as in Carletta et al (1997) and mutual information
measures how much one label ?informs? the other
(see Sec. 3). For CallHome Spanish 3 dialogues were
coded for activities by two coders and the result
seems to indicate that the task was easier.
Both datasets have been annotated not only by a semi-
naive annotator but also by the first author of the paper.
The results for ?-statistics (Carletta et al, 1997) and mu-
tual information between the coders can be seen in Tab. 2.
The intercoder agreement would be considered moderate but
compares approximately to Carletta et al (1997) agreement
on transactions (? = 0.59), especially for the interactive ac-
tivities and CallHome Spanish.
For classification a neural network was trained that uses
the softmax function as its output and KL-divergence as
3 In contrast to (Ries et al, 2000; Thyme?-Gobbel et al,
2001) the ?consoling? activity has been eliminated and an
?informing? activity has been introduced for segments where
one or more than one member of the rejoinder give informa-
tion to the others. Additionally an ?introducing? activity
was added to account for a introduction of people or topics
at the beginning of meetings.
Feature all interactive
SBC meet SBC meet
baseline 32.7 41.1 50.5 54.6
dialogue acts per channel 28.1 37.6 47.7 56.7
dialogue acts 28.0 36.2 46.7 65.3
words 38.3 39.7 53.3 54.6
dominance 32.7 44.7 64.5 58.2
style 24.3 35.5 53.3 58.9
style + words 42.1 38.3 52.3 57.5
dominance + words 41.1 41.1 52.3 58.9
dominance + style + words 42.1 39.7 53.3 60.3
dialogue acts + words 42.1 37.6 57.0 61.0
dialogue acts + style + words 39.3 40.4 57.9 61.0
Wordnet 37.4 37.6 46.7 52.5
Wordnet + words 49.5 39.0 53.3 57.5
first author 59.8 57.9 73.8 72.7
Table 3: Activity detection: Activities are detected
on the Santa Barbara Corpus (SBC) and the meet-
ing database (meet) either without clustering the
activities (all) or clustering them according to their
interactivity (interactive) (see Sec. 2 for details).
the error function. The network connects the input di-
rectly to the output units. Hidden units have not been used
since they did not yield improvements on this task. The
network was trained using RPROP with momentum (Ried-
miller and Braun, 1993) and corresponds to an exponen-
tial model (Nigam et al, 1999). The momentum term can
be interpreted as a Gaussian prior with zero mean on the
network weights. It is the same architecture that we used
previously (Ries et al, 2000) for the detection of activities
on CallHome Spanish. Although some feature sets could be
trained using the iterative scaling algorithm if no hidden
units are being used the training times weren?t high enough
to justify the use of the less flexible iterative scaling algo-
rithm. The features used for classification are
words the 50 most frequent words / part of speech pairs
are used directly, all other pairs are replaced by their
part of speech 4.
stylistic features adapted from Biber (1988) and contain
mostly syntactic constructions and some word classes.
Wordnet a total of 40 verb and noun classes (so called lex-
icographers classes (Fellbaum, 1998)) are defined and
a word is replaced by the most frequent class over all
possible meanings of the word.
dialogue acts such as statements, questions, backchannels,
. . . are detected using a language model based detec-
tor trained on Switchboard similar to Stolcke et al
(2000) 5
4Klaus Zechner trained an English part of speech tagger
tagger on Switchboard that has been used. The tagger uses
the code by Brill (1994).
5The model was trained to be very portable and therefore
the following choices were taken: (a) the dialogue model
is context-independent and (b) only the part of speech are
taken as the input to the model plus the 50 most likely
word/part of speech types.
dominance is described as the distribution of the speaker
dominance in a conversation. The distribution is rep-
resented as a histogram and speaker dominance is mea-
sured as the average dominance of the dialogue acts (Linell
et al, 1988) of each speaker. The dialogue acts are de-
tected and the dominance is a numeric value assigned
for each dialogue act type. Dialogue act types that
restrict the options of the conversation partners have
high dominance (questions), dialogue acts that signal
understanding (backchannels) carry low dominance.
First author The activities used for classification are those
of the semi-naive coder. The ?first author? column de-
scribes the ?accuracy? of the first author with respect
to the naive coder.
The detection of interactive activities works fairly well
using the dominance feature on SBC which is also natu-
ral since the relative dominance of speakers should describe
what kind of interaction is exhibited. The dialogue act dis-
tribution on the other hand works fairly well on the more
homogeneous meeting database were there is a better chance
to see generalizations from more specific dialogue based in-
formation. Overall the combination of more than one feature
is really important since word level, Wordnet and stylistic
information, while sometimes successful, seem to be able to
improve the result while they don?t provide good features by
themselves. The meeting data is also more difficult which
might be due to its informal style.
3. INFORMATION ACCESS ASSESSMENT
Assuming a probabilistic information retrieval model a
query r ? in our example an activity ? predicts a docu-
ment d with the probability q(d|r) = q(r|d)q(d)q(r) . Let p(d, r)
be the real probability mass distribution of these quanti-
ties. The probability mass function q(r|d) is estimated on
a separate training set by a neural network based classi-
fier 6. The quantity we are interested in is the reduction
in expected coding length of the document using the neural
network based detector 7:
?Eplog
q(D)
q(D|R)
? H(R)? Ep log
1
q(R|D)
The two expectations correspond exactly to the measures in
Tab. 5, the first represents the baseline, the second the one
for the respective classifier. In more standard information
theoretic notation this quantity may be written as:
H(R)? (Hp(R|D) +D(p(r|d)||q(r|d)))
This equivalence is not extremely useful though since the
quantities in parenthesis can?t be estimated separately. For
the small meeting database and SBC however no entropy
reductions could be obtained. On the larger databases, on
the other hand, entropy reductions could be obtained (?
0.5bit on the CallHome Spanish database Ries et al (2000),
? 1bit for the sub-database detection problem in Sec. 4).
6All quantities involving the neural net q(r|d) have been
determined using a round robin approach such that network
is trained on a separate training set.
7Since estimating q(d) is simple we may assume that q(d) ??
r p(d, r).
Another option is to assume that the labels of one coder
are part of D. If the query by the other coder is R we are in-
terested in the reduction of the document entropy given the
query. If we furthermore assume that H(R|D) = H(R|R?)
where R? is the activity label embedded in D:
H(D)?H(D|R) = H(R)?H(R|D) = MI(R,R?)
Tab. 2 shows that the labels of the semi-naive coder and the
first author only inform each other by 0.25?0.65 bits. How-
ever, since all constraints are important to apply, it might be
important to include manual annotations to be matched by
a query or in a graphical presentation of the output results.
Another interesting question to consider is whether the
activity is correlated with the rejoinder or not. This ques-
tion is important since a correlation of the activity with the
rejoinder would mean that the indexing performance of ac-
tivities needs to be compared to other indices that apply to
rejoinders such as attendance, time and place (for results on
the correlation with rejoinders see Waibel et al (2001)). The
correlation can be measured using the mutual information
between the activity and the meeting identity. The mutual
information is moderate for SBC (? 0.67 bit) and much
lower for the meetings (? 0.20 bit). This also corresponds
to our intuition since some of the rejoinders in SBC belong
to very distinct dialogue genre while the meeting database
is homogeneous. The conclusion is that activities are useful
for navigation in a rejoinder if the database is homogeneous
and they might be useful for finding conversations in a more
heterogeneous database.
# # #
Talk 344 Edu 25 Finance 8
News 217 Scifi 24 Religious 5
Sitcom 97 Series 24 Series-Old 3
Soap 87 Cartoon 23 Infotain 3
Game 46 Movies 22 Music 2
Law 32 Crafts 17 Horror 1
Sports 32 Specials 15
Drama 31 Comedy 9
Table 4: TV show types: The distribution of show
types in a large database of TV shows (1067 shows)
that has been recorded over the period of a couple
of months until April 2000 in Pittsburgh, PA
4. DETECTION OF SUB-DATABASES
We set up an environment for TV shows that records the
subtitles with timestamps continuously from one TV chan-
nel and the channel was switched every other day. At the
same time the TV program was downloaded from http:
//tv.yahoo.com/ to obtain programming information in-
cluding the genre of the show. Yahoo assigns primary and
secondary show types and unless the combination of pri-
mary/secondary show-type is frequent enough the primary
showtype is used (Tab. 4). The TV show database has the
advantage that we were able to collect a large and varied
database with little effort. The same classifier as in Sec. 2
has been used however dialogue acts have not been detected
since the data contains a lot of noise, is not necessarily con-
versational and speaker identities can?t be determined easily.
Detection results for TV shows can be seen in Tab. 5. It may
be noted that adding a lot of keywords does improve the de-
tection result but not so much the entropy. It may therefore
be assume that there is a limited dependence between topic
and genre which isn?t really a surprise since there are many
shows with weekly sequels and there may be some true re-
peats.
Feature accuracy entropy
Wordnet stylistic words
baseline 32.2 3.31
? 50.9 2.73
? 50 62.2 2.33
? ? 50 60.0 2.29
? ? 61.2 2.28
? 56.9 2.41
? 50 61.5 2.25
50 61.3 2.35
250 62.7 2.17
500 66.0 2.14
? ? 500 64.9 2.13
5000 67.2 2.08
Table 5: Show type detection: Using the neural net-
work described in Sec. 2 the show type was detected.
If there is a number in the word column the word
feature is being used. The number indicates how
many word/part of speech pairs are in the vocabu-
lary additionally to the parts of speech.
5. EMOTION AND DOMINANCE
Emotions are displayed in a variety of gestures, some of
which are oral and may be detected via automated methods
from the audio channel (Polzin, 1999). Using only verbal
information the emotions happy, excited and neutral can
be detected on the meeting database with 88.1% accuracy
while always picking neutral yields 83.6%. This result can be
improved to 88.6% by adding pitch and power information.
While these experiments were conducted at the utterance
level emotions can be extended to topical segments. For
that purpose the emotions of the individual utterances are
entered in a histogram over the segment and the vectors
are clustered automatically. The resulting clusters roughly
correspond to a ?neutral?, ?a little happy? and ?somewhat
excited? segment. Using the classifier for emotions on the
word level the segment can be classified automatically into
categories with a 83.3% accuracy while the baseline is 68.9%.
The entropy reduction by automatically detected emotional
activities is ? 0.3bit 8. A similar attempt can be made for
dominance (Linell et al, 1988) distributions: Dominance is
easy to understand for the user of an information access
system and it can be determined automatically with high
accuracy.
8 A similar classification result for emotions on the utter-
ance level has been obtained by just using the laughter vs.
non-laughter tokens of the transcript as the input. This
may indicate that (a) the index should really be the amount
of laughter in the conversational segment and that (b) emo-
tions might not be displayed very overtly in meetings. These
results however would require a wider sampling of meeting
types to be generally acceptable.
6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
It has been shown that activities can be detected and that
they may be efficient indices for access to oral communica-
tion. Overall it is easy to make high level distinctions with
automated methods while fine-grained distinctions are even
hard to make for humans ? on the other hand automatic
methods are still able to model some aspect of it (Fig. 3).
To obtain an reduction in entropy a relatively large database
such as CallHome Spanish is required (120 dialogues). Al-
ternatives to activities might be emotional and dominance
distributions that are easier to detect and that may be nat-
ural to understand for users. If activities are only used for
local navigation support within a rejoinder one could also
visualize by displaying the dialogue act patterns for each
channel on a time line.
The author has also observed that topic clusters and activ-
ities are largely independent in the meeting domain result-
ing in orthogonal indices. Since activities have intuitions for
naive users and they may be remembered it can be assumed
that users would be able to make use of these constraints.
Ongoing work includes the use of speaker activity for dia-
logue segmentation and further assessment of features for
information access. Overall the methods presented here and
the ongoing work are improving the ability to index oral
communication. It should be noted that some of the tech-
niques presented lend themselves to implementations that
don?t require (full) speech recognition: Speaker identifica-
tion and dialogue act identification may be done without
an LVCSR system which would allow to lower the compu-
tational requirements as well as to a more robust system.
Figure 3: Detection accuracy summary: The detec-
tion of high-level genre as exemplified by the differ-
entiation of corpora can be done with high accuracy
using simple features (Ries, 1999). Similar it was
fairly easy to discriminate between male and female
speakers on Switchboard (Ries, 1999). Discrimi-
nating between sub-genre such as TV-show types
(Sec. 4) can be done with reasonable accuracy. How-
ever it is a lot harder to discriminate between ac-
tivities within one conversation for personal phone
calls (CallHome) (Ries et al, 2000) or for general
rejoinders (Santa) and meetings (Sec. 2).
References
M. M. Bahktin. Speech Genres and other late Essays, chap-
ter Speech Genres. University of Texas Press, Austin,
1986.
D. Biber. Variation across speech and writing. Cambridge
University Press, 1988.
E. Brill. A report on recent progress in transformation based
error-driven learning. In DARPA Workshop, 1994.
J. Carletta, A. Isard, S. Isard, J. C. Kowtko, G. Doherty-
Sneddon, and A. H. Anderson. The reliability of a dia-
logue structure coding scheme. Computational Linguis-
tics, 23(1):13?31, March 1997.
C. Fellbaum, editor. WordNet ? An Electronic Lexical
Database. MIT press, 1998.
G. Fritz and F. Hundschnur. Handbuch der Dialoganalyse.
Niemeyer, Tuebingen, 1994.
D. J. Herrmann. Autobiographical memory and the validity
of retrospective reports, chapter The validity of retrospec-
tive reports as a function of the directness of retrieval
processes, pages 21?31. Springer, 1993.
B. Kessler, G. Nunberg, and H. Schu?tze. Automatic detec-
tion of genre. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics and
the 8th Meeting of the European Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 32?38. Mor-
gan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco CA, 1997. URL
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/cmp-lg/9707002.
P. Linell, L. Gustavsson, and P. Juvonen. Interactional
dominance in dyadic communication: a presentation of
initiative-response analysis. Linguistics, 26:415?442, 1988.
K. Nigam, J. Lafferty, and A. McCallum. Using maxi-
mum entropy for text classification. In Proceedings of
the IJCAI-99 Workshop on Machine Learning for Infor-
mation Filtering, 1999. URL http://www.cs.cmu.edu/
~lafferty/.
T. Polzin. Detecting Verbal and Non-Verbal Cues in the
Communication of Emotion. PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon
University, November 1999.
M. Riedmiller and H. Braun. A direct adaptive method for
faster backpropagation learning: The RPROP algorithm.
In Proc. of the IEEE Int. Conf. on Neural Networks, pages
586?591, 1993.
K. Ries. Towards the detection and description of textual
meaning indicators in spontaneous conversations. In Pro-
ceedings of the Eurospeech, volume 3, pages 1415?1418,
Budapest, Hungary, September 1999.
K. Ries, L. Levin, L. Valle, A. Lavie, and A. Waibel.
Shallow discourse genre annotation in callhome spanish.
In Proceecings of the International Conference on Lan-
guage Ressources and Evaluation (LREC-2000), Athens,
Greece, May 2000.
A. Stolcke, K. Ries, N. Coccaro, E. Shriberg, R. Bates,
D. Jurafsky, P. Taylor, R. Martin, C. V. Ess-Dykema, and
M. Meteer. Dialogue act modeling for automatic tagging
and recognition of conversational speech. Computational
Linguistics, 26(3), September 2000.
A. Thyme?-Gobbel, L. Levin, K. Ries, and L. Valle. Dia-
logue act, dialogue game, and activity tagging manual for
spanish conversational speech. Technical report, Carnegie
Mellon University, 2001. in preperation.
van Bretan, J. Dewe, A. Hallberg, J. Karlgren, and N. Wolk-
ert. Genres defined for a purpose, fast clustering, and an
iterative information retrieval interface. In Eighth DE-
LOS Workshop on User Interfaces in Digital Libraries
L?angholmen, pages 60?66, October 1998.
A. Waibel, M. Bett, and M. Finke. Meeting browser: Track-
ing and summarising meetings. In Proceedings of the
DARPA Broadcast News Workshop, 1998.
A. Waibel, M. Bett, F. Metze, K. Ries, T. Schaaf, T. Schultz,
H. Soltau, H. Yu, and K. Zechner. Advances in automatic
meeting record creation and access. In ICASSP, Salt Lake
City, Utah, USA, 2001. to appear.
Dialogue Act Modeling for 
Automatic Tagging and Recognition 
of Conversational Speech 
Andreas Stolcke* 
SRI International 
Noah Coccaro 
University of Colorado at Boulder 
Rebecca Bates 
University of Washington 
Paul Taylor 
University of Edinburgh 
Carol Van Ess-Dykema 
U.S. Department of Defense 
Klaus Ries 
Carnegie Mellon University and 
University of Karlsruhe 
Elizabeth Shriberg 
SRI International 
Daniel Jurafsky 
University of Colorado at Boulder 
Rachel Martin 
Johns Hopkins University 
Marie Meteer 
BBN Technologies 
We describe a statistical approach for modeling dialogue acts in conversational speech, i.e., speech- 
act-like units such as STATEMENT, QUESTION, BACKCHANNEL, AGREEMENT, DISAGREE- 
MENT, and APOLOGY. Our model detects and predicts dialogue acts based on lexical, colloca- 
tional, and prosodic ues, as well as on the discourse coherence of the dialogue act sequence. 
The dialogue model is based on treating the discourse structure of a conversation as a hidden 
Markov model and the individual dialogue acts as observations emanating from the model states. 
Constraints on the likely sequence of dialogue acts are modeled via a dialogue act n-gram. The 
statistical dialogue grammar is combined with word n-grams, decision trees, and neural networks 
modeling the idiosyncratic lexical and prosodic manifestations ofeach dialogue act. We develop 
a probabilistic ntegration of speech recognition with dialogue modeling, to improve both speech 
recognition and dialogue act classification accuracy. Models are trained and evaluated using a 
large hand-labeled database of 1,155 conversations from the Switchboard corpus of spontaneous 
human-to-human telephone speech. We achieved good dialogue act labeling accuracy (65% based 
on errorful, automatically recognized words and prosody, and 71% based on word transcripts, 
compared to a chance baseline accuracy of 35% and human accuracy of 84%) and a small reduction 
in word recognition error. 
? Speech Technology and Research Laboratory, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Ave., Menlo Park, CA 
94025, 1-650-859-2544. E-mail: stolcke@speech.sri.com. 
@ 2000 Association for Computational Linguistics 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
Table 1 
Fragment of a labeled conversation (from the Switchboard corpus). 
Speaker Dialogue Act Utterance 
A YEs-No-QuESTION So do you go to college right now? 
A ABANDONED Are yo-, 
B YES- ANSWER Yeah, 
B STATEMENT it's my last year \[laughter\]. 
A DECLARATIVE-QUESTION You're a, so you're a senior now. 
B YEs-ANSWER Yeah, 
B STATEMENT I'm working on my projects trying to graduate 
\[laughter\]. 
A APPRECIATION Oh, good for you. 
B BACKCHANNEL Yeah. 
A APPRECIATION That's great, 
A YEs-No-QUESTION um, is, is N C University is that, uh, State, 
B STATEMENT N C State. 
A SIGNAL-NoN-UNDERSTANDING What did you say? 
B STATEMENT N C State. 
1. Introduction 
The ability to model and automatically detect discourse structure is an important 
step toward understanding spontaneous dialogue. While there is hardly consensus 
on exactly how discourse structure should be described, some agreement exists that 
a useful first level of analysis involves the identification of dialogue acts (DAs). A 
DA represents he meaning of an utterance at the level of illocutionary force (Austin 
1962). Thus, a DA is approximately the equivalent of the speech act of Searle (1969), 
the conversational game move of Power (1979), or the adjacency pair part of Schegloff 
(1968) and Saks, Schegloff, and Jefferson (1974). 
Table 1 shows a sample of the kind of discourse structure in which we are inter- 
ested. Each utterance is assigned a unique DA label (shown in column 2), drawn from 
a well-defined set (shown in Table 2). Thus, DAs can be thought of as a tag set that 
classifies utterances according to a combination of pragmatic, semantic, and syntactic 
criteria. The computational community has usually defined these DA categories so as 
to be relevant to a particular application, although efforts are under way to develop 
DA labeling systems that are domain-independent, such as the Discourse Resource 
Initiative's DAMSL architecture (Core and Allen 1997). 
While not constituting dialogue understanding in any deep sense, DA tagging 
seems clearly useful to a range of applications. For example, a meeting summarizer 
needs to keep track of who said what to whom, and a conversational agent needs to 
know whether it was asked a question or ordered to do something. In related work 
DAs are used as a first processing step to infer dialogue games (Carlson 1983; Levin 
and Moore 1977; Levin et al 1999), a slightly higher level unit that comprises a small 
number of DAs. Interactional dominance (Linell 1990) might be measured more ac- 
curately using DA distributions than with simpler techniques, and could serve as an 
indicator of the type or genre of discourse at hand. In all these cases, DA labels would 
enrich the available input for higher-level processing of the spoken words. Another im- 
portant role of DA information could be feedback to lower-level processing. For exam- 
ple, a speech recognizer could be constrained by expectations of likely DAs in a given 
context, constraining the potential recognition hypotheses so as to improve accuracy. 
340 
Stolcke et al Dialogue Act Modeling 
Table 2 
The 42 dialogue act labels. DA frequencies are given as percentages of the total 
number of utterances in the overall corpus. 
Tag Example % 
STATEMENT 
BACKCHANNEL/ACKNOWLEDGE 
OPINION 
ABANDONED/UNINTERPRETABLE 
AGREEMENT/ACCEPT 
APPRECIATION 
YEs-No-QUESTION 
NON-VERBAL 
YES ANSWERS 
CONVENTIONAL-CLOSING 
WH-QUESTION 
NO ANSWERS 
RESPONSE ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
HEDGE 
DECLARATIVE YES-No-QuESTION 
OTHER 
BACKCHANNEL-QUESTION 
QUOTATION 
SUMMARIZE/REFORMULATE 
AFFIRMATIVE NON-YES ANSWERS 
ACTION-DIRECTIVE 
COLLABORATIVE COMPLETION 
REPEAT-PHRASE 
OPEN-QUESTION 
RHETORICAL-QUESTIONS 
HOLD BEFORE ANSWER/AGREEMENT 
REJECT 
NEGATIVE NON-NO ANSWERS 
SIGNAL-NON-UNDERSTANDING 
OTHER ANSWERS 
CONVENTIONAL-OPENING 
OR-CLAUSE 
DISPREFERRED ANSWERS 
3RD-PARTY-TALK 
OFFERS, OPTIONS ~ COMMITS 
SELF-TALK 
D OWNPLAYER 
MAYBE/AcCEPT-PART 
TAG-QUESTION 
DECLARATIVE WH-QUESTION 
APOLOGY 
THANKING 
Me, I'm in the legal department. 36% 
Uh-huh. 19% 
I think it's great 13% 
So, -/ 6% 
That's exactly it. 5% 
I can imagine. 2% 
Do you have to have any special training? 2% 
<Laughter>, < Throat_clearing> 2% 
Yes. 1% 
Well, it's been nice talking to you. 1% 
What did you wear to work today? 1% 
No. 1% 
Oh, okay. 1% 
I don't know if I'm making any sense or not. 1% 
So you can afford to get a house? 1% 
Well give me a break, you know. 1% 
Is that right? 1% 
You can't be pregnant and have cats .5% 
Oh, you mean you switched schools for the kids. .5% 
It is. .4% 
Why don't you go first .4% 
Who aren't contributing. .4% 
Oh, fajitas .3% 
How about you ? .3% 
Who would steal a newspaper? .2% 
I'm drawing a blank. .3% 
Well, no .2% 
Uh, not a whole lot. .1% 
Excuse me? .1% 
I don't know .1% 
How are you? .1% 
or is it more of a company? .1% 
Well, not so much that. .1% 
My goodness, Diane, get down from there. .1% 
I'I1 have to check that out .1% 
What's the word I'm looking for .1% 
That's all right. .1% 
Something like that <.1% 
Right? <.1% 
You are what kind of buff? <.1% 
I'm sorry. <.1% 
Hey thanks a lot <.1% 
The goal of this article is twofold: On the one hand, we aim to present a com- 
prehensive f ramework for model ing and automatic lassification of DAs, founded on 
wel l -known statistical methods. In doing so, we will pull together previous approaches 
as well as new ideas. For example, our model draws on the use of DA n-grams and the 
hidden Markov models of conversation present in earlier work, such as Nagata and 
Morimoto (1993, 1994) and Woszczyna and Waibel (1994) (see Section 7). However,  
our f ramework generalizes earlier models, giving us a clean probabilistic approach for 
performing DA classification from unreliable words and nonlexical evidence. For the 
341 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
speech recognition task, our framework provides a mathematically principled way to 
condition the speech recognizer on conversation context through dialogue structure, as 
well as on nonlexical information correlated with DA identity. We will present meth- 
ods in a domain-independent framework that for the most part treats DA labels as an 
arbitrary formal tag set. Throughout the presentation, we will highlight he simplifi- 
cations and assumptions made to achieve tractable models, and point out how they 
might fall short of reality. 
Second, we present results obtained with this approach on a large, widely available 
corpus of spontaneous conversational speech. These results, besides validating the 
methods described, are of interest for several reasons. For example, unlike in most 
previous work on DA labeling, the corpus is not task-oriented in nature, and the 
amount of data used (198,000 utterances) exceeds that in previous tudies by at least 
an order of magnitude (see Table 14). 
To keep the presentation i teresting and concrete, we will alternate between the 
description of general methods and empirical results. Section 2 describes the task 
and our data in detail. Section 3 presents the probabilistic modeling framework; a
central component of this framework, the discourse grammar, is further discussed in 
Section 4. In Section 5 we describe xperiments for DA classification. Section 6 shows 
how DA models can be used to benefit speech recognition. Prior and related work is 
summarized in Section 7. Further issues and open problems are addressed in Section 8, 
followed by concluding remarks in Section 9. 
2. The Dialogue Act Labeling Task 
The domain we chose to model is the Switchboard corpus of human-human con- 
versational telephone speech (Godfrey, Holliman, and McDaniel 1992) distributed by 
the Linguistic Data Consortium. Each conversation i volved two randomly selected 
strangers who had been charged with talking informally about one of several, self- 
selected general-interest topics. To train our statistical models on this corpus, we com- 
bined an extensive ffort in human hand-coding of DAs for each utterance, with a 
variety of automatic and semiautomatic tools. Our data consisted of a substantial 
portion of the Switchboard waveforms and corresponding transcripts, totaling 1,155 
conversations. 
2.1 Utterance Segmentation 
Before hand-labeling each utterance in the corpus with a DA, we needed to choose an 
utterance segmentation, as the raw Switchboard ata is not segmented in a linguis- 
tically consistent way. To expedite the DA labeling task and remain consistent with 
other Switchboard-based research efforts, we made use of a version of the corpus that 
had been hand-segmented into sentence-level units prior to our own work and in- 
dependently of our DA labeling system (Meteer et al 1995). We refer to the units of 
this segmentation as utterances. The relation between utterances and speaker turns 
is not one-to-one: a single turn can contain multiple utterances, and utterances can 
span more than one turn (e.g., in the case of backchanneling by the other speaker in 
midutterance). Each utterance unit was identified with one DA, and was annotated 
with a single DA label. The DA labeling system had special provisions for rare cases 
where utterances seemed to combine aspects of several DA types. 
Automatic segmentation f spontaneous speech is an open research problem in its 
own right (Mast et al 1996; Stolcke and Shriberg 1996). A rough idea of the difficulty 
of the segmentation problem on this corpus and using the same definition of utterance 
units can be derived from a recent study (Shriberg et al 2000). In an automatic labeling 
342 
Stolcke t al. Dialogue Act Modeling 
of word boundaries as either utterance or nonboundaries u ing a combination oflexical 
and prosodic ues, we obtained 96% accuracy based on correct word transcripts, and 
78% accuracy with automatically recognized words. The fact that the segmentation 
and labeling tasks are interdependent (Warnke et al 1997; Finke et al 1998) further 
complicates the problem. 
Based on these considerations, we decided not to confound the DA classification 
task with the additional problems introduced by automatic segmentation a d assumed 
the utterance-level s gmentations as given. An important consequence of this decision 
is that we can expect utterance l ngth and acoustic properties at utterance boundaries 
to be accurate, both of which turn out to be important features of DAs (Shriberg et al 
1998; see also Section 5.2.1). 
2.2 Tag Set 
We chose to follow a recent standard for shallow discourse structure annotation, the 
Dialog Act Markup in Several Layers (DAMSL) tag set, which was designed by the 
natural language processing community under the auspices of the Discourse Resource 
Initiative (Core and Allen 1997). We began with the DAMSL markup system, but modi- 
fied it in several ways to make it more relevant to our corpus and task. DAMSL aims to 
provide a domain-independent framework for dialogue annotation, as reflected by the 
fact that our tag set can be mapped back to DAMSL categories (Jurafsky, Shriberg, and 
Biasca 1997). However, our labeling effort also showed that content- and task-related 
distinctions will always play an important role in effective DA labeling. 
The Switchboard omain itself is essentially "task-free," thus giving few external 
constraints on the definition of DA categories. Our primary purpose in adapting the 
tag set was to enable computational DA modeling for conversational speech, with 
possible improvements to conversational speech recognition. Because of the lack of a 
specific task, we decided to label categories that seemed inherently interesting linguis- 
tically and that could be identified reliably. Also, the focus on conversational speech 
recognition led to a certain bias toward categories that were lexically or syntactically 
distinct (recognition accuracy is traditionally measured including all lexical elements 
in an utterance). 
While the modeling techniques described in this paper are formally independent of 
the corpus and the choice of tag set, their success on any particular task will of course 
crucially depend on these factors. For different asks, not all the techniques used in 
this study might prove useful and others could be of greater importance. However, 
we believe that this study represents a fairly comprehensive application of technology 
in this area and can serve as a point of departure and reference for other work. 
The resulting SWBD-DAMSL tag set was multidimensional; pproximately 50ba- 
sic tags (e.g., QUESTION, STATEMENT) could each be combined with diacritics indicat- 
ing orthogonal information, for example, about whether or not the dialogue function 
of the utterance was related to Task-Management and Communication-Management. 
Approximately 220 of the many possible unique combinations ofthese codes were used 
by the coders (Jurafsky, Shriberg, and Biasca 1997). To obtain a system with somewhat 
higher interlabeler agreement, as well as enough data per class for statistical mod- 
eling purposes, a less fine-grained tag set was devised. This tag set distinguishes 42 
mutually exclusive utterance types and was used for the experiments reported here. 
Table 2 shows the 42 categories with examples and relative frequencies. 1 While some 
1 For the study focusing on prosodic modeling ofDAs reported elsewhere (Shriberg et al 1998), the tag 
set was further reduced to six categories. 
343 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
of the original infrequent classes were collapsed, the resulting DA type distribution 
is still highly skewed. This occurs largely because there was no basis for subdividing 
the dominant DA categories according to task-independent a d reliable criteria. 
The tag set incorporates both traditional sociolinguistic and discourse-theoretic 
notions, such as rhetorical relations and adjacency pairs, as well as some more form- 
based labels. Furthermore, the tag set is structured so as to allow labelers to annotate 
a Switchboard conversation from transcripts alone (i.e., without listening) in about 
30 minutes. Without hese constraints he DA labels might have included some finer 
distinctions, but we felt that this drawback was balanced by the ability to cover a large 
amount of data. 2
Labeling was carried out in a three-month period in 1997 by eight linguistics 
graduate students at CU Boulder. Interlabeler agreement for the 42-1abel tag set used 
here was 84%, resulting in a Kappa statistic of 0.80. The Kappa statistic measures 
agreement ormalized for chance (Siegel and Castellan, Jr. 1988). As argued in Carletta 
(1996), Kappa values of 0.8 or higher are desirable for detecting associations between 
several coded variables; we were thus satisfied with the level of agreement achieved. 
(Note that, even though only a single variable, DA type, was coded for the present 
study, our goal is, among other things, to model associations between several instances 
of that variable, e.g., between adjacent DAs.) 
A total of 1,155 Switchboard conversations were labeled, comprising 205,000 ut- 
terances and 1.4 million words. The data was partitioned into a training set of 1,115 
conversations (1.4M words, 198K utterances), used for estimating the various compo- 
nents of our model, and a test set of 19 conversations (29K words, 4K utterances). 
Remaining conversations were set aside for future use (e.g., as a test set uncompro- 
mised of tuning effects). 
2.3 Major Dialogue Act Types 
The more frequent DA types are briefly characterized below. As discussed above, the 
focus of this paper is not on the nature of DAs, but on the computational framework 
for their recognition; full details of the DA tag set and numerous motivating examples 
can be found in a separate report (Jurafsky, Shriberg, and Biasca 1997). 
Statements and Opinions. The most common types of utterances were STATEMENTS 
and OPINIONS. This split distinguishes "descriptive, narrative, or personal" statements 
(STATEMENT) from "other-directed opinion statements" (OPINION). The distinction was 
designed to capture the different kinds of responses we saw to opinions (which are 
often countered or disagreed with via further opinions) and to statements (which more 
often elicit continuers or backchannels): 
Dialogue Act 
STATEMENT 
STATEMENT 
STATEMENT 
OPINION 
OPINION 
Example Utterance 
Well, we have a cat, um, 
He's probably, oh, a good two years old, 
big, old, fat and sassy tabby. 
He's about five months old 
Well, rabbits are darling. 
I think it would be kind of stressful. 
2 The effect of lacking acoustic information on labeling accuracy was assessed by relabeling a subset of 
the data with listening, and was found to be fairly small (Shriberg et al 1998). A conservative estimate 
based on the relabeling study is that, for most DA types, at most 2% of the labels might have changed 
based on listening. The only DA types with higher uncertainty were BACKCHANNELS and 
AGREEMENTS, which are easily confused with each other without acoustic ues; here the rate of change 
was no more than 10%. 
344 
Stolcke t al. Dialogue Act Modeling 
OPINIONS often include such hedges as I think, I believe, it seems, and I mean. We 
combined the STATEMENT and OPINION classes for other studies on dimensions in 
which they did not differ (Shriberg et al 1998). 
Questions. Questions were of several types. The YES-No-QUESTION label includes only 
utterances having both the pragmatic force of a yes-no-question and the syntactic mark- 
ings of a yes-no-question (i.e., subject-inversion r sentence-final t gs). DECLARATIVE- 
QUESTIONS are utterances that function pragmatically as questions but do not have 
"question form." By this we mean that declarative questions normally have no wh- 
word as the argument of the verb (except in "echo-question" format), and have "declar- 
ative" word order in which the subject precedes the verb. See Weber (1993) for a survey 
of declarative questions and their various realizations. 
Dialogue Act Example Utterance 
YEs-No-QUESTION 
YEs-No-QUESTION 
YEs-No-QuESTION 
DECLARATIVE- QUESTION 
WH-QUESTION 
Do you have to have any special training? 
But that doesn't eliminate it, does it? 
Uh, I guess a year ago you're probably 
watching C N N a lot, right? 
So you're taking a government course? 
Well, how old are you? 
Backchannels. A backchannel is a short utterance that plays discourse-structuring roles, 
e.g., indicating that the speaker should go on talking. These are usually referred to in 
the conversation analysis literature as "continuers" and have been studied extensively 
(Jefferson 1984; Schegloff 1982; Yngve 1970). We expect recognition of backchannels to
be useful because of their discourse-structuring role (knowing that the hearer expects 
the speaker to go on talking tells us something about the course of the narrative) 
and because they seem to occur at certain kinds of syntactic boundaries; detecting a 
backchannel may thus help in predicting utterance boundaries and surrounding lexical 
material. 
For an intuition about what backchannels look like, Table 3 shows the most com- 
mon realizations of the approximately 300 types (35,827 tokens) of backchannel in 
our Switchboard subset. The following table shows examples of backchannels in the 
context of a Switchboard conversation: 
Speaker Dialogue Act Utterance 
B STATEMENT 
A BACKCHANNEL 
B STATEMENT 
B STATEMENT 
A BACKCHANNEL 
B STATEMENT 
B STATEMENT 
A APPRECIATION 
but, uh, we're to the point now where our 
financial income is enough that we can consider 
putting some away - 
Uh-huh. / 
- for college, / 
so we are going to be starting a regular payroll 
deduction - 
Urn. / 
- -  in the fall / 
and then the money that I will be making this 
summer we'll be putting away for the college 
fund. 
Urn. Sounds good. 
Turn Exits and Abandoned Utterances. Abandoned utterances are those that the speaker 
breaks off without finishing, and are followed by a restart. Turn exits resemble aban- 
doned utterances in that they are often syntactically broken off, but they are used 
345 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
Table 3 
Most common realizations of backchannels in Switchboard. 
Frequency Form Frequency Form Frequency Form 
38% uh-huh 2% yes 1% sure 
34% yeah 2% okay 1.% um 
9% right 2% oh yeah 1% huh-uh 
3% oh 1% huh 1% uh 
mainly as a way of passing speakership to the other speaker. Turn exits tend to be 
single words, often so or or. 
Speaker Dialogue Act Utterance 
A STATEMENT we're from, uh, I 'm from Ohio / 
A STATEMENT and my wife's from Florida / 
A TURN-ExIT SO, -/  
B BACKCHANNEL Uh-huh./ 
A HEDGE 
A ABANDONED 
A STATEMENT 
so, I don't know, / 
it's Klipsmack>, - / 
I 'm glad it's not the kind of problem I have to 
come up with an answer to because it's not - 
Answers and Agreements. YES-ANSWERS include yes, yeah, yep, uh-huh, and other varia- 
tions on yes, when they are acting as an answer to a YES-NO-QUESTION or DECLARA- 
TWE-0UESTION. Similarly, we also coded NO-ANSWERS. Detecting ANSWERS can help 
tell us that the previous utterance was a YES-NO-QUESTION. Answers are also seman- 
tically significant since they are likely to contain new information. 
AGREEMENT/ACCEPT, REJECT, and MAYBE/ACCEPT-PART all mark the degree 
to which a speaker accepts ome previous proposal, plan, opinion, or statement. The 
most common of these are the AGREEMENT/AccEPTS. These are very often yes or yeah, 
so they look a lot like ANSWERS. But where ANSWERS follow questions, AGREEMENTS 
often follow opinions or proposals, so distinguishing these can be important for the 
discourse. 
3. Hidden Markov Modeling of Dialogue 
We will now describe the mathematical  nd computational  f ramework used in our 
study. Our goal is to perform DA classification and other tasks using a probabilis- 
tic formulation, giving us a principled approach for combining multiple knowledge 
sources (using the laws of probability), as well as the ability to derive model  parame- 
ters automatical ly from a corpus, using statistical inference techniques. 
Given all available evidence E about a conversation, the goal is to find the DA 
sequence U that has the highest posterior probabil ity P(UIE ) given that evidence. 
Apply ing Bayes' rule we get 
U* = argmaxP(UIE ) 
U 
P(U)P(ElU) = argmax u P(E) 
= argmaxP(U)P(ElU) (1) 
U 
Here P(U) represents the prior probabil ity of a DA sequence, and P(EIU ) is the like- 
346 
Stolcke t al. Dialogue Act Modeling 
Table 4 
Summary of random variables used in dialogue modeling. 
(Speaker labels are introduced in Section 4.) 
Symbol Meaning 
U 
E 
F 
A 
W 
T 
sequence of DA labels 
evidence (complete speech signal) 
prosodic evidence 
acoustic evidence (spectral features used in ASR) 
sequence of words 
speakers labels 
lihood of U given the evidence. The likelihood is usually much more straightforward 
to model than the posterior itself. This has to do with the fact that our models are 
generative or causal in nature, i.e., they describe how the evidence is produced by the 
underlying DA sequence U. 
Estimating P (U) requires building a probabilistic discourse grammar, i.e., a statisti- 
cal model of DA sequences. This can be done using familiar techniques from language 
modeling for speech recognition, although the sequenced objects in this case are DA 
labels rather than words; discourse grammars will be discussed in detail in Section 4. 
3.1 Dialogue Act Likelihoods 
The computation of likelihoods P(EIU ) depends on the types of evidence used. In our 
experiments we used the following sources of evidence, ither alone or in combination: 
Transcribed words: The likelihoods used in Equation 1 are P(WIU ), where W 
refers to the true (hand-transcribed) words spoken in a conversation. 
Recognized words: The evidence consists of recognizer acoustics A, and we seek 
to compute P(A I U). As described later, this involves considering multiple 
alternative recognized word sequences. 
Prosodic features- Evidence is given by the acoustic features F capturing various 
aspects of pitch, duration, energy, etc., of the speech signal; the associated 
likelihoods are P(F I U). 
For ease of reference, all random variables used here are summarized in Table 4. 
The same variables are used with subscripts to refer to individual utterances. For 
example, Wi is the word transcription of the ith utterance within a conversation ( ot 
the ith word). 
To make both the modeling and the search for the best DA sequence feasible, we 
further equire that our likelihood models are decomposable byutterance. This means 
that the likelihood given a complete conversation can be factored into likelihoods 
given the individual utterances. We use Ui for the ith DA label in the sequence U, 
i.e., U = (U1 . . . . .  Ui,..., Un), where n is the number of utterances in a conversation. 
In addition, we use Ei for that portion of the evidence that corresponds to the ith 
utterance, .g., the words or the prosody of the ith utterance. Decomposability of the 
likelihood means that 
P(EIU) = P(E11 U1).... .  P(En \[Un) (2) 
Applied separately to the three types of evidence Ai, Wi, and Fi mentioned above, 
it is clear that this assumption is not strictly true. For example, speakers tend to reuse 
347 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
E1 Ei E.  
T T T 
<start> , U1 , . . .  ~ Ui ) . . . - - - *  Un 
Figure 1 
The discourse HMM as Bayes network. 
<end> 
words found earlier in the conversation (Fowler and Housum 1987) and an answer 
might actually be relevant o the question before it, violating the independence of the 
P(WilUi). Similarly, speakers adjust their pitch or volume over time, e.g., to the con- 
versation partner or because of the structure of the discourse (Menn and Boyce 1982), 
violating the independence of the P(FilUi). As in other areas of statistical modeling, 
we count on the fact that these violations are small compared to the properties actually 
modeled, namely, the dependence of Ei on Ui. 
3.2 Markov  Mode l ing  
Returning to the prior distribution of DA sequences P(U), it is convenient to make 
certain independence assumptions here, too. In particular, we assume that the prior 
distribution of U is Markovian, i.e., that each Ui depends only on a fixed number k of 
preceding DA labels: 
P(U i lU l ,  . . . ,  U i -1 )  ~- P (U i lU i -k  . . . . .  Ui -1 )  (3) 
(k is the order of the Markov process describing U). The n-gram-based discourse gram- 
mars we used have this property. As described later, k = 1 is a very good choice, i.e., 
conditioning on the DA types more than one removed from the current one does not 
improve the quality of the model by much, at least with the amount of data available 
in our experiments. 
The importance of the Markov assumption for the discourse grammar is that 
we can now view the whole system of discourse grammar and local utterance-based 
likelihoods as a kth-order hidden Markov model (HMM) (Rabiner and Juang 1986). 
The HMM states correspond to DAs, observations correspond to utterances, transition 
probabilities are given by the discourse grammar (see Section 4), and observation 
probabilities are given by the local likelihoods P(Eil Ui). 
We can represent the dependency structure (as well as the implied conditional 
independences) as a special case of Bayesian belief network (Pearl 1988). Figure 1 
shows the variables in the resulting HMM with directed edges representing conditional 
dependence. To keep things simple, a first-order HMM (bigram discourse grammar) 
is assumed. 
3.3 D ia logue  Act  Decod ing  
The HMM representation allows us to use efficient dynamic programming algorithms 
to compute relevant aspects of the model, such as 
? the most probable DA sequence (the Viterbi algorithm) 
? the posterior probability of various DAs for a given utterance, after 
considering all the evidence (the forward-backward algorithm) 
The Viterbi algorithm for HMMs (Viterbi 1967) finds the globally most probable 
state sequence. When applied to a discourse model with locally decomposable ike- 
lihoods and Markovian discourse grammar, it will therefore find precisely the DA 
348 
Stolcke et al Dialogue Act Modeling 
sequence with the highest posterior probability: 
U* = argmaxP(UIE ) (4) 
u 
The combination of likelihood and prior modeling, HMMs, and Viterbi decoding is 
fundamentally the same as the standard probabilistic approaches to speech recognition 
(Bahl, Jelinek, and Mercer 1983) and tagging (Church 1988). It maximizes the prob- 
ability of getting the entire DA sequence correct, but it does not necessarily find the 
DA sequence that has the most DA labels correct (Dermatas and Kokkinakis 1995). To 
minimize the total number of utterance labeling errors, we need to maximize the prob- 
ability of getting each DA label correct individually, i.e., we need to maximize P(UilE) 
for each i = 1 . . . . .  n. We can compute the per-utterance posterior DA probabilities by 
summing: 
P(u\[E) = E P(UIE) (5) 
U: Ui=u 
where the summation is over all sequences U whose ith element matches the label in 
question. The summation is efficiently carried out by the forward-backward algorithm 
for HMMs (Baum et al 1970). 3
For zeroth-order (unigram) discourse grammars, Viterbi decoding and forward- 
backward decoding necessarily ield the same results. However, for higher-order 
discourse grammars we found that forward-backward decoding consistently gives 
slightly (up to 1% absolute) better accuracies, as expected. Therefore, we used this 
method throughout. 
The formulation presented here, as well as all our experiments, uses the entire 
conversation as evidence for DA classification. Obviously, this is possible only during 
off-line processing, when the full conversation is available. Our paradigm thus follows 
historical practice in the Switchboard omain, where the goal is typically the off-line 
processing (e.g., automatic transcription, speaker identification, indexing, archival) of 
entire previously recorded conversations. However, the HMM formulation used here 
also supports computing posterior DA probabilities based on partial evidence, e.g., 
using only the utterances preceding the current one, as would be required for on-line 
processing. 
4. Discourse Grammars 
The statistical discourse grammar models the prior probabilities P(U) of DA sequences. 
In the case of conversations for which the identities of the speakers are known (as 
in Switchboard), the discourse grammar should also model turn-taking behavior. A 
straightforward approach is to model sequences of pairs (Ui, Ti) where Ui is the DA 
label and Ti represents he speaker. We are not trying to model speaker idiosyncrasies, 
so conversants are arbitrarily identified as A or B, and the model is made symmetric 
with respect o the choice of sides (e.g., by replicating the training sequences with 
sides switched). Our discourse grammars thus had a vocabulary of 42 x 2 = 84 labels, 
plus tags for the beginning and end of conversations. For example, the second DA tag 
in Table 1 would be predicted by a trigram discourse grammar using the fact that the 
same speaker previously uttered a YES-NO-QUESTION, which in turn was preceded by 
the start-of-conversation. 
3 We note in passing that he Viterbi and Baum algorithms have quivalent formulations in the Bayes 
network framework (Pearl 1988). The HMM terminology was chosen here mainly for historical reasons. 
349 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
Table 5 
Perplexities of DAs with and without urn 
information. 
Discourse Grammar P(U) P(U, T) P(UIT )
None 42 84 42 
Unigram 11.0 18.5 9.0 
Bigram 7.9 10.4 5.1 
Trigram 7.5 9.8 4.8 
4.1 N-gram Discourse Mode ls  
A computationally convenient type of discourse grammar is an n-gram model based on 
DA tags, as it allows efficient decoding in the HMM framework. We trained standard 
backoff n-gram models (Katz 1987), using the frequency smoothing approach of Witten 
and Bell (1991). Models of various orders were compared by their perplexities, i.e., 
the average number of choices the model predicts for each tag, conditioned on the 
preceding tags. 
Table 5 shows perplexities for three types of models: P(U), the DAs alone; P(U, T), 
the combined DA/speaker ID sequence; and P(UIT ), the DAs conditioned on known 
speaker IDs (appropriate for the Switchboard task). As expected, we see an improve- 
ment (decreasing perplexities) for increasing n-gram order. However, the incremental 
gain of a trigram is small, and higher-order models did not prove useful. (This ob- 
servation, initially based on perplexity, is confirmed by the DA tagging experiments 
reported in Section 5.) Comparing P(U) and P(U\[T), we see that speaker identity adds 
substantial information, especially for higher-order models. 
The relatively small improvements from higher-order models could be a result of 
lack of training data, or of an inherent independence of DAs from DAs further re- 
moved. The near-optimality of the bigram discourse grammar is plausible given con- 
versation analysis accounts of discourse structure in terms of adjacency pairs (Schegloff 
1968; Sacks, Schegloff, and Jefferson 1974). Inspection of bigram probabilities estimated 
from our data revealed that conventional djacency pairs receive high probabilities, as 
expected. For example, 30% of YES-NO-QUESTIONS are followed by YES-ANSWERS, 
14% by NO-ANSWERS (confirming that the latter are dispreferred). COMMANDS are fol- 
lowed by AGREEMENTS in 23% of the cases, and STATEMENTS elicit BACKCHANNELS 
in 26% of all cases. 
4.2 Other Discourse Mode ls  
We also investigated non-n-gram discourse models, based on various language model- 
ing techniques known from speech recognition. One motivation for alternative models 
is that n-grams enforce a one-dimensional representation  DA sequences, whereas 
we saw above that the event space is really multidimensional (DA label and speaker 
labels). Another motivation is that n-grams fail to model long-distance dependencies, 
such as the fact that speakers may tend to repeat certain DAs or patterns throughout 
the conversation. 
The first alternative approach was a standard cache model (Kuhn and de Mori 
1990), which boosts the probabilities of previously observed unigrams and bigrams, on 
the theory that tokens tend to repeat hemselves over longer distances. However, this 
does not seem to be true for DA sequences in our corpus, as the cache model showed 
no improvement over the standard N-gram. This result is somewhat surprising since 
unigram dialogue grammars are able to detect speaker gender with 63% accuracy (over 
350 
Stolcke t al. Dialogue Act Modeling 
a 50% baseline) on Switchboard (Ries 1999b), indicating that there are global variables 
in the DA distribution that could potentially be exploited by a cache dialogue grammar. 
Clearly, dialogue grammar adaptation needs further esearch. 
Second, we built a discourse grammar that incorporated constraints on DA se- 
quences in a nonhierarchical way, using maximum entropy (ME) estimation (Berger, 
Della Pietra, and Della Pietra 1996). The choice of features was informed by similar 
ones commonly used in statistical language models, as well our general intuitions 
about potentially information-bearing elements in the discourse context. Thus, the 
model was designed so that the current DA label was constrained by features uch as 
unigram statistics, the previous DA and the DA once removed, DAs occurring within a 
window in the past, and whether the previous utterance was by the same speaker. We 
found, however, that an ME model using n-gram constraints performed only slightly 
better than a corresponding backoff n-gram. 
Additional constraints such as DA triggers, distance-1 bigrams, separate ncoding 
of speaker change and bigrams to the last DA on the same/other channel did not 
improve relative to the trigram model. The ME model thus confirms the adequacy of 
the backoff n-gram approach, and leads us to conclude that DA sequences, at least 
in the Switchboard omain, are mostly characterized by local interactions, and thus 
modeled well by low-order n-gram statistics for this task. For more structured tasks this 
situation might be different. However, we have found no further exploitable structure. 
5. Dialogue Act Classification 
We now describe in more detail how the knowledge sources of words and prosody 
are modeled, and what automatic DA labeling results were obtained using each of the 
knowledge sources in turn. Finally, we present results for a combination of all knowl- 
edge sources. DA labeling accuracy results hould be compared to a baseline (chance) 
accuracy of 35%, the relative frequency of the most frequent DA type (STATEMENT) in 
our test set. 4 
5.1 Dialogue Act Classification Using Words 
DA classification using words is based on the observation that different DAs use 
distinctive word strings. It is known that certain cue words and phrases (Hirschberg 
and Litman 1993) can serve as explicit indicators of discourse structure. Similarly, 
we find distinctive correlations between certain phrases and DA types. For example, 
92.4% of the uh-huh's occur in BACKCHANNELS, and 88.4% of the trigrams "<start> 
do you" occur in YES-NO-QUESTIONS. To leverage this information source, without 
hand-coding knowledge about which words are indicative of which DAs, we will use 
statistical language models that model the full word sequences associated with each 
DA type. 
5.1.1 Classification from True Words. Assuming that the true (hand-transcribed) words 
of utterances are given as evidence, we can compute word-based likelihoods P(WIU ) 
in a straightforward way, by building a statistical language model for each of the 42 
DAs. All DAs of a particular type found in the training corpus were pooled, and 
a DA-specific trigram model was estimated using standard techniques (Katz backoff 
\[Katz 1987\] with Witten-Bell discounting \[Witten and Bell 1991\]). 
4 The frequency of STATEMENTS across all labeled ata was slightly different, cf. Table 2. 
351 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
A1 Ai An 
T T 
wl wi w.  
T T T 
<start> ~ U1 ~ . . . .  ~ Ui ~ . . . .  Un ~ <end> 
Figure 2 
Modified Bayes network including word hypotheses and recognizer acoustics. 
5.1.2 Classification from Recognized Words. For fully automatic DA classification, 
the above approach is only a partial solution, since we are not yet able to recognize 
words in spontaneous speech with perfect accuracy. A standard approach is to use 
the 1-best hypothesis from the speech recognizer in place of the true word transcripts. 
While conceptually simple and convenient, his method will not make optimal use of 
all the information in the recognizer, which in fact maintains multiple hypotheses as 
well as their relative plausibilities. 
A more thorough use of recognized speech can be derived as follows. The classifi- 
cation framework is modified such that the recognizer's acoustic information (spectral 
features) A appear as the evidence. We compute P(A\[U) by decomposing it into an 
acoustic likelihood P(A\]W) and a word-based likelihood P(W\[ U), and summing over 
all word sequences: 
P(AlU) = ~-~ P(AIW, U)P(WIU) 
w 
= ~P(A IW)P(W\ [U  ) 
w 
(6) 
The second line is justified under the assumption that the recognizer acoustics (typ- 
ically, cepstral coefficients) are invariant o DA type once the words are fixed. Note 
that this is another approximation i our modeling. For example, different DAs with 
common words may be realized by different word pronunciations. Figure 2 shows the 
Bayes network resulting from modeling recognizer acoustics through word hypothe- 
ses under this independence assumption; note the added Wi variables (that have to 
be summed over) in comparison to Figure 1. 
The acoustic likelihoods P(A\[W) correspond to the acoustic scores the recognizer 
outputs for every hypothesized word sequence W. The summation over all W must 
be approximated; in our experiments we summed over the (up to) 2,500 best hypothe- 
ses generated by the recognizer for each utterance. Care must be taken to scale the 
recognizer acoustic scores properly, i.e., to exponentiate he recognizer acoustic scores 
by 1/~, where A is the language model weight of the recognizer, s 
5 In a standard recognizer the total og score of a hypothesis Wi is computed as 
logP(AdWi ) + )~ logP(Wi) - I~\]Wi\], 
where \[Wi\] is the number of words in the hypothesis, and both A and/~ are parameters optimized to 
minimize the word error rate. The word insertion penalty/~ represents a correction to the language 
model that allows balancing insertion and deletion errors. The language model weight ,~ compensates 
for acoustic score variances that are effectively too large due to severe independence assumptions in 
the recognizer acoustic model. According to this rationale, it is more appropriate o divide all score 
components by ),. Thus, in all our experiments, we computed a summand in Equation 6whose 
352 
Stolcke t al. Dialogue Act Modeling 
Table 6 
DA classification accuracies (in %) from transcribed and recognized 
words (chance = 35%). 
Discourse Grammar True Recognized Relative Error Increase 
None 54.3 42.8 25.2% 
Unigram 68.2 61.8 20.1% 
Bigram 70.6 64.3 21.4% 
Trigram 71.0 64.8 21.4% 
5.1.3 Results. Table 6 shows DA classification accuracies obtained by combining the 
word- and recognizer-based likelihoods with the n-gram discourse grammars de- 
scribed earlier. The best accuracy obtained from transcribed words, 71%, is encour- 
aging given a comparable human performance of84% (the interlabeler agreement, see 
Section 2.2). We observe about a 21% relative increase in classification error when us- 
ing recognizer words; this is remarkably small considering that the speech recognizer 
used had a word error rate of 41% on the test set. 
We also compared the n-best DA classification approach to the more straightfor- 
ward 1-best approach. In this experiment, only the single best recognizer hypothesis 
is used, effectively treating it as the true word string. The 1-best method increased 
classification error by about 7% relative to the n-best algorithm (61.5% accuracy with 
a bigram discourse grammar). 
5.2 Dialogue Act Classification Using Prosody 
We also investigated prosodic information, i.e., information i dependent of the words 
as well as the standard recognizer acoustics. Prosody is important for DA recogni- 
tion for two reasons. First, as we saw earlier, word-based classification suffers from 
recognition errors. Second, some utterances are inherently ambiguous based on words 
alone. For example, some YES-NO-QUESTiONS have word sequences identical to those 
of STATEMENTS, but can often be distinguished by their final F0 rise. 
A detailed study aimed at automatic prosodic lassification of DAs in the Switch- 
board domain is available in a companion paper (Shriberg et al 1998). Here we investi- 
gate the interaction of prosodic models with the dialogue grammar and the word-based 
DA models discussed above. We also touch briefly on alternative machine learning 
models for prosodic features. 
5.2.1 Prosodic Features. Prosodic DA classification was based on a large set of fea- 
tures computed automatically from the waveform, without reference to word or phone 
information. The features can be broadly grouped as referring to duration (e.g., utter- 
ance duration, with and without pauses), pauses (e.g., total and mean of nonspeech 
regions exceeding 100 ms), pitch (e.g., mean and range of F0 over utterance, slope of 
F0 regression line), energy (e.g., mean and range of RMS energy, same for signal-to- 
logarithm was 
1 logP(Ai\]Wi) + logP(WilUi) - ~lWil. -d 
We found this approach to give better esults than the standard multiplication of logP(W) by ,L Note 
that for selecting the best hypothesis in a recognizer only the relative magnitudes of the score weights 
matter; however, for the summation in Equation 6 the absolute values become important. The 
parameter values for )~ and # were those used by the standard recognizer; they were not specifically 
optimized for the DA classification task. 
353 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
~ 23.403 
~ an utt < 0 .3" /~U >= 0.3"/17 
Figure 3 
Decision tree for the classification of BACKCHANNELS (B) and AGREEMENTS (A). Each node is 
labeled with the majority class for that node, as well as the posterior probabilities of the two 
classes. The following features are queried in the tree: number of frames in continuous (> 1 s) 
speech regions (cont_speech_frames), total utterance duration (ling_dir), utterance duration 
excluding pauses > 100 ms (ling_dur_minus_minlOpause), andmean signal-to-noise ratio 
(snr_mean_utt ). 
noise ratio \[SNR\]), speaking rate (based on the "enrate" measure of Morgan, Fosler, 
and Mirghafori \[1997\]), and gender (of both speaker and listener). In the case of ut- 
terance duration, the measure correlates both with length in words and with overall 
speaking rate. The gender feature that classified speakers as either male or female was 
used to test for potential inadequacies in F0 normalizations. Where appropriate, we 
included both raw features and values normalized by utterance and/or  conversation. 
We also included features that are the output of the pitch accent and boundary tone 
event detector of Taylor (2000) (e.g., the number of pitch accents in the utterance). A 
complete description of prosodic features and an analysis of their usage in our models 
can be found in Shriberg et al (1998). 
5.2.2 Prosodic Decision Trees. For our Prosodic classifiers, we used CART-style deci- 
sion trees (Breiman et al 1984). Decision trees allow the combination of discrete and 
continuous features, and can be inspected to help in understanding the role of different 
features and feature combinations. 
To illustrate one area in which prosody could aid our classification task, we applied 
trees to DA classifications known to be ambiguous from words alone. One frequent 
example in our corpus was the distinction between BACKCHANNELS and AGREEMENTS 
(see Table 2), which share terms such as right and yeah. As shown in Figure 3, a prosodic 
tree trained on this task revealed that agreements have consistently longer durations 
and greater energy (as reflected by the SNR measure) than do backchannels. 
354 
Stolcke t al. Dialogue Act Modeling 
Table 7 
DA classification using prosodic 
decision trees (chance = 35%). 
Discourse Grammar Accuracy (%) 
None 38.9 
Unigram 48.3 
Bigram 49.7 
The HMM framework requires that we compute prosodic likelihoods of the form 
P(FilUi) for each utterance Ui and associated prosodic feature values Fi. We have 
the apparent difficulty that decision trees (as well as other classifiers, such as neural 
networks) give estimates for the posterior probabilities, P(Ui\[Fi). The problem can be 
overcome by applying Bayes' rule locally: 
P(Ui) t rue)  
(7) 
Note that P(Fi) does not depend on Ui and can be treated as a constant for the purpose 
of DA classification. A quantity proportional to the required likelihood can therefore 
be obtained either by dividing the posterior tree probability by the prior P(Ui), 6 or by 
training the tree on a uniform prior distribution of DA types. We chose the second 
approach, downsampling our training data to equate DA proportions. This also coun- 
teracts a common problem with tree classifiers trained on very skewed distributions 
of target classes, i.e., that low-frequency classes are not modeled in sufficient detail 
because the majority class dominates the tree-growing objective hznction. 
5.2.3 Results with Dec is ion Trees. As a preliminary experiment to test the integra- 
tion of prosody with other knowledge sources, we trained a single tree to discriminate 
among the five most frequent DA types (STATEMENT, BACKCHANNEL, OPINION, ABAN- 
DONED, and AGREEMENT, totaling 79% of the data) and an Other category comprising 
all remaining DA types. The decision tree was trained on a downsampled training 
subset containing equal proportions of these six DA classes. The tree achieved a clas- 
sification accuracy of 45.4% on an independent test set with the same uniform six-class 
distribution. The chance accuracy on this set is 16.6%, so the tree clearly extracts useful 
information from the prosodic features. 
We then used the decision tree posteriors as scaled DA likelihoods in the dialogue 
model HMM, combining it with various n-gram dialogue grammars for testing on our 
full standard test set. For the purpose of model integration, the likelihoods of the Other 
class were assigned to all DA types comprised by that class. As shown in Table 7, the 
tree with dialogue grammar performs ignificantly better than chance on the raw DA 
distribution, although not as well as the word-based methods (cf. Table 6). 
5.2.4 Neural  Network  Classifiers. Although we chose to use decision trees as prosodic 
classifiers for their relative ase of inspection, we might have used any suitable proba- 
bilistic classifier, i.e., any model that estimates the posterior probabilities of DAs given 
the prosodic features. We conducted preliminary experiments o assess how neural 
6 Bourlard and Morgan (1993) use this approach tointegrate neural network phonetic models in a 
speech recognizer. 
355 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
Table 8 
Performance ofvarious prosodic neural network classifiers on 
an equal-priors, ix-class DA set (chance = 16.6%). 
Network Architecture Accuracy (%) 
Decision tree 45.4 
No hidden layer, linear output function 44.6 
No hidden layer, softmax output function 46.0 
40-unit hidden layer, softmax output function 46.0 
networks compare to decision trees for the type of data studied here. Neural networks 
are worth investigating since they offer potential advantages over decision trees. They 
can learn decision surfaces that lie at an angle to the axes of the input feature space, 
unlike standard CART trees, which always split continuous features on one dimen- 
sion at a time. The response function of neural networks is continuous (smooth) at 
the decision boundaries, allowing them to avoid hard decisions and the complete 
fragmentation f data associated with decision tree questions. 
Most important, however, related work (Ries 1999a) indicated that similarly struc- 
tured networks are superior classifiers if the input features are words and are therefore 
a plug-in replacement for the language model classifiers described in this paper. Neural 
networks are therefore a good candidate for a jointly optimized classifier of prosodic 
and word-level information since one can show that they are a generalization of the 
integration approach used here. 
We tested various neural network models on the same six-class downsampled 
data used for decision tree training, using a variety of network architectures and out- 
put layer functions. The results are summarized in Table 8, along with the baseline 
result obtained with the decision tree model. Based on these experiments, a softmax 
network (Bridle 1990) without hidden units resulted in only a slight improvement 
over the decision tree. A network with hidden units did not afford any additional 
advantage, ven after we optimized the number of hidden units, indicating that com- 
plex combinations of features (as far as the network could learn them) do not predict 
DAs better than linear combinations of input features. While we believe alternative 
classifier architectures should be investigated further as prosodic models, the results 
so far seem to confirm our choice of decision trees as a model class that gives close to 
optimal performance for this task. 
5.2.5 Intonation Event Likel ihoods. An alternative way to compute prosodically based 
DA likelihoods uses pitch accents and boundary phrases (Taylor et al 1997). The ap- 
proach relies on the intuition that different utterance types are characterized by dif- 
ferent intonational "tunes" (Kowtko 1996), and has been successfully applied to the 
classification ofmove types in the DCIEM Map Task corpus (Wright and Taylor 1997). 
The system detects equences ofdistinctive pitch patterns by training one continuous- 
density HMM for each DA type. Unfortunately, the event classification accuracy on 
the Switchboard corpus was considerably poorer than in the Map Task domain, and 
DA recognition results when coupled with a discourse grammar were substantially 
worse than with decision trees. The approach could prove valuable in the future, 
however, if the intonation event detector can be made more robust to corpora like 
OURS. 
356 
Stolcke et al Dialogue Act Modeling 
A1 Ai An 
T 1 1 
Wl Wi W,, 
T T t 
<start> - , 0"1 , . . .---* U/ , ... ~ Un , <end> 
1 1 ,t 
F1 Fi G 
Figure 4 
Bayes network for discourse HMM incorporating both word recognition and prosodic features. 
5.3 Using Multiple Knowledge Sources 
As mentioned earlier, we expect improved performance from combining word and 
prosodic information. Combining these knowledge sources requires estimating a com- 
bined likelihood P(Ai, Fi\[Ui) for each utterance. The simplest approach is to assume 
that the two types of acoustic observations (recognizer acoustics and prosodic features) 
are approximately conditionally independent once Ui is given: 
P(ai, w,,Fdui) = P(A~, Wdui)e(Fifai, W~, Ui) 
~, P(ai, Wi\[Ui)P(FilUi) (8) 
Since the recognizer acoustics are modeled by way of their dependence on words, it 
is particularly important o avoid using prosodic features that are directly correlated 
with word identities, or features that are also modeled by the discourse grammars, 
such as utterance position relative to turn changes. Figure 4 depicts the Bayes network 
incorporating evidence from both word recognition and prosodic features. 
One important respect in which the independence assumption is violated is in the 
modeling of utterance length. While utterance length itself is not a prosodic feature, 
it is an important feature to condition on when examining prosodic characteristics 
of utterances, and is thus best included in the decision tree. Utterance length is cap- 
tured directly by the tree using various duration measures, while the DA-specific 
LMs encode the average number of words per utterance indirectly through n-gram 
parameters, but still accurately enough to violate independence in a significant way 
(Finke et al 1998). As discussed in Section 8, this problem is best addressed by joint 
lexical-prosodic models. 
We need to allow for the fact that the models combined in Equation 8 give es- 
timates of differing qualities. Therefore, we introduce an exponential weight a on 
P(Fi\[Ui) that controls the contribution of the prosodic likelihood to the overall likeli- 
hood. Finally, a second exponential weight fl on the combined likelihood controls its 
dynamic range relative to the discourse grammar scores, partially compensating for 
any correlation between the two likelihoods. The revised combined likelihood estimate 
thus becomes: 
P(Ai, Wi, FilUi) ~, {P(Ai, WilUi)P(Fi\[Ui)~}  (9) 
In our experiments, the parameters a and fl were optimized using twofold jackknifing. 
The test data was split roughly in half (without speaker overlap), each half was used 
to separately optimize the parameters, and the best values were then tested on the 
respective other half. The reported results are from the aggregate outcome on the two 
test set halves. 
357 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
Table 9 
Combined utterance classification accuracies (chance = 
35%). The first two columns correspond to Tables 7 
and 6, respectively. 
Discourse Grammar Accuracy (%) 
Prosody Recognizer Combined 
None 38.9 42.8 56.5 
Unigram 48.3 61.8 62.4 
Bigram 49.7 64.3 65.0 
Table 10 
Accuracy (in %) for individual 
subtasks, using uniform priors 
and combined models for two 
(chance = 50%). 
Classification Task True Words Recognized Words 
Knowledge Source 
QUESTIONS/STATEMENTS 
prosody only 76.0 76.0 
words only 85.9 75.4 
words+prosody 87.6 79.8 
AGREEMENTS / BACKCHANNELS 
prosody only 72.9 72.9 
words only 81.0 78.2 
words+prosody 84.7 81.7 
5.3.1 Results. In this experiment we combined the acoustic n-best likelihoods based 
on recognized words with the Top-5 tree classifier mentioned in Section 5.2.3. Results 
are summarized in Table 9. 
As shown, the combined classifier presents a slight improvement over the rec- 
ognizer-based classifier, The experiment without discourse grammar indicates that 
the combined evidence is considerably stronger than either knowledge source alone, 
yet this improvement seems to be made largely redundant by the use of priors and 
the discourse grammar. For example, by definition DECLARATIVE-QUESTIONS are not 
marked by syntax (e.g., by subject-auxiliary inversion) and are thus confusable with 
STATEMENTS and OPINIONS. While prosody is expected to help disambiguate hese 
cases, the ambiguity can also be removed by examining the context of the utterance, 
e.g., by noticing that the following utterance is a YEs-ANswER or NO-ANSWER. 
5.3.2 Focused Classifications. To gain a better understanding of the potential for 
prosodic DA classification i dependent of the effects of discourse grammar and the 
skewed DA distribution i  Switchboard, we examined several binary DA classification 
tasks. The choice of tasks was motivated by an analysis of confusions committed by a 
purely word-based DA detector, which tends to mistake QUESTIONS for STATEMENTS, 
and BACKCHANNELS for AGREEMENTS (and vice versa). We tested aprosodic lassifier, 
a word-based classifier (with both transcribed and recognized words), and a combined 
classifier on these two tasks, downsampling the DA distribution to equate the class 
sizes in each case. Chance performance in all experiments i  therefore 50%. Results 
are summarized in Table 10. 
358 
Stolcke et al Dialogue Act Modeling 
As shown, the combined classifier was consistently more accurate than the classi- 
fier using words alone. Although the gain in accuracy was not statistically significant 
for the small recognizer test set because of a lack of power, replication for a larger 
hand-transcribed test set showed the gain to be highly significant for both subtasks 
by a Sign test, p < .001 and p < .0001 (one-tailed), respectively. Across these, as well 
as additional subtasks, the relative advantage of adding prosody was larger for recog- 
nized than for true words, suggesting that prosody is particularly helpful when word 
information is not perfect. 
6. Speech Recognition 
We now consider ways to use DA modeling to enhance automatic speech recognition 
(ASR). The intuition behind this approach is that discourse context constrains the 
choice of DAs for a given utterance, and the DA type in turn constrains the choice of 
words. The latter can then be leveraged for more accurate speech recognition. 
6.1 Integrating DA Modeling and ASR 
Constraints on the word sequences hypothesized by a recognizer are expressed prob- 
abilistically in the recognizer language model (LM). It provides the prior distribution 
P(Wi) for finding the a posteriori most probable hypothesized words for an utterance, 
given the acoustic evidence Ai (Bahl, Jelinek, and Mercer 1983): 7
W 7 = argmaxP(WilAi) 
wi 
P(Wi)P(AilWi) = argmax 
wi P(Ai) 
= argmaxP(Wi)P(AilWi) (10) 
wi 
The likelihoods P(AilWi) are estimated by the recognizer's acoustic model. In a stan- 
dard recognizer the language model P(Wi) is the same for all utterances; the idea here 
is to obtain better-quality LMs by conditioning on the DA type Ui, since presumably 
the word distributions differ depending on DA type. 
W7 -- argmaxP(WilAi, Ui) 
wi 
P( WilUi)P(AilWi, Ui) = argmax 
Wi P(AiIUi) 
argmaxP(WilUi)P(AirWi) (11) 
wi 
As before in the DA classification model, we tacitly assume that the words Wi depend 
only on the DA of the current utterance, and also that the acoustics are independent of
the DA type if the words are fixed. The DA-conditioned language models P(Wil Ui) are 
readily trained from DA-specific training data, much as we did for DA classification 
from words. 8 
7 Note the similarity of Equations 10 and 1. They are identical except for the fact that we are now 
operating at the level of an individual utterance, the evidence isgiven by the acoustics, and the targets 
are word hypotheses instead of DA hypotheses. 
8 In Equation 11 and elsewhere in this section we gloss over the issue of proper weighting of model 
probabilities, which is extremely important in practice. The approach explained in detail in footnote 5
applies here as well. 
359 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
The problem with applying Equation 11, of course, is that the DA type Ui is 
generally not known (except maybe in applications where the user interface can be 
engineered to allow only one kind of DA for a given utterance). Therefore, we need 
to infer the likely DA types for each utterance, using available evidence E from the 
entire conversation. This leads to the following formulation: 
W~ = argmaxP(WilAi, E)
wi 
---- argmax ~-~ P(WilAi, Ui, E)P(UilE) 
Wi Ui 
argmax ~\[\] P( WiiAi, Ui)P( Ui\[E) 
W~ U~ 
(12) 
The last step in Equation 12 is justified because, as shown in Figures 1 and 4, the 
evidence E (acoustics, prosody, words) pertaining to utterances other than i can affect 
the current utterance only through its DA type Ui. 
We call this the mixture-of-posteriors approach, because it amounts to a mixture of 
the posterior distributions obtained from DA-specific speech recognizers (Equation 11), 
using the DA posteriors as weights. This approach is quite expensive, however, as it 
requires multiple full recognizer or rescoring passes of the input, one for each DA 
type. 
A more efficient, though mathematically ess accurate, solution can be obtained 
by combining uesses about the correct DA types directly at the level of the LM. We 
estimate the distribution of likely DA types for a given utterance using the entire 
conversation E as evidence, and then use a sentence-level mixture (Iyer, Ostendorf, 
and Rohlicek 1994) of DA-specific LMs in a single recognizer run. In other words, we 
replace P(WilUi) in Equation 11 with 
~_~ P(WilUi)P(Ui\]E), 
ui 
a weighted mixture of all DA-specific LMs. We call this the mixture-of-LMs ap- 
proach. In practice, we would first estimate DA posteriors for each utterance, us- 
ing the forward-backward algorithm and the models described in Section 5, and then 
rerecognize the conversation or rescore the recognizer output, using the new posterior- 
weighted mixture LM. Fortunately, as shown in the next section, the mixture-of-LMs 
approach seems to give results that are almost identical to (and as good as) the mixture- 
of-posteriors approach. 
6.2 Computational Structure of Mixture Modeling 
It is instructive to compare the expanded scoring formulas for the two DA mixture 
modeling approaches for ASK The mixture-of-posteriors approach yields 
P(WilAi, E) = ~ P(ailui) 
ui 
(13) 
whereas the mixture-of-LMs approach gives 
) P(A,Iw,) 
P(WilAi'E) ~ P(WiIUi)P(UilE) P(Ai) (14) 
360 
Stolcke t al. Dialogue Act Modeling 
Table 11 
Switchboard word recognition error rates and 
LM perplexities. 
Model WER (%) Perplexity 
Baseline 41.2 76.8 
1-best LM 41.0 69.3 
Mixture-of-posteriors 41.0 n/a 
Mixture-of-LMs 40.9 66.9 
Oracle LM 40.3 66.8 
We see that the second equation reduces to the first under the crude approximation 
P(Ai\] Ui) ~ P(Ai). In practice, the denominators are computed by summing the numer- 
ators over a finite number of word hypotheses Wi, so this difference translates into 
normalizing either after or before summing over DAs. When the normalization takes 
place as the final step it can be omitted for score maximization purposes; this shows 
why the mixture-of-LMs approach is less computationally expensive. 
6.3 Experiments and Results 
We tested both the mixture-of-posteriors and the mixture-of-LMs approaches on our 
Switchboard test set of 19 conversations. Instead of decoding the data from scratch 
using the modified models, we manipulated n-best lists consisting of up to 2,500 best 
hypotheses for each utterance. This approach is also convenient since both approaches 
require access to the full word string for hypothesis scoring; the overall model is no 
longer Markovian, and is therefore inconvenient to use in the first decoding stage, or 
even in lattice rescoring. 
The baseline for our experiments was obtained with a standard backoff trigram 
language model estimated from all available training data. The DA-specific language 
models were trained on word transcripts of all the training utterances of a given type, 
and then smoothed further by interpolating them with the baseline LM. Each DA- 
specific LM used its own interpolation weight, obtained by minimizing the perplexity 
of the interpolated model on held-out DA-specific training data. Note that this smooth- 
ing step is helpful when using the DA-specific LMs for word recognition, but not for 
DA classification, since it renders the DA-specific LMs less discriminative. 9 
Table 11 summarizes both the word error rates achieved with the various models 
and the perplexities of the corresponding LMs used in the rescoring (note that per- 
plexity is not meaningful in the mixture-of-posteriors approach). For comparison, we 
also included two additional models: the 'q-best LM" refers to always using the DA- 
specific LM corresponding to the most probable DA type for each utterance. It is thus 
an approximation to both mixture approaches where only the top DA is considered. 
Second, we included an "oracle LM," i.e., always using the LM that corresponds to 
the hand-labeled DA for each utterance. The purpose of this experiment was to give us 
an upper bound on the effectiveness of the mixture approaches, by assuming perfect 
DA recognition. 
It was somewhat disappointing that the word error rate (WER) improvement in
the oracle experiment was small (2.2% relative), even though statistically highly sig- 
nificant (p < .0001, one-tailed, according to a Sign test on matched utterance pairs). 
9 Indeed, during our DA classification experiments, wehad observed that smoothed DA-specific LMs 
yield lower classification accuracy. 
361 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
Table 12 
Word error reductions through DA oracle, by DA type. 
Dialogue Act Baseline WER Oracle WER WER Reduction 
NO-ANSWER 29.4 11.8 -17.6 
BACKCHANNEL 25.9 18.6 -7.3 
BACKCHANNEL-QUESTION 15.2 9.1 -6.1 
ABANDONED/UNINTERPRETABLE 48.9 45.2 -3.7 
WH-QUESTION 38.4 34.9 -3.5 
YES-No-QUESTION 55.5 52.3 --3.2 
STATEMENT 42.0 41.5 --0.5 
OPINION 40.8 40.4 --0.4 
Other 8% 
onded/Uninterpretable 3% 
kchannel 3% 
as-No-Question 3% 
Statement 53% 
Dpinion 30% 
Figure 5 
Relative contributions to test set word counts by DA type. 
The WER reduction achieved with the mixture-of-LMs approach did not achieve sta- 
tistical significance (0.25 > p > 0.20). The 1-best DA and the two mixture models 
also did not differ significantly on this test set. In interpreting these results one must 
realize, however, that WER results depend on a complex combination of factors, most 
notably interaction between language models and the acoustic models. Since the ex- 
periments only varied the language models used in rescoring, it is also informative to 
compare the quality of these models as reflected by perplexity. On this measure, we 
see a substantial 13% (relative) reduction, which is achieved by both the oracle and 
the mixture-of-LMs. The perplexity reduction for the 1-best LM is only 9.8%, showing 
the advantage of the mixture approach. 
To better understand the lack of a more substantial reduction in word error, we an- 
alyzed the effect of the DA-conditioned rescoring on the individual DAs, i.e., grouping 
the test utterances by their true DA types. Table 12 shows the WER improvements for 
a few DA types, ordered by the magnitude of improvement achieved. As shown, all 
frequent DA types saw improvement, but the highest wins were observed for typically 
short DAs, such as ANSWERS and BACKCHANNELS. This is to be expected, as such DAs 
tend to be syntactically and lexically highly constrained. Furthermore, the distribution 
of number of words across DA types is very uneven (Figure 5). STATEMENTS and 
OPINIONS, the DA types dominating in both frequency and number of words (83% of 
total), see no more than 0.5% absolute improvement, thus explaining the small overall 
improvement. In hindsight, this is also not surprising, since the bulk of the training 
data for the baseline LM consists of these DAs, allowing only little improvement in
362 
Stolcke et al Dialogue Act Modeling 
the DA-specific LMs. A more detailed analysis of the effect of DA modeling on speech 
recognition errors can be found elsewhere (Van Ess-Dykema nd Ries 1998). 
In summary, our experiments confirmed that DA modeling can improve word 
recognition accuracy quite substantially in principle, at least for certain DA types, 
but that the skewed distribution of DAs (especially in terms of number of words per 
type) limits the usefulness of the approach on the Switchboard corpus. The benefits 
of DA modeling might therefore be more pronounced on corpora with more even 
DA distribution, as is typically the case for task-oriented ialogues. Task-oriented 
dialogues might also feature specific subtypes of general DA categories that might 
be constrained by discourse. Prior research on task-oriented dialogues ummarized in 
the next section, however, has also found only small reductions in WER (on the order 
of 1%). This suggests that even in task-oriented domains more research is needed to 
realize the potential of DA modeling for ASR. 
7. Prior and Related Work 
As indicated in the introduction, our work builds on a number of previous efforts 
in computational discourse modeling and automatic discourse processing, most of 
which occurred over the last half-decade. It is generally not possible to directly com- 
pare quantitative results because of vast differences in methodology, tag set, type and 
amount of training data, and, principally, assumptions made about what information 
is available for "free" (e.g., hand-transcribed versus automatically recognized words, 
or segmented versus unsegmented utterances). Thus, we will focus on the conceptual 
aspects of previous research efforts, and while we do offer a summary of previous 
quantitative results, these should be interpreted as informative datapoints only, and 
not as fair comparisons between algorithms. 
Previous research on DA modeling has generally focused on task-oriented ia- 
logue, with three tasks in particular garnering much of the research effort. The Map 
Task corpus (Anderson et al 1991; Bard et al 1995) consists of conversations between 
two speakers with slightly different maps of an imaginary territory. Their task is to 
help one speaker eproduce a route drawn only on the other speaker's map, all with- 
out being able to see each other's maps. Of the DA modeling algorithms described 
below, Taylor et al (1998) and Wright (1998) were based on Map Task. The VERBMO- 
BIL corpus consists of two-party scheduling dialogues. A number of the DA m6deling 
algorithms described below were developed for VERBMOBIL, including those of Mast 
et al (1996), Warnke et al (1997), Reithinger et al (1996), Reithinger and Klesen (1997), 
and Samuel, Carberry, and Vijay-Shanker (1998). The ATR Conference corpus is a sub- 
set of a larger ATR Dialogue database consisting of simulated dialogues between a
secretary and a questioner at international conferences. Researchers using this corpus 
include Nagata (1992), Nagata and Morimoto (1993, 1994), and Kita et al (1996). Ta- 
ble 13 shows the most commonly used versions of the tag sets from those three tasks. 
As discussed earlier, these domains differ from the Switchboard corpus in being 
task-oriented. Their tag sets are also generally smaller, but some of the same problems 
of balance occur. For example, in the Map Task domain, 33% of the words occur in 1 
of the 12 DAs 0NSTRUCT). Table 14 shows the approximate size of the corpora, the tag 
set, and tag estimation accuracy rates for various recent models of DA prediction. The 
results summarized in the table also illustrate the differences in inherent difficulty of 
the tasks. For example, the task of Warnke et al (1997) was to simultaneously segment 
and tag DAs, whereas the other results rely on a prior manual segmentation. Similarly, 
the task in Wright (1998) and in our study was to determine DA types from speech 
input, whereas work by others is based on hand-transcribed textual input. 
363 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
Table 13 
Dialogue act tag sets used in three other extensively studied corpora. 
VERBMOBIL. These 18 high-level DAs used in VERBMOBIL-1 are 
abstracted over a total of 43 more specific DAs; most experiments on 
VERBMOBIL DAs use the set of 18 rather than 43. Examples are from 
Jekat et al (1995). 
Tag Example 
THANK 
GREET 
INTRODUCE 
BYE 
REQUEST~COMMENT 
SUGGEST 
REJECT 
ACCEPT 
REQUEST-SUGGEST 
INIT 
GIVE_REASON 
FEEDBACK 
DELIBERATE 
CONFIRM 
CLARIFY 
DIGRESS 
MOTIVATE 
GARBAGE 
Thanks 
Hello Dan 
It's me again 
Alright bye 
How does that look? 
from thirteenth through seventeenth June 
No Friday I'm booked all day 
Saturday sounds fine, 
What is a good day of the week for you? 
I wanted to make an appointment with you 
Because I have meetings all afternoon 
Okay 
Let me check my calendar here 
Okay, that would be wonderful 
Okay, do you mean Tuesday the 23rd? 
\[we could meet for lunch\] and eat lots of ice cream 
We should go to visit our subsidiary in Munich 
Oops, I- 
Maptask. The 12 DAs or "move types" used in Map Task. Examples are 
from Taylor et al (1998). 
Tag Example 
INSTRUCT 
EXPLAIN 
ALIGN 
CHECK 
QUERY-YN 
QUERY-W 
ACKNOWLEDGE 
CLARIFY 
REPLY-Y 
REPLY-N 
REPLY-W 
READY 
Go round, ehm horizontally underneath diamond mine 
I don't have a ravine 
Okay? 
So going down to Indian Country? 
Have you got the graveyard written down ? 
In where? 
Okay 
{you want to go. . .  diagonally} Diagonally down 
I do. 
No, I don't 
{And across to?} The pyramid. 
Okay 
ATR. The 9 DAs ("illocutionary force types") used in the ATR Dialogue 
database task; some later models used an extended set of 15 DAs. 
Examples are from the English translations given by Nagata (1992). 
Tag Example 
PHATIC 
EXPRESSIVE 
RESPONSE 
PROMISE 
REQUEST 
INFORM 
QUESTIONIP 
QUESTIONREF 
QUESTIONCONF 
Hello 
Thank you 
That's right 
I will send you a registration form 
Please go to Kitaooji station by subway 
We are not giving any discount his time 
Do you have the announcement of the conference ? 
What should I do? 
You have already transferred the registration fee, right ? 
364 
Stolcke et al D ia logue Act  Mode l ing  
,.0 
C 
~'~ o 
% > 
.~  to 
.~~ ~ 
g,..l 
m m ~ 
c~8 ,~.~ ~ 
c ~ Z 
~m 
.~  K 
, -~  
NS~ 
~ ~.~ 
?? l l  ~ ~  
v 
r--~ ~ , O', ?~ 
365 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
The use of n-grams to model the probabilities of DA sequences, or to predict 
upcoming DAs on-line, has been proposed by many authors. It seems to have been 
first employed by Nagata (1992), and in follow-up papers by Nagata and Morimoto 
(1993, 1994) on the ATR Dialogue database. The model predicted upcoming DAs by 
using bigrams and trigrams conditioned on preceding DAs, trained on a corpus of 
2,722 DAs. Many others subsequently relied on and enhanced this n-grams-of-DAs 
approach, often by applying standard techniques from statistical language modeling. 
Reithinger et al (1996), for example, used deleted interpolation tosmooth the dialogue 
n-grams. Chu-Carroll (1998) uses knowledge of subdialogue structure to selectively 
skip previous DAs in choosing conditioning for DA prediction. 
Nagata and Morimoto (1993, 1994) may also have been the first to use word n- 
grams as a miniature grammar for DAs, to be used in improving speech recognition. 
The idea caught on very quickly: Suhm and Waibel (1994), Mast et aL (1996), Warnke 
et al (1997), Reithinger and Klesen (1997), and Taylor et al (1998) all use variants of 
backoff, interpolated, orclass n-gram language models to estimate DA likelihoods. Any 
kind of sufficiently powerful, trainable language model could perform this function, of 
course, and indeed Alexandersson and Reithinger (1997) propose using automatically 
learned stochastic context-free grammars. Jurafsky, Shriberg, Fox, and Curl (1998) show 
that the grammar of some DAs, such as appreciations, can be captured by finite-state 
automata over part-of-speech tags. 
N-gram models are likelihood models for DAs, i.e., they compute the conditional 
probabilities of the word sequence given the DA type. Word-based posterior probability 
estimators are also possible, although less common. Mast et al (1996) propose the use 
of semantic lassification trees, a kind of decision tree conditioned on word patterns 
as features. Finally, Ries (1999a) shows that neural networks using only unigram fea- 
tures can be superior to higher-order n-gram DA models. Warnke et al (1999) and 
Ohler, Harbeck, and Niemann (1999) use related discriminative training algorithms 
for language models. 
Woszczyna nd Waibel (1994) and Suhm and Waibel (1994), followed by Chu- 
Carroll (1998), seem to have been the first to note that such a combination of word 
and dialogue n-grams could be viewed as a dialogue HMM with word strings as 
the observations. (Indeed, with the exception of Samuel, Carberry, and Vijay-Shanker 
(1998), all models listed in Table 14 rely on some version of this HMM metaphor.) 
Some researchers explicitly used HMM induction techniques to infer dialogue gram- 
mars. Woszczyna nd Waibel (1994), for example, trained an ergodic HMM using 
expectation-maximization o model speech act sequencing. Kita et al (1996) made 
one of the few attempts at unsupervised iscovery of dialogue structure, where a 
finite-state grammar induction algorithm is used to find the topology of the dialogue 
grammar. 
Computational pproaches to prosodic modeling of DAs have aimed to auto- 
matically extract various prosodic parameters--such as duration, pitch, and energy 
patterns--from the speech signal (Yoshimura et al \[1996\]; Taylor et al \[1997\]; Kompe 
\[1997\], among others). Some approaches model F0 patterns with techniques such as 
vector quantization and Gaussian classifiers to help disambiguate utterance types. An 
extensive comparison of the prosodic DA modeling literature with our work can be 
found in Shriberg et al (1998). 
DA modeling has mostly been geared toward automatic DA classification, and 
much less work has been done on applying DA models to automatic speech recog- 
nition. Nagata and Morimoto (1994) suggest conditioning word language models on 
DAs to lower perplexity. Suhm and Waibel (1994) and Eckert, Gallwitz, and Niemann 
(1996) each condition a recognizer LM on left-to-right DA predictions and are able to 
366 
Stolcke et al Dialogue Act Modeling 
show reductions in word error rate of 1% on task-oriented corpora. Most similar to 
our own work, but still in a task-oriented omain, the work by Taylor et al (1998) 
combines DA likelihoods from prosodic models with those from 1-best recognition 
output o condition the recognizer LM, again achieving an absolute reduction in word 
error rate of 1%, as disappointing as the 0.3% improvement in our experiments. 
Related computational tasks beyond DA classification and speech recognition have 
received even less attention to date. We already mentioned Warnke et al (1997) and 
Finke et al (1998), who both showed that utterance segmentation a d classification can 
be integrated into a single search process. Fukada et al (1998) investigate augmenting 
DA tagging with more detailed semantic "concept" tags, as a preliminary step toward 
an interlingua-based dialogue translation system. Levin et al (1999) couple DA clas- 
sification with dialogue game classification; dialogue games are units above the DA 
level, i.e., short DA sequences such as question-answer pairs. 
All the work mentioned so far uses statistical models of various kinds. As we have 
shown here, such models offer some fundamental dvantages, uch as modularity and 
composability (e.g., of discourse grammars with DA models) and the ability to deal 
with noisy input (e.g., from a speech recognizer) in a principled way. However, many 
other classifier architectures are applicable to the tasks discussed, in particular to DA 
classification. A nonprobabilistic approach for DA labeling proposed by Samuel, Car- 
berry, and Vijay-Shanker (1998) is transformation-based l arning (Brill 1993). Finally 
it should be noted that there are other tasks with a mathematical structure similar to 
that of DA tagging, such as shallow parsing for natural anguage processing (Munk 
1999) and DNA classification tasks (Ohler, Harbeck, and Niemann 1999), from which 
further techniques could be borrowed. 
How does the approach presented here differ from these various earlier models, 
particularly those based on HMMs? Apart from corpus and tag set differences, our 
approach differs primarily in that it generalizes the simple HMM approach to cope 
with new kinds of problems, based on the Bayes network representations depicted in 
Figures 2 and 4. For the DA classification task, our framework allows us to do classifi- 
cation given unreliable words (by marginalizing over the possible word strings corre- 
sponding to the acoustic input) and given nonlexical (e.g., prosodic) evidence. For the 
speech recognition task, the generalized model gives a clean probabilistic framework 
for conditioning word probabilities on the conversation context via the underlying DA 
structure. Unlike previous models that did not address peech recognition or relied 
only on an intuitive 1-best approximation, our model allows computation of the opti- 
mum word sequence by effectively summing over all possible DA sequences as well 
as all recognition hypotheses throughout the conversation, using evidence from both 
past and future. 
8. D iscuss ion and Issues for Future Research 
Our approach to dialogue modeling has two major components: tatistical dialogue 
grammars modeling the sequencing of DAs, and DA likelihood models expressing 
the local cues (both lexical and prosodic) for DAs. We made a number of significant 
simplifications to arrive at a computationally and statistically tractable formulation. 
In this formulation, DAs serve as the hinges that join the various model components, 
but also decouple these components through statistical independence assumptions. 
Conditional on the DAs, the observations across utterances are assumed to be inde- 
pendent, and evidence of different kinds from the same utterance (e.g., lexical and 
prosodic) is assumed to be independent. Finally, DA types themselves are assumed 
to be independent beyond a short span (corresponding to the order of the dialogue 
367 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
n-gram). Further research within this framework can be characterized by which of 
these simplifications are addressed. 
Dialogue grammars for conversational speech need to be made more aware of the 
temporal properties of utterances. For example, we are currently not modeling the fact 
that utterances by the conversants may actually overlap (e.g., backchannels interrupt- 
ing an ongoing utterance). In addition, we should model more of the nonlocal aspects 
of discourse structure, despite our negative results so far. For example, a context-free 
discourse grammar could potentially account for the nested structures proposed in 
Grosz and Sidner (1986). 1? 
The standard n-gram models for DA discrimination with lexical cues are probably 
suboptimal for this task, simply because they are trained in the maximum likelihood 
framework, without explicitly optimizing discrimination between DA types. This may 
be overcome by using discriminative training procedures (Warnke et al 1999; Ohler, 
Harbeck, and Niemann 1999). Training neural networks directly with posterior prob- 
ability (Ries 1999a) seems to be a more principled approach and it also offers much 
easier integration with other knowledge sources. Prosodic features, for example, can 
simply be added to the lexical features, allowing the model to capture dependencies 
and redundancies across knowledge sources. Keyword-based techniques from the field 
of message classification should also be applicable here (Rose, Chang, and Lippmann 
1991). Eventually, it is desirable to integrate dialogue grammar, lexical, and prosodic 
cues into a single model, e.g., one that predicts the next DA based on DA history and 
all the local evidence. 
The study of automatically extracted prosodic features for DA modeling is likewise 
only in its infancy. Our preliminary experiments with neural networks have shown that 
small gains are obtainable with improved statistical modeling techniques. However, 
we believe that more progress can be made by improving the underlying features 
themselves, in terms of both better understanding of how speakers use them, and 
ways to reliably extract hem from data. 
Regarding the data itself, we saw that the distribution of DAs in our corpus limits 
the benefit of DA modeling for lower-level processing, in particular speech recognition. 
The reason for the skewed distribution was in the nature of the task (or lack thereof) in 
Switchboard. It remains to be seen if more fine-grained DA distinctions can be made 
reliably in this corpus. However, it should be noted that the DA definitions are really 
arbitrary as far as tasks other than DA labeling are concerned. This suggests using 
unsupervised, self-organizing learning schemes that choose their own DA definitions 
in the process of optimizing the primary task, whatever it may be. Hand-labeled DA 
categories may still serve an important role in initializing such an algorithm. 
We believe that dialogue-related tasks have much to benefit from corpus-driven, 
automatic learning techniques. To enable such research, we need fairly large, stan- 
dardized corpora that allow comparisons over time and across approaches. Despite 
its shortcomings, the Switchboard omain could serve this purpose. 
9. Conclusions 
We have developed an integrated probabilistic approach to dialogue act modeling for 
conversational speech, and tested it on a large speech corpus. The approach combines 
models for lexical and prosodic realizations of DAs, as well as a statistical discourse 
10 The inadequacy of n-gram models for nested discourse structures i  pointed out by Chu-Carroll (1998), 
although the suggested solution is a modified n-gram approach. 
368 
Stolcke et al Dialogue Act Modeling 
grammar. All components of the model are automatically trained, and are thus appli- 
cable to other domains for which labeled data is available. Classification accuracies 
achieved so far are highly encouraging, relative to the inherent difficulty of the task as 
measured by human labeler performance. We investigated several modeling alterna- 
tives for the components of the model (backoff n-grams and maximum entropy models 
for discourse grammars, decision trees and neural networks for prosodic lassification) 
and found performance largely independent of these choices. Finally, we developed a
principled way of incorporating DA modeling into the probability model of a contin- 
uous speech recognizer, by constraining word hypotheses using the discourse context. 
However, the approach gives only a small reduction in word error on our corpus, 
which can be attributed to a preponderance of a single dialogue act type (statements). 
Note 
The research described here is based on a 
project at the 1997 Workshop on Innovative 
Techniques in LVCSR at the Center for Speech 
and Language Processing at Johns Hopkins 
University (Jurafsky et al 1997; Jurafsky et 
al. 1998). The DA-labeled Switchboard tran- 
scripts as well as other project-related publi- 
cations are available at http://www.colorado. 
edu/ling/jurafsky/ws97/. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank the funders, researchers, and 
support staff of the 1997 Johns Hopkins 
Summer Workshop, especially Bill Byrne, 
Fred Jelinek, Harriet Nock, Joe Picone, 
Kimberly Shiring, and Chuck Wooters. 
Additional support came from the NSF via 
grants IRI-9619921 and IRI-9314967, and 
from the UK Engineering and Physical 
Science Research Council (grant 
GR/J55106). Thanks to Mitch Weintraub, to 
Susann LuperFoy, Nigel Ward, James Allen, 
Julia Hirschberg, and Marilyn Walker for 
advice on the design of the SWBD-DAMSL 
tag set, to the discourse labelers at CU 
Boulder (Debra Biasca, Marion Bond, Traci 
Curl, Anu Erringer, Michelle Gregory, Lori 
Heintzelman, Taimi Metzler, and Amma 
Oduro) and the intonation labelers at the 
University of Edinburgh (Helen Wright, 
Kurt Dusterhoff, Rob Clark, Cassie Mayo, 
and Matthew Bull). We also thank Andy 
Kehler and the anonymous reviewers for 
valuable comments on a draft of this paper. 
References 
Alexandersson, Jan and Norbert Reithinger. 
1997. Learning dialogue structures from a 
corpus. In G. Kokkinakis, N. Fakotakis, 
and E. Dermatas, editors, Proceedings ofthe 
5th European Conference on Speech 
Communication a d Technology, volume 4, 
pages 2,231-2,234. Rhodes, Greece, 
September. 
Anderson, Anne H., Miles Bader, Ellen G. 
Bard, Elizabeth H. Boyle, Gwyneth M. 
Doherty, Simon C. Garrod, Stephen D. 
Isard, Jacqueline C. Kowtko, Jan M. 
McAllister, Jim Miller, Catherine F. Sotillo, 
Henry S. Thompson, and Regina Weinert. 
1991. The HCRC Map Task corpus. 
Language and Speech, 34(4):351-366. 
Austin, J. L. 1962. How to do Things with 
Words. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
Bahl, Lalit R., Frederick Jelinek, and 
Robert L. Mercer. 1983. A maximum 
likelihood approach to continuous speech 
recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern 
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 
5(2):179-190, March. 
Bard, Ellen G., Catherine Sotillo, Anne H. 
Anderson, and M. M. Taylor. 1995. The 
DCIEM Map Task corpus: Spontaneous 
dialogues under sleep deprivation and 
drug treatment. In Isabel Trancoso and 
Roger Moore, editors, Proceedings ofthe 
ESCA-NATO Tutorial and Workshop on 
Speech under Stress, pages 25-28, Lisbon, 
September. 
Baum, Leonard E., Ted Petrie, George 
Soules, and Norman Weiss. 1970. A 
maximization technique occurring in the 
statistical analysis of probabilistic 
functions in Markov chains. The Annals of 
Mathematical Statistics, 41(1):164-171. 
Berger, Adam L., Stephen A. Della Pietra, 
and Vincent J. Della Pietra. 1996. A 
maximum entropy approach to natural 
language processing. Computational 
Linguistics, 22(1):39-71. 
Bourlard, Herv6 and Nelson Morgan. 1993. 
Connectionist Speech Recognition. A Hybrid 
Approach. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Boston, MA. 
Breiman, L., J. H. Friedman, R. A. Olshen, 
and C. J. Stone. 1984. Classification and 
Regression Trees. Wadsworth and Brooks, 
Pacific Grove, CA. 
369 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
Bridle, J. S. 1990. Probabilistic interpretation 
of feedforward classification etwork 
outputs, with relationships to statistical 
pattern recognition. In F. Fogleman Soulie 
and J. Herault, editors, Neurocomputing: 
Algorithms, Architectures and Applications. 
Springer, Berlin, pages 227-236. 
Brill, Eric. 1993. Automatic grammar 
induction and parsing free text: A 
transformation-based approach. In 
Proceedings ofthe ARPA Workshop on Human 
Language Technology, Plainsboro, NJ, 
March. 
Carletta, Jean. 1996. Assessing agreement on 
classification tasks: The Kappa statistic. 
Computational Linguistics, 22(2):249-254. 
Carlson, Lari. 1983. Dialogue Games: An 
Approach to Discourse Analysis. D. Reidel. 
Chu-Carroll, Jennifer. 1998. A statistical 
model for discourse act recognition in 
dialogue interactions. In Jennifer 
Chu-Carroll and Nancy Green, editors, 
Applying Machine Learning to Discourse 
Processing. Papers from the 1998 AAAI 
Spring Symposium. Technical Report 
SS-98-01, pages 12-17. AAAI Press, Menlo 
Park, CA. 
Church, Kenneth Ward. 1988. A stochastic 
parts program and noun phrase parser 
for unrestricted text. In Second Conference 
on Applied Natural Language Processing, 
pages 136-143, Austin, TX. 
Core, Mark and James Allen. 1997. Coding 
dialogs with the DAMSL annotation 
scheme. In Working Notes of the AAAI Fall 
Symposium on Communicative Action in 
Humans and Machines, pages 28-35, 
Cambridge, MA, November. 
Dermatas, Evangelos and George 
Kokkinakis. 1995. Automatic stochastic 
tagging of natural anguage texts. 
Computational Linguistics, 21(2):137-163. 
Eckert, Wieland, Florian Gallwitz, and 
Heinrich Niemann. 1996. Combining 
stochastic and linguistic language models 
for recognition of spontaneous speech. In 
Proceedings ofthe IEEE Conference on 
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 
volume 1, pages 423-426, Atlanta, GA, 
May. 
Finke, Michael, Maria Lapata, Alon Lavie, 
Lori Levin, Laura Mayfield Tomokiyo, 
Thomas Polzin, Klaus Ries, Alex Waibel, 
and Klaus Zechner. 1998. Clarity: 
Inferring discourse structure from speech. 
In Jennifer Chu-Carroll and Nancy Green, 
editors, Applying Machine Learning to 
Discourse Processing. Papers from the 1998 
AAAI Spring Symposium. Technical Report 
SS-98-01, pages 25-32. AAAI Press, Menlo 
Park, CA. 
Fowler, Carol A. and Jonathan Housum. 
1987. Talkers' signaling of "new" and 
"old" words in speech and listeners' 
perception and use of the distinction. 
Journal of Memory and Language, 26:489-504. 
Fukada, Toshiaki, Detlef Koll, Alex Waibel, 
and Kouichi Tanigaki. 1998. Probabilistic 
dialogue act extraction for concept based 
multilingual translation systems. In 
Robert H. Mannell and Jordi 
Robert-Ribes, editors, Proceedings ofthe 
International Conference on Spoken Language 
Processing, volume 6, pages 2,771-2,774, 
Sydney, December. Australian Speech 
Science and Technology Association. 
Godfrey, J. J., E. C. Holliman, and 
J. McDaniel. 1992. SWITCHBOARD: 
Telephone speech corpus for research and 
development. In Proceedings ofthe IEEE 
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal 
Processing, volume 1, pages 517-520, San 
Francisco, CA, March. 
Grosz, Barbara J. and Candace L. Sidner. 
1986. Attention, intention, and the 
structure of discourse. Computational 
Linguistics, 12(3):175-204. 
Hirschberg, Julia B. and Diane J. Litman. 
1993. Empirical studies on the 
disambiguation of cue phrases. 
Computational Linguistics, 19(3):501-530. 
Iyer, Rukmini, Mari Ostendorf, and J. Robin 
Rohlicek. 1994. Language modeling with 
sentence-level mixtures. In Proceedings of
the ARPA Workshop on Human Language 
Technology, pages 82-86, Plainsboro, NJ, 
March. 
Jefferson, Gail. 1984. Notes on a systematic 
deployment of the acknowledgement 
tokens 'yeah' and 'mm hm'. Papers in 
Linguistics, 17:197-216. 
Jekat, Susanne, Alexandra Klein, Elisabeth 
Maier, Ilona Maleck, Marion Mast, and 
Joachim Quantz. 1995. Dialogue acts in 
VERBMOBIL. Verbmobil-Report 65, 
Universit~it Hamburg, DFKI GmbH, 
Universit~it Erlangen, and TU Berlin, 
April. 
Jurafsky, Dan, Rebecca Bates, Noah Coccaro, 
Rachel Martin, Marie Meteer, Klaus Ries, 
Elizabeth Shriberg, Andreas Stolcke, Paul 
Taylor, and Carol Van Ess-Dykema. 1997. 
Automatic detection of discourse 
structure for speech recognition and 
understanding. In Proceedings ofthe IEEE 
Workshop on Speech Recognition and 
Understanding, pages 88-95, Santa 
Barbara, CA, December. 
Jurafsky, Daniel, Rebecca Bates, Noah 
Coccaro, Rachel Martin, Marie Meteer, 
Klaus Ries, Elizabeth Shriberg, Andreas 
Stolcke, Paul Taylor, and Carol Van 
370 
Stolcke et al Dialogue Act Modeling 
Ess-Dykema. 1998. Switchboard iscourse 
language modeling project final report. 
Research Note 30, Center for Language 
and Speech Processing, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, January. 
Jurafsky, Daniel, Elizabeth Shriberg, and 
Debra Biasca. 1997. Switchboard-DAMSL 
Labeling Project Coder's Manual. 
Technical Report 97-02, University of 
Colorado, Institute of Cognitive Science, 
Boulder, CO. http://www.colorado.edu/ 
ling/jurafsky/manual.augustl.html. 
Jurafsky, Daniel, Elizabeth E. Shriberg, 
Barbara Fox, and Traci Curl. 1998. Lexical, 
prosodic, and syntactic ues for dialog 
acts. In Proceedings ofACL/COLING-98 
Workshop on Discourse Relations and 
Discourse Markers, pages 114-120. 
Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Katz, Slava M. 1987. Estimation of 
probabilities from sparse data for the 
language model component of a speech 
recognizer. IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, 
Speech, and Signal Processing, 35(3):400-401, 
March. 
Kita, Kenji, Yoshikazu Fukui, Masaaki 
Nagata, and Tsuyoshi Morimoto. 1996. 
Automatic acquisition of probabilistic 
dialogue models. In H. Timothy Bunnell 
and William Idsardi, editors, Proceedings of
the International Conference on Spoken 
Language Processing, volume 1, 
pages 196-199, Philadelphia, PA, October. 
Kompe, Ralf. 1997. Prosody in speech 
understanding systems. Springer, Berlin. 
Kowtko, Jacqueline C. 1996. The Function of 
Intonation in Task Oriented Dialogue. Ph.D. 
thesis, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh. 
Kuhn, Roland and Renato de Mori. 1990. A 
cache-base natural anguage model for 
speech recognition. IEEE Transactions on 
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 
12(6):570-583, June. 
Levin, Joan A. and Johanna A. Moore. 1977. 
Dialogue games: Metacommunication 
structures for natural anguage 
interaction. Cognitive Science, 1(4):395-420. 
Levin, Lori, Klaus Ries, Ann Thym~-Gobbel, 
and Alon Lavie. 1999. Tagging of speech 
acts and dialogue games in Spanish 
CallHome. In Towards Standards and Tools 
for Discourse Tagging (Proceedings ofthe ACL 
Workshop at ACL'99), pages 42-47, College 
Park, MD, June. 
Linell, Per. 1990. The power of dialogue 
dynamics. In Ivana Markov~ and Klaus 
Foppa, editors, The Dynamics of Dialogue. 
Harvester, Wheatsheaf, New York, 
London, pages 147-177. 
Mast, M., R. Kompe, S. Harbeck, 
A. Kiel~ling, H. Niemann, E. NOth, E. G. 
Schukat-Talamazzini, and V. Warnke. 
1996. Dialog act classification with the 
help of prosody. In H. Timothy Bunnell 
and William Idsardi, editors, Proceedings of
the International Conference on Spoken 
Language Processing, volume 3, 
pages 1,732-1,735, Philadelphia, PA, 
October. 
Menn, Lise and Suzanne E. Boyce. 1982. 
Fundamental frequency and discourse 
structure. Language and Speech, 25:341-383. 
Meteer, Marie, Ann Taylor, Robert 
MacIntyre, and Rukmini Iyer. 1995. 
Dysfluency annotation stylebook for the 
Switchboard corpus. Distributed by LDC, 
ftp://ftp.cis.upenn.edu/pub/treebank/ 
swbd/doc/DFL-book.ps, February. 
Revised June 1995 by Ann Taylor. 
Morgan, Nelson, Eric Fosler, and Nikki 
Mirghafori. 1997. Speech recognition 
using on-line estimation of speaking rate. 
In G. Kokkinakis, N. Fakotakis, and E. 
Dermatas, editors, Proceedings ofthe 5th 
European Conference on Speech 
Communication a d Technology, volume 4, 
pages 2,079-2,082, Rhodes, Greece, 
September. 
Munk, Marcus. 1999. Shallow Statistical 
Parsing for Machine Translation. Diploma 
thesis, Carnegie Mellon University. 
Nagata, Masaaki. 1992. Using pragmatics to 
rule out recognition errors in cooperative 
task-oriented dialogues. In John J. Ohala, 
Terrance M. Nearey, Bruce L. Derwing, 
Megan M. Hodge, and Grace E. Wiebe, 
editors, Proceedings ofthe International 
Conference on Spoken Language Processing, 
volume 1, pages 647-650, Banff, Canada, 
October. 
Nagata, Masaaki and Tsuyoshi Morimoto. 
1993. An experimental statistical dialogue 
model to predict he speech act type of 
the next utterance. In Katsuhiko Shirai, 
Tetsunori Kobayashi, and Yasunari 
Harada, editors, Proceedings ofthe 
International Symposium on Spoken Dialogue, 
pages 83-86, Tokyo, November. 
Nagata, Masaaki and Tsuyoshi Morimoto. 
1994. First steps toward statistical 
modeling of dialogue to predict he 
speech act type of the next utterance. 
Speech Communication, 15:193-203. 
Ohler, Uwe, Stefan Harbeck, and Heinrich 
Niemann. 1999. Discriminative training of 
language model classifiers. In Proceedings 
of the 6th European Conference on Speech 
Communication a d Technology, volume 4, 
pages 1607-1610, Budapest, September. 
371 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 3 
Pearl, Judea. 1988. Probabilistic Reasoning in 
Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible 
Inference. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, 
CA. 
Power, Richard J. D. 1979. The organization 
of purposeful dialogues. Linguistics, 
17:107-152. 
Rabiner, L. R. and B. H. Juang. 1986. An 
introduction to hidden Markov models. 
IEEE ASSP Magazine, 3(1):4-16, January. 
Reithinger, Norbert, Ralf Engel, Michael 
Kipp, and Martin Klesen. 1996. Predicting 
dialogue acts for a speech-to-speech 
translation system. In H. Timothy Bunnell 
and William Idsardi, editors, Proceedings of
the International Conference on Spoken 
Language Processing, volume 2, 
pages 654-657, Philadelphia, PA, October. 
Reithinger, Norbert and Martin Klesen. 
1997. Dialogue act classification using 
language models. In G. Kokkinakis, N. 
Fakotakis, and E. Dermatas, editors, 
Proceedings ofthe 5th European Conference on 
Speech Communication a d Technology, 
volume 4, pages 2,235-2,238, Rhodes, 
Greece, September. 
Ries, Klaus. 1999a. HMM and neural 
network based speech act classification. In
Proceedings ofthe IEEE Conference on 
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 
volume 1, pages 497-500, Phoenix, AZ, 
March. 
Ries, Klaus. 1999b. Towards the detection 
and description of textual meaning 
indicators in spontaneous conversations. 
In Proceedings ofthe 6th European Conference 
on Speech Communication a d Technology, 
volume 3, pages 1,415--1,418, Budapest, 
September. 
Rose, R. C., E. I. Chang, and R. P. 
Lippmann. 1991. Techniques for 
information retrieval from voice 
messages. In Proceedings ofthe IEEE 
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal 
Processing, volume 1, pages 317-320, 
Toronto, May. 
Sacks, H., E. A. Schegloff, and G. Jefferson. 
1974. A simplest semantics for the 
organization of turn-taking in 
conversation. Language, 50(4):696-735. 
Samuel, Ken, Sandra Carberry, and 
K. Vijay-Shanker. 1998. Dialogue act 
tagging with transformation-based 
learning. In Proceedings ofthe 36th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics and 17th International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics, volume 2, 
pages 1,150-1,156, Montreal. 
Schegloff, Emanuel A. 1968. Sequencing in
conversational openings. American 
Anthropologist, 70:1,075-1,095. 
Schegloff, Emanuel A. 1982. Discourse as an 
interactional chievement: Some uses of 
'uh huh' and other things that come 
between sentences. In Deborah Tannen, 
editor, Analyzing Discourse: Text and Talk. 
Georgetown University Press, 
Washington, D.C., pages 71-93. 
Searle, J. R. 1969. Speech Acts. Cambridge 
University Press, London-New York. 
Shriberg, Elizabeth, Rebecca Bates, Andreas 
Stolcke, Paul Taylor, Daniel Jurafsky, 
Klaus Ries, Noah Coccaro, Rachel Martin, 
Marie Meteer, and Carol Van 
Ess-Dykema. 1998. Can prosody aid the 
automatic lassification of dialog acts in 
conversational speech? Language and 
Speech, 41(3-4):439--487. 
Shriberg, Elizabeth, Andreas Stolcke, Dilek 
Hakkani-Ti~r, and GOkhan Tiir. 2000. 
Prosody-based automatic segmentation f 
speech into sentences and topics. Speech 
Communication, 32(1-2). Special Issue on 
Accessing Information in Spoken Audio. 
To appear. 
Siegel, Sidney and N. John Castellan, Jr. 
1988. Nonparametric Statistics for the 
Behavioral Sciences. Second edition. 
McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Stolcke, Andreas and Elizabeth Shriberg. 
1996. Automatic linguistic segmentation 
of conversational speech. In H. Timothy 
Bunnell and William Idsardi, editors, 
Proceedings ofthe International Conference on 
Spoken Language Processing, volume 2, 
pages 1,005-1,008, Philadelphia, PA, 
October. 
Suhm, B. and A. Waibel. 1994. Toward better 
language models for spontaneous speech. 
In Proceedings ofthe International Conference 
on Spoken Language Processing, volume 2, 
pages 831-834, Yokohama, September. 
Taylor, Paul A. 2000. Analysis and synthesis 
of intonation using the tilt model. Journal 
of the Acoustical Society of America, 
107(3):1,697-1,714. 
Taylor, Paul A., Simon King, Stephen Isard, 
and Helen Wright. 1998. Intonation and 
dialog context as constraints for speech 
recognition. Language and Speech, 
41(3-4):489-508. 
Taylor, Paul A., Simon King, Stephen Isard, 
Helen Wright, and Jacqueline Kowtko. 
1997. Using intonation to constrain 
language models in speech recognition. In 
G. Kokkinakis, N. Fakotakis, and E. 
Dermatas, editors, Proceedings ofthe 5th 
European Conference on Speech 
Communication a d Technology, volume 5, 
pages 2,763-2,766, Rhodes, Greece, 
September. 
372 
Stolcke et al Dialogue Act Modeling 
Van Ess-Dykema, Carol and Klaus Ries. 
1998. Linguistically engineered tools for 
speech recognition error analysis. In 
Robert H. Mannell and Jordi 
Robert-Ribes, editors, Proceedings ofthe 
International Conference on Spoken Language 
Processing, volume 5, pages 2,091-2,094, 
Sydney, December. Australian Speech 
Science and Technology Association. 
Viterbi, A. 1967. Error bounds for 
convolutional codes and an 
asymptotically optimum decoding 
algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Information 
Theory, 13:260-269. 
Warnke, Volker, Stefan Harbeck, Elmar 
N0th, Heinrich Niemann, and Michael 
Levit. 1999. Discriminative estimation of 
interpolation parameters for language 
model classifiers. In Proceedings ofthe IEEE 
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal 
Processing, volume 1, pages 525-528, 
Phoenix, AZ, March. 
Warnke, Volker, R. Kompe, Heinrich 
Niemann, and Elmar NOth. 1997. 
Integrated ialog act segmentation a d 
classification using prosodic features and 
language models. In G. Kokkinakis, N. 
Fakotakis, and E. Dermatas, editors, 
Proceedings ofthe 5th European Conference on 
Speech Communication a d Technology, 
volume 1, pages 207-210, Rhodes, Greece, 
September. 
Weber, Elizabeth G. 1993. Varieties of 
Questions in English Conversation. John 
Benjamins, Amsterdam. 
Witten, Ian H. and Timothy C. Bell. 1991. 
The zero-frequency problem: Estimating 
the probabilities of novel events in 
adaptive text compression. IEEE 
Transations on Information Theory, 
37(4):1,085-1,094, July. 
Woszczyna, M. and A. Waibel. 1994. 
Inferring linguistic structure in spoken 
language. In Proceedings ofthe International 
Conference on Spoken Language Processing, 
volume 2, pages 847-850, Yokohama, 
September. 
Wright, Helen. 1998. Automatic utterance 
type detection using suprasegmental 
features. In Robert H. Mannell and Jordi 
Robert-Ribes, editors, Proceedings ofthe 
International Conference on Spoken Language 
Processing, volume 4, pages 1,403-1,406, 
Sydney, December. Australian Speech 
Science and Technology Association. 
Wright, Helen and Paul A. Taylor. 1997. 
Modelling intonational structure using 
hidden Markov models. In Intonation: 
Theory, Models and Applications. Proceedings 
of an ESCA Workshop, pages 333-336, 
Athens, September. 
Yngve, Victor H. 1970. On getting a word in 
edgewise. In Papers from the Sixth Regional 
Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society, 
pages 567-577, Chicago, April. University 
of Chicago. 
Yoshimura, Takashi, Satoru Hayamizu, 
Hiroshi Ohmura, and Kazuyo Tanaka. 
1996. Pitch pattern clustering of user 
utterances in human-machine dialogue. In 
H. Timothy Bunnell and William Idsardi, 
editors, Proceedings ofthe International 
Conference on Spoken Language Processing, 
volume 2, pages 837-840, Philadelphia, 
PA, October. 
373 

