Unsupervised, corpus-based method for extending
a biomedical terminology
Olivier Bodenreider Thomas C. Rindflesch Anita Burgun
Lister Hill National Center
for Biomedical Communications
National Library of Medicine
Bethesda, Maryland, 20894 - USA
{olivier|tcr}@nlm.nih.gov
LIM - University of Rennes
Avenue du Pr L?on Bernard
35043 Rennes Cedex - France
Anita.Burgun
@univ-rennes1.fr


Abstract
Objectives: To automatically extend
downwards an existing biomedical termi-
nology using a corpus and both lexical
and terminological knowledge. Methods:
Adjectival modifiers are removed from
terms extracted from the corpus (three
million noun phrases extracted from
MEDLINE), and demodified terms are
searched for in the terminology (UMLS
Metathesaurus, restricted to disorders and
procedures). A phrase from MEDLINE
becomes a candidate term in the Metathe-
saurus if the following two requirements
are met: 1) a demodified term created
from this phrase is found in the terminol-
ogy and 2) the modifiers removed to cre-
ate the demodified term also modify
existing terms from the terminology, for a
given semantic category. A manual re-
view of a sample of candidate terms was
performed. Results: Out of the 3 million
simple phrases randomly extracted from
MEDLINE, 125,000 new terms were
identified for inclusion in the UMLS.
83% of the 1000 terms reviewed manually
were associated with a relevant UMLS
concept. Discussion: The limitations of
this approach are discussed, as well as ad-
aptation and generalization issues.
1 Introduction
Although providing a reasonable coverage of the
clinical subdomain, Chute et al (1996) showed
that terminological resources such as the Interna-
tional Classificaton of Diseases, SNOMED Inter-
national or the UMLS Metathesaurus do not
capture all the concepts needed for representing
clinical concepts in patient records. In a subsequent
study, Chute and Elkin (1997) suggested that quali-
fiers (including adjectival modifiers) be available
as a separate axis, in order to both increase the ex-
pressivity of a terminology and reduce its com-
plexity by limiting the number of pre-coordinated
terms.
In this study, rather than reducing the complex-
ity, we use modification phenomena in order to
investigate a corpus-based methodology for auto-
matically discovering new terms for inclusion in a
controlled vocabulary. In other words, our objec-
tive is to acquire hyponyms for terms in an original
vocabulary that appear in the literature but are not
present in the original vocabulary.
2 Background
Terms play a major role in a variety of natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) applications, including
machine translation, text understanding, automatic
indexing, and information retrieval. Taking advan-
tage of the availability of large corpora, automatic
terminology acquisition methods were developed,
for example, by Bourigault and Jacquemin (1999).
Word affinities generally play a central role in
these methods. Grefenstette (1994) defines three
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                            the Biomedical Domain, Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 53-60.
                         Proceedings of the Workshop on Natural Language Processing in
orders of word affinities. ?First order affinities de-
scribe collocates of words, second-order affinities
show similarly used words, and third-order affini-
ties create semantic groupings among similar
words?. In term extraction, this analysis is often
applied to modifiers in order to establish groups of
terms modified by a given modifier or the list of all
possible modifiers for a given term.
Hersh et al (1996) demonstrated the feasibility
of applying natural language processing techniques
to a corpus of clinical narratives from an electronic
medical record (EMR) system. Although the terms
extracted were compared to existing terms in the
UMLS, the goal of this study was vocabulary dis-
covery, but not the automatic integration of newly
discovered terms into the terminology.
The automatic extension of an existing resource
based on a corpus has also been studied. For ex-
ample, Habert et al (1998) propose a method for
extending an existing specialized semantic lexicon.
Although related to these studies, our objective
is to automatically extend downwards an existing
biomedical terminology using a corpus and a com-
bination of lexical, syntactic, and terminological
knowledge.

In this study, the textual source, or corpus, is
MEDLINE? 1, the U.S. National Library of Medi-
cine?s (NLM) premier bibliographic database.
MEDLINE contains over eleven million references
to articles from more than 4,600 worldwide jour-
nals in life sciences with a concentration on bio-
medicine.
We use the Unified Medical Language System?
(UMLS?) Metathesaurus? 2 as the terminology to
be extended. The Metathesaurus, also developed
by NLM, is organized by concept or meaning. A
concept is defined as a cluster of terms represent-
ing the same meaning (synonyms, lexical variants,
acronyms, translations). For example, names for
the disease multiple sclerosis include multiple scle-
rosis, MS, ?multiple sclerosis, NOS?, disseminated
sclerosis, and scl?rose en plaques. The 13th edition
(2002) of the UMLS Metathesaurus contains over
1.5 million unique English terms drawn from more
than sixty families of medical vocabularies, and
organized in some 775,000 concepts.
                                                         
1
 www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/factsheets/medline.html
2
 umlsks.nlm.nih.gov
In order to address the large size of the
Metathesaurus, we limited our study to a signifi-
cant subdomain of clinical medicine: disorders and
procedures (currently about 615,000 unique terms,
corresponding to some 157,000 disorder concepts
and 95,000 medical procedure concepts).
In the UMLS, each concept is categorized by
semantic types (ST) from the semantic network.
McCray et al (2001) designed groupings of STs
that provide a partition the Metathesaurus and,
therefore, can be used to extract consistent sets of
concepts corresponding to a subdomain, such as
disorders or procedures.
Disorder and procedure terms were restricted to
terms suitable for natural language processing, ex-
cluding, for example, such terms as abdominal in-
jury, NOS. The notation ?NOS?, meaning ?not
otherwise specified?, is a marker for underspecifi-
cation often found in terminological resources.
When identified in the Metathesaurus, obsolete and
truncated terms were also excluded. 477,491
unique terms were selected for further processing.
3 Methods
The approach we propose for discovering candi-
dates for Metathesaurus concepts is to compare
phrases extracted from MEDLINE to current
UMLS phrases. We capitalize on differences in
modification structure between the MEDLINE
phrase and the UMLS phrase to determine candi-
dates for inclusion in the Metathesaurus. The cru-
cial difference is between a phrase containing
adjectival modification and a similar phrase ?de-
modified? by removing its adjectives.
A phrase from MEDLINE becomes a candidate
term in the Metathesaurus if the following two re-
quirements are met: 1) a demodified term created
from this phrase is found in the terminology and 2)
similarly modified terms exist in the terminology,
for a given semantic category. For example, the
phrase pancreatic bronchogenic cyst  is a candidate
term for a disorder in the Metathesaurus because
bronchogenic cyst  exists in the Metathesaurus
(concept: C0006281) and other Metathesaurus dis-
order terms are modified by the same adjective
pancreatic  (e.g., pancreatic hemorrhage).
3.1 Processing phrases from MEDLINE
Recently, Srinivasan et al (2002) performed a
shallow syntactic analysis on the entire MEDLINE
collection, using only titles and abstracts in Eng-
lish. Although their goal was to find Metathesaurus
concepts in MEDLINE citations, an interesting
side-effect of their analysis was the production of
some 175 million noun phrase types that are avail-
able for further research.
From these phrases, we selected the subset of
?simple? phrases, i.e., noun phrases excluding
prepositional modification or any other complex
feature. Examples of simple MEDLINE noun
phrases include abdominal aneurysmal aortitis  and
radical aggressive tumor resection. Out of some
forty million simple noun phrases, we randomly
selected a subset of three million phrases to be
used as our corpus, representative of the noun
phrases found in MEDLINE.
The phrases in our sample were then submitted
to an underspecified syntactic analysis described
by Rindflesch et al (2000) that draws on a stochas-
tic tagger (see Cutting et al (1992) for details) as
well as the SPECIALIST Lexicon, a large syntactic
lexicon of both general and medical English that is
distributed with the UMLS. Although not perfect,
this combination of resources effectively addresses
the phenomenon of part-of-speech ambiguity in
English.
The resulting syntactic structure identifies the
head and modifiers for the noun phrase analyzed.
Each modifier is also labeled as being adjectival,
adverbial, or nominal. Although all types of modi-
fication in the simple English noun phrase were
labeled, only adjectives and nouns were selected
for further analysis in this study. For example, the
term catastrophic cervical spinal cord injuries  was
analyzed as:
[[mod([catastrophic,adj]),
  mod([cervical,adj]),
  mod([spinal,adj]),
  mod([cord,noun]),
  head([injuries,noun])]]
A similar analysis was performed on UMLS
terms for disorders and procedures.
3.2 Comparing MEDLINE phrases to UMLS
phrases
The method we use can be summarized as follows.
Starting with a random subset of three million sim-
ple noun phrases from MEDLINE, we excluded
those that were already present in the UMLS by
mapping them to the Metathesaurus. We then per-
formed a shallow syntactic analysis of the phrases
in order to select those consisting of one or more
modifiers followed by a head noun.
Demodified terms were created by removing
every possible combinations of modifiers in the
terms. The same process was applied to disorder
and procedure terms in the Metathesaurus in order
to obtain a list of allowable adjectival modifiers for
these two categories. Such modifiers in the
Metathesaurus serve as a filter for MEDLINE
phrases, since finding a similarly modified term in
the UMLS is one of the two requirements for can-
didate terms. Demodified terms created from acci-
dental arterial perforations  include arterial
perforations, accidental perforations, and perfora-
tions.
Demodified terms derived from MEDLINE
phrases whose modifiers are all allowable are then
mapped to the Metathesaurus. In this example,
both accidental  and arterial  are adjectives found in
the Metathesaurus in disorder or procedure terms.
The second requirement for candidate terms is that
at least one associated demodified term be mapped
to a concept in the Metathesaurus. Two terms from
our example map to Metathesaurus concepts: arte-
rial perforations  and perforations. The term acci-
dental perforations  does not map to any concept
and is therefore eliminated from further process-
ing. The last step ensures that, in case of multiple
demodified terms, the finest-grained is selected.
Arterial perforations  is selected over perforations
for this reason.
Figure 1 illustrates the sequence of methods
used in the study and the interactions between
processing MEDLINE phrases and Metathesaurus
terms. It also presents the number of MEDLINE
phrases and Metathesaurus terms present before
and after each of the six steps detailed below.
Step1. Mapping phrases to the UMLS
In order to identify MEDLINE phrases that already
exist in the Metathesaurus, all MEDLINE phrases
in our sample were mapped to the UMLS by first
attempting an exact match between input term and
Metathesaurus concept. If an exact match failed,
normalization was then attempted. This process
makes the input and target terms potentially com-
patible by eliminating such inessential differences
as inflection, case and hyphen variation, as well as
word order variation. Duplicate names were re-
moved from each set prior to mapping to the
UMLS.
Step 2. Identifying (adj+, noun*, head) phrases
Since this method is based on adjectival modifica-
tion, the syntactic analysis was used to restrict the
original sets of MEDLINE phrases and Metathe-
saurus terms to phrases and terms having the fol-
lowing structure: (adj+, noun*, head).
The phrase is required to start with an adjectival
modifier, possibly followed by other adjectives and
end with a head noun, possibly preceded by other
nouns. This specification excludes both simple
terms (e.g., one isolated noun) and complex terms,
not suitable for our analysis.
Step 3. Creating demodified terms
When adjectival modifiers are identified in a term
O, a set of demodified terms {T1, T2,?,Tn} is cre-
ated by removing from term O any combinations
of adjectival modifiers found in it. While the struc-
ture of the demodified terms remains syntactically
correct, the semantics of some terms may be
anomalous, especially when adjectives other than
the leftmost are removed. Since most of them are
semantically valid, we found it convenient to keep
all demodified terms for further analysis. Demodi-
fied terms with incorrect semantics will be filtered
out later in the experiment, since they will not map
to an existing concept.
The number of demodified terms is 2m ? 1, m
being the number of adjectival modifiers. For ex-
ample, the term chronic sciatic constriction injury
starts with the two adjectival modifiers chronic  and
sciatic, so that the following three demodified
terms are generated sciatic constriction injury,
chronic constriction injury, and constriction injury.
Although there is no need to demodify UMLS
terms in this study, the removal of adjectival modi-
fiers was used to establish a list of adjectives oc-
curring in disorder and procedure terms. These
adjectives constitute the list of allowable modifiers
for the two categories of terms studied.
Step 4. Searching for similarly modified terms
in the Metathesaurus
In this study, one requirement for candidate terms
is that a similarly modified term be present in the
terminology. The list of allowable modifiers com-
puted from Metathesaurus terms at the previous
step provides a simple way to implement this con-
straint. For a given category, an allowable modifier
indicates that some terms from this category are
modified by this modifier, i.e., that a similarly
modified term exists in the Metathesaurus.
Practically, MEDLINE phrases whose adjecti-
val modifiers do not all belong to the list of allow-
able modifiers are excluded from further analysis,
because, by definition, there will be no similarly
modified term in the Metathesaurus.
Step 5. Searching for demodified terms in the
Metathesaurus
The second requirement for a MEDLINE phrase to
become a candidate term is that a demodified term
created from this phrase be found in the terminol-
ogy. Using only MEDLINE phrases whose adjec-
tival modifiers all belong to the list of allowable
modifiers, the demodified terms created from these
phrases are mapped to the UMLS using the proce-
dure previously described. MEDLINE phrases with
no demodified term mapped to a UMLS concept
are definitely excluded. Demodified terms map-
ping to concepts in categories other than disorders
or procedures are also eliminated.
As explained earlier, the compatibility of the
modifiers of the candidate terms is checked against
the list of allowable modifiers for the category of
the Metathesaurus concept(s) to which a demodi-
fied term mapped. In some cases, a cadidate term
is eliminated because the modified term maps to a
disorder concept, while its modifiers are compati-
ble with procedures (or the other way around).
Step 6. Hooking candidate terms to the termi-
nology
The remaining step consists of finding the appro-
priate hook in the terminology for the candidate
term. Based on the fact that modification is nor-
mally associated with a hyponymic relation, tenta-
tive parents for the candidate term will be those
that map to the demodified terms generated from
this term.
When only one demodified term maps to a
Metathesaurus concept, this concept is selected as
the tentative parent for the candidate term. When
several demodified terms map to Metathesaurus
concepts, the preference is given to the concept
that is likely to be closest to the term. As a surro-
gate for closeness, we use the following heuristics:
1) the fewer modifiers removed, the closer the
terms, and 2) the candidate term and the demodi-
fied term are closer if the modifier removed is the
leftmost modifier. In the rare cases where several
demodified terms are deemed equally close to the
candidate term, they are all selected as tentative
parents.
4 Evaluation
A subset of 1000 candidate terms was randomly
selected to evaluate this method. The existence of a
hyponymic relationship between the candidate
term and the Metathesaurus concept(s) selected as
valid mappings for the demodified terms created
from the candidate term was evaluated by a manual
review performed by the authors. A secondary ob-
jective of this evaluation was to gain insights about
how these methods could be tuned in order to pre-
vent inaccurate mappings and select the most use-
ful candidate terms.
The following classification was used to de-
scribe the quality of the hyponymic relationship
between the candidate term and the Metathesaurus
concept(s) selected: ?relevant? means that the
hooking of the candidate term to the terminology
was relevant, even if a more specific concept was
available; ?non relevant? means that none of the
Metathesaurus concepts selected was a correct
hook for the candidate term; ?more or less rele-
vant? means that the Metathesaurus concepts se-
lected were not irrelevant as hooks, but were
distant ancestors, i. e., too general for the relation-
ship to be fully informative. Finally, for polyse-
mous candidate terms, it was not possible to
evaluate the quality of the relationship with cer-
tainty.
5 Results
Out of the 3 million randomly selected simple
MEDLINE phrases, 125,464 phrases were selected
as candidate terms with (at least) one Metathesau-
rus concept to hook them to. Details about the
number of phrases selected at each step of the
processing are given in Figure 1.
The total number of adjectival modifiers found
in a MEDLINE phrase ranged from 1 to 7. Phrases
with one (42% of the phrases) or two (46% of the
phrases) modifiers predominated. The candidate
terms resulted from removing one modifier from
the original phrase in 66% of the cases, and two
modifiers in 30% of the cases. The modifier(s) re-
moved included the leftmost modifier in 95% of
the cases. The list of the most frequent modifiers in
existing terms and candidate terms for disorders
and procedures is given in Table 1.
In 78% of the cases, only one demodified term
was generated from the original phrase. Two de-
modified terms were generated in 17% of the
cases. In 61% of the cases, only the leftmost adjec-
tive was removed. The first two adjectives in the
phrase were removed in 29% of the cases.
Out of the 1000 candidate terms reviewed as
hyponyms of some Metathesaurus concept, 834
were considered relevant, 28 more or less relevant,
and 138 not relevant.
6 Discussion
This study confirms the observations made in two
previous studies taking advantage of adjectival
modification phenomena in various tasks related to
terminologies, in particular to suggest hyponymic
relations among medical terms [Bodenreider et al
(2001)] and to assess the consistency of a biomedi-
cal terminology [Bodenreider et al (2002)].
Although a larger-scale evaluation would be re-
quired to fully assess the results, the major finding
is that the method is effective at automatically
identifying many new terms for inclusion into an
extended terminological resource. However, the
evaluation revealed some limitations which are
analyzed below. Adaptation and generalization
issues will be addressed as well.
Limitations
The errors discovered during the manual review
illustrate some of the limitations of this method.
More exactly, these limitations are common to
many NLP applications. Although acronyms were
sometimes associated with their correct meaning in
the Metathesaurus, in the set of terms reviewed
manually, the presence of acronyms was responsi-
ble for 22% of the non-relevant associations. For
example, the MEDLINE term individual black
rats, whose two adjectival modifiers are allowable
disease modifiers, is wrongly identified as a hypo-
nym of recurrent acute tonsillitis  because the ac-
ronym RAT is associated (as a synonym) with the
disease recurrent acute tonsillitis  in the Metathe-
saurus. In some cases, failure to identify the correct
part of speech also resulted in inaccurate associa-
tions (e.g., controlling stress  to stress  where con-
trolling was actually not an adjective). Not all
truncated terms present in the Metathesaurus syno-
nyms of some concepts are identified as such.
When not identified, truncated terms are used for
the mapping, sometimes resulting in inaccurate
associations. For example, the candidate term uri-
nary protein is wrongly associated with the con-
cept protein measurement  because protein is
considered a synonym for the procedure protein
measurement  in the Metathesaurus.
Sometimes, the association is not inaccurate,
but the concept associated with the candidate term
is very general, and the relationship weakly infor-
mative. For example, once demodified, aplastic
syndrome  is associated with syndrome, a concept
close to the top of the hierarchy. Although aplastic
syndrome  is a valid hyponym of syndrome, it
would be more accurately categorized as a kind of
hematologic syndrome, which requires domain
knowledge unavailable here.
Finally, in some cases, because hyponymy is
the only relation considered, the association of a
candidate term with a Metathesaurus concept, al-
though relevant, is not necessarily the closest pos-
sible. For example, the term colonic vaginal fistula
is correctly associated with its hypernym vaginal
fistula, but fails to be identified as a synonym of
the concept fistula of vagina to large intestine.
Practically, in a completely automatic setting, the
use of this algorithm could result in creating sev-
eral concepts for the same meaning.
Tuning
This algorithm can be tuned from a strict mode,
allowing fewer phrases to automatically become
candidate terms, but with greater precision, to a
relaxed mode, selecting a larger number of candi-
date terms when recall is the priority. The latter
would require some supervision prior to integrating
the candidate terms into the terminology.
Almost all the limitations mentioned above can
be addressed. Terms containing acronyms could be
identified and eliminated before mapping to the
Metathesaurus. Part of speech taggers trained on a
terminology would more accurately identify the
part of speech of words that can be both adjectives
and nouns. Truncated Metathesaurus terms should
be systematically excluded from the index used for
mapping. Methods for identifying synonymy based
on derivational variation or other techniques could
also be investigated.
Moreover, additional refinement could be
brought to this method. For example, when de-
modified terms are created, the removal of adjec-
tives could be restricted to the leftmost, thus
maximally preserving the structure of the remain-
ing noun phrase, and therefore limiting the risks of
association with a semantically distant concept.
Finally, using statistical information about the
distribution of adjectival modifiers could provide a
surrogate for the strength of the association. For
example, knowing that many diseases can be acute,
if this adjective is found in the corpus as the modi-
fier of a disease concept, this association could be
accepted with a confidence proportional to the
relative frequency of this modifier for all diseases,
in the case of acute for a disease, a high confi-
dence.
Generalization
The method presented was voluntarily restricted to
the domain of disorders and procedures, to adjecti-
val modification, and to the biomedical literature.
Generalizing to other domains would pose no
problems as long as terms of their terminology is
amenable to natural language processing tech-
niques and modification phenomena. This would
include domains such as anatomy or physiology.
However, domains such as molecular biology, with
many gene and gene product names, and chemis-
try, with many chemical names would probably
yield fewer candidate terms.
Nominal modification is common in English
and in principle can be addressed with a methodol-
ogy similar to the one discussed here. Nominal
modifiers often express a quality more closely re-
lated semantically to the head than do adjectives.
Details in the methodology would be adjusted to
accommodate this characteristic.
Generalization to other corpora such as patient
records and electronic textbooks of medicine
would likely yield additional terms.

Finally, although this method relies on features
of the UMLS such as the semantic categorization
of the concepts, it could also be applied to other
terminologies that do not provide this feature, such
as the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH). In this
case, the concept hierarchy itself could be used as a
surrogate for the categorization. For example, if
the candidate term chronic rheumatic fever  is asso-
ciated with the MeSH term rheumatic fever, its
category is disease because the polyhierarchical
structure in which rheumatic fever  is involved ul-
timately converges to the top of the C hierarchy,
i.e., the term diseases.
References
Bodenreider, O., Burgun, A., and Rindflesch, T. C.
(2001). Lexically-suggested hyponymic relations
among medical terms and their representation in the
UMLS. Proceedings of TIA'2001 "Terminology and
Artificial Intelligence", 11-21.
Bodenreider, O., Burgun, A., and Rindflesch, T. C.
(2002). Assessing the consistency of a biomedical
terminology through lexical knowledge. Proceedings
of the Workshop on Natural Language Processing in
Biomedical Applications (NLPBA'2002), 77-83.
Bourigault, D., and Jacquemin, C. (1999). Term Extrac-
tion + Term Clustering: An Integrated Platform for
Computer-Aided Terminology. Proceedings of the
Ninth Conference of the European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (EACL'99).
Chute, C. G., Cohn, S. P., Campbell, K. E., Oliver, D.
E., and Campbell, J. R. (1996). The content coverage
of clinical classifications. For The Computer-Based
Patient Record Institute's Work Group on Codes &
Structures. J Am Med Inform Assoc  3, 224-233.
Chute, C. G., and Elkin, P. L. (1997). A clinically de-
rived terminology: qualification to reduction. Proc
AMIA Annu Fall Symp, 570-574.
Cutting, D. R., Kupiec, J., Pedersen, J. O., and Sibun, P.
(1992). A practical part-of-speech tagger. Proceed-
ings of the Third Conference on Applied Natural
Language Processing, 133-140.
Grefenstette, G. (1994). Corpus-derived first, second
and third-order word affinities. Paper presented at:
EURALEX (Amsterdam).
Habert, B., Nazarenko, A., Zweigenbaum, P., and
Bouaud, J. (1998).  Extending an existing specialized
semantic lexicon. Proceedings of the First Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, 663-668.
Hersh, W. R., Campbell, E. H., Evans, D. A., and
Brownlow, N. D. (1996). Empirical, automated vo-
cabulary discovery using large text corpora and ad-
vanced natural language processing tools. Proc
AMIA Annu Fall Symp, 159-163.
McCray, A. T., Burgun, A., and Bodenreider, O. (2001).
Aggregating UMLS semantic types for reducing con-
ceptual complexity. Medinfo  10, 216-220.
Rindflesch, T. C., Rajan, J. V., and Hunter, L. (2000).
Extracting molecular binding relationships from
biomedical text. In "Proceedings of the 6th Applied
Natural Language Processing Conference" (San
Francisco, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers), pp. 188-
195.
Srinivasan, S., Rindflesch, T. C., Hole, W. T., and
Aronson, A. R. (2002). Finding UMLS Metathesau-
rus concepts in MEDLINE. Proc AMIA Annu Fall
Symp, (submitted).




Table 1. Most frequent modifiers identified in existing terms (UMLS)
and candidate terms (MEDLINE) for disorders and procedures.

Disorder terms Procedure terms
MEDLINE UMLS MEDLINE UMLS
severe congenital using surgical
chronic acute clinical serum
acute accidental two diagnostic
primary intentional routine dental
human chronic conventional local
recurrent pulmonary surgical therapeutic
pulmonary malignant initial total
multiple cerebral human patient
two renal total percutaneous
malignant benign standard cardiac

2,979,060
phrases not in UMLS
3,000,000
randomly selected
?simple? MEDLINE phrases
map to
UMLS
477,491
unique English terms
(disorders and procedures)
1,586,469
UMLS Metathesaurus
unique English terms
select disorders +
procedures
79,610
(mod+, head) terms
(adj+, noun*, head)
filter
remove
modifiers
3,114
procedure
modifiers
6,951
disorder
modifiers
1,322,468
(mod+, head) phrases
2,826,848
demodified terms
1,619,338
selected demodified terms
130,352
selected demodified terms +
UMLS mapping (diso./proc.)
(adj+, noun*, head)
filter
remove
modifiers
filter
modifiers
map to
UMLS
125,464
candidate terms
select
mapping






 


Figure 1. Summary of the methods for comparing MEDLINE phrases to UMLS terms.
Abstraction Summarization for Managing the Biomedical  
Research Literature 
 
 
Marcelo Fiszman Thomas C. Rindflesch Halil Kilicoglu 
Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications 
National Library of Medicine 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
{fiszman|tcr|halil}@nlm.nih.gov 
 
 
Abstract 
We explore a semantic abstraction approach 
to automatic summarization in the biomedical 
domain. The approach relies on a semantic 
processor that functions as the source inter-
preter and produces a list of predications. A 
transformation stage then generalizes and 
condenses this list, ultimately generating a 
conceptual condensate for a disorder input 
topic. The final condensate is displayed in 
graphical form. We provide a set of principles 
for the transformation stage and describe the 
application of this approach to multidocument 
input. Finally, we examine the characteristics 
and quality of the condensates produced. 
1 Introduction 
Several approaches to text-based information manage-
ment applications are being pursued, including word-
based statistical processing and those depending on 
string matching, syntax, or semantics. Statistical sys-
tems have enjoyed considerable success for information 
retrieval, especially using the vector space model (Sal-
ton et al, 1975). Since the SIR system (Raphael, 1968), 
some have felt that automatic information management 
could best be addressed using semantic information. 
Subsequent research (Schank, 1975; Wilks, 1976) ex-
panded this paradigm. More recently, a number of ex-
amples of knowledge-based applications show 
considerable promise. These include systems for ma-
chine translation (Viegas et al, 1998), question answer-
ing, (Harabagiu et al, 2001; Clark et al, 2003), and 
information retrieval (Mihalcea and Moldovan, 2000).  
In the biomedical domain, the MEDLINE? biblio-
graphic database provides opportunities for keeping 
abreast of the research literature. However, the large 
size of this online resource presents potential challenges 
to the user. Query results often include hundreds or 
thousands of citations (including title and abstract). 
Automatic summarization offers potential help in man-
aging such results; however, the most popular approach, 
extraction, faces challenges when applied to multi-
document summarization (McKeown et al, 2001). 
Abstraction summarization offers an attractive alter-
native for managing citations resulting from MEDLINE 
searches. We present a knowledge-rich abstraction ap-
proach that depends on underspecified semantic inter-
pretation of biomedical text. As an example, a graphical 
representation (Batagelj, 2003) of the semantic predica-
tions serving as a summary (or conceptual condensate) 
from our system is shown in Figure 1. The input text 
was a MEDLINE citation with title ?Gastrointestinal 
tolerability and effectiveness of rofecoxib versus 
naproxen in the treatment of osteoarthritis: a random-
ized, controlled trial.? 
 
Figure 1. Semantic abstraction summarization 
Our semantic interpreter and the abstraction sum-
marizer based on it both draw on semantic information 
from the Unified Medical Language System? (UMLS),? 
a resource for structured knowledge in the biomedical 
domain. After introducing the semantic interpreter, we 
describe the transformation phase of our paradigm, dis-
cussing principles that depend on semantic notions in 
order to condense the semantic predications represent-
ing the content of text. Initially, this process was applied 
to summarizing single documents. We discuss its adap-
tation to multidocument input, specifically to the set of 
citations resulting from a query to the MEDLINE data-
base. Although we have not yet formally evaluated the 
effectiveness of the resulting condensate, we discuss its 
characteristics and possibilities as both an indicative and 
informative summary. 
2 
2.1 
2.2 
Background 
Lexical Semantics  
Research in lexical semantics (Cruse, 1986) provides 
insight into the interaction of reference and linguistic 
structure. In addition to paradigmatic lexical phenomena 
such as synonymy, hypernymy, and meronymy, diathe-
sis alternation (Levin and Rappaport Hovav, 1996), 
deep case (Fillmore, 1968), and the interaction of predi-
cational structure and events (Tenny and Pustejovsky, 
2000) are being investigated. Some of the consequences 
of research in lexical semantics, with particular attention 
to natural language processing, are discussed by Puste-
jovsky et al (1993) and Nirenburg and Raskin (1996). 
Implemented systems often draw on the information 
contained in WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). 
In the biomedical domain, UMLS knowledge pro-
vides considerable support for text-based systems. 
(Burgun and Bodenreider (2001) compare the UMLS to 
WordNet.) The UMLS (Humphreys et al, 1998) con-
sists of three components: the Metathesaurus,? Seman-
tic Network (McCray, 1993), and SPECIALIST 
Lexicon (McCray et al, 1994). The Metathesaurus is at 
the core and contains more than 900,000 concepts com-
piled from more than sixty controlled vocabularies. 
Many of these have hierarchical structure, and some 
contain meronymic information in addition to hy-
pernymy. Editors combine terms in the constituent vo-
cabularies into a set of synonyms (cf. WordNet?s 
synsets), which constitutes a concept. One term in this 
set is called the ?preferred name? and is used as the 
concept name, as shown in (1). 
(1) Concept: Dyspnea  Synonyms: Breath-
lessness, Shortness of breath, Breathless, Diffi-
culty breathing, Respiration difficulty, etc. 
In addition, each concept in the Metathesaurus is as-
signed at least one semantic type (such as ?Sign or 
Symptom? for (1)), which categorizes the concept in the 
biomedical domain. The semantic types available are 
drawn from the Semantic Network, in which they are 
organized hierarchically in two single-inheritance trees, 
one under the root ?Entity? and another under ?Event?.  
The Semantic Network also contains semantic 
predications with semantic types as arguments. The 
predicates are semantic relations relevant to the bio-
medical domain and are organized as subtypes of five 
classes, such as TEMPORALLY_RELATED_TO and  
FUNCTIONALLY_RELATED_TO.  Examples are shown in 
(2). 
(2)  ?Pharmacologic Substance? TREATS ?Disease 
or Syndrome?, ?Virus? CAUSES ?Disease or 
Syndrome? 
Lexical semantic information in the UMLS is dis-
tributed between the Metathesaurus and the Semantic 
Network. The Semantic Network stipulates permissible 
argument categories for classes of semantic predica-
tions, although it does not refer to deep case relations. 
The Metathesaurus encodes synonymy, hypernymy, and 
meronymy (especially for human anatomy). Synonymy 
is represented by including synonymous terms under a 
single concept. Word sense ambiguity is represented to 
some extent in the Metathesaurus. For example dis-
charge is represented by the two concepts in (3), with 
different semantic types. 
(3) Discharge, Body Substance: ?Body Substance? 
Patient Discharge: ?Health Care Activity? 
The SPECIALIST Lexicon contains orthographic in-
formation (such as spelling variants) and syntactic in-
formation, including inflections for nouns and verbs and 
sub-categorization for verbs. A suite of lexical access 
tools accommodate other phenomena, including deriva-
tional variation.  
 SemRep 
Our summarization system relies on semantic predica-
tions provided by SemRep (Rindflesch and Fiszman, 
2003), a program that draws on UMLS information to 
provide underspecified semantic interpretation in the 
biomedical domain (Srinivasan and Rindflesch, 2002; 
Rindflesch et al, 2000). Semantic interpretation is based 
on a categorical analysis that is underspecified in that it 
is a partial parse (cf. McDonald, 1992). This analysis 
depends on the SPECIALIST Lexicon and the Xerox 
part-of-speech tagger  (Cutting et al, 1992) and pro-
vides simple noun phrases that are mapped to concepts 
in the UMLS Metathesaurus using MetaMap (Aronson, 
2001).  
The categorial analysis enhanced with Metathesau-
rus concepts and associated semantic types provides the 
basis for semantic interpretation, which relies on two 
components: a set of ?indicator? rules and an (under-
specified) dependency grammar. Indicator rules map 
between syntactic phenomena (such as verbs, nominali-
zations, and prepositions) and predicates in the Seman-
tic Network. For example, such rules stipulate that the 
preposition for indicates the semantic predicate TREATS 
in sumatriptan for migraine. The application of an indi-
cator rule satisfies the first of several necessary condi-
tions for the interpretation of a semantic predication.  
Argument identification is controlled by a partial 
dependency grammar. As is common in such grammars, 
a general principle disallows intercalated dependencies 
(crossing lines). Further, a noun phrase may not be used 
as an argument in the interpretation of more than one 
semantic predication, without license. (Coordination 
and relativization license noun phrase reuse.) A final 
principle states that if a rule can apply it must apply. 
Semantic interpretation in SemRep is not based on 
the ?real? syntactic structure of the sentence; however  
linear order of the components of the partial parse is 
crucial. Argument identification rules are articulated for 
each indicator in terms of surface subject and object.  
For example, subjects of verbs are to the left and objects 
are to the right. (Passivization is accommodated before 
final interpretation.) There are also rules for preposi-
tions and several rules for arguments of nominaliza-
tions.  
The final condition on the interpretation of an asso-
ciative semantic predication is that it must conform to 
the appropriate relationship in the Semantic Network. 
For example, if a predication is being constructed on the 
basis of an indicator rule for TREATS, the syntactic ar-
guments identified by the dependency grammar must 
have been mapped to Metathesaurus concepts with se-
mantic types that conform to the semantic arguments of 
TREATS in the Semantic Network, such as ?Pharma-
cologic Substance? and ?Disease or Syndrome?. Hy-
pernymic propositions are further controlled by 
hierarchical information in the Metathesaurus (Rind-
flesch and Fiszman, 2003). 
In processing the sentence in (4), SemRep first con-
structs the partial categorical representation given 
schematically in (5).  This is enhanced with semantic 
information from the Metathesaurus as shown in (6), 
where the corresponding concept for each relevant noun 
phrase is shown, along with its semantic type. The final 
semantic interpretation for  (4) is given in (7). 
 
(4) Mycoplasma pneumonia is an infection of the 
lung caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae 
(5) [[Mycoplasma pneumonia] [is] [an infection] 
[of the lung] [caused] [by Mycoplasma pneumo-
niae]] 
(6) ?Mycoplasma pneumonia???Disease or Syn-
drome? 
?Infection???Disease or Syndrome? 
?Lung???Body Part, Organ, or Organ Compo-
nent? 
?Mycoplasma pneumoniae???Bacterium? 
(7) Mycoplasma Pneumonia ISA Infection  
Lung LOCATION_OF Infection 
Lung LOCATION_OF Mycoplasma Pneumonia 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae CAUSES Infection  
Mycoplasma pneumoniae CAUSES My-
coplasma Pneumonia 
3 
3.1 
Automatic Summarization 
Automatic summarization is ?a reductive transformation 
of source text to summary text through content reduc-
tion, selection, and/or generalization on what is impor-
tant in the source? (Sparck Jones, 1999). Two 
paradigms are being pursued: extraction and abstraction 
(Hahn and Mani, 2000). Extraction concentrates on cre-
ating a summary from the actual text occurring in the 
source document, relying on notions such as frequency 
of occurrence and cue phrases to identify important in-
formation. 
Abstraction, on the other hand, relies either on lin-
guistic processing followed by structural compaction 
(Mani et al, 1999) or on interpretation of the source text 
into a semantic representation, which is then condensed 
to retain only the most important information asserted in 
the source. The semantic abstraction paradigm is attrac-
tive due to its ability to manipulate information that may 
not have been explicitly articulated in the source docu-
ment. However, due to the challenges in providing se-
mantic representation, semantic abstraction has not been 
widely pursued, although the TOPIC system (Hahn and 
Reimer, 1999) is a notable exception.  
Semantic Abstraction Summarization 
We are devising an approach to automatic summariza-
tion in the semantic abstraction paradigm, relying on 
SemRep for semantic interpretation of source text. The 
transformation stage that condenses these predications is 
guided by principles articulated in terms of frequency of 
occurrence as well as lexical semantic phenomena.  
We do not produce a textual summary; instead, we 
present the disorder condensates in graphical format. 
We first discuss the application of this approach to 
summarizing single documents (full text research arti-
cles on treatment of disease) and then consider its ex-
tension to multidocument input in the form of biomedi-
cal scientific abstracts directed at clinical researchers.  
The transformation stage takes as input a list of 
Sem
3.2 Transformation 
In the semantic abstraction paradigm the transformation 
b. Connectivity: Also include ?useful? additional 
c. Novelty: Do not include predications that the 
d. Saliency: Only include the most frequently oc-
Alth urrence (saliency) plays a 
rol
(relevance), a condensation process, identi-
fies
ders} 
 {Disorders} 
isorders} 
ders} 
s of 
sem
a generalization process 
and
ovelty) provides further condensation by 
elim
tion phase 
and
n these principles are applied to the semantic 
pre
 
Rep predications and a seed disorder concept. The 
output is a conceptual condensate for the input concept. 
Before transformation begins, predications are subjected 
to a focused word sense disambiguation filter. Branded 
drug names such as Advantage (Advantage brand of 
Imidacloprid) and Direct (Direct type of resin cement), 
which are ambiguous with the more common meaning 
of their names, are resolved to their non-pharmaceutical 
sense.  
stage condenses and generalizes, and in our approach 
these processes are based on four general principles: 
a. Relevance: Include predications on the topic of 
the summary 
predications 
user already knows 
curring predications 
ough frequency of occ
e in determining predications to be included in the 
summary, the other three principles depend crucially on 
lexical semantic information from the UMLS. These 
four principles guide the phases involved in creating a 
summary. 
Phase 1 
 predications on a given topic (in this study, disor-
ders) and is controlled by a semantic schema 
(Jacquelinet et al, 2003) for that topic. The schema is 
represented as a set of predications in which the predi-
cate is drawn from a relation in the UMLS Semantic 
Network and the arguments are represented as a ?do-
main? covering a class of concepts in the Metathesaurus 
(Disorders, for example).  
{Disorders} ISA {Disor
{Etiological process} CAUSES
{Treatment} TREATS  {Disorders} 
{Body location} LOCATION_OF {D
{Disorders} OCCURS_IN {Disorders} 
{Disorders} CO-OCCURS_WITH {Disor
Each domain for the schema is defined in term
antic categorization in the Semantic Network. For 
example {Disorders} is a subset of the semantic group 
Disorders (McCray et al, 2001) and contains the fol-
lowing semantic types: ?Disease or Syndrome?, ?Neo-
plastic Process?, ?Mental or Behavioral Dysfunction?, 
and ?Sign or Symptom?. Although the schema is not 
complete, it represents a substantial amount of what can 
be said about disorders. Predications produced by Sem-
Rep must conform to this schema in order to be in-
cluded in the conceptual condensate; such predications 
are called ?core predications.? 
Phase 2 (connectivity) is 
 identifies predications occurring in neighboring 
semantic space of the core. This is accomplished by 
retrieving all the predications that share an argument 
with one of the core predications. For example, from 
Naproxen TREATS Osteoarthritis, non-core predica-
tions such as Naproxen ISA NSAID are included in the 
condensate. 
Phase 3 (n
inating predications that have a generic argument, 
as determined by hierarchical depth in the Metathesau-
rus. Arguments occurring less than an empirically de-
termined distance from the root are considered too 
general to be useful, and predications containing them 
are eliminated. For example Pharmaceutical Prepara-
tions TREATS Migraine is not included in the conden-
sate for migraine because ?Pharmaceutical 
Preparations? was determined to be generic.  
Phase 4 (saliency) is the final transforma
 its operations are adapted from TOPIC?s (Hahn and 
Reimer, 1999) saliency operators. Frequency of occur-
rence for arguments, predicates, and predications are 
calculated, and those occurring more frequently than the 
average are kept in the condensate; others are elimi-
nated.  
Whe
dications produced by SemRep for a full-text article 
with 214 sentences (Lisse et al, 2003) concerned with 
comparing naproxen and rofecoxib for treating os-
teoarthritis, with respect to effectiveness and gastroin-
testinal tolerability, the resulting condensate is given in 
Figure 2. (The abstract for this article was summarized 
in Figure 1.) 
 
Figure 2. Semantic abstraction summarization 
of a journal article on osteoarthritis 
4 Multidocument Summarization  
The MEDLINE database, developed and maintained by 
the N  than 12 
million citations (dating from the 1960?s to the present) 
d at the same time retaining differences 
that
ramework for de-
term
Th
results 
for  
Eval ation, especially for 
mult ev et al, 2003). 
It is usually classified as intrinsic (measures the quality 
nd marked the predica-
tion
h 
set
ational Library of Medicine, contains more
drawn from nearly 4,600 journals in the biomedical do-
main. Access is provided by a statistical information 
retrieval system. Due to the size of the database, 
searches often retrieve large numbers of items. For ex-
ample, the query ?diabetes? returns 207,997 citations. 
Although users can restrict searches by language, date 
and publication type (as well as specific journals), re-
sults can still be large. For example, a query for treat-
ment (only) for diabetes, limited to articles published in 
2003 and having an abstract in English finds 3,621 
items; limiting this further to articles describing clinical 
trials still returns 390 citations. We describe the adapta-
tion of our abstraction summarization process to multi-
document input for managing the results of searches in 
MEDLINE.  
Extending summarization to multidocument input 
presents challenges in removing redundancies across 
documents an
 might be important. One issue is devising a frame-
work on which to compute similarities and differences 
across documents. Radev (2000) defines twenty-four 
relationships (such as equivalence, subsumption, and 
contradiction) that might apply at various structural lev-
els across documents. Sub-events (Daniel et al, 2003) 
and sub-topics (Saggion and Lapalme, 2002) also con-
tribute to the framework used for comparing documents 
in multidocument summarization.  
A particular challenge to multidocument summariza-
tion in the extraction paradigm is determining what 
parts of documents conform to the f
ining similarities and differences. A recent study 
(Kan et al, 2001) uses topic composition from text 
headers, but other studies in the extraction paradigm 
(Goldstein et al, 1999), extraction coupled with rhetori-
cal structural identification (Teufel and Moens, 2002), 
and syntactic abstraction paradigms use  different meth-
odologies (Barzilay et al, 1999; McKeown et al, 1999). 
Our semantic abstraction summarization system 
naturally extends to multidocument input with no modi-
fication from the system designed for single documents. 
e disorder schema serves as the framework for identi-
fying sub-topics, and predications retrieved across sev-
eral documents must conform to its structure. 
Informational equivalence (and redundancy) is com-
puted on this basis. For example, all predications that 
conform to the schema line {Treatment} TREATS  
{Disorders} constitute a representation of a subtopic in 
the disorder domain. Exact matches in this set constitute 
redundant information, and other types of relationships 
can be computed on the basis of partial matches. Al-
though we concentrate on similarities across documents, 
differences could be computed by examining predica-
tions that are not shared among citations.  
We have begun testing our system applied to the re-
sults of MEDLINE searches on disorders, concentrating 
on the most recent 300 citations retrieved. The 
 migraine are represented graphically in Figure 3. 
Traversing the predicates (arcs) in this condensate pro-
vides an informative summary of these citations. 
5 Evaluation and Results 
uation in automatic summariz
idocument input, is  daunting (Rad
of the summary as related to the source documents) or 
extrinsic (how the summary affects some other task). 
Since we do not have a gold standard to compare the 
final condensates against, we performed a linguistic 
evaluation on the quality of the condensates generated 
for four diseases: migraine, angina pectoris, Crohn?s 
disease, and pneumonia. The input for each summary 
was 300 MEDLINE citations. 
Table 1 presents evaluation results. The first author 
(MF) examined the source sentence that SemRep used 
to generate each predication a
s as either correct or incorrect. Precision was calcu-
lated as the total number of correct predications divided 
by the total number of predications in the condensate. 
We also measured the reduction (compression) for 
each of the four disorder concepts. In Table 1, ?Base? is 
the number of predications SemRep produced from eac
 of 300 citations. ?Final? is the number of predica-
tions left after the final transformation. Therefore, this is 
a compression ratio on the semantic space of predica-
tions, and is different from text compression in the tradi-
tional sense. 
 
Concept Base Final C I Precision 
Migraine 2485 102 72 30 71% 
A 3 8
ia 
   
ngina 2989 41 3  80% 
Crohn?s 3077 135 71 64 53% 
Pneumon 2694 28 27 1 96% 
Total 11245 306 203 103 66% 
Table 1. ts the f di se 
r  = r
In Crohn?s disease (with lowest precision) a single 
Sem
for 52% of th ocessing the 
sen
 Resul  for our sea concepts  
C = Co rect, I Incor ect 
Rep error type in  argument identification accounts 
e mistakes. For example in pr
tence 36 patients with inflammatory bowel disease 
(11 with ulcerative colitis and 25 with Crohn?s disease), 
the parenthesized material caused SemRep to incor-
rectly  returned ?Inflammatory Bowel Diseases CO- 
OCCURS_WITH Ulcerative Colitis? and ?Ulcerative 
Colitis predicate CO-OCCURS_WITH Crohn?s Dis-
ease.? Word sense ambiguity also contributed to a large 
number of errors.  
6 Content Characterization 
We sformation stage 
has and predications 
during the summarization process. SemRep produced 
S_IN; 
and
pes in the final 
con
he 
fin
nitially parsed, only 63 are represented in 
the
o far do not accommodate. Some of 
the
lusion and Future Directions 
We raction 
summarization that produces conceptual condensates for 
condensate to the text that produced them. We 
als
ional Library of Medicine 
Re
01. Effective mapping of biomedical 
LS Metathesaurus: The MetaMap pro-
Ba
edi-
Ba
e context of multi-document summa-
Bu
and semantic classes in WordNet and the 
Cl
 to text meaning processing. Pro-
Cr
ge.  
examined the effect that  the tran
on the distribution of predicates 
2,485 predications from 300 citations retrieved for mi-
graine. Of these, 1,638 are distributed over four predi-
cates in the disorder schema (327?TREATS; 148?ISA; 
180?LOCATION_OF; 54?CAUSES; 720?
OCCURS_IN; and 209?CO-OCCURS_WITH).  
After phases 1, 2, and 3 of the transformation proc-
ess, 311 predications remain (134?TREATS; 41?ISA; 
12?LOCATION_OF; 5?CAUSES; 68?OCCUR
 51?CO-OCCURS_WITH). This reduction is largely 
due to hierarchical pruning in phase 3. 
Phase 4 operations, based on frequency of occur-
rence pruning (saliency), further condensed the list, and 
the top three TREATS predication ty
densate are (13?Sumatriptan TREATS Migraine; 6?
Botulinum Toxins TREATS Migraine; and 6?feverfew 
extract TREATS Migraine). This list represents the fact 
that Sumatriptan is a popular treatment for migraine.  
Besides frequency, another way of looking at the 
predications is typicality (Kan et al, 2001), or distribu-
tion of predications across citations.  Looking at t
al condensate for migraine and focusing on TREATS, 
the most widely distributed predications are  ?Sumatrip-
tan TREATS Migraine,? which occurs in  ten citations; 
?Botulinum Toxins TREATS Migraine? (three cita-
tions); and  ?feverfew extract TREATS Migraine? (two 
citations). 
One can also view the final condensate from the per-
spective of citations, rather than predications. Of the 
300 citations i
 final condensate, one with six predications, one with 
five predications, three with four predications, and so 
on. It is tempting to hypothesize that more highly rele-
vant citations will have produced more predications, but 
this must be formally tested in the context of the user?s 
retrieval objective.  
An informal examination of the citations that con-
tributed to the final condensate for migraine revealed 
differences that we s
se, such as publication and study type, could be ad-
dressed outside of natural language processing with 
MEDLINE metadata. Others, including medication de-
livery system and target population of the disorder 
topic, are amenable to current processing either through 
extension of the disease schema or enhancements to 
SemRep.  
7 Conc
propose a framework based on semantic abst
disorder topics that are both indicative and informative. 
The approach uses a biomedical semantic processor as 
the source interpreter. After semantic interpretation, a 
series of transformations condense the predications pro-
duced, and a final condensate is displayed in graphical 
form. 
In the future, we would like to link the predications 
in the 
o plan to evaluate the effectiveness of this approach 
in retrieving useful articles for clinical researchers. Fi-
nally, we would like to investigate additional ways of 
visualizing the condensates.  
Acknowledgements The first author was supported 
by an appointment to the Nat
search Participation Program administered by the 
Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education through 
an inter-agency agreement between the U.S. Department 
of Energy and the National Library of Medicine. 
References 
Aronson AR. 20
text to the UM
gram. Proceedings of the AMIA Symp, pp 17-21. 
tagelj AM. 2003. Pajek - Analysis and Visualization 
of Large Networks. In M. J?nger and P. Mutzel, 
tors, Graph Drawing Software. Springer Verlag, Ber-
lin, pp 77-103. 
rzilay R, McKeown KR, Elhadad M. 1999. Informa-
tion fusion in th
rization. Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of 
the Association of Computational Linguistics, pp 
550-557. 
rgun A, Bodenreider O. 2001. Comparing terms, 
concepts, 
Unified Medical Language System. Proceedings of 
the NAACL Workshop on WordNet and Other Lexical 
Resources: Applications, Extensions and Customiza-
tions, pp 77-82. 
ark P, Harrison P, Thompson J. 2003. A knowledge-
driven approach
ceedings of the HLT-NAACL Workshop on Text 
Meaning, pp 1-6.  
use DA. 1986. Lexical semantics. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambrid
Cutting D, Kupiec J, Pedersen J, Sibun P. 1992. A prac-
tical part-of-speech tagger. Proceedings of the Third 
Da
marization. Proceedings of HLT-
Fi
. 
Fe
trac-
Ha
6.  
erators for 
Ha
 
Hu
 System: 
Ja
eux P. 2003. Developing the 
Ka
on for 
Le
ment realization. unpublished ms.  
B, 
M
M
d Intelligent Systems. Law-
M
ts. 
M
hniruk A, Pate V, 
M
tion Man-
M
. Proceedings of the Annual Symp Comput 
M
t 1):216-20. 
w Mexico State Univer-
Pu
 Linguistics, 19:331-58. 
e, pp 33-145. 
st ACL 
Ra
Celebi A, Liu D, Drabek E. 2003. Evaluation chal-
Conference on Applied Natural Language Process-
ing, pp 133-40. 
niel N, Radev D, Allison T. 2003. Sub-event based 
multi-document sum
NAACL Workshop on Text Summarization, pp 9-16. 
llmore CJ. 1968. The case for case. In E. Bach and 
RT. Harms, editors, Universals in Linguistic Theory
Holt Rinehart and Winston, New York, pp 1-88. 
llbaum C. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Da-
tabase. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA 
Goldstein J, Mittal V, Carbonell J, Kantrowitz M. 2000. 
Multi-document summarization by sentence ex
tion. Proceedings of the ANLP/NAACL Workshop on 
Automatic Summarization, pp 40-48.  
hn U, Mani I. 2000. The challenges of automatic 
summarization. Computer, 33(11):29-3
Hahn U, Reimer U. 1999. Knowledge-based text sum-
marization: salience and generalization op
knowledge base abstraction. In I. Mani and MT. 
Maybury, editors, Advances in Automatic Text Sum-
marization. MIT Press, Cambridge, pp 215-32.  
rabagiu S, Moldovan D, Pasca M, Mihalcea R, 
Surdeanu M, Bunescu R; Girju R, Rus V, Morarescu
P. 2001. The role of lexico-semantic feedback in 
open-domain textual question-answering. Proceed-
ings of the 39th Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, pp 274-81.  
mphreys BL, Lindberg DA, Schoolman HM, Barnett 
GO. 1998. The Unified Medical Language
An informatics research collaboration. J Am Med In-
form Assoc, 5(1):1-11. 
cquelinet C, Burgun A, Delamarre D, Strang N, Djab-
bour S, Boutin B, Le B
ontological foundations of a terminological system 
for end-stage diseases, organ failure, dialysis and 
transplantation. Int J Med Inf, 70(2-3):317-28. 
n M, McKeown KR, Klavans JL. 2001. Domain-
specific informative and indicative summarizati
information retrieval. Workshop on Text Summariza-
tion (DUC3).  
vin B, Rappaport Hovav M. 1996. From lexical se-
mantics to argu
Lisse JR, Perlman M, Johansson G, Shoemaker JR, 
Schechtman J, Skalky CS, Dixon ME, Polis A
Mollen AJ, Geba GP. 2003. Gastrointestinal toler-
ability and effectiveness of rofecoxib versus 
naproxen in the treatment of osteoarthritis: a random-
ized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med, 139(7):539-46. 
ani I, Gates B, Bloedorn E. 1999. Improving summa-
ries by revising them. Proceedings of the 37th An-
nual Meeting of the Association of Computational 
Linguistics, pp 558-65. 
cDonald DD. 1992. Robust partial parsing through 
incremental, multi-algorithm processing. In PS Ja-
cobs, editor, Text-base
rence Erlbaum Associates, New Jersey, pp 83-99. 
cKeown KR, Klavans JL, Hazivassiloglou V, Barzi-
lay R., Eskin E. 1999. Towards multidocument sum-
marization by reformulation: progress and prospec
Proceedings of the Sixteenth National Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, pp 453-60. 
cKeown HR, Chang, SF, Cimino J, Feiner SK, 
Friedman C, Gravano L, Hatzivassiloglou V, Johnson 
S,  Jordan DA, Klavans JL, Kus
Teufel S. 2001. PERSIVAL, a system for personal-
ized search and summarization over multimedia 
healthcare information. JCDL, pp 331-40. 
cCray AT. 1993. Representing biomedical knowledge 
in the UMLS Semantic Network. High-Performance 
Medical Libraries: Advances in Informa
agement for the Virtual Era. Meckler Publishing, pp 
45-55. 
cCray AT, Srinivasan S, Browne AC. 1994. Lexical 
methods for managing variation in biomedical termi-
nologies
Appl Med Care, pp:235-9. 
cCray AT, Burgun A, Bodenreider O. 2001. Aggre-
gating UMLS semantic types for reducing conceptual 
complexity.  Medinfo, 10(P
Mihalcea R, Moldovan D. 2000. Semantic indexing 
using WordNet senses. Proceedings of the ACL 
Workshop on IR and NLP. 
Nirenburg S, Raskin V. 1996. Ten choices for lexical 
semantics. Memoranda in Computer and Cognitive 
Science. MCCS-96-304. Ne
sity. 
stejovsky J., Bergler S, Anick P. 1993. Lexical se-
mantic techniques for corpus analysis. Computa-
tional
Raphael B. 1968. SIR: Semantic information retrieval. 
In Minsky, M. (ed.) Semantic Information Process-
ing. The MIT Press, Cambridg
Radev D. 2000. A Common theory of information fu-
sion from multiple text sources, step one: cross-
document structure. Proceedings of 1
SIGDIAL Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue. 
dev D, Teufel S, Saggion H, Lam W, Blitzer J, Qi H, 
lenges in large-scale multi-document summarization: 
the MEAD project. Proceedings of ACL. 
Rindflesch TC, Bean CA, Sneiderman CA. 2000. Ar-
gument identification for arterial branching predica-
tions asserted in cardiac catheterization reports. 
Proceedings of the AMIA Symp, pp 704-8. 
:462-77.  
Sal
Sri ring text mining 
Sp tomatic summarizing: factors 
Sc
Publishing Co, Amster-
Te
 Experiments with relevance and rhetorical 
Te
di-
Vi
icative Forms in 
W
cs: An in-
Advances in Automatic Text Summarization. MIT 
Press, Cambridge, pp 1-13. 
hank RC. 1975. Conceptual information processing. 
Amsterdam. North-Holland 
dam, 
ufel S, Moens M. 2002. Summarizing scientific arti-
cles -Rindflesch TC, Fiszman M. 2003. The interaction of 
domain knowledge and linguistic structure in natural 
language processing: interpreting hypernymic propo-
sitions in biomedical text. J Biomed Infor, 36
status. Computational Linguistics, 28(4):409-445. 
nny C, Pustejovsk J. 2000. A history of events in lin-
guistic theory. In C. Tenny and J. Pustejovsky, e
tors, Events as Grammatical Objects, CSLI 
Publications, Stanford, pp 3-37. 
egas E, Mahesh K, Nirenburg  S. 1998. Semantics in 
action. In P. St. Dizier, editor, Pred
Saggion H, Lapalme G. Generating indicative-
informative summaries with SumUM. 2002. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 28(4):497-526. 
ton G, Wong A, Yang CS. 1975. A vector space 
Natural Language and in Lexical Knowledge Bases. 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.  
ilks YA. 1976. Parsing English II. In E. Charniak and 
Y. Wilks, editors, Computational semanti
model for automatic indexing. Communications of 
the ACM, (18):613-20. 
nivasan P, Rindflesch T. 2002. Explo
from MEDLINE. Proceedings of the AMIA Symp, pp 
722-6. 
arck Jones K. 1999. Au
troduction to artificial intelligence and natural lan-
guage comprehension. North Holland Publishing 
Company, Amsterdam, pp 155-84. .and directions In I. Mani and MT. Maybury, editors, 
 
Figure 3. Semantic abstraction summarization on citations retrieved for migraine. Arrow thickness re-
flects redundant information (i.e. informational equivalence of sentences across multiple documents)  
Using Natural Language Processing, Locus Link, and the  
Gene Ontology to Compare OMIM to MEDLINE 
 
 
Bisharah 
Libbus 
Halil 
Kilicoglu 
Thomas C. 
Rindflesch 
James G. 
Mork 
Alan R. 
Aronson 
Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications 
National Library of Medicine 
Bethesda, Maryland, 20894 
{libbus|halil|tcr|mork|alan}@nlm.nih.gov 
 
 
Abstract 
Researchers in the biomedical and molecular 
biology fields are faced with a wide variety of 
information sources. These are presented in 
the form of images, free text, and structured 
data files that include medical records, gene 
and protein sequence data, and whole genome 
microarray data, all gathered from a variety of 
experimental organisms and clinical subjects. 
The need to organize and relate this informa-
tion, particularly concerning genes,  has moti-
vated the development of resources, such as 
the Unified Medical Language System, Gene 
Ontology, LocusLink, and the Online Inheri-
tance In Man (OMIM) database. We describe 
a natural language processing application to 
extract information on genes from unstruc-
tured text and discuss ways to integrate this 
information with some of the available online 
resources.  
1 Introduction 
The current knowledge explosion in genetics and ge-
nomics poses a challenge to both researchers and medi-
cal practitioners. Traditionally, scientific reviews, which 
summarize and evaluate the literature, have been indis-
pensable in addressing this challenge. OMIM (Online 
Mendelian Inheritance in Man) (OMIM 2000), for ex-
ample, is a clinical and biomedical information resource 
on human genes and genetic disorders. It has close to 
15,000 entries detailing clinical phenotypes and disor-
ders as well as information on nearly 9,000 genes. The 
database can be searched by gene symbol, chromosomal 
location, or disorder. 
More recently, automated techniques for information 
and knowledge extraction from the literature are being 
developed to complement scientific reviews. These 
methods address the need to condense and efficiently 
present large amounts of data to the user.  The feasibil-
ity of applying natural language processing techniques 
to the biomedical literature (Friedman and Hripcsak 
1999; de Bruijn and Martin 2002) and to the wealth of 
genomics data now available (Jenssen et al 2001; Yan-
dell and Majoros 2002) is increasingly being recog-
nized. Efforts to develop systems that work toward this 
goal focus on the identification of such items as gene 
and protein names (Tanabe and Wilbur 2002) or groups 
of genes with similar function (Jenssen et al 2001; 
Masys et al 2001). Other groups are interested in identi-
fying protein-protein (Blaschke et al 1999; Temkin and 
Gilder 2003) or gene-gene interactions (Stephens et al 
2001; Tao et al 2002), inhibit relations (Pustejovsky et 
al. 2002), protein structure (Gaizauskas et al 2003), and 
pathways (Ng and Wong 1999; Friedman et al 2001). 
We discuss the modification of an existing natural 
language processing system, SemGen (Rindflesch et al 
2003), that has broad applicability to biomedical text 
and that takes advantage of online resources such as 
LocusLink and the Gene Ontology. We are pursuing 
research that identifies gene-gene interactions in text on 
genetic diseases. For example the system extracts (2) 
from (1).  
1) Here, we report that TSLC1 directly associates 
with MPP3, one of the human homologues of a 
Drosophila tumor suppressor gene, Discs large 
(Dlg). 
2) TSLC1|INTERACT_WITH|MPP3 
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                   Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases, pp. 69-76.
                                                HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Biolink 2004,
Due to the complexity of the language involved, the 
extraction of such predications is currently not accurate 
enough to support practical application. However, we 
suggest its potential in the context of an application that 
combines traditional, human-curated resources such as 
OMIM and emerging information extraction applica-
tions. 
2 
3 SemGen 
Molecular Biology Resources 
To support and supplement the information extracted by 
SemGen from biomedical text, we draw on two re-
sources, LocusLink and the Gene Ontology. LocusLink 
(Wheeler et al 2004) provides a single query interface 
to curated genomic sequences and genetic loci. It pre-
sents information on official nomenclature, aliases, se-
quence accessions, phenotypes, OMIM numbers, 
homology, map locations, and related Web sites, among 
others. Of particular interest is the Reference Sequence 
(RefSeq) collection, which provides a comprehensive, 
curated, integrated, non-redundant set of sequences, 
including genomic DNA, transcript (RNA), and protein 
products for major research organisms. Currently, 
SemGen uses LocusLink to obtain normalized gene 
names and Gene Ontology annotations.  
The Gene Ontology (GO) (The Gene Ontology Con-
sortium 2000, 2001, 2004) aims to provide a dynamic 
controlled vocabulary that can be applied to all organ-
isms, even while knowledge of gene and protein func-
tion is incomplete or unfolding. The GO consists of 
three separate ontologies: molecular function, biological 
process, and cellular component. These three branches 
are used to characterize gene function and products and 
provide a comprehensive structure that permits the an-
notation of molecular attributes of genes in various or-
ganisms. We use GO annotations to examine whether 
there are identifiable patterns, or concordance, in the 
function of gene pairs identified by SemGen.  
SemGen identifies gene interaction predications based  
on semantic interpretation adapted from SemRep (Srini-
vasan and Rindflesch 2002; Rindflesch and Fiszman 
2003), a general natural language processing system 
being developed for the biomedical domain. After the 
application of  a statistically-based labeled categorizer 
(Humphrey 1999) that limits input text to the molecular 
biology domain, SemGen processing proceeds in  three 
major phases: categorial analysis, identification of con-
cepts, and identification of relations.  
The initial phase relies on a parser that draws on the 
SPECIALIST Lexicon (McCray et al 1994) and the 
Xerox Part-of-Speech Tagger (Cutting et al 1992) to 
produce an underspecified categorial analysis.  
In the phase for identifying concepts, disorders as 
well as genes and proteins are isolated by mapping sim-
ple noun phrases from the previous phase to concepts in 
the Unified Medical Language System? (UMLS)? 
Metathesaurus? (Humphreys et al 1998), using 
MetaMap (Aronson 2001). ABGene, a program that 
identifies genes and proteins using several statistical and 
empirical methods (Tanabe and Wilbur 2002) is also 
consulted during this phase. In addition, a small list of 
signal words (such as gene, codon, and exon) helps 
identify genetic phenomena. For example, the genetic 
phenomena in (4) are identified from the sentence in (3). 
Concepts isolated in this phase serve as potential argu-
ments in the next phase.  
3) WIF1 was down-regulated in 64% of primary 
prostate cancers, while SFRP4 was up-regulated 
in 81% of the patients. 
4) genphenom|WIF1  
genphenom|SFRP4 
 
During the final phase, in which relations are identi-
fied, the predicates of semantic propositions are based 
on indicator rules. These stipulate verbs, nominaliza-
tions, and prepositions that ?indicate? semantic predi-
cates. During this phase, argument identification is 
constrained by an underspecified dependency grammar, 
which also attempts to accommodate coordinated argu-
ments as well as predicates.  
SemGen originally had twenty rules indicating one 
of three etiology relations between genetic phenomena 
and diseases, namely CAUSE, PREDISPOSE, and 
ASSOCIATED_WITH. In this project, we extended Sem-
Gen to cover gene-gene interaction relations: INHIBIT, 
STIMULATE, AND INTERACT_WITH. About 20 indicator 
rules were taken from MedMiner (Tanabe et al 1999). 
We supplemented this list by taking advantage of the 
verbs identified in syntactic predications by GeneScene 
(Leroy et al 2003). SemGen has 46 gene-gene interac-
tion indicator rules (mostly verbs), including 16 for 
INHIBIT (such as block, deplete, down-regulate); 12 for 
INTERACT_WITH (bind, implicate, influence, mediate); 
and 18 for STIMULATE (amplify, activate, induce, up-
regulate).  
An overview of the SemGen system is given in Fig-
ure 1, and an example is provided below. SemGen proc-
essing on input text (5) produces the underspecified 
syntactic structure (represented schematically) in (6). 
(7) illustrates genetic phenomena identified, and (8) 
shows the final semantic interpretation. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. SemGen system  
 
5) We show here that EGR1 binds to the AR in 
prostate carcinoma cells, and an EGR1-AR 
complex can be detected by chromatin im-
munoprecipitation at the enhancer of an en-
dogenous AR target gene. 
6) [We] [show] [here] [that] [EGR1] [binds] [to 
the AR] [in prostate carcinoma cells,] [and] [an 
EGR1-AR complex] [can] [be] [detected] [by 
chromatin immunoprecipitation] [at the enhan-
cer] [of an endogenous AR target gene] 
7) genphenom|egr1 
genphenom|ar 
genphenom|enhancer endogenous ar target gene 
8) egr1|INTERACT_WITH|ar 
During processing, SemGen normalizes gene sym-
bols using the preferred symbol from LocusLink. The 
final interpretation with LocusLink gene symbol is 
shown in (9).  
9) EGR1|INTERACT_WITH|AR 
As we retrieve the LocusLink symbol for a gene, we 
also get the GO terms associated with that gene. We are 
interested in extending the application of our textual 
analysis and knowledge extraction methodology and 
relating it to other biomedical and genomic resources. 
Gene Ontology is one such important resource, and be-
low we discuss the possibility that GO might shed addi-
tional light on the biological relationship between genes 
that are paired functionally based on textual analysis. 
The GO terms for the genes in (9) are given in (10) and 
(11). 
 
10) EGR1|[transcription factor activity; regulation 
of transcription, DNA-dependent; nucleus] 
11) AR|[androgen receptor activity; steroid binding; 
receptor activity; transcription factor activity; 
transport; sex differentiation; regulation of tran-
scription, DNA-dependent; signal transduction; 
cell-cell signaling; nucleus] 
4 SemGen Evaluation and Error Analysis 
Before suggesting an application using SemGen output, 
we discuss the results of error analysis performed on 
344 sentences from MEDLINE citations related to six 
genetic diseases: Alzheimer's disease, Crohn?s disease, 
lung cancer, ovarian cancer, prostate cancer and sickle 
cell anemia. Out of 442 predications identified by Sem-
Gen, 181 were correct, for 41% precision. This is not 
yet accurate enough to support a production system; 
however, the majority of the errors are focused in two 
syntactic areas, and we believe that with further devel-
opment it is possible to provide output effective for 
supporting practical applications. 
The majority of the errors fall into one of two major 
syntactic classes, relativization and coordination. A fur-
ther source of error is the fact that we have not yet ad-
dressed interaction relations that involve a process in 
addition to a gene.  
Reduced relative clauses, such as mediated by Tip60 
in (12), are a rich source of argument identification er-
rors.  
12) LRPICD dramatically inhibits APP-derived in-
tracellular domain/Fe65 transactivation medi-
ated by Tip60.  
SemGen wrongly interpreted this sentence as asserting 
that LRPICD inhibits Tip60. The rules of the under-
specified dependency grammar that identify arguments 
essentially look to the left and right of a verb for a noun 
phrase that has been marked as referring to a genetic 
phenomenon. Arguments are not allowed to be used in 
more than one predication (unless licensed by coordina-
tion or as the head of a relative clause).  
A number of phenomena conspire in (12) to wrongly 
allow TIP60  to be analyzed as the object of inhibits. 
The actual object, transactivation, was not recognized 
because we have not yet addressed processes as argu-
ments of gene interaction predications. Further, the 
predication on transactivation, with argument TIP60, 
was not interpreted, and hence TIP60 was available (in-
correctly) for the object of inhibits.  If we had recog-
nized the relative clause in (12), TIP60 would not have 
been reused as an argument of inhibits, since only heads 
of relative clauses can be reused. 
The underspecified analysis on which SemGen is 
based is not always effective in identifying verb phrase 
coordination, as in (13), leading to the incorrect inter-
pretation that WIF1 interacts with SFRP4. 
13) WIF1 was down-regulated in 64% of primary 
prostate cancers, while SFRP4 was up-regulated 
in 81% of the patients.  
A further source of error in this sentence is that 
down-regulated was analyzed by the tagger as a past 
tense rather than past participle, thus causing the argu-
ment identification phase to look for an object to the 
right of this verb form. A further issue here is that we 
have not yet addressed truncated passives.  
5 Using SemGen to Compare OMIM and 
MEDLINE  
SemGen errors notwithstanding, we are investigating 
possibilities for exploiting automatically extracted gene 
interaction predications. We discuss an application 
which compares MEDLINE text to OMIM documents, 
for specified diseases. LocusLink preferred gene sym-
bols and GO terms are an integral part of this process-
ing. We feel it is instructive to investigate the 
consequences of this comparison, anticipating results 
that are effective enough for practical application. 
We selected five diseases with a genetic component 
(Alzheimer?s disease, Crohn?s disease, lung cancer, 
prostate cancer, and sickle cell anemia), and retrieved 
the corresponding OMIM report for each disease, auto-
matically discarding sections such as references, head-
ings, and edit history. We also queried PubMed for each 
disease and retrieved all MEDLINE citations that were 
more recent than the corresponding OMIM report. Both 
OMIM and MEDLINE files were then submitted to 
SemGen.  
For each disease, the MEDLINE file was larger than 
the corresponding OMIM file, and the categorizer 
eliminated some parts of each file as not being in the 
molecular biology domain. Table 1 shows the number 
of sentences in the original input files and the number 
processed after the categorizer eliminated sentences not 
in the molecular biology domain.  
 
 
 OMIM 
Orig. 
OMIM 
Proc. 
MEDLINE 
Orig. 
MEDLINE 
Proc. 
Alz 408 264 1639 862 
Crohn 188 124 4871 1236 
LungCa 55 34 9058 2966 
ProstCa 121 69 6989 2964 
SCA 184 79 4383 1057 
 
    Table 1. Input sentences processed by SemGen 
A paragraph in the OMIM file for Alzheimer?s dis-
ease beginning with the sentence Alzheimer disease is 
by far the most common cause of dementia, for example, 
was eliminated, while a MEDLINE citation with the 
title Semantic decision making in early probable AD: A 
PET activation study was removed.   
An overview of predication types retrieved by Sem-
Gen is given in Table 2 for the files on Alzheimer?s 
disease. Of the gene-disease predications, the majority 
had predicate ASSOCIATED_WITH (15 from OMIM and 
25 from MEDLINE). For gene-gene relations, 
INTERACT_WITH predominated (3 from OMIM and 12 
from MEDLINE). 
 
Alzheimer disease OMIM MEDLINE 
Gene-Disease 16 31 
Gene-Gene  3 22 
Total 19 53 
 
Table 2. Gene interaction predication types 
 
We developed a program that compares semantic 
predications found in MEDLINE abstracts to those 
found in an OMIM report associated with a particular 
disease and classifies the comparison between two 
predications as either an exact match, partial match, or 
no match. The category of a comparison is determined 
by examining the argument and predicate fields of the 
predications. If all three fields match, the comparison is 
an exact match; if any two fields match it is a partial 
match. All other cases are considered as no match.  
Although fewer than half of the predications ex-
tracted by SemGen are likely to be correct, we provide 
some examples from the files on Alzheimer?s disease.  
(The system retains the document ID?s, which are sup-
pressed here for clarity.) Examples of partial matches 
between gene-disease predications extracted from 
OMIM and MEDLINE are shown in (14) and (15).  
14) OM: APP | ASSOCIATED_WITH | Alz-
heimer?s Disease 
ML:  CD14 | ASSOCIATED_WITH | Alz-
heimer?s Disease 
15) OM: amyloid beta peptide | 
ASSOCIATED_WITH | Alzheimer?s Disease 
ML: amyloid beta peptide | 
ASSOCIATED_WITH | Senile Plaques 
Some of the gene-disease predications that only oc-
curred in OMIM are given in (16), and a few of those 
occurring exclusively in MEDLINE are given in (17). 
 
16) TGFB1 | ASSOCIATED_WITH | Amyloid 
deposition  
        PRNP | ASSOCIATED_WITH | Amyloid 
deposition 
        Mutation 4 gene | CAUSE | Alzheimer?s Dis-
ease 
 
17) MOG | ASSOCIATED_WITH | Nervous Sys-
tem Diseases 
Acetylcholinesterase | PREDISPOSE | Alz-
heimer?s Disease  
 
In (18) are listed some of the gene-gene interaction 
predications found in MEDLINE but not in OMIM. 
18) LAMR1 | STIMULATE | HTATIP 
MAPT|INTERACT_WITH | HSPA8  
CD14 | STIMULATE | amyloid peptide 
 
6 Using the GO Terms  
As noted above, for each gene argument in the predica-
tions identified by SemGen, we retrieved from Locus-
Link the GO terms associated with that gene. We have 
begun to investigate ways in which these terms might be 
used to compare genes by looking at the gene-gene in-
teraction predications extracted from MEDLINE that 
did not occur in OMIM.  
To support this work, we developed a program that 
sorts gene-gene interaction predications by the GO 
terms of their arguments. For each gene function, the 
predications in which both arguments share the same 
function are listed first. These are followed by the 
predications in which only the first argument has that 
gene function, and then the predications in which only 
the second argument has the relevant gene function. A 
typical output file of this process is shown in (19): 
 
19) RECEPTOR ACTIVITY 
        ----------------- 
        Both Arguments: 
        DTR|STIMULATE|EGFR 
        First Argument: 
        AR|STIMULATE|TRXR3 
        EPHB2|STIMULATE|ENO2 
        Second Argument: 
        EGR1|INTERACT_WITH|AR 
        PSMC6|STIMULATE|AR 
 
The three branches of the Gene Ontology provide a 
uniform system for relating genes by function. The 
terms in the molecular function and biological process 
branches are perhaps most useful for this purpose; how-
ever, we have begun by considering all three branches 
(including the cellular component branch). The most 
effective method of exploiting GO annotations remains 
a matter of research.  
It is important to recognize that GO mapping is not 
precise; different annotators may make different GO 
assignments for the same gene. Nevertheless, GO anno-
tations provide considerable potential for relating the 
molecular functions and biological processes of genes. 
We consider one of the predications extracted from the 
MEDLINE file for prostate cancer that did not occur in 
OMIM: 
19) EGR1|INTERACT_WITH|AR 
Both genes EGR1 and AR in LocusLink elicit the 
same human gene set (367 Hs AR; 1026 Hs CDKN1A; 
1958 Hs EGR1; 3949 Hs LDLR; 4664 Hs NAB1; 4665 
Hs NAB2; 5734 Hs PTGER4; 114034 Hs TOE1). This 
suggests a high degree of sequence homology and func-
tional similarity. In addition, LocusLink provides the 
following GO terms for the two genes: 
20) EGR1: early growth response 1; LocusID: 1958 
Gene Ontology: transcription factor activity; 
regulation of transcription, DNA-dependent; 
nucleus  
21)  AR: androgen receptor (dihydrotestosterone re-
ceptor; testicular feminization; spinal and bulb 
ar muscular atrophy; Kennedy disease) ; Lo-
cusID: 367 Gene Ontology:  androgen receptor 
activity; steroid binding; receptor activity; tran-
scription factor activity; transport; sex differen-
tiation; regulation of transcription, DNA-
dependent; signal transduction; cell-cell signal-
ing; nucleus 
(The GO provides additional, hierarchical information 
for terms, which we have not yet exploited.) 
Thirty percent of the predications examined had 
some degree of overlap in their GO terms. For example, 
the terms for EGR1 (transcription factor activity; regu-
lation of transcription, DNA- dependent; and nucleus) 
are identical to three of the GO terms for the AR gene. 
This concordance may not be typical of the majority of 
paired genes in our sample. However, in the case of 
genes that do not exhibit such complete overlap, con-
cordance might be obtained at higher nodes in the clas-
sification scheme. 
An alternate approach for assessing distance be-
tween GO annotations has been suggested by Lord et al 
(2003a, 2003b). They propose a ?semantic similarity 
measure? using ontologies to explore the relationships 
between genes that may have associated interaction or 
function. The authors consider the information content 
of each GO term, defined as the number of times each 
term, or any child term, occurs. 
The fact that any one gene has a number of GO an-
notations indicates that a particular gene may perform 
more than one function or its function may be classified 
under a number of molecular activities. Some of these 
activities may be part of, i.e. extending to a variable 
degree down, the same GO structure. For example, for 
gene AR, ?receptor activity? (GO 4872) partially over-
laps with ?androgen receptor activity? (GO 4882), as 
does ?steroid binding? (GO 5496) with ?transcription 
factor activity? (GO 3700), and ?signal transduction 
(GO 7165) and ?cell-cell signaling (GO 7267). This 
indicates that in assessing similarity one needs to exam-
ine the ontology structure and not rely solely on the GO 
terms.  
While we have no experimental evidence, we would 
like to speculate about the functional or biological sig-
nificance indicated by similarity in GO annotation. 
There are three orthogonal aspects to GO: molecular 
function, biological process, and cellular component. If 
two genes map more closely in one of the taxonomies, 
then their function is necessarily more closely related. 
The majority of GO terms are in the molecular function 
taxonomy. It is conceivable that genes that map more 
closely could be involved in the same cascade or par-
ticipate in the same genetic regulatory network. There is 
increasing interest in genetic networks (e.g. 
www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/ kegg2.html; http://ecocyc.org; 
http://us.expasy.org/tools/pathways; www.biocarta.com) 
and combining the ability to search and extract informa-
tion from the literature with GO mapping could prove 
effective in elucidating the functional interactions of 
genes. 
 
7 
8 Conclusion 
Potential Knowledge Discovery 
To determine whether our automatic comparison of 
MEDLINE to OMIM based on SemGen predications 
might throw new light on  gene-gene interactions, we 
examined predications found in the MEDLINE file that 
had no match in the OMIM file. We searched the 
OMIM reports for information on the genes found in 
such predications to confirm that they were absent from 
the OMIM reports. For example, while the OMIM re-
port on colon cancer did not mention BARD1, the 
SemGen output for MEDLINE had   
22) BARD1|INTERACT_WITH|hmsh2 
The abstract containing this predication (PMID 
11498787) asserts that the BARD1 gene (LocusID 580) 
interacts with the breast cancer gene BRCA1 as well as 
with hMSH2, a mismatch repair gene associated with 
colon cancer.  BARD1 shares homology with the two 
conserved regions of BRCA1 and also interacts with the 
N-terminal region of BRCA1. Interaction of BARD1 
with BRCA1 could be essential for the function of 
BRCA1 in tumor suppression.  
Conversely, disruption of this interaction may possi-
bly contribute to the process of oncogenesis. It has been 
reported that the BRCA1/BARD1 complex is responsi-
ble for many of the tumor suppression activities of 
BRCA1 (Baer and Ludwig 2002). The gene hMSH2 
(LocusID 4436) is one of a number of genes that, when 
mutated, predisposes to colon cancer type 1. It is the 
human homolog of the bacterial mismatch repair gene 
mutS. We hypothesize that the interaction of BARD1 
with hMSH2, in a similar fashion to BRCA1, may be 
necessary for tumor suppression. Disruption of this in-
teraction may increase the likelihood of developing co-
lon cancer. Furthermore, this observation serves to point 
toward a possible link between BRCA1 and colon can-
cer. 
 
We have extended earlier work with SemGen (Rind-
flesch et al 2003) and are now able to extract from text, 
in addition to names of gene and disorders, gene-
disorder and gene-gene relations. Although SemGen is 
not at a stage where it can be used indiscriminately and 
without selective review and evaluation, it may never-
theless prove useful for reviewers by providing an effi-
cient means of scanning a large number of references 
and extracting relations involving genes and diseases. 
The process of curation and review is time consum-
ing. Given the rate at which new publications are added 
to the scientific literature, the availability of tools for 
accelerating the review process would meet a real need. 
As demonstrated by our pilot study on six disorders, 
SemGen could prove useful, even at this prototype 
stage, in extracting relevant information from the litera-
ture concerning genes and diseases. Additionally, the 
ability to scan and extract information from diverse sci-
entific domains could play an important role in identify-
ing new relationships between genes and diseases that 
would promote hypothesis-generation and advance sci-
entific research. Even with the present limitations, 
SemGen could assist in making the scientific literature 
more accessible and reduce the time it takes for re-
searchers to update their knowledge and expertise. 
References 
Aronson, A.R. (2001). ?Effective mapping of biomedi-
cal text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap 
program.? In Proceedings of the AMIA Annual Sym-
posium, 17-21. 
Baer, R., and Ludwig, T. (2002). ?The BRCA1/BARD1 
heterodimer: a tumor suppressor complex with ubiq-
uitin E3 ligase activity.? Current Opinion in Genetics 
& Development, 12, 86-91 
Blaschke, C.; Andrade, M.A.; Ouzounis, C.; and Valen-
cia, A. (1999). ?Automatic extraction of biological 
information from scientific text: protein-protein in-
teractions.? In Proceedings of the Seventh Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Systems for 
Molecular Biology, 60-70. 
de Bruijn, B., and Martin, J. (2002). ?Getting to the 
(c)ore of knowledge: mining biomedical literature.? 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 67, 7-
18. 
Cutting, D.; Kupiec, J.; Pedersen, J.; and Sibun, P. 
(1992). ?A practical part-of-speech tagger.? In Pro-
ceedings of the Third Conference on Applied Natural 
Language Processing. 
Friedman, C., and Hripcsak, G. (1999). ?Natural lan-
guage processing and its future in medicine.? Aca-
demic Medicine, 74 (8),890-5. 
Friedman, C.; Kra, P.; Yu, H.; Krauthammer, M.; and 
Rzhetsky, A. (2001). ?GENIES: a natural-language 
processing system for the extraction of molecular 
pathways from journal articles.? Bioinformatics, 17 
Suppl 1, S74-82. 
Gaizauskas, R; Demetriou, G.; Artymiuk, P.J.; and  
Willett, P. (2003). ?Protein Structures and Informa-
tion Extraction from Biological Texts: The PASTA 
System.? Bioinformatics, 19, 135-43. 
The Gene Ontology Consortium. (2000). ?Gene ontol-
ogy: tool for the unificaiton of biology.? Nature, 25, 
25-29. 
The Gene Ontology Consortium. (2001). ?Creating the 
Gene Ontology Resource: Design and implementa-
tion.? Genome Research, 11,1425-1433. 
The Gene Ontology Consortium. (2004). ?The Gene 
Ontology (GO) database and informatics resource.? 
Nucleic Acids Research, 32,D258-D261. 
Humphrey, S. (1999). ?Automatic indexing of docu-
ments from journal descriptors: A preliminary inves-
tigation.? Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science, 50(8), 661-74. 
Humphreys, B.L.; Lindberg, D.A.; Schoolman, H.M.; 
and Barnett, G.O. (1998). ?The Unified Medical lan-
guage System: An informatics research collabora-
tion.? Journal of American Medical Informatics 
Association, 5(1), 1-13. 
Jenssen, T.K.; Laegreid, A.; Komoroswski, J.; and 
Hovig, E. (2001). ?A literature network of human 
genes for high-throughput analysis of gene expres-
sion.? Nature Genetics, 28,21-28.  
Leroy, G.; Chen, H.; Martinez, J.D. (2003) ?A shallow 
parser based on closed-class words to capture rela-
tions in biomedical text.? Journal of Biomedical In-
formatics, 36, 145-58 . 
Lord, P.W.; Stevens, R.D.; Brass, A.; and Goble, C.A. 
(2003a). ?Investigating semantic similarity measures 
across the Gene Ontology: the relationship between 
sequence and annotation.? Bioinformatics 19:1275-
1283. 
Lord, P.W.; Stevens, R.D.; Brass, A.; and Goble, C.A. 
(2003b). ?Semantic similarity measures as tools for 
exploring the Gene Ontology.? Pacific Symposium 
on. Biocomputing,  601-612. 
Masys, D.R.; Welsh, J.B.; Fink, J.L.; Gribskov, M.; 
Klacansky, I.; and Vorbeil, J. (2001). ?Use of key-
word hierarchies to interpret gene expression pat-
terns.? Bioinformatics, 17(4), 319-26. 
McCray, A.T.; Srinivasan, S.; and Browne, A.C. (1994). 
?Lexical methods for managing variation in biomedi-
cal terminologies.? In Proceedings of the Annual 
Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical 
Care, 235-9. 
Ng, S.K., and Wong, M. (1999). ?Toward routine auto-
matic pathway discovery from on-line scientific text 
abstracts.? Genome Informatics, 10,104-112. 
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man, OMIM (2000). 
McKusick-Nathans Institute for Genetic Medicine, 
Johns Hopkins University (Baltimore, MD) and Na-
tional Center for Biotechnology Information, Na-
tional Library of Medicine (Bethesda, MD). WWW 
URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/.  
Pustejovsky, J.; Castano, J.; Zhang, J.; Kotecki, M.; and 
Cochran, B. (2002). ?Robust relational parsing over 
biomedical literature: extracting inhibit relations.? 
Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing, 362-73. 
Rindflesch, T. C., and Fiszman, M. (2003). ?The inter-
action of domain knowledge and linguistic structure 
in natural language processing: Interpreting hy-
pernymic propositions in biomedical text.? Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, 36(6):462-77. 
Rindflesch, T. C.; Libbus, B.; Hristovski, D.; Aronson, 
A.R.; and Kilicoglu, H. (2003). ?Semantic relations 
asserting the etiology of genetic diseases.? In Pro-
ceedings of the AMIA Annual Symposium, 554-8. 
Srinivasan, P., Rindflesch, T.C. (2002). ?Exploring Text 
Mining from MEDLINE.? In Proceedings of the 
AMIA Annual Symposium, 722-6. 
Stephens, M.; Palakal, M.; Mukhopadhyay, S.; and 
Raje, R. (2001). ?Detecting gene relations form Med-
line abstracts.? In Proceedings of the Sixth Pacific 
Symposium on Biocomputing, 6, 483-96. 
Tanabe, L.; Scherf, U.; Smith, L.H.; Lee, J.K.; Hunter, 
L.; Weinstein, J.N. (1999). ?MedMiner: An Internet 
text- mining tool for biomedical information, with 
application to gene expression profiling.? BioTech-
niques, 27(6),1210-17. 
Tanabe, L., Wilbur, W.J. (2002). ?Tagging gene and 
protein names in biomedical text.? Bioinformatics, 
18(8), 1124-32. 
Tao, Y-C., and Leibel, R.L. (2002). ?Identifying rela-
tionships among human genes by systematic analysis 
of biological literature.? BMC Bioinformatics, 3,16-
25. 
Temkin, J. M., and Gilder, M. R. (2003). ?Extraction of 
protein interaction information from unstructured text 
using a context-free grammar.? Bioinformatics, 
19(16), 2046-53. 
Wheeler, D.L.; Church, D.M.; Edgar, R.; Federhen, S.; 
Helmberg, W.; Madden, T.L.; Pontius, J.U.; Schuler, 
G.D.; Schriml, L.M.; Sequeira, E.; Suzek, T.O.; 
Tatusova, T.A.; Wagner, L. (2004). ?Database re-
sources of the National Center for Biotechnology In-
formation: update.? Nucleic Acids Research, 32(1), 
D35-40.  
Yandell, M.D., and Majoros, W.H. (2002) ?Genomics 
and natural language processing.? Nature Reviews 
Genetics, 3, 601-610. 
 
Proceedings of the ACL-ISMB Workshop on Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases: Mining
Biological Semantics, pages 32?37, Detroit, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
MedTag: A Collection of Biomedical Annotations
L.H. Smith
 
, L. Tanabe
 
, T. Rindflesch

, W.J. Wilbur
 
 
National Center for Biotechnology Information

Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications
NLM, NIH, 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894

lsmith,tanabe,wilbur  @ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
rindesch@nlm.nih.gov
Abstract
We present a database of annotated
biomedical text corpora merged into a
portable data structure with uniform con-
ventions. MedTag combines three cor-
pora, MedPost, ABGene and GENETAG,
within a common relational database data
model. The GENETAG corpus has been
modified to reflect new definitions of
genes and proteins. The MedPost cor-
pus has been updated to include 1,000
additional sentences from the clinical
medicine domain. All data have been up-
dated with original MEDLINE text ex-
cerpts, PubMed identifiers, and tokeniza-
tion independence to facilitate data accu-
racy, consistency and usability.
The data are available in flat files along
with software to facilitate loading the
data into a relational SQL database
from ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/lsmith
/MedTag/medtag.tar.gz.
1 Introduction
Annotated text corpora are used in modern computa-
tional linguistics research and development to fine-
tune computer algorithms for analyzing and classi-
fying texts and textual components. Two important
factors for useful text corpora are 1) accuracy and
consistency of the annotations, and 2) usability of
the data. We have recently updated the text corpora
we use in our research with respect to these criteria.
Three different corpora were combined. The AB-
Gene corpus consists of over 4 000 sentences anno-
tated with gene and protein named entities. It was
originally used to train the ABGene tagger to recog-
nize gene/protein names in MEDLINE records, and
recall and precision rates in the lower 70 percentile
range were achieved (Tanabe and Wilbur, 2002).
The MedPost corpus consists of 6 700 sentences,
and is annotated with parts of speech, and gerund
arguments. The MedPost tagger was trained on
3 700 of these sentences and achieved an accuracy
of 97.4% on the remaining sentences (Smith et. al.,
2004). The GENETAG corpus for gene/protein
named entity identification, consists of 20 000 sen-
tences and was used in the BioCreative 2004 Work-
shop (Yeh et. al., 2005; Tanabe et. al., 2005) (only
15 000 sentences are currently released, the remain-
ing 5 000 are being retained for possible use in a fu-
ture workshop). Training on a portion of the data,
the top performing systems achieved recall and pre-
cision rates in the lower 80 percentile range. Be-
cause of the scarcity of good annotated data in the
realm of biomedicine, and because good perfor-
mance has been obtained using this data, we feel
there is utility in presenting it to a wider audience.
All of the MedTag corpora are based on MED-
LINE abstracts. However, they were queried at dif-
ferent times, and used different (but similar) algo-
rithms to perform tokenization and sentence seg-
mentation. The original annotations were assigned
to tokens, or sequences of tokens, and extensively
reviewed by the authors at different times for the dif-
ferent research projects.
The main goals in combining and updating these
32
MedTag? Collection?
MedPost? ABGene? GENETAG?
6,700 sentences?
5,700 molecular biology?
1,000 clinical medicine?
60 part-of-speech tags?
97.4% accuracy?
1 annotator?
4,265 sentences?
Molecular Biology?
Single Genes/Proteins tagged?
1 annotator?
15,000 sentences?
50% Molecular Biology?
50% Other Biomedical?
All Genes/Proteins tagged?
3 annotators?
EXCERPT?
ID?
PubMed?  ID?
Corpus code?
Original? text?
Citation?
ANNOTATION?
ID?
Corpus code?
Character offsets?
Annotated text?
Data Model?
SQL Relational?
Database with?
Web Interface?
MEDLINE?
MEDLINE?
Figure 1: Component corpora, common data model
and main record types of the MedTag collection.
corpora into a single corpus were to
1. update the text for all corpora to that currently
found in MEDLINE, storing a correct citation
and the original, untokenized text for each ex-
cerpt
2. eliminate tokenization dependence
3. put all text and annotations into a common
database format
4. provide programs to convert from the new cor-
pus format to the data formats used in previous
research
2 Merging the Corpora
We describe what was done to merge the original
corpora, locating original sources and modifying the
text where needed. An overview is given in Figure
1. Some basic statistics are given in Table 1.
2.1 Identifying Source Data
The original data of the three corpora were assem-
bled and the text was used to search MEDLINE to
Corpus sentences tokens most frequent tag
GENETAG-05 15,000 418,246 insulin GENE(112)
MedPost 6,700 181,626 the DD(8,507)
AbGene 4,265 123,208 cyclin GENE(165)
MedPost
Adj Adv Aux Noun Punct Verb
14,648 4,553 56,262 60,732 21,806 23,625
GENETAG-05
GENE ALTGENE
24,562 19,216
ABGene
GENE ALTGENE
8,185 0
Table 1: MedTag Corpora. GENE = gene and pro-
tein names, ALTGENE = acceptable alternatives for
gene and protein names. MedPost tagset contains
60 parts of speech which have been binned here for
brevity.
find the closest match. An exact or near exact match
was found for all but a few excerpts. For only a
few excerpts, the MEDLINE record from which the
excerpt was originally taken had been removed or
modified and an alternative sentence was selected.
Thus, each excerpt in the database is taken from a
MEDLINE record as it existed at one time in 2004.
In order to preserve the reference for future work,
the PubMed ID and citation data were also retrieved
and stored with each excerpt. Each excerpt in the
current database roughly corresponds to a sentence,
although the procedure that extracted the sentence is
not specified.
2.2 Eliminating Tokenization Dependence
In the original ABGene and GENETAG corpora, the
gene and protein phrases were specified by the to-
kens contained in the phrase, and this introduced
a dependence on the tokenization algorithm. This
created problems for researchers who wished to use
a different tokenization. To overcome this depen-
dence, we developed an alternative way of specify-
33
ing phrases. Given the original text of an excerpt,
the number of non-whitespace characters to the start
of the phrase does not depend on the tokenization.
Therefore, all annotations now refer to the first and
last character of the phrase that is annotated. For
example the protein serum LH in the excerpt
There was no correlation between serum
LH and chronological or bone age in this
age group, which suggests that the corre-
lation found is not due to age-related par-
allel phenomena.
is specified as characters 28 to 34 (the first character
is 0).
2.3 Data Model
There are two main record types in the database,
EXCERPT and ANNOTATION. Each EXCERPT
record stores an identifier and the original corpus
code (abgene, medpost, and genetag) as well as sub-
corpus codes that were defined in the original cor-
pora. The original text, as it was obtained from
MEDLINE, is also stored, and a human readable ci-
tation to the article containing the reference.
Each ANNOTATION record contains a reference
to the excerpt (by identifier and corpus), the char-
acter offset of the first and last characters of the
phrase being annotated (only non-whitespace char-
acters are counted, starting with 0), and the corre-
sponding annotation. The annotated text is stored
for convenience, though it can be obtained from
the corresponding excerpt record by counting non-
whitespace characters.
The data is provided as an ASCII file in a standard
format that can be read and loaded into a relational
database. Each record in the file begins with a line
of the form  table name where table name is the
name of the table for that record. Following the table
name is a series of lines with the form eld: value
where eld is the name of the field and value is the
value stored in that field.
Scripts are provided for loading the data into a re-
lational database, such as mysql or ORACLE. SQL
queries can then be applied to retrieve excerpts and
annotations satisfying any desired condition. For
example, here is an SQL query to retrieve excerpts
from the MedPost corpus containing the token p53
and signaling or signalling
Figure 2: A screen capture of the annotator?s inter-
face and the GENETAG-05 annotations for a sen-
tence.
select text from excerpt
where text like ?%p53%?
and text rlike ?signa[l]*ing?;
2.4 Web Interface
A web-based corpus editor was used to enter and
review annotations. The code is being made avail-
able, as is, and requires that the data are loaded into a
mysql database that can be accessed by a web server.
The interface supports two annotation types: Med-
Post tags and arbitrary phrase annotations. MedPost
tags are selectable from a pull-down menu of pre-
programmed likely tags. For entering phrase anno-
tations, the user highlights the desired phrase, and
pressing the enter key computes and saves the first
and last character offsets. The user can then enter
the annotation code and an optional comment be-
fore saving it in the database. A screen dump of the
phrase annotations for a sentence in the genetag cor-
pus is shown in figure 2.
The data from the database was dumped to the flat
file format for this release. We have also included
some files to accommodate previous users of the
corpora. A perl program, alt eval.perl is in-
34
cluded that replaces the GENETAG evaluation pro-
gram using non-whitespace character numbers in-
stead of token numbers. Copies of the ABGene and
MedPost corpora, in the original formats, are also
included.
3 Updates of Component Corpora
3.1 MedPost Update
The MedPost corpus (Smith et. al., 2004) originally
contained 5 700 tokenized sentences. An additional
1 000 annotated sentences have been added for this
release. Each sentence in the MedPost corpus is
fully tokenized, that is, divided into non-overlapping
annotated portions, and each token is annotated with
one of 60 part of speech tags (see Table 1). Minor
corrections to the annotations have been made since
the original release.
Since most of the original corpus, and all of the
sentences used for training the MedPost tagger, were
in the area of molecular biology, we added an addi-
tional 1 000 sentences selected from random MED-
LINE abstracts on the subject of clinical medicine.
As a preliminary result, the trained MedPost tag-
ger achieves approximately 96.9% accuracy, which
is comparable to the 97.4% accuracy achieved on the
subset of 1 000 sentences selected randomly from all
of MEDLINE. An example of a sentence from the
clinical medicine collection is
EvidenceNN isVBZ nowRR availableJJ
toTO showVVI aDD beneficialJJ effectNN
ofII bezafibrateNN onII retardingVVGN
atheroscleroticJJ processesNNS andCC inII
reducingVVGN riskNN ofII coronaryJJ heartNN
diseaseNN .
In addition to the token-level annotations, all
of the gerunds in the MedPost corpus (these are
tagged VVGN) were also examined and it was noted
whether the gerund had an explicit subject, direct
object, or adjective complement. This annotation
is stored with an annotation of type gerund. To il-
lustrate, the two gerunds in the previous example,
retarding and reducing both have direct objects (re-
tarding processes and reducing risk), and the gerund
tag is entered as ?o?. The gerund annotations have
been used to improve a noun phrase bracketer able
to recognize gerundive phrases.
3.2 GENETAG Update
GENETAG is a corpus of MEDLINE sentences that
have been annotated with gene and protein names.
The closest related work is the GENIA corpus (Kim
et. al., 2003). GENIA provides detailed coverage of
a large number of semantic entities related to a spe-
cific subset of human molecular biology, whereas
GENETAG provides gene and protein name anno-
tations only, for a wide range of organisms and
biomedical contexts (molecular biology, genetics,
biochemistry, clinical medicine, etc.)
We are including a new version of GENE-
TAG, GENETAG-05, as part of the MedTag sys-
tem. GENETAG-05 differs from GENETAG in
four ways: 1) the definition of a gene/protein en-
tity has been modified, 2) significant annotation er-
rors in GENETAG have been corrected, 3) the con-
cept of a non-specific entity has been refined, and 4)
character-based indices have been introduced to re-
duce tokenization problems. We believe that these
changes result in a more accurate and robust corpus.
GENETAG-05 maintains a wide definition of a
gene/protein entity including genes, proteins, do-
mains, sites, sequences, and elements, but exclud-
ing plasmids and vectors. The specificity con-
straint requires that a gene/protein name must be
included in the tagged entity. This constraint has
been applied more consistently in GENETAG-05.
Additionally, plain sequences like ATTGGCCTT-
TAAC are no longer tagged, embedded names are
tagged (ras-mediated), and significantly more terms
have been judged to violate the specificity constraint
(growth factor, proteases, protein kinase, ribonu-
clease, snoRNA, rRNA, tissue factor, tumor anti-
gen, complement, hormone receptors, nuclear fac-
tors, etc.).
The original GENETAG corpus contains some en-
tities that were erroneously tagged as gene/proteins.
Many of these errors have been corrected in the up-
dated corpus. Examples include camp-responsive
elements, mu element, VDRE, melanin, dentin,
myelin, auxin, BARBIE box, carotenoids, and cel-
lulose. Error analysis resulted in the updated anno-
tation conventions given in Table 1.
Enzymes are a special class of proteins that cat-
alyze biochemical reactions. Enzyme names have
varying degrees of specificity, so the line drawn for
35
tagging purposes is based on online resources1 as
well as background knowledge. In general, tagged
enzymes refer to more specific entities than un-
tagged enzymes (tyrosine kinase vs. protein kinase,
ATPase vs. protease). Enzymes that can refer to
either DNA or RNA are tagged if the reference is
specified (DNA endonuclease vs. endonuclease).
Enzymes that do not require DNA/RNA distinction
are tagged (lipase vs. ligase, cyclooxygenase vs.
methylase). Non-specific enzymes are tagged if they
clearly refer to a gene or protein, as in (1).
1) The structural gene for hydrogenase en-
codes a protein product of molecular mass
45820 Da.
Semantic constraints in GENETAG-05 are the
same as those for GENETAG. To illustrate, the name
in (2) requires rabies because RIG implies that the
gene mentioned in this sentence refers to the rabies
immunoglobulin, and not just any immunoglobulin.
In (3), the word receptor is necessary to differen-
tiate IGG receptor from IGG, a crucial biological
distinction. In (4), the number 1 is needed to ac-
curately describe a specific type of tumor necrosis
factor, although tumor necrosis factor alone might
be adequate in a different context.
2) rabies immunoglobulin (RIG)
3) IGG receptor
4) Tumor necrosis factor 1
Application of the semantic constraint can result in
apparent inconsistencies in the corpus (immunoglob-
ulin is sufficient on its own in some sentences in the
corpus, but is insufficient in (2)). However, we be-
lieve it is important that the tagged entity retain its
true meaning in the sentence context.
4 Recommended Uses
We have found the component corpora of MedTag
to be useful for the following functions:
1) Training and evaluating part-of-speech
taggers
2) Training and evaluating gene/protein
named entity taggers
1http://cancerweb.ncl.ac.uk/omd/copyleft.html
http://www.onelook.com/
3) Developing and evaluating a noun
phrase bracketer for PubMed phrase
indexing
4) Statistical analysis of grammatical
usage in medical text
5) Feature generation for machine learn-
ing
The MedPost tagger was recently ported to Java
and is currently being employed in MetaMap, a pro-
gram that maps natural language text into the UMLS
(Aronson,A.R., 2001).
5 Conclusion
We have merged three biomedical corpora into a col-
lection of annotations called MedTag. MedTag uses
a common relational database format along with a
web interface to facilitate annotation consistency.
We have identified the MEDLINE excerpts for each
sentence and eliminated tokenization dependence,
increasing the usability of the data. In GENETAG-
05, we have clarified many grey areas for annotation,
providing better guidelines for tagging these cases.
For users of previous versions of the component cor-
pora, we have included programs to convert from the
new standardized format to the formats used in the
older versions.
References
Aronson, A. R. 2001. Effective mapping of biomedical
text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap pro-
gram. Proc. AMIA Symp., 1721.
Kim, J.-D., Ohta, T., Tateisi, Y. and Tsujii, J. 2003. GE-
NIA corpus: a semantically annotated corpus for bio-
textmining. Bioinformatics, 19: 180 - 182.
Tanabe, L and Wilbur, WJ. 2002. Tagging gene and
protein names in biomedical text. Bioinformatics, 18,
1124-1132.
Tanabe L, Xie N, Thom, LH, Matten W, Wilbur, WJ:
GENETAG: a tagged gene corpus for gene/protein
named entity recognition. BMC Bioinformatics 2005.
Smith, L, Rindflesch, T, and Wilbur, WJ. 2004. MedPost:
a part of speech tagger for biomedical text. Bioinfor-
matics, 20(13) 2320-2321.
Yeh A, Hirschman L, Morgan A, Colosimo M: BioCre-
AtIvE task 1A: gene mention finding evaluation. BMC
Bioinformatics 2005.
36
Entity Type Problem GENETAG-05
Convention
Positive Examples Negative
Examples
Protein
Families
Some are named after
structural motifs.
Do not tag
structures alone,
but tag structurally
related gene and
protein families.
Zinc finger protein,
bZIP transcription
factor, homeobox
gene, TATA binding
protein
Zinc finger,
helix-turn-helix
motif, leucine
zipper, homeobox,
TATA box
Domains Name can refer to 1) the
amino acid content of a
sequence (PEST), 2) the
protein that binds the
sequence (TFIIIA DNA
binding domain), 3) a
homologous gene (SH2 - Src
homology domain 2), 4) the
first proteins in which the
domain was discovered (LIM,
PDZ), or 5) structural entities
(POZ, zinc finger domain).
Tag only if the
domain refers to a
gene or protein.
Immuno-globulin
regions are tagged.
(VH refers to the
Immuno-globulin
heavy chain V
region).
BTB domain, LIM
domain, HECT
domain, VH
domain, SH2
domain, TFIIIA
DNA binding
domain,
Kru?ppel-associated
box (KRAB)
domains, NF-IL6
beta leucine zipper
domain
PEST domain, SR
domain, zinc finger
domain, b-Zip
domain, POZ
domain, GATA
domain, RS
domain, GAR
domain
Boxes,
Response
Elements and
Sites
Name can refer to 1) the
sequence or site itself
(TAAG), 2) a non-protein that
binds to it (Glucocorticoid
Response Element), 3) a
protein that binds to it (Sp1),
or 4) to homologous genes
(VL30).
Tag only if the
sequence or site
refers to a gene or
protein.
VL30 element, Zta
response elements,
activating protein 1
(AP-1) site, Ets
binding site, SP1
site, AP-2 box
GRE, TRE, cyclic
AMP response
element ( CRE),
TAAG sites, TGn
motif, TAR element,
UP element
Hormones Some are peptide hormones. Tag only peptide
hormones.
Insulin, Glucagon,
growth hormone
Estrogen,
Progesterone,
thyroid hormone
?and?
constructs
Some conjuncts require the
entire construct.
Unless both
conjuncts can stand
alone, tag them
together.
TCR alpha and
beta, D-lactate and
D-glycerate
dehydrogenase
TCR alpha, beta,
D-lactate,
D-glycerate
dehydrogenase
Viral
Sequences
Promoters, enhancers, repeats
are distinguished by
organism.
Tag only if the
organism is present.
Viral LTR, HIV
long terminal
repeat, SV40
promoter
LTR, long terminal
repeat
Sequences Some sequences lack gene or
protein names.
Tag only if a gene
name is included.
NF kappa B
enhancer
(TGGAAATTCC)
TCTTAT, TTGGGG
repeats
Embedded
Names
Some names are embedded in
non-gene text.
Tag only the gene
part.
P-47-deficient,
ras-transformed
P-47-deficient,
ras-transformed
Transposons,
Satellites
Often repetitive sequences. Tag if specific. L1 element, TN44,
copia
retrotransposon
non-LTR
retrotransposon
Antibodies Often use organism or disease
name.
Tag if specific. anti-SF group
rickettsiae (SFGR)
antinuclear
antibody
Alternative
Transcripts
Names differ from primary
transcript.
Tag if primary
transcript named.
I kappa B
gamma,VEGF20
Exon 2, IIA
Table 2: Some problematic gene/protein annotations and conventions followed in GENETAG-05.
37
BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 137?144,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Interpreting Comparative Constructions in Biomedical Text 
Marcelo Fiszman,1   Dina Demner-Fushman,2    
Francois M. Lang,2  Philip Goetz,2 
Thomas C. Rindflesch2 
1University of Tennessee ? GSM, Knoxville, TN 37920 
mfiszman@utmck.edu 
2Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications 
National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD 20894 
{ddemner|goetzp|flang|trindflesch}@mail.nih.gov 
 
Abstract 
We propose a methodology using 
underspecified semantic interpretation to 
process comparative constructions in 
MEDLINE citations, concentrating on two 
structures that are prevalent in the research 
literature reporting on clinical trials for 
drug therapies. The method exploits an 
existing semantic processor, SemRep, 
which constructs predications based on the 
Unified Medical Language System. Results 
of a preliminary evaluation were recall of 
70%, precision of 96%, and F-score of 
81%. We discuss the generalization of the 
methodology to other entities such as 
therapeutic and diagnostic procedures. The 
available structures in computable format 
are potentially useful for interpreting 
outcome statements in MEDLINE 
citations. 
1 Introduction 
As natural language processing (NLP) is 
increasingly able to support advanced information 
management techniques for research in medicine 
and biology, it is being incrementally improved to 
provide extended coverage and more accurate 
results. In this paper, we discuss the extension of 
an existing semantic interpretation system to 
address comparative structures. These structures 
provide a way of explicating the characteristics of 
one entity in terms of a second, thereby enhancing 
the description of the first. This phenomenon is 
important in clinical research literature reporting 
the results of clinical trials.  
In the abstracts of these reports, a treatment for 
some disease is typically discussed using two types 
of comparative structures. The first announces that 
the (primary) therapy focused on in the study will 
be compared to some other (secondary) therapy. A 
typical example is (1). 
(1) Lansoprazole compared with 
ranitidine for the treatment of 
nonerosive gastroesophageal reflux 
disease. 
An outcome statement (2) often appears near the 
end of the abstract, asserting results in terms of the 
relative merits of the primary therapy compared to 
the secondary. 
(2) Lansoprazole is more 
effective than ranitidine in 
patients with endoscopically 
confirmed non-erosive reflux 
esophagitis. 
The processing of comparative expressions such 
as (1) and (2) was incorporated into an existing 
system, SemRep [Rindflesch and Fiszman, 2003; 
Rindflesch et al, 2005], which constructs semantic 
predications by mapping assertions in biomedical 
text to the Unified Medical Language System? 
(UMLS)? [Humphreys et al, 1998].  
2 Background 
2.1 Comparative structures in English 
The range of comparative expressions in English is 
extensive and complex. Several linguistic studies 
have investigated their characteristics, with 
differing assumptions about syntax and semantics 
(for example [Ryan, 1981; Rayner and Banks, 
1990; Staab and Hahn, 1997; Huddleston and 
Pullum, 2002]). Our study concentrates on  
137
structures in which two drugs are compared with 
respect to a shared attribute (e.g. how well they 
treat some disease). An assessment of their relative 
merit in this regard is indicated by their positions 
on a scale. The compared terms are expressed as 
noun phrases, which can be considered to be 
conjoined. The shared characteristic focused on is 
expressed as a predicate outside the comparative 
structure. An adjective or noun is used to denote 
the scale, and words such as than, as, with, and to 
serve as cues to identify the compared terms, the 
scale, and the relative position of the terms on the 
scale.  
The first type of structure we address (called  
comp1 and illustrated in (3)) merely asserts that the 
primary and secondary terms (in bold) are being 
compared. A possible cue for identifying these 
structures is a form of compare. A further 
characteristic is that the compared terms are 
separated by a conjunction, or a preposition, as in 
(3). 
(3) To compare misoprostol with 
dinoprostone for cervical ripening 
and labor induction. 
As shown in (4), a scale may be  mentioned 
(efficacy); however, in this study, we only identify 
the compared terms in structures of this type.  
(4) To compare the efficacy of 
misoprostol with dinoprostone for 
cervical ripening and labor 
induction. 
In the more complex comparative expression we 
accommodate (called comp2), the relative ranking 
of two compared terms is indicated on a scale 
denoted by an adjective (e.g. effective in (5)). The 
relative position of the compared terms in scalar 
comparative structures of this type expresses either 
equality or inequality. Inequality is further divided 
into superiority, where the primary compared term 
is higher on the scale than the secondary, and 
inferiority, where the opposite is true. Cues 
associated with the adjective designating the scale 
signal these phenomena (e.g. as ADJ as in (5) for 
equality, ADJer than in (6) for superiority, and less 
ADJ than in (7) for inferiority).  
(5) Azithromycin is as effective 
as erythromycin estolate for the 
treatment of pertussis in children. 
(6) Naproxen is safer than 
aspirin in the treatment of the 
arthritis of rheumatic fever. 
(7) Sodium valproate was 
significantly less effective than 
prochlorperazine in reducing pain 
or nausea. 
In examples (3) through (7), the characteristic the 
compared drugs have in common is treatment of 
some disorder, for example treatment of pertussis 
in children in (5).  
Few studies describe an implemented automatic 
analysis of comparatives; however, Friedman 
[Friedman, 1989] is a notable exception. Jindal and 
Liu [Jindal and Liu, 2006] use machine learning to 
identify some comparative structures, but do not 
provide a semantic interpretation. We exploit 
SemRep machinery to interpret the aspects of 
comparative structures just described. 
2.2 SemRep 
SemRep [Rindflesch and Fiszman, 2003; 
Rindflesch et al, 2005] recovers underspecified 
semantic propositions in biomedical text based on 
a partial syntactic analysis and structured domain 
knowledge from the UMLS. Several systems that 
extract entities and relations are under 
development in both the clinical and molecular 
biology domains. Examples of systems for clinical 
text are described in [Friedman et al, 1994], 
[Johnson et al, 1993], [Hahn et al, 2002], and 
[Christensen et al, 2002]. In molecular biology, 
examples include [Yen et al, 2006], [Chun et al, 
2006], [Blaschke et al, 1999], [Leroy et al, 2003], 
[Rindflesch et al, 2005], [Friedman et al, 2001], 
and [Lussier et al, 2006].  
During SemRep processing, a partial syntactic 
parse is produced that depends on lexical look-up 
in the SPECIALIST lexicon [McCray et al, 1994] 
and a part-of-speech tagger [Smith et al, 2004]. 
MetaMap [Aronson, 2001] then matches noun 
phrases to concepts in the Metathesaurus? and 
determines the semantic type for each concept. For 
example, the structure in (9), produced for (8), 
allows both syntactic and semantic information to 
be used in further SemRep processing that 
interprets semantic predications.  
(8) Lansoprazole for the 
treatment of gastroesophageal 
reflux disease 
138
(9) [[head(noun(Lansoprazole),me
taconc(?lansoprazole?:[phsu]))],[p
rep(for),det(the),head(noun(treatm
ent))],[prep(of),mod(adj(gastroeso
phageal)),mod(noun(reflux)),head(n
oun(disease),metaconc(?Gastroesoph
ageal reflux disease?:[dsyn]))]] 
Predicates are derived from indicator rules that 
map syntactic phenomena (such as verbs and 
nominalizations) to relationships in the UMLS 
Semantic Network. Argument identification is 
guided by dependency grammar rules as well as 
constraints imposed by the Semantic Network. In 
processing (8), for example, an indicator rule links 
the nominalization treatment with the Semantic 
Network relation ?Pharmacologic Substance 
TREATS Disease or Syndrome.? Since the 
semantic types of the syntactic arguments 
identified for treatment in this sentence 
(?Pharmacologic Substance? for ?lansoprazole? and 
?Disease or Syndrome? for ?Gastroesophageal 
reflux disease?) match the corresponding semantic 
types in the relation from the Semantic Network, 
the predication in (10) is constructed, where 
subject and object are Metathesaurus concepts.  
(10) lansoprazole TREATS 
Gastroesophageal reflux disease 
3 Methods 
3.1 Linguistic patterns 
We extracted sentences for developing 
comparative processing from a set of  some 10,000 
MEDLINE citations reporting on the results of 
clinical trials, a rich source of comparative 
structures. In this sample, the most frequent 
patterns for comp1 (only announces that two terms 
are compared) and comp2 (includes a scale and 
positions on that scale) are given in (11) and (12). 
In the patterns, Term1 and Term2 refer to the 
primary and secondary compared terms, 
respectively. ?{BE}? means that some form of be 
is optional, and slash indicates disjunction. These 
patterns served as guides for enhancing SemRep 
argument identification machinery but were not 
implemented as such. That is, they indicate 
necessary components but do not preclude 
intervening modifiers and qualifiers.   
(11) comp1: Compared terms 
C1:   Term1 {BE} compare with/to Term2 
C2:   compare Term1 with/to Term2 
C3:   compare Term1 and/versus Term2 
C4a: Term1 comparison with/to Term2 
C4b: comparison of Term1 with/to Term2 
C4c: comparison of Term1 and/versus Term2 
C5   Term1 versus Term2 
(12) comp2: Scalar patterns 
S1:   Term1 BE as ADJ as {BE} Term2 
S2a: Term1 BE more ADJ than {BE} Term2 
S2b: Term1 BE ADJer than {BE}Term2  
S2c: Term1 BE less ADJ than {BE} Term2 
S4:   Term1 BE superior to Term2 
S5:   Term1 BE inferior to Term2 
As with SemRep in general, the interpretation of 
comparative structures exploits underspecified 
syntactic structure enhanced with Metathesaurus 
concepts and semantic types. Semantic groups 
[McCray et al, 2001] from the Semantic Network 
are also available. For this project, we exploit the 
group Chemicals & Drugs, which contains such 
semantic types as ?Pharmacologic Substance?, 
?Antibiotic?, and ?Immunologic Factor?. (The 
principles used here also apply to compared terms 
with semantic types from other semantic groups, 
such as ?Procedures?.) In the comp1 patterns, a 
form of compare acts as an indicator of a 
comparative predication. In comp2, the adjective 
serves that function. Other words appearing in the 
patterns cue the indicator word (in comp2) and 
help identify the compared terms (in both comp1 
and comp2). The conjunction versus  is special in 
that it cues the secondary compared term (Term2) 
in comp1, but may also indicate a comp1 structure 
in the absence of a form of compare (C5).  
3.2 Interpreting comp1 patterns  
When SemRep encounters a form of compare, it 
assumes a comp1 structure and looks to the right 
for the first noun phrase immediately preceded by 
with, to, and, or versus. If the head of this phrase is 
mapped to a concept having a semantic type in the 
group Chemicals & Drugs, it is marked as the 
secondary compared term. The algorithm then 
looks to the left of that term for a noun phrase 
having a semantic type also in the group Chemicals 
& Drugs, which becomes the primary compared 
term. When this processing is applied to (13), the 
semantic predication (14) is produced, in which the 
predicate is COMPARED_WITH; the first 
argument is the primary compared term and the 
139
other is the secondary. As noted earlier, although a 
scale is sometimes asserted in these structures (as 
in (13)), SemRep does not retrieve it. An assertion 
regarding position on the scale never appears in 
comp1 structures.  
(13) To compare the efficacy and 
tolerability of Hypericum 
perforatum with imipramine in 
patients with mild to moderate 
depression. 
(14) Hypericum perforatum 
COMPARED_WITH Imipramine 
SemRep considers noun phrases occurring 
immediately to the right and left of versus as being 
compared terms if their heads have been mapped to 
Metathesaurus concepts having semantic types 
belonging to the group Chemicals & Drugs. Such 
noun phrases are interpreted as part of a comp1 
structure, even if a form of compare has not 
occurred. The predication (16) is derived from 
(15).  
(15) Intravenous lorazepam versus 
dimenhydrinate for treatment of 
vertigo in the emergency 
department: a randomized clinical 
trial. 
(16) Lorazepam COMPARED_WITH 
Dimenhydrinate 
SemRep treats compared terms as being 
coordinated. For example, this identification 
allows both ?Lorazepam? and ?Dimenhydrinate? 
to function as arguments of TREATS in (15). 
Consequently, in addition to (16), the predications 
in (17) are returned as the semantic interpretation 
of (15). Such processing is done for all comp1 and 
comp2 structures (although these results are not 
given for (13) and are not further discussed in this 
paper). 
(17) Lorazepam TREATS Vertigo  
 Dimenhydrinate TREATS 
Vertigo 
3.3 Interpreting comp2 patterns  
In addition to identifying two compared terms 
when processing comp2 patterns, a scale must be 
named and the relative position of the terms on that 
scale indicated. The algorithm for finding 
compared terms in comp2 structures begins by 
locating one of the cues as, than, or to and then 
examines the next noun phrase to the right. If its 
head has been mapped to a concept with a 
semantic type in the group Chemicals & Drugs, it 
is marked as the secondary compared term. As in 
comp1, the algorithm then looks to the left for the 
first noun phrase having a head in the same 
semantic group, and that phrase is marked as the 
primary compared term.  
To find the scale name, SemRep examines the 
secondary compared term and then locates the first 
adjective to its left. The nominalization of that 
adjective (as found in the SPECIALIST Lexicon) 
is designated as the scale and serves as an 
argument of the predicate SCALE in the 
interpretation. For adjectives superior and inferior 
(patterns S4 and S5 in (12)) the scale name is 
?goodness.? 
In determining relative position on the scale, 
equality is contrasted with inequality. If the 
adjective of the construction is immediately 
preceded by as (pattern S1 in (12) above), the two 
compared terms have the same position on the 
scale (equality), and are construed as arguments of 
a predication with predicate SAME_AS. In all 
other comp2 constructions, the compared terms are 
in a relationship of inequality. The primary 
compared term is considered higher on the scale 
unless the adjective is inferior or is preceded by 
less, in which case the secondary term is higher. 
The predicates HIGHER_THAN and 
LOWER_THAN are used to construct predications 
with the compared terms to interpret position on 
the scale. The equality construction in (18) is 
expressed as the predications in (19).  
(18) Candesartan is as effective 
as lisinopril once daily in 
reducing blood pressure. 
(19) Candesartan COMPARED_WITH 
lisinopril 
 SCALE:Effectiveness  
 Candesartan SAME_AS 
lisinopril 
The superiority construction in (20) is expressed as 
the predications in (21).  
(20) Losartan was more effective 
than atenolol in reducing 
cardiovascular morbidity and 
mortality in patients with 
hypertension, diabetes, and LVH. 
(21) Losartan COMPARED_WITH 
Atenolol 
140
 SCALE:Effectiveness 
 Losartan HIGHER_THAN 
Atenolol 
The inferiority construction in (22) is expressed as 
the predications in (23).  
(22) Morphine-6-glucoronide was 
significantly less potent than 
morphine in producing pupil 
constriction. 
(23) morphine-6-glucoronide 
COMPARED_WITH Morphine 
 SCALE:Potency 
 morphine-6-glucoronide 
LOWER_THAN Morphine 
3.4 Accommodating negation  
Negation in comparative structures affects the 
position of the compared terms on the scale, and is 
accommodated differently for equality and for 
inequality. When a scalar comparison of equality 
(pattern S1, as ADJ as) is negated, the primary 
term is lower on the scale than the secondary 
(rather than being at least equal). For example, in 
interpreting the negated equality construction in 
(24), SemRep produces (25). 
(24) Amoxicillin-clavulanate was 
not as effective as ciprofloxacin 
for treating uncomplicated bladder 
infection in women. 
(25) Amoxicillin-clavulanate 
COMPARED_WITH Ciprofloxaci 
 SCALE:Effectiveness 
 Amoxicillin-clavulanate 
LOWER_THAN Ciprofloxacin 
For patterns of inequality, SemRep negates the 
predication indicating position on the scale. For 
example, the predications in (27) represent the 
negated superiority comparison in (26). Negation 
of inferiority comparatives (e.g. ?X is not less 
effective than Y?) is extremely rare in our sample.  
(26) These data show that 
celecoxib is not better than 
diclofenac (P = 0.414) in terms of 
ulcer complications. 
(27) celecoxib COMPARED_WITH 
diclofenac 
 SCALE:Goodness  
 celecoxib NEG_HIGHER_THAN 
diclofenac 
3.5 Evaluation 
To evaluate the effectiveness of the developed 
methods we created a test set of 300 sentences 
containing comparative structures. These were 
extracted by the second author (who did not 
participate in the development of the methodology) 
from 3000 MEDLINE citations published later in 
date than the  citations used to develop the 
methodology. The citations were retrieved with a 
PubMed query specifying randomized controlled 
studies and comparative studies on drug therapy.  
Sentences containing direct comparisons of the 
pharmacological actions of two drugs expressed in 
the target structures (comp1 and comp2) were 
extracted starting from the latest retrieved citation 
and continuing until 300 sentences with 
comparative structures had been examined. These 
were annotated with the PubMed ID of the citation, 
names of two drugs (COMPARED_WITH 
predication), the scale on which they are compared 
(SCALE), and the relative position of the primary 
drug with respect to the secondary (SAME_AS, 
HIGHER_THAN, or LOWER_THAN).  
The test sentences were processed using 
SemRep and evaluated against the annotated test 
set. We then computed recall and precision in 
several ways: overall for all comparative 
structures, for comp1 structures only, and for 
comp2 structures only. To understand how the 
overall identification of comparatives is influenced 
by the components of the construction, we also 
computed recall and precision separately for drug 
names, scale, and position on scale (SAME_AS, 
HIGHER_THAN and LOWER_THAN taken 
together). Recall measures the proportion of 
manually annotated categories that have been 
correctly identified automatically. Precision 
measures what proportion of the automatically 
annotated categories is correct.  
In addition, the overall identification of 
comparative structures was evaluated using the F-
measure [Rijsbergen, 1979], which combines recall 
and precision. The F-measure was computed using 
macro-averaging and micro-averaging. Macro-
averaging was computed over each category first 
and then averaged over the three categories (drug 
names, scale, and position on scale). This approach 
gives equal weight to each category. In micro-
averaging (which gives an equal weight to the 
performance on each sentence) recall and precision 
141
were obtained by summing over all individual 
sentences. Because it is impossible to enumerate 
all entities and relations which are not drugs, scale, 
or position we did not use the classification error 
rate and other metrics that require computing of 
true negative values. 
4 Results 
Upon inspection of the SemRep processing results 
we noticed that the test set contained nine 
duplicates.  In addition, four sentences were not 
processed for various technical reasons. We report 
the results for the remaining 287 sentences, which 
contain 288 comparative structures occurring in 
168 MEDLINE citations. Seventy four citations 
contain 85 comp2 structures. The remaining 203 
structures are comp1.  
Correct identification of comparative structures 
of both types depends on two factors: 1) 
recognition of both drugs being compared, and 2) 
recognition of the presence of a comparative 
structure itself. In addition, correct identification of 
the comp2 structures depends on recognition of the 
scale on which the drugs are compared and the 
relative position of the drugs on the scale. Table 1 
presents recall, precision, and F-score reflecting 
these factors. 
 
Table 1. SemRep performance 
Task Recall Precision F-score
Overall 0.70 0.96 0.81 
Drug extraction 0.69 0.96 0.81 
Comp1 0.74 0.98 0.84 
Comp2  0.62 0.92 0.74 
Scale  0.62 1.00 0.77 
Position on scale 0.62 0.98 0.76 
 
We considered drug identification to be correct 
only if both drugs participating in the relationship 
were identified correctly. The recall results 
indicate that approximately 30% of the drugs and 
comparative structures of comp1, as well as 40% 
of comp2 structures, remain unrecognized; 
however, all components are identified with high 
precision. Macro-averaging over compared drug 
names, scale, and position on scale categories we 
achieve an F-score = 0.78. The micro-average 
score for 287 comparative sentences is 0.5. 
5 Discussion 
In examining SemRep errors, we determined that 
more than 60% of the false negatives (for both 
comp1 and comp2) were due to ?empty heads? 
[Chodorow et al, 1985; Guthrie et al, 1990], in 
which the syntactic head of a noun phrase does not 
reflect semantic thrust. Such heads prevent 
SemRep from accurately determining the semantic 
type and group of the noun phrase. In our sample, 
expressions interpreted as empty heads include 
those referring to drug dosage and formulations, 
such as extended release (the latter often 
abbreviated as XR). Examples of missed 
interpretations are in sentences (28) and (29), 
where the empty heads are in bold. Ahlers et al 
[Ahlers et al, 2007] discuss enhancements to 
SemRep for accommodating empty heads. These 
mechanisms are being incorporated into the 
processing for comparative structures.  
(28) Oxybutynin 15 mg was more 
effective than propiverine 20 mg 
in reducing symptomatic and 
asymptomatic IDCs in ambulatory 
patients. 
(29) Intravesical atropine was as 
effective as oxybutynin immediate 
release for increasing bladder 
capacity and it was probably 
better with less antimuscarinic 
side effects 
False positives were due exclusively to word 
sense ambiguity. For example, in (30) bid (twice a 
day) was mapped to the concept ?BID protein?, 
which belongs to the semantic group Chemicals & 
Drugs. The most recent version of MetaMap, 
which will soon be called by comparative 
processing, exploits word sense disambiguation 
[Humphrey et al, 2006] and will likely resolve 
some of these errors.  
(30) Retapamulin ointment 1% (bid) 
for 5 days was as effective as 
oral cephalexin (bid) for 10 days 
in treatment of patients with SID, 
and was well tolerated. 
Although, in this paper, we tested the method on 
structures in which the compared terms belong to 
the semantic group Chemicals & Drugs, we can 
straightforwardly generalize the method by adding 
other semantic groups to the algorithm. For 
142
example, if SemRep recognized the noun phrases 
in bold in (31) and (32) as belonging to the group 
Procedures, comparative processing could proceed 
as for Chemicals & Drugs.  
(31) Comparison of multi-slice 
spiral CT and magnetic resonance 
imaging in evaluation of the un-
resectability of blood vessels in 
pancreatic tumor. 
(32) Dynamic multi-slice spiral 
CT is better than dynamic magnetic 
resonance to some extent in 
evaluating the un-resectability of 
peripancreatic blood vessels in 
pancreatic tumor. 
The semantic predications returned by SemRep 
to represent comparative expressions can be 
considered a type of executable knowledge that 
supports reasoning. Since the arguments in these 
predications have been mapped to the UMLS, a 
structured knowledge source, they can be 
manipulated using that knowledge. It is also 
possible to compute the transitive closure of all 
SemRep output for a collection of texts to 
determine which drug was asserted in that 
collection to be the best with respect to some 
characteristic. This ability could be very useful in 
supporting question-answering applications. 
As noted earlier, it is common in reporting on 
the results of randomized clinical trials and 
systematic reviews that a comp1 structure appears 
early in the discourse to announce the objectives of 
the study and that a comp2 structure often appears 
near the end to give the results. Another example 
of this phenomenon appears in (33) and (34) (from 
PMID 15943841).  
(33) To compare the efficacy of 
famotidine and omeprazole in 
Japanese patients with non-erosive 
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease 
by a prospective randomized 
multicentre trial. 
(34) Omeprazole is more effective 
than famotidine for the control of 
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease 
symptoms in H. pylori-negative 
patients. 
We suggest one example of an application that 
can benefit from the information provided by the 
knowledge inherent in the semantic interpretation 
of comparative structures, and that is the 
interpretation of outcome statements in MEDLINE 
citations, as a method for supporting automatic 
access to the latest results from clinical trials 
research. 
6 Conclusion 
We expanded a symbolic semantic interpreter to 
identify comparative constructions in biomedical 
text. The method relies on underspecified syntactic 
analysis and domain knowledge from the UMLS.  
We identify two compared terms and scalar 
comparative structures in MEDLINE citations. 
Although we restricted the method to comparisons 
of drug therapies, the method can be easily 
generalized to other entities such as diagnostic and 
therapeutic procedures. The availability of this 
information in computable format can support the 
identification of outcome sentences in MEDLINE, 
which in turn supports translation of biomedical 
research into improvements in quality of patient 
care. 
Acknowledgement This study was supported in 
part by the Intramural Research Programs of the 
National Institutes of Health, National Library of 
Medicine. 
References  
Ahlers C, Fiszman M, Demner-Fushman D, Lang F, 
Rindflesch TC. 2007. Extracting semantic 
predications from MEDLINE citations for 
pharmacogenomics. Pacific Symposium on 
Biocomputing  12:209-220. 
Aronson AR. 2001. Effective mapping of biomedical 
text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: The MetaMap 
program. Proc AMIA Symp, 17-21. 
Blaschke C, Andrade MA, Ouzounis C, and Valencia A. 
1999. Automatic extraction of biological information 
from scientific text: protein-protein interactions. 
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on 
Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology. Morgan 
Kaufman Publishers, San Francisco, CA. 
Christensen L, Haug PJ, and Fiszman M. 2002. 
MPLUS: A probabilistic medical language 
understanding system. Proceedings of the Workshop 
on Natural Language Processing in the Biomedical 
Domain, Association for Computational Linguistics, 
29-36. 
Chodorow MS, Byrd RI, and Heidom GE. 1985. 
Extracting Semantic Hierarchies from a Large On-
143
Line Dictionary. Proceedings of the 23rd Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 299-304. 
Chun HW, Tsuruoka Y, Kim J-D, Shiba R, Nagata N, 
Hishiki T, and Tsujii J. 2006, Extraction of gene-
disease relations from Medline using domain 
dictionaries and machine learning. Pac Symp 
Biocomput, 4-15. 
Friedman C. 1989. A general computational treatment 
of the comparative. Proc 27th Annual Meeting Assoc 
Comp Linguistics, 161-168. 
Friedman C, Alderson PO, Austin JH, Cimino JJ, and 
Johnson SB. 1994.  A general natural-language text 
processor for clinical radiology. J Am Med Inform 
Assoc, 1(2):161-74. 
Friedman C, Kra P, Yu H, Krauthammer M, and 
Rzhetsky A. 2001.  GENIES: a natural-language 
processing system for the extraction of molecular 
pathways from journal articles. Bioinformatics, 17 
Suppl 1:S74-S82. 
Guthrie L, Slater BM, Wilks Y, Bruce R. 1990. Is there 
content in empty heads? Proceedings of the 13th 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, v3:138 ? 
143.   
Hahn U, Romacker M, and Schulz S. 2002. 
MEDSYNDIKATE--a natural language system for 
the extraction of medical information from findings 
reports. Int J Med Inf, 67(1-3):63-74. 
Huddleston R, and Pullum GK. 2002. The Cambridge 
Grammar of the English Language. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Humphrey SM, Rogers WJ, Kilicoglu H, Demner-
Fushman D, Rindflesch TC. 2006. Word sense 
disambiguation by selecting the best semantic type 
based on Journal Descriptor Indexing: Preliminary 
experiment. J Am Soc Inf SciTech 57(1):96-113. 
Humphreys BL, Lindberg DA, Schoolman HM, and 
Barnett OG. 1998. The Unified Medical Language 
System: An informatics research collaboration. J Am 
Med Inform Assoc, 5(1):1-11. 
Jindal, Nitin and Bing Liu. 2006. Identifying 
comparative sentences in text documents. 
Proceedings of the 29th Annual International ACM 
SIGIR Conference on Research & Development on 
Information Retrieval. 
Johnson SB, Aguirre A, Peng P, and Cimino J. 1993. 
Interpreting natural language queries using the 
UMLS. Proc Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care, 
294-8. 
Leroy G, Chen H, and Martinez JD. 2003 A shallow 
parser based on closed-class words to capture 
relations in biomedical text. J Biomed Inform, 
36(3):145-158. 
Lussier YA, Borlawsky T, Rappaport D, Liu Y, and 
Friedman C. 2006 PhenoGO: assigning phenotypic 
context to Gene Ontology annotations with natural 
language processing. Pac Symp Biocomput, 64-75. 
McCray AT, Srinivasan S, and Browne AC. 1994. 
Lexical methods for managing variation in 
biomedical terminologies. Proc Annu Symp Comput 
Appl Med Care, 235-9. 
McCray AT, Burgun A, and Bodenreider O. 2001 
Aggregating UMLS semantic types for reducing 
conceptual complexity. Medinfo, 10(Pt 1): 216-20. 
Rayner M and Banks A. 1990. An implementable 
semantics for comparative constructions. 
Computational Linguistics, 16(2):86-112. 
Rindflesch TC. 1995. Integrating natural language 
processing and biomedical domain knowledge for 
increased information retrieval effectiveness. Proc 
5th  Annual Dual-use Technologies and Applications 
Conference, 260-5. 
Rindflesch TC and Fiszman M. 2003. The interaction of 
domain knowledge and linguistic structure in natural 
language processing: Interpreting hypernymic 
propositions in biomedical text. J Biomed Inform, 
36(6):462-77. 
Rindflesch TC, Marcelo Fiszman , and Bisharah Libbus.  
2005. Semantic interpretation for the biomedical 
research literature. Medical informatics: Knowledge 
management and data mining in biomedicine. 
Springer, New York, NY. 
Rijsbergen V. 1979.  Information Retrieval, 
Butterworth-Heinemann, Newton, MA. 
Ryan K. 1981. Corepresentational grammar and parsing 
English comparatives. Proc 19th Annual Meeting  
Assoc Comp Linguistics, 13-18. 
Smith L, Rindflesch T, and Wilbur WJ. 2004. MedPost: 
a part-of-speech tagger for biomedical text. 
Bioinformatics, 20(14):2320-1. 
Staab S and Hahn U. Comparatives in context. 1997. 
Proc 14th National Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence and 9th Innovative Applications of 
Artificial Intelligence Conference, 616-621. 
Yen YT, Chen B, Chiu HW, Lee YC, Li YC, and Hsu 
CY. 2006. Developing an NLP and IR-based 
algorithm for analyzing gene-disease relationships.
 
144
Extracting Molecular Binding Relationships from Biomedical Text 
Thomas C. RINDFLESCH 
National Library of Medicine 
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD, 20894 
tcr@nlm.nih.gov 
Jayant V. RAJAN 
University of Rochester 
Rochester, NY, 14620 
Jayant.Rajan@ mc.rochester.edu 
Lawrence HUNTER 
National Cancer Institute 
7550 Wisconsin Avenue 
Bethesda, MD, 20894 
lhunter@nih.gov 
Abstract 
ARBITER is a Prolog program that extracts 
assertions about macromolecular binding 
relationships from biomedical text. We de- 
scribe the domain knowledge and the under- 
specified linguistic analyses that support he 
identification of these predications. After 
discussing a formal evaluation of 
ARBITER, we report on its application to 
491,000 MEDLINE ~ abstracts, during 
which almost 25,000 binding relationships 
suitable for entry into a database of macro- 
molecular function were extracted. 
Introduction 
Far more scientific information exists in the lit- 
erature than in any structured atabase. Con- 
venient access to this information could signifi- 
cantly benefit research activities in various 
fields. The emerging technology of information 
extraction (Appelt and Israel 1997, Hearst 1999) 
provides a means of gaining access to this in- 
formation. In this paper we report on a project o 
extract biomolecular data from biomedical text. 
We concentrate on molecular binding affinity, 
which provides a strong indication of macro- 
molecular function and is a core phenomenon in 
molecular biology. Our ultimate goal is to auto- 
matically construct a database of binding rela- 
tionships asserted in MEDLINE citations. 
The National Library of Medicine's 
MEDLINE textual database is an online reposi- 
tory of more than 10 million citations from the 
biomedical literature. All citations contain the 
title of the corresponding article along with other 
bibliographic information. In addition, a large 
number of citations contain author-supplied ab- 
stracts. Initial studies indicate that there are ap- 
proximately 500,000 MEDLINE citations rele- 
vant to molecular binding affinity. 
Our decision to apply information extraction 
technology to binding relationships was guided 
not only by the biological importance of this 
phenomenon but also by the relatively straight- 
forward syntactic uing of binding predications 
in text. The inflectional forms of a single verb, 
bind, indicate this relationship n the vast major- 
ity of cases, and our initial work is limited to 
these instances. For example, our goal in this 
project is to extract he binding predications in 
(2) from the text in (1). 
(1) CC chemokine r ceptor 1 (CCR1) is ex- 
pressed in neutrophils, monocytes, lympho- 
cytes, and eosinophils, and binds the leuko- 
cyte chemoattractant d hematopoiesis 
regulator macrophage inflammatory protein 
(MIP)- 1 alpha, as well as several related CC 
chemokines. 
(2) <CC chemokine receptor 1> 
BINDS 
<leukocyte chemoattractant> 
<CC chemokine r ceptor 1> 
BINDS 
<hematopoiesis regulator macrophage 
inflammatory protein- 1alpha> 
<CC chemokine r ceptor 1> 
BINDS 
<related CC chemokine> 
Considerable interest in information extrac- 
tion has concentrated on identifying named enti- 
ties in text pertaining to current events (for ex- 
ample, Wacholder et al 1997, Voorhees and 
Harman 1998, and MUC-7); however, several 
recent efforts have been directed at biomolecular 
data (Blaschke t al. 1999, Craven and Kumlien 
1999, and Rindflesch et al 2000, for example). 
The overall goal is to transform the information 
188
encoded in text into a more readily accessible 
tbrmat, typically a template with slots named for 
the participants in the scenario of interest. The 
template for molecular binding can be thought of 
as a simple predication with predicate "bind" 
and two arguments which participate (sym- 
metrically) in the relationship: BINDS(<X>, 
<Y>). 
Various strategies, both linguistic and statis- 
tical, have been used in information extraction 
efforts. We introduce a Prolog program called 
ARBITER (Assess and Retrieve Binding Termi- 
nology) that takes advantage of an existing do- 
main knowledge source and relies on syntactic 
cues provided by a partial parser in order to 
identify and extract binding relations from text. 
We discuss the syntactic processing used and 
then report on a formal evaluation of ARBITER 
against a test collection of 116 MEDLINE cita- 
tions in which the binding relations were marked 
by hand. Finally, we provide a brief overview of 
the results of applying ARBITER to the 500,000 
MEDLINE citations discussing molecular bind- 
ing affinity. 
1 Extracting Binding Relationships 
from Text 
Our strategy for extracting binding relationships 
from text divides the task into two phases: Dur- 
ing the first phase we identify all potential 
binding arguments, and then in the second phase 
we extract just those binding terms which are as- 
serted in the text as participating in a particular 
binding predication. In support of this proces- 
sing, we rely on the linguistic and domain 
knowledge contained in the National Library of 
Medicine's Unified Medical Language System ~
(UMLS ?) as well an existing tool, the 
SPECIALIST minimal commitment parser (Ar- 
onson et al 1994). 
The UMLS (Humphreys et al 1998) consists 
of several knowledge sources applicable in the 
biomedical domain: the Metathesaums, Seman- 
tic Network, and SPECIALIST Lexicon 
(McCray et al 1994). The Metathesaurus was 
constructed from more than forty controlled vo- 
cabularies and contains more than 620,000 bio- 
medical concepts. The characteristic of the 
Metathesaurus most relevant for this project is 
that each concept is associated with a semantic 
type that categorizes the concept into subareas of 
biology or medicine. Examples pertinent to 
binding terminology include the semantic types 
'Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein' and 'Nucleo- 
tide Sequence'. The SPECIALIST Lexicon 
(with associated lexical access tools) supplies 
syntactic information for a large compilation of 
biomedical and general English terms. 
The SPECIALIST minimal commitment 
parser relies on the SPECIALIST Lexicon as 
well as the Xerox stochastic tagger (Cutting et 
al. 1992). The output produced is in the tradition 
of partial parsing (Hindle 1983, McDonald 
1992, Weischedel et al 1993) and concentrates 
on the simple noun phrase, what Weischedel et 
al. (1993) call the "core noun phrase," that is a 
noun phrase with no modification to the right of 
the head. Several approaches provide similar 
output based on statistics (Church 1988, Zhai 
1997, for example), a finite-state machine (Ait- 
Mokhtar and Chanod 1997), or a hybrid ap- 
proach combining statistics and linguistic rules 
(Voutilainen and Padro 1997). 
The SPECIALIST parser is based on the no- 
tion of barrier words (Tersmette t al. 1988), 
which indicate boundaries between phrases. Af- 
ter lexical look-up and resolution of category la- 
bel ambiguity by the Xerox tagger, complemen- 
tizers, conjunctions, modals, prepositions, and 
verbs are marked as boundaries. Subsequently, 
boundaries are considered to open a new phrase 
(and close the preceding phrase). Any phrase 
containing a noun is considered to be a (simple) 
noun phrase, and in such a phrase, the right-most 
noun is labeled as the head, and all other items 
(other than determiners) are labeled as modifi- 
ers. An example of the output from the 
SPECIALIST parser is given below in (4). The 
partial parse produced serves as the basis for the 
first phase of extraction of binding relationships, 
namely the identification of those simple noun 
phrases acting as potential binding arguments 
(referred to as "binding terms"). 
1.1 Identifying binding terminology 
In order to identify binding terminology in text 
we rely on the approach discussed in (Rindfiesch 
et al 1999). Text with locally-defined acronyms 
expanded is submitted to the Xerox tagger and 
the SPECIALIST parser. Subsequent processing 
concentrates on the heads of simple noun 
1RQ 189
phrases and proceeds in a series of cascaded 
steps that depend on existing domain knowledge 
as well as several small, special-purpose re- 
sources in order to determine whether each noun 
phrase encountered is to be considered a binding 
term. 
As the first step in the process, an existing 
program, MetaMap, (Aronson et al 1994) at- 
tempts to map each simple noun phrase to a con- 
cept in the UMLS Metathesaurus. The semantic 
type for concepts corresponding to successfully 
mapped noun phrases is then checked against a 
small subset of UMLS semantic types referring 
to bindable entities, such as 'Amino Acid, Pep- 
tide, or Protein', 'Nucleotide Sequence', 'Car- 
bohydrate', 'Cell', and 'Virus'. For concepts 
with a semantic type in this set, the correspond- 
ing noun phrase is considered to be a binding 
term. 
The heads of noun phrases that do not map to 
a concept in the Metathesaurus are tested against 
a small set of general "binding words," which 
often indicate that the noun phrase in which they 
appear is a binding term. The set of binding 
words includes such nouns as cleft, groove, 
membrane, ligand, motif, receptor, domain, ele- 
ment, and molecule. 
The head of a noun phrase that did not sub- 
mit to the preceding steps is examined to see 
whether it adheres to the morphologic shape of a 
normal English word. In this context such a 
word is often an acronym not defined locally 
and indicates the presence of a binding term 
(Fukuda et al 1998). A normal English word has 
at least one vowel and no digits, and a text token 
that contains at least one letter and is not a nor- 
real English word functions as a binding word in 
this context. 
The final step in identifying binding terms is 
to join contiguous imple noun phrases qualify- 
ing as binding terms into a single macro-noun 
phrase. Rindflesch et al (1999) use the term 
"macro-noun phrase" to refer to structures that 
include reduced relative clauses (commonly in- 
troduced by prepositions or participles) as well 
as appositives. Two binding terms joined by a 
form of be are also treated as though they 
formed a macro-noun phrase, as in Jel42 is an 
IgG which binds ... 
The results of identifying binding terms (and 
thus potential binding arguments) are given in 
(4) for the sentence in (3). In (4) evidence sup- 
porting identification as a binding term is given 
in braces. Note that in the underspecified syn- 
tactic analysis, prepositional phrases are treated 
as (simple) noun phrases that have a preposition 
as their first member. 
(3) Je142 is an IgG which binds to the small 
bacterial protein, HPr and the structure of the 
complex is known at high resolution. 
(4) \[binding_term(\[ head(Je142)\], 
{ Morphology Shape Rule } 
\[aux0s)\], 
\[det(an), head(IgG)\] { Metathesaurus } 
), 
\[pron(which)\], 
\[verb(binds)\], 
binding_term(\[prep(to), det(the), 
mod(small), mod(bacterial), head(protein), 
punc(,)\], { Metathesaurus } 
\[head(HPr)\] { Morphology Shape Rule } 
), 
\[conj(and)\], 
\[det(the), head(structure)I, 
binding_term(\[prep(of), det(the), 
head(complex)\] { General Binding Word } 
), 
\[aux(is)\], 
\[verb(known)\], 
\[prep(at), mod(high), head(resolution), 
punc(.)l\] 
1.2 Identifying binding terms as 
arguments of relationships 
Before addressing the strategy for determining 
the arguments of binding predications, we dis- 
cuss the general treatment of macro-noun 
phrases during the second part of the processing. 
Although ARBITER attempts to recover com- 
plete macro-noun phrases during the first phase, 
only the most specific (and biologically useful) 
part of a macro-noun phrase is recovered uring 
the extraction of binding predications. Terms re- 
ferring to specific molecules are more useful 
than those referring to general classes of bind- 
able entities, such as receptor, ligand, protein, 
or molecule. The syntactic head of a macro-noun 
phrase (the first simple noun phrase in the list) is 
not always the most specific or most useful term 
in the construction. 
l_qt~ 190
The Specificity Rule for determining the 
most specific part of the list of simple binding 
terms constituting a macro-noun phrase chooses 
the first simple term in the list which has either 
of the following two characteristics: a) The head 
was identified by the Morphology Shape Rule. 
b) The noun phrase maps to a UMLS concept 
having one of the following semantic types: 
'Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein', 'Nucleic 
Acid, Nucleoside, or Nucleotide', 'Nucleotide 
Sequence', 'Immunologic Factor', or 'Gene or 
Genome'. For example, in (5), the second simple 
term, TNF-alpha promoter, maps to the Meta- 
thesaurus with semantic type 'Nucleotide Se- 
quence' and is thus considered to be the most 
specific term in this complex-noun phrase. 
(5) binding_term( 
\[transcriptionally active kappaB motifs\], 
\[in the TNF-alpha promoter\], 
\[in normal cells\]) 
In identifying binding terms as arguments of 
a complete binding predication, as indicated 
above, we examine only those binding relations 
cued by some form of the verb bind (bind, binds, 
bound, and binding). The list of minimal syntac- 
tic phrases constituting the partial parse of the 
input sentence is examined from left to right; for 
each occurrence of a form of binds, the two 
binding terms serving as arguments are then 
sought. (During the tagging process, we force 
bind, binds, and bound to be labeled as "verb," 
and binding as "noun.") 
A partial analysis of negation and coor- 
dination is undertaken by ARBITER, but ana- 
phora resolution and a syntactic treatment of re- 
lativization are not attempted. With the added 
constraint hat a binding argument must have 
been identified as a binding term based on the 
domain knowledge resources used, the partial 
syntactic analysis available to ARBITER sup- 
ports the accurate identification of a large num- 
ber of binding predications asserted in the re- 
search literature. 
1.2.1 Arguments of binding 
It is convenient o categorize binding pred- 
ications into two classes depending on which 
form of bind cues the predication: a) binding and 
b) bind, binds, and bound. In our test collection 
(discussed below), about half of the binding re- 
lationships asserted in the text are cued by the 
gerundive or participial form binding. In this 
syntactic predication, the resources available 
from the underspecified syntactic parse serve 
quite well as the basis for correctly identifying 
the arguments of the binding relationship. 
The most common argument configuration 
associated with binding is for both arguments o 
occur to the right, cued by prepositions, most 
commonly of and to; however, other frequent 
patterns are of-by and to-by. Another method of 
argument cuing for binding is for the subject of 
the predication to function syntactically as a 
modifier of the head binding in the same simple 
noun phrase. The object in this instance is then 
cued by either of or to (to the right). A few other 
patterns are seen and some occurrences of bind- 
ing do not cue a complete predication; either the 
subject is missing or neither argument is expli- 
citly mentioned. However, the examples in (6) 
fairly represent the interpretation f binding. 
(6) These results uggest that 2 amino acids, 
Thr-340 and Ser-343, play important but 
distinct roles in promoting the binding of ar- 
restin to rhodopsin. 
<arrestin> 
BINDS 
<rhodopsin> 
Surprisingly, arrestin binding to phospho- 
rylated T340E did not increase to the level 
observed for wild-type rhodopsin. 
<arrestirt> 
BINDS 
<phosphorylated 340e> 
1.2.2 Arguments of bind 
The arguments of forms of bind other than 
binding invariably occur on either side of the 
cuing verb form. The default strategy for iden- 
tifying both arguments in these instances is to 
choose the closest binding term on either side of 
the verb. In the cases we have investigated, this 
strategy works often enough to be useful for the 
surface object. However, due to predicate coor- 
dination as well as relativization, such a strategy 
often fails to identify correctly the surface sub- 
ject of bind (binds or bound) when more than 
191 
one binding term precedes the verb. We there- 
fore use the strategy summarized in (7) for re- 
covering the surface subject in such instances. 
(7) When more than one binding term precedes a 
form of bind other than binding, choose the 
most specific of these binding terms as the 
surface subject of the predication. 
"Most specific" is determined (recursively) for a 
series of binding terms in the same way that the 
most specific part of a complex binding term is 
determined. 
The input text (8) provides an example of a 
binding predication cued by binds in which the 
arguments appear (immediately) on either side 
of the cuing verb. The two macro-noun phrases 
serving as potential arguments are underlined. 
(8) A transcription factor, Auxin Response Fac- 
tor 1, that binds to tl!e sequence TGTCTC in 
auxin response lements was cloned from 
Arabidopsis by using a yeast one-hybrid sys- 
tem. 
(9) <auxin response factor 1> 
BINDS 
<sequence tgtctc> 
In the extracted binding relationship in (9), 
the Specificity Rule chooses Auxin Response 
Factor 1 from the first macro-noun phrase be- 
cause it maps to the UMLS Metathesaurus with 
semantic type 'Amino Acid, Peptide, or Pro- 
tein'. In the second argument, the sequence 
TGTCTC has a head that submits to the Mor- 
phology Shape Rule and hence is considered to 
be more specific than auxin response lements. 
In (10), the Specificity Rule applies correctly 
to select he surface subject of the binding pred- 
ication when multiple binding terms appear to 
the left of the verb. 
(10) Phosphatidylinositol transfer protein has a 
single lipid-binding site that can reversibly 
bind phosphatidylinositol and phosphatidyl- 
choline and transfer these lipids between 
membrane compartments in vitro. 
<phosphatidylinositol transfer protein> 
BINDS 
<phosphatidylcholine> 
<phosphatidylinositol transfer protein> 
BINDS 
<phosphatidylinositol> 
Both Phosphatidylinositol transfer protein and a 
single lipid-binding site occur to the left of bind 
and have been identified as binding terms by the 
first phase of processing. However, Phos- 
phatidylinositol transfer protein maps to the cor- 
responding Metathesaurus concept with seman- 
tic type 'Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein, thus 
causing it to be more specific than a single lipid- 
binding site. The second predication listed in 
(10) was correctly extracted ue to coordination 
processing. 
ARBITER pursues limited coordination 
identification i the spirit of Agarwal and Bog- 
gess (1992) and Rindflesch (1995). Only bind- 
ing terms are considered as candidates for coor- 
dination. For each conjunction encountered, the 
phrase immediately tothe right is examined; if it 
is a binding term, all contiguous binding terms 
occurring immediately tothe left of the conjunct 
are considered to be coordinate with the right 
conjunct. Coordination inside the simple noun 
phrase is not considered, and therefore structures 
such as The TCR alpha beta or -gamma delta 
chains are not recognized. Nonetheless, as in- 
dicated in (11), this limited approach to noun 
phrase coordination is often effective. 
(11) Purified recombinant NC 1, like authentic 
NC 1, also bound specifically to fibronectin, 
collagen type I, and a laminin 5/6 complex. 
<authentic ncl> 
BINDS 
<laminin 5 / 6 complex> 
<authentic ncl > 
BINDS 
<collagen type i> 
<authentic ncl> 
BINDS 
<fibronectin> 
<purified recombinant cl > 
BINDS 
<laminin 5 / 6 complex> 
<purified recombinant cl> 
BINDS 
<collagen type i> 
<purified recombinant cl > 
BINDS 
<fibronectin> 
192 
Although the particular underspecified syn- 
tactic analysis used in the identification of 
binding predications in the biomedical research 
literature is limited in several important ways, it 
appears adequate to enable this project with a 
useful level of effectiveness, and this is sup- 
ported by evaluation. 
2 Evaluation 
In order to determine ARBITER's effectiveness, 
the program was formally evaluated against a 
gold standard of MEDLINE citations in which 
the binding predications asserted were marked 
by hand. A search of MEDLINE limited to one 
month (June 1997) and based on the text words 
((bind, binds, binding, or bound) and (protein or 
proteins)) retrieved 116 citations with 1,141 sen- 
tences; of these, 346 contained some form of the 
verb bind. 260 binding predications were identi- 
fied in the binding sentences. (The binding sen- 
tences also contained 2,025 simple noun 
phrases, 1,179 of which were marked as being 
binding terms.) 
In processing this test collection, ARBITER 
extracted 181 binding predications, 132 of which 
were correct. Since ARBITER missed 128 
marked binding predications (false negatives) 
and incorrectly identified 49 such relationships, 
recall and precision as measures of effectiveness 
are 51% and 73%, respectively. 
In comparing ARBITER's output against that 
marked in the gold standard, fairly stringent 
matching criteria were used. A binding predica- 
tion extracted from a particular sentence by 
ARBITER had to appear in that same sentence 
in the gold standard (not just the same citation) 
in order to be counted as correct. Further, in the 
gold standard, only the most specific component 
of a macro-noun phrase was marked as being the 
correct argument for a particular binding predi- 
cation. If ARBITER retrieved any other part of a 
macro-noun phrase in identifying the arguments 
of that predication, it was assessed as an error. 
A large number of ARBITER errors are due 
to two phenomena: difficulties in correctly iden- 
tifying binding terms during the first phase of 
processing and syntactic omplexity confound- 
ing argument identification during the second 
phase. An example of the first error type is seen 
in (12), where the failure to identify ran as a 
binding term caused ARBITER to miss the cor- 
rect binding predication asserted in this sentence 
(indicated by "-FN->"). 
(12) Requirement of guanosine triphosphate- 
bound ran for signal-mediated nuclear pro- 
tein export. 
-FN-> <guanosine triphosphate> 
BINDS 
<Ran> 
-FP-> < guanosine triphosphate> 
BINDS 
<signal - mediate nuclear protein 
export> 
This error then led to the false positive error 
("-FP->") when the program wrongly interpreted 
the next noun phrase in the sentence (signal- 
mediated nuclear protein export) as the second 
argument in this predication. 
The interaction of coordination and negation 
in (13) caused ARBITER to partially misinter- 
pret the binding predications in this sentence. 
(13) The nonvisual arrestins, beta-arrestin a d 
arrestin3, but not visual arrestin, bind spe- 
cifically to a glutathione S-transferase- clath- 
rin terminal domain fusion protein. 
<arrestin3> 
BINDS 
<glutathione s-transferase-clathrin terminal 
domain fusion protein> 
<beta rrestin> 
BINDS 
<glutathione s-transferase-clathrin terminal 
domain fusion protein> 
<nonvisual rrestin> 
BINDS 
<glutathione s-transferase-clathrin terminal 
domain fusion protein> 
-FN-> <visual arrestin> 
DOES_NOT_BIND 
<glutathione s-transferase-clathrin 
terminal domain fusion protein> 
Although some of the coordination i  (13) 
was processed properly, resulting in the relation- 
ships listed, the negated coordination associated 
with the noun phrase visual arrestin was not in- 
terpreted correctly, and thus ARBITER failed to 
1Q"2  193
identify the predication marked as a false nega- 
tive. 
3 Application 
As an initial application of ARBITER we ran the 
program on 491,356 MEDLINE citations, which 
were retrieved using the same search strategy re- 
sponsible for the gold standard. During this run, 
331,777 sentences in 192,997 citations produced 
419,782 total binding assertions. Extrapolating 
from the gold standard evaluation, we assume 
that this is about half of the total binding predi- 
cations asserted in the citations processed and 
that somewhat less than three quarters of those 
extracted are correct. 
The initial list of 419,982 binding triples rep- 
resents what ARBITER determined was asserted 
in the text being processed. Many of these as- 
sertions, such as those in (14), while correct, are 
too general to be useful. 
(14) <receptors> 
BINDS 
<Peptides> 
<Erythrocytes> 
BINDS 
<Antibodies> 
Further processing on ARBITER raw output 
extracted specific protein names and genomic 
structures and reduced the number of such 
binding predications to 345,706. From these 
more specific binding predication, we began the 
construction of a database containing binding 
relations asserted in the literature. More detailed 
discussion of this database can be found in (Ra- 
jan et al in prep); however, here we give an ini- 
tial description of its characteristics. 
We submitted the 345,706 more specific 
ARBITER binding predications to a search in 
GenBank (Benson et al 1998) and determined 
that 106,193 referred to a GenBank entry. The 
number of Genbank entries with at least one 
binding assertion is 11,617. Preliminary results 
indicate that the database we are constructing 
will have some of the following characteristics: 
? 10,769 bindings between two distinct Gen- 
bank entries (5,569 unique) 
? 875 more binding assertions found between 
an entry and a specific DNA sequence 
? 27,345 bindings between a Genbank entry 
and a UMLS Metathesaurus concept 
? 5,569 unique relationships among pairs of 
entries (involving 11,617 unique entries) 
Conclusion 
The cooperation of structured omain knowl- 
edge and underspecified syntactic analysis en- 
ables the extraction of macromolecular binding 
relationships from the research literature. Al- 
though our implementation is domain-specific, 
the underlying principles are amenable to 
broader applicability. 
ARBITER makes a distinction between first 
labeling binding terms and then identifying cer- 
tain of these terms as arguments in a binding 
predication. The first phase of this processing is
dependent on biomedical domain knowledge ac- 
cessible from the UMLS. Applying the tech- 
niques we propose in other areas would require 
at least a minimum of semantic lassification of 
the concepts involved. General, automated tech- 
niques that could supply this requirement are be- 
coming increasingly available (Morin and Jac- 
quemin 1999, for example). 
Although we concentrated onthe inflectional 
forms of a single verb, the principles we invoke 
to support argument identification during the 
second phase of processing apply generally to 
English predication encoding strategies (with a 
minimum of effort necessary to address preposi- 
tional cuing of gerundive arguments for specific 
verbs). The approach to noun phrase coordina- 
tion also applies generally, so long as hy- 
pernymic lassification is available for the heads 
of the potential conjuncts. 
Acknowledgements 
We are grateful to John Wilbur for assistance 
with accessing GenBank, to Alan Aronson for 
modifications to MetaMap, and to James Mork 
for providing the distributed system that sup- 
ported the processing of MEDLINE citations. 
References 
Agaxwal R. and Boggess L. (1992) A simple but use- 
ful approach to conjunct identification. Proceed- 
ings of the 30th Annual Meeting of the Associa- 
tion for Computational Linguistics, pp. 15-21. 
194
Ait-Mokhtar S. and Chanod J.-P. (1997) Incremental 
finite-state parsing. Proceedings of the Fifth Con- 
ference on Applied Natural Language Processing, 
pp. 72-9. 
Appelt D. E. and Israel D. (1997) Tutorial on build- 
ing information extraction systems. Fifth Confer- 
ence on Applied Natural Language Processing. 
Aronson A. R., Rindflesch T. C., and Browne A. C. 
(1994) Exploiting a large thesaurus for informa- 
tion retrieval. Proceedings of RIAO 94, pp. 197- 
216. 
Benson D. A., Boguski M. S., Lipman D. J., Ostell J., 
and Ouelette B. F. (1998) GenBank. Nucleic Acids 
Research, 26/1, pp. 1-7. 
Blaschke C., Andrade M. A., Ouzounis C., and Va- 
lencia A. (1999) Automatic extraction of biological 
information from scientific text: protein-protein 
interactions. Intelligent Systems for Molecular Bi- 
ology (ISMB), 7, pp. 60-7. 
Church K. W. (1988) A stochastic parts program and 
noun phrase parser for unrestricted text. Proceed- 
ings of the Second Conference on Applied Natural 
Language Processing, pp. 136-143. 
Craven M. and Kumlien J. (1999) Constructing bio- 
logical knowledge bases by extracting information 
from text sources. Intelligent Systems for Molecu- 
lar Biology (ISMB), 7, pp. 77-86. 
Cutting D. R., Kupiec J., Pedersen J. O., and Sibun P. 
(1992) A practical part-of-speech tagger. Pro- 
ceedings of the Third Conference on Applied Natu- 
ral Language Processing. 
Fukuda F., Tsunoda T., Tamura A., and Takagi T. 
(1998) Toward information extraction: Identifying 
protein names from biological papers. Pacific 
Symposium on Biocomputing (PSB), 3, pp. 705- 
16. 
Hearst M. A. (1999) Untangling text data mining. 
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the As- 
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3-10. 
Hindle D. (1983) Deterministic parsing of syntactic 
non-fluencies. Proceedings of the 21st Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin- 
guistics, pp. 123-8. 
Humphreys B. L., Lindberg D. A. B., Schoolman H. 
M., and Barnett G. O. (1998) The Unified Medical 
language System: An informatics research collabo- 
ration. Journal of the American Medical Informat- 
ics Association, 5/1, pp. 1-13. 
McCray A. T., Srinivasan S., and Browne A. C. 
(1994) Lexical methods for managing variation in 
biomedical terminologies. Proceedings of the 18th 
Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in 
Medical Care, pp. 235-9. 
McDonald D. D. (1992) Robust partial parsing 
through incremental, multi-algorithm processing. 
In "Text-Based Intelligent Systems," P. S. Jacobs, 
ed., pp. 83-99. 
Morin E. and Jacquemin C. Projecting corpus-based 
semantic links on a thesaurus. Proceedings of the 
37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics, pp. 389-96. 
MUC-7. Message Understanding Conference Pro- 
ceedings, http://www.muc.saic.com. 
Rajan J. V., Hunter L., and Rindflesch T. C. (In 
prep.) Mining MEDLINE. 
Rindflesch T. C. (1995) Integrating natural anguage 
processing and biomedical domain knowledge for 
increased information retrieval effectiveness. Pro- 
ceedings of the 5th Annual Dual-Use Technologies 
and Applications Conference, pp. 260-5. 
Rindflesch T. C., Hunter L., and Aronson A. R. 
(1999) Mining molecular binding terminology from 
biomedical text. Proceedings of the AMIA Annual 
Symposium, pp. 127-131. 
Rindflesch T. C., Tanabe L., Weinstein J. N., and 
Hunter L. (2000) EDGAR: Extraction of drug, s, 
genes and relations from the biomedical literature. 
Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing (PSB), 5, pp. 
514-25. 
Tersmette K. W. F., Scott A. F., Moore G.W., Mathe- 
son N. W., and Miller R. E. (1988) Barrier word 
method for detecting molecular biology multiple 
word terms. Proceedings of the 12th Annual Sym- 
posium on Computer Applications in Medical 
Care, pp. 207- 11. 
Voorhees E. M. and Harman D. K. (1998) The Sev- 
enth Text Retrieval Conference. 
Vourtilainen A. and Padro L. (1997) Developing a 
hybrid NP parser. Proceedings of the Fifth Confer- 
ence on Applied Natural Language Processing, pp. 
80-7. 
Wacholder N., Ravin Y., and Choi M. (1997) Disam- 
biguation of proper names in text. Proceedings of 
the Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing, pp. 202-208. 
Weischedel R., Meteer M., Schwartz R., Ramshaw 
L., and Palmucci J. (1993) Coping with ambiguity 
and unknown words through probabilistic models. 
Computational Linguistics, 19/2, pp. 359-382. 
Zhai C. (1997) Fast statistical parsing of noun 
phrases for document indexing. Proceedings of the 
Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing, pp. 312-31. 
195 
Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL 2010, pages 46?54,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Arguments of Nominals in Semantic Interpretation of Biomedical Text 
 
Halil Kilicoglu,1,2 Marcelo Fiszman,2 Graciela Rosemblat,2  
Sean Marimpietri,3 Thomas C. Rindflesch2 
1Concordia University, Montreal, QC, Canada 
2National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD, USA 
3University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA 
h_kilico@cse.concordia.ca, sean.marimpietri@gmail.com  
{fiszmanm,grosemblat,trindflesch}@mail.nih.gov 
 
Abstract 
Based on linguistic generalizations, we 
enhanced an existing semantic processor, 
SemRep, for effective interpretation of a 
wide range of patterns used to express 
arguments of nominalization in clinically 
oriented biomedical text. Nominaliza-
tions are pervasive in the scientific litera-
ture, yet few text mining systems ade-
quately address them, thus missing a 
wealth of information. We evaluated the 
system by assessing the algorithm inde-
pendently and by determining its contri-
bution to SemRep generally. The first 
evaluation demonstrated the strength of 
the method through an F-score of 0.646 
(P=0.743, R=0.569), which is more than 
20 points higher than the baseline. The 
second evaluation showed that overall 
SemRep results were increased to F-score 
0.689 (P=0.745, R=0.640), approximate-
ly 25 points better than processing with-
out nominalizations. 
1 Introduction 
Extracting semantic relations from text and 
representing them as predicate-argument struc-
tures is increasingly seen as foundational for 
mining the biomedical literature (Kim et al, 
2008). Most research has focused on relations 
indicated by verbs (Wattarujeekrit et al, 2004; 
Kogan et al, 2005). However nominalizations, 
gerunds, and relational nouns also take argu-
ments. For example, the following sentence has 
three nominalizations, treatment, suppression, 
and lactation (nominalized forms of the verbs 
treat, suppress, and lactate, respectively). Agon-
ist is derived from agonize, but indicates an 
agent rather than an event. 
Bromocriptine, an ergot alkaloid dopamine 
agonist, is a recent common treatment for 
suppression of lactation in postpartum wom-
en. 
In promoting economy of expression, nomina-
lizations are pervasive in scientific discourse, 
particularly the molecular biology sublanguage, 
due to the highly nested and complex biomolecu-
lar interactions described (Friedman et al, 2002). 
However, Cohen et al (2008) point out that no-
minalizations are more difficult to process than 
verbs. Although a few systems deal with them, 
the focus is often limited in both the nominaliza-
tions recognized and the patterns used to express 
their arguments.  Inability to interpret nominal 
constructions in a general way limits the effec-
tiveness of such systems, since a wealth of 
knowledge is missed.  
In this paper, we discuss our recent work on 
interpreting nominal forms and their arguments. 
We concentrate on nominalizations; however, the 
analysis also applies to other argument-taking 
nouns. Based on training data, we developed a 
set of linguistic generalizations and enhanced an 
existing semantic processor, SemRep, for effec-
tive interpretation of a wide range of patterns 
used to express arguments of nominalization in 
clinically oriented biomedical text. We evaluated 
the enhancements in two ways: by examining the 
ability to identify arguments of nominals inde-
pendently and the effect these enhancements had 
on the overall quality of SemRep output. 
2 Background 
The theoretical linguistics literature has ad-
dressed the syntax of nominalizations (e.g. 
Chomsky, 1970; Grimshaw, 1990; Grimshaw 
and Williams, 1993), however, largely as support 
for theoretical argumentation, rather than de-
tailed description of the facts. Quirk et al (1985) 
concentrate on the morphological derivation of 
46
nominalizations from verbs. Within the context 
of NomBank, a project dedicated to annotation of 
argument structure, Meyers et al (2004a) de-
scribe the linguistics of nominalizations, empha-
sizing semantic roles.  However, major syntactic 
patterns of argument realization are also noted. 
Cohen et al (2008) provide a comprehensive 
overview of nominalizations in biomedical text. 
They include a review of the relevant literature, 
and discuss a range of linguistic considerations, 
including morphological derivation, passiviza-
tion, transitivity, and semantic topics (e.g. 
agent/instrument (activator) vs. ac-
tion/process/state (activation)). Based on an 
analysis of the PennBioIE corpus (Kulick et al, 
2004), detailed distributional results are provided 
on alternation patterns for several nominaliza-
tions with high frequency of occurrence in bio-
medical text, such as activation and treatment.  
In computational linguistics, PUNDIT (Dahl 
et al, 1987) exploited similarities between nomi-
nalizations and related verbs.  Hull and Gomez 
(1996) describe semantic interpretation for a li-
mited set of nominalizations, relying on Word-
Net (Fellbaum, 1998) senses for restricting fillers 
of semantic roles. Meyers et al (1998) present a 
procedure which maps syntactic and semantic 
information for verbs into a set of patterns for 
nominalizations. They use NOMLEX (MacLeod 
et al, 1998), a nominalization lexicon, as the ba-
sis for this transformation. More recently, the 
availability of the NomBank corpus (Meyers et 
al., 2004b) has supported supervised machine 
learning for nominal semantic role labeling (e.g. 
Pradhan et al, 2004; Jiang and Ng, 2006; Liu 
and Ng, 2007). In contrast, Pad? et al (2008) use 
unsupervised machine learning for semantic role 
labeling of eventive nominalizations by exploit-
ing similarities between the argument structure 
of event nominalizations and corresponding 
verbs. Gurevich and Waterman (2009) use a 
large parsed corpus of Wikipedia to derive lexi-
cal models for determining the underlying argu-
ment structure of nominalizations.   
Nominalizations have only recently garnered 
attention in biomedical language processing. Ge-
neScene (Leroy and Chen, 2005) considers only 
arguments of nominalizations marked by prepo-
sitional cues. Similarly, Schuman and Bergler 
(2006) focus on the problem of prepositional 
phrase attachment. In the BioNLP?09 Shared 
Task on Event Extraction (Kim et al, 2009), the 
most frequent predicates were nominals. Several 
participating systems discuss techniques that ac-
commodate nominalizations (e.g. K. B. Cohen et 
al., 2009; Kilicoglu and Bergler, 2009). Nomina-
lizations have not previously been addressed in 
clinically oriented text.  
2.1 SemRep 
SemRep (Rindflesch and Fiszman, 2003) auto-
matically extracts semantic predications (logical 
subject-predicate-logical object triples) from un-
structured text (titles and abstracts) of MED-
LINE citations.  It uses domain knowledge from 
the Unified Medical Language System? (UMLS 
?) (Bodenreider, 2004), and the interaction of 
this knowledge and (underspecified) syntactic 
structure supports a robust system. SemRep ex-
tracts a range of semantic predications relating to 
clinical medicine (e.g. TREATS, DIAGNOSES, AD-
MINISTERED_TO, PROCESS_OF, LOCATION_OF), 
substance interactions (INTERACTS_WITH, INHI-
BITS, STIMULATES), and genetic etiology of dis-
ease (ASSOCIATED_WITH, PREDISPOSES, CAUS-
ES). For example, the program identifies the fol-
lowing predications from input text MRI re-
vealed a lacunar infarction in the left internal 
capsule. Arguments are concepts from the 
UMLS Metathesaurus and predicates are rela-
tions from the Semantic Network.  
Magnetic Resonance Imaging DIAGNOSES Infarc-
tion, Lacunar  
Internal Capsule LOCATION_OF Infarction, Lacu-
nar 
Processing relies on an underspecified syntac-
tic analysis based on the UMLS SPECIALIST 
Lexicon (McCray et al, 1994) and the MedPost 
part-of-speech tagger (Smith et al, 2004). Output 
includes phrase identification, and for simple 
noun phrases, labeling of heads and modifiers.  
[HEAD(MRI)] [revealed] [a MOD(lacunar), 
HEAD(infarction)] [in the MOD(left) MOD(internal), 
HEAD(capsule).] 
MetaMap (Aronson and Lang, 2010) maps sim-
ple noun phrases to UMLS Metathesaurus con-
cepts, as shown below. Associated semantic 
types are particularly important for subsequent 
processing. 
[HEAD(MRI){Magnetic Resonance Imaging (Di-
agnostic Procedure)}] [revealed] [a 
MOD(lacunar), HEAD(infarction) {Infarction, Lacu-
nar(Disease or Syndrome)}] [in the MOD(left) 
MOD(internal), HEAD(capsule) {Internal Cap-
sule(Body Part, Organ, or Organ Component)}.] 
47
This structure is the basis for extracting semantic 
predications, which relies on several mechan-
isms. Indicator rules map syntactic phenomena, 
such as verbs, nominalizations, prepositions, and 
modifier-head structure in the simple noun 
phrase to ontological predications. Examples in-
clude: 
reveal (verb) ? DIAGNOSES 
in (prep) ? LOCATION_OF 
SemRep currently has 630 indicator rules. Onto-
logical predications are based on a modified ver-
sion of the UMLS Semantic Network and have 
semantic types as arguments. For example:  
Diagnostic Procedure DIAGNOSES Disease or 
Syndrome 
Body Part, Organ, or Organ Component LOCA-
TION_OF Disease or Syndrome 
Construction of a semantic predication begins 
with the application of an indicator rule, and is 
then constrained by two things. Arguments must 
satisfy syntactic restrictions for the indicator and 
must have been mapped to Metathesaurus con-
cepts that match the arguments of the ontological 
predication indicated. As part of this processing, 
several syntactic phenomena are addressed, in-
cluding passivization, argument coordination, 
and some types of relativization. For both verb 
and preposition indicators, underspecified syn-
tactic rules simply ensure that subjects are on the 
left and objects on the right. Enhancing SemRep 
for nominalizations involved extending the syn-
tactic constraints for arguments of nominaliza-
tion indicators.  
3 Methods 
In order to gain insight into the principles under-
lying expression of nominal arguments, we first 
determined the 50 most common nominalizations 
in MEDLINE citations that also occur in the 
UMLS SPECIALIST Lexicon, and then analyzed 
a corpus of 1012 sentences extracted from 476 
citations containing those nominalizations. We 
further limited these sentences to those with no-
minalizations containing two overt arguments 
(since SemRep only extracts predications with 
two arguments), resulting in a final set of 383 
sentences. We determined 14 alternation patterns 
for nominalizations based on this analysis and 
devised an algorithm to accommodate them. We 
then conducted two evaluations, one to assess the 
effectiveness of the algorithm independently of 
other considerations and another to assess the 
contribution of enhanced nominalization 
processing to SemRep generally.  
3.1 Nominal Alternations  
Much work in identifying arguments of nomina-
lizations assigns semantic role, such as agent, 
patient, etc., but SemRep does not. In this analy-
sis, arguments are logical subject and object. Re-
lational nouns often allow only one argument 
(e.g. the weight of the evidence), and either one 
or both of the arguments of a nominalization or 
gerund may be left unexpressed. SemRep doesn?t 
interpret nominalizations with unexpressed ar-
guments. If both arguments appear, they fall into 
one of several patterns, and the challenge in no-
minalization processing is to accommodate these 
patterns. Cohen et al (2008) note several such 
patterns, including those in which both argu-
ments are to the right of the nominalization, cued 
by prepositions (treatment of fracture with sur-
gery), the nominalization separates the argu-
ments (fracture treatment with surgery, surgical 
treatment for fracture), and both arguments pre-
cede the nominalizations, as modifiers of it (sur-
gical fracture treatment and fracture surgical 
treatment).  
Cohen et al (2008) do not list several patterns 
we observed in the clinical domain, including 
those in which the subject appears to the right 
marked by a verb (the treatment of fracture is 
surgery) or as an appositive (the treatment of 
fracture, surgery), and those in which the subject 
appears to the left and the nominalization is ei-
ther in a prepositional phrase (surgery in the 
treatment of fracture, surgery in fracture treat-
ment) or is preceded by a verb or is parenthetical 
(surgery is (the best) treatment for fracture; sur-
gery is (the best) fracture treatment; surgery, the 
best fracture treatment). One pattern, in which 
both arguments are on the right and the subject 
precedes the object, is seen most commonly in 
the clinical domain when the nominalization has 
a lexically specified cue (e.g. the contribution of 
stem cells to kidney repair). The nominal alterna-
tion patterns are listed in Table 1. 
Generalizations about arguments of nominali-
zations are based on the position of the argu-
ments, both with respect to each other and to the 
nominalization, and whether they modify the 
nominalization or not. A modifying argument is 
internal to the simple noun phrase of which the 
nominalization is the head; other arguments 
(both to the left and to the right) are external. 
(Relativization is considered external to the sim-
ple noun phrase.) 
48
  [NOM] [PREP OBJ] [PREP SUBJ]  
Treatment of fracture with surgery 
[NOM] [PREP OBJ], [SUBJ] 
The treatment of fracture, surgery 
[NOM] [PREP OBJ] ([SUBJ]) 
The treatment of fracture (surgery) 
[NOM] [PREP OBJ] [BE] [SUBJ] 
The treatment of fracture is surgery 
[NOM] [PREP SUBJ] [PREP OBJ] 
Treatment with surgery of fracture 
[SUBJ NOM] [PREP OBJ] 
Surgical treatment of fracture 
[SUBJ] [PREP NOM] [PREP OBJ] 
Surgery in the treatment of fracture 
[SUBJ] [BE] [NOM] [PREP OBJ] 
Surgery is the treatment of fracture 
[OBJ NOM] [BE] [SUBJ] 
Fracture treatment is surgery 
[OBJ NOM] [PREP SUBJ] 
Fracture treatment with surgery 
[SUBJ] [PREP OBJ NOM] 
Surgery for fracture treatment 
[SUBJ] [BE] [OBJ NOM] 
Surgery is the fracture treatment 
[SUBJ OBJ NOM] 
Surgical fracture treatment 
[OBJ SUBJ NOM] 
Fracture surgical treatment 
Table 1. Patterns 
Argument cuing plays a prominent role in de-
fining these patterns. A cue is an overt syntactic 
element associated with an argument, and can be 
a preposition, a verb (most commonly a form of 
be), a comma, or parenthesis. A cued argument is 
in a dependency with the cue, which is itself in a 
dependency with the nominalization. The cue 
must occur between the nominalization and the 
argument, whether the argument is to the right 
(e.g. treatment of fracture) or to the left (e.g. 
surgery in the treatment). Prepositional cues for 
the objects of some nominalizations are stipu-
lated in the lexicon; some of these are obligatory 
(e.g. contribution ? to), while others are optional 
(treatment ? for).  
External arguments of nominalizations must 
be cued, and cues unambiguously signal the role 
of the argument, according to the following 
cuing rules (Cohen et al, 2008). Verbs, comma, 
parenthesis, and the prepositions by, with, and 
via cue subjects only. (By is used for semantic 
role agent and with for instrument, but SemRep 
does not exploit this distinction.) Of cues sub-
jects only if the nominalization has an obligatory 
(object) cue; it must cue objects otherwise. There 
is a class of nominalizations (e.g. cause) that do 
not allow a prepositionally cued subject. Consi-
derable variation is seen in the order of subject 
and object; however, if the subject intervenes 
between the nominalization and the object, both 
must have equal cuing status (the only possibili-
ties are that both be either uncued or cued with a 
preposition).  
3.2 Algorithm 
In extending SemRep for identifying arguments 
of nominalizations, existing machinery was ex-
ploited, namely shallow parsing, mapping simple 
noun phrases to Metathesaurus concepts, and the 
application of indicator rules to map nominaliza-
tions to enhanced Semantic Network ontological 
predications (which imposes restrictions on the 
semantic type of arguments). Finally, syntactic 
argument identification was enhanced specifical-
ly for nominalizations and exploits the linguistic 
generalizations noted. For example in the sen-
tence below, phrases have been identified and 
cervical cancer has been mapped to the Metathe-
saurus concept ?Cervix carcinoma? with seman-
tic type ?Neoplastic Process?, and vaccination to 
?Vaccination? (?Therapeutic or Preventive Pro-
cedure?). An indicator rule for prevention maps 
to the ontological predication ?Therapeutic or 
Preventive Procedure PREVENTS Neoplastic 
Process? (among others) in generating the predi-
cation: ?Vaccination PREVENTS Cervix carcino-
ma.? 
Therefore, prevention of cervical cancer with 
HPV vaccination may have a significant fi-
nancial impact.  
Processing to identify arguments for preven-
tion begins by determining whether the nomina-
lization has a lexically specified object cue. This 
information is needed to determine the cuing 
function of of. Since it is common for there to be 
at least one argument on the right, identification 
of arguments begins there. Arguments on the 
right are external and must be cued. If a cued 
argument is found, its role is determined by the 
argument cuing rules. Since prevention does not 
have a lexically specified cue, of marks its ob-
ject. Further, the semantic type of the concept for 
the object of of matches the object of the onto-
logical predication (?Neoplastic Process?).  
The algorithm next looks to the right of the 
first argument for the second argument. Since 
processing addresses only two arguments for 
nominalizations, subject and object, once the role 
49
of the first has been determined, the second can 
be inferred. For cued arguments, the process 
checks that the cue is compatible with the cuing 
rules. In all cases, the relevant semantic type 
must match the subject of the ontological predi-
cation. In this instance, with cues subjects and 
?Therapeutic or Preventive Process? matches the 
subject of the ontological predication indicated.  
If only one noun phrase to the right satisfies 
the argument cuing rules, the second argument 
must be on the left. A modifier immediately to 
the left of the nominalization (and thus an inter-
nal argument) is sought first, and its role inferred 
from the first argument. Since internal arguments 
are not cued, there is no need to ensure cuing 
compatibility. The predication ?Operative Sur-
gical Procedures TREATS Pregnancy, Ectopic? 
is found for resolution in  
Surgical resolution of an ectopic pregnancy 
in a captive gerenuk (Litocranius walleri wal-
leri).  
Resolution is an indicator for the ontological 
predication ?Therapeutic or Preventive Proce-
dure TREATS Disease or Syndrome.? Surgical 
maps to ?Operative Surgical Procedures? (?The-
rapeutic or Preventive Procedure?), which 
matches the subject of this predication, and ec-
topic pregnancy maps to ?Pregnancy, Ectopic? 
(?Disease or Syndrome?), which matches its ob-
ject.  Of marks the object of resolution. 
An argument to the left of a nominalization 
may be external, in which case a cue is neces-
sary. For preceding treatment satisfies this re-
quirement in the following sentence. 
Preclinical data have supported the use of 
fludarabine and cyclophosphamide (FC) in 
combination for the treatment of indolent 
lymphoid malignancies. 
The two drugs in this sentence map to concepts 
with semantic type ?Pharmacologic Substance? 
and the malignancy has ?Neoplastic Process?, as 
above. There is an ontological predication for 
TREATS with subject ?Pharmacologic Substance?. 
After coordination processing in SemRep, two 
predications are generated for treatment:  
Cyclophosphamide TREATS Malignant lymphoid 
neoplasm 
Fludarabine TREATS Malignant lymphoid neop-
lasm 
If there is no argument to the right, both ar-
guments must be on the left. A modifier imme-
diately to the left of the nominalization is sought 
first. Given the properties of cuing (the cue in-
tervenes between the argument and the nominali-
zation), if both arguments occur to the left, at 
least one of them must be internal, since it is not 
possible to have more than one external argu-
ment on the left (e.g. *Surgery is fracture for 
treatment). The role of the first argument is 
found based on semantic type. The first modifier 
to the left of treatment in the following sentence 
is epilepsy, which has semantic type ?Disease or 
Syndrome?, matching the object of the ontologi-
cal predication for TREATS.  
Patients with most chances of benefiting from 
surgical epilepsy treatment 
The second modifier to the left, surgical maps to 
the concept ?Operative Surgical Procedures,? 
whose semantic type matches the subject of the 
ontological predication. These conditions allow 
construction of the predication ?Operative Sur-
gical Procedures TREATS Epilepsy.?   
In the next sentence, the indicator rule for pre-
diction maps to the ontological predication 
?Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein PREDISPOSES 
Disease or Syndrome.?  
The potential clinical role of measuring these 
apolipoproteins for ischemic stroke predic-
tion warrants further study. 
Ischemic stroke satisfies the object of this predi-
cation and apolipoproteins the subject. Since the 
external subject is cued by for, all constraints are 
satisfied and the predication ?Apolipoproteins 
PREDISPOSES Ischemic stroke? is generated.   
3.3 Evaluation 
Three-hundred sentences from 239 MEDLINE 
citations (titles and abstracts) were selected for 
annotating a test set. Some had previously been 
selected for various aspects of SemRep evalua-
tion; others were chosen randomly. A small 
number (30) were sentences in the GENIA event 
corpus (Kim et al, 2008) with bio-event-
triggering nominalizations. Annotation was con-
ducted by three of the authors. One, a linguist 
(A), judged all sentences, while the other two, a 
computer scientist (B) and a medical informatics 
researcher (C), annotated a subset. Annotation 
was not limited to nominalizations. The statistics 
regarding the individual annotations are given 
below. The numbers in parentheses show the 
number of annotated predications indicated by 
nominalizations. 
 
50
Annotator # of Sentences # of Predications 
A  300 533 (286) 
B 200 387 (190) 
C 132 244 (134) 
Table 2. Annotation statistics 
As guidance, annotators were provided UMLS 
Metathesaurus concepts for the sentences. How-
ever, they consulted the Metathesaurus directly 
to check questionable mappings. Annotation fo-
cused on the 25 predicate types SemRep ad-
dresses.  
We measured inter-annotator agreement, de-
fined as the F-score of one set of annotations, 
when the second is taken as the gold standard. 
After individual annotations were complete, two 
annotators (A and C) assessed all three sets of 
annotations and created the final reference stan-
dard. The reference standard has 569 predica-
tions, 300 of which (52.7%) are indicated by 
nominalizations. We further measured the 
agreement between individual sets of annotations 
and the reference standard. Results are given be-
low: 
 
Annotator pair # of Sentences IAA 
A-B  200 0.794 
A-C 132 0.974 
B-C 103 0.722 
A-Gold 300 0.925 
B-Gold 200 0.889 
C-Gold 132 0.906 
Table 3. Inter-annotator agreement 
We performed two evaluations. The first (ev-
al1) evaluated nominalizations in isolation, while 
the second (eval2) assessed the effect of the en-
hancements on overall semantic interpretation in 
SemRep. For eval1, we restricted SemRep to 
extract predications indicated by nominalizations 
only. The baseline was a nominalization argu-
ment identification rule which simply stipulates 
that the subject of a predicate is a concept to the 
left (starting from the modifier of the nominali-
zation, if any), and the object is a concept to the 
right. This baseline implements the underspecifi-
cation principle of SemRep, without any addi-
tional logic. We compared the results from this 
baseline to those from the algorithm described 
above to identify arguments of nominalizations. 
The gold standard for eval1 was limited to predi-
cations indicated by nominalizations.  
We investigated the effect of nominalization 
processing on SemRep generally in eval2, for 
which the baseline implementation was SemRep 
with no nominalization processing. The results 
for this baseline were evaluated against those 
obtained using SemRep with no restrictions. 
Typical evaluation metrics, precision, recall, and 
F-score, were calculated. 
4 Results and Discussion 
The results for the two evaluations are presented 
below.  
 Precision Recall F-Score 
eval1 
Baseline 0.484 0.359 0.412 
With NOM 0.743 0.569 0.645 
 
eval2 
Baseline 0.640 0.333 0.438 
With NOM 0.745 0.640 0.689 
Table 4. Evaluation results 
Results illustrate the importance of nominali-
zation processing for effectiveness of semantic 
interpretation and show that the SemRep metho-
dology naturally extends to this phenomenon. 
With a single, simple, rule (eval1 baseline), Se-
mRep achieves an F-score of 0.412. With addi-
tional processing based on linguistic generaliza-
tions, F-score improves more than 20 points. 
Further, the addition of nominalization 
processing not only enhances the coverage of 
SemRep (more than 30 points), but also increases 
precision (more than 10 points). While nominali-
zations are generally considered more difficult to 
process than verbs (Cohen et al, 2008), we were 
able to accommodate them with greater precision 
than other types of indicators, including verbs 
(0.743 vs. 0.64 in eval1 with NOM vs. eval2 
baseline) with our patterns.  
 Precision Recall F-Score 
eval1 
Baseline 0.233 0.140 0.175 
With NOM 0.690 0.400 0.506 
 
eval2 
Baseline (No 
NOM) 
0.667 0.278 0.392 
With NOM 0.698 0.514 0.592 
Table 5. Results for molecular biology sentences 
 
Limiting the evaluation to sentences focusing on 
biomolecular interactions (from GENIA), while 
not conclusive due to the small number of sen-
tences (30), also shows similar patterns, as 
shown in Table 5. As expected, while overall 
51
quality of predications is lower, since molecular 
biology text is significantly more complex than 
that in the clinical domain, improvements with 
nominalization processing are clearly seen. 
Errors were mostly due to aspects of SemRep 
orthogonal to but interacting with nominalization 
processing. Complex coordination structure was 
the main source of recall errors, as in the follow-
ing example.  
RESULTS: The best predictors of incident 
metabolic syndrome were waist circumfe-
rence (odds ratio [OR] 1.7 [1.3-2.0] per 11 
cm), HDL cholesterol (0.6 [0.4-0.7] per 15 
mg/dl), and proinsulin (1.7 [1.4-2.0] per 3.3 
pmol/l). [PMID 14988303] 
While the system was able to identify the predi-
cation ?Waist circumference PREDISPOSES 
Metabolic syndrome,? it was unable to find the 
predications below, due to its inability to identify 
the coordination of waist circumference, HDL 
cholesterol, and proinsulin.  
(FN) Proinsulin PREDISPOSES Metabolic syn-
drome 
(FN) High Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol PRE-
DISPOSES Metabolic syndrome 
 
Mapping of noun phrases to the correct UMLS 
concepts (MetaMap) is a source of both false 
positives and false negatives, particularly in the 
context of the molecular biology sentences, 
where acronyms and abbreviations are common 
and their disambiguation is nontrivial (Okazaki 
et al, 2010). For example, in the following sen-
tence  
PTK inhibition with Gen attenuated both 
LPS-induced NF-kappaB DNA binding and 
TNF-alpha production in human monocytes. 
[PMID 10210645] 
PTK was mapped to ?Ephrin receptor EphA8? 
rather than to ?Protein Tyrosine Kinase?, causing 
both a false positive and a false negative.  
(FP) Genistein INHIBITS Ephrin receptor EphA8 
(FN) Genistein INHIBITS Protein Tyrosine Kinase 
Some errors were due to failure to recognize a 
relative clause by SemRep. Only the head of 
such a structure is allowed to be an argument 
outside the structure. In the sentence below, the 
subject of treatment is hyperthermic intraperito-
neal intraoperative chemotherapy, which is the 
head of the reduced relative clause, after cytore-
ductive surgery.  
Hyperthermic intraperitoneal intraoperative 
chemotherapy after cytoreductive surgery for 
the treatment of abdominal sarcomatosis: 
clinical outcome and prognostic factors in 60 
consecutive patients. [PMID 15112276] 
SemRep failed to recognize the relative clause, 
and therefore the nominalization algorithm took 
the noun phrase inside it as the subject of treat-
ment, since it satisfies both semantic type and 
argument constraints.  
(FP) Cytoreductive surgery  TREATS Sarcamato-
sis NOS 
(FN) intraperitoneal therapy TREATS Sarcamato-
sis NOS 
A small number of errors were due solely to 
nominalization processing. In the following sen-
tence, the object of contribution is cued with in, 
rather than lexically specified to, which causes a 
recall error.  
Using SOCS-1 knockout mice, we investi-
gated the contribution of SOCS-1 in the 
development of insulin resistance induced 
by a high-fat diet (HFD). [PMID 
18929539] 
(FN) Cytokine Inducible SH-2 Containing Pro-
tein PREDISPOSES Insulin Resistance 
Accurate identification of the arguments of 
nominalizations in the molecular biology sub-
domain is more challenging than in clinically-
oriented text. Some of the syntactic structure re-
sponsible for this complexity is discussed by K. 
B. Cohen et al (2009). In particular, they note 
the problem of an argument being separated from 
the nominalization, and point out the problem of 
specifying the intervening structure. Although 
we have not focused on molecular biology, the 
analysis developed for clinical medicine shows 
promise in that domain as well. One relevant ex-
tension could address the syntactic configuration 
in which intervening structure involves an argu-
ment of a nominalization shared with a verb oc-
curring to the left of the nominalization, as in-
duced and activation interact in the following 
sentence: 
IL-2 induced less STAT1 alpha activation 
and IFN-alpha induced greater STAT5 acti-
vation in NK3.3 cells compared with preacti-
vated primary NK cells. [PMID 8683106] 
This could be addressed with an extension of our 
rule that subjects of nominalizations can be cued 
with verbs. With respect to argument identifica-
tion, induce can function like a form of be.  
52
5 Conclusion 
We discuss a linguistically principled implemen-
tation for identifying arguments of nominaliza-
tions in clinically focused biomedical text. The 
full range of such structures is rarely addressed 
by existing text mining systems, thus missing 
valuable information. The algorithm is imple-
mented inside SemRep, a general semantic inter-
preter for biomedical text. We evaluated the sys-
tem both by assessing the algorithm independent-
ly and by determining the contribution it makes 
to SemRep generally. The first evaluation re-
sulted in an F-score of 0.646 (P=0.743, 
R=0.569), which is 20 points higher than the 
baseline, while the second showed that overall 
SemRep results were increased to F-score 0.689 
(P=0.745, R=0.640), approximately 25 points 
better than processing without nominalizations. 
Since our nominalization processing is by ex-
tending SemRep, rather than by creating a dedi-
cated system, we provide the interpretation of 
these structures in a broader context. An array of 
semantic predications generated by mapping to 
an ontology (UMLS) normalizes the interpreta-
tion of verbs and nominalizations.  Processing is 
linguistically based, and several syntactic phe-
nomena are addressed, including passivization, 
argument coordination, and relativization. The 
benefits of such processing include effective ap-
plications for extracting information on genetic 
diseases from text (Masseroli et al, 2006), as 
well as research in medical knowledge summari-
zation (Fiszman et al, 2004; Fiszman et al, 
2009), literature-based discovery (Ahlers et al, 
2007; Hristovski et al, 2010), and enhanced in-
formation retrieval (Kilicoglu et al, 2008; T. 
Cohen et al, 2009). 
 
Acknowledgments 
This study was supported in part by the Intra-
mural Research Program of the National Insti-
tutes of Health, National Library of Medicine. 
References 
C. B. Ahlers, D. Hristovski, H. Kilicoglu, T. C. 
Rindflesch. 2007. Using the literature-based dis-
covery paradigm to investigate drug mechanisms. 
In Proceedings of AMIA Annual Symposium, pages 
6-10. 
A. R. Aronson and F.-M. Lang. 2010. An overview of 
MetaMap: historical perspective and recent ad-
vances. Journal of the American Medical Informat-
ics Association, 17:229-236. 
O. Bodenreider. 2004. The Unified Medical Language 
System (UMLS): integrating biomedical terminol-
ogy. Nucleic Acids Research, 32(Database is-
sue):D267-70.  
N. Chomsky. 1970. Remarks on nominalization. In 
Jacobs, Roderick, and Peter S. Rosenbaum (eds.) 
Readings in English transformational grammar. 
Boston: Ginn and Company, pages 184-221.  
K. B. Cohen, M. Palmer, L. Hunter. 2008. Nominali-
zation and alternations in biomedical language. 
PLoS ONE, 3(9): e3158. 
K. B. Cohen, K. H. Verspoor, H. L. Johnson, C. 
Roeder, P. V. Ogren, W. A. Baumgartner, E. 
White, H. Tipney, L. Hunter. 2009. High-precision 
biological event extraction with a concept recog-
nizer. In Proceedings of the BioNLP 2009 Work-
shop Companion Volume for Shared Task, pages 
50-58. 
T. Cohen, R. Schvaneveldt, T. C. Rindflesch. 2009. 
Predication-based semantic indexing: Permutations 
as a means to encode predications in semantic 
space. In Proceedings of AMIA Annual Symposium, 
pages 114-118. 
D. A. Dahl, M. S. Palmer, R. J. Passonneau. 1987. 
Nominalizations in PUNDIT. In Proceedings of 
ACL, pages 131-139. 
C. Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical 
Database. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
M. Fiszman, D. Demner-Fushman, H. Kilicoglu, T. C. 
Rindflesch. 2009. Automatic summarization of 
MEDLINE citations for evidence-based medical 
treatment: A topic-oriented evaluation. Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, 42(5):801-813.  
M. Fiszman, T. C. Rindflesch, H. Kilicoglu. 2004. 
Abstraction summarization for managing the bio-
medical research literature. In Proceedings of 
HLT/NAACL Workshop on Computational Lexical 
Semantics, pages 76-83. 
C. Friedman, P. Kra, A. Rzhetsky. 2002. Two bio-
medical sublanguages: a description based on the 
theories of Zellig Harris. Journal of Biomedical In-
formatics, 35:222?235. 
J. Grimshaw. 1990.  Argument Structure. MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA. 
J. Grimshaw and E. Williams. 1993. Nominalizations 
and predicative prepositional phrases. In J. Puste-
jovsky (ed.) Semantics and the Lexicon. Dordrecht: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, pages  97-106.  
O. Gurevich and S. A. Waterman. 2009. Mining of 
parsed data to derive deverbal argument structure. 
In Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Grammar 
Engineering Across Frameworks. pages 19-27. 
D. Hristovski, A. Kastrin, B. Peterlin, T. C. 
Rindflesch. 2010. Combining semantic relations 
53
and DNA microarray data for novel hypothesis 
generation. In C. Blaschke, H. Shatkay (Eds.) 
ISMB/ECCB2009, Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics, 
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, pages 53-61.  
R. D. Hull and F. Gomez. 1996. Semantic interpreta-
tion of nominalizations. In Proceedings of AAAI, 
pages 1062-1068. 
Z. P. Jiang and H. T. Ng. 2006. Semantic role labeling 
of NomBank: A maximum entropy approach. In 
Proceedings of EMNLP?06, pages 138?145. 
H. Kilicoglu and S. Bergler. 2009. Syntactic depen-
dency based heuristics for biological event extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of the BioNLP 2009 Workshop 
Companion Volume for Shared Task, pages 119-
127. 
H. Kilicoglu, M. Fiszman, A. Rodriguez, D. Shin, A. 
M. Ripple, T. C. Rindflesch. 2008. Semantic 
MEDLINE: A Web application to manage the re-
sults of PubMed searches. In Proceedings of 
SMBM?08, pages 69-76. 
J-D. Kim, T. Ohta, S. Pyysalo, Y. Kano, J. Tsujii. 
2009. Overview of BioNLP?09 Shared Task on 
Event Extraction. In Proceedings of the BioNLP 
2009 Workshop Companion Volume for Shared 
Task, pages 1-9. 
J-D. Kim, T. Ohta, J. Tsujii. 2008. Corpus annotation 
for mining biomedical events from literature. BMC 
Bioinformatics, 9(1):10. 
Y. Kogan, N. Collier, S. Pakhomov, M. Krautham-
mer. 2005. Towards semantic role labeling & IE in 
the medical literature. In Proceedings of AMIA An-
nual Symposium, pages 410?414. 
S. Kulick, A. Bies, M. Liberman, M. Mandel, R. 
McDonald, M. Palmer. A. Schein, L. Ungar. 2004. 
Integrated annotation for biomedical information 
extraction. In Proceedings of BioLINK: Linking 
Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases, 
pages 61?68. 
G. Leroy and H. Chen. 2005.  Genescene: An ontolo-
gy-enhanced integration of linguistic and co-
occurrence based relations in biomedical texts. 
Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science and Technology, 56(5): 457?468. 
C. Liu and H. Ng. 2007. Learning predictive struc-
tures for semantic role labeling of NomBank. In 
Proceedings of ACL, pages 208?215. 
C. Macleod, R. Grishman, A. Meyers, L. Barrett, R. 
Reeves. 1998. NOMLEX: A lexicon of nominali-
zations. In Proceedings of EURALEX?98. 
M. Masseroli, H. Kilicoglu, F-M. Lang, T. C. 
Rindflesch. 2006. Argument-predicate distance as a 
filter for enhancing precision in extracting predica-
tions on the genetic etiology of disease. BMC Bio-
informatics, 7:291. 
A. T. McCray, S. Srinivasan, A. C. Browne. 1994. 
Lexical methods for managing variation in biomed-
ical terminologies. In Proceedings of 18th Annual 
Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical 
Care, pages 235?239. 
A. Meyers, C. Macleod, R. Yanbarger, R. Grishman, 
L. Barrett, R. Reeves. 1998. Using NOMLEX to 
produce nominalization patterns for information 
extraction. In Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Computational Treatment of Nominals (COL-
ING/ACL), pages 25-32. 
A. Meyers, R. Reeves, C. Macleod, R. Szekely, V. 
Zielinska, B. Young, R. Grishman. 2004a. Anno-
tating noun argument structure for NomBank. In 
Proceedings of LREC. 
A. Meyers, R. Reeves, C. Macleod, R. Szekely, V. 
Zielinska, B. Young, R. Grishman. 2004b. The 
NomBank project: An interim report. In Proceed-
ings of HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Frontiers in 
Corpus Annotation, pages 24?31. 
N. Okazaki, S. Ananiadou, J. Tsujii. 2010. Building a 
high quality sense inventory for improved abbrevi-
ation disambiguation. Bioinformatics: btq129+. 
S. Pad?, M. Pennacchiotti, C. Sporleder. 2008. Se-
mantic role assignment for event nominalisations 
by leveraging verbal data. In Proceedings of CoL-
ing?08, pages 665-672. 
S. Pradhan, H. Sun, W. Ward, J. Martin, D. Jurafsky. 
2004. Parsing arguments of nominalizations in 
English and Chinese. In Proceedings of 
HLT/NAACL, pages 141?144. 
R. Quirk, S. Greenbaum, G. Leech, J. Svartvik. 1985. 
A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Lan-
guage. Longman, London. 
T. C. Rindflesch and M. Fiszman. 2003. The interac-
tion of domain knowledge and linguistic structure 
in natural language processing: Interpreting hyper-
nymic propositions in biomedical text. Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, 36(6):462-77. 
J. Schuman and S. Bergler. 2006. Postnominal prepo-
sitional phrase attachment in proteomics. In Pro-
ceedings of BioNLP Workshop on Linking Natural 
Language Processing and Biology, pages 82?89. 
L. Smith, T. C. Rindflesch, W. J. Wilbur. 2004. Med-
Post: a part-of-speech tagger for biomedical text. 
Bioinformatics, 20(14):2320-2321. 
T. Wattarujeekrit, P. K. Shah, N. Collier. 2004. PAS-
Bio: Predicate-argument structures for event ex-
traction in molecular biology. BMC Bioinformat-
ics, 5:155.  
 
54
