Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 391?398,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Creating a Test Collection for Citation-based IR Experiments
Anna Ritchie
University of Cambridge
Computer Laboratory
15 J J Thompson Avenue
Cambridge, CB3 0FD, U.K.
ar283@cl.cam.ac.uk
Simone Teufel
University of Cambridge
Computer Laboratory
15 J J Thompson Avenue
Cambridge, CB3 0FD, U.K.
sht25@cl.cam.ac.uk
Stephen Robertson
Microsoft Research Ltd
Roger Needham House
7 J J Thomson Avenue
Cambridge, CB3 0FB, U.K.
ser@microsoft.com
Abstract
We present an approach to building a test
collection of research papers. The ap-
proach is based on the Cranfield 2 tests but
uses as its vehicle a current conference;
research questions and relevance judge-
ments of all cited papers are elicited from
conference authors. The resultant test col-
lection is different from TREC?s in that
it comprises scientific articles rather than
newspaper text and, thus, allows for IR
experiments that include citation informa-
tion. The test collection currently con-
sists of 170 queries with relevance judge-
ments; the document collection is the ACL
Anthology. We describe properties of
our queries and relevance judgements, and
demonstrate the use of the test collection
in an experimental setup. One potentially
problematic property of our collection is
that queries have a low number of relevant
documents; we discuss ways of alleviating
this.
1 Introduction
We present a methodology for creating a test collec-
tion of scientific papers that is based on the Cran-
field 2 methodology but uses a current conference as
the main vehicle for eliciting relevance judgements
from users, i.e., the authors.
Building a test collection is a long and expensive
process but was necessary as no ready-made test col-
lection existed on which the kinds of experiments
with citation information that we envisage could be
run. We aim to improve term-based IR on scien-
tific articles with citation information, by using in-
dex terms from the citing article to additionally de-
scribe the cited document. Exactly how to do this is
the research question that our test collection should
help to address.
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 mo-
tivates our proposed experiments and, thereby, our
test collection. Section 3 discusses the how test col-
lections are built and, in particular, our own. Sec-
tion 4 briefly describes the practicalities of compil-
ing the document collection and the processing we
perform to prepare the documents for our experi-
ments. In Section 5, we show that our test collection
can be used with standard IR tools. Finally, Sec-
tion 6 discusses the problem of the low number of
relevant documents judged so far and two ways of
alleviating this problem.
2 Motivation
The idea of using terms external to a document,
coming from a ?citing? document, has been bor-
rowed from web-based IR. When one paper cites
another, a link is made between them and this link
structure is analogous to that of the web: ?hyper-
links ... provide semantic linkages between ob-
jects, much in the same manner that citations link
documents to other related documents? (Pitkow and
Pirolli, 1997). Link structure, particularly anchor
text, has been used to advantage in web-based IR.
While web pages are often poorly self-descriptive
(Brin and Page, 1998) anchor text is often a higher-
level description of the pointed-to page. (Davison,
391
2000) provides a good discussion of how well an-
chor text does this and provides experimental results
in support. Thus, beginning with (McBryan, 1994),
there is a trend of propagating anchor text along its
hyperlink to associate it with the linked page, as well
as the page in which it is found. Google, for ex-
ample, includes anchor text as index terms for the
linked page (Brin and Page, 1998). The TREC Web
tracks have also shown that using anchor text im-
proves retrieval effectiveness for some search tasks
(Hawking and Craswell, 2005).
This idea has already been applied to citations and
scientific articles (Bradshaw, 2003). In Bradshaw?s
experiment, scientific documents are indexed by the
text that refers to them in documents that cite them.
However, unlike in experiments with previous col-
lections, we need both the citing and the cited article
as full documents in our collection. The question of
how to identify citation ?anchor text? and its extent
is a matter for research; this requires the full text of
the citing article. Previous experiments and test col-
lections have had only limited access to the content
of the citing article: Bradshaw had access only to a
fixed window of text around the citation, as provided
by CiteSeer?s ?citation context?; in the GIRT collec-
tions (Kluck, 2003), a dozen or so content-bearing
information fields (e.g., title, abstract, methodologi-
cal descriptors) represent each document and the full
text is not available. Additionally, in Bradshaw?s ex-
periment, no access is given to the text of the cited
article itself so that the influence of a term-based IR
model cannot be studied and so that documents can
only be indexed if they have been cited at least once.
A test collection containing full text for many cit-
ing and cited documents, thus, has advantages from
a methodological point of view.
2.1 Choosing a Genre
When choosing a scientific field to study, we looked
for one that is practicable for us to compile the doc-
ument collection (freely available machine-readable
documents; as few as possible document styles),
while still ensuring good coverage of research top-
ics in an entire field. Had we chosen the medical
field or bioinformatics, the prolific number of jour-
nals would have been a problem for the practical
document preparation.
We also looked for a relatively self-contained
field. As we aim to propagate referential text to cited
papers as index terms, references from documents
in the collection to other documents within the col-
lection will be most useful. We call these internal
references. While it is impossible to find or create
a collection of documents with only internal refer-
ences, we aim for as high a proportion of internal
references as possible.
We chose the ACL (Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics) Anthology1 , a freely available
digital archive of computational linguistics research
papers. Computational linguistics is a small, ho-
mogenous research field and the Anthology contains
the most prominent publications since the beginning
of the field in 1960, consists of only 2 journals, 7
conferences and 5 less important publications, such
as discontinued conferences and a series of work-
shops, resulting in only 7000 papers2.
With the ACL Anthology, we expect a high pro-
portion of internal references within a relatively
compact document collection. We empirically mea-
sured the proportion of collection-internal refer-
ences. We found a proportion of internal refer-
ences to all references of 0.33 (the in-factor). We
wanted to compare this number to a situation in
another, larger field (genetics) but no straightfor-
ward comparison is possible, as there are very many
genetics journals and quality of journals probably
plays a larger role in a bigger field. We tried to
simulate a similar collection to the 9 main jour-
nals+conferences in the Anthology, by considering
10 journals in genetics with a range of impact fac-
tors3, resulting in an in-factor of 0.17 (dropping to
0.14 if only 5 journals are considered). Thus, our
hypothesis that the Anthology is reasonably self-
contained, at least in comparison with other possible
collections, was confirmed.
The choice of computational linguistics has the
added benefit that we are familiar with the domain;
we can interpret the subject matter better than we
would be able to in the medical domain. This should
be of use to us in our eventual experiments.
1http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
2This is our estimate, after substracting non-papers such as
letters to the editor, tables of contents etc. The Anthology is
growing by ?500 papers per year.
3Journal impact factor is a measure of the frequency with
which its average article is cited and is a measure of the relative
importance of journals within a field (Garfield, 1972).
392
3 Building Test Collections
To turn our document collection into a test col-
lection, a parallel set of search queries and rele-
vance judgements is needed. There are a number
of alternative methods for building a test collec-
tion. For TREC, humans devise queries specifically
for a given set of documents and make relevance
judgements on pooled retrieved documents from that
set (Harman, 2005). Theirs is an extremely labour-
intensive and expensive process and an unrealistic
option in the context of our project.
The Cranfield 2 tests (Cleverdon et al, 1966) in-
troduced an alternative method for creating a test
collection, specifically for scientific texts. The
method was subject to criticism and has not been
employed much since. Nevertheless, we believe this
method to be worth revisiting for our current situa-
tion. In this section, we describe in turn the Cran-
field 2 method and our adapted method. We discuss
some of the original criticisms and their bearing on
our own work, then describe our returns thus far.
3.1 The Cranfield 2 Test Collection
The Cranfield 2 tests (Cleverdon et al, 1966) were
a comparative evaluation of indexing language de-
vices. From a base collection of 182 (high speed
aerodynamics and aircraft structures) papers, the
Cranfield test collection was built by asking the au-
thors to formulate the research question(s) behind
their work and to judge how relevant each reference
in their paper was to each of their research questions,
on a 5-point scale. Referenced documents were ob-
tained and added to the base set. Authors were also
asked to list additional relevant papers not cited in
their paper. The collection was further expanded
in a second stage, using bibliographic coupling to
search for similar papers to the referenced ones and
employing humans to search the collection for other
relevant papers. The resultant collection comprised
1400 documents and 221 queries (Cleverdon, 1997).
The principles behind the Cranfield technique are:
? Queries: Each paper has an underlying research
question or questions; these constitute valid
search queries.
? Relevant documents: A paper?s reference list is
a good starting point for finding papers relevant
to its research questions.
? Judges: The paper author is the person best
qualified to judge relevance.
3.2 Our Anthology Test Collection
We altered the Cranfield design to fit to a fixed,
existing document collection. We designed our
methodology around an upcoming conference and
approached the paper authors at around the time of
the conference, to maximize their willingness to par-
ticipate and to minimise possible changes in their
perception of relevance since they wrote the paper.
Due to the relatively high in-factor of the collection,
we expected a significant proportion of the relevance
judgements gathered in this way to be about Anthol-
ogy documents and, thus, useful as evaluation data.
Hence, the authors of accepted papers for ACL-
2005 and HLT-EMNLP-2005 were asked, by email,
for their research questions and relevance judge-
ments for their references. We defined a 4-point
relevance scale, c.f. Table 1, since we felt that the
distinctions between the Cranfield grades were not
clear enough to warrant 5. Our guidelines also in-
cluded examples of referencing situations that might
fit each category. Personalized materials for partic-
ipation were sent, including a reproduction of their
paper?s reference list in their response form. This
meant that invitations could only be sent once the
paper had been made available online.
We further deviated from the Cranfield methodol-
ogy by deciding not to ask the authors to try to list
additional references that could have been included
in their reference list. An author?s willingness to
name such references will differ more from author
to author than their naming of original references, as
referencing is part of a standardized writing process.
By asking for this data, the consistency of the data
across papers will be degraded and the status of any
additional references will be unclear. Furthermore,
feedback from an informal pilot study conducted on
ten paper authors confirmed that some authors found
this task particularly difficult.
Each co-author of the papers was invited individu-
ally to participate, rather than inviting the first author
alone. This increased the number of invitations that
needed to be prepared and sent (by a factor of around
2.5) but also increased the likelihood of getting a re-
turn for a given paper. Furthermore, data from mul-
tiple co-authors of the same paper can be used to
393
Grade Description
4 The reference is crucially relevant to the problem. Knowledge of the contents of the referred work will be fun-
damental to the reader?s understanding of your paper. Often, such relevant references are afforded a substantial
amount of text in a paper e.g., a thorough summary.
3 The reference is relevant to the problem. It may be helpful for the reader to know the contents of the referred work,
but not crucial. The reference could not have been substituted or dropped without making significant additions to
the text. A few sentences may be associated with the reference.
2 The reference is somewhat (perhaps indirectly) relevant to the problem. Following up the reference probably would
not improve the reader?s understanding of your paper. Alternative references may have been equally appropriate
(e.g., the reference was chosen as a representative example from a number of similar references or included in a
list of similar references). Or the reference could have been dropped without damaging the informativeness of your
paper. Minimal text will be associated with the reference.
1 The reference is irrelevant to this particular problem.
Table 1: Relevance Scale
measure co-author agreement on the relevance task.
This is an interesting research question, as it is not
at all clear how much even close collaborators would
agree on relevance, but we do not address this here.
We plan to expand the collection in a second
stage, in line with the Cranfield 2 design. We will
reapproach contributing authors after obtaining re-
trieval results on our collection (e.g., with a stan-
dard IR engine) and ask them to make additional rel-
evance judgements on these papers.
3.3 Criticisms of Cranfield 2
Both Cranfield 1 (Cleverdon, 1960) and 2 were sub-
ject to various criticisms; (Spa?rck Jones, 1981) gives
an excellent account of the tests and their criticisms.
The majority were criticisms of the test collection
paradigm itself and are not pertinent here. How-
ever, the source-document principle (i.e., the use of
queries created from documents in the collection) at-
tracted particular criticisms. The fundamental con-
cern was that the way in which the queries were cre-
ated led to ?an unnaturally close relation? between
the terms in the queries and those used to index
the documents in the colection (Vickery, 1967); any
such relationship might have created a bias towards
a particular indexing language, distorting the com-
parisons that were the goal of the project.
In Cranfield 1, system success was measured
by retrieval of source documents alone, criticized
for being an over-simplification and a distortion of
?real-life? searching. The evaluation procedure was
changed for Cranfield 2 so that source documents
were excluded from searches and, instead, retrieval
of other relevant documents was used to measure
success. This removed the problem that, usually,
when a user searches, there is no source document
for their query. Despite this, Vickery notes that there
were ?still verbal links between sought document
and question? in the new method: each query author
was asked to judge the relevance of the source doc-
ument?s references and ?the questions ... were for-
mulated after the cited papers had been read and has
possibly influenced the wording of his question?.
While adapting the Cranfield 2 method to our
needs, we have tried to address some of the crit-
icisms, e.g., that authors? relevance judgements
change over time. Nevertheless, we still have
source-document queries and must consider the as-
sociated criticisms. Firstly, our test collection is
not intended for comparisons of indexing languages.
Rather, we aim to compare the effect of adding ex-
tra index terms to a base indexing of the documents.
The source documents will have no influence on
the base indexing of a document above that of the
other documents. The additional index terms, com-
ing from citations to that document, will generally
be ?chosen? by someone other than the query author,
with no knowledge of the query terms4. Also, our
documents will be indexed fully automatically, fur-
ther diminishing the scope of any subconscious hu-
man influence.
Thus, we believe that the suspect relationship be-
tween queries and indexing is negligible in the con-
4The exception to this is self-citation. This (very indirectly)
allows the query author to influence the indexing but it seems
highly improbable that an author would be thinking about their
query whilst citing a previous work.
394
text of our work, as opposed to the Cranfield tests,
and that the source-document principle is sound.
3.4 Returns and Analysis
Out of around 500 invitations sent to conference au-
thors, 85 resulted in research questions with rele-
vance judgements being returned; 235 queries in to-
tal. Example queries are:
? Do standard probabilistic parsing techniques,
developed for English, fare well for French and
does lexicalistion help improve parsing results?
? Analyze the lexical differences between genders
engaging in telephone conversations.
Of the 235 queries, 18 were from authors whose
co-authors had also returned data and were dis-
carded (for retrieval purposes); we treat co-author
data on the same paper as ?the same? and keep
only the first authors?. 47 queries had no relevant
Anthology-internal references and were discarded.
Another 15 had only relevant Anthology references
not yet included in the archive5; we keep these for
the time being. This leaves 170 unique queries with
at least 1 relevant Anthology reference and an aver-
age of 3.8 relevant Anthology references each. The
average in-factor across queries is 0.42 (similar to
our previously estimated Anthology in-factor)6 .
Our average number of judged relevant docu-
ments per query is lower than for Cranfield, which
had an average of 7.2 (Spa?rck Jones et al, 2000).
However, this is the final number for the Cran-
field collection, arrived at after the second stage
of relevance judging, which we have not yet car-
ried out. Nevertheless, we must anticipate a po-
tentially low number of relevant documents per
query, particularly in comparison to, e.g., the TREC
ad hoc track (Voorhees and Harman, 1999), with
86.8 judged relevant documents per query.
4 Document Collection and Processing
The Anthology documents are distributed in PDF, a
format designed to visually render printable docu-
ments, not to preserve editable text. So the PDF col-
lection must be converted into a fully textual format.
5HLT-NAACL-2004 papers, e.g., are listed as ?in process?.
6We cannot directly compare this to Cranfield?s in-factor as
we do not have access to the documents.
IXML XML XMLPDF XMLStructure
Presentational StructureLogical
Pre?ProcesssorPTX TemplatePTX List ParserReference ProcessorCitation
XML
+ ReferenceList + Citations
OmniPage
Figure 1: Document Processing Pipeline
A pipeline of processing stages has been developed
in the framework of a wider project, illustrated in
Figure 1.
Firstly, OmniPage Pro 147, a commercial PDF
processing software package, scans the PDFs and
produces an XML encoding of character-level page
layout information. AI algorithms for heuristically
extracting character information (similar to OCR)
are necessary since many of the PDFs were created
from scanned paper-copies and others do not contain
character information in an accessible format.
The OmniPage output describes a paper as text
blocks with typesetting information such as font and
positional information. A pre-processor (Lewin et
al., 2005) filters and summarizes the OmniPage out-
put into Intermediate XML (IXML), as well as cor-
recting certain characteristic errors from that stage.
A journal-specific template converts the IXML to a
logical XML-based document structure (Teufel and
Elhadad, 2002), by exploiting low-level, presenta-
tional, journal-specific information such as font size
and positioning of text blocks.
Subsequent stages incrementally add more de-
tailed information to the logical representation. The
paper?s reference list is annotated in more detail,
marking up individual references, author names, ti-
tles and years of publication. Finally, a citation pro-
cessor identifies and marks up citations in the doc-
ument body and their constituent parts, e.g., author
names and years.
5 Preliminary Experimentation
We expect that our test collection, built for our cita-
tion experiments, will be of wider value and we in-
tend to make it publicly available. As a sanity check
on our data so far, we carried out some preliminary
experimentation, using standard IR tools: the Lemur
Toolkit8, specifically Indri (Strohman et al, 2005),
7http://www.scansoft.com/omnipage/
8http://www.lemurproject.org/
395
its integrated language-model based search engine,
and the TREC evaluation software, trec eval9.
5.1 Experimental Set-up
We indexed around 4200 Anthology documents.
This is the total number of documents that have, at
the time of writing, been processed by our pipeline
(24 years of CL journal, 25 years of ACL proceed-
ings, 14 years of assorted workshops), plus another
?90 documents for which we have relevance judge-
ments that are not currently available through the
Anthology website but should be incorporated into
the archive in the future. The indexed documents do
not yet contain annotation of the reference list or ci-
tations in text. 19 of our 170 queries have no relevant
references in the indexed documents and were not
included in these experiments. Thus, Figure 2 shows
the distribution of queries over number of relevant
Anthology references, for a total of 151 queries.
Our Indri index was built using default parameters
with no optional processing, e.g., stopping or stem-
ming, resulting in a total of 20117410 terms, 218977
unique terms and 2263 ?frequent?10 terms.
We then prepared an Indri-style query file from
the conference research questions. The Indri query
language is designed to handle highly complex
queries but, for our very basic purposes, we created
simple bag-of-words queries by stripping all punctu-
ation from the natural language questions and using
Indri?s #combine operator over all the terms. This
means Indri ranks documents in accordance with
query likelihood. Again, no stopping or stemming
was applied.
Next, the query file was run against the Anthology
index using IndriRunQuery with default parameters
and, thus, retrieving 1000 documents for each query.
Finally, for evaluation, we converted the Indri?s
ranked document lists to TREC-style top results file
and the conference relevance judgements compiled
into a TREC-style qrels file, including only judge-
ments corresponding to references within the in-
dexed documents. These files were then input to
trec eval, to calculate precision and recall metrics.
9http://trec.nist.gov/trec eval/trec eval.8.0.tar.gz
10Terms that occur in over 1000 documents.
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14Threshhold (# Relevant References in Index)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Pre
cis
ion
 at 
5 D
ocu
me
nts
Figure 3: Effect of Thresholding on P at 5 Docs
5.2 Results and Discussion
Out of 489 relevant documents, 329 were retrieved
within 1000 (per query) documents. The mean av-
erage precision (MAP) was 0.1014 over the 151
queries. This is the precision calculated at each rele-
vant document retrieved (0.0, if that document is not
retrieved), averaged over all relevant documents for
all queries, i.e., non-interpolated. R-precision, the
precision after R (the number of relevant documents
for a query) documents are returned, was 0.0965.
The average precision at 5 documents was 0.0728.
We investigated the effect of excluding queries
with lower than a threshold number of judged rel-
evant documents. Figure 3 shows that precision at
5 documents increases as greater threshold values
are applied. Similar trends were observed with other
evaluation measures, e.g., MAP and R-precision in-
creased to 0.2018 and 0.1528, respectively, when
only queries with 13 or more relevant documents
were run, though such stringent thresholding does
result in very few queries. Nevertheless, these trends
do suggest that the present low number of relevant
documents has an adverse effect on retrieval results
and is a potential problem for our test collection.
We also investigated the effect of including only
authors? main queries, as another potential way of
objectively constructing a ?higher quality? query set.
Although, this decreased the average in-factor of rel-
evant references, it did, in fact, increase the average
absolute number of relevant references in the index.
Thus, MAP increased to 0.1165, precision at 5 doc-
uments to 0.1016 and R-precision to 0.1201.
These numbers look poor in comparison to the
performance of IR systems at TREC but, impor-
tantly, they are not intended as performance results.
Their purpose is to demonstrate that such numbers
can be produced using the data we have collected,
396
(a) (b)
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140Query
0
10
20
30
# R
ele
van
t R
efe
ren
ces
TotalAnthology Index
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15# Relevant References in Index
0
10
20
30
# Q
uer
ies
(a) (b)
Figure 2: (a) Relevant References Per Query and (b) Distribution of Queries over Number of Relevant References
rather than to evaluate the performance of some new
retrieval system or strategy.
A second point for consideration follows directly
from the first: our experiments were carried out
on a new test collection and ?different test collec-
tions have different intrinsic difficulty? (Buckley
and Voorhees, 2004). Thus, it is meaningless to
compare statistics from this data (from a different
domain) to those from the TREC collections, where
queries and relevance judgements were collected in
a different way, and where there are very many rele-
vant documents.
Thirdly, our experiments used only the most basic
techniques and the results could undoubtedly be im-
proved by, e.g., applying a simple stop-list. Never-
theless, this notion of intrinsic difficulty means that
it may be the case that evaluations carried out on this
collection will produce characteristically low preci-
sion values.
Low numbers do not necessarily preclude our
data?s usefulness as a test collection, whose purpose
is to facilitate comparative evaluations. (Voorhees,
1998) states that ?To be viable as a laboratory tool,
a [test] collection must reliably rank different re-
trieval variants according to their true effectiveness?
and defends the Cranfield paradigm (from criticisms
based on relevance subjectivity) by demonstrating
that the relative performance of retrieval runs is sta-
ble despite differences in relevance judgements. The
underlying principle is that it is not the absolute pre-
cision values that matter but the ability to compare
these values for different retrieval techniques or sys-
tems, to investigate their relative benefits. A test col-
lection with low precision values will still allow this.
It is known that all evaluation measures are un-
stable for very small numbers of relevant documents
(Buckley and Voorhees, 2000) and there are issues
arising from incomplete relevance information in a
test collection (Buckley and Voorhees, 2004). This
makes the second stage of our test collection com-
pilation even more indispensable (asking subjects to
judge retrieved documents), as this will increase the
number of judged relevant documents, as well as
bridging the completeness gap.
There are further possibilities of how the prob-
lem could be countered. We could exclude queries
with lower than a threshold number of relevant docu-
ments (after the second stage). Given the respectable
number of queries we have, we might be able to af-
ford this luxury. We could add relevant documents
from outside the Anthology to our collection. This
is least preferable methodologically: using the An-
thology has the advantage that it has a real identity
and was created for real reasons outside our experi-
ments. Furthermore, the collection ?covers a field?,
i.e., it includes all important publications and only
those. By adding external documents to the collec-
tion, it would lose both these properties.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented an approach to building a test
collection from an existing collection of research pa-
pers and described the application of our method
to the ACL Anthology. We have collected 170
queries with relevance data, centered around the
ACL-2005 and HLT-EMNLP-2005 conferences. We
397
have sanity-checked the usability of our data by
running the queries through a retrieval system and
evaluating the results using standard software. The
collection currently has a low number of judged
relevant documents and further experimentation is
needed to determine if this poses a real problem.
We plan a second stage of collecting relevance
judgements, in line with the original Cranfield de-
sign, whereby authors who have contributed queries
will be asked to judge the relevance of documents in
retrieval rankings from standard IR models and, ide-
ally, from our eventual citation-based experiments.
Nevertheless, our test collection is likely to suffer
from incomplete relevance information. The bpref
measure (Buckley and Voorhees, 2004) gauges re-
trieval effectiveness solely on the basis of judged
documents and is more stable to differing levels
of completeness than measures such as MAP, R-
precision or precision at fixed document cutoffs.
Thus, bpref may offer a solution to the incomplete-
ness problem and we intend to investigate its poten-
tial use in our future evaluations.
When finished, we hope our test collection will
be a generally useful IR resource. In particular, we
expect the collection to be useful for experimenta-
tion with citation information, for which there is cur-
rently no existing test collection with the properties
that ours offers.
Acknowledgements Thanks to the reviewers for
their useful comments and to Karen Spa?rck Jones for
many instructive discussions.
References
Shannon Bradshaw. 2003. Reference directed indexing:Redeeming relevance for subject search in citation in-dexes. In Research and Advanced Technology for Dig-ital Libraries (ECDL), pages 499?510.
Sergey Brin and Lawrence Page. 1998. The anatomy ofa large-scale hypertextual Web search engine. Com-puter Networks and ISDN Systems, 30(1?7):107?117.
Chris Buckley and Ellen Voorhees. 2000. Evaluating
evaluation measure stability. In Research and Devel-opment in Information Retrieval (SIGIR).
Chris Buckley and Ellen Voorhees. 2004. Retrieval eval-uation with incomplete information. In Research anddevelopment in information retrieval (SIGIR).
Cyril Cleverdon, Jack Mills, and Michael Keen. 1966.Factors determining the performance of indexing
sytems, volume 1. design. Technical report, ASLIBCranfield Project.
Cyril Cleverdon. 1960. Report on the first stage of an in-
vestigation into the comparative efficiency of indexingsystems. Technical report, ASLIB Cranfield Project.
Cyril Cleverdon. 1997. The Cranfield tests on index lan-guage devices. In Readings in information retrieval,pages 47?59. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Brian D. Davison. 2000. Topical locality in the web.
In Research and Development in Information Retrieval(SIGIR), pages 272?279.
Eugene Garfield. 1972. Citation analysis as a tool injournal evaluation. Science, 178 (4060):471?479.
Donna Harman. 2005. The TREC test collections. InEllen Voorhees and Donna Harman, editors, TRECExperiment and Evaluation in Information Retrieval,chapter 2. MIT Press.
David Hawking and Nick Craswell. 2005. The verylarge collection and web tracks. In Ellen Voorhees and
Donna Harman, editors, TREC: Experiment and Eval-uation in Information Retrieval, chapter 9. MIT Press.
Michael Kluck. 2003. The GIRT data in the evaluationof CLIR systems - from 1997 until 2003. In CLEF,pages 376?390.
Ian Lewin, Bill Hollingsworth, and Dan Tidhar. 2005.
Retrieving hierarchical text structure from typeset sci-entific articles - a prerequisite for e-science text min-ing. In UK e-Science All Hands Meeting.
Oliver McBryan. 1994. GENVL and WWWW: Toolsfor taming the web. In World Wide Web Conference.
James Pitkow and Peter Pirolli. 1997. Life, death, and
lawfulness on the electronic frontier. In Human Fac-tors in Computing Systems.
Karen Spa?rck Jones, Steve Walker, and Stephen Robert-son. 2000. A probabilistic model of information re-trieval: development and comparative experiments -
parts 1 and 2. Information Processing and Manage-ment, 36(6):779?840.
Karen Spa?rck Jones. 1981. The Cranfield tests. InKaren Spa?rck Jones, editor, Information Retrieval Ex-periment, chapter 13, pages 256?284. Butterworths.
Trevor Strohman, Donald Metzler, Howard Turtle, and
W. Bruce Croft. 2005. Indri: a language-model basedsearch engine for complex queries. Technical report,University of Massachusetts.
Simone Teufel and Noemie Elhadad. 2002. Collection
and linguistic processing of a large-scale corpus ofmedical articles. In Language Resources and Evalu-ation Conference (LREC).
B. C. Vickery. 1967. Reviews of CLEVERDON, C. W.,MILLS, J. and KEEN, E. M. the Cranfield 2 report.Journal of Documentation, 22:247?249.
Ellen Voorhees and Donna Harman. 1999. Overview ofthe eighth Text REtrieval Conference (TREC 8). InText REtrieval Conference (TREC).
Ellen Voorhees. 1998. Variations in relevance judgmentsand the measurement of retrieval effectiveness. In Re-search and Development in Information Retrieval (SI-GIR), pages 315?323.
398
Proceedings of the Workshop on How Can Computational Linguistics Improve Information Retrieval?, pages 25?32,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
How to Find Better Index Terms Through Citations
Anna Ritchie
University of Cambridge
Computer Laboratory
15 J J Thompson Avenue
Cambridge, CB3 0FD, U.K.
ar283@cl.cam.ac.uk
Simone Teufel
University of Cambridge
Computer Laboratory
15 J J Thompson Avenue
Cambridge, CB3 0FD, U.K.
sht25@cl.cam.ac.uk
Stephen Robertson
Microsoft Research Ltd
Roger Needham House
7 J J Thomson Avenue
Cambridge, CB3 0FB, U.K.
ser@microsoft.com
Abstract
We consider the question of how informa-
tion from the textual context of citations
in scientific papers could improve index-
ing of the cited papers. We first present ex-
amples which show that the context should
in principle provide better and new index
terms. We then discuss linguistic phenom-
ena around citations and which type of
processing would improve the automatic
determination of the right context. We
present a case study, studying the effect
of combining the existing index terms of
a paper with additional terms from papers
citing that paper in our corpus. Finally, we
discuss the need for experimentation for
the practical validation of our claim.
1 Introduction
Information Retrieval (IR) is an established field
and, today, the ?conventional? IR task is embodied
by web searching. IR is mostly term-based, re-
lying on the words within documents to describe
them and, thence, try to determine which docu-
ments are relevant to a given user query. There are
theoretically motivated and experimentally vali-
dated techniques that have become standard in the
field. An example is the Okapi model; a prob-
abilistic function for term weighting and docu-
ment ranking (Spa?rck Jones, Walker & Robertson
2000). IR techniques using such statistical mod-
els almost always outperform more linguistically
based ones. So, as statistical models are developed
and refined, it begs the question ?Can Computa-
tional Linguistics improve Information Retrieval??
Our particular research involves IR on scien-
tific papers. There are definite parallels between
the web and scientific literature, such as hyper-
links between webpages alongside citation links
between papers. However, there are also funda-
mental differences, like the greater variability of
webpages and the independent quality control of
academic texts through the peer review process.
The analogy between hyperlinks and citations it-
self is not perfect: whereas the number of hyper-
links varies greatly from webpage to webpage, the
number of citations in papers is more constrained,
due to the combination of strict page limits, the
need to cite to show awareness of other work and
the need to conserve space by including only the
most relevant citations. Thus, while some aspects
of web-based techniques will carry across to the
current research domain, others will probably not.
We are interested in investigating which lessons
learned from web IR can successfully be applied
to this slightly different domain.
2 Index Terms Through Link Structure
We aim to improve automatic indexing of scien-
tific papers by finding additional index terms out-
side of the documents themselves. In particular,
we believe that good index terms can be found by
following the link structure between documents.
2.1 Hyperlinks
There is a wealth of literature on exploiting link
structure between web documents for IR, includ-
ing the ?sharing? of index terms between hyper-
linked pages. Bharat & Mihaila (2001), for in-
stance, propagate title and header terms to the
pointed-to page, while Marchiori (1997) recur-
sively augments the textual content of a page with
all the text of the pages it points to.
Research has particularly concentrated on an-
chor text as a good place to find index terms, i.e.,
25
the text enclosed in the ?a? tags of the HTML
document. It is a well-documented problem that
webpages are often poorly self-descriptive (e.g.,
Brin & Page 1998, Kleinberg 1999). For in-
stance, www.google.com does not contain the
phrase search engine. Anchor text, on the other
hand, is often a higher-level description of the
pointed-to page. Davison (2000) provides a good
discussion of just how well anchor text does this
and provides experimental results to back this
claim. Thus, beginning with McBryan (1994),
there is a trend of propagating anchor text along
its hyperlink to associate it with the linked page,
as well as that in which it is found. Google, for
example, includes anchor text as index terms for
the linked page (Brin & Page 1998).
Extending beyond anchor text, Chakrabarti
et al (1998) look for topic terms in a window
of text around hyperlinks and weight that link ac-
cordingly, in the framework of a link structure al-
gorithm, HITS (Kleinberg 1999).
2.2 Citations
The anchor text phenomenon is also observed with
citations: they are introduced purposefully along-
side some descriptive reference to the cited doc-
ument. Thus, this text should contain good in-
dex terms for the cited document. In the fol-
lowing sections, we motivate the use of reference
terms as index terms for cited documents, firstly,
with some citation examples and, secondly, by dis-
cussing previous work.
Examples: Reference Terms as Index Terms
Figure 1 shows some citations that exemplify
why reference terms should be good index terms
for the cited document. (1) is an example of a ci-
tation with intuitively good index terms (those un-
derlined) for the cited paper around it; a searcher
looking for papers about a learning system, partic-
ularly one that uses theory renement and/or one
that learns non-recursive NP and VP structures
might be interested in the paper, as might those
searching for information about ALLiS.
The fact that an author has chosen those partic-
ular terms in referring to the paper means that they
reflect what that author feels is important about the
paper. It is reasonable, then, that other researchers
interested in the same things would find the cited
paper useful and could plausibly use such terms
as query terms. It is true that the cited paper may
well contain these terms, and they may even be
important, prominent terms, but this is not neces-
sarily the case. There are numerous situations in
which the terms in the document are not the best
indicators of what is important in it. Firstly, what
is important in a paper in terms of what it is known
and cited for is not always the same as what is
important in it in terms of subject matter or fo-
cus. Secondly, what are considered to be the im-
portant contributions of a paper may change over
time. Thirdly, the terminology used to describe the
important contributions may be different from that
used in the paper or may change over time.
(2) exemplifies this special case, where a paper
is referred to using terms that are not in the paper
itself: the cited paper is the standard reference for
the HITS algorithm yet the name HITS was only
attributed to the algorithm after the paper was writ-
ten and it doesn?t contain the term at all1.
The last two examples show how citing au-
thors can provide higher level descriptions of the
cited paper, e.g., good overview and comparison.
These meta-descriptors are less likely to appear
in the papers themselves as prominent terms yet,
again, could plausibly be used as query terms for
a searcher.
Reference Directed Indexing
These examples (and many more) suggest that
text used in reference to papers can provide use-
ful index terms, just as anchor text does for web-
pages. Bradshaw & Hammond (2002) even go so
far as to argue that reference is more valuable as
a source of index terms than the document?s own
content. Bradshaw?s theory is that, when citing,
authors describe a document in terms similar to a
searcher?s query for the information it contains.
However, there is no anchor text, per se, in pa-
pers, i.e., there are no HTML tags to delimit the
text associated with a citation, unlike in webpages.
The question is raised, therefore, of what is the
anchor text equivalent for formal citations. Brad-
shaw (2003) extracts NPs from a fixed window of
around one hundred words around the citation and
uses these as the basis of his Reference-Directed
Indexing (RDI).
Bradshaw evaluates RDI by, first, indexing doc-
uments provided by Citeseer (Lawrence, Bol-
lacker & Giles 1999). A set of 32 queries was cre-
ated by randomly selecting keyword phrases from
1There is a poetic irony in this: Kleinberg?s paper notes
the analagous problem of poorly self-descriptive webpages.
26
(1) ALLiS (Architecture for Learning Linguistic Structures) is a learning system which uses
theory renement in order to learn non-recursive NP and VP structures (Dejean, 2000).
(2) Such estimation is simplied from HITS algorithm (Kleinberg, 1998).
(3) As two examples, (Rabiner, 1989) and (Charniak et al, 1993) give
good overviews of the techniques and equations used for Markov models and part-of-speech tagging,
but they are not very explicit in the details that are needed for their application.
(4) For a comparison to other taggers, the reader is referred to (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999).
Figure 1: Citations Motivating Reference Index Terms
24 documents in the collection with an author-
written keywords section. Document relevance
was determined by judging whether it addressed
the same topic as the topic in the query source
paper that is identified by the query keywords.
Thus, the performance of RDI was compared to
that of a standard vector-space model implementa-
tion (TF*IDF term weighting and cosine similarity
retrieval), with RDI achieving better precision at
top 10 documents (0.484 compared to 0.318, sta-
tistically significant at 99.5% confidence).
Citing Statements
In a considerably earlier study, closer to our
own project, O?Connor (1982) motivated the use
of words from citing statements as additional
terms to augment an existing document represen-
tation. Though O?Connor did not have machine-
readable documents, procedures for ?automatic?
recognition of citing statements were developed
and manually carried out on a collection of chem-
istry journal articles.
Proceeding from the sentence in which a ci-
tation is found, a set of hand-crafted, mostly
sentence-based rules were applied to select the
parts of the citing paper that conveyed informa-
tion about the cited paper. For instance, the citing
sentence, S, was always selected. If S contained a
connector (a keyword, e.g., this, similarly, former)
in its first twelve words, its predecessor, S?1, wasalso selected etc. The majority of rules selected
sentences from the text; others selected titles and
words from tables, figures and captions.
The selected statements (minus stop words)
were added to an existing representation for the
cited documents, comprising human index terms
and title and abstract terms, and a small-scale re-
trieval experiment was performed. A 20% in-
crease in recall was found using the citing state-
ments in addition to the existing index terms,
though in a follow-up study on biomedical papers,
the increase was only 4%2 (O?Connor 1983).
O?Connor concludes that citing statements can
aid retrieval but notes the inherent difficulty in
identifying them. Some of the selection rules were
only semi-automatic (e.g., required human identi-
fication of an article as a review) and most relied
on knowledge of sentence boundaries, which is a
non-trivial problem in itself. In all sentence-based
cases, sentences were either selected in their en-
tirety or not at all and O?Connor notes this as a
source of falsely assigned terms.
3 Complex Citation Contexts
There is evidence, therefore, that good index terms
for scholarly documents can be found in the doc-
uments that cite them. Identifying which terms
around a citation really refer to it, however, is non-
trivial. In this section, we discuss some exam-
ples of citations where this is the case and propose
potential ways in which computational linguistics
techniques may be useful in more accurately lo-
cating those reference terms. We take as our theo-
retical baseline all terms in a fixed window around
a citation.
3.1 Examples: Finding Reference Terms
The first two examples in Figure 2 illustrate how
the amount of text that refers to a citation can vary.
Sometimes, only two or three terms will refer to a
citation, as is often the case in enumerations such
as (5). On the other hand, (6) shows a citation
where much of the following section refers to the
cited work. When a paper is heavily based on pre-
vious work, for example, extensive text may be af-
forded to describing that work in detail. Thus, this
context could contribute dozens of legitimate in-
dex terms. A fixed size window around a citation
2O?Connor attributes this to a lower average number of
citing papers in the biomedical domain.
27
(5) Similar advances have been made in machine translation (Frederking and Nirenburg, 1994),
speech recognition (Fiscus, 1997) and named entity recognition (Borthwick et al, 1998).
(6) Brown et al (1993) proposed a series of statistical models of the translation process.
IBM translation models try to model the translation probability ... which describes the relationship
between a source language sentence ... and a target language sentence ... . In
statistical alignment models ... a ?hidden? alignment ... is introduced, which describes a mapping
from a target position ... to a source position ... . The relationship between the translation model
and the alignment model is given by: ...
(7) The results of disambiguation strategies reported for pseudo-words and the like are consistently
above 95% overall accuracy, far higher than those reported for
disambiguating three or more senses of polysemous words (Wilks et al 1993; Leacock, Towell,
and Voorhees 1993).
(8) This paper concentrates on the use of zero, pronominal, and nominal anaphora in Chinese
generated text. We are not concerned with lexical anaphora (Tutin and Kittredge 1992) where the
anaphor and its antecedent share meaning components, while the anaphor belongs to an open
lexical class.
(9) Previous work on the generation of referring expressions focused on
producing minimal distinguishing descriptions (Dale and Haddock 1991; Dale 1992; Reiter and
Dale 1992) or descriptions customized for different levels of hearers (Reiter 1990). Since we are
not concerned with the generation of descriptions for different levels of users, we look only at the
former group of work, which aims at generating descriptions for a subsequent reference to
distinguish it from the set of entities with which it might be confused.
(10) Ferro et al (1999) and Buchholz et al (1999) both describe learning systems to nd GRs. The
former (TR) uses transformation-based error-driven learning (Brill and Resnik, 1994) and the
latter (MB) uses memory-based learning (Daelemans et al, 1999).
Figure 2: Citations Motivating Computational Linguistics
would not capture all the terms referring to it and
only those.
In list examples such as (5), where multiple ci-
tations are in close proximity, almost any window
size would result in overlapping windows and in
terms being attributed to the wrong citation(s), as
well as the right one. In such examples, the pres-
ence of other citations indicates a change in refer-
ence term ?ownership?. The same is often true of
sentence boundaries, as they often signal a change
in topic. Citations frequently occur at the start of
sentences, as in (6), where a different approach is
introduced. Similarly, a citation at the end of a
sentence, as in (7), often indicates the completion
of the current topic. In both cases, the sentence
boundary (c.f. topic change) is also the boundary
of the reference text. The same arguments increas-
ingly apply to paragraph and section boundaries.
(8) is another example where the reference text
does not extend beyond the citation sentence,
though the citation is not at a sentence boundary.
Instead, the topic contrast is indicated by a linguic-
tic cue, i.e., the negation in We are not. This il-
lustrates another phenomenon of citations: in con-
trasting their work with others?, researchers often
explicitly state what their paper is not about. Intu-
itively, not only are these terms better descriptors
of the cited rather than citing paper, they might
even raise the question of whether one should go
as far as excluding selected terms during index-
ing of the citing paper. We are not advocating this
here, though, and note that, in practice, such terms
would not have much impact on the document: we
would expect them to have low term frequencies
in comparison to the important terms in that doc-
ument and in comparison to their frequencies in
other documents where they are important.
(9) is another example of this negation effect
(We are not concerned with...). Along with (10),
it also shows how complex the mapping between
reference terms and citations can be. Firstly, ref-
erence terms may belong to more than one cita-
28
tion. For instance, in (10), describe learning sys-
tems to nd GRs refers to both Ferro et al (1999)
and Buchholz et al (1999). Here, the presence of
a second citation does not end the domain of the
first?s reference text, indicated by the use of both
and the conjunction between the citations. Simi-
larly, transformation-based error-driven learning
also refers to two citations but, in this case, they
are on opposite sides of the reference text, i.e.,
Ferro et al (1999) and (Brill and Resnik, 1994).
Moreover, there is an intervening citation that it
does not refer to, i.e., Buchholz et al (1999). The
same is true of memory-based learning.
4 Case Study
In this section, we study the effect of adding ci-
tation index terms to one document: The Mathe-
matics of Statistical Machine Translation: Param-
eter Estimation from the Computational Linguis-
tics journal3 . Our experimental setting is a corpus
of ?9000 papers in the ACL Anthology4 , a digital
archive of computational linguistics research pa-
pers. We found 24 citations to the paper in 10 other
Anthology papers (that we knew to have citations
to this paper through an unrelated study). As a
simulation of ideal processing, we then manually
extracted the terms from those around those cita-
tions that specifically referred to the paper, hence-
forth ideal reference terms. Next, we extracted
all terms from a fixed window of ?50 terms on
either side (equivalent to Bradshaw (2003)?s win-
dow size), henceforth xed reference terms. Fi-
nally, we calculated various term statistics, includ-
ing IDF values across the corpus. All terms were
decapitalized. We now attempt to draw a ?term
profile? of the document, both before and after
those reference terms are added to the document,
and discuss the implications for IR.
4.1 Index Term Analysis
Table 1 gives the top twenty ideal reference terms
ranked by their TF*IDF values in the original doc-
ument. Note that we observe the effects on the
relative rankings of the ideal reference terms only,
since it is these hand-picked terms that we con-
sider to be important descriptors for the document
and whose statistics will be most affected by the
inclusion of reference terms. To give an indication
of their importance relative to other terms in the
3http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/J93-2003.pdf
4http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
Rank
Ideal Doc TF*IDF Term
1 1 351.73 french
2 2 246.52 alignments
3 3 238.39 fertility
4 4 212.20 alignment
5 5 203.28 cept
6 8 158.45 probabilities
7 9 150.74 translation
8 12 106.11 model
9 17 79.47 probability
10 18 78.37 models
11 19 78.02 english
12 21 76.23 parameters
13 24 71.77 connected
14 28 62.48 words
15 32 57.57 em
13 35 54.88 iterations
14 45 45.00 statistical
15 54 38.25 training
16 69 32.93 word
17 74 31.31 pairs
18 81 29.29 machine
19 83 28.53 empty
20 130 19.72 series
Table 1: Ideal Reference Term Ranking by
TF*IDF
document, however, the second column in Table 1
gives the absolute rankings of these terms in the
original document. These numbers confirm that
our ideal reference terms are, in fact, relatively im-
portant in the document; indeed, the top five terms
in the document are all ideal reference terms. Fur-
ther down the ranking, the ideal reference terms
become more ?diluted? with terms not picked from
our 24 citations. An inspection revealed that many
of these terms were French words from example
translations, since the paper deals with machine
translation between English and French. Thus,
they were bad index terms, for our purposes.
Hence, we observed the effect of adding, first,
the ideal reference terms then, separately, the fixed
reference terms to the document, summarized in
Tables 2 to 5. Tables 2 and 3 show the terms with
the largest differences in positions as a result of
adding the ideal and fixed reference terms respec-
tively.
For instance, ibm?s TF*IDF value more than
doubled. The term ibm appears only six times in
the document (and not even from the main text
but from authors? institutions and one bibliogra-
phy item) yet one of its major contributions is
the machine translation models it introduced, now
standardly referred to as ?the IBM models?. Con-
29
TF*IDF Ideal
Term ? Doc+ideal Rank ?
ibm 24.24 37.46 28? 20
generative 4.44 11.10 38? 33
source 5.35 6.42 65? 44
decoders 6.41 6.41 ? 45
corruption 6.02 6.02 ? 46
expectation 2.97 5.94 51? 47
relationship 2.96 5.92 52? 48
story 2.94 5.88 53? 49
noisy-channel 5.75 5.75 ?52
extract 1.51 7.54 41? 38
Table 2: Term Ranking Changes (Ideal)
TF*IDF Ideal
Term ? Doc+fixed Rank ?
ibm 48.48 61.70 28? 18
target 19.64 19.64 ? 26
source 14.99 16.06 65? 32
phrase-based 14.77 14.77 ? 36
trained 14.64 19.52 43? 27
approaches 11.03 11.03 ? 41
parallel 9.72 17.81 34? 29
generative 8.88 15.54 38? 33
train 8.21 8.21 ? 45
channel 6.94 6.94 ? 55
expectation 5.93 8.90 51? 44
learn 5.93 7.77 60? 47
Table 3: Term Ranking Changes (Fixed)
sequently, ?IBM? was contained in many citation
contexts in citing papers, leading to an ideal ref-
erence term frequency of 11 for ibm. As a result,
ibm is boosted eight places to rank 20. This exem-
plifies how reference terms can better describe a
document, in terms of what searchers might plau-
sibly look for (c.f. Example 2).
There were twenty terms that do not occur
in the document itself but are nevertheless used
by citing authors to describe it, shown in Ta-
bles 4 and 5. Many of these have high IDF val-
ues, indicating their distinctiveness in the corpus,
e.g., decoders (6.41), corruption (6.02) and noisy-
channel (5.75). This, combined with the fact that
citing authors use these terms in describing the
paper, means that these terms are intuitively high
quality descriptors of the paper. Without the refer-
ence index terms, however, the paper would score
zero for these terms as query terms.
Many more fixed reference terms were found
per citation than ideal ones. This can introduce
noise. In general, the TF*IDF values of ideal ref-
erence terms can only be further boosted by in-
cluding more terms and a comparison of Tables 2
Term TF*IDF
decoders 6.41
corruption 6.02
noisy-channel 5.75
attainable 5.45
target 5.24
source-language 4.99
phrase-based 4.92
target-language 4.82
application-specific 4.40
train 4.10
intermediate 4.01
channel 3.47
approaches 3.01
combinations 1.70
style 2.12
add 1.32
major 1.16
due 0.83
considered 0.81
developed 0.78
Table 4: New Non-zero TF*IDF Terms (Ideal)
with 3 (or 4 with 5) shows that this is sometimes
the case, e.g, ibm occurred a further eleven times
in the fixed reference terms, doubling its increase
in TF*IDF. However, instances of those terms that
only occurred in the fixed reference terms did not,
in fact, refer to the citation of the paper, by defi-
nition of the ideal reference terms. For instance,
one such extra occurrence of ibm is from a sen-
tence following the citation that describes the ex-
act model used in the current work:
(11) According to the IBM models (Brown et al,
1993), the statistical word alignment model
can be generally represented as in Equation
(1) ... In this paper, we use a simplied IBM
model 4 (Al-Onaizan et al, 1999), which ...
Here, the second occurrence refers to (Al-
Onaizan et al, 1999) but, by its proximity to the
citation to our example paper (Brown et al, 1993),
is picked up by the fixed window. Since the term
was arguably not directly intended to describe our
paper, then, a different term might equally have
been used; one that was inappropriate as an in-
dex term. Table 6 lists the fixed reference terms
that were not also in the ideal reference terms; al-
most 400 in total. The vast majority of these occur
very infrequently which suggests that they should
not greatly affect the term profile of the document.
However, the argument for adding good, high IDF
reference terms that are not in the document itself
30
Term TF*IDF
target 19.64
phrase-based 14.77
approaches 11.03
train 8.21
channel 6.94
decoders 6.41
corruption 6.02
noisy-channel 5.75
attainable 5.45
source-language 4.99
target-language 4.82
application-specific 4.40
intermediate 4.01
combinations 3.40
style 2.12
considered 1.62
major 1.16
due 0.83
developed 0.78
Table 5: New Non-zero TF*IDF Terms (Fixed)
conversely applies to adding bad ones: an ?incor-
rect? reference term added to the document will
have its TF*IDF pushed off the zero mark, giving
it the potential to score against inappropriate query
terms. If such a term is distinctive (i.e., has a high
IDF), the effect may be significant. The term giza,
for example, has an IDF of 6.34 and is the name
of a particular tool that is not mentioned in our
example paper. However, since the tool is used
to train IBM models, the two papers in the exam-
ple above are often cited by the same papers and
in close proximity. This increases the chances of
such terms being picked up as reference terms for
the wrong citation by a fixed window, heightening
the adverse effect on its term profile.
5 Discussion and Conclusions
It is not too hard to find examples of citations that
show a fixed window size is suboptimal for finding
terms used in reference to cited papers. In extract-
ing the ideal reference terms from only 24 cita-
tions for our case study, we saw just how difficult
it is to decide which terms refer to which citations.
We, the authors, came across examples where it
was ambiguous how many citations certain terms
referred to, ones where knowledge of the cited pa-
pers was required to interpret the scope of the cita-
tion and ones where we simply did not agree. This
is a highly complex indexing task; one which hu-
mans have difficulty with, one for which we expect
low human agreement and, therefore, the type that
computational linguistics struggles to achieve high
performance on. We agree with O?Connor (1982)
that it is hard. We make no claims that computa-
tional linguistics will provide a full solution.
Nevertheless, our examples suggest that even
simple computational linguistics techniques
should help to more accurately locate reference
terms. While it may be impossible to automati-
cally pick out each specific piece of text that does
refer to a given citation, there is much scope for
improvement over a fixed window. The examples
in Section 2 suggest that altering the size of the
window that is applied would be a good first step.
Some form of text segmentation, whether it be
full-blown discourse analysis or simple sentence
boundary detection, may be useful in determining
where the extent of the reference text is.
While the case study presented here highlights
several interesting effects of using terms from
around citations as additional index terms for the
cited paper, it cannot answer questions about how
successful a practical method based on these ob-
servations would be, over a using simple fixed
window, for example. In order for any real im-
provement in IR, the term profile of a document
would have to be significantly altered by the refer-
ence terms. Enough terms, in particular repeated
terms, would have to be successfully found via ci-
tations for such a quantitative improvement. It is
not clear that computational linguistic techniques
will improve over the statistical effects of redun-
dant data.
We are thus in the last stages of setting up a
larger experiment that will shed more light on this
question. The experimental setup requires data
where there are a significant number of citations
to a number of test documents and a significant
number of reference set terms. We have recently
presented a test collection of scientific research pa-
pers (Ritchie, Teufel & Robertson 2006), which
we intend to use for this experiment.
References
Bharat, K. & Mihaila, G. A. (2001), When experts agree:using non-affiliated experts to rank popular topics, in?Tenth International World Wide Web Conference?,
pp. 597?602.
Bradshaw, S. (2003), Reference directed indexing: Re-
deeming relevance for subject search in citation in-dexes., in ?ECDL?, pp. 499?510.
Bradshaw, S. & Hammond, K. (2002), Automatically in-
dexing documents: Content vs. reference, in ?Intel-ligent User Interfaces?.
31
TF # Terms Terms
13 1 asr
8 4 caption, closed, section, methods
7 2 method, sentences
6 4 describes, example, languages, system
5 6 corpus, dictionary, heuristic, large, paper, results
4 17 account, aligned, confidence, dependency, details, during, equation, generally, given, manual, measures,
order, probabilistic, proposed, shown, simplified, systems, word-aligned
3 29 according, algorithm, applications, build, case, choosing, chunk, current, described, employed, equiv-
alence, experiments, introduced, introduction, length, links, number, obtain, obtained, performance,
performing, problem, produced, related, show, sum, true, types, work
2 64 adaptation, akin, approximate, bitext, calculated, called, categories, certain, chunks, common, consider,
consists, domain-specific, error, estimation, experimental, extracted, families, feature, features, found,
functions, generated, generic, giza, good, high, improve, information, input, iraq, knowledge, large-
scale, lexicon, linked, log-linear, maximum, measure, notion, omitted, original, output, parameter, pick,
position, practice, presents, quality, rate, represented, researchers, rock, role, sinhalese, takes, tamil,
text-to-text, toolkit, transcripts, transcriptions, translations, version, word-based, word-to-word
1 252 access, accuracy, achieve, achieving, actual, addition, address, adopted, advance, advantages, align-
ing, amalgam, annotated, applied, apply, applying, approximated, association, asymmetric, augmented,
availability, available, average, back-off, base, baum-welch, begin, bitexts, bunetsu, candidate, can-
didates, cat, central, chinese, choose, chunk-based, class, closely, collecting, combination, compare,
compared, compares, computed, concludes, consequently, contributed, convention, corpora, correspon-
dence, corrupts, cost, counts, coverage, crucial, currently, decades, decoding, defines, denote, dependent,
depending, determine, dictionaries, direct, directions, disadvantages, distinction, dominated, dynamic,
efforts, english-chinese, english-spanish, enumerate, eojeol, eq, equations, errors, evaluation, excellent,
expansion, explicitly, extracts, failed, fairly, final, finally, fit, flat-start, followed, form, formalisms, for-
mulation, generation, gis, give, grouped, hallucination, halogen, handle, heuristic-based, hidden, highly,
hill-climbing, hmm-based, hypothesis, ideal, identified, identify, identity, immediate, implemented, im-
proved, improves, incorporate, increase, influence, initial, initialize, inspired, interchanging, introduces,
investigations, involve, kate, kind, learning, learns, letter, letters, lexical, likelihood, link, list, longer,
lowercase, main, make, makes, mapping, maximal, maximizes, means, modeling, modified, names,
needed, nitrogen, nodes, occupy, omitting, optimal, outperform, overcome, parse, parser, part, part-of-
speech, path, performed, play, plays, popular, pos, positions, power, precision, probable, produce, pro-
gramming, promising, real-valued, reason, recall, recent, recently, recognition, recursion, recursively, re-
duction, reductions, refine, relative, relying, renormalization, representation, require, requires, research,
restricting, reveal, sample, sampling, satisfactory, segments, semantic, sequences, setting, shortcom-
ings, showed, significant, significantly, similarity, similarly, simple, simplicity, situation, space, speech,
spelling, state-of-the-art, step, strategies, string, strong, studies, summaries, summarization, supervised,
syntactic, tags, task-specific, technique, techniques, technologies, terms, testing, threshold, translation-
related, transliteration, tree, trees, trellis, type, underlying, unrealistic, unsupervised, uppercase, value,
viterbi, wanted, ways, well-formedness, well-founded, widely, widespread, works, written, wtop, yas-
met, years, yields
Table 6: Term Frequencies of ?Noisy? Reference Index Terms
Brin, S. & Page, L. (1998), ?The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual Web search engine?, ComputerNetworks and ISDN Systems 30(1?7), 107?117.
Chakrabarti, S., Dom, B., Gibson, D., Kleinberg, J.,Raghavan, P. & Rajagopalan, S. (1998), Automaticresource list compilation by analyzing hyperlink
structure and associated text, in ?Seventh Interna-tional World Wide Web Conference?.
Davison, B. D. (2000), Topical locality in the web,in ?Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval (SIGIR)?, pp. 272?279.
Kleinberg, J. M. (1999), ?Authoritative sources in ahyperlinked environment?, Journal of the ACM46(5), 604?632.
Lawrence, S., Bollacker, K. & Giles, C. L. (1999), In-
dexing and retrieval of scientific literature, in ?Con-ference on Information and Knowledge Manage-ment (CIKM)?, pp. 139?146.
Marchiori, M. (1997), ?The quest for correct informa-
tion on the Web: Hyper search engines?, ComputerNetworks and ISDN Systems 29(8?13), 1225?1236.
McBryan, O. (1994), GENVL and WWWW: Tools for
taming the web, in ?First International World WideWeb Conference?.
O?Connor, J. (1982), ?Citing statements: Computerrecognition and use to improve retrieval?, Informa-tion Processing and Management 18(3), 125?131.
O?Connor, J. (1983), ?Biomedical citing statements:Computer recognition and use to aid full-text re-
trieval?, Information Processing and Management19, 361?368.
Ritchie, A., Teufel, S. & Robertson, S. (2006), Creatinga test collection for citation-based IR experiments,in ?HLT-NAACL?.
Spa?rck Jones, K., Walker, S. & Robertson, S. E. (2000),?A probabilistic model of information retrieval: de-
velopment and comparative experiments - parts 1& 2.?, Information Processing and Management36(6), 779?840.
32
