95
96
97
98
Evaluation and Improvement
of Cross-Lingual Question Answering Strategies
Anne-Laure Ligozat and Brigitte Grau and Isabelle Robba and Anne Vilnat
LIMSI-CNRS
91403 Orsay Cedex, France
firstname.lastname@limsi.fr
Abstract
This article presents a bilingual question
answering system, which is able to process
questions and documents both in French
and in English. Two cross-lingual strate-
gies are described and evaluated. First, we
study the contribution of biterms trans-
lation, and the influence of the comple-
tion of the translation dictionaries. Then,
we propose a strategy for transferring the
question analysis from one language to the
other, and we study its influence on the
performance of our system.
1 Introduction
When a question is asked in a certain language
on the Web, it can be interesting to look for the
answer to the question in documents written in
other languages in order to increase the number of
documents returned. The CLEF evaluation cam-
paign for cross-language question answering sys-
tems addresses this issue by encouraging the deve-
lopment of such systems.
The objective of question answering systems
is to return precise answers to natural-language
questions, instead of the list of documents usually
returned by a search engine. The opening to mul-
tilingualism of question answering systems raises
issues both for the Information Retrieval and the
Information Extraction points of view.
This article presents a cross-language question
answering system able to treat questions and docu-
ments either in French or in English. Two different
strategies for shifting language are evaluated, and
several possibilities of evolution are presented.
2 Presentation of our question answering
system
Our bilingual question answering system has
participated in the CLEF 2005 evaluation cam-
paign 1. The CLEF QA task aims at evaluating dif-
ferent question answering systems on a given set
of questions, and a given corpus of documents, the
questions and the documents being either in the
same language (except English) or in two diffe-
rents languages. Last year, our system participated
in the French to English task, for which the ques-
tions are in French and the documents to search in
English.
This system is composed of several modules
that are presented Figure 1. The first module ana-
lyses the questions, and tries to detect a few of
their characteristics, that will enable us to find the
answers in the documents. Then the collection is
processed thanks to MG search engine 2. The do-
cuments returned are reindexed according to the
presence of the question terms, and more preci-
sely to the number and type of these terms ; next,
a module recognizes the named entities, and the
sentences from the documents are weighted accor-
ding to the information on the question. Finally,
different processes are applied depending on the
expected answer type, in order to extract answers
from the sentences.
3 Cross-language strategies for question
answering systems
Two main approaches are possible to deal with
multilingualism in question answering systems :
1Multilingual Question Answering task at the Cross Lan-
guage Evaluation Forum, http ://clef-qa.itc.it/
2MG for Managing Gigabytes
http ://www.cs.mu.oz.au/mg/
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
23
English
terms
Fusion
English
answers
English
questions
   
Collection
French
questions
   Selection
   Named entity tagging
Answer extraction
   Reindexing and ranking
   Sentence weighting
Document processing
   Answer extraction
English
   Focus 
   Answer type
   Semantically linked words
   Main verb
   Terms
   Syntactic relations
Question analysis
translation
answers
2 lists of ranked
                  (a)
                 (b)
Search
engine
FIG. 1 ? Architecture of our cross-language question answering system
question translation and term-by-term translation.
These approaches have been implemented and
evaluated by many systems in the CLEF evalua-
tions, which gives a wide state-of-the-art of this
domain and of the possible cross-language strate-
gies.
The first approach consists in translating the
whole question into the target language, and then
processing the question analysis in this target lan-
guage. This approach is the most widely used, and
has for example been chosen by the following sys-
tems : (Perret, 2004), (Jijkoun et al, 2004), (Neu-
mann and Sacaleanu, 2005), (de Pablo-Sa?nchez et
al., 2005), (Tanev et al, 2005). Among these sys-
tems, several have measured the performance loss
between their monolingual and their bilingual sys-
tems. Thus, the English-French version of (Perret,
2004) has a 11 % performance loss (in terms of ab-
solute loss), dropping from 24.5% to 13.5% of cor-
rect answers. The English-Dutch version of (Jij-
koun et al, 2004)?s system has an approximative
10% performance loss of correct answers : the per-
centage of correct answers drops from 45.5% to
35%. As for (de Pablo-Sa?nchez et al, 2005), they
lose 6% of correct answers between their Spanish
monolingual system and their English-Spanish bi-
lingual system. (Hartrumpf, 2005) also conducted
an experiment by translating the questions from
English to German, and reports a drop from about
50% of performance.
For their cross-language system, (Neumann and
Sacaleanu, 2004) chose to use several machine
translation tools, and to gather the different trans-
lations into a ?bag of words? that is used to ex-
pand queries. Synonyms are also added to the
?bag of words? and EuroWordNet 3 is used to
3Multilingual database with wordnets for several Euro-
disambiguate. They lose quite few correct ans-
wers between their German monolingual system
and their German-English bilingual system, with
which they obtain respectively 25 and 23.5% of
correct answers.
Translating the question raises two main pro-
blems : syntactically incorrect questions may be
produced, and the resolution of translation am-
biguities may be wrong. Moreover, the unknown
words such as some proper names are not or in-
correctly translated. We will describe later several
possibilities to deal with these problems, as well
as our own solution.
Other systems such as (Sutcliffe et al, 2005) or
(Tanev et al, 2004) use a term-by-term translation.
In this approach, the question is analyzed in the
source language and then the information retur-
ned by the question analysis is translated into the
target language. (Tanev et al, 2004), who partici-
pated in the Bulgarian-English and Italian-English
tasks in 2004, translate the question keywords by
using bilingual dictionaries and MultiWordNet 4.
In order to limit the noise stemming from the dif-
ferent translations and to have a better cohesion,
they validate the translations in two large cor-
pora, AQUAINT and TIPSTER. This system got a
score of 22.5% of correct answers in the bilingual
task, and 28% in the monolingual task in 2004.
(Sutcliffe et al, 2005) combine two translation
tools and a dictionary to translate phrases. Even-
tually, (Laurent et al, 2005) also translate words
or idioms, by using English as a pivot language.
The performance of this system is of 64% of cor-
rect answers for the French monolingual task, and
pean languages, http ://www.illc.uva.nl/EuroWordNet/
4Multilingual lexical database in which the Italian Word-
Net is strictly aligned with Princeton WordNet, http ://multi-
wordnet.itc.it
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
24
39.5% for the English-French bilingual task.
4 Adopted approach
In order to deal with the conversion from French
to English in our system, two strategies are ap-
plied in parallel. They differ on what is translated
to treat the question asked in French. The first sub-
system called MUSQAT proceeds to the question
analysis in French, and then translates the ques-
tion terms extracted by this question analysis mo-
dule, following the - - - arrows in Figure 1. The
second sub-system makes use of a machine trans-
lation tool (Reverso 5) to obtain translations of the
questions and then our English monolingual sys-
tem called QALC is applied, following the ..-.. ar-
rows in Figure 1 . These strategies will be detailed
later in the article.
If they represent the most common strategies for
this kind of task, an original feature of our system
is the implementation of both strategies, which en-
ables us to merge the results obtained by following
these strategies, in order to improve the global per-
formance of our system.
In Table 1, we present an analysis of the results
we obtained for the CLEF evaluation campaign.
We evaluate the results obtained at two different
points of the question-answering process, i.e. af-
ter the sentence selection (point (a) in Figure 1),
and after the answer extraction (point (b) in Fi-
gure 1). At point (a), we count how many ques-
tions (among the global evaluation set of 200 ques-
tions) have an appropriate answer in the first five
sentences. At point (b), we distinguish the answers
the analysis process labels as named entities (NE),
from the others, since the corresponding answe-
ring processes are different. We also detail how
many answers are ranked first, or in the first five
ranks, as we take into account the first five ans-
wers.
As illustrated in Table 1, the two strategies for
dealing with multilingualism give quite different
results, which can be explained by each strategy
characteristics.
MUSQAT proceeds to the question analysis
with French questions correctly expressed, and
which analysis is therefore more reliable. Yet, the
terms translations are then obtained from every
possible translation of each term, and thus without
taking account any context ; moreover, they de-
pend on the quality of the dictionaries used, and
5http ://www.reverso.net/
MUSQAT Reverso
+QALC
% %
(a) : Sentences first 5 41 46
with an answer ranks
(b) : Correct rank 1 18 14
NE answers
first 5 26 17
ranks
(b) : Correct rank 1 16 13
other answers
first 5 23 20
ranks
(b) : Total rank 1 17 13
(NE + non NE)
first 5 24 19
ranks
Final result 19
(fusion of both strategies)
TAB. 1 ? Performance of our system in CLEF
2005
introduce noise because of the erroneous transla-
tions.
In MUSQAT, we do not only translate mono-
terms (i.e. terms composed of single word) : the
biterms (composed of two words) of the French
questions are also extracted by the question analy-
sis. Every sequence of two terms which are tagged
as adjective/common noun or proper noun/proper
noun... constitutes a biterm. Each word of the bi-
term is translated, and then the existence of the
corresponding biterm built in English is checked
in the corpus. The biterms thus obtained are then
used by the further modules of the system. Taking
biterms into account is useful since they provide
a minimal context to the words forming them, as
well for the translation as for the re-indexing and
re-ranking of the documents (see Figure 1), as ex-
plained in (Ferret et al, 2002). Moreover, the pre-
sence of the biterm translations in the corpus is a
kind of validation of the monoterms translations.
As for translating the question, which is imple-
mented by Reverso+QALC, it presents the advan-
tage of giving a unique translation of the question
terms, which is quite reliable. But the grammati-
cality or realism of the question are not assured,
and thus the question analysis, based on regular
expression patterns, can be disturbed.
In this work, we tried to evaluate each strategy
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
25
and to bypass their drawbacks : on the one hand
(Section 5), by examining how the biterm transla-
tion in MUSQAT could be more reliable, and on
the other hand (Section 6) by improving the ques-
tion analysis, by relying on the French questions,
for QALC.
5 Biterm translation
The translation of terms and biterms present in
the question is achieved using two dictionaries.
The first of them, which was used last year for
our participation to CLEF is Magic-Dic 6. It is a
dictionary under GPL licence, which was retained
for its capacity to evolve. Indeed users can sub-
mit new translations which are controlled before
being integrated. Yet, it is quite incomplete. This
year we used FreeDict as well (FreeDict is also un-
der GPL licence), to fill in the gaps of Magic-Dic.
FreeDict added 424 translations to the 690 terms
already obtained. By mixing both sets of transla-
tions we obtained 463 additional biterms, making
a total of 777 biterms.
Nevertheless, whatever the quality and the size
of the dictionaries are, the problem of biterm trans-
lation remains the same : since biterms are not in
the dictionaries, the only way for us to get their
translation is to combine all the different term
translations. The main drawback of this approach
is the generated noise, for none of the terms consti-
tuting the biterm is disambiguated. For example,
three different translations are found for the bi-
term Conseil de de?fense : defense council, defense
advice and defense counsel ; but only the first of
those should be finally retained by our system.
To reduce this noise, an interesting possibility is
to validate the obtained biterms by searching them
or their variants in the complete collection of do-
cuments. (Grefenstette, 1999) reports a quite simi-
lar experiment in the context of a machine trans-
lation task : he uses the Web in order to order the
possible translations of noun phrases, and in par-
ticular noun biterms. Fastr (Jacquemin, 1996) is
a parser which takes as input a corpus and a list
of terms (multi or monoterms) and outputs the in-
dexed corpus in which terms and their variants are
recognized. Hence, Fastr is quite adequate for bi-
terms validation : it tags all the biterms present in
the collection, whether in their original form or in
a variant that can be semantic or syntactic.
In order to validate the biterms, the complete
6http ://magic-dic.homeunix.net
collection of the CLEF campaign (500 Mbyte) was
first tagged using the TreeTagger, then Fastr was
applied. The results are presented Table 2 : 39.5%
of the 777 biterms were found in the collection, in
a total of 63,404 occurrences. Thus there is an ave-
rage of 206 occurrences for each biterm. If we do
not take into account the biterm which is the most
represented (last year with 30,981 occurrences),
this average falls to 105. The 52 biterms which are
found in their original form only are most of the
time names of persons. Lastly, biterms that are ne-
ver found in their original form, are often consti-
tuted of one term badly translated, for example the
biterm oil importation is not present in the collec-
tion but its variant import of oil is found 28 times.
Then, it may be interesting to replace these biterms
by the most represented of their variants.
Whenever a biterm is thus validated (found in
the collection beyond a chosen threshold), the
translation of its terms is itself validated, other
translations being discarded. Thus, biterm valida-
tion enables us to validate monoterm translations.
Then, the following step will be to evaluate how
this new set of terms and biterms improves the re-
sults of MUSQAT.
After CLEF 2005 evaluation, we had at our dis-
posal the set of questions in their English original
version (this set was provided by the organizers).
We had also the English translation (far less cor-
rect) provided by the automatic translator Reverso.
As we can see it Table 3, for each set of ques-
tions the number of terms and biterms is nearly
the same. In the set of translations given by Re-
verso, we manually examined how many biterms
were false and found that here again the figures
were close to those of the original version. There
are two main reasons for which a biterm may be
false :
? in two thirds of cases, the association itself is
false : the two terms should not have been as-
sociated ; it is the case for example of many
country from the question How many coun-
tries joined the international coalition to res-
tore the democratic government in Haiti ? 7
? in one third of cases, one of the terms is
not translated or translated with an erroneous
term, like movement zapatiste coming from
the question What carry the courtiers of the
movement zapatiste in Mexico ? 8
7This sentence is an example of very good translation gi-
ven by Reverso
8This sentence is an example of bad translation given by
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
26
Total Number of biterms 777
Number of biterms found in the collection 307 - 39.5%
Number of biterms found in their original form only 52 - 17%
Number of biterms found with semantic variations only 150 - 54%
TAB. 2 ? Magic-Dic and FreeDict biterms validated by Fastr
Questions Questions Questions
in French translated in English in English
by Reverso (original version)
Terms 1180 1122 1163
Biterms 272 204 261
False Biterms 33 38 27
Common Biterms - 106
TAB. 3 ? Biterms in the different sets of questions
However, we calculated that among the 204 bi-
terms given by Reverso, 106 are also present in the
original set of questions in English. Among the 98
remaining biterms, 38 are false (for the reasons gi-
ven above). Then, there are 60 biterms which are
neither erroneous nor present in the original ver-
sion. Some of them contain a term which has been
translated using a different word, but that is never-
theless correct ; yet, most of these 60 biterms have
a different syntax from those constructed from the
original version, which is due to the syntax of the
questions translated by Reverso.
This leads us to conclude that even if Reverso
produces syntactically erroneous questions, the
vocabulary it chooses is most of the time adequate.
Yet, it is still interesting to use also the biterms
constructed from the dictionaries since they are
much more numerous and provide variants of the
biterms returned by Reverso.
6 Multilingual question analysis
We have developed for the evaluations a ques-
tion analysis in both languages. It is based on the
morpho-syntactic tagging and the syntactic analy-
sis of the questions. Then different elements are
detected from both analyses : recognition of the
expected answer type, of the question category, of
the temporal context...
There are of course lexicons and patterns which
are specific to each language, but the core of the
module is independent from the language. This
Reverso, which should have produced What do supporters of
the Zapatistas in Mexico wear ?
module was evaluated on corpora of similar ques-
tions in French and in English, and its results on
both languages are quite close (around 90% of re-
call and precision for the expected answer type
for example ; for more details, see (Ligozat et al,
2006)).
As presented above, our system relies on two
distinct strategies to answer to a cross-language
question :
? Either the question is analyzed in the ori-
ginal language, and next translated term-by-
term. The question analysis is then more re-
liable since it processes a grammatically cor-
rect question ; yet, the translation of terms has
no context to rely on.
? Or the question is first translated into the
target language before being analyzed. Al-
though this strategy improves the translation,
its main inconvenient is that each translation
error has strong consequences on the ques-
tion analysis. We will now try to evaluate to
which extent the translation errors actually
influence our question analysis and to find so-
lutions to avoid minimize this influence in the
Reverso+QALC system.
An error in the question translation can lead to
wrong terms or an incorrect English construction.
Thus, the translation of the question ?Combien y
a-t-il d?habitants en France ?? (?How many inhabi-
tants are there in France ??) is ?How much is there
of inhabitants in France ??.
In order to evaluate our second strategy, Re-
verso+QALC, using question translation and then
a monolingual system, it is interesting to estimate
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
27
the influence of a such a coarse translation on the
results of our system.
In order to avoid these translating problems, it
is possible to adapt either the input or the out-
put of the translating module. (Ahn et al, 2004)
present an example of a system processing pre-
and post-corrections thanks to surface reformu-
lation rules. However, this type of correction is
highly dependent on the kind of questions to pro-
cess, as well as on the errors of the translation tool
that is used.
We suggest to use another kind of processing,
which makes the most of the cross-lingual charac-
ter of the task, in order to improve the analysis of
the translated questions and to take into account
the possibilities of errors in these questions.
Our present system already takes into account
some of the most frequent translation errors, by
allowing the question analysis module to loosen
some of its rules in case the question be transla-
ted. Thus, a definition question such as ?Qu?est-
ce que l?UNITA ??, translated ?What UNITA ??
by our translating tool, instead of ?What is the
UNITA ??, will nevertheless be correctly analyzed
by our rules : indeed, the pattern WhatGN will be
considered as corresponding to a definition ques-
tion, while on a non-translated question, only the
pattern WhatBeGN will be allowed.
In order to try and improve our processing of
approximations in the translated questions, the so-
lution we suggest here consists in making the
question analysis in both the source and the target
languages, and in reporting the information (or at
least part of it) returned by the source analysis into
the target analysis. This is possible first because
our system treats both the languages in a parallel
way, and second, some of the information retur-
ned by the question analysis module use the same
terms in English and in French, like for example
the question category or the expected Named En-
tity type.
More precisely, we propose, in the task with
French questions and English documents, to ana-
lyse the French questions, and their English trans-
lations, and then to report the question category
and the expected answer type of the French ques-
tions into the English question analysis. The in-
formation found in the source language should be
more reliable since obtained on a real question.
For example, for the question ?Combien de
communaute?s Di Mambro a-t-il cre?e ?? (?How
many communities has Di Mambro created ??),
Reverso?s translation is ?How many Di Mambro
communities has he create ?? which prevents the
question analysis module to analyze it correctly.
The French analysis is thus used, which provides
the question category combien (how many) and the
expected named entity type NUMBER. This infor-
mation is reported in the English analysis file.
These characteristics of the question are used at
two different steps of the question answering pro-
cess : when selecting the candidate sentences and
when extracting the answers. Improving their re-
liability should then enable us to increase the num-
ber of correct answers after these two steps.
In order to test this strategy, we conducted an
experiment based on the CLEF 2005 FR-EN task,
and the 200 corresponding French questions. We
launched the question answering system on three
question files :
? The first question file (here called English
file) contained the original English questions
(provided by the CLEF organizers). This file
will be considered as a test file, since the re-
sults of our system on this file represent those
that would be reached without translation er-
rors.
? The second file (called Translated file) contai-
ned the translated questions analysis.
? The last file (called Improved file) contained
the same analysis, but for which the question
category and the expected answer type were
replaced by those of the French analysis.
Then we searched for the number of correct ans-
wers for each input question file after the sentence
selection and after the answer extraction. The re-
sults obtained by our system on each file are pre-
sented on Figure 2, Figure 3 and Figure 4. These
figures present the number of questions expecting
a named entity answer, expecting another kind of
answer, and the total number of questions, as well
as the results of our system on each type of ques-
tion : the number of correct questions are given at
the first five ranks, and at the first rank, first for the
sentences (?long answers?) and then for the short
answers.
These results show that the information trans-
fer from the source language to the target lan-
guage significantly improves the system?s results ;
the number of correct answers increases in every
case. It increases from 34 on the translated ques-
tions file to 36 on the improved file, and from 52
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
28
FIG. 2 ? QALC?s results (i.e. number of correct
answers) on the 200 questions
FIG. 3 ? Results on the named entities questions
FIG. 4 ? Results on the non named entities ques-
tions
to 55 for the first 5 ranks. These results are closer
to those of the monolingual system, which returns
41 correct answers at the first rank, and 59 on the
first 5 ranks.
It is interesting to see that the difference bet-
ween the monolingual and the bilingual systems
is less noticeable after the sentence selection step
than after the answer extraction step, which tends
to prove that the last step of our process is more
sensitive to translation errors. Moreover, this expe-
riment shows that this step can be improved thanks
to an information transfer between the source and
the target languages. In order to extend this stra-
tegy, we could also match each French question
term to its English equivalent, in order to trans-
late all the information given by the French analy-
sis into English. Thus, the question analysis errors
would be minimized.
7 Conclusion
The originality of our cross-language question
answering system is to use in parallel the two
most widely used strategies for shifting language,
which enables us to benefit from the advantages
of each strategy. Yet, each method presents draw-
backs, that we tried to evaluate in this article, and
to bypass.
For the term-by-term translation, we make the
most of the question biterms in order to restrict the
possible translation ambiguities. By validating the
biterms in the document collection, we have im-
proved the quality of both the biterms and the mo-
noterms translations. We hope this improvement
will lead to a better selection of the candidate sen-
tences from the documents.
For the question translation, we use the infor-
mation deduced from the source language to avoid
the problems coming from a bad or approximative
translation. This strategy enables us to solve some
of the problems coming from non-grammatical
translations ; matching each term of the French
question with its English equivalent would enable
us to transfer all the information of the French ana-
lysis. But the disambiguation errors of the transla-
tion remain.
References
Kisuh Ahn, Beatrix Alex, Johan Bos, Tiphaine Del-
mas, Jochen L. Leidner, and Matthew B. Smillie.
2004. Cross-lingual question answering with QED.
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
29
In Working Notes, CLEF Cross-Language Evalua-
tion Forum, pages 335?342, Bath, UK.
Ce?sar de Pablo-Sa?nchez, Ana Gonza?lez-Ledesma,
Jose? Luis Mart??nez-Ferna?ndez, Jose? Maria Guirao,
Paloma Martinez, and Antonio Moreno. 2005.
MIRACLE?s 2005 approach to cross-lingual ques-
tion answering. In Working Notes, CLEF Cross-
Language Evaluation Forum, Vienna, Austria.
Olivier Ferret, Brigitte Grau, Martine Hurault-Plantet,
Gabriel Illouz, Christian Jacquemin, Laura Mon-
ceaux, Isabelle Robba, and Anne Vilnat. 2002. How
NLP can improve question answering. Knowledge
Organization, 29(3-4).
Gregory Grefenstette. 1999. The world wide web as
a resource for example-based machine translation
tasks. In ASLIB Conference on Translating and the
Computer, volume 21, London, UK.
Sven Hartrumpf. 2005. University of Hagen at
QA@CLEF 2005 : Extending knowledge and dee-
pening linguistic processing for question answering.
In Working Notes, CLEF Cross-Language Evalua-
tion Forum, Vienna, Austria.
Christian Jacquemin. 1996. A symbolic and surgical
acquisition of terms through variation. Connectio-
nist, Statistical and Symbolic Approaches to Lear-
ning for Natural Language Processing, pages 425?
438.
Valentin Jijkoun, Gilad Mishne, Maarten de Rijke, Ste-
fan Schlobach, David Ahn, and Karin Muller. 2004.
The University of Amsterdam at QA@CLEF2004.
In Working Notes, CLEF Cross-Language Evalua-
tion Forum, pages 321?325, Bath, UK.
Dominique Laurent, Patrick Se?gue?la, and Sophie
Ne`gre. 2005. Cross lingual question answering
using QRISTAL for CLEF 2005. In Working Notes,
CLEF Cross-Language Evaluation Forum, Vienna,
Austria.
Anne-Laure Ligozat, Brigitte Grau, Isabelle Robba,
and Anne Vilnat. 2006. L?extraction des re?ponses
dans un syste`me de question-re?ponse. In Traitement
Automatique des Langues Naturelles (TALN 2006),
Leuven, Belgium.
Gu?nter Neumann and Bogdan Sacaleanu. 2004.
Experiments on robust NL question interpretation
and multi-layered doument annotation for a cross-
language question / answering system. In Working
Notes, CLEF Cross-Language Evaluation Forum,
pages 311?320, Bath, UK.
Gu?nter Neumann and Bogdan Sacaleanu. 2005. DF-
KI?s LT-lab at the CLEF 2005 multiple language
question answering track. In Working Notes, CLEF
Cross-Language Evaluation Forum, Vienna, Aus-
tria.
Laura Perret. 2004. Question answering system for the
French language. In Working Notes, CLEF Cross-
Language Evaluation Forum, pages 295?305, Bath,
UK.
Richard F.E. Sutcliffe, Michael Mulcahy, Igal Gabbay,
Aoife O?Gorman, Kieran White, and Darina Slat-
tery. 2005. Cross-language French-English ques-
tion answering using the DLT system at CLEF 2005.
In Working Notes, CLEF Cross-Language Evalua-
tion Forum, Vienna, Austria.
Hristo Tanev, Matteo Negri, Bernardo Magnini, and
Milen Kouylekov. 2004. The DIOGENE ques-
tion answering system at CLEF-2004. In Working
Notes, CLEF Cross-Language Evaluation Forum,
pages 325?333, Bath UK.
Hristo Tanev, Milen Kouylekov, Bernardo Magnini,
Matteo Negri, and Kiril Simov. 2005. Exploiting
linguistic indices and syntactic structures for multi-
lingual question answering : ITC-irst at CLEF 2005.
In Working Notes, CLEF Cross-Language Evalua-
tion Forum, Vienna, Austria.
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
30
