Automatic Analysis of Plot for Story Rewriting
Harry Halpin
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh, EH8 9LW
Scotland, UK
H.Halpin@ed.ac.uk
Johanna D. Moore
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh, EH8 9LW
Scotland, UK
J.Moore@ed.ac.uk
Judy Robertson
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh EH8 9LW
Scotland, UK
judyr@inf.ed.ac.uk
Abstract
A method for automatic plot analysis of narrative
texts that uses components of both traditional sym-
bolic analysis of natural language and statistical
machine-learning is presented for the story rewrit-
ing task. In the story rewriting task, an exemplar
story is read to the pupils and the pupils rewrite the
story in their own words. This allows them to prac-
tice language skills such as spelling, diction, and
grammar without being stymied by content creation.
Often the pupil improperly recalls the story. Our
method of automatic plot analysis enables the tu-
toring system to automatically analyze the student?s
story for both general coherence and specific miss-
ing events.
1 Introduction
StoryStation is an intelligent tutoring system cre-
ated to provide personalized attention and detailed
feedback to children ages 10-12 on their writing
(Roberston and Wiemar-Hastings, 2002). Writing
is viewed as a skill-based task, with skills being
elements of writing such as spelling, diction, and
plot development. Each writing skill is associated
with an animated agent that provides online help.
Evaluations of StoryStation show that children en-
joy the personalized encouragement and construc-
tive comments that StoryStation provides (Robert-
son and Cross, 2003). StoryStation was designed
by researchers in conjunction with two teachers and
a group of students. However, both students and
teachers indicated StoryStation would be signifi-
cantly improved if it were enhanced with an agent
that could give feedback about the plot of a story.
Here we describe how techniques from symbolic
natural language processing and statistical machine-
learning were used to tackle the problem of auto-
mated plot analysis for StoryStation.
2 The Story Rewriting Task
In the story rewriting task, pupils rewrite a story in
their own words, allowing them to focus on their
writing ability instead of plot formulation. This task
is currently used in Scottish schools and thus it was
chosen to be the first feature of the plot analysis
agent. We collected a corpus of 103 stories rewritten
by children from classes at primary schools in Scot-
land. Pupils were told a story, an exemplar story,
by a storyteller and were asked to rewrite the story
in their own words.1 The automated plot analysis
program must be able to give a general rating of the
quality of the rewritten story?s plot and be able to
determine missing or incorrect events. The general
rating can be used by the teacher to find out which
pupils are in need of attention, while the more spe-
cific details can be used by an animated agent in
StoryStation to remind the student of specific events
and characters they have forgotten or misused.
3 Plot Ratings
The stories were rated for plot by three different
raters. A story-teller (Rater B) ranked all of the sto-
ries. Two others (Rater A, a teacher, and Rater C)
ranked the stories as well, although Rater A ranked
only half. The following scale, devised by a teacher
with over forty years of experience, was used.
1. Excellent: An excellent story shows that the
reader understands the ?point? of the story and
should demonstrate some deep understanding
of the plot. The pupil should be able to retrieve
all the important links and, not all the details,
but the right details.
2. Good: A good story shows that the pupil was
listening to the story, and can recall the main
1The exemplar story used in our corpus was ?Nils? Ad-
venture,? a story from ?The Wonderful Adventures of Nils?
(Lagerloff, 1907).
Class Probability Number of Class
1 (Excellent) 0.175 18
2 (Good) 0.320 33
3 (Fair) 0.184 19
4 (Poor) 0.320 33
Table 1: Distribution of Story Ratings
events and links in the plot. However, the
pupil shows no deeper understanding of the
plot, which can often be detected by the pupil
leaving out an important link or emphasizing
the wrong details.
3. Fair: A fair story shows that the pupil is miss-
ing more than one link or chunk of the story,
and not only lacks an understanding of the
?point? but also lacks recall of vital parts of
the story. A fair story does not really flow.
4. Poor: A poor story has definite problems with
recall of events, and is missing substantial
amount of the plot. Characters will be misiden-
tified and events confused. Often the child
writes on the wrong subject or starts off recit-
ing only the beginning of the story.
Rater B and Rater A had an agreement of 39%
while Rater B and Rater C had an agreement of
77%. However, these numbers are misleading as the
rating scale is ordinal and almost all the disagree-
ments were the result of grading a story either one
rank better or worse. In particular Rater A usually
marked incomplete stories as poor while the other
raters assigned partial credit. To evaluate the relia-
bility of the grades both Cronbach?s ? and Kendall?s
?b were used, since these statistics take into account
ordinal scales and inter-rater reliability. Between
Rater A and B there was a Cronbach?s ? statistic
of .86 and a Kendall?s ?b statistic of .72. Between
Rater B and C there was a Cronbach?s ? statistic
of .93 and Kendall?s ?b statistic of .82. These statis-
tics show our rating scheme to be fairly reliable. As
the most qualified expert to rate all the stories, Rater
B?s ratings were used as the gold standard. The dis-
tribution of plot ratings are given in Table 1.
4 A Minimal Event Calculus
The most similar discourse analysis program to the
one needed by StoryStation is the essay-grading
component of ?Criterion? by ETS technologies
(Burstein et al, 2003), which is designed to anno-
tate parts of an essay according to categories such
as ?Thesis, ?Main Points,? ?Support,? and ?Con-
clusion.? Burstein et. al. (2003) uses Rhetorical
Structure Theory to parse the text into discourse re-
lations based on satellites and nuclei connected by
rhetorical relations. Moore and Pollack (1992) note
that Rhetorical Structure Theory conflates the infor-
mational (the information being conveyed) and in-
tentional (the effects on the reader?s beliefs or atti-
tudes) levels of discourse. Narratives are primarily
informational, and so tend to degenerate to long se-
quences of elaboration or sequence relations. Since
in the story rewriting task the students are attempt-
ing to convey information about the narrative, un-
like the primarily persuasive task of an essay, our
system focuses on the informational level as embod-
ied by a simplified event calculus. Another tutoring
system similar to ours is the WHY physics tutoring
system (Rose et al, 2002).
We formulate only three categories to describe
stories: events, event names, and entities. This for-
mulation keeps the categories from being arbitrary
or exploding in number. Entities are both animate
characters, such as ?elves? and ?storks,? and inani-
mate objects like ?sand? and ?weather.? Nouns are
the most common type of entities. Events are com-
posed of the relationships among entities, such as
?the boy becomes an elf,? which is composed of a
?boy? and ?elf? interacting via ?becoming,? which
we call the event name. This is because the use
of such verbs is an indicator of the presence of an
event in the story. In this manner events are relation-
ships labeled with an event name, and entities are
arguments to these relationships as in propositional
logic. Together these can form events such as be-
come(boy,elf), and this formulation maps partially
onto Shanahan?s event calculus which has been
used in other story-understanding models (Mueller,
2003). The key difference between an event calcu-
lus and a collection of propositions is that time is
explicitly represented in the event calculus.
Each story consists of a group of events that are
present in the story, e1...eh. Each event consists of
an event name, a time variable t, and a set of enti-
ties arranged in an ordered set n1...na. An event
must contain one and only one event name. The
event names are usually verbs, while the entities
tend to be, but are not exclusively, nouns. Time is
made explicit through a variable t. Normally, the
Shanahan event calculus has a series of predicates
to deal with relations of achievements, accomplish-
ments, and other types of temporal relations (Shana-
han, 1997), however our calculus does not use these
since it is difficult to extract these from ungrammati-
cal raw text automatically. A story?s temporal order
is a partial ordering of events as denoted by their
time variable t. When incorporating a set of entities
into an event, a superscript is used to keep the enti-
ties distinct, as n13 is entity 1 in event 3. An entity
may appear in multiple events, such as entity 1 ap-
pearing in event 3 (n13) and in event 5 (n15). The plot
of a story can then be considered an event structure
of the following form if it has h events:
e1(t1, (n11, n21, ...na1)), ...., eh(th, (n2h, n4h...nch))
Where time t1 ? t2 ? ...th. An example from a
rewritten story is ?Nils found a coin and he walked
round a sandy beach. He talked to the stork. Asked
a question.? This is represented by an event struc-
ture as:
find(t = 1(Nils, coin)),
walk(t = 1, (Nils, sand, beach)),
talk(t = 2, (stork, Nils)),
ask(t = 3, (question))
Note that the rewritten stories are often ungram-
matical. A sentence may map onto one, multiple, or
no events. Two stories match if they are composed
of the same ordering of events.
5 Extracting the Event Calculus
The event calculus can be extracted from raw text
by layering NLP modules using an XML-based
pipeline. Our main constraint was that the text of the
pupil was rarely grammatical, restricting our choice
of NLP components to those that did not require a
correct parse or were in any other ways dependent
on grammatical sentences. At each level of process-
ing, an XML-enabled natural language processing
component can add mark-up to the text, and use any
mark-up that the previous components made. All
layers in the pipeline are fully automatic. For our
pipeline we used LT-TTT (Language Technology
Text Tokenization Toolkit) (Grover et al, 2000).
Once words are tokenized and sentence boundaries
detected by LT-TTT, LT-POS tags the words using
the Penn Treebank tag-set without parsing the sen-
tences. While a full parse could be generated by a
statistical parser, such parses would likely be incor-
rect for the ungrammatical sentences often gener-
ated by the pupils (Charniak, 2000). Pronouns are
resolved using a cascading rule-based approach di-
rectly inspired by the CogNIAC algorithm (Bald-
win, 1997) with two variations. First, it resolves in
distinct cascades for singular and then plural pro-
nouns. Second, it resolves using only the Cog-
NIAC rules that can be determined using Penn Tree-
bank tags. The words are lemmatized using an aug-
mented version of the SCOL Toolset and sentences
are chunked using the Cass Chunker (Abney, 1995).
There is a trade-off between this chunking approach
that works on ungrammatical sentences and one that
requires a full parse such as those using dependency
grammars. The Cass Chunker is highly precise,
but often inaccurate and misses relations and enti-
ties that are not in a chunk. In its favor, those tu-
ples in chunks that it does identify are usually cor-
rect. SCOL extracts tuples from the chunks to deter-
mine the presence of events, and the remaining ele-
ments in the chunk are inspected via rules for enti-
ties. Time is explicitly identified using a variation of
the ?now point? algorithm (Allen, 1987). We map
each event?s time variable to a time-line, assuming
that events occur in the order in which they appear
in the text. While temporal ordering of events is
hard (Mani and Wilson, 2003), given that children
of this age tend to use a single tense throughout the
narrative and that in narratives events are presented
in order (Hickmann, 2003), this simple algorithm
should suffice for ordering in the domain of chil-
dren?s stories.
6 Plot Comparison Algorithm
Since the story rewriting task involves imperfect re-
call, story events will likely be changed or left out
by the pupil. The story rewriting task involves the
students choosing their own diction and expressing
their own unique mastery of language, so variation
in how the fundamental elements of the story are
rewritten is to be expected. To deal with these is-
sues, an algorithm had to be devised that takes the
event structure of the rewritten story and compares
it to the event structure of the exemplar story, while
disregarding the particularities of diction and gram-
mar. The problem is one of credit allocation for the
similarity of rewritten events to the exemplar event.
The words used in the events of the two story mod-
els may differ. The exemplar story model might
use the event see(Nils,stork), but a rewritten story
may use the word ?bird? instead of the more precise
word ?stork.? However, since the ?bird? is refer-
ring to the stork in the exemplar story, partial credit
should be assigned. A plot comparison algorithm
was created that uses abstract event calculus repre-
sentations of plot and the text of the rewritten story,
taking into account temporal order and word simi-
larity. The exemplar story?s event structure is cre-
ated by applying the event extraction pipeline to the
storyteller?s transcript.
The Plot Comparison Algorithm is given in Fig-
ure 1. In the pseudo-code, E of size h and R of size
j are the event structures of the exemplar story and
rewritten story respectively, with the names of each
of their events denoted as e and r. The set of entities
of each event are denoted as Ne and Nr respectively.
T is the lemmatized tokens of the rewritten story?s
raw text. WordNet(x) denotes the synset of x. The
?now point? of the rewritten story is t, and feature
set is f , which has an index of i. The index i is
incremented every time f is assigned a value. 1 de-
notes an exact match, 2 a WordNet synset match, 3
a match in the text, and 0 a failure to find any match.
The Plot Comparison Algorithm essentially iter-
ates through the exemplar story looking for matches
of the events in the rewritten story. To find if two
events are in or out of order the rewritten story has
a ?now point? that serves as the beginning of its it-
eration. Each event of the event structure of the ex-
emplar story is matched against each event of the
rewritten story starting at the ?now point? and us-
ing the exact text of the event name. If that match
fails a looser match is attempted by giving the event
names of the rewritten story to WordNet and see-
ing if a match to the resultant synset succeeds (Fell-
baum, 1998). If either match attempt succeeds, the
algorithm attempts to match entities in the same
fashion and the ?now point? of the rewritten story
is incremented. Thus the algorithm does not looks
back in the rewritten story for a match. If the event
match fails, one last attempt is made by checking
the event name or entity against every lemmatized
token in the entire rewritten text. If this fails, a fail-
ure is recorded. The results of the algorithm are can
be used as a feature set for machine-learning. The
event calculus extraction pipeline and the Plot Com-
parison Algorithm can produce event calculus rep-
resentations of any English text and compare them.
They have been tested on other stories that do not
have a significant corpus of rewritten stories. The
number of events for an average rewritten story in
our corpus was 26, with each event having an aver-
age of 1 entity.
Included in Figure 2 is sample output from our
algorithm given the exemplar story model ea and a
rewritten story rb whose text is as follows: Nils took
the coin and tossed it away, cause it was worthless.
A city appeared and so he walked in. Everywhere
was gold and the merchant said Buy this Only one
coin Nils has no coin. So he went to get the coin he
threw away but the city vanished just like that right
behind him. Nils asked the bird Hey where the city
go? Let?s go home.
Due to space limitations, we only display selected
events from the transcript and their most likely
match from the rewritten story in Figure 2. The out-
put of the feature set would be the concatenation in
order of every value of fe.
Algorithm
6.1: PLOTCOMPARE(E, R, T )
t? 1
i? 0
for ex ? e1 to eh
do for ry ? rt to rj
do
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
if ex = ry
then fi ? 1 and t? t + 1
else if ex ? WORDNET(ry)
then fi ? 2 and t? t + 1
if fi = 1 or 2
then
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
for each n ? Ne
if n ? N r
then fi ? 1
else if n ? WORDNET(Nr)
then fi ? 2
else if n ? T
then fi ? 3
else fi ? 0
else if ex ? T
then fi ? 3
else fi ? 0
Figure 1: Plot Comparison Algorithm
ea rb fe
throw(Nils, coin) toss(coin) 2, 3, 1
see(Nils, city) appear(city) 0, 3, 3
enter(Nils, city) walk(Nils) 0, 3, 3
ask(Nils, merchant) say(merchant) 0, 3, 3
say(Nils) say(merchant) 1, 3
leave(Nils) go(Nils) 2, 1
disappear(city) vanish(city) 2, 1
inquire(Nils, stork) ask(Nils, bird) 2, 1, 2
fly(stork) go(home) 0, 3
Figure 2: Example of Plot Algorithm
7 Learning the Significance of Events
Machine-learning is crucial to our experiment, as it
will allow our model to discriminate what events
and words in a rewritten story are good predictors
of plot quality as rated by a human expert. We
have restricted our feature set to the results of the
Plot Comparison Algorithm and LSA scores, as we
describe below. Other possible features, such as
the grammatical correctness and the number of con-
junctives, are dealt with by other agents in StoryS-
tation. We are focusing on plot recall quality as
opposed to general writing quality. Two different
machine-learning algorithms with differing assump-
tions were used. These are by no means exhaus-
tive of the options, and extensive tests have been
done with other algorithms. Further experiments
are needed to understand the precise nature of the
relations between the feature set and machine learn-
ing algorithms. All results were created by ten-fold
cross validation over the rated stories, which is es-
pecially important given our small corpus size.
7.1 Nearest Neighbors using LSA
We can classify the stories without using the re-
sults of the Plot Comparison Algorithm, and instead
use only their statistical attributes. Latent Semantic
Analysis (LSA) provides an approximation of ?se-
mantic? similarity based on the hypothesis that the
semantics of a word can be deduced from its context
in an entire document, leading to useful coherency
scores when whole documents are compared (Foltz
et al, 1998). LSA compares the text of each rewrit-
ten story in the corpus for similarity to the transcript
of the exemplar story in a subspace produced by
reducing the dimensionality of the TASA 12 grade
USA reading-level to 200. This dimensionality was
discovered through experimentation to be our prob-
lem?s optimal parameters for LSA given the range
of choices originally used by Landauer (1997). The
stories can be easily classified by grouping them to-
gether based on LSA similarity scores alone, and
this technique is embodied in the simple K-Nearest
Neighbors (K-NN) learner. K-NN makes no para-
metric assumptions about the data and uses no for-
mal symbolic features other than an LSA similarity
score. For K-NN k = 4 gave the best results over
a large range of k, and we expect this k would be
ideal for stories of similar length.
As shown in Table 2, despite its simplicity this al-
gorithm performs fairly well. It is not surprising that
features based primarily on word distributions such
as LSA could correctly discriminate the non-poor
from the poor rewritten stories. Some good rewrit-
ten stories closely resemble the exemplar story al-
most word for word, and so share the same word
distribution with the exemplar story. Poor rewritten
stories usually have little resemblance to the exem-
plar story, and so have a drastically different word
distribution. The high spread of error in classifying
stories is shown in the confusion matrix in Table 3.
This leads to unacceptable errors such as excellent
stories being classified as poor stories.
7.2 Hybrid Model with Naive Bayes
By using both LSA scores and event structures as
features for a statistical machine learner, a hybrid
model of plot rating can be created. In hybrid mod-
Class Precision Recall F-score
1 (Excellent) 0.11 0.17 0.13
2 (Good) 0.42 0.46 0.44
3 (Fair) 0.30 0.16 0.21
4 (Poor) 0.83 0.76 0.79
Table 2: K-Nearest Neighbors Precision and Recall
Class 1 2 3 4
1 (Excellent) 3 10 4 1
2 (Good) 13 15 2 3
3 (Fair) 9 6 3 1
4 (Poor) 2 5 1 25
Table 3: K-Nearest Neighbors: Confusion Matrix
els a formal symbolic model (the event calculus-
based results of a Plot Comparison Algorithm) en-
ters a mutually beneficial relationship with a statis-
tical model of the data (LSA), mediated by a ma-
chine learner (Naive Bayes). One way to combine
LSA similarity scores and the results of the event
structure is by using the Naive Bayes (NB) ma-
chine learner. NB makes the assumptions of both
parametrization and Conditional Independence.
The recall and precision per rank is given in Ta-
ble 4, and it is clear that while no stories are clas-
sified as excellent at all, the majority of good and
poor stories are identified correctly. As shown by
the confusion matrix in Table 5, NB does not de-
tect excellent stories and it collapses the distinction
between good and excellent stories. Compared to
K-NN with LSA, NB shows less spread in its er-
rors, although it does confuse some poor stories as
good and one excellent story as fair. Even though
it mistakenly classifies some poor stories as good,
for many teachers this is better than misidentifying
a good story as a poor story.
The raw accuracy results over all classes of the
machine learning algorithms are summarized in Ta-
ble 6. Note that average human rater agreement
is the average agreement between Rater A and C
(whose agreement ranged from 39% to 77%), since
Rater B?s ratings were used as the gold standard.
This average also assumes Rater A would have con-
tinued marking at the same accuracy for the com-
Class Precision Recall F-Score
1 (Excellent) 0.00 0.00 0.00
2 (Good) 0.43 0.88 0.58
3 (Fair) 0.45 0.26 0.33
4 (Poor) 0.92 0.67 0.77
Table 4: Naive Bayes Precision and Recall
Class 1 2 3 4
1 (Excellent) 0 17 1 0
2 (Good) 1 29 2 1
3 (Fair) 0 13 5 1
4 (Poor) 0 8 3 22
Table 5: Naive Bayes Confusion Matrix
Machine Learner Percentage Correct
K-NN (LSA) 44.66%
ID3 DT (Events) 40.78%
NB (LSA + Events) 54.37%
Rater Agreement 58.37%
Table 6: Machine Learner Comparison
plete corpus. DT refers to an ID3 Decision Tree
algorithm that creates a purely symbolic machine-
learner whose feature set was only the results of the
Plot Comparison Algorithm (Quinlan, 1986). It per-
formed worse than K-NN and thus the details are
not reported any further. Using NB and combining
the LSA scores with the results of the Plot Com-
parison Algorithm produces better raw performance
than K-NN. Recall of 54% for NB may seem dis-
appointing, but given that the raters only have an
average agreement of 58%, the performance of the
machine learner is reasonable. So if the machine-
learner had a recall of 75% it would be suspect.
Statistics to compare the results given the ordinal
nature of our rating scheme are shown in Table 7.
8 Discussion
From these experiments as shown in Table 6 we
see that the type of machine learner and the par-
ticular features are important to correctly classify
children?s stories. Inspection of the results shows
that separating good and excellent stories from poor
stories is best performed by Naive Bayes. For our
application, teachers have indicated that the classi-
fication of an excellent or good story as a poor one
is considered worse than the classifying of a fair
or even poor story as good. Moreover, it uses the
event-based results of the Plot Comparison Algo-
rithm so that the agent in StoryStation may use these
results to inform the student what precise events and
entities are missing or misused. NB is fast enough to
provide possible feedback in real time and its abil-
ity to separate poor stories from good and excellent
stories would allow it to be used in classrooms. It
also has comparable raw accuracy to average human
agreement as shown in Table 6, although it makes
more errors than humans in classifying a story off
by more than one class off as shown by the statistics
Machine Learner Cronbach?s ? Kendall?s ?b
NB to Rater B .78 .59
Rater A to Rater B .86 .72
Rater C to Rater B .93 .82
Table 7: Statistical Comparison
in Table 7. The results most in its favor are shown
highlighted in Table 5. It separates with few errors
both excellent and good stories from the majority of
poor stories.
While the event calculus captures some of the rel-
evant defining characteristics of stories, it does not
capture all of them. The types of stories that give the
machine learners the most difficulty are those which
are excellent and fair. One reason is that these sto-
ries are less frequent in the training data than poor
and good stories. Another reason is that there are
features particular to these stories that are not ac-
counted for by an event structure or LSA. Both ex-
cellent stories and fair stories rely on very subtle
features to distinguish them from good and poor sto-
ries. Good stories were characterized in the rating
criteria as ?parroting off of the main events,? and
the event calculus naturally is good at identifying
this. Poor stories have ?definite problems with the
recall of events,? and so are also easily identified.
However, fair stories show both a lack of ?under-
standing of the point? and ?do not really flow? while
the excellent story shows an ?understanding of the
point.? These characteristics involve relations such
as the ?point? of the story and connections between
events. These ideas of ?flow? and ?point? are much
more difficult to analyze automatically.
9 Conclusion
Due to its practical focus, the plot analysis of our
system is very limited in nature, focusing on just
the story rewriting task. Traditionally ?deep? rep-
resentation systems have attempted to be powerful
general-purpose story understanding or generation
systems. A general plot analysis agent would be
more useful than our current system, which is suc-
cessful by virtue of the story rewriting task being
less complex than full story understanding. How-
ever, our system fulfills an immediate need in the
StoryStation application, in contrast to more tra-
ditional story-understanding and story-generation
systems, which are usually used as testing grounds
for theoretical ideas in artificial intelligence. The
system was tested and developed using a small man-
ually collected corpus of a single rewritten story.
While previous researchers who worked on this
problem felt that the small size of the corpus made
machine-learning unusable, the results shows that
with careful feature selection and relatively simple
algorithms empirical methods can be made to work.
We expect that our technique can be generalized to
larger corpora of diverse types.
Our hybrid system uses both LSA and event
structures to classify plot quality. The use of event
structures in classifying stories allows us to de-
tect whether particular crucial characters and events
have been left out of the rewritten story. Separating
the students who have written good plots from those
who have done so poorly is a boon to the teachers,
since often it is the students who have the most dif-
ficulty with plot that are least likely to ask a teacher
for help. StoryStation is now being used in two
schools as part of their classroom writing instruc-
tion over the course of the next year. Results from
this study will be instrumental in shaping the future
of the plot analysis system in StoryStation and the
expansion of the current system into a general pur-
pose plot analysis system for other writing tasks.
References
Steven Abney. 1995. Chunks and dependencies:
Bringing processing evidence to bear on syntax.
In Jennifer Cole, Georgia Green, and Jerry Mor-
gan, editors, Computational Linguistics and the
Foundations of Linguistic Theory, pages 145?
164.
James Allen. 1987. Natural Language Understand-
ing. Menlo Park, CA, Benjamin/Cummings Pub-
lishing.
Breck Baldwin. 1997. CogNIAC : A High Preci-
sion Pronoun Resolution Engine.
Jill Burstein, Daniel Marcu, and Kevin Knight.
2003. Finding the WRITE Stuff: Automatic
Identification of Discourse Structure in Student
Essays. IEEE Intelligent Systems, pages 32?39.
Eugene Charniak. 2000. A Maximum-Entropy In-
spired Parser. In Proceedings of the North Amer-
ican Association for Computational Linguistics.
Christine Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Peter Foltz, Walter Kintsch, and Thomas Landauer.
1998. The measurement of textual coherence
with Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse Pro-
cesses, 25(2&3):285?307.
Claire Grover, Colin Matheson, Andrei Mikheev,
and Marc Moens. 2000. LT TTT - A Flexible
Tokenisation Tool. In Proceedings of the Second
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference.
Maya Hickmann. 2003. Children?s Discourse: per-
son, space and time across language. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Selma Lagerloff. 1907. The Wonderful Adventures
of Nils. Doubleday, Page, and Company, Garden
City, New York.
Thomas. Landauer and Susan Dumais. 1997. A so-
lution to Plato?s problem: The Latent Semantic
Analysis theory of the acquisition, induction, and
representation of knowledge. Psychological Re-
view.
I. Mani and G. Wilson. 2003. Robust temporal pro-
cessing of the news. In In Proceedings of Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Johanna D. Moore and Martha Pollack. 1992.
A problem for RST: The need for multi-level
discourse analysis. Computational Linguistics,
18(4):537?544.
Erik T. Mueller. 2003. Story understanding
through multi-representation model construction.
In Graeme Hirst and Sergei Nirenburg, editors,
Text Meaning: Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL
2003 Workshop, pages 46?53, East Stroudsburg,
PA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ross Quinlan. 1986. Induction of decision trees. In
Machine Learning, volume 1. Kluwer Academic
Press.
Judy Roberston and Peter Wiemar-Hastings. 2002.
Feedback on children?s stories via multiple inter-
face agents. In International Conference on In-
telligent Tutoring Systems, Biarritz, France.
Judy Robertson and Beth Cross. 2003. Children?s
perceptions about writing with their teacher and
the StoryStation learning environment. Narrative
and Interactive Learning Environments: Special
Issue of International Journal of Continuing En-
gineering Education and Life-long Learning.
C. Rose, D. Bhembe, A. Roque, S. Siler, R. Srivas-
tava, and K. VanLehn. 2002. A hybrid language
understanding approach for robust selection of tu-
toring goals. In International Conference on In-
telligent Tutoring Systems, Biarritz, France.
Murray Shanahan. 1997. Solving the Frame Prob-
lem. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
