Compiling French-Japanese Terminologies from the Web 
 
Xavier Robitaille?, Yasuhiro Sasaki?, Masatsugu Tonoike?,  
Satoshi Sato? and Takehito Utsuro? 
?Graduate School of Informatics, 
Kyoto University 
Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, 
Kyoto 606-8501 Japan 
?Graduate School of Engineering, 
Nagoya University 
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, 
Nagoya 464-8603 Japan 
{xavier, sasaki, tonoike, utsuro}@pine.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp, 
ssato@nuee.nagoya-u.ac.jp 
 
Abstract 
We propose a method for compiling bi-
lingual terminologies of multi-word 
terms (MWTs) for given translation pairs 
of seed terms. Traditional methods for bi-
lingual terminology compilation exploit 
parallel texts, while the more recent ones 
have focused on comparable corpora. We 
use bilingual corpora collected from the 
web and tailor made for the seed terms. 
For each language, we extract from the 
corpus a set of MWTs pertaining to the 
seed?s semantic domain, and use a com-
positional method to align MWTs from 
both sets. We increase the coverage of 
our system by using thesauri and by ap-
plying a bootstrap method. Experimental 
results show high precision and indicate 
promising prospects for future develop-
ments.  
1 Introduction 
Bilingual terminologies have been the center of 
much interest in computational linguistics. Their 
applications in machine translation have proven 
quite effective, and this has fuelled research aim-
ing at automating terminology compilation. Early 
developments focused on their extraction from 
parallel corpora (Daille et al (1994), Fung 
(1995)), which works well but is limited by the 
scarcity of such resources. Recently, the focus 
has changed to utilizing comparable corpora, 
which are easier to obtain in many domains. 
Most of the proposed methods use the fact that 
words have comparable contexts across lan-
guages. Fung (1998) and Rapp (1999) use so 
called context vector methods to extract transla-
tions of general words. Chiao and Zweigenbaum 
(2002) and D?jean and Gaussier (2002) apply 
similar methods to technical domains. Daille and 
Morin (2005) use specialized comparable cor-
pora to extract translations of multi-word terms 
(MWTs).  
These methods output a few thousand terms 
and yield a precision of more or less 80% on the 
first 10-20 candidates. We argue for the need for 
systems that output fewer terms, but with a 
higher precision. Moreover, all the above were 
conducted on language pairs including English. 
It would be possible, albeit more difficult, to ob-
tain comparable corpora for pairs such as 
French-Japanese. We will try to remove the need 
to gather corpora beforehand altogether. To 
achieve this, we use the web as our only source 
of data. This idea is not new, and has already 
been tried by Cao and Li (2002) for base noun 
phrase translation. They use a compositional 
method to generate a set of translation candidates 
from which they select the most likely translation 
by using empirical evidence from the web.  
The method we propose takes a translation 
pair of seed terms in input. First, we collect 
MWTs semantically similar to the seed in each 
language. Then, we work out the alignments be-
tween the MWTs in both sets. Our intuition is 
that both seeds have the same related terms 
across languages, and we believe that this will 
simplify the alignment process. The alignment is 
done by generating a set of translation candidates 
using a compositional method, and by selecting 
the most probable translation from that set. It is 
very similar to Cao and Li?s, except in two re-
spects. First, the generation makes use of 
thesauri to account for lexical divergence be-
tween MWTs in the source and target language. 
Second, we validate candidate translations using 
a set of terms collected from the web, rather than 
using empirical evidence from the web as a 
whole. Our research further differs from Cao and 
Li?s in that they focus only on finding valid 
translations for given base noun phrases. We at-
tempt to both collect appropriate sets of related 
MWTs and to find their respective translations. 
The initial output of the system contains 9.6 
pairs on average, and has a precision of 92%.  
We use this high precision as a bootstrap to 
augment the set of Japanese related terms, and 
obtain a final output of 19.6 pairs on average, 
with a precision of 81%. 
2 Related Term Collection 
Given a translation pair of seed terms (sf, sj), we 
use a search engine to gather a set F of French 
terms related to sf, and a set J of Japanese terms 
related to sj. The methods applied for both lan-
guages use the framework proposed by Sato and 
Sasaki (2003), outlined in Figure 1. We proceed 
in three steps: corpus collection, automatic term 
recognition (ATR), and filtering.   
2.1 Corpus Collection 
For each language, we collect a corpus C from 
web pages by selecting passages that contain the 
seed. 
Web page collection 
In French, we use Google to find relevant web 
pages by entering the following three queries: 
?sf?, ?sf est? (sf is), and ?sf sont? (sf are). In Japa-
nese, we do the same with queries ?sj?, ?sj???, 
?sj??, ?sj????, and ?sj??, where ?? toha, 
? ha, ??? toiu, and ? no are Japanese func-
tional words that are often used for defining or 
explaining a term. We retrieve the top pages for 
each query, and parse those pages looking for 
hyperlinks whose anchor text contain the seed. If 
such links exist, we retrieve the linked pages as 
well. 
Sentence extraction 
From the retrieved web pages, we remove html 
tags and other noise. Then, we keep only prop-
erly structured sentences containing the seed, as 
well as the preceding and following sentences ? 
that is, we use a window of three sentences 
around the seed. 
2.2 Automatic Term Recognition 
The next step is to extract candidate related terms 
from the corpus. Because the sentences compos-
ing the corpus are related to the seed, the same 
should be true for the terms they contain. The 
process of extracting terms is highly language 
dependent. 
French ATR 
We use the C-value method (Frantzi and 
Ananiadou (2003)), which extracts compound 
terms and ranks them according to their term-
hood. It consists of a linguistic part, followed by 
a statistical part. 
The linguistic part consists in applying a lin-
guistic filter to constrain the structure of terms 
extracted. We base our filter on a morphosyntac-
tic pattern for the French language proposed by 
Daille et al It defines the structure of multi-word 
units (MWUs) that are likely to be terms. Al-
though their work focused on MWUs limited to 
two content words (nouns, adjectives, verbs or 
adverbs), we extend our filter to MWUs of 
greater length. The pattern is defined as follows: 
( ) ( )( )+NumNounDetPrepAdjNumNoun ?  
The statistical part measures the termhood of 
each compound that matches the linguistic pat-
tern. It is given by the C-value:  
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
??
??
?
??
??
?
?
??
?
?
?
??
?
?
?
?=?
?
?
otherwise
T
b
aaa
nestednotisaif
aa
a
a
Tb a
P
f
f)f(log
,
flog
valueC
2
2
 
where a is the candidate string, f(a) is its fre-
quency of occurrence in all the web pages re-
trieved, Ta is the set of extracted candidate terms 
that contain a, and P(Ta) is the number of these 
candidate terms. 
The nature of our variable length pattern is 
such that if a long compound matches the pat-
tern, all the shorter compounds it includes also 
match. For example, consider the N-Prep-N-
 
 
 
related term sets 
(F, J)
 the  Web ATR 
Filtering 
 
 Corpus collection 
corpora 
(Cf, Cj) 
 
term sets 
(Xf, Xj) 
seed terms
(sf, sj) 
Figure 1: Related term collection 
Prep-N structure in syst?me ? base de connais-
sances (knowledge based system). The shorter 
candidate syst?me ? base (based system) also 
matches, although we would prefer not to extract 
it. 
Fortunately, the strength of the C-value is the 
way it effectively handles nested MWTs. When 
we calculate the termhood of a string, we sub-
tract from its total frequency its frequency as a 
substring of longer candidate terms. In other 
words, a shorter compound that almost always 
appears nested in a longer compound will have a 
comparatively smaller C-value, even if its total 
frequency is higher than that of the longer com-
pound. Hence, we discard MWTs whose C-value 
is smaller than that of a longer candidate term in 
which it is nested. 
Japanese ATR 
Because compound nouns represent the bulk of 
Japanese technical MWTs, we extract them as 
candidate related terms. As opposed to Sato and 
Sasaki, we ignore single nouns. Also, we do not 
limit the number of candidates output by ATR as 
they did.  
2.3 Filtering 
Finally, from the output set of ATR, we select 
only the technical terms that are part of the 
seed?s semantic domain. Numerous measures 
have been proposed to gauge the semantic simi-
larity between two words (van Rijsbergen 
(1979)). We choose the Jaccard coefficient, 
which we calculate based on search engine hit 
counts. The similarity between a seed term s and 
a candidate term x is given by: ( )
( )xsH
xsHJac ?
?=  
where H(s ? x) is the hit count of pages contain-
ing both s and x, and H(s ? x) is the hit count of 
pages containing s or x. The latter can be calcu-
lated as follows: 
( ) ( ) ( )xsHxHsHxsH ??+=? )(  
Candidates that have a high enough coefficient 
are considered related terms of the seed.  
3 Term Alignment 
Once we have collected related terms in both 
French and Japanese, we must link the terms in 
the source language to the terms in the target 
language. Our alignment procedure is twofold. 
First, we first generate Japanese translation can-
didates for each collected French term. Second, 
we select the most likely translation(s) from the 
set of candidates. This is similar to the genera-
tion and selection procedures used in the litera-
ture (Baldwin and Tanaka (2004), Cao and Li, 
Langkilde and Knight (1998)). 
3.1 Translation Candidates Generation 
Translation candidates are generated using a 
compositional method, which can be divided in 
three steps. First, we decompose the French 
MWTs into combinations of shorter MWU ele-
ments. Second, we look up the elements in bilin-
gual dictionaries. Third, we recompose transla-
tion candidates by generating different combina-
tions of translated elements. 
Decomposition 
In accordance with Daille et al, we define the 
length of a MWU as the number of content 
words it contains. Let n be the length of the 
MWT to decompose. We produce all the combi-
nations of MWU elements of length less or equal 
to n. For example, consider the French transla-
tion of ?knowledge based system?: 
It has a length of three and yields the following 
four combinations1: 
Note the treatment given to the prepositions 
and determiners: we leave them in place when 
they are interposed between content words 
within elements, otherwise we remove them. 
Dictionary Lookup 
We look up each element in bilingual dictionar-
ies. Because some words appear in their inflected 
forms, we use their lemmata. In the example 
given above, we look up connaissance (lemma) 
rather than connaissances (inflected). Note that 
we do not lemmatize MWUs such as base de 
connaissances. This is due to the complexity of 
gender and number agreements of French com-
pounds. However, only a small part of the 
MWTs are collected in their inflected forms, and 
French-Japanese bilingual dictionaries do not 
contain that many MWTs to begin with. The per-
formance hit should therefore be minor.  
Already at this stage, we can anticipate prob-
lems arising from the insufficient coverage of 
                                                 
1 A MWT of length n produces 2n-1 combinations, 
including itself. 
syst?me ? base de connaissances
Noun Prep Noun Prep Noun 
[syst?me ? [base de [connaissances]
[syst?me]  [base de [connaissances]
[syst?me ? [base]  [connaissances]
[syst?me]  [base]  [connaissances]
French-Japanese lexicon resources. Bilingual 
dictionaries may not have enough entries, and  
existing entries may not include a great variety of 
translations for every sense. The former problem 
has no easy solution, and is one of the reasons 
we are conducting this research. The latter can be 
partially remedied by using thesauri ? we aug-
ment each element?s translation set by looking 
up in thesauri all the translations obtained with 
bilingual dictionaries. 
Recomposition 
To recompose the translation candidates, we 
simply generate all suitable combinations of 
translated elements for each decomposition. The 
word order is inverted to take into account the 
different constraints in French and Japanese. In 
the example above, if the lookup phase gave {?
? chishiki}, {?? dodai, ??? besu} and {?
? taikei, ???? shisutemu} as respective 
translation sets for syst?me, base and connais-
sance, the fourth decomposition given above 
would yield the following candidates: 
connaissance base syst?me 
?? ?? ?? 
?? ?? ????
?? ??? ?? 
?? ??? ????
If we do not find any translation for one of the 
elements, the generation fails. 
3.2 Translation Selection  
Selection consists of picking the most likely 
translation from the translation candidates we 
have generated. To discern the likely from the 
unlikely, we use the empirical evidence provided 
by the set of Japanese terms related to the seed. 
We believe that if a candidate is present in that 
set, it could well be a valid translation, as the 
French MWT in consideration is also related to 
the seed. Accordingly, our selection process con-
sists of picking those candidates for which we 
find a complete match among the related terms.  
3.3 Relevance of Compositional Methods 
The automatic translation of MWTs is no simple 
task, and it is worthwhile asking if it is best tack-
led with a compositional method. Intricate prob-
lems have been reported with the translations of 
compounds (Daille and Morin, Baldwin and Ta-
naka), notably:  
? fertility: source and target MWTs can be 
of different lengths. For example, table 
de v?rit? (truth table) contains two con-
tent words and translates into ??????
shinri ? chi ? hyo (lit. truth-value-table), 
which contains three. 
? variability of forms in the transla-
tions: MWTs can appear in many forms. 
For example, champ electromagn?tique 
(electromagnetic field) translates both 
into ???? denji? ba (lit. electromag-
netic field)???? denji?kai (lit. elec-
tromagnetic ?region?). 
? constructional variability in the trans-
lations: source and target MWTs have 
different morphological structures. For 
example, in the pair apprentissage auto-
matique??? ???  kikai ? gakushu 
(machine learning) we have (N-
Adj)?(N-N). In the pair programmation 
par contraintes???????? patan?
ninshiki (pattern recognition) we have 
(N-par-N)?(N-N). 
? non-compositional compounds: some 
compounds? meaning cannot be derived 
from the meaning of their components. 
For example, the Japanese term ???
aka?ten (failing grade, lit. ?red point?) 
translates into French as note d??chec (lit. 
failing grade) or simply ?chec (lit. fail-
ure).  
? lexical divergence: source and target 
MWTs can use different lexica to ex-
press a concept. For example, traduction 
automatique (machine translation, lit. 
?automatic translation?) translates as ?
???? kikai ? honyaku (lit. machine 
translation). 
It is hard to imagine any method that could ad-
dress all these problems accurately.  
Tanaka and Baldwin (2003) found that 48.7% 
of English-Japanese Noun-Noun compounds 
translate compositionality. In a preliminary ex-
periment, we found this to be the case for as 
much as 75.1% of the collected MWTs. If we are 
to maximize the coverage of our system, it is 
sensible to start with a compositional approach. 
We will not deal with the problem of fertility and 
non-compositional compounds in this paper. 
Nonetheless, lexical divergence and variability 
issues will be partly tackled by broader transla-
tions and related words given by thesauri. 
4 Evaluation 
4.1 Linguistic Resources 
The bilingual dictionaries used in the experi-
ments are the Crown French-Japanese Dictionary 
(Ohtsuki et al (1989)), and the French-Japanese 
Scientific Dictionary (French-Japanese Scientific 
Association (1989)). The former contains about 
50,000 entries of general usage single words. 
The latter contains about 50,000 entries of both 
single and multi-word scientific terms. These 
two complement each other, and by combining 
both entries we form our base dictionary to 
which we refer as DicFJ. 
The main thesaurus used is Bunrui Goi Hyo 
(National Institute for Japanese Language 
(2004)). It contains about 96,000 words, and 
each entry is organized in two levels: a list of 
synonyms and a list of more loosely related 
words. We augment the initial translation set by 
looking up the Japanese words given by DicFJ. 
The expanded bilingual dictionary comprised of 
the words from DicFJ combined with their syno-
nyms is denoted DicFJJ. The dictionary resulting 
of DicFJJ combined with the more loosely related 
words is denoted DicFJJ2. 
Finally, we build another thesaurus from a 
Japanese-English dictionary. We use Eijiro 
(Electronic Dictionary Project (2004)), which 
contains 1,290,000 entries. For a given Japanese 
entry, we look up its English translations. The 
Japanese translations of the English intermediar-
ies are used as synonyms/related words of the 
entry. The resulting thesaurus is expected to pro-
vide even more loosely related translations (and 
also many irrelevant ones). We denote it DicFJEJ. 
4.2 Notation 
Let F and J be the two sets of related terms col-
lected in French and Japanese. F? is the subset of 
F for which Jac?0.01: { }01.0)(' ??= fJacFfF  
F?* is the subset of valid related terms in F?, as 
determined by human evaluation. P is the set of 
all potential translation pairs among the collected 
terms (P=F?J). P? is the set of pairs containing 
either a French term or a Japanese term with 
Jac?0.01: 
( ){ }01.0)(01.0)(,' ?????= jJacfJacJjFfP  
P?* is the subset of valid translation pairs in P?, 
determined by human evaluation. These pairs 
need to respect three criteria: 1) contain valid 
terms, 2) be related to the seed, and 3) constitute 
a valid translation. M is the set of all translations 
selected by our system. M? is the subset of pairs 
in M with Jac?0.01 for either the French or the 
Japanese term. It is also the output of our system: { }01.0)(01.0)(),(' ????= jJacfJacMjfM  
M?* is the intersection of M? and P?*, or in other 
words, the subset of valid translation pairs output 
by our system. 
4.3 Baseline Method 
Our starting point is the simplest possible align-
ment, which we refer to as our baseline. It is 
worked out by using each of the aforementioned 
dictionaries independently. The output set ob-
tained using DicFJ is denoted FJ, the one using 
DicFJJ is denoted FJJ, and so on. The experiment 
is made using the eight seed pairs given in Table 
1. On average, we have |F'| =74.3, |F'*|=51.0 and 
|P'*|=24.0. Table 2 gives a summary of the key 
results. The precision and the recall are given by: 
'
'*
M
M
precision =  , 
'*
'*
P
M
recall =  
DicFJ contains only Japanese translations cor-
responding to the strict sense of French elements. 
Such a dictionary generates only a few transla-
tion candidates which tend to be correct when 
present in the target set. On the other hand, the 
lookup in DicFJJ2 and DicFJEJ interprets French 
Set |M'| |M'*| Prec. Recall 
FJ 10.5 9.6  92% 40% 
FJJ 15.3 12.6  83% 53% 
FJJ2 20.5 13.4  65% 56% 
FJEJ 30.9 14.1  46% 59% 
Table 2: Results for the baseline 
Id French Japanese (English)
1 analyse vectorielle ??????? bekutoru?kaiseki (vector analysis) 
2 circuit logique ????? ronri?kairo (logic circuit) 
3   intelligence artificielle          ????? jinko?chinou (artificial intelligence) 
4 linguistique informatique ?????? keisan?gengogaku (computational linguistics) 
5 reconnaissance des formes ??????? patan?ninshiki (pattern recognition) 
6 reconnaissance vocale ????? onsei?ninshiki (speech recognition) 
7 science cognitive ????? ninchi?kagaku (cognitive science) 
8 traduction automatique ????? kikai?honyaku (machine translation) 
Table 1: Seed pairs 
MWT elements with more laxity, generating 
more translations and thus more alignments, at 
the cost of some precision. 
4.4 Incremental Selection 
The progressive increase in recall given by the 
increasingly looser translations is in inverse pro-
portion to the decrease in precision, which hints 
that we should give precedence to the alignments 
obtained with the more accurate methods. Con-
sequently, we start by adding the alignments in 
FJ to the output set. Then, we augment it with 
the alignments from FJJ whose terms are not 
already in FJ. The resulting set is denoted FJJ'. 
We then augment FJJ' with the pairs from FJJ2 
whose terms are not in FJJ', and so on, until we 
exhaust the alignments in FJEJ.  
For instance, let FJ contain (synth?se de la 
parole? ? ? ? ? ? onsei ? gousei (speech 
synthesis)) and FJJ contain this pair plus 
(synth?se de la parole?????? onsei?kaiseki 
(speech analysis)). In the first iteration, the pair 
in FJ is added to the output set. In the second 
iteration, no pair is added because the output set 
already contains an alignment with synth?se de 
la parole. 
Table 3 gives the results for each incremental 
step. We can see an increase in precision for FJJ', 
FJJ2' and FJEJ' of respectively 5%, 9% and 8%, 
compared to FJJ, FJJ2 and FJEJ. We are effec-
tively filtering output pairs and, as expected, the 
increase in precision is accompanied by a slight 
decrease in recall.  Note that, because FJEJ is 
not a superset of FJJ2, we see an increase in both 
precision and recall in FJEJ' over FJEJ. None-
theless, the precision yielded by FJEJ' is not suf-
ficient, which is why DicFJEJ is left out in the 
next experiment. 
4.5 Bootstrapping 
The coverage of the system is still shy of the 20 
pairs/seed objective we gave ourselves. One 
cause for this is the small number of valid trans-
lation pairs available in the corpora. From an 
average of 51 valid related terms in the source 
set, only 24 have their translation in the target set. 
To counter that problem, we increase the cover-
age of Japanese related terms and hope that by 
doing so, we will also increase the coverage of 
the system as a whole.  
Once again, we utilize the high precision of 
the baseline method. The average 10.5 pairs in 
FJ include 92% of Japanese terms semantically 
similar to the seed. By inputting these terms in 
the term collection system, we collect many 
more terms, some of which are probably the 
translations of our French MWTs. 
The results for the baseline method with boot-
strapping are given in Table 4. The ones using 
incremental selection and bootstrapping are 
given in Table 5. FJ+ consists of the alignments 
given by a generation process using DicFJ and a 
selection performed on the augmented set of re-
lated terms. FJJ+ and FJJ2+ are obtained in the 
same way using DicFJJ and DicFJJ2. FJ+' contains 
the alignments from FJ, augmented with those 
from FJ+ whose terms are not in FJ. FJJ+' con-
tains FJ+', incremented with terms from FJJ. 
FJJ+'' contains FJJ+', incremented with terms 
from FJJ+, and so on.  
The bootstrap mechanism grows the target 
term set tenfold, making it very laborious to 
identify all the valid translation pairs manually. 
Consequently, we only evaluate the pairs output 
by the system, making it impossible to calculate 
recall. Instead, we use the number of valid trans-
lation pairs as a makeshift measure. 
Bootstrapping successfully allows for many 
more translation pairs to be found. FJ+, FJJ+, 
and FJJ2+ respectively contain 7.6, 8.7 and 8.5 
more valid alignments on average than FJ, FJJ 
and FJJ2. The augmented target term set is nois-
ier than the initial set, and it produces many more 
invalid alignments as well. Fortunately, the in-
cremental selection effectively filters out most of 
the unwanted, restoring the precision to accept-
able levels.  
Set |M'| |M'*| Prec. Recall 
FJJ' 14.0  12.3  88% 51% 
FJJ2' 16.1  12.8  79% 53% 
FJEJ' 29.1  15.5  53% 65% 
Table 3: Results for the incremental selection 
Set |M'| |M'*| Prec. 
FJ+' 19.5 16.1  83% 
FJJ+' 22.5 18.6  83% 
FJJ +'' 24.3 19.6  81% 
FJJ2+' 25.6 20.1  79% 
FJJ2+'' 28.6 20.6  72% 
Table 5: Results for the incremental 
selection with bootstrap expansion 
Set |M'| |M'*| Prec. 
FJ+ 20.9 16.8  80% 
FJJ+ 30.9 21.3  69% 
FJJ2+ 45.8 22.6  49% 
Table 4: Results for the baseline 
method with bootstrap expansion 
4.6 Analysis 
A comparison of all the methods is illustrated in 
the precision ? valid alignments curves of Figure 
2. The points on the four curves are taken from 
Tables 2 to 5. The gap between the dotted and 
filled curves clearly shows that bootstrapping 
increases coverage. The respective positions of 
the squares and crosses show that incremental 
selection effectively filters out erroneous align-
ments. FJJ+'', with 19.6 valid alignments and a 
precision of 81%, is at the rightmost and upper-
most position in the graph. The detailed results 
for each seed are presented in Table 6, and the 
complete output for the seed ?logic circuit? is 
given in Table 7.  
From the average 4.7 erroneous pairs/seed, 3.2 
(68%) were correct translations but were judged 
unrelated to the seed. This is not surprising, con-
sidering that our set of French related terms con-
tained only 69% (51/74.3) of valid related terms. 
Also note that, of the 24.3 pairs/seed output, 5.25 
are listed in the French-Japanese Scientific Dic-
tionary. However, only 3.9 of those pairs are in-
cluded in M'*. The others were deemed unrelated 
to the seed.  
In the output set of ?machine translation?, ?
??????? shizen ?gengo ?shori (natural lan-
guage processing) is aligned to both traitement 
du language naturel and traitement des langues 
naturelles. The system captures the term?s vari-
ability around langue/language. Lexical diver-
gence is also taken into account to some extent. 
The seed computational linguistics yields the 
alignment of langue maternelle (mother tongue) 
with ?? ?? bokoku ? go (literally [[mother-
country]-language]). The usage of thesauri en-
abled the system to include the concept of coun-
try in the translated MWT, even though it is not 
present in any of the French elements. 
5 Conclusion and future work 
We have proposed a method for compiling bilin-
gual terminologies of compositionally translated 
MWTs. As opposed to previous work, we use the 
web rather than comparable corpora as a source 
of bilingual data. Our main insight is to constrain 
source and target candidate MWTs to only those 
strongly related to the seed. This allows us to 
achieve term alignment with high precision. We 
showed that coverage reaches satisfactory levels 
by using thesauri and bootstrapping.  
Due to the difference in objectives and in cor-
pora, it is very hard to compare results: our 
method produces a rather small set of highly ac-
curate alignments, whereas extraction from com-
parable corpora generates much more candidates, 
but with an inferior precision. These two ap-
proaches have very different applications. Our 
method does however eliminate the requirement 
of comparable corpora, which means that we can 
use seeds from any domain, provided we have 
reasonably rich dictionaries and thesauri.  
Let us not forget that this article describes 
only a first attempt at compiling French-Japanese 
terminology, and that various sources of im-
provement have been left untapped. In particular, 
our alignment suffers from the fact that we do 
not discriminate between different candidate 
translations. This could be achieved by using any 
of the more sophisticated selection methods pro-
posed in the literature. Currently, corpus features 
are used solely for the collection of related terms. 
These could also be utilized in the translation 
selection, which Baldwin and Tanaka have 
shown to be quite effective. We could also make 
use of bilingual dictionary features as they did. 
Lexical context is another resource we have not 
exploited. Context vectors have successfully 
been applied in translation selection by Fung  as 
well as  Daille and Morin.  
On a different level, we could also apply the 
bootstrapping to expand the French set of related 
terms. Finally, we are investigating the possibil-
seed |F'| |F'*| |P'*| |M'| |M'*| Prec. 
1 89 40 14 26 13 50% 
2 64 55 24 14 14 100% 
3 72 59 38 40 33 83% 
4 67 49 22 23 18 78% 
5 85 70 22 21 17 81% 
6 67 50 27 22 21 95% 
7 36 27 16 20 17 85% 
8 114 58 29 28 24 86% 
avg 74.3 51.0 24.0  24.3  19.6  81% 
Table 6: Detailed results for  FJJ+'' 
70% 
80% 
90% 
100% 
25
Pr
ec
is
io
n 
0% 
10% 
20% 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
0 5 10 15 20 
Baseline 
Baseline with bootstrap
Incremental 
Incremental with bootstrap
Number of Valid Alignments
Figure 2: Precision - Valid Alignments curves 
ity of resolving the alignments in the opposite 
direction: from Japanese to French. Surely the 
constructional variability of French MWTs 
would present some difficulties, but we are con-
fident that this could be tackled using translation 
templates, as proposed by Baldwin and Tanaka. 
References 
T. Baldwin and T. Tanaka. 2004. Translation by Ma-
chine of Complex Nominals: Getting it Right. In 
Proc. of the ACL 2004 Workshop on Multiword 
Expressions: Integrating Processing, pp. 24?31, 
Barcelona, Spain.  
Y. Cao and H. Li. 2002. Base Noun Phrase Transla-
tion Using Web Data and the EM Algorithm. In 
Proc. of COLING -02, Taipei, Taiwan. 
Y.C. Chiao and P. Zweigenbaum. 2002. Looking for 
Candidate Translational Equivalents in Specialized, 
Comparable Corpora. In Proc. of COLING-02, pp. 
1208?1212. Taipei, Taiwan. 
B. Daille, E. Gaussier, and J.M. Lange. 1994. To-
wards Automatic Extraction of Monolingual and 
Bilingual Terminology. In Proc. of COLING-94, 
pp. 515?521, Kyoto, Japan. 
B. Daille and E. Morin. 2005. French-English Termi-
nology Extraction from Comparable Corpora, In 
IJCNLP-05, pp. 707?718, Jeju Island, Korea. 
H. D?jean., E. Gaussier and F. Sadat. An Approach 
Based on Multilingual Thesauri and Model Com-
bination for Bilingual Lexicon Extraction. In Proc. 
of COLING-02, pp. 218?224. Taipei, Taiwan. 
Electronic Dictionary Project. 2004. Eijiro Japanese-
English Dictionary: version 79. EDP. 
K.T. Frantzi, and S. Ananiadou. 2003. The C-
Value/NC-Value Domain Independent Method for 
Multi-Word Term Extraction. Journal of Natural 
Language Processing, 6(3), pp. 145?179. 
French Japanese Scientific Association. 1989. French-
Japanese Scientific Dictionary: 4th edition. Haku-
suisha. 
P. Fung. 1995. A Pattern Matching Method for Find-
ing Noun and Proper Noun from Noisy Parallel 
Corpora. In Proc of the ACL-95, pp. 236?243, 
Cambridge, USA. 
P. Fung. 1998. A Statiscal View on Bilingual Lexicon 
Extraction: From Parallel Corpora to Non-parallel 
Corpora. In D. Farwell, L. Gerber and L. Hovy 
eds.: Proceedings of the AMTA-98, Springer, pp. 
1?16. 
I. Langkilde and K. Knight. 1998. Generation that 
exploits corpus-based statistical knowledge. In 
COLLING/ACL-98, pp. 704?710, Montreal, Can-
ada. 
National Institute for Japanese Language. 2004. Bun-
rui Goi Hyo: revised and enlarged edition Dainip-
pon Tosho. 
T. Ohtsuki et al 1989. Crown French-Japanese Dic-
tionary: 4th edition. Sanseido. 
R. Rapp. 1999. Automatic Identification of Word 
Translations from Unrelated English and German 
Corpora. In Proc. of the ACL-99. pp. 1?17. Col-
lege Park, USA. 
S. Sato and Y. Sasaki. 2003. Automatic Collection of 
Related Terms from the Web. In ACL-03 Compan-
ion Volume to the Proc. of the Conference, pp. 
121?124, Sapporo, Japan. 
T. Tanaka and T. Baldwin. 2003. Noun-Noun Com-
pound Machine Translation: A Feasibility Study on 
Shallow Processing. In Proc. of the ACL-2003 
Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Analysis, 
Acquisition and Treatment, pp. 17?24. Sapporo, 
Japan. 
van Rijsbergen, C.J. 1979. Information Retrieval. 
London: Butterworths. Second Edition. 
Jac (Fr.) French term Japanese term (English) eval? 
0.100  portes logiques ?????? ronri?geeto (logic gate) 2/2/2 
0.064  fonctions logiques ????? ronri?kansuu (logic function) 2/2/2 
0.064  fonctions logiques ????? ronri?kinou (logic function) 2/2/2 
0.048  registre ? d?calage ???????? shifuto?rejisuta (shift register) 2/2/2 
0.044  simulateur de circuit ????????? kairo?shimureeta (circuit simulator) 2/2/2 
0.040  circuit combinatoire ?????? kumiawase?kairo (combinatorial circuit) 2/2/2 
0.031  nombre binaire 2??? ni?shinsuu (binary number) 2/2/2 
0.024  niveaux logiques ?????? ronri?reberu (logical level) 2/2/2 
0.020  circuit logique combinatoire ????????? kumiawase?ronri?kairo (combinatorial logic circuit) 2/2/2 
0.017  valeur logique ???? ronri?chi (logical value) 2/2/2 
0.013  tension d' alimentation ????? dengen?denatsu (supply voltage) 2/2/2 
0.011  conception de circuits ????? kairo?sekkei (circuit design) 2/2/2 
0.007  conception d' un circuit logique ???????? ronri?kairo?sekkei (logic circuit design) 2/1/2 
0.005  nombre de portes ????? geeto?suu (number of gates) 2/1/2 
? relatedness / termhood / quality of the translation, on a scale of  0 to 2 
Table 7: System output for seed pair circuit logique ????? (logic circuit) 
