Evaluating CETEMP?blico, a free resource for Portuguese
	
SINTEF Tele og Data
Postboks 124, Blindern
N-0314 Oslo, Norway
Diana.Santos@informatics.sintef.no


Departamento de Inform?tica
Universidade do Minho
PT-4710-057 Braga, Portugal
Paulo.Rocha@alfa.di.uminho.pt
Abstract
In this paper we present a thorough
evaluation of a corpus resource for
Portuguese, CETEMP?blico, a 180-
million word newspaper corpus free
for R&D in Portuguese processing.
We provide information that should
be useful to those using the resource,
and to considerable improvement for
later versions. In addition, we think
that the procedures presented can be
of interest for the larger NLP
community, since corpus evaluation
and description is unfortunately not a
common exercise.
 
CETEMP?blico is a large corpus of European
Portuguese newspaper language, available at no
cost to the community dealing with the
processing of Portuguese.1 It was created in the
framework of the Computational Processing of
Portuguese project, a government funded
initiative to foster language engineering of the
Portuguese language.2
Evaluating this resource, we have two main
goals in mind: To contribute to improve its
usefulness; and to suggest ways of going about
as far as corpus evaluation is concerned in
general (noting that most corpora projects are
simply described and not evaluated).
                                                     
1
 CETEMP?blico stands for ?Corpus de Extractos de
Textos Electr?nicos MCT / P?blico?, and its full reference
is http://cgi.portugues.mct.pt/cetempublico/
2
 See http://www.portugues.mct.pt/
In fact, and despite the amount of research
devoted to corpus processing nowadays, there is
not much information about the actual corpora
being processed, which may lead na?ve users
and/or readers to conclude that this is not an
interesting issue. In our opinion, that is the
wrong conclusion.
There is, in fact, a lot to be said about any
particular corpus. We believe, in addition, that
such information should be available when one
is buying, or even just browsing, a corpus, and it
should be taken into consideration when, in turn,
systems or hypotheses are evaluated with the
help of that corpus.
In this paper, we will solely be concerned
with CETEMP?blico, but it is our belief that
similar kinds of information could be published
about different corpora. Our intention is to give
a positive contribution both to the whole
community involved in the processing of
Portuguese and to the particular users of this
corpus. At the moment of writing, 160 people
have ordered (and, we assume, consequently
received) it3. There have also been more than
four thousand queries via the Web site which
gives access to the corpus.
We want to provide evaluation data and
describe how one can improve the corpus. We
are genuinely interested in increasing its value,
and have, since corpus release,4 made available
four patches (e-mailing this information to all
                                                     
3
 Although we also made available a CQP (Christ et al,
1999) encoded version in March 2001, the vast majority of
the users received the text-only version.
4
 The corpus was ready in July 2000; the first copies were
sent out in October, with the information that version 1.0
creation date was 25 July 2000.
who ordered the corpus). We have also tried to
considerably improve the Web page.
We decided to concentrate on the evaluation
of version 1.0, given that massive distribution
was done of that particular version5. Web
access to the corpus (Santos and Bick, 2000)
will not be dealt with here. Note that all trivial
improvements described here have already been
addressed in some patch.
 	
As described in detail in Rocha and Santos
(2000) and also in the FAQ at the corpus Web
page, CETEMP?blico was built from the raw
material provided by the Portuguese daily
newspaper P?blico: text files in Macintosh
format, covering approximately the years 1991
to 1998, and including both published news
articles and those created but not necessarily
brought to print. These files were automatically
tagged with a classification based on, but not
identical to, the one used by the newspaper to
identify sections, and with the semester the
article was associated to. In addition, sentence
separation, and title and author identification
were automatically created. The texts were then
divided in extracts with an average length of
two paragraphs. These extracts were randomly
shuffled (for copyright reasons) and numbered,
and the final corpus was the ordered sequence
of the extract numbers.
To illustrate the corpus in text format, we
present in Appendix A an extract that includes
all possible tags with the exception of <marca>.
 
We start by commenting on the distribution
process, and then go on to analyse the corpus
contents and the specific options chosen in its
creation.
Let us first comment on the distribution
options. While this resource is entirely free
(one has just to register in a Web page in order
to receive the corpus at the address of one?s
choice), several critical remarks are not out of
place:
                                                     
5
 We have no estimate of how many users have actually
succeeded, or even tried, to apply the patches made
available later on. We have just launched a Web
questionnaire in order to have a better idea of our user
community.
First of all, when publicizing the resource, it
was not clear for whom the CD distribution was
actually meant: Later on, we discovered that
many traditional linguists ordered it just to find
out that they were much better off with the on-
line version.
Second, more accompanying information in
the CD would not hurt, instead of pointing to a
Web page as the only source: In fact, the
assumption that everyone has access to the Web
while working with CETEMP?blico is not
necessarily true in Portugal or Brazil.
Finally, we did not produce a medium-size
technical description; in addition to the FAQ on
the Web page, we provided only a full paper
(Rocha and Santos, 2000) describing the whole
project, arguably an overkill.
About the corpus contents, several
fundamental decisions can ? and actually have,
in previous conferences or by e-mail ? be
criticized, in particular the use of a single text
source and the inclusion of sentence tags (by
criteria so far not yet documented). Still, we
think that both are easy to defend, since 1) the
time taken in copyright handling and contract
writing with every copyright owner strongly
suggests minimizing their number. And 2)
although sentence separation is a controversial
issue, it is straightforward to dispose of
sentence separation tags. So, this option cannot
really be considered an obstacle to users.6
We will concentrate instead on each
annotation, after discussing the choice of texts
and extracts.
