Proceedings of the Analyzing Conversations in Text and Speech (ACTS) Workshop at HLT-NAACL 2006, pages 50?57,
New York City, New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
ChAT: A Time-Linked System for Conversational Analysis 
 
Michelle L. Gregory Douglas Love Stuart Rose Anne Schur 
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory 
609 Battelle Blvd 
Richland, WA 99354 
{michelle.gregory;douglas.love;stuart.rose;anne.schur}@pnl.gov 
 
Abstract 
We present a system for analyzing conver-
sational data. The system includes state-of-
the-art natural language processing compo-
nents that have been modified to accom-
modate the unique nature of conversational 
data. In addition, we leverage the added 
richness of conversational data by analyz-
ing various aspects of the participants and 
their relationships to each other. Our tool 
provides users with the ability to easily 
identify topics or persons of interest, in-
cluding who talked to whom, when, entities 
that were discussed, etc. Using this tool, 
one can also isolate more complex net-
works of information: individuals who may 
have discussed the same topics but never 
talked to each other. The tool includes a UI 
that plots information over time, and a se-
mantic graph that highlights relationships 
of interest.  
1 Introduction 
The ability to extract and summarize content from 
data is a fundamental goal of computational lin-
guistics. As such, a number of tools exist to auto-
matically categorize, cluster, and extract 
information from documents. However, these tools 
do not transfer well to data sources that are more 
conversational in nature, such as multi-party meet-
ings, telephone conversations, email, chat rooms, 
etc. Given the plethora of these data sources, there 
is a need to be able to quickly and accurately ex-
tract and process pertinent information from these 
sources without having to cull them manually.  
Much of the work on computational analysis of 
dialogue has focused on automatic topic segmenta-
tion of conversational data, and in particular, using 
features of the discourse to aid in segmentation 
(Galley et al 2003; Stolcke et al, 1999; 
Hirschberg & Hakatani, 1996.). Detailed discourse 
and conversational analytics have been the focus of 
much linguistic research and have been used by the 
computational community for creating models of 
dialogue to aid in natural language understanding 
and generation (Allen & Core, 1997; Carletta et al, 
1997; van Deemter et al, 2005; Walker et al, 
1996). However, there has been much less focus on 
computational tools that can aid in either the analy-
sis of conversations themselves, or in rendering 
conversational data in ways such that it can be 
used with traditional data mining techniques that 
have been successful for document understanding.  
This current work is most similar to the NITE 
XML Toolkit (Carletta & Kilgour, 2005) which 
was designed for annotating conversational data. 
NITE XML is system in which transcripts of con-
versations are viewable and time aligned with their 
audio transcripts. It is especially useful for adding 
annotations to multi-modal data formats. NITE 
XML is not analysis tool, however. Annotations 
are generally manually added. In this paper, we 
present a Conversational Analysis Tool (ChAT) 
which integrates several language processing tools 
(topic segmentation, affect scoring, named entity 
extraction) that can be used to automatically anno-
tate conversational data. The processing compo-
nents have been specially adapted to deal with 
conversational data.  
ChAT is not an annotation tool, however, it is 
analysis tool. It includes a UI that combines a vari-
ety of data sources onto one screen that enables 
users to progressively explore conversational data. 
For example, one can explore who was present in a 
50
given conversation, what they talked about, and the 
emotional content of the data. The data can be 
viewed by time slice or in a semantic graph. The 
language processing components in ChAT are ver-
satile in that they were developed in modular, open 
designs so that they can be used independently or 
be integrated into other analytics tools. We present 
ChAT architecture and processing components in 
Section 2. In section 3 we present the UI , with a 
discussion following in section 4.  
2 ChAT Architecture 
ChAT is a text processing tool designed to aid in 
the analysis of any kind of threaded dialogue, in-
cluding meeting transcripts, telephone transcripts, 
usenet groups, chat room, email or blogs. Figure 1 
illustrates the data processing flow in ChAT. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: ChAT Architecture. 
 
 Data is ingested via an ingest engine, then the 
central processing engine normalizes the format 
(time stamp, speaker ID, utterance; one utterance 
per line). Processing components are called by the 
central processing engine which provides the input 
to each component, and collects the output to send 
to the UI. 
We designed the system to be general enough to 
handle multiple data types. Thus, with the excep-
tion of the ingest engine, the processing compo-
nents are domain and source independent. For 
example, we did not want the topic segmentation 
to rely on features specific to a dataset, such as 
acoustic information from transcripts. Addition-
ally, all processing components have been built as 
independent plug-ins to the processing engine: The 
input of one does not rely on the output of the oth-
ers. This allows for a great deal of flexibility in 
that a user can choose to include or exclude vari-
ous processes to suit their needs, or even exchange 
the components with new tools. We describe each 
of the processing components in the next section. 
2.1 Ingest Engine 
The ingest engine is designed to input multiple 
data sources and transform them into a uniform 
structure which includes one utterance per line, 
including time stamp and participant information. 
So far, we have ingested three data sources. The 
ICSI meeting corpus (Janin et al, 2003) is a corpus 
of text transcripts of research meetings. There are 
75 meetings in the corpus, lasting 30 minutes to 
1.5 hours in duration, with 5-8 participants in each 
meeting. A subset of these meetings were hand 
coded for topic segments (Galley, et al, 2003). We 
also used telephone transcripts from the August 14, 
2003 power grid failure that resulted in a regional 
blackout1. These data consist of files containing 
transcripts of multiple telephone conversations be-
tween multiple parties. Lastly, we employed a chat 
room dataset that was built in-house by summer 
interns who were instructed to play a murder mys-
tery game over chat. Participants took on a charac-
ter persona as their login and content was based on 
a predefined scenario, but all interactions were un-
scripted beyond that. 
                                                          
1http://energycommerce.house.gov/108/Hearings/09032003hearing1061/hearing
.htm 
Ingest Engine User Interface 
Central Processing Engine 
Processing Components 
          
 
           
Topic Segmentation 
Participant 
Information 
Named Entity 
Extraction 
Affect 
51
  
Figure 2. Plot of WindowDiff evaluation metric for LCseg and WLM on meeting corpus. p-value = 
0.032121 for two-sample equal variance t-test. 
2.2 Topic Segmentation 
The output of the ingest process is a list of utter-
ance that include a time (or sequence) stamp, a 
participant name, and an utterance. Topic segmen-
tation is then performed on the utterances to chunk 
them into topically cohesive units. Traditionally, 
algorithms for segmentation have relied on textual 
cues (Hearst, 1997; Miller et al 1998; Beeferman 
et al 1999; Choi, 2000). These techniques have 
proved useful in segmenting single authored 
documents that are rich in content and where there 
is a great deal of topic continuity. Topic segmenta-
tion of conversational data is much more difficult 
due to often sparse content, intertwined topics, and 
lack of topic continuity. 
Topic segmentation algorithms generally rely on 
a lexical cohesion signal that requires smoothing in 
order to eliminate noise from changes of word 
choices in adjoining statements that do not indicate 
topic shifts (Hearst, 1997; Barzilay and Elhadad, 
1997). Many state of the art techniques use a slid-
ing window for smoothing (Hearst, 1997; Miller et 
al. 1998; Galley et al, 2003). We employ a win-
dowless method (WLM) for calculating a suitable 
cohesion signal which does not rely on a sliding 
window to achieve the requisite smoothing for an 
effective segmentation. Instead, WLM employs a 
constrained minimal-spanning tree (MST) algo-
rithm to find and join pairs of elements in a se-
quence. In most applications, the nearest-neighbor 
search used by an MST involves an exhaustive, 
O(N2), search throughout all pairs of elements. 
However since WLM only requires information on 
the distance between adjoining elements in the se-
quence the search space for finding the two closest 
adjoining elements is linear, O(N), where N is the 
number of elements in the sequence. We can there-
fore take advantage of the hierarchical summary 
structure that an MST algorithm affords while not 
incurring the performance penalty.  
Of particular interest for our research was the 
success of WLM on threaded dialogue. We evalu-
ated WLM?s performance on the ICSI meeting 
corpus (Janin et al 2003) by comparing our seg-
mentation results to the results obtained by imple-
menting LCSeg (Galley et al, 2003). Using the 25 
hand segmented meetings, our algorithm achieved 
a significantly better segmentation for 20 out of 25 
documents. Figure 2 shows the hypothesized seg-
ments from the two algorithms on the ICSI Meet-
ing Corpus. 
Topic segmentation of conversational data can 
be aided by employing features of the discourse or 
speech environment, such as acoustic cues, etc. 
(Stolcke et al, 1999; Galley et al, 2003). In this 
work, we have avoided using data dependent (the 
52
integration of acoustic cues for speech transcripts, 
for example) features to aid in segmentation be-
cause we wanted our system to be as versatile as 
possible. This approach provides the best segmen-
tation possible for a variety of data sources, regard-
less of data type.  
 
2.3 Named Entity Extraction  
In addition to topics, ChAT also has integrated 
software to extract the named entities. We use 
Cicero Lite from the Language Computer Corpora-
tion (LCC) for our entity detection (for a product 
description and evaluation, see Harabagiu et al, 
2003). Using a combination of semantic represen-
tations and statistical approaches, Cicero Lite iso-
lates approximately 80 entity types. ChAT 
currently makes use of only a handful of these 
categories, but can easily be modified to include 
more. Because named entity extraction relies on 
cross-utterance dependencies, the main processing 
engine sends all utterance from a conversation at 
once rather than an utterance at a time.  
2.4 Sentiment Analysis 
In addition to topic and entity extraction, conversa-
tions can also be analyzed by who participated in 
them and their relationship to one another and their 
attitude toward topics they discuss. In an initial 
attempt to capture participant attitude, we have 
included a sentiment analysis, or affect, compo-
nent. Sentiment analysis is conducted via a lexical 
approach. The lexicon we employed is the General 
Inquirer (GI) lexicon developed for content analy-
ses of textual data (Stone, 1977). It includes an 
extensive lexicon of over 11,000 hand coded word 
stems, and 182 categories, but our implementation 
is limited to positive (POS) and negative (NEG) 
axes. In ChAT, every utterance is scored for the 
number of positive and negative words it contains. 
We make use of this data by keeping track of the 
affect of topics in general, as well as the general 
mood of the participants.  
 
2.5 Participant Roles 
Analyzing conversations consists of more than 
analyzing the topics within them. Inherent to the 
nature of conversational data are the participants. 
Using textual cues, one can gain insight into the 
relationships of participants to each other and the 
topics. In ChAT we have integrated several simple 
metrics as indicators of social dynamics amongst 
the participants. Using simple speaker statistics, 
such as number of utterances, number of words, 
etc., we can gain insight to the level of engagement 
of participants in the conversation. Features we use 
include: 
? The number of utterance 
? Proportion of questions versus state-
ments 
? Proportion of ?unsolicited? statements 
(ones not preceded by a question mark) 
Additionally, we use the same lexical resources 
as we use for sentiment analysis for indications of 
personality type. We make use of the lexical cate-
gories of strong, weak, power cooperative, and 
power conflict as indicators of participant roles in 
the conversational setting.  Thus far, we have not 
conducted any formal evaluation on the sentiment 
analysis with this data, but our initial studies of our 
pos and neg categories show a 73% agreement 
with hand tagged positive and negative segments 
on a different data set.  
3 User Interface 
As described in Section 2 on ChAT architecture, 
the processing components are independent of the 
UI, but we do have a built-in UI that incorporates 
the processing components that is designed to aid 
in analyzing conversations.  
53
  
Figure 3. Screen shot of the main UI for ChAT  
 
The components of the system are all linked 
through the X-axis, representing time, as seen in 
Figure 3. Depending on the dataset, positions along 
the time axis  are based on either the time stamp or 
sequential position of the utterance. The default 
time range is the whole conversation or chat room 
session, but a narrower range can be selected by 
dragging in the interval panel at the top of the UI. 
Note that all of the values for each of the compo-
nents are recalculated based on the selected time 
interval. Figure 4 shows that a time selection re-
sults in a finer grained subset of the data, allowing 
one to drill down to specific topics of inter-
est.
 
Figure 4: Time Selection.  
 
54
The number of utterance for a given time frame 
is indicated by the number inside the box corre-
sponding to the time frame. The number is recalcu-
lated as different time frames are selected. 
3.1.1 Topics 
The central organizing unit in the UI is topics. The 
topic panel, detailed in Figure 5, consists of three 
parts: the color key, affect scores, and topic labels. 
Once a data file is imported into the UI, topic seg-
mentation is performed on the dataset according to 
the processes outline in Section 3.2. Topic labels 
are assigned to each topic chunk. Currently, we use 
the most prevalent word tokens as the label, and 
the user can control the number of words per label. 
Each topic segment is assigned a color, which is 
indicated by the color key. The persistence of a 
color throughout the time axis indicates which 
topic is being discussed at any given time. This 
allows a user to quickly see the distribution of top-
ics of a meeting, for example. It also allows a user 
to quickly see the participants who discussed a 
given topic. 
 
 
Figure 5. Topic Labels in the Topic Panel. 
 
3.1.2 Affect 
Affect scores are computed for each topic by 
counting the number of POS or NEG affect words 
in each utterance that comprises a topic within the 
selected time interval. Affect is measured by the 
proportion of POS to NEG words in the selected 
time frame. If the proportion is greater than 0, the 
score is POS (represented by a +), if it is less than 
0, it is NEG (-). The degree of sentiment is indi-
cated by varying shades of color on the + or ? 
symbol.  
Note that affect is computed for both topics and 
participants. An affect score on the topic panel in-
dicates overall affect contained in the utterances 
present in a given time frame, whereas the affect 
score in the participant panel indicates overall af-
fect in a given participant?s utterances for that time 
frame. 
3.1.3 Participants 
The participant panel (Figure 6) consists of three 
parts:  speaker labels, speaker contribution bar, and 
affect score. The speaker label is displayed in al-
phabetical order and is grayed out if there are no 
utterances containing the topic in the selected time 
frame. The speaker contribution bar, displayed as a 
horizontal histogram, shows the speaker?s propor-
tion of utterances during the time frame. Non ques-
tion utterances are displayed in red while 
utterances containing questions are displayed in 
green as seen. For example, in Figure 6, we can see 
that speaker me011 did most of the talking (and 
was generally negative), but speaker me018 had a 
higher proportion of questions.  
 
 
Figure 6. Participant Panel. 
 
3.1.4 Named Entities 
In the current implementation, the named entity 
panel consists of only list of entity labels present in 
a given time frame. We do not list each named en-
tity because of space constraints, but plan to inte-
grate a scroll bar so that we can display individual 
entities as opposed to the category labels. 
55
3.2 Semantic Graph 
Data that is viewed in the main UI can be sent to a 
semantic graph for further analysis. The graph al-
lows a user to choose to highlight the relationships 
associated with a topic, participant, or individual 
named entity. The user selects objects of interest 
from a list (see Figure 7), then the graph function 
organizes a graph according to the chosen object, 
see Figure 8, that extracts the information from the 
time-linked view and represent it in a more abstract 
view that denotes relationships via links and nodes.  
 
 
Figure 7. Semantic Graph Node Selection. 
 
The semantic graph can help highlight relation-
ships that might be hard to view in the main UI. 
For example, Figure 8 represents a subset of the 
Blackout data in which three participants, indicated 
by blue, all talked about the same named entity, 
indicated by green, but never talked to each other, 
indicated by the red conversation nodes.  
 
 
Figure 8. Graph of the Relationship between Three Par-
ticipants.  
 
4 Discussion 
In this paper, we have presented ChAT, a system 
designed to aid in the analysis of any kind of 
threaded dialogue. Our system is designed to be 
flexible in that the UI and processing components 
work with multiple data types. The processing 
components can be used independently, or within 
the UI. The UI aids users in in-depth analysis of 
individual conversations. The components can be 
run independent of the UI and in batch, resulting in 
an xml document containing the original tran-
scripts and the metadata added by the processing 
components. This functionality allows the data to 
be manipulated by traditional text mining tech-
niques, or to be viewed in any other visualization.  
We have not performed user evaluation on the 
interface. Our topic segmentation performs better 
than the current state of the art, and named-entity 
extraction we have integrated is commercial grade. 
We are currently working on an evaluation of the 
affect scoring. While our topic segmentation is 
good, we are working to improve the labels we use 
for the topics. Most importantly, we plan on ad-
dressing the usefulness of the UI with user studies. 
 
References 
R. Barzilay and M. Elhadad. Using lexical chains for 
text summarization. In Proc.of the Intelligent Scal-
able Text Summarization Workshop (ISTS?97), ACL, 
1997. 
D. Beeferman, A. Berger, and J. Lafferty. 1999. Statisti-
calmodels for text segmentation. Machine Learning, 
34(1?3):177?210. 
Carletta, J.C. and Kilgour, J. (2005) The NITE XML 
Toolkit Meets the ICSI Meeting Corpus: Import, An-
notation, and Browsing. MLMI'04: Proceedings of 
the Workshop on Machine Learning for Multimodal 
Interaction. Samy Bengio and Herve Bourlard, eds. 
Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
Volume 3361.  
 F. Choi. 2000. Advances in domain independent linear 
text segmentation. In Proc. of NAACL?00. 
van Deemter, Emiel Krahmer & Mari?t Theune. 2005 
.Real versus template-based Natural Language Gen-
eration: a false opposition?  Computational Linguis-
tics 31(1), pages 15-24. 
 
 M. Galley, Kathleen McKeown, Eric Fosler-Lussier, 
Hongyan Jing. Discourse Segmentation of Multi-
56
party Conversation. In Proceedings of the 41st An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (ACL-03). July 2003. Sapporo, Japan. 
S. Harabagiu, D. Moldovan, C. Clark, M. Bowden, J. 
Williams, and J. Bensley. 2003. Answer Mining by 
Combining Extraction Techniques with Abductive 
Reasoning, Proceedings of the Twelfth Text Retrieval 
Conference (TREC ):375. 
M. A. Hearst. TexTiling: Segmenting text info multi-
paragraph subtopic passages. Computational Linguis-
tics, 23(1):33?64, 1997. 
J. Hirschberg and C. Nakatani. A prosodic analysis of 
discourse segments in direction-giving monologues. 
In Proc. ACL, pp. 286?293, Santa Cruz, CA, 1996. 
A. Janin, D. Baron, J. Edwards, D. Ellis, D. Gelbart,N. 
Morgan, B. Peskin, T. Pfau, E. Shriberg, A. Stolcke, 
and C. Wooters. 2003. The ICSI meeting corpus. In 
Proc. of ICASSP-03, Hong Kong 
N. E. Miller, P. Wong, M. Brewster, and H. Foote. 
TOPIC ISLANDS - A wavelet-based text visualiza-
tion system. In David Ebert, Hans Hagen, and Holly 
Rushmeier, editors, IEEE Visualization '98, pages 
189-196, 1998. 
A. Stolcke, E. Shriberg, D. Hakkani-Tur, G. Tur, Z. 
Rivlin, K. Sonmez (1999), Combining Words and 
Speech Prosody for Automatic Topic Segmentation. 
Proc. DARPA Broadcast News Workshop, pp. 61-64, 
Herndon, VA.  
 
P. Stone, 1977. Thematic text analysis: new agendas for 
analyzing text content. in Text Analysis for the Social 
Sciences ed. Carl Roberts. Lawrence Erlbaum Asso-
ciates. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57
