Virtual Modality: a Framework for Testing and Building  
Multimodal Applications 
 
P?ter P?l Boda1 
Audio-Visual Systems Laboratory 
Nokia Research Center 
Helsinki, Finland 
boda@mit.edu 
Edward Filisko 
Spoken Language Systems Group 
CSAIL, MIT 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 
filisko@csail.mit.edu 
                                                          
1
 Currently a Visiting Scientist with the Spoken Language 
Systems Group, CSAIL, MIT.  
 
 
Abstract 
This paper introduces a method that generates 
simulated multimodal input to be used in test-
ing multimodal system implementations, as 
well as to build statistically motivated multi-
modal integration modules. The generation of 
such data is inspired by the fact that true mul-
timodal data, recorded from real usage scenar-
ios, is difficult and costly to obtain in large 
amounts. On the other hand, thanks to opera-
tional speech-only dialogue system applica-
tions, a wide selection of speech/text data (in 
the form of transcriptions, recognizer outputs, 
parse results, etc.) is available. Taking the tex-
tual transcriptions and converting them into 
multimodal inputs in order to assist multimo-
dal system development is the underlying idea 
of the paper. A conceptual framework is es-
tablished which utilizes two input channels: 
the original speech channel and an additional 
channel called Virtual Modality. This addi-
tional channel provides a certain level of ab-
straction to represent non-speech user inputs 
(e.g., gestures or sketches). From the tran-
scriptions of the speech modality, pre-defined 
semantic items (e.g., nominal location refer-
ences) are identified, removed, and replaced 
with deictic references (e.g., here, there). The 
deleted semantic items are then placed into the 
Virtual Modality channel and, according to 
external parameters (such as a pre-defined 
user population with various deviations), tem-
poral shifts relative to the instant of each cor-
responding deictic reference are issued. The 
paper explains the procedure followed to cre-
ate Virtual Modality data, the details of the 
speech-only database, and results based on a 
multimodal city information and navigation 
application.  
1 Introduction 
Multimodal systems have recently drawn significant 
attention from researchers, and the reasons for such an 
interest are many. First, speech recognition based appli-
cations and systems have become mature enough for 
larger-scale deployment. The underlying technologies 
are gradually exhibiting increased robustness and per-
formance, and from the usability point of view, users 
can see some clear benefits from speech-driven applica-
tions. The next evolutionary step is the extension of the 
"one dimensional" (i.e., speech-only) interface capabili-
ties to include other modalities, such as gesture, sketch, 
gaze, and text. This will lead to a better and more com-
prehensive user experience.  
A second reason is the widely accepted, and ex-
pected, mobility and pervasiveness of computers. De-
vices are getting more and more powerful and versatile; 
they can be connected anywhere and anytime to net-
works, as well as to each other. This poses new de-
mands for the user interface. It is no longer sufficient to 
support only a single input modality. Depending on the 
specific application, the given usage scenario, and the 
context, for example, users should be offered a variety 
of options by which to interact with the system in an 
appropriate and efficient way. 
Third, as the output capabilities of devices provide 
ever-increasing multimedia experiences, it is natural 
that the input mechanism must also deal with various 
modalities in an intuitive and comprehensive manner. If 
a map is displayed to the user, it is natural to expect that 
the user may want to relate to this physical entity, for 
instance, via gestures, pointing, gazing or by other, not 
necessarily speech-based, communicative means. 
Multimodal interfaces give the user alternatives and 
flexibility in terms of the interaction; they are enabling 
rather than restricting. The primary goal is to fully un-
derstand the user's intention, and this can only be real-
ized if all intentional user inputs, as well as any 
available contextual information (e.g., location, prag-
matics, sensory data, user preferences, current and pre-
vious interaction histories) are taken into account.  
This paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 intro-
duces the concept of Virtual Modality and how the mul-
timodal data are generated.  Section 3 explains the 
underlying Galaxy environment and briefly summarizes 
the operation of the Context Resolution module respon-
sible for, among other tasks, resolving deictic refer-
ences.  The data generation as well as statistics is 
covered in Section 4.  The experimental methodology is 
described in Section 5.  Finally, the results are summa-
rized and directions for future work are outlined. 
2 Virtual Modality 
This section explains the underlying concept of Virtual 
Modality, as well as the motivation for the work pre-
sented here. 
2.1 Motivation 
Multiple modalities and multimedia are an essential part 
of our daily lives. Human-human communication relies 
on a full range of input and output modalities, for in-
stance, speech, gesture, vision, gaze, and paralinguistic, 
emotional and sensory information. In order to conduct 
seamless communication between humans and ma-
chines, as many such modalities as possible need to be 
considered.  
Intelligent devices, wearable terminals, and mobile 
handsets will accept multiple inputs from different mo-
dalities (e.g., voice, text, handwriting), they will render 
various media from various sources, and in an intelli-
gent manner they will also be capable of providing addi-
tional, contextual information about the environment, 
the interaction history, or even the actual state of the 
user.  Information such as the emotional, affective state 
of the user, the proximity of physical entities, the dia-
logue history, and biometric data from the user could be 
used to facilitate a more accommodating, and concise 
interaction with a system. Once contextual information 
is fully utilized and multimodal input is supported, then 
the load on the user can be considerably reduced. This is 
especially important for users with severe disabilities. 
Implementing complex multimodal applications 
represents the chicken-and-egg problem. A significant 
amount of data is required in order to build and tune a 
system; on the other hand, without an operational sys-
tem, no real data can be collected. Incremental and rule-
based implementations, as well as quick mock-ups and 
Wizard-of-Oz setups (Lemmel? and Boda, 2002), aim to 
address the application development process from both 
ends; we follow an intermediate approach.  
The work presented here is performed under the as-
sumption that testing and building multimodal systems 
can benefit from a vast amount of multimodal data, even 
if the data is only a result of simulation. Furthermore, 
generating simulated multimodal data from textual data 
is justified by the fact that a multimodal system should 
also operate in speech-only mode. 
2.2 The concept 
Most current multimodal systems are developed with 
particular input modalities in mind.  In the majority of 
cases, the primary modality is speech and the additional 
modality is typically gesture, gaze, sketch, or any com-
bination thereof. Once the actual usage scenario is fixed 
in terms of the available input modalities, subsequent 
work focuses only on these input channels. This is ad-
vantageous on the one hand; however, on the other 
hand, there is a good chance that system development 
will focus on tiny details related to the modality-
dependent nature of the recognizers and their particular 
interaction in the given domain and application sce-
nario. 
Virtual Modality represents an abstraction in this 
sense. The focus is on what semantic units (i.e., mean-
ingful information from the application point of view) 
are delivered in this channel and how this channel aligns 
with the speech channel. Note that the speech channel 
has no exceptional role; it is equal in every sense with 
the Virtual Modality. There is only one specific consid-
eration regarding the speech channel, namely, it con-
veys deictic references that establish connections with 
the semantic units delivered by the Virtual Modality 
channel.  
The abstraction provided by the Virtual Modality 
enables the developer to focus on the interrelation of the 
speech and the additional modalities, in terms of their 
temporal correlation, in order to study and experiment 
with various usage scenarios and usability issues. It also 
means that we do not care how the information deliv-
ered by the Virtual Modality arose, what (ac-
tual/physical) recognition process produced them, nor 
how the recognition processes can influence each 
other?s performance via cross-interaction using early 
evidence available in one channel or in the other - al-
though we acknowledge that this aspect is important and 
desired, as pointed out by Coen (2001) and Haikonen 
(2003), this has not yet been addressed in the first im-
plementation of the model.  
The term ?virtual modality? is not used in the multimo-
dal research community, as far as we know. The only 
occurrence we found is by Marsic and Dorohonceanu 
(2003), however, with ?virtual modality system? they 
refer to a multimodal management module that manages 
and controls various applications sharing common mo-
dalities in the context of telecollaboration user inter-
faces. 
2.3 Operation 
The idea behind Virtual Modality is explained with the 
help of Figure 1.  The upper portion describes how the 
output of a speech recognizer (or direct natural language 
input from keyboard) and a sequence of words, {w1 ?. 
wN}, is transformed into a corresponding sequence of 
concepts, {C1 ?. CM}.  The module responsible for this 
operation, for the sake of simplicity and generality, is 
called a classifier (CL).  In real-life implementations, 
this module can be a sophisticated natural language un-
derstanding (NLU) unit, a simple semantic grammar, or 
a hybrid of several approaches.  
The middle part of Figure 1 exhibits how the Virtual 
Modality is plugged into the classifier. The Virtual Mo-
dality channel (VM) is parallel to the speech channel 
(Sp) and it delivers certain semantic units to the classi-
fier. These semantic units correspond to a portion of the 
word sequence in the speech channel. For instance, the 
original incoming sentence might be, ?From Harvard 
University to MIT.?  In the case of a multimodal setup 
the semantic unit, originally represented by a set of 
words in the speech channel (e.g., ?to MIT?), will be 
delivered by the Virtual Modality as mi. 
The tier between the two modality channels is a 
deictic reference in the speech channel (di in the bottom 
of Figure 1).  There are various realizations of a deictic 
reference, in this example it can be, for example, ?here?, 
?over there?, or ?this university?.  Nevertheless, in all 
cases for these input combinations (i.e., speech only, 
speech and some other modality) the requirement is that 
the very same sequence of semantic concepts is to be 
produced by the classifier.  
There is one more criterion: there must be a tempo-
ral correspondence between the input channels. The 
deictic reference can only be resolved if the input deliv-
ered by the other modality channel is within certain time 
frames. This is indicated tentatively in the figure as mi 
occurring either in synchrony with, prior to, or follow-
ing the deictic reference in time (see Section 4.3).  
 
CL
w1 w2 w3 ?. wN C1 C2 ?. CM
Sp
w1 ? di ? wN
CL
C1 C2 ?. CM
mi
mi
mi
Sp
VM
CL
w1 w2 w3 ?. wN
C1 C2 ?. CM
w2 w3  
Sp
VM
 
 
Figure 1.  The concept of Virtual Modality (Sp and VM stand for the Speech and Virtual 
Modality channels, respectively. CL is a classifier and integrator that transforms and fuses a 
sequence of words, wi, and Virtual Modality inputs, mi, into a corresponding sequence of 
concepts Ck.). 
In the above described model the speech channel will 
always have a deictic replacement when a semantic unit 
is moved to the Virtual Modality channel, although 
Oviatt, DeAngeli and Kuhn (1997) reported their find-
ings that in a given application domain users are not 
even using spoken deictic references in more than half 
of the multimodal input cases. Therefore, to conform to 
this, we keep in mind that di can have a void value, as 
well. 
2.4 The use of Virtual Modality 
The framework described above enables two steps in the 
development of multimodal systems. First, with the in-
troduction of the Virtual Modality, modules designed to 
resolve inputs from multimodal scenarios can be tested.  
Quite often, these inputs alone represent ambiguity and 
the combination of two or more input channels are 
needed to resolve them. 
On the other hand, with the removal of pre-defined 
semantic units to the Virtual Modality channel, a 
multimodal database can be generated from the speech- 
only data.  For instance, in a given application domain, 
all location references can be moved to the Virtual Mo-
dality channel and replaced by randomly chosen deictic 
references.  Furthermore, the temporal relation between 
the deictic reference and the corresponding semantic 
unit in the Virtual Modality can be governed by external 
parameters.  This method facilitates the generation of a 
large amount of ?multimodal? data from only a limited 
amount of textual data.  This new database can then be 
used for the first task, as described above, and equally 
importantly, it can be used to train statistically moti-
vated multimodal integrator/fusion modules. 
As it was pointed out by Oviatt et al (2003), predic-
tive and adaptive integration of multimodal input is nec-
essary in order to provide robust performance for 
multimodal systems. Availability of data, even if it is 
generated artificially, can and will help in the develop-
ment process. 
2.5 Further considerations 
The primary goal of an interactive system is the full 
understanding of the user?s intention in the given con-
text of an application.  Processing all active inputs from 
the user can only attain this task: recognizing and inter-
preting them accurately.  Additionally, by considering 
all passively and implicitly available information (e.g., 
location, sensory data, dialogue history, user prefer-
ences, pragmatics), the system can achieve an even 
fuller understanding of the user?s intention. 
The Virtual Modality can be used to simulate the de-
livery of all the previously described information.  From 
a semantic interpretation point of view, an implicitly 
available piece of information, i.e., the physical location 
of the user (detectable by a mobile device, for instance), 
is equal to an active user input generated in a given mo-
dality channel.  The only difference might be the tempo-
ral availability of the data: a location information 
derived from a mobile device is continuously available 
over a longer period of time, while a user gesture over a 
map specifying, for example the value for a ?from here? 
deictic reference, is present only for a relatively short 
time. 
3 System Architecture 
Researchers in the Spoken Language Systems group at 
MIT have been developing human-computer dialogue 
systems for nearly two decades.  These systems are im-
plemented within the Galaxy Communicator architec-
ture, which is a multimodal conversational system 
framework (Seneff et al, 1998).  As shown in Figure 2, 
a Galaxy system is configured around a central pro-
grammable hub, which handles the communications 
among various human language technology servers, 
including those that handle speech recognition and syn-
thesis, language understanding and generation, context 
resolution, and dialogue management. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  The Galaxy Communicator archi-
tecture. 
 
Several Galaxy domains are currently under develop-
ment at MIT (Zue et al, 1994; Seneff et al, 2000; Zue 
et al, 2000; Seneff, 2002), but the research effort pre-
sented here concerns only Voyager, the traffic and city 
guide domain (Glass et al, 1995; Wang, 2003) - al-
though the Virtual Modality concept is applicable for 
other domains as well.  Voyager?s map-based interface 
provides opportune conditions for the use of multimodal 
input and deictic references.  For example, a typical user 
input may be, ?How do I get from here to there?? which 
is spoken while the user clicks on two different loca-
tions on a graphical map. 
After the utterance has been recognized and parsed, 
the semantic frame representation of the utterance is 
sent to the Context Resolution (CR) server (Filisko and 
Seneff, 2003).  It is the CR server?s duty to interpret the 
user?s utterance in the context of the dialogue history, 
the user?s physical environment, and limited world 
knowledge, via a resolution algorithm. This protocol 
includes a step to resolve any deictic references the user 
has made. 
In addition to the user?s utterance and dialogue his-
tory, all gestures for the current turn are sent to the CR 
server.  All of this contextual information can then be 
utilized to make the most appropriate resolutions of all 
the deictic references. The context-resolved semantic 
frame is finally sent to the dialogue manager, where an 
appropriate reply to the user is formulated. 
The simulation of such an interaction cycle has been 
facilitated by the use of a Batchmode server, developed 
by Polifroni and Seneff (2000). The server receives an 
input (e.g. the text representation of the spoken utter-
ance) from a file of logged or pre-formatted data.  After 
the input has been processed, the next input is obtained 
from the input file, and the cycle continues (more details 
in Section 5). 
4 Data Generation 
4.1 Application domain 
The original data used for generating multimodal simu-
lated inputs are taken from the log files of the Voyager 
application. The Voyager application provides informa-
tion about city landmarks (e.g. universities, museums, 
sport arenas, subway stops), gives navigation guidance 
and up-to-date traffic information over the phone and 
via a graphical interface. Geographically it covers the 
area of Boston and Cambridge in Massachusetts. Users 
can use natural language in the queries and dialogue 
management takes care of user-friendly disambiguation, 
error recovery and history handling. A typical dialogue 
between Voyager (V) and a user (U) is given below: 
 
U: Can you show me the universities in Boston? 
V: Here is a map and list of universities in Boston? 
 
U: What about Cambridge? 
V: Here is a map and list of universities in Cambridge? 
 
U: How do I get there <click Harvard> from here <click MIT>? 
V: Here are directions to Harvard University from MIT? 
 
4.2 Defining a user population 
As mentioned earlier, the data to be generated can be 
used both for testing and for system development. In 
both scenarios, real dialogues should be simulated as 
closely as possible. Therefore a virtual user population 
was defined for each experiment. 
First, the distribution of various user types was de-
fined. A user type is specified in terms of the delay a 
user exhibits with the Virtual Modality data delivery, 
relative to the speech channel. The following six user 
types were defined: outspoken, precise, too-fast, 
quickie, slowhand and everlate. Outspoken is an imagi-
nary user who never uses the Virtual Modality, and 
communicates with the system using only the speech 
modality. Precise always issues the Virtual Modality 
input in synchrony with the spoken deictic reference. 
Too-fast always issues the Virtual Modality input sig-
nificantly earlier than the corresponding deictic refer-
ence in the speech channel, while Quickie issues the 
Virtual Modality input only slightly earlier than the 
deictic reference. Similar rules apply for Slowhand and 
Everlate, except that they issue the Virtual Modality 
input slightly later or much later, respectively, than the 
deictic reference. 
Once the composition of the user population has 
been determined, the corresponding temporal deviations 
must be specified. In a real system the exact instances 
are typically given as elapsed time from a reference 
point specified by a universal time value (with different 
devices synchronized using the Network Time Proto-
col). However, such accuracy is not necessary for the 
experiments. Rather, a simplified measurement is intro-
duced in order to describe intuitively how the Virtual 
Modality input deviates from the instant when the corre-
sponding deictic reference was issued. The unit used 
here is a word distance, more precisely the average 
length of a word (how many words are between the 
deictic reference and the input in the Virtual Modality 
channel). A 0 means that the deictic reference and the 
Virtual Modality event are in synchrony, while a ?1 
(+1) means that the Virtual Modality input was issued 
one word earlier (later) than the corresponding deictic 
reference.  
Using this formalism, the following deviation pat-
tern for the five user types is defined as a starting point 
for the experiments: 
 
Too-fast -2 
Quickie -1 
Precise 0 
Slowhand +1 
Everlate +2 
 
Table 1. Temporal deviation parameters for 
the user types that use the Virtual Modality. 
 
 
4.3 Generation of the multimodal data 
Generating multimodal data is, in a sense, the reverse 
process of the multimodal integration step. Since it is 
known how the deictic references are realized in a given 
domain, generating sentences with deictic references 
once the actual definite phrases are found, seems 
straightforward.  
The idea is simple: find all instances of a given type 
of semantic unit (e.g., location reference) in the input 
sentences, move them to the Virtual Modality channel 
with timing information and, as a replacement, put sen-
sible deictic references back into the original sentences. 
The implementation, however, reveals several prob-
lems. First, identification of the location references is 
not necessarily an easy task. It may require a complex 
parsing or keyword-spotting algorithm, depending on 
the application in question. In our case, the log files 
include the output of the TINA Natural Language Un-
derstanding module, meaning that all semantically rele-
vant units present in an input sentence are marked 
explicitly in the output parse frame (Seneff, 1992). 
Figure 3 gives an example of the parse frame. 
 
{c directions 
   :subject 1 
   :domain "Voyager" 
   :input_string " give me directions from harvard to mit " 
   :utterance_id 6 
   :pred {p from 
            :topic {q university 
                      :name "Harvard University" } } 
   :pred {p to 
           :topic {q university 
           :name "Massachusetts Institute of Technology" } } } 
 
Figure 3.  Parse frame for the input sentence 
?give me directions from harvard to mit?. 
 
The movement and time marker placement step repre-
sents no problem. 
The third step, namely the replacement of the re-
moved semantic units with sensible deictic references, 
requires certain manipulation. Performing the replace-
ment using only deictic references, such as, ?here?, 
?over here?, ?there?, and ?over there?, would result in a 
rather biased data set. Instead, depending on the topic of 
the location reference (e.g., city, road, university), defi-
nite noun phrases like ?this city? and ?that university? 
were also used. Eventually, a look-up table was defined 
which included the above general expressions, as well 
as patterns such as ?this $? and ?that $? in which the 
variable part (i.e., $) was replaced with the actual topic. 
The selection for a sentence was randomly chosen, re-
sulting in good coverage of various deictic references 
for the input sentences. For the example depicted in 
Figure 3, the following sentence is generated: 
 
 
?give me directions from there to this university? 
 
The following is a summary of the overall multimodal 
data generation process: 
 
1. Define the distribution of the user population (e.g., 
outspoken 20%, precise 40%, quickie, 20%, slow-
hand 15%, everlate 5%); 
2. Define the corresponding deviations (see Table 1); 
3. Randomly allocate turns (sentences) to the pre-
defined user types (e.g. 40% of all data will go for 
the precise user type with deviation 0); 
4. Identify all location references in the input sen-
tence based on the parse frame; 
5. Remove all or a pre-defined quantity of location 
expressions from the original sentence and replace 
them with deictic markers; 
6. Place the removed location phrases into the Virtual 
Modality channel; 
7. Place time markers to the Virtual Modality channel 
referring to the original position of the location 
phrases in the input sentence; 
8. Issue the pre-determined time shift, if needed, in 
the Virtual Modality channel; 
9. Randomly select an acceptable deictic reference 
and insert it into the original sentence in place of 
the deictic marker; 
10. Repeat 4-9 until all data has been processed. 
An example of the generated Virtual Modality data and 
the corresponding sentence is shown in Figure 4. 
4.4 Statistics 
Table 2 below details some statistics on data obtained 
from Voyager?s original log files. 
 
  Number of sessions 1099 
Number of turns 6077 
Average number of turns 
per session 5.53 
  All location references 6982 
Average number of refer-
ences per turn 1.14 
Number of different loca-
tion reference patterns 203 
  The five most frequent loca-
tion reference patterns: 
 
in <?.> 
of <?.> 
show_me <?.> 
on <?.> 
from <?.> to <?.> 
 
 
 
9.95% 
8.15% 
6.39% 
5.69% 
3.95% 
Table 2.  Overview of the original Voyager 
data (turn = sentence). 
Although the above table covers the original data, the 
newly generated Virtual Modality database has the same 
characteristics since the location references there be-
come deictic references.  
5 Experiments 
The experimental setup is depicted in Figure 4. The core 
of the system is the Galaxy Communicator architecture 
extended with the Batchmode server (as explained in 
Section 3 and shown in more details in Figure 2). It 
must be noted that although the sentences are taken 
from dialogues, each sentence is processed independ-
ently so the focus of attention is the new aspect intro-
duced by the Virtual Modality. 
There are two runs for each experiment. First, the 
original sentences are input to the Batchmode server and 
then passed to the Voyager application via the Galaxy 
architecture. The outcomes are the corresponding 
frames from the Language Understanding server (the 
Context Resolution server is not invoked due to the ab-
sence of context in this case). The second run takes the 
Virtual Modality data, namely the new sentences with 
the deictic references and the accompanying data for the 
Virtual Modality channel (semantic value, begin-end 
markers). The output frames are produced by the Lan-
guage Understanding module and further processed by 
the Context Resolution server to resolve deictic refer-
ences. 
The last step of the execution is the comparison of 
the frame pairs: one frame for the original sentence and 
the other for the Virtual Modality data.  
The results presented below are from the very initial 
tests; clearly more work is needed to justify the concept 
of Virtual Modality, as well as to fully investigate the 
utilization of the generated data in testing.  
The initial experiments were run on 436 sentences, 
which represent a small portion of the entire database. 
The results indicate that if only one deictic reference per 
sentence is used with zero deviation, the generated out-
put frames are identical to the original sentence output 
frames in 82.03% of the cases. The erroneous results 
occurred when the preposition and a chosen deictic form 
together formed an ungrammatical expression (e.g. 
?how about on over there??). The data generation proc-
ess requires further refinements to decide whether a 
preposition can be used with a randomly selected deictic 
expression.  
In sentences with two deictic references only 
78.26% agreement was achieved. The major reason for 
this is the incorrect replacement of highways and high-
way numbers with deictic references by the data genera-
tion process. Also, awkward combinations of deictic 
references result in incorrect resolution. All these prob-
lems will be addressed in future work. 
Additionally, since the current version of the Con-
text Resolution server has no built-in time limits for 
resolving deictic references, future work will aim to 
incorporate some kind of temporal considerations and 
adaptivity. The Virtual Modality data creation process 
supports the generation of a large amount of time-
shifted versions of the original data, which can be used 
for further testing of the system?s temporal robustness. 
 
Galaxy 
Communicator
Batchmode
server
VM data MM event
database
Original 
sentences
{c directions
:subject 1
:domain "Voyager"
:utterance_id 6
:pred {p from
:topic {q university
:name "Harvard University" } }
:pred {p to
:topic {q university
:name ?MIT" } }
Original frame
{c directions
:subject 1
:domain "Voyager"
:utterance_id 6
:pred {p from
:topic {q university
:name "Harvard University" } }
:pred {p to
:topic {q pronoun
:name ?here" } }
VM frame
?
?From Harvard University to MIT?
?From Harvard University to here?
D1 = ?MIT?
D1_begin = 4
D1_end    = 5
{c directions
:subject 1
:domain "Voyager"
:utterance_id 6
:pred {p from
:topic {q university
:name "Harvard University" } }
:pred {p to
:topic {q university
:name ?MIT" } }
After Context Resolution
 
 
Figure 4. The evaluation procedure 
6 Summary and Future Work 
An experimental framework has been introduced, called 
Virtual Modality, which aims to assist in the develop-
ment and testing of multimodal systems. The paper ex-
plained the motivation behind generating (simulated) 
multimodal data from available textual representations 
of logged user inputs. The procedure of replacing loca-
tion references with deictic expressions, as well as the 
placement of the referenced semantic value along with 
temporal information to the Virtual Modality channel 
were explained. Lastly, the evaluation scenario and pre-
liminary test results were presented. 
Future work will investigate the following topics: 
? how the generated Virtual Modality data can be 
utilized to train a statistical (or hybrid) multimo-
dal integration module; 
? how adaptivity in the integration module can be 
achieved using a vast amount of training data; 
? how N-best choices in the Virtual Modality input 
can be utilized; 
? whether disambiguation can be achieved with 
training examples covering all temporal cases; 
? how evidence in one modality can help to resolve 
some ambiguity in the other modality, and ulti-
mately, how to provide an accurate interpretation 
of the overall user intention. 
7 Acknowledgements 
Thanks to Stephanie Seneff for her comments, to 
Mitchell Peabody for setting up the database server and 
to D. Scott Cyphers for his always-available help with 
the Galaxy system. 
The first author acknowledges the financial support 
from the Nokia Foundation, Suomen Akatemia and the 
Ella and Georg Ehrnrooth Foundation. 
References 
Michael H. Coen.  2001.  ?Multimodal Integration A 
Biological View.?  17th International Joint Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2001, Seattle, 
Washington, USA, August 4?10, pp. 1417?1424. 
Edward Filisko and Stephanie Seneff.  2003.  ?A Con-
text Resolution Server for the Galaxy Conversational 
Systems.?  Eurospeech?2003. Geneva, Switzerland, 
September 1?4, pp. 197?200. 
J. Glass, G. Flammia, D. Goodine, M. Phillips, J. Poli-
froni, S. Sakai, S. Seneff, and V. Zue.  1995.  ?Multi-
lingual Spoken-Language Understanding in the MIT 
Voyager System,? Speech Communication, 17(1-
2):1?18. 
Pentti O. Haikonen.  2003.  The Cognitive Approach to 
Conscious Machines. Imprint Academic, Exeter, UK. 
Saija-Maaria Lemmel? and P?ter P?l Boda. 2002.  ?Ef-
ficient Combination of Type-In and Wizard-of-Oz 
Tests in Speech Interface Development Process.? 
ICSLP'2002, Denver, CO, September 16?20, pp. 
1477?1480. 
Ivan Marsic and Bogdan Dorohonceanu.  2003.  ?Flexi-
ble User Interfaces for Group Collaboration?. Inter-
national Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 
Vol.15, No.3, pp. 337-360. 
Sharon Oviatt, Antonella DeAngeli and Karen Kuhn.  
1997.  ?Integration and Synchronization of Input 
Modes During Multimodal Human-Computer Inter-
action.?  Conference on Human Factors in Comput-
ing Systems, CHI '97.  ACM Press, New York. 
Sharon Oviatt, Rachel Coulston, Stefanie Tomko, Ben-
fang Xiao, Rebecca Lunsford, Matt Wesson, and 
Lesley Carmichael.  2003.  ?Toward a Theory of Or-
ganized Multimodal Integration Patterns During 
Human-Computer Interaction.? 5th International 
Conference on Multimodal Interfaces, ICMI?2003, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, pp. 44?51. 
Joseph Polifroni and Stephanie Seneff.  2000.  ?Galaxy-
II as an Architecture for Spoken Dialogue Evalua-
tion.?  2nd International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC).  Athens, Greece. 
Stephanie Seneff.  1992.  ?TINA: A Natural Language 
System for Spoken Language Applications,?  Com-
putational Linguistics, 18(1):61?86. 
Stephanie Seneff.  2002.  ?Response Planning and Gen-
eration in the MERCURY Flight Reservation System,? 
Computer Speech and Language, 16:283?312. 
Stephanie Seneff, Chian Chuu, and D. Scott Cyphers.  
2000.  ?ORION:  From On-line Interaction to Off-line 
Delegation.?  ICSLP?2000, Beijing, China, October, 
pp. 142?145. 
Stephanie Seneff, Ed Hurley, Raymond Lau, Christine 
Pao, P. Schmid, and Victor Zue.  1998.  ?Galaxy-II:  
A Reference Architecture for Conversational System 
Development.?  ICSLP?1998, pp. 931?934.  
Sy Bor Wang.  2003.  A Multimodal Galaxy-based 
Geographic System.  S.M. thesis, MIT Department of 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. 
Victor Zue, Stephanie Seneff, Joseph Polifroni, Michael 
Phillips, Christine Pao, D. Goodine, David Goddeau, 
and James Glass.  1994.  ?PEGASUS: A Spoken Dia-
logue Interface for On-line Air Travel Planning,? 
Speech Communication, 15(3?4):331?340. 
Victor Zue, Stephanie Seneff, James Glass, Joseph Poli-
froni, Christine Pao, Timothy J. Hazen, and I. Lee 
Hetherington.  2000.  ?JUPITER:  A Telephone-based 
Conversational Interface for Weather Information,?  
IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing, 
8(1):85?96. 
