Unsupervised, corpus-based method for extending
a biomedical terminology
Olivier Bodenreider Thomas C. Rindflesch Anita Burgun
Lister Hill National Center
for Biomedical Communications
National Library of Medicine
Bethesda, Maryland, 20894 - USA
{olivier|tcr}@nlm.nih.gov
LIM - University of Rennes
Avenue du Pr L?on Bernard
35043 Rennes Cedex - France
Anita.Burgun
@univ-rennes1.fr


Abstract
Objectives: To automatically extend
downwards an existing biomedical termi-
nology using a corpus and both lexical
and terminological knowledge. Methods:
Adjectival modifiers are removed from
terms extracted from the corpus (three
million noun phrases extracted from
MEDLINE), and demodified terms are
searched for in the terminology (UMLS
Metathesaurus, restricted to disorders and
procedures). A phrase from MEDLINE
becomes a candidate term in the Metathe-
saurus if the following two requirements
are met: 1) a demodified term created
from this phrase is found in the terminol-
ogy and 2) the modifiers removed to cre-
ate the demodified term also modify
existing terms from the terminology, for a
given semantic category. A manual re-
view of a sample of candidate terms was
performed. Results: Out of the 3 million
simple phrases randomly extracted from
MEDLINE, 125,000 new terms were
identified for inclusion in the UMLS.
83% of the 1000 terms reviewed manually
were associated with a relevant UMLS
concept. Discussion: The limitations of
this approach are discussed, as well as ad-
aptation and generalization issues.
1 Introduction
Although providing a reasonable coverage of the
clinical subdomain, Chute et al (1996) showed
that terminological resources such as the Interna-
tional Classificaton of Diseases, SNOMED Inter-
national or the UMLS Metathesaurus do not
capture all the concepts needed for representing
clinical concepts in patient records. In a subsequent
study, Chute and Elkin (1997) suggested that quali-
fiers (including adjectival modifiers) be available
as a separate axis, in order to both increase the ex-
pressivity of a terminology and reduce its com-
plexity by limiting the number of pre-coordinated
terms.
In this study, rather than reducing the complex-
ity, we use modification phenomena in order to
investigate a corpus-based methodology for auto-
matically discovering new terms for inclusion in a
controlled vocabulary. In other words, our objec-
tive is to acquire hyponyms for terms in an original
vocabulary that appear in the literature but are not
present in the original vocabulary.
2 Background
Terms play a major role in a variety of natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) applications, including
machine translation, text understanding, automatic
indexing, and information retrieval. Taking advan-
tage of the availability of large corpora, automatic
terminology acquisition methods were developed,
for example, by Bourigault and Jacquemin (1999).
Word affinities generally play a central role in
these methods. Grefenstette (1994) defines three
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                            the Biomedical Domain, Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 53-60.
                         Proceedings of the Workshop on Natural Language Processing in
orders of word affinities. ?First order affinities de-
scribe collocates of words, second-order affinities
show similarly used words, and third-order affini-
ties create semantic groupings among similar
words?. In term extraction, this analysis is often
applied to modifiers in order to establish groups of
terms modified by a given modifier or the list of all
possible modifiers for a given term.
Hersh et al (1996) demonstrated the feasibility
of applying natural language processing techniques
to a corpus of clinical narratives from an electronic
medical record (EMR) system. Although the terms
extracted were compared to existing terms in the
UMLS, the goal of this study was vocabulary dis-
covery, but not the automatic integration of newly
discovered terms into the terminology.
The automatic extension of an existing resource
based on a corpus has also been studied. For ex-
ample, Habert et al (1998) propose a method for
extending an existing specialized semantic lexicon.
Although related to these studies, our objective
is to automatically extend downwards an existing
biomedical terminology using a corpus and a com-
bination of lexical, syntactic, and terminological
knowledge.

In this study, the textual source, or corpus, is
MEDLINE? 1, the U.S. National Library of Medi-
cine?s (NLM) premier bibliographic database.
MEDLINE contains over eleven million references
to articles from more than 4,600 worldwide jour-
nals in life sciences with a concentration on bio-
medicine.
We use the Unified Medical Language System?
(UMLS?) Metathesaurus? 2 as the terminology to
be extended. The Metathesaurus, also developed
by NLM, is organized by concept or meaning. A
concept is defined as a cluster of terms represent-
ing the same meaning (synonyms, lexical variants,
acronyms, translations). For example, names for
the disease multiple sclerosis include multiple scle-
rosis, MS, ?multiple sclerosis, NOS?, disseminated
sclerosis, and scl?rose en plaques. The 13th edition
(2002) of the UMLS Metathesaurus contains over
1.5 million unique English terms drawn from more
than sixty families of medical vocabularies, and
organized in some 775,000 concepts.
                                                         
1
 www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/factsheets/medline.html
2
 umlsks.nlm.nih.gov
In order to address the large size of the
Metathesaurus, we limited our study to a signifi-
cant subdomain of clinical medicine: disorders and
procedures (currently about 615,000 unique terms,
corresponding to some 157,000 disorder concepts
and 95,000 medical procedure concepts).
In the UMLS, each concept is categorized by
semantic types (ST) from the semantic network.
McCray et al (2001) designed groupings of STs
that provide a partition the Metathesaurus and,
therefore, can be used to extract consistent sets of
concepts corresponding to a subdomain, such as
disorders or procedures.
Disorder and procedure terms were restricted to
terms suitable for natural language processing, ex-
cluding, for example, such terms as abdominal in-
jury, NOS. The notation ?NOS?, meaning ?not
otherwise specified?, is a marker for underspecifi-
cation often found in terminological resources.
When identified in the Metathesaurus, obsolete and
truncated terms were also excluded. 477,491
unique terms were selected for further processing.
3 Methods
The approach we propose for discovering candi-
dates for Metathesaurus concepts is to compare
phrases extracted from MEDLINE to current
UMLS phrases. We capitalize on differences in
modification structure between the MEDLINE
phrase and the UMLS phrase to determine candi-
dates for inclusion in the Metathesaurus. The cru-
cial difference is between a phrase containing
adjectival modification and a similar phrase ?de-
modified? by removing its adjectives.
A phrase from MEDLINE becomes a candidate
term in the Metathesaurus if the following two re-
quirements are met: 1) a demodified term created
from this phrase is found in the terminology and 2)
similarly modified terms exist in the terminology,
for a given semantic category. For example, the
phrase pancreatic bronchogenic cyst  is a candidate
term for a disorder in the Metathesaurus because
bronchogenic cyst  exists in the Metathesaurus
(concept: C0006281) and other Metathesaurus dis-
order terms are modified by the same adjective
pancreatic  (e.g., pancreatic hemorrhage).
3.1 Processing phrases from MEDLINE
Recently, Srinivasan et al (2002) performed a
shallow syntactic analysis on the entire MEDLINE
collection, using only titles and abstracts in Eng-
lish. Although their goal was to find Metathesaurus
concepts in MEDLINE citations, an interesting
side-effect of their analysis was the production of
some 175 million noun phrase types that are avail-
able for further research.
From these phrases, we selected the subset of
?simple? phrases, i.e., noun phrases excluding
prepositional modification or any other complex
feature. Examples of simple MEDLINE noun
phrases include abdominal aneurysmal aortitis  and
radical aggressive tumor resection. Out of some
forty million simple noun phrases, we randomly
selected a subset of three million phrases to be
used as our corpus, representative of the noun
phrases found in MEDLINE.
The phrases in our sample were then submitted
to an underspecified syntactic analysis described
by Rindflesch et al (2000) that draws on a stochas-
tic tagger (see Cutting et al (1992) for details) as
well as the SPECIALIST Lexicon, a large syntactic
lexicon of both general and medical English that is
distributed with the UMLS. Although not perfect,
this combination of resources effectively addresses
the phenomenon of part-of-speech ambiguity in
English.
The resulting syntactic structure identifies the
head and modifiers for the noun phrase analyzed.
Each modifier is also labeled as being adjectival,
adverbial, or nominal. Although all types of modi-
fication in the simple English noun phrase were
labeled, only adjectives and nouns were selected
for further analysis in this study. For example, the
term catastrophic cervical spinal cord injuries  was
analyzed as:
[[mod([catastrophic,adj]),
  mod([cervical,adj]),
  mod([spinal,adj]),
  mod([cord,noun]),
  head([injuries,noun])]]
A similar analysis was performed on UMLS
terms for disorders and procedures.
3.2 Comparing MEDLINE phrases to UMLS
phrases
The method we use can be summarized as follows.
Starting with a random subset of three million sim-
ple noun phrases from MEDLINE, we excluded
those that were already present in the UMLS by
mapping them to the Metathesaurus. We then per-
formed a shallow syntactic analysis of the phrases
in order to select those consisting of one or more
modifiers followed by a head noun.
Demodified terms were created by removing
every possible combinations of modifiers in the
terms. The same process was applied to disorder
and procedure terms in the Metathesaurus in order
to obtain a list of allowable adjectival modifiers for
these two categories. Such modifiers in the
Metathesaurus serve as a filter for MEDLINE
phrases, since finding a similarly modified term in
the UMLS is one of the two requirements for can-
didate terms. Demodified terms created from acci-
dental arterial perforations  include arterial
perforations, accidental perforations, and perfora-
tions.
Demodified terms derived from MEDLINE
phrases whose modifiers are all allowable are then
mapped to the Metathesaurus. In this example,
both accidental  and arterial  are adjectives found in
the Metathesaurus in disorder or procedure terms.
The second requirement for candidate terms is that
at least one associated demodified term be mapped
to a concept in the Metathesaurus. Two terms from
our example map to Metathesaurus concepts: arte-
rial perforations  and perforations. The term acci-
dental perforations  does not map to any concept
and is therefore eliminated from further process-
ing. The last step ensures that, in case of multiple
demodified terms, the finest-grained is selected.
Arterial perforations  is selected over perforations
for this reason.
Figure 1 illustrates the sequence of methods
used in the study and the interactions between
processing MEDLINE phrases and Metathesaurus
terms. It also presents the number of MEDLINE
phrases and Metathesaurus terms present before
and after each of the six steps detailed below.
Step1. Mapping phrases to the UMLS
In order to identify MEDLINE phrases that already
exist in the Metathesaurus, all MEDLINE phrases
in our sample were mapped to the UMLS by first
attempting an exact match between input term and
Metathesaurus concept. If an exact match failed,
normalization was then attempted. This process
makes the input and target terms potentially com-
patible by eliminating such inessential differences
as inflection, case and hyphen variation, as well as
word order variation. Duplicate names were re-
moved from each set prior to mapping to the
UMLS.
Step 2. Identifying (adj+, noun*, head) phrases
Since this method is based on adjectival modifica-
tion, the syntactic analysis was used to restrict the
original sets of MEDLINE phrases and Metathe-
saurus terms to phrases and terms having the fol-
lowing structure: (adj+, noun*, head).
The phrase is required to start with an adjectival
modifier, possibly followed by other adjectives and
end with a head noun, possibly preceded by other
nouns. This specification excludes both simple
terms (e.g., one isolated noun) and complex terms,
not suitable for our analysis.
Step 3. Creating demodified terms
When adjectival modifiers are identified in a term
O, a set of demodified terms {T1, T2,?,Tn} is cre-
ated by removing from term O any combinations
of adjectival modifiers found in it. While the struc-
ture of the demodified terms remains syntactically
correct, the semantics of some terms may be
anomalous, especially when adjectives other than
the leftmost are removed. Since most of them are
semantically valid, we found it convenient to keep
all demodified terms for further analysis. Demodi-
fied terms with incorrect semantics will be filtered
out later in the experiment, since they will not map
to an existing concept.
The number of demodified terms is 2m ? 1, m
being the number of adjectival modifiers. For ex-
ample, the term chronic sciatic constriction injury
starts with the two adjectival modifiers chronic  and
sciatic, so that the following three demodified
terms are generated sciatic constriction injury,
chronic constriction injury, and constriction injury.
Although there is no need to demodify UMLS
terms in this study, the removal of adjectival modi-
fiers was used to establish a list of adjectives oc-
curring in disorder and procedure terms. These
adjectives constitute the list of allowable modifiers
for the two categories of terms studied.
Step 4. Searching for similarly modified terms
in the Metathesaurus
In this study, one requirement for candidate terms
is that a similarly modified term be present in the
terminology. The list of allowable modifiers com-
puted from Metathesaurus terms at the previous
step provides a simple way to implement this con-
straint. For a given category, an allowable modifier
indicates that some terms from this category are
modified by this modifier, i.e., that a similarly
modified term exists in the Metathesaurus.
Practically, MEDLINE phrases whose adjecti-
val modifiers do not all belong to the list of allow-
able modifiers are excluded from further analysis,
because, by definition, there will be no similarly
modified term in the Metathesaurus.
Step 5. Searching for demodified terms in the
Metathesaurus
The second requirement for a MEDLINE phrase to
become a candidate term is that a demodified term
created from this phrase be found in the terminol-
ogy. Using only MEDLINE phrases whose adjec-
tival modifiers all belong to the list of allowable
modifiers, the demodified terms created from these
phrases are mapped to the UMLS using the proce-
dure previously described. MEDLINE phrases with
no demodified term mapped to a UMLS concept
are definitely excluded. Demodified terms map-
ping to concepts in categories other than disorders
or procedures are also eliminated.
As explained earlier, the compatibility of the
modifiers of the candidate terms is checked against
the list of allowable modifiers for the category of
the Metathesaurus concept(s) to which a demodi-
fied term mapped. In some cases, a cadidate term
is eliminated because the modified term maps to a
disorder concept, while its modifiers are compati-
ble with procedures (or the other way around).
Step 6. Hooking candidate terms to the termi-
nology
The remaining step consists of finding the appro-
priate hook in the terminology for the candidate
term. Based on the fact that modification is nor-
mally associated with a hyponymic relation, tenta-
tive parents for the candidate term will be those
that map to the demodified terms generated from
this term.
When only one demodified term maps to a
Metathesaurus concept, this concept is selected as
the tentative parent for the candidate term. When
several demodified terms map to Metathesaurus
concepts, the preference is given to the concept
that is likely to be closest to the term. As a surro-
gate for closeness, we use the following heuristics:
1) the fewer modifiers removed, the closer the
terms, and 2) the candidate term and the demodi-
fied term are closer if the modifier removed is the
leftmost modifier. In the rare cases where several
demodified terms are deemed equally close to the
candidate term, they are all selected as tentative
parents.
4 Evaluation
A subset of 1000 candidate terms was randomly
selected to evaluate this method. The existence of a
hyponymic relationship between the candidate
term and the Metathesaurus concept(s) selected as
valid mappings for the demodified terms created
from the candidate term was evaluated by a manual
review performed by the authors. A secondary ob-
jective of this evaluation was to gain insights about
how these methods could be tuned in order to pre-
vent inaccurate mappings and select the most use-
ful candidate terms.
The following classification was used to de-
scribe the quality of the hyponymic relationship
between the candidate term and the Metathesaurus
concept(s) selected: ?relevant? means that the
hooking of the candidate term to the terminology
was relevant, even if a more specific concept was
available; ?non relevant? means that none of the
Metathesaurus concepts selected was a correct
hook for the candidate term; ?more or less rele-
vant? means that the Metathesaurus concepts se-
lected were not irrelevant as hooks, but were
distant ancestors, i. e., too general for the relation-
ship to be fully informative. Finally, for polyse-
mous candidate terms, it was not possible to
evaluate the quality of the relationship with cer-
tainty.
5 Results
Out of the 3 million randomly selected simple
MEDLINE phrases, 125,464 phrases were selected
as candidate terms with (at least) one Metathesau-
rus concept to hook them to. Details about the
number of phrases selected at each step of the
processing are given in Figure 1.
The total number of adjectival modifiers found
in a MEDLINE phrase ranged from 1 to 7. Phrases
with one (42% of the phrases) or two (46% of the
phrases) modifiers predominated. The candidate
terms resulted from removing one modifier from
the original phrase in 66% of the cases, and two
modifiers in 30% of the cases. The modifier(s) re-
moved included the leftmost modifier in 95% of
the cases. The list of the most frequent modifiers in
existing terms and candidate terms for disorders
and procedures is given in Table 1.
In 78% of the cases, only one demodified term
was generated from the original phrase. Two de-
modified terms were generated in 17% of the
cases. In 61% of the cases, only the leftmost adjec-
tive was removed. The first two adjectives in the
phrase were removed in 29% of the cases.
Out of the 1000 candidate terms reviewed as
hyponyms of some Metathesaurus concept, 834
were considered relevant, 28 more or less relevant,
and 138 not relevant.
6 Discussion
This study confirms the observations made in two
previous studies taking advantage of adjectival
modification phenomena in various tasks related to
terminologies, in particular to suggest hyponymic
relations among medical terms [Bodenreider et al
(2001)] and to assess the consistency of a biomedi-
cal terminology [Bodenreider et al (2002)].
Although a larger-scale evaluation would be re-
quired to fully assess the results, the major finding
is that the method is effective at automatically
identifying many new terms for inclusion into an
extended terminological resource. However, the
evaluation revealed some limitations which are
analyzed below. Adaptation and generalization
issues will be addressed as well.
Limitations
The errors discovered during the manual review
illustrate some of the limitations of this method.
More exactly, these limitations are common to
many NLP applications. Although acronyms were
sometimes associated with their correct meaning in
the Metathesaurus, in the set of terms reviewed
manually, the presence of acronyms was responsi-
ble for 22% of the non-relevant associations. For
example, the MEDLINE term individual black
rats, whose two adjectival modifiers are allowable
disease modifiers, is wrongly identified as a hypo-
nym of recurrent acute tonsillitis  because the ac-
ronym RAT is associated (as a synonym) with the
disease recurrent acute tonsillitis  in the Metathe-
saurus. In some cases, failure to identify the correct
part of speech also resulted in inaccurate associa-
tions (e.g., controlling stress  to stress  where con-
trolling was actually not an adjective). Not all
truncated terms present in the Metathesaurus syno-
nyms of some concepts are identified as such.
When not identified, truncated terms are used for
the mapping, sometimes resulting in inaccurate
associations. For example, the candidate term uri-
nary protein is wrongly associated with the con-
cept protein measurement  because protein is
considered a synonym for the procedure protein
measurement  in the Metathesaurus.
Sometimes, the association is not inaccurate,
but the concept associated with the candidate term
is very general, and the relationship weakly infor-
mative. For example, once demodified, aplastic
syndrome  is associated with syndrome, a concept
close to the top of the hierarchy. Although aplastic
syndrome  is a valid hyponym of syndrome, it
would be more accurately categorized as a kind of
hematologic syndrome, which requires domain
knowledge unavailable here.
Finally, in some cases, because hyponymy is
the only relation considered, the association of a
candidate term with a Metathesaurus concept, al-
though relevant, is not necessarily the closest pos-
sible. For example, the term colonic vaginal fistula
is correctly associated with its hypernym vaginal
fistula, but fails to be identified as a synonym of
the concept fistula of vagina to large intestine.
Practically, in a completely automatic setting, the
use of this algorithm could result in creating sev-
eral concepts for the same meaning.
Tuning
This algorithm can be tuned from a strict mode,
allowing fewer phrases to automatically become
candidate terms, but with greater precision, to a
relaxed mode, selecting a larger number of candi-
date terms when recall is the priority. The latter
would require some supervision prior to integrating
the candidate terms into the terminology.
Almost all the limitations mentioned above can
be addressed. Terms containing acronyms could be
identified and eliminated before mapping to the
Metathesaurus. Part of speech taggers trained on a
terminology would more accurately identify the
part of speech of words that can be both adjectives
and nouns. Truncated Metathesaurus terms should
be systematically excluded from the index used for
mapping. Methods for identifying synonymy based
on derivational variation or other techniques could
also be investigated.
Moreover, additional refinement could be
brought to this method. For example, when de-
modified terms are created, the removal of adjec-
tives could be restricted to the leftmost, thus
maximally preserving the structure of the remain-
ing noun phrase, and therefore limiting the risks of
association with a semantically distant concept.
Finally, using statistical information about the
distribution of adjectival modifiers could provide a
surrogate for the strength of the association. For
example, knowing that many diseases can be acute,
if this adjective is found in the corpus as the modi-
fier of a disease concept, this association could be
accepted with a confidence proportional to the
relative frequency of this modifier for all diseases,
in the case of acute for a disease, a high confi-
dence.
Generalization
The method presented was voluntarily restricted to
the domain of disorders and procedures, to adjecti-
val modification, and to the biomedical literature.
Generalizing to other domains would pose no
problems as long as terms of their terminology is
amenable to natural language processing tech-
niques and modification phenomena. This would
include domains such as anatomy or physiology.
However, domains such as molecular biology, with
many gene and gene product names, and chemis-
try, with many chemical names would probably
yield fewer candidate terms.
Nominal modification is common in English
and in principle can be addressed with a methodol-
ogy similar to the one discussed here. Nominal
modifiers often express a quality more closely re-
lated semantically to the head than do adjectives.
Details in the methodology would be adjusted to
accommodate this characteristic.
Generalization to other corpora such as patient
records and electronic textbooks of medicine
would likely yield additional terms.

Finally, although this method relies on features
of the UMLS such as the semantic categorization
of the concepts, it could also be applied to other
terminologies that do not provide this feature, such
as the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH). In this
case, the concept hierarchy itself could be used as a
surrogate for the categorization. For example, if
the candidate term chronic rheumatic fever  is asso-
ciated with the MeSH term rheumatic fever, its
category is disease because the polyhierarchical
structure in which rheumatic fever  is involved ul-
timately converges to the top of the C hierarchy,
i.e., the term diseases.
References
Bodenreider, O., Burgun, A., and Rindflesch, T. C.
(2001). Lexically-suggested hyponymic relations
among medical terms and their representation in the
UMLS. Proceedings of TIA'2001 "Terminology and
Artificial Intelligence", 11-21.
Bodenreider, O., Burgun, A., and Rindflesch, T. C.
(2002). Assessing the consistency of a biomedical
terminology through lexical knowledge. Proceedings
of the Workshop on Natural Language Processing in
Biomedical Applications (NLPBA'2002), 77-83.
Bourigault, D., and Jacquemin, C. (1999). Term Extrac-
tion + Term Clustering: An Integrated Platform for
Computer-Aided Terminology. Proceedings of the
Ninth Conference of the European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (EACL'99).
Chute, C. G., Cohn, S. P., Campbell, K. E., Oliver, D.
E., and Campbell, J. R. (1996). The content coverage
of clinical classifications. For The Computer-Based
Patient Record Institute's Work Group on Codes &
Structures. J Am Med Inform Assoc  3, 224-233.
Chute, C. G., and Elkin, P. L. (1997). A clinically de-
rived terminology: qualification to reduction. Proc
AMIA Annu Fall Symp, 570-574.
Cutting, D. R., Kupiec, J., Pedersen, J. O., and Sibun, P.
(1992). A practical part-of-speech tagger. Proceed-
ings of the Third Conference on Applied Natural
Language Processing, 133-140.
Grefenstette, G. (1994). Corpus-derived first, second
and third-order word affinities. Paper presented at:
EURALEX (Amsterdam).
Habert, B., Nazarenko, A., Zweigenbaum, P., and
Bouaud, J. (1998).  Extending an existing specialized
semantic lexicon. Proceedings of the First Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, 663-668.
Hersh, W. R., Campbell, E. H., Evans, D. A., and
Brownlow, N. D. (1996). Empirical, automated vo-
cabulary discovery using large text corpora and ad-
vanced natural language processing tools. Proc
AMIA Annu Fall Symp, 159-163.
McCray, A. T., Burgun, A., and Bodenreider, O. (2001).
Aggregating UMLS semantic types for reducing con-
ceptual complexity. Medinfo  10, 216-220.
Rindflesch, T. C., Rajan, J. V., and Hunter, L. (2000).
Extracting molecular binding relationships from
biomedical text. In "Proceedings of the 6th Applied
Natural Language Processing Conference" (San
Francisco, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers), pp. 188-
195.
Srinivasan, S., Rindflesch, T. C., Hole, W. T., and
Aronson, A. R. (2002). Finding UMLS Metathesau-
rus concepts in MEDLINE. Proc AMIA Annu Fall
Symp, (submitted).




Table 1. Most frequent modifiers identified in existing terms (UMLS)
and candidate terms (MEDLINE) for disorders and procedures.

Disorder terms Procedure terms
MEDLINE UMLS MEDLINE UMLS
severe congenital using surgical
chronic acute clinical serum
acute accidental two diagnostic
primary intentional routine dental
human chronic conventional local
recurrent pulmonary surgical therapeutic
pulmonary malignant initial total
multiple cerebral human patient
two renal total percutaneous
malignant benign standard cardiac

2,979,060
phrases not in UMLS
3,000,000
randomly selected
?simple? MEDLINE phrases
map to
UMLS
477,491
unique English terms
(disorders and procedures)
1,586,469
UMLS Metathesaurus
unique English terms
select disorders +
procedures
79,610
(mod+, head) terms
(adj+, noun*, head)
filter
remove
modifiers
3,114
procedure
modifiers
6,951
disorder
modifiers
1,322,468
(mod+, head) phrases
2,826,848
demodified terms
1,619,338
selected demodified terms
130,352
selected demodified terms +
UMLS mapping (diso./proc.)
(adj+, noun*, head)
filter
remove
modifiers
filter
modifiers
map to
UMLS
125,464
candidate terms
select
mapping






 


Figure 1. Summary of the methods for comparing MEDLINE phrases to UMLS terms.
Exploring adjectival modification in biomedical discourse 
across two genres 
Olivier Bodenreider Serguei V. Pakhomov 
Lister Hill National Center 
for Biomedical Communications 
National Library of Medicine 
Bethesda, Maryland, 20894 ? USA 
Division of Medical Informatics Research 
Department of Health Sciences Research 
Mayo Clinic 
Rochester, Minnesota, 55905 ? USA 
olivier@nlm.nih.gov Pakhomov.Serguei@mayo.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
Objectives: To explore the phenomenon 
of adjectival modification in biomedical 
discourse across two genres: the biomedi-
cal literature and patient records. Meth-
ods: Adjectival modifiers are removed 
from phrases extracted from two corpora 
(three million noun phrases extracted 
from MEDLINE, on the one hand, and 
clinical notes from the Mayo Clinic, on 
the other). The original phrases, the adjec-
tives extracted, and the resulting demodi-
fied phrases are compared across the two 
corpora after normalization. Quantitative 
comparisons (frequency of occurrence) 
are performed on the whole domain. 
Qualitative comparisons are performed on 
the two subdomains (disorders and proce-
dures). Results: Although the average 
number of adjectives per phrase is equiva-
lent in the two corpora (1.4), there are 
more adjective types in MAYO than in 
MEDLINE for disorders and procedures. 
For disorder phrases, the 38% of adjective 
types common to the two corpora account 
for 85% of the occurrences. The predomi-
nance of adjectives in one corpus is ana-
lyzed. Discussion: Potential applications 
of this approach are discussed, namely 
terminology acquisition, information re-
trieval, and genre characterization. 
1 Introduction 
In previous studies, we demonstrated the feasi-
bility of using NLP techniques such as shallow 
parsing of adjectival modification for identifying 
hierarchical relations among biomedical terms 
(Bodenreider et al, 2001) and for extending an 
existing biomedical terminology (Bodenreider et 
al., 2002). In these studies, the corpus was bio-
medical terminology or phrases extracted from the 
biomedical literature. 
Other authors have explored adjectival modifi-
cation in a clinical corpus. Chute and Elkin (1997) 
note, based on empirical observation of clinical 
data, that many clinical terms are accompanied by 
modifiers, including adjectives. The authors make 
a distinction between clinical modifiers (such as 
chronic, severe, and acute) and operational or ad-
ministrative qualifiers (such as no evidence of, his-
tory of, and status post). It appears that the class of 
clinical modifiers consists primarily of adjectives 
that provide specific information regarding condi-
tion and are distributed on a scale. They suggest 
that operational modifiers be kept separate from 
the terms themselves in order to avoid combinato-
rial explosion. 
Taking this idea one step further, we believe 
that, besides operational modifiers, other adjectives 
encountered in clinical phrases could receive a 
special treatment in applications such as informa-
tion retrieval. For example, adjectives expressing 
nuances useful only in the context of clinical care 
could be removed from the phrase when searching 
the biomedical literature. This is the case of adjec-
tives expressing degree of certainty (e.g., prob-
able). In other cases, adjectives specific to clinical 
phrases can be mapped to synonyms or closely 
related modifiers (e.g., greenish sputum, green 
sputum). The ability to map stylistic variations of 
the same adjective becomes especially important to 
establishing links between clinical records and sci-
entific literature, which actually has significant 
implications for improving patient care in clinical 
practice as well as health science research. Finally, 
adjectives absent from the biomedical literature or 
terminologies may denote recent phenomena, not 
yet integrated in terminologies. 
Knowledge about these classes of adjectives 
may help map across genres. Conversely, studying 
adjectival modification across genres may help 
identify adjectives whose representation varies 
across genres, possibly denoting one of these phe-
nomena. 
In the present paper, we explore the phenome-
non of adjectival modification across two genres: 
the biomedical literature and patient records. The 
expected outcome of this study is to obtain a better 
characterization of adjectival modification in bio-
medical phrases of various origins, in order to fully 
take advantage of this phenomenon in applications 
such as the automatic construction of terminology 
and ontology resources and the retrieval of clinical 
documents. 
2 Background 
Adjectival modification as well as lexical seman-
tics of adjectives has been studied extensively in 
the linguistic and NLP literature. Most approaches 
have been directed at creating adjective taxono-
mies and other ways of classifying and represent-
ing adjectives according to their properties and 
function. Raskin and Niernburg (1995) provide a 
comprehensive overview of the various approaches 
that have been taken to description, classification 
and representation of adjectives. 
From the NLP standpoint, Fellbaum (1993) par-
titions adjectives in WordNet? 1 into two large 
classes: descriptive and relational. Descriptive ad-
jectives ?ascribe a value of an attribute to a noun? 
(p.27) (i.e., big child) while relational adjectives 
are usually derived from and are somehow associ-
ated with a noun (i.e., musical child). Another 
prominent distinction has to do with whether an 
adjective can express continuous (scalar) or dis-
crete (non-scalar) values. Raskin and Niernburg 
(1996) point out that for text meaning representa-
                                                          
1
 www.cogsci.princeton.edu/~wn/ 
tion for computational semantics, the most impor-
tant distinction to make is between scalar and non-
scalar. They also present a method for incorporat-
ing the semantics of the modifier adjective into the 
semantics of the modified noun by representing 
nouns as frames with elements such as 
ATTRIBUTE_SIZE than can be filled in by the 
semantic content of the modifying adjectives. 
The major contribution of this study is to ex-
plore adjectival modification across two genres in 
the biomedical domain. Our approach is essentially 
practical and oriented towards applied perspec-
tives. 
3 Resources 
The two genres compared in this study are the 
biomedical literature and patient records. More 
precisely, we use MEDLINE as our bibliographic 
corpus and clinical notes recorded at the Mayo 
Clinic as our clinical corpus. 
MEDLINE? 2, the U.S. National Library of 
Medicine?s (NLM) premier bibliographic database, 
contains over twelve million references to articles 
from more than 4,600 worldwide journals in life 
sciences with a concentration on biomedicine. 
Srinivasan et al (2002) performed a shallow syn-
tactic analysis on the entire MEDLINE collection, 
using only titles and abstracts in English. From the 
175 million noun phrase types identified in their 
study, we selected the subset of ?simple? phrases, 
i.e., noun phrases excluding prepositional modifi-
cation or any other complex feature. In this study, 
a randomly selected subset of three million of these 
simple noun phrases constitutes our bibliographic 
corpus. 
The Mayo Clinic is a group medical practice in 
the United States and spans all recognized medical 
care settings and specialties. Currently over 50,000 
patient visits occur each week that generate 40,000 
medical documentation entries in Mayo electronic 
record that principally consists of text narratives. 
The current size of the collection is approaching 
fifteen million notes and each note has on average 
200 to 250 words of text. For this study we consid-
ered only the most current sample of the clinical 
notes collection ? 1,783,377 documents recorded 
in 2002. Only simple noun phrases of the same 
type extracted from MEDLINE were extracted 
                                                          
2
 www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi 
from this corpus, resulting in a set of 9,665,942 
phrases. A randomly selected subset of three mil-
lion of these simple noun phrases constitutes our 
clinical corpus. 
In both cases, the noun phrases were first nor-
malized for case, so that the two subsets studied 
represent three million noun phrase types each. 
 
Another resource used in this study is the Uni-
fied Medical Language System? 3 (UMLS?) 
Metathesaurus?. The Metathesaurus, also devel-
oped by NLM, is organized by concept or mean-
ing. A concept is defined as a cluster of terms 
representing the same meaning (synonyms, lexical 
variants, acronyms, translations). The 14th edition 
(2003AA) of the UMLS Metathesaurus contains 
over 1.75 million unique English terms drawn from 
more than sixty families of medical vocabularies, 
and organized in some 875,000 concepts. 
In the UMLS, each concept is categorized by 
semantic types from the Semantic Network. 
McCray et al (2001) designed groupings of se-
mantic types that provide a partition the Metathe-
saurus and, therefore, can be used to extract 
consistent sets of concepts corresponding to a sub-
domain, such as disorders or procedures. 
4 Methods 
In order to compare the linguistic phenomenon of 
adjectival modification across two corpora of noun 
phrases, we first extracted the adjectives after 
submitting the phrases to a shallow syntactic 
analysis and normalizing the head noun of the 
phrase for inflectional variation. Then, we com-
pared across corpora the adjectives on the one hand 
and the ?demodified? noun phrases4 (i.e., noun 
phrases from which the adjectives have been re-
moved) on the other. In order to address the size of 
these corpora, we limited the focus of our study to 
a significant subdomain of clinical medicine: dis-
orders and procedures. 
4.1 Extracting adjectives 
Figure 1 illustrates the sequence of methods 
used for extracting adjectives from the original 
noun phrases. It also presents the number of 
phrases present before and after each of the four 
steps detailed below. 
                                                          
3
 umlsinfo.nlm.nih.gov 
4
 also referred to as ?nested terms? in the literature 
Step 1. Syntactic analysis 
The phrases in our bibliographic and clinical 
samples were then submitted to an underspecified 
syntactic analysis described by Rindflesch et al 
(2000) that draws on a stochastic tagger (see 
(Cutting et al, 1992) for details) as well as the 
SPECIALIST Lexicon5, a large syntactic lexicon 
of both general and medical English that is distrib-
uted with the UMLS. Although not perfect, this 
combination of resources effectively addresses the 
phenomenon of part-of-speech ambiguity in Eng-
lish.  
The resulting syntactic structure identifies the 
head and modifiers for the noun phrase analyzed. 
Each modifier is also labeled as being adjectival, 
adverbial, or nominal. Although all types of modi-
fication in the simple English noun phrase were 
labeled, only adjectives and nouns were selected 
for further analysis in this study. For example, the 
phrase abnormal esophageal motility study was 
analyzed as: 
 
[[mod([abnormal,adj]), 
  mod([esophageal,adj]), 
  mod([motility,noun]), 
  head([study,noun])]] 
 
The result of the syntactic analysis was used to 
select the noun phrases suitable for studying the 
adjectival modification phenomenon, i.e., phrases 
having the following structure: (adj+, noun*, 
head). The phrase is required to start with an ad-
jectival modifier, possibly followed by other adjec-
tives and end with a head noun, possibly preceded 
by other nouns. This specification excludes both 
simple phrases (e.g., one isolated noun) and com-
plex phrases, not suitable for our analysis. 
Step 2. Normalizing the head noun 
In order to compare phrases across corpora, we 
normalized the head noun for inflectional variation 
in each noun phrase. As a result, the two noun 
phrases cerebrovascular accident (in MAYO) and 
cerebrovascular accidents (in MEDLINE) are con-
sidered equivalent. When both the singular and the 
plural form of a phrase appear in the same corpus, 
only the singular form is considered for further 
processing. In practice, to normalize head nouns, 
we used the program lvg6, developed at NLM and 
distributed with the UMLS. 
                                                          
5
 umlslex.nlm.nih.gov 
6
 umlslex.nlm.nih.gov (lvg parameters used: -f:b -CR:oc) 



1,329,225
(adj+, noun*, head)
phrases
3,000,000
randomly selected
?simple? phrases
syntactic
analysis
1,322,403
normalized phrases
normalize
head noun
remove
adjectives
select sub-
domain

2,826,395
demodified
phrases
72,324
adjective
types
Disorders
18,370 adjectives
279,182 dem. terms
Procedures
16,098 adjectives
160,207 dem. terms
1,641,350
(adj+, noun*, head)
phrases
3,000,000
randomly selected
?simple? phrases
syntactic
analysis
1,575,478
normalized phrases
normalize
head noun
remove
adjectives
3,092,340
demodified
phrases
44,268
adjective
types
	
select sub-
domain
Disorders
16,486 adjectives
714,257 dem. terms
Procedures
11,630 adjectives
242,326 dem. terms
 
Figure 1. Summary of the methods. 
 
Step 3. Creating demodified phrases 
When adjectives are identified in a phrase O, a set 
of demodified phrases {T1, T2,?,Tn} is created by 
removing from phrase O any combinations of ad-
jectival modifiers found in it. While the structure 
of the demodified phrases remains syntactically 
correct, the semantics of some phrases may be 
anomalous, especially when adjectives other than 
the leftmost are removed. Since most of them are 
semantically valid, we found it convenient to keep 
all demodified phrases for further analysis. De-
modified phrases with incorrect semantics will be 
filtered out later in the experiment, since they will 
appear with a lower frequency. 
The number of demodified phrases derived 
from a given phrase is 2m ? 1, m being the number 
of adjectives in the phrase. For example, the phrase 
acute respiratory infection syndrome starts with 
the two adjectival modifiers acute and respiratory, 
so that the following three demodified phrases are 
generated respiratory infection syndrome, acute 
infection syndrome, and infection syndrome. 
Step 4. Restricting to disorders and procedures 
Because of the large size of the two corpora, we 
only performed a quantitative analysis of adjectival 
modification for the whole biomedical domain. We 
restricted the qualitative study to disorders and 
procedures. These represent a significant subdo-
main of clinical medicine, yet are small enough to 
be able to perform at least a somewhat detailed 
analysis. 
All phrases, original and demodified, were 
mapped to the UMLS Metathesaurus by first at-
tempting an exact match between phrases and 
Metathesaurus concepts. If an exact match failed, 
normalization was then attempted. This process 
makes the input and target terms potentially com-
patible by eliminating such inessential differences 
as inflection, case and hyphen variation, as well as 
word order variation. From the phrases mapping to 
some concept in the UMLS, we selected those for 
which the semantic category of the concept 
mapped to corresponded to the subdomains of in-
terest. In practice, for a phrase to be considered a 
procedure, it had to map to a UMLS concept and 
the semantic type of this concept had to belong to 
the semantic group Procedures. The same principle 
was used for selecting disorders, using the seman-
tic group Disorders. For example, the demodified 
phrase arthroscopic surgery (derived from decom-
pressive arthroscopic surgery) is considered a pro-
cedure because it maps, as a synonym, to the 
concept Surgical Procedures, Arthroscopic, whose 
semantic group is Procedures. Exceptionally (32 
UMLS concepts), a term may name both a disorder 
and a procedure. These terms are simply counted 
twice, once with Disorders and once with Proce-
dures. 
4.2 Comparing corpora 
In order to investigate the characteristics of each 
corpus (noun phrases extracted from the biomedi-
cal literature and from patient records), we used 
two kinds of comparisons: quantitative and qualita-
tive. The quantitative part consists of comparing 
frequencies of adjectives and demodified phrases 
across corpora, for the whole corpus as well as on 
specific subsets (Disorders and Procedures). In the 
qualitative part, we examined only phrases form 
the subdomains of Disorders and Procedures. 
Quantitative comparisons 
As mentioned earlier, the head noun of each phrase 
was normalized for inflectional variation (see Step 
2 above). The purpose of normalizing the head 
noun is two-fold. First, it contributes to identifying 
phrase variants within each corpus, resulting in 
accurate counts of phrase types after duplicates had 
been removed. Second, it provides a simple means 
(string match) for identifying equivalent phrases 
across corpora. 
We computed the number of original phrases, 
adjectives, and demodified phrases in each corpus, 
counting tokens and types in each category. Addi-
tionally, we explored similarities between the two 
genres by computing the number of phrases and 
adjectives common to the two corpora (intersec-
tion). Finally, we computed the number of phrase 
and adjective types for the two corpora taken to-
gether (union) in order to better characterize the 
whole domain. From these frequencies, we derived 
additional parameters such as the ratio of the num-
ber of adjectives to the number of original phrases. 
Qualitative comparisons 
We first extracted adjectives from the original 
phrases corresponding to Disorders and Procedures 
and computed their frequency of occurrence. Be-
cause phrases must map to a UMLS term in order 
to be identified as members of a subdomain, only 
the adjectives present in biomedical terms can be 
analyzed. For this reason, their rank will be studied 
rather than their frequency7. 
In order to better represent the whole spectrum 
of adjectives present in the two corpora, we then 
turned to the demodified phrases instead of the 
original phrases. In this second part, the condition 
                                                          
7
 rank n simply corresponds to the nth highest frequency 
for a phrase to be considered a member of a sub-
domain was that the demodified phrase (not the 
entire phrase) map to a UMLS term. However, 
some adjectives may be overrepresented when sev-
eral demodified phrases map to a UMLS term in 
the subdomains considered. For example, the 
phrase abdominal vascular reconstructive surgery, 
once demodified, maps to both vascular surgery 
(with modifiers abdominal and reconstructive) and 
reconstructive surgery (with modifiers abdominal 
and vascular). In this case, the adjective abdominal 
was counted twice. 
For each adjective, we determined the corpus in 
which it was predominantly used. If more than half 
of the occurrences appear in one corpus, the adjec-
tive is considered predominant in this corpus. 
When more than half of the occurrences appear in 
both corpora, the adjective is considered common 
to the two corpora. 
5 Results 
5.1 Extracting adjectives 
Out of the 3 million simple noun phrases randomly 
selected from MEDLINE, 1,322,403 phrase types 
were selected for further processing. Out of these, 
72,324 adjective types (1,916,530 tokens) were 
extracted and 2,826,395 demodified phrases were 
generated. 1,575,478 phrase types were selected 
from the 3 million noun phrases in the MAYO 
corpus. Out of these, 44,268 adjective types 
(2,209,778 tokens) were extracted and 3,092,340 
demodified phrases were generated. Details about 
the number of phrases selected at each step of the 
processing are given in Figure 1. 
5.2 Comparing corpora 
Quantitative results 
The number of original phrases (Table 1), adjec-
tives (Table 2), and demodified phrases (Table 3) 
are presented below in tabular format. Counts are 
broken down by corpus (MEDLINE and MAYO), on 
the one hand, and by subdomain (Disorders and 
Prodedures), on the other. Tables also include re-
sults obtained on the whole corpus (All), i.e., with-
out subsetting, and on the union of the two corpora 
(Together). Except for original phrases (Table 1), 
which, by design, are phrase types, Table 2 and 
Table 3 contain the numbers of types (upper left) 
and tokens (lower right). 
The number of adjectives per phrase ranges 
from 1 to 16 in MEDLINE and from 1 to 7 for 
MAYO when the whole corpus is considered. The 
maximum number of adjectives per phrase is 6 or 7 
for the various subsets. Phrases containing so many 
adjectives may look syntactically and semantically 
suspicious. While some of them denote extraction 
errors (often due to inappropriate part-of-speech 
tagging), most correspond to valid phrases and re-
flect the complexity of the biomedical domain 
(e.g., diastolic systolic mean middle cerebral ar-
tery blood flow velocity and combined enteral par-
enteral synthetic hypercaloric nutrition). The 
distribution of the number of adjectives per phrase 
is plotted in Figure 2. 
Although the number of phrases processed is 
slightly more important for MAYO (1,575,476) 
than for MEDLINE (1,322,403), and although the 
ratio of the number of adjective tokens extracted to 
the number of original phrases is roughly similar in 
the two corpora (1.45 for MEDLINE and 1.40 for 
MAYO), there are significantly more adjective 
types in MEDLINE (72,324) than in MAYO 
(44,268). A difference in the opposite direction is 
observed in the Disorders and Procedures subsets, 
where the number of adjective types is higher in 
MAYO than in MEDLINE, while the average number 
of adjectives per phrase is still slightly higher in 
MEDLINE (1.27 vs. 1.21 for Disorders and 1.21 vs. 
1.14 for Procedures). This finding requires further 
investigation. 
Despite reducing the variation by normalizing 
head nouns for inflection, less than 3% of the 
original phrases are common to the two corpora. 
This proportion is significantly higher for the sub-
set of disorder and procedure phrases where up to 
one third of MEDLINE phrases can be found in the 
MAYO corpus. Not surprisingly, the proportion of 
adjectives in common is higher. Overall, 44% of 
the adjectives in MAYO are also found in MEDLINE 
and up to 75% of the adjectives in MEDLINE are 
also found in MAYO (for disorders). Interestingly, 
the adjectives common to both corpora are also the 
most frequent. For example, as shown in Table 2, 
the 1,584 adjective types in common in the subset 
Disorders account for 38% of all adjectives for 
Disorders (4,148), but the corresponding 25,557 
adjective tokens account for 85% of all tokens 
(30,046). 
 
Table 1 ? Number of original phrases (types), for 
Disorders (Di) and Procedures (Pr) 
 
 MEDLINE MAYO Together Common 
Di 4,941 19,641 22,774 1,808 
Pr 1,534 4,959 6,028 465 
All 1,322,403 1,575,476 2,857,848 40,031 
 
Table 2 ? Number of adjectives (types [top] and 
tokens [bottom]), for Disorders (Di) and Proce-
dures (Pr) 
 
 MEDLINE MAYO Together Common 
  2,048   3,684   4,148   1,584 Di 6,299 23,747 30,046 25,557 
     902   1,499   1,790      611 Pr 1,852 5,667 7,519 5,683 
72,324 44,268 97,762 18,830 All 1,916,530 2,209,778 4,126,308 3,885,852 
 
Table 3 ? Number of demodified phrases (types 
[top] and tokens [bottom]), for Disorders (Di) and 
Procedures (Pr) 
 
 MEDLINE MAYO Together Common 
22,031 24,719 34,302 12,448 Di 174,548 463,097 637,645 571,041 
  9,850   8,595 13,691 4,754 Pr 101,323 166,180 267,503 241,790 
1,487,889 1,047,772 2,403,504 132,157 All 2,826,395 3,092,340 5,918,735 2,709,100 
 
 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4
  
Number of adjectives per phrase MEDLINE MAYO
all disorders procedures
 
 
Figure 2. Distribution of the number of adjectives 
per phrase 
 
Qualitative results 
The list of the most frequent adjectives found in 
the original phrases corresponding to Disorders 
and Procedures in the UMLS is given in Table 4, 
with their rank in each corpus. Interestingly, most 
high-ranking adjectives are found in both corpora. 
 
Table 4 ? Rank of the most frequent adjectives in 
MEDLINE (ME) and MAYO (Ma) 
 
Disorders ME Ma Procedures ME Ma 
chronic 2 2 total 1 2 
normal 3 1 surgical 2 3 
acute 4 3 partial 5 1 
congenital 1 8 serum 4 5 
increased 6 5 patient 13 4 
abnormal 8 4 percutaneous 3 15 
neonatal 17 >100 renal 12 7 
decreased 11 7 pulmonary 10 12 
pulmonary 10 9 ultrasound >100 22 
benign 7 13 general >100 23 
renal 9 11 cardiac 16 8 
recurrent 15 6 spinal 11 14 
multiple 12 10 radical 14 13 
increasing 14 12 evoked 29 >100 
malignant 5 27 coronary 8 24 
fetal 33 >100 femoral >100 33 
nasal >100 33 studied 33 >100 
joint 18 18 aortic >100 34 
intracranial 40 >100 fluid 7 27 
positive 24 17 abdominal 24 11 
 
Considering not the original phrases, but de-
modified phrases corresponding to disorders and 
procedures, most adjectives with a frequency 
greater than 10 are found in the two corpora (86% 
for disorder and 80% for procedures). However, 
their representation may differ largely across cor-
pora. Examining the contexts of adjectives for Dis-
orders (4978 adjectives with a frequency greater 
than 10), we found that 40% of the adjectives ap-
pear predominantly in MAYO (e.g., mild, possible, 
recent, probable, questionable, greenish), 20% 
predominantly in MEDLINE (e.g., experimental, 
human, neonatal, canine, intracellular), while 40% 
share most of their contexts across the two corpora 
(e.g., acute, chronic, recurrent). The repartition of 
the demodified phrases for Disorders (8263 
phrases with a frequency greater than 10) is some-
what different. 65% of the demodified phrases ap-
pear predominantly in MAYO (e.g., discomfort, 
tenderness, low back pain, chest pain, diarrhea), 
15% predominantly in MEDLINE (e.g., resistance, 
strain, vesicle, hyperthermia), while 20% share 
most of their contexts across the two corpora (e.g., 
disease, lesion, pain, symptom, abnormality). 
6 Applications 
In this section, we briefly examine some of the 
applications that may benefit from a better knowl-
edge of adjectival modification in biomedical dis-
course: genre characterization, terminology and 
ontology acquisition, and information retrieval. 
Genre characterization 
Knowledge about adjectives and demodified 
phrases predominantly associated with one corpus 
may be useful to characterize corpora, and in this 
experiment, genres. Although limited, this study 
suggests, for example, that a clinical corpus con-
tains markers for uncertainty (e.g., possible, prob-
able, questionable) and non-specific symptoms 
(e.g., discomfort, low back pain). On the other 
hand, in a broad bibliographic corpus, precisions 
about organism or age groups must be given (e.g., 
human, canine, neonatal). Interestingly, while the 
term fever is found with no predominance in either 
corpus, its more scientific synonyms hyperthermia 
and pyrexia are used predominantly in MEDLINE. If 
corroborated, this finding may suggest that, al-
though both scientific publications and medical 
records are geared toward peers, the language used 
in scientific publications tends to be more special-
ized. 
Terminology and ontology acquisition 
The method described in this paper constitutes a 
useful technique for adapting existing terminol-
ogies and ontologies with empirically derived 
terms from a new subdomain. First, demodified 
phrases are more likely to be mapped to another 
corpus. And second, because adjectival modifica-
tion often denotes a hyponymic relation between a 
phrase without modifier and a modified phrase, the 
modified phrase can be linked as a candidate hy-
ponym to the phrase without modifier 
(Bodenreider et al, 2002). 
This approach could be used, for example, for 
adapting biomedical terminologies to subtle clini-
cal nuances. When used with exactly the same 
subdomain the existing terminology comes from, 
this technique could enable regular updates of the 
terminology provided that current textual data is 
used for phrase extraction. 
The approach is currently limited to simple ad-
jectival modification; however, this is a self-
imposed limitation. Theoretically, the same meth-
odology can be adapted to work on nominal, 
prepositional phrase and other types of modifica-
tion. 
Information retrieval 
Terminologies as well as ontologies are frequently 
used for information or document retrieval in the 
domains for which such terminologies or ontolo-
gies are available. Medicine is one such domain 
where there are numerous terminological re-
sources. Integrated in a system such as the UMLS, 
these resources provide, for example, many syno-
nyms for each concept, increasing the chances of 
retrieving documents from a given term. However, 
most terms in these resources are pre-coordinated 
and may not include all the variants needed in 
various contexts. Moreover, most terms are noun 
phrases and, while synonyms are often given for 
nouns, it may not be the case for their modifiers. 
For example, while the various synonyms for fever 
(e.g., hyperthermia and pyrexia) are present in the 
UMLS, there is no greenish variant for green spu-
tum. Nor can there systematically be a variant de-
noting uncertainty. Therefore, identifying classes 
of adjectives that can be either ignored (e.g., uncer-
tainty markers) or mapped to other adjectives (e.g., 
greenish to green) would increase the performance 
of information retrieval systems operating on clini-
cal corpora. In light of these findings, existing ter-
minologies and ontologies can provide a core of 
medical concepts common to most subdomains; 
whereas the methodology described here can be 
used to tailor the general-purpose terminological 
resources to accommodate subdomain-specific 
terminology services. 
7 Conclusions 
In conclusion, adjectival modification plays an im-
portant role in biomedical texts, and knowledge 
about this phenomenon can be exploited in appli-
cations such as the retrieval of biomedical docu-
ments and for developing terminology services in 
the biomedical domain. 
In the future, we would like to identify patterns 
in biomedical terms and phrases based, in part, on 
classes of adjectival modifiers. Creating such a 
model for terms would constitute a generative ap-
proach to biomedical terminology, contrasting with 
the lists of precoordinated terms populating most 
terminology systems in the biomedical domain. 
References 
Bodenreider, O., Burgun, A., and Rindflesch, T. C. 
(2001). Lexically-suggested hyponymic relations 
among medical terms and their representation in the 
UMLS. Proceedings of TIA'2001 "Terminology and 
Artificial Intelligence", 11-21. 
Bodenreider, O., Rindflesch, T. C., and Burgun, A. 
(2002). Unsupervised, corpus-based method for ex-
tending a biomedical terminology. Proceedings of 
the ACL'2002 Workshop "Natural Language Proc-
essing in the Biomedical Domain", 53-60. 
Chute, C. G., and Elkin, P. L. (1997). A clinically de-
rived terminology: qualification to reduction. Proc 
AMIA Annu Fall Symp, 570-574. 
Cutting, D. R., Kupiec, J., Pedersen, J. O., and Sibun, P. 
(1992). A practical part-of-speech tagger. Proceed-
ings of the Third Conference on Applied Natural 
Language Processing, 133-140. 
Fellbaum, C. (1993). Five Papers on WordNet: Adjec-
tives in Wordnet, D. Gross, ed. 
McCray, A. T., Burgun, A., and Bodenreider, O. (2001). 
Aggregating UMLS semantic types for reducing 
conceptual complexity. Medinfo 10, 216-220. 
Raskin, V., and Niernburg, S. (1995). Lexical Semantics 
of Adjectives: A Microtheory of Adjectival Meaning. 
Memoranda In Cognitive and Computer Science 
MCCS-95-288. 
Raskin, V., and Niernburg, S. (1996). Adjectival Modi-
fication in Text Meaning Representation. Proceed-
ings of COLING '96, 842-847. 
Rindflesch, T. C., Rajan, J. V., and Hunter, L. (2000). 
Extracting molecular binding relationships from 
biomedical text. In "Proceedings of the 6th Applied 
Natural Language Processing Conference" (San 
Francisco, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers), pp. 188-
195. 
Srinivasan, S., Rindflesch, T. C., Hole, W. T., Aronson, 
A. R., and Mork, J. G. (2002). Finding UMLS 
Metathesaurus concepts in MEDLINE. Proc AMIA 
Symp, 727-731. 
 
BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 105?112,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
From Indexing the Biomedical Literature to Coding Clinical Text: 
Experience with MTI and Machine Learning Approaches 
Alan R. Aronson1, Olivier Bodenreider1, Dina Demner-Fushman1, Kin Wah Fung1,  
Vivian K. Lee1,2, James G. Mork1, Aur?lie N?v?ol1, Lee Peters1, Willie J. Rogers1
1Lister Hill Center 
National Library of Medicine 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
{alan, olivier, demnerd, 
kwfung, mork, neveola,  
peters, wrogers} 
@nlm.nih.gov 
 
2Vanderbilt University 
Nashville, TN 37235 
vivian.lee@vanderbilt.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes the application of an 
ensemble of indexing and classification 
systems, which have been shown to be suc-
cessful in information retrieval and classi-
fication of medical literature, to a new task 
of assigning ICD-9-CM codes to the clini-
cal history and impression sections of radi-
ology reports. The basic methods used are: 
a modification of the NLM Medical Text 
Indexer system, SVM, k-NN and a simple 
pattern-matching method. The basic meth-
ods are combined using a variant of stack-
ing. Evaluated in the context of a Medical 
NLP Challenge, fusion produced an F-
score of 0.85 on the Challenge test set, 
which is considerably above the mean 
Challenge F-score of 0.77 for 44 participat-
ing groups. 
1 Introduction 
Researchers at the National Library of Medicine 
(NLM) have developed the Medical Text Indexer 
(MTI) for the automatic indexing of the biomedical 
literature (Aronson et al, 2004). The unsupervised 
methods within MTI were later successfully com-
bined with machine learning techniques and ap-
plied to the classification tasks in the Genomics 
Track evaluations at the Text Retrieval Conference 
(TREC) (Aronson et al, 2005 and Demner-
Fushman et al, 2006). This fusion approach con-
sists of using several basic classification methods 
with complementary strengths, combining the re-
sults using a modified ensemble method based on 
stacking (Ting and Witten, 1997). 
While these methods have shown reasonable 
performance on indexing and retrieval tasks of 
biomedical articles, it remains to be determined 
how they would perform on a different biomedical 
corpus (e.g., clinical text) and on a different task 
(e.g., coding to a different controlled vocabulary). 
However, except for competitive evaluations such 
as TREC or BioCreAtIvE, corpora and gold stan-
dards for such tasks are generally not available, 
which is a limiting factor for such studies. For a 
survey of currently available corpora and devel-
opments in biomedical language processing, see 
Hunter and Cohen, 2006. 
The Medical NLP Challenge 1  sponsored by a 
number of groups including the Computational 
Medicine Center (CMC) at the Cincinnati Chil-
dren?s Hospital Medical Center gave us the oppor-
tunity to apply our fusion approach to a clinical 
corpus. The Challenge was to assign ICD-9-CM 
codes (International Classification of Diseases, 9th 
Revision, Clinical Modification) 2  to clinical text 
consisting of anonymized clinical history and im-
pression sections of radiology reports. 
The Medical NLP Challenge organizers distrib-
uted a training corpus of almost 1,000 of the ano-
nymized, abbreviated radiology reports along with 
                                                 
1 See www.computationalmedicine.org/challenge/.
2 See www.cdc.gov/nchs/icd9.htm.
105
gold standard ICD-9-CM assignments for each 
report obtained via a consensus of three independ-
ent sets of assignments. The primary measure for 
the Challenge was defined as the balanced F-score, 
with a secondary measure being cost-sensitive ac-
curacy. These measures were computed for sub-
missions to the Challenge based on a test corpus 
similar in size to the training corpus but distributed 
without gold standard code assignments. 
The main objective of this study is to determine 
what adaptation of the original methods is required 
to code clinical text with ICD-9-CM, in contrast to 
indexing and retrieving MEDLINE?. Note that an 
earlier study (Gay et al, 2005) showed that only 
minor adaptations were required in extending the 
original model to full-text biomedical articles. A 
secondary objective is to evaluate the performance 
of our methods in this new setting. 
 
2 Methods 
In early experimentation with the training corpus 
provided by the Challenge organizers, we discov-
ered that several of the training cases involved ne-
gated assertions in the text and that deleting these 
improved the performance of all basic methods 
being tested. For example, ?no pneumonia? occurs 
many times in the impression section of a report, 
sometimes with additional context. Section 2.1 
describes the process we used to remove these ne-
gated expressions; section 2.2 consists of descrip-
tions of the four basic methods used in this study; 
and section 2.3 defines the fusion of the basic 
methods to form a final result. 
2.1 Document Preparation 
The NegEx program (Chapman et al, 2001a and 
2001b, and Goldin and Chapman, 2003), which 
discovers negated expressions in text, was used to 
find negated expressions in the training and test 
corpora using a dictionary generated from concepts 
from the 2006AD version of the UMLS? Metathe-
saurus? (excluding the AMA vocabularies). A ta-
ble containing the concept unique identifier (CUI) 
and English string (STR with LAT=?ENG?) was 
extracted from the main concept table, MRCON, 
and was used as input to NegEx to generate a dic-
tionary that was later used as the universe of ex-
pressions which NegEx could find to be negated in 
the target corpora. (See the Appendix for examples 
of the input and output to this process.) 
The XML text of the training and test corpora 
was converted to a tree representation and then 
traversed, operating on one radiology report at a 
time. The clinical history and impression sections 
of each report were tokenized to allow whitespace 
to be separated from the punctuation, numbers and 
alphabetic text. The concepts from the UMLS were 
tokenized in the same way, to allow the concepts 
found by NegEx to be aligned with the text. The 
negation phrases discovered by NegEx were also 
tokenized to find the appropriate negation phrase 
preceding or trailing the target concept. Using the 
location information obtained by matching the set 
of one or more target concepts and the associated 
negation phrase, the overlapping concept spans 
were merged and the span for the negation phrase 
and the outermost negated concept was removed. 
Any intervening concepts associated with the same 
negation phrase were removed, too. The abbrevi-
ated tree representation was then re-serialized back 
into XML. 
As an example of our use of NegEx, consider 
the report with clinical history ?13-year 2-month - 
old female evaluate for cough.? and impression 
?No focal pneumonia.? After removal of negated 
text, the clinical history becomes ?13-year 2-month 
- old female?, and the discussion is empty. 
2.2 Basic Methods 
The four basic methods used for the Medical NLP 
Challenge are MTI (a modification of NLM?s 
Medical Text Indexer system), SVM (Support 
Vector Machines), k-NN (k Nearest Neighbors) 
and Pattern Matching (a simple, pattern-based clas-
sifier). Each of these methods is described here. 
Note that the MTI method uses a ?Restrict to ICD-
9-CM? algorithm that is described in the next sec-
tion. 
 
MTI. The original Medical Text Indexer (MTI) 
system, shown in Figure 1, consists of an infra-
structure for applying alternative methods of dis-
covering MeSH? headings for citation titles and 
abstracts and then combining them into an ordered 
list of recommended indexing terms. The top por-
tion of the diagram consists of two paths, or meth-
ods, for creating a list of recommended indexing 
terms: MetaMap Indexing and PubMed? Related 
Citations. The MetaMap Indexing path actually 
106
computes UMLS Metathesaurus concepts, which 
are passed to the Restrict to MeSH process 
(Bodenreider et al, 1998). The results from each 
path are weighted and combined using Post-
Processing, which also refines the results to con-
form to NLM indexing policy. The system is 
highly parameterized not only by path weights but 
also by several parameters specific to the Restrict 
to MeSH and Post-Processing processes. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Medical Text Indexer (MTI) System 
 
For use in the Challenge, the Medical Text In-
dexer (MTI) program itself required few adapta-
tions.  Most of the changes involved the environ-
ment from which MTI obtains the data it uses 
without changing the normal parameter settings. 
We also added a further post-processing compo-
nent to filter our results. 
For the environment, we replaced MTI?s normal 
?Restrict to MeSH? algorithm with a ?Restrict to 
ICD-9-CM? algorithm, described below, in order 
to map UMLS concepts to ICD-9-CM codes in-
stead of MeSH headings. We also trained the Pub-
Med Related Citations component, TexTool (Ta-
nabe and Wilbur, 2002), on the Medical NLP Chal-
lenge training data instead of the entire MED-
LINE/PubMed database as is the case for normal 
MTI use at NLM.  For both of these methods, we 
used the actual ICD-9-CM codes to mimic UMLS 
CUIs used internally by MTI. 
To create the new training data for the TexTool 
(Related Citations), we reformatted the Medical 
NLP Challenge training data into a pseudo-
MEDLINE format using the ?doc id? component 
as the PMID, the ?CLINICAL_HISTORY? text 
component for the Title, the ?IMPRESSION? text 
component for the Abstract, and all of the 
?CMC_MAJORITY? codes as MeSH Headings 
(see Figure 2).  This provided us with direct ICD-
9-CM codes to work with instead of MeSH Head-
ings. 
 
<doc id="97663756" type="RADIOLOGY_REPORT"> 
  <codes> 
    <code origin="CMC_MAJORITY" type="ICD-9-
CM">780.6</code> 
    <code origin="CMC_MAJORITY" type="ICD-9-
CM">786.2</code> 
    <code origin="COMPANY3" type="ICD-9-
CM">786.2</code> 
    <code origin="COMPANY1" type="ICD-9-
CM">780.6</code> 
    <code origin="COMPANY1" type="ICD-9-
CM">786.2</code> 
    <code origin="COMPANY2" type="ICD-9-
CM">780.6</code> 
    <code origin="COMPANY2" type="ICD-9-
CM">786.2</code> 
  </codes> 
  <texts> 
    <text origin="CCHMC_RADIOLOGY" 
type="CLINICAL_HISTORY">Cough and fever.</text> 
    <text origin="CCHMC_RADIOLOGY" 
type="IMPRESSION">Normal radiographic appear-
ance of the chest, no pneumonia.</text> 
  </texts> 
</doc> 
PMID- 97663756 
TI  - Cough and fever. 
AB  - Normal radiographic appearance of the 
chest, no pneumonia. 
MH  - Fever (780.6) 
MH  - Cough (786.2) 
 
Figure 2: XML Medical NLP Training Data modi-
fied to pseudo-ASCII MEDLINE format 
 
Within MTI we also utilized an experimental 
option for MetaMap (Composite Phrases), which 
provides a longer UMLS concept match than usual. 
We did not use the following: (1) UMLS concept-
specific checking and exclusion sections; and (2) 
the MeSH Subheading generation, checking, and 
removal elements, since they were not needed for 
this Challenge. We then had MTI use the new Re-
107
strict to ICD-9-CM file and the new TexTool to 
generate its results. 
 
Restrict to ICD-9-CM. The mapping of every 
UMLS concept to ICD-9-CM developed for the 
Medical NLP Challenge is an adaptation of the 
original mapping to MeSH, later generalized to any 
target vocabulary (Fung and Bodenreider, 2005). 
Based on the UMLS Metathesaurus, the mapping 
utilizes four increasingly aggressive techniques: 
synonymy, built-in mappings, hierarchical map-
pings and associative mappings. In order to comply 
with coding rules in ICD-9-CM, mappings to non-
leaf codes are later resolved into leaf codes. 
Mappings to ICD-9-CM are identified through 
synonymy when names from ICD-9-CM are in-
cluded in the UMLS concept identified by 
MetaMap. For example, the ICD-9-CM code 592.0 
Calculus of kidney is associated with the UMLS 
concept C0392525 Nephrolithiasis through synon-
ymy. 
Built-in mappings are mapping relations be-
tween UMLS concepts implied from mappings 
provided by source vocabularies in the UMLS. For 
example, the UMLS concept C0239937 Micro-
scopic hematuria is mapped to the concept 
C0018965 (which contains the ICD-9-CM code 
599.7 Hematuria) through a mapping provided by 
SNOMED CT. 
In the absence of a mapping through synonymy 
or built-in mapping, a hierarchical mapping is 
attempted. Starting from the concept identified by 
MetaMap, a graph of ancestors is built by first us-
ing its parent concepts and broader concepts, then 
adding the parent concepts and broader concepts of 
each concept, recursively. Semantic constraints 
(based on semantic types) are applied in order to 
prevent semantic drift. Ancestor concepts closest 
to the MetaMap source concept are selected from 
the graph. Only concepts that can be resolved into 
ICD-9-CM codes (through synonymy or built-in 
mapping) are selected. For example, starting from 
C0239574 Low grade pyrexia, a mapping is found 
to ICD-9-CM code 780.6 Fever, which is con-
tained in the concept C0015967, one of the ances-
tors of C0239574. 
The last attempt to find a mapping involves not 
only hierarchical, but also associative relations. 
Instead of starting from the concept identified by 
MetaMap, associative mappings explore the con-
cepts in associative relation to this concept. For 
example, the concept C1458136 Renal stone sub-
stance is mapped to ICD-9-CM code 592.0 Calcu-
lus of kidney. 
Finally, when the identified ICD-9-CM code 
was not a leaf code (e.g., 786.5 Chest pain), we 
remapped it to one of the corresponding leaf codes 
in the training set where possible (e.g., 786.50 Un-
specified chest pain). 
Of the 2,331 UMLS concepts identified by 
MetaMap in the test set after freezing the method, 
620 (27%) were mapped to ICD-9-CM. More spe-
cifically, 101 concepts were mapped to one of the 
45 target ICD-9-CM codes present in the training 
set. Of the 101 concepts, 40 were mapped through 
synonymy, 11 through built-in mappings, 40 
through hierarchical mapping and 10 through asso-
ciative mapping. 
 
After the main MTI processing was completed, 
we applied a post-processing filter, restricting our 
results to the list of 94 valid combinations of ICD-
9-CM codes provided in the training set (hence-
forth referred to as allowed combinations) and 
slightly emphasizing MetaMap results. Examples 
of the post-processing rules are: 
? If MTI recommended 079.99 (Unspecified 
viral infection in conditions?) via either 
MetaMap or Related Citations, use 079.99, 
493.90 (Asthma, unspecified type?), and 
780.6 (Fever) for indexing. This is the only 
valid combination for this code based on the 
training corpus. 
? Similarly, if MTI recommended ?Enlarge-
ment of lymph nodes? (785.6) via the 
MetaMap path with a score greater then 
zero, use 785.6 and 786.2 (Cough) for in-
dexing. 
The best F-score (F = 0.83) for the MTI method 
was obtained on the training set using the negation-
removed text.  This was a slight improvement over 
using the original text (F = 0.82). 
 
SVM. We utilized Yet Another Learning Envi-
ronment3 (YALE), an open source application de-
veloped for machine learning and data mining, to 
determine the data classification performance of 
support vector machine (SVM) learning on the 
                                                 
3 See http://rapid-i.com. 
108
training data. To prepare the Challenge data for 
analysis, we removed all stop words and created 
feature vectors for the free text extracted from the 
?CLINICAL_HISTORY? and ?IMPRESSION? 
fields of the records.  Since both the training and 
test Challenge data had a known finite number of 
individual ICD-9-CM labels (45) and distinct com-
binations of ICD-9-CM labels (94), the data was 
prepared both as feature vectors for 45 individual 
labels as well as a model with 94 combination la-
bels.  In addition, the feature vectors were created 
using both simple term frequency as well as in-
verse document frequency (IDF) weighting, where 
the weight is (1+log(term frequency))*(total 
documents/document frequency).  There were thus 
a total of four feature vector datasets: 1) 45 indi-
vidual ICD-9-CM labels and simple term fre-
quency, 2) 45 ICD-9-CM labels and IDF weight-
ing, 3) 94 ICD-9-CM combinations and simple 
term frequency, and 4) 94 ICD-9-CM combina-
tions and IDF weighting. 
The YALE tool encompasses a number of SVM 
learners and kernel types.  For the classification 
problem at hand, we chose the C-SVM learner and 
the radial basis function (rbf) kernel.  The C-SVM 
learner attempts to minimize the error function 
?
=
+
N
i
i
T Cww
1
,
2
1 ?  
Niandbxw iii
T
i ,,1,01))(( K=???+ ????
 
where w is the vector of coefficients, b is a con-
stant, ?  is the kernel function, x are the independ-
ent variables, and ?i are parameters for handling 
the inputs.  C > 0 is the penalty parameter of the 
error function.  The rbf kernel is defined as K(x, 
x?) = exp(?? |x ? x?|2), ? > 0 where ? is a kernel 
parameter that determines the rbf width. We ran 
cross-validation experiments using YALE on all 
training datasets and varying C (10, 100, 1000, 
10000) and ? (0.01, 0.001, 0.0001, 0.00001) to de-
termine the optimal C and ? combination.  The 
cross-validation experiments generated classifica-
tion models that were then applied to the complete 
training datasets to analyze the performance of the 
learner. The 94 ICD-9-CM combination and sim-
ple term frequency dataset with C = 10000 and ? = 
0.01 had the best F-score at 0.86.  The best F-score 
for the 94 ICD-9-CM combination and IDF weight 
dataset was 0.79, where C = 0.001 and ? = 10000.   
Further preprocessing the training dataset by 
removing negated expressions was found to im-
prove the best F-score from 0.86 to 0.87.  The C = 
10000 and ? = 0.01 combination was then applied 
to the test dataset, which was preprocessed to re-
move negation and stop words and transformed to 
a feature vector using 94 ICD-9-CM combinations 
and simple term weighting.  The predicted ICD-9-
CM classifications and confidence of the predic-
tions for each clinical free text report were output 
and later combined with other methods to optimize 
the accuracy and precision of our ICD-9-CM clas-
sifications. 
 
k-NN. The Challenge training set was used to 
build a k-NN classifier. The k-NN classification 
method works by identifying, within a labelled set, 
documents similar to the document being classi-
fied, and inferring a classification for it from the 
labels of the retrieved neighbors. 
The free text in the training data set was proc-
essed to obtain a vector-space representation of the 
patient reports.  
Several methods of obtaining this representation 
were tested: after stop words were removed, simple 
term frequency and inverse document frequency 
(IDF) weighting were applied alternatively. A 
higher weight was also given to words appearing in 
the history portion of the text (vs. impression). 
Eventually, the most efficient representation was 
obtained by using controlled vocabulary terms ex-
tracted from the free text with MetaMap.4 Further 
processing on this representation of the training 
data showed that removing negated portions of the 
free text improved the results, raising the F-score 
from 0.76 to 0.79.   
Other parameters were also assessed on the 
training data, such as the number of neighbors to 
use (2 was found to be the best vs. 5, 10 or 15) and 
the restriction of the ICD-9-CM predictions to the 
set of 94 allowed combinations. When the predic-
tion for a given document was not within the set of 
allowed 94 combinations, an allowed subset of the 
ICD-9-CM codes predicted was selected based on 
the individual scores obtained for each ICD-9-CM 
code.  
The best F-score (F = 0.79) obtained on the 
training set used the MetaMap-based representa-
                                                 
4 Note that this use of MetaMap is independent of its 
inclusion as a component of MTI. 
109
tion with simple frequency counts on the text with 
negated expressions removed. ICD-9-CM predic-
tions were obtained from the nearest neighbors and 
restricted to one of the 94 allowed combinations.   
 
Pattern Matching. We developed a pattern-
matching classifier as a baseline for our more so-
phisticated classification methods. A list of all 
UMLS string representations for each of 45 codes 
(including synonyms from source vocabularies 
other than ICD-9-CM) was created as described in 
the MTI section above. The strings were then con-
verted to lower case, punctuation was removed, 
and strings containing terms unlikely to be found 
in a clinical report were pruned. For example, Ab-
domen NOS pain and Abdominal pain (finding) 
were reduced to abdominal pain. For the same rea-
sons, some of the strings were relaxed into pat-
terns. For example, it is unlikely to see PAIN 
CHEST in a chart, but very likely to find pain in 
chest. The string, therefore, was relaxed to the fol-
lowing pattern: pain.*chest. The text of the clinical 
history and the impression fields of the radiology 
reports with negated expressions removed (see 
Section 2.2) was broken up into sentences. Each 
sentence was then searched for all available pat-
terns. A corresponding code was assigned to the 
document for each matched pattern. This pattern 
matching achieved F-score = 0.79 on the training 
set. To reduce the number of codes assigned to a 
document, a check for allowed combinations was 
added as a post-processing step. The combination 
of assigned codes was looked up in the table of 
allowed codes. If not present, the codes were re-
duced to the combination of assigned codes most 
frequently occurring in the training set. This 
brought the F-score up to 0.84 on the training data. 
As the performance of this classifier was compara-
ble to other methods, we decided to include these 
results when combining the predictions of the other 
classifiers.  
2.3 Fusion of  Basic Methods: Stacking 
Experience with ad hoc retrieval tasks in the TREC 
Genomics Track has shown that combining predic-
tions of several classifiers either significantly im-
proves classification results, or at least provides 
more consistent and stable results when the train-
ing data set is small (Aronson et al, 2005). We 
therefore experimented with stacking (Ting and 
Witten, 1997), using a simple majority vote and a 
union of all assigned codes as baselines. The pre-
dictions of base classifiers described in the previ-
ous section were combined using our re-
implementation of the stacked generalization pro-
posed by Ting and Witten.  
3 Results 
Table 1 shows the results obtained for the training 
set. The best stacking results were obtained using 
predictions of all four base classifiers on the text 
with deleted negated expressions and with check-
ing for allowed combinations. We retained all final 
predictions with probability of being a valid code 
greater than 0.3. Checking for the allowed combi-
nations for the ensemble classifiers degraded the F-
score significantly. 
 
Classifier F-score 
MTI 0.83 
SVM 0.87 (x-validation) 
k-NN 0.79 (x-validation) 
Pattern Matching 0.84 
Majority 0.82 
Stacking 0.89 
 
Table 1: Training results for each classifier, the ma-
jority and stacking 
 
Since stacking produced the best F-score on the 
training corpus and is known to be more robust 
than the individual classifiers, the corresponding 
results for the test corpus were submitted to the 
Challenge submission website. The stacking results 
for the test corpus achieved an F-score of 0.85 and 
a secondary, cost-sensitive accuracy score of 0.83. 
For comparison purposes, 44 Challenge submis-
sions had a mean F-score of 0.77 with a maximum 
of 0.89. Our F-score of 0.85 falls between the 70th 
and 75th percentiles. 
4 Discussion 
It is significant that it was fairly straightforward to 
port various methods developed for ad hoc MED-
LINE citation retrieval, indexing and classification 
to the assignment of codes to clinical text. The 
modifications to MTI consisted of replacing Re-
strict to MeSH with Restrict to ICD-9-CM, training 
the Related Citations method on clinical text and 
replacing MTI?s normal post-processing with a 
much simpler version. Preprocessing the text using 
110
NegEx to remove negated expressions was a fur-
ther modification of the overall approach. 
It is noteworthy that a simple pattern-matching 
method performed as well as much more sophisti-
cated methods in the effort to fuse results from 
several methods into a final outcome. This unex-
pected success might be explained by the follow-
ing limitations of the Challenge. 
Possible limitations on the extensibility of the 
current research arise from two observations: (1) 
the Challenge cases were limited to two relatively 
narrow topics, cough/fever/pneumonia and uri-
nary/kidney problems; and (2) the clinical text was 
almost error-free, a situation that would not be ex-
pected in the majority of clinical text. It is possible 
that these conditions contributed to the success of 
the pattern-matching method but also caused 
anomalous behavior, such as the fact that simple 
frequency counts provided a better representation 
than IDF for the SVM and k-NN methods. 
Finally, as a result of low confidence in the 
ICD-9-CM code assignment, no codes were as-
signed to 29 records in the test set. It is worthwhile 
to explore the causes for such null assignments. 
One of the reasons for low confidence could be the 
aggressive pruning of the text by the negation algo-
rithm. For example, after removal of negated text 
in the sample report given in section 2.1, the only 
remaining text is ?13-year 2-month - old female? 
from the clinical history field; this provided no 
evidence for code assignment. Secondly, in some 
cases the original text was not sufficient for confi-
dent code assignment. For example, for the docu-
ment with clinical history ?Bilateral grade 3.? and 
impression ?Interval growth of normal appearing 
Kidneys?, no code was assigned by the SVM, k-
NN, or pattern-matching classifiers. Code 593.70 
corresponding to the UMLS concept Vesicouret-
eral reflux with reflux nephropathy, unspecified or 
without reflux nephropathy was assigned by MTI 
with a very low confidence, which was not suffi-
cient for the final assignment of the code. The third 
reason for assigning no code to a document was 
the wide range of assignments provided by the 
base classifiers. For example, for the following 
document: ?CLINICAL_HISTORY: 3-year - old 
male with history of left ureteropelvic and uret-
erovesical obstruction. Status post left pyeloplasty 
and left ureteral reimplantation. IMPRESSION: 1. 
Stable appearance and degree of hydronephrosis 
involving the left kidney. Stable urothelial thicken-
ing. 2. Interval growth of kidneys, left greater than 
right. 3. Normal appearance of the right kidney 
with interval resolution of right urothelial thicken-
ing.? MTI assigned codes 593.89 Other specified 
disorders of kidney and ureter and 591 Hy-
dronephrosis. Codes 593.70 Vesicoureteral reflux 
with reflux nephropathy, unspecified or without 
reflux nephropathy and 753.3 Double kidney with 
double pelvis were assigned by the k-NN classifier. 
Pattern matching resulted in assignment of code 
591 with fairly low confidence. No code was as-
signed to this document by the SVM classifier. 
Despite failing to assign codes to these 29 records, 
the conservative approach (using threshold) re-
sulted in better performance, achieving F-score 
0.85 compared to F-score 0.80 when all 1,634 
codes assigned by the base classifiers were used. 
5 Conclusion 
We are left with two conclusions. First, this re-
search confirms that combining several comple-
mentary methods for accomplishing tasks, ranging 
from ad hoc retrieval to categorization, produces 
results that are better and more stable than the re-
sults for the contributing methods. Furthermore, 
we have shown that the basic methods employing 
domain knowledge and advanced statistical algo-
rithms are applicable to clinical text without sig-
nificant modification. Second, although there are 
some limitations of the current Challenge test col-
lection of clinical text, we appreciate the efforts of 
the Challenge organizers in the creation of a test 
collection of clinical text. This collection provides 
a unique opportunity to apply existing methods to a 
new and important domain. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported in part by the Intramural 
Research Program of the NIH, National Library of 
Medicine and by appointments of Aur?lie N?v?ol 
and Vivian Lee to the NLM Research Participation 
Program sponsored by the National Library of 
Medicine and administered by the Oak Ridge Insti-
tute for Science and Education. 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the many 
essential contributions to MTI, especially W. John 
Wilbur for the PubMed Related Citations indexing 
method, and Natalie Xie for adapting TexTool (an 
interface to Related Citations) for this paper. 
111
References 
Aronson AR, Demner-Fushman D, Humphrey SM, Lin 
J, Liu H, Ruch P, Ruiz ME, Smith LH, Tanabe LK, 
Wilbur WJ. Fusion of knowledge-intensive and sta-
tistical approaches for retrieving and annotating tex-
tual genomics documents. Proc TREC 2005, 36-45. 
Aronson AR, Mork JG, Gay CW, Humphrey SM and 
Rogers WJ. The NLM Indexing Initiative's Medical 
Text Indexer. Medinfo. 2004: 268-72. 
Bodenreider O, Nelson SJ, Hole WT and Chang HF. 
Beyond synonymy: exploiting the UMLS semantics 
in mapping vocabularies. Proc AMIA Symp 1998: 
815-9. 
Chapman WW, Bridewell W, Hanbury P, Cooper GF, 
Buchanan B. Evaluation of negation phrases in narra-
tive clinical reports. Proc AMIA Symp. 2001a:105-9.  
Chapman WW, Bridewell W, Hanbury P, Cooper GF 
and Buchanan BG. A simple algorithm for identify-
ing negated findings and diseases in discharge sum-
maries. J Biomed Inform. 2001b;34:301-10.  
Demner-Fushman D, Humphrey SM, Ide NC, Loane RF, 
Ruch P, Ruiz ME, Smith LH, Tanabe LK, Wilbur WJ 
and Aronson AR. Finding relevant passages in scien-
tific articles: fusion of automatic approaches vs. an 
interactive team effort. Proc TREC 2006, 569-76. 
Fung KW and Bodenreider O. Utilizing the UMLS for 
semantic mapping between terminologies. AMIA 
Annu Symp Proc 2005: 266-70. 
Gay CW, Kayaalp M and Aronson AR. Semi-automatic 
indexing of full text biomedical articles. AMIA Annu 
Symp Proc. 2005:271-5. 
Goldin I and Chapman WW. Learning to detect nega-
tion with ?not? in medical texts. Proc Workshop on 
Text Analysis and Search for Bioinformatics, ACM 
SIGIR, 2003. 
Hunter L and Cohen KB. Biomedical language process-
ing: what?s beyond PubMed? Mol Cell. 2006 Mar 
3;21(5):589-94. 
Tanabe L and Wilbur WJ. (2002) Tagging gene and 
protein names in biomedical text. Bioinformatics, 
Aug 2002; 18: 1124 ?32. 
Ting WK and Witten I. 1997. Stacking bagged and dag-
ged models. 367-375. Proc. of ICML'97. Morgan 
Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA.
Appendix  
A sample of the input to NegEx for dictionary generation:  
 
C0002390 pneumonitis, allergic interstitial 
C0002390 allergic interstitial pneumonitis, nos 
C0002390 extrinsic allergic bronchiolo alveolitis 
C0002390 extrinsic allergic bronchiolo alveolitis, nos 
C0002390 hypersensitivity pneumonia 
C0002390 hypersensitivity pneumonia, nos 
C0002390 eaa  extrinsic allergic alveolitis 
C0002390 allergic extrinsic alveolitis nos (disorder) 
C0002390 extrinsic allergic alveolitis (disorder) 
C0002390 hypersensitivity pneumonitis nos (disorder) 
 
A sample of the dictionary generated by NegEx for later use in detecting negated expressions:  
 
C0002098 hypersensitivity granuloma (morphologic abnormality 
C0151726 hypersensitivity injection site 
C0020517 hypersensitivity nos 
C0429891 hypersensitivity observations 
C0002390 hypersensitivity pneumonia 
C0002390 hypersensitivity pneumonia, nos 
C0002390 hypersensitivity pneumonitides 
C0005592 hypersensitivity pneumonitides, avian 
C0002390 hypersensitivity pneumonitis 
C0182792 hypersensitivity pneumonitis antibody determination re-
agents 
112
