Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 21?24,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Multilingual Ontological Analysis of European Directives
Gianmaria Ajani
Dipartimento di Scienze Giuridiche
Universita` di Torino - Italy
gianmaria.ajani@unito.it
Guido Boella
Leonardo Lesmo
Alessandro Mazzei
Dipartimento di Informatica
Universita` di Torino - Italy
[guido|lesmo|mazzei]@di.unito.it
Piercarlo Rossi
Dipartimento di Studi per l?Impresa e il Territorio
Universita` del Piemonte Orientale - Italy
piercarlo.rossi@eco.unipmn.it
Abstract
This paper describes the main features of our
tool called ?Legal Taxonomy Syllabus?. The
system is an ontology based tool designed to
annotate and recover multi-lingua legal in-
formation and build conceptual dictionaries
on European Directives.
1 Introduction
The European union each year produces a large
number of Union Directives (EUD), which are trans-
lated into each of the communitary languages. The
EUD are sets of norms that have to be implemented
by the national legislations. The problem of multi-
linguism in European legislation has recently been
addressed by using linguistic and ontological tools,
e.g. (Boer et al, 2003; Giguet and P.S., 2006; De-
spre?s and Szulman, 2006). The management of
EUD is particularly complex since the implementa-
tion of a EUD however not correspond to the straight
transposition into a national law. An EUD is subject
to further interpretation, and this process can lead to
unexpected results. Comparative Law has studied in
details the problematics concerning EUD and their
complexities. On the other hand managing with ap-
propriate tools this kind of complexity can facilitate
the comparison and harmonization of national legis-
lation (Boer et al, 2003). Based on this research, in
this paper, we describe the tool for building multilin-
gual conceptual dictionaries we developed for repre-
senting an analysing the terminology and concepts
used in EUD.
The main assumptions of our methodology, mo-
tivated by studies in comparative law (Rossi and
Vogel, 2004) and ontologies engineering (Klein,
2001), are the following ones: 1) Terms and con-
cepts must be distinguished; for this purpose, we
use lightweight ontologies, i.e. simple taxonomic
structures of primitive or composite terms together
with associated definitions. They are hardly axiom-
atized as the intended meaning of the terms used by
the community is more or less known in advance
by all members, and the ontology can be limited to
those structural relationships among terms that are
considered as relevant (Oberle, 2005)1. 2) We dis-
tinguish the ontology implicitly defined by EUD,
the EU level, from the various national ontologies,
the national level. Furthermore, each national leg-
islation refers to a distinct national legal ontology.
We do not assume that the transposition of an EUD
introduces automatically in a national ontology the
same concepts present at the EU level. 3) Corre-
sponding concepts at the EU level and at the national
level can be denoted by different terms in the same
national language.
In this paper, we show how the Legal Taxon-
omy Syllabus (LTS) is used to build a dictionary
of consumer law, to support the Uniform Terminol-
ogy Project2 (Rossi and Vogel, 2004). The struc-
ture of this paper is the following one. In Section 2
we stress two main problems which comparative law
has raised concerning EUD and their transpositions.
In Section 3 we describe how the methodology of
the LTS allows to cope with these problems and fi-
nally in Section 4we give some conclusions.
1See http://cos.ontoware.org/
2http://www.uniformterminology.unito.it
21
2 Terminological and conceptual
misalignment
Comparative law has identified two key points in
dealing with EUD, which makes more difficult deal-
ing with the polysemy of legal terms: we call them
the terminological and conceptual misalignments.
In the case of EUD (usually adopted for harmon-
ising the laws of the Member States), the termino-
logical matter is complicated by their necessity to
be implemented by the national legislations. In or-
der to have a precise transposition in a national law,
a Directive may be subject to further interpretation.
Thus, a same legal concept can be expressed in dif-
ferent ways in a Directive and in its implementing
national law. The same legal concept in some lan-
guage can be expressed in a different way in a EUD
and in the national law implementing it. As a con-
sequence we have a terminological misalignment.
For example, the concept corresponding to the word
reasonably in English, is translated into Italian as
ragionevolmente in the EUD, and as con ordinaria
diligenza into the transposition law.
In the EUD transposition laws a further problem
arises from the different national legal doctrines.
A legal concept expressed in an EUD may not be
present in a national legal system. In this case we
can talk about a conceptual misalignment. To make
sense for the national lawyers? expectancies, the Eu-
ropean legal terms have not only to be translated
into a sound national terminology, but they need to
be correctly detected when their meanings are to re-
fer to EU legal concepts or when their meanings are
similar to concepts which are known in the Member
states. Consequently, the transposition of European
law in the parochial legal framework of each Mem-
ber state can lead to a set of distinct national legal
doctrines, that are all different from the European
one. In case of consumer contracts (like those con-
cluded by the means of distance communication as
in Directive 97/7/EC, Art. 4.2), the notion to pro-
vide in a clear and comprehensible manner some el-
ements of the contract by the professionals to the
consumers represents a specification of the informa-
tion duties which are a pivotal principle of EU law.
Despite the pairs of translation in the language ver-
sions of EU Directives (i.e., klar und versta?ndlich
in German - clear and comprehensible in English -
chiaro e comprensibile in Italian), each legal term,
when transposed in the national legal orders, is in-
fluenced by the conceptual filters of the lawyers?
domestic legal thinking. So, klar und versta?ndlich
in the German system is considered by the German
commentators referring to three different legal con-
cepts: 1) the print or the writing of the informa-
tion must be clear and legible (gestaltung der infor-
mation), 2) the information must be intelligible by
the consumer (formulierung der information), 3) the
language of the information must be the national of
consumer (sprache der information). In Italy, the
judiciary tend to control more the formal features of
the concepts 1 and 3, and less concept 2, while in
England the main role has been played by the con-
cept 2, though considered as plain style of language
(not legal technical jargon) thanks to the historical
influences of plain English movement in that coun-
try.
Note that this kind of problems identified in com-
parative law has a direct correspondence in the on-
tology theory. In particular Klein (Klein, 2001) has
remarked that two particular forms of ontology mis-
match are terminological and conceptualization on-
tological mismatch which straightforwardly corre-
spond to our definitions of misalignments.
3 The methodology of the Legal Taxonomy
Syllabus
A standard way to properly manage large multilin-
gual lexical databases is to do a clear distinction
among terms and their interlingual acceptions (or
axies) (Se?rasset, 1994; Lyding et al, 2006). In
our system to properly manage terminological and
conceptual misalignment we distinguish in the LTS
project the notion of legal term from the notion of
legal concept and we build a systematic classifica-
tion based on this distinction. The basic idea in
our system is that the conceptual backbone consists
in a taxonomy of concepts (ontology) to which the
terms can refer to express their meaning. One of
the main points to keep in mind is that we do not
assume the existence of a single taxonomy cover-
ing all languages. In fact, it has been convincingly
argued that the different national systems may orga-
nize the concepts in different ways. For instance,
the term contract corresponds to different concepts
22
EU ontology Italian ontology German ontology 
Term-Ita-A Term-Ger-A 
EU-1 
Ita-2 
Ger-3 
Ger-5 
Ita-4 
Figure 1: Relationship between ontologies and
terms. The thick arcs represent the inter-ontology
?association? link.
in common law and civil law, where it has the mean-
ing of bargain and agreement, respectively (Sacco,
1999). In most complex instances, there are no
homologous between terms-concepts such as frutto
civile (legal fruit) and income, but respectively civil
law and common law systems can achieve function-
ally same operational rules thanks to the function-
ing of the entire taxonomy of national legal concepts
(Graziadei, 2004). Consequently, the LTS includes
different ontologies, one for each involved national
language plus one for the language of EU docu-
ments. Each language-specific ontology is related
via a set of association links to the EU concepts, as
shown in Fig. 1.
Although this picture is conform to intuition, in
LTS it had to be enhanced in two directions. First,
it must be observed that the various national ontolo-
gies have a reference language. This is not the case
for the EU ontology. For instance, a given term in
English could refer either to a concept in the UK on-
tology or to a concept in the EU ontology. In the
first case, the term is used for referring to a concept
in the national UK legal system, whilst in the second
one, it is used to refer to a concept used in the Euro-
pean directives. This is one of the main advantages
of LTS. For example klar und versta?ndlich could re-
fer both to concept Ger-379 (a concept in the Ger-
man Ontology) and to concept EU-882 (a concept
in the European ontology). This is the LTS solution
for facing the possibility of a correspondence only
partial between the meaning of a term has in the na-
tional system and the meaning of the same term in
the translation of a EU directive. This feature en-
ables the LTS to be more precise about what ?trans-
lation? means. It puts at disposal a way for asserting
that two terms are the translation of each other, but
just in case those terms have been used in the trans-
lation of an EU directive: within LTS, we can talk
about direct EU-translations of terms, but only about
indirect national-system translations of terms. The
situation enforced in LTS is depicted in Fig. 1, where
it is represented that: The Italian term Term-Ita-A
and the German term Term-Ger-A have been used as
corresponding terms in the translation of an EU di-
rective, as shown by the fact that both of them refer
to the same EU-concept EU-1. In the Italian legal
system, Term-Ita-A has the meaning Ita-2. In the
German legal system, Term-Ger-A has the meaning
Ger-3. The EU translations of the directive is cor-
rect insofar no terms exist in Italian and German that
characterize precisely the concept EU-1 in the two
languages (i.e., the ?associated? concepts Ita-4
and Ger-5 have no corresponding legal terms). A
practical example of such a situation is reported in
Fig. 2, where we can see that the ontologies include
different types of arcs. Beyond the usual is-a (link-
ing a category to its supercategory), there are also
a purpose arc, which relates a concept to the legal
principle motivating it, and concerns, which refers
to a general relatedness. The dotted arcs represent
the reference from terms to concepts. Some terms
have links both to a National ontology and to the EU
Ontology (in particular, withdrawal vs. recesso and
difesa del consumatore vs. consumer protection).
The last item above is especially relevant: note
that this configuration of arcs specifies that: 1) with-
drawal and recesso have been used as equivalent
terms (concept EU-2) in some European Directives
(e.g., Directive 90/314/EEC). 2) In that context, the
term involved an act having as purpose the some
kind of protection of the consumer. 3) The terms
used for referring to the latter are consumer protec-
tion in English and difesa del consumatore in Ital-
ian. 4) In the British legal system, however, not
all withdrawals have this goal, but only a subtype
of them, to which the code refers to as cancellation
(concept Eng-3). 5) In the Italian legal system, the
term diritto di recesso is ambiguous, since it can be
used with reference either to something concerning
23
Figure 2: An example of interconnections among
terms.
the risoluzione (concept Ita-4), or to something
concerning the recesso proper (concept Ita-3).
Finally, it is possible to use the LTS to translate
terms into different national systems via the con-
cepts which they are transposition of at the European
level. For instance suppose that we want to trans-
late the legal term credito al consumo from Italian
to German. In the LTS credito al consumo is asso-
ciated to the national umeaning Ita-175. We find
that Ita-175 is the transposition of the European
umeaning EU-26 (contratto di credito). EU-26 is
associated to the German legal term Kreditvertrag
at European level. Again, we find that the national
German transposition of EU-26 corresponds to the
national umeaning Ger-32 that is associated with
the national legal term Darlehensvertrag. Then, by
using the European ontology, we can translate the
Italian legal term credito al consumo into the Ger-
man legal term Darlehensvertrag.
4 Conclusions
In this paper we discuss some features of the LTS, a
tool for building multilingual conceptual dictionar-
ies for the EU law. The tool is based on lightweight
ontologies to allow a distinction of concepts from
terms. Distinct ontologies are built at the EU level
and for each national language, to deal with poly-
semy and terminological and conceptual misalign-
ment.
Many attempts have been done to use ontology
in legal field, e.g. (Casanovas et al, 2005; De-
spre?s and Szulman, 2006) and LOIS project (that is
based on EuroWordNet project (Vossen et al, 1999),
http://www.loisproject.org), but to our
knowledge the LTS is the first attempt which starts
from fine grained legal expertise on the EUD do-
main.
Future work is to study how the LTS can be used
as a thesaurus for general EUD, even if the current
domain is limited to consumer law.
References
A. Boer, T.M. van Engers, and R. Winkels. 2003. Using
ontologies for comparing and harmonizing legislation.
In ICAIL, pages 60?69.
P. Casanovas, N. Casellas, C. Tempich, D. Vrandecic, and
R. Benjamins. 2005. OPJK modeling methodology.
In Proceedings of the ICAIL Workshop: LOAIT 2005.
S. Despre?s and S. Szulman. 2006. Merging of legal
micro-ontologies from european directives. Artificial
Intelligence and Law, ??:????? In press.
E. Giguet and P.S. 2006. Multilingual lexical database
generation from parallel texts in 20 european lan-
guages with endogenous resources. In Proceedings of
the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Ses-
sions, pages 271?278, July.
M. Graziadei. 2004. Tuttifrutti. In P. Birks and A. Pretto,
editors, Themes in Comparative Law, pages ?. Oxford
University Press.
M. Klein. 2001. Combining and relating ontologies: an
analysis of problems and solutions. In Workshop on
Ontologies and Information Sharing, IJCAI?01, Seat-
tle, USA.
V. Lyding, Elena Chiocchetti, G. Se?rasset, and F. Brunet-
Manquat. 2006. The LexALP information system:
Term bank and corpus for multilingual legal termi-
nology consolidated. In Proc. of the Wokshop on
Multilingual Language Resources and Interoperabil-
ity, ACL06, pages 25?31.
D. Oberle, editor. 2005. Semantic Management of Mid-
dleware. Springer Science+Business and Media.
P. Rossi and C. Vogel. 2004. Terms and concepts; to-
wards a syllabus for european private law. European
Review of Private Law (ERPL), 12(2):293?300.
R. Sacco. 1999. Contract. European Review of Private
Law, 2:237?240.
G. Se?rasset. 1994. Interlingual lexical organization for
multilingual lexical databases in NADIA. In Proc.
COLING94, pages 278?282.
P. Vossen, W. Peters, and J. Gonzalo. 1999. Towards a
universal index of meaning. In Proc. ACL-99 Siglex
Workshop.
24
Social Goals in Conversational Cooperation 
Guido  Boe l la ,  Rossana  Damiano  and  Leonardo  Lesmo 
Dipartimento dii informatica nd Centro di Scienza Cognitiva 
Universita' di Torino 
Cso Svizzera 185 10149 Torino, ITALY 
email: {guido,rossana,lesmo}@di.unito.it 
Abst ract  
We propose a model where dialog 
obligations arise from the interplay 
of social goals and intentions of the 
participants: when an agent is ad- 
dressed with a request, t:he agent's 
decision to commit o the requester's 
linguistic and domain goals is mo- 
tivated by a trade-off between the 
preference for preventing a negative 
reaction of the requester and the 
cost of the actions needed to satisfy 
the goals. 
1 In t roduct ion  
As noticed by (Airenti et al, 1993), a dialog 
.participant, even when he does not commit o 
the domain goals of his partner (i.e., he does- 
n't cooperate behaviorally), typically contin- 
ues to cooperate at the conversational level. 
\[1\] A: Do you have Marlboros? 
B: Uh, no. We ran out 1 
\[2\] A: Can you tell me the time? 
? B :  No. My watch is broken 2
\[3\] A: Could you give me some money 
for the booze? 
B: I won't giv e you a dime 
What leads people to exhibit these forms of 
cooperation? (Traum and Allen, 1994) have 
challenged intention-based approaches to di- 
alog modeling ((Cohen and Levesque, 1990), 
(Lambert and Carberry, 1991), (Airenti et al, 
1993)) arguing that, in non-cooperative s t- 
tings (i.e., when the participants do not have 
1 (Merrit, 1976) 
~(Green and Carberry, 1999) 
shared goals), intention-based approaches 
leave unexplained why a participant should 
bother to be cooperative, both at the con- 
versational and at the behavioral level. In 
order to overcome these difficulties, (Traum 
and Allen, 1994) claim that speech acts 
pose obligations on the hearer: obligations 
are pro-attitudes which provide the hearer 
with a motivation to act, even if he is not 
- strictly speaking - cooperating with the 
speaker. Elaborating this proposal, (Poesio 
and Traum, 1998) propose to add obligations 
to the illocutive effect of speech acts: for in- 
stance, a (successful) question would pose on 
the addressee the obligation to answer; and, 
in general, a speech act poses the obligation 
to ground it. 
While we agree with (Traum and Allen, 1994) 
that cooperation between agents who are not 
part of a group has to be explained by some 
mechanism which obliges an agent to answer 
- at least for refusing explicitly - we want to 
go deeper inside the notion of obligation and 
try to show that it is strictly related to that 
of intention. 
In order to explain obligations, we re- 
sort to the notion of social goals, starting 
from (Goffman, 1981)'s sociolinguistic anal- 
ysis of interactions. We argue that, in non- 
cooperative situations, social goals provide 
agents with the motivation for committing to 
other agents' communicated goals. As shown 
by (Brown and Levinson, 1987), an agent has 
the social goal of taking into account he face 
of other people (and his own as well); this 
concern generates complementary needs for 
the requester and for the requestee. From 
the requester's point of view, it results in 
84 
the production of complex linguistic forms 
aimed at reducing the potential offence in- 
trinsic to a demand to act (conversationally 
or behaviorally); from the requestee's point 
of view, while acceptance normally addresses 
the requester's potential offence by a display- 
ing of good-tempered feelings, any refusal at 
the conversational or behavioral level consti- 
tutes in turn a potential offence to the reques- 
tee's face, and sets up the social need for the 
refusing agent to act in order to nullify this 
potential offence (Goffman, 1981). 
Differently from obligations, ocial goals in- 
fluence actions in an indirect way: in order 
to evaluate the effects of an action on his in- 
terlocutor, an agent has to make a tentative 
prediction of his reaction (anticipatory coordi- 
nation) (Castelfranchi, 1998). This prediction 
allows the agent o keep the partner's possible 
reaction into account when planning his next 
(domain or linguistic) action. Social goals in- 
tervene as preferences during the action se- 
lection phase, by leading the planning agent 
to choose the actions which minimize the of- 
fence to the partner and address the potential 
offence conveyed by a refusal. 
2 The  In teract iona l  F ramework  
2.1 Goals and Preferences 
We assume that every agent A has a set of 
goals G, and a set of preferences P towards 
states of affairs. Besides, an agent has at his 
disposal a set of action operators (recipes for 
achieving domain and linguistic goals, corre- 
sponding to behavioral nd conversational co- 
operation) organized in a hierarchical way. 
The preferences of an agent are expressed 
as functions which map states, represented as 
sets of attribute-value pairs, to real numbers; 
an overall utility function, which consists of 
the weighted sum of the individual functions, 
expresses the utility of reaching the state de- 
picted by a certain configuration ofattributes, 
according to the results of the multi-attribute 
utility theory (Haddawy and Hanks, 1998). 
Goals provide the input to the planning pro- 
cess; in addition, they can appear in the pref- 
erences of the agent, i.e., they can be related 
to a utility function which evaluates the ex- 
pected utility of achieving them 3. On the ba- 
sis of his goals and of the recipes he knows, 
an agent builds a set of plans, by selecting the 
recipes which have among their effects one (or 
more) of the goals in the set. 4 
The planner we use is a modification of the 
DRIPS decision-theoretic h erarchical planner 
(Haddawy and Hanks, 1998). The planning 
process tarts by applying to the current state 
all selected recipes and recursively expands 
the partial plans until the appropriate l vel 
of detail is reached. When the planning algo- 
rithm concludes the refinement of the input 
recipes, it returns the preferred plan, i. e., 
the one with the highest expected utility: the 
agent becomes committed to that plan, which 
constitutes his current intention. The use of 
preferences allows a plan to be ewluated not 
only with respect o the fact that it achieves 
the goal it has been built for, but also with 
respect o its side effects (for instance, con- 
suming less resources). 
2.2 Ant ic ipatory  Coord inat ion and 
Adopt ion 
The planning situation depicted above 
becomes more complex when two or more 
agents interact. In particular, a goal of agent 
A may become known to agent B; a special 
occurrence of this situation arises when A 
has explicitly asked B for help. If this is the 
case, it is possible that agent B comes to 
choose a plan to satisfy this goal, even if it 
does not yield any direct utility to him. 
Notice that if an agent evaluated the utility 
of a plan for achieving a goal that has been 
requested by another agent only on the basis 
of its immediate outcome, he would never 
choose that plan in a non-cooperative s tting: 
performing an action for achieving another 
agent's goal often results only in a negative 
utility, since the side effects of the action 
ZNot all goals are among the preferred states of af- 
fairs, since there are instrurnentalgoals which arise as 
a consequence of the intention to achieve some higher- 
level goal. 
4In the planning process, we distinguish between 
primary effects, which are the goals that led to the 
selection of a given recipe, and side e_ffects, i.e., all 
other effects of the recipe. 
85 
cannot but affect resources and time. The 
reason why B m:topts a partner's goal is the 
fact that the satisfaction of an adopted goal 
can have an indirect utility for B in the light 
of A's reaction. Here, the ability of an agent 
to predict the potential reactions of another 
agent is exploited to decide whether it is 
worth for him to commit to the satisfaction 
of the other agent's goal. 
In order to evaluate how the partner's 
reaction affects his own preferences, like 
not offending the partner and other social 
goals, an agent evaluates the utility of a plan 
by considering the world states resulting 
from the other partner's reaction (one-level 
lookahead), both in case he has commit- 
ted to the partner's goals, and in case he 
has decided that they are not worth pursuing. 
The DRIPS planner has been modified to 
implement the following process of intention 
formation in interactions with other agents 
(see figure 1): 
1. adoption: if A communicates to B a goal 
gA which he wants B to achieve, then the cur- 
rent set of B's goals, GB, becomes G~, the 
union of {gA} and GB. 
2. planning: B builds the set of plans PB 
which aim at achieving (all or some of) the 
goals in G~ (in this way the plans achiev- 
ing also gA are compared with those which 
do not). 
3. anticipatory coordination: from the state 
resulting from each plan pi in PB, B considers 
the possible reaction of A: the world state 
resulting from the reaction becomes the new 
outcome of p~. 
4. preference-driven choice: B chooses the Pi 
in PB whose outcome maximizes his utility. 
For a detailed description of the planning 
algorithm with anticipatory coordination, see 
(Boella, 2000). 
In the following Section, we will show how so- 
cial obligations arise spontaneously in a model 
of conversational interaction which exploits 
the planning framework described above. 
3 Social  Goa ls  and  Conversat iona l  
Cooperat ion  
3.1 Social Goals 
In this section, we exploit the framework de- 
scribed above to model the complex dynamics 
of goals and social preferences that underlies 
examples like \[1\]. In particular, we consider 
the possibility that the partner is offended by 
the agent's response to a request. The offence 
is not modeled as a direct effect of an action 
of the agent. Instead, during the planning 
phase, the agent makes a tentative prediction 
of the partner's attitude in the state where 
he is faced with a refusal, in order to evaluate 
how this state complies with his preference 
for not offending: the partner is offended as a 
result of his reaction to the agent's refusal. 
In our model, the preference for not offend- 
ing the partner corresponds to a social goal ~ 
of an agent: this preference doesn't constitute 
an input to planning, but, by being embodied 
in the utility function of the agent, it con- 
tributes to plan selection, by promoting the 
plans which do not have offending as a conse- 
quence. This is in line with (Goffman, 1967)'s 
claim that "Ordinarily, maintenance of face is 
a condition of interaction, not its objective" 
(p.12). 
Some authors ((Schegloff and Sacks, 1973), 
(Coulthard, 1977)) have characterized the or- 
ganization of conversation i terms of proto- 
typical pairs, adjacency pairs. In our model, 
the existence of adjacency pairs is not mo- 
tivated by the action of specific grounding 
norms, or obligations. 6 Rather, these ex- 
changes are explained by the interplay of the 
communicative intentions of the participants, 
and by their ability to recognize the intentions 
of the interlocutors (Ardissono et al, 2000). 
Sin (Clark, 1996)'s terminology, goals like being 
polite are called interpersonal goals. 
o "Given a speaker's need to know whether his mes- 
sage has been received, and if so, whether or not has 
been passably understood, and given a recipient's need 
to show that he has received the message and correctly 
- given these very fundamental requirements of talk 
as a communication system - we have the essential ra- 
tionale for the existence ofadjacency pairs, that is, 
for the organization f talk into two-part exchanges" 
((Goffman, 1981), p. 12). 
86 
4. preference-driven choice 
; . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
? =========================== _l 
f . . . . . . . . . . . .  ~ 3. anticipatory ~ J ~?~-~t~)~ 2. planning coordinta#on 
i , ~ Z ~ - .  A'S REACTION 
8', PuN2 . . . . .  
Figure 1: The intention formation process in interactions 
In general, the preference for not offending 
which encompasses conversational phenom- 
ena like request-response pairs, is motivated 
by the requestee's goal of displaying a good- 
tempered acceptance of the request itself: in 
(Goffman, 1981)'s terms, communicative ex- 
changes are subject to a set of "constraints 
regarding how each individual ought to han- 
dle himself with respect to each others, so that 
he not discredit his own tacit claim to good- 
character or the tacit claim of the others that 
they are persons of social worth (...)" (p. 16). 
Within an interaction, agents are aware of 
the fact that their actions have social effects, 
like conveying some information about their 
character and about their attitude towards 
the partner: "An act is taken to carry im- 
plications regarding the character of the ac- 
tor and his evaluation of his listeners, as well 
as reflecting on the relationship between him 
and them" ((Goffman, 1981), p. 21). As a 
consequence, agents are very cautious in the 
use of the expressive means they have at dis- 
posal, namely verbal actions: besides moni- 
toring the partner's reactions, they try to an- 
ticipate them with the aim of not offending 
the partner. 
The preference for not offending holds as 
well in the circumstances where an agent is 
forced to refuse his cooperation by the impos- 
sibility of executing the appropriate action to 
achieve the partner's goal. However, if this is 
the case, the requestee has to cope with the 
additional fact that a simple, negative answer 
can be mistakenly taken to count as a refusal 
to cooperate at all: 
\[4\] A: Have you got a cigarette? 
B: No 
For this reason, the refusing agent is likely 
to provide the requester with an acceptable 
reason, i.e. a remedy or account (Levinson, 
1983), when the request is to be turned down. 
What remains to be explained is why ree- 
quests at behavioral level seem to pose less 
constraints on the addressee, if compared 
to requests at conversational level: provided 
that the interactants don't have shared goals, 
it is a matter of fact that it is easier to refuse 
a request for money (see example \[3\]) ~ than 
a request o tell the time (see example \[2\]). 
In particular, conversational goals often force 
the hearer to satisfy them: it is aggressive not 
to answer at all or to ignore the speaker. 
The reason why paying attention to people, 
listening and understanding are not easily re- 
fused is that they are low cost actions, or "free 
goods" in (Goffman, 1967) terminology, so no 
one can refuse them without threatening the 
speaker's face and offending him. A refusal at 
the conversational level - ignoring a potential 
partner and not even responding to his verbal 
request - constitutes a menace to the face of 
the requester, so it is hardly justified. 
7We thank the anonymous reviewers for the ob- 
servation that this example lends itself to a deeper 
analysis, involving further social and psycological pa- 
rameters. However, we will not discuss the example 
here, due to space reasons. 
87 
Up to this point no explicit obligation is 
created: the "obligation to act" depends on 
the utility of the action needed to establish 
cooperation; if the cost of the action is low 
(e.g., a conversational ~=tion): the refusal to 
execute it can be motivated in the requester's 
eyes only by a requestee's negative attitude 
towards him. So, the requester, as a result of 
his ability to infer the requestee's reasoning, 
will be offended by a refusal; the preference 
for not threatening the face of the partners 
and preserving one's own social face normally 
makes the utility of offences negative, thus 
leading requestees toavoiding refusals. At the 
same time, this analysis, by making explicit 
the underlying motivations for the preference 
for a certain type of response, accounts for the 
existence of preferred and dispreferred second 
turns in adjacency pairs. 
3.2 Conversat iona l  Cooperat ion 
The effect on the requester is evaluated by 
the planning agent by means of the antici- 
pation of his reaction. In general, the situa- 
tion a requestee is faced with is constituted 
by the choice between the alternative of sat- 
isfying the requester's conversational or be- 
havioral goals and the alternative of going on 
with his own activity. 
Consider the situation depicted in example 
\[1\] from B's point of view, where B is faced 
with A's indirect request: 
\[1\] A: Do you have Marlboros? 
B: Uh, no. We ran out 
B can attribute to A two main goals (see fig- 
ure 2): s 
1. the behavioral goal that B sells to A a 
packet of cigarettes (sell): however, since A 
cannot ake B's cooperation for granted, this 
goal is related in turn to the goal of know- 
ing whether B has committed to the perlocu- 
tionary intention of selling to A a packet of 
cigarettes (knowif-satisfy), by committing to 
A's goal (satisfy), and, if this is the case, to 
the goal of knowing whether he has completed 
the corresponding plan to sell the cigarettes 
8The recognition ofdomain goals depends on the 
recognition ofthe linguistic goals, :i.e., on the success 
of the linguistic actions. 
(hand the cigarettes, cash, ect.) to A (knowif- 
completed); 
2. the conversational goal of knowing if the 
request has been understood by B and is now 
part of the common ground (grounded); this 
goal directly relates to the management of di- 
alog: if A does not believe that the illocu- 
tionary effect of his question holds, he should 
repeat or reformulate the question. 
Note that, at both levels, subsidiary goals 
arise as part of the intentional behavior of an 
agent: for example, after performing an ac- 
tion for achieving some goal, it is rational to 
check whether this action has succeeded. 9 
B considers if it is possible for him to com- 
mit to the higher-level goal (sell), to which the 
remaining recognized goals are subordinated: 
although B is inclined to satisfy this goal, B 
knows that one of the preconditions for ex- 
ecuting the selling action (has(B, Marlboros)) 
is not true. 
At this point, besides the choice of not re- 
sponding at all, the alternative courses of 
action available to B consist in committing 
to A's goal to know if B has committed to 
his (unachievable) sell goal (knowif-satisfy), 
and the subordinate goal to know if B has 
completed the plan to achieve it (knowif- 
completed), or to commit o A's goal - at con- 
versational level - to have his illocutionary act 
grounded (grounded)3 ? The choice between 
the alternative of not responding at all and 
any of the other alternatives i  accomplished 
by considering the reaction of the partner to a 
refusal at the conversational level; this choice 
is enforced by the consideration that commu- 
nicative actions are "free goods", so they can- 
not be refused without incurring in a state 
where the partner is offended. 
Being committed to the satisfaction of the 
knowif-cornpleted goal, B has to choose be- 
9We will not describe here how these goals are iden- 
tified and kept ogether in a unified structure: works 
like (Ardissono et al, 2000) show how the recognition 
of the intentions stemming from the problem solving 
activity can constitute the required glue 
1?Note that, when producing an illocutionary act to 
satisfy the know-satisfied or knowifieompleted goal, B 
satisfies the grounded goal as well: by displaying the 
reaction to the perlocutionary effect, he uptake of the 
illocutionary effect is granted. 
88 
t 
request(A,B,(sell(B,A,cigarettes))) 
t 
have(A, cigarettes) 
sell(B,A,cigarettes). 
t 
sa~sfy(B,(sen(B,A,eigarettes))) 
knowif-~tisfy(A,B(sell(B,A,cigarettes))) 
grounded(request(A,B,(sell(B,A,cigarettes)))) 
knowif-completed(A,B(sell(B,A,cigarettes))) 
Figure 2: The intentions of A in example \[1\] 
tween different ways to communicate the im- 
possibility to execute the plan. In this case, 
two plans can apply: the simple plan for refus- 
ing, or the elaborated plan for refusing which 
includes a justification for the refusal. 
The first plan is less expensive, by being 
shorter and by not requiring a mental effort; 
however, it is not fully explicit about the mo- 
tivations of the refusal, and so it is potentially 
offensive in the partner's evaluation (A could 
think that B didn't want to sell the cigarettes 
to him). On the contrary, the second plan, 
though more expensive, obeys to the prefer- 
ence for not offending, since it protects the 
refusing requestee from the accusation of non- 
cooperativeness. 
The existence of complex refusal acts has been 
remarked on by (Gree n and Carberry, 1999). 
In their mechanism for initiative in answer 
generation, the ambiguity of a negative an- 
swer to a pre-request between a literal answer 
and a refusal triggers the "Excuse-Indicated" 
rule, which generates the appropriate xpla- 
nation. 
4 Re la ted  Work  
(Traum and Allen, 1994) defined a model of 
linguistic interaction based on the notion of 
obligation. Obligations are pro-attitudes that 
impose less commitment than intentions (so 
that they can be violated), while their social 
character explains why humans are solicited 
to act, in both cooperative and non cooper- 
ative contexts. The notion of obligation has 
been exploited also in applied dialog systems, 
like (Jameson et al, 1996), where they are as- 
sociated to move types. 
While in (Traum and Allen, 1994) discourse 
obligations are social norms that speakers 
have to learn, in our model, the speakers have 
to learn in what conditions humans happen to 
be offended; this same knowledge xplains the 
use of indirect speech acts (as in (Ardissono 
et al, 1999)). 
Moreover, obligations eem somehow redun- 
dant in cooperative contexts, where intentions 
are sufficient o explain grounding and other 
conversational phenomena. 
Differently from (Traum and Allen, 1994), 
(Allwood, 1994) introduces, besides the obli- 
gations associated to the communicative acts, 
two additional sources of obligation which are 
related, respectively, to ethical and rational 
motivations intrinsic to social relations and 
to the management of communication itself. 
Communication management obligations give 
rise to the mechanisms of turn-taking, inter- 
action sequencing, and so on, while the eth- 
ical obligation are socially desirable qualities 
of the interactional behavior: there exists a 
strong social expectation towards them, but 
an agent can decide to disobey them. 
(Kreutel and Matheson, 2000) claim that 
the intentional structure in uncooperative di- 
alogues can be determined by resorting to dis- 
course obligations. In order to do so, they 
define a set of inference rules which allow to 
reconstruct the participants' intentions epa- 
rately from obligations, then show how obli- 
gations account for the existence of conversa- 
tional preferences by addressing pending in- 
tentions. However, the semantic rules they 
89 
propose seem to constitute a shortcut o the 
recognition of the communicative intentions 
of the speaker, which has been proven to 
be necessary to reconstruct dialog coherence 
(Levinson, 1981); the resulting representa- 
tion, since it lacks a model of the private in- 
tentions of the participants inadequately ac- 
counts for the presence of individual inten- 
tions which have to be traded-off against obli- 
gations in situations where cooperation is not 
granted. 
5 An  Example  S i tuat ion  
In order to verify the feasibility of exploit- 
ing social goals for motivating cooperation, 
we have implemented a prototype using a de- 
cision theoretic planner inspired to the ap- 
proach of (Haddawy and Hanks, 1998). The 
planner exploits hierarchical plans to find 
the optimal sequence of actions under uncer- 
tainty, based on a multi-attribute utility func- 
tion. Goals can be by traded off against cost 
(waste of resources) and against each other. 
Five different attributes n have been intro- 
duced to depict the situation in example \[2\], 
where B is interrupted by A while he is ex- 
ecuting a generic action Act; this action is 
aimed at reaching one of B's private goal. 
\[2\] A: Can you tell me the time? 
B: No. My watch is broken 
The following attributes model the states 
involved in the example situation, and appear 
in the effects of the participants' actions. 
? time: it models time as a bounded re- 
source; the utility decreases as a function 
of time; 
? grounded: it models A's goal of knowing 
that B has successfully interpreted the 
request; 
? res: it models the consumption of (generic) 
resources; 
? refused: it is true if A believes that B 
has refused, without any justification, to 
commit o A's communicated goal; 
? offended: it models A's degree of offence; 
n Note that the values 0 and 1 of the attributes 
ground and satisfied.requestrepresent the truth-values 
of the corresponding propositions. 
Other goals like knowing whether B has 
committed to the achievement of the goal or 
whether the achievement has been successful 
or higher-level domain goals are not included 
in this example for space reasons. 
In order to model the alternatives available 
to B, we have introduced the following ac- 
tions (see figure 3). Effects are represented 
as changes in the value of attributes: for ex- 
ample, (time=time+2) means that after the 
execution of the Notify-motivation action, the 
value of the time attribute will increase by 2. 
? Action Tell-time: it represents B's cooper- 
ation with A at the behavioral level (B 
executes the requested action); 
? Action Ground: it has the effect that A 
knows that the illocutionary effect of his 
request has been properly recognized by 
the partner (the grounded attribute is set 
to "true"). 
? Action Notify-impossible: it models B's 
notification that A's goal is impossible 
to achieve; it specializes into two sub- 
actions, Notify-motivation and Notify- 
simple: both actions have a cost in 
terms of resources and time and set the 
grounded attribute to true, but the sec- 
ond one negatively affects the refused at- 
tribute, meaning that A considers it as a 
(possible) unjustified refusal. 
? Action Act: it constitutes B's current plan 
when he is interrupted by A's request. It 
affects both the grounded and the refused 
attribute, by setting the latter to "false". 
? Action Refuse: it represents B's act of 
communicating to A that he will not do 
what A requested, without any justifica- 
tion. Among its effects, there is the fact 
that B comes to know A's choice (refused 
and grounded attribute are set to "true"). 
Before B replies to A's request, the 
grounded attribute is set to false and the re- 
fused attribute is set to true. Note that - with 
the exception of Act - all actions affect the 
value of the grounded attribute, meaning that, 
after performing any of them, A's request re- 
sults grounded anyway, since all these actions 
are coherent replies. 
90 
(ac t ion  Not i fy -mot ivat ion  
( t ime = t ime + 3) 
( res  = res  - 3) 
(g rounded = I) 
( re fused  = 0)) 
(ac t ion  Ground 
( t ime = t ime + i) 
( res = res  - 2) 
(g rounded = I)) 
(ac t ion  
(ac t ion  Not i fy -s imp le  (ac t ion  Refuse  (ac t ion  
( t ime = t ime + I) ( t ime = t ime + 2) 
( res  = res  - I) ( res = res  - 2) 
(g rounded = I) (g rounded = I) 
( re fused  = I)) ( re fused  = I)) 
Te l l - t ime 
( t ime = t ime + 1) 
( res  = res  - 2) 
(g rounded = I) 
( re fused  = 0)) 
Ac t  
( t ime = t ime +5) 
( res  = res  -5)  
(g rounded = 0) 
(goa l  = 1)) 
Figure 3: A simplified representation of some of the actions that B can execute: the action 
name is followed by the list of its effects. 
On A's side, we have introduced the action 
React 12 (see Figure 5), that models the change 
of the offended parameter depending on B's 
choice. The key parameter affecting the level 
of offence is the cost 13 of the requested ac- 
tions: the less the cost of the requested ac- 
tion, the greater the offence; this follows the 
principle that low-cost actions cannot be re- 
fused (Goffman, 1967), and, if they are, re- 
questers get offended. The lack of grounding 
is interpreted by A as B is not cooperating 
at the conversational level: since cooperating 
at the conversational level (interpreting the 
sentence, grounding it) has a low cost, it is 
offensive not to do it. 
Now, let's consider in detail the current sit- 
uation, i.e, the one where A has just asked to 
B to do something while B has just performed 
the first step of Act. In order to explore the 
different alternatives, the planner builds and 
evaluates ome plans. These plans differ in 
that the actions for pursuing the partner's 
recognized goal can be included or omitted. 
From the result state of each alternative, the 
planner then tries to predict he reaction of A 
by simulating the execution of the React ac- 
tion by A (see figure 5), and commits to the 
plan whose resulting state after the predicted 
reaction yields the greater utility according to 
B's preferences ( ee Figure 6). 
As explained in Section 2.1., an agent's util- 
ity function is a weighted sum of individual 
utility functions, which represent the prefer- 
*2We assume that weights Wi and Wj are set, re- 
spectively, to 20 and 10. 
*aWhere (cost(action) = (res * 2) + time). 
ences of the agent. The weights associated to 
the individual functions reflect the strength 
of each preference, by allowing for different 
trade-offs among preferences during the pro- 
cess of decision making. 14 
In figure 4, two alternative plans are repre- 
sented, where the utility of B is calculated 
by using the utility function in figure 6. As- 
suming that the weights W1, W2, W3; and 
W4 are set to 10, 5, 8, and 100, respectively, 
B will choose the plan which includes Notify- 
impossible as the first step, and Act - the pros- 
ecution of B's previous activity - as the sec- 
ond step. This solution yields in fact a higher 
utility than the alternative of ignoring A's re- 
quest at all and continuing one's own activity. 
A change in the weights of the utility func- 
tion of B affects his behavior, by determining 
a variation in the degree of cooperation: the 
stronger is the preference for not offending, 
the more cooperative is the agent. For exam- 
ple, if the utility function of B associates a
greater utility to the achievement of B's pri- 
vate goal (by executing Act) than to the social 
preference for not offending, B will decide to 
disregard A's request, both at conversational 
and behavioral level, is On the contrary, if the 
14 As (Traum, 1999) notices with reference to social 
rules, "when they directly conflict with the agent's 
personal goals, the agent may choose to violate them 
(and perhaps suffer the consequences of not meeting 
its obligations)." In our model, this roughly amounts 
to associating a greater utility to the achievement of 
the agent's own goals than to the preference for not 
offending. 
*STipically, this is the case in specific contexts when 
private goals of the addressee are very relevant and 
contrast with the satisfaction of the requester's goal; 
91 
$1 
A 
res = 20 
off = 0 
B 
res = 50 
goal =0 
SH 
grounded = 0 
refused = 1 
time : 0 
NOTIFY -  
MOTIVAT ION (B) 
ACT (B) 
S2  
A 
res = 20 
off = 0 
B 
res = 47 
goal = 0 
SH 
grounded = 1 
refused = 0 
t ime = 3 
$2  
A 
res = 20 
off = 0 
13 
res = 45 
goal = 1 
SH 
grounded : O 
:refused = 1 
1:~me = 5 
ACT (B) 
$3 
A 
res : 20 
off = 0 
B 
res = 42 
goal = 1 
SH 
grounded = 1 
refused = 0 
time = 8 
S3 
A 
tee  = 19  
off  : I 
B 
res  z 45  
goa l  : 1 
SH 
~ou.~Led = 0 
: i re fusedL = 1 
t ime= 6 
REACT (A) 
REACT (A) 
ITB = 38'7 
$3 
A 
re8  = 19  
of f  = 0 
B 
tee  = 42 
goa l  = 1 
S~ 
g ' ~ e d  = 1 
ze~ed : 0 
t ime : 9 
= 448 
Figure 4: Two of B's alternative plans in response to A's request 
(ac t ion  React  
( t ime = t ime + i)  
( res  = res  - i )  
(o f fended = o f fended + 
(not (grounded) )  * Wi  + 
( re fused  / cos t (ac t ion) )  * W~))  
Figure 5: The partner's reaction 
Us= ( ress  * Wi)  - 
( t ime * W~) - 
(o f fended * Ws)  + 
(goa l  * We)  
Figure 6: The utilitY function of B 
utility function of B models a more balanced 
tra~:le-off between the achievement of B's pri- 
vate goMs and social preferences, B will de- 
cide to ground A's request, at least, or to be 
fully cooperative by satisfying A's request. 
6 Conc lus ions  
In this paper we proposed an intention-based 
approach to dialog that aims at overcoming 
the critics posed by (Traum and Allen, 1994) 
by assuming the existence of social goals. Our 
solution does not rest on an explicit notion 
for  example ,  B cou ld  miss ing  the  t ra in .  
of obligation, even if some similarities can be 
found with (Traum and Allen, 1994). The 
advantage of not resorting to a primitive no- 
tion of obligation is to have a uniform source 
of motivations for explaining the behavior of 
agents. 
With respect to approaches which stipu- 
late a primitive notion of obligation, here, the 
same phenomena are accounted for without 
introducing further propositional attitudes. 
This explanation of the motivations leading 
to cooperation provides an explicative model 
that is uniform with the treatment of deon- 
tic reasoning in agent theories (Conte et al, 
1998), (Boella and Lesmo, 2000) and the def- 
inition of cooperation proposed in (Boella et 
al., 2000). 
It is clear that, by reducing the number 
of propositional attitudes, the reasoning pro- 
cess becomes more complex, but our model 
is aimed at constituting an explanation, and 
it does not exclude the possibility of compil- 
ing the reasoning in more compact form: as 
(Brown and Levinson, 1987) notice, %here is 
a rational basis for conventions, too". 
92 
References  
G. Airenti, B. Bara, and M. Colombetti. 1993. 
Conversational nd behavior games in the prag- 
matics of discourse. Cognitive Science, 17:197- 
256. 
J. Allwood. 1994. Obligations and options in di- 
alogue. Think, 3. 
L. Ardissono, G. Boella, and L. Lesmo. 1999. The 
role of social goals in planning polite speech 
acts. In Workshop on Attitude, Personality 
and Emotions in User-Adapted Interaction at 
UM'99 Conference, pages 41-55, Banff. 
L. Ardissono, G. Boella, and L. Lesmo. 2000. 
Plan based agent architecture for interpreting 
natural anguage dialogue. International Jour- 
nal of Human- Computer Studies, (52) :583-636. 
G. Boella and L. Lesmo. 2000. Deliberate nor- 
mative agents. In Proc. of Autonomous Agents 
2000 Workshop on Norms and Institutions., 
Barcelona. 
G. Boella, R. Damiano, and L. Lesmo. 2000. 
Cooperation and group utility. In N.R. Jen- 
nings and Y. Lesp~rance, editors, Intelligent 
Agents VI - -  Proceedings of the Sixth Interna- 
tional Workshop on Agent Theories, Architec- 
tures, and Languages (ATAL-99, Orlando FL), 
pages 319-333. Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
G. Boella. 2000. Cooperation among economi- 
cally rational agents. Ph.D. thesis, Universit~ 
di Torino, Italy. 
P. Brown and S. C. Levinson. 1987. Politeness: 
some universals on language usage. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
C. Castelfranchi. 1998. Modeling social action for 
AI agents. Artificial Intelligence, 103:157-182. 
H.C. Clark. 1996. Using Language. Cambridge 
University Press. 
P.R. Cohen and H.J. Levesque. 1990. Rational 
interaction as the basis for communication. In
P.R. Cohen, J. Morgan, and M.E. Pollack, ed- 
itors, Intentions in communication, pages 221- 
255. MIT Press. 
R. Conte, C. Castelfranchi, and F. Dignum. 
1998. Autonomous norm-acceptance. In J. P. 
Mueller, M.P. Singh, and A.S. Rao, editors, In- 
telligent Agents V - -  Proc. of 5th Int. Work- 
shop on Agent Theories, Architectures, and 
Languages (ATAL-98). Springer Verlag, Berlin. 
M. Coulthard. 1977. An Introduction to Dis- 
course Analysis. Longman, London. 
E. Goffman. 1967. Interaction Ritual. Penguin, 
Harmondsworth. 
E. Goffman. 1981. Forms of Talk. University of 
Pennsylavania Press. 
N. Green and S. Carberry. 1999. Interpret- 
ing and generating indirect answers. Compu- 
tational Linguistics, 25(3):389-435. 
P. Haddawy and S. Hanks. 1998. Utility models 
for goal-directed, decision-theoretic planners. 
Computational Intelligence, 14:392-429. 
A. Jameson, R. Sharer, J. Simons, and T. Weis. 
1996. How to juggle discourse obligations. In 
R. Meyer-Klabunde and C. yon Stutterheim, 
editors, Proceedings of the Symposium 'Concep- 
tual and Semantic Knowledge in Language Pro- 
duction', pages 171-185. 
J. Kreutel and C. Matheson. 2000. Obliga- 
tions, intentions and the notion of conversa- 
tional games. In Proc. Gotalog, 4th Workshop 
on the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue. 
L. Lambert and S. Carberry. 1991. A tripartite 
plan-based model of dialogue. In Proc. 29th 
Annual Meeting of A CL, pages 47-54, Berkeley, 
CA. 
S.C. Levinson. 1981. The essential inadequacies 
of speech act models of dialogue. In M. Par- 
ret, M. Sbis~, and J. Verschueren, editors, Pos- 
sibilities and Limitations of Pragmatics, pages 
473-492. Benjamins, Amsterdam. 
S.C. Levinson. 1983. Pragmatics. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
M. Merrit. 1976. On questions following questions 
(in service encounters). Language in Society, 
5(3):315-357. 
M. Poesio and D. Traum. 1998. Towards an 
axiomatization of dialogue acts. In Proc. of 
13th Twente Workshop on Language Technol- 
ogy, pages 207-222, Enschede. 
E.A. Schegloff and H. Sacks. 1973. Opening up 
closings. Semiotica, 7:289-327. 
D.R. Traum and J.F. Allen. 1994. Discourse obli- 
gations in dialogue processing. In Proc. 32nd 
Annual Meeting of A CL, pages 1-8, Las Cruces, 
New Mexico. 
D. Traum. 1999. Speech acts for dialogue agents. 
In M. Wooldridge and A. Rao, editors, Foun- 
dations and Theories of rational Agents, pages 
169-201. Kluwer. 
93 
Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 532?537,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Extracting Definitions and Hypernym Relations relying on Syntactic
Dependencies and Support Vector Machines
Guido Boella
University of Turin
Department of Computer Science
boella@di.unito.it
Luigi Di Caro
University of Turin
Department of Computer Science
dicaro@di.unito.it
Abstract
In this paper we present a technique to
reveal definitions and hypernym relations
from text. Instead of using pattern match-
ing methods that rely on lexico-syntactic
patterns, we propose a technique which
only uses syntactic dependencies between
terms extracted with a syntactic parser.
The assumption is that syntactic informa-
tion are more robust than patterns when
coping with length and complexity of the
sentences. Afterwards, we transform such
syntactic contexts in abstract representa-
tions, that are then fed into a Support
Vector Machine classifier. The results on
an annotated dataset of definitional sen-
tences demonstrate the validity of our ap-
proach overtaking current state-of-the-art
techniques.
1 Introduction
Nowadays, there is a huge amount of textual
data coming from different sources of informa-
tion. Wikipedia1 , for example, is a free encyclo-
pedia that currently contains 4,208,409 English ar-
ticles2. Even Social Networks play a role in the
construction of data that can be useful for Infor-
mation Extraction tasks like Sentiment Analysis,
Question Answering, and so forth.
From another point of view, there is the need
of having more structured data in the forms of
ontologies, in order to allow semantics-based re-
trieval and reasoning. Ontology Learning is
a task that permits to automatically (or semi-
automatically) extract structured knowledge from
plain text. Manual construction of ontologies usu-
ally requires strong efforts from domain experts,
and it thus needs an automatization in such sense.
1http://www.wikipedia.org/
2April 12, 2013.
In this paper, we focus on the extraction of hy-
pernym relations. The first step of such task relies
on the identification of what (Navigli and Velardi,
2010) called definitional sentences, i.e., sentences
that contain at least one hypernym relation. This
subtask is important by itself for many tasks like
Question Answering (Cui et al, 2007), construc-
tion of glossaries (Klavans and Muresan, 2001),
extraction of taxonomic and non-taxonomic rela-
tions (Navigli, 2009; Snow et al, 2004), enrich-
ment of concepts (Gangemi et al, 2003; Cataldi et
al., 2009), and so forth.
Hypernym relation extraction involves two as-
pects: linguistic knowlege, and model learning.
Patterns collapse both of them, preventing to face
them separately with the most suitable techniques.
First, patterns have limited expressivity; then, lin-
guistic knowledge inside patterns is learned from
small corpora, so it is likely to have low coverage.
Classification strictly depends on the learned pat-
terns, so performance decreases, and the available
classification techniques are restricted to those
compatible with the pattern approach. Instead, we
use a syntactic parser for the first aspect (with all
its native and domain-independent knowledge on
language expressivity), and a state-of-the-art ap-
proach to learn models with the use of Support
Vector Machine classifiers.
Our assumption is that syntax is less dependent
than learned patterns from the length and the com-
plexity of textual expressions. In some way, pat-
terns grasp syntactic relationships, but they actu-
ally do not use them as input knowledge.
2 Related Work
In this section we present the current state of the
art concerning the automatic extraction of defini-
tions and hypernym relations from plain text. We
will use the term definitional sentence referring to
the more general meaning given by (Navigli and
Velardi, 2010): A sentence that provides a for-
532
mal explanation for the term of interest, and more
specifically as a sentence containing at least one
hypernym relation.
So far, most of the proposed techniques rely on
lexico-syntactic patterns, either manually or semi-
automatically produced (Hovy et al, 2003; Zhang
and Jiang, 2009; Westerhout, 2009). Such pat-
terns are sequences of words like ?is a? or ?refers
to?, rather than more complex sequences includ-
ing part-of-speech tags.
In the work of (Westerhout, 2009), after a man-
ual identification of types of definitions and related
patterns contained in a corpus, he successively ap-
plied Machine Learning techniques on syntactic
and location features to improve the results.
A fully-automatic approach has been proposed
by (Borg et al, 2009), where the authors applied
genetic algorithms to the extraction of English def-
initions containing the keyword ?is?. In detail,
they assign weights to a set of features for the clas-
sification of definitional sentences, reaching a pre-
cision of 62% and a recall of 52%.
Then, (Cui et al, 2007) proposed an approach
based on soft patterns, i.e., probabilistic lexico-
semantic patterns that are able to generalize over
rigid patterns enabling partial matching by cal-
culating a generative degree-of-match probability
between a test instance and the set of training in-
stances.
Similarly to our approach, (Fahmi and Bouma,
2006) used three different Machine Learning algo-
rithms to distinguish actual definitions from other
sentences also relying on syntactic features, reach-
ing high accuracy levels.
The work of (Klavans and Muresan, 2001) re-
lies on a rule-based system that makes use of ?cue
phrases? and structural indicators that frequently
introduce definitions, reaching 87% of precision
and 75% of recall on a small and domain-specific
corpus.
As for the task of definition extraction, most
of the existing approaches use symbolic methods
that are based on lexico-syntactic patterns, which
are manually crafted or deduced automatically.
The seminal work of (Hearst, 1992) represents the
main approach based on fixed patterns like ?NPx
is a/an NPy? and ?NPx such as NPy?, that usu-
ally imply < x IS-A y >.
The main drawback of such technique is that it
does not face the high variability of how a relation
can be expressed in natural language. Still, it gen-
erally extracts single-word terms rather than well-
formed and compound concepts. (Berland and
Charniak, 1999) proposed similar lexico-syntactic
patterns to extract part-whole relationships.
(Del Gaudio and Branco, 2007) proposed a rule-
based approach to the extraction of hypernyms
that, however, leads to very low accuracy values
in terms of Precision.
(Ponzetto and Strube, 2007) proposed a
technique to extract hypernym relations from
Wikipedia by means of methods based on the
connectivity of the network and classical lexico-
syntactic patterns. (Yamada et al, 2009) extended
their work by combining extracted Wikipedia en-
tries with new terms contained in additional web
documents, using a distributional similarity-based
approach.
Finally, pure statistical approaches present
techniques for the extraction of hierarchies of
terms based on words frequency as well as co-
occurrence values, relying on clustering proce-
dures (Candan et al, 2008; Fortuna et al, 2006;
Yang and Callan, 2008). The central hypothesis is
that similar words tend to occur together in similar
contexts (Harris, 1954). Despite this, they are de-
fined by (Biemann, 2005) as prototype-based on-
tologies rather than formal terminological ontolo-
gies, and they usually suffer from the problem of
data sparsity in case of small corpora.
3 Approach
In this section we present our approach to identify
hypernym relations within plain text. Our method-
ology consists in relaxing the problem into two
easier subtasks. Given a relation rel(x, y) con-
tained in a sentence, the task becomes to find 1)
a possible x, and 2) a possible y. In case of more
than one possible x or y, a further step is needed
to associate the correct x to the right y.
By seeing the problem as two different classi-
fication problems, there is no need to create ab-
stract patterns between the target terms. In ad-
dition to this, the general problem of identifying
definitional sentences can be seen as to find at least
one x and one y in a sentence.
3.1 Local Syntactic Information
Dependency parsing is a procedure that extracts
syntactic dependencies among the terms contained
in a sentence. The idea is that, given a hyper-
nym relation, hyponyms and hypernyms may be
533
characterized by specific sets of syntactic contexts.
According to this assumption, the task can be seen
as a classification problem where each term in a
sentence has to be classified as hyponym, hyper-
nym, or neither of the two.
For each noun, we construct a textual represen-
tation containing its syntactic dependencies (i.e.,
its syntactic context). In particular, for each syn-
tactic dependency dep(a, b) (or dep(b, a)) of a tar-
get noun a, we create an abstract token3 dep-
target-b? (or dep-b?-target), where b? becomes the
generic string ?noun? in case it is another noun;
otherwise it is equal to b. This way, the nouns are
transformed into abstract strings; on the contrary,
no abstraction is done for verbs.
For instance, let us consider the sentence ?The
Albedo of an object is the extent to which it dif-
fusely reflects light from the sun?. After the Part-
Of-Speech annotation, the parser will extract a se-
ries of syntactic dependencies like ?det(Albedo,
The)?, ?nsubj(extent, Albedo)?, ?prepof(Albedo,
object)?, where det identifies a determiner, nsubj
represents a noun phrase which is the syntac-
tic subject of a clause, and so forth4. Then,
such dependencies will be transformed in abstract
terms like ?det-target-the?, ?nsubj-noun-target?,
and ?prepof -target-noun?. These triples represent
the feature space on which the Support Vector Ma-
chine classifiers will construct the models.
3.2 Learning phase
Our model assumes a transformation of the local
syntactic information into labelled numeric vec-
tors. More in detail, given a sentence S annotated
with the terms linked by the hypernym relation,
the system produces as many input instances as
the number of nouns contained in S. For each
noun n in S, the method produces two instances
Snx and Sny , associated to the label positive or neg-
ative depending on their presence in the target re-
lation (i.e., as x or y respectively). If a noun is
not involved in a hypernym relation, both the two
instances will have the label negative. At the end
of this process, two training sets are built, i.e., one
for each relation argument, namely the x-set and
the y-set. All the instances of both the datasets are
then transformed into numeric vectors according
3We make use of the term ?abstract? to indicate that some
words are replaced with more general entity identifiers.
4A complete overview of the Stan-
ford dependencies is available at
http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/dependencies manual.pdf.
to the Vector Space Model (Salton et al, 1975),
and are finally fed into a Support Vector Machine
classifier5 (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995). We refer to
the two resulting models as the x-model and the
y-model. These models are binary classifiers that,
given the local syntactic information of a noun, es-
timate if it can be respectively an x or a y in a hy-
pernym relation.
Once the x-model and the y-model are built, we
can both classify definitional sentences and extract
hypernym relations. In the next section we deepen
our proposed strategy in that sense.
The whole set of instances of all the sentences
are fed into two Support Vector Machine classi-
fiers, one for each target label (i.e., x and y).
At this point, it is possible to classify each term
as possible x or y by querying the respective clas-
sifiers with its local syntactic information.
4 Setting of the Tasks
In this section we present how our proposed tech-
nique is able to classify definitional sentences un-
raveling hypernym relations.
4.1 Classification of definitional sentences
As already mentioned in previous sections, we la-
bel as definitional all the sentences that contain at
least one noun n classified as x, and one noun m
classified as y (where n 6= m). In this phase, it
is not further treated the case of having more than
one x or y in one single sentence. Thus, given an
input sentence:
1. we extract all the nouns (POS-tagging),
2. we extract all the syntactic dependencies of
the nouns (dependency parsing),
3. we fed each noun (i.e., its instance) to the x-
model and to the y model,
4. we check if there exist at least one noun clas-
sified as x and one noun classified as y: in
this case, we classify the sentences as defini-
tional.
4.2 Extraction of hypernym relations
Our method for extracting hypernym relations
makes use of both the x-model and the y-model
as for the the task of classifying definitional sen-
tences. If exactly one x and one y are identified
5We used the Sequential Minimal Optimization imple-
mentation of the Weka framework (Hall et al, 2009).
534
in the same sentence, they are directly connected
and the relation is extracted. The only constraint
is that x and y must be connected within the same
parse tree.
Now, considering our target relation hyp(x, y),
in case the sentence contains more than one noun
that is classified as x (or y), there are two possible
scenarios:
1. there are actually more than one x (or y), or
2. the classifiers returned some false positive.
Up to now, we decided to keep all the possi-
ble combinations, without further filtering opera-
tions6. Finally, in case of multiple classifications
of both x and y, i.e., if there are multiple x and
multiple y at the same time, the problem becomes
to select which x is linked to which y7. To do this,
we simply calculate the distance between these
terms in the parse tree (the closer the terms, the
better the connection between the two). Neverthe-
less, in the used corpus, only around 1.4% of the
sentences are classified with multiple x and y.
Finally, since our method is able to extract
single nouns that can be involved in a hyper-
nym relation, we included modifiers preceded by
preposition ?of?, while the other modifiers are re-
moved. For example, considering the sentence
?An Archipelago is a chain of islands?, the whole
chunk ?chain of islands? is extracted from the sin-
gle triggered noun chain.
5 Evaluation
In this section we present the evaluation of our
approach, that we carried out on an annotated
dataset of definitional sentences (Navigli et al,
2010). The corpus contains 4,619 sentences ex-
tracted from Wikipedia, and only 1,908 are anno-
tated as definitional. On a first instance, we test the
classifiers on the extraction of hyponyms (x) and
hypernyms (y) from the definitional sentences, in-
dependently. Then, we evaluate the classification
of definitional sentences. Finally, we evaluate the
ability of our technique when extracting whole hy-
pernym relations. With the used dataset, the con-
structed training sets for the two classifiers (x-set
and y-set) resulted to have approximately 1,500
features.
6We only used the constraint that x has to be different
from y.
7Notice that this is different from the case in which a sin-
gle noun is labeled as both x and y.
Alg. P R F Acc
WCL-3 98.8% 60.7% 75.2 % 83.4 %
Star P. 86.7% 66.1% 75.0 % 81.8 %
Bigrams 66.7% 82.7% 73.8 % 75.8 %
Our sys. 88.0% 76.0% 81.6% 89.6%
Table 1: Evaluation results for the classification of
definitional sentences, in terms of Precision (P ),
Recall (R), F-Measure (F ), and Accuracy (Acc),
using 10-folds cross validation. For the WCL-3
approach and the Star Patterns see (Navigli and
Velardi, 2010), and (Cui et al, 2007) for Bigrams.
Algorithm P R F
WCL-3 78.58% 60.74% * 68.56%
Our system 83.05% 68.64% 75.16%
Table 2: Evaluation results for the hypernym re-
lation extraction, in terms of Precision (P ), Re-
call (R), and F-Measure (F ). For the WCL-3 ap-
proach, see (Navigli and Velardi, 2010). These re-
sults are obtained using 10-folds cross validation
(* Recall has been inherited from the definition
classification task, since no indication has been re-
ported in their contribution).
5.1 Results
In this section we present the evaluation of our
technique on both the tasks of classifying def-
initional sentences and extracting hypernym re-
lations. Notice that our approach is susceptible
from the errors given by the POS-tagger8 and the
syntactic parser9 . In spite of this, our approach
demonstrates how syntax can be more robust for
identifying semantic relations. Our approach does
not make use of the full parse tree, and we are not
dependent on a complete and correct result of the
parser.
The goal of our evaluation is twofold: first, we
evaluate the ability of classifying definitional sen-
tences; finally, we measure the accuracy of the hy-
pernym relation extraction.
A definitional sentences is extracted only if at
least one x and one y are found in the same sen-
tence. Table 1 shows the accuracy of the ap-
proach for this task. As can be seen, our pro-
posed approach has a high Precision, with a high
Recall. Although Precision is lower than the pat-
8http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/tagger.shtml
9http://www-nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml
535
tern matching approach proposed by (Navigli and
Velardi, 2010), our Recall is higher, leading to an
higher overall F-Measure.
Table 2 shows the results of the extraction of
the whole hypernym relations. Note that our ap-
proach has high levels of accuracy. In particular,
even in this task, our system outperforms the pat-
tern matching algorithm proposed by (Navigli and
Velardi, 2010) in terms of Precision and Recall.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
We presented an approach to reveal definitions and
extract underlying hypernym relations from plain
text, making use of local syntactic information fed
into a Support Vector Machine classifier. The aim
of this work was to revisit these tasks as classical
supervised learning problems that usually carry to
high accuracy levels with high performance when
faced with standard Machine Learning techniques.
Our first results on this method highlight the va-
lidity of the approach by significantly improving
current state-of-the-art techniques in the classifi-
cation of definitional sentences as well as in the
extraction of hypernym relations from text. In fu-
ture works, we aim at using larger syntactic con-
texts. In fact, currently, the detection does not
surpass the sentence level, while taxonomical in-
formation can be even contained in different sen-
tences or paragraphs. We also aim at evaluating
our approach on the construction of entire tax-
onomies starting from domain-specific text cor-
pora, as in (Navigli et al, 2011; Velardi et al,
2012). Finally, the desired result of the task of ex-
tracting hypernym relations from text (as for any
semantic relationships in general) depends on the
domain and the specific later application. Thus,
we think that a precise evaluation and comparison
of any systems strictly depends on these factors.
For instance, given a sentence like ?In mathemat-
ics, computing, linguistics and related disciplines,
an algorithm is a sequence of instructions? one
could want to extract only ?instructions? as hyper-
nym (as done in the annotation), rather than the en-
tire chunk ?sequence of instructions? (as extracted
by our technique). Both results can be valid, and
a further discrimination can only be done if a spe-
cific application or use of this knowlege is taken
into consideration.
References
M. Berland and E. Charniak. 1999. Finding parts in
very large corpora. In Annual Meeting Association
for Computational Linguistics, volume 37, pages
57?64. Association for Computational Linguistics.
C. Biemann. 2005. Ontology learning from text: A
survey of methods. In LDV forum, volume 20, pages
75?93.
C. Borg, M. Rosner, and G. Pace. 2009. Evolutionary
algorithms for definition extraction. In Proceedings
of the 1st Workshop on Definition Extraction, pages
26?32. Association for Computational Linguistics.
K.S. Candan, L. Di Caro, and M.L. Sapino. 2008. Cre-
ating tag hierarchies for effective navigation in so-
cial media. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM work-
shop on Search in social media, pages 75?82. ACM.
Mario Cataldi, Claudio Schifanella, K Selc?uk Can-
dan, Maria Luisa Sapino, and Luigi Di Caro. 2009.
Cosena: a context-based search and navigation sys-
tem. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Management of Emergent Digital EcoSys-
tems, page 33. ACM.
C. Cortes and V. Vapnik. 1995. Support-vector net-
works. Machine learning, 20(3):273?297.
Hang Cui, Min-Yen Kan, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2007.
Soft pattern matching models for definitional ques-
tion answering. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 25(2), April.
R. Del Gaudio and A. Branco. 2007. Automatic ex-
traction of definitions in portuguese: A rule-based
approach. Progress in Artificial Intelligence, pages
659?670.
I. Fahmi and G. Bouma. 2006. Learning to iden-
tify definitions using syntactic features. In Pro-
ceedings of the EACL 2006 workshop on Learning
Structured Information in Natural Language Appli-
cations, pages 64?71.
B. Fortuna, D. Mladenic?, and M. Grobelnik. 2006.
Semi-automatic construction of topic ontologies.
Semantics, Web and Mining, pages 121?131.
Aldo Gangemi, Roberto Navigli, and Paola Velardi.
2003. The ontowordnet project: Extension and
axiomatization of conceptual relations in wordnet.
In Robert Meersman, Zahir Tari, and DouglasC.
Schmidt, editors, On The Move to Meaningful In-
ternet Systems 2003: CoopIS, DOA, and ODBASE,
volume 2888 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 820?838. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H Witten.
2009. The weka data mining software: an update.
ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 11(1):10?
18.
Zellig Harris. 1954. Distributional structure. Word,
10(23):146?162.
536
M.A. Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hy-
ponyms from large text corpora. In Proceedings of
the 14th conference on Computational linguistics-
Volume 2, pages 539?545. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
E. Hovy, A. Philpot, J. Klavans, U. Germann, P. Davis,
and S. Popper. 2003. Extending metadata defi-
nitions by automatically extracting and organizing
glossary definitions. In Proceedings of the 2003 an-
nual national conference on Digital government re-
search, pages 1?6. Digital Government Society of
North America.
J.L. Klavans and S. Muresan. 2001. Evaluation of
the definder system for fully automatic glossary con-
struction. In Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium,
page 324. American Medical Informatics Associa-
tion.
Roberto Navigli and Paola Velardi. 2010. Learning
word-class lattices for definition and hypernym ex-
traction. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 1318?1327, Uppsala, Sweden, July. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Roberto Navigli, Paola Velardi, and Juana Mara Ruiz-
Martnez. 2010. An annotated dataset for extracting
definitions and hypernyms from the web. In Pro-
ceedings of the Seventh International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC?10),
Valletta, Malta. European Language Resources As-
sociation (ELRA).
R. Navigli, P. Velardi, and S. Faralli. 2011. A graph-
based algorithm for inducing lexical taxonomies
from scratch. In Proceedings of the Twenty-
Second international joint conference on Artificial
Intelligence-Volume Volume Three, pages 1872?
1877. AAAI Press.
R. Navigli. 2009. Using cycles and quasi-cycles to dis-
ambiguate dictionary glosses. In Proceedings of the
12th Conference of the European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 594?
602. Association for Computational Linguistics.
S.P. Ponzetto and M. Strube. 2007. Deriving a large
scale taxonomy from wikipedia. In Proceedings
of the national conference on artificial intelligence,
volume 22, page 1440.Menlo Park, CA; Cambridge,
MA; London; AAAI Press; MIT Press; 1999.
G. Salton, A. Wong, and C. S. Yang. 1975. A vec-
tor space model for automatic indexing. Commun.
ACM, 18(11):613?620, November.
R. Snow, D. Jurafsky, and A.Y. Ng. 2004. Learn-
ing syntactic patterns for automatic hypernym dis-
covery. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 17.
Paola Velardi, Stefano Faralli, and Roberto Navigli.
2012. Ontolearn reloaded: A graph-based algorithm
for taxonomy induction. Computational Linguistics,
pages 1?72.
Eline Westerhout. 2009. Definition extraction using
linguistic and structural features. In Proceedings
of the 1st Workshop on Definition Extraction, WDE
?09, pages 61?67, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
I. Yamada, K. Torisawa, J. Kazama, K. Kuroda,M.Mu-
rata, S. De Saeger, F. Bond, and A. Sumida. 2009.
Hypernym discovery based on distributional simi-
larity and hierarchical structures. In Proceedings
of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing: Volume 2-Volume 2,
pages 929?937. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
H. Yang and J. Callan. 2008. Ontology generation for
large email collections. In Proceedings of the 2008
international conference on Digital government re-
search, pages 254?261. Digital Government Society
of North America.
Chunxia Zhang and Peng Jiang. 2009. Automatic ex-
traction of definitions. In Computer Science and
Information Technology, 2009. ICCSIT 2009. 2nd
IEEE International Conference on, pages 364 ?368,
aug.
537
