Integrating Text Planning and Linguistic 
Choice Without Abandoning Modularity: 
The IGEN Generator 
Robert Rubinoff* 
Natural anguage generation is usually divided into separate text planning and linguistic om- 
ponents. This division, though, assumes that the two components can operate independently, 
which is not always true. The IGEN generator eliminates the need for this assumption; it handles 
interactions between the components without sacri~cing the advantages of modularity. IGEN 
accomplishes this by means of annotations that its linguistic omponent places on the structures 
it builds; these annotations provide an abstract description of the effects of particular linguistic 
choices, allowing the planner to evaluate these choices without needing any linguistic knowledge. 
This approach allows IGEN to vary the work done by each component independently, even in 
cases where the final output depends on interactions between them. In addition, since IGEN 
explicitly models the effects of linguistic choices, it can gracefully handle situations where the 
available time or linguistic resources are limited. 
1. Introduction 
Programs that generate natural language have generally been divided into two largely 
independent components: a text planning component that organizes the information 
to be expressed, and a linguistic omponent that converts the information i to gram- 
matical sentences of some natural anguage (e.g., Thompson 1977; McKeown 1985; 
McDonald 1983; Meteer 1989; Reithinger 1990; Dale 1989). This division seems natural, 
and has indeed proven useful, because the two components deal with different kinds 
of data and involve different kinds of reasoning. The planning component reasons 
about information and text structures to plan a coherent discourse, while the linguis- 
tic component arranges the lexical elements and syntactic onstructions available in 
some language to ensure the resulting text's grammaticality and comprehensibility. 
This division into independent components, though, is only tenable if the decisions 
each component must make can be made independently. If some of the generator's 
work involves both text planning and purely linguistic issues, there will be no way 
to make the necessary decisions without violating the generator's modularity. As we 
shall see, natural anguage generation does indeed involve such decisions. The need 
to handle interactions between text planning and linguistic concerns thus seems to 
require either abandoning the division into separate components (e.g., Danlos 1987; 
Kantrowitz and Bates 1992), with the resulting increase in complexity, or foregoing 
the ability to handle these interactions at all (as advocated in Reiter \[1994\]). A third 
option is to identify possible interactions in advance and handle them as special cases, 
but this only allows the generator to handle those interactions that have been antici- 
? AnswerLogic, Inc., 1111 9 St. NW, Suite 600, Washington, DC 20036. E-mail: rrubinoff@answerlogic. 
com. The research described here was done at the University of Pennsylvania and Carnegie Mellon 
University. 
(~) 2000 Association for Computational Linguistics 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 2 
pated in advance. Furthermore, handling the interactions often requires violating the 
modularity of the system, because detecting when the special case has occurred still 
requires both planning and linguistic knowledge. 
The IGEN generator solves this problem. IGEN handles interactions between the 
text planning and linguistic components without having to sacrifice any of the gen- 
erator's modularity. The key to IGEN's approach is the use of annotations that the 
linguistic component attaches to each linguistic expression it constructs. These anno- 
tations abstract away from the details of the linguistic expressions, describing only 
those properties of the expressions that are potentially relevant o the planner. The 
planner can then evaluate the choices made by the linguistic component and deter- 
mine how those choices interact with the text plan independently of the linguistic 
component's processes and data structures. As a result, IGEN can make decisions in- 
volving interactions between the components while retaining complete modularity. In 
fact, replacing IGEN's normal inguistic component with one for a different language 
involves no change in the planner despite the fact that the two languages have d~- 
ferent idiomatic expressions for some of the sentences being generated; the planner's 
processing is identical in both languages. Furthermore, since the annotations allow 
IGEN to explicitly model the effects of its decisions, IGEN is able to gracefully handle 
the effects of limitations on processing time or linguistic resources; ince IGEN always 
knows how well a given linguistic construction carries out its plan, it can choose the 
best available construction when it can't find an ideal one. 
2. Modularity in Generation 
Research in natural language generation has generally separated the task into distinct 
text planning and linguistic components. The text planning component selects and 
organizes the information to be expressed in some internal representation a d then 
sends it to the linguistic omponent, which converts the information from the internal 
form into grammatical sentences of some natural anguage. The names given to the 
components vary; they have been called "strategic" and "tactical" components (e.g., 
McKeown 1985; Thompson 1977; Danlos 1987) 1, "planning" and "realization" (e.g., 
McDonald 1983; Hovy 1988a), or simply "what to say" versus "how to say it" (e.g., 
Danlos 1987; Reithinger 1990). The precise division of work between the components 
can also vary, as can the extent o which the text planner is responsible for select- 
ing (as opposed to merely organizing) the information to be expressed. Much (if not 
most) work in generation, though, continues to rely on this modular approach for its 
basic design. For example, DIOGENES (Nirenburg et al 1988), EPICURE (Dale 1989), 
SPOKESMAN (Meteer 1989), Sibun's work on local organization of text (Sibun 1991), 
and COMET (Fisher and McKeown 1990) all are organized this way. McDonald has 
even argued for extending the model to a large number of components (McDonald 
1988), and several systems have indeed added an additional component between the 
planner and the linguistic component (Meteer 1994; Panaget 1994; Wanner 1994). Re- 
iter describes a pipelined modular approach as a consensus architecture underlying 
most recent work in generation (Reiter 1994). 
As this large body of work makes clear, the modular approach as been very 
useful, simplifying the design of generators and making them more flexible. In fact, in 
at least one case the "tactical" component ofa generator was successfully replaced with 
a radically different independently designed one (Rubinoff 1986). A modular design, 
l Danlos uses "syntactic" rather than "tactical"; see the note on page 122 of Danlos (1987). 
108 
Rubinoff The IGEN Generator 
though, presumes that the work done by each module can be done independently. 
Separating eneration into text planning and linguistic components thus implicitly 
assumes that text planning can be done without knowledge of the language being used 
and, conversely, that linguistic choices can be made without text planning knowledge. 
Unfortunately, this is not always true; both structural and lexical choices sometimes 
depend on interactions between the two parts of the generator. Thus generation must 
either compromise the modularity between the components or give up the ability to 
handle these cases properly} 
2.1 Interactions between the Modules 
The modular approach to generation assumes that the linguistic component's decisions 
never matter to the planner (or whichever component(s) organize the information to 
be expressed). This is not the case, though, as can be seen from the alternations in 
(1)-(3): 
(1) a. John killed him with a gun. 
b. John shot him dead. 
(2) a. John infected him with a virus. 
b. *John virused him sick. 
(3) a. *John homed him with an order. 
b. John ordered him home. 
The sentences (la) and (lb) express essentially the same information, so if the 
generator is attempting to express this information, it must choose between them at 
some point. In a modular generator, though, there is no point at which the decision 
can be made. The planner can't make this choice, because the availability of the choice 
depends on the particular linguistic resources of English. This can be seen by com- 
parison with (2) and (3), in which only one alternative is available. In fact, a different 
alternative is available in each case. Since the planner doesn't know which alterna- 
tive(s) is/are available, it can't choose between them; the linguistic component must 
make the choice. 
On the other hand, the decision has to be made by the planner, since it can depend 
on and/or  affect the goals the generator is trying to achieve. The choice between (la) 
and (lb) should depend (in part) on what the generator is primarily trying to talk 
about. (la) is more appropriate if the generator is going to continue talking about the 
gun, whereas (lb) is more appropriate if the main concern is the ramifications of the 
victim's death. Since the planner is the component that deals with this information, it
must choose between the alternatives. 
Also, the choice between (la) and (lb) determines what information can be easily 
omitted; cutting off the end of the sentence leaves out mention of the use of a gun in 
(la) and the death of the victim in (lb). Since the planner knows the consequences of 
omitting information, it must make the choice of which alternative to use and whether 
to abbreviate it. It might seem that the planner could simply indicate exactly what 
2 Note that these interactions aren't he result of the particular details of how the work is divided 
between the components. Aswe shall see, there are some decisions that depend on both the 
underlying oals driving the generator and the details of what can be expressed ina particular 
language. Any architecture that deals with these issues in different components will encounter the 
problems described below. 
109 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 2 
information it wants included in the utterance, but that would require the generator 
to always assume a strategy of saying as little as possible. 
Furthermore, decisions about what information to include may interact with other 
decisions. For example, the generator may want to emphasize the victim's death but 
not care about the means of death; it might then choose (lb) for the emphasis even 
though (la) would let it skip mention of the gun. This kind of decision can only be 
made by the planner. 
The same kinds of interactions arise in the process of lexical choice. It would 
seem that lexical choice has to be handled by the planner, since it depends very much 
on what the generator is trying to accomplish. For example, the choice of describing 
someone as either firm, obstinate, or stubborn should depend on what else the generator 
wants to say about the person, as should the choice between meek and wimpy. The 
generator might describe how justice was served by an execution rather than how the 
prisoner was murdered by the state. Similarly, the generator might deride the comments 
of a dreamer, but praise the insights of a visionary. These kinds of lexical choices can 
only be made by the component that handles the generator's goals. 
On the other hand, there are a number of reasons why lexical choice has to be 
handled by the linguistic component. First of all, lexical choice is very dependent on 
the particular linguistic vocabulary of the language being generated. Thus French, for 
example, uses two different verbs (connaftre and savoir) to express knowing a person 
and knowing information, but English just uses know for both concepts. Similarly, 
English uses to be to indicate both location and a state or property, whereas French 
uses se trouver for the former and ~tre for the latter. 
Furthermore, there is in general no guarantee that there will be any lexical item to 
express a given concept. For example, there is no word in English for the concept of 
a car with a removable door. There's no inherent reason why there couldn't be; after 
all, there's a word for a car with a removable roof. This is just a particular fact about 
English. Similarly, there is a word giant meaning "large man", but no corresponding 
word meaning "large car". 
In addition, since lexical choice interacts with syntactic decisions, it cannot be done 
in advance of choosing syntactic structures. For example, a generator cannot decide 
to use probable instead of likely without knowing if the completed utterance could be 
the ungrammatical he is probable to be early. Similarly, the verb drink can't be chosen 
without knowing whether the clause will have a direct object; he drinks apple juice and 
he drinks actually have quite different meanings. 3 Note that the decision here doesn't 
depend just on whether the beverage is going to be explicitly mentioned; it depends 
on whether it's going to be mentioned in a specific syntactic position in the sentence. 
So here too it is impossible to assign the decision to a single component; he decision 
must be made by both components. 
The need to handle interactions such as these forces compromises in the modular- 
ity of generators. In the TEXT system (McKeown 1985), for example, some decisions 
about what information to include are in fact encoded into the tactical component. 
For example, TEXT's tactical component omits the attribute value WATER (used in 
TEXT to indicate that some object travels in or under the water) when it must be 
3 McDonald has argued that lexical choice should be done in the first step in generation; i  cases where 
lexical and syntactic decisions interact, lexical choice will constrain subsequent syntactic decisions 
(McDonald 1991). This approach iscertainly possible (although it's not clear how to prevent 
independent lexical choices from imposing incompatible syntactic constraints), but it assumes that the 
resulting syntactic constraints don't matter to the generator. For example, choosing drink may require 
the generator to include a direct object even if it would prefer not to indicate that information; by the 
time the generator discovers this requirement, it is already committed to the choice. 
110 
Rubinoff The IGEN Generator 
expressed as an adjective. This is because the only available adjective is the somewhat 
awkward water-going, and it turns out that in the sentences TEXT happens to generate, 
WATER only appears in an adjective context in cases where it's not important to say 
it. Thus, this strategic decision (that WATER can be omitted) is encoded permanently 
into the tactical component; here is no way for the strategic omponent to control this 
decision. 
In MUMBLE (Meteer et al 1987), in contrast, the interactions have pushed lin- 
guistic information into the text planner. For example, MUMBLE can take the already 
constructed phrase Fluffy, Floyd's dog, buries bones and modify it with the information 
that this was reported by Helga to produce Helga reported that Fluffy, Floyd's dog, buries 
bones. But in order to do this, it has to mark the information about Helga with the 
new-main-clause feature. So the planner has to know what clauses are, know that 
the earlier information was turned into a clause, and know that making Helga reports 
a new main clause is a useful thing to do. Many of the linguistic decisions are thus 
actually being made by the planner. 
2.2 Facing the Dilemma 
We are now faced with a dilemma. On the one hand, the separation of planning and 
linguistic realization into distinct components seems natural and useful. On the other 
hand, it precludes making decisions involving interactions between text planning and 
linguistic issues. 
One possible response would be to abandon the separation; the generator could be 
a single component that handles all of the work. This approach as occasionally been 
taken, as in Kantrowitz and Bates (1992) and Danlos (1987) 4 and, at least implicitly, in 
Paris and Scott (1994) and Delin et al (1994); however, under this approach, all of the 
flexibility and simplicity of modular design is lost. 
The opposite approach is to simply ignore the limitations of a modular design and 
proceed as if there need be no interactions between the components. Whatever prob- 
lems result will be handled as best they can, on a case-by-case basis. This approach is 
the one taken (implicitly or explicitly) in the majority of generators. In fact, Reiter has 
even argued in favor of this approach, claiming that the interactions are sufficiently mi- 
nor to be ignored (or at least handled on an ad hoc basis) (Reiter 1994). While this cer- 
tainly has appeal as a design methodology, it seems reckless to assume that problems 
will never appear. Certainly an approach to generation that does handle these interac- 
tions would be an improvement, as long as it didn't require abandoning modularity. 
There have in fact been attempts to develop modified modular designs that allow 
generators to handle interactions between the components. These include devices uch 
as interleaving the components (McDonald 1983; Appelt 1983), backtracking on failure 
(Appelt 1985; Nogier 1989), allowing the linguistic component to interrogate the plan- 
ner (Mann 1983; Sondheimer and Nebel 1986), and Hovy's notion of restrictive (i.e., 
bottom-up) planning (Hovy 1988a, 1988c). All of these approaches, though, require 
that potential interactions be determined either by the tactical component or by the 
system designer in advance. The text planning component still has no way to detect 
and respond to unanticipated interactions on its own initiative. 5 
4 Danlos till has a separate low-level "syntactic" omponent, but essentially all of the generator's 
decisions are made by the strategic component. 
5 In fact, adding additional components may make the problem even worse, as decisions may then be 
spread across three or more separate components. It might seem that a component placed between the 
planner and the realizer could handle interactions between the levels, but this would simply recreate 
the original problem within the "middle" component; coping with the interactions would still require 
dealing with the whole range of issues that come up in both planning and realization. 
111 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 2 
The IGEN generator esolves the modularity dilemma by means of a new ap- 
proach that preserves complete modularity but allows the generator to handle inter- 
actions between the components. The key to IGEN's approach is that the linguistic 
component provides the planner with an abstract description of the effects of using 
particular linguistic structures. This abstract description is encoded in annotations that 
the linguistic component attaches to the structures it builds. In contrast with previous 
feedback-based approaches, in which the feedback only occurs when the linguistic 
component needs additional help from the planner, IGEN annotates all of its linguistic 
structures. This allows the planner to detect situations where linguistic choices cause 
problems at the planning level; the linguistic component need not be aware of them. 
Conversely, the planner can build communicative plans without concern for whether 
the linguistic component can actually express the elements of the plan; any such prob- 
lems will be detected by the linguistic component and reflected in the annotations. 
The annotations allow a cycle of negotiation between the planner and the linguistic 
component; each component works entirely within its own level, drawing only on the 
results of the work at the other level. 
3. IGEN: A New Model for Generation 
The IGEN generator overcomes the limitations of the modular approach, without giv- 
ing up its advantages, by the use of annotations that provide feedback from the lin- 
guistic component to the planner. These annotations abstract away from the details 
of the linguistic expressions, allowing the planner to detect interactions between de- 
cisions at the linguistic and planning levels without having to know anything about 
the knowledge or reasoning used by the linguistic component. The planner can then 
respond to these interactions by choosing among the expressions proposed by the lin- 
guistic component, using the annotations to evaluate how particular linguistic choices 
affect the successful achievement of the goal(s) driving the generator. This approach 
allows IGEN's components to interact while preserving the strict separation between 
their knowledge and processing. 
The annotations are predicates that apply to the linguistic expression they are 
attached to, indicating some effect of or property of the expression. Most of them also 
take an explicit argument indicating a semantic expression whose relation to the option 
is indicated by the annotation. The types of annotations used by IGEN are shown in 
Figure 1. They fall into the following general categories: 6 
Meaning-based These relate the meaning of a linguistic option to the informa- 
tion it is supposed to express, both in terms of how explicitly and how 
completely the information is expressed. 
Contextual These indicate dependencies and effects on the presence and status 
of elements in the discourse context, including not only availability for 
anaphoric reference but also effects on how various elements in the dis- 
course context will be perceived. 
Pragmatic These indicate various pragmatic and stylistic features of the op- 
tion. 7 
6 There are also some annotation types used to keep track of IGEN's internal processing; these are not 
shown here. 
7 Note that IGEN currently only uses one annotation ofthis type: concise-construction, used to mark 
constructions that are particularly concise. 
112 
Rubinoff The IGEN Generator 
Meaning-based: 
makes-explicit 
makes-implicit 
indirectly-suggests 
missing-info 
extra-info 
Contextual: 
activates-in-context 
from-context 
relates-to 
Pragmatic: 
concise-construction 
tone 
marks-as-focus 
Figure 1 
Annotation types. 
The IGEN generator uses these annotations to allow for interactions between its 
various components, hown in Figure 2. IGEN works as follows: The communicative 
planner responds to goals given to the generator by building an appropriate plan, 
which will contain a number of communicative actions, i.e., actions that communi- 
cate information, and places requests for ways to express that information into the 
workspace. The linguistic component then responds by producing a series of anno- 
tated linguistic options for each of the planner's requests. These are also placed in 
the workspace, where the planner can use the annotations to evaluate and rank the 
options and also, when appropriate, to modify the plan based on what the linguistic 
component is able to produce. 
This process doesn't actually produce any output, though, since there is no way to 
determine when it is "finished." The linguistic component can always come up with 
yet another way to express omething, and the planner can always do more reasoning 
about he interactions between some expression and the planner's pecific and general 
goals. There must therefore be another component, here called the utterer, that is 
responsible for assembling utterances from the options preferred by the planner and 
shipping them off to be spoken or written. The utterer's job is to balance the planner's 
preferences against ime pressure, producing output when whatever deficiencies the 
options have are outweighed by the consequences of remaining silent. The various 
components thus work together in parallel, incrementally building, improving, and 
producing utterances. Each component of the generator handles a particular aspect of 
the generation task, involving different kinds of knowledge and different constraints 
on the generator's work. 
IGEN in some ways resembles a blackboard architecture (Nii 1986b, 1986a); like 
a blackboard, its workspace contains everal possible utterances that are described at 
different levels of structure and are built up incrementally by various independent 
components. On the other hand, it doesn't have the strict hierarchical structure that 
usually characterizes blackboard systems; each request from the planner may corre- 
spond to several inguistic options, and the linguistic options may handle (parts of) 
more than one request. Also, blackboard systems usually have sequential scheduling of 
actions, whereas IGEN's planner, linguistic component, and utterer all run in parallel. 
Furthermore, the relevant issue here for IGEN is whether there are real interac- 
tions between the modules, which a blackboard-style approach to generation doesn't 
113 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 2 
Goals 
N N Entries / / .  
~/ upt" 
. Workspace 
Evaluations -I 
Utterer 
Evaluated Options 
) 
Assembled Utterances 
Figure 2 
Architecture of the IGEN generator. 
guarantee. Blackboard-based generation can still be structured in a way that makes 
such interactions impossible, either explicitly, as in DIOGENES (Nirenburg et al 1988), 
which uses several blackboards successively, or implicitly, as in GLINDA, in which 
successive stages of rules depend on the results of previous tages for their triggers. 8 
3.1 The Communicative Planner 
This is a special-purpose planner that accepts goals from the overall system and plans 
out ways to achieve them via communication. These can be "communicative" goals 
such as "transmit this information to the user" (or more precisely "get the user to be- 
lieve this information"), but they can also be social interaction goals such as "establish 
a deferential (or collegial, or superior) attitude toward the user" or cooperative behav- 
ior goals such as "be straightforward" or "transmit as little information as possible" 
8 As can be seen from the diagram on page 24 of Kantrowitz and Bates (1992) and the accompanying 
discussion. 
114 
Rubinoff The IGEN Generator 
or even more general goals such as "get the user to take his umbrella" or "convince 
the user to improve his diet." 
The communicative planner draws on a set of specialized plans that capture how 
communication acts can achieve various goals. It draws on knowledge of the effects 
of communication to plan out how to achieve various kinds of goals by expressing 
various kinds of information. Since it has to evaluate how well particular linguistic 
expressions further those goals, the planner needs to build an explicit representation 
of its plan(s) that indicates how particular actions contribute to their achievement. The 
planner depends on the linguistic component to tell it how to carry out these actions, 
i.e., how to express particular information in language. 
While the planner is specialized for planning communicative actions, it can in 
principle draw on anything in the system's general body of knowledge and belief that 
might support the goals it is given. Thus (as we shall see) in the second example in 
Section 4.3, the planner decides to mention the rain not because it bears any special 
relationship to anything in the input goal, but rather because mentioning it is part of a 
plan that achieves the goal. Even in cases where the planner's goal is simply to transmit 
some specific information, it can include any additional information that will help that 
transmission to succeed. The planner's role is not just to organize information, or even 
to collect information on some topic and organize it, but rather to identify a set of 
communicative acts that will achieve some goal. 
3.1.1 Building an Initial Plan. The communicative planner starts off by building an 
initial plan to achieve the goals it is given. The form of that plan is important. It cannot 
be just a (partially or totally) ordered set of information to go into the text, as is the 
case in many generators. Since IGEN's planner needs to evaluate how well linguistic 
options achieve the plan's goals, the plan must record what each piece of information 
in the plan is intended to accomplish and how it supports the purpose of the larger 
text containing it. Sometimes the planner's goal may simply be to convey certain 
information to the user, but there may also be more indirect goals that conveyance 
is intended to achieve. Thus the plan must indicate in detail why the information is 
being expressed. An example of the type of plan the planner must build is shown 
in Figure 3 (Section 4.1 discusses the use of this plan in more detail). This model of 
text plans meshes well with the model of discourse structure developed by Grosz and 
Sidner (Grosz and Sidner 1985, 1986), in which the purpose of each discourse segment 
is an important part of the structure. 9 
IGEN constructs its plans using a hierarchical planning algorithm (Nilsson 1980). 
The planner first checks all of its top-level plans to see which have effects that match 
the goal. Each matching plan's preconditions are checked; if they are currently (be- 
lieved to be) true, the planner then attempts to find all instantiations of the plan's 
body. 1? The body of a plan can be an action or sequence of actions, a goal or sequence 
9 Moore and Paris also note that "a generation system must maintain the kinds of information outlined 
by Grosz and Sidner" (Moore and Paris 1989, 203). Their planner uses plan structures similar to 
IGEN's, except that the plan operators they use are generally instantiations of rhetorical relations 
drawn from Rhetorical Structure Theory (Mann and Thompson 1987). In IGEN, the plans can involve 
any goals or actions that could be achieved via communication. 
Hovy has described another text planner that builds similar plans (Hovy 1988b). This system, 
however, starts with a list of information to be expressed and merely arranges it into a coherent 
pattern; it is thus not a planner in the sense used here (as Hovy makes clear). 
10 Since text planning was not the primary focus of this work, IGEN is designed to simply assume that 
any false preconditions are unattainable. IGEN's planner divides the requirements of a plan into two 
parts: the preconditions, which are not planned for, and those in the plan body, which are. This has no 
115 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 2 
. 
2. 
. 
4. 
N. 
Overall Goal: Know(Hearer,\[weather information over next few days\]) 
Achieve (1) by achieving: 
Know(Hearer,\[first day's information\]) 
Know(Hearer,\[second day's information\]) 
Know(Hearer,\[last day's information\]) 
Support (2) by performing: Utter(\[first day's information\]) 
Support (2) by performing: Utter(\[second day's information\]) 
Support (2) by performing: Utter(\[last day's information\]) 
Figure 3 
A sample initial plan. 
of goals, a subplan, or a goal decomposition. 11 To instantiate the body, the planner 
accordingly collects the action(s), recursively plans for the goal(s), instantiates the 
subplan, or carries out the goal decomposition. The net result of this process is a list 
of possible complete plans that achieve the original goal. 
3.1.2 Responding to Linguistic Options. Once the communicative planner has built 
up an initial plan of what it wants to say, it puts requests for the individual bits of 
information contained in the plan into the workspace for the linguistic component to 
respond to. The planner, however, cannot assume that its requests will be followed 
precisely; the linguistic component may not be able to find a way of completely sat- 
isfying them. The planner must therefore xamine and evaluate the responses that 
the linguistic component puts into the workspace (as described below in Section 3.2). 
These responses consist of linguistic structures together with the annotations that pro- 
vide descriptions of how closely the option carries out the request(s) it responds to, as 
well as any other information or effects arising from the use of the option. Drawing 
on these annotations, the planner evaluates how well the various options fit into the 
plan and assigns them appropriate ratings along a scale from VERY-HIGH to VERY-L0W. 
The evaluation algorithm is divided into two phases (as shown in Figure 4), which 
work roughly as follows: The first phase looks at how well the option matches the 
request, checking first to see whether the option misses any requested information; 
if there is no missing information, the rating is based on annotations indicating the 
relationship between the option's meaning and the request. The second phase then 
adjusts the option's rating based on how any missing or added information interacts 
with the plan structure. This ability to adjust preferences among linguistic options 
based on planning issues allows IGEN to overcome the usual limitations of a modular 
generator design. Without the annotations (or some similar feedback mechanism), 
the planner would have to supply the linguistic component with any information 
that might be relevant o choosing among the options. This could potentially include 
practical effects, ince the preconditions, byand large, are types of goals that IGEN doesn't have any 
plans for; any attempt to plan for them would immediately fail. 
11 A goal decomposition s away to decompose a goal into subgoals that can be planned for 
independently. For example, the utter-sequence plan works by decomposing the information tobe 
uttered according tosome relevant ordering. 
116 
Rubinoff The IGEN Generator 
EVALUATE(Option, Request) 
Phase 1: 
1. Let Covered-Pieces = 
UNION(Request, arguments of any COVERS-OTHER-ENTRY annotations). 
2. If Option has a MISSING-INFO annotation whose argument isa member of 
Covered-Pieces, or has more than one MISSING-INFO annotation, evaluation is
: VERY-LOW.  
3. Else if Option has any MISS ING- INFO annotations, evaluation is :LOW. 
4. Else if Option has any INDIRECTLY-SUGGESTS annotations, evaluation is
: MEDIUM. 
5. Else if Option has any MA~S-IMPLICIT annotations, evaluation is : HIGH. 
6. Else evaluation is :VERY-HIGH (because Option must have a MAKES-EXPLICIT 
annotation). 
Phase 2: 
1. Let Adjustment =0. 
2. For each MISSING-INFO annotation attached to Option: Subtract 1/2 from 
Adjustment if its argument isan item in the plan (1 if it's a critical item). 
3. For eachACT IVATES- IN -CONTEXT or EXTRA- INFO annotation attached to 
Option: 
? If its argument is a critical item in the plan, add I to Adjustment. 
? Else if its argument supports or conflicts with a critical item in the plan 
or strengthens or weakens a goal or precondition of the plan or the head 
of the request, add or subtract 1from Adjustment accordingly. 
? Else if its argument is a sequence, Request is a member of another 
sequence that is a critical item in the plan, and the two sequences are 
along the same scale but are disjoint or only overlap slightly, subtract 1
from Adjustment. For example, the sequences \[1, 2, 3, 4\] and \[4, 5, 6, 7\] 
would trigger this adjustment, but the sequences \[1, 2, 3, 4\] and \[2, 3, 4, 5\] 
wouldn't. 
? Else if its argument isan element in the plan, add 1/2 to Adjustment. 
4. Adjust Option's Phase I evaluation up or down Adjustment levels (ignoring 
1/2s), e.g. an Adjustment of -2 or - 21/2 would change :HIGH to : LOW, and add 
an ADJUSTED-UP  or ADJUSTED-DOWN annotation to Option as appropriate. 
Note: a "critical" item in a plan is one that plays a central role in the structure of the 
plan, e.g. the basis of a goal decomposi t ion or an action, goal or plan sequence. 
Figure 4 
The linguistic option evaluation algorithm. 
anyth ing in the plan, so the linguistic component  wou ld  have to understand and 
reason about every aspect of the plan, defeating the whole purpose  of a modu lar  
architecture. 
In addit ion to evaluat ing options, the planner looks for opportunit ies to revise the 
plan based on the work  of the linguistic component .  For example, the same linguistic 
structure may appear  as an opt ion for several different parts of the plan, or an opt ion 
for one part  of the plan may also express information contained in (or related to) 
117 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 2 
another part of the plan. The planner can reorganize the plan to take advantage of 
these kinds of situations. 12Thus the communicative plan can be modified based on 
linguistic information, again without violating the strict modularity of the generator. 
3.2 The Linguistic Component 
The linguistic component is the part of IGEN that produces the actual bits of lan- 
guage that make up the utterance. It acts like a "consultant" to the communicative 
planner, providing it with linguistic expressions that attempt o capture part or all of 
the information the planner wants to express. 13 The linguistic component monitors the 
workspace, looking for requests from the planner, to which it responds by suggesting 
linguistic expressions that capture some or all of the information in the request. These 
expressions are placed in the workspace as options for the planner to evaluate; the 
linguistic component continues uggesting options for a request as long as that request 
remains in the workspace. 14
The linguistic options are pieces of surface structure; they can be at any level of 
grammatical structure and need only be partially specified. Thus an option could be a 
full sentence, phrase, or word, or a particular clause structure (e.g., a topicalization or 
an/t-cleft) with no further detail filled in, or a noun phrase with a determiner but with 
the head noun left unspecified. The options are represented as feature sets indicating 
the various syntactic and lexical properties of the option. 15 For example, the following 
feature set represents the partial phrase "It will be ADJP" in which the predicate 
adjective has not yet been specified: 
CAT ~ S 
SUBJ . . . .  #<w : IT> - ? - 
LEX = #<w:BE> 
TENSE = FUTURE 
FRED ~ ADJP 
ORDER z (SUBJ HEAD FRED) 
The FRED role in this phrase has not been filled yet, so its value is ADJF, indicating 
that it must be filled by an adjective phrase. 
The linguistic component is also responsible for annotating the options it puts into 
the workspace. The annotations are derived primarily from three sources: acomparison 
of the structure and position of the option's meaning and the request in IGEN's seman- 
tic network, the induced perspective shift of the option's meaning, and special anno- 
tations associated irectly with the option. 16 The annotation algorithm works roughly 
12 Another possibility would be for the planner to revise the plan when it detects problems with the 
options. For example, in a tutoring situation, if the linguistic component only returned options that 
involve concepts the student doesn't yet understand or know about, the planner might decide to revise 
the plan (perhaps to simplify what it's trying to say). IGEN doesn't implement this kind of plan 
revision, although the annotations provide the planner with the information ecessary to do so. 
13 IGEN's design allows for multiple linguistic components, each providing a different kind of linguistic 
knowledge, although only one was actually used; see Rubinoff (1992) for details. 
14 As currently implemented, the linguistic omponent finds options by scanning through IGEN's 
semantic network, looking for items that are part of the meaning of some expression (Rubinoff 1992). 
The particular method used to produce the options, though, is incidental to the the overall functioning 
of the generator; it has no effect on the annotation or evaluation of the options, as the annotations 
depend only on the relationship between the option's meaning and the request. 
15 There is also a MAP feature used to connect unfilled syntactic arguments with the corresponding 
semantic objects. 
16 The induced perspective shift of the option's meaning is computed using a model of perspective built 
into IGEN's knowledge representation formalism; see Rubinoff (1992) for details. 
118 
Rubinoff The IGEN Generator 
as fol lows: First  the l inguist ic  component  adds  an annotat ion  that indicates the k ind  of 
connect ion (if any) between the opt ion 's  mean ing  and  the request;  this p roduces  ei ther 
a MAKES-EXPLICIT, MAKES-IMPLICIT, INDIRECTLY-SUGGESTS, or MISSING-INFO annota- 
tion. Next it adds EXTRA-INFO and MISSING-INFO annotations to indicate the differ- 
ences between (the meaning of) the option and the request, and COVERS-OTHER-ENTRY 
annotations for any other requests that are included in the option's meaning. Finally, it 
adds ACTIVATES-IN-CONTEXT annotations to indicate any associated perspective shifts. 
For an example, consider the situation described in Section 2.1 where the generator 
is trying to express the information that John shot and killed someone. 17 Among the 
annotated options produced to express #<SHOOT-AND-KILL (JOHN, BILL)> are: 
? #<w:KILL>: 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<KILL (AGENTi, AGENT2) >) 
(MAKES-IMPLICIT #<SHOOT-AND-KILL(AGENTi, AGENT2) >) 
(MISSING-INFO #<INSTRUMENT(SHOOT-AND-KILL, GUN) >) 
? #<w: SHOOT>: 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #< SHOOT (AGENT1, AGENT2) >) 
(MAKES-IMPLICIT #<SHOOT-AND-KILL (AGENTI, AGENTg.) >) 
(MISSING-INFO #<RESULT (SHOOT-AND-KILL, DEATH) >) 
In each of these cases, there is a MAKES-EXPLICIT annotat ion  for the mean ing  of the 
word ,  a MAKES-IMPLICIT annotat ion  for the requested in format ion,  and  a MISSINGINF0 
annotat ion  for the proper ty  of the request  hat is not  covered by  the opt ion.  (Of course,  
MAKES-EXPLICIT annotat ions  on the opt ions  that p roduce  with a gun and dead indicate 
how the miss ing  in format ion  can be added to the utterance.)  
The full annotat ion  a lgor i thm is as fol lows: 18 
ANNOTATE(Request ,  Opt ion)  
i, 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Construct a MAKES-EXPLICIT annotation for each node or link in Option's 
meaning and collect them in Annotations. 
If Option's meaning contains Request and nothing else, return Annotations. 
If Request is an instance of an element in Option's meaning and they have the 
same label, add a MAKES-EXPLICIT annotation for Request o Annotations. 
Else if Request is an instance, subconcept, or subrange of an element in Option's 
meaning or a position within (or identical to) an element in Option's meaning, 
then add a MAKES-IMPLICIT annotation for Request, MISSING-INFO annotations 
for any links connected to Request that don't match links connected to the 
element in Option's meaning, and EXTRA-INFO annotations for any links 
connected to the element in Option's meaning that don't match links connected 
to Request. 
Else if an element in Option's meaning is an instance or subconcept of Request, 
add a MAKES-IMPLICIT annotation for Request and MISSING-INFO annotations as 
described in step (4) to Annotations. 
17 While these annotations provide the necessary information for the planner to choose among the 
options as discussed in Section 2.1, IGEN's plan revision capabilities doesn't currently handle this case. 
As a result, IGEN currently produces either "John shot him dead" or "John killed him with a gun" for 
this example. 
18 This description leaves out a few details; for example, in certain cases MISSING-INF0 annotations are 
only generated for links considered "prominent" in the current perspective; see Rubinoff (1992) for 
details. 
119 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 2 
6. 
7. 
8, 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
Else if an element in Option's meaning is a "sibling" of Request (i.e., they are 
instances or subconcepts of the same element) or an "uncle" of Request (i.e., the 
sibling of an element of which Request is an instance or subconcept), add a 
MAKES-IMPLICIT annotation for Request and MISSING-INFO and EXTRA-INFO 
annotations as described in step (4) to Annotations. 
Else if there is any other link between Request and an element in Option's 
meaning, add an INDIRECTLY-SUGGESTS annotation for Request o Annotations. 
Else add a MISSING-INF0 annotation for Request to Annotations. 
If Option's meaning contains a node or link that is another part of the planner's 
request, then add a COVERS-0THER-ENTRY annotation for the workspace ntry 
containing the request to Annotations, and repeat steps (3) through (8) for that 
request. 
Add ACTIVATES-IN-CONTEXT annotations for every element that would be shifted 
into perspective by an element in Option's meaning to Annotations. 
Add any special annotations associated with Option to Annotations. 
Return Annotations. 
3.3 The Utterer 
The utterer is responsible for the final assembly and output of the utterance. Its main 
concern is balancing the desire for the most appropriate possible utterance against 
time pressure. Since the planner and the linguistic component build up and refine the 
utterance incrementally, they can continue working indefinitely; there's never a point 
where they can declare the utterance "finished" and quit working. On the other hand, 
IGEN can't go too long without uttering something or it will lose its turn, because 
the user will either utter (i.e., type) something else or get tired of waiting and leave 
(or quit the program). So the utterer must strike a balance between the advantage 
of improvements to the utterance that may yet be found and the disadvantage of 
continued elay. 
The actual work of the utterer is fairly straightforward. It constantly monitors the 
workspace, checking the available options against a time-sensitive acceptability level. 
Whenever the best available utterance meets or exceeds the minimum acceptable eval- 
uation, the utterer proceeds to output the utterance. The criterion of acceptability is
determined via a set of delay thresholds that control how long to wait before low- 
ering the minimum acceptable rating. For example, the default threshold settings are 
\[0,1,2,12,16\], meaning: if the time since the last utterance is more than 0, accept an 
option rated VERY-HIGH or better; if the time since the last utterance is more than 1, 
accept an option rated HIGH or better; and so on through all the ratings. 19 If the time 
since the last utterance is more than 16, then any option will be accepted; this essen- 
tially means that the generator would rather say something completely stupid than 
remain silent. 
If any of the candidate utterances' evaluations meets or exceeds the current mini- 
mum acceptable rating, the utterer chooses the best candidate utterance and outputs 
it, removing the workspace ntries it derives from. If there are two or more candidate 
utterances with the highest rating, the utterer breaks the tie by comparing the ratings 
19 IGEN measures time in terms of cycles through its process cheduler, an arbitrary but workable 
approach that allows for consistent timing behavior. 
120 
Rubinoff lqle IGEN Generator 
of the individual options they are composed of. If there is still a tie, the utterer chooses, 
in order of preference, the candidate utterance that: 
. 
2. 
. 
, 
5. 
violates fewer constraints. 2? 
was the only one whose rating was adjusted up by the planner, since 
this means there was something specific about the option that fit well 
into the plan. 
is more concise, indicated by the presence of a CONCISE-CONSTRUCTION 
annotation. 21
covers more entries in the workspace. 
covers an earlier entry in the workspace. 
If none of these criteria distinguish the candidate utterances, the utterer simply picks 
one at random. 
4. Examples 
The workings of the various components and representational machinery described 
above can be seen more clearly by looking at a few examples of IGEN at work. These 
examples demonstrate how IGEN can handle decisions that involve various kinds of 
interactions between linguistic and planning issues, despite the strict separation of the 
planning and linguistic components of the generator. In addition, the examples how 
how IGEN is sensitive to time pressure, improving its output when given more time 
to work and degrading racefully when forced to work faster. 
4.1 Supporting the Plan Structure 
In this example, the generator is given the goal #<KNOW(HEARER,WEATHER-INFD)>, 
where #<WEATHER-INF0> is an unordered collection of facts about the weather over 
a three-day span starting on the current day. The final output in response to this goal 
is: 
(4) It is warm on today. It will be warm on Monday. It will be cool on 
Tuesday. 
Since the input goal simply involves transmitting a fixed set of information to the 
hearer, the construction of this response is fairly straightforward. Nevertheless, even 
in this simple example there are a few places where purely linguistic preferences are 
overridden by the planner in order to support he text plan structure. 
4.1.1 Building the Initial Plan. Upon being invoked, IGEN sends its goal to the com- 
municative planner, which constructs an initial plan. The planner starts by applying 
the utter-sequence plan, which involves decomposing the goal based on a relevant se- 
quence. Since the members of #<WEATI-IER-INF0~ all have connections to the sequence 
of days in the month, the planner is able to decompose the original goal into a sequence 
20 The only possible constraint in the current implementation is a missing (obligatory) feature value; all 
other grammatical and conceptual constraints are strictly enforced. 
21 This is actually controlled by a parameter (*conciseness-preference*) that determines whether the 
utterer will prefer concise or verbose options or neither. In theory, tlnis parameter should be set by the 
planner based on its knowledge of the situation; in practice, it is set by hand to prefer concise options. 
121 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 2 
of goals based on the sequence of days involved in the goal. Further p lanning for the 
sequence of subgoals yields the fol lowing plan: 
i. 
2. 
. 
4. 
5. 
Overall  Goal: #<KNOW (HEARER, WEATHER-INF0) > 
Achieve (I) by sequencing information based on the #<SEQUENCE> of the 
three days involved 
Support (2) with information about #<SEPT-25> 
Support (2) with information about #<SEPT-26> 
Support (2) with information about #<SEPT-27> 
Requests to express the informat ion about  each day 's  weather  are then passed on to 
the linguistic component .  
In particular, the planner carries out step (4) of the plan by  placing in the workspace 
the request: 
#<OVER-TIME-SPAN(#<WITHIN-RANGE(TEMPERATURE,56DEG-75DEG-F)>, 
SEPT-26)> 
A separate workspace entry is created for each node and link in this request, 22 with 
the entry for the top-level #<0VER-TIME-SPAN> link marked  as their "head"  entry. 
4.1.2 Producing and Evaluating Linguistic Options. The linguistic component  hen 
begins to produce and annotate linguistic opt ions for each of these entries. It also runs 
the first phase of the evaluat ion algor i thm (described in Figure 4) to produce an initial 
evaluation. 23 
For #<TEMPERATURE>, the linguistic component  finds the fo l lowing options: 24 
#<w : WEATHER> 
HEAD ~-~ CAT ~--- N 
LEX ~ #<w : WEATHER> 
The linguistic component draws on the portion of IGEN's knowledge 
shown in Figure 5 to annotate this option. Since the option directly 
expresses the concept #<WEATHER>, the linguistic component attaches a 
MAKES-EXPLICIT annotation to the option. Since #<TEMPERATURE> has a 
#<PART> link connecting it to #<WEATHER>, it attaches an 
INDIRECTLY-SUGGESTS annotation for #<TEMPERATURE>. 
22 This doesn't limit the linguistic component toworking on only one node or link at a time; options can 
cover or depend on other entries, as, for example, the future tense option in Section 4.1.2. 
23 This should really be done by the planner, but the first phase doesn't actually depend on any 
information about he plan, so it can safely be run by the linguistic component without compromising 
the separation of the components. The second phase, which does depend on the plan, will be run by 
the planner. 
24 It actually produces everal other options that are immediately ruled out as being completely 
inappropriate, .g. the word temperature as an option for #<SEPT-26>, or because they require 
arguments hat aren't present in the request, e.g. the verb be (which needs two arguments) as an option 
for #<TEMPERATURE>. Throughout these examples, uch options will simply be ignored in the interests 
of brevity. 
122 
Rubinoff The IGEN Generator 
=weather" ------?>( weather ~ =it":/d/om 
part I / I part I / I part I I I I part 
wind ) ( precipitation 
=waiqrfl" - - - I~ :~ warm 
part 
"temperature" 
ran0e-end CG 
Figure 5 
Some semantic network fragments used by the linguistic component. 
#<w: TEMPERATURE> 
HEAD ~ CAT ~--- N 
LEX z #<w : TEMPERATURE> 
Since the meaning of #<w : TEMPERATURE> is the request itself, the only 
annotation attached is a MAKES-EXPLICIT annotation for 
#<TEMPERATURE>. 
#<w: IT> 
LEX ----- #<w: IT> 
Since the usage of #<w: IT> here is an idiomatic construction, it has 
some special handling in the lexicon to indicate that its meaning 
depends on what it is being used to describe. In particular, #<w: IT> 
here is taken to mean #<TEMPERATURE>. The linguistic component thus 
produces a MAKES-EXPLICIT annotation for #<TEMPERATURE>, as it does 
for the option using the word  #<w : TEMPERATURE>. #<w: IT> is also 
marked as producing a CONCISE-CONSTRUCTION annotation, so the 
linguistic component attaches one to the option. 
123 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 2 
As these options are produced, they are evaluated based on their annotations accord- 
ing to the algorithm described in Figure 4. In the first phase, #<w : WEATHER> is rated 
MEDIUM, reflecting the fact that the option doesn't really express the request, but does 
suggest it indirectly by mentioning a closely related concept. #<w : TEMPERATURE> is 
rated VERY-HIGH, reflecting the option's exact match with the request, as is #<w: IT>, 
which also expresses #<TEMPERATURE> (albeit idiomatically). The second phase of 
the evaluation algorithm makes no changes to the ratings, since the options' annota- 
tions don't indicate anything that would interact with the plan, leaving #<w: IT> and 
#<w : TEMPERATURE> as the preferred options. 25 
For #<WITHIN-RANGE>, the only acceptable option the linguistic omponent finds is: 
#<w:BE> 
CAT 
HEAD 
SUBJ 
PRED 
ORDER = 
---- S 
_-- \[ CAT ---- V 
L LEX = #<w:BE> 
---- NP 
z ADJP  
(SUBJ HEAD PRED)  
The SUBJ and PRED features indicate #<w:BE>'s syntactic roles; the value of these 
features indicates the syntactic onstraints on the structures that may fill the roles. 
In addition, the structure has a MAP feature indicating which workspace ntries can 
provide options to fill the roles. 
Since #<WITHIN-RANGE> is a subconcept of #<BE-LOCATED> (one meaning of 
#<w:BE> in IGEN's lexicon), the linguistic component produces (MAKES-EXPLICIT 
#<BE-LOCATED>) and (MAKES-IMPLICIT #<WITHIN-RANGE>) annotations for the op- 
tion. These annotations lead the first phase of the evaluation algorithm to rate the 
option as HIGH; the second phase leaves this evaluation unadjusted. (Of course, since 
there is only one acceptable option here, its rating doesn't really matter.) 
For #<56DEG-Z5DEG-F>, the options produced are (omitting the details of the 
structures to show only the annotations): 
#<w:WARM>: 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<WARM>) 
(MAKES-IMPLICIT #<56DEG-75DEG-F>) 
#<w:TEMPERATURE>: 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<TEMPERATURE>) 
(INDIRECTLY-SUGGESTS #<56DEG-75DEG-F>) 
These annotations are based on the network fragment shown in Figure 5. #<w:WARM> 
is rated HIGH, because it does a reasonable job of describing the requested temperature 
range} 6 The #<w : TEMPERATURE> option is not as good, but it at least gives a sense of 
what is being talked about, so it gets the next lower rating of MEDIUM. 
The entries we have seen so far have not involved any interactions between the 
25 Re  ut terer  wi l l  u l t imate ly  choose  #<w:  IT> because  it is marked  as more  concise.  
26 \ ] 'h is  is determined us ing  a ru le -based  in ference mechan ism descr ibed  in Rub ino f f  (1992). 
124 
Rubinoff The IGEN Generator 
options and the plan. Our first instance of such interactions arises in the options for 
# < 0VER-TIME-SPAN>: 
? #<w:  0VER>: 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<0VER-TIME-SPAN>) 
(ACTIVATES-IN-CONTEXT 
#< INSTANCE (SEPT-26, LINEAR-SPAN) >) 
? #<w:0N>:  
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<0N>) 
(MAKES-IMPLICIT #<0VER-TIME-SPAN>) 
(ACTIVATES-IN-CONTEXT 
#< INSTANCE (SEPT-26, LINEAR-POS) >) 
? \[TENSE : FUTURE\]: 27 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<0VER-TIME-SPAN>) 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<FUTURE>) 
(COVERS-0THER-ENTRY entry for:#<SEPT-26>) 
(MAKES-IMPLICIT #<SEPT-26>) 
The first phase evaluations uggest hat #<w: OVER> is the preferred option. Here, 
though, the second phase of the evaluation algorithm modifies the ratings based on 
interactions with the plan. The ACTIVATES-IN-CONTEXT annotations for #<w:0VER> 
and #<w:0N> indicate that these options affect how the system (and the hearer) 
perceive the time span being talked about. Since the #<SEQUENCE> of days being 
talked about is the organizing principle of the plan, it is a "critical" piece of the 
plan, as are the #<MEMBER> links connecting it to the pieces of the original goal. The 
ACTIVATES-IN-CONTEXT annotation for #<w:0VER> indicates that it encourages the 
hearer to think of #<SEPT-26> as a #<LINEAR-SPAN>. This conflicts with the (critical) 
#<MEMBER> link between #<SEPT-26> and the #<SEQUENCE>, because it describes the 
day as a span of time rather than as a discrete point in a sequence. The second phase 
algorithm thus downgrades #<w:0VER>'s rating from VERY-HIGH to HIGH. Conversely, 
#<w:0N> encourages the hearer to think of #<SEPT-26> as a #<LINEAR-POS>, i.e., 
a discrete position within a linear span, supporting the critical #<MEMBER> link. \]"he 
rating for #<w: ON> is therefore upgraded from HIGH to VERY-HIGH, and it becomes the 
preferred option. 28 
Note here how the use of annotations allows the planner to remain ignorant of 
purely linguistic issues. The planner has no way  to distinguish between an option 
realizing #<0VER-TIME-SPAN> as a lexical item and one realizing it as the value of 
some feature of another option. Its decision is based solely on the contextual effects 
of the available options. The planner can only make distinctions based on the effects 
of the options, not on the forms of the options. 
The final piece of the request is #<SEPT-26>, for which the linguistic component 
produces the following options: 
? #<w :TOMORROW>: 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<TOMORROW>) 
27 This is an example of how linguistic options need not be single words or complete phrases; this option 
is a feature value pair that will be added to another phrase. 
28 #<w:0N> ispreferred over \[TENSE =FUTURE\], which is also rated VERY-HIGH, because itwas adjusted 
up in response to a specific plan interaction as discussed in Section 3.3. 
125 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 2 
(MAKES-IMPLICIT #<SEPT-26>) 
(ACTIVATES-IN-CONTEXT #<FEW-DAYS>) 
#<w:MONDAY>: 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<MONDAY>) 
(MAKES-IMPLICIT #<SEPT-26>) 
(ACTIVATES-IN-CONTEXT #<WEEK>) 
The first phase of the evaluation algorithm rates both of these options as HIGH, since 
they match the planner's request equally well. The second phase, though, distinguishes 
between them on the basis of the particular time sequences they activate. The se- 
quence #<WEEK> activated by the option #<w :MONDAY> is significantly different from 
the #<SEQUENCE> of three days around which the plan is organized, so #<w :MONDAY> 
is downgraded to #<MEDIUM>. The #<FEW-DAYS> sequence activated by the option 
#<w : TOMORROW>, on the other hand, largely overlaps with the plan's #<SEQUENCE>, 
so no adjustment is made. As a result, #<w:TOMORR0W> becomes the preferred option. 
4.1.3 Assembling the Utterance. As these options are produced and evaluated, the 
utterer watches the workspace, trying to assemble them into an acceptable utterance. 
Whenever an option appears that meets the current acceptability threshold, the utterer 
utters (i.e., prints) it. The final result is: 
(5) It will be warm on Monday. 
Note that this output does not simply use the highest-rated option from each entry in 
the workspace, because that would involve the ungrammatical phrase on tomorrow. In 
addition to responding to time pressure, the utterer also enforces yntactic onstraints; 
it chooses the best possible combination of options that is syntactically acceptable. 29 
4.1.4 Summary. This simple example illustrates how the annotations allow IGEN to 
maintain the traditional division into two independent components while still han- 
dling interactions between decisions at the planning and linguistic levels. The planner 
never has to deal with linguistic structures, and the linguistic component never has to 
deal with plans or information structures. For example, the planner can't distinguish 
between lexical items and feature values; conversely the linguistic component has no 
access to the goals driving the planner or the plans it builds. Nevertheless, when there 
are decisions that depend on both informational and linguistic structures, the annota- 
tions allow IGEN to handle the interactions between the different levels. The effects of 
these interactions are relatively minor in this example, but subsequent examples will 
show how they can be more dramatic. 
4.2 Revising the Plan 
In addition to merely selecting among options, IGEN's planner can revise the plan in 
response to them. Consider a slight modification to the previous example, in which 
IGEN is given the same goal except hat the temperature on the third day falls within 
29 This is an oversimplification, as can be seen from the output in (4) in Section 4.1, where IGEN 
produces the phrase on today. What's really going on is that IGEN's lexicon has two entries for each of 
today and tomorrow; one as a noun phrase and one as a prepositional phrase. As it happens, the PP 
entry turns up first. In the case here, the option for Monday is produced and selected before the NP 
option for tomorrow turns up. In the first sentence of(4), there is no such option, so the linguistic 
component has time to produce the NP today option. 
126 
Rubinoff The IGEN Generator 
the range considered "warm."  IGEN proceeds to build a plan that is identical to the 
previous one (except for the difference in the information to be expressed). As before, 
the planner places requests in the workspace and the linguistic component starts to 
construct options. At this point, IGEN is well on its way to generating text similar 
to (4): 
(6) It is warm on today. It will be warm on Monday. It will be warm on 
Tuesday. 
However, once the option for warm is produced, something new happens. The 
planner detects that there are several parallel structures in the workspace that can use 
the same linguistic structure (warm) to realize different concepts (the different tem- 
perature ranges) in corresponding positions within each structure. This provides the 
opportunity to combine the parallel structures into a single conjoined structure, which 
the planner proceeds to do. All of the workspace ntries for the parallel structures are 
removed, and the planner enters requests for a new conjoined structure: 3?
#< 0VER-TIME-SPAN (#<WITHIN-RANGE (TEMPERATURE , 56DEG-75DEG-F) >, 
#<AND (SEPT-25 , SEPT-26 , SEPT-27) >) > 
IGEN then proceeds as in the previous example, ult imately generating: 
(7) It will be warm on today, Monday, and Tuesday. 
Note that the planner couldn't have created this conjoined structure initially be- 
cause it d idn't  know that all three days'  temperatures could be realized the same way. 
To the planner, each day has a different temperature range. This example appears 
exactly the same as the previous one. Once the linguistic component indicates that 
all three temperature ranges can be realized the same way, though, the planner can 
then determine that this results in a parallelism that can be reduced to a conjoined 
structure. The annotations allow the planner to modify its plan, based on the results of 
the realization process, despite not having any access to purely linguistic knowledge 
or processing. 
4.3 Varying the Utterance in Response to the Plan 
In the previous examples, we have seen how IGEN can use the feedback from the 
linguistic component to improve the organization of the text it generates. The anno- 
tations also allow IGEN to tailor the generated text so as to better achieve the goals 
behind the utterance. Consider IGEN's response to the goal "make the user happy":  31 
1. 
2. 
Overall goal: #<BE-STATE (HEARER, HAPPY) > 
Achieve (1) by achieving subgoals: 
(a) Goal: Downplay unpleasant information 
30 The temperature ange used in the conjoined structure is chosen randomly from among the structures 
being combined. This is safe to do because it is certain that all of the temperature anges can be 
realized the same way; that's what triggered the combination i the first place. 
31 The construction of the plans in this section is admittedly ad hoc; IGEN certainly doesn't have a 
complete model of the psychological factors and issues they involve. What's important here, though, is 
not the construction ofthe plan but rather how the plan and the annotations are used to produce the 
kind of subtle effects that can't be produced by the linguistic omponent or the planner alone. 
127 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 2 
. 
. 
5. 
(b) Goal: Emphasize pleasant information 
Achieve (2a) by expressing: 
#<MINIMAL-SIGNIFICANCE (# < CONSIST-0F (PRECIPITATION, 
RAIN) >) > 
Achieve (2b) by expressing: 
#<WITHIN-RANGE (TEMPERATURE, 60DEG-80DEG-F) > 
Achieve (2b) by expressing: 
#<AT-TIME (#<CONSIST-0F (PRECIPITATION, N0-PRECIPITATION) >, 
THIS-AFTERN00N) > 
The final result for this plan is: 
(8) It is only drizzling. It is warm. It will be clear soon. 
Most of this output is produced straightforwardly in a manner similar to the previous 
example. Some of the choices, however, are the result of interactions of a sort beyond 
what was seen there. 
Consider the options for #<CONSIST-0F (PRECIPITATION,RAIN) > in step (3) of the 
plan; these include: 32 
? #<w:RAINS>: VERY-HIGH 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<CONSIST-0F>) 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<PRECIPITATION>) 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<RAIN>)  
? #<w:DRIZZLES>: HIGH 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<C0NSIST-0F>) 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<PRECIPITATION>) 
(MAKES-IMPLICIT #<RAIN>)  
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<DRIZZLE>) 
(EXTRA-INF0 #<STRENGTH(RAIN,WEAK)>) 
? #<w:POURS>:HIGH 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<C0NSIST-0F>) 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<PRECIPITATION>) 
(MAKES-IMPLICIT #<RAIN>) 
(MAKES-EXPLICIT #<POUR>) 
(EXTRA-INFO #<STRENGTH(RAIN,STRONG)>) 
The first phase of the evaluation algorithm rates the word #<w:RAINS> highest, since 
it captures the intended meaning precisely. #<w: DRIZZLES> and #<w: POURS> are the 
next best options, since they capture the basic meaning, and are equally appropriate, 
since the linguistic component can't evaluate the significance of the extra information 
they present. 
The second phase, however, determines that the EXTRA-INF0 expressed by the 
option #<w:DRIZZLES> implies another part of the information requested by the 
planner (the #<MINIMAL-SIGNIFICANCE> relation). Its rating is therefore increased 
to VERY-HIGH. Conversely, the rating for #<w:POURS> is lowered to MEDIUM, since it 
32 To simplify the discussion, I have included the first-phase evaluations of the options here. 
128 
Rubinoff The IGEN Generator 
contradicts the #<MINIMAL-SIGNIFICANCE> relation. This leaves both other options, 
#<w:RAINS> and #<w:DRIZZLES>, rated VERY-HIGH; the utterer will prefer to use 
#<w:DRIZZLES>, though, since there was something specific about the option that the 
planner approved of. 
The decision here to say #<w : DRIZZLES> instead of #<w:RAINS> could not have 
been made by either the planner of the linguistic component alone. The decision de- 
pends on both the planner's knowledge that the concept #<DRIZZLE> supports an- 
other piece of the plan and the linguistic component's knowledge that there is a way 
to express #<DRIZZLE> without making explicit its distortion of the actual information 
that it's raining. It's only the interaction between the two components provided by 
the annotations that makes saying #<w : DRIZZLES> instead of #<w:RAINS> possible. 
The point of using the annotations, though, was not just to handle these kinds 
of interactions, but more importantly to do so without compromising the principled 
separation of the two components. Among other things, this makes it possible for IGEN 
to express the same information in a different manner, based solely on differences in 
the plan. If the purely linguistic issues are the same, the linguistic component will do 
exactly the same work, even though the differences in the output may depend in part 
on that work. 
We can see this by comparing the previous example with IGEN's response to 
the goal #<TAKE(HEARER, UMBRELLA)>, for which the planner constructs the following 
plan: 
i. 
2. 
. 
. 
Goal: #<TAKE(HEARER,UMBRELLA) > 
Achieve (I) by achieving subgoal: 
#<WANT (HEARER, #<TAKE (HEARER, UMBRELLA) > ) > 
Achieve (2) by achieving subgoal: 
#<KNOW (HEARER, #<CONSIST-0F (PRECIPITATION, RAIN) >) > 
depending on the preconditions: 
#<DANGEROUS (#<C0NSIST-0F (PRECIPITATION, RAIN) > ) > 
and 
# < PROTECTI ON (# < TAKE ( HEARER, UMBRELLA) >, 
#<CONSIST-0F (PRECIPITATION, RAIN) >) > 
Achieve (3) by expressing: 
#<CONSIST-0F (PRECIPITATION, RAIN) > 
Note that the information to be expressed here in step (4) is also expressed in step (3) of 
the previous example. Since the linguistic component doesn't have access to the plan, 
it necessarily produces the same options as before. The planner, though, evaluates 
these options differently, since it is using them to carry out a different plan. 
The three options #<w: RAINS>, #<w: POURS>, and #<w: DRIZZLES> are produced 
and annotated as before. Their evaluations are different, though. Step (3) here has 
a precondition that #<CONSIST-0F(PRECIPITATION,RAIN) > be #<DANGEROUS> in or- 
der to achieve its intended goal. The extra information expressed by #<w:POURS> 
supports this precondition, so #<w:POURS> is upgraded to VERY-HIGH. On  the other 
hand, #<w:DRIZZLES> undercuts the precondition and is therefore downgraded to 
MEDIUM. The preferred option here is therefore #<w:POURS>, in contrast to the previ- 
ous example, and the final result is then: 
(9) It is pouring. 
129 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 2 
The final output differs even though the linguistic component does exactly the 
same processing in these two examples. From the linguistic component's point of view, 
the examples are exactly the same; the same request is placed in the workspace, so the 
same options are produced. The difference lies solely in the plan structure, not in the 
content of the explicit message to be realized, so only the planner behaves differently. 
The linguistic component's design and functioning are completely indifferent o the 
issues that concern the planner. 
4.4 The Range of Variation 
We can see similar variation in the handling of #<N0-PRECIPITATION>, which is real- 
ized in three different ways in three different examples because of the different roles 
it plays in the three plans. In Section 4.3, it was realized as clear; the two examples 
that follow illustrate how IGEN can select alternative realizations. 
Consider first what happens when the generator is given the goal "get the user to 
conserve water." In response, it builds up a plan to do so by talking about he drought: 
I. 
2. 
. 
4. 
Goal: #<CONSERVE(HEARER,WATER) >
Achieve (1) by achieving subgoah 
# <WANT (HEARER, # <CONSERVE (HEARER, WATER) >) > 
Achieve (2) by achieving subgoah 
# < KNOW (HEARER, # < SERI 0US-DROUGHT > ) > 
depending on the preconditions: 
#<DANGEROUS(#<SERIOUS-DROUGHT>)  and 
#<PROTECTION (#< CONSERVE (HEARER, WATER) >, 
#<SERIOUS-DROUGHT>) > 
Achieve (3) by expressing: 
#<CONTINUE (DROUGHT) > 
#<OVER-TIME-SPAN (CONSIST-0F (PRECIPITATION, 
N0-PRECIPITATION) ) , 
TODAY) > 
and 
#<0VER-TIME-SPAN (REPEAT (CONSIST-OF (PRECIPITATION, 
N0-PRECIPITATION) ) , 
TOMORROW) >
This plan is similar to the one built in Section 4.3 for the goal #<TAKE(HEARER,UM- 
BRELLA) >; they both involve motivating the hearer to take some action by explaining 
some danger that the action will provide protection from. The main difference here 
is that rather than simply telling the user that there is a serious drought, the plan- 
ner draws on a more specific (ad hoc) plan that involves expressing more detailed 
information. 
The final result for this example is: 
(10) The drought is continuing. It is dry today. It will be dry again tomorrow. 
Note that IGEN uses #<w:DRY> here to express #<N0-PRECIPITATION>, in con- 
trast with the first example in Section 4.3, where it was expressed by #<w : CLEAR>. 
This happens because #<w: DRY> has an (ACTIVATES-IN-CONTEXT #<DROUGHT>) anno- 
tation, and activating the concept #<DROUGHT> supports the sense of danger that is a 
precondition of step (3) of the plan. #<w:DRY>'s evaluation is thus upgraded, making 
130 
Rubinoff The IGEN Generator 
it the preferred option. In the example in Section 4.3, this activation doesn't interact 
with the plan, so #<w:CLEAR> remains the preferred option. 
Yet another ealization is selected when IGEN is given the goal of convincing the 
user to go to the park, resulting in the following plan: 
I. 
2. 
. 
. 
Goal: #<BE-LOCATED(HEARER,PARK) > 
Achieve (1) by achieving subgoal: 
#<WANT (HEARER, #<BE-LOCATED (HEARER, PARK) >) > 
Achieve (2) by achieving subgoal: 
#<KNOW (HEARER, 
AND (CONSIST-0F (PRECIPITATION, N0-PRECIPITATION) ) 
WITHIN-RANGE (TEMPERATURE, WARM) ) > 
depending on the preconditions: 
#<ENJOYABLE (#<BE-LOCATED (HEARER, PARK) >) > 
and 
#<SUITABLE ( 
#<AND (CONSIST-0F (PRECIPITATION, N0-PRECIPITATION) , 
WITHIN-RANGE (TEMPERATURE, WARM) ) >, 
#<BE-LOCATED (HEARER, PARK) >) > 
Achieve (3) by expressing: 
#<AND (CONSIST-0F (PRECIPITATION, N0-PRECIPITATION) , 
WITHIN-RANGE (TEMPERATURE, WARM) ) > 
The resulting output is: 
(11) It is sunny and it is warm. 
The only difference from previous examples lies in the choice of #<w: SUNNY> 
to express the concept #<N0-PRECIPITATION> rather than using either #<w:CLEAR> 
or #<w:DRY>. This choice arises because of an ACTIVATES-IN-CONTEXT annotation 
indicating that the use of #<w:SUNNY> activates the concept #<SUNSHINE>, which 
strengthens the enjoyability precondition i step (3) of the plan. It is this sort of inter- 
action between linguistic choices and the plan structure that allows IGEN to express 
#<N0-PRECIPITATION> three different ways in three different examples. 
The point here is not just that IGEN can produce different lexical realizations for 
a particular concept. If that were the only goal, we could dispense with the feedback 
mechanism and simply design some sort of discrimination network (or similar device) 
to test various features of the information being expressed. The planner could supply 
whatever information is needed to drive the network. 33 Something like this approach 
is in fact used in some systems (e.g., Elhadad and Robin 1992; PenMan 1989; Hovy 
1988a). 
The problem with the discrimination network approach is that it can't handle 
the range of examples hown here without violating the modularity of the generator. 
The examples hown here have involved linguistic choices that depend on the plan 
structure, on other actions in the plan, and on preconditions of the plan. Furthermore, 
the plan dependencies can involve a nontrivial amount of reasoning (e.g., the example 
immediately above, which involves the connection between sunshine and enjoying 
33 Of course, that still wouldn't allow for examples like the one in Section 4.2, where the planner modifies 
the plan in response tothe work of the linguistic component. 
131 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 2 
being outdoors). Encoding these decisions in a discrimination net (or any other kind 
of processing) within the linguistic component would mean giving that component 
access to all of the plan and the reasoning used to construct i . Much of the planner's 
knowledge and processing would have to be duplicated in the linguistic omponent. 
IGEN, in contrast, handles these examples while maintaining strict modularity. 
4.5 The Effects of Time Pressure 
The discussion of the examples in Section 4.3 glosses over an important detail: IGEN 
will only generate the output shown there if the time pressure iseased by increasing the 
delay thresholds. In particular, the choice of #<w :DRIZZLES> and #<w: POURS> over 
#<w:RAINS> in those examples is made with the thresholds et to force the utterer 
to always wait at least five time units before uttering the next piece of text. This 
is necessary because the linguistic component produces the option for #<w:RAINS> 
sooner than the options for #<w: POURS> and #<w :DRIZZLES>. 
If the delay thresholds are left at the default settings, the utterer will accept an 
option that is rated VERY-HIGH without any delay. Thus when the #<w:RAINS> op- 
tion appears, the utterer immediately accepts and utters it. While # <w:DRTZZLES > and 
#<w: POURS > would be better options in these examples, the utterer never gets a chance 
to see them. Because of time pressure, the decision of how to realize the planner's re- 
quest is made before the linguistic component has a chance to find #<w : DRIZZLES>. 
There's nothing wrong with this result; it is raining is a perfectly good way to ex- 
press #<CONSIST-0F(PRECIPITATION,RAIN)>. It's just that if IGEN is given more 
time to work, it can produce a better utterance. The utterer's job is to balance the 
quality of the utterance against ime pressure; in this example, changing the inten- 
sity of the time pressure induces a corresponding change in the refinement of the 
utterance. 
Of course, if the time pressure is set sufficiently high (e.g., to simulate a situation 
where the the hearer is about to walk away), IGEN will sometimes produce an utter- 
ance that has some slight problems, because speed is more important than perfection. 
Consider what happens when the example in Section 4.1 is run with the delay thresh- 
olds set to accept anything that's not terrible (i.e., any option rated MEDIUM or higher) 
right away. The planning and initial production and evaluation of options proceeds 
as with the default hresholds. The handling of #<0VER-TIME-SPAN> works out dif- 
ferently, though. The option for #<w:0VER> is produced by the linguistic omponent 
several time units before the option for #<w:0N>. With the default hresholds, that's 
not a problem, because the utterer can wait long enough for #<w: 0N> to be produced. 
With the increased time pressure, though, the utterer is forced to produce the utterance 
before the option #<w:0N> is available. The resulting utterance (for the second day's 
information) is it will be warm over Monday. 
This result is not awful; the sentence still manages to express the intended infor- 
mation. It just doesn't fit quite as well into the intended overall structure of the text. 
So the main consequence here of increasing the time pressure is to generate a text 
that is slightly less coherent and fluent. In this case, IGEN responds to increasing time 
pressure with a slight degradation i the generated text. 
4.6 The Effects of Vocabulary Limitations 
Since IGEN is designed to always find the best utterance possible in the available time, 
without assuming any notion of a "correct" utterance, it can produce reasonable output 
even when generating in domains where it has limited linguistic resources. This can 
be seen by looking at the result of selectively disabling elements of its "vocabulary," 
i.e., the lexical and syntactic resources available to the linguistic omponent. The result 
132 
Rubinoff The IGEN Generator 
is a gradual, graceful degradation of the generated text as the generator's linguistic 
resources become poorer. 
Consider again IGEN's response (under relatively mild time pressure) when given 
the goal #<TAKE(HEARER,UMBRELLA)>. The resulting plan, as we have seen, requires 
expressing the information #<CONSIST-0F (PRECIPITATION,RAIN) >, which is accom- 
plished by uttering it is pouring. If the verb #<w: POUR> is removed from the generator's 
vocabulary, though, this utterance is not possible; instead the output becomes it is rain- 
ing. Note that this is the same output IGEN produces if the time pressure is increased; 
the consequence of limiting either time or vocabulary is the same. 
If the verbs #<w:RAINS> and #<w:DRIZZLES> are removed as well, the generator 
is left with no single option that can express all of the requested information. Instead, 
the utterer esorts to assembling individual options for the various pieces of the re- 
quest, producing the sentence the precipitation consists of rain. 34 While this utterance does 
adequately express the requested information, it is fairly awkward. Still, it's not bad, 
given that the two best options are unavailable. 
Beyond this point, further vocabulary removal starts to make things much worse. 
Removing the phrase #<w: CONSIST OF> leads to the utterance of it will be clear. This 
utterance is terrible; it completely misses the intended information. That's not surpris- 
ing; after all, the options that should be used have all been removed from IGEN's 
vocabulary. On the other hand, it's not completely bizarre; it's still talking about the 
weather, and in fact it's even still describing the precipitation. That is, IGEN still has 
a vague sense of what it's trying to say; it's not simply producing an utterance at ran- 
dom. This can be seen again by removing the phrase #<w: BE CLEAR>; the resulting 
utterance is then it snowed. IGEN is still trying to get as close as it can to the intended 
information, even though it can't really get it right. 
Eventually, of course, removing linguistic resources will make the generator col- 
lapse; if every word or phrase relating to precipitation of any sort is removed, then 
IGEN produces it is medium, which, though grammatical, is gibberish. If the linguistic 
component has absolutely no way to produce options related to what the planner 
wants to express, then there's really nothing IGEN can do. What's significant here, 
though, is that as the generator's linguistic resources are gradually impoverished, the 
generator's output degrades gracefully. Rather than immediately collapse when its 
preferred options are removed, IGEN continues to produce the best possible utterance 
it can build with its remaining linguistic resources. 3s
4.7 Generating in a Different Language 
As a test of IGEN's modularity, a simple French linguistic component was developed 
and tested on the examples in Sections 4.1 and 4.3. Switching to a different language 
provides an extreme xample of how the linguistic component can be varied without 
affecting the planner. The change primarily involved defining new lexicon entries for 
the French words, phrases, and feature values needed to talk about the weather. In 
addition, the routine that handles verb inflection had to be replaced, since French verb 
endings are different from English ones. Other than these changes, though, no mod- 
34 The actual output is precipitation consists of rain, but this is just due to a limitation of the implemented 
grammar. Specifically, there's no requirement that noun phrases have determiners, o the linguistic 
component never bothers to suggest one for the NP headed by #<w:PRECIPITATIOR>. 
35 Of course, in many situations it's best to put a lower bound on the quality of IGEN's output; this can 
be done simply by setting the appropriate delay thresholds to infinity. It would also be possible to set 
an overall time limit on IGEN's processing, after which an uncompleted plan would be assumed to 
have failed. IGEN could then modify the plan or take other appropriate corrective action. 
133 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 2 
ification to IGEN was necessary. The linguistic component was otherwise unaltered, 
and the planner and utterer equired no changes at all. 36 
The main difference between the ways English and French describe the weather 
lies in the "weather it" construction. English allows weather descriptions that use 
it together with any of a class of verbs of being, seeming, or becoming. Thus the 
following sentences are all possible in English: 
(12) It is warm. 
(13) It seems warm. 
(14) It feels warm. 
(15) It's becoming warm. 
(16) It's getting warm. 
In these sentences, the meaning of it seems to be the weather or the temperature; 
thus in any of these sentences it could be replaced by the weather or the temperature 
without changing the meaning or acceptability. This phenomenon is modeled in IGEN 
by having a special word #<w:IT> whose meaning can range over the various items 
constituting the weather; this word is constrained to appear only as the subject of an 
appropriate verb. Thus, as we saw in Section 4.1, #<w: IT> is represented as meaning 
#<TEMPERATURE> and annotated appropriately. 
A literal translation of any of the sentences in (12) to (16) into French, though, 
would be ungrammatical. The corresponding French construction uses the verb faire 
(literally 'to make' or 'to do'), as in (17): 
(17) 
(18) 
(19) 
(20) 
(21) 
I1 fait chaud. 
It makes/does warm 
It is warm. 
*Le temps fait chaud. 
The weather makes/does warm 
The weather is warm. 
*La temp4rature fait chaud. 
The temperature makes/does warm 
The temperature is warm. 
*I1 semble chaud. 
It seems warm. 
I1 semble faire chaud. 
It seems to make/do  warm. 
It seems warm. 
Unlike it in (12) to (16), the il here is not referring to the weather or the temperature. 
Rather it is an expletive, i.e., a dummy subject required by the grammar of the lan- 
guage, similar to the it in the English it seems John left. This can be seen by comparison 
36 It was necessary toadd a few more elements o the semantic network (which is used by both 
components) o capture the meaning of the French word sur, which does not correspond exactly to the 
meaning of any English word, as discussed below. These new elements were used only by the 
linguistic omponent, not by the planner. 
134 
Rubinoff The IGEN Generator 
with (18) and (19), in which replacing il with le temps ("the weather") or la temperature 
("the temperature") leads to an ungrammatical sentence. (20) and (21) demonstrate 
that the crucial element in the French construction is the verb faire; other verbs can 
be used only if they combine with faire. This contrasts with the English construction, 
in which it is the crucial element and can be used with a range of verbs. The French 
construction is thus represented in IGEN as a version of the verb faire that takes an 
expletive il as its subject and whose meaning ranges over specifications of the various 
elements of the weather. 
A second difference between the two languages hows up in Section 4.1 in the 
options for #<0VER-TIME-SPAN>. In English, IGEN has to choose between using on 
or over to express this link. In French, though, these concepts are expressed by the 
same word (sur). 37 Furthermore, sur can't be used for temporal expressions, only for 
spatial expressions. So the options for #<0VER-TIME-SPAN> work out quite differ- 
ently in French. French in general uses ~ ("at") rather than sur for temporal expres- 
sions; however ~ cannot be used with expressions describing days. Instead, these 
temporal modifiers are expressed using bare NP's with no preposition. This con- 
struction is modeled in IGEN by a null preposition whose object must be a definite 
NP. 
Given all of this, IGEN produces the following results in French for the example 
in Section 4.1: 
(22) I1 fait chaud aujourd'hui. I1 fera chaud lundi. 
it does warm today it will do warm Monday 
It is warm today. It will be warm Monday. 
I1 fera frais mardi. 
it will do cool Tuesday 
It will be cool Tuesday. 
This is equivalent to the English result except for expressing the temporal modifier 
as a noun phrase rather than as a prepositional phrase headed by on, as discussed 
above. 
Similarly, the variant in Section 4.2 produces: 
(23) I1 fera chaud aujourd'hui lundi et mardi. 
it will do warm today Monday and Tuesday 
It will be warm today Monday and Tuesday. 
For the goal of making the user happy, IGEN produces the French output: 
(24) I1 bruine seulement. I1 fait chaud. Le temps sera clair bientdt. 
it drizzles only it does warm the weather will be clear soon 
It's only drizzling. It's warm. It will be clear soon. 
This is exactly the same as the English output except for the use of the French "weather 
faire" construction or the explicit use of le temps ("the weather')  rather than the English 
"weather it" construction. 
37 Note that the point here is not that sur is the (unique) translation of on and over into French; IGEN is 
doing generation, not machine translation. It's just that sur is the French word that most naturally 
expresses the particular concepts IGEN is using. 
135 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 2 
The goal of convincing the user to take his umbrella, though, produces the output: 
(25) I1 pleut. 
it rains 
It's raining. 
because French doesn't have a verb corresponding to to pour. Since no option equiva- 
lent to the one for #<w: POURS> is proposed, the option for #<w: PLEUT> is the preferred 
option, just as #<w:RAINS> is the preferred option in English when lack of time or 
deliberate removal prevents the linguistic component from finding #<w : POUR$>. 
The point here is not simply that IGEN can handle these changes; after all, one of 
the primary motivations for dividing the generator into separate planning and linguis- 
tic components i to allow the components to be modified independently. The point 
is that IGEN allows the linguistic component to be modified so dramatically without 
limiting its ability to handle interactions between linguistic and planning issues. In 
fact, IGEN can handle these interactions equally with either version of the linguistic 
component without having to make any corresponding changes to the planner. 
5. Summary 
IGEN is designed to overcome the limitations, while retaining the advantages, of the 
modular approach to natural anguage generation. It does this by means of annota- 
tions that provide the planner with an abstract description of the effects of particular 
linguistic choices, allowing IGEN to handle interactions between the planning and 
linguistic levels while retaining the complete independence of the components. Thus 
IGEN can vary the work done by each component independently, even in cases where 
the final output depends on interactions between them. 
As the examples in Section 4 show, IGEN can vary how it expresses information 
in response to the differing roles that the information plays in the plan and, con- 
versely, in response to a change in the language being used. It can also revise its 
initial communicative plan based on the options suggested by the linguistic compo- 
nent. Furthermore, this variation requires no weakening of the generator's modularity. 
Changes in the plan structure are invisible to the linguistic component, and the change 
in languages i invisible to the planner. In addition, since IGEN explicitly models and 
reasons about the effects of its linguistic choices, it can gracefully handle situations 
where the available time or linguistic resources are limited. 
References 
Appelt, Douglas E. 1983. TELEGRAM: A 
grammar formalism for language 
planning. In Proceedings ofthe 21st Annual 
Meeting, pages 74-78, Cambridge, MA, 
June. Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Appelt, Douglas E. 1985. Planning English 
Sentences. Studies in Natural Language 
Processing. Cambridge University Press. 
Dale, Robert. 1989. Generating Referring 
Expressions ina Domain of Objects and 
Processes. Ph.D. thesis, Centre for 
Cognitive Science, University of 
Edinburgh. 
Danlos, Laurence. 1987. The Linguistic Basis 
of Text Generation. Studies in Natural 
Language Processing. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, England, 
English translation edition. Translated by 
Dominique Debize and Colin Henderson. 
Delin, Judy, Anthony Hartley, C4cile Paris, 
Donia Scott, and Keith Vander Linden. 
1994. Expressing procedural relationships 
in multilingual instructions. In Proceedings 
of the Seventh International Workshop on 
Natural Language Generation, pages 61-70, 
Kennebunkport, ME, June. 
Elhadad, Michael and Jacques Robin. 1992. 
Controlling content realization with 
functional unification grammars. In 
136 
Rubinoff The IGEN Generator 
Robert Dale, Eduard Hovy, Dietmar 
ROsner, and Oliviero Stock, editors, 
Aspects of Automated Natural Language 
Generation. Springer-Verlag, pages 89-104. 
Fisher, Steven K. and Kathleen R. 
McKeown. 1990. Coordinating text and 
graphics in explanation generation. In
Proceedings ofthe Eigth National Conference 
on Arti~cial Intelligence, pages 442-449, 
Boston, MA. American Association for 
Artificial Intelligence. 
Grosz, Barbara J. and Candace L. Sidner. 
1985. Discourse structure and the proper 
treatment of interruptions. In Proceedings 
of the Ninth International Joint Conference on 
Arti~cial Intelligence, pages 832-839, Los 
Angeles, CA, August. Morgan Kaufmann. 
Grosz, Barbara J. and Candace L. Sidner. 
1986. Attention, intentions, and the 
structure of discourse. Computational 
Linguistics, 12(3):175-204. 
Hovy, Eduard H. 1988a. Generating Natural 
Language Under Pragmatic Constraints. 
Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ. 
Hovy, Eduard H. 1988b. Planning coherent 
multisentential text. In Proceedings ofthe 
26th Annual Meeting, pages 163-169, 
Buffalo, NY, June. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
Hovy, Eduard H. 1988c. Two types of 
planning in language generation. In
Proceedings ofthe 26th Annual Meeting, 
pages 179-186, Buffalo, NY, June. 
Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Kantrowitz, Mark and Joseph Bates. 1992. 
Integrated natural anguage generation 
systems. In Robert Dale, Eduard Hovy, 
Dietmar R6sner, and Oliviero Stock, 
editors, Aspects of Automated Natural 
Language Generation. Springer-Verlag. 
Mann, William C. 1983. An overview of the 
nigel text generation grammar. In 
Proceedings ofthe 21st Annual Meeting, 
pages 79-84. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
Mann, William C. and Sandra A. 
Thompson. 1987. Rhetorical structure 
theory: Description and construction of
text structures. In Gerard Kempen, editor, 
Natural Language Generation: New Results in 
Artijqcial Intelligence, Psychology, and 
Linguistics. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 
Boston, MA, chapter 7, pages 85-96. 
McDonald, David D. 1983. Natural 
language generation as a computational 
problem. In M. Brady and Robert 
Berwick, editors, Computational Models of 
Discourse. MIT Press, pages 209-265. 
McDonald, David D. 1988. Modularity in 
langauge generation: Methodological 
issues. In Proceedings ofthe AAAI-88 
Workshop on Text Planning and Generation, 
St. Paul, MN, August. 
McDonald, David D. 1991. On the place of 
words in the generation process. In C~cile 
Paris, William R. Swartout, and William 
C. Mann, editors, Natural Language 
Generation i  Arti~cial Intelligence and 
Computational Linguistics. Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, Boston, MA, 
chapter 9, pages 229-247. 
McKeown, Kathleen R. 1985. TEXT 
GENERATION: Using Discourse Strategies 
and Focus Constraints to Generate Natural 
Language. Cambridge University Press. 
Meteer, Marie W. 1989. The "Generation Gap": 
The Problem of Expressibility in Text Planning. 
Ph.D. thesis, University of Massachusetts 
at Amherst, Amherst, MA, December. 
Meteer, Marie W. 1994. Generating event 
descriptions with sage: A simulation and 
generation environment. In Proceedings of
the Seventh International Workshop on 
Natural Language Generation, pages 99-107, 
Kennebunkport, ME, June. 
Meteer, Marie W., David D. McDonald, 
Scott D. Anderson, David Forster, 
Linda S. Gay, Alison K. Huettner, and 
Penelope Sibun. 1987. Mumble-86: Design 
and implementation. Technical Report 
87-87, Computer and Information Science, 
University of Massachusetts at Amherst, 
Amherst, MA. 
Moore, Johanna D. and C4cile Paris. 1989. 
Planning text for advisory dialogues. In 
Proceedings ofthe 27th Annual Meeting, 
pages 203-211, Vancouver, BC, June. 
Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Nii, H. Penny. 1986a. Blackboard systems: 
Blackboard application systems, 
blackboard systems from a knowledge 
engineering perspective. AI Magazine, 
7(3):82-106. 
Nii, H. Penny. 1986b. Blackboard systems: 
The blackboard model of problem solving 
and the evolution of blackboard 
architectures. AI Magazine, 7(2):38-53. 
Nilsson, Nils J. 1980. Principles of Artij~'cial 
Intelligence. Tioga Publishing Co., Palo 
Alto, CA. 
Nirenburg, Sergei, Rita McCardell, Eric 
Nyberg, Philip Werner, Scott Huffman, 
Edward Kenschaft, and Irene Nirenburg. 
1988. Diogenes-88. Technical Report 
CMU-CMT-88-107, Center for Machine 
Translation at Carnegie-Mellon 
University, Pittsburgh, PA, June. 
Nogier, Jean-Francois. 1989. A natural 
language production system based on 
conceptual graphs. Technical Report E146, 
137 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 2 
Centre Scientifique IBM France, Paris. 
Panaget, Franck. 1994. Using a textual 
representation level component in the 
context of discourse and dialogue 
generation. In Proceedings ofthe Seventh 
International Workshop on Natural Language 
Generation, pages 127-136, 
Kennebunkport, ME, June. 
Paris, C~cile L. and Donia R. Scott. 1994. 
Intentions, structure and expression i  
multi-lingual instructions. In Proceedings of
the Seventh International Workshop on 
Natural Language Generation, pages 45--52, 
Kennebunkport, ME, June. 
PenMan Project, The. 1989. The PenMan 
documentation. Technical Report, 
USC/Information Sciences Institute, 
Marina del Rey, CA. 
Reiter, Ehud. 1994. Has a consensus NL 
generation architecture appeared, and is it 
psycholinguistically plausible. In 
Proceedings ofthe Seventh International 
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, 
pages 163-170, Kennebunkport, ME, June. 
Reithinger, Norbert. 1990. Popel--A parallel 
and incremental natural language 
generation system. In C~cile Paris, 
William Swartout, and William Mann, 
editors, Natural Language Generation i  
Artificial Intelligence and Computational 
Linguistics. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Boston, MA, pages 179-200. 
Rubinoff, Robert. 1986. Adapting mumble: 
Experience with natural language 
generation. In Proceedings ofAAAI-86, 
pages 1063-1068, Philadelphia, PA, 
August. American Association for 
Artificial Intelligence, Morgan Kauffman. 
Rubinoff, Robert. 1992. Negotiation, Feedback, 
and Perspective Within Natural Language 
Generation. Ph.D. thesis, CIS Department, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadephia, 
PA, December. Available as Technical 
Report MS-CIS-92-91. 
Sibun, Penelope. 1991. Locally Organized Text 
Generation. Ph.D. thesis, University of 
Massachusetts at Amherst, Amherst, MA. 
Available as COINS Technical Report 
91-73. 
Sondheimer, Norman K. and Bernhard 
Nebel. 1986. A logical-form and 
knowledge-base d sign for natural 
language generation. In Proceedings ofthe 
Fifth National Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, pages 612-618, Philadelphia, 
PA, August. American Association for 
Artificial Intelligence. 
Thompson, Henry. 1977. Strategy and 
tactics: A model for language production. 
In Papers from the Thirteenth Regional 
Meeting, pages 651-668. Chicago 
Linguistics Society. 
Wanner, Leo. 1994. Building another bridge 
over the generation gap. In Proceedings of
the Seventh International Workshop on 
Natural Language Generation, 
pages 137-144, Kennebunkport, ME, June. 
138 
