A Hybrid Approach to Chinese Word Segmentation around CRFs 
ZHOU Jun-sheng1, 2  DAI Xin-yu1  NI Rui-yu1  CHEN Jia-jun1
1Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210093 CHINA 
2Deptartment of Computer Science, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, 210097 CHINA 
{Zhoujs, dxy, niry, chenjj}@nlp.nju.edu.cn 
Abstract
In this paper, we present a Chinese word 
segmentation system which is consisted of 
four components, i.e. basic segmentation, 
named entity recognition, error-driven 
learner and new word detector. The basic 
segmentation and named entity recognition, 
implemented based on conditional random 
fields, are used to generate initial 
segmentation results. The other two 
components are used to refine the results. 
Our system participated in the tests on 
open and closed tracks of Beijing 
University (PKU) and Microsoft Research 
(MSR). The actual evaluation results show 
that our system performs very well in MSR 
open track, MSR closed track and PKU 
open track.
1 Introduction 
Word segmentation is the first step in Chinese 
NLP, but segmentation of the Chinese text into 
words is a nontrivial task. Three difficult tasks, 
i.e. ambiguities resolution, named entity 
recognition and new word identification, are 
the key problems to word segmentation in 
Chinese.
In this paper, we report a Chinese word 
segmentation system using a hybrid strategy. In 
our system, texts are segmented in four steps: 
basic segmentation, named entity recognition, 
error-driven learning and new word detection. 
The implementations of basic segmentation 
component and named entity recognition 
component are both based on conditional 
random fields (CRFs) (Lafferty et al, 2001), 
while the Error-Driven learning component and 
new word detection component use statistical 
and rule methods. We will describe each of 
these steps in more details below. 
2 System Description 
2.1 Basic segmentation 
We implemented the basic segmentation 
component with linear chain structure CRFs. 
CRFs are undirected graphical models that 
encode a conditional probability distribution 
using a given set of features. In the special case 
in which the designated output nodes of the 
graphical model are linked by edges in a linear 
chain, CRFs make a first-order Markov 
independence assumption among output nodes, 
and thus correspond to finite state machines 
(FSMs). CRFs define the conditional probability 
of a state sequence given an input sequence as 
??
?
??
? ??
  
$
T
t
K
k
ttkk
o
tossf
Z
osP
1 1
1 ),,,(exp
1)|( O
 Where  is an arbitrary 
feature function over its arguments, and?N
is a learned weight for each feature function.  
),,,( 1 tossf ttk 
Based on CRFs model, we cast the 
segmentation problem as a sequence tagging 
problem. Different from (Peng et al, 2004), we 
represent the positions of a hanzi (Chinese
character) with four different tags: B for a hanzi
196
that starts a word, I for a hanzi that continues the 
word, F for a hanzi that ends the word, S for a 
hanzi that occurs as a single-character word. The 
basic segmentation is a process of labeling each 
hanzi with a tag given the features derived from 
its surrounding context. The features used in our 
experiment can be broken into two categories: 
character features and word features. The 
character features are instantiations of the 
following templates, similar to those described in 
(Ng and Jin, 2004), C refers to a Chinese hanzi.
(a) Cn (n ?2,?1,0,1,2 ) 
(b) CnCn+1( n ?2,?1,0,1) 
(c) C?1C1
(d) Pu(C0 ) 
In addition to the character features, we came 
up with another type word context feature which 
was found very useful in our experiments. The 
feature captures the relationship between the 
hanzi and the word which contains the hanzi. For 
a two-hanzi word, for example, the first hanzi
?? ? within the word ???? will have the 
feature WC0=TWO_F set to 1, the second hanzi
??? within the same word ???? will have the 
feature WC0=TWO_L set to 1. For the 
three-hanzi word, for example, the first hanzi
??? within a word ????? will have the 
feature WC0=TRI_F set to 1, the second hanzi
??? within the same word ????? will have 
the feature WC0=TRI_M set to 1, and the last 
hanzi ??? within the same word ????? will 
have the feature WC0=TRI_L set to 1. Similarly, 
the feature can be extended to a four-hanzi word. 
2.2 Named Entity recognition 
After basic segmentation, a great number of 
named entities in the text, such as personal 
names, location names and organization names, 
are not yet segmented and recognized properly. 
So the second step we take is named entity 
recognition based on CRFs. In contrast to 
Chinese personal names and location name, the 
recognition of Chinese organization names is a 
difficult task. Especially in Microsoft Research 
corpus, the whole organization name, such as 
????????, ?????????????
?????????? and so on, is regarded 
as a single word. In this section, we only 
present our approach for organization name 
recognition.  
The important factor in applying CRFs model 
to organization name recognition is how to select 
the proper features set. The constitution of 
Chinese organization is very complicated, and 
most organization names do not have any 
common structural characteristics except for 
containing some feature words, such as ??
??  and so on. But as a proper noun, the 
occurrence of an organization name has the 
specific context. The context information of 
organization name mainly includes the boundary 
words and some title words (e.g. ??????).
By analyzing a large amount of organization 
name corpus, we find that the indicative intensity 
of different boundary words vary greatly. So we 
divide the left and right boundary words into two 
classes according to the indicative intensity. 
Accordingly we construct the four boundary 
words lexicons. To solve the problem of the 
selection and classification of boundary words, 
we make use of mutual Information I(x, y). If 
there is a genuine association between x and y, 
then I(x,y) >> 0. If there is no interesting 
relationship between x and y, then I(x,y)?0. If x 
and y are in complementary distribution, then 
I(x,y) << 0. By using mutual information, we 
compute the association between boundary word 
and the type of organization name, then select 
and classify the boundary words.  
In order to increase the precision of 
organization name recognition, we still 
introduce the ?forbidden word? feature that 
would prevent some words from being 
recognized as component of organization name. 
197
For we know that some words, such as ??
? ?? ??? ?, are impossible to occur in 
organization name, we collected these words to 
formed a ?forbidden words? lexicon. Based on 
the consideration given in preceding section, 
we constructed a set of atomic feature patterns, 
listed in table 2. Additionally, we defined a set 
of conjunctive feature patterns, which could 
form effective feature conjunctions to express 
complicated contextual information. 
2.3 Error-driven learning 
As a method based on statistics, no matter how 
well a CRFs model is constructed, some 
obviously errors always occurred because of 
the sparseness of training data. For this reson, 
error-driven learning method (Brill, 1995) is 
adopted to refine the segmentation result in this 
bakeoff in three steps: 
1) Based on CRFs model, we segment the 
training data which has been removed all the 
space between words. Based on the comparison 
of the segmentation result with the original 
training data, the difference between them will 
be extracted. If a difference occurs more than 
one time, an error-driven rule will be 
constructed. The rule is described as: ??
ZZZZZZis the segmentation of ?in 
training data. We named this rule set 
constructed by this step CRF-Ruleset.
2) Based on FMM&BMM, we segment the 
training data which has been removed all the 
space between words. As we know, 
overlapping ambiguity strings can be found 
through FMM&BMM, and the true 
segmentation of such OASs can be found in 
training data. If an OAS string has unique 
segmentation, a rule ? ?  ZZZ was 
constructed. We called the rule set constructed 
in this step OAS-Ruleset.
3) In the testing data, if there is the same 
string as ?in CRFs-Ruleset or OAS-Ruleset,
it will be segmented as ZZZ according to 
the rule??ZZZ.
For example, in the PKU testing data, 
through error-driven learning, we can segment 
the string ??????? as ???????
while this string is always segmented wrong as 
??????? segmented by CRFs model. 
In other words, error-driven learning can 
always can be seen as a consistency check. It 
assures the consistency of the segmentation of 
the training data and testing data when some 
strings such as ??????? occur in both. 
2.4 New word detection 
CRFs segmentation model can gives good 
performance on OOV words identification. But 
there are still some new words that have not 
been recognized. So an additive new words 
recognizer is adopted (Chen, 2003).  
In-word probability of each character is used 
for new word detection. The in-word 
probability of a character is a probability that 
the character occurs as a part of a word of two 
or more characters. And the in-word 
probability of a character is trained from the 
training data and is calculated as follows: 
     ( )
   in word
Number of C Occurrence in wordsP C
Number of C Occurrence
 .
The consecutive single characters are 
combined into a new word if the in-word 
probability of each single character is over a 
threshold. Obviously, the value of the threshold 
is the key to the performance of this new words 
recognizer. Same as (Chen, 2003), we divided 
the training data as training data and 
developing data to find an exactly value of the 
threshold. For this bakeoff, we set the threshold 
of PKU data as 0.86 and that of MSR data as 
0.88. Some new words such as ????? ??
?? ???? were recognized by this recognizer. 
3 Experimental results 
198
We participated in the four GB tracks in the 
second international Chinese word 
segmentation bakeoff: PKU-open, PKU-closed, 
MSR-open, MSR-closed. In the closed tracks, 
we used the dictionary with the words 
appearing in the training corpus and didn?t 
conduct the process of named entity 
recognition. In the open tracks, we employed a 
dictionary of 134,458 entries. The size of 
training data used in the open tracks is same as 
the closed tracks. Except for a dictionary with 
more vocabulary, we have not employed any 
other special resources in the open tracks. 
Table 1 shows the performance of our system 
in the bakeoff.  
PKU
(open) 
PKU
(closed)
MSR
(open) 
MSR
(closed)
Precision 0.970 0.950 0.971 0.956 
Recall 0.964 0.941 0.959 0.959 
F 0.967 0.946 0.965 0.957 
OOV 0.058 0.058 0.026 0.026 
Recall 
on OOV 0.864 0.813 0.785 0.496 
Table 1: Official Bakeoff Outcome 
It?s a pity that we make a careless mistake (a 
program bug) which led to 752 left quotation 
marks concatenated to the words following it in 
the closed and open tracks on Microsoft 
research corpus. With the problem fixed, the 
actual results of the official test data are better 
than any other system, as shown in Table 2. 
MSR (open) MSR (closed)
Precision 0.978 0.957 
Recall 0.976 0.976 
F 0.977 0.966 
OOV 0.026 0.026 
Recall on 
OOV 0.772 0.387 
Recall on 
In-Voc 0.982 0.992 
Table 2  Actual evaluation on MSR corpus
4 Conclusion 
Our open and closed GB track experiments 
show that its performance is competitive. The 
most important advantage of our system is the 
ability to cope with the unknown words. 
Especially in the open track on the Microsoft 
research corpus, the recall on OOV of our 
system achieves 77.2%, higher than any other 
system. In future work, we would attempt to 
generalize the ideas of large-margin to CRFs 
model, leading to new optimal training 
algorithms with stronger guarantees against 
overfitting.
References
Eric Brill , 1995. Transformation Based Error Driven 
Learning and Natural Language Processing : A 
Case Study in Part of Speech Tagging , 
Computational Linguistics , V21. No. 4 ,  
J. Lafferty, A. McCallum, and F. Pereira. 2001. 
Conditional random fields: Probabilistic models for 
segmenting and labeling sequence data. In Proc. 
ICML 01.  
Aitao Chen. 2003. Chinese Word Segmentation Using 
Minimal Linguistic Knowledge. In Proceedings of 
the Second SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese 
Language Processing.
 Ng, Hwee Tou and Jin Kiat Low. 2004. Chinese 
Part-of-Speech Taging: One-at-a-Time or All at 
Once? Word-based or Character based? In 
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical 
Methods in Natural Language Processing, Spain. 
Peng, Fuchun, Fangfang Feng, and Andrew 
McCallum. 2004. Chinese Segmentation and New 
Word Detection using Conditional Random Fields . 
In Proceedings of the Twentith International 
Conference on Computaional Linguistics, pages 
562?568.  
199
